Series Editor: David J. Lockwood
Nanostructure Science and Technology
Srikanta Moharana
Duncan H. Gregory
Ram Naresh Mahaling   Editors
Emerging 
Nanodielectric 
Materials 
for Energy Storage
From Bench to Field

Nanostructure Science and Technology 
Series Editor 
David J. Lockwood, FRSC 
National Research Council of Canada 
Ottawa, ON, Canada

Nanostructure science and technology now forms a common thread that runs through 
all physical and materials sciences and is emerging in industrial applications as 
nanotechnology. The breadth of the subject material is demonstrated by the fact that 
it covers and intertwines many of the traditional areas of physics, chemistry, biology, 
and medicine. Within each main topic in this ﬁeld there can be many subﬁelds. For 
example, the electrical properties of nanostructured materials is a topic that can cover 
electron transport in semiconductor quantum dots, self-assembled molecular nanos-
tructures, carbon nanotubes, chemically tailored hybrid magnetic-semiconductor 
nanostructures, colloidal quantum dots, nanostructured superconductors, nanocrys-
talline electronic junctions, etc. Obviously, no one book can cope with such a diver-
sity of subject matter. The nanostructured material system is, however, of increasing 
signiﬁcance in our technology-dominated economy and this suggests the need for a 
series of books to cover recent developments. 
The scope of the series is designed to cover as much of the subject matter as 
possible – from physics and chemistry to biology and medicine, and from basic 
science to applications. At present, the most signiﬁcant subject areas are concentrated 
in basic science and mainly within physics and chemistry, but as time goes by more 
importance will inevitably be given to subjects in applied science and will also 
include biology and medicine. The series will naturally accommodate this ﬂow of 
developments in the sciences and technology of nanostructures and maintain its 
topicality by virtue of its broad emphasis. It is important that emerging areas in 
the biological and medical sciences, for example, not be ignored as, despite their 
diversity, developments in this ﬁeld are often interlinked. The series will maintain the 
required cohesiveness from a judicious mix of edited volumes and monographs that 
while covering subﬁelds in depth will also contain more general and interdisciplinary 
texts. 
Thus the series is planned to cover in a coherent fashion the developments in basic 
research from the distinct viewpoints of physics, chemistry, biology, and materials 
science and also the engineering technologies emerging from this research. Each 
volume will also reﬂect this ﬂow from science to technology. As time goes by, the 
earlier series volumes will then serve as reference texts to subsequent volumes.

Srikanta Moharana · Duncan H. Gregory · 
Ram Naresh Mahaling 
Editors 
Emerging Nanodielectric 
Materials for Energy Storage 
From Bench to Field

Editors 
Srikanta Moharana 
Department of Chemistry, School 
of Applied Sciences 
Centurion University of Technology 
and Management 
R. Sitapur, Paralakhemundi, Odisha, India 
Ram Naresh Mahaling 
School of Chemistry 
Jyoti Vihar, Sambalpur University 
Burla, Odisha, India 
Duncan H. Gregory 
School of Chemistry 
University of Glasgow 
Glasgow, UK 
ISSN 1571-5744
ISSN 2197-7976 (electronic) 
Nanostructure Science and Technology 
ISBN 978-3-031-40937-0
ISBN 978-3-031-40938-7 (eBook) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7 
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2024 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse 
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar 
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. 
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. 
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG 
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland 
Paper in this product is recyclable.

Preface 
Nanocomposites are typically made up of a host material and one or more guest mate-
rials. This book offers a comprehensive discussion of the synthetic methods that can 
be utilised to prepare them as well as the physicochemical and electrical character-
istics of nanocomposites. The volume pays particular attention to the surface alter-
nation of inorganic core-shell materials with nanometric dimensions, which assists 
in the development of an understanding of how nanocomposites function. More 
speciﬁcally, the book demonstrates in great detail how a broad interface between 
the polymer and the inorganic ﬁllers governs the characteristics of nanocomposite 
dielectrics. Nanodielectrics are a new class of promising dielectric materials designed 
at the nanometric scale for potential applications in advanced electronic devices such 
as energy storage. 
This book on Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage: From Bench 
to Field is intended to place an emphasis on the most advanced and fundamental 
phenomena pertinent to current global energy challenges. The scale of these chal-
lenges demands new technologies, and the design of new classes of nanodielectrics 
with applications in several key areas (which will be highlighted) will be at the centre 
of this new technological drive. Also highlighted will be the various facile processing 
techniques employed to fabricate nanodielectric materials and their composites with 
attractive properties like mechanical strength and ﬂexibility that can complement 
electrical performance for end-use applications in the form of ﬂexible thin-ﬁlm capac-
itors, for example. The book thus endeavours to provide simultaneous fundamental 
insight into properties, performance and utility from bench to ﬁeld. It places a tool 
for the birth and growth of new technological solutions in the hands of graduate 
students and both industrial and academic researchers including material scientists, 
engineers, physicists and chemists. 
Since the discovery of nanocomposite dielectrics, scientists have learnt to produce 
several kinds of dielectric materials with enhanced qualities. As a result, the interest 
in nanocomposite dielectrics and their use has grown more widespread. For this 
interest in dielectrics to proliferate further, it is essential to have an understanding 
of the most recent developments in the ﬁeld. It is hard to address all of the potential
v

vi
Preface
applications of nanocomposite dielectrics in a single book, owing to the tremen-
dous progress that has been made in nanocomposite dielectric research. In this book, 
we have provided an overview of the current research being conducted in nanodi-
electrics of a speciﬁc ﬁeld, and our subsequent books in this series will cover a 
great deal of additional material. This book comprises ﬁfteen chapters based on 
recent nanodielectric materials for energy storage research. Chapter 1 “The Past, 
Present and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials” describes the energy, 
electronics and sensor sectors. This chapter mainly focuses on the properties and 
application of dielectric nanomaterials. Chapter 2 “Synthesis Approaches of Nanodi-
electric Materials” deals with various synthesis techniques towards nanodielectric 
materials. Chapter 3 “Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization of 
Nanodielectrics” describes the synthesis, microstructural and dielectric properties of 
many of the most important materials. Chapter 4 “Role and Prospects of Polymer 
Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric World” provides a relatively brief overview 
and outlook of polymer-based nanomaterials with applications in various ﬁelds. 
Chapter 5 “Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications” 
presents a current and topical summary of different nanocomposite dielectrics along 
with their beneﬁts. Chapter 6 “Effect of Nanoﬁllers Reinforced Polymer Blends For 
Dielectric Applications” gives a concise introduction to the properties and dielec-
tric applications of polymer blends and nanocomposites incorporating nanoﬁllers. 
Chapter 7 “Metal and Metal Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics For Energy 
Storage: Opportunities and Challenges” focuses on the properties of metal oxide-
based polymeric nanocomposite dielectrics, whereas Chap. 8 “Fabrication and Prop-
erties of Dielectric Elastomer Based Nanocomposites” takes a broad view of the 
synthesis and properties of elastomeric nanocomposites. Chapter 9 “Physical and 
Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer Nanodielectrics and Their Applications” 
explores the progress that has been made in identifying and interpreting the physical 
and chemical properties of nanocomposite dielectrics formed from inorganic ﬁllers 
and polymeric hosts together with the applications that are most pertinent. Chapter 10 
“Surface Engineering of Graphene Based Polymeric Composites for Energy Storage 
Devices” deals with the prospects for surface alteration of graphene-based polymer 
composites, their properties and how they ﬁnd application in energy storage. In 
Chap. 11 “Core-Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High Performance Dielectric 
Applications”, the authors describe how core-shell structures have become impor-
tant for dielectric applications and how one might synthesise such nanomaterials. 
Chapter 12 “Transition Metal Oxide Based Nanomaterial for Advanced Energy Stor-
age” offers a detailed discussion on transition metal oxide-based nanomaterials for 
practical applicability in the ﬁeld of advanced energy storage, while Chap. 13 “Flu-
oropolymer Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application” takes a speciﬁc 
look at the growing number of ﬂuoropolymer-based nanocomposite dielectrics that 
have been reported so far and their increasing inﬂuence in energy storage appli-
cations. Chapter 14 “Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy 
Storage” introduces some of the most advanced energy storage applications offered 
by hybrid organic-inorganic nanocomposite dielectrics, and then lastly Chap. 15 
“Metal Oxide Nanoﬁller Introduced Polymer Based Nanocomposite Dielectrics for

Preface
vii
Advanced Energy Storage Devices” demonstrates the use of metal oxide ceramics in 
the doping of polymeric matrix dielectric nanocomposites. Overall, the book deals 
with many of the hosts of different aspects of nanodielectric composite research. 
Despite the vast breadth and depth of the area, we hope that you agree that the 
book provides a conveniently concise outline of the polymer (material) science and 
technology involved. We have high hopes that once the reader has had a chance 
to appreciate this volume, she or he will be equipped with sufﬁcient information 
to proceed further into the otherwise daunting expanse of nanocomposite dielec-
tric research. Each chapter of this book is comprehensively referenced, citing many 
examples of the most cutting-edge research from across the globe. In this respect, 
this volume acts as an atlas for further exploration, which should be of equal use to 
professionals in academia and industry, as to beginners in the ﬁeld in navigating the 
far reaches of the nanodielectric world. 
R. Sitapur, India 
Glasgow, Scotland 
Burla, India 
Srikanta Moharana, Ph.D. 
Duncan H. Gregory, Ph.D. 
Ram Naresh Mahaling, Ph.D.

Contents 
1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric 
Nanomaterials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 
S. Chandraleka, V. Balasubramani, R. Sasikumar, 
M. R. Kuppusamy, T. M. Sridhar, Pragati Kumar, and Nupur Saxena 
2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25 
Vinod Kashyap, Sukhvant Singh, Sumit, and Lipeeka Rout 
3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization 
of Nanodielectrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59 
Sudhanshu Dwivedi 
4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials 
in the Dielectric World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97 
Sushrisangita Sahoo, Abhinav Yadav, K. P. Andryushin, 
and L. A. Reznichenko 
5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their 
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123 
Joshi Harsh Nitinkumar, Navyasree Reghu, P. K. Akhilesh, 
Alexandru Vlad, Meera Balachandran, and Prasanth Raghavan 
6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric 
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151 
Debashish Nayak, Ram Bilash Choudhary, Sanjeev Kumar, 
Jayanta Bauri, and Sarfaraz Ansari 
7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics 
for Energy Storage: Opportunities and Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
189 
Minal Bafna, Nipun Bafna, Farah Deeba, and Ankur Jain
ix

x
Contents
8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based 
Nanocomposites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
213 
Tajamal Hussain, Rabia Batool, Khurram Shehzad, 
Adnan Mujahid, Adeel Afzal, and Muhammad Zahid 
9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer 
Nanodielectrics and Their Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
243 
Kavya Pulagam Srinivasa Babu, K. P. Chaithra, 
Arunkumar Chandrasekhar, and T. P. Vinod 
10 
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric 
Composites for Energy Storage Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
269 
Debajani Tripathy, Ankita Subhrasmita Gadtya, Bibhuti B. Sahu, 
and Srikanta Moharana 
11 
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance 
Dielectric Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
305 
Anupam Sahoo, Sangita Kumari Swain, and Sukanta Kumar Swain 
12 
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced 
Energy Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
331 
Priyambada Mallick, Srikanta Moharana, L. Biswal, 
and Santosh Ku Satpathy 
13 
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage 
Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
357 
Anindita Mukherjee, Anupam Ghosh, and Barnali Dasgupta Ghosh 
14 
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy 
Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
385 
Nupur Saxena, P. Sakthivel, D. Sridharan, and Pragati Kumar 
15 
Metal Oxide Nanoﬁller-Introduced Polymer-Based 
Nanocomposite Dielectrics for Advanced Energy Storage 
Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
415 
Pravati Panda, Subhendu Chakroborty, Anchit Modi, 
and Srikanta Moharana 
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
433

About the Editors 
Editors and Contributors 
Dr. Srikanta Moharana is presently working as Assistant Professor at the Depart-
ment of Chemistry, School of Applied Sciences, Centurion University of Technology 
and Management, Odisha, India. He obtained his Ph.D. and M.Phil. degrees in Chem-
istry from the School of Chemistry, Sambalpur University, India. He has received 
his M.Sc. degree in Chemistry from National Institute of Technology, Rourkela. He 
has published more than 45 research papers in international peer-reviewed journals, 
19 book chapters and many more counting. He has awarded Prof. G. B. Behera 
Best Ph.D. thesis award under the banner of Orissa Chemical Society, Odisha, 
India. He has delivered two invited talks and presented his work at various national 
and international conferences. Currently, two students are continuing Ph.D. under 
his guidance. He has more than 4 years of teaching and 4 years of research experi-
ence. His research experience as well as research interests lies in graphene, carbon 
nanotubes and ceramic-based polymer nanocomposites synthesis and characterisa-
tion for advanced energy storage applications. He is Life Member of Orissa Chemical 
Society. 
Prof. Duncan H. Gregory is West CHEM chair of Inorganic Materials, University 
of Glasgow. He was previously EPSRC Advanced Fellow, Lecturer, then Reader 
in Materials Chemistry at the University of Nottingham. He is currently Visiting 
Professor at Kyushu University and was Vice President of the Royal Society of 
Chemistry (RSC) Materials Chemistry Division Council (2009–2014). His research 
interests focus on the discovery of new solids including sustainable energy mate-
rials (e.g. Li batteries, fuel storage, thermoelectrics), inorganic nanomaterials and 
the solid-state chemistry of non-oxides. His research also embraces the sustainable 
production of materials including the microwave synthesis and processing of solids. 
He has published more than 180 papers in peer-reviewed journals, is Editor-in-Chief 
of the journal Inorganics and Associate Editor of Materials for Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy. He was the winner of the RSC Sustainable Energy Award in
xi

xii
About the Editors
2009 and was awarded the Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining (IOM3) Kroll 
Medal in 2019. 
Prof. Ram Naresh Mahaling at present working in School of Chemistry, Jyoti 
vihar, Sambalpur University, Odisha, India (BHARAT). He has served Sambalpur 
University in the capacity of Assistant Professor and Associate Professor prior 
to join as full Professor. He has more than 13 years of teaching and 17 years 
of research experience and has published more than 60 research papers in peer-
reviewed journals and authored seven book chapters. His current areas of research 
include the synthesis of perovskite-type metal oxide (BaTiO3, BiFeO3, CaTiO3, etc.)-
based polymer composite materials for electronic applications and energy storage, 
nanocomposites and their structure-properties relationship. He has visited the Insti-
tute of Polymer Research Dresden, Germany, and University of Orleans, France, 
for two-and-half years as Postdoctoral Fellow. He has received research grants from 
different funding agency, such as UGC, New Delhi; DST SERB, New Delhi, and 
Government of Odisha. So far he has guided fourteen (14) M.Phil. students, and two 
Ph.D. Currently 5 students are working under him for his Ph.D. He has delivered 
seven invited talks in different national and international conferences. 
Contributors 
Adeel Afzal School of Chemistry, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan 
P. K. Akhilesh Institute of Condensed Matter and Nanosciences, Université-
catholique de Louvain, Ottignies-Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium 
K. P. Andryushin Research Institute of Physics, Southern Federal University, 
Rostov-on-Don, Russia 
Sarfaraz Ansari Nanostructured Composite Materials Laboratory, Indian Institute 
of Technology (Indian School of Mines), Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India 
Kavya Pulagam Srinivasa Babu Department of Chemistry, CHRIST (Deemed to 
be University), Bengaluru, India 
Minal Bafna Department of Physics, Agrawal PG College, Jaipur, India 
Nipun Bafna Mechanical and Industrial Engineering Department, IIT Roorkee, 
Roorkee, India 
Meera Balachandran Department 
of 
Chemical 
Engineering 
and 
Materials 
Science, Amrita School of Engineering, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore, 
India; 
Centre of Excellence in Advanced Materials and Green Technologies (CoE-AMGT), 
Amrita School of Engineering, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore, India 
V. Balasubramani Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Madras, 
Chennai, India

About the Editors
xiii
Rabia Batool School of Chemistry, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan 
Jayanta Bauri Nanostructured Composite Materials Laboratory, Indian Institute 
of Technology (Indian School of Mines), Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India 
L. Biswal Department of Physics, School of Applied Sciences, KIIT Deemed to be 
University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
K. P. Chaithra Department of Chemistry, CHRIST (Deemed to be University), 
Bengaluru, India 
Subhendu Chakroborty Department of Basic Sciences, IITM, IES University, 
Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India 
S. Chandraleka Department of Chemistry, R.V. Government Arts College, Chen-
galpattu, India 
Arunkumar Chandrasekhar Nanosensors and Nanoenergy Lab, Department of 
Sensors and Biomedical Technology, School of Electronics Engineering, Vellore 
Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu, Vellore, India 
Ram Bilash Choudhary Nanostructured Composite Materials Laboratory, Indian 
Institute of Technology (Indian School of Mines), Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India 
Barnali Dasgupta Ghosh Department of Chemistry, Birla Institute of Technology 
Mesra, Ranchi, India 
Farah Deeba SS Jain Subodh P G College, Jaipur, India; 
School of Applied Sciences, Suresh GyanVihar University, Jaipur, India 
Sudhanshu Dwivedi S.S. Jain Subodh P.G. (Autonomous) College, Jaipur, India 
Ankita Subhrasmita Gadtya Department of Chemistry, School of Applied 
Sciences, Centurion University of Technology and Management, R.Sitapur, 
Paralakhemundi, Odisha, India 
Anupam Ghosh Department of Management, Birla Institute of Technology Mesra, 
Ranchi, India 
Tajamal Hussain School of Chemistry, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan 
Ankur Jain School of Applied Sciences, Suresh GyanVihar University, Jaipur, 
India; 
Center for Renewable Energy and Storage, Suresh GyanVihar University, Jaipur, 
India 
Vinod Kashyap Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology 
Tiruchirappalli, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India; 
Department of Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India 
Pragati Kumar Nano Materials and Device Lab, Department of Nanoscience and 
Materials, Central University of Jammu, Jammu, J & K, India

xiv
About the Editors
Sanjeev Kumar Nanostructured Composite Materials Laboratory, Indian Institute 
of Technology (Indian School of Mines), Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India 
M. R. Kuppusamy Department of Chemistry, R.V. Government Arts College, 
Chengalpattu, India 
Priyambada Mallick School of Applied Sciences, Centurion University of Tech-
nology and Management, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Anchit Modi Department of Basic Sciences, IITM, IES University, Bhopal, 
Madhya Pradesh, India 
Srikanta Moharana Department of Chemistry, School of Applied Sciences, Centu-
rion University of Technology and Management, R.Sitapur, Paralakhemundi, Odisha, 
India; 
School of Applied Sciences, Centurion University of Technology and Management, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Adnan Mujahid School of Chemistry, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan 
Anindita Mukherjee Department of Chemistry, Birla Institute of Technology 
Mesra, Ranchi, India 
Debashish Nayak Nanostructured Composite Materials Laboratory, Indian Insti-
tute of Technology (Indian School of Mines), Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India 
Joshi Harsh Nitinkumar Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials 
Science, Amrita School of Engineering, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore, 
India; 
Centre of Excellence in Advanced Materials and Green Technologies (CoE-AMGT), 
Amrita School of Engineering, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore, India 
Pravati Panda Department of Basic Sciences, RIE, Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar, 
India 
Prasanth Raghavan Materials Science and NanoEngineering Lab (MSNE-Lab), 
Department of Polymer Science and Rubber Technology, Cochin University of 
Science and Technology (CUSAT), Cochin, India; 
Department of Materials Engineering and Convergence Technology, Gyeongsang 
National University, Jinju, Republic of Korea 
Navyasree Reghu Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, 
Amrita School of Engineering, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore, India; 
Centre of Excellence in Advanced Materials and Green Technologies (CoE-AMGT), 
Amrita School of Engineering, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore, India 
L. A. Reznichenko Research Institute of Physics, Southern Federal University, 
Rostov-on-Don, Russia 
Lipeeka Rout Department of Chemistry, Madanapalle Institute of Technology & 
Science, Madanapalle, Andhra Pradesh, India

About the Editors
xv
Sushrisangita Sahoo Research Institute of Physics, Southern Federal University, 
344090 Rostov-on-Don, Russia; 
Department of Material Science and Engineering, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, 
AL, 36088 USA 
Anupam Sahoo Department 
of 
Chemistry, 
Sri 
Krushna 
Chandra 
Gajapati 
(Autonomous) College, Paralakhemundi, Odisha, India 
Bibhuti B. Sahu Basic Science and Humanities Department, Nalanda Institute of 
Technology (NIT), Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
P. Sakthivel Centre for Materials Science, Department of Physics, Science and 
Humanities, Faculty of Engineering, Karpagam Academy of Higher Education, 
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 
R. Sasikumar Department of Physical Chemistry, University of Madras, Chennai, 
India 
Santosh Ku Satpathy School of Applied Sciences, Centurion University of Tech-
nology and Management, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Nupur Saxena Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), 
Jammu, Jammu, India; 
Organisation of Science Innovations and Research, Bah, India 
Khurram Shehzad School of Micro-Nano Electronics, ZJU-Hangzhou Global 
Scientiﬁc and Technological Innovation Center, Zhejiang University, 
Zhejiang, 
China 
Sukhvant Singh Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology 
Tiruchirappalli, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India; 
Centre for Sustainable Technologies (CST), Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, 
India 
T. M. Sridhar Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Madras, 
Chennai, India 
D. Sridharan Vioma Motors Pvt Ltd., Mumbai, Maharashtra, India 
Sumit Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India 
Sangita Kumari Swain Centre of Excellence, Berhampur University, Berhampur, 
Odisha, India 
Sukanta Kumar Swain Department of ECE, Indian Institute of Information Tech-
nology, Ranchi, Jharkhand, India 
Debajani Tripathy Department of Chemistry, School of Applied Sciences, Centu-
rion University of Technology and Management, R.Sitapur, Paralakhemundi, Odisha, 
India

xvi
About the Editors
T. P. Vinod Department of Chemistry, CHRIST (Deemed to be University), 
Bengaluru, India 
Alexandru Vlad Institute of Condensed Matter and Nanosciences, Université-
catholique de Louvain, Ottignies-Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium 
Abhinav Yadav Research Institute of Physics, Southern Federal University, 
Rostov-on-Don, Russia 
Muhammad Zahid Department of Chemistry, University of Agriculture Faisal-
abad, Faisalabad, Pakistan

Chapter 1 
The Past, Present, and Potential Future 
of Dielectric Nanomaterials 
S. Chandraleka, V. Balasubramani, R. Sasikumar, M. R. Kuppusamy, 
T. M. Sridhar, Pragati Kumar, and Nupur Saxena 
Abstract Dielectric nanomaterials with a relatively high dielectric loss tangent are 
used in various ﬁelds such are transformers, solar cells, transistors, capacitors, energy 
storage devices, microwave, and nanophotonic applications. An abundance of bonded 
surface charges is present on the surface of these nanomaterials that change their 
functional properties. Dielectric nanomaterials help to improve the dispersion of 
nanomaterials by applying them as thin ﬁlm layers or as composites. These dielec-
tric nanomaterials provide less space charge and a lower electric ﬁeld by forming a 
multilayer composite and extending the life of electronic devices and electric motors. 
In this chapter, the past, present, and potential future of dielectric nanomaterials and 
their surface modiﬁcation with polymers or several composites such are nanodielec-
tric of metals and metal oxides including their characteristics are highlighted. The 
importance of dielectric nanomaterials and ﬂexible nanocomposite materials with 
their wide range of applications for energy storage, electronics, sensors, and their 
potential deliverables as futuristic devices are presented along with their future scope. 
Keywords Dielectric nanomaterials · Flexible dielectric nanocomposites ·
Energy · Electronics · Sensors
S. Chandraleka · M. R. Kuppusamy 
Department of Chemistry, R.V. Government Arts College, Chengalpattu 603001, India 
V. Balasubramani · T. M. Sridhar envelope symbol
Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Madras, Chennai 600025, India 
e-mail: tmsridhar23@gmail.com 
R. Sasikumar 
Department of Physical Chemistry, University of Madras, Chennai 600025, India 
P. Kumar 
Department of Nanoscience and Materials, Central University of Jammu, 
Samba, Jammu, J & K 181143, India 
N. Saxena 
Organisation of Science Innovations and Research, Bah 283104, India 
e-mail: n1saxena@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_1 
1

2
S. Chandraleka et al.
1.1 
Introduction of Dielectric Nanomaterials and Their 
Origin 
Interest in dielectric devices grew in the early 1990s with the discovery that certain 
thin elastomeric ﬁlms, such as silicon ﬁlms, can withstand large electrical stresses 
and generate large mechanical forces. It is interesting to take a look at the past, 
present, and potential current developments, current challenges, and future advances 
in dielectric nanomaterials related to the properties of dielectric nanomaterials [1]. 
A number of commercial products based on dielectric nanomaterials technology 
have already reached the market. This effect lags far behind other transducer 
technologies such as electromagnetism, but the history and potential of the tech-
nology are linked to antennas, loudspeakers, microphones (which convert waves into 
sound signals), and thermometers. It continues to expand from transponders, wire-
less communications, echo scanning, electromagnetic sensors, and energy storage. 
Polymer-based nanocomposites are usually chosen for energy storage devices 
because of their dielectric properties that enhance device performance [2]. Solid– 
liquid and gaseous dielectric nanomaterials are used along with metal dopants for 
various applications, whose properties vary with respect to their corresponding appli-
cations have made strides in the ﬁeld of nanodielectrics with advances in the synthesis 
methodology to modify the structure of chemical nanomaterials applied in electronic 
applications. The combination of chemical constituents of nanocomposites brings out 
the dielectric characteristics. 
The challenges exist with the use of nanoparticles as they are prone to agglomera-
tion, and there are issues with regard to stability and viscosity in addition to polymer 
matrices. This results in the need to carry out surface modiﬁcation of nanoparticles 
with organic dyes or other organic or electromagnetic nanomaterials and is presented 
in Fig. 1.1. Changes to the surface of the nanomaterials are a viable method to alter the 
dielectric properties of nanoparticles with polymers, improving their energy storage 
and capacity behavior over a long history [3]. This has led to the development of 
nanodielectrics properties with a wide range of materials and nanocomposites that 
have reactive ﬂexibility of each dielectric nanocomposite. These nanocomposites 
also come with challenges, unique properties, advantages, and limitations.
The dielectric behavior of the nanocomposites selected in this chapter includes 
a wide variety of metals, widely used in energy storage, solar cells, batteries, and 
many other applications. Modiﬁcation of dielectric nanoparticles results in changes 
to the interfacial structure that bring about the reduction in the interfacial force 
between particles, and the performance of dielectric nanocomposites is degraded. 
The interfacial charge density provides a stimulus effect on the dielectric properties 
of the modiﬁed nanocomposites [4]. The interfacial location of cationic groups and 
electron-withdrawing functional groups may reduce the overall dielectric loss and 
improve the dielectric breakdown strength. Ceramics, plastics, mica, glass, distilled 
water, dry air, vacuum, nitrogen, and helium are among the natural sources of dielec-
tric nanomaterials. This would lead to a better evaluation of all types of dielectric

1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials
3
Fig. 1.1 Overview of 
nanodielectric materials
nanomaterials, and a better understanding of their long-term impact, stability, and 
potential for global energy storage and human health can be explored [5]. 
Normally, the dielectric constant of nanoparticles generally increases, and changes 
can be attributed to the interface relationship between the metal nanoparticles and 
polymer, which can improve the homogeneity of the composites. High dielectric 
parameters make it suitable for applications such as conductive paints and sensors. 
Polymer matrix dielectric non-materials were introduced in the twenty-ﬁrst century. 
The rapid growth of life sciences and electrochemistry is impacted by the introduction 
of carbon-based materials, semiconducting metal oxides, hydroxyapatite (chemical 
constituent present in natural bone), and many dielectric nanomaterials [6]. Non-
dielectric materials of the past have fueled innovation in portable electronics manu-
facturing and electrical insulation. With their high thermal conductivity, dielectric 
nanomaterials have found their way into almost all ﬁelds, resulting in higher energy 
storage compared to nanomaterials with polymer matrix dielectric nanomaterials [7]. 
Their potential applications of nanomaterials-based dielectrics are given in Fig. 1.2.
Their multiferroic properties at room temperature make them ideal candidates for 
future potential applications in memory devices. These devices are required from 
scientiﬁc calculators to supercomputers with varying sizes and speeds. Life science 
research is one of the future developments of dielectric nanomaterials involved in the 
molecules that will lead to upcoming areas of application of nanotechnology-based 
devices. Although the above dielectric parameters can be used for past and present 
nanomaterials applications and devices, and the future potential of nanodielectric 
nanomaterials has differences mainly in the parameters involved in interfacial effects 
of molecular ordering. The disadvantage of currently used insulating composites is 
the disintegration of electrical properties [8, 9].

4
S. Chandraleka et al.
Fig. 1.2 Potential applications of nanodielectric materials
The shortcomings of the present applications offer us the scope for further modi-
ﬁcations or the addition of metals to nanoparticles that are required to improve the 
strength of current dielectric nanodevices. Polymers act as ﬁllers, and the interac-
tions between ﬁllers and nanomaterials impact the physico-chemical and mechanical 
properties of the polymers paving the way for future improvements in dielectric and 
electrical insulation. Polymer nanocomposites properties are further modiﬁed with 
inorganic ﬁllers to bring out signiﬁcant changes in dielectric properties widely used 
as energy storage materials [10]. 
1.2 
Properties of Dielectric Nanomaterials and Their 
Applications in the Present Scenario 
Dielectric nanomaterials exhibit properties that are required for the fabrication of 
highly ﬂexible materials. Flexible polymer matrix nanodielectrics have been used in 
emerging or developing international research ﬁelds as it offers scientists the opportu-
nity to present different perspectives, methods, and results [11]. It is presently applied 
to energy systems, life sciences, medical technology, robotics, machine learning, a 
host of biomedical devices like artiﬁcial skin and dresses with sensors, and elec-
trical isolation among several others. Polydopamine (PDA) is used as a surface 
adhesive material in combination with polymers, semiconductor materials, inorganic 
ceramics, and rare metals [12]. Next, the PDA modiﬁers are commonly applied with 
nanomaterials, changing the dielectric nature with the use of small molecules like 
organosilanes, phosphonic acids, dopamine, and carboxylic acids. These character-
istic primary organic molecules or nanomaterials prevent aggregation. The leakage 
current and dielectric damage of these nanomaterial-based devices can be brought 
down. Further, the dielectric breakdown property is enhanced by the modiﬁed surface 
of the metal oxide which presents an electron-withdrawing functional group with an 
electropositive phenyl conﬁguration at the interface. After dopamine surface modi-
ﬁcation, the nanoﬁller dispersion and its dielectrics in the nanocomposites have

1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials
5
enhanced their performance. Surface modiﬁcation has led to the development of 
cost-effective methods to improve dielectric devices. 
The properties of the nanoparticles present in nanomaterials are affected by the 
changes in interface charge density which in turn impacts the performance of dielec-
tric composites. Dielectric nanomaterials and their composites are attractive for appli-
cations in dielectric capacitors as the carbon-based energy and fuel resources are 
being over-exploited for energy requirements, and its pollution levels have harmed 
the environment depriving us of clean air. Renewable energy technologies based 
on solar, wind, biofuel, geothermal, and tidal power are the leading alternatives to 
replace carbon-based energy resources [13]. A major challenge for renewable energy 
today is achieving efﬁcient conversion and storage. The dielectric of capacitors with 
surface-modiﬁed nanomaterial brings about a change in the levels of dispersion due to 
ﬂexible dielectric nanomaterials. Dielectric nanoparticles with relatively high dissi-
pation factors are chosen due to the abundance of bound surface charges present on 
their surfaces. The dielectric properties of the fabricated nanocomposites are eval-
uated by recording the capacitance of the surface-modiﬁed nanocomposites as a 
function of frequency to determine the real (ε’) and imaginary (ε”) components of 
the complex permittivity [14]. 
Dielectrics are non-metallic substances with high resistivity, insulation resistance, 
and negative temperature coefﬁcient of resistance. Other hands it is a non-conducting 
substance that retains an electric charge, and it has free electrons for current to ﬂow. 
In the presence of an electric ﬁeld, no charge ﬂows through the material. The charge 
shifts slightly from its average equilibrium position due to dielectric polarization in 
the presence of an electric ﬁeld. Further polarization results in the ﬂow of positive 
charges toward the ﬁeld, while negative charges move in the reverse way of the 
ﬁeld. This property brings about changes in the internal electric ﬁeld leading to the 
enhanced capacity to accumulate electrons inside materials, and this property result 
enhances the energy storage applications [15]. 
The dielectric properties of nanomaterials have changed in their fundamental 
molecular properties that are capable of imminent electron migration even though 
the energy gap is very large for dielectric nanomaterials. This in turn brings about 
a change in polarization when it is subjected to a peripheral electric ﬁeld. Further, 
a negative temperature coefﬁcient of resistance is obtained that could increase the 
conductivity, the resistivity of the semiconductor material decreases with increasing 
temperature, and the insulation resistance is high which allows objects of a certain 
size on the surface of metal plate. Being a poor insulator and an excellent conductor 
of electricity, it retains a large amount of charge for a long period. Dielectric nanoma-
terials have high resistivity, and the electrostatic force between electrons and nuclei 
is very strong. Electrical breakdown is observed with these materials as a disad-
vantage with these insulating materials. Finally, it is the mechanism of nanometric 
interfacial and molecular ordering processes that triggers the electrical breakdown 
in these insulating materials which need to be studied. To overcome the drawbacks, 
the present applications need some more changes or addition to enhance the current 
nanodielectric devices’ strength [16].

6
S. Chandraleka et al.
Hydrogels synthesized by polymerization using dielectric nanomaterials as 
dopants are excellent candidates for 3D cell models due to their biocompatible struc-
tures. Further, it provides useful properties for biosensors and tunable drug delivery 
applications. Electronic device applications are based on the light intensity, chemical 
structure, and dielectric characterization of dyes—methylene-blue (MB), rhodamine-
B (RB), and MB/RB dyes along with NiFe2O4 nanoparticle-based hydrogels as a 
function of frequency and bias, viscosity, and zigzag motion have approximately 
equal parts of the same absorbing medium absorbing equal parts of incident light in 
terms of suitability for biocompatibility for biosensor based applications. Hydrogels 
doped with organic dyes exhibit low adsorption coefﬁcients such as MB, RB, and 
MB/RB, whereas dielectric nanoparticles exhibit high adsorption coefﬁcients as a 
result of the dipole, Fermi direct distribution, which increases electron transfer [17]. 
Hydrogels doped with NiFe2O4 nanoparticles, the small size and high ratio of emitted 
photons to absorbed photons offer new scope for biomedical imaging of cancer and 
other target molecules in-vivo in the human body. 
Organic dyes have been incorporated into hydrogels framed works to detect the 
membrane biology of the cells and image them with doped nanoparticles. These 
materials should have increased dielectric capacity on the application of electrical 
potential that results in partial ionization at elevated temperatures for applications 
in e-cars, e-bikes, space, and high-temperature furnaces industry. Polymers incorpo-
rated with dielectric nanomaterials show superior results of excellent power density 
and excellent rate capabilities. Power density indicates how quickly a device can 
deliver energy than batteries such as magnesium, lithium, and zinc ion batteries. One 
of the major problems of today’s scenario in aircraft engines is that it requires some 
form of cooling to prevent engine damage. Normally, these cooling devices break 
down resulting in degradation of the critical electronic-based control systems due 
to disabling of cooling systems. Here, there is a requirement for materials that can 
withstand temperatures of up to 250 °C for power electronics and heat sources which 
causes damage to electronics systems [18]. Therefore, polymer matrix nanoparticles 
provide excellent cooling even under a high electric ﬁeld which is a property to be 
incorporated in dielectric capacitors to withstand all weather conditions. The various 
types of dielectric nanomaterials currently being used along with their potential 
applications are summarized in Table 1.1.
1.3 
Nanodielectric of Metals 
The metal and polymer composites are solid-based dielectric nanomaterials that 
show extremely improved properties with respect to surface structure, the inter-
action between particles, and the size of nanomaterials. Nanodielectric metals are 
commonly expensive to manufacture as it involves the use of a large magnetic spin 
moment and strong ferromagnetic coupling due to high Curie temperature. Metals 
are solids, and they can have anisotropic behavior where nanodielectric metals have

1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials
7
Table 1.1 Types of dielectric nanomaterials currently being used along with their potential 
applications 
Types of dielectric 
nanomaterials 
Dielectric constant value at kHz
Application 
Pure PVC
3.2
High thermal conductivity 
metal industry 
Metal nanoparticles
1.2
Energy, sensors, and 
superconductors 
Polydopamine
3.2
Energy, solar cell, and 
biomedical 
Metals
1.3
Energy, sensors, biomedical 
Hydrogels
1.5
Biomedical, drug delivery, 
and 3D cells models 
Metal oxides
1.5
Energy, sensors, and 
biomedical 
Polymer nanocomposites
3.2
High-voltage cables 
Carbon-based nanocomposites 
2.8
Solar, wind, biofuel, 
geothermal, and tidal power 
Organic nanocomposites
2.5
Membrane biology and 
thermal barrier coating 
industry
large magnetocrystalline anisotropy which means it does not have the extrinsic prop-
erty of metals which has ferromagnetic behavior and is not dependent on the particle 
size and structure, but the quantum of energy required for magnetization in each 
direction is high. The crystal lattice angles dictate these directions, as it is essential 
that the orbital motion of electrons coupled to the electric ﬁeld of the crystal would 
provide the ﬁrst-order contribution to the magnetocrystalline anisotropy. Studies have 
reported that gold, germanium, zinc, and some other metal nanoparticles have shown 
that the dielectric behavior changes contribute the device applications [5, 19]. These 
nanodielectric properties could be applied to interdisciplinary sciences involving 
chemistry, biology, physics, and materials science to fabricate these devices. 
1.3.1 
Gold 
Gold has characteristics of high tensile strength which is responsible for developing 
uniform coatings with polymer matrix, and the obtained surface structures are ideal 
for the required applications. Trace levels of gold are used to cure the disease in 
medicinal applications so that it can kill or destroy the harmful cells present in 
the human body. The smaller levels of gold are well tolerated by the human body. 
Gold nanoparticles present in the composite with the polymer matrix are suitable 
materials for health care, cosmetics, tissue engineering, and most importantly medical

8
S. Chandraleka et al.
diagnostics and sensors applications. Gold plays a vital application on both sides of 
electrochemical-based devices as well as in the process involving biomedical aspects 
of drug delivery systems [20]. The reason this gold is an ideal material for many 
applications is due to its enormous dielectric property of gold nanoparticles and 
its antibacterial activity that favors the development of smart drug delivery systems. 
Gold-containing nanoparticles have high dielectric constant and dielectric loss which 
enhances the dielectric properties when compared to the pure polymeric matrix [21]. 
The vibrant optical property of nanomaterials enhances the device application and 
also has strong catalytic properties for all types of industrial applications. The pres-
ence of gold in the composite with polymer matrix enhances the dielectric constant 
due to the composition of polymer materials as they act as conductive ﬁllers. This 
type of high-energy storage material is more needful for the future to replace the 
need for deﬁciency of nonrenewable sources. Society needs storage devices to store 
more energy for the future with high dielectric permittivity (ε’) at the low applied 
voltage, and this can be developed with gold nanoparticles [4]. 
The polymers used have different chemical compositions, and these changes affect 
the dielectric constant of nanomaterials; for example, the copolymer which is formed 
with two different monomers react together to form more ﬂexible properties. Already 
gold has more tensile strength compared with the transition elements present in the 
periodic table and also as a composite with copolymers it enhances more ﬂexible 
properties that interconnect with the conductive ﬁllers to produce more efﬁcient 
energy-stored capacitors. 
1.3.2 
Metal Oxides 
Zinc oxide is a transition metal oxide with the formula of ZnO which is commonly 
used for several applications from plastics to rechargeable batteries as ZnO nanos-
tructures can be used as anode materials in lithium-ion batteries. Materials with low 
frequency and temperature dependence are well suited for the fabrication of devices. 
Nano copper (II) oxide (CuO) has a superior dielectric constant and is independent 
of the temperature of the device. M-type hexagonal ferrite with the chemical formula 
M Fe12O19 (M = Ba, Sr, Pb) has excellent oxidation resistance, high magnetic mate-
rial resistance behavior to variations in the magnetic ﬁeld, and has the magnetic ﬁeld 
strength capacity to demagnetize a completely magnetized material [22]. These nano 
oxides have the ability to provide information about the remanence and magnetic 
energy of the products. These characteristics of dielectric nanomaterials can be used 
as sensors, radar adsorptive materials, and several others. The rare earth metal doped 
in glass matrix results in enriching the optical properties. The silicon solar cell shows 
a high refractive index due to the plasmonic effect of gold and silver nanoparticles 
which are the reason for the rare earth metal growth on the glass matrix. This kind 
of material is widely used in ultrafast device response [22].

1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials
9
1.4 
Applications of Dielectric Nanomaterials in Energy, 
Electronics, and Sensors 
The wide range of applications of nanodielectrics is illustrated in Fig. 1.2, and this 
technology has been applied in many areas. The prominent areas are space charge 
suppression, charge storage, partial discharge (PD) resistance, high thermal conduc-
tivity, and the biomedical ﬁeld which lead to the signiﬁcant role of nanodielectrics 
in sectors like energy (supercapacitors and batteries), electronics, and sensors. The 
most prominent applications of nanodielectrics are as follows: 
1.4.1 
High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) Cable 
Nanodielectrics possess excellent dielectric properties and can moderate the inter-
nally developed electric ﬁeld. In the case of conventional dielectrics, the space charge 
accumulation can destroy the distribution of the electric ﬁeld and thereby degrading 
the polymer chain gradually. The polymer-nanoparticle composite (PNC) is a revo-
lutionary material system that prohibits space charge accumulation and has been 
proven as a boon to researchers in this ﬁeld. Many researchers have explored different 
PNCs. The incorporation of poly(stearyl methacrylate)-grafted SiO2 into crosslinked 
polyethylene (XLPE) was studied by Zhang et al. [23] and showed the efﬁcient 
suppression of space charge that led to limit the distortion in the internal ﬁeld by 
10.6% at room temperature over a broad externally applied DC ﬁeld ranging from 30 
to 100 kV/mm. Chu et al. [24] have used carbon-doped TiO2 nanoﬁbers in P(VDF-
HFP) nanocomposites and studied their dielectric and energy storage properties. The 
incorporation of MgO nanoparticles in the MgO/low-density polyethylene (LDPE) 
nanodielectrics resulted in the enhancement of the average trap depth that led to space 
charge accumulation near the electrodes [25]. Ganea et al. [26] reported the effect 
of incorporating TiO2 nanoparticles in bis-imidazolium salt with two cyanobiphenyl 
groups and dodecyl sulfate counterion (BIC). They have showed the conductivity 
enhancement with an increase in temperature and doping concentration at a constant 
frequency as shown in Fig. 1.3a–c. Besides, the characteristic relaxation time was 
found to decrease with an increase in the TiO2 nanoparticles’ concentration. The 
effect of the coupling agent was studied by Wang et al. [27] on the electrical proper-
ties of Al2O3/LDPE nanodielectrics and observed that the modiﬁed Al2O3 exhibits 
better space charge suppression than that of pristine one. Chen et al. [28] explained 
the charge dynamics in nanodielectric materials using deep trap formation by intro-
ducing nanoparticles in the material. In another work, space charge characteristics 
of polypropylene (PP)-based nanodielectrics were investigated by Zhou et al. [29] 
for its application as a recyclable insulating material for HVDC cable (Fig. 1.3).

10
S. Chandraleka et al.
Fig. 1.3 a Temperature dependency of the electric conductivity σ’ for BIC, b Electric conductivity 
versus temperature at a ﬁxed frequency, f = 10 Hz, for the samples: BIC, BIC-01, and BIC-2, and 
c Conductivity spectra at T = 296 K, T = 306 K, and T = 324 K for BIC. Adapted with permission 
from ref. [26], Copyright: Elsevier, 2020 
1.4.2 
Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Applications 
Capacitors are the main energy storage components in electrical and electronic 
circuits as well as sensors [30]. These are of various types, viz. thin ﬁlm, ceramic (ﬁlm 
and laminated), electrolytic (aluminum and titanium), and the most sought superca-
pacitors type. Among these, the largest are supercapacitors and electrolytic which are 
manufactured by many manufacturers like Panasonic, Kemet, Murata, Vishay, etc. 
[31]. The energy storage capacitors seek huge applications in defense for transporta-
tion through vehicles, aircraft, and ships. For signiﬁcant improvement of proﬁciency 
of energy storage in the capacitor, the dielectric material is required to possess high 
energy density [32]. Capacitors are highly required in power circuits for conditioning. 
It provides a constant current ﬂow in the electrical circuit by regularizing the ﬂuc-
tuations in the current. The capacitors are more important for the circuits which are 
used for a wide range of temperature and frequency [33]. Energy-storing capacitors 
are highly important in power electronic circuitries, AC, and DC ﬁlters. Huai et al. 
[34] analyzed the importance of electrolytic and PNC ﬁlm capacitors in DC-link 
ﬁlters for their high energy density, current, and voltage regulation efﬁciency, reli-
ability, and stability provided to the circuit. Nanodielectric materials possess high 
dielectric constant and exhibit high breakdown ﬁeld strength, hence are an important 
part of capacitors. The nanodielectrics are advantageous in enhancing the storage 
density of capacitors and supporting the miniaturization of the capacitor. The excel-
lent dielectric breakdown properties, anti-aging properties, temperature, frequency 
independence, and reliability are some of the issues that need to be explored in the 
near future [35].

1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials
11
1.4.3 
High Thermal Conductivity of Nanodielectrics 
Nanodielectrics with high thermal conductivity are highly required for electrical 
as well as electronic circuits and systems. For applications employing high-voltage 
ﬁelds, the dissipation due to leakage current is enormous when the conducting voltage 
is enhanced. Particularly, for miniaturized devices, the compactness of the device will 
lead to more generation of heat in integrated circuitries. 
Most of the literature on nanodielectrics focuses only on the thermal conductivity 
of the material. However, thermal expansion and breakdown strength studies are 
equally important and play a key role in the microelectronic packaging of integrated 
circuits. High thermal conductivity can be achieved by incorporating nano-sized 
ﬁllers in polymer host matrices [36]. These ﬁllers can create thermally conductive 
pathways like whiskers and ﬁlaments in the host matrix and modify the thermal 
resistance at the contacts [37]. 
There are various ﬁllers that have been used to enhance the thermal conductivity 
of dielectric materials. As mentioned in an earlier section, these are classiﬁed as 
metal nanoparticles like Ag, Cu [38] inorganic nanoparticles like Si3N4, BN, AlN, 
SiC, MgO, SiO2, and Al2O3) [39–41], and carbon-based materials [42, 43]. Sengwa 
et al. [39] reported a comparative study of different metal oxides ﬁllers like Al2O3, 
SnO2, TiO2, and ZnO) in PVDF blended with poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO) for their 
dielectric properties and concluded that the incorporation of Al2O3 nanoparticles 
signiﬁcantly improved the dielectric permittivity of the PNC as shown in Fig. 1.4. 
Boron nitride nanosheets (BNNSs) have also been proven to be a great inﬂuencer in 
improving the thermal conductivity of PNCs and explored by Seyhan et al. [44] and 
Sun et al. [45]. Additionally, the thermal conductivity of the polymer was reported 
to be highly dependent on the geometric distribution of the BNNSs in the host in the 
former case, whereas Ag nanoparticles were also used in the latter case to reduce the 
interfacial thermal resistance between two adjacent BNNSs. In another report, Hong 
et al. [46] suggested a different approach for enhancing the thermal conductivity and 
mechanical stretching of the PNC by incorporating a 3D hexagonal BN network in 
the polymer. Graphite was used as a ﬁller for synthesizing nanodielectric PNC by 
Zhang et al. [47].
1.4.4 
Nanodielectrics for Rotating Machines 
The rotating machine systems include electric motors and generators. Nanodielectrics 
play a crucial role here too to restrain partial discharge (PD) to occur. Rotating 
machines are highly useful to run many appliances, smaller equipment, machines, etc. 
And PD may accelerate the degradation of polymer sequences and can cause major 
breakdowns of appliances or machines particularly for high-voltage devices. In high-
voltage machines like pellet on and other electrostatic accelerators, homogeneous

12
S. Chandraleka et al.
Fig. 1.4 Thermal conductivity spectra of the 75PVDF/25PEO blend (PB) ﬁlm and the 75PVDF/ 
25PEO–5 wt% nanoﬁllers-based different PNC ﬁlms (PBAl2O3, PBSnO2, PBTiO2, and PBZnO), 
at 27 °C. The solid lines drawn on the conductivity spectrum of PBZnO ﬁlm represent linear ﬁts of 
the low-frequency data as well as high-frequency data. Inset shows the comparative plot of thermal 
conductivity at 100 Hz for different PNC ﬁlms. Adapted with permission from ref. [39], Copyright: 
Elsevier, 2020
distribution of electric ﬁeld is hard to realize, and hence, there are high chances for 
surface corona discharge thereby breakdown down the machine. 
An investigation on the property of PD resistance in nanodielectrics is highly 
desirable to understand the quality and its performance for prolonged high-voltage 
applications. There are three key parameters that decide the efﬁciency of a nanodi-
electrics material. These are PD current, erosion depth, and surface roughness. Here, 
again the incorporation of nanoﬁllers like fumed silica (SiO2) in XLPE [48] and sili-
cate in polyamide [49] can be a boon to strengthen the bonding by resisting energetic 
charges moving in the polymer. This way, it is possible to shield the polymer and 
enhance the life of the equipment. 
1.4.5 
Nanodielectrics for Modulation and Sensing 
In a recent breakthrough work, Tan et al. [50] reported the induction of dynamically 
controllable quasi-bound state in the continuum (QBIC) with ultrahigh quality factor 
in a symmetric metallic metal surface at terahertz (THz) frequencies using a nanodi-
electric or semiconductor layer, having thickness 1000 times less than the resonant

1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials
13
wavelength (λ/1000), Additionally, the germanium nanostrips work as microchan-
nels for their promising application as BIC-based refractive index sensor. The nanos-
trips provide 200% transmission intensity modulation when subjected to photoex-
citation with very fast recovery (~ps). The sensitivity of the refractive index sensor 
was reported as −24.5 GHz/RIU with a 500-nm-thick superstrate as depicted in 
Fig. 1.5a–c. 
Fig. 1.5 Terahertz refractive index BIC sensor. a Illustration of the device with analyte ﬂowing 
through the Ge strip microchannels. b Simulated transmission amplitude spectra showing the 
collapse and revival of the BIC resonance mode with changing the refractive index of an analyte 
placed in microchannels separated by the Ge strips of the device of Fig. 1.2a. The refractive index 
of Ge is 4 (vertical dashed line), and the calculated BIC resonance (from COMSOL) is at 0.61 THz 
(horizontal dashed line). c Transmission amplitude spectra of the QBIC resonance for a superstrate 
thickness (Ge strip and analyte) of h = 500 nm and different refractive indices of the analyte. The 
inset shows the frequency spectral shift as a function of the analyte refractive index. The device 
sensitivity in terms of frequency shift per refractive index unit is obtained from the slope through a 
linear ﬁt. Adopted with permission from ref. [50], Copyright 2021

14
S. Chandraleka et al.
1.4.6 
Advanced Applications of Dielectric Nanomaterials 
in Various Fields 
The solid dielectric material such as ceramic substances has proven superior dielectric 
properties which is the major requirement for the development of supercapacitor 
applications. These solid materials should have characteristics of deﬁnite shape and 
structure. Solid dielectric nanomaterials depend on the distance between two grains 
and their size followed by the bonding between particles. Ferromagnetic substances 
doped into ceramic materials enhance the performance of supercapacitors. Chromium 
nanoparticles incorporated into the crystalline structure of superconducting (CuTl)-
1223 matrix to obtain (Cr)x/(CuTl)-1223 superconductor composites are an example 
of supercapacitor application [51]. 
The dielectric nature of nanocomposites enables us to deploy them in energy 
storage applications as capacitors. The common factors which affect the energy 
storage levels and its discharge properties in nanocomposite materials are an accu-
mulation of nanoﬁllers and phase separation in the composites as this leads to the 
two constituent phases which are separated apart. This leads us to concentrate on 
improving the energy conversion rate of dielectric nanocomposites to inﬂuence the 
potential to enrich them to be incorporated as capacitive devices. Silanes have been 
the best candidates as modiﬁers with the only setback being its hydrolytic stability 
that restricts its development. The other candidate available is phosphonates which 
contain phosphorus and are also an insurmountable weakness in its detrimental prop-
erties that affect our environment. To overcome these challenges, there is a need 
for surface modiﬁers such are low-molecular-weight carboxylic acids and catechol 
which are present in dopamine and polydopamine and can be explored as surface 
modiﬁers. This surface modiﬁcation focuses on silanes, phosphonates, and dopamine 
as chemical agents to modify the surfaces of metal oxide dielectric nanomaterials. 
Chemical modiﬁcation of nanomaterials brings about a change in the functioning 
capacity of dielectric properties which include breakdown strength, energy density, 
and dielectric constant of the nanocomposites. The dielectric calculations of these 
nanomaterials depend on the frequency and temperature applied to the system as it 
ﬂuctuates, and the parameters which affect the dielectric materials include conduc-
tance (G), capacitance (c), tangent loss (tanδ), and complex dielectric constant (Er''
= E'r − iE''r) varies. These parameters can be calculated by using an impedance 
analyzer. If temperature increases, the Er'' are also increases as most energy is lost 
from the sample, but it is inversely proportional to the frequency given to the system. 
Speciﬁc polymer matrices are used to potentially determine the ﬁnal performance 
for optimizing nanocomposites and the properties of dielectric nanomaterials which 
are responsible for the various applications and the ways to overcome them have to be 
explored [51]. Dielectric-polymer nanocomposites are most suitable, but the choice 
of chemical reactions or chemical reagents used to functionalize these nanomaterials 
in the polymeric matrix determines the potential performance in various applications. 
Surface modiﬁcation techniques have been widely used to modify nanomaterials for 
dialectics, but there is scope for further research in this ﬁeld.

1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials
15
Several classiﬁcations have been used to classify dielectric nanomaterials as they 
differ in their dimensions, breakdown strength, surface area, composition, porosity, 
nature of ceramic inorganic materials, negative temperature coefﬁcient of resistance, 
high insulating resistance, and polarization. MgxCa (0.90-x)Zn0.10Fe2O4 nanopar-
ticle is an example of a surface-modiﬁed system for microwave applications [52]. 
Permittivity and dissipation factor, loss tangent, and dielectric constant are the prop-
erties that need to be evaluated to test the suitability of nanomaterials for microwave 
application. These properties indicate the role of metal nanoparticles on the dielec-
tric properties of the developed nanocomposites. The presence of polymer matrix 
helps to clarify the applicability of metals/microelectronics industry such as transis-
tors, capacitors and resistors, solid-state devices like solar cells, semiconductor laser, 
electrochemical sensing, and electricity resistance. 
Parallel plate capacitors can only store a limited amount of energy before dielectric 
breakdown occurs. Because of the setting of the electric ﬁeld in between two parallel 
plates are connected across the battery by external charge. This is used to measure the 
dielectric properties of materials; on the other hand, the impedance analyzer was used 
to measure the dielectric loss with respect to changes in frequency. It explained that 
dielectric loss is the energy loss that occurs when heating a dielectric material with 
a varying electric ﬁeld or AC circuit alternately charges and discharges every half 
cycle. Dielectric nanomaterial especially gold has higher dielectric loss with polymer 
matrix concerning all frequency ranges from impedance analyzer. The dielectric loss 
of nanomaterials is directly proportional to the polarization resulting in a higher 
dielectric constant, and dielectric loss can be attributed to the maximum polarization 
of dipoles at low and high frequencies. The dipole polarization is minimal and the 
dielectric constant and Dielectric loss is reduced. The dielectric loss can be calculated 
by using the below formulae 
epsilon asterisk left parenthesis omega right parenthesis equals epsilon left parenthesis omega right parenthesis minus i epsilon prime left parenthesis omega right parenthesis
where ε is a real number (permittivity), and ε' is an imaginary number (dielectric 
loss) Part of the dielectric constant of a material. 
1.5 
Flexible Dielectric Nanocomposites 
Flexible polymer-based nanocomposites (PNCs) have attracted researchers for fron-
tier research on ﬂexible electronics, sensors, and energy devices. Flexible matrix 
provides the folding and bending opportunity to device foldable electronics [40, 53– 
56], fabrication of sensors [50], energy devices [54–59], electromagnetic shielding 
[60], etc. 
As far as ﬂexible energy harvesters are concerned, Kar et al. [59] devised  a  
highly efﬁcient self-cleaning piezoelectric nanogenerator (PSNG) based on 2D SnO2 
nanosheet and PVDF polymer nanocomposite. The schematic representation of the 
fabrication process of PSNG is depicted in Fig. 1.6a–e. They adopted a simple

16
S. Chandraleka et al.
Fig. 1.6 Schematic representation of the process of fabrication for PSNG, Images show a bending, 
b rolling, and c twisting of the sample S-5.0. Digital images of PSNG d before and e after covering 
with SnO2 NS/PVDF. Adopted with permission from ref. [59], Copyright: Elsevier, 2019 
approach of hydrothermal to prepare 2D SnO2 nanosheets and their composites with 
PVDF in different concentrations of SnO2 were synthesized using the facile solution 
casting method in thickness ∼100 ± 5 μm. So formed self-standing PNC ﬁlms are 
easy to bend, fold, twist, and roll as shown in Fig. 1.6a–c. 
A summary of this entire work is schematically represented in Fig. 1.7a. The 
PSNG is capable of energy generation (illumination of LED panel) by body move-
ment, sound energy of the string of a guitar, air blowing, and the self-cleaning prop-
erty of 2D SnO2 nanosheet-PVDF nanocomposites. Figure 1.7b shows the real-time 
applications of this PSNG under bio-mechanical pressures, particularly with human 
body movements like tapping by ﬁnger, twisting by the wrist, pressure by heel and 
toe, etc. The PSNG is capable and efﬁcient to illuminate a panel of 85 blue and yellow 
LEDs directly and instantly without any capacitor or storage through a rectiﬁer circuit 
connection using gentle imparting of human ﬁngers. Other ways to generate power 
are depicted in Fig. 1.7c–f. The power generation using this PSNG was investigated 
under air blowing by an air-blower (Fig. 1.7g) and sound using a speaker of 3W 
(Fig. 1.7h).
Polymer-based ﬂexible nanodielectrics are immensely beneﬁcial for biomedical 
and futuristic robotics as well. The electroactive polymers (EAPs) exhibit a change in 
shape or size if subjected to an external bias. Advanced robotics ﬁnd numerous appli-
cations of these EAPs as artiﬁcial skin to the human-like robots. EAPs are preferred 
owing to their fantastic dielectric properties, ﬂexibility, robustness, lightweight, faster 
response as well as economic [61]. 
Numerous efforts have been carried out to realize this futuristic and revolutionary 
research. Particularly, capacitive type sensors are extremely useful for different

1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials
17
Fig. 1.7 a Schematic representation of the function of the ﬂexible and self-cleaning energy 
harvester. Digital images of piezoelectric power generation (rectiﬁed output voltage) by PSNG 
due to b ﬁngers imparting, c wrist twisting, d wooden piece imparting, e heel pressure. f Digital 
image of instant illumination of 85 numbers of commercial LEDs by simple ﬁnger imparting onto 
the upper surface of PSNG. Charging capacitor (1μF) by power generated from the PSNG via g air 
blowing, and h sound (a common tune of guitar) from a speaker using a full wave rectiﬁer. Capacitor 
voltage reached around 3.5 V for air blowing of250s duration. Adopted with permission from ref. 
[59], Copyright: Elsevier, 2019

18
S. Chandraleka et al.
biomedical applications owing to their low power consumption, environment friend-
liness, and sustainability in adverse conditions. Their promising applications are 
health monitoring can be done by wearable sensors, electronic skin (e-skin) for arti-
ﬁcial intelligent appliances, etc. [62]. Dielectric elastomers (DE) are a special class of 
EPAs, which are designed by sandwiching a thin and soft layer of polymer between 
two compliant electrodes and are extremely promising for making muscles of human-
like robots. In this row, simulations of human facial expressions on the artiﬁcial skin 
were experimented with by Kwak et al. [63]. Additionally, the electromechanical 
properties of Des are extensively useful as touch sensors and functional sensors 
as well as the interconnects for the artiﬁcial outer skin of the robot to the circuits 
inside [64]. In other work, multi-walled CNTs were used as ﬁllers in DEs to prepare 
nanocomposite. Further, their electrical and shape properties were examined, and it 
was observed that less power is required with better deformation properties. 
1.5.1 
Challenges with Present Dielectric Nanomaterials 
and Future Perspectives 
The challenge with these types of dielectric nanomaterials is the separation of conduc-
tive particles of porous ferrite or dielectric nanomaterials samples, the value of 
the dielectric parameter shows a very small change, and it should obey Koop’s 
phenomenology and Maxwell–Wagner polarization ease to show that the dielectric 
dispersion pattern was also elucidated by Maxwell–Wagner polarization, following 
Koop’s phenomenology. It states that conductive particle shows the separation of 
the porous ferrite or dielectric nanomaterials. Nanocomposites sample allow very 
small changes in the numbers of the dielectric properties which are breakdown value, 
dielectric loss tangent and permittivity, resistance, and conductance which result from 
band gap variation due to grain boundary. Maximum electrical permittivity values 
arise due to the presence of thin grain boundaries to keep away Koop’s hypothesis 
and the Maxwell–Wagner model of interfacial polarization. The connection between 
frequency and AC conductivity is explained with Koop’s theory for different nanodi-
electric materials. Here, grain boundaries that possess increased resistance at low 
frequencies result in maintaining constant conductivity. The rise in AC conductivity 
values occurs in the high-frequency region where higher conductivity of the grains 
when compared to the grain boundaries of the corresponding dielectric spectrum is 
dominated by polarization processes that start from the grain boundaries of ferrite and 
dielectric nanoparticles. The thickness of the grain boundaries determines the perfor-
mance of the dielectric constant as they are inversely proportional. The Maxwell– 
Wagner model at low frequencies is widely used to deﬁne grain boundary polarization 
standardized materials. Johnsher’s power law is applied to heterogeneous disordered 
nanodielectric solid materials or multiphase materials built up with interfaces and 
defects which are responsible for the electrical properties of ferrites. Koop’s theory

1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials
19
has been also used to explain the correlation between AC conductivity and frequency 
for different ferrites. 
Integrating the sensor scattering property of silicon nanoparticles and the electrons 
present inside the atom shows a magnetic dipole due to its spinning nature around 
the nuclei of silicon nanoparticles to escape thermal forfeiture. Anapole mode is 
an anon-emitting radio rays source that exists when electric and circulating dipole 
is present on the surface of an imaginary torus along the plane (toroidal dipole) 
suitable for refractometric sensors. The nanoparticles which have large dipole show 
a high dielectric constant. Refractometric sensors are currently used in the ﬁeld 
of food and cell membrane application in the biomedical ﬁeld. Organic dye-doped 
and nanoparticles including Fe and Ni combination particles doped in hydrogel exist 
with high dielectric constant values respective to their frequency range by impedance 
hence proved by using Koops theory and Maxwell–Wagner approach. 
In general, Maxwell–Wagner polarization reduces the efﬁciency of nanomate-
rials. To avoid polarization, the cyclability of the connections of the lithium-ion 
batteries should be improved. Rare-earth metal doping of LiRxMn2-xO4 nanoparticles 
improved their structural stability and increased their dielectric constant for memory 
devices. The dielectric barrier discharge method (DBD) is diverse from another 
synthesis of C3N4-Mn3O4 nanoparticles nonthermal plasma formed in between the 
two electrodes separated on the application of AC potential. DBDs include the ioniza-
tion of the surrounding air followed by an H2S gas atmosphere, producing a variety 
of reactive species for gas detection in sensors. Reducing the size of the nanoparticles 
increases the surface area resulting in increased sensitivity and faster responses in 
both response time and recovery time. 
Dielectric nanomaterials have created an impact on the currently manufactured 
devices for dielectric applications from health care to communications engineering. 
This has paved the way for the future generation of novel smart technologies for 
harnessing nonrenewable energy resources from sensors to microelectronic devices 
as given below in Fig. 1.8.
1.6 
Conclusions 
Nanomaterials have signiﬁcantly enhanced the properties of dielectric devices, and it 
is currently applied across all industries and in device manufacturing. The twenty-ﬁrst 
century is the move toward protecting our natural fossil resources and living in a green 
environment free of pollution. The demonstration of e-vehicles as a challenge to the 
present carbon-based fuels had increased our dependence on nanodielectric materials 
for developing smart sensors and fast charging tools. Renewable energy resources 
have to be optimally used to build a sustainable future for our people on earth in 
the coming decades where the requirement of reusable materials for batteries, better 
storage capacity, and monitoring their performance remotely with sensor and artiﬁ-
cial intelligence technologies would be the next challenge. Nanodielectrics are now 
in the forefront of frontier technologies which scientists are working up to technical

20
S. Chandraleka et al.
Fig. 1.8 a Schematic representation of past, present, and future applications of dielectric nanoma-
terial
produce products and devices using ﬂexible polymer-matrixes, doped metal semi-
conducting oxides, and hybrid nanomaterials. The advancement in the development 
of nanomaterials for dielectric applications would further lead to the development 
of a sustainable economy by harnessing of nature through green energy routes and 
containing pollution. 
Acknowledgements Ms. Chandralekha acknowledges the ﬁnancial support of the Government 
of Tamil Nadu fellowship Under Department of Collegiate Education (Ref. No. 31350/1/2020). 
The authors acknowledge RUSA-MHRD (COMMUNICATION No: C3/RI & QI/PF4-Appoint/ 
Theme-2/ Group-1/2021/150 for the ﬁnancial support and facilities under UGC SAP DRS-I (Ref. 
No. F.540/16/DRS-I/2016 (SAP-I)), Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Madras, 
Guindy Campus, Chennai-600025, Tamil Nadu, India. 
References 
1. Abadias G, Chason E, Keckes J, Sebastiani M, Thompson GB, Barthel E, Doll GL, Murray 
CE, Stoessel CH, Martinu L (2018) Stress in thin ﬁlms and coatings: current status, challenges, 
and prospects. J Vac Sci Technol, A: Vac, Surf Films 36(2):020801 
2. Blatsi C, Patsidis AC, Psarras GC (2022) Dielectric properties and energy storage of hybrid/ 
boron nitride/titanium carbide/epoxy nanocomposites. J Compos Sci 6(9):259 
3. Mahmood A, Naeem A, Mahmood T (2017) High-k polymer nanocomposites for energy storage 
applications. Polymer dielectrics: properties and applications of, p 23 
4. Khan I, Saeed K, Khan I (2019) Nanoparticles: properties, applications and toxicities. Arab J 
Chem 12(7):908–931

1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials
21
5. Niu Y, Wang H (2019) Dielectric nanomaterials for power energy storage: surface modiﬁcation 
and characterization. ACS Appl Nano Mater 2(2):627–642 
6. Sundar U, Lao Z, Cook-Chennault K (2020) Enhanced dielectric permittivity of optimized 
surface modiﬁed of barium titanate nanocomposites. Polymers 12(4):827 
7. Singh D, Singh N, Garg A, Gupta RK (2019) Engineered thiol anchored Au-BaTiO3/PVDF 
polymer nanocomposite as efﬁcient dielectric for electronic applications. Compos Sci Technol 
174:158–168 
8. Wahab YA, Fatmadiana S, Naseer MN, Johan MR, Hamizi NA, Sagadevan S, Akbarzadeh O, 
Chowdhury ZZ, Sabapathy T, Al Douri Y (2020) Metal oxides powder technology in dielectric 
materials. In: Metal oxide powder technologies. Elsevier, pp 385–399 
9. Song JH, Min SH, Kim SG, Cho Y, Ahn SH (2022) Multi-functionalization strategies using 
nanomaterials: a review and case study in sensing applications. Int J Precis Eng Manuf-Green 
Technol 9(1):323–347 
10. Lewis TJ (1994) Nanometric dielectrics. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 1(5):812–825 
11. Pandey JC, Singh M (2021) Dielectric polymer nanocomposites: past advances and future 
prospects in electrical insulation perspective. SPE Polym 2(4):236–256 
12. Zhong SL, Dang ZM, Zhou WY, Cai HW (2018) Past and future on nanodielectrics. IET 
Nanodielectrics 1(1):41–47 
13. Xu C, Song Y, Han M, Zhang H (2021) Portable and wearable self-powered systems based on 
emerging energy harvesting technology. Microsyst Nanoeng 7(1):1–14 
14. Tafete GA, Abera MK, Thothadri G (2022) Review on nanocellulose-based materials for 
supercapacitors applications. J Energy Storage 48:103938 
15. Panwar NL, Kaushik SC, Kothari S (2011) Role of renewable energy sources in environmental 
protection: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 15(3):1513–1524 
16. Jeevanandam J, Barhoum A, Chan YS, Dufresne A, Danquah MK (2018) Review on nanopar-
ticles and nanostructured materials: history, sources, toxicity and regulations. Beilstein J 
Nanotechnol 9(1):1050–1074 
17. Puiggalí J, del Valle LJ, Katsarava R (2019) Other miscellaneous materials and their 
nanocomposites. In: Nanomaterials and polymer nanocomposites, pp 353–398 
18. Co¸skun R, Okutan M, Öztürk M, Yalçın O (2019) Experimental model to describe the dielectric 
response of different dye and nanoparticles doped hydrogels for biological cell membranes and 
biological systems. J Mol Liq 296:112072 
19. Hassan YA, Hu H (2020) Current status of polymer nanocomposite dielectrics for high-
temperature applications. Compos Part A Appl Sci Manuf 138:106064 
20. Amina SJ, Guo B (2020) A review on the synthesis and functionalization of gold nanoparticles 
as a drug delivery vehicle. Int J Nanomed 15:9823 
21. Anik MI, Mahmud N, Al Masud A, Hasan M (2022) Gold nanoparticles (GNPs) in biomedical 
and clinical applications: a review. Nano Select 3(4):792–828 
22. Mutlu S, Metin E, Yuksel SA, Bayrak U, Nuhoglu C, Arsu N (2021) In-situ photochemical 
synthesis and dielectric properties of nanocomposite thin ﬁlms containing Au, Ag and MnO 
nanoparticles. Eur Polymer J 144:110238 
23. Zhang L, Khani MM, Krentz TM (2017) Suppression of space charge in crosslinked polyethy-
lene ﬁlled with poly (stearyl methacrylate)-grafted SiO2 nanoparticles. Appl Phys Lett 
110:130903 
24. Chu H, Fu C, Xu J, Li W, Qian J, Nie W, Ran X (2020) Carbon-doped inorganic nanoassemblies 
as ﬁllers to tailor the dielectric and energy storage properties in polymer-based nanocomposites. 
Mater Des 188:108486 
25. Zhang L, Zhou YX, Tian JH (2014) Experiment and simulation of space charge suppression 
in LDPE/MgO nanocomposite under external DC electric ﬁeld. J Electrostat 72:252–260 
26. Ganea CP, Cîrcu V, Manaila-Maximean D (2020) Effect of titanium oxide nanoparticles on the 
dielectric properties and ionic conductivity of a new smectic bis-imidazolium salt with dodecyl 
sulfate anion and cyanobiphenyl mesogenic groups. J Mol Liq 317:113939 
27. Wang SJ, Zha JW, Wu YH (2015) Preparation, microstructure and properties of polyethylene/ 
alumina nanocomposites for HVDC insulation. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 22(6):3350– 
3356

22
S. Chandraleka et al.
28. Chen G, Li ST, Zhong LS (2015) Space charge in nanodielectrics and its impact on electrical 
performance. In: IEEE 11th International conference on the properties and applications of 
dielectric materials (ICPADM), Sydney, NSW, Australia, July, pp 36–39 
29. Zhou Y, Hu J, Dang B (2017) Effect of different nanoparticles on tuning electrical properties 
of polypropylene nanocomposites. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 24(3):1380–1389 
30. Cao Y, Irwin PC, Younsi K (2004) The future of nanodielectrics in the electrical power industry. 
IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 11(5):797–807 
31. Angel C, Ramon R, Victoria J (2016) Entropy characterisation of overstressed capacitors for 
life time prediction. J Power Sources 336:272–278 
32. Rafael VR, Sheng C, Vladimir P (2012) Electrical and electron paramagnetic resonance spec-
troscopy characterization of Mn-doped nanostructured TiO2 for capacitor applications. J Power 
Sources 210:21–25 
33. DeCerbo JN, Bray KR, Merett JN (2015) Analysis of multilayered, nitrogen-doped aluminium 
oxide and hafnium oxide dielectric ﬁlms for wide-temperature capacitor applications. Thin 
Solid Films 590:71–75 
34. Huai W, Dennis A, Frede B (2015) Degradation testing and failure analysis of DC ﬁlm capacitors 
under high humidity conditions. Microelectron Reliab 55:2007–2011 
35. Daniel T, Yang C, Enis T (2013) Nanoﬁller dispersion in polymer dielectrics. J Mater Sci 
4:6–15 
36. El-Hag AH, Simon LC, Jayaram SH (2006) Erosion resistance of nano-ﬁlled silicone rubber. 
IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 13:122–128 
37. Huang X, Jiang P, Tanaka T (2011) A review of dielectric polymer composites with high thermal 
conductivity. IEEE Electr Insul Mag 27:8–16 
38. Jiang PK, Chen J, Huang XY (2017) Research status of thermally conductive but electrically 
insulating polymer nanocomposites (in Chinese). High Voltage Eng 43(9):2791–2799 
39. Sengwa RJ, Dhatarwal P, Choudhary S (2020) A comparative study of different metal 
oxide nanoparticles dispersed PVDF/PEO blend matrix-based advanced multifunctional 
nanodielectrics for ﬂexible electronic devices. Mater Today Commun 25:101380 
40. Wu K, Fang JC, Ma JR. Achieving a collapsible, strong, and highly thermally conductive ﬁlm 
based onoriented functionalized boron nitride nanosheets and cellulose nanoﬁber. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces 9:20035–30045 
41. Kozako M, Okazaki Y, Hikita M (2010) Preparation and evaluation of epoxy composite insu-
lating materials toward high thermal conductivity. International conference on solid dielectrics, 
Potsdam, Germany, July, pp 1–4 
42. Sun RH, Yao H, Zhang HB (2016) Decoration of defect-free graphene nanoplatelets with 
alumina for thermally conductive and electrically insulating epoxy composites. Compos Sci 
Technol 137:16–23 
43. Wu ZJ, Gao S, Chen L (2017) Electrically insulated epoxy nanocomposites reinforced with 
synergistic core-shell SiO2@MWCNTs and montmorillonite biﬁllers. Macromol Chem Phys 
218:1700357 
44. Seyhan AT, Goncu Y, Durukan O (2017) Silanization of boron nitride nanosheets (BNNSs) 
through microﬂuidization and their use for producing thermally conductive and electrically 
insulating polymer nanocomposites. J Solid State Chem 249:98–107 
45. Sun JJ, Yao YM, Zeng XL (2017) Preparation of boron nitride nanosheet/nanoﬁbrillated cellu-
lose nanocomposites with ultrahigh thermal conductivity via engineering interfacial thermal 
resistance. Adv Mater Interfaces 4:1700563 
46. Hong HJ, Kwan SM, Lee DS (2017) Highly ﬂexible and stretchable thermally conductive 
composite ﬁlm by polyurethane supported 3D networks for boron nitride. Compos Sci Technol 
152:94–100 
47. Zhang XM, Zhang JJ, Zhang XL (2017) Toward high efﬁciency thermally conductive and 
electrically insulating pathways through uniformly dispersed and highly oriented graphites 
close-packed with SiC. Compos Sci Technol 150:217–226 
48. Tanaka T, Bulinski A, Castellon J et al (2011) Dielectric properties of XLPE/SiO2 nanocom-
posites based on CIGRE WG D1.24 cooperative test result. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 
18(5):1484–1517

1
The Past, Present, and Potential Future of Dielectric Nanomaterials
23
49. Kozako M, Fuse N, Ohki Y et al (2004) Surface degradation of polyamide nanocompos-
ites caused by partial discharges using IEC(b) electrodes. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 
11(5):833–839 
50. Tan TCW, Srivastava YK, Ako RT, Wang W, Bhaskaran M, Sriram S, Al-Naib I, Plum E, Singh 
R (2021) Active control of nanodielectric-induced THz Quasi-BIC in ﬂexible metasurfaces: a 
platform for modulation and sensing. Adv Mater 33(27):2100836 
51. Siddabattuni S, Schuman TP, Dogan F (2013) Dielectric properties of polymer–particle 
nanocomposites inﬂuenced by electronic nature of ﬁller surfaces. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
5(6):1917–1927 
52. Rahman MA, Islam MT, Hossain A, Singh MJ, Albadran SM, Soliman MS, Samsuz-
zaman M (2022) Preparation of new ﬂexible antenna based on sol–gel synthesized 
MgxCa(0.9-x)Zn0.10Fe2O4 nanoparticle for microwave imaging applications. J Market Res 
20:3579–3591 
53. Ambrosio R, Carrillo A, Mota ML, de la Torre K, Torrealba R, Moreno M, Vazquez H, Flores 
J, Vivaldo I (2018) Polymeric nanocomposites membranes with high permittivity based on 
PVA-ZnO nanoparticles for potential applications in ﬂexible electronics. Polymers 10:1370 
54. Kumar S, Supriya S, Kar M (2018) Enhancement of dielectric constant in polymer-ceramic 
nanocomposite for ﬂexible electronics and energy storage applications. Compos Sci Technol 
157:48–56 
55. Morsi MA, Rajeh A, Al-Muntaser AA (2019) Reinforcement of the optical, thermal and elec-
trical properties of PEO based on MWCNTs/Au hybrid ﬁllers: nanodielectrics materials for 
organoelectronic devices. Compos Part B 173:106957 
56. Choudhary S, Sengwa RJ (2018) ZnO nanoparticles dispersed PVA–PVP blend matrix based 
high performance ﬂexible nanodielectrics for multifunctional microelectronic devices. Curr 
Appl Phys 18:1041–1058 
57. Luo H, Zhou X, Ellingford C, Zhang Y, Chen S, Zhou K, Zhang D, Bowen CR, Wan C 
(2019) Interface design for high energy density polymer nanocomposites. Chem Soc Rev 
48:4424–4465 
58. Yan J, Liu M, Jeong YG, Kang W, Li L, Zhao Y, Deng N, Cheng B, Yang G (2019) Performance 
enhancements in poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride)-based piezoelectric nano- generators for efﬁcient 
energy harvesting. Nano Energy 56:662–692 
59. Kar E, Bose N, Dutta B, Banerjee S, Mukherjee N, Mukherjee S (2019) 2D SnO2 nanosheet/ 
PVDF composite based ﬂexible, self-cleaning piezoelectric energy harvester, energy convers. 
Manage 184:600–608 
60. Tsonos C, Soin N, Tomara G, Yang B, Psarras GC, Kanapitsasa A, Siores E (2016) 
Electromagnetic wave absorption properties of ternary poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride)/magnetite 
nanocomposites with carbon nanotubes and grapheme. RSC Adv 6:1919–1924 
61. Liu L, Zhang C, Luo M (2017) A biologically inspired artiﬁcial muscle based on ﬁber-reinforced 
and electropneumatic dielectric elastomers. Smart Mater Struct 26:085018 
62. Chhetry A, Yoon H, Park JY (2017) A ﬂexible and highly sensitive capacitive pressure sensor 
based on conductive ﬁbers with a microporous dielectric for wearable electronics. J. Mater. 
Chem. C 5:10068–10076 
63. Kwak JW, Chi HJ, Jung KM (2005) A face robot actuated with artiﬁcial muscle based on 
dielectric elastomer. J Mech Sci Technol 19(2):578–588 
64. Yoon SG, Chang ST (2017) Microﬂuidic capacitive sensors with ionic liquid electrodes and 
CNT/PDMS nanocomposites for simultaneous sensing of pressure and temperature. J Mater 
Chem C 5:1910–1919

Chapter 2 
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric 
Materials 
Vinod Kashyap, Sukhvant Singh, Sumit, and Lipeeka Rout 
Abstract It is highly critical to acquire desirable performance and durability of 
materials for various engineering applications. To overcome these issues, in recent 
years, studies on nanodielectric material are found to be one of the most dynamic 
ﬁelds of research among scientists. A multi-component nanostructure that can lead to 
the change of several dielectric properties is termed as nanodielectric. These mate-
rials provide extensively high-dielectric properties due to which they can act as a 
suitable material for energy storage device applications, in particular for capacitors. 
Nanodielectric materials were associated with high-dielectric and insulating prop-
erties. Such properties of nanodielectric material have commonly been observed in 
nanocomposites and ceramics materials. More recently, nanoparticles were being 
incorporated in various metal oxide and polymer support to achieve the enhanced 
dielectric property of the materials. Fundamentally, the basic principle of nanodielec-
tric materials lies on a large internal area of the surface. Owing to their wide range of 
properties, it is highly necessary to make the nanodielectric material using the proper 
synthetic procedure. The most important factor to achieve the dielectric property of 
the material is to synthesize the nanocomposite or to incorporate the nanoparticle 
with uniform size distribution. A well-dispersed nanoparticle can enhance the dielec-
tric property of the material. Since many variables can affect the dielectric property 
such as particle size, dispersion, and aspect ratio, synthesis of these materials is of
V. Kashyap · S. Singh 
Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Tiruchirappalli, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil 
Nadu, India 
V. Kashyap 
Department of Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India 
S. Singh 
Centre for Sustainable Technologies (CST), Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India 
Sumit 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India 
L. Rout envelope symbol
Department of Chemistry, Madanapalle Institute of Technology & Science, Madanapalle, Andhra 
Pradesh, India 
e-mail: lipika.pooja@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_2 
25

26
V. Kashyap et al.
high priority and highly important. Keeping the above in mind, the current chapter 
will give a thorough study of various synthetic methods which can be utilized for the 
synthesis of suitable nanodielectric material. In the current chapter, the authors have 
explained various available methods for the synthesis of nanodielectric material. 
Keywords Nanodielectric materials · Sol–gel · Hydrothermal method ·
Electrospinning · Spray pyrolysis 
2.1 
Introduction 
Presently, it is imperative to increase the use of energy and renewable sources due to 
the rising energy demand and the depletion of fossil resources [1]. The development of 
renewable energy generation is one of the major scientiﬁc interest in order to achieve 
the productivity of energy consumption [1]. The development of nanomaterials ﬁlls 
two primary needs: the establishment of their functioning and their applications in 
the practical ﬁeld [2]. Since the introduction of DC electricity and the electric bulb by 
Thomas Edison in the late nineteenth century, electric power has become an effective 
source of energy for the human world [2]. 
For their prospective applications, dielectric materials with high dielectric 
constant and low dielectric loss have drawn a lot of attention [3, 4]. Nanodielec-
tric materials were found to have superior dielectric properties and possess immense 
interest owing to their potential applications as capacitor materials [5, 6]. These 
capacitor materials can be further utilized for electronic devices, gate dielectrics, 
electroactive materials, management of grid energy by power electronics, and also in 
pulsed power systems [7–9]. High-performance dielectric materials also have been 
utilized in various industrial applications such as computers, telecommunications, 
defense, and aerospace [10–12]. In general, the development of pulse power is in 
much demand, because of the requirement of much energy over a longer period 
and which further can release it quickly, thus increasing the available instantaneous 
power [13, 14]. The capacity of electrostatic energy relies upon induced electric ﬁeld 
polarization of dielectric materials, which further need high strength of breakdown 
and high dielectric permittivity. 
Previously, few researchers’ reported that compared to available conventional 
ceramic-based dielectric materials, composites based on polymers were found to have 
better efﬁciency, good ﬂexibility, minimal expense, and lightweight to become a stan-
dard material in the microelectronics industries [15, 16]. They observed that ﬂexible 
polymer composites with a high dielectric constant are profoundly attractive, and this 
high dielectric constant of polymer nanocomposites is of great interest for various 
practical applications [17]. Similarly, over the past few decades’ successful commer-
cialization was made for organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) using organic elec-
tronics. One of the emerging device building blocks is organic ﬁeld-effect transis-
tors (OFETs) which have shown higher efﬁciency compared to amorphous silicon 
thin-ﬁlm transistors [18], essentially utilizing the properties of ﬂexible and printable

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
27
materials. In recent years, applications of OFET in backplane displays [19], biosen-
sors [20], and electronic devices were broadly investigated [21, 22]. Moreover, it is 
believed that in near future these types of materials with high synthetic tenability, 
multifunctional properties, and high interface sensitivity are most likely to expand 
the scope of technological development [23]. 
Additionally, other forms of nanodielectric materials are available which have 
been used for numerous industrial applications [24]. In the current instance, biax-
ially oriented polypropylene (BOPP) is broadly applied as a dielectric material 
for the storage of electrical energy, because of its low dielectric loss, high break-
down strength, and easy way of manufacturing. Recently, poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride) 
(PVDF) and its copolymers were found to be the most prevalent dielectric material 
for the application of capacitors with high energy density [25]. Also, a great deal of 
effort has gone into creating PVDF-based polymers by mixing, blending, coating, 
spinning, and nanocomposite production. Among these methods, nanocomposites 
have demonstrated advantages for enhancing the impact of the inorganic nanoﬁllers 
on the dielectric permittivity [26]. 
To develop such materials that are very ﬂexible, those having a high dielectric 
constant, and are less expensive, efforts have been made to synthesize these materials 
using various synthetic techniques. There are several techniques available for the 
preparation of numerous forms of nanodielectric materials. Every synthetic strategy 
has advantages and disadvantages depending on the reaction time, particle size, 
thickness of the ﬁlm, etc. 
Keeping all the above in mind, in the present chapter, our prime focus is to discuss 
the novel and cost-effective synthetic routes of nanodielectric materials. There are 
several available methods for the preparation of materials with excellent dielectric 
properties. A schematic of available synthesis methods for nanodielectric materials 
synthesis are shown in Fig. 2.1.
2.2 
Introduction to Various Synthetic Routes 
for Nanodielectric Materials Synthesis 
It is vitally important to create and design materials for use in electronic applications. 
While examining the dielectric characteristics of nanodielectric, the production of the 
materials was frequently overlooked. The physical characteristics of the raw materials 
employed in the preparation process are what give rise to the physical characteristics 
of the composite material, it has been noted [27]. To achieve various properties and 
various forms of nanodielectric materials for a diverse range of applications, it is 
very important and essential to synthesize those materials with suitable techniques 
and under optimized conditions.

28
V. Kashyap et al.
Fig. 2.1 Various synthetic techniques for nanodielectric materials synthesis
In recent years, highly cost-effective synthetic techniques have been adapted to 
create various forms of nanodielectric materials such as polymer-based, nanoparticle-
based, and ceramic-based [28]. The enormous synthetic techniques for nanodielec-
tric materials have attracted a lot of research interest, as they provide material with a 
high dielectric constant which is highly required for various applications. Recently, 
researchers have tried to overcome the difﬁculties associated with the development 
of nanodielectric with effective dielectric properties for devices and applications. 
Mostly, nanodielectric properties are observed in nanocomposites and ceramic mate-
rials [29]. In recent years, it has been found that in ceramics form nanostructures were 
obtained to large extent. Notably, it has been observed that nanocrystalline powder 
can be used as starting material for the synthesis of nanodielectric materials. The main 
focus was being made to synthesize nanostructure materials with dielectric property 
using novel concepts and approaches. There was various novel approached which 
has been utilized to obtain nanodielectric materials [30, 31]. The basic principle of 
materials nanodielectric mostly relies on its large internal surface area. In order to 
engineer these materials, one needs to select a speciﬁc aspect ratio, apply internal

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
29
modiﬁcations, and change their morphology. Nanodielectric can also be fabricated 
using organic oxide materials. The traditional method for making dielectric materials 
with nanoparticles in them required combining polymer materials with nanoparticle 
precursors to create a composite dielectric material. Till date, various novel synthetic 
routes have been utilized to form highly effective nanodielectric materials for several 
industrial applications. The details of each synthetic techniques have been discussed 
in the later part of the chapter. 
2.3 
Sol–gel Technique for Nanodielectric Materials 
Synthesis 
A sol–gel synthetic method is a bottom-up approach in which components of atomic 
dimensions are assembled to form nanomaterials [32]. The beneﬁt of this technique 
is that particle size may be controlled. It is a method of wet chemical synthesis used 
to produce ﬁbers, thin ﬁlms, and powders of ceramic, dielectric, and glass materials 
[33–35]. A sol is a solid ion or particle suspension in a solvent, either colloidal 
or molecularly. When the solvent in the sol starts to evaporate and the particles 
left behind start to join up in a continuous network, a gel is created [36]. In this 
method, metal alkoxides and chlorides are typically utilized as precursors. During 
the synthesis technique, pH must be managed because this process is sensitive to it, 
and it will help to prevent precipitation and create a homogeneous gel. 
The following steps occurred in the general sol–gel process (Fig. 2.2): 
1. Hydrolysis—Metal precursors undergo hydrolysis by water in presence of 
catalysts such as HCl or ammonia.
Fig. 2.2 Schematic diagram of different stages of the sol–gel process: from precursor to aerogel [1– 
5, 32]. Adapted with permission from ref. [32]. Open access under a CC BY 4.0 license. Copyright 
© 2021 Dmitry Bokov et al. 

30
V. Kashyap et al.
2. Condensation—Condensation reactions that either produce water or alcohol are 
used to polymerize siloxane to create bonds. Further, this results in the formation 
of monomers, dimers, cyclic trimers, and higher-order rings. 
3. Growth of material—The molecules start to aggregate with an increase in the 
number of siloxane bonds where they create a network, and when they dry, gel 
forms. The network contracts as the water and alcohol are driven away. The 
formation of spherical nanoparticles occurs at pH values greater than thee 
the ratio which ranges from 7 to 5. 
High-purity and highly efﬁcient nanodielectric materials can be prepared at room 
temperature using the sol–gel method. Nanodielectric materials with high efﬁciency 
have a wide range of applications in optical ﬁbers and high-performance electrical 
insulation [32]. Dielectric materials are also used in semiconductor materials and 
capacitors which can store charge. Dielectric materials have applications in instru-
mental analysis. The instruments use dielectric material in diodes in the detectors 
and radiant power monitor devices. 
Recently, in 2020, N. Murali and co-workers synthesized cobalt ferrite nanodi-
electric materials by utilizing the sol–gel method [37]. They have investigated the 
cobalt ferrite’s magnetic, dielectric, and structural characteristics. They discovered 
that the magnetic and dielectric properties of nanomaterials are greatly inﬂuenced by 
several important factors, including particle size, crystallinity, composition, and site 
occupancy, and the earlier parameters can be effectively managed by adjusting the 
calcination temperature and calcination time. They have noticed that as the calcina-
tion temperature rises, the materials’ coercivity diminishes. Additionally, they have 
researched CoFe2O4’s dielectric characteristics in the 100 to 5 MHz frequency range. 
Many functional groups have been grafted onto metal oxide surfaces using the sol– 
gel procedures, and their dielectric properties have been further examined by a small 
number of researchers [38]. Dierkes and co-workers investigated how charge transfer

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
31
of (PP)/(ethylene-octene) copolymer (EOC)/silica nanodielectrics was affected by 
3 aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) functionalized nano-silica [39]. They have 
incorporated APTES over the silica surface to generate an amine functional group 
which is responsible to modify the electronic properties and interfacial interaction 
on the silica-polymer surface. According to a few reports, it has been observed that 
surface modiﬁcation can enhance the nucleation rate and crystallinity of the nanodi-
electrics. Most recently, in 2022, sol–gel technology was used by Ghamarpoor et al. 
to create silica nanoparticles based on vinyl [40]. They used the sol–gel technique 
to graft vinyltriethoxysilane (VTES) over silica for this purpose. The grafting was 
required to create strong interaction between the surface of the silica and nitrile 
rubber (NBR) Matrix. 
A lot of interest has been paid to thin-ﬁlm nanodielectric in addition to powder-
based and polymer-based nanodielectric. Aoki et al. have reported the synthesis of 
HfO2 nano-ﬁlms using the sol–gel method ad further studied their dielectric proper-
ties. They stated that the sol–gel method and post-annealing can be used to create a 
high-quality metal oxide nano-ﬁlm. In this thin-ﬁlm manufacturing procedure, metal 
oxide precursors were ﬁrst made to chemisorb on the silicon wafer in an organic 
solvent to create a homogeneous layer. Next, the alkoxide group was hydrolyzed. 
Later, the deposited ﬁlm was annealed for a few cycles to get uniform nanodielectric 
thin ﬁlm [41]. Similar to this, Jian et al. published in 2005 on the sol–gel produced 
ZnFe2O4–SiO2 composite thin ﬁlm’s dielectric behavior [42]. 
A straightforward method called sol–gel can be utilized to create high-purity prod-
ucts with a high level of production efﬁciency. Using this method, optical components 
with complex shapes can be synthesized. The process can design and control chem-
ical homogeneous composition. This technique can be used to create porous and rich 
materials with organic and polymeric properties, as well as thin layers of amorphous 
materials [43]. Precursors are highly reactive due to the solution-phase process. The 
structure of a material can be altered by modifying factors like pH, temperature, etc. 
This method is capable of sintering at low temperatures, typically between 200 and 
600 °C. The sol–gel method is versatile as it can produce aerogels, xerogels, ceramic 
materials, nanopowders, nanorods, nanostructures thin ﬁlms, etc. Apart from the 
merits, the sol–gel process has some demerits too. Nanoparticles (NPs), sometimes, 
get contacted during agglomeration. Processing time is a long, and large production 
of NPs is difﬁcult. The use of toxic chemical solvents is harmful to both humans 
and the environment [44]. One of the major problems is the puriﬁcation of NPs after 
the synthesis. Separation of the NPs from the solvent consumes a lot of time and 
generates toxic residues. 
2.4 
Hydrothermal Synthesis of Nanodielectric Material 
In a hydrothermal method, nanoparticles are created through hydrolysis processes 
that take place at high temperatures and high vapor pressure [45]. In this process, 
materials are obtained by the crystallization of phases under high temperatures and

32
V. Kashyap et al.
pressure. The method can be used at room temperature and below critical pressure 
[46]. This technique is dependent on the solubility of minerals in hot, high-pressure 
water. Factors affecting the hydrothermal synthesis process are the initial pH of the 
solution, duration, temperature, and pressure in the autoclave. Typically, an autoclave 
is used to perform the hydrothermal technique [47]. In this process, a metal precursor 
solution is mixed in a hydrolyzing solution and kept at a high temperature for 10–24 h 
in an autoclave, then cooling it down to ambient temperature for crystallization. The 
resulting crystals are collected using ﬁltration, washing, and drying. Large particle-
size nanocrystals can be synthesized using the hydrothermal method which is useful 
to increase the dielectric constant of the material and hence increases dielectric 
properties of the synthesized materials. Nanomaterials synthesized using this method 
tend to withstand high frequencies and high temperatures and therefore can be used 
in semiconductor devices [48]. 
In recent years, many researchers have utilized the hydrothermal method for the 
synthesis of various forms of nanodielectric materials and also studied their dielec-
tric properties for electronic applications. For example, the hydrothermal process 
was used to create silver nanowires that were then coated with a carbonaceous shell 
as shown in Fig. 2.3. The synthesis was carried out by using silver nitrate as a 
metal precursor, Cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB), and glucose [49]. 
Silver nanowire/manganese dioxide nanowire/poly(methyl methacrylate) (AgNW/ 
MnO2NW/PMMA) was synthesized, according to Zerrati et al. Here, they have 
utilized two types of synthetic techniques to get the ﬁnal nanocomposite. For 
the synthesis of Ag, nanowires were synthesized via the hard-template technique, 
whereas the hydrothermal method was used for the synthesis of MnO2 nanowires. 
They observed a high dielectric permittivity of 64 at 8.2 GHz was noted in the 
synthesized nanocomposite [50].
Similarly, hydrothermal synthesis in supercritical water has an advantage over 
the conventional method as the rate increases by 103 times under critical conditions. 
Supercritical water provides control of crystal phase, particle size, and morphology. 
Titanium dioxide NPs synthesized using this method have high crystallinity and high 
surface area due to which the dielectric properties of TiO2 NPs are enhanced. For 
the synthesis, a slurry of titanium tetra propoxidein an aqueous medium was kept 
in a gold-tube reactor inside the autoclave. The synthesis is carried out at 400 °C at 
25 MPa pressure for 24 h. This system is referred to as the batchwise system [51]. 
High-dielectric materials are used in diodes, solar cells, transistors, and gates. 
According to Ahmad et al., the hydrothermal process they used to create cubic ZrO2 
was far more stable at relatively high temperatures. Zirconia has potentially high 
dielectric properties due to which it has extensive use in gates. They discovered that 
solid zirconia NPs have a large surface area and function as p-type semiconductors. 
Additionally, they observed that the dielectric coefﬁcient, which is inﬂuenced by the 
synthesis temperature, crystalline structure, and particle size, determines the band 
gap of these materials. For the synthesis, a solution of zirconium oxynitrate as a 
limiting reagent is prepared in NaOH and double distilled water. The solution was 
then put into a hydrothermal ﬂask, and the precipitate was later cleaned and dried 
for 1.5 h at 110 °C before being ground [52].

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
33
Fig. 2.3 Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Ag@Cnano cables [49]. Adapted with permission 
from ref [49] Copyright (2018) (Royal society of chemistry)
One of the advantages of the hydrothermal synthesis approach is its propensity to 
produce unstable or less stable materials at high temperatures. With this technique, 
one can produce large crystals with good purity. The method is easy and simple with 
a low cost of synthesis, but the initial setup cost is high [53]. The material’s loss is 
minimal with a high product yield. Besides this, they have a few disadvantages which 
include longer reaction time, and it is difﬁculty to observe the crystals as they grow 
during the synthesis process inside the autoclave as the autoclave is fully equipped 
with Teﬂon. 
2.5 
Combustion Synthesis of Nanodielectric Materials 
One of the most utilized processes for fabricating a variety of oxide materials is 
solution combustion synthesis (SCS). K.C. Patil and others invented and perfected 
this technique in India in the 1980s [54]. When urea and Al(NO3)3. 9H2O were  
heated fast to a temperature of 500 °C in a mufﬂe furnace (preheated), the ﬁrst 
unintentional synthesis of α-alumina occurred. A large amount of white material that 
was recognized as α-Al2O3 was produced during the reaction, and the mixture foamed 
and burned with an incandescent ﬂame. Concepts from propellant chemistry were 
applied to properly learn about the combustion reaction’s high exothermic nature. The 
energy released during the reaction is at its highest, and there is no carbon residue left 
once the combustion is ﬁnished. To create pigments, phosphors, and catalysts, the host 
oxide matrix can be doped with the appropriate amount of metal ions. By using this

34
V. Kashyap et al.
technique, pink alumina was produced by adding an appropriate amount of chromium 
nitrate to the redox mixture of urea and aluminum nitrate, which uniformly doped the 
alumina matrix about 1% of Cr. Later, hydrazides were employed in place of urea to 
produce a wide range of oxides. Patil’s group employed hydrazides such as malonic 
acid dihydrazide, oxalyldihydrazide, maleic hydrazide, and carbohydrazide [55]. 
Other researchers investigated various fuels, including glycine, alanine, hexamine, 
citric acid, etc. 
Due to their high carrier mobilities, outstanding thermal stability, mechanical 
ﬂexibility, and optical transparency, metal-oxide semiconductors and dielectrics, 
particularly in amorphous phases, constitute potential materials for next-generation 
electronics. The development of metal oxide ﬁlms, particularly those for thin-ﬁlm 
transistors, is widely performed via sol–gel processes. However, the necessary stages 
of sol–gel condensation, densiﬁcation, and contamination removal are commonly 
needed for processing temperatures of > 500 °C, which are incompatible with afford-
able glasses and conventional ﬂexible polymeric substrates. A unique variant of 
the SCS approach was recently developed by Marks and co-researchers at North-
western University to fabricate thin-ﬁlm transistors for next-generation electronics. 
To improve the preparation conditions and attributes of the synthesized ﬁlms, many 
studies have already been published. We predict that, in addition to the production of 
electrical devices, combustion-based deposition techniques may have a signiﬁcant 
impact on the creation of dielectric nanomaterials and electrochemical devices [56]. 
Controlling the type of combustion allowed for the modiﬁcation of solid combustion 
product particle size, and by employing fuels that produce (i) the rate at which the fuel 
burns is slow, (ii) a decrease in exothermicity (making the reaction smolders instead 
of ﬂam), and (iii) an increase in the number of gaseous products (H2O, N2, CO2, 
etc., in which the heat is dissipated). Unlike volume combustion, linear combustion 
appears to produce oxide powders that are nanoscale in size. Additionally, it was 
found that metal acetates enhanced the synthesis of nanoscale oxides. 
By using the solution combustion synthesis method, Kim et al. demonstrated a 
straightforward and relatively low-temperature (at 200 °C) synthesis technique for 
the construction of metal oxide thin-ﬁlm transistors.In2O3, Zn-Sn–O, In-Zn–O, and 
In–Sn–O are materials used to create metal oxide thin-ﬁlm transistors (ITO), and 
they incorporated NH4NO3 that had been dissolved in 2-methoxy ethanol with metal 
sources including In(NO3)3, Zn(NO3)2, and SnCl2 to produce the precursor solution. 
To control the pH of the solution, they add ammonia solution, and precursor solu-
tions were maintained for 72 h before ﬁlm casting. Then, silicon wafers were spin-
coated with solutions containing 0.05 M of total metal concentration, and they were 
heated for 30 min at 150–400 °C. Solution combustion synthesis-derived transistors 
with thin-ﬁlm layers was found to be highly efﬁcient with saturation mobility of 
6.0 cm2/V s. The authors claim that this property is far better than the mobility of 
amorphous silicon, which is now employed widely in large-area electronic applica-
tions (below 1 cm2/Vs) [57]. The schematic of the device structure has been presented 
in Fig. 2.4.
Krengvirat and Sreekantan reported bismuth titanate ceramics which is consid-
ered as well knows nanodielectric material, using an intermediate fuel agent-assisted

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
35
Fig. 2.4 Low-temperature solution-processing principles for metal oxides and fabricated device 
structures. a Depiction of the two different synthetic approaches. b, Energetics of combustion 
synthesis-based processes versus conventional processes. c, Top-contact bottom-gate TFT device 
structure used in this study [57]. Adapted with permission from ref. [57] Copyright (2018) (Springer 
Nature)
self-combustion synthesis (SCS) technique to replace praseodymium [58]. Similarly, 
Sekar et al. reported (Pb- BNb)O3 (where B is Fe, Ni, Mg, or Zn), a lead-based niobate 
material based on two different combustion synthesis techniques. In the ﬁrst combus-
tion synthesis technique, they ignited the solutions of metal nitrates, NH4NO3, 
tetraformaltrisazine, and Nb2(C2O4)5 (Niobium oxalate) in a furnace (which is 
preheated) through a single-step fabrication approach. In the second combustion 
synthesis method, solution combustion was used in a two-step process to produce 
PbO (lead monoxide), FeNbO4, MgNb2O6, NiNb2O6, and ZnNb2O6. They then 
combined PbO with metal niobates in the following stage, calcined the mixture, and 
the result was the desired lead-based ferroelectric ceramics. Microstructural inves-
tigations revealed that both synthesis methods create powders with good particle 
structures that can be sintered into compact samples with a relative density of around 
97% [59]. They noticed that the ceramics created using the two-step synthesis process 
demonstrated higher dielectric properties in comparison with materials created using 
a single-stage synthesis strategy. 
The solution combustion synthesis method’s key beneﬁts include: (i) the proce-
dure is speedy and requires just basic equipment, (ii) since in this process redox 
reaction has exothermic nature, it can save energy by using the exothermicity; (iii)

36
V. Kashyap et al.
that method is allowing the modiﬁcation in the composition of the product, struc-
tural modiﬁcations, also that method allows homogeneity as well as stoichiometry 
modiﬁcations of the product; (iv) that method allows to the formation of highly pure 
materials; (v) to create industrially usable materials, it enables incorporation of the 
necessary amount of impurity ions or dopants in the oxide hosts; (vi) that it allows 
metastable phases to be stabilized (γ-Fe2O3, anatase TiO2, etc.); and apart from that 
(vii) it provides the fabrication of almost any size and shape of the obtained mate-
rials, for example, micron to nano size and spherical to hexagonal shape. Magnetic 
oxides, pigments, phosphors, high Tc cuprates, materials for solid oxide fuel cells, 
metal oxide catalysts, and durable materials are among the materials mentioned. 
(e.g., t-ZrO2/Al2O3). 
The solution combustion synthesis-derived powders are particularly efﬁcient for 
removing pollutants from the environment. One-step combustion has been used 
to successfully deposit nano-sized crystalline ionic catalysts on ceramic cordierite 
honeycombs. 
2.6 
Electrospinning Method for Nanodielectric Material 
Synthesis 
An electrostatically charged jet of molten polymer or a polymeric solution is used 
in the electrospinning (ES) technique to create continuous polymeric or inorganic 
ﬁbers that can be anywhere between a few nanometers to a few micrometers in size. 
As depicted in Fig. 2.5, the procedure is carried out via a needle with a polymer 
solution streaming via it coupled to a grounded electrode for collecting and an HV 
DC generator [27].
The HV source is used to electrostatically charge a polymer solution, which then 
jets out of the needle tip as a hanging drop. The drop is distorted by the strong elec-
tric ﬁeld between the grounded electrode and the needle until it becomes the shape 
of a Taylor cone. The thin ﬂuid polymer jet is created and drawn in the direction 
of the metal collector when the charged drop experiences an electrostatic force that 
is greater than surface tension and exceeds a certain level of electric potential. The 
charged jet is then released. Objects are stretched and accelerated by the electric ﬁeld 
and go through an instability process known as whipping instability; the spiral path 
taken by the ﬁbers speeds up the stretching process, leading to ﬁber thinning as the 
solvent evaporates (or the melt polymer solidiﬁes). During this instability process, 
ﬁbers with diameters in the region of a few hundred nanometers are produced [60]. 
The jet’s uneven motion results in the random deposition of ﬁbers in the nonwoven 
nanoporous material type materials on the collector. Complex manufacturing proce-
dures are required for the synthesis of high-quality nanocomposites. Electrospin-
ning is now the most used technique in the ﬁeld of electrical power engineering for 
creating nanodielectric materials based on polymers. The performance of composites 
depends on how evenly the ﬁllers are distributed throughout the polymer. The two

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
37
Fig. 2.5 Electrospinning apparatus
most common dispersion techniques utilized today are the solid-phase approach and 
the liquid-phase method. The solid-phase process, which is straightforward, simple to 
use, and convenient for large-scale production, under mechanical pressure, combined 
the matrix and ﬁllers. However, the ﬁller/matrix interface adhesion is poor, and the 
ﬁller dispersion is not sufﬁciently uniform. The liquid-phase method, also known 
as the chemical method, has a higher interface adhesion and a far greater ability 
to spread ﬁllers. For improving material characteristics, appropriate synthesis and 
preparation processes are also crucial in addition to material design and dispersion. 
In the electrospinning process, for instance, it is highly desirable for the development 
of composite qualities that the ﬁbrous ﬁllers can be layered sequentially along the 
direction of the ﬁber orientation to construct the network structure, retain the direc-
tional interconnection structure well, and produce no visible interface void or pore 
[61]. 
Li et al. reported a polymer-based nanodielectric material with high energy densi-
ties for electrical energy storage applications. They create uniform BaTiO3 nanoﬁbers 
(BT nfs) with a high aspect ratio, which are used as ﬁllers in a poly(vinylidene 
ﬂuoride-hexaﬂuoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) nanocomposite after being electrospun 
and surface-modiﬁed using poly(vinyl pyrrolidone). A straightforward solution-
cast approach was used to create the nanocomposite ﬁlms. They discovered that, 
compared to the polymer matrix and the nanocomposites with BT nfs, the dielectric 
constant and the energy density of the nanocomposites are signiﬁcantly increased 
with a little loading of BT nfs [62]. Similarly, in 2017, Lin and co-workers 
prepared high-temperature resistance and high thermally stable core–shell barium 
titanate@silicon dioxide (BT@SiO2) nanoﬁbers with polyimide using the electro-
spinning technique as presented in Fig. 2.6. They have reported that the dielectric

38
V. Kashyap et al.
Fig. 2.6 Fabrication procedures of BT@SiO2/PI nanocomposite ﬁlms [63]. Adapted with permis-
sion from ref [63] Copyright (2017) (Elsevier) 
permittivity of nanocomposite ﬁlm increases signiﬁcantly as the presence of thin 
SiO2 layers was utilized to restrict the high dielectric loss from the nanoﬁbers [63]. 
The ES method is thought to be straightforward, affordable, and useable in an 
industrial setting and creates extremely porous nanocomposite with excellent inor-
ganic nanoparticle dispersion. For example, high-performance polymeric nanocom-
posite separators for Li-ion batteries could be made using ES. In another study, sili-
cone rubber was mixed with nano-silica using the ES approach to lessen particle 
aggregation [64]. Nano-silica was electrospun into silicone ﬁbers, which were 
then integrated into a silicone rubber matrix. Comparing ES to high-shear melt 
compounding, it has been demonstrated that a greater volume percentage of nano-
silica may be disseminated more evenly into silicone rubber. In addition to this, 
a few limitations of the ES method include the use of toxic organic solvents, the 
difﬁculty to maintain uniform porosity of materials, and also, difﬁcult to synthesize 
nanomaterials on large scale. 
2.7 
Intercalation Method for Nanodielectric Materials 
Mostly, the intercalation method is used to synthesize polymer-based nanodielectric 
materials. PCNs, or polymer-clay nanocomposites, have received a lot of interest 
due to their exceptional properties, which include high dielectric properties, high 
thermal, and gas permeability, and pharmaceutical properties like optical, electrical,

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
39
and mechanical at the nanoscaled level as compared to their pristine polymers. Dielec-
tric properties of PCNs (acrylonitrile butadiene styrene and poly methyl methacry-
late) with altering amounts (up to 10 wt%) of organically modiﬁed montmorillonite 
(OMMT) in the frequency range of 100 Hz–1 to MHz showed signiﬁcant greater 
dielectric constant, and compared to pure polymers, exfoliated nanocomposites have 
greater dielectric loss values owing to the increased interfacial area between the 
clay layers and the polymer, which is driven by Maxwell–Wagner polarization. Pure 
polymers were shown to have higher dielectric constant and dielectric loss values in 
the same frequency range as intercalated nanocomposites, which is explained by the 
reduced mobility of polymer chains in the nanoscale pathways of OMMT [65]. 
These discoveries can be explained in terms of unique microstructures created in 
nanocomposite ﬁlms after clay has completely laminated, exfoliated, and distributed 
in the polymer matrix with exfoliated polymer nanocomposites. The exfoliated 
OMMT and polymer matrix form a substantial interfacial area. In an applied electric 
ﬁeld, different conductivities in the two phases lead to a signiﬁcant interfacial or space 
charge polarization near the interface, due to trapped charges, and this phenomenon 
is known as Maxwell–Wagner polarization. As the OMMT content in exfoliated 
nanocomposites rises, the area at the interface between the polymers and OMMT 
expands, and as a result, the dielectric constant rises. Lower real and imaginary 
components of dielectric permittivity are displayed in intercalated nanocomposites 
than those displayed by the corresponding pristine polymers because the polymer 
chains are restricted between OMMT layers. 
Polymer–clay nanocomposites (PCNs) are also known as organic–inorganic 
nanocomposites, and a suitable synthetic route can be utilized to control their useful 
properties [66]. The intercalation approach for the preparation of nanodielectric mate-
rials is most widely utilized for the preparation of PCNs; e.g., the clay, Nylon-6 
hybrid was produced by the intercalation process and polymerization, and it is the 
prior nanocomposite developed by the Toyota group [67]. In general, the intercala-
tion process is achieved by incorporating polymers within the layers of clay having 
dimensions in the range: from the thickness of a few nanometers to ~100 nm, length 
of 0.5 μm to as much as mm, and clay includes natural and synthetic clays, kaolinite, 
micas, and further layered inorganics [28] depending upon the exfoliated and inter-
calated hybrid techniques [28]. Moreover, when intercalate was requisite, organic 
materials were made to immerse within the layers of clay which further expands 
inside the component mixtures. Further, it is made to exfoliate the complete layers of 
clay materials that were distinct from one another but at the same time tied up inside 
the matrix of the organic component [66]. This strategy is a reversible technique 
that includes a collection of substances with layered structures. In PCN materials, 
three distinct phases occur from hydrogen bonding interactions between the clay 
intercalated/exfoliated at the nanoscale and the polymer (an organic substance) (an 
inorganic material). These steps are as follows: 
(1) Microphase-separated composites, in which clay and polymer matrix are still 
incompatible,

40
V. Kashyap et al.
(2) Intercalated clay assemblies, where polymer molecules inﬁltrate among clay 
galleries, 
(3) Exfoliated structures, wherein the polymer matrix is ﬁlled with individual clay 
nanoplatelets [66]. 
Furthermore, intercalation or exfoliation is more feasible for a continuous in-line 
process than spherical inorganic nanodielectric, which can be produced in the lab 
more conveniently through a batch technique. 
PEO is an etheric-linked simple chain polymer, contrary to PVA, which is a 
polymer with a backbone made of carbon chains and hydroxyl groups connected 
to carbons of methane. These polymer matrices composite (PMC) are frequently 
used in conjunction with montmorillonite clay for the development of organic–inor-
ganic nanocomposite (NC) materials because they have a wide range of H-bond 
forming potential for the hydroxyl group (OH) of PVA monomer units and the 
ether oxygen of PEO monomer units. MMT clay is typically made up of linked 
silica and alumina sheets with an aspect ratio (length/width) of 100–1000 nm and 
a thickness of about 1 nm. To allow polar solvents and polymers to easily access 
the interlayer galleries, the cation quantity ratio can be changed depending on 
the source of the minerals, and its cation exchange mechanism can exhibit more 
hydrophilic organophilic MMT. This causes the exfoliation and intercalation of the 
polymer-layered silicate nanostructures. 
In 2010, Sengwa et al. synthesized PEO-PVA blend-MMT clay nanocomposites 
using an intercalation process, and further, they presented the dielectric characteris-
tics of the material in which their dielectric analysis showed that by incorporating 0.5– 
2 weight percent MMT clay into the PVA-PEO blend, the ∈’ value may be adjusted to 
be close to 1 [66]. As a result, the polymer-layered silicate nanostructures’ end matrix 
is exfoliated and intercalated, enabling the use of these structures as low-dielectric 
constant nanodielectric with improved mechanical and thermal properties in low-
frequency microelectronic technology. They created a PEO-PVA blend-MMT clay 
nanocomposite. In their research, they describe how they intercalated and exfoliated 
colloidally stable MMT clay in the suspension of the PVA-PEO blend matrix over a 
subsequent 24 h. Subsequently, adding clay hydrocolloids to 60 mm stainless steel 
rings, the PVA-PEO blend-MMT clay nanocomposite was cast and allowed to dry 
for a week at room temperature. Meanwhile, in the intercalation process, the misci-
bility of PVA and PEO is facilitated by the rise in polymer chain segmental motion 
relaxation time with increasing MMT clay concentration up to 2% by weight which 
is primarily due to intercalated and exfoliated nanostructures of MMT clay sheets 
allowing polymer chains to be connected by H-bonds. 
Recently, exfoliated or Intercalated Montmorillonite (MMT)—PANI nanocom-
posites (PANC) using emulsion intercalation were reported by Hundekal et al. [68]. 
They have chosen to utilize a layered silicate known as natural montmorillonite 
(MMT) as a ﬁller. With an increase in frequency, it is evident that the values of the 
dielectric constant and dielectric loss decrease. This drops signiﬁcantly sharply after 
the onset frequency of the AC conductivity. All PANC nanocomposites’ dielectric 
permittivity signiﬁcantly increased at lower frequencies (less than 100 Hz), and

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
41
this demonstrates that in this frequency range, the ionic conduction mechanism 
predominates. 
For the PANI synthesized in this work, a high dielectric constant was observed, 
which is signiﬁcantly greater than that stated in the literature [69, 70]. This might 
be a result of the PANI exhibiting nanocrystalline domains instead of microdomains 
simply because it was exposed to mechanical shear. They have observed that hyper-
electronic polarization and a signiﬁcant polar on delocalization may be contributing 
to the high dielectric response for the nanocrystalline PANC at a lower frequency 
(100 Hz–1 kHz). They have demonstrated that the use of swelling agents in combi-
nation with signiﬁcant shear forces is the most efﬁcient technique of exfoliation or 
intercalation, and the versatility of clay molecule orientation in the solid state offers 
a wider route for conduction in the composite. 
In 2008, Akat and his co-workers reported a novel synthetic route for the prepa-
ration of PNCs which is considered efﬁcient nanodielectric materials by employing 
a chain transfer agent that is intercalated in the process of traditional free radical 
polymerization [71]. This method of synthesis is extremely simple, and a facile 
quaternization procedure yields the interactive chain transfer agent from commer-
cially accessible substances. Irrespective of the structure of the monomer, the above-
mentioned technique can be used to polymerize free radicals from a variety of 
monomers since chain transfer events involving thiol groups are ubiquitous. 
A few advantages associated with this technique are that it eliminates the need for 
various organic during the synthesis of nanocomposite materials. If the ﬁller surface 
is transformed in such a way that the forces anchoring the particles or platelets 
together are very weak, the polymer can intercalate between the interlayers. Heat, 
radiation, diffusion of a suitable initiator, a catalyst, or organic initiator attached 
by cation exchange inside the interlayer can be used to start polymerization before 
the swelling phase. Apart from this, the synthesis process has some demerits which 
include the need for high temperatures but that is undesirable for polymer materials 
[72]. The desired monomer, when polymerized, was incapable of producing adequate 
shear stress to effectively exfoliate and achieve adequate dispersion of the nanoclay 
particles in the polymer matrix [73]. Also, it will work only for low viscous polymers 
[74]. 
2.8 
Spray Pyrolysis of Nanodielectric Materials 
Spray pyrolysis is a technique that produces thin ﬁlms by simply misting a solution 
onto a heated surface, where a chemical product is produced when two or more 
components react. At the deposition temperature, the chemical reagents are chosen 
so that: other than the desired molecule, the byproducts are typically volatile. The 
technique has been used for a long time to create a transparent SnOx electrical 
conductor to glass and is advantageous for the deposition of oxides. Since Cham-
berlin & Skarman’s pioneering work on CdS ﬁlms for application in solar cells in 
1966, there have been numerous investigations reported in this area [75].

42
V. Kashyap et al.
A lot of effort has been made in the last several decades to synthesize BaTiO3 
powders that are nano-sized and have great phase purity and narrow particle size 
distribution. Sol–gel processing and co-precipitation of mixed metal oxalates are two 
examples of solution-based approaches that have been used to design various kinds 
of nanoparticles [76], including the hydrothermal approach [77]. Spray pyrolysis is 
being utilized reliably to develop ceramic particles that are between microns and 
submicron in size. Since it is an effective, continuous method that generates spher-
ical particles with good phase purity and regulated size distributions [78]. Spray 
pyrolysis yields particles through the evaporation, pyrolysis, and crystallization of 
atomized liquid droplets [79]. Consequently, on a nanometer scale, all the compo-
nents of a droplet are mixed homogeneously, and thus, the resulting particles exhibit 
remarkable phase purity and an outstanding stoichiometric composition for multi-
component oxides. The procedure has a limitation because there was not enough time 
for solute diffusion or particle densiﬁcation, which results in a high rate of evapora-
tion and the bulk of the synthesized particles having hollow and porous structures. To 
control particle morphology, extensive research has been done [80, 81]. A schematic 
representation of the spray pyrolysis method is presented in Fig. 2.7 
Chemical spray deposition processes are categorized based on the type of reac-
tion. As the solvent initially evaporates in process A, a droplet adheres to the surface, 
providing a solid residue that may still react after it dries [82]. In process B, the dry 
solid changes the surface because the solvent evaporates before the droplet reaches 
the surface, where the breakdown occurs. In process C, as the droplet gets closer
Fig. 2.7 Schematic diagram for spray pyrolysis system 

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
43
to the substrate, the solvent evaporates; the solid melts and transforms into vapor, 
which then diffuses to the substrate, where it undergoes a heterogeneous process. 
(They refer to it as a genuine CVD technique.). In process D, a chemical reac-
tion happens in the vapor phase at the maximum temperatures whenever the metallic 
compound evaporates before reaching the substrate [82]. The ideal temperature, solu-
tion concentration, carrier gas ﬂow rate, droplet radius, nozzle-to-substrate distance, 
solution ﬂow rate, and, for continuous processes, substrate motion are the key factors 
in all operations. The chemical makeup of the carrier gas and/or environment should 
be included in this list, as well as, most notably, the substrate temperature. Type A 
or Type B studies on spray pyrolysis depositions are the most frequent [82]. 
2.8.1 
Types of Spray Pyrolysis Methods 
Several attempts have been made to synthesize nanoparticles utilizing the spray pyrol-
ysis technique, such as low-pressure spray pyrolysis [83], electrospray pyrolysis [84], 
and salt-assisted aerosol decomposition are reported [85]. Kang and Park introduced 
a novel aerosol method called the ﬁlter expansion aerosol generator (FEAG), and 
they reported that it can effectively produce nano-sized ZnO particles [78]. Another 
author, Xia et al. have also reported a novel spray pyrolysis synthesis method to 
efﬁciently fabricate nanoparticles, known as “salt-assisted spray pyrolysis” [85]. In 
addition to this, many researchers have utilized the spray pyrolysis technique for 
the preparation of highly efﬁcient nanodielectric material and have presented their 
dielectric properties for various applications. 
In 2012, Choi et al. prepared nanoscaled Ba0.7Sr0.3TiO3 using spray pyrolysis, to 
create hollow, thin-walled particles for dielectric properties. In synthesis, strontium 
nitrate [Sr(NO3)2], titanium tetra-isopropoxide, and barium nitrate [Ba(NO3)2] are  
used as the precursors for the synthesis (TTIP). The hydrolyzed TTIP was peptized 
with a small amount of nitric acid [HNO3] to create a clear solution, and ethylenedi-
aminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and citric acid were utilized as chelating agents as well 
as gas evolution additives to increase the hollowness of the particles of precursor. 
The concentrations of citric acid [(CH2CO2H)2], EDTA, and metal components were 
set at 0.1 M. Precursor powders were processed via spray pyrolysis at 900 °C, and 
the air carrier gas ﬂow rate was set at 40 L min−1. Post-treatments after spray pyrol-
ysis were carried out for 2 h in an environment of air at temperatures of 900, 1000, 
and 1100 °C. After being pelletized at 250 kg f cm−2 to a diameter of 10 mm, the 
powders were sintered for two hours at 1300 °C. Using the surfaces of the pellets 
as an electrode, the silver paste was applied to evaluate the dielectric characteris-
tics. Figure 2.8 illustrates the equipment layout and the process of the nano-sized 
Ba0.7Sr0.3TiO3 powders developed through spray pyrolysis [86].
Ko and co-workers have also reported on spray pyrolysis by applying the same 
procedure as described in Fig. 2.8 to create precursors of BaTiO3 nanopowders with 
varying quantities of Ag. The pellet surfaces were coated with Ag paste to create

44
V. Kashyap et al.
Fig. 2.8 Diagram illustrating the spray pyrolysis process and the method by which ceramic particles 
of nanoscale are formed [86]. Adapted with permission from ref. [86] Copyright (2012) (Elsevier)
an electrode, which was then used to create electrical contact. An LCR meter was 
utilized to measure the dielectric characteristics [87]. 
In another article, authors have reported spray pyrolysis fabrication of Al2O3, 
TiO2, Al2x−1·TixOy, and ZnO nanodielectric materials. Aerosols comprising 50 mg/ 
mL aluminum chloride (AlCl3) and titanium dioxide solutions spray-coated at 420 °C 
onto commercially available indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass (sheet resistivity Rs. 
15 Ohms/) were applied using a pneumatic airbrush maintained at a vertical distance 
of around 30 cm (1:5). The spray coating of the precursors and blends’ aerosols 
took place for 30 s, with a 20-s interruption to enable the vapors to settle. They 
have shown that after successful synthesis of the nanodielectric materials, they were 
spray-coated on ITO substrate to obtain an optimized thickness. Bottom-gate top-
contact (BG-TC) transistors were developed using aluminum (Al) as source material 
for the manufacturing of thin-ﬁlm transistors (TFTs) and the spray-coated glass/ITO/ 
composite/ZnO stacks were used to thermally evaporate drain (S/D) electrodes with 
a shadow mask under a high vacuum. Device characterization was carried out at 
room temperature and under a high vacuum [88]. 
Similarly, Adamopoulos et al. reported the fabrication of a dielectric mate-
rial zinc oxide (ZnO), ZrO2, and Li-ZnO deposition through the spray pyrolysis 
process. They have presented transistor fabrication; ITO glass substrates were used 
to construct bottom-gate top-contact transistors. At a substrate temperature of around 
400 °C, high-k ZrO2 dielectric coatings were sprayed over ITO electrodes. Then, 
a layer of undoped/Li-doped ZnO with a thickness approximately of 35 nm was

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
45
sprayed. Through a shadow mask and a high vacuum, aluminum source/drain elec-
trodes successfully thermally evaporated (10–6 mbar) after the semiconducting ﬁlms 
were deposited by using a spray pyrolysis process [89]. Jung et al. demonstrate 
the preparation of barium titanate nanodielectric material with tetragonal crystal 
structures by ﬂame spray pyrolysis method. BaCO3 and titanium tetra-isopropoxide 
(TTIP) were the substrate materials utilized in the fabrication of the barium titanate 
(BaTiO3) powder. In the report, they observed that barium titanate powder synthesis 
via the spray pyrolysis method can function as an efﬁcient dielectric material for 
various practical applications. Figure 2.9 depicts the ﬂame spray pyrolysis appa-
ratus schematic representation, and Fig. 2.10 represents the synthesis mechanism of 
the nanoscaled barium titanate (BaTiO3) powders by ﬂame spray pyrolysis process 
[90]. 
Spray pyrolysis thin-ﬁlm coating of khaya gum biopolymer for electrical and 
dielectric properties was also reported. The primary source for the production of 
khaya gum was the exudates of the Senegalese khaya trees. Using an agate mortar 
and pestle, the collected gum was crushed into a powder and then sieved. The solution 
was then prepared by ﬁrst reﬁning the KG powder and then dissolving it in 20 ml of 
distilled water. After that, using a hot plate and spray pyrolysis, it was homogenized 
and sprayed onto the glass for four minutes at 200 °C and glass slides that had been 
coated with indium tin oxide (ITO). Aluminum (Al) having a thickness of 100 nm
Fig. 2.9 Schematic diagram of ﬂame spray pyrolysis [90]. Adapted with permission from ref. [90] 
Copyright (2008) (Elsevier)

46
V. Kashyap et al.
Fig. 2.10 Synthesis mechanism of the nano-sized BaTiO3 powder by ﬂame spray pyrolysis [90]. 
Adapted with permission from ref. [90] Copyright (2008) (Elsevier)
was thermally evaporated by a shadow mask with an area of 0.01 cm2 to perform 
capacitance measurements. They calculated the capacitance values using several 
frequencies [91]. 
The following are some advantages of spray pyrolysis: (i) Open-air procedure; 
(ii) The opportunity to monitor the deposition technique (iii) Economical viable 
and ongoing operation; (iv) There is no requirement for high-quality regents as 
precursors; (v) Have higher production rate; (vi) High surface area allows crystal 
size to be controlled, and (vii) Compositional homogeneity present in fabricated 
materials. Spray pyrolysis has certain drawbacks also, including (i) a very poor yield 
produced from the powder materials; (ii) It is necessary to convert the sulﬁdes into 
an oxide; and (iii) There are several difﬁculties with temperature optimization [92]. 
2.9 
Reversible Addition-Fragmentation Transfer (RAFT) 
Process for Nanodielectric Materials 
Due to their potential applications, such as in small electronic devices, capacitor 
materials, pulsed power systems, and power electronics for grid energy management, 
novel polymeric nanocomposite materials with improved dielectric characteristics 
are of great interest [93, 94]. Polymer nanodielectric materials synthesized by adding 
inorganic nanoparticles into polymer matrices have obtained signiﬁcant attention 
because they promise the best characteristics of polymer and ceramic dielectrics and 
are among the most promising techniques for producing high-performance dielectrics 
[94]. The approach includes the incorporation of conductive polymer along with 
semiconductive ﬁllers (such as carbon nanotubes and conductive polymers) and 
high-permittivity inorganic ﬁllers (e.g., Barium titanate, i.e., BaTiO3) or polymers 
with robust breakdown strength [95]. Ferroelectric polymers including PVDF-based 
homo- and copolymers and polyimides have been included in polymer nanocom-
posite matrices. The ceramic ﬁller-based nanocomposites of conductive polymer 
(PNCs) can incorporate the features of polymers and ceramics and demonstrates 
a novel category of material that shows ﬂexibility, easy processability, and of low 
cost [96]. Recently, signiﬁcantly great approaches have been made toward the fabri-
cation of core–shell nanoparticles, which involve the modiﬁcation of nanoparticles 
incorporating polymer shells utilizing several synthetic methods (e.g., grafting from,

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
47
grafting to, etc.). To develop single or multiple-component nanocomposite systems, 
most of the modiﬁed nanoparticles can be used. 
To date, many polymer nanocomposites (PNCs) have been developed, However, 
certain challenging issues need to be addressed, e.g., homogenous nanoparticle 
dispersion, strengthening the adhesion of the polymeric particle interface, and opti-
mizing dielectric loss. Consequently, several approaches have been used to deal 
with these challenges by altering the interface of PNCs through the addition of 
organic molecules to nanoparticles, along with coupling agents, phosphoric acids, 
surfactants, and others. However, these techniques still have constraints since surface 
modiﬁcations do not make a direct contribution to accomplishing the objective of 
enhanced dielectric properties. It has been established that the synthesis of core– 
shell structured dielectric of polymer nanocomposites (PNCs) via the “grafting from” 
technique is a promising strategy for this class of materials [97]. 
Tang and co-workers in 2013, developed a novel polymer nanocomposite using 
nanodielectric materials containing conjugated oligothiophene side chains. They 
depicted that the polymers synthesized by the RAFT method possess signiﬁcant 
dielectric permittivity, which is comparable to poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride) and signif-
icantly greater than most of the other polymers (such as 2–5 for polystyrene and 
polypropylene, etc.). Polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF) in particular, polymers exhibit 
exceptional consistency over a wide frequency range, from 100 Hz to several MHz, 
with negligible dielectric loss (0.02). This functionality is due to fast-relaxing 
nano dipoles and signiﬁcantly higher polarizable related to nanoscaled crystalline 
domains (<2 nm) incorporated into oligothiophene side groups. Using barium titanate 
(BaTiO3, BT) nanoparticles and polymers containing oligothiophene, they soon 
created core–shell nanoparticles with a monolayered structure for use in dielectric 
polymer nanocomposites. Under controlled/living in situ surface-initiated RAFT 
polymerization, the oligothiophene-incorporating polymer was grafted from BT 
nanoparticles [98]. 
RAFT polymerization has become apparent as one of the best optimistic 
approaches due to its facile chemical experimental conditions, functional group toler-
ability, and versatility to a variety of vinyl monomers. In contrast to atom transfer 
radical polymerization (ATRP) and nitroxide-mediated polymerization, reversible 
addition-fragmentation transfer polymerization (NMP) relies on the degenerative 
chain transfer technique rather than the reversible termination of propagating radi-
cals. A chain transfer agent (CTA) that contains thiocarbonylthio is often used by 
reversible addition-fragmentation transfer (RAFT) to accomplish its deactivation– 
activation equilibrium. The radical concentration is not signiﬁcantly affected by 
the activation or deactivation process, an external initiator is required, and initi-
ation proceeds as in a standard radical polymerization process. A typical RAFT 
polymerization involves the following four steps: initiation, addition-fragmentation, 
reinitiation, and equilibration. In the subsequent initiation step, the thiocarbonylthio 
molecule receives the propagating radical (Pn•). 
(1) to generate intermediate radical 
(2) followed by gradual fragmentation to generate another thiocarbonylthio group

48
V. Kashyap et al.
(3) with a newly produced radical (R•) 
(4) Thus, the radical (R•) may react with the newly formed thiocarbonyl group or 
with a monomer to produce a new propagating radical (Pm•), which can then start 
the polymerization process. After the subsequent consumption of the initially 
injected CTA, the degenerative chain transfer process between propagating (Pn 
or Pm) and dormant chains establish the “primary equilibrium” of activation– 
deactivation (i.e., the end of the “initialization period”). 
2.9.1 
Merits and Demerits of the RAFT Method 
It is believed that reversible addition-fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymer-
ization is a reliable method. Polymerization can be achieved in a wide diverse range of 
solvents, including water, at various temperatures, with a high functional group toler-
ance and without the need for metals. Majority of monomers susceptible to radical 
polymerization can be utilized to prepare conﬁned copolymers or polydispersity 
polymers using this technique. It is feasible to enhance the conversion of RAFT poly-
merizations and attain economically viable polymerization rates. In heterogeneous 
media (emulsion, mini emulsion, and suspension), polymerizations can be carried out 
robustly. Monomers, solvents, and initiators are compatible with a diverse range of 
functionalities. Accessible and capable of exhibiting high purity are stars, microgel, 
blocks, supramolecular assemblies, hyperbranched structures, and other complex 
architectures. As of 2014, almost all monomer classes susceptible to radical polymer-
ization are incorporated by the diverse range of RAFT agents that are commercially 
available. Besides this, the RAFT method also has some demerits, such as a speciﬁc 
RAFT agent is only appropriate for a speciﬁc set of monomers, and its synthesis 
often necessitates a multistep synthetic procedure followed by puriﬁcation. Because 
the thioester moiety gradually breaks down to produce tiny sulfur compounds, RAFT 
agents can be unstable over extended periods, be highly colored, and have a pungent 
scent. For some applications, the resultant polymers presence of sulfur and color 
may also be undesirable; however, this can, to a certain extent, be eliminated using 
further chemical and physical puriﬁcation techniques [99]. This remarkable versa-
tility, however, cannot be attained without carefully considering the RAFT agent and 
reaction parameters. Inappropriate RAFT agent selection for the monomer(s) and/ 
or reaction conditions is commonly responsible for reported RAFT polymerization 
challenges (retardation, ordinary than expected control). RAFT agents that perform 
effectively in one set of circumstances may not always be the best approach.

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
49
2.10 
Self-assembly Process for Nanodielectric Materials 
Organic, inorganic, and polymeric semiconductors that can be processed using a solu-
tion have been produced during the last 20 years as a result of factors like printability, 
the potential for large-area depositions, the ability to manufacture devices at a low 
cost, and compatibility with substrates that are versatile mechanically [100]. In addi-
tion to their mechanical adaptability and ﬂexibility, hybrid materials offer the envi-
ronmental, optical, and electrical resilience of inorganic materials. Several groups 
have combined hybrid materials made of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) and 
ultrathin MO layers, such as those made of HfOx, AlOx, and ZrOx, to obtain extraor-
dinarily low operating voltage OTFTs. Multi-layered organic–inorganic hybrid mate-
rials are necessary for potential and high-quality multilayers adopting the simplest 
and most reliable way in conventional thin-ﬁlm transistors and other applications. 
High-quality hybrid ﬁlms could be made using vapor-phase fabrication methods for 
organic/inorganic hybrid materials. However, they usually need high- or medium-
vacuum deposition machinery (such as chemical/physical vapor deposition or atomic 
layer deposition), and it is not immediately clear how to incorporate them into 
large-volume coating techniques. By layer-by-layer solution-based deposition of 
precisely deﬁned precursor molecules, a wide variety of functional materials can 
be produced with a high level of precision and structural control at the molec-
ular level. A variety of such assembly’s chemistry has been observed, frequently 
based on metal–ligand coordination or siloxane. One of these material systems is 
the family of silane-based nanodielectrics known as self-assembled nanodielectrics 
(SANDs), which has promising features for a variety of optoelectronic applications, 
including TFTs. Strong siloxane connections that alternate between organic and inor-
ganic multilayers make up SANDs. Various self-assembly methods can be used to 
create high-performance multi-layered gate dielectrics for TFT applications [101]. 
Moreover, the functions of these dielectrics efﬁciently represent both organic and 
inorganic semiconductor devices and can be optimized by numerous self-assembled 
monolayers (SAMs) to boost the TFT efﬁciency even more. 
In general, the molecular self-assembly method describes the spontaneous 
assembly of precursor molecules to produce nanostructured materials, which can 
be accompanied depending on their environments and the inherent characteristics of 
the molecules [102]. To modify the structures which emerge after the self-assembly 
method, we have to depend on the following deceptive approach: Firstly, the precursor 
molecule’s framework can be utilized to modify the direction of intermolecular inter-
actions, and secondly, carefully choosing the ambient temperature. The spontaneous 
assembling of molecules into well-deﬁned, stable aggregates with non-covalent 
bonds at equilibrium conditions is referred to as molecular self-assembly. This 
method emerges as a novel approach in synthetic chemistry, having the potential of 
producing nonbiological assemblies having dimensions of 1 to 102 nm (with a molec-
ular mass of 104 to 1010 Dalton’s). The above process helps in synthesizing structures 
with comparable size to those which can be synthesized by microlithography and 
other methodology of microfabrication [103].

50
V. Kashyap et al.
Thin-ﬁlm transistors (TFTs) made from unusual materials have attracted interest 
recently because they can be used to make inexpensive electronic devices like printed 
RF-ID cards, sensors, and ﬂexible electronic displays [104]. Strong capacitances and 
low processing temperatures (such as 200 °C) are provided by solution-processable 
self-assembled nanodielectrics (SANDs), which are composed of structurally distinct 
and substantial layers of alternately alternating inorganic oxide (such as ZrOx and 
HfOx) and organic (such as stilbazolium) layers. SANDs have produced outstanding 
device metrics when incorporated with a variety of semiconductors; they have never 
been incorporated into the most technologically sophisticated top-gate thin-ﬁlm tran-
sistor architecture. Recently, solution-phase methods for the low-temperature devel-
opment of highly efﬁcient semiconductor ﬁlms and dielectrics were synthesized 
by utilizing the self-assembly process of organic–inorganic hybrid nanodielectric 
(SANDs) ﬁlms. The potential beneﬁts are also limited by the diversity of the SAND 
structure, which can be modiﬁed to take into account both the organic and inorganic 
components in addition to the vast variety of suitable unconventional semiconductors. 
Tobin J. Marks et al. demonstrated the development pathways of solution-
processed zirconia self-assembled nanodielectric material (Zr-SAND) on template-
stripped Al substrates. Based on the ultrasmooth (r.m.s. roughness 0.4 nm) nature of 
the resulting Zr-SAND on aluminum structures, template-stripped metal substrates 
show the same remarkable electronic uniformity (capacitance 700 nF cm2 and 
leakage current < 1 Ma cm−2 at −2 MV cm−1) and growth of multi-layered Zr-
SAND on Si while demonstrating superior temperature and response toward the 
voltage capacitance. They reported that the synthesized nanodielectric material is 
essential to carry out comprehensive transport measurements in developing transistor 
technologies with SAND including for developing future technologies in ﬂexible 
electronics or integrated circuits (ICs) [105]. 
The growth of Zr-SAND is shown schematically in which (a–d) layer-by-layer 
assembly of the zirconia self-assembled nanodielectric (Zr-SAND) multilayer struc-
ture is shown in the following Fig. 2.11. In a separate article, researchers utilized 
the solution-processed a-IGZO with the four-layer Hf-SAND to create top-gate thin-
ﬁlm transistors (TFTs), which exhibit exceptional bias stress stability and electron 
mobility (SAT = 19.4 and Vth = (10–100.83 V), subthreshold slopes (SS = 293 mV/ 
dec), and gate leakage currents A. Structures for self-assembled nanodielectric 
(SAND) gate dielectrics [106]. 
Fig. 2.11 Zirconia self-assembled nanodielectrics (Zr-SAND) solution-processed on aluminum 
substrates using template-stripped [106]. Adapted with permission from ref. [106] Copyright (2021) 
(American chemical society)

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
51
For the synthesis of nanostructures, solution-based self-assembly techniques have 
several advantages, such as the ability to control the characteristics of the nanos-
tructures by altering the concentrations of constituent molecules, accessibility of 
this approach for effectively regulating the size and shape of nanostructures, and 
simple and economic viable experimental processes. The self-assembly technique 
yields silicate materials that are prone to aggregation. There are numerous signif-
icant challenges with the self-assembly technique because it is relatively a novel 
technique in nanotechnology. Unfortunately, it is difﬁcult to handle self-assembly 
on a large scale, and to be extensively applied, we will need to ensure signiﬁcantly 
high degrees of repeatability at these scales. The basic principles of atomistic and 
macroscale processes might differ dramatically from those of nanostructures, and 
the thermodynamic and kinetic mechanisms of self-assembly are poorly understood. 
In self-assembling systems, equilibrium time scale and kinetic rates are affected by 
concepts of thermal motion and capillary action that are less evident. 
2.11 
Conclusion and Perspectives of Every Synthesis 
Method for Nanodielectric Materials 
Due to their widespread use in industry, particularly in telecommunication and elec-
tronic applications, nanodielectric materials. Moreover, different types of nanodielec-
tric materials expand the possibility of realizing numerous signiﬁcant applications. 
The nanoparticles have been produced using a variety of unique synthetic methods 
in order to achieve greater dielectric characteristics. In this chapter, we address alter-
native synthetic techniques for the creation of nanomaterials with greater dielectric 
characteristics while keeping the aforementioned in mind. Various synthetic routes 
have their own merits and demerits which have been well explained. Depending on the 
type of application of the nanomaterials, researchers have chosen the synthetic proce-
dure, such as thin ﬁlm, nanocomposite, polymer-based nanocomposite, and metal 
nanoparticle-based nanodielectric materials. In the sol–gel synthesis approach, nano-
sized particles can be prepared with good stoichiometric control and ultraﬁne parti-
cles with narrow size distribution. Also, it takes short time for processing at a lower 
temperature. The hydrothermal method takes place in a closed system with high pres-
sure and temperature. This process provides large-sized particles for various applica-
tions. To synthesize these ﬁlm-based dielectric materials, spray pyrolysis method can 
be used, which provides limited size distribution of particles with a uniform coating. 
In the spray pyrolysis technique, a solution is made to spray on the heated substrate 
to create a thin ﬁlm, which further can be used for various industrial applications. 
Polymer-based nanodielectric can be synthesized using the RAFT method. RAFT 
method includes the addition of inorganic ﬁllers with high permittivities such as 
barium titanate, conductive or semiconductive ﬁllers like carbon nanotubes, and other 
conductive polymers, to those polymers with high breakdown strength. The combus-
tion method provides fast synthesis with the consumption of low energy and gives

52
V. Kashyap et al.
products with high purity. Control over particle size using the combustion method by 
choosing appropriate fuel that produces a slow burning rate and less exothermicity. 
Polymer-clay nanocomposite can be synthesized using the intercalation method. In 
the intercalation technique, the polymer was incorporated within the layers of clay 
having few nanometer dimensions. Polymer incorporation largely affected by the 
intercalated clay structure which is further responsible for the high electrical and 
dielectric properties of the nanocomposite. Silane-based nanodielectrics are referred 
to as self-assembled nanodielectrics (SANDs). In the SAMs technique, nanostruc-
tured materials were formed by spontaneous assembly of precursor molecules. This 
method provides a stable and structurally well-deﬁned aggregate associated with 
non-covalent bonds. Nanoﬁbers with higher dielectric properties can be synthesized 
by using electrospinning techniques. The electrospinning method is a comprehensive 
and simple method to get ultraﬁne ﬁbers from various materials. The applicability of 
various synthetic routes has provided various challenges for the synthesis of nanoma-
terials with electronic properties. In the future, these synthetic routes can be further 
modiﬁed to produce other forms of nanodielectric for various industrial applications. 
References 
1. Dang ZM, Yuan JK, Yao SH, Liao RJ (2013) Flexible nanodielectric materials with high 
permittivity for power energy storage. Adv Mater 25(44):6334–6365 
2. Tan DQ (2020) Review of polymer-based nanodielectric exploration and ﬁlm scale up for 
advanced capacitors. Adv Funct Mater 30(18):1808567 
3. Tian F, Lei Q, Wang X, Wang Y (2012) Investigation of electrical properties of LDPE/ZnO 
nanocomposite dielectrics. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 9:763–769 
4. Yang K, Huang X, Zhu M, Xie L, Tanaka T, Jiang P (2014) Combining RAFT polymerization 
and thiol–ene click reaction for core–shell structured polymer@ BaTiO3 nanodielectrics with 
high dielectric constant, low dielectric loss, and high energy storage capability. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces 6(3) 
5. Simon P, Gogotsi Y (2008) Materials for electrochemical capacitors. Nat Mater 7(11):845–854 
6. Thongbai P, Yamwong T, Maensiri S (2009) Electrical responses in high permittivity dielectric 
(Li, Fe)-doped NiO ceramics. Appl Phys Lett 94(15):152905 
7. Brochu P, Pei Q (2012) Dielectric elastomers for actuators and artiﬁcial muscles. In: 
Electroactivity in polymeric materials. Springer, Boston, MA 
8. Wang Y, Zhou X, Chen Q, Chu B, Zhang Q (2010) Recent development of high energy density 
polymers for dielectric capacitors. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 17(4):1036–1042 
9. Ortiz RP, Facchetti A, Marks TJ (2010) High-k organic, inorganic, and hybrid dielectrics for 
low-voltage organic ﬁeld-effect transistors. Chem Rev 110(1):205–239 
10. Wang Q, Zhu L (2011) Polymer nanocomposites for electrical energy storage. J Polym Sci 
B: Polym Phys 49(20):1421–1429 
11. Cao Y, Irwin PC, Younsi K (2004) The future of nanodielectrics in the electrical power 
industry. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 11(5):797–807 
12. Sanida A, Stavropoulos SG, Speliotis T, Psarras GC (2021) Evaluating the multifunctional 
performance of polymer matrix nanodielectrics incorporating magnetic nanoparticles: a 
comparative study. Polymer 236:124311 
13. Slenes KM, Winsor P, Scholz T, Hudis M (2001) Pulse power capability of high energy density 
capacitors based on a new dielectric material. IEEE Trans Magn 37(1):324–327

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
53
14. Hardy CG, Islam MS, Gonzalez-Delozier D, Ploehn HJ, Tang C (2012) Oligoaniline-
containing supramolecular block copolymer nanodielectric materials. Macromol Rapid 
Commun 33(9):791–797 
15. Sikalidis CE (2011) Advances in ceramics: electric and magnetic ceramics, bioceramics, 
ceramics and environment. BoD–Books on Demand 
16. Pan Z, Zhai J, Shen B (2017) Multilayer hierarchical interfaces with high energy density in 
polymer nanocomposites composed of BaTiO3@ TiO2@ Al2O3 nanoﬁbers. J Mater Chem 
5(29):15217–15226 
17. Li J, Claude J, Norena-Franco LE, Seok SI, Wang Q (2008) Electrical energy storage in ferro-
electric polymer nanocomposites containing surface-functionalized BaTiO3 nanoparticles. 
Chem Mater 20(20):6304–6306 
18. Horowitz G, Hajlaoui R, Bouchriha H, Bourguiga R, Hajlaoui M (1998) The concept of 
threshold voltage in organic ﬁeld-effect transistors. Adv Mater 10(12):923–927 
19. Kleemann H, Schwartz G, Zott S, Baumann M, Furno M (2020) Megahertz operation of 
vertical organic transistors for ultra-high resolution active-matrix display. Flex Print Electron 
5(1):014009 
20. Ta J, Sun W, Lu L (2022) Organic small molecule semiconductor materials for OFET-based 
biosensors. Biosens Bioelectron 216:114667 
21. Ji D, Li T, Hu W, Fuchs H (2019) Recent progress in aromatic polyimide dielectrics for organic 
electronic devices and circuits. Adv Mater 31(15):1806070 
22. Singh TB, Sariciftci NS (2006) Progress in plastic electronics devices. Annu Rev Mater Res 
36:199–230 
23. Kim CH, Kymissis I (2017) Graphene–organic hybrid electronics. J Mater Chem C 
5(19):4598–4613 
24. Chen Q, Shen Y, Zhang S, Zhang QM (2015) Polymer-based dielectrics with high energy 
storage density. Annu Rev Mater Res 45(1):433–458 
25. Feng M, Zhang C, Zhou G, Zhang T, Feng Y, Chi Q, Lei Q (2020) Enhanced energy storage 
characteristics in PVDF-based nanodielectrics with core-shell structured and optimized shape 
ﬁllers. IEEE Access 8:81542–81550 
26. Liu Y, Gao J, Wang Y, Zhou J, Cao L, He Z, Zhang Y, Tang C, Zhong L (2019) 
Enhanced temperature stability of high energy density ferroelectric polymer blends: the spatial 
conﬁnement effect. Macromol Rapid Commun 40(21):1900406 
27. Andritsch T, Fabiani D, Vazquez IR (2013) Nanodielectrics-examples of preparation and 
microstructure. IEEE Electr Insul Mag 29(6):21–28 
28. Tanaka T, Montanari G, Mulhaupt R (2004) Polymer nanocomposites as dielectrics and elec-
trical insulation-perspectives for processing technologies, material characterization and future 
applications. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 11(5):763–784 
29. Anandraj J, Joshi GM (2018) Fabrication, performance and applications of integrated 
nanodielectric properties of materials—a review. Compos Interfaces 25(5–7):455–489 
30. Saha S, Chakravorty D (2006) One-dimensional organic giant dielectrics. Appl Phys Lett 
89(4):043117 
31. Chen X, Saito T, Yamada H, Matsushige K (2001) Aligning single-wall carbon nanotubes 
with an alternating-current electric ﬁeld. Appl Phys Lett 78(23):3714–3716 
32. Bokov D, Turki Jalil A, Chupradit S, Suksatan W, Javed Ansari M, Shewael IH, Valiev GH, 
Kianfar E (2021) Nanomaterial by sol-gel method: synthesis and application. Adv Mater Sci 
Eng 2021 
33. Znaidi L, Illia GS, Benyahia S, Sanchez C, Kanaev A (2003) Oriented ZnO thin ﬁlms synthesis 
by sol–gel process for laser application. Thin Solid Films 428(1–2):257–262 
34. Wang N, Magdassi S, Mandler D, Long Y (2013) Simple sol–gel process and one-step 
annealing of vanadium dioxide thin ﬁlms: synthesis and thermochromic properties. Thin 
Solid Films 534:594–598 
35. Li L, Yalcin B, Nguyen BN, Meador MAB, Cakmak M (2009) Flexible nanoﬁber-reinforced 
aerogel (xerogel) synthesis, manufacture, and characterization. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
1(11):2491–2501

54
V. Kashyap et al.
36. Abid N, Khan AM, Shujait S, Chaudhary K, Ikram M, Imran M, Haider J, Khan M, Khan 
Q, Maqbool M (2021) Synthesis of nanomaterials using various top-down and bottom-
up approaches, inﬂuencing factors, advantages, and disadvantages: a review. Adv Colloid 
Interface Sci 102597 
37. Mammo TW, Murali N, Kumari CV, Margarette S, Ramakrishna A, Vemuri R, Rao YS, 
Prasad KV, Ramakrishna Y, Samatha K (2020) Synthesis, structural, dielectric and magnetic 
properties of cobalt ferrite nanomaterial prepared by sol-gel autocombustion technique. Phys 
B: Condens Matter 581:411769 
38. Gunji N, Komori Y, Yoshitake H (2016) Double functionalization with mercaptopropyl and 
vinyl groups of the surface of silica nanoparticles and its application to tire rubber. Colloids 
Surf A Physicochem Eng 511:351–356 
39. Mahtabani A, Rytöluoto I, Anyszka R, He X, Saarimäki E, Lahti K, Paajanen M, Dierkes 
W, Blume A (2020) On the silica surface modiﬁcation and its effect on charge trapping and 
transport in pp-based dielectric nanocomposites. ACS Appl Polym Mater 2(8):3148–3160 
40. Ghamarpoor R, Jamshidi M (2022) Synthesis of vinyl-based silica nanoparticles by sol–gel 
method and their inﬂuences on network microstructure and dynamic mechanical properties 
of nitrile rubber nanocomposites. Sci Rep 12(1):1–15 
41. Aoki Y, Kunitake T, Nakao A (2005) Sol–gel fabrication of dielectric HfO2 nano-ﬁlms; 
formation of uniform, void-free layers and their superior electrical properties. Chem Mater 
17(2):450–458 
42. Jiang H, Liu H, Yu H, Gao F, Liu J-M, Nan C (2005) Dielectric behaviors of ZnFe2O4–SiO2 
composite thin ﬁlms prepared by sol-gel method. Int J Mod Phys 19(15–17):2682–2686 
43. Srivastava M, Mishra P, Gupta VK, Srivastava N (2020) Green synthesis of nanomaterials for 
bioenergy applications. Wiley 
44. Parashar M, Shukla VK, Singh R (2020) Metal oxides nanoparticles via sol–gel method: 
a review on synthesis, characterization and applications. J Mater Sci: Mater Electron 
31(5):3729–3749 
45. Adschiri T, Kanazawa K, Arai K (1992) Rapid and continuous hydrothermal crystallization 
of metal oxide particles in supercritical water. J Am Ceram Soc 75(4):1019–1022 
46. Raghavendra M, Jagadish K, Srikantaswamy S, Pradeep T, Gnana Prakash A, Ravikumar 
H (2022) Effect of CeO2 nanoparticles on dielectric properties of PVB/CeO2 polymer 
nanodielectrics: a positron lifetime study. J Mater Sci: Mater Electron 33(2):1063–1077 
47. Dewangan R, Asthana A, Singh AK, Carabineiro SA (2021) Control of surface functionaliza-
tion of graphene-metal oxide polymer nanocomposites prepared by a hydrothermal method. 
Pol Bull 78(8):4665–4683 
48. Das S, Das S, Sutradhar S (2017) Effect of Gd3+ and Al3+ on optical and dielectric properties 
of ZnO nanoparticle prepared by two-step hydrothermal method. Ceram Int 43(9):6932–6941 
49. Chen Z, Li H, Xie G, Yang K (2018) Core–shell structured Ag@ C nanocables for ﬂexible 
ferroelectric polymer nanodielectric materials with low percolation threshold and excellent 
dielectric properties. RSC Adv 8(1):1–9 
50. Zeraati AS, Arjmand M, Sundararaj U (2017) Silver nanowire/MnO2 nanowire hybrid 
polymer nanocomposites: materials with high dielectric permittivity and low dielectric loss. 
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 9(16):14328–14336 
51. Hayashi H, Hakuta Y (2010) Hydrothermal synthesis of metal oxide nanoparticles in 
supercritical water. Materials 3(7):3794–3817 
52. Ahmad T, Shahazad M, Phul R (2017) Hydrothermal synthesis, characterization and dielectric 
properties of zirconia nanoparticles. Mater Sci Eng Int J 1:100–104 
53. Gan YX, Jayatissa AH, Yu Z, Chen X, Li M (2020) Hydrothermal synthesis of nanomaterials. 
vol 2020. Hindawi 
54. Patil K (2008) Chemistry of nanocrystalline oxide materials: combustion synthesis, properties 
and applications. World Scientiﬁc 
55. Patil KC, Aruna S, Mimani T (2002) Combustion synthesis: an update. Curr Opin Solid State 
Mater Sci 6(6):507–512

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
55
56. Varma A, Mukasyan AS, Rogachev AS, Manukyan KV (2016) Solution combustion synthesis 
of nanoscale materials. Chem Rev 116(23):14493–14586 
57. Kim M-G, Kanatzidis MG, Facchetti A, Marks TJ (2011) Low-temperature fabrication of 
high-performance metal oxide thin-ﬁlm electronics via combustion processing. Nat Mater 
10(5):382–388 
58. Krengvirat W, Sreekantan S, Ahmad-Fauzi M, Chinwanitcharoen C, Kawamura G, Matsuda 
A (2012) Control of the structure, morphology and dielectric properties of bismuth 
titanate ceramics by praseodymium substitution using an intermediate fuel agent-assisted 
self-combustion synthesis. J Mater Sci 47(9):4019–4027 
59. Sekar MM, Halliyal A (1998) Low-temperature synthesis, characterization, and properties of 
lead-based ferroelectric niobates. J Am Ceram Soc 81(2):380–388 
60. Ramakrishna S (2005) An introduction to electrospinning and nanoﬁbers. World scientiﬁc 
61. Jiang J, Shen Z, Cai  X,  Qian  J,  Dan Z, Lin  Y,  Liu B, Nan  CW, Chen L, Shen Y  
(2019) Polymer nanocomposites with interpenetrating gradient structure exhibiting ultrahigh 
discharge efﬁciency and energy density. Adv Energy Mater 9(15):1803411 
62. Li Z, Liu F, Yang G, Li H, Dong L, Xiong C, Wang Q (2018) Enhanced energy storage 
performance of ferroelectric polymer nanocomposites at relatively low electric ﬁelds induced 
by surface modiﬁed BaTiO3 nanoﬁbers. Compos Sci Technol 164:214–221 
63. Wang J, Long Y, Sun Y, Zhang X, Yang H, Lin B (2017) Enhanced energy density and 
thermostability in polyimide nanocomposites containing core-shell structured BaTiO3@ SiO2 
nanoﬁbers. Appl Surf Sci 426:437–445 
64. Bian S, Jayaram SH, Cherney EA (2010) Use of electrospinning to disperse nanosilica 
into silicone rubber. In: 2010 annual report conference on electrical insulation and dielectic 
phenomena. IEEE, pp 1–4 
65. Anwar N, Ishtiaq M, Shakoor A, Niaz NA, Rizvi TZ, Qasim M, Irfan M, Mahmood A (2021) 
Dielectric properties of polymer/clay nanocomposites. Polym Polym Compos 29(6):807–813 
66. Sengwa R, Choudhary S, Sankhla S (2010) Dielectric properties of montmorillonite clay 
ﬁlled poly (vinyl alcohol)/poly (ethylene oxide) blend nanocomposites. Compos Sci Technol 
70(11):1621–1627 
67. Kojima Y, Usuki A, Kawasumi M, Okada A, Kurauchi T, Kamigaito O (1993) Synthesis of 
nylon 6–clay hybrid by montmorillonite intercalated with ∈-caprolactam. J Polym Sci, Part 
A: Polym Chem 31(4):983–986 
68. Vellakkat M, Kamath A, Raghu S, Chapi S, Hundekal D (2014) Dielectric constant and 
transport mechanism of percolated polyaniline nanoclay composites. Ind Eng Chem Res 
53(43):16873–16882 
69. Yan X, Goodson T (2006) High dielectric hyperbranched polyaniline materials. J Phys Chem 
B 110(30):14667–14672 
70. Joo J, Long S, Pouget J, Oh E, MacDiarmid A, Epstein A (1998) Charge transport of the 
mesoscopic metallic state in partially crystalline polyanilines. Phys Rev B 57(16):9567 
71. Akat H, Tasdelen MA, Du Prez F, Yagci Y (2008) Synthesis and characterization of polymer/ 
clay nanocomposites by intercalated chain transfer agent. Eur Polymer J 44(7):1949–1954 
72. Pavlidou S, Papaspyrides C (2008) A review on polymer–layered silicate nanocomposites. 
Prog Polym Sci 33(12):1119–1198 
73. Pizzatto L, Lizot A, Fiorio R, Amorim CL, Machado G, Giovanela M, Zattera AJ, Crespo JS 
(2009) Synthesis and characterization of thermoplastic polyurethane/nanoclay composites. 
Mater Sci Engg C 29(2):474–478 
74. Thomas S, Maria HJ (2016) Progress in rubber nanocomposites. Woodhead Publishing 
75. Chamberlin R, Skarman J (1966) Chemical spray deposition process for inorganic ﬁlms. J 
Electrochem Soc 113(1):86 
76. Kim S, Lee M, Noh T, Lee C (1996) Preparation of barium titanate by homogeneous 
precipitation. J Mater Sci 31(14):3643–3645 
77. Hayashi K, Yamamoto T, Sakuma T (1996) Grain orientation dependence of the PTCR effect 
in niobium-doped barium titanate. J Am Ceram Soc 79(6):1669–1672

56
V. Kashyap et al.
78. Kang YC, Park SB (1997) Effect of preparation conditions on the formation of primary ZnO 
particles in ﬁlter expansion aerosol generator. J Mater Sci Lett 16(2):131–133 
79. Chiu H-H (2000) Advances and challenges in droplet and spray combustion. I. Toward a 
uniﬁed theory of droplet aerothermochemistry. Prog Energy Combust Sci 26(4–6):381–416 
80. Roh HS, Kang YC, Park SB (2000) Morphology and luminescence of (GdY)2O3: Eu particles 
prepared by colloidal seed-assisted spray pyrolysis. J Colloid Interface Sci 228(2):195–199 
81. Lee D, Kang Y, Park H, Ryu S (2003) VUV characteristics of BaAl {sub 12} O {sub 19}: Mn 
{sup 2+} phosphor particles prepared from aluminum polycation solutions by spray pyrolysis. 
J Alloys Compd 353 
82. Mooney JB, Radding SB (1982) Spray pyrolysis processing. Annu Rev Mater Sci 12(1):81– 
101 
83. Lenggoro IW, Okuyama K, de la Mora JF, Tohge N (2000) Preparation of ZnS nanoparticles 
by electrospray pyrolysis. J Aerosol Sci 31(1):121–136 
84. Kang YC, Park SB (1995) A high-volume spray aerosol generator producing small droplets 
for low pressure applications. J Aerosol Sci 26(7):1131–1138 
85. Xia B, Lenggoro IW, Okuyama K (2002) Nanoparticle separation in salted droplet microre-
actors. Chem Mater 14(6):2623–2627 
86. Choi SH, Ko YN, Lee J-K, Kang YC (2012) Dielectric properties of nano-sized Ba0.7Sr0.3TiO3 
powders prepared by spray pyrolysis. Ceram Int 38 (5):4029–4033 
87. Ko YN, Choi SH, Kang YC (2013) Nano-sized Ag–BaTiO3 composite powders with various 
amount of Ag prepared by spray pyrolysis. J Eur Ceram Soc 33(7):1335–1341 
88. Afouxenidis D, Mazzocco R, Vourlias G, Livesley PJ, Krier A, Milne WI, Kolosov O, 
Adamopoulos G (2015) ZnO-based thin ﬁlm transistors employing aluminum titanate 
gate dielectrics deposited by spray pyrolysis at ambient air. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
7(13):7334–7341 
89. Adamopoulos G, Thomas S, Wöbkenberg PH, Bradley DD, McLachlan MA, Anthopoulos TD 
(2011) High-mobility low-voltage ZnO and Li-doped ZnO transistors based on ZrO2 high-k 
dielectric grown by spray pyrolysis in ambient air. Adv Mater 23(16):1894–1898 
90. Jung D, Hong S, Cho J, Kang Y (2008) Nano-sized barium titanate powders with tetragonal 
crystal structure prepared by ﬂame spray pyrolysis. J Eur Ceram Soc 28(1):109–115 
91. Seck M, Mohammadian N, Diallo AK, Faraji S, Erouel M, Bouguila N, Ndiaye D, Khirouni 
K, Majewski LA (2020) Organic FETs using biodegradable almond gum as gate dielectric: a 
promising way towards green electronics. Org Electron 83:105735 
92. Majumder S (2022) Synthesis methods of nanomaterials for visible light photocatalysis. In: 
Nanostructured materials for visible light photocatalysis. Elsevier, pp 47–113 
93. Bhattacharya SK, Tummala RR (2000) Next generation integral passives: materials, processes, 
and integration of resistors and capacitors on PWB substrates. J Mater Sci Mater Electro 
11(3):253–268 
94. Barber P, Balasubramanian S, Anguchamy Y, Gong S, Wibowo A, Gao H, Ploehn HJ, Zur 
Loye H-C (2009) Polymer composite and nanocomposite dielectric materials for pulse power 
energy storage. Materials 2(4):1697–1733 
95. Wang S, Huang X, Wang G, Wang Y, He J, Jiang P (2015) Increasing the energy efﬁciency 
and breakdown strength of high-energy-density polymer nanocomposites by engineering 
the Ba0.7Sr0.3TiO3 nanowire surface via reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer 
polymerization. J Phys Chem C 119(45):25307–25318 
96. Yang K, Huang X, Xie L, Wu C, Jiang P, Tanaka T (2012) Core–shell structured polystyrene/ 
BaTiO3 hybrid nanodielectrics prepared by in situ RAFT polymerization: a route to high 
dielectric constant and low loss materials with weak frequency dependence. Macromol Rapid 
Commun 33(22):1921–1926 
97. Qiao Y, Yin X, Wang L, Islam MS, Benicewicz BC, Ploehn HJ, Tang C (2015) Bimodal 
polymer brush core–shell barium titanate nanoparticles: a strategy for high-permittivity 
polymer nanocomposites. Macromolecules 48(24):8998–9006 
98. Qiao Y, Islam MS, Han K, Leonhardt E, Zhang J, Wang Q, Ploehn HJ, Tang C (2013) Poly-
mers containing highly polarizable conjugated side chains as high-performance all-organic 
nanodielectric materials. Adv Funct Mater 23(45):5638–5646

2
Synthesis Approaches for Nanodielectric Materials
57
99. Moad G, Chong Y, Postma A, Rizzardo E, Thang SH (2005) Advances in RAFT polymeriza-
tion: the synthesis of polymers with deﬁned end-groups. Polymer 46(19):8458–8468 
100. Arias AC, MacKenzie JD, McCulloch I, Rivnay J, Salleo A (2010) Materials and applications 
for large area electronics: solution-based approaches. Chem Rev 110(1):3–24 
101. Ashurbekova K, Ashurbekova K, Botta G, Yurkevich O, Knez M (2020) Vapor phase 
processing: a novel approach for fabricating functional hybrid materials. Nanotechnology 
31(34):342001 
102. Whitesides GM, Grzybowski B (2002) Self-assembly at all scales. Science 295(5564):2418– 
2421 
103. Whitesides GM, Mathias JP, Seto CT (1991) Molecular self-assembly and nanochemistry: a 
chemical strategy for the synthesis of nanostructures. Science 254(5036):1312–1319 
104. Ha Y-G, Emery JD, Bedzyk MJ, Usta H, Facchetti A, Marks TJ (2011) Solution-deposited 
organic–inorganic hybrid multilayer gate dielectrics. Design, synthesis, microstructures, and 
electrical properties with thin-ﬁlm transistors. J Am Chem Soc 133(26):10239–10250 
105. Everaerts K, Zeng L, Hennek JW, Camacho DI, Jariwala D, Bedzyk MJ, Hersam MC, Marks TJ 
(2013) Printed indium gallium zinc oxide transistors. Self-assembled nanodielectric effects 
on low-temperature combustion growth and carrier mobility. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
5(22):11884–11893 
106. Stallings K, Smith J, Chen Y, Zeng L, Wang B, Di Carlo G, Bedzyk MJ, Facchetti A, Marks 
TJ (2021) Self-assembled nanodielectrics for solution-processed top-gate amorphous IGZO 
thin-ﬁlm transistors. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 13(13):15399–15408

Chapter 3 
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric 
Characterization of Nanodielectrics 
Sudhanshu Dwivedi 
Abstract Nanostructured dielectric materials are a special class of high-quality 
electronic-grade materials having conﬁnement of at least one of its dimensions at 
the nanoscale for advanced nanoelectronics, nanodevice, optical, and many other 
potential applications. Nanodielectric materials became signiﬁcantly important with 
the progression of the miniaturization of device dimensions. Currently, transistor 
fabrication technology has seen many advancements reaching almost atomic scales 
that inculcate very high quality and ultrathin gate dielectric layers. High capaci-
tance nanodielectric gate materials are extremely important in high-throughput thin-
ﬁlm transistors (TFTs) for potentially hysteresis-free and low-voltage action. More-
over, organic–inorganic hybrid nanodielectric materials are the most-sought-after 
for ﬂexible electronics on account of mechanical bendability. Organic nanodielectric 
materials are highly desired for advanced low-voltage operating carbon nanotube 
(CNT)-based TFTs and for complementary logic gates applications. Another fact 
is the ease of deposition of dielectric solution over plastic substrates for ﬂexible 
nanoelectronic applications. Other categories of nanodielectric materials include 
carbon black composited with polymers to form nanocomposites, silica aerogel, 
epoxy microcomposites enhanced with nanosized clays, crystalline dielectric mate-
rials, and nanometric dendrimers. Next-generation applications can be classiﬁed 
into increased stress, higher temperature, stress-grading, and surface modiﬁcation 
submissions. Engineered nanodielectric layers are of paramount importance for self-
cleaning or easy-to-clean surfaces for outdoor applications in cars and windows, 
for example. The main feature of a high static contact angle provides for a nonwet-
ting surface. Next-generation highly efﬁcient insulation materials are the need of 
the hour that is free from unambiguous dielectric breakdown character including 
surface ﬂashover between the dielectric surface and vacuum or surrounding envi-
ronment. Nanoscale ﬁllers, nanodielectric materials, and nanoparticles have been 
synthesized and worked on for state-of-the-art applications. This chapter is a concise 
effort to present information about nanosized dielectric materials, their synthesis 
methods, and their state-of-the-art applications.
S. Dwivedi envelope symbol
S.S. Jain Subodh P.G. (Autonomous) College, Jaipur, India 
e-mail: sudhanshu.dwivedi@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_3 
59

60
S. Dwivedi
Keywords Nanotechnology · Dielectric materials · Theory of dielectrics ·
Nanodielectrics · Nanoﬁllers · Polymer matrix 
3.1 Introduction 
The term “nanodielectrics” entails a multicomponent nanostructure possessing 
dielectric properties that are engineered in a way such that it is at least one of 
the dimensions is conﬁned in the nanoregime typically less than 100 nm [1–4]. 
Fréchette [1] points out two different deﬁnitions of nanodielectrics as follows, “Nan-
odielectrics are those materials composed of multicomponent dielectrics conﬁned in 
nanodimensions, so that its dielectric properties are altered as compared to the bulk 
phase”. “Nanodielectric can be deﬁned as materials that exhibit altered properties 
due to nanoconﬁnement within 100 nm of at least one of its dimensions”. This deﬁ-
nition is closer to a speciﬁc feature of nanostructured materials showing modiﬁed 
novel properties at the nanoscale. 
Michel F. Fréchette states in the IEEE Electrical Insulation Magazine that 
he coined the word nanodielectrics entailing a combination of nanotechnology 
and dielectrics [1]. This concept of nanostructured dielectric materials came to 
the forefront in form of published literature after 2001. In the ﬁrst experimental 
report, current–voltage characteristics were markedly modiﬁed by the use of a 
nano-additives-based mixed compound in the case of a ZnO varistor. 
Nanodielectric materials exhibit completely distinguished performance as exem-
pliﬁed by the above-stated deﬁnitions and should not be confused with micron-sized 
agglomerated structures possessing distinct properties due to the inclusion of defects 
or even mild enhancement in dielectric properties. In addition to the chief feature of 
nanoconﬁnement in form of a nanoparticle, nanocrystal, nanocomposites, nanopow-
ders, or mixed nanomaterials, the fundamental process should allow for the dielectric 
behavior to prevail. Michel F. Fréchette recognizes four different types of nanodi-
electrics that are nanoclusters of varying aspect-ratios, multilayered nanostructured 
dielectric ﬁlms, nanocoating of only a few nanometers thickness, and nanophases. 
In a sense, self-assembly lies at the core of the development of a nanodielectric 
material along with the potential of erecting a structure based on building blocks and 
interfaces. 
Nanodielectric materials can be utilized in a range of applications that includes 
space charge suppression, high-density energy storage, nonlinear ﬁeld-grading appli-
cations, high thermal conductivity applications, and even in advanced applications in 
biomedical systems [1, 4–7]. Nanodielectric materials with nonlinear ﬁeld-grading 
properties mean that the dielectric properties can be varied as a function of the electric 
ﬁeld-induced stress [5]. Information acquired as a result of nonlinear ﬁeld grading 
can be used in the distribution of electric ﬁelds over the dielectric surfaces homo-
geneously. This is particularly useful in the prevention of the formation of electric 
stress zones in high-voltage applications. Sometimes, nonlinear ﬁeld grading can be

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
61
performed intentionally to induce nonlinear electrical characteristics by incorpora-
tion of nanoﬁllers into the polymer matrix. Nonlinear ﬁeld-grading characteristics are 
also useful for outdoor high-voltage applications relying on high-voltages. Another 
state-of-the-art application of nanodielectrics is in integrated circuitry (IC) which has 
scaled down to as low as 3 nm node in the fabrication of next-generation devices. As a 
result, highly advanced nanodielectric materials are the need of the hour for effective 
electrical and thermal insulation as more heat per volume will be generated. Addition-
ally, super-advanced nanodielectrics as gate materials are required to avoid electron 
tunneling phenomenon due to conﬁnement of thickness in the 1–3 nm range [8–10]. 
This is highly desirable to control the increment of open-circuit current or leakage 
current because of the operation of nanodevices in the high-voltage regime. The 
development of thinner insulation material with much enhanced dielectric strength 
will ensure signiﬁcantly reduced dielectric layer material for the same voltage level in 
a much more compact integrated circuitry nearing approximately atomic dimensions 
for a single node. Nanoﬁllers-polymer composite materials are signiﬁcantly useful 
because of low costs, ﬂexible features, high breakdown strength, and high permit-
tivity. Further, the incorporation of inorganic nanomaterials in a polymer base avoids 
not only the incorporation of space charges but accumulation as well. Space charges 
are detrimental to the local electric ﬁeld distribution that degrades the efﬁciency of 
the involved polymer as a function of time under high voltages of the direct current 
operation. Enis Tuncer and Isidor Sauers have reviewed the nanoparticle as ﬁllers in 
a polymer matrix along with their applications in a detailed manner [11]. Dielectric 
materials are of prime commercial value in the sense that lesser insulation mate-
rial for the same voltage level with a positively modiﬁed breakdown can result in the 
development of much more efﬁcient, cost-effective, and weight-reduced applications 
including power capacitors, transformers, and even power cables. Voltage endurance 
is an important parameter in the case of solid insulation materials that depict the 
time taken in a breakdown on the application of an electric ﬁeld that is lower in 
magnitude in comparison with the stress generated due to a ﬁeld leading to instant 
failure. Nanodielectrics can also improve direct current (DC)-based transmission 
cable systems. Nanodielectric material systems can improve mechanical features in 
form of tensile strength, elongation at the point of fracture, hardness, resistance to 
wettability and temperature variations, and electrical properties in form of enhance-
ment of tolerance level against electrical arcing and reduced dielectric permittivities. 
Nanocomposite-enameled wires were subjected to repetitive surge voltage in a study 
forwarded by Okuba et al. and Hayakawa and Okubo which estimated a breakdown 
lifetime longer by a factor of 1000 as compared to bulk-phased enameled wires 
under similar surge voltage application [12]. Nanodielectrics can also be promising 
for high-temperature dielectric applications that include capacitors, compact trans-
formers, and generators. Nanodielectrics are also under consideration for use in cryo-
genic applications with a focus on thermoplastics, such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), 
polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), or even a thermoset. A remarkable feature is that 
high permittivity particles on compositing with low permittivity surfactant produce 
a material that possesses low dielectric permittivity.

62
S. Dwivedi
For insulation applications, nanodielectrics must possess sound features of high 
electric strength, effective relative permittivity along with low dielectric loss (δ) 
of the tailored material medium as per the application, and high tolerance level 
against material erosion, high stability of the optimized nanostructure design for 
prolonged periods in a reduced nano-entropy conﬁguration, stable behavior as a 
function of temperature, or even on prolonged hours of operation including effec-
tive mechanical properties. Effective relative permittivity along with low dielec-
tric loss (δ) need to be engineered in a nanodielectric material according to the 
requirements. In terms of commercial applications, the switchover from the current 
module of bulk insulation materials to nanodimensional materials with a brand-new 
set of properties is a giant step. All original equipment manufacturers (OEM) are 
fearful of making a changeover because of dreadful commercial implications. The 
important features of nanodielectric materials are inclusive of highly efﬁcient voltage 
endurance, high ﬁdelity against discharge-driven deformations, superior dielectric 
behavior with distention for intrinsic space charge collection, and increment in alter-
nating current (AC) breakdown strength with positive consequences of enhancing the 
operational electric load that become signiﬁcant at high temperatures under applica-
tion of divergent ﬁelds along with direct voltage. This can ensure a highly concise 
mechanical design of electric machines along with thermal features. 
3.1.1 
Theory of Dielectric Materials 
Dielectrics belong to the broader class of materials that possess the property of polar-
izability under the application of an electric ﬁeld. The formation of dipolar structures 
allows the containment of an electrostatic ﬁeld within them [13]. Insulators are also 
dielectric materials that prevent the ﬂow of leakage currents or open-circuit currents 
in devices. Dielectrics have become extremely important in integrated circuitry (IC) 
since shrinking of device architectures to almost atomic scales (1–3 nm node) has 
compelled the development of ultrathin high-k dielectric materials that can not only 
provide effective gating but prevent leakage currents as well. Under the effect of an 
electric ﬁeld, positive charges are along the direction of the electric ﬁeld (E) while 
negative charges are aligned in a direction opposite to the direction of the electric 
ﬁeld (E). In this process, dielectric material remains neutral as a whole, although, 
electrons get displaced from their mean vibrating positions in length scales smaller 
than atomic sizes. No signiﬁcant charge displacement is observed at the macro-scale 
similar to the conductors to cause higher conductivities. G. C. Psarras has provided 
details of the theory of dielectrics in his book chapter on “Fundamentals of Dielectric 
Theories” in a very nice manner [13]. 
Polarization happens due to the distribution of charged species in a dielectric 
with a vector pointing from the midpoint of negatively charged species toward the 
midpoint of positively charged species. The developed electric dipole moment (μ) 
due to the absolute value of positive and negative charges with distance r between 
the two centers is given as follows,

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
63
bold mu e
quals bold q asterisk bold r
The total dipole moment can be calculated by summing the above product over 
a range of different dipoles. Polarization (P) is deﬁned as the total electric moment 
per unit volume (V) of the dielectric material, which is given as, 
bold upper P equals StartFraction bold upper M Over bold upper V EndFraction
bo
ld upper P equals StartFraction bold upper M Over bold upper V EndFraction
Polarization is an important parameter that practically resembles charge surface 
density with units of C m−2 and dimensions as [L−2TI]. Polarization can be deﬁned 
as the average sum of n electric dipole moments contained in a unit volume which 
can be expressed as, 
bo l
d n
i
tali
c 
u
pper P equals b o l d s y m b o l left angle bracket sigma summation Underscript bold italic j equals 1 Overscript bold italic n Endscripts bold italic mu Subscript bold italic i Baseline right angle bracket
In an isotropic material, under the effect of zero electric ﬁelds (E = 0), permanent 
electric dipole moments are arranged randomly. On application of an E, permanent 
electric moments are along the direction of E, while induced dipole moments (μind) 
are also developed as outlined above. Hence, dipole moment as a whole is expressed 
as, 
bold it alic mu Sub
script bold upper T o t a l Baseline equals bold italic mu Subscript bold i Baseline plus bold italic mu Subscript bold i n d
And, in that case, total polarization is, 
bo l
d n
i
tali
c uppe
r
 P equals b o l d s y m b o l left angle bracket sigma summation Underscript bold italic j equals 1 Overscript bold italic n Endscripts bold italic mu Subscript bold upper T o t a l Baseline right angle bracket
The coefﬁcient of polarization or polarizability (α) is an important dielectric 
parameter for dielectrics that give the ability of atoms or molecules to get polarized. 
In the case of linear dielectrics, polarizability can be deﬁned as the total dipole 
moment developed in a dielectric under the application of an external electric ﬁeld 
(E) or better total dipole moment produced per unit of electric ﬁeld (E). 
Hence, 
bold italic alpha equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction bold italic mu Subscript bold upper T o t a l Baseline Over bold italic upper E EndFraction
bo
ld italic alpha equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction bold italic mu Subscript bold upper T o t a l Baseline Over bold italic upper E EndFraction
In the above equation, E is the acting electric ﬁeld and not the ﬁeld applied 
externally. Polarizability possesses dimensions of volume and can be estimated for 
dielectric materials with different types of atoms.

64
S. Dwivedi
Electric displacement vector ( ModifyingAbove b o l d s y m b o l upper D With right arrow) with bol d italic  epsilon 0 equals 8.854 b o l d s y m b o l asterisk 10 Superscript negative 12 Baseline b o l d s y m b o l upper F divided by bold italic m is expressed as 
follows, 
bo ld ital ic 
upper D equals b o l d s y m b o l epsilon 0 bold italic upper E plus bold italic upper P
Noticeable point is that polarization relates to induced charges over edge surfaces 
of the sample in a parallel plate capacitor ﬁlled with a dielectric material, electric 
displacement pertains to independent charges at the electrode surfaces, while electric 
ﬁeld vector left parenthesis bold upper D) depends on both independent and induced charges. 
The relative dielectric constant (bold italic epsilon) of a material is deﬁned as follows, 
Relative dielectric constant left parenthesis  bold italic epsi lon  right parenthesis equals StartFraction bold italic upper E bold italic l bold italic e bold italic c bold italic t bold italic r bold italic i bold italic c bold italic upper P bold italic e bold italic r bold italic m bold italic i bold italic t bold italic t bold italic i bold italic v bold italic i bold italic t bold italic y bold italic o bold italic f b o l d s y m b o l upper M a t e r i a l left parenthesis bold italic epsilon Subscript bold italic m Baseline right parenthesis Over bold italic upper E bold italic l bold italic e bold italic c bold italic t bold italic r bold italic i bold italic c bold italic upper P bold italic e bold italic r bold italic m bold italic i bold italic t bold italic t bold italic i bold italic v bold italic i bold italic t bold italic y bold italic o bold italic f b o l d s y m b o l upper V a c u u m left parenthesis bold italic epsilon 0 right parenthesis EndFraction
Relative di electric constan t l eft parenthesis bold italic epsilon right parenthesis equals StartFraction bold italic upper E bold italic l bold italic e bold italic c bold italic t bold italic r bold italic i bold italic c bold italic upper P bold italic e bold italic r bold italic m bold italic i bold italic t bold italic t bold italic i bold italic v bold italic i bold italic t bold italic y bold italic o bold italic f b o l d s y m b o l upper M a t e r i a l left parenthesis bold italic epsilon Subscript bold italic m Baseline right parenthesis Over bold italic upper E bold italic l bold italic e bold italic c bold italic t bold italic r bold italic i bold italic c bold italic upper P bold italic e bold italic r bold italic m bold italic i bold italic t bold italic t bold italic i bold italic v bold italic i bold italic t bold italic y bold italic o bold italic f b o l d s y m b o l upper V a c u u m left parenthesis bold italic epsilon 0 right parenthesis EndFraction
Relative dielectric constant (epsilon) in terms of electric displacement vector left parenthesis bold italic upper D) is  
expressed as, 
bold  italic epsilon equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction bold italic upper D Over bold italic epsilon 0 bold italic upper E EndFraction equals 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 1 Over bold italic epsilon 0 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic upper P Over bold italic upper E EndFraction
bold ital ic  epsilon equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction bold italic upper D Over bold italic epsilon 0 bold italic upper E EndFraction equals 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 1 Over bold italic epsilon 0 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic upper P Over bold italic upper E EndFraction
bol
d italic epsilon equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction bold italic upper D Over bold italic epsilon 0 bold italic upper E EndFraction equals 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 1 Over bold italic epsilon 0 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic upper P Over bold italic upper E EndFraction
bo
ld italic epsilon equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction bold italic upper D Over bold italic epsilon 0 bold italic upper E EndFraction equals 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 1 Over bold italic epsilon 0 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic upper P Over bold italic upper E EndFraction
Here, 
StartFraction bold upper P Over bold epsilon 0 bold upper E EndFraction
StartFraction bold upper P Over bold epsilon 0 bold upper E EndFraction is electric susceptibility that provides the degree of induced electric 
polarization due to the application of an electric ﬁeld. 
Dielectrics can be classiﬁed into polar and nonpolar dielectrics. Polar dielectrics 
possess permanent electric molecular dipoles since the line joining the midpoints of 
positive and negative charge carriers is not along a single direction. Permanent molec-
ular dipole moments persist even in the absence of the application of an electric ﬁeld. 
The essence lies in the asymmetrical nature of the molecules constituting molecular 
dielectrics with the value of dipole moment increasing on increasing the difference in 
electronegativity of the constituent atoms. On the other hand, symmetrical molecules 
in nonpolar molecular dielectrics are aligned, so that the midpoints of positive and 
negative charge carriers coincide to cause a loss of nonsymmetrical nature. Molec-
ular dipole moments tend to be oriented in an externally applied electric ﬁeld. Perfect 
molecular orientation happens when the imposed force due to an externally applied 
ﬁeld overcomes the thermal energy of molecules. Dipoles tend toward incremental 
alignment with an increase in the strength of the external electric ﬁeld while the 
ordering becomes randomized on increasing the temperature based on additionally 
imparted thermal energy. Atoms do not possess permanent electric dipole moments 
because of being spherically symmetric. However, under the effect of an externally 
applied ﬁeld, their electron clouds acquire certain orientations leading to the devel-
opment of induced dipole moments. There may be interactions happening between 
permanent electric moments and induced dipoles that may onset a distortion in the 
perfect alignment of dipoles in the direction of an electric ﬁeld. 
Technically, polarization can be classiﬁed into distortional and orientational 
polarizability.

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
65
(i) Distortional polarizability is also known as deformational polarizability. Distor-
tion polarizability can be classiﬁed commonly into electronic and atomic or 
ionic polarizability based on relative deformations or distortions of electronic 
charges or between ions generated due to an externally applied electric ﬁeld. It 
is to be noted that electronic polarizability keeps on increasing as a function of 
the increment in the number of electrons. The genesis lies in the fact that elec-
trons in outer shells of atoms with many electrons experience a lesser degree 
of binding forces with nuclei imparting signiﬁcant contribution to α-values. 
Atomic or ionic polarizability is a consequence of displacements of atoms or 
ions from their equilibrium positions under the effect of an externally applied 
electric ﬁeld. Atomic or ionic polarizability progresses much slower in compar-
ison with electronic polarization due to the higher mass of ions or atoms than 
electrons. However, both electronic and atomic polarizability has low relaxation 
times making them “fast” processes. Another important parameter is that defor-
mational polarization has no dependence on temperature, and hence, no energy 
loss is reﬂected as a function of temperature. 
(ii) Orientational polarizability is also called as dipolar polarizability. Permanent 
electric dipole moment is exhibited due to structural molecules or groups in 
polar dielectric materials. Randomly oriented dipoles get perfectly aligned in 
the direction of an externally applied electric ﬁeld. In the structural conﬁguration 
of solids, the relative displacement of charges with localized attachment to atoms 
or molecules leads to distortional and orientational polarizability. Space charge 
is an important element in dielectrics that portray additional charge carriers 
moving short distances across the dielectric and imparting overall polarization 
and leading to an enhancement in the capacitance of dielectric material. An 
important characteristic is a constriction in movement or traveling paths due to 
trapping at the grain boundaries or interfaces in the dielectric material. Space 
charge contribution can be signiﬁcant that becomes indistinct or approximately 
impossible to ﬁlter out from other polarizability contributions. Hence, space 
charge or interfacial polarizability (α) appears as a fourth term in the total polar-
izability of a material in addition to electronic, atomic, or ionic and orientational 
polarizabilities. As pointed out previously, polarization attempts to overcome 
thermal energy-based contribution to kinetic energy (K.E.) of molecules and 
hence is a function of the applied temperature. 
Determination of the static value of dielectric permittivity or dielectric constant as 
well as polarization is a direct function of dipole moments of a polar dielectric. Peter 
J. W. Debye adopted Langevin’s theory of statistic orientation to derive an analytical 
explanation of permanent dipole moments of a polar dielectric material. As pointed 
out in this theory, the cumulative effect of two opposing actions generated due to 
an externally applied electric ﬁeld that aligns dipoles in preferred orientations and 
thermal agitation-driven randomization of dipoles results in a statistical equilibrium. 
Here, the deﬁnite rotation of molecules as well as their corresponding relative inter-
actions are neglected in the derivation of statistical equilibrium. The assumption is 
based on factors that include very slowly varying externally applied electric ﬁeld to

66
S. Dwivedi
achieve polarizations of all different types in an equilibrium state, permanent dipole 
moment (μ) is free from effects of temperature as well as applied ﬁelds, dipole axes 
can adopt any alignment for the direction of externally applied ﬁeld in an initial phase, 
Boltzmann statistical distribution of permanent electric dipole moments in a direction 
to that of the applied ﬁeld, and isotropic nature of the dielectric material. Based on 
above-mentioned assumptions, Debye formulated the theory of dielectrics by doing 
away with complexities resulting in dielectric materials due to close interactions of 
molecules attributed to dense packing fractions. 
3.1.2 
Nanodielectrics 
The development of nanodielectric technology relies heavily on morphological 
features of nanomaterials that can acquire granular microstructure, one-dimensional 
(1D) nanoﬁber, and two-dimensional (2D) nanoplatelets. Such morphologically 
varying nanostructures can be used as ﬁllers for spatial distribution in a polymer 
matrix creating an interface of two distinguished materials. This interfacial zone 
has a strong bearing on the overall properties reﬂected by these typiﬁed polymer-
nanoparticles mixed nanocomposites. Advanced tailoring of nanodielectric prop-
erties is possible by suitable modiﬁcations in the microstructure of the nanopar-
ticle along with tuning of ﬁller percentage and spatial distribution in the polymer 
matrix. Zhong et al. have reviewed polymer-nanoparticle composite materials as 
nanodielectrics in detail [6]. 
Nanodielectric materials are mainly of two types nanostructured ceramics and 
nanocomposites. The use of nanocrystalline materials as starting precursor material 
leads to the development of a highly efﬁcient ﬁnal product. A simplistic approach 
is to mingle nanostructured particles in a polymer matrix for the preparation of 
polymer nanocomposites. However, highly efﬁcient approaches need to be followed 
for the development of nanometric dielectric materials. Nanodielectric particles of 
very small sizes show an agglomeration tendency. The great interest in nanodielectric 
materials lies in the large surface area available in nanosized surfaces, better func-
tionalization opportunities offering high loading sites, and highly modiﬁed proper-
ties in contrast to their bulk counterparts. Spontaneous dielectric polarization as a 
function of the externally applied electric ﬁeld happens in nanodielectric materials 
[14]. Nanosized dipoles are formed in the nanostructured dielectric material at an 
instant under an external electric force. Generally, the electric polarization of perfect 
insulator materials is termed dielectric polarization. Dielectric polarization can be 
explained based on the following three mechanisms of electronic, atomic or ionic, 
and orientational polarization, 
(i) Spatial shift of electron cloud about the nuclei that induce the formation of 
atomic dipoles developing electronic polarization (Pe),

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
67
(ii) Dislocation of various atomic nuclei from their initial relative positions in 
an inverse space to induce molecular dipoles developing atomic or ionic 
polarization (Pa), 
(iii) Alignment of permanent molecular dipoles under the inﬂuence of an electric 
ﬁeld force to develop orientational polarization (Pμ). 
The resultant dielectric polarization vector ( ModifyingAbove b o l d s y m b o l upper P With right arrow) is the actual sum of all the above-
mentioned three contributing polarization vectors.
l
ef
t
 par
ent hesi
s M odif
yi
ngAbove b o l d s y m b o l upper P With right arrow right parenthesis equals ModifyingAbove upper P Subscript e Baseline With right arrow plus ModifyingAbove upper P Subscript a Baseline With right arrow plus ModifyingAbove upper P Subscript mu Baseline With right arrow
Electronic polarization and atomic polarization as well as depolarization are very 
fast processes in dielectric materials in comparison with orientational polarization 
as well as disorientation polarization. 
Engineering of nanodielectric materials requires suitable tailoring of nanos-
tructure shape and sizes, morphological features, design of structures with appro-
priate aspect ratios, and relevant interfacial modiﬁcations. Nanoﬁllers can be suit-
ably divided into classes of 0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D types with each speciﬁc type of 
nanoﬁller improving on the particular properties of mechanical, electrical, thermal, 
and optical properties. Quantum dots belong to the category of 0D quantum 
conﬁned nanoﬁllers. Similarly, nanoshells, nanolaminas, and nanoplates belong to 
1D conﬁned nanoﬁllers. Nanotubes, nanowires, and nanoﬁbers are 2D conﬁned 
nanostructures. Nanosized SiO2 forms a good example of 3D conﬁned quantum 
structures. 
Polymer nanocomposites (PNCs) can be synthesized by the application of three 
major PNC components of the polymer matrix, nanomodiﬁed particles along with 
transitional constituents, such as surfactants and intercalants [15–20]. A range of 
polymers is available in the commercial market that can be exploited as a matrix for 
the synthesis of PNCs. Different polymers including polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) [21, 
22], polyethylene glycol (PEG) [23], and even di-block copolymers (poly-styrene-
poly-ethylene oxide) [24, 25] can be used for the preparation of PNCs. Polymers need 
to be processed with nanomodiﬁed particles and transitional constituents carefully 
in a thermal environment below their glass transition temperature (Tg). Earlier ther-
mosets were used frequently for PNCs which were subsequently replaced by thermo-
plastics [5, 26–28]. Polyoleﬁns (POs) belong to the category of thermoplastic poly-
mers possessing intricate organic molecular structures with relatively low melting 
points (M.P), semi-crystalline, cost-effective, less resistant to degradation against 
UV-radiation, mechanical breakage, and oxidation chemical means along with the 
temperature of processing not to exceed 250 °C [28]. Clay-containing PNCs can 
be synthesized by reactive, solution, and melt-compounding methods. The reactive 
method involves in situ polymerization technology, solution method is focused on 
creating a dispersion of organoclay in a solution dissolved with polymer, while melt-
compounding consists of formation by compounders [28]. Clay platelets as well as 
polymers are of the separate chemical constitution with polymers being hydrophobic 
and largely immiscible with hydrophilic clays, mostly silicates. Compatibilization

68
S. Dwivedi
is a two-step process forming a diffused ionic layer in a region surrounding the clay 
platelet along with the dispersion of extra ionic bunches in the material medium [28]. 
The interface between clay and matrix offers a range of complex reactions. Organic 
molecules are physisorbed followed by solidiﬁcation resulting in enhancement of 
overall net solid content. Signiﬁcant enhancement of electric modulus along with 
barrier characteristics due to totaling of a small quantity of effectively distributed 
clay particles is caused because of increment in solid content at the interface. This 
may also halt the UV-driven degradation process. The inclusion of clay particles 
enhances the degree of crystallinity along with providing efﬁcient nucleation sites. 
An important parameter is the optimization of type and quantity of intercalant as 
well as compatibilizer that may cover the clay particles effectively and halt effective 
nucleation. The inclusion of an optimized content of clay in PNC is an important 
parameter that shows the most effective performance in the 2–4 wt% range of organ-
oclay. The degradation of clays may be driven catalytically by transition metal ions 
as contaminants. Organoclay does not have a sound effect on dielectric properties 
when added in small quantities but has a pronounced effect on mechanical as well 
as barrier characteristics. 
3.1.3 
Interface Chemistry 
Interface chemistry plays a major role in each of the steps involved in the synthesis 
methodology of nanocomposites. Glass transition temperature (Tg) in polymers is 
a classical illustration of the involved interfacial chemistry in nanocomposites [29]. 
Simulation or modeling or even experimental study of interfacial chemistry-related 
characteristics is an important factor that can be tailored effectively by varying simu-
lation or experimental conditions. A plethora of literature has been presented on 
interface chemistry in nanocomposites. Alcoutlabi and McKenna concluded in their 
report that the present theoretical accounts to explain Tg are not sufﬁcient to describe 
the distinct features at the nanoscale [28, 30]. The defect diffusion model incul-
cated factors of concentration of defects, percolation fraction, defect lattice geom-
etry correlation length, and defect–defect interaction enthalpy [28]. This model on 
nanoconﬁned Tg was presented by Bendler et al. and focused on a calculable asso-
ciation between the percolation ratio obtained by ﬁxed to transportable areas and 
Tg [31]. Lewis et al. have pointed out that nanocomposite presents an interface 
between nanoﬁller and polymer matrix and it has nothing to do with a simplistic two-
component phasic system [32, 33]. As a result, the incorporation of a minimum of a 
single interphase region becomes of prime importance to get a nanoproduct in which 
structure–property relationships and involved chemistries become distinct in contrast 
to the two initial bulk phases that react primarily to produce the nanocomposite. A 
signiﬁcant distinction of this system is that nanoparticles possess the enormously 
exposed surface area to contribute to the interphase region in a nanocomposite. 
Complex permittivity (ε) is an important parameter and dielectric response to 
externally applied AC electric ﬁelds studied in terms of complex permittivity.

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
69
Complex permittivity consists of a real part (ε’) and an imaginary part (ε”). The 
real part of complex permittivity (ε’) entails energy stored in a dielectric material, 
while the imaginary part of complex permittivity (ε”) talks about different mech-
anisms that correlate to the dissipation of energy. Tanaka gave an initial modeling 
theory that considered a nanocomposite formed by the dispersion of nanoparticles in 
a polymer matrix. In a model based on this approach as shown in Fig. 3.1, nanoparti-
cles are encircled by three different layers of separate structural geometry covered by 
a diffuse Gouy–Chapman charge layer [34]. In the core lies the nanoparticle, while 
other layers lie one above the other as shown in the model given below. Adjacent two 
layers close to the core nanoparticle in the model, consisting of immobilized species 
that bear a strong interacting relationship with their inner neighbor, are covalently 
attached to it. An enhanced free volume including chain mobility lies at the core 
of this system conﬁned in an area between the immobilized shells and undisturbed 
matrix summing up with other factors to generate a distinct effect on the dielectric 
nature of the formed three-phase system.
The rule of mixing the composite material consisting of two systems A and 
B portrays that the properties of the ﬁnally derived composite material will lie in 
between the values shown by precursor materials A and B. 
Raetzke and Kindersberger have discussed the impact of interphase in terms of 
fraction based on the diameter of the particle and thickness of interphase signifying 
the role of physical or even chemical bonding at the interphase, acting radius, and 
correlated material properties [29]. As pointed out above, nanoparticles as ﬁllers 
possess a surrounding area covered with polymer forming the interphase. This 
surrounding layer around the nanoparticles or interphase has a thickness typically in 
the range of 0.5–10 nm. Polymeric chains contained in the surrounding matrix are 
bound to the particle surface by physical or chemical bonds that may possess orien-
tations as shown in Fig. 3.2a and b. The interphase structure depends on a range of 
parameters that include ﬁller or type of nanoparticles, surface treatment meted-out, 
type of matrix material, and even the crystalline or semi-crystalline nature of inter-
phase that plays a deciding role. Properties of interphase are completely different 
from surrounding matrix material because of distinct interphase structure and typical 
bond formation with the particle surface.
Attachment of polymeric chains over nanoﬁller surfaces happens by chemical 
bonds that depend on polar or nonpolar characteristics of the two bonding species. 
An interesting factor is the conversion of surface groups from nonpolar to polar 
characteristics due to surface treatment. Ehrenstein has pointed out that chemical 
bonds of polymeric chains possess bond energies between 40 and 800 kJ mol−1 with 
bond lengths typically lying in the range of 0.075 to 3 nm [35]. On the other hand, 
bond energies in physical bonds are typically between 0.2 and 25 kJ mol−1 for bond 
lengths between 0.5 and 0.8 nm. 
An explanation of interphase phenomena in terms of a multicore model entails 
involving all three layers, so that the contribution from interphase becomes signiﬁcant 
along with nanoﬁller surfaces impacting the polymeric chains. Different nanoﬁller 
concentrations will produce interphase made up of different fractions. For the estab-
lishment of a simplistic explanation, it is pertinent to consider the three separate

70
S. Dwivedi
Nanoparticle 
FirstLayer 
Second Layer 
ThirdLayer 
ClosestNeighbour 
Gouy-Chapman Diffuse Layer 
Charge Distribution 
Gouy-Chapman diffuse layer  overlaps 
three-layered core-shell type of model. 
Electric Double Layer 
Fig. 3.1 Schematic representation of the interfacial model for core–shell structured nanoparticles 
for advanced nanodielectric materials [34]
layers as a single interphase layer possessing thickness, j. Bond lengths and atomic 
diameters are the parameters important for the determination of thickness j of inter-
phase in the multicore model. Typically, the ﬁrst layer possesses a thickness in the 
range of 1–1.5 nm in which polymeric functional groups are chemically bonded to 
the nanoﬁller surfaces, and consists of contribution from nanoﬁller surfaces as well, 
with a typical value of 0.4 nm. The thickness of the initially attached organic layer 
in a tight-binding approach lies in the range of ~0.3 nm–1.0 nm, which typically is 
dependent upon the type of polymer. The second layer has polymeric chains attached 
to nanoﬁller surfaces or the ﬁrst layer as per the multicore model. In the second layer,

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
71
Fig. 3.2 Schematic representation of a nanoﬁller surrounded by polymer matrix in such that 
a polymer chains are arranged parallel to the nanoﬁller surface, and b polymeric chains oriented 
radially about the nanoﬁller surface [29]
the sterical arrangement of polymeric functional groups is affected mainly and facil-
itates an ordered arrangement. In the parallel arrangement of polymeric chains about 
the nanoﬁller surface, as shown in Fig. 3.2a, the little number of functional groups 
constitute mere thickness of the second layer that is dependent on smaller bond 
lengths of H2-bonds as well as dipole bonds. It signiﬁes that the thickness of the 
second layer depends on the degree of strength of the bonds. The thickness of the 
interphase layer can be estimated by the diameter of polymeric chains typically in 
the range of ~0.3 nm to 1.0 nm along with bond lengths between 0.5 and 0.8 nm. A 
typical thickness between 1.5 and 8 nm prevails for about 2–4 entangled polymeric 
chains in the second layer. In the case of radial attachment of polymeric groups 
to the nanoﬁller surface, as shown in Fig. 3.2b, the second layer can adopt higher 
thicknesses based on polymeric chain lengths. 
In contrast to the ﬁrst and second polymer layers, the third layer is affected by 
the orientation of polymeric chains in the second layer, and usually, the thickness is 
between 1 and 3 nm. With all the above three-layered structure considerations, the 
thickness ( j) of interphase lies in the range of 3–12 nm. 
Interphase structure greatly impacts the mechanical, dielectric, electrical and 
thermal conductivity, and prevention of material degradation. The mobility of poly-
meric chains affects dielectric properties, such as dielectric loss (tan δ). On increasing 
interphase fractions, the permittivity of dielectric material can show drastic changes. 
Raetzke and Kindersberger have given a simpliﬁed model for the estimation of 
interphase faction at different fractions of nanoﬁllers [29]. Assumptions for this 
model are outlined below, 
(i) All particles are assumed to be spherical and uncapped in interphase having 
nonvariable thickness j. 
(ii) All particles are assumed to be equal in size with a constant diameter “d”. 
(iii) Homogeneous dispersion of particles happens in dispersing medium or in the 
matrix.

72
S. Dwivedi
In a cubic conﬁguration with homogeneous dispersion, as shown in Fig. 3.3a, 
eight particles share each corner in the cubic geometry along with one particle at the 
body center of the cubic structure. Let the center-to-center distance of the two closest 
lying particle centers be r0. This type of particle arrangement in a cubic conﬁguration 
can accommodate a maximum nanoﬁller concentration of 68%.
Estimation of interphase fraction or f j can be performed by knowing about 
nanoﬁller concentration Vf, while interphase thickness or j is another important 
parameter. Four different conditions can be considered in this regard, 
Star
tFraction 2 Over StartRoot 3 EndRoot EndFraction left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis less than or equals b o l d s y m b o l r 0
√
St
art Frac tion 2 O
ver StartRoot 3 EndRoot EndFraction left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis less than or equals b o l d s y m b o l r 0
At low concentrations of nanoﬁllers, interparticle distance is signiﬁcantly high, and 
hence, no overlapping of neighboring interphases happens. Considering spherical 
volumes to be Vd and Vd+2j for diameters d and d + 2j, respectively, let the interphase 
volume be represented as Vj, then, 
upp er V Subscrip t bold j Baseline equals upper V Subscript bold d plus bold 2 bold j Baseline minus upper V Subscript bold d Baseline equals one sixth bold italic pi left bracket left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis cubed minus bold italic d cubed right bracket
upp
e
r V  Sub scrip t bol
d j Baseline equals upper V Subscript bold d plus bold 2 bold j Baseline minus upper V Subscript bold d Baseline equals one sixth bold italic pi left bracket left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis cubed minus bold italic d cubed right bracket
Now, the estimation of interphase fraction f i to nanoﬁller concentration f can be 
given as, 
St artFraction bold italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 1 Baseline Over bold italic f EndFraction equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic j Baseline Over bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic d Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction one sixth bold italic pi left bracket left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis cubed minus bold italic d cubed right bracket Over one sixth b o l d s y m b o l pi d cubed EndFraction
S
tartF raction bold italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 1 Baseline Over bold italic f EndFraction equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic j Baseline Over bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic d Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction one sixth bold italic pi left bracket left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis cubed minus bold italic d cubed right bracket Over one sixth b o l d s y m b o l pi d cubed EndFraction
St ar
tF
raction bold italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 1 Baseline Over bold italic f EndFraction equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic j Baseline Over bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic d Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction one sixth bold italic pi left bracket left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis cubed minus bold italic d cubed right bracket Over one sixth b o l d s y m b o l pi d cubed EndFraction
Sta
r
tFr acti on bo ld italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 1 Baseline Over bold italic f EndFraction equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic j Baseline Over bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic d Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction one sixth bold italic pi left bracket left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis cubed minus bold italic d cubed right bracket Over one sixth b o l d s y m b o l pi d cubed EndFraction
StartFraction bold italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 1 Baseline Over bold italic f EndFraction equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic j Baseline Over bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic d Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction one sixth bold italic pi left bracket left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis cubed minus bold italic d cubed right bracket Over one sixth b o l d s y m b o l pi d cubed EndFraction
StartF
raction bold italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 1 Baseline Over bold italic f EndFraction equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic j Baseline Over bold italic upper V Subscript bold italic d Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction one sixth bold italic pi left bracket left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis cubed minus bold italic d cubed right bracket Over one sixth b o l d s y m b o l pi d cubed EndFraction
bo ld i ta l
ic
 f  Sub script bold italic j comma 1 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 right bracket
b
old
 it
a
lic f Subscript bold italic j comma 1 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 right bracket
left par enth esis bol d italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis b o l d s y m b o l less than or equals b o l d s y m b o l r 0 less than StartFraction 2 Over StartRoot 3 EndRoot EndFraction left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis
√
le
ft pare nth
esis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis b o l d s y m b o l less than or equals b o l d s y m b o l r 0 less than StartFraction 2 Over StartRoot 3 EndRoot EndFraction left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis
In this range, interphase fraction enhances with nanoﬁller concentration, so that 
closely lying interphases overlap. 
bo ld it al ic
 f
 
S
ub scri pt bold italic j comma 2 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction square root 3 Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket
b
old
 ita lic
 
f Subscript bold italic j comma 2 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction square root 3 Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket
bo ld  italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 2 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction square root 3 Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket
bo ld italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 2 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction square root 3 Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket
√
bold italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 2 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction square root 3 Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket
bo
ld italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 2 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction square root 3 Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket
b
old
 i tali c f Subscript bold italic j comma 2 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction square root 3 Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket
bo ld
 italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 2 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction square root 3 Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket
bo
ld italic f Subscript bold italic j comma 2 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction square root 3 Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket
b
old
 i
talic f Subscript bold italic j comma 2 Baseline equals bold italic f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 bold italic j Over bold italic d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction square root 3 Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction bold italic r 0 Over bold italic d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket
StartF raction 2 square root 2 Over 3 EndFraction left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis less than bold italic r 0 less than left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis
St art Frac tion 2 sq uare root  2 
Over 3 EndFraction left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis less than bold italic r 0 less than left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis
High overlapping of closely lying interphases happens in the above-speciﬁed 
range. Under this condition, interphase concentration reduces because nanoﬁllers

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
73
r0 
r0 
2r0 
(a) 
Fig. 3.3 a For homogeneous dispersions of particles, a cubic geometry can be assumed for a 
perfect arrangement of particles such that eight particles share each corner of the cube similar to 
the cubic crystal geometry in face-centered cubic ( fcc) conﬁguration. This can be described as 
the fundamental geometry of the arrangement of particles that are dispersed homogeneously in 
a polymer matrix. In addition, a body-centered cubic (bcc)-type conﬁgurational structure is also 
visible such that a particle is placed at the center of the body of the cube, so that a maximum of 
68% of nanoﬁller concentration by volume can be accommodated [29]. b Nonoverlapping particles 
are represented schematically here since nanoﬁller particles are placed at considerable distances 
attributed to low nanoﬁller concentrations used in the formation of nanocomposites. As a result, 
interphases of closely-lying particles do not partake in the formation of common regions. Interphase 
fraction is supposed to increase linearly with an increment in nanoﬁller concentration [29]

74
S. Dwivedi
begin to shift toward closely lying interphases with an increment in nanoﬁller 
concentration (Fig. 3.4). 
St artL ay ou
t 
1
s
t Ro w 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
S
tar
tLay out
 
1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
St ar tLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
St artLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
√
StartLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
St
artLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
S
tar
tL ay ou t 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
St artLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
√
StartLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
St
artLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
S
t
ar
tLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
St ar tLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
St ar tLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
St
art
La yo ut  1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
St ar tLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
S
ta
rtLayout 1st Row 1st Column b o l d s y m b o l f Subscript b o l d s y m b o l j comma 3 2nd Column equals b o l d s y m b o l f left bracket left parenthesis 1 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 2 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis cubed minus 1 minus 8 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 4 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction StartRoot 3 EndRoot Over 2 EndFraction StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column minus 6 left parenthesis one half plus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction minus StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over 2 b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis squared left parenthesis 2 plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction 4 b o l d s y m b o l j Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction plus b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l r 0 Over b o l d s y m b o l d EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
bold ita lic r 0 less than StartFraction 2 square root 2 Over 3 EndFraction left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis
bo ld ital ic 
r 0 less than StartFraction 2 square root 2 Over 3 EndFraction left parenthesis bold italic d plus 2 bold italic j right parenthesis
If interphase fraction dominates in the overall structural conﬁguration, the effect 
of incremental nanoﬁller concentration leads to a decremental interphase fraction 
(Fig. 3.5). 
bo ld it alic  f  
Subscript bold italic j comma 3 Baseline equals 1 minus b o l d s y m b o l f
Fig. 3.4 Schematic 
representation of the 
diagonal element of 
fundamental geometry of 
particles reﬂecting 
overlapping of interphases 
under the third condition [29] 

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
75
Fig. 3.5 Schematic 
representation of the 
interphase-based formation 
of the complete polymeric 
layer [29] 
3.2 Synthesis, Microstructural, and Dielectric 
Characterization of Nanodielectrics 
Different techniques employed for nanoparticle synthesis are also used for the prepa-
ration of dielectric nanoscale materials. This is inclusive of simple solution tech-
niques, co-precipitation methods, simple mixing of nanoparticles in a polymer envi-
ronment for the formation of polymer nanocomposites preparation of nanoparti-
cles under vacuum, hydrothermal synthesis, sol–gel method, sonochemical synthesis 
of nanoparticles, microwave-assisted synthesis, template-based synthesis approach, 
and application of biological templates for synthesis of nanoparticles and physical 
methods that include pulsed laser ablation. 
3.2.1 
Simple Solution Techniques for Nanodielectric Particles 
Solution-based mixing of nanoﬁllers with polymers in a solution along with the 
melt-compounding method in the context of broader mechanical mixing of two 
components is a well-established process. Mechanical mixing is a common process 
in industrial production that entails the management of a diverse physical system 
to produce a resulting homogeneous system in the conﬁguration of unit operation. 
Mass or heat transfer happens due to the mechanical agitation of multiple phases. In 
the simple solution chemistry or mechanical mixing method, polymers are usually 
dissolved in a solution followed by the dispersion of nanoﬁllers in this polymer solu-
tion to synthesize nanocomposites in the solution. This nanocomposite solution is 
subjected to evaporation to get solidiﬁed nanocomposites in a mixed conﬁguration.

76
S. Dwivedi
Shear forces in the simple solution chemistry method are of a much lower degree 
due to the imposition of mechanical agitation of a lesser degree. This is usually 
performed by placing the mixed components solution on a mechanical stirrer under 
constant magnetic stirring under the effect of temperatures if so required. However, 
the applied temperature must be kept below its Tg to avoid the transformation of the 
polymeric phase. Due to this fact, external parameters play a vital role in the disper-
sion of nanoﬁllers in the polymer solution, such as surface loading of nanoparticles, 
surface modiﬁcation by organic molecules, and presence of binders. The advan-
tage of this method involves high control over the produced nanocomposites since 
constituents can be mixed in desired percentages and mechanical mixing. Another 
beneﬁt is to have better control over the shape, size, and morphological features of 
nanoparticles that are produced separately as one of the constituents. Ajay Vasudeo 
Rane and others have given details of clay-polymer nanocomposites prepared by 
mechanical mixing of polymers with both pristine and modiﬁed clays [36]. Solid– 
solid phase mixing and solid–liquid phase mixings are the stereotyped methods in 
the formation of clay-polymer nanocomposites. Solid–solid mixing in this case is 
further classiﬁed into convective and intensive mixing. Convective mixing gener-
ates a random state eventually with the potential risk of demixing constituents due 
to segregation caused by variations in shape, size, and density. Convective mixing 
is not suitable for the mechanical mixing of materials possessing cohesive nature 
mostly exercised in the case of very ﬁnely divided particles or even wet compounds. 
Convective or transportation forces are of a very mild nature that is not sufﬁcient 
to overcome relatively strong cohesive forces acting among particles. As a result, 
energy-based mixing or impact employment or application of shear stress may be 
followed to negate the effect of cohesive interparticle forces. Four different synthesis 
methods of clay-polymer nanocomposites include in situ template synthesis, solu-
tion intercalation, in situ intercalative polymerization, and melt intercalation [36]. 
Melt intercalation in conjunction with a shear mixer is the preferred method for the 
synthesis of clay-polymer nanocomposites based on thermoplastics and elastomers. 
Solution intercalation is applied for the synthesis of clay-polymer nanocomposites 
in which different thermosets, thermoplastics, and elastomers based on solubility 
parameters are dissolved in the speciﬁed solvents followed by intercalation with 
solvent-dissolved nanoclay particles. At the industrial scale, mechanical mixing is 
performed in batches inline or dynamic mixing with mixers possessing the capability 
to operate at 1500 or 1800 rpm. 
Ren et al. have compared the dielectric properties of pristine polyetherimide (PEI) 
polymeric materials with those of polyetherimide polymer composited with hafnium 
oxide (HfO2) nanoparticles synthesized mainly by the solution casting method [37]. 
Solutions were cast over glass slides followed by drying at a suitable temperature for 
a speciﬁc period to evaporate the solvent. Dried solution casted ﬁlms were peeled-off 
and dried again to obtain 9 to 12 μm thick ﬁlms. 
Nanocomposites enhanced with HfO2 nanoparticles show an improved dielectric 
constant along with a reduction in high-ﬁeld current density. A difference in morpho-
logical features of the pristine PEI and PEI-HfO2 nanocomposites was observed 
from scanning electron micrographs (SEM) as shown in Fig. 3.6.

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
77
Fig. 3.6 SEM images of pristine PEI and HfO2-enhanced nanocomposites in PEI matrix [37]. 
Morphological changes are visible at the microscale of 5 μm with a network formation in the 
HfO2-enhanced matrix in comparison with a rather larger layered-type formation in pristine PEI 
composites [37]. Reprinted with permission from ref. [37]. Copyright (2021) (Elsevier) 
For pristine PEI and PEI/HfO2 nanocomposites with various nanoﬁller contents, 
a comparison of D-E loops was performed at E = 300 MV.m−1 as shown in Fig. 3.3a 
and b. It was inferred that electric displacement (D) is steadily improved as a function 
of the induction of HfO2 nanoﬁllers in the PEI matrix along with more than 95% 
efﬁciency of the charge–discharge cycle. At nanoﬁller contents of 1 vol%, 3 vol%, 
5 vol%, 7 vol%, and 9 vol%, D-value increased to 1.03 × 10–2, 1.07  × 10–2, 1.11  
× 10–2, 1.14  × 10–2, and 1.22 × 10–2 C m−2 for nanocomposites from 9.77 × 10–3 
C m−2 of pristine PEI at 300 MV m−1.Thus, the D-value reﬂects a trend similar 
to that of dielectric constant since D changes in a linear manner as a function of 
bold italic epsilon Subscript bold r Baseline left parenthesis bold italic upper D equals bold italic epsilon bold 0 bold italic epsilon Subscript bold r Baseline bold italic upper E right parenthesisin the case of linear dielectrics Fig. 3.7. 
Figure 3.8 shows a schematic of the PEI/HfO2 nanocomposites with nanoparti-
cles at the core and ﬁrst, second, and third layers as the bonding, bound, and loose 
layers typically in a Guoy–Chapman electrical double-layer conﬁguration [37]. Band
Fig. 3.7 a D-E loops of pristine PEI and PEI/HfO2 nanocomposites derived at E = 300 MV m−1. 
Inset shows the Dmax and charge–discharge efﬁciency in % of pristine PEI and PEI/HfO2 nanocom-
posites as a function of nanoﬁller content at E = 300 MV m−1. b Maximum discharged energy 
density (J cm−3) and leakage current density (A cm−2) were derived as a function of nanoﬁller 
content in vol% for pristine PEI and PEI/HfO2 nanocomposites [37]. Reprinted with permission 
from ref. [37]. Copyright (2021) (Elsevier) 

78
S. Dwivedi
diagram with HOMO and LUMO bands can also be seen along with this core–shell 
nanoparticle interfacial model. Charge incorporation from electrodes and charge 
transport including charge trapping and de-trapping in pristine PEI and PEI/HfO2 
nanocomposites can be seen in Fig. 3.10. High degree of thermal and electrical stim-
ulation prevails only at high temperatures and electric ﬁelds, respectively, and hence, 
conduction mechanisms based on charge density in pristine PEI are signiﬁcantly 
boosted to overcome the potential barrier conveniently. However, an opposite mech-
anism happens in PEI/HfO2 nanocomposites, and charge carriers are trapped in 
holes or positive vacancies formed at the interface of HfO2 nanoﬁllers and polymer 
matrix. Insertion of wide band gap HfO2 dielectric nanoﬁllers impedes the elec-
trical conduction mechanism as documented by signiﬁcantly reduced leakage current 
density.
3.2.2 
Co-precipitation Method 
Co-precipitation is a synthesis method in which compounds soluble in a solution are 
abolished during the precipitation process [38]. More than one compounds become 
soluble instantly to make happen precipitation when dissolved in a single solu-
tion phase. However, the degree of contamination becomes of a very high degree. 
Generally, co-precipitation is the process of bringing down involved materials that 
are dissolved in normal conditions. Precipitation can be understood as the process 
of formation of insoluble solid-phase particles from a super-saturated solution on 
the dissolution of a substance. Precipitant is the chemical reagent that causes the 
formation of the insoluble solid phase. 
Precipitation happens in a much faster manner in a strongly super-saturated solu-
tion. The super-saturated solution has its concentration exceeding its solubility owed 
to the formation of a mixture of solvents, evaporation of solvents, and associated 
temperature changes. Precipitation involves the development of a solid phase that 
forms an interface with the constituent solution. Interface chemistry gets involved 
here inculcating free energy connected with the dissolution reaction including relative 
surface energy formation between the two phases. Free energy of dissolution reaction 
enhances the degree of randomness and hence entropy of the system in an exothermic 
or endothermic reaction mechanism. The nicety of the co-precipitation method is that 
no precipitate product will be obtained in case no appropriate nucleation sites are 
found associated with a lesser favorable energy. 
On the other hand, post-precipitation is a method in which precipitation of the 
unwanted phase happens initially after the precipitation of the required compound. 
The degree of contamination is low. On this formed precipitate, a precipitation layer 
is formed over this initially formed layer. 
Co-precipitation usually involves the instant happening of nucleation or beginning 
of precipitate formation, growth of solid phase, and coarsening along with agglom-
eration in the solid content. Regarding the formation of nanocomposites, Ostwald 
ripening, and other secondary processes tailor the shape, size, morphological features,

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
79
Fig. 3.8 Band diagrams for the core–shell nanoparticle interfacial model along with HOMO and 
LUMO bands. Evac is the vacuum energy level, EF is the Fermi energy level, EC is the conduction 
band, EV is the valence band, EAf is electron afﬁnity, and BGF is the band gap of nanoﬁller, while 
EAm and BGm are electron afﬁnity and bandgap of the polymer matrix, respectively [37]. Reprinted 
with permission from ref. [37]. Copyright (2021) (Elsevier)
and associated properties of the resulting products. Co-precipitation of nanocompos-
ites is a widely used process for the formation of metals from aqueous solutions 
or obtained from nonaqueous solutions by reduction, electrochemical reduction, 
formation of oxides from aqueous and nonaqueous solutions, or even microwave-
sonication-assisted co-precipitation methods. Some of the beneﬁts of co-precipitation 
in the formation of nanocomposites are fast synthesis procedures along with control 
of shape, size and composition, modiﬁcation of particle surfaces along with homoge-
neous character, offering synthesis facility at low temperatures, energy efﬁciency, and 
no use of organic solvents as a medium. Disadvantages are inclusive of nonapplica-
bility to noncharged species, taking a bit of time to synthesize, associated irregularity

80
S. Dwivedi
in batch-to-batch production, the inclusion of impurities, and nonconformity with 
reactants that possess highly varying precipitation rates. 
Vadivel et al. formed magnetic nanosized particles of chromium (Cr)-displaced 
cobalt ferrite (CoFe2-xCrxO4) at different Cr concentrations of 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, and 
0.3 by co-precipitation followed by annealing for 3 h at T = 600 °C [39]. Multi-
component particles were single phasic in a cubic spinel geometry with an average 
crystallite size of 15–23 nm. Dielectric studies revealed that both dielectric constant 
(ε) and dielectric loss (ε) were analyzed to be higher in comparison with the pristine 
CoFe2O4 nanoparticles. Fluorescence spectral analysis displayed UV emissions in 
the strong red zone as well as in the weak blue zone. Figure 3.9a and b show the 
variation of dielectric constant (ε') and dielectric loss (ε'') as a function of frequency 
in various Cr-substituted CoFe2O4 compounds. It can be seen that the dielectric 
constant (ε') increases at reduced f-values.
Variation of dielectric constant (ε') as a function of logarithmic ( f ) at different 
temperatures of 40, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, and 200 °C is shown for 
(a) CoFe2O4, (b)  CoFe1.9Cr0.1O4, (c)  CoFe1.8Cr0.2O4, and (d) CoFe1.7Cr0.3O4 
nanoparticles in Fig. 3.10a–d. This is observable that the dielectric constant (ε') 
increases from 8.0 × 103 to ~ 1 × 104 at room temperatures on increasing Cr from 
0.0 to 0.2 and 0.3. The effect of temperature is that the value of the dielectric constant 
(ε') increases with increasing temperature. Dielectric loss (ε'') for the four samples 
under the same operating temperatures is shown in Fig. 3.11a–d. Dielectric loss 
(ε'') at room temperature for the four samples shows erratic behavior with value 
decreasing from ~ 1.4 × 104 to 8.0 × 103 in the case of CoFe1.9Cr0.1O4, again rising 
to 1.0 × 104 for CoFe1.8Cr0.2O4, and ﬁnally rising to 2.0 × 104 for CoFe1.7Cr0.3O4. 
However, all the samples show comparatively higher values of dielectric loss for the 
operational temperature of 200 °C.
Krishna et al. used chemical co-precipitation for the synthesis of lanthanum oxide 
nanoparticles by employing organic and biological capping agents [40]. The organic 
capping agent was ethylene-diamine-tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) and the biological 
capping agent was starch and deoxy-ribo-nucleic-acid (DNA). Lanthanum oxide 
nanoparticles are obtained by annealing the carbonates at temperatures of 450 to 
700 °C. Dielectric permittivity was estimated from drawing plots of capacitance 
as a function of applied frequencies for the two operational temperatures. Dielectric 
permittivity was found to possess enhanced values at low operational frequencies and 
reduced values at high operational frequencies. Under AC conduction, maximum AC 
conductivity is achieved at high operational frequencies. 
Joshi et al. co-precipitated nickel ferrite nanoparticles of single-phase cubic spinel 
crystal geometry in a space group of Fd3m possessing an average crystallite size of 8 
to 20 nm based on annealing temperature [41]. Strong temperature dependence was 
observed at all the operational frequencies for dielectric permittivity, dielectric loss, 
and AC conductivity measurements. Frail polaron hopping was discovered between 
Fe3+/Fe2+ ions for dominant ac-conduction. Optical bandgap was estimated to lie 
in the range of 1.27 eV to 1.47 eV for NiFe2O4 by UV–visible diffuse spectra and 
established as an indirect bandgap material. Dielectric constant (ε') and dielectric loss 
(tanδ) were studied at room temperature as shown in Fig. 3.12. Dielectric constant

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
81
Fig. 3.9 a Dielectric constant (ε') and  b dielectric loss (ε'') as a function of logarithmic ( f ) in  
CoFe2O4, CoFe1.9Cr0.1O4, CoFe1.8Cr0.2O4, and  CoFe1.7Cr0.3O4 [39]. Reprinted with permission 
from ref. [39] Copyright (2014) (Elsevier)
showed frequency dispersion in the lower frequency range that became constant 
nature for frequencies beyond 10 kHz. The dielectric constant value fell sharply in 
the low-frequency region and was found to increase gradually at higher operational 
frequencies. Electronic, ionic, and orientational polarizations as well as space charge 
were the reasons for high dielectric constant values in the region of low frequencies.

82
S. Dwivedi
Fig. 3.10 Dielectric constant (ε') as a function of logarithmic ( f ) in  a CoFe2O4, b CoFe1.9Cr0.1O4, 
c CoFe1.8Cr0.2O4, and  d CoFe1.7Cr0.3O4 at different temperatures of 40, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140, 
160, 180, and 200 °C [39]. Reprinted with permission from ref. [39], Copyright (2014) (Elsevier)
Space charge polarization was the dominating factor at high temperatures and low 
frequencies.
Dielectric constant (ε') and dielectric loss (δ) were also drawn as a function of 
temperature for the sample calcined at 550 °C for 2 h as shown in Fig. 3.13. Curves  
were acquired at different operational frequencies of 10 kHz, 25 kHz, 50 kHz, 75 kHz, 
100 kHz, and 1 MHz. The normal behavior of magnetic semiconductor ferrite shows 
an initial increment in dielectric constant as a function of temperature. The formation 
of free localized dipoles increases the dielectric constant (ε') due to supplemental 
thermal energy. These free localized dipoles tend to line up along a direction in 
which the ﬁeld is applied. Enhancement in temperature causes the creation of lattice 
phonons that undergo interaction with electrons for electron–phonon scattering.
Figure 3.14 shows the variation of AC conductivity σ ac with angular frequency 
at different temperatures of 40, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, and 200 °C [41]. 
It can be observed that σ ac shows dispersion characteristics at higher operating 
frequencies with a variable gradient. Eventually, all σ ac curves meet each other on 
higher operating frequencies. This shows the presence of several temperature induced 
as well as multiple relaxation processes. This electrical conduction can be expressed 
by a phenomenal expression in which the hopping of charge carriers is the major

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
83
Fig. 3.11 Dielectric loss (ε'') as a function of logarithmic ( f ) in  a CoFe2O4, b CoFe1.9Cr0.1O4, 
c CoFe1.8Cr0.2O4, and  d CoFe1.7Cr0.3O4 at different temperatures of 40, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140, 
160, 180, and 200 °C [39]. Reprinted with permission from ref. [39] Copyright (2014) (Elsevier)
Fig. 3.12 Dielectric 
constant and loss as a 
function of frequency for the 
grounded sample and 
calcined for 2 h at 550 °C 
[41]. Reprinted with 
permission from ref. [41], 
Copyright (2014) (Elsevier)

84
S. Dwivedi
Fig. 3.13 Dielectric 
constant and dielectric loss 
as a function of temperature 
under different operational 
frequencies for the sample 
calcined at 500 °C for 2 h 
[41]. Reprinted with 
permission from ref. [41], 
Copyright (2014) (Elsevier)
mechanism. This relationship is called Jonscher’s universal power law, 
sigm a Subscript 
bold a c Baseline equals sigma Subscript bold d c Baseline plus bold upper K omega Superscript bold s
Here, K is a constant that depends on temperature, s occupies a value between 0 
and 1, and ω is the angular frequency of the AC ﬁeld. The value of s was found to 
increase as a function of temperature which can be explained based on small polaron 
hopping.
Fig. 3.14 AC-conductivity 
plotted as a function of 
angular frequency of the AC 
applied ﬁeld in logarithmic  
scales at different 
temperatures of 40, 60, 80, 
100, 120, 140, 160, 180, and 
200 °C [41]. Reprinted with 
permission from ref. [41], 
Copyright (2014) (Elsevier) 

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
85
3.2.3 
Hydrothermal Process 
Hydrothermal synthesis involves chemical reactions of precursor substances kept 
in an air-tight sealed reactor heated to create temperatures and pressures above the 
normal atmospheric ranges [42]. When a reaction takes place at elevated temperatures 
and pressures in an organic solvent, it is more commonly referred to as solvothermal 
synthesis. 
The advantage of the hydrothermal synthesis method is that it can be used to 
dissolve most of the materials in an appropriate solvent by thermal treatment and 
creating pressures in the vicinity of the critical point. This synthesis method is an 
effective method for the production of metastable or intermediate-phase compounds. 
A range of ﬂexibility is offered in this synthesis method by tailoring parameters of 
reaction time, temperature, and change of surfactant, solvent, and precursors. Another 
beneﬁt is to obtain products with reduced M.P., a tendency to undergo pyrolysis, and 
possessing high vapor pressures. A high disadvantage of the hydrothermal process 
is that it does not offer any ﬂexibility to observe and study reaction mechanisms, 
rates, and other parameters in situ because of the happening of reactions under high 
pressures in the sealed reactor. 
Köseo˘glu et al. hydrothermally synthesized Mn0.2Ni0.8Fe2O4 nanoparticles 
assisted with polyethylene glycol (PEG) [43]. Temperature-dependent properties as 
a function of frequency (1 Hz to 3 MHz) showed dielectric dispersion that is based 
on Koop’s theory. Koop’s theory relies on the Maxwell–Wagner model focused on 
homogeneous double structure with reference to interfacial polarization [44]. 
Jiang et al. have shed light on nanoscale BaTiO3 as well as polymer-BaTiO3 
nanocomposites with tailored properties in form of a review [45]. Polymer-based 
nanocomposites of BaTiO3 have several advantages over pristine BaTiO3 nanocrys-
tals. Hydrothermal as well as solvothermal processes of BaTiO3 form the core of this 
detailed review article. In a work performed by Phromviyo et al. Ag nanoparticles 
were hydrothermally synthesized by applying Aloe vera-plant extracted solution 
in form of a surface stabilizer and reducing agent to produce Ag@Ale-NPs [46]. 
This was followed by the preparation of Ag@Ale-NPs/PVDF polymer nanocom-
posites by liquid-phase backed dispersion as well as hot-pressing techniques. Modi-
ﬁed surfaces of Ag@Ale-NPs were conﬁrmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
(XPS). Dielectric properties were studied at two different ﬁller compositions of 0.18 
and 0.22 in volume fractions. At the volume fraction of 0.18, high dielectric permit-
tivity (ε) of  ≈92.5 along with highly reduced tangential loss of 0.049 was discovered 
at 1 kHz and room temperature. On increasing the nanoparticle volume fraction to 
0.22, a substantially higher value of ε of ≈257.2 became evident along with a low 
loss of tanδ ≈0.26. Interfacial polarization along with the micro capacitance effect 
in the PVDF matrix was the factors responsible for outstanding dielectric properties 
of the synthesized Ag@Ale-NPs/PVDF polymer nanocomposites. 
SEM images of surface-modiﬁed nanoparticles of Ag@Ale-NPs by reacting Aloe 
vera extract in a reactor for 3 h, 6 h, and 12 h in hydrothermal synthesis is shown in 
Fig. 3.15 [46].

86
S. Dwivedi
Fig. 3.15 Morphological features along with particle size distributions of a 164 nm with S.D. = 56, 
b 228 nm with S.D. = 62, and c 303 nm with S.D. = 90 as visible in SEM images of surface-modiﬁed 
Ag@Ale-NPs prepared with the help of Aloe vera plant extracts reacted for three different times of 
3 h, 6 h,  and 12 h [46]. Reprinted with permission from ref. [46], Copyright (2018) (Elsevier) 
Microstructure of nanocomposites was also observed by SEM imaging in a largely 
fractured cross-sectional area for ﬁller volume fractions of f Ag@Ale = 0.08 and 
f Ag@Ale = 0.22 [46]. Microstructure consisted of random distribution of Ag@Ale-
NPsin a surrounding PVDF polymer matrix in a cluster conﬁguration more specif-
ically on increasing ﬁller volume fraction. Cluster conﬁguration indicated the high 
tendency of Ag@Ale-NPs to agglomerate due to interparticle cohesive forces. 
Information on agglomeration is essential for establishing a correlation between 
microstructure and derived dielectric propertiesFig. 3.16.

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
87
Fig. 3.16 Morphology of Ag@Ale-NPs in PVDF polymer in a cross-section under different ﬁller 
volume fractions of f Ag@Ale = 0.08 & f Ag@Ale = 0.14 [46]. Reprinted with permission from ref. 
[46], Copyright (2018) (Elsevier) 
The tangential dielectric loss was estimated to change from 0.039 for a ﬁller 
volume fraction of 0.22 to 0.049 with a ﬁller volume fraction of 0.18 under an opera-
tional frequency of 1 kHz. Cluster formation was detected for the ﬁller volume frac-
tion of 0.18 with each of the clusters separated by a polymer layer of PVDF resulting 
in mild enhancement of the percolation threshold. However, the presence of a barrier 
polymer layer prevented the formation of weak conductive links between different 
conductive clusters. Hence, dielectric tangential loss (tanδ) at lower frequencies 
was maintained at lower values. Lower operating frequencies are an approximation 
to direct current (DC) conductivities. Free electrons generated from conductive clus-
ters tend to assemble at the interface of the PVDF barrier layer between different 
loose nanoparticle agglomerates. This gives rise to the effect of interfacial polar-
ization. Low tangential loss (tan δ) of polymeric nanocomposites was ascribed to 
micro capacitor formation because of two close-lying nanoparticles clusters acting 
as microelectrodes along the direction of the applied electric ﬁeld separated by a 
dielectric polymer barrier layer (Fig. 3.17). 
Fig. 3.17 Tangential loss 
(tanδ) plotted as a function 
of frequency in Hz for 
different ﬁller volume 
fractions of f Ag@Ale = 0.02, 
0.04, 0.08, 0.12, 0.18, and 
0.22 at room temperature 
[46]. Reprinted with 
permission from ref. [46], 
Copyright (2018) (Elsevier)

88
S. Dwivedi
3.2.4 
Sol–gel 
Sol–gel method involves the formation of a sol or solution that slowly but eventually 
progresses in form of a diphasic system reﬂecting a behavior similar to gels [47]. 
Gel-resembling diphasic system consists of a solid as well as a liquid phase. Sol– 
gel-derived particles can possess surface morphological features in the geometry 
of discrete or distinct particles and extend to more regular networks of polymeric 
chains. Sol–gel method possesses the capability to produce ultraﬁne divided distinct 
particles in ceramic powders of single as well as multicomponent constitution at 
the nanometer scale. Metal nanoparticles are usually derived by the sol–gel process 
by mixing the precursor substances in the liquid phase, formation of stable sol that 
is normally transparent by hydrolysis and polycondensation reactions, and further 
aging of sols leads to the development of a 3D structural network followed by drying, 
calcination, and sintering. 
Advantages of sol–gel are inclusive of the (i) formation of a homogeneous 
product at relatively low temperatures, (ii) better control over shape, size, porosity, 
and (iii) metal-oxide or ceramic particles in a polymer matrix form an α-β 
matrix for enhanced applications, and (iv) suitable methodology for the formation 
of multicomponent particles with the possibility to include dopant atoms. 
Yadav et al. used a honey-mediated sol–gel combustion method for the synthesis 
of fcc-spinel ferrite CoFe2O4 nanoparticles subsequently calcined at 500, 700, 900, 
and 1100 °C [48]. The dielectric constant (ε) of  CoFe2O4 nanoparticles was plotted 
as a function of frequency, and it decreased with increment in frequency. At lower 
operating frequencies that are nearly identical to DC conductivity, ε-values lie on the 
higher side depicting effects associated with space charges, ionic charges, and inter-
facial polarization. Contrarily, ε-values became practically independent of applied 
frequencies because formed electric dipoles were not capable of catching up with 
the fast-varying electric ﬁeld lines as a function of time. Again, Koop’s theory is 
of paramount importance here as outlined above relying on dielectric formation in 
which two heterogeneous medium layers of the Maxwell–Wagner type are consid-
ered. The dielectric module consists of insulating grain boundaries separating the 
conductive grains in a granular or polycrystalline or multicrystalline conﬁguration. 
At low operational frequencies, grain boundaries play a major role as compared to the 
grain itself, so that ε-values become effectively high. Moreover, the hopping mech-
anism of charge carriers takes place, so that charge carriers pile up at the insulating 
boundary because of high resistances and thus producing polarization. This polariza-
tion or accumulation of charge carriers is not observed at higher operating frequencies 
since the charge carriers can not pursue the AC electric ﬁeld at higher frequencies. 
Dielectric constant varied as a function of cationic distribution depending on granular 
size and type of microstructure. Dielectric loss suffers from a lag or phase difference 
in polarization about the AC electric ﬁeld. This may be caused due to microstructural 
attributes, such as grain boundaries, imperfections, defects or dislocations, or distor-
tions in unit cell lattice volume. The hopping frequency whereby becomes equal to 
the frequency of the applied AC ﬁeld, and oscillating ions begin receiving maximized

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
89
electrical energy. This is reﬂected in form of a power loss peak in the plot of tan δ 
versus frequency (f). The mathematical expression for maximum tangential loss in 
dielectric materials is given as, 
omega 
tau equals bold 1
omega eq
uals bold 2 pi f
The mathematical relationship between relaxation time (τ ) and jumping proba-
bility per unit time (p) is given  as,  
tau equal
s bold 1 divided by bold 2 p
omega  Subs
cript bold max Baseline equals bold 2 p
Debye relaxation is observed when the rate of hopping of jumping probability per 
unit time becomes equal to ac-frequency. 
Vasudevan et al. applied the sol–gel method for the synthesis of poly(vinyl 
pyrrolidone) (PVP) doped with varying concentrations of titanium dioxide (TiO2) 
to obtain PVP-TiO2 nanocomposites [49]. Dielectric properties were estimated for 
the nanocomposites in the range of operational frequencies of 1 kHz to 2 MHz in the 
vicinity of room temperature. The dielectric constant and tangential loss were esti-
mated to be reduced at high operational frequencies of AC conduction. Conductivity 
values were 10–7 to 10–8 S cm−1, which decreased steeply on increasing wt% of TiO2 
due to enhancement in randomness or reduction of homogeneity in microstructure 
pattern in the whole volume of the nanocomposite. 
Singh et al. used the sol–gel method for the preparation of polysulfone-
ZnO nanocomposites and studied frequency-dependent and temperature-dependent 
dielectric properties [50]. Dipolar polarization was solely deciphered to be respon-
sible for the observed dielectric behavior, while interfacial polarization was partly. 
Dielectric relaxation was studied in terms of electric modulus to observe the 
effects of electrode polarization and resolving low-frequency relaxation mechanisms. 
Figures 3.9 and 3.10 show the real (M') and imaginary (M'') parts of complex elec-
tric modulus of pure polysulfone and ZnO-loaded polysulfone nanocomposites at 
different operating temperatures of 30, 60, 90, and 120 °C (Fig. 3.18).
Mathematical equations for the calculation of real and imaginary parts of electric 
modulus are given as, 
b o
 l d s y m b o l upper M Superscript prime Baseline equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l epsilon prime Over bold italic epsilon Superscript b o l d s y m b o l prime 2 Baseline plus b o l d s y m b o l epsilon Superscript b o l d s y m b o l double prime 2 Baseline EndFraction
b
 o l d
 s y
 m b o l upper M Superscript prime Baseline equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l epsilon prime Over bold italic epsilon Superscript b o l d s y m b o l prime 2 Baseline plus b o l d s y m b o l epsilon Superscript b o l d s y m b o l double prime 2 Baseline EndFraction
b o  
l d s y m b o l upper M Superscript double prime Baseline equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l epsilon double prime Over bold italic epsilon Superscript b o l d s y m b o l prime 2 Baseline plus b o l d s y m b o l epsilon Superscript b o l d s y m b o l double prime 2 Baseline EndFraction
b
 o l d
 s y
 m b o l upper M Superscript double prime Baseline equals b o l d s y m b o l StartFraction b o l d s y m b o l epsilon double prime Over bold italic epsilon Superscript b o l d s y m b o l prime 2 Baseline plus b o l d s y m b o l epsilon Superscript b o l d s y m b o l double prime 2 Baseline EndFraction

90
S. Dwivedi
Fig. 3.18 Real part of electric modulus (M') plotted as a function of frequency ( f ) for pure and 
ZnO-loaded polymer nanocomposites at a T = 30 °C, b T = 60 °C, c T = 90 °C, and d T = 120 °C 
[50]. Reprinted with permission from ref. [50], Copyright (2015) (Springer)
It can be observed from Fig. 3.19 that the electric modulus of pristine and ZnO-
loaded nanocomposites shows an increasing trend as a function of increasing frequen-
cies at different operational temperatures. However, the imaginary part (M”) of pris-
tine and ZnO-loaded nanocomposites do not show any peak in the curve at an oper-
ating temperature of 30 °C. Observance of sharp peaks at operational temperatures 
of 90 °C and 120 °C is representative of dielectric relaxation at higher operational 
frequencies reﬂecting very quick crystalline relaxation propagating with retentive 
symmetries. At higher temperatures of 120 °C, peaks of imaginary parts (M”) of  
dielectric relaxation shift toward higher frequencies. Good broadening of peaks is 
observed for M” at 90 °C for different loading wt% of nanoﬁllers. However, the peak 
became sharp and peak-broadening decreased at 120 °C of operational temperature 
reﬂecting Maxwell–Wagner–Sillers (MWS) type crystalline relaxation in any asym-
metric mode. Further, it was inferred that the peak reduced in a vertical orientation 
on increasing the wt% of nanoﬁllers.

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
91
Fig. 3.19 Imaginary part of electric modulus (M'') plotted as a function of frequency (f) for pure 
and ZnO-loaded polymer nanocomposites at a T = 30 °C, b T = 90 °C, c T = 120 °C, and d T = 
180 °C [50]. Reprinted with permission from ref. [50], Copyright (2015) (Springer) 
Figure 3.20 shows the variation of AC conductivity (σ AC) in S m−1 of the pristine 
PSF and ZnO-loaded nanocomposites at mass% of (i) 3%, (ii) 5%, and (iii) 10% 
at the speciﬁc frequencies of 20 kHz, 50 kHz, and 95 kHz derived at two different 
temperatures of 30 °C and 180 °C.
It can be observed from Fig. 3.20 that the σ AC value is 3.61 × 10–7 S m−1 for 
pristine PSF, while it becomes 5.55 × 10–7 S m−1 for 10 mass% ZnO-loaded PSF 
at f = 20 kHz and T = 30 °C showing an increment of 53.74%. At T = 180 °C, 
σ AC value was 1.56 × 10–5 S m−1 for pristine PSF which became 2.03 × 10–5 
S m−1 for 10 mass % ZnO-loaded PSF at the same f = 20 kHz showing an incre-
ment of ~30%. It can also be observed easily that σ AC value increased by an order 
of 100 as reﬂected by determined σ AC values on switching T = 30 °C to T = 
180 °C. This is close to that of a semiconducting type of behavior with ZnO itself 
being a wide-bandgap material. An increment in σ AC values at T = 180 °C indi-
cates that more free charge carriers become available at higher temperatures due 
to enhancement in kinetic energy (K.E.) because of an increased supply of thermal

92
S. Dwivedi
Fig. 3.20 AC conductivity (σ AC) derived as a function of mass% of ZnO-loaded nanoﬁllers at 
the operational temperatures of 30 °C and 180 °C [50]. Reprinted with permission from ref. [50], 
Copyright (2015) (Springer)
energy. Another reason is the reduced interparticle distance and increased proba-
bility of much-enhanced contacts developing higher probabilities of charge carrier 
transfer. This mechanism happens at different nanoﬁller concentrations to develop 
overlapped interfacial regions inside the nanocomposites. Dispersion of nanoﬁllers 
in the polymer matrix is an important factor in the crossover of interfacial regions in 
the nanocomposites that leads to the formation of percolation of charge carriers in 
weakly conducting chains. 
3.3 Conclusion 
Nanodielectric materials offer countless opportunities for high-end applications 
based on nanoelectronics, nanosensors, and high-voltage-based electrical transmis-
sion devices as well as improvement in the performance of ceramic-based appli-
cations. Dispersion of nanoﬁllers (spherically shaped nanoparticles, nanowires, 
nanotubes, etc.) in a matrix, usually a polymer, produces a nanocomposite mate-
rial with much-enhanced properties. An interfacial region is formed at the boundary 
of the matrix and particle surface that possesses modiﬁed properties in comparison 
with both matrix and nanoﬁller. The design of nanodielectrics gives high consider-
ation to properties of interphase in addition to that of nanoﬁllers and matrix since 
interphase fraction is the substantial fraction in composite material. A major problem 
is that the majority of the peer-reviewed research reports do not include quantiﬁca-
tion of nanoﬁller dispersions. Further, concerning industrial applications, advanced 
research on optimized concentration of nanoﬁllers in a matrix is required along with 
prolonged usage of derived nanocomposite materials in several cycles. In addition, 
the huge volume of consistent and reliable datasets is needed that can be applied to

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
93
prepare models in a rather empirical approach along with providing due considera-
tion to breakdown as well as recovered state after prolonged use in several cycles, a 
multiscale model to include parameters related to nanoﬁller type and functionaliza-
tion, matrix, along with conditions of processing, and, last but not the least, involved 
costing as it has straight industrial consequences. 
References 
1. Frèchette MF (2013) What are nanodielectrics ? IEEE ElectrInsul Mag 29:8–11 
2. IEEE (2010) Nanodielectrics: a panacea solving all electrical insulation problems? 10th IEEE 
Intl Conf Solid Dielectr 1–29 
3. FrèchetteM F, Reed CW, Sedding H (2006) Progress, understanding and challenges in the ﬁeld 
of nanodielectrics. IEEJ Trans Fund Mater 126:1031–1043 
4. Stevens GC, Vaughan AS (2013) Nanodielectrics and their role in power transmission appli-
cations. In: Melhem Z (ed) Electricity transmission, distribution and storage systems, pp 
206–241 
5. Cao Y, Irwin PC, Younsi K (2004) The future of nanodielectrics in the electrical power industry. 
IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 11:797–807 
6. ZhongS-L D-M, ZhouW-Y C-W (2018) Past and future on nanodielectrics. IET Nanodielectr 
1:41–47 
7. Bhugra VS (2020) Advanced magnetic and dielectric nanomaterials, Ph.D. Thesis, Victoria 
University of Wellington, pp 1–214 
8. Marks T, Ye P, Facchetti A, Lu G, Lin H (2007) High performance ﬁeld effect transistors with 
self-assembled nanodielectrics. US Patent (US2007/0284629 A1), pp 1–10 
9. Stallings K, Smith J, Chen Y, Zeng L, Wang B, di Carlo G, Bedzyk MJ, Facchetti A, Marks 
TJ (2021) Self-assembled nanodielectrics for solution-processed top-gated amorphous IGZO 
thin ﬁlm transistors. ACS Appl Mater Interf 13:15399–15408 
10. Lee S, Han H, Kim C-H (2020) Nanodielectrics approaches to low-voltage organic transistors 
and circuits. Eur Phys J Appl Phys 91:20201(1–8) 
11. Tuncer E, Sauers I (2010) Industrial applications perspective of nanodielectrics. In: Nelson J 
(ed) Dielectric polymer nanocomposites. Springer, Boston, MA 
12. Okubo H, Nakamura Y, Inano H, Hayakawa N, Hiroshima S, Hirose T, Hamaguchi M (2007) 
Lifetime characteristics of nanocomposite enameled wire under surge voltage application. Ann 
Rep Conf Electr Insul Dielect Phenom 1–4 
13. Psarras GC (2018) Fundamentals of dielectric theories. In: Dang Z-M (ed) Dielectric polymer 
materials for high-density energy storage. Elsevier 
14. Jiang S, Jin L, Hou H, Zhang L (2019) Polymer-based nanocomposites with high dielectric 
permittivity. In: Polymer-based multifunctional nanocomposites and their applications, pp 201– 
243 
15. Singh M, Apata IE, Samant S, Wu W, Tawade BV, Pradhan N, Raghavan D, Karim A (2021) 
Nanoscale strategies to enhance the energy storage capacity of polymer dielectric capacitors: 
review of recent advances. Poly Rev 62:211–260 
16. Luo H, Wang F, Guo R, Zhang D, He G, Chen S, Wang Q (2022) Progress on polymer dielectrics 
for electrostatic capacitors application. Adv Sci 9:2202438(1–25) 
17. Balaraman AA, Dutta S (2022) Inorganic dielectric materials for energy storage applications: 
a review. J Phys D: Appl Phys 55:183002(1–38) 
18. Hassan YA, Hu H (2020) Current status of polymer nanocomposite dielectrics for high-
temperature applications. Compos Part A: Appl Sci Manufact 138:106064(1–24) 
19. Pandey JC, Singh M (2021) Dielectric polymer nanocomposites: past advances and future 
prospects in electrical insulation perspective. SPE Poly 2:236–256

94
S. Dwivedi
20. Yuan J, Yao S, Poulin P (2016) Dielectric constant of polymer composites and the routes to 
high-k or low-k nanocomposite materials. In: Huang X, Zhi C (eds) Polymer nanocomposites. 
Springer, Cham 
21. Reddy PL, Deshmukh K, Chidambaram K, Nazeer Ali MM, Sadasivuni KK, Kumar YR, 
Lakshmipathy R, Khadheer Pasha SK (2019) Dielectric properties of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) 
nanocomposites ﬁlled with green synthesized zinc sulphide (ZnS) nanoparticles. J Mater Sci: 
Mater Elect 30:4676–4687 
22. Roy AS, Gupta S, Sindhu S, ParveenA RPC (2013) Dielectric properties of novel PVA/ZnO 
hybrid nanocomposite ﬁlms. Comp Part B: Engg 47:314–319 
23. Li Y, Bi X, Wang S, Zhan Y, Liu H-Y, Mai Y-W, Liao C, Lu Z, Liao Y (2020) Core-shell 
structured polyethylene glycol functionalized graphene for energy-storage polymer dielectrics: 
combined mechanical and dielectric performances. Comp Sci Technol 199:108341(1–9) 
24. Mao H, You Y, Tong L (2018) Dielectric properties of di-block copolymers containing a poly-
arylene ether nitrile block and a poly-arylene ether ketone block. J Mater Sci: Mater Electr 
29:3127–3134 
25. Samant SP, Grabowski CA, Kisslinger K, Yager KG, Yuan G, Satija SK, Durstock MF, 
Raghavan D, Karim A (2016) Directed self-assembly of block copolymers for high breakdown 
strength polymer ﬁlm capacitors. ACS Appl Mater Inter 8:7966–7976 
26. Tanaka T, Imai T (2013) Advances in nanodielectric materials over the past 50 years. IEEE 
ElectrInsul Mag 29:10–23 
27. Andritsch TM (2010) Epoxy based nanodielectrics for high voltage DC applications— 
synthesis, dielectric properties and space charge dynamics, Ph.D. Thesis, Delft University 
of Technology 
28. International Science Nanodielectrics (2010) International conference on solid dielectrics, 
Postdam Germany, pp 1–29 
29. Raetzke S, Kindersberger J (2006) The effect of interphase structures in nanodielectrics. IEEJ 
Trans Fund Mater 126:1044–1049 
30. Alcoutlabi M, McKenna GB (2005) Effects of conﬁnement on material behaviour at the 
nanometre size scale. J Phys: Condens Matt 17:R461–R524 
31. Bendler JT, Fontanella JJ, Shlesinger MF, Wintersgill MC (2009) The defect diffusion model 
and the glass transition in nanoscale and bulk ﬁlms. J Comput Theor Nanosci 6:1–5 
32. Lewis TJ (2004) Interfaces are the dominant feature of dielectrics at the nanometric level. IEEE 
Trans Dielect Electr Insul 11:739–753 
33. Lewis TJ (2005) Interfaces: nanometric dielectrics. J Phys D Appl Phys 38:202–212 
34. Tanaka T (2005) Dielectric nanocomposites with insulating properties. IEEE Trans Dielect 
Electr Insul 12:914–928 
35. Ehrenstein GW (1999) Polymer-Werkstoffe, Carl Hanser Verlag 2 Auﬂage 
36. Rane AV, Kanny K, Abitha VK, Patil SS, Thomas S (2017) Clay-polymer composites: design 
of clay polymer nanocomposite by mixing. In: Jlassi K, Chehimi MM, Thomas S (eds) Clay 
polymer nanocomposites, pp 113–144 
37. Ren L, Yang L, Zhang S, Li H, Zhou Y, Ai D, Xie Z, Zhao X, Peng Z, Liao R, Wang Q (2021) 
Largely enhanced dielectric properties of polymer composites with HfO2 nanoparticles for 
high-temperature ﬁlm capacitors. Comp Sci Technol 201:108528(1–32) 
38. Kolthoff IM (1932) Theory of coprecipitation: the formation and properties of crystalline 
precipitates. J Phys Chem 36:860–881 
39. Vadivel M, Ramesh Babu R, Sethuraman K, Ramamurthi K, Arivanandhan M (2014) Synthesis, 
structural, dielectric, magnetic and optical properties of Cr substituted CoFe2O4 nanoparticles 
by coprecipitation method. J MagnMagn Mater 362:122–129 
40. Krishna PGA, Tharayil NJ (2019) Dielectric properties of lanthanum oxide nanoparticle 
synthesized using chemical coprecipitation method. AIP Conf Proc 2162:020079(1–9) 
41. Joshi S, Kumar M, Chhoker S, Srivastava G, Jewariya M, Singh VN (2014) Structural, magnetic, 
dielectric and optical properties of nickel ferrite nanoparticles synthesized by coprecipitation 
method. J Mol Struct 1076:55–62

3
Synthesis, Microstructural and Dielectric Characterization …
95
42. Yang G, Park S-J (2019) Conventional and microwave hydrothermal synthesis and application 
of functional materials: a review. Mater 12:1177(1–18) 
43. Köseo˘glu Y, Bay M, Tan M, Baykal A, Sözeri H, Topkaya R, Akdo˘gan N (2011) Magnetic 
and dielectric properties of Mn0.2Ni0.8Fe2O4 nanoparticles synthesized by PEG-assisted 
hydrothermal method. J Nanopart Res 13:2235–2244 
44. Farea AMM, Kumar S, Batoo KM, Yousef A, Lee CG, Alimuddin (2008) Structure and 
electrical properties of Co0.5CdxFe2.5-xO4 ferrites 464:361–369 
45. Jiang B, Iocozzia J, Zhao L, Zhang H, Harn Y-W, Chen Y, Lin Z (2019) Barium titanate at 
the nanoscale: controlled synthesis and dielectric and ferroelectric properties. Chem Soc Revs 
48:1194–1228 
46. Phromviyo N, Chanlek N, Thongbai P, Maensiri S (2018) Enhanced dielectric permittivity 
with retaining low loss in poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) by incorporating with Ag nanoparticles 
synthesized via hydrothermal method. Appl Surf Sci 446:59–65 
47. Kumar A, Yadav N, Bhatt M, Mishra NK, Chaudhary P, Singh R (2015) Sol–gel derived 
nanomaterials and it’s applications: a review. Res J Chem Sci 5:1–8 
48. Yadav RS, Kuˇritka I, Vilcakova J, Havlica J, Masilko J, Kalina L, Tkacz J, Švec J, Enev V, 
Hajdùchovà M (2017) Impact of grain size and structural changes on magnetic, dielectric, 
electrical, impedance and modulus spectroscopic characteristics of CoFe2O4 nanoparticles 
synthesized by honey mediated sol-gel combustion method. Adv Nat Sci: Nanosci. Nanotechnol 
8:045002(1–14) 
49. Vasudevan P, Thomas S, Arunkumar KV, Karthika S, Unnikrishnan NV (2015) Synthesis and 
dielectric studies of poly(vinyl pyrrolidone)/titanium dioxide nanocomposites. IOP Conf Ser: 
Mater Sci Engg 73:012015 
50. Singh PK, Gaur MS, Chauhan RS (2013) Dielectric properties of sol–gel synthesized 
polysulfone-ZnO nanocomposites. J Therm Analy Calor 111:743–751

Chapter 4 
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based 
Nanomaterials in the Dielectric World 
Sushrisangita Sahoo, Abhinav Yadav, K. P. Andryushin, 
and L. A. Reznichenko 
Abstract The development of reliable energy storage systems is the best strategy to 
resolve the global crisis of increased energy consumption in this modern high-tech 
world and exhaustion of fossil fuels for energy production. Electrostatic capaci-
tors are one of the extensively used energy storage systems by the engineers and 
researchers among other such devices like supercapacitors and batteries due to its 
unique characteristics of superior charge density, ultrafast charge and discharge, high 
stability, and long-life time. These unique features made them suitable for distributed 
power systems, microelectronic circuits, electric vehicles, etc. But these electrostatic 
capacitors have the demerits of low energy density. Therefore, the main objective 
of researchers is now to achieve high energy density and energy storage efﬁciency 
along with the high-power density. The only possible way to attain the high energy 
density of the electrostatic capacitor is to tailor the features of dielectric materials. 
Both the ceramics and polymers were used individually in the dielectric layer of the 
electrostatic capacitors, while the both the individuals have some pros and cons. So, 
materials scientist combines both the ceramics and polymer to obtain the pro qualities 
of polymer like high breakdown strength and ﬂexibility, and high dielectric constant 
of ceramics. Recently, ceramics in nanoform are chosen as the ﬁller materials to the 
polymer matrix in the trend of device miniaturization. So, in this chapter, we will 
discuss about the various attempts made to design the polymer-ceramic nanocom-
posites to obtain the high dielectric constant and hence the energy density of the 
material. 
Keywords Nanocomposites · Polymer · Filler · Dielectric permittivity ·
Breakdown strength
S. Sahoo envelope symbol · A. Yadav · K. P. Andryushin · L. A. Reznichenko 
Research Institute of Physics, Southern Federal University, 344090 Rostov-on-Don, Russia 
e-mail: sushri1990@gmail.com; ssahoo@tuskegee.edu 
S. Sahoo 
Department of Material Science and Engineering, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, AL 36088, 
USA 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_4 
97

98
S. Sahoo et al.
4.1 
Introduction 
The current craze in portable and wearable electronics in the modern high-tech world 
triggered a growing interest of scientiﬁc communities toward the design and develop-
ment of ﬂexible piezo/triboelectric nanogenerators for energy harvesting and storage 
devices [1–4]. Polymer-based materials are the best option to choose as the base mate-
rial for ﬂexibility purpose as it can easily rollable, foldable, twistable, and bendable. 
Flexibility is not only the feature required for energy harvesting and storage devices, 
so we need to optimize other parameters for the device performance. On the other 
hand, we are all aware of the fact that the exhausted usage of fossil fuels and high 
consumption of energy in the modern high-tech world became a serious threat to our 
society. To avoid the consequences of this serious threat, we need to resolve these 
problems by (1) developing some cost-effective, ecofriendly, and efﬁcient energy 
storage devices and (2) diverting our path from exhausting usage of nonrenewable 
energy resources to renewable energy sources (like wind, sun, sound thermal and 
mechanical energy, etc.). So, some of the researchers now put their efforts on energy 
conversion from environmental phenomena. Though the idea of energy conversion 
seems very simple, it is really challenging due to the intermittent nature of this 
energy sources [5–9]. Some other material researcher trying to resolve the storage of 
the conversion energy in a stable and controlled manner [10]. Among all the storage 
systems (such as ﬂywheel energy storage, compressed air storage, and hydro storage), 
the electrochemical energy storage systems, fuel cells, and electrostatic capacitors 
are widely used by the researchers [11–13]. The two main subsystems of electro-
chemical storage systems are Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors, both depends on 
electrochemical processes to store energy, but both of them have different working 
mechanism yielding different charge storage properties [14]. However, the electro-
static capacitors usually store the energy through electric ﬁeld induced polarization 
and depolarization process [15]. 
Li-ion batteries follow the diffusion controlled faradic reactions in the bulk elec-
trode to store energy, i.e., the Li-ion travels from anode to cathode or cathode to 
anode during charging and discharging process, and hence, the process is slow [14]. 
The bulk storage mechanism of batteries causes its high energy density, whereas 
the lengthy process yields low power density and short life time. In contrast to 
batteries, supercapacitors stores energy either through the accumulation of elec-
trostatic charge on the electrode–electrolyte surface (EDLC) or through fast and 
reversible redox reactions (pseudocapacitors) [16]. Supercapacitors exhibit high-
power density and long-life span, but low energy density. In contrast to the above 
two electrochemical storage devices, the electrostatic (or dielectric) capacitors store 
energy through electric-ﬁeld-induced polarization and depolarization process and 
have unique pro qualities of ultrahigh-power density, greater cycling stability, and 
long lifespan [17–19], but limited energy densities [20]. The energy density of these 
dielectric capacitors strongly depend on their dielectric permittivity and breakdown 
strength. Conventional dielectrics are either polymer or ceramics. Both of them 
have some merits and demerits for application purpose. The ceramics exhibit high

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
99
dielectric permittivity and thermal stability, but have demerits of poor ﬂexibility and 
low breakdown strength. However, the polymers have good ﬂexibility and break-
down strength, but have low dielectric permittivity. Therefore, polymer nanocom-
posites were proposed, which incorporate the individual’s merits by dispersing 
nanoﬁllers in the polymer matrix [21–24]. Various types of polymer matrix used 
for energy storage devices including both ferroelectric and conducting polymer such 
as poly(vinylideneﬂouride) PVDF, poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA), polyether-
imide (PEI), PVDF-based copolymers, polyimide (PI), polypyrrole (PPy), polyani-
line (PANI), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), and polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) [25– 
35]. The ultimate properties of the polymer nanocomposites are strongly affected 
or controlled by the features of nanoﬁller, nanoﬁller/polymer interfaces, interac-
tion between the nanoﬁllers, and spatial composite structure. Hence, it has been 
a great challenge for researchers to achieve simultaneous improvement in dielec-
tric permittivity (dielectric and energy storage properties) as well as breakdown 
strength (mechanical properties). A continuous effort has been made by the material 
researchers to solve the technical challenges associated with the polymer nanocom-
posites and improve their performance by choosing the suitable types of ﬁllers, 
surface modiﬁcation, microstructure and alignment of ﬁller, complex structures, 
etc., for the application perspective. Various parameters are designed such as the 
(1) selection of the polymer matrix, e.g., linear dielectric or ferroelectric polymers, 
in some cases even conductive polymer matrix was also chosen; (2) nanoﬁllers with 
different electrical properties (conductor, semiconductor, and dielectric), shapes, 
size, and compositions; (3) surface engineering; (4) hierarchical structures with 
different orientation and morphology of ﬁllers; (5) multilayered nanocomposites 
[36–41]. 
Though excellent reviews on polymer nanocomposites are summarized earlier, 
but the collective information regarding the fundamental mechanisms and the signif-
icance of dielectric properties of polymer nanocomposites for energy devices as well 
as the theoretical and experimental approach to explain the crucial parameters are 
discussed in this chapter. Section 4.2 covers the basic concepts of dielectric, i.e., 
dielectric polarization to understand the working mechanism of capacitive storage, 
the dielectric breakdown, and energy storage density. Section 4.3 covers the models 
for dielectric permittivity and breakdown strength, which are used to explain the 
experimental trend of the polymer nanocomposites. Section 4.4 describes the crucial 
parameters which affect the overall properties of the polymer nanocomposites. The 
last section describes the different attempts made by the researcher to enhance and 
optimize these crucial parameters for energy storage devices.

100
S. Sahoo et al.
4.2 
Some Basic Concepts of Dielectric Capacitors 
and Energy Storage 
Dielectric capacitors stores energy through electric-ﬁeld-induced polarization and 
depolarization process. Since polarization, breakdown, conduction, and dissipation 
strongly affect the different properties of a dielectric material, we have discussed 
these mechanisms for better understanding of the basic concepts. 
4.2.1 
Dielectric Polarization 
Polarization mechanism can be explained based on the response of individual atoms, 
ions, and dipoles of a dielectric material under the action of external applied ﬁeld. 
The dielectric material polarized through displacement of atoms, ions, or dipoles 
from their equilibrium position by the action of an external electric ﬁeld causing 
electric dipole moment. Electronic, ionic, dipolar or orientational, and space charge 
polarizations are the four different types of polarization mechanisms. Electronic 
polarization is the response of individual atoms to the external applied electric ﬁeld. 
Each material constitutes atoms, and there is a symmetric distribution of electronic 
cloud and nucleus resulting zero dipole moment in the absence of applied electric 
ﬁeld. But these atoms can be polarized due to the displacement of the centers of 
electron cloud and nucleus under the action of electric ﬁeld causing some nonzero 
dipole moment. Electronic polarization is observed in all dielectrics and exists up 
to optical frequency range (ultraviolet/visible), i.e., a very high frequency range 
due to involvement of electron. Similarly, the displacement of positive and negative 
ions from their equilibrium position results a net induced dipole moment under the 
inﬂuence of electric ﬁeld, and the corresponding polarization is called as the ionic 
polarization. Ionic polarization is observed in those dielectric materials which have 
ionic bonding and exists up to infrared frequency. But some dielectrics possess some 
permanent dipole moments, and the application of electric ﬁeld causes these dipole 
moments to align in one direction. Such kind of polarization is called orientational 
polarization. Orientational or dipolar polarization is observed in polar dielectrics and 
exists only up to microwave frequency due to slow response of dipoles to the applied 
ﬁeld. Due to electrical inhomogeneity, defects, and imperfections in some inhomo-
geneous dielectric material, charges are accumulated on the surfaces of grain and 
grain boundary or near the electrode interfaces resulting space charge or interfacial 
polarization. The total polarization of the dielectric material is the contribution of all 
these four types of polarization [20, 42].

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
101
4.2.2 
Dielectric Breakdown 
Breakdown suggests about the failure of a dielectric material against a certain applied 
electric ﬁeld which causes the loss of its insulating properties and the corresponding 
electric ﬁeld called as the breakdown strength or dielectric strength of the mate-
rial. The breakdown process of the dielectric material involves three mechanisms 
such as electromechanical breakdown, intrinsic breakdown, and thermal breakdown. 
The dominance of electrostatic compressive force over the mechanical compressive 
strength is the main reason for electromechanical breakdown of the dielectric mate-
rial. The breakdown strength of electromechanical breakdown is generally expressed 
in terms of Young’s modulus (Y) as [43, 44]: 
up er E Subscript b Baseline equals 0.606 StartRoot StartFraction upper Y Over epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline EndFraction EndRoot
/
upper E Subscript b Baseline equals 0.606 StartRoot StartFraction upper Y Over epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline EndFraction EndRoot
upper
 E Subscript b Baseline equals 0.606 StartRoot StartFraction upper Y Over epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline EndFraction EndRoot
The crossover of charge carriers (mainly electrons) from valence band to conduc-
tion band under the inﬂuence of very high electric ﬁeld results large conduction 
currents and hence breakdown of dielectric material. This breakdown is known as 
intrinsic breakdown. The collision of highly accelerated electrons with atoms or 
molecules broke their covalent bonds under the application of high ﬁeld and released 
more electrons and holes. This leads to a dielectric breakdown in a material, and 
it is known as avalanche breakdown. The thermal breakdown generally occurs in 
the dielectric material, when the heat produced through the conduction and leakage 
loss of the dielectric exceeds the dissipation of those energy through radiation and 
conduction. 
4.2.3 
Energy Storage 
The energy density of polar or nonlinear dielectric materials can be deﬁned as the 
integral of electric ﬁeld (upper E) with respect to the electrical displacement (upper D) vector 
between the limit of remnant polarization (uper P Subscript r) and maximum electrical displacement 
(Dmax) i.e. [19, 45], 
upp er
 U Su
b
scr
ipt 
e Baseline equals integral Underscript upper P Subscript r Baseline Overscript upper D Subscript max Baseline Endscripts upper E d upper D
and the energy storage efﬁciency (η) can be deﬁned in terms energy density (upper U Subscript e) and 
energy loss (upper U Subscript l) as the following equation: 
eta 
equals StartFraction upper U Subscript e Baseline Over upper U Subscript e Baseline plus upper U Subscript l Baseline EndFraction
eta  equa
ls StartFraction upper U Subscript e Baseline Over upper U Subscript e Baseline plus upper U Subscript l Baseline EndFraction

102
S. Sahoo et al.
The energy loss (upper U Subscript l) represents the energy dissipated during the charge and 
discharge process of dielectric material. uper U Subscript l also denotes the (1) energy consump-
tion of all the dielectric materials during polarization and depolarization process and 
(2) unavoidable leakage loss. 
The electrical displacement vector for these polar dielectrics can be expressed as: 
up per D equa
ls upper P plus epsilon 0 upper E
However, the energy density (upper U Subscript e) for nonpolar or linear dielectric materials can 
be deﬁned as the product of electrical displacement vector and electric ﬁeld with 
some constant (i.e., one half
one half). 
up er U Subscript e Baseline equals one half upper D upper E
up pe
r U Subscript e Baseline equals one half upper D upper E
The electrical displacement vector for these nonpolar dielectric materials directly 
proportional to electric ﬁeld and can be written as: 
up per D  equals  
epsilon upper E equals epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline upper E
epsi lo n Sub script r Baseline comma epsilon comma and epsilon 0 are the relative dielectric constant and dielectric constants in 
medium and free space, respectively. 
So, the above equation of energy density is deduced to [46, 47]: 
there fore upper U Subscript e Baseline equals one half epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline upper E squared
therefo re 
upper U Subscript e Baseline equals one half epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline upper E squared
All these mathematical expressions clearly indicate the signiﬁcant contribution 
of these critical parameters such as polarization, dielectric constant, breakdown 
strength, and energy loss to the energy density of the dielectric material. Any one 
of them can affect the energy storage performance of the material. High dielectric 
constant and high breakdown strength are required to obtain high energy density of 
nonpolar (linear) dielectric material. Similarly, high polarization (or high dielectric 
displacement) and high breakdown strength are required for high energy density 
of polar (or nonlinear) dielectric material. High dielectric constant is needed for 
high polarization in polar dielectrics. Therefore, dielectric constant and breakdown 
strength are most important parameter, and their value should be high to obtain 
enhanced energy density for both polar and nonpolar dielectrics. On the other hand, 
it is not only to achieve the high energy density, but we have to optimize the 
energy storage efﬁciency. So, the dielectric material should have low energy loss, 
leakage loss, and conductivity. Polymer nanocomposites incorporate the individual’s 
pro factor such as high breakdown strength of polymer and ﬁller’s high dielec-
tric constant (or polarization) to optimize the most essential factor energy density 
and consequently the dielectric energy storage performance. The high dielectric

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
103
constant of these polymer nanocomposites can be obtained either from percola-
tion polymer nanocomposites by addition of conductive ﬁllers or from dielectric-
reinforced polymer nanocomposites having intrinsic dielectric properties. Similarly, 
the breakdown strength has equal signiﬁcance in energy storage, so the breakdown 
processes are also discussed in our following sections. 
4.3 
Models for Dielectric Permittivity and Breakdown 
Strength 
As we have mentioned earlier, the polymer nanocomposites combined the pro 
quality of individual components such as the ﬁllers which signiﬁcantly contributes 
to the dielectric properties and the polymer matrix which provides the mechanical 
properties. The electrical properties of polymer nanocomposites exhibit completely 
different trends than the pure polymer and ﬁller constituents. Therefore, several 
models are proposed to explain the dielectric properties of these polymer nanocom-
posites. 
4.3.1 
Models for Dielectric Permittivity 
Initially, simple models such as series and parallel models are proposed by assuming 
continuous medium of polymer matrix with dielectric permittivity ‘epsilon Subscript p’ ﬁlled with 
spherical ﬁllers of dielectric permittivity‘epsilon Subscript f ’, and both the ﬁller and the polymer have 
no dielectric loss. The series and parallel model can be mathematically expressed as: 
Series Model co lon  
epsilon Subscript c Baseline equals StartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline epsilon Subscript f Baseline Over epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript f Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript p Baseline EndFraction
Ser ie s Model co lo
n epsilon Subscript c Baseline equals StartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline epsilon Subscript f Baseline Over epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript f Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript p Baseline EndFraction
Parallel Model co lon  epsi lo n Subscr ip t
 c Baseline equals epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline
where epsilon Subscript c is the permittivity of the polymer composites, f Subscript p and f Subscript f represent the 
volume fraction of the polymer matrix and the ﬁller, respectively. 
Then, these simple models are modiﬁed by Sillars and Landau–Lifshitz which 
holds good for lower volume fraction of the ﬁller, but limited to the conductivity of 
both ﬁller and polymer matrix. The mathematical expression can be written as: 
eps ilon
 
Su bscr ip t
 
c Ba seli
ne equals epsilon Subscript p Baseline left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline EndFraction right bracket
epsi lon S
u
bscript c Baseline equals epsilon Subscript p Baseline left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline EndFraction right bracket
Maxwell–Garnet equation which is more accurate than the previous ones but have 
the limitation in resistivity of polymer matrix and ﬁller can be expressed as [48, 49]:

104
S. Sahoo et al.
eps ilon
 
Su b
sc ri p
t
 c B asel
ine equals epsilon Subscript p Baseline left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 1 minus f Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis plus 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left parenthesis For spherical fillers right parenthesis
e
ps il on  
Su
bscr ipt 
c
 Base
l
ine e quals epsi lon Sub
script p Baseline left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 1 minus f Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis plus 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left parenthesis For spherical fillers right parenthesis
and 
eps ilon
 
Su b
sc r
i
pt c  Bas
eline equals epsilon Subscript p Baseline left bracket 1 plus StartFraction f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over upper A left parenthesis 1 minus f Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis plus epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left parenthesis for non spheroid fillers right parenthesis
e
p
si lo n S
ub
scri pt c
 
Base
l
ine e qual s epsilon  Subscr
ipt p Baseline left bracket 1 plus StartFraction f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over upper A left parenthesis 1 minus f Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis plus epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left parenthesis for non spheroid fillers right parenthesis
up pe r A equals one third
upper A equals one third is the depolarization factor, which indicates the deviation from spherical 
shape of the dispersed ﬁller. 
Then, Bruggeman proposed an improved model (expressed in the following equa-
tion) which is valid for relatively large volume fractions of spherical ﬁller than the 
previous models and for agglomerated or closely packed ﬁller particles. 
eps ilon S
ubsc ript  c  
B
asel ine 
equals epsilon Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus 2 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over 3 epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction
epsil on  S u
b
scri pt c
 
Baseline equals epsilon Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus 2 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over 3 epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction
And the ﬁnal Bruggeman equation can be written as [48, 50]:
S
tart Frac
tion left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript c Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript c Superscript 1 divided by 3 Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction left parenthesis 1 minus f Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript p Superscript 1 divided by 3 Baseline EndFraction
Start
Fr
a
c
ti on  l e
ft
 par enth
esis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript c Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript c Superscript 1 divided by 3 Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction left parenthesis 1 minus f Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript p Superscript 1 divided by 3 Baseline EndFraction
Start
Fr
action left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript c Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript c Superscript 1 divided by 3 Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction left parenthesis 1 minus f Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript p Superscript 1 divided by 3 Baseline EndFraction
Further, Jaysundere and Smith proposed a model by considering the interaction 
between the ﬁller particles which cannot be neglected for nanosized ﬁllers and also in 
large volume fractions of ﬁller, hence, calculated the overall electric ﬁeld by including 
the polarization of adjacent particles. This factor was neglected in previous models 
as all of them are valid for lower ﬁller loadings and assumed less interaction of ﬁller 
particles due to large distance between them. The Jaysundere–Smith equation can 
be written as [48, 51, 52]: 
eps il
on Su bs cript c Ba
seline equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction
epsilon S u
b
sc ript  c  B aseli ne equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction
epsilon S u
bscript c Baseline equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction
ep si lo n Su
bscript c Baseline equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction
epsilon S u
b
sc ript  c  B aseli ne equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction
epsilon S u
b
script c Baseline equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction left bracket 1 plus 3 f Subscript f Baseline StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over left parenthesis 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction
Lichtenker proposed a model by modifying the initial idea of series and parallel 
model and calculated the formula for effective dielectric permittivity and conductivity 
of the polymer-based composites. The series and parallel models explained the lower 
and upper bound of the effective dielectric permittivity based on arrangement of 
the parallel layers of the composite perpendicular or along the ﬁeld, respectively. 
The Lichtenker formula widen the lower and upper limit of the effective dielectric 
permittivity and can be written as [52, 53]: 
eps
ilon  Subs cr ip
t eff Su pe rs
c
ript alpha Baseline equals epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Superscript alpha Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Superscript alpha

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
105
alphais the parameter whose value explains the transition from anisotropy (= −1) to 
isotropy (= 1). 
Another model was proposed to explain the dielectric properties of the polymer 
composite having conducting ﬁllers and called as percolation model. Though insu-
lating (inorganic) ﬁllers mainly dispersed in polymer matrix to enhance the dielectric 
permittivity of the composite, the dielectric constant is not still high enough in appli-
cation point of view even at high ﬁller concentration and the high ﬁller inclusion 
affects the mechanical properties of the host polymer. So, some researcher dispersed 
conducting ﬁllers to achieve high dielectric constant of the composites. The high 
dielectric constant in these composites is the result of Maxwell–Wagner polariza-
tion. These composites also exhibit high loss and conductivity. Both the dielectric 
constant and conductivity of these composites follow a nonlinear trend above perco-
lation threshold ( f Subscript c) which cannot be explained by the above-mentioned models. 
The equations for percolation theories can be written as [48, 49, 54]: 
eps i
l
on Su bs c
ript  c B as el in e
 proportional to left parenthesis f Subscript c Baseline minus f Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative q Baseline for f Subscript f Baseline less than f
q equals  0.8 minus 1 is the dielectric critical exponent. 
Yamada model was proposed for polymer composites with higher loading of 
dielectric ﬁller and the equation can be written as [55, 56]: 
eps ilon  
Subs c
r
ipt c Ba
seline equals 1 plus StartFraction eta f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over eta epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis 1 minus f Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction
epsi l
o
n Su bscr
ip
t c Ba s
e
line equals 1 plus StartFraction eta f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over eta epsilon Subscript p Baseline plus left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis 1 minus f Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction
etais the shape factor. 
Yu et al. [56] ﬁtted the experimental data of surface-modiﬁed BaTiO3 nanoﬁllers 
dispersed PVDF matrix composites with the Yamada model and ﬁnd that the model 
simulation ﬁtted well with the trend of experimental data of permittivity except the 
ﬁller concentration at 60%. 
Modiﬁed Kernel model was another model purposed which considers the inter-
action between the adjacent ﬁllers in the polymer composites and the equation can 
be written as [53, 57]: 
eps il
on Su bs cript c B
a
seline equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction
epsi lon 
Su
bs cr
ip t c Basel ine equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction
epsi lon 
Subscript c Baseline equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction
ep si lo n S
u
bscript c Baseline equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction
epsi lon 
Su
bs cr
ip t c Basel ine equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction
epsi lon 
S
ubscript c Baseline equals StartStartFraction epsilon Subscript p Baseline f Subscript p Baseline plus epsilon Subscript f Baseline f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket OverOver f Subscript p Baseline plus f Subscript f Baseline left bracket StartFraction 3 epsilon Subscript p Baseline Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket left bracket 1 plus StartFraction 3 f Subscript f Baseline left parenthesis epsilon Subscript f Baseline minus epsilon Subscript p Baseline right parenthesis Over epsilon Subscript f Baseline plus 2 epsilon Subscript p Baseline EndFraction right bracket EndEndFraction

106
S. Sahoo et al.
4.3.2 
Models for Breakdown Strength 
Phase-ﬁeld model, ﬁnite element simulation, stochastic simulation, and machine 
learning are the different type of breakdown simulations used to understand the 
dielectric breakdown mechanism of the polymer nanocomposites. 
Dielectric breakdown model: 
The dielectric breakdown model was proposed to understand the underlying mecha-
nism of breakdown patterns in a polymer composite by assuming the homogeneous 
distribution of the dielectric ﬁllers in the polymer matrix. The formed electrical 
trees in the polymer composite propagate through the dielectric medium during the 
dielectric breakdown, and the electrical ﬁeld affects this tree channel growth. So, the 
mathematical relation between the probability (p) of tree channel growth and the 
electric ﬁeld left parenthesis upper E) can be expressed as [58]: 
p
 
left parenthes
i
s
 i comma k right arrow k Superscript prime Baseline comma k Superscript prime Baseline right parenthesis equals StartFraction left parenthesis upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline Over sigma summation left parenthesis upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline EndFraction
p 
left pa
renthesis i comma k right arrow k Superscript prime Baseline comma k Superscript prime Baseline right parenthesis equals StartFraction left parenthesis upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline Over sigma summation left parenthesis upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline EndFraction
where η is the exponent and i c omma k prime represents the tree channel growth sites. 
Failure probability and fractal dimension are the two factors which can determine 
the electrical tree behaviors. The number of channels connected to the electrical 
tree are controlled by the factor called propagation time, which affect the failure 
probability. Similarly scaling behavior (upper C) is another function used to calculate the 
fractal dimension (upper D) using the following mathematical relation: 
upp er C S ubsc
ript r Baseline equals upper C 0 r Superscript upper D minus 2
where r represents the radius of the circle which covers all the electrical sites. 
The failure probability was also explained on the basis of Weibull distribution 
model. The Weibull statistics model can be mathematically expressed as [45, 59, 
60]: 
up per P e
q
u
als 1 minus e Superscript minus left parenthesis StartFraction upper E Over upper E 0 EndFraction right parenthesis Super Superscript beta
up
per
 P equals 1 minus e Superscript minus left parenthesis StartFraction upper E Over upper E 0 EndFraction right parenthesis Super Superscript beta
where upp er P co mma upper E comma upper E 0 comma and beta represent the cumulative probability of electric failure, 
experimental breakdown data, scale parameter, and shape parameter, respectively. 
The scale parameter suggests the ﬁeld strength where there is a 63% probability for 
the sample to breakdown (characteristic Eb), and the shape parameter called as the 
Weibull modulus displays the dispersion of E. 
Modiﬁed dielectric breakdown model: 
The dielectric breakdown model was again modiﬁed for randomly distributed ﬁller 
in the polymer matrix by introducing a new term “upper L Subscript i” in the existing equation of

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
107
probability as [58]: 
p
 
left parenthes
i
s
 i comma k right arrow k Superscript prime Baseline comma k Superscript prime Baseline right parenthesis equals StartFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline Over upper L Subscript i Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline Over sigma summation left parenthesis StartFraction upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline Over upper L Subscript i Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline EndFraction
p 
left parenthesis i comma k right arrow k Superscript prime Baseline comma k Superscript prime Baseline right parenthesis equals StartFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline Over upper L Subscript i Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline Over sigma summation left parenthesis StartFraction upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline Over upper L Subscript i Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline EndFraction
p 
left parenthesis i comma k right arrow k Superscript prime Baseline comma k Superscript prime Baseline right parenthesis equals StartFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline Over upper L Subscript i Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline Over sigma summation left parenthesis StartFraction upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline Over upper L Subscript i Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline EndFraction
p 
le
ft parenthesis i comma k right arrow k Superscript prime Baseline comma k Superscript prime Baseline right parenthesis equals StartFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline Over upper L Subscript i Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline Over sigma summation left parenthesis StartFraction upper E Subscript i comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline Over upper L Subscript i Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline EndFraction
where upper L Subscript i was represented as the pertaining breakdown channel length which can be 
expressed as: 
up er L Subscript i Baseline equals upper L 0 minus StartFraction upper L 0 Over a Subscript i Baseline EndFraction
up
er L Subscript i Baseline equals upper L 0 minus StartFraction upper L 0 Over a Subscript i Baseline EndFraction
a Subscript i is the distance between the conducting particle. 
Wang et al. used the modiﬁed dielectric breakdown model to explain the improve-
ment of breakdown strength of a sandwich polymer nanocomposites which constitute 
an array of ultrasmall metal particles (Ag, Au, or Pt) in between the layers of PVDF 
HFP. 
Phase-ﬁeld model: 
Ceramics or dielectric ﬁllers with high dielectric constant were dispersed in 
the polymer matrix to enhance the effective dielectric permittivity of the polymer 
nanocomposites. The accumulation of charges in the interfaces of ceramic ﬁllers 
and the polymer matrix due to the huge difference in their dielectric constant also 
affects the local electric ﬁeld at the interface and consequently deteriorates the break-
down strength of the polymer nanocomposites. Further, application of electric ﬁeld 
above a critical value may initiate cracks and weak paths to propagate, resulting in 
a complete breakdown. Phase-ﬁeld model was developed to describe the damage 
initiation and the progress in the polymer composites [61]. The dielectric breakdown 
of the polymer composites can be explored by obtaining the local ﬁeld distributions 
and crack propagation details continuum phase-ﬁeld model [62]. The inﬂuence of 
microstructure on the breakdown strength, energy density, and dielectric permit-
tivity of the polymer composites can also be investigated from the simulation of 
this model. This model can also design the novel microstructures of desired energy 
density and breakdown strength. The inﬂuence of various stimuli (e.g., mechanical, 
electrical, and thermal stimulus) on breakdown behavior of polymer composites can 
be predicted by the continuous phase-ﬁeld model. By considering the contribution 
of electric energy, phase separation energy, and gradient energy, one can develop the 
phase-ﬁeld model to simulate the breakdown strength in polymer nanocomposites. 
The contribution of thermal energy which was not included in the phase-ﬁeld model 
was incorporated to develop the electrothermal breakdown model, which predicts 
well about the breakdown strength of the 3D ﬁller-based polymer nanocomposites. 
Stochastic model: 
Stochastic model was proposed to understand the breakdown phenomena by studying 
one of the most important features, i.e., the fractal properties of the branched

108
S. Sahoo et al.
discharges. According to this model, the growth probability depends on the local 
ﬁeld (potential), and the mathematical expression can be written as [63]: 
p
 
left parenthes
i
s
 i comma k right arrow i Superscript prime Baseline comma k Superscript prime Baseline right parenthesis equals StartFraction left parenthesis phi Subscript i prime comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline Over sigma summation left parenthesis phi Subscript i prime comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline EndFraction
p 
left par
enthesis i comma k right arrow i Superscript prime Baseline comma k Superscript prime Baseline right parenthesis equals StartFraction left parenthesis phi Subscript i prime comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline Over sigma summation left parenthesis phi Subscript i prime comma k Sub Superscript prime Subscript Baseline right parenthesis Superscript eta Baseline EndFraction
The denominator represents all the possible growth processes. 
Yue et al. [64] reported a modiﬁed stochastic model to study the growth of the 
breakdown path and the internal electric ﬁeld distribution of the polymer composites 
under the applied electric ﬁeld. The break down probability P(r) was reported as: 
upper P left parenthesis r right parenthesis equals StartFraction upper E left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared Over upper E Subscript b Baseline left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared EndFraction divided by sigma summation StartFraction upper E left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared Over upper E Subscript b Baseline left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared EndFraction
upper P l
e ft parenthesis r right parenthesis equals StartFraction upper E left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared Over upper E Subscript b Baseline left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared EndFraction divided by sigma summation StartFraction upper E left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared Over upper E Subscript b Baseline left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared EndFraction
upper P
 left parenthesis r right parenthesis equals StartFraction upper E left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared Over upper E Subscript b Baseline left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared EndFraction divided by sigma summation StartFraction upper E left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared Over upper E Subscript b Baseline left parenthesis r right parenthesis squared EndFraction
where E(r) and Eb(r) represent the electric ﬁeld of a local point and intrinsic break-
down strength, respectively. The denominator suggests the sum of all points where 
local electric ﬁeld exceeds the breakdown strength. In addition to modiﬁed stochastic 
model, they also used the machine learning to study the breakdown strength of the 
polymer composites. They used three parameters, i.e., the dielectric permittivity, 
size, and content of the ﬁller, to build the model for the breakdown process of the 
polymer composites. 
Finite element simulations: 
Wang et al. [65] investigated the local electric ﬁeld distribution and its effect on 
breakdown strength of the polymer composites by ﬁnite element simulations, when 
high permittivity ﬁllers like barium titanate were added on the polymer matrix. 
Similarly, the local ﬁeld distributions and leakage current density of the double-
layered composite of boron nitride surface-modiﬁed BCZT ferroelectric nanoﬁllers 
and PVDF polymer were analyzed by the ﬁnite element simulations [66]. The elec-
tric ﬁeld distribution in the layered structure of PVDF/PMMA polymer composites 
was analyzed from the ﬁnite element analysis [67]. The effect of surface-modiﬁed 
barium titanate nanoparticle by TiO2 and polydopamine ﬁller on breakdown strength 
of epoxy composite was studied by ﬁnite element simulations [68]. 
4.4 
Crucial Parameters (Dielectric Permittivity, Dielectric 
Loss, Breakdown Strength, and Energy Density) 
of Polymer-Based Nanocomposites 
The ﬁrst crucial factor in polymer composite dielectric is the type of dielectric mate-
rial which means the variation of electric displacement is different in different dielec-
tric materials with application of electric ﬁeld as the polarization and energy loss is 
different in polar and nonpolar (linear) dielectrics. There are mainly two types of

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
109
dielectrics: (1) polar or nonlinear dielectrics and (2) nonpolar or linear dielectrics. 
Again, the polar or nonlinear dielectric subcategorized to ferroelectric (both normal 
and relaxor) and antiferroelectric. However, the nonpolar dielectrics include the linear 
dielectrics and paraelectric material. The variation of electric displacement for both 
polar and nonpolar dielectrics with application of electric ﬁeld is illustrated in Fig. 4.1. 
It is clear from the ﬁgure that the nonlinear dielectrics have more pronounced energy 
loss, but they also exhibit high polarization and dielectric constant. Relaxor ferro-
electric material possess high saturation polarization, low remnant polarization, and 
moderate breakdown strength, which made them potential material among all the 
dielectric. The efﬁciency of these relaxor materials can reach up to 90%, and the 
narrow hysteresis loop suggests the low energy dissipation in the form of heat during 
discharging. As we have mentioned in our previous Sect. 4.2.3, the energy storage 
density and efﬁciency of these polar dielectrics depend upon the remnant polariza-
tion and saturation polarization and low energy loss. However, the linear dielectrics 
(e.g., polymers or some composite) exhibits almost no energy loss, but their energy 
density was limited due to their low polarization and dielectric permittivity. 
From the above discussion on energy density of capacitive storage, we found that 
the other important parameters are the dielectric permittivity and breakdown strength. 
Various types of nanoﬁllers based on their electrical properties like dielectric/ 
ceramics, conducting, and semiconducting are incorporated in the polymer matrix 
to improve the dielectric permittivity of the polymer nanocomposites. More details 
regarding the inclusion of ceramics, conductive and semiconductive nanoﬁllers for 
the enhancement of dielectric permittivity, and the energy storage properties are 
discussed in or following sections. However, in search for high permittivity of the 
polymer nanocomposites, researchers never tried to sacriﬁce the ﬂexibility of the
Fig. 4.1 Variation of electric displacement with applied electric ﬁeld in linear and nonlinear 
dielectric. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [69]. Copyright 2019 Elsevier 

110
S. Sahoo et al.
polymer matrix. So, a small amount of ﬁller incorporated in the polymer matrix to 
maintain the ﬂexibility. In case of linear dielectrics, there is only induced polariza-
tion; whereas for polymer nanocomposites, the total polarization is the contribution 
of polarization of the nanoﬁller, the interaction between the ﬁllers, and interface 
between the polymer matrix and nanoﬁllers. The inclusion of nanoﬁller (whether 
it is conductive or insulating) in polymer matrix has a signiﬁcant effect on overall 
properties of the polymer nanocomposites because the large surface area of nanoma-
terials create a large interaction zone among the nanoﬁller and the polymer matrix. 
In addition, the inclusion of nanoﬁller also changes the surface morphology of the 
polymer matrix. The small size of the nanoﬁller also modiﬁes the internal ﬁeld and 
space charge distribution of the polymer nanocomposites. The space charge distri-
bution and the scattering effect due to the incorporation of nanoﬁllers signiﬁcantly 
affect the breakdown strength and dielectric permittivity of the polymer nanocom-
posites. Maxwell–Wager–Sillars theory was used to explain the interfacial space 
charge behavior of polymer nanocomposites [70]. Two different models, i.e., Lewis 
and Tanaka’s model [71–73], are purposed to understand the effect of interface due 
to inclusion of nanosized ﬁller in the polymer matrix, and the details of models, the 
inﬂuence of interface in different parameters, and overall properties of the compos-
ites are explained in Prateek et al. They also reviewed in detail the effect of (i) shape 
of conducting and nonconducting ﬁller with different dimensions (0D, 1D, 2D), (ii) 
the 1D and 2D ﬁllers with different aspect ratios on overall properties of the polymer 
nanocomposites. Another important parameter in the energy density equation is the 
breakdown strength, but it was studied that the enhancement of breakdown strength 
always accompanied by the decrease in dielectric permittivity. The inverse relation-
ship between the breakdown strength and dielectric permittivity mainly attributed to 
the local electric ﬁeld distribution in the polymer nanocomposites due to huge differ-
ence of individual dielectric permittivity of ﬁller and matrix. We can neither ignore 
the breakdown strength nor the contribution of dielectric permittivity to the energy 
density, so we have to maintain these to parameter to obtain the optimized proper-
ties of the polymer nanocomposites. So, the one promising way to maintain these 
parameters is to reduce the difference of permittivity of ﬁller and polymer matrix, 
and this can be obtained by adopting surface engineering, interfacial, and topological 
design. The examples of surface modiﬁcation to maintain the breakdown strength of 
the polymer composites are discussed in the following section. 
4.5 
Different Approaches for Performance Improvement 
of Polymer Nanocomposites 
(a) By adding different types of ﬁllers in polymer dielectric 
Different types of nanoﬁllers such as conductors, semiconductors, and ceramics 
with different electrical properties are dispersed with the polymer matrix to tailor the 
dielectric and energy storage performance of the polymer nanocomposites.

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
111
Ceramics Fillers: 
The most traditional way to achieve the high dielectric constant in the polymer 
nanocomposites is to incorporate ceramics ﬁller such as Pb(Zr0.5Ti0.5)O3 (PZT) 
[74], 
CaCu3Ti4O12 
(CCTO) 
[75], 
BaTiO3 
(BT) 
[76], 
Na1/2Y1/2Cu3Ti4O12 
(NYCTO) 
[77], 
BaxSr1-x 
TiO3, 
xNaNbO3-
(1-x)BaTiO3 
(NN-BT) 
[78], 
(Bi0.5Ba0.25Sr0.25)(Fe0.5Ti0.5)O3
(BFO–BST)
[79],
and
0.78Bi0.5Na0.5TiO3– 
0.22SrTiO3 (BNT-ST) [80] in the polymer matrix. Some of other recent examples 
are also discussed in the following paragraph. 
Considering ultrahigh dielectric and polarization response of the ferroelectric 
ceramics near the morphotropic phase boundary (MPB), Xie et al. [81] chosen the 
MPB composition of the Pb(Zr0.52Ti0.48)O3 (PZT) nanocubes (NCs) as ceramic ﬁllers 
for the P(VDF-CTFE) polymer matrix. But, as we know, the huge difference between 
the dielectric constant of the PZT ceramic and the PVDF-CTFE polymer would cause 
accumulation of charges in the interfaces between the ceramic and polymer, which 
also affect the local electric ﬁeld at the interface and consequently the reduction of 
overall breakdown strength of the polymer nanocomposite. Again, the high conduc-
tivity of the ferroelectric ceramics ﬁller will induce the high leakage current and loss 
of the polymer nanocomposite and hence affect the energy density. So, to avoid such 
problems, they tried to introduce a buffer coating layer of SiO2 over the PZT ceramics. 
The dielectric constant of the polymer nanocomposites increased from 11 of pristine 
polymer to 15.8 at 1 kHz in the addition of 5 vol% of the ﬁller. This core–shell struc-
ture PZT@SiO2 embedded P(VDF-CTFE) nanocomposites possess a high energy 
density of 16.8 Jcm−3 at breakdown strength of 491 MVm−1. Xie et al. [82] studied 
the effect of three different types of ﬁller, i.e., semiconductive (SiO2), conductive 
(Al2O3), and dielectric nanoﬁller (BaTiO3) on dielectric and energy storage proper-
ties of polypropylene polymer matrix experimentally explained based on theoretical 
models and visualized simulation. Jaysundere–Smith, Maxwell–Wagner, and parallel 
models are used to explain the experimental data of the dielectric constant for all 
the composites. They found that the BaTiO3/PP composites are the best option to 
obtain high dielectric constant with low loss among the others by keeping the same 
breakdown strength for all the composites. 
Conductive or Metallic Fillers: 
Conductive ﬁllers include the pure metallic nanoparticles, conducting polymers, and 
carbon-based nanoparticles like Fe2O3 [83], NiO [84], Ni, carbon black, W and 
Ag [85, 86] carbon nanotube [87, 88], graphene, etc., were used for the polymer 
nanocomposites [89–91]. 
The dramatic increase of dielectric constant near the percolation threshold leads 
to the development of conductive ﬁller-based polymer composites. Qi et al. [92] 
explained clearly that the size of the metal ﬁller has a signiﬁcant effect on the proper-
ties of polymer composites. They also mentioned the relation between the percolation 
probability to the size ratio of the ﬁller to composite thickness and proposed that the 
metal ﬁllers in the nanometer range will be the suitable option for polymer compos-
ites for practical applications. They added Ag nanoparticles on the epoxy polymer

112
S. Sahoo et al.
to form the metal-polymer nanocomposite which has the dielectric constant of 300 
with a relatively low loss of 0.05. A highly aligned reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/ 
epoxy polymer nanocomposites exhibit an exceptionally high dielectric constant of 
14,000 with 3 wt% of the ﬁller concentration at1 kHz and explained on the basis of 
Maxwell–Wagner–Sillars polarization [93]. 
Semiconductor Fillers: 
Apart from conducting and dielectric ceramics ﬁllers, semiconducting nanoﬁllers 
are also used to improve the dielectric constant of the polymer matrix and the 
enhanced dielectric constant in these semiconductor polymer nanocomposites is 
mainly observed near the percolation threshold. The pro qualities of semicon-
ducting ﬁllers include the appreciable band gap, low AC conductivity, relatively low 
dielectric constant compatible to the polymer matrix, and the nonlinear electrical 
characteristics. 
The enhanced dielectric, energy storage performance of the semiconductor ﬁller-
based polymer nanocomposites, i.e., fullerene-type tungsten disulﬁde nanoparticle-
PVDF, was recently reported by Guo et al. [94]. They observed the enhancement of 
polar electroactive phases with increase in ﬁller content leading to enhanced dielec-
tric, mechanical, and energy storage properties. The dielectric constant increases 1.5 
to 4 times than the pristine polymer PVDF even in the moderate addition of ﬁller, 
whereas the higher ﬁller concentration exhibits dielectric constant more than 40 times 
with an increase in tang ent delta. The dielectric behavior with the ﬁller content was explained 
with the percolation model and ﬁtted with various model for the comparison as shown 
in Fig. 4.2.
Similarly, Jia et al. enhanced electrical polarization and improved dielectric 
constant of a semiconductor nanostructured ﬁller (both ﬂower and nanosheet) in 
the PVDF matrix [95]. A novel three-dimensional zinc oxide superstructures (ﬂower 
and walnut like) ﬁller was used by Wu et al. [96] to tailor the dielectric constant 
and breakdown strength of the PVDF polymer matrix. The polymer nanocomposites 
signiﬁcantly enhance the dielectric constant to 19.4, 104.9, and 221.1 for commer-
cial ZnO, walnut-like, and ﬂower-like ZnO superstructures at 100 Hz, whereas their 
breakdown strengths are found to be 45, 40, and 42 kV/mm, respectively. Ji et al. 
[97] used nickel hydroxide Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles in three different dimensions, 
i.e., nanosphere (0D), nanoplates (1D), and nanoﬂowers (3D) as ﬁllers in the PVDF 
matrix, and the existence of -OH group will enhance the polar/electroactive β phase 
of PVDF. The -OH group will act as a surface layer above the Ni and do not need 
additional surface modiﬁcation of the conductive ﬁller. The hydroxyl group will 
provide a good interaction between the polymer matrix and ﬁller. The maximum 
energy density of 17.3 J/cm3 at 421 kV/mm and dielectric constant of 16.3 at 100 Hz 
were observed for 5 wt% nanoplates-Ni(OH)2 based composites in comparison 
with other nanoﬁllers having different dimensions. It also suggests the ﬁller dimen-
sion which also affects dielectric and energy storage properties. A semiconductor-
based hybrid ﬁller, i.e., ZnO@MoS2 was used to modify the different properties of 
poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride-chlorotriﬂuoroethylene-double bonds) [98].  The 2 wt%  of  
this hybrid nanoﬁller (4 mol% of MoS2 in ZnO) in the polymer matrix yields the

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
113
Fig. 4.2 Variation of dielectric constant with respect to frequency and ﬁller content of fullerene-type 
tungsten disulﬁde nanoparticle-PVDF nanocomposites. Fitting of experimental data of dielectric 
constant with ﬁller content by various model. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [94]. Copyright 
2020 Elsevier
energy density of 7.2 Jcm−3 at 300 MVm−1which is 70% higher compared to that 
of pristine polymer and possess high energy efﬁciency of 83%. 
Jing et al. [99] prepared a polymer nanocomposite by incorporating a completely 
new type of ﬁller, i.e., a high entropy oxide nanoﬁber (Eu0.2Bi0.2Y0.2La0.2Cr0.2)2O3 
in the P(VDF-HFP)/PMMA polymer matrix. The 0.6 wt% of the ﬁller concentration 
leads to highest breakdown strength of 509.4 kV mm−1 and energy density of 15.13 
Jcm−3. The enhanced breakdown strength in the nanocomposites is explained by 
the several factors such as polymorphic distortion caused by the high entropy in the 
lattice, and the movement of the long polymer was restricted by the pinning effect 
associated with the polymorphic distortion and reduces the loss in strong electric 
ﬁeld and promotes the breakdown strength. The transmission of space charges is 
also blocked by the charge shielding layer between the nanoﬁber and the polymer, 
which again contributes to the enhanced breakdown strength. 
Heterogenous ﬁllers are also used in some literatures where both conductive and 
insulating ﬁllers are used for the polymer nanocomposites. Ji et al. [100] used multi-
walled carbon nanotube (MWCNTs) and barium titanate (BaTiO3) ﬁllers and PVDF 
polymer to prepare multilayered ﬁlms with alternate distribution of layers. They 
also proposed a theoretical calculations/model for dielectric properties of heteroge-
nous ﬁller-based polymer nanocomposites by modifying the classical series model

114
S. Sahoo et al.
by considering the contribution of two additional factors, i.e., ﬁller distribution and 
interfacial polarization. 
4.6 
By Structural Design and Surface Engineering 
Recently, Zeng et al. [101] developed a novel polymer nanocomposite by incorpo-
rating a surface-modiﬁed BaTiO3 nanoparticle with polyimide (PI) polymer shells 
in the polyetherimide (PEI) polymer matrix. The dispersion of core–shell struc-
tured PI@BTO nanoﬁllers yields an improved the energy density to 15.55 Jcm−3 
with charger–discharge efﬁciency (η) of 80% and enhanced breakdown strength 
of 600.7 MVm−1 in the PEI-PI@BTO nanocomposites. Similarly, Hu et al. [102] 
ﬁrst designed a polymer nanocomposite by employing surface-modiﬁed core–shell 
nanoﬁbers and then fabricated sandwiched structures by sandwiching these polymer 
nanocomposites layer in between the outer layer of host polymer matrix. They have 
chosen Ba(Ti0.85Zr0.15)O3 as core and Ba(Ti0.65Zr0.35)O3 as shell nanoﬁbers for the 
core–shell structure, which was further modiﬁed by polydopamine (PDA). Then, 
after modiﬁcation, they have added the surface-modiﬁed core–shell nanoﬁber to 
the PVDF polymer matrix in different ﬁller concentration. Then, they fabricated 
three-layer sandwich structure by considering the polymer nanocomposite as the 
central layer in between the host PVDF outer layer. They observed the enhanced 
dielectric constant, breakdown strength, and energy density in lower ﬁller content 
(2wt% of surface-modiﬁed core–shell structure) of both the single layer and trilayer 
nanocomposites. The energy density of the single and trilayer composites are found 
to be 8.2 and 9.9 Jcm−3, respectively. The energy density and breakdown strength 
of the polymer nanocomposites are tailored by adding different polymer@BaTiO3 
nanoparticle core–shell structure on PVDF HFP matrix in Li et al. [103]. The BaTiO3 
is surface modiﬁed by the polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), polymethylsulfonyl 
ethyl methacrylate (PMSEMA), and polyglycidyl methacrylate (PGMA) polymers 
to prepare the core–shell structure. They studied the polarity of different polymer 
shell on the energy storage performance of the polymer nanocomposite and found the 
enhanced energy density and breakdown strength for the PMMA polymer shell with 
lowest polarity. Pan et al. [104] reported the enhanced dielectric constant of 149.5 at 
1 kHz, high breakdown strength of 250.6 MV m−1with suppressed dielectric loss 0.19 
of PVDF/MoS2-PPy composites. The hybrid MoS2-PPy nanoﬁller was fabricated by 
ﬁrst exfoliating the molybdenum disulﬁde (MoS2) with the cetyltrimethyl ammo-
nium bromide (CTAB) solution and the exfoliated MoS2 again followed by surface 
modiﬁcation with conducting polymer polypyrrole (PPy). Xu et al. [68] recently 
reported a novel design of polymer nanocomposites by using a gradient dielectric 
ﬁller means a double core–shell structure which not only improves the compatibility 
and dispersibility between the ﬁller and polymer matrix but also improves the break-
down strength, nonlinear conductive, and dielectric properties. The double core–shell 
structure ﬁller material constitutes BaTiO3 nanoparticle as the core covered by TiO2 
as the ﬁrst shell layer and then encapsulated by a second layer of polydopamine. Then,

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
115
this double core–shell structure ﬁller was dispersed in the epoxy polymer matrix to 
prepare the polymer nanocomposites. Then, again these polymer nanocomposites 
were exfoliated boron nitride nanosheets with parallel and random alignments. The 
dispersion of this double core–shell structure ﬁller with 10 wt% and the exfolia-
tion of the polymer nanocomposite signiﬁcantly improves the breakdown strength 
of the pure polymer matrix epoxy by 55%, i.e., from 29.4 to 45.7 kVmm−1. The  
nonlinear trend of dielectric and conductivity properties of these nanocomposites 
were explained on the basis of nonlinear effective medium theory (EMT) and the 
hopping transport model, respectively. 
Li et al. [105] developed sandwich-structured ceramic-polymer nanocomposites, 
which constitute BaTiO3 nanoﬁber-(PVDF-HFP) composites as the outer layer and 
MgO nanowires-(PVDF-HFP) composites in the central layer in an objective to 
improve the breakdown strength and high dielectric constant by the outer layer 
and central layer, respectively. They found best energy density of 15.55 Jcm−3 and 
charge–discharge efﬁciency of 68% at Weibull breakdown strength of 416 MVm−1 
for the sandwich structure with 2 wt% MgO in the central layer and 20 wt% BaTiO3 
in the outer layers. Bai et al. [66] prepared a two-layer polymer composite, where the 
bottom layer constitutes the polymer composites of PVDF ﬁlled with boron nitride 
surface insulated 0.5(Ba0.7Ca0.3)TiO3-0.5Ba(Zr0.2Ti0.8)O3 (BCZT) nanoﬁbers and 
the top layer consists of the boron-nitride-ﬁlled PVDF composite. They obtained a 
high breakdown strength and energy density by tailoring the ratios of boron nitrides 
in the top layer and also the amounts of surface-insulated BCZT nanoﬁbers in the 
bottom layer. The PVDF-boron nitrides nanocomposite in the top layer exhibits an 
ultrahigh breakdown strength of 730 MVm−1 for 0.8 wt% of ﬁllers. The double-
layer nanocomposites with the above composite in the top layer and the bottom 
layer with 1.6 wt% of BCZT@boron nitride nanoﬁber was found to be with energy 
density of 24.3 Jcm−3 at 718 MVm−1. Luo et al. [106] designed a unique sand-
wich ﬁlm in which the Ba0.6Sr0.4TiO3 nanoﬁbers network are completely inter-
connected and covered by the PVDF-HFP top and bottom layers. The sandwich 
ﬁlm with 4 vol% of the nanoﬁbers possesses an enhanced energy storage density 
of 9.46 J/cm−3, improved dielectric constant of 24.8 at 1 kHz and higher break-
down strength of 2954 kVcm−1. Here, instead of polymer-based nanocomposites 
in the middle layer, a direct nanoﬁber network was used for the sandwich structure 
to improve the dielectric constant, energy density, and breakdown strength. Zhang 
et al. [67] reported high breakdown strength of 486.05 MVm−1, energy density 
of 8.65 Jcm−3, and a high polarization of 4.48 μCcm−2 for a sandwich structure of 
PMMA/PVDF blended layer (for 30 mass% of PMMA) covered by the outer layer of 
polyetherimide. The designing of different layered structures by ordering the polymer 
nanocomposites layer (called hard layer) and pure polymer layer (soft layer) in ﬁve 
different arrangements and the inﬂuence of interfaces between the adjacent layers 
on different parameters like breakdown strength and energy density were studied 
by Wang et al. [107]. The BaTiO3/poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) nanocomposites repre-
sent the hard layer and denoted by B, and the pure PVDF layer represents the soft 
layer denoted by P. They observed the layer structure with polymer nanocomposites 
as the outer layer, and pure polymer in the middle layer (i.e., B-P-B ﬁlm) exhibits

116
S. Sahoo et al.
Fig. 4.3 Breakdown 
strengths of 
sandwich-structured ﬁlms 
with different geometries. 
Reprinted with permission 
from Ref. [106]. Copyright 
2021 Elsevier 
the highest breakdown strength in comparison with others as shown in Fig. 4.3. 
They also prepared the single-layer polymer nanocomposites of PVDF and BaTiO3 
nanoparticles and compared the energy density and breakdown strength with the 
polymer nanocomposites. They found that both the energy density (7.02 Jcm−3) and 
breakdown strength (390 kVmm−1) of layered structure are higher than those of 
single-layer nanocomposites. 
4.7 
Conclusion and Perspectives 
In comparison with the recent energy storage systems such as supercapacitors, 
batteries, and fuel cells, dielectric capacitors attracted much attention of contem-
porary materials researcher due to its unique qualities such as high-power density, 
fast cycling rate, and long lifespan. But the application potentiality of conventional 
dielectric capacitors (either ceramics or polymer) is restricted by alternate pro qual-
ities of pure polymer and ceramics, i.e., pure polymer’s application potentiality is 
limited due to its low permittivity and energy density, whereas the ceramics lack 
in ﬂexibility and breakdown strength. These shortcomings of conventional dielec-
tric capacitors are resolved by fabrication of polymer-ceramics composites through 
inclusion of ceramics ﬁller in the polymer matrix. Again, for further improvement 
in the energy storage properties with high energy density, polymer nanocomposites 
were developed which incorporates the ﬁllers in nanoform (0D, 1D, 2D nanoﬁllers). 
The main focus of the researchers in recent trend to design and develop efﬁcient 
energy storage system is to optimize all the parameters of dielectric to attain high 
energy density and efﬁciency in polymer nanocomposites. The dielectric proper-
ties of the polymer nanocomposites strongly depend on the physical, chemical, and 
mechanical properties of both the ﬁllers and polymer matrix. So, selection of both

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
117
the ﬁller and polymer matrix is the most signiﬁcant step to expect the desired param-
eters in the polymer nanocomposites. To obtain the high dielectric permittivity of the 
polymer nanocomposites, two different approaches have been made, i.e., addition 
of either (1) ceramics ﬁller with high dielectric permittivity or (2) conductive ﬁller 
associated with the percolation thresholds. But again, the addition of ceramics ﬁller 
in the polymer matrix affects/deteriorates the breakdown strength of the polymer 
nanocomposites due to huge difference in their permittivity. So, to maintain both the 
breakdown strength and dielectric permittivity in polymer nanocomposites, surface 
modiﬁcation of ceramics ﬁller was carried out. Again, to reduce the difference of 
dielectric permittivity of polymer matrix and ﬁller, conductive or semiconducting 
ﬁller having comparatively lower permittivity was added to resolve the above issues. 
Both nanoparticles and nanoﬁbers are added as ﬁllers in the polymer matrix to prepare 
ternary composites with improved properties in comparison with binary composites. 
Novel structural design such as multilayered and core–shell structure has been devel-
oped to tailor the properties by interface minimization. Nanoﬁllers (speciﬁcally 1D 
or 2D) with speciﬁc orientation or alignment found to be the best core ﬁller in core– 
shell structured polymer nanocomposites to obtain enhanced dielectric constant. 
The difference in permittivity of polymer matrix and ﬁller can be balanced by core– 
shell conﬁguration and results a gradient dielectric permittivity. The development of 
different layered and laminated architecture also enables another way to improve in 
breakdown strength and energy density of the polymer nanocomposites. 
Though there are many major breakthroughs in the design and development of 
polymer nanocomposites and tailoring their properties by novel approaches and 
architecture, still there are some unresolved quests to be explored in the future 
generation such as (1) the unsolved puzzle for simultaneous improvement break-
down strength and dielectric permittivity, (2) more attention needed to reduce the 
dielectric loss to improve the efﬁciency of energy storage, (3) new attempts and 
extensive analysis needed to alleviate the interfacial polarization, and (4) signiﬁcant 
effort to design novel engineered architecture for effective energy storage systems. 
Acknowledgements This research was funded by Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the 
Russian Federation: State task in the ﬁeld of scientiﬁc activity, scientiﬁc project No. 0852-2020-0032 
(BAZ0110/20-3-07IF). 
References 
1. Ghosh SK, Mandal D (2017) Bio-assembled, piezoelectric prawn shell made self-powered 
wearable sensor for noninvasive physiological signal monitoring. Appl Phys Lett 110:123701 
2. Rahman W, Ghosh SK, Middya TR, Mandal D (2017) Highly durable piezo-electric energy 
harvester by a super toughened and ﬂexible nanocomposite: effect of laponite nano-clay in 
poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride). Mater. Res. Express 4:095305

118
S. Sahoo et al.
3. Karan SK, Maiti S, Agrawal AK, Das AK, Maitra A, Paria S, Bera A, Bera R, Halder L, 
Mishra AK, Kim JK, Khatua BB (2019) Designing high energy conversion efﬁcient bio-
inspired vitamin assisted single-structured based self-powered piezoelectric/wind/acoustic 
multienergy harvester with remarkable power density. Nano Energy 59:169–183 
4. Ding R, Zhange X, Chen G, Wang H, Kishor R, Xiao J, Gao F, Zeng K, Chen X, Sun XW, Zheng 
Y (2017) High-performance piezoelectric nanogenerators composed of formamidinium lead 
halide perovskite nanoparticles and poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride). Nano Energy 37:126–135 
5. Ryu H, Yoon HJ, Kim SW (2019) Hybrid energy harvesters: toward sustainable energy 
harvesting. Adv Mater 1:1802898 
6. Vatansever D, Hadimani RL, Shah T, Siores E (2011) An investigation of energy harvesting 
from renewable sources with PVDF and PZT. Smart Mater Struct 20:055019 
7. Karan SK, Maiti S, Agrawal DAK, Maitra A, Paria S, Bera A, Bera R, Halder L, 
Mishra AK, Kim JK, Khatua BB (2019) Designing high energy conversion efﬁcient bio-
inspired vitamin assisted single-structured based self-powered piezoelectric/wind/acoustic 
multienergy harvester with remarkable power density. Nano Energy 59:169–183 
8. Liang Q, Yan X, Gu Y, Zhang K, Liang M, Lu S, Zheng X, Zhang Y (2015) Highly transparent 
triboelectric nanogenerator for harvesting water-related energy reinforced by antireﬂection 
coating. Sci Rep 5:1–7 
9. Alam MM, Sultana A, Mandal D (2018) Biomechanical and acoustic energy harvesting from 
TiO2 nanoparticle modulated PVDF nanoﬁber made high performance nanogenerator. ACS 
Appl Energy Mater 1:3103–3112 
10. Yang Z, Zhang J, Kintner-Meyer MCW, Lu X, Choi D, Lemmon JP, Liu J (2011) 
Electrochemical energy storage for green grid. Chem Rev 111:3577–3613 
11. Poullikkas A (2013) A comparative overview of large-scale battery systems for electricity 
storage. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 27:778–788 
12. Luo X, Wang J, Dooner M, Clarke J (2015) Overview of current development in electrical 
energy storage technologies and the application potential in power system operation. Appl 
Energy 137:511–536 
13. Ibrahim H, Ilinca A, Perron J (2008) Energy storage systems—characteristics and compar-
isons. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 12:1221–1250 
14. Simon P, Gogotsi Y, Dunn B (2014) Where do batteries end and supercapacitors begin? 
Science 343:1210–1211 
15. Yang M, Li Q, Zhang X, Bilotti E, Zhang C, Xu C, Gan S, Dang ZM (2022) Surface engineering 
of 2D dielectric polymer ﬁlms for scalable production of high-energy-density ﬁlms. Prog 
Mater Sci 128:100968 
16. Simon P, Gogotsi Y (2008) Materials for electrochemical capacitors. Nat Mater 7:845–854 
17. Sun Z, Ma C, Wang X, Liu M, Lu L, Wu M, Lou X, Wang H, Jia C (2017) Large energy 
density, excellent thermal stability, and high cycling endurance of lead-free BaZr0.2Ti0.8O3 
ﬁlm capacitors. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 9:17096–17101 
18. Zhou M, Liang R, Zhou Z, Dong X (2018) Novel BaTiO3-based lead-free ceramic capacitors 
featuring high energy storage density, high power density, and excellent stability. J Mater 
Chem C6:8528–8537 
19. Hu J, Zhang S, Tang B (2021) Rational design of nanomaterials for high energy density 
dielectric capacitors via electrospinning. Energy Storage Mater 37:530–555 
20. Cheng R, Wang Y, Men R, Lei Z, Song J, Li Y, Guo M (2022) High-energy-density polymer 
dielectrics via compositional and structural tailoring for electrical energy storage. iScience25, 
104837 
21. Gao F, Zhang K, Guo Y, Xu J, Szafran M (2021) (Ba, Sr)TiO3/polymer dielectric composites– 
progress and perspective. Prog Mater Sci 121:100813 
22. Huang X, Sun B, Zhu Y, Li S, Jiang P (2019) High-k polymer nanocomposites with 1D ﬁller 
for dielectric and energy storage applications. Prog Mater Sci 100:187–225 
23. Singh M, ApataI E, Samant S, Wu W, Tawade BV, Pradhan N, Raghavan D, Karima A (2022) 
Nanoscale strategies to enhance the energy storage capacity of polymeric dielectric capacitors: 
review of recent advances. Poly Rev 62:211–260

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
119
24. Zhang L, Liu Z, Lu X, Yang G, Zhang X, Cheng ZY (2016) Nano-clip based composites with 
a low percolation threshold and high dielectric constant. Nano Energy 26:550–557 
25. Wanga H, Xie H, Wang S, Gao Z, Li C, Hu G, Xiong C (2018) Enhanced dielectric property and 
energy storage density of PVDF-HFP based dielectric composites by incorporation of silver 
nanoparticles-decorated exfoliated montmorillonite nanoplatelets. Compos A 108:62–68 
26. Zh J-W, Zheng M-S, Fan B-H, Dang Z-M (2021) Polymer-based dielectrics with high 
permittivity for electric energy storage: a review. Nano Energy 89:106438 
27. Sun L, Shi Z, Wang H, Zhang K, Dastan D, Sun K, Fan R (2020) Ultrahigh discharge efﬁciency 
and improved energy density in rationally designed bilayer polyetherimide-BaTiO3 /P(VDF-
HFP) composites. J Mater Chem A 8:5750–5757 
28. Wang Y, Yao MG, Ma R, Yuan QB, Yang DS, Cui B, Ma CR, Liu M, Hu DW (2020) Design 
strategy of barium titanate/polyvinylidene ﬂuoride-based nanocomposite ﬁlms for high energy 
storage. J Mater Chem A 8:884–917 
29. Bouharras FE, Raihane M, Ameduri B (2020) Recent progress on core-shell structured 
BaTiO3@polymer/ﬂuorinated polymers nanocomposites for high energy storage: synthesis, 
dielectric properties and applications. Prog Mater Sci 113:100670 
30. Feng Y, Zhou YH, Zhang TD, Zhang CH, Zhang YQ, Zhang Y, Chen QG, Chi QG (2020) 
Ultrahigh discharge efﬁciency and excellent energy density in oriented core-shell nanoﬁber-
polyetherimide composites. Energy Storage Mater 25:180–192 
31. Guo MF, Jiang JY, Shen ZH, Lin YH, Nan CW, Shen Y (2019) High-energy-density ferro-
electric polymer nanocomposites for capacitive energy storage: enhanced breakdown strength 
and improved discharge efﬁciency. Mater Today 29:49–67 
32. Marwat MA, Xie B, Zhu YW, Fan PY, Ma WG, Liu HM, Ashtar M, Xiao JZ, Salamon D, 
Samart C, Zhang HB (2019) Largely enhanced discharge energy density in linear polymer 
nanocomposites by designing a sandwich structure. Compos Part A: Appl S 121:115–122 
33. Lu X, Zou XW, Shen JL, Zhang L, Jin L, Cheng ZY (2020) High energy density with ultrahigh 
discharging efﬁciency obtained in ceramic-polymer nanocomposites using a non-ferroelectric 
polar polymer as matrix. Nano Energy 70:104551 
34. Zhou Y, Wang Q (2020) Advanced polymer dielectrics for high temperature capacitive energy 
storage. J Appl Phys 127:240902 
35. Cheng S, Zhou Y, Hu J, He J, Li Q (2020) Polyimide ﬁlms coated by magnetron sputtered 
boron nitride for high-temperature capacitor dielectrics. IEEE T Dielect El In 27:498–503 
36. Li Q, Han K, Gadinski MR, Zhang G, Wang Q (2014) High energy and power density 
capacitors from solution-processed ternary ferroelectric polymer nanocomposites. Adv Mater 
26:6244–6249 
37. Tang H, Sodano HA (2013) Ultra high energy density nanocomposite capacitors with fast 
discharge using Ba0.2Sr0.8TiO3 nanowires. Nano Lett 13:1373–1379 
38. Huang X, Jiang P (2015) Core-shell structured high-k polymer nanocomposites for energy 
storage and dielectric applications. Adv Mater 27:546–554 
39. Hu P, Shen Y, Guan YH, Zhang XH, Lin YH, Zhang QM, Nan CW (2014) Topological-
structure modulated polymer nanocomposites exhibiting highly enhanced dielectric strength 
energy density. Adv Funct Mater 24:3172–3178 
40. Zhang G, Li Q, Allahyarov E, Li Y, Zhu L (2021) Challenges and opportunities of polymer 
nanodielectrics for capacitive energy storage. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 13:37939–37960 
41. JiangY ZhouM, ShenZ ZhangX, PanH LinYH (2021) Ferroelectric polymers and their 
nanocomposites for dielectric energy storage applications. APL Mater 9:020905 
42. Shanmugasundram HPPV, Jayamani E, Soon KH (2022) A comprehensive review on dielectric 
composites: classiﬁcation of dielectric composites. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 157:112075 
43. StarkKH GartonCG (1955) Electric strength of irradiated polythene. Nature 176:1225–2126 
44. Hu J, Zhang S, Tang B (2021) 2D ﬁller-reinforced polymer nanocomposite dielectrics for 
high-k dielectric and energy storage applications. Energy Storage Mater 34:260–281 
45. Xiong X, Zhang Q, Zhang Z, Yang H, Tong J, Wen J (2021) Superior energy storage perfor-
mance of PVDF-based composites induced by a novel nanotube structural BST@SiO2 ﬁller. 
Composites: Part A 145:106375

120
S. Sahoo et al.
46. Jian G, Jiao Y, Meng Q, Wei Z, Zhang J, Yan C, Moon K, Wong C (2020) Enhanced dielectric 
constant and energy density in a BaTiO3/polymer-matrix composite sponge. Commun Mater 
1:1–12 
47. Ren L, Yang L, Zhang S, Li H, Zhou Y, Ai D, Xie Z, Zhao X, Peng Z, Liao R, Wang Q (2021) 
Largely enhanced dielectric properties of polymer composites with HfO2 nanoparticles for 
high-temperature ﬁlm capacitors. Compos Sci Technol 201:108528 
48. Dang Z, Yuan J, Zha J, Zhou T, Li S, Hu G (2012) Fundamentals, processes and applications 
of high-permittivity polymer–matrix composites. Prog Mater Sci 57:660–723 
49. Yang W, Yu S, Sun R, Du R (2011) Nano- and microsize effect of CCTO ﬁllers on the dielectric 
behavior of CCTO/PVDF composites. Acta Mat 59:5593–5602 
50. Nelsont SO, You T-S (1990) Relationships between microwave permittivities of solid and 
pulverized Plastics. J Phys D: Appl Phys 23:346 
51. Thomas S, Deepu VN, Mohanan P, Sebastian MT (2008) Effect of ﬁller content on the 
dielectric properties of PTFE/ZnAl2O4–TiO2 composites. J Am Ceram Soc 91:1971–1975 
52. Dash S, Choudhary RNP, Kumar A, Goswami MN (2019) Enhanced dielectric properties and 
theoretical modeling of PVDF–ceramic composites. J Mater Sci Mater Electron 30:19309– 
19318 
53. Hossain ME, Liu SY, O’Brien S, Li J (2014) Modeling of high-k dielectric nanocomposites. 
Acta Mech 225:1197–1209 
54. Zhang C, Chi Q, Dong J, Cui Y, Wang X, Liu L, Lei Q (2016) Enhanced dielectric properties 
of poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) composites ﬁlled with nano iron oxide-deposited barium titanate 
hybrid particles. Sci Rep 6:1–9 
55. Yamada T, Ueda T, Kitayama T (1982) Piezoelectricity of a high-content lead zirconate titanate 
polymer composite. J Appl Phys 53:4328–4332 
56. Yu K, Niu Y, Zhou Y, Bai Y, Wang H (2013) Nanocomposites of surface-modiﬁed BaTiO3 
nanoparticles ﬁlled ferroelectric polymer with enhanced energy density. J Am Ceram Soc 
96:2519–2524 
57. JayasundereN SV (1993) Dielectric constant for binary piezoelectric 0–3 composites. J Appl 
Phys 73:2462–2466 
58. Hu H, Zhang F, Luo S, Chang W, Yue J, Wang CH (2020) Recent advances in rational design 
of polymer nanocomposite dielectrics for energy storage. Nano Energy 74:104844 
59. Chen C, Xie Y, Liu J, Li J, Wei X, Zhang Z (2020) Enhanced energy storage capability 
of P(VDF-HFP) nanodielectrics by HfO2 passivation layer: preparation, performance and 
simulation. Compos Sci Technol 188:107968 
60. Tabhane GH, Giripunje SM, Kondawar SB (2021) Fabrication and dielectric performance 
of RGO-PANI reinforced PVDF/BaTiO3 composite for energy harvesting. Synth Met 
279:116845 
61. Honga W, Pitike KC (2015) Modeling breakdown-resistant composite dielectrics. Procedia 
IUTAM 12:73–82 
62. Sen ZH, Wang JJ, Lin Y, Nan CW, Chen LQ, Shen Y (2017) High-throughput phase-ﬁeld 
design of high-energy-density polymer nanocomposites. Adv Mater 30:1704380 
63. Niemeyer LP, Wiesmann HJ (1984) Fractal dimension of dielectric breakdown. Phys Rev Lett 
52:1033 
64. Yue D, Feng Y, Liu XX, Yin J-H, Zhang W-C, Guo H, Su B, Lei Q-Q (2022) Predic-
tion of energy storage performance in polymer composites using high-throughput stochastic 
breakdown simulation and machine learning. Adv Sci 9:2105773 
65. Wanga Z, Nelson JK, Hillborg H, Zhao S, Schadler LS (2013) Dielectric constant and break-
down strength of polymer composites with high aspect ratio ﬁllers studied by ﬁnite element 
models. Compos Sci Technol 76:29–36 
66. BaiH GeG, HeX ShenB, ZhaiJ PanH (2020) Ultrahigh breakdown strength and energy density 
of polymer nanocomposite containing surface insulated BCZT@BN nanoﬁbers. Compos Sci 
Technol 195:108209 
67. Zhang T, Sun Q, Kang F, Wang Z, Xue R, Wang J, Zhang L (2022) Sandwich-structured 
polymer dielectric composite ﬁlms for improving breakdown strength and energy density at 
high temperature. Compos Sci Technol 227:109596

4
Role and Prospects of Polymer-Based Nanomaterials in the Dielectric …
121
68. Xu H, Xie C, Gou B, Wang R, Zhou J, Li L (2022) Core-double-shell structured 
BT@TiO2@PDA and oriented BNNSs doped epoxy nanocomposites with ﬁeld-dependent 
nonlinear electrical properties and enhancing breakdown strength. Compos Sci Technol 
230:109777 
69. Huang X, Sun B, Zhua Y, Lib S, Jiang P (2019) High-k polymer nanocomposites with 1D 
ﬁller for dielectric and energy storage applications. Prog Mate Sci 100:187–225 
70. Rogti F, Ferhat M (2014) Maxwell Wagner polarization and interfacial charge at the 
multilayers of thermoplastic polymers. J Electrostat 72:91–97 
71. Danikas MG (2010) On two nanocomposite models: differences, similarities and interpre-
tational possibilities regarding Tsagaropoulos’ model and Tanaka’s model. J Electr Eng 
61:241 
72. Lewis TJ (2005) Interfaces: nanometric dielectrics. J Phys D: Appl Phys 38:202 
73. Prateek TVK, Gupta RK (2016) Recent progress on ferroelectric polymer-based nanocom-
posites for high energy density capacitors: synthesis, dielectric properties, and future aspects. 
Chem Rev 116:4260–4317 
74. Tiwari V, Srivastava G (2015) Structural, dielectric and piezoelectric properties of 0–3 PZT/ 
PVDF composites. Ceram Int 41:8008–8013 
75. Thomas P, Varughese KT, Dwarakanath K, Varma KBR (2010) Dielectric properties of 
Poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride)/CaCu3Ti4O12 composites. Compos Sci Technol 70:539–545 
76. Fu J, Hou Y, Zheng M, Wei Q, Zhu M, Yan H (2015) Improving dielectric properties of 
PVDF composites by employing surface modiﬁed strong polarized BaTiO3 particles derived 
by molten salt method. Appl Mater Interfaces 44:24480–24491 
77. Kum-onsa P, Thongbai P (2020) Improved dielectric properties of poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) 
composites incorporating Na1/2Y1/2Cu3Ti4O12 particles. Mater Today Commun 25:101654 
78. Santos IA, Rosso JM, Cotica LF, Bonadio TGM, Freitas VF, Guo R, Bhalla AS 
(2016) Dielectric and structural features of the environmentally friendly leadfree PVDF/ 
Ba0.3Na0.7Ti0.3Nb0.7O3 0–3 composite. Curr Appl Phys 16:1468–1472 
79. Behera C, Choudhary RNP, Das PR (2017) Development of multiferroic polymer nanocom-
posite from PVDF and (Bi0.5Ba0.25Sr0.25)(Fe0.5Ti0.5)O3. J Mater Sci: Mater Electron 
28:2586–2597 
80. Ji SH, Cho JH, Jeong YH, Paik JH, Yun JD, Yun JS (2016) Flexible lead-free piezoelectric 
nanoﬁber composites based on BNT-ST and PVDF for frequency sensor applications. Sensors 
and Actuators A 247:316–322 
81. Xie B, Wang T, Cai J, Zheng Q, Liu Z, Guo K, Mao P, Zhang H, Jiang S (2022) High 
energy density of ferroelectric polymer nanocomposites utilizing PZT@SiO2nanocubes with 
morphotropic phase boundary. J Chem Eng 434:134659 
82. Xie Z, Liu D, Xiao Y, Wang K, Zhang Q, Wu K, Fu Q (2022) The effect of ﬁller permittivity 
on the dielectric properties of polymer-based composites. Compos Sci Technol 222:109342 
83. Gonçalves R, Martins PM, Caparrós C, Martins P, Benelmekki M, Botelho G, Lanceros-
Méndez S, Lasheras A, Gutierrez J, Barandiarán JM (2013) Nucleation of the electroactive 
β-phase, dielectric and magnetic response of poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) composites with Fe2O3 
nanoparticles. J Non-Cryst Solids 361:93–99 
84. Amoresi RAC, Felix AA, Botero ER, Domingues NLC, Falcão EA, Zaghet MA, Rinaldi AW 
(2015) Crystallinity, morphology and high dielectric permittivity of NiOnanosheets ﬁlling 
Poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride). Ceram Int 41:14733–14739 
85. XuHP DangZM (2007) Electrical property and microstructure analysis of poly(vinylidene 
ﬂuoride)-based composites with different conducting ﬁllers. Chem Phy Lett 438:196–202 
86. Xu HP, XieHQ, Yang DD, Wu YH, Wang JR (2011) Novel dielectric behaviors in PVDF-based 
semiconductor composites. J Appl Polym Sci 122:3466–3473 
87. Dang ZM, Wang L, Yin Y, Zhang Q, Lei QQ (2007) Giant dielectric permittivities in func-
tionalized carbon-nanotube/electroactive-polymer nanocomposites. Adv Mater 19:852–857 
88. Wang L, Dang ZM (2005) Carbon nanotube composites with high dielectric constant at low 
percolation threshold. Appl Phys Lett 87:042903

122
S. Sahoo et al.
89. Youseﬁ LX, Zheng Q, Shen X, Pothnis JR, Jia J, Zussman E, Kim JK (2013) Simultaneous 
in situ reduction, self-alignment and covalent bonding in graphene oxide/epoxy composites 
Nariman. Carbon 59:406–417 
90. Stankovich S, Dikin DA, Dommett GHB, Kohlhaas KM, Zimney EJ, Stach EA, Piner RD, 
Nguyen ST, Ruoff RS (2006) Graphene-based composite materials. Nature 442:282–286 
91. Youseﬁ N, Gudarzi MM, Zheng Q, Aboutalebi SH, Sharif F, Kim JK (2012) Self-alignment 
and high electrical conductivity of ultralarge graphene oxide–polyurethane nanocomposites. 
J Mater Chem 22:12709–12717 
92. QiL LI, ChenS SD, ExarhosG J (2005) High-dielectric-constant silver-epoxy composites as 
embedded dielectrics. Adv Mat 17:1777–1781 
93. Youseﬁ N, Sun X, Lin X, Shen X, Jia J, Zhang B, Tang B, Chan M, Kim JK (2014) 
Highly aligned graphene/polymer nanocomposites with excellent dielectric properties for 
high-performance electromagnetic interference shielding. Adv Mater 26:5480–5487 
94. Guo D, Cai K, Deng P, Si G, Sun L, Chen F, Ning H, Jin L, Ma J (2020) Struc-
ture tailorable triple-phase and pure double-polar-phase ﬂexible IF-WS2@poly(vinylidene 
ﬂuoride) nanocomposites with enhanced electrical and mechanical properties. J Mater 
6:563–572 
95. Jia Q, Huang X, Wang G, Diao J, Jiang P (2016) MoS2 nanosheet superstructures based 
polymer composites for high-dielectric and electrical energy storage applications. J Phys 
Chem C 120:10206–10214 
96. Wu W, Huang X, Li S, Jiang P, Toshikatsu T (2012) Novel three-dimensional zinc oxide 
superstructures for high dielectric constant polymer composites capable of withstanding high 
electric ﬁeld. J Phys Chem C 116:24887–24895 
97. Ji W, Deng H, Sun C, Fu Q (2019) Nickel hydroxide as novel ﬁller for high energy density 
dielectric polymer composites. Compos Sci Technol 172:117–124 
98. Wen F, Zhu C, Li L, Zhou B, Zhang L, Han C, Li W, Yue Z, Wu W, Wang G, Zhang S 
(2022) Enhanced energy storage performance of polymer nanocomposites using hybrid 2D 
ZnO@MoS2 semiconductive nano-ﬁllers. J Chem Eng 430:132676 
99. Jing L, Li W, Gao C, Li M, Fei W (2022) Enabling high energy storage performance in 
PVDF-based nanocomposites ﬁlled with high-entropy oxide nanoﬁber. Compos Sci Technol 
230:109783 
100. Ji W, Deng H, Fu Q (2017) Heterogeneous ﬁller distribution in polymeric capacitor ﬁlms: an 
efﬁcient route to improve their dielectric properties. Compos Sci Technol 151:131–138 
101. Zeng J, Yan J, Li BW, Zhang X (2022) Improved breakdown strength and energy storage 
performances of PEI-based nanocomposite with core-shell structured PI@BaTiO3 nanoﬁllers. 
Ceram Int 48:20526 
102. Hu J, Liu Y, Zhang S, Tang B (2022) Novel designed core–shell nanoﬁbers constituted by 
single element-doped BaTiO3 for high-energy–density polymer nanocomposites. J Chem Eng 
428:131046 
103. Li H, Wang L, Zhu Y, Jiang P, Huang X (2021) Tailoring the polarity of polymer shell on 
BaTiO3 nanoparticle surface for improved energy storage performance of dielectric polymer 
nanocomposites. Chin Chem Lett 32:2229–2232 
104. Pan X, Wang M, Qi X, Zhang N, Huang T, Yang J, Wang Y (2020) Fabrication of sandwich-
structured PPy/MoS2/PPynanosheets for polymer composites with high dielectric constant, 
low loss and high breakdown strength. Compos A 137:106032 
105. Li Z, Liu F, Li H, Ren L, Dong L, Xiong C, Wang Q (2019) Largely enhanced energy storage 
performance of sandwich-structured polymer nanocomposites with synergistic inorganic 
nanowires. Ceram Int 45:8216–8221 
106. Luo W, Xu L, Zhang G, Zhou L, Li H (2021) Sandwich-structured polymer nanocomposites 
with Ba0·6Sr0·4TiO3 nanoﬁbers networks as mediate layer inducing enhanced energy storage 
density. Compos Sci Technol 204:108628 
107. Wang Y, Hou Y, Deng Y (2017) Effects of interfaces between adjacent layers on breakdown 
strength and energy density in sandwich-structured polymer composites. Compos Sci Technol 
145:71–77

Chapter 5 
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric 
Composites and Their Applications 
Joshi Harsh Nitinkumar, Navyasree Reghu, P. K. Akhilesh, Alexandru Vlad, 
Meera Balachandran, and Prasanth Raghavan 
Abstract With the tremendous growth in electrical gadgets and electriﬁcation in 
recent years, there is an urgent need to utilise green/renewable energy and improve 
energy efﬁciency, energy conversion systems, and energy storage density. In the 
future, development in electrical power technologies will be aligned in the direc-
tion of higher power and frequency, wider bandwidth, faster speed, smaller form 
factor, higher temperature rating, lower cost, greater ﬂexibility, and scalability. In 
this context, polymer nanocomposite dielectrics, also known as nanodielectrics, have 
garnered considerable scientiﬁc interest. Polymer nanodielectric combines the advan-
tages of high dielectric constant nanoﬁllers with high dielectric breakdown strength 
polymer matrix and offers the ﬂexibility of engineering materials and structures to 
obtain desired and unique properties. This chapter discusses current developments 
in nanodielectric composites for energy storage applications with an emphasis on 
fundamental material concerns for two different types of polymer nanodielectrics: 
composites of polymer and ceramic and conductive nanoparticles. The role of tune-
able nonlinear nanodielectrics in energy storage and harvesting is also discussed. 
The chapter highlights the applications, opportunities, and challenges associated 
with future developments in nanodielectrics.
J. H. Nitinkumar · N. Reghu · M. Balachandran envelope symbol
Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Amrita School of Engineering, 
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore 641112, India 
e-mail: b_meera@cb.amrita.edu 
Centre of Excellence in Advanced Materials and Green Technologies (CoE-AMGT), Amrita 
School of Engineering, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore 641112, India 
P. K. Akhilesh · A. Vlad 
Institute of Condensed Matter and Nanosciences, Universitécatholique de Louvain, 1348 
Ottignies-Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium 
P. Raghavan 
Materials Science and NanoEngineering Lab (MSNE-Lab), Department of Polymer Science and 
Rubber Technology, Cochin University of Science and Technology (CUSAT), Cochin 682022, 
India 
Department of Materials Engineering and Convergence Technology, Gyeongsang National 
University, 501 Jinju-Daero, Jinju 52828, Republic of Korea 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_5 
123

124
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
Keywords Polymer nanodielectrics · Dielectric properties · Ceramic 
nanoparticles · Conducting nanoparticles · Applications 
5.1 
Polymer Nanodielectrics: An Introduction 
Polymer nanodielectric composites comprise a polymer matrix and a nanodimen-
sional ﬁller that has at least one dimension in the range of less than 100 nm. 
Polymer nanodielectrics combine the high breakdown strength and low loss of the 
polymer matrix with favourable dielectric properties like high dielectric constant of 
the nanoﬁllers [1]. Due to their nanometric size and high speciﬁc surface area of 
nanoparticles that create large interfacial interactions, they exhibit exceptional prop-
erties compared to bulk materials [2]. A schematic representation of the polymer 
nanodielectric composite and microstructural appearance—correlation between a 
number of particles and size of particles and the nanoparticle–polymer interface is 
provided in Fig. 5.1. There are opportunities to tailor nanodielectrics to have a unique 
combination of properties by careful selection of materials along with engineering 
the dispersion and interface between the constituent materials. The interfacial region 
becomes signiﬁcant as particle size reduces and constitutes a considerable fraction 
of the polymer dielectric, even at low concentration of the nanoparticle. Hence, it 
is important to design and optimise the dispersion of nanoparticle in the polymer 
matrix and the interfacial region to achieve desirable properties. There are various 
methods reported to prepare nanodielectrics. The popular preparation methods of 
nanodielectrics composites are depicted below in Fig. 5.2a.
The intrinsic interfacial region can be engineered by changes in matrix structure, 
mobility, and crosslinking of polymer chains while the extrinsic interfacial regions 
can be modiﬁed by ligands on nanoparticle surfaces resulting from functionalization 
[3]. Due to these features, nanodielectrics have immense potential in various ﬁelds 
ranging from high-voltage insulation to energy storage devices and sensors. 
There are several properties of interest for polymer dielectrics viz. dielectric 
permittivity, dielectric breakdown strength, dielectric constant, energy density, 
partial discharge resistance, treeing lifetime, space charge density, tracking resis-
tance, and conductivity [4, 5]. The major factors affecting the performance of nanodi-
electrics are presented in Fig. 5.2b. Over the past three decades, studies have been 
conducted on nanodielectrics with different polymers as matrices. They include 
epoxy resins, polyoleﬁns, polyesters, polyimides, polyimide-amides, polyester-
imide, and elastomers. Several nanoparticles are used in polymer nanodielectrics like 
layered silicates, silicon dioxide, titanium dioxide, aluminium oxide, silicon carbide, 
barium titanate, magnesium dioxide, zinc oxide, zirconium dioxide, manganese 
sulphoselenide, etc. [4–10]. The changes in the properties of nanodielectrics upon 
incorporation of nanoﬁllers vary depending on the nanoﬁller properties, dispersion, 
and polymer–ﬁller interaction. In general, it has been observed that the breakdown 
strength, tracking resistance, partial discharge resistance, tree inception, and growth 
time are enhanced while space charge accumulation is decreased. However, the effect

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
125
Fig. 5.1 a Schematic representation of polymer nanodielectric composite, b microstructural 
appearance—correlation between number of particles and size of particles and the nanoparticle— 
polymer interface
on properties like permittivity, dielectric loss, and DC conductivity are complicated 
and may increase or decrease depending on several factors [5]. This chapter examines 
the current developments in nanodielectric composites for energy storage applica-
tions with an emphasis on fundamental material concerns for two different types 
of polymer nanodielectrics: composites of polymer and ceramic and conductive

126
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
Fig. 5.2 a Various fabrication methods for synthesising nanodielectrics and b the major factors 
affecting the performance of nanodielectrics
nanoparticles. The applications, opportunities, and challenges associated with the 
future developments in nanodielectrics are also discussed.

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
127
5.2 
Polymer Nanodielectrics Based on Ceramic 
Nanoparticles 
A synergy between high breakdown strength of polymers and high permittivity of 
ceramic materials can be achieved by choosing speciﬁc ceramic materials having 
architecture surface morphology and particle size to be incorporated into the polymer 
matrix. Sintered bulk ceramics like ferroelectric BaTiO3 possess relative permittivity 
(εr) higher than 1000 in value. By reducing the internal strain energy and electrostatic 
energy of jammed crystalline grains, bulk BaTiO3 with polygrain has been shown 
to have ferroelectric domains of 180° orientation and domains of 90° for tetragonal 
phase [11]. 
In a study by Paniagua et al., phosphonic acid was adopted as a surface initiator for 
the formation of polystyrene and polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) over the barium 
titanate (BTO) nanoparticles via atom transfer radical polymerization. This method 
of preparation resulted in BaTiO3 as a core embedded in the grafted polymer as 
shown in Fig. 5.3a. The surface morphology of the resulting polymer nanodielec-
tric composites is displayed in Fig. 5.3b–e. The performance evaluation at a ﬁeld 
strength of ∼220 V/μm showed that the one-component system, (PMMA-grafted-
BTO) exhibited a maximum extractable energy density (2 J/cm3), which was two 
times higher than that of the composite without covalent attachment or the pristine 
polymer. Due to the high permittivity, high breakdown strength, mechanical ﬂexi-
bility of the nanoparticles, and ease of processability due to the organic polymer, 
such materials have potential applications in hybrid capacitors [12].
The ability of a substance to store electrical energy in an electrical ﬁeld is measured 
by a number called the dielectric constant, which is the relative permittivity of a 
dielectric material. Due to the absence of grain boundaries in ceramics, it is possible to 
enhance the dielectric characteristics of polymers by using carefully chosen nanoce-
ramic ﬁllers. The relationship between breakdown strength and dielectric permittivity 
of various dielectric materials is displayed in Fig. 5.4.
Higher εr values are caused by ionic polarisation between ferroelectric domains 
and movable domain walls in ferroelectric ceramics2. Because of the large domains, 
which lessen the number of domain walls, εr is not particularly high for bulk BaTiO3 
when grain size is above 1 μm. The greatest value of εr was reported to be ~5000 with 
a large number of relatively tiny domains, and when εr value continued to decrease, 
such as by 30 nm, it was reported to be ~1000 [11, 13, 14]. 
For BaTiO3 particles that are nanosized, the εr value depends on both the synthesis 
methods used to create the nano-BaTiO3 particles as well as the ferroelectric and 
paraelectric phases. Nanoparticles typically do not undergo the effects of sintering at 
high temperature, but they do exhibit a variety of crystallographic ﬂaws, e.g. BaTiO3 
nanoparticles in the ferroelectric-tetragonal phase have a greater εr value compared 
to those in the paraelectric-cubic phase. Paraelectric BaTiO3 nanoparticles with a size 
of less than 200 nm are typically produced using low temperature hydrothermal and 
sol–gel methods, whereas ferroelectric BaTiO3 nanoparticles larger than 200 nm are 
typically produced using high-temperature pyrolysis and combustion methods. Since

128
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
Fig. 5.3 a Scheme for the creation of a one-component, three-constituent hybrid dielectric that can 
be used to build capacitors. b TEM micrograph of BTO-1-PS composite [29% (v/v) BTO] (inset: 
crystal structure of BaTiO3) and  c cross section SEM image for composite 5 [19% (v/v) BTO], 
d cross-sectional SEM for composites BTO-1-PMMA and e BTO-1/cPMMA22 (both 22% (v/v) in 
BTO) [12]. Adapted with permission from ref. [12] Copyright (2014) (American Chemical Society)
it is practically impossible to quantify the εr value for such tiny particles directly, 
various mixing procedures have been used to separate nanoparticles from polymer 
composites. It is usually claimed that the Bruggeman mixing model, which takes 
into consideration particle–particle dipole interactions, provides a more accurate 
estimation of εr for BaTiO3 nanoparticles than any other model [15]. The εr value 
was discovered to drop from 800 to 200 for particle sizes greater than 10 μm, and on 
further reduction in size, the εr value was reported to be ~50 for 5–20 nm BaTiO3 
nanoparticles [16–18].

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
129
Fig. 5.4 Relationship between breakdown strength and dielectric permittivity (dielectric constant) 
of various dielectric materials
The crystalline grain and domain structure has a signiﬁcant impact on the εr of 
perovskite nanoparticles. Multiple crystal grains are typically found in one phase 
of BaTiO3 nanoparticles larger than 1–10 μm in size, and they typically exhibit the 
ferroelectric/tetragonal phase, which has 180° and 90° domains at room temperature. 
They have an extremely high εr value because 90° domain walls are present. Only 
single crystal grains were seen as particle size decreased from 0.2 to 1 μm because 
there was no particle jamming, and therefore, no need for them to minimise internal 
strain energy. The only 180° domain walls that were present in this kind of single 
crystal grain structure nullify the impact of the dipoles and cause the εr to decrease 
further [19–21]. 
To achieve uniform dispersion of nanoparticles without blending any homopoly-
mers, polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) was grafted with 70 nm BaTiO3 nanopar-
ticles in one experiment. In this experiment, it was found that εr increased with the 
BaTiO3 volume fraction [22]. The maximal εr in the PVDF/BTO nanocomposite was 
discovered to be up to 60 vol%, which is three times greater than PVDF in value. εr 
began to decline above 60 vol% because of the spin-coated composite ﬁlm’s porosity. 
The results of the research conclude that compared to polymer matrices, addition of 
ceramic nanoﬁllers into it enhances the εr by 3–5 times before percolation threshold 
is reached [23]. 
The 1D nanoﬁllers, like nanowires, nanoﬁbers, and nanotubes with higher aspect 
ratio (AR) were also tested for their effects when added to spherical ceramic 
nanoﬁllers. It was found that these ﬁllers boost at lower ﬁller contents inside the

130
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
ceramic nanoﬁllers [24, 25]. It was discovered that ﬁlling the BaTiO3 with larger 
aspect ratio nanowires increased the εr for PVDF at higher ﬁller loadings [26]. 
The polar coupling contact is stronger in the longitudinal direction compared to 
the transverse direction (i.e., along the diameter) in high aspect ratio (AR) ﬁllers, 
and as a result, εr is higher in the longitudinal direction compared to the transverse 
direction [26]. Because movable domain walls are present in ferroelectric/tetragonal 
BaTiO3 nanotubes and nanowires, it has been found that their εr is higher than those 
of paraelectric/cubic nanotubes and nanowires. This suggests that the crystalline 
phase also affects the εrs of nanotubes and nanowires [27]. High aspect ratio ﬁllers 
have a substantially lower percolation threshold than spherical nanoparticles [28]. 
A parallel capacitor circuit is used to model the overall capacitance when the high 
aspect ratio nanoﬁllers are oriented to the electric ﬁeld parallelly, whereas a series 
circuit is used to model when the nanoﬁllers are perpendicular to electric ﬁeld. 
up per C equals upper C Subscript f Baseline plus upper C Subscript m
StartFraction 1 Over upper C EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript f Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript m Baseline EndFraction
St ar tFraction 1 Over upper C EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript f Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript m Baseline EndFraction
St ar
tF raction 1 Over upper C EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript f Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript m Baseline EndFraction
StartFraction 1 Over upper C EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript f Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript m Baseline EndFraction
where Cf is capacitance for ﬁller and Cm is capacitance for matrix 
The parallel capacitor model gives signiﬁcantly greater εr, i.e., when the ﬁllers in 
the composites are oriented parallelly, it gives a greater εr compare to ﬁllers oriented 
perpendicular to the applied electric ﬁeld [29]. For ceramic ﬁller, the εr’s value is 
only slightly higher than base polymer when the percolation threshold value is not 
yet reached. However, above this percolation threshold value, the polymer/ceramic 
interface acts as a conductive pathway, signiﬁcantly reducing Eb and eta, making it 
only ﬁt for low-voltage applications. Additionally, polymer nanocomposite materials 
with ceramic ﬁller loadings greater than 10 vol% are frequently brittle and susceptible 
to mechanical failure, making them unsuitable for use in ﬁlm capacitors. 
5.2.1 
Dielectric Loss 
Low dielectric loss is crucial for any practical thin ﬁlm capacitor application, and 
the equivalent series resistance provides the total of these various dielectric losses 
(ESR). As the ripple grows and the ESR rises, wound capacitors heat up signiﬁcantly, 
shortening their lifetime [30]. For the deployment of novel polymer dielectrics for 
thin-ﬁlm capacitance applications, a low dielectric loss achievement is more crucial 
than a high Ue since at higher temperatures ripple current heating is unfavourable. 
Dielectric losses in polymer nanodielectrics are not only caused by the polymer 
matrix and ceramic ﬁllers but also due to their interactions. Sources of dielectric 
losses depend on several polarisation mechanisms [31], including:

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
131
a. Dielectric loss owing to resonant (due to electronic and atomic polarization) and 
relaxation (due to orientational polarization); 
b. 
Space charge conduction (due to ions and electrons); 
c. Extrinsic and intrinsic ferroelectric switching of aligned electric domains, the 
former caused due to impurity ion losses and thermally activated electrons, the 
latter being a feature of dielectric itself. 
Extrinsic dielectric losses in ceramic ﬁllers are caused by lattice vibration in 
domains, which also causes ionic polarization, and intrinsic dielectric losses in 
domain walls caused by dipole vibration. Because of the high dipole mobility in 
the walls, relaxation loss for perovskite crystals occurs around about 1 GHz[13]. 
Lattice ionic polarisation occurs in ferroelectric domains at 20 GHz frequency [32] 
that is higher than the power frequency (1 Hz to 1 MHz). Ceramic ﬁllers, therefore, 
exhibit relatively low intrinsic loss at the power frequency. When it comes to nanoce-
ramic ﬁllers, the leakage current is not signiﬁcant until the percolation threshold is 
reached, but above this value, the signiﬁcance of the leakage current because of the 
percolated polymer–ceramic particles interfaces under high electric ﬁeld is enhanced. 
On the other hand, in case of bulk ceramics, the leakage current due to conduction 
of electrons originates from grain boundaries causing an extrinsic dielectric loss. 
The intrinsic and resonant losses occur in the optical (>1014 Hz) and infrared (1012– 
1014 Hz) ranges, respectively. Since the power frequency range is within 102–106 Hz, 
little resonant loss is always seen. Since polar polymers inherently have larger relax-
ation dielectric loss than nonpolar polymers, the relaxation loss is placed right inside 
the power frequency range. When used for high-ﬁeld poling, ferroelectric polymers 
like PVDF and its copolymers cause severe hysteresis or ferroelectric loss, which is 
why they are never used for electric energy storage [33, 34]. Both ionic and electronic 
currents are large in polymers above T g/T m temperature. The extrinsic dielectric loss 
due to impunity ion contamination and thermally activated electrons make them 
unfavourable candidate for applications of high-voltage capacitors. Compared to a 
liquid amorphous matrix, polymer crystals are better at preventing the conduction 
of electrons and ions [35]. Polar polymers typically have impurity ion concentration 
below trace levels but can be still contaminated at higher temperatures [36, 37]. 
The Eb for polymer/ceramic particle nanodielectrics is greatly reduced because of 
the strong interaction between high-κ (dielectric constant) ceramic ﬁllers and polymer 
matrix. At lower frequencies, an impurity ion conduction loss in the polypropylene 
matrix of the PP/BTO@POSS nanocomposite was detected, which increased with 
temperature. The polarisation of thermally activated electrons in BTO nanoparticles 
is responsible for the rather broad and feeble peak at 1 kHz frequency that was seen. 
Remarkable hysteresis loss was noted for the PP/BTO@POSS at 20% nanocom-
posites with input electric ﬁelds greater than 50 MV/m. At the same electric ﬁeld, 
the above-mentioned nanocomposite displays a higher Ue value than the pristine 
polypropylene, but the η considerably dropped as a result of the widened hysteresis 
loop. The conductivities and εrs of the PP matrix and the BTO ﬁllers differ signif-
icantly. BTO has a high thermal conductivity because of its comparatively high εr, 
which results in an unusually large concentration of thermally activated electrons.

132
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
The highly insulating PP matrix blocks these thermally activated electrons when 
an electric ﬁeld is applied, creating interfacial polarisation, because of which, the 
interfacial charges within the BTO nanoparticle may move back and forth resulting 
in a great loss of conduction. The contact between BTO and PP and bulk BTO 
are the two potential conduction paths. Out of these two, the primary conduction 
pathway is the PP/BTO interface [38]. A thin layer of linear ceramic dielectrics is 
typically employed such as amorphous SiO2, Al2O3, and TiO3 using techniques like 
layer-by-layer coating of methyl aluminoxane, sol–gel preparation, or even atomic 
layer deposition to further reduce the interfacial conduction. Although the amor-
phous oxide surface coating’s highly insulating qualities allowed for a reduction in 
interface conduction, hysteresis loss persisted. 
5.2.2 
Dielectric Breakdown Strength 
One of the major beneﬁts for ﬁlms of polymer is their higher dielectric breakdown 
strength (Eb), and BOPP currently has the highest breakdown strength of all commer-
cially available ﬁlms (Eb at 63.2% failure probability of ~ 730 MV/m for 2cm2 sample 
area) [39]. The Eb value results from the following variables: 
a. PP resins that are ultraclean; 
b. 
minimal leakage current; 
c. consistent ﬁlm thickness. 
When working at ~ 200 MV/m and 85 °C, this high Eb guarantees a continuous 
lifetime of > 100,000 h. The energy bandgap (Eg) of the material strongly inﬂuences 
the intrinsic Eb (Eb is proportional to Eg α) [40, 41] with α = 3 for semiconductors and 
α = 1 for insulators. Due to their wide energy band gap and slow carrier movement, 
polymers have a high Eb value [42, 43]. The highest observed value of Eb for most 
insulating polymers is only 750 MV/m, which is due to intrinsic/extrinsic ﬂaws and 
degradation (such as broken bonds) under high-ﬁeld stresses [44]. Theoretically, the 
intrinsic Eb value for PP is larger than 2 GV/m. 
The four primary processes for breakdown in any polymer thin ﬁlm are elec-
tronic breakdown, thermal breakdown, electromechanical breakdown, and partial 
discharges [44]. Low temperatures are necessary for electronic breakdown, and a 
strong electric ﬁeld is needed to introduce hot metal electrons into the polymer 
dielectric [31]. Hot electrons that are injected into a polymer will break chemical 
bonds to produce Auger electrons, which then disrupt neighbouring molecular bonds 
[45]. Thermal breakdown in polymer dielectrics occurs via joule heating and typi-
cally takes place at higher temperatures with a smaller electric ﬁeld. At the loca-
tions of ﬂaws and impurities in polymers, both breakdown mechanisms cause gas-
phase production. Precleaning is used in the ﬁlm capacitor manufacturing process 
to minimise these ﬂaws. Distribution of electric ﬁeld in nonuniform way becomes 
another crucial element in multicomponent systems because of the signiﬁcant εr 
and conductivity of electrons differences between ceramic ﬁllers and polymer as

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
133
matrix. Interfacial polarisation was seen in this type of system along the Eo direc-
tion at the two poles of a single particle. Because of the compatibility of the POSS 
ligand and the polypropylene matrix, the high dielectric constant nanoparticles of 
BTO dispersed well in the polypropylene /BTO@POSS nanocomposite than in the 
PP/BTO nanocomposites. The Weibull Eb of the PP/BTO@POSS nanocompos-
ites dramatically lowered as compared to the hot-pressed PP, and as a result of 
the BTO particles clustering, the PP/BTO nanoparticles had an even lower Weibull 
Eb. According to the results, it is crucial to distribute ceramic nanoparticles evenly 
throughout the polymer matrix. The afﬁnity of high dielectric constant particles with 
the polymer as matrix can be improved by functionalising surfaces of nanoﬁllers 
with tiny molecules like dopamine, organosilane, and organophosphate ligands, or 
by grafting polymer brushes. Al2O3, Ta2O5, ZrO3, and TiO2 are some examples of 
ceramic nanoparticles with a moderate εr that is utilised to prevent the ﬁeld concen-
tration caused by increased interfacial polarisation near high-κ particles. Where there 
is insufﬁcient ﬁller to cause percolation, these high-κ ceramic nanoﬁllers will produce 
low energy density and a low εr. Creating nanoparticles with a core–shell morphology 
that have a gradient εr proﬁle from the polymer matrix to the core and shell of the 
nanoﬁllers is an alternative strategy [46]. According to a phase-ﬁeld modelling when 
the thickness of the shell is roughly equivalent to the diameter of the core, the ideal 
core–shell structure is produced [47]. In addition, the distinctive 2D nanoﬁllers of 
plate-like structure offers a stronger capability of blocking charges to impede move-
ment of electrons within the nanocomposite. Low level of ﬁller can minimise ﬁller 
agglomeration and hence concentration of local ﬁelds. When ultrathin boron nitride 
nanosheets (BNNS) were used as ﬁller in P(VDF-TrFECFE) in trials, the Eb value 
was recorded as 610 MV/m, which was a 70% increase over the Eb value of the ﬁlm 
with a pristine PVDF-TrFECFE solution-cast sample (362 MV/m) [48]. 
Nanoparticles have large surface area, which cause lot of ﬂaws on their surfaces. 
These ﬂaws also could be caused by foreign atoms on the surface, irregularities in 
the surface’s geometry, or the molecules close to the particle’s surface being non-
centrosymmetric (coordinative unsaturation) [49]. These ﬂaws lead to the generation 
of new localised energy levels in a band that would otherwise be forbidden. The 
created energy levels could be charge traps that are located in the band gap between 
the valence and conduction bands (localised states in the band gap). They prefer to 
ﬁll these traps rather than remain in the conduction or valence band when mobile 
charges, such as electrons or holes, are present [50]. Once it has ﬁlled the trap, the 
electron or hole ﬁnds it difﬁcult to return to the conduction or valence band, especially 
if the trap is deep enough; however, it can migrate to nearby similar traps if they are 
close enough [97]. 
As seen in Fig. 5.5a, they may transition from one particle interphase to another. 
This could worsen the characteristics of electrical insulation and promote charge 
mobility in nanocomposites. If the traps are deep enough and far from each other, 
these phenomenon will not take place. In contrast, if the aforementioned defects 
produce energy states that are deeper in the conduction/valence band, this may enlarge 
the band gap in the particle interphase region and act as an energy barrier for the 
passage of charges. These phenomenon is schematically displayed in Fig. 5.5b. This

134
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
Fig. 5.5 a Possible mechanism for charge movement through the charge traps in the particle inter-
phase and b the particle interphase represents an energy barrier for charge movement [49]. Adapted 
with permission from ref. [49] Copyright (2018) (Elsevier) 
may indicate a potential mechanism that enhances the nanocomposites’ dielectric 
characteristics. 
A novel method of stacked nanodielectrics has been developed by researchers to 
enhance both Eb and εr of nanocomposites [51]. The fundamental idea behind this 
technique is to produce a dielectric “hard” layer with a high Eb and a dielectric “soft” 
layer with a high εr in a rationally constructed ﬁlm architecture. A small percentage 
of insulating nanoﬁllers are present in the high Eb layer, whereas the high-κ layer 
contains a substantial number of high-κ ﬁllers. To maximise the Ue and enhance 
the synergy between Eb and εr, tuning is required for the stacked nanodielectrics’ 
architecture, volume percentage, and number of layers. 
5.2.3 
Discharged (Ue) 
In general, raising either εr or electric ﬁeld or both can result in a high Ue. Since 
the power frequency has no resonance losses region, improving electric and atomic 
polarisation is the best way to boost εr [42]. When Eg is above 4 eV for insulting 
polymers, the deformation εrs of the polymer cannot exceed 5. This is because of 
the molecular bonding of localised electrons and atoms. In order to increase the εr 
for polymers, orientational and interfacial polarizations are applied; however, they 
result in dielectric losses in the power frequency. It is not possible to simultaneously 
increase εr/Ur and Eb for this reason. Therefore, we are limited to ﬁnding an εr/Ue 
and Eb compromise. Therefore, for polymer nanodielectrics, getting high Ue should 
not be as important as obtaining low loss and high Eb. Low dielectric loss is ensured, 
and Ue should be evaluated at appropriate temperatures and electric ﬁelds to actual 
application. A trilayer BNNS-BT-BNNS structure and stacked c-BCB nanodielectric 
demonstrated a Ue of 1.1 J/cm3 at a η of 93% at 150 °C and 200 MV/m, which was 
around 2.8 times that of BOPP seen at 70 °C [52]. 
Dielectric properties estimation of nanodielectric interphase by numerical 
modelling and dielectric spectroscopy is studied by Andrei et al. [53]. In their

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
135
studies, to calculate the frequency-dependent dielectric properties of the polymer-
nanoparticle interphase, an electro-quasistatic numerical model of a PP-SiO2 nanodi-
electric is suggested. It is based on a combination of dielectric spectroscopic results 
and semi-analytical formulations. The nanodielectric model is made up of spherical 
SiO2 nanoparticles with a diameter of 15 nm that are evenly dispersed across a PP 
matrix. Each nanoparticle is encircled by an interphase that is 10 nm thick. 
5.3 
Polymer Nanodielectrics Based on Conductive 
Nanoparticles 
Metallic and conductive nanoparticles [54] and carbonaceous nanoparticles (such 
as carbon black (CB) [55], carbon nanotubes (CNTs) [56], and graphene nanoplates 
(GNPs) [57]) are utilised as ﬁllers in polymer nanodielectrics. When a polymer 
serves as the matrix, the conductive particles become polarised when an electric 
ﬁeld is applied, and this causes the internal electric ﬁeld to be zero. 
When linear dielectric regime as determined by broadband dielectric spectroscopy 
(BDS), the great dielectric constant has been reported for some of these nanodi-
electrics in recent years, e.g. adding Ag nanoparticles as ﬁller to epoxy could result 
in a relative dielectric constant (εr) of more than 300 [54]. 
Conductive particles in thin polymers function as nanoscale electrodes, and 
nanocapacitors are created at the interface between the polymer and the nanopar-
ticles. The percolation barrier is nearly reached when the ﬁller material, the connec-
tion between nanocapacitors to one another as well as to metal electrodes [57]. A 
high εr,app (colossal apparent) occurs when the thickness or interparticle distance of 
the boundary layer becomes very tiny. Since there is no conduction or tunnelling of 
electrons at low ﬁelds (<1 MV/m), the tang ent deltavalue for these nanodielectrics likewise 
stays low. 
Large ceramic granules that are semiconductive and thin insulating grains borders 
form the grain boundary barrier layer (GBBL) in ceramic capacitors, and their polar-
isation results in a colossal apparent (εr,app) resistance of up to 105 [58] which is 
given by, 
epsilon  Subscript r comma app Baseline equals StartFraction epsilon Subscript g b Baseline d Subscript g Baseline Over t EndFraction
epsilon Subscript r comma app Baseline equals StartFraction epsilon Subscript g b Baseline d Subscript g Baseline Over t EndFraction
where εgb is dielectric constant of insulating grain boundary layer, dg is average grain 
size of dielectric material, and t is thickness of insulating grain boundary layer. 
Local electron tunnelling is provided at the grain boundaries via a Schottky barrier. 
In order to prevent charges from being injected via the conductive medium, from 
metal electrodes to bulk composite channel, it is crucial to ensure that there will 
be no direct contact between the metallic electrodes and semiconducting granules 
[59]. Researchers used nanosized (18 and 100 nm) surface functionalised aluminium 
nanoparticles using polymer brushes and a matrix made of isotactic polypropylene

136
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
(iPP) to study the improvement of dielectric constant by incorporating nanosized 
conductive particles into polymer/conductive particle nanodielectrics. The εr of PP/ 
nAl nanodielectrics was investigated using BDS at various nAl concentrations under 
an applied electric ﬁeld of 1MV/m. It was found that the εr,app was only 5.7 at 25 
vol% of 100 nm nAl, which was 2.5% less than iPP [60]. 
Conducive electrons may tunnel into the polypropylene matrix in the presence 
of strong electric ﬁelds, causing dielectric loss. Due to conduction loss, these 
injected electrons also signiﬁcantly reduce the Eb (breakdown strength) of polymer/ 
conductive particle nanodielectrics. This was seen in an experiment where Eb was 
reduced from 620 MV/m for iPP on 5 vol% nAl to 300 MV/m on 25 vol% loading. 
When metallic nanoparticles are polarised, the charges in the interfacial region cause 
a strong changes the polymer matrix’s local electric ﬁeld in the direction of the elec-
tric ﬁeld. These close-by areas cause dielectric breakdown and electron tunnelling 
in the iPP matrix, making them hot spots. 
Therefore, under an elevated local ﬁeld, the metallic particles transform into 
providing free electrons to the PP matrix by electron sources via electron tunnelling, 
making nanocomposite conductive above a particular threshold, ultimately resulting 
in catastrophic dielectric breakdown. The increase of εrs in polymer nanodielectrics 
is facilitated by these kinds of electrons conducting under a strong electric ﬁeld. 
Because the internal electric ﬁeld for metallic particles in conductive nanoparticle 
nanodielectrics is laterally zero, they are unable to store any electric energy. As a 
result, the augmented εr and Ur can only be achieved by raising the polymer matrix’s 
local electric ﬁeld [45]. 
The metallic particle size must be lower than 2–3 nm at normal temperature to 
display an efﬁcient Coulomb blockade effect [61], yet it is challenging to disperse 
these tiny metallic nanoparticles uniformly in the polymer matrix. As a result, 
high-voltage capacitor applications cannot use composites of polymer and metallic 
nanoparticles. 
Due to their high aspect ratio, CNTs and GNPs can easily aggregate or percolate 
when used as ﬁllers, which increases the conductivity of polymer/CNT and polymer/ 
GNP nanocomposites. Again, this behaviour led to a situation where conductive 
pathways transported electrons from the ﬁller to the polymer matrix, increasing 
the εeff for those nanodielectrics. Regarding a PVDF/GNP nanocomposite made of 
polyvinylidene ﬂuoride, researchers obtained more than 200 and 2700 εrs values at 
1000 and 100 Hz, respectively [62]. Additionally, in polymer/carbon nanodielectrics, 
researchers noticed a nonlinear behaviour in the link between current and voltage 
[63]. 
Researchers have suggested a variety of additional methods to increase Eb and 
decrease conductive ﬁller/polymer nanocomposites’ dielectric loss, including a third 
ﬁller, sandwich/multi-layered buildings, as well as surface coating. One research 
team created polyurethane (PU) nanocomposites based on CNT ﬁllers with GO 
capsulation, where the function of the Go was to support the CNT dispersion by 
π-π interaction and serve as a barrier to prevent direct contact between two CNT 
particles [64]. As a result, this nanocomposite was found to have a resistivity that 
was almost four times as high as nanocomposite with CNT-only ﬁllers and to have

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
137
no electric percolation. In that experiment, the Eb value was reported at 120 MV/ 
m, substantially doubling its previous value, and it declined as the ﬁller quantity 
rose. In a further set of experiments, PI-(PI/NH2-MWCNT)-PI-three-layered ﬁlms 
in which the insulating layers block the conductive paths were made resulting in 
ultralow dielectric loss and high dielectric constant [65]. There were not colossal εr 
values reported between 0 and 20 wt% ﬁller content; however, this three-layer ﬁlm 
reduced Eb values 300 to 75 MV/m at a 20 weight percent loading, which was better 
than a single-layer composite of PI and CNT. 
5.4 
Applications of Nanodielectrics 
The advantages of nanodielectrics are excellent mechanical properties, high dielec-
tric breakdown strength, low dielectric loss, high power and energy density, and 
good processibility. Multiscale models and design methodologies are needed to be 
compliant for nanodielectrics to be applicable in the industry. Not only to control the 
dispersion of nanodielectrics, understand the interface contributions, and measuring 
ageing, there should have necessary tools that will enable customization of the 
constituent properties to meet the needs of the bulk material for a particular appli-
cation [4]. These properties of nanodielectrics have been successfully used in many 
areas such as space charge suppression, high energy density storage in capacitors, 
generators and motors, wire enamels, and in high thermal conductivity. The selected 
applications of nanodielectrics are shown in Fig. 5.6.
5.4.1 
Space Charge Suppression 
The superior characteristics of nanodielectrics reduce the internal electric ﬁeld in 
them. The breakdown properties and the anti-ageing capabilities of nanodielectrics 
can be enhanced, especially in direct current (HDVC) cable operating voltage level 
and high voltage [66]. Improvement of breakdown strength originates from the inter-
facial zones formed around the nanoparticles and these zones can modify the trap 
properties, carrier mobility and charge injection in polymer matrices by changing the 
chain conformation, aggregation structure, or morphology. These modiﬁcations can 
cause the suppression of space charge accumulation as well as improvement of elec-
trical breakdown strength. By the addition of nanoparticles in the polymer matrix, 
some nanodielectrics exhibit smaller space charge accumulation. The injected charge 
is captured by the traps which are formed as the result of the introduction of nanopar-
ticles. This is effective only at lower concentration, and higher charge injection causes 
the degradation of polymer chains. It has been showed by the various research that the 
addition of inorganic particles into the polymer matrix can prevent the injection and 
space charge suppression [67]. Zhang et al. addressed the issue by attaching matrix-
compatible polymer brushes to spherical colloidal SiO2 NPs (10–15 nm diameter) to

138
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
Fig. 5.6 Selected applications of nanodielectrics in various ﬁelds
create a uniform NP dispersion in cross-linked polyethylene and were able to achieve 
improved space charge suppression, improved DC breakdown strength, and limited 
internal ﬁeld distortion (10.6%) over a broad range of external DC ﬁelds from 30 to 
100 kV/mm at room temperature [68]. Zhang et al.in their study showed that the 
introduction of MgO nanoparticles in low-density polyethylene (LDPE) improved 
the average trap depth in MgO/low-density polyethylene (LDPE) nanodielectrics. 
As a result, there was a signiﬁcant build-up of space charge close to the electrodes. 
This was measured by using improved pulsed electro-acoustic (PEA) system [69]. 
Wang et al. evaluated the impact of vinyl silane coupling agent on the electrical 
characteristics of Al2O3/LDPE nanodielectrics and came to the conclusion that the 
modiﬁed Al2O3 nanoparticles have a greater space charge suppressing effect than 
the unmodiﬁed ones [70]. In addition to that, Zhou et al. studied the morphology, 
dielectric properties, DC volume resistivity, and space charge behaviour of surface 
modiﬁed MgO, TiO2, ZnO, and Al2O3 blended with polypropylene (PP). The results 
show that the space charge suppression and breakdown strength ﬁrst increase with 
the increase in nanoparticle content and then decreases [71].

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
139
5.4.2 
High-Density Energy Storage 
Polymer-based nanocomposites with high permittivity, high breakdown strength, 
ﬂexibility, and lower cost are required for deployment in distributed power produc-
tion systems and high compact electronic circuits [66]. Development of nanodielec-
tric materials is closely related to the advancement of capacitor technology, and it is 
shown in Fig.  5.7. Polymers serving as the matrix and the ﬁllers are used to increase 
the effective dielectric constant. Capacitors that can store a higher amount of energy 
and capable of instantly releasing it are becoming more and more necessary. These 
capacitors are used in a variety of military and commercial applications. For such 
applications, a base polymer with a high permittivity, such as poly(vinylidene ﬂuo-
ride) (PVDF), is a good choice to start. In theory, the ﬁllers aid to increase the effective 
dielectric constant of the system while maintaining the polymer’s built in resistance 
to disintegration. Many studies are reported on the breakdown strength and composite 
dielectric permittivity of polymer nanocomposites. Most of the research concentrate 
on improving the dielectric permittivity by using ferro-metal oxides such as Pb(Zr, 
Ti)O3 (PZT), Pb(Mg0.33Nb0.77)O3-PbTiO3 (PMNT), and BaTiO3 (BT). Studies show 
that the dielectric permittivity of ceramics can be extended from tens (TiO2, Al2O3) to  
thousands (BaTiO3), and can even can extend to over 10,000 for CaCu3Ti4O12 [72]. 
In conductive polymer nanocomposites for high energy density applications, several 
studies on percolation phenomenon that occurs when the volume percent of ﬁllers 
exceeds the percolation threshold have been reported [73]. Metal particles, carbon 
nanotubes, and graphene sheets are used as the conductive ﬁllers. Their polymer-
based nanocomposites indicate an exponential increase in permittivity around the 
percolation threshold. Additionally, a hierarchical structure for nanocomposites has 
been devised to concurrently increase the breakdown strength and permittivity [74]. 
Flexible nanocomposites containing polymer and high dielectric ceramic nanoparti-
cles have gained greater importance for dielectric and energy storage application. A 
core–shell Ag@polydopamine@BaTiO3 nanocomposites with strawberry-like prop-
erties was created by Yang et al. The strawberry-like BT-PDA-Ag show greater 
enhanced energy density and can be used for energy storage [75]. Wang et al. 
created a dielectric composite material with extremely high discharge energy density 
by changing the interface between nanoparticles and poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride-co-
hexaﬂuoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP]). After coating SiO2 outside, barium titanate 
dielectric concentration and current density inside BT particles decrease. This coating 
with PDA increases the interface interactions with the nanoparticles, and as a result, 
ultra-high discharge energy has been achieved. With varied BaTiO3 compositions 
steadily increasing layer by layer in the nanocomposites, Wang et al. created a new 
sandwich-like three-layer structure for them [76]. Luo et al. created a 3-D BaTiO3 
network in polymer composite with increased permittivity and energy storage density 
[77].

140
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
Fig55..7 Development of materials is closely related to the advancement of capacitor technology 
5.4.3 
Generators and Motors 
In rotating machines, it is desirable to have higher capability of withstanding elec-
trical and thermal stress along with improved thermal conductivity [78]. The main 
advantages of generators are good mechanical strength and environmentally friendly 
[79]. This was one of the ﬁrst application of nanodielectric and driving force for 
improvements in motor systems. Research has been carried out with materials like 
mica, epoxy resin, and ﬁbre glass. Mica can split in way to form a thin, ﬂat laminate 
[80], with excellent dielectric qualities, low dielectric losses, heat resistance, and high 
dielectric strength. High-voltage rotating machines experience the combined effect of 
thermal, electrical, and mechanical loads. The improvement of voltage endurance is 
arguably one of the biggest advantages of nanodielectrics [4]. The observed improve-
ment in the short-term AC breakdown strength of roughly 30% opens the door to the 
possibility of raising working electric stress and/or decreasing ground wall dimen-
sions [81]. The ground wall insulation of large form-wound generators and motors, 
for which voltage endurance is essential and standards are available, is thus obvi-
ously a top target application [82]. Generator design and development is undergoing 
radical change, not only in the hardware that is being designed but in the way in 
which they are designed. To meet current and future market demands, improved 
generator design solutions are required due to the highly ﬂexible peak load regime 
and the decreasing energy price at the liberalised market. The use of nanoparticles 
can improve the properties of the dielectrics. A study done on using SiO2 nanoparti-
cles in epoxy mica has led to a more efﬁcient stator winding insulation system that is

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
141
customised to the needs of the new, highly ﬂexible grid without sacriﬁcing longevity 
on the one hand and the speciﬁc power output on the other. In the near future, it 
might be applied to both new-generation designs and the renovation and upgrading 
of already installed generators [83]. 
5.4.4 
Application in Wire Enamels 
Wire enamels also beneﬁt from nanodielectrics’ ability to withstand electrical stress 
for an extended period. This suggest a way to prepare insulating materials that 
are resistant to coronas, along with the regularly reported improvement in erosion-
resistant under stress [4]. A common low-voltage generator was constructed using 
stator coils with many turns, ranging from one to sixteen turns per coil which can 
be random wound or form wound. Random-wound coil generators can be made 
at low cost, and through the application of vacuum-pressure impregnation, their 
ability to survive harsh weather conditions can be increased. The low-voltage motors 
coated with polymer nanocomposites have many applications. When the low-voltage 
motors are random wound with round wire and coated with polyamide-imide, it 
offers the necessary abrasion resistance for winding at high working temperatures. 
The middle layers contain different nanosized oxide ﬁllers, including tin oxide, 
which was thought to be the most prevalent ﬁller, for increased resistance to partial 
discharge. Normally, production with greater ﬁller loading reduced wire ﬂexibility, 
which caused enamel cracks, whereas resistance to partial discharge rose with ﬁller 
loading. The resistance to partial discharges was considerably enhanced at modest 
ﬁller loading. Strands of magnet wire with a rectangular cross-section coiled around 
it puncture the coils for medium- to high-voltage motors. Depending on the magnetic 
wire’s application and type, it goes through the coating a number of times. Here, the 
construction is layer-by-layer coating which results in multiple polymers to polymer 
interface. These wound coil wire enamels are applicable in transformers, motors, 
coils, low-current cables, and telephone installations. Random-wound conductors, 
which use enamelled magnet wire, are particularly common in the design of tiny 
motors (and other devices like solenoids) [78]. 
5.4.5 
Nanodielectrics with High Thermal Conductivity 
The dissipation from the leakage current grows in the high-voltage ﬁeld as the level 
of conducting voltage rises. As electronic components are arranged in integrated 
circuits with ever-increasing compactness, there is a corresponding increase in heat 
generation per unit volume. The electrical power system and electronic system needs 
high thermal conductivity and excellent electrical insulation [66]. There are different 
types of ﬁllers that can increase the thermal conductivity of nanocomposites [84]. 
These ﬁllers can be metals, inorganic particles, and carbon materials. Wu et al.

142
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
studied the improvement of dielectric properties, high dielectric constant, and low 
dielectric loss and thermal conductivity nanocomposites utilised in ﬁlm capacitors for 
energy storage [85]. Seyhan et al. showed that the thermal conductivity of polymer 
nanocomposites with boron nitride nanosheets (BNNSs) can be improved while 
maintaining the characteristics of electrical insulation [86]. Zhang et al. created 
a nanocomposite of uniformly dispersed strongly orientated graphite in a polymer 
matrix [87]. Sun et al. added a small amount of silver nanoparticles in order to reduce 
the interfacial thermal resistance between adjacent BNNSs [88]. Hong et al. created 
a method to construct 3D hexagonal boron nitride network in a polymer composite 
which is veriﬁed with high thermally conductive and mechanically stretchable [89]. 
5.5 
Future Prospects 
5.5.1 
Self-Healing Dielectrics 
It is desirable to have electrical insulation that has self-healing capacity, and it is 
especially attractive if healing is not dependent on an external source. One such 
approach is to incorporate encapsulated ﬂuids that are discharged owing to damage 
and locally cross-link to perform mechanical repair [90]. One illustration of this is 
the well-known clearing phenomenon built into the metallised ﬁlm capacitors. 
Partial discharges, such those that take place in voids, are cause of majority of 
localised damage in high-voltage insulation. These discharges also involve the release 
of photon energy at a precise site where healing is required and can serve as the foun-
dation for a focused self-healing approach. A means of introducing active substances 
at the interior of the polymer matrix is provided by the insertion of nanoparticles. 
When these active agents are photosensitive, the energy formed by the light-emitting 
process can be utilised. Despite being an active ﬁeld, high-voltage dielectric struc-
tures hardly ever use it [4]. However, in recent times, efforts are being made to apply 
the chemistry and theories of self-healing phenomenon to electrically insulating 
materials, including methods that use plasma energy. 
5.5.2 
Increased Stress Applications 
Any practice use of solid dielectrics is to prevent electrical trembling that results 
from such as in. In cast spacers for gas-insulated equipment, moulded bushings, and 
cast transformers, one of the problems limiting their durability is electrical treeing 
caused due to electrical stresses. Electrical treeing is caused due to electrical stresses 
developed in the material that arises from defects arising in moulding processes like 
in extrusions, moulding, or casting. Hence, the average stress inside the material is 
to be kept at low level. Nanomaterials dispersed in polymer dielectric act as barrier

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
143
that slow the formation of trees and enhances the resistance of materials to elec-
trical treeing in a wide variety of materials [8, 10, 91]. The dielectric strength of 
HVDC cables is signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by charge injection, trapping, and space 
charge accumulation [92]. In XLPE-nanoclay composites, the stress concentration 
was found to be maximum at the interface of nanoclay and XLPE, while stress 
concentration inside the nanoclay platelet was lower. The tortuous path created by 
dispersed nanoclay in XLPE prevented the propagation of both electrical treeing and 
water tree [10]. Conducting nanosized ﬁllers improve electrical conductivity, which 
lowers the tendency of materials to accumulate charge [93]. 
5.5.3 
Biomedical Applications 
When activated by an outside electric ﬁeld, ﬂexible materials known as electroactive 
polymers (EAP) show a change in size or shape. Dielectric elastomers (DEs), a type 
of EAP, are representative of potential applications ranging from artiﬁcial muscle to 
robotics interaction due to their satisﬁed mechanical and dielectric properties, such as 
lightness, softness, ﬂexibility, high deformability, quick response, and low cost [94]. 
Wang et al. investigated dielectric elastomer nanocomposites with multi-walled CNT 
and concluded that the electric ﬁelds inside the material are concurrently decreased 
and the deforming performance is improved [95]. A fascinating experiment by Kwak 
et al. used artiﬁcial muscle based on DE to simulate human facial expressions on a 
robot [96]. In addition to their employment in artiﬁcial muscles, these soft dielec-
tric materials’ electromechanical capabilities are frequently employed as functional 
sensors to pick up on environmental changes or human motion. Chhetry et al. stated 
that the strategy of the microstructuring dielectric material is leveraging the sensor’s 
performance by enhancing the effective permittivity and reducing the stiffness [97]. 
5.6 
Challenges and Future Trends 
In this chapter, we have discussed about some of the important features of nanodi-
electrics and the major research related to the applications. Over the past 15 years, 
researchers in the ﬁeld of dielectrics have made signiﬁcant advancements in the 
manufacturing of nanodielectric ﬁlms and materials. The knowledge in dielectric 
polymer and nanodielectric composites have grown as a result of scientiﬁc investi-
gation from the atomic scale to the nanometre and micrometre levels and continues to 
grow in terms of applications. Adopting antiferroelectric ﬁllers and creating atypical 
composites may result in a high energy density. A potential and workable method for 
increasing the energy density without reducing the dielectric strength is to keep ﬁllers 
at a lower loading fraction. It is possible to increase the dielectric strength of dielectric 
polymers by molecularly altering the chemistry of the polymer; however, this will call 
for more research and a scale-up procedure. Though ﬁlm scale-up might be difﬁcult,

144
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
the logical design of polymer dielectrics may offer scientiﬁc direction for dielec-
tric material synthesis in practice [98]. The most recent advancements in enhancing 
the dielectric strength of polymer ﬁlms should be further evaluated on a wide scale 
and thinner gauges. More research should be done on economical polymers. The 
current market demands for advanced ﬁlm capacitors are still uncertain, and the 
high cost of capacitors makes it difﬁcult to implement new technologies. There 
should be more research done on polymers with intermediate dielectric constants and 
polymer composites, like high-temperature polymers that have undergone molecular 
modiﬁcation for achieving desired qualities without sacriﬁcing dielectric loss. It is 
important to continue paying attention to the basic principles of nanodielectrics, 
polymer chemistry, and computer modelling. In the long run, this will provide supe-
rior dielectrics with a high dielectric constant, high dielectric strength, and low dielec-
tric loss [97]. However, overcoming the high cohesive energy of nanoparticles and 
ensuring homogenous dispersion remains difﬁcult, particularly for production at an 
industrial scale [66]. The dielectric characteristics of nanoparticles can be effectively 
improved by surface modiﬁcation. 
References 
1. Zhang G, Li Q, Allahyarov E, Li Y, Zhu L (2021) Challenges and opportunities of polymer 
nanodielectrics for capacitive energy storage. ACS Appl Mater Interf 13(32):37939–37960. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c04991 
2. Ashok N, Prakash K, Selvakumar D, Balachandran M (2020) Synergistic enhancement 
of mechanical, viscoelastic, transport, thermal and radiation ageing characteristics through 
chemically bonded interface in nanosilica reinforced EPDM-CIIR blends. J Appl Poly Sci 
138(12):50082. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.20201087 
3. Schadler LS, Nelson JK (2020) Polymer nanodielectrics—short history and future perspective. 
J Appl Phys 128:120902. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0019865 
4. Tan DQ (2020) The search for enhanced dielectric strength of polymer-based dielectrics: a 
focused review on polymer nanocomposites. J Appl Polym Sci 137(33):49379. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/app.49379 
5. Tanaka T, Imai T (2013) Advances in nanodielectric materials over the past 50 years. IEEE 
Elect Insulat Magazine 29(1):10–23. https://doi.org/10.1109/MEI.2013.6410535 
6. Yasoda KY, Baji DS, Kumar MS, Santhanagopalan D, Batabyal SK (2023) Sustainable devel-
opment of manganese sulfoselenide nanoparticles anchored graphene oxide nanocomposite 
for high-performance supercapacitor and lithium-ion battery applications. J Alloys Compound 
930:Art. no. 167282. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2022.167282 
7. Murali B, Baiju KG, Prasad RK, Kumaresan D (2023) Fabrication of barium titanate nanowires-
GNP composite bilayer photoanodes for the high-performance dye-sensitized solar cells. Appl 
Surf Sci 610:Art. no. 155316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2022.155316 
8. Kavitha D, Sindhu TK, Nambiar TNP (2017) Impact of permittivity and concentration of ﬁller 
nanoparticles on dielectric properties of polymer nanocomposites. IET Sci, Measurement Tech 
11(2):179–185. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-smt.2016.0226 
9. Sreehitha PR, Durga B, Balachandran M (2020) Dielectric properties, thermal characteristics 
and degradation kinetics of PMMA nanodielectrics. Mat Today: Proceed 24(2):772–781, 17 
10. Kavitha D, Balachandran M (2019) XLPE—layered silicate nanocomposites for high voltage 
insulation applications: mechanical and treeing behavior. IET Sci, Measure Tech 13(7):1019– 
1025. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-smt.2018.5417

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
145
11. Buscaglia V, Randall CA (2020) Size and scaling effects in barium titanate. an overview. J Eur 
Ceram Soc 40(11):3744–3758. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeurceramsoc.2020.01.021 
12. Paniagua SA, Kim Y, Henry K, Kumar R, Perry JW, Marder SR (2014) Surface-initiated 
polymerization from barium titanate nanoparticles for hybrid dielectric capacitors. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces 6:3477–3482. https://doi.org/10.1021/am4056276 
13. Teranishi T, Hoshina T, Tsurumi T (2009) Wide range dielectric spectroscopy on perovskite 
dielectrics. Mater Sci Eng B 161(1–3):55–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mseb.2008.11.039 
14. Arlt G, Hennings D, de With G (1985) Dielectric properties of ﬁne-grained barium titanate 
ceramics. J Appl Phys 58(4):1619–1625. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.336051 
15. Allahyarov E, Löwen H, Zhu L (2016) Dipole correlation effects on the local ﬁeld and the 
effective dielectric constant in composite dielectrics containing high-k inclusions. Phys Chem 
Chem Phys 18(28):19103–19117. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6CP03149H 
16. Goswami AK (1969) Dielectric properties of unsintered barium titanate. J Appl Phys 
40(2):619–624. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1657443 
17. Hsiang H-I, Yen F-S (1993) Dielectric properties and ferroelectric domain of BaTiO3 powders. 
J Appl Phys 32(Part 1, No. 11A):5029–5035. https://doi.org/10.1143/JJAP.32.5029 
18. Guo HZ, Mudryk Y, Ahmad MI, Pang XC, Zhao L, Akinc M, Pecharsky VK, Bowler N, Lin 
ZQ, Tan X (2012) Structure evolution and dielectric behavior of polystyrene-capped barium 
titanate nanoparticles. J Mater Chem. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2jm35600g 
19. Li Y, Liao Z, Fang F, Wang X, Li L, Zhu J (2014) Signiﬁcant increase of curie temperature in 
nano-scale BaTiO3. Appl Phys Lett 105(18):182901. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4901169 
20. Polking MJ, Han M-G, Yourdkhani A, Petkov V, Kisielowski CF, Volkov VV, Zhu Y, Caruntu G, 
Paul Alivisatos A, Ramesh R (2012) Ferroelectric order in individual nanometre-scale crystals. 
Nat Mater 11(8):700–709. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat3371 
21. Polking MJ (2016) Deciphering the physics and chemistry of perovskites with transmission 
electron microscopy. Nanoscale 8(12):6237–6248. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5NR06186E 
22. Paniagua SA, Kim Y, Henry K, Kumar R, Perry JW, Marder SR (2014) Surface-initiated 
polymerization from barium titanate nanoparticles for hybrid dielectric capacitors. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces 6(5):3477–3482. https://doi.org/10.1021/am4056276 
23. Kim P, Doss NM, Tillotson JP, Hotchkiss PJ, Pan M-J, Marder SR, Li J, Calame JP, Perry 
JW (2009) High energy density nanocomposites based on surface-modiﬁed BaTiO3 and a 
ferroelectric polymer. ACS Nano 3(9):2581–2592. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn9006412 
24. Zhang H, Marwat MA, Xie B, Ashtar M, Liu K, Zhu Y, Zhang L, Fan P, Samart C, Ye Z (2020) 
Polymer matrix nanocomposites with 1D ceramic nanoﬁllers for energy storage capacitor 
applications. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 12(1):1–37. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b15005 
25. Pan Z, Zhai J, Shen B (2017) Multilayer hierarchical interfaces with high energy density in 
polymer nanocomposites composed of BaTiO3@TiO2@Al2O3 nanoﬁbers. J Mater Chem A 
5(29):15217–15226. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7TA03846A 
26. Tang H, Zhou Z, Sodano HA (2014) Relationship between BaTiO3 nanowire aspect ratio and 
the dielectric permittivity of nanocomposites. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 6(8):5450–5455. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/am405038r 
27. Joshi UA, Yoon S, Baik S, Lee JS (2006) Surfactant-free hydrothermal synthesis of highly 
tetragonal barium titanate nanowires: a structural investigation. J Phys Chem B 110(25):12249– 
12256. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp0600110 
28. Calame JP (2006) Finite difference simulations of permittivity and electric ﬁeld statistics in 
ceramic-polymer composites for capacitor applications. J Appl Phys 99(8):084101. https://doi. 
org/10.1063/1.2188032 
29. Tang H, Lin Y, Sodano HA (2012) Enhanced energy storage in nanocomposite capacitors 
through aligned PZT nanowires by uniaxial strain assembly. Adv Energy Mater 2(4):469–476. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201100543 
30. Makdessi M, Sari A, Venet P, Bevilacqua P, Joubert C (2015) Accelerated ageing of metallized 
ﬁlm capacitors under high ripple currents combined with a DC voltage. IEEE Trans Power 
Electron 30(5):2435–2444. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPEL.2014.2351274 
31. Chi KK (2004) Dielectric phenomena in solids. Elsevier

146
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
32. Tsurumi T, Li J, Hoshina T, Kakemoto H, Nakada M, Akedo J (2007) Ultrawide range dielectric 
spectroscopy of BaTiO3-based perovskite dielectrics. Appl Phys Lett 91(18):182905. https:// 
doi.org/10.1063/1.2804570 
33. Zhu L, Wang Q (2012) Novel ferroelectric polymers for high energy density and low loss 
dielectrics. Macromolecules 45(7):2937–2954. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma2024057 
34. Soulestin T, Ladmiral V, Santos FDD, Améduri B (2017) Vinylidene ﬂuoride- and 
triﬂuoroethylene-containing ﬂuorinated electroactive copolymers. How does chemistry impact 
properties? Prog Polym Sci 72:16–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2017.04.004 
35. Li Y, Makita Y, Zhang G, Rui G, Li Z-M, Zhong G-J, Miyoshi T, Huang H-D, Zhu L (2020) 
Effects of rigid amorphous fraction and lamellar crystal orientation on electrical insulation 
of poly(ethylene terephthalate) ﬁlms. Macromolecules 53(10):3967–3977. https://doi.org/10. 
1021/acs.macromol.0c00646 
36. Chen X, Allahyarov E, Li Q, Langhe D, Ponting M, Schuele DE, Baer E, Zhu L (2020) Reducing 
dielectric loss by nanoconﬁned impurity ion transport in multilayer ﬁlms under low electric 
ﬁelds. Compos Part B Eng 190:107908. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2020.107908 
37. Chen X, Allahyarov E, Langhe D, Ponting M, Li R, Fukuto M, Schuele DE, Baer E, Zhu L 
(2020) Reducing dielectric loss and enhancing electrical insulation for multilayer polymer ﬁlms 
by nanoconﬁned ion transport under high poling electric ﬁelds. J Mater Chem C 8(18):6102– 
6117. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0TC00522C 
38. Zhang G, Brannum D, Dong D, Tang L, Allahyarov E, Tang S, Kodweis K, Lee J-K, Zhu L 
(2016) Interfacial polarization-induced loss mechanisms in polypropylene/BaTiO3 nanocom-
posite dielectrics. Chem Mater 28(13):4646–4660. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b0 
1383 
39. Ho J, Ramprasad R, Boggs S (2007) Effect of alteration of antioxidant by UV treatment on the 
dielectric strength of BOPP capacitor ﬁlm. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 14(5):1295–1301. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDEI.2007.4339492 
40. Wang L-M (2006) Relationship between intrinsic breakdown ﬁeld and bandgap of mate-
rials. In: 2006 25th International Conference on Microelectronics; IEEE: Belgrade, Serbia 
and Montenegro, pp 576–579. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMEL.2006.1651032 
41. Sun Y, Bealing C, Boggs S, Ramprasad R (2013) 50+ years of intrinsic breakdown. IEEE Electr 
Insul Mag 29(2):8–15. https://doi.org/10.1109/MEI.2013.6457595 
42. Wang CC, Pilania G, Boggs SA, Kumar S, Breneman C, Ramprasad R (2014) Computational 
strategies for polymer dielectrics design. Polymer 55(4):979–988. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pol 
ymer.2013.12.069 
43. Sun Y, Boggs S, Ramprasad R (2015) The effect of dipole scattering on intrinsic breakdown 
strength of polymers. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 22(1):495–502. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TDEI.2014.004690 
44. Dissado LA, Fothergill JC, Electrical degradation and breakdown in polymers. 
45. Chiu F-C (2014) A review on conduction mechanisms in dielectric ﬁlms. Adv Mater Sci Eng 
2014:1–18. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/578168 
46. Wang J, Guan F, Cui L, Pan J, Wang Q, Zhu L (2014) Achieving high electric energy storage 
in a polymer nanocomposite at low ﬁlling ratios using a highly polarizable phthalocyanine 
interphase. J Polym Sci Part B Polym Phys 52(24):1669–1680. https://doi.org/10.1002/polb. 
23554 
47. Wang YU, Tan DQ, Krahn J (2011) Computational study of dielectric composites with core-
shell ﬁller particles. J Appl Phys 110(4):044103. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3624660 
48. Li Q, Zhang G, Liu F, Han K, Gadinski MR, Xiong C, Wang Q (2015) Solution-processed 
ferroelectric terpolymer nanocomposites with high breakdown strength and energy density 
utilizing boron nitride nanosheets. Energy Environ Sci 8(3):922–931. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C4EE02962C 
49. Alhabill FN, Ayoob R, Andritsch T, Vaughan AS (2018) Introducing particle interphase model 
for describing the electrical behaviour of nanodielectrics. Mat Design 158:62–73. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.matdes.2018.08.018

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
147
50. Anta JA, Marcelli G, Meunier M, Quirke N (2002) Models of electron trapping and transport 
in polyethylene: current–voltage characteristics. J Appl Phys 92:1002. https://doi.org/10.1063/ 
1.1489714 
51. Shen Z, Wang J, Lin Y, Nan C, Chen L, Shen Y (2018) High-throughput phase-ﬁeld design of 
high-energy-density polymer nanocomposites. Adv Mater 30(2):1704380. https://doi.org/10. 
1002/adma.201704380 
52. Li Q, Liu F, Yang T, Gadinski MR, Zhang G, Chen L-Q, Wang Q (2016) Sandwich-structured 
polymer nanocomposites with high energy density and great charge-discharge efﬁciency at 
elevated temperatures. Proc Natl Acad Sci 113(36):9995–10000. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 
1603792113 
53. Andrei L, Ciuprina F (2017) Dielectric properties estimation of nanodielectric interphase 
by numerical modeling and dielectric spectroscopythe. In: 10th International Symposium 
on Advanced Topics in Electrical Engineering March 23–25. Bucharest, Romania. 519–523. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ATEE.2017.7905100 
54. Qi L, Lee BI, Chen S, Samuels WD, Exarhos GJ (2005) High-dielectric-constant silver-epoxy 
composites as embedded dielectrics. Adv Mater 17(14):1777–1781. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.200401816 
55. Xu H-P, Dang Z-M, Jiang M-J, Yao S-H, Bai J (2008) Enhanced dielectric properties and 
positive temperature coefﬁcient effect in the binary polymer composites with surface modiﬁed 
carbon black. J Mater Chem 18(2):229–234. https://doi.org/10.1039/B713857A 
56. Liu H, Shen Y, Song Y, Nan C-W, Lin Y, Yang X (2011) Carbon nanotube array/polymer 
core/shell structured composites with high dielectric permittivity, low dielectric loss, and large 
energy density. Adv Mater 23(43):5104–5108. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201102079 
57. Youseﬁ N, et al (2014) Highly aligned graphene/polymer nanocomposites with excellent 
dielectric properties for high-performance electromagnetic interference shielding. Adv Mater 
26(31):5480–5487. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201305293 
58. Chiou B-S, Lin S-T, Duh J-G, Chang P-H (1989) Equivalent circuit model in grain-boundary 
barrier layer capacitors. J Am Ceram Soc 72(10):1967–1975. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1151-
2916.1989.tb06008.x 
59. Simon P, Gogotsi Y (2008) Materials for electrochemical capacitors. Nat Mater 7(11):845–854. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2297 
60. Zhang G, Li Y, Tang S, Thompson RD, Zhu L (2017) The role of ﬁeld electron emission in 
polypropylene/aluminum nanodielectrics under high electric ﬁelds. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
9(11):10106–10119. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b00095 
61. Lu J, Moon K-S, Xu J, Wong CP (2006) Synthesis and dielectric properties of novel high-K 
polymer composites containing in-situ formed silver nanoparticles for embedded capacitor 
applications. J Mater Chem 16(16):1543. https://doi.org/10.1039/b514182f 
62. He F, Lau S, Chan HL, Fan J (2009) High dielectric permittivity and low percolation threshold 
in nanocomposites based on poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) and exfoliated graphite nanoplates. Adv 
Mater 21(6):710–715. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200801758 
63. Celzard A, McRae E, Furdin G, Marêché JF (1997) Conduction mechanisms in some graphite
- polymer composites: the effect of a direct-current electric ﬁeld. J Phys Condens Matter 
9(10):2225–2237. https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-8984/9/10/011 
64. Wu C, Huang X, Wu X, Xie L, Yang K, Jiang P (2013) Graphene oxide-encapsulated carbon 
nanotube hybrids for high dielectric performance nanocomposites with enhanced energy 
storage density. Nanoscale 5(9):3847. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3nr00625e 
65. Chen Y et al (2014) Enhanced dielectric properties of amino-modiﬁed-CNT/polyimide 
composite ﬁlms with a sandwich structure. J Mater Chem A 2(34):14118. https://doi.org/10. 
1039/C4TA01818D 
66. Zhong S-L et al (2018) Past and future on nanodielectrics. IET Nanodielect 1(1):41–47. 
Accessed 19 Sept 2021. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-nde.2018.0004 
67. Chen G, Li ST, Zhong LS (2015) Space charge in nanodielectrics and its impact on electrical 
performance. In: IEEE 11th International Conference on the Properties and Applications of 
Dielectric Materials (ICPADM), Sydney, NSW, Australia, July, pp 36–39

148
J. H. Nitinkumar et al.
68. Zhang L, Khani MM, Krentz TM et al (2017) Suppression of space charge in crosslinked 
polyethylene ﬁlled with poly(stearyl methacrylate)-grafted SiO2 nanoparticles. Appl Phys Lett 
110:130903 
69. Zhang L, Zhou YX, Tian JH et al (2014) Experiment and simulation of space charge suppression 
in LDPE/MgO nanocomposite under external DC electric ﬁeld. J Electrostat 72:252–260 
70. Wang SJ, Zha JW, Wu YH et al (2015) Preparation, microstructure and properties of 
polyethylene/alumina nanocomposites for HVDC insulation. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 
22(6):3350–3356 
71. Zhou Y, Hu J, Dang B et al (2017) Effect of different nanoparticles on tuning electrical properties 
of polypropylene nanocomposites. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 24(3):1380–1413 
72. Barber P, Balasubramanian S, Anguchamy Y et al (2009) Polymer composite and nanocom-
posite dielectric materials for pulse power energy storage. Materials 2:1697–1733 
73. Dang ZM, Zhou T, Yao SH et al (2009) Advanced calcium copper titanate/ polyimide functional 
hybrid ﬁlms with high dielectric permittivity. Adv Mater 21:2077–2082 
74. Dang ZM, Zheng MS, Zha JW (2016) 1D/2D carbon nanomaterial-polymer dielectric 
composites with high permittivity for power energy storage applications. Small 12(13):1–14 
75. Yang K, Huang XY, He JL et al (2015) Strawberry-like core-shell Ag@polydopamine@BaTiO3 
hybrid nanoparticles for high-k polymer nanocomposites with high energy density and low 
dielectric loss. Adv Mater 2:1500361 
76. Wang YF, Wang LX, Yuan QB et al (2017) Ultrahigh electric displacement and energy density 
in gradient layer-structured BaTiO3/PVDF nanocomposites with an interfacial barrier effect. 
J. Mater. Chem. A. 5:10849–10855 
77. Luo SB, Shen YB, Yu SH et al (2017) Construction of a 3D-BaTiO3 network leading to signif-
icantly enhanced dielectric permittivity and energy storage density of polymer composites. 
Energy Environ Sci 10:137–144 
78. Anandraj J, Joshi GM (2017) Fabrication, performance and applications of integrated nanodi-
electric properties of materials—A review. Compos Interf. https://doi.org/10.1080/09276440. 
2017.1361717 
79. Chauhan RC, Manmohon S, Baljit S (2007) Rotating machine insulation materials and 
techniques—an overview. Indian J Eng Mater Sci 7:370–374 
80. Mitsui H, Yoshida K, Inoue Y et al (1981) Mechanical degradation of high voltage rotating 
machine insulation. IEEE Trans Elect Insul EI-16:351–359 
81. Gott BEB, Electr IEEE (1996) Insul Mag 12(4):28 
82. IEEE Standard 1043 (1989) IEEE recommended practice for voltage-endurance testing of form 
wound bars and coils 
83. Hidinger T, Brockschmdt M, Gröppel P, Weil M, Weidner JR (2016) Improved generator 
performance with a nanocomposite high voltage insulation system for stator windings—a 
status report. GIGRE Paper A1-109 
84. Jiang PK, Chen J, Huang XY (2017) Research status of thermally conductive but electrically 
insulating polymer nanocomposites (in Chinese). High Voltage Eng 43(9):2791–2799 
85. Wu K, Li YW, Huang R et al (2017) Constructing conductive multi-walled carbon nanotubes 
network inside hexagonal boron nitride network in polymer composites for signiﬁcantly 
improved dielectric property and thermal conductivity. Compos Sci Technol 151:193–201 
86. Seyhan AT, Goncu Y, Durukan O et al (2017) Silanization of boron nitride nanosheets (BNNSs) 
through microﬂuidization and their use for producing thermally conductive and electrically 
insulating polymer nanocomposites. J Solid State Chem 249:98–107 
87. Zhang XM, Zhang JJ, Zhang XL et al (2017) Toward high efﬁciency thermally conductive and 
electrically insulating pathways through uniformly dispersed and highly oriented graphites 
close-packed with SiC. Compos Sci Technol 150:217–226 
88. Sun JJ, Yao YM, Zeng XL et al (2017) Preparation of boron nitride nanosheet/nanoﬁbrillated 
cellulose nanocomposites with ultrahigh thermal conductivity via engineering interfacial 
thermal resistance. Adv Mater Interfaces 4:1700563 
89. Hong HJ, Kwan SM, Lee DS et al (2017) Highly ﬂexible and stretchable thermally conductive 
composite ﬁlm by polyurethane supported 3D networks for boron nitride. Compos Sci Technol 
152:94–100

5
Recent Progress in Nanodielectric Composites and Their Applications
149
90. Toohey T, Sottos NR, Lewis JA, Moore JS, White SR (2007) Nat Mater 6:581 
91. Danikas MD, Tanaka T (2009) Nanocomposites—a review of electrical treeing and breakdown. 
IEEE Electr Insul Mag 25(4):19–25 
92. Dissado LA, Mazzanti G, Montanari GC (1997) The role of trapped space charges in the 
electrical aging of insulating materials. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 4(5):496–506 
93. Krivda A, Tanaka T, Frechette M, Castellon J, Fabiani D, Montanari GC, Gorur R, Morshuis P, 
Gubanski S, Kindersberger J, Vaughn A, Pelissou S, Tanaka Y, Schmidt LE, Iyer G, Andritsch 
T, Seiler J, Anglhuber M (2012) Characterization of epoxy microcomposite and nanocomposite 
materials for power engineering applications. IEEEElectr. Insul. Mag. 28(2):38–51 
94. Liu L, Zhang C, Luo M et al (2017) A biologically inspired artiﬁcial muscle based on ﬁber-
reinforced and electropneumatic dielectric elastomers. Smart Mater Struct 26:085018 
95. Wang Y, Sun LZ (2017) Development of dielectric elastomer nanocomposites as stretchable 
actuating materials. Appl Phys Lett 111:161904 
96. Kwak JW, Chi HJ, Jung KM et al (2005) A face robot actuated with artiﬁcial muscle based on 
dielectric elastomer. J Mech Sci Technol 19(2):578–588 
97. Chhetry A, Yoon H, Park JY (2017) A ﬂexible and highly sensitive capacitive pressure sensor 
based on conductive ﬁbers with a microporous dielectric for wearable electronics. J. Mater. 
Chem. C 5:10068–10076 
98. Tan DQ (2019) Review of polymer-based nanodielectric exploration and ﬁlm scale-up 
for advanced capacitors. Adv Funct Mat 30(18):1808567. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201 
808567

Chapter 6 
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer 
Blends for Dielectric Applications 
Debashish Nayak, Ram Bilash Choudhary, Sanjeev Kumar, Jayanta Bauri, 
and Sarfaraz Ansari 
Abstract The dielectric properties of nanoﬁller-reinforced polymer blends were 
discussed in this chapter. The fast development of modern technology means that 
innovative, eco-friendly, ﬂexible, cost-effective, and light materials must be made 
for human development. This chapter study looks at the wide range of dielectric 
materials discovered, from ceramics to polymer composites, and the principles that 
led to their use in real-world applications. This chapter has outlined the fundamental 
concepts of dielectric behavior in composite systems. This chapter also looks at 
how polarization models produce composites to give them suitable dielectric prop-
erties and combinations of the different composite parts to solve engineering and 
scientiﬁc problems. Also, recent discoveries of dielectric composite materials have 
been put into groups, and their properties have been examined. This chapter discusses 
polymer-ceramic dielectric composites, ceramic-based dielectric composites, natural 
ﬁber-reinforced polymer composites (NFRPCs), and bio-based polymer dielectric 
composites. Finally, the production procedures of all of the dielectric materials 
discussed, as well as their key applications, have been carefully investigated. 
Keywords Polymer dielectrics · Dielectric materials · Ceramic dielectrics ·
Characterization of materials 
6.1 
Introduction 
The introduction of electricity to the globe ushered in a period of rapid and profound 
change that was impossible to foresee. The intelligent people on this planet have 
been eager to use the sciences and theories that electricity has made possible to look 
into the unknown and spread information about it. Soon after that, in the 1700s and 
1800s, much progress was made that led to the basic ideas that make induction an 
excellent way to produce electricity. Since then, scientists and engineers have kept
D. Nayak envelope symbol · R. B. Choudhary · S. Kumar · J. Bauri · S. Ansari 
Nanostructured Composite Materials Laboratory, Indian Institute of Technology (Indian School of 
Mines), Dhanbad, Jharkhand 826004, India 
e-mail: debashishiitism@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_6 
151

152
D. Nayak et al.
looking into ways to make electricity. This has led to the invention of light bulbs, 
which have brought light to parts of the world that were previously in the dark [1]. 
Regarding any aspect of innovation, the material employed is a primary consider-
ation [2]. This is because different materials have different properties that change the 
need for the invention. Because of this, materials science and engineering research 
have become an essential part of many of the world’s most important discoveries. 
Over the past 50 years, improvements in technology related to semiconductors, 
lasers, microscopes, light-emitting diodes, lithium-ion batteries, nanoparticles, ﬁber-
reinforced plastics, and metamaterials have been made possible, thanks to advance-
ments in materials and research in material science [3]. Only because of the progress 
made in materials science, these researchers have been able to ﬁnd breakthroughs in 
their respective domains. Material science is essential in almost every part of modern 
life, from making a pen’s capillary tube to a high-resolution lens for a space mission. 
In addition to this, they have shown the critical role that materials engineering plays by 
breaking barriers in the ﬁelds of aeronautics, medicine, and information technology. 
Dielectrics research is one of the most intriguing ﬁelds in materials science and 
electronics. Michael Faraday, a famous scientist, was the ﬁrst to use this term to 
describe the occurrence that occurred when an insulating material was placed in 
between an electric ﬁeld and the object being tested. When the insulator underwent 
charge distribution and storage for a limited duration, this factor was eventually 
shown to represent a sort of polarization. Capacitors, which utilized insulating mate-
rials or a dielectric substance to store charge and, in turn, energy, were invented 
thanks to Faraday’s principles. Since that time, the ﬁelds of electronics and materials 
have advanced to create new dielectric materials that may be employed in applica-
tions such as capacitors, pulsed power release, integrated circuits, battery storage, 
and piezoelectric materials [4]. It is unquestionably anticipated that the nature of 
materials and their behavior would improve with the fast growth of global markets 
and technological breakthroughs. 
This chapter covers the fundamental theory, fundamental quantities, and funda-
mental principles of the dielectric. This chapter discussed the basic variables that 
affect the dielectric as well as the method used to test the dielectric. Additionally, we 
discussed the high-K and low-K dielectric qualities using several polymer catego-
rization schemes based on permittivity. Dielectric materials based on polymers and 
their composites are made from a variety of materials, including those with ceramic, 
carbon, and semiconducting bases. We explained the dielectric qualities and their 
imitators in the electrochemical application in several instances. 
6.2 
Dielectric Fundamental Theory 
William Whewell created the term dielectric, which derives from the Greek word 
‘Di’ or ‘Día’ means across and electric. “Dielectric” and “Insulator” are synonyms. 
Dielectric materials have few free or loosely bound electrons and a high speciﬁc 
resistance, which slows down the ﬂow of electricity. Charge carriers do not move

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
153
through a dielectric material when an electric ﬁeld is present. Instead, their equilib-
rium positions just move a little bit. A positive charge moving along the direction 
of an applied electric ﬁeld creates an electric dipole moment. Polarization is the 
number of dipole moments per unit volume. Due to opposing charge separation, 
an internal electrical ﬁeld opposes the material’s external ﬁeld. Random orientation 
deployments result in zero internal ﬁelds without external ﬁelds. Direct or alternating 
current will transfer electric charges via any conductor or insulator. If the material is 
an insulator or dielectric, the movement of these charges will be hindered, forming a 
dipole moment between the two substances and polarizing them. To improve material 
qualities and comprehend dielectric behavior, we must grasp numerous fundamental 
quantities. 
6.2.1 
Electric Dipole Moment 
An electric dipole is made up of two point charges that are equal and opposing one 
another, and they are separated by some distance. A dipole moment will be the term 
used to describe the ensuing occurrence, and polarization will be the term used to 
describe the accumulation of dipole moments inside a volume. When all of the dipole 
charges are aligned in the same direction, the polarizability of the material will be 
determined by the number of dipole moments that are contained inside each unit. 
Since the dipole moment contains a component that speciﬁes the direction of the 
dipole moment that it generates, it is a vector quantity. 
When two charges, +q and −q, are separated by a distance r, the electric dipole 
moment, denoted by m, is a vector with magnitude m = qr and a direction from 
the negative charge to the positive charge. When placed in an electric ﬁeld from the 
outside, an electric dipole experiences a torque equal to the product of m, E, and the 
sine of the angle between m and E (τ = mE sinθ). Torque has a tendency to align 
the dipole moment, denoted by m, in the direction of E. The orientation of dipole 
moments in the presence of an external electric ﬁeld is shown in Fig. 6.1. If materials 
have n numbers of an electric dipole, then the total dipole moment is represented by 
the given equation, 
up pe
r
 
M eq
uals
 sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript n Endscripts q Subscript i Baseline r Subscript i
where i represent the ith number of dipole moments. The polarization (P) of a  
dielectric material is deﬁned as the dipole moments per unit volume. 
up pe r P equals StartFraction upper M Over upper V EndFraction
up
per P equals StartFraction upper M Over upper V EndFraction
where V volume of the dielectric materials.

154
D. Nayak et al.
Fig. 6.1 Orientation of dipole moments in the presence of the external electric ﬁeld
The formula for calculating the potential energy of a dipole is Ue = -–pE cos, 
which may also be written as upp e r U  Subscript e Baseline equals negative p dot upper E in vector notation. In an electric ﬁeld that 
is not homogeneous throughout, the potential energy of an electric dipole will vary 
depending on its location, and the dipole will be able to experience a force. When p 
is aligned with E, the direction of decreasing ﬁeld strength corresponds to the order 
in which the force acting on the dipole will be. This is because the potential energy 
Ue will decrease in this direction. 
6.2.2 
Dielectric Constant 
The charge density (D), or dielectric displacement caused by an applied electric 
ﬁeld E in a dielectric medium is proportional to the magnitude of the ﬁeld. This 
direct proportionality necessitates the inclusion of a constant, denoted by the symbol 
k(E), which represents the dielectric constant or permittivity of the material that is 
sandwiched in between the parallel plates. 
up per 
D equals epsilon upper E
An absolute permittivity (E0) is discovered to exist in a vacuum, which is the 
location where the electric ﬁeld is produced, and this property will be expressed as 
follows: 
up per D 
equals epsilon 0 upper E
The absolute permittivity is 8.854 × 10–12 F/m because there is no air to interact 
with. Accordingly, the dielectric constant (also known as the relative permittivity) 
may be thought of as the density of the electric ﬁeld created in the medium divided 
by the density of the electric ﬁeld generated in a vacuum when the electric ﬁeld

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
155
is held at a constant. It is also the ratio between the material’s capacitance and the 
vacuum’s capacitance. This section describes the potential difference between the 
parallel plates under certain situations: 
up per V e
quals StartAbsoluteValue upper E 0 EndAbsoluteValue r
The decrease in ﬁeld strength and the potential difference that results from the 
addition of a dielectric material between two parallel plate conductors is indicative of 
the charge storage capacity of the dielectric material. For all practical purposes, the 
static dielectric constant may be expressed in terms of capacitances in a vacuum and 
with a dielectric in the center. Here is the permittivity or dielectric constant equation. 
up er  E 0 equals StartFraction upper C Over upper C 0 EndFraction
up
er E 0 equals StartFraction upper C Over upper C 0 EndFraction
In addition, the capacitance of the circuit, while it is empty or under vacuum, is 
denoted by the letter C, whereas the capacitance when it is ﬁlled with the dielectric 
material is denoted by the letter C0. Although this word is not often used, permittivity 
has a link to electrical susceptibility. According to one idea, the permittivity values 
of materials are determined by their electrical susceptibility. 
6.2.3 
Dialectics Under the Applied Electric Field 
A dielectric material’s properties may be studied by applying an electric ﬁeld. 
Polarization, dissipation, conduction, and breakdown are important characteristics 
of materials. Direct current aligns dipoles in a dielectric material’s ﬁeld direction. 
Furthermore, the charge migrates from one end to the other, ensuring polarization. By 
neutralizing electrode charges, dielectric substances store charge and act as capac-
itors. The permittivity of a substance is determined by its capacitance value. There 
are two types of current in an alternating current electric ﬁeld between parallel plate 
capacitors. A charging current (IC) and a loss current (IL) determine the material’s 
dielectric constant. The loss current is the parallel material’s conductance. Some 
polarization and conduction currents are the same. 
up per I  equ
als upper I Subscript upper C Baseline plus upper I Subscript upper L
Dielectric constants may be used to indicate charge storage, where the aforemen-
tioned equation may be changed. 
up per I equal
s
 u ppe r V 
left parenthesis i omega upper C 0 right parenthesis left parenthesis element of prime negative i element of double prime right parenthesis
epsilo n S upe
rscript asterisk Baseline equals element of prime negative i element of double prime

156
D. Nayak et al.
One rotation of the object is equal to omega= 2πf (radians per second), where the 
AC voltage supply’s frequency is f (Eq. 6.8). element of prime is the real part of the dielectric 
constant, and element of double prime is the imaginary part of the dielectric constant, where epsilon Superscript asteriskrepresents 
the electrical losses in the dielectric material. The dielectric constant may be stated 
to better explain electric losses, a complicated number in relation to Eq. (6.9). When 
charging is in progress, the charge is stored in the material because of polarization, 
and when an alternating current is ﬂowing, the phase of the polarization current 
is 90 degrees out of phase with the external electric ﬁeld, contributing to losses or 
dielectric dissipation. Loss current is a current that runs through resistance and causes 
energy loss. It is regarded as one of the most signiﬁcant dielectric losses in the critical 
elements that engineers, among others, ﬁnd interesting to determine the suitability 
of a material for the task at hand. When a capacitor is placed between parallel plate 
electrodes in a vacuum, the voltage is shown as follows: 
v equal s up pe
r V Subscript m Baseline cosine omega t
The current through the capacitor is introduced as ii, where v represents the instan-
taneous voltage, V m represents the maximum value of v, and omegarepresents the angular 
frequency. 
i S ubsc
r
ipt i B aseline equals upper I Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis cosine omega t plus StartFraction pi Over 2 EndFraction right parenthesis
i
 
Subscript i Baseline equals upper I Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis cosine omega t plus StartFraction pi Over 2 EndFraction right parenthesis
And Im can be represented by, 
up er I Subscript m Baseline equals StartFraction upper V Subscript m Baseline Over z EndFraction equals omega upper C 0 upper V Subscript m
up
per I S
ubscript m Baseline equals StartFraction upper V Subscript m Baseline Over z EndFraction equals omega upper C 0 upper V Subscript m
The optimum dielectric material has a current–voltage relationship of 90, when the 
voltage and the current components are not in phase. When a result of the increase in 
capacitance caused by the dielectric material being positioned between the electrodes, 
the current is as follows: 
i S ubscrip
t
 i B
aseline equals upper I Subscript m Baseline upper C o s left bracket omega t plus left parenthesis StartFraction pi Over 2 EndFraction minus delta right parenthesis right bracket
i Sub
sc
ript i Baseline equals upper I Subscript m Baseline upper C o s left bracket omega t plus left parenthesis StartFraction pi Over 2 EndFraction minus delta right parenthesis right bracket
up er I Sub s
cript m Baseline equals omega upper C 0 upper V Subscript m element of
In the equations shown above, the dimensionless dielectric constant is introduced. 
When the current and voltage are out of phase at an angle of 2°, this angle is known 
as the loss angle in Eq. (6.11). The current between the electrodes may be split into 
two halves. While the charging current is identical to that of an ideal capacitor, the 
dielectric loss is located in the 90° trailing component of the applied voltage, and the 
corresponding equation for the loss angle is,

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
157
delta equa ls tangent Superscript negative 1 Baseline StartFraction epsilon double prime Over epsilon prime EndFraction
de
lta equals tangent Superscript negative 1 Baseline StartFraction epsilon double prime Over epsilon prime EndFraction
As a result, tan is known as the dissipation factor, and E'' is known as the loss 
index. As a result, the loss index in a dielectric material is deﬁned as the complex 
portion of the dielectric constant, and the dielectric loss may be calculated using 
the equation above. The letter D is used to symbolize the dissipation component, 
tan, commonly known as the loss tangent. The following Eq. (6.18) may also be 
expressed in terms of the charging current and loss current. 
tang ent delta equals StartFraction upper I Subscript upper L Baseline Over upper I Subscript upper C Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction epsilon double prime Over epsilon prime EndFraction
tan
gent delta equals StartFraction upper I Subscript upper L Baseline Over upper I Subscript upper C Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction epsilon double prime Over epsilon prime EndFraction
ta
ngent delta equals StartFraction upper I Subscript upper L Baseline Over upper I Subscript upper C Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction epsilon double prime Over epsilon prime EndFraction
The loss factor may be expressed in another equation when it comes to resistance 
and impedance in a capacitor, supposing the resistance is a theoretically inﬁnite 
quantity. 
tang ent
 delta equals StartFraction 1 Over omega upper R upper C EndFraction
tang
ent delta equals StartFraction 1 Over omega upper R upper C EndFraction
6.2.3.1
Polarization 
Polarization is the spatial organization of a charged particle in response to an applied 
electric ﬁeld. In order to counteract the effects of the electric ﬁeld, the charges 
will become polarized. This will result in the negative charges moving in opposite 
directions. The presence of an external ﬁeld is what leads to the generation of an 
electric moment over the whole of the dielectric material’s volume, and this occurs in 
each polarizing unit, whether it is an atom, an ion, or a molecule. The polarizable unit 
will acquire an electric dipole moment, denoted by the symbol p, whose magnitude 
is proportional to the strength of the external ﬁeld, denoted by the symbol E. This  
direct proportionality is shown by linear dielectrics and is given by the equation p = 
αE, where α = polarizability, which represents the qualities of individual polarizable 
units and is denoted by a symbol. Linear dielectrics exhibit this direct proportionality. 
The degree to which a dielectric substance may be polarized is crucial in deter-
mining its electrical characteristics. This parameter is independent of the dielectric 
volume; therefore, it is very crucial. Because polarization causes charges that may be 
displaced to collect at physical barriers like grain boundaries, interfacial polarization, 
and space-charge polarization can both be said to have occurred as a consequence 
of polarization. Dielectric behavior may be caused by several different dielectric 
processes, which can be seen at the microscopic level. The dielectric constant is 
determined by the polarization process, which changes with frequency. At microwave 
frequencies, for instance, the dipole of water molecules, which spins in response to 
an alternating electric ﬁeld, interacts strongly with ionic conduction. This happens

158
D. Nayak et al.
because water molecules are polarized in a way that allows them to conduct electricity. 
Atomic and electrical mechanisms are, on the whole, quite feeble. Each dielectric 
mechanism has a unique “cutoff frequency” as a deﬁning property. 
Dipole moments per unit volume are called the polarization of dielectric materials. 
If the materials have n numbers of dipole moments, then the total polarization of the 
materials is deﬁned as, 
up pe
r
 
P eq
ua l
s sigma summation Underscript j equals 1 Overscript n Endscripts m Subscript j
In the case of polar materials, there are permanent dipole moments. Due to the 
random arrangement’s dipole moments, the resultant dipole moments of the materials 
are zero, but if the materials applied a strong electric ﬁeld, then the materials showed 
two types of phenomenon, one is intrinsic dipole moments (mi) which tends to align 
along the direction of the electric ﬁeld to provide a net dipole moment, and the second 
is induced dipole moments (m Subscript ind Baseline right parenthesisdeveloped in the material. 
m S ubscr ipt up
per T Baseline equals m Subscript i Baseline plus m Subscript ind
Based on the polarization mechanism, dielectric polarization is divided into ﬁve 
major categories such as. 
1. Electronic polarization (Pe), 
2. Ionic or atomic polarization (Pa), 
3. Orientational polarization (Por), 
4. Space-charge/interfacial polarization (Psp), 
5. Spontaneous polarization (Pst). 
up per P  equa ls upp er P S ubscr
ipt e Baseline plus upper P Subscript a Baseline plus upper P Subscript or Baseline plus upper P Subscript sp Baseline plus upper P Subscript st
It takes a certain amount of time for the dipoles’ dielectric polarization to reach 
its maximum value when an external ﬁeld is applied. The dipoles’ dielectric polar-
ization will diminish after some time when the external ﬁeld is no longer there. 
The polarizations of the dipoles in the material and the alterations to the electric ﬁeld 
occur at different times. An example of relaxation is when polarization (dipole align-
ment) lags after an applied ﬁeld. Because of the lag, Gibbs’s free energy is always 
decreasing and can never be restored. Transmission, or relaxation, is a function of 
frequency. Debye relaxation refers to the phenomenon that occurs in ideal systems 
when the dipole populations do not interact and may be described by the Debye equa-
tion. When all the material’s dipoles relax at the same rate (same relaxation time), 
that is, when the relaxation time is equal to 1, where is the angular frequency of the 
applied ﬁeld, we say that the material is undergoing Debye relaxation. In most cases, 
it is written as the frequency dependence of the medium’s complex permittivity.

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
159
element of  
l eft parenthesis omega right parenthesis equals element of Subscript alpha Baseline plus StartFraction normal upper Delta element of Over 1 plus i omega tau EndFraction
el ement o
f left parenthesis omega right parenthesis equals element of Subscript alpha Baseline plus StartFraction normal upper Delta element of Over 1 plus i omega tau EndFraction
where element of Subscript alpha Baselineis the dielectric constant at the highest frequency and Δε = element of Subscript s Baseline−element of Subscript alpha Baselinewhere 
element of Subscript s Baseline is the dielectric constant at the lowest frequency and τ is the relaxation time. Real 
and imaginary parts of the complex dielectric permittivity yield 
element of  lef t  parenthesis omega right parenthesis equals element of Subscript alpha Baseline plus StartFraction element of Subscript s Baseline minus element of Subscript alpha Baseline Over 1 plus i omega tau EndFraction
el ement o
f left parenthesis omega right parenthesis equals element of Subscript alpha Baseline plus StartFraction element of Subscript s Baseline minus element of Subscript alpha Baseline Over 1 plus i omega tau EndFraction
elemen t of p rime equals element of Subscript alpha Baseline plus StartFraction left parenthesis element of Subscript s Baseline minus element of Subscript alpha Baseline right parenthesis omega tau Over 1 plus omega squared tau squared EndFraction
el ement of
 prime equals element of Subscript alpha Baseline plus StartFraction left parenthesis element of Subscript s Baseline minus element of Subscript alpha Baseline right parenthesis omega tau Over 1 plus omega squared tau squared EndFraction
element o f  double prime equals StartFraction left parenthesis element of Subscript s Baseline minus element of Subscript alpha Baseline right parenthesis omega tau Over 1 plus omega squared tau squared EndFraction
el ement of
 double prime equals StartFraction left parenthesis element of Subscript s Baseline minus element of Subscript alpha Baseline right parenthesis omega tau Over 1 plus omega squared tau squared EndFraction
The dielectric loss is given by, 
tangent left parenthesis delta right parenthesis equals StartFraction element of double prime Over element of prime EndFraction equals StartFraction left parenthesis element of Subscript s Baseline minus element of Subscript alpha Baseline right parenthesis omega tau Over element of Subscript alpha Baseline plus omega squared tau squared EndFraction
ta ngent l eft parenthesis delta right parenthesis equals StartFraction element of double prime Over element of prime EndFraction equals StartFraction left parenthesis element of Subscript s Baseline minus element of Subscript alpha Baseline right parenthesis omega tau Over element of Subscript alpha Baseline plus omega squared tau squared EndFraction
tan gent le
ft parenthesis delta right parenthesis equals StartFraction element of double prime Over element of prime EndFraction equals StartFraction left parenthesis element of Subscript s Baseline minus element of Subscript alpha Baseline right parenthesis omega tau Over element of Subscript alpha Baseline plus omega squared tau squared EndFraction
In contrast, many dielectric materials have multiple relaxation times for dipoles. 
This means that instead of the Debye equation, they adhere to the Cole–Cole equation. 
6.2.3.2
Dielectric Relaxation 
Response time to a periodic external electric ﬁeld is a key issue in dielectrics. Dielec-
tric relaxation occurs when polarization lags behind an oscillating electric ﬁeld. 
Dielectric relaxation may occur at a typical period for a certain polarization; hence, it 
may assist to identify the polarization process. It also causes considerable energy loss 
(or conversion, like in an oscillator, etc.), which is vital for engineering applications. 
Because time t and frequency f are inverse ( f = 1/t), dielectric relaxation is explored 
in the frequency domain through dielectric spectroscopy. Impedance analyzers (LCR 
meters) typically work from a few Hz to 10 MHz. A vector network analyzer works 
from MHz to GHz. Higher frequency spectroscopy uses wave-guided systems, THz 
time-domain spectroscopy, etc. In many circumstances, these techniques are not 
marketed. 
Different electric parameters, such as the complex dielectric constant epsilon Superscript asterisk Baseline equals epsilon prime minus epsilon double prime, 
the complex impedance Z* = upper Z prime−iZ, the complex admittance Y * = u p per Y prime minus i upper Y double prime, and 
the complex electric modulus M* = up pe r M prime minus i upper M double prime may be used to elucidate a relaxation 
process. A material’s electric modulus, which is equal to the inverse of its dielectric 
permittivity, represents the rate at which its electric ﬁeld relaxes while the electric 
displacement remains the same (M* = 1/E*).

160
D. Nayak et al.
Debye Relaxation 
The Debye relaxation equation is the most straightforward and tasteful mathematical 
expression utilized to explain the phenomena of relaxation to date. 
eps il on Su bsc ript r Baseline equals epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline plus StartFraction epsilon Subscript s Baseline minus epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline Over 1 plus i omega tau EndFraction
ep silon S
ubscript r Baseline equals epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline plus StartFraction epsilon Subscript s Baseline minus epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline Over 1 plus i omega tau EndFraction
The static and high-frequency dielectric permittivity are shown here as epsilon Subscript s and 
epsilon Subscript normal infinity, respectively. The typical time for relaxing is tau. Peter Debye, a scientist, was the 
ﬁrst to describe this relaxation for noninteracting dipoles in an alternating external 
electric ﬁeld with a distinct relaxation duration. E’-E” plots the optimal semicircle 
for Debye relaxation in the complex plane. The semicircle transforms into an ellipse, 
known as the Cole–Cole circle, as a result of the reciprocal interactions of dipoles in 
actual materials. The relaxation is known as Cole–Cole relaxation, and the following 
equation describes it: 
eps il on S
ubs cript r Baseline equals epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline plus StartFraction epsilon Subscript s Baseline minus epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline Over 1 plus left parenthesis i omega tau right parenthesis Superscript 1 minus alpha Baseline EndFraction
ep silon Subscr
ipt r Baseline equals epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline plus StartFraction epsilon Subscript s Baseline minus epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline Over 1 plus left parenthesis i omega tau right parenthesis Superscript 1 minus alpha Baseline EndFraction
Here, the value of the exponent parameter may range from 0 to 1. The Cole–Cole 
equation becomes the Debye equation when = 0. In various polymers, Cole–Cole 
relaxation is seen. 
Maxwell–Wagner Relaxation 
Electric inhomogeneities in materials, such as grain boundaries, the contact between 
dielectrics and electrodes, and others, generate Maxwell–Wagner relaxation. This is 
sometimes shown using a two-layer equivalent electric circuit, as in Fig. 6.2. 
Maxwell–Wagner relaxation’s dielectric permittivity may alternatively be stated 
as a Debye relaxation style: 
eps il on Su bsc ript r Baseline equals epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline plus StartFraction epsilon Subscript s Baseline minus epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline Over 1 plus i omega tau EndFraction minus i StartFraction sigma Over omega EndFraction
ep silon S ubsc ript r Baseline equals epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline plus StartFraction epsilon Subscript s Baseline minus epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline Over 1 plus i omega tau EndFraction minus i StartFraction sigma Over omega EndFraction
ep
silon Subscript r Baseline equals epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline plus StartFraction epsilon Subscript s Baseline minus epsilon Subscript normal infinity Baseline Over 1 plus i omega tau EndFraction minus i StartFraction sigma Over omega EndFraction
If the following conditions are fulﬁlled, the result will be: C0 = E0S/d; E∞ = 
C1 C2/[C0(C1 + C2)]; E0 = [R2 1C1 + up
er R 2 squared C2]/[C0(R1 + R2)2]; delta= 1/[C0(R1 + 
R2)]; tau= R1R2(C1 + C2)/(R1 + R2). It seems to reason that when there is a large 
disparity between two resistances, the relaxation would be visible. Each RC unit in
Fig. 6.2 Two-layer 
Maxwell–Wagner equivalent 
electric circuit 

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
161
Fig. 6.2 corresponds to a component of the researched dielectrics, such as a grain, 
grain border, or electrode interface. It is usual practice to plot data in both impedance 
and electric modulus to distinguish between these various component relaxations. 
The circuit’s impedance is as follows: 
up p
er Z prime equals StartFraction upper R 1 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper R 2 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
up per Z prime  
equals StartFraction upper R 1 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper R 2 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
up per Z prim
e equals StartFraction upper R 1 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper R 2 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
upp er Z 
double prime equals upper R 1 StartFraction omega upper R 1 upper C 1 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus upper R 2 StartFraction omega upper R 2 upper C 2 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
up per Z doubl e pri
me equals upper R 1 StartFraction omega upper R 1 upper C 1 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus upper R 2 StartFraction omega upper R 2 upper C 2 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
up per Z doub
le prime equals upper R 1 StartFraction omega upper R 1 upper C 1 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus upper R 2 StartFraction omega upper R 2 upper C 2 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
The electric modulus of the circuit is as follows: 
up per M prime equals StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 1 EndFraction StartFraction left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 2 EndFraction StartFraction left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
up
er M prime equals StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 1 EndFraction StartFraction left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 2 EndFraction StartFraction left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
up per M prime equals StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 1 EndFraction StartFraction left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 2 EndFraction StartFraction left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
upp
er M prime equals StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 1 EndFraction StartFraction left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 2 EndFraction StartFraction left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
up per M prim
e equals StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 1 EndFraction StartFraction left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 2 EndFraction StartFraction left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
upp er M double prime equals StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 1 EndFraction StartFraction omega upper R 1 upper C 1 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 2 EndFraction StartFraction omega upper R 2 upper C 2 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
upp
er M double prime equals StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 1 EndFraction StartFraction omega upper R 1 upper C 1 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 2 EndFraction StartFraction omega upper R 2 upper C 2 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
up per M double  prime equals StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 1 EndFraction StartFraction omega upper R 1 upper C 1 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 2 EndFraction StartFraction omega upper R 2 upper C 2 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
up
er M double prime equals StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 1 EndFraction StartFraction omega upper R 1 upper C 1 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 2 EndFraction StartFraction omega upper R 2 upper C 2 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
up per M doub
le prime equals StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 1 EndFraction StartFraction omega upper R 1 upper C 1 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 1 upper C 1 right parenthesis squared EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C 0 Over upper C 2 EndFraction StartFraction omega upper R 2 upper C 2 Over 1 plus left parenthesis omega upper R 2 upper C 2 right parenthesis squared EndFraction
From these equations, we may deduce that, whereas normalizing the electric 
modulus shows just a little amount of relaxation in capacitance, normalizing the 
impedance reveals a signiﬁcant amount of relaxation in resistance. In light of the 
fact that the electric circuit corresponding to Maxwell–Wagner relaxation changes 
from case to case, a more complex circuit model may be utilized to characterize 
the dielectric behavior of Maxwell–Wagner relaxation. Here, we just provide the 
simplest scenario, which calls for the use of only two dielectric constituents. 
Universal Dielectric Relaxation 
The term universal dielectric response also refers to universal dielectric relaxation. 
We ﬁrst present complicated conductivity to help you grasp it better. 
sigma e qua l s sig ma
 0 plus sigma Superscript prime Baseline minus i sigma double prime
In this case, the DC conductivity is σ 0, and the AC conductivity is s igma prime. It is unclear 
if the formula has a value of sigma 0. You may look at the link between sigma 0 and sigma as 
sig ma 0 e quals limit sigmaas f → 0. Typically, the AC conductivity is determined from dielectric 
measurement by: 
sigma equa
ls epsilon 0 epsilon double prime omega
Jonscher observed that the frequency-dependent AC conductivity for several 
dielectrics complies with the following exponent connection. 
sigma equal s up per 
A omega Superscript n Baseline left parenthesis 0 less than n less than 1 right parenthesis

162
D. Nayak et al.
This is referred to as “universal dielectric relaxation”. It is referred to as a “virtually 
constant loss” if n = 1. The ion hopping effect is thought to explain the universal 
dielectric response. But at high frequencies, electric heterogeneity may also cause 
similar phenomena. At sufﬁciently low temperatures or high frequencies, almost 
continuous loss occurs, and the cause was formerly thought to be vibration relaxation 
or off-center relaxations that spread out into a wide distribution. 
It has so far been unable to pinpoint a particular relaxation. The temperature 
typically has a considerable impact on the characteristic relaxation time constant, 
which may be described as an exponent function of temperature: 
tau equals tau 
0 e Superscript upper E Super Subscript a Superscript divided by k Super Subscript upper B Superscript upper T
Here, the temperature is T, the Boltzmann constant is kB, and Ea is the activation 
energy. The activation energy is a reﬂection of the power required for dipoles to 
jump from one potential well to another. As a result, it provides details on potential 
relaxation mechanisms. 
6.3 
Techniques for Dielectric Measurements 
When it comes to measuring dielectric properties, there is no one method that can 
describe all materials throughout the whole frequency range. Because it is difﬁcult 
to get an accurate measurement for both kinds of materials (lossy and low loss), it 
means that each band and their respective losses need a distinct procedure. When 
attempting to characterize materials based on their dielectric measurements, there is 
always some degree of ambiguity. Some signiﬁcant factors on that the whole process 
depends, 
• Temperature, 
• Nature of the materials, 
• Thickness of the materials, 
• Size of the materials, 
• Frequency, 
• Coating and non-coating, 
• Destructive and nondestructive, 
• Sample cost, 
• Sample prepetition process. 
Considering the above parameters, testing frequency and test material should be 
addressed while choosing a measurement procedure. Even the measuring equip-
ment, sample holder, and design are determined by frequency and substance. As for 
measurement techniques, they may be divided into two primary categories: reso-
nant and non-resonant. Materials may be characterized at single or several discrete 
frequencies using resonant techniques. This method employs a dielectric material as 
the resonant element. However, it is applicable only to test samples with minimal loss.

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
163
Resonators that are dielectric, planar, and split are all good examples. Perturbation 
and perturbation-induced resonant frequency shift are two further techniques. This 
approach suits low- to moderate-loss samples. Non-resonant methods may measure 
a wide frequency range. It may classify materials by calculating their reﬂection 
and transmission coefﬁcients. Here are several prominent and relevant dielectric 
measuring methods. 
6.3.1 
Coaxial Probe Method 
A coaxial probe, coaxial-line probe, or open-ended coaxial-line technique are all 
terms used to describe this kind of probe and its associated technology. Measuring 
lossy materials at high frequencies (such as RF and microwave) may be accomplished 
using this approach, which is one of the most practical and regularly used methods. 
In order to measure the complex reﬂection coefﬁcient, it is used with the VNA. 
A metallic probe is used by the coaxial line in order to detect the reﬂected signal 
(both phase and magnitude) from the MUT. When testing liquids, the probe is 
submerged into the sample, but when testing ﬂat surfaces, it contacts the sample. 
Dielectric measurements may be carried out using this approach across a wide 
frequency range, anywhere from 0.5 to 110 GHz, and the process itself is relatively 
straightforward. However, this technique exhibits some deﬂection for the measure-
ments of low-permittivity materials across a large frequency range of around 0.5– 
110 GHz [5]. However, some deﬂection may be seen using this approach for materials 
with a low permittivity (Fig. 6.3).
6.3.2 
Transmission Line Method (Waveguide) 
Another common method involves placing a sample of the chemical under examina-
tion in the center of a closed transmission line (as shown in Fig. 6.4). When taking 
measurements, both the reﬂection and transmission coefﬁcients come in handy. 
Although it outperforms the coaxial line in terms of precision and sensitivity, the 
frequency range that it is capable of is much less than that of the coaxial cable. 
Because a sample has to span the whole cross-sectional area of a line, it needs to 
be prepared in the shape of a slab or an annular geometry slab. This makes sample 
preparation very complicated and, as a result, more time consuming.
6.3.3 
Free-Space Method 
This approach is risk-free since it does not require physical touch. Though often used 
at a higher frequency, it is also capable of being employed at a lower one; however,

164
D. Nayak et al.
Fig. 6.3 Schematic diagram for coaxial probe method [6]
Fig. 6.4 Schematic diagram for transmission (waveguide) line method [7]
the latter application is restricted in terms of the sample sizes it can practically 
handle. The dielectric properties of solid materials are measured using the free-space 
approach, which requires the samples to be big, ﬂat, and properly faced on both sides. 
Homogeneous materials are those that are uniform and free of any imperfections. 
Material is positioned in between two horn antennas to direct energy onto or through 
the material in combination with a vector network analyzer. The use of the free-space 
measurement approach has several beneﬁts, the most important of which is the ability 
to get reﬂection and transmission coefﬁcients without making any kind of physical 
contact with the sample (Fig. 6.5).

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
165
Fig. 6.5 Schematic diagram for free-space method [8] 
6.3.4 
Resonant Cavity Method 
This method does not involve any physical contact and is not harmful. It is most often 
used at a higher frequency, but it can also be used at a lower frequency; however, 
the latter application is restricted in terms of the sample sizes it can practically 
handle. The dielectric properties of solid materials are measured using the free-space 
approach, which requires the samples to be big, ﬂat, and properly faced on both sides. 
Homogeneous materials are those that are uniform and free of any imperfections. 
Material is positioned in between two horn antennas with the intention of directing 
energy onto or through the material in combination with a vector network analyzer. 
The use of the free-space measurement approach has a number of beneﬁts, the most 
important of which is the ability to get reﬂection and transmission coefﬁcients without 
making any kind of physical contact with the sample (Fig. 6.6). 
Fig. 6.6 Schematic diagram for cavity resonator method [7]

166
D. Nayak et al.
Fig. 6.7 Schematic diagram for parallel plate method [6] 
6.3.5 
Parallel Plate (Electrode) Method 
To create a capacitor using the parallel plate capacitor technique, a dielectric material 
is placed between two electrodes in the form of a thin sheet sample in order to create 
a capacitor. The LCR meter, an impedance analyzer, and a dielectric ﬁxture are the 
three instruments that may be used to collect measurements (see Fig. 6.7). In this 
technique, generally low frequencies of less than one gigahertz are used. When doing 
a test using parallel plates, it is necessary to take into account the size of the material 
as well as measure its capacitance and dissipation factor. In order to determine the 
dielectric constant of a material, a dielectric sample must ﬁrst be placed in a sample 
holder before the capacitance value can be used to determine the permittivity. It 
includes extremely easy sample preparation and setup, and the frequency range that 
is generally used for this purpose is from 20 Hz to 1 GHz. It has a high measurement 
precision (approximately 1% for r’ and 5% 0.005 for tan), and it has several other 
beneﬁts as well. If the air gap and its consequences are not taken into consideration 
and calibrated, however, this may lead to substantial inaccuracy. Poor results are 
also brought about by the inﬂuence of electrode polarization, which leads to false 
observations. It is possible to lessen its impact by using electrodes with a large 
microscopic surface area or by operating at higher frequencies; this is because the 
effect weakens signiﬁcantly with rising frequency [3]. 
6.3.6 
Planar Transmission Method 
These different kinds of transmission lines ﬁnd widespread use in a variety of RF 
and microwave components. The microstrip line approach is the most frequent and 
straightforward method for measuring dielectric materials. It is simple to construct, 
there are few costs associated with its production, and its small construction makes it 
particularly well-suited for use in industrial settings. For the purpose of determining 
the dielectric permittivity, the test sample may function either as a substrate (when 
the sample is solid) or as a superstrate (when the sample is either solid or liquid).

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
167
Fig. 6.8 Schematic diagram 
for planar transmission line 
method (View from the top 
side of MSL) [6] 
When a dielectric sample is placed over a quasi-TEM transmission line, it is generally 
known that the effective permittivity of MSL will change, a behavior that is highly 
dependent on the permittivity of the sample itself. In order to obtain the sample’s 
dielectric characteristics, this will alter MSL’s effective dielectric constant (εeff) and 
characteristic impedance (Z0). First, you need to get the unloaded effective dielectric 
constant so you can take a reading. Then, you will need to attach the sample to 
the signal strip (as shown in Fig. 6.8). This study examines the alterations in the 
effective dielectric constant (εeff) and the characteristic impedance of a microstrip 
line (MSL). These changes can be utilized to determine the dielectric properties of 
a sample through the plane transmission line method. Bernard conducts dielectric 
measurements using a microstrip ring resonator. The approach demonstrates a change 
in the quality factor and a variation in the resonant frequency. When a sample is put 
on top of the ring, its presence alters the substrate or the air barrier, hence shifting the 
resonance frequency. When used as a substrate, rather than an overlay test material, 
the inﬂuence of the dielectric sample is able to shine through more clearly. 
6.4 
Dielectric Materials 
Studies have revealed that polymers offer appealing qualities such as high ﬂexibility, 
attractive chemical stability, cost efﬁciency, and simplicity of fabrication, which has 
led to their rising use in electronic applications [9]. Because polymers possess this 
inherent capacity, they may serve as viable substitutes for inorganic and ceramic-
based dielectric materials. Polymers provide a number of beneﬁts, but the fact that 
they have poor thermal stability and display poor dielectric constants restricts the 
majority of the applications to which they may be put. However, by manufacturing 
nanocomposites and including inorganic ﬁllers in the composites, it is possible to 
enhance the dielectric constant values [10]. Research has been done on polymer 
dielectrics in many different aspects of their applications. One example is in the ﬁeld

168
D. Nayak et al.
of microelectronics, which focuses primarily on the reduction in the size of electronic 
components [11]. 
6.4.1 
Classiﬁcation of Dielectric Materials 
Dielectric materials are sometimes called “electrically insulating materials” mate-
rials because of their insulating qualities. Traditional dielectric capacitors may be 
categorized into several groups based on the various dielectric materials. First, 
there are dielectric materials based on polymers. This kind of capacitor mostly 
uses polymer materials as its dielectric materials. Then, there are dielectric capac-
itors made of ceramic. Such capacitors’ dielectric components may be multi-phase 
ceramics, glass–ceramics, ceramic ﬁlms, etc. Graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNT) 
are two examples of the types of carbon-based materials that are utilized to make 
dielectric materials. In a variety of contexts and applications, dielectric metal alloys 
made from oxides, sulﬁdes, and nitrides of various metals are used. Perovskite mate-
rials are now being employed in applications that need them to be dielectric as well. 
In this chapter, we quickly go through every polymeric material and every composite 
that can be made from it. 
6.4.2 
Dielectric Polymer and Polymer–Polymer Composite 
Materials 
Improving polymer breakdown strength is a challenge. Ramprasad investigated 
the process of polymer breakdown strength mathematically and found that dipoles 
increased dipole-induced scattering, which reduced and constrained hot electrons. 
Electron scattering by dipoles and phonons accounted for the temperature depen-
dence of the breakdown ﬁeld. Amorphous polymers have a high-voltage poten-
tial due to their randomly dispersed dipoles. Dipole scattering restricted mobility 
may analyze dipole scattering’s effect on the polymer breakdown ﬁeld. Because of 
their low cost, high dielectric strength, high energy density, and low dielectric loss, 
polymer-based dielectrics are preferable over ceramic dielectrics for various applica-
tions. Since these capacitors contribute a signiﬁcant amount of space and weight (> 
30%), further improvements in energy and power density of dielectric materials are 
necessary for miniaturization and better functionality in contemporary electronics 
and electrical power systems. High electric energy density with minimal dielectric 
loss is a key difﬁculty in producing polymer-based dielectrics. High-k polymer and 
low-k polymer and its composites play vital roles in the dielectric applications which 
are discussed below. All the polymer and polymeric composites were synthesized 
by different polymerization processes which are described in Table 6.1.

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
169
Table 6.1 List of the different polymerization process and their importance with examples 
Polymerization 
process 
Methods and importance of the 
polymerization process 
Example of polymer 
and its composites 
Refs. 
Sol-gel method
Because the synthesis process is done at 
room temperature and organic 
ingredients may be incorporated at the 
early phases of the reaction, the sol-gel 
approach is frequently employed in the 
preparation of polymer compounds. 
Polycondensation and hydrolysis may 
also occur concurrently to form glass-like 
polymer matrices. This process may also 
be used to create polycrystals and organic 
and inorganic substances 
Sol-gel PPy
[12] 
Melt blending
Melt blending, in which polymeric 
components are melted and chilled 
(cooled), is an efﬁcient method for 
generating polymer composites 
Clay/polymer 
composites 
[13] 
Solvent method
The solvent strategy employs a process 
called polymer intercalation from a 
solution, which is a solvent system in 
which the polymer or monomer may 
swell. Water, toluene, DMSO, DMF, and 
chloroform are the most common 
solvents used to dissolve the polymer 
into the intercalates 
POP
[14] 
Free-radical 
polymerization 
A wide variety of polymers and material 
composites may be synthesized using the 
free-radical polymerization synthesis 
method. It is one of the most ﬂexible 
types of polymerization because simple 
reactions may occur between polymeric 
free-radical chain ends and other 
chemicals or substrates due to the 
generality of free-radical chemical 
interactions 
PMMA, PMMA-ZnS 
[2, 15] 
In situ 
polymerization 
To initiate polymerization, a liquid 
monomer solution is absorbed by a 
modiﬁed silicate layer, where it then 
seeps into the void between the layers 
PAni, PPy, PIn, etc
[16–18] 
Spin-on 
technique 
Making polymer thin ﬁlms using spin-on 
or spin-coating requires dissolving 
soluble linear or branched polymers in a 
solvent. To evenly distribute the polymer 
solution, we place it in a jar and spin it at 
rates between 1,500 and 500 revolutions 
per minute 
Macroporous 
polymer 
[19]
(continued)

170
D. Nayak et al.
Table 6.1 (continued)
Polymerization
process
Methods and importance of the
polymerization process
Example of polymer
and its composites
Refs.
Chemical vapor 
deposition 
An electrically charged gas begins a 
reaction with plasma in polymer CVD, 
while the substrate temperature is 
adjusted independently. The coating 
material is heated, and the pressure 
surrounding the vessel is decreased, 
allowing the polymer plasma within the 
chamber to evaporate. The vapor is kept 
from settling on the substrate, resulting in 
a homogeneous covering. The thickness 
of the ﬁlm deposition and the time 
required for the vaporization process are 
determined by temperature and pressure 
Polysiloxane
[20] 
Solvothermal
In solvothermal synthesis, the desired 
product is formed in solution using a 
closed-system technique that employs 
high temperatures and pressures to 
trigger a chemical reaction or breakdown 
of the precursor components 
1D zinc coordination 
polymer 
[21] 
Electrochemical
Electropolymerization, or the production 
of polymer ﬁlms in an electric ﬁeld, 
typically uses either a constant potential 
(potentiostatic) or a linearly scanned 
potential (potentiodynamic) technique. 
Electropolymerization, or the production 
of polymer ﬁlms using an electric ﬁeld, 
typically makes use of either a constant 
potential (potentiostatic) or a linearly 
scanned potential (potentiodynamic) 
technique 
PDMS
[22] 
Hydrothermal
Hydrothermal synthesis is a common 
method used to create nanomaterials. It is 
simply a reaction-solution process. 
During hydrothermal synthesis, 
nanomaterials may be created at 
temperatures ranging from room 
temperature to thousands of degrees 
Celsius 
Porous organic 
polymer 
[23] 
6.4.3 
Low-k Polymer and Its Composites 
If the dialectic permittivity of a polymer or polymer composite is less than 4.2, 
then the polymer or polymer composite may be referred to as having a low-k value. 
To reduce the permittivity of polymers, a number of different modiﬁcations can 
be applied to the polymer chains. Some examples of these adjustments include

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
171
Fig. 6.9 Chemical structure of low-k polymer used for dielectric application 
decreasing the ionic and orientation contributions and adding ﬂuoride or carbon 
to the polymer chain. 
Polymers, when used in dielectric applications, may be split into two cate-
gories: thermoplastic polymers and thermoset polymers. The addition polymer-
ization process is most commonly used to manufacture thermoplastic polymers. 
Common thermoplastic polymers used in insulation systems include polypropy-
lene (PP), polyethylene (PE), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polypropylene (PP), and 
polyamide (PA). Insulation systems in electrical devices beneﬁt greatly from the 
usage of thermoplastic polymers. In contrast, when heat or chemicals are used to 
cure thermostable or thermoset polymers, the polymerization process is irreversible 
and the resulting material cannot be altered. However, the composite’s electrical and 
mechanical characteristics will undergo a cataclysmic shift due to treating these ther-
mosetting polymers. These polymers are capable of taking on the shape of a resin. 
Epoxy, polyester, phenol, and silicon resins are all examples of these types of resins. 
The structure of low-k polymer is shown in Fig. 6.9. 
6.4.4 
Analysis of Important Low-k Dielectric Polymer 
6.4.4.1
Dielectric Polymers Based on Silicon-Based Materials 
These polymers are a hybrid mix with the formula RSiO3, where R may be any 
number of different things like alkyl, aryl, carboxylic acid, etc. Common silicon-
based polymers with low dielectric permittivity and microwave losses include 
poly(hydrogen silsesquioxane) (PHSSQ) and polymethyl silsesquioxane (PMSSQ).

172
D. Nayak et al.
Table 6.2 At normal temperature, the dielectric permittivity of common traditional polymers 
Polymer
Dielectric 
permittivity 
Polymer
Dielectric 
permittivity 
Poly(arylene ether)
2.9
Poly(arylene ether oxazole)
2.6–2.8 
Polyquinoline
2.8
Poly(ether ketone ketone)
3.5 
Poly(norbornene)
2.4
Silsequioxane
2.8–3.0 
Polystyrene
2.6
Fluorinated polyimide
2.6–2.8 
Poly(phenyl quinoxaline)
2.8
Poly(tetraﬂuoroethylene)
1.9 
Polynaphthalene
2.2
Non-ﬂuorinated aromatic 
polyimide 
3.2–3.6 
Parylene N
2.6
Parylene F
2.4 
Because of their outstanding thermal, chemical, mechanical, and electrical capabil-
ities, they have been widely researched for use in microelectronic packaging. The 
dielectric constants decreased gradually as frequency increased (2.96–2.55 from 
frequency ranges 100–1000 kHz). Dielectric loss rises with frequency, with a loss of 
0.02–0.032 predicted from 100 kHz to 1 MHz [24]. 
The dielectric properties of nano-hybrid composites containing the silica-based 
polymer tetraethyl orthosilicate have been investigated. The dielectric properties of 
samples made by combining polyvinylpyrrolidone and silicon dioxide using the sol-
gel technique in the presence of a coupling agent are studied. Dielectric constant and 
loss were determined using an impedance analyzer on samples with varying weight 
ratios. The estimated loss tangents demonstrate that when the silica concentration 
rises from 31.27 to 55.35 wt.%, the losses increase at low frequencies spanning from 
1 to 100 kHz [25] (Table 6.2). 
6.4.4.2
Low-k Epoxy Resins 
Low-k dielectrics make use of epoxy resins. The properties they possess make them 
perfect for use in dental products. Their mechanical qualities, great adhesion strength, 
sensible heat, and electrical resistance make them ideal for application in coatings, 
adhesives, electronic materials, and polymer matrices for ﬁber-reinforced compos-
ites. Their primary use is as a microscale organic ﬁller in dry distribution transformers. 
In order to create trifunctional epoxy resins, trimethylolpropane, and epichlorohy-
drin are combined. Low viscosity, noncrystalline, and plastic resin does not meet the 
application [26]. At low temperatures (127–348 °C), curing progresses slowly at ﬁrst, 
then levels out after a few minutes. Epoxy systems that already include ﬂuorine are 
modiﬁed with ﬂuorinated monomers and oligomers for use in dielectrics. Fluorine 
boosts the blend’s hydrophobicity but reduces its overall surface energy. Between 2 
and 10 GHz, dielectric constants ranged from 6.8 to 5.5. Epoxy resins may be manu-
factured from biodegradable components such as sugars, starches, proteins, lipids, 
and oils. There is a high demand from business because of their low production cost,

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
173
small carbon footprint, and biodegradability. Epoxy resins may be made at a low cost 
by reacting soybean oil and castor oil with glacial acetic acid. 
6.4.4.3
Fluorinated Polymers 
Fluorocarbons are nonpolar, making them hydrophobic. Fluorinated polymers 
include at least one ﬂuorine atom in the polymer chain, which limits water absorp-
tion. Fluorine may reduce the dielectric constant of polyimides. Fluorine hinders 
electronic polarization by being nonpolar and low-polarizable. Altering the polymer 
chain’s free volume changes the composite’s polarizability. PIs have strong chemical 
and thermal stability, and ﬂuorine adds performance to electronics. Fluorination is 
used to enhance PI thin-ﬁlm dielectric characteristics. Fluorine groups reduce surface 
free energy and dielectric permittivity of PI ﬁlms, according to studies. When a reduc-
tion in dielectric constant is necessary, the ﬂuorination procedure may be extended 
to epoxy resins. Epoxy resins have been used as insulation material because of their 
high electrical resistance and widespread use as molding compounds in electronic 
packaging. The regulated dielectric constants for ﬂuorinated epoxy resins range from 
2.71 to 3.25, and the related loss tangents have been estimated to be between 1.3 × 
10–3 and 3.5 × 10–3, respectively. 
6.4.4.4
Porous Polymers 
Hydrogen methyl silsesquioxane compounds, which provide low-k dielectric and 
loss properties, are promising porous polymers with low dielectric constants. They 
have a dielectric permittivity of 2.06 and have pores that are smaller than 10 nm in 
size because of their strong hydrogen bonding, which inhibits phase separation (on 
average). They are created by hybridizing the porous polymers with an amphiphilic 
block copolymer, namely poly[styrene-block-(2-vinylpyridine)] or PS-block-P2VP. 
The creation of regular nanopores in thin ﬁlms is facilitated by this hybrid composite 
[27]. It is shown that the loss at 10 kHz is 0.04 and the dielectric constants are 
3.6. The signiﬁcant spontaneous polarization is what causes the consequences of 
these features. Additionally, the polymer chain’s vast contact area leads to various 
interfacial polarizations [28]. The beneﬁts of porous poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride), often 
known as PVDF composites, in terms of mechanical strength, solvent resistance, and 
thermal stability make them valuable in applications involving multilayer dielectrics. 
At normal temperatures, PVDF composites have dielectric constants ranging from 
7 to 13 [29]. Porous PVDF composites will have two compact surface layers and a 
dielectric permittivity of 1.5 to 2.5. Studies have shown the conductivity of copper 
nanowires in porous PVDF’s dielectric behavior. When the number of nanowires 
was increased, low dielectric permittivity between 11.8 and 17.5 was observed. As 
the frequency was raised, the permittivity gradually decreased. Results from the 
dielectric permittivity have also shown that the Maxwell–Wagner–Sillars effect and 
interfacial polarization were identiﬁed.

174
D. Nayak et al.
6.4.5 
High-k Polymer and Its Composites 
In order to maximize performance, polymers with excellent dielectric properties at 
working frequencies and voltages are desired. These properties include high permit-
tivity, low dielectric loss, and a high breakdown ﬁeld [30]. High dielectric constant 
materials have a dielectric constant greater than silicon oxide (k ~ 4.2). The intrinsic 
dielectric constants of polymers have been increased using a variety of methods, 
including modifying the chain architecture of polymers, mixing polymers, dispersing 
ceramics, and conducting nanoparticles throughout polymers. There are many high-
k polymers, which are good for dielectric application, and by the addition of other 
polymers to it, their dielectric properties increased. In this chapter, we described 
some important polymers and their composites for high-k dielectric properties. 
6.4.5.1
Basic Polymer for High-k Dielectric Application 
Polyvinyl Alcohol 
Poly(vinyl alcohol), or PVA for short, is a water-soluble polymer having a high 
dielectric constant (between 5 and 8) between 10 Hz and 1 MHz, making it useful 
in low-temperature electronics. When PVA-infused composite substrates are cross-
linked with an ammonium dichromate or another cross-linking agent, the resulting 
materials have a higher dielectric strength. 
Polyvinylidene Fluoride 
Mechanically ﬂexible, low thermal conductivity, strong chemical and corrosion resis-
tance, a dielectric constant of 8, and considerable dipole moments in the CH2-CF2 
units all contribute to thermoplastic ﬂuoropolymers’ widespread usage as electrical 
insulators. With a leakage current of (4 × 10–6 A) or less, PVDF composite thin ﬁlms 
are ideal for use in microelectronics. They are spin-coated on substrates whose amor-
phous phases at interfaces exhibit greater temperature relaxation. PVDF composites 
have a decent dielectric breakdown strength and minimal power dissipation compared 
to other high-k polymeric materials. PVDF composites with high dielectric constants 
may be employed in “gated” dielectric actuators, electric stress management, and 
capacitors [29]. There are various dielectric PVDF-based composites materials with 
dielectric loss and dielectic constant are tabulated in Table 6.3.
Cyanoethyl Polymers 
CEP is an organic polymer with hydroxyl groups. A polysaccharide chain with a 
cyanoethyl side chain has a huge dipole moment. Their dielectric constant might

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
175
Table 6.3 Composites based on polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF) and its dielectric property 
PVDF-based composites
Filler materials
Dielectric loss
Dielectric constant
Refs. 
PVDF-10 T
TiO2
3.29
23.06
[31] 
PVDF/PVA-MK (30%)
PVA and MK
0.1 (103 Hz)
4.27 (103 Hz)
[32] 
PVDF/GO (20%)
GO
0.28
1.83
[33] 
Zn/PVDF
Zn core–shell
3
60
[34] 
Ba0.6Sr0.4TiO3/PVDF
BST
8.7
[35] 
RuO2@nBaTiO3/PVDF
RuO2@nBT
1.467
3837.16
[10]
reach 16. Spin-coating CEP composites into thin ﬁlms provides superior dielec-
tric and semiconductor interfaces, like PVA composites. Cross-linking agents up to 
50 wt% of CEP polymers reduce leakage current the greatest, meeting application 
requirements [36]. 
6.4.5.2
High-k Polymer–Polymer Blends and Composites 
Polymer systems’ desired qualities may be achieved through blending polymers 
with the right structure and properties in order to maximize the blend’s permit-
tivity. Researchers may create high-permittivity polymer blends by combining high-
permittivity polymers with low-permittivity polymers. The improved permittivity 
comes from polymer–polymer interactions and novel mix topologies. The permit-
tivity of polymer blend system (kblend) is intermediate between components, kpolymer-A 
< kblend < kpolymer-B. kpolymer-A and kpolymer-B are mix polymers. This blending process is 
a straightforward and effective path for organic materials, compared to other difﬁcult 
synthetic procedures, generating excellent dielectric and mechanical characteristics, 
notably useful for capacitor manufacturing. 
Researchers also have concentrated on polymer composites to boost the permit-
tivity of polymer systems to fulﬁll electronic industry needs. High-permittivity 
polymer composites use various ﬁllers distributed in the polymer matrix. Polymer 
composites will have high permittivity, great temperature stability, and frequency 
properties by mixing high-k inorganic materials with organic insulation. Two ﬁllers 
are often used. High-k ceramic particles and electrically conductive additives like 
metals or carbon are used. These two additives improve polymer composites in 
various ways. Nanoﬁller agglomeration and poor compatibility between inorganic 
ﬁllers and organic polymer matrices are major roadblocks to composite advance-
ment. When ﬁllers are added to composites made from high-k polymer systems, the 
leakage current and dielectric loss of such materials rise; ﬁnally, the vast disparity 
in permittivity causes the electric ﬁeld within the composites to be distorted when 
subjected to an external electric ﬁeld. There are different polymer blenders and 
polymer composites which showed high-k dielectric constant are discussed below.

176
D. Nayak et al.
Polymer–Polymer Blends and Composites for High-k Dielectric Properties 
Dang investigated a PP/PVDF blend, which stands for polypropylene/polyvinylidene 
ﬂuoride [37]. Novel high PVDF is combined with PP matrix to increase permittivity. 
Permittivity reached ~5.4 at 1000 Hz, approximately 3 times pure PP’s (~2.2). This 
blended solution combines the dielectric characteristics of PVDF with the process-
ability of polymers. They might offer a new generation of capacitor dielectric ﬁlms. 
Using solution mixing and casting, polymer blend ﬁlms were made. This ﬁlm’s 
100 Hz permittivity is 12. This is higher than PMMA (~2.9) and nears PVDF. 
Nan et al. explained the combined ArPTU with PVDF for solution-cast composite 
ﬁlms for dielectric application [38]. Permittivity and dielectric loss at 1 kHz are 9.2 
and 0.02. Blend ﬁlms restrict early polarization saturation at low ﬁelds, improving 
breakdown strength and energy density. PVDF/ArPTU (90/10) ﬁlm has 10.8 J/ 
cm3 energy density at 700 MV/m and 83% charge–discharge efﬁciency. At certain 
volume fractions, the permittivity of polyvinylidene ﬂuoride-polyamide (PA11)/ 
PVDF blends can approach 60, which is twelve times greater than PA11 (~5) alone 
and ﬁve times higher than PVDF (~12). Dielectric permittivity (kblend) surpassed 
those of the constituent polymers, unlike ordinary polymer blends [39]. These ﬁnd-
ings show that polymer-blended systems with high-permittivity components are a 
new, versatile, easy-to-process material. They may be used in ﬂexible electronics. 
For 
low-loss, 
high-energy-density 
capacitors, 
Zhang 
et 
al. 
suggested 
polar-ﬂuoropolymer 
blends 
with 
tailed 
nanostructures 
[40]. 
Poly(ethylene-
chlorotriﬂuoroethylene)
[P(VDF-CTFE)]
and
poly(vinylidene
ﬂuoride-
chlorotriﬂuoroethylene) [P(VDF-CTFE)] are two examples of such mixes (ECTFE). 
Classical composite theory predicts a dielectric constant of 7 and modest loss (~1%) 
for blend and cross-linked blend ﬁlms. Cross-linking blends increased nanoscale 
mixing, reducing losses in blend ﬁlms at high ﬁelds while preserving energy density. 
6.4.6 
Ceramic and Polymer-Ceramic Composites 
as Dielectric Materials for High-k and Low-k Dielectric 
Applications 
Linear or nonlinear dielectric materials exist. An electric ﬁeld induces polarization in 
linear dielectrics, and removing it depolarizes the material. There is a subcategory for 
both polar and nonpolar substances. Polar molecules retain their dipole moments even 
when exposed to no external electric ﬁeld. Generally speaking, the dipole moments 
of molecules in polar dielectrics are larger when they are not symmetric. They expe-
rience electronic and ionic polarization, making them molecules without perma-
nent dipole moments. Alkali halides, metal oxides, parafﬁn, benzene, and carbon 
chlorides are all examples of ionic crystals. Molecules in nonpolar dielectrics do 
not exhibit a persistent dipole–dipole moment because of the symmetry between 
the positive and negative charges. External ﬁelds cause them to become polarized.

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
177
Fig. 6.10 Classiﬁcation of dielectric ceramic materials 
When it comes to polar molecules, atoms or molecules with spherical symmetry 
have their electron clouds pointing in the direction of the electric ﬁeld. Positive and 
negative charges are generated via polarization. These materials include atoms or 
molecules such as silicon, as well as inert gases, liquids, and solids. These chemicals 
are polarized by electrons. Ceramics are composed of inorganic, nonmetallic, and 
nonorganic components, as seen in Fig. 6.10. Heat processing is possible with single 
or polycrystalline ceramics. Ceramics are corrosion-resistant while remaining stiff 
and brittle. Because new technologies do not need traditional ceramic compounds, 
better ceramics have been developed to keep up. Despite its mechanical shortcom-
ings, ceramics have a high stiffness factor, hardness, and abrasion resistance. They 
are resistant to corrosion and heat. Modern ceramics are employed in the electrical 
industry due to their material properties. Ceramics are resistant to both weather and 
electricity. Ceramics are used in the electrical and engineering industries because of 
their properties. Advanced ceramics that are often used include aluminum oxides and 
zirconium oxides. Carbides, nitrides, silicides, and borides are examples of ceramics 
that are not oxides. Single-crystal silicates are used in high-capacity capacitors, 
whereas steatite tubes are characterized by low permittivity and capacitance. The 
high permittivity of titanium oxide led to the development of ultracapacitors. 
6.4.6.1
Glass–Ceramic 
Some of us may be aware that sand from the soil is heated and melted to create 
glass. The amorphous compounds of silicon and lime make up glasses. Glasses 
made from soda-lime and silicate are rather common. Despite their names, soda-lime 
and silicate glass–ceramics do not include any of the aforementioned elements. Pure 
silicate and borate glasses have a 3.2 to 3.8 MHz dielectric constant. Even though the 
composites have a higher dielectric permittivity than pure borates and silicates, their

178
D. Nayak et al.
values are still below 4.2, making them low-k dielectric ceramics. The dielectric 
constant might be increased to more than 4.2 with the help of certain ‘dopants. 
Alumina doping helps ceramics attain 5 and 1 MHz permittivity. Lead borosilicate 
glass (~7.0), magnesium aluminosilicate glass (~5.0), calcium aluminosilicate glass 
(~6.0), and lithium silicate glass (~6.5) have low permittivity as compared to others. 
Glass–ceramics have high dielectric constants and thermal expansion coefﬁcients, 
making them ideal for multilayer ceramics. High-performance packaging and pin 
grid arrays employ these chemicals [41]. 
Borosilicate glass has a dielectric constant between 3.9 and 4.2, placing it in the 
family of low-k dielectrics with two other amorphous phases. The matrix was formed 
at 950 °C, matching silica’s thermal expansion coefﬁcient. Extra dopants are needed 
to prevent silica matrix martensitic transformation. Pure silica has a permittivity of 
4 and is the inorganic limit. Porosity and how porous channels increase dielectric 
characteristics have been studied in this substance [42]. Polymers are included in 
these silica matrices. Polymer-modiﬁed ceramics fulﬁll low permittivity and losses. 
Molecular clusters may be seen in microscopic examinations of silica and polymer-
modiﬁed silica gels. In order to create nanopores, a two-phase technique is required, 
consisting of a continuous solid phase and a porous air phase. 
Connection in ULSI circuits, including computer DRAM chips, MPUs, and appli-
cation-speciﬁc ICs, requires multilayer dielectric thin ﬁlms. Therefore, the dielectric 
permittivity of these layers should be kept low to minimize signal latency and cross 
talk. Fluorinating silica matrices is one approach to reducing dielectric permittivity. 
Silicon oxide-ﬂuoride ﬁlms are formed on silicon via chemical vapor deposition 
(CVD) [43]. 
Borophosphosilicate (B2O3–P2O5–SiO2) ceramic glass is a good electronic pack-
aging material. With their glass–ceramic composition, boron trioxide and phospho-
rous pentoxide boost the coefﬁcients. The 1:1:2 stoichiometric ratios characterize 
these glass–ceramics dielectric constant and loss tangent. Glass-derived ceramics 
internalize these chemicals. Additional sintering and surface crystallization yields 
external nucleation in these composites, and the use of silver, gold, and copper in 
metallization indicates the viability of tape casting for fabricating multilayer glass– 
ceramic sheets. Borophosphosilicate glass–ceramics made by heating ﬁne-grained 
boron phosphate glass–ceramics. Silica renders the composite acid, basic, and water-
resistant. Sol-gel synthesis includes introducing reagents at the correct temperature 
and pressure in an alkaline environment. Boron (tetramethyl borate), phosphorus 
(tetramethylphosphite), and modiﬁed silica (tetramethylorthosilicate) alkoxides are 
used. (Tetramethoxysilane will also be utilized as a catalyst) [44]. 
6.4.6.2
Oxide Composites of Glass–Ceramic 
To create samples with low permittivity and optimum thermal expansion coefﬁcients, 
dielectric interlayers mix cordierite, quartz, and borosilicate substrates. This oxide 
glass–ceramic is used in high-temperature ceramic ﬁlters, structural ceramics, and

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
179
solid oxide fuel cells. Ceramic ﬁllers include bismuth, silica, alumina, and magne-
sium oxides. Impedance analyzer dielectric constants are 8.8–9.04 at 13.4 GHz. The 
calcium titanate powder dielectric resonator is sintered for 4 h at 1450 °C at 6.55 GHz, 
and dielectric permittivity was 40.5–20.7 [45]. It has been shown that oxides of 
ceramic-glass composites, such as bismuth, sodium, potassium, and titanates, all 
contribute to better energy storage. High sintering temperatures and sintering aids 
maximize microwave ceramics. These aids may boost permittivity and thermal 
expansion. Discontinuous and increased grain development in oxide ceramics reduce 
performance. To prevent holes and discontinuous grain development, chemicals and 
many precautions are utilized. 
6.4.7 
Dielectric Perovskite and Dielectric Polymer-Perovskite 
Composite Materials 
Due to the fact that electro-ceramics may be made from more than 3000 different 
compounds, perovskites have drawn particular interest in the ﬁeld of dielectrics for 
microwave communication. Perovskites are one of the few ceramics that enable appli-
cations demanding optimal dielectric characteristics and low TCF values, making 
them a promising candidate for use as microwave dielectrics for wireless communi-
cation. There are ﬁve distinct lattice conﬁgurations in which the simple perovskite 
structures may be found: the cubic, tetragonal, hexagonal, orthorhombic, and rhom-
bohedral structures. The structure of these inﬂuences the operating temperatures 
in microwave devices, and each of them has a distinct transition for providing 
paraelectricity [46]. 
Common structures in low-cost perovskite electronics include A-titanate, A-
zirconate, and R-BO3. These crystals have a non-perovskite structure with a high 
packing factor and include a, B, and R as substitutes for barium, calcium, aluminum, 
strontium, magnesium, and zinc. They are straightforward perovskite ceramics, 
thanks to the chemicals in their metal oxide composite. In addition, the addition 
of rare earth metals like neodymium and lanthanum, which are stoichiometrically 
regulated, results in modiﬁed perovskite ceramics with speciﬁc uses. In recent years, 
a barium magnesium and tantalum (BMT) composite has shown to be an effective 
hexagonal perovskite, thanks to its stable temperature and optimum temperature coef-
ﬁcients. Dopants like niobium and manganese may be used to dope BMTs, which 
have high dielectric characteristics (permittivity of 25 at 10 GHz) and a TCF of 
2.7 ppm/K. It was also proposed that at high sintering temperatures of 1650 °C, this 
might be difﬁcult for commercial application since defects in the material would be 
introduced [47].

180
D. Nayak et al.
6.4.8 
Dielectric Rare-Earth and Polymer-Rare Earth 
Composite Materials 
Since lead-free ceramics (BaTiO3) are not dangerous to people or the environment, 
they are particularly popular in the electronics sector. Due to its exceptional electrical 
characteristics, high permittivity, and use in cutting-edge electrical appliances, rare 
earth (RA)-doped barium titanate (BaTiO3) has had its dielectric properties exam-
ined. Here, research on the dielectric properties of BaTiO3 ceramics doped with RA 
(lanthanum (La), erbium (Er), neodymium (Nd), samarium (Sm), and cerium (Ce)) 
was described. The primary goal of this review is to investigate the effects of doping 
on the described RA’s BaTiO3’s dielectric characteristics. 
6.4.9 
Carbon and Polymer-Carbon-Based Composite 
Materials for High- and Low-k Dielectric Application 
High-k dielectric polymer composites may be made by combining carbon nanos-
tructures with polymers. Despite their low percolation threshold, nanocomposites 
have high permittivity. Polymers are the ﬁrst step. Practical applications are limited 
by the high dielectric loss and low breakdown ﬁeld. The biggest challenge is 
resolving conﬂicts. Carbon-based compounds may improve the dielectric charac-
teristics of polymers. Table 6.4 summarizes some polymer-carbon composite studies 
for high dielectric applications. Carbon nanotubes and graphene have the poten-
tial to improve the dielectric properties of dielectric polymers at low concentra-
tions while maintaining composite ﬂexibility [52]. High electrical conductivity and 
signiﬁcant dielectric loss are possible near percolation when conductive particles 
tunnel. Composites are unable to endure electric ﬁelds over the percolation threshold. 
This ﬂaw hampered the formation of conductive high-k composites. It is critical 
to raise the dielectric constant while lowering dielectric loss and composite ﬂex-
ibility. Carbon additions improve matrix polymers mechanically and electrically. 
Graphite, carbon ﬁber, CNTs, graphene, and reduced graphene oxide are exam-
ples of carbon ﬁllers. According to experts, polymer-carbon nanocomposites have 
a variety of uses. Carbon improves the electrical and mechanical characteristics of 
polymers. Carbon-containing polymer composites have received a lot of attention. 
Carbon comes in a variety of shapes, sizes, and characteristics. The enormous surface 
area of carbon strengthens composites. Under mild stress, carbon nanotubes increase 
their mechanical and electrical qualities. CNTs beneﬁt from a high aspect ratio.
Filler geometry, size, surface area, physical and chemical properties, interfa-
cial interactions with the matrix-polymer, ﬁller–ﬁller interactions, ﬁller concentra-
tion, mixing method, temperature, shear effects, composite morphology, and oper-
ating frequency can all have an impact on the dielectric properties of polymer-
carbon composites [53]. It is possible to use one-, two-, or three-dimensional 
composite ﬁllings. Thanks to their excellent functional and structural features,

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
181
Table 6.4 Rare-earth-doped ceramics dielectric properties 
Ba1-xLa2x/3TiO3 
Curie 
temp. 
(K) 
Permittivity 
Ref. 
Ba1-xSm2x/3TiO3 
Curie 
temp. 
(K) 
Permittivity
Ref. 
X = 0.00
390
5900
[48] 
X = 0.00
390
5800
[49] 
X = 0.02
353
4600
X = 0.02
373
5200 
X = 0.04
318
6500
X = 0.04
353
7000 
X = 0.06
293
9100
X = 0.06
343
7400 
X = 0.08
230
8600
Ba1-xCexTiO3
Curie temp 
(K) 
Permittivity 
Ref. 
Ba1-xErxTiO3
Curie 
temp 
(K) 
Permittivity 
Ref. 
X = 0.00
110
1000
[50] 
X = 0.00
133
5350
[51] 
X = 0.01
100
2050 
X = 0.01
133
19,606
X = 0.01
100
5050
Table 6.5 Polymer-carbon-based dielectric materials and its properties 
Composites
Dielectric constant
Dielectric loss
Refs. 
PAni/rGO
51.8
0.0093
[54] 
PAni/rGO/BaTiO2
54
7.83
[55] 
PVDF/CNT
39
87
[56] 
PVA/GA
70
0.9
[57] 
CNT/GNP
41
0.9
[57] 
carbonaceous nanoﬁllers like CNTs and graphene play a crucial role. Table 6.5 
showed some polymer-carbon-based dielectric material properties that are highly 
useful for optoelectronic applications. 
6.4.10 
Negative Permittivity Polymer Composites 
There has been a lot of research on the positive permittivity of dielectric compos-
ites over the years; however, certain met composites, because of their unusual 
electromagnetic properties, may generate a negative permittivity. Negative permit-
tivity from metallic wire arrays and electric ﬁelds provide negative permeability in 
epsilon-negative materials (ENMs). Theoretically, applied voltage and ENM current 
follow a new dielectric theory basic. They are mostly used in electronic packaging 
as interference shields or insulators between layers of dielectric composites. This 
ﬁtting approach improves space-charge polarization owing to two heterogeneous 
interfaces. New literature reviews ENM-promising polymer-based composites. A 
nickel-rutile cermet negative permittivity metamaterial was explored in liquid–solid

182
D. Nayak et al.
structure compounds. The conduction mechanism shifted from hopping to metallic 
when nickel concentration increased in percolative cermet. The magnetic behavior 
of the epsilon-negative cermet was less than 1, conﬁrming that conductive networks 
caused a high-frequency diamagnetic response of eddy currents [58]. After sintering, 
indium oxide-doped ceramics were studied for negative permittivity. The negative 
permittivity seen during monophase indium-tin-oxide sintering was traced back to an 
increase in the concentration of charge carriers, as predicted by the Drude–Lorentz 
oscillator model. The dielectric properties were inﬂuenced by the presence of free 
carriers [59]. 
Negative permittivity metamaterials with “bilayers” have been created to ﬁnd 
the frequency zones with the greatest and lowest dielectric permittivity. Wang et al. 
(2016) discovered that permittivity increased by 40% while dielectric loss remained 
at 0.06. (considered low at relaxation frequencies). The author also showed thickness 
ratio and single-layer composites versus dielectric characteristics [60]. 
For the purpose of studying diamagnetic ENMs, Engheta et al. [61] recommended 
using a narrow subwavelength cavity dielectric resonator constructed from meta-
materials with negative permittivity and permeability. This discovery is important, 
as metamaterial-based composite production uses mathematical procedures [61]. 
After this investigation, a laminated composite with a negative permittivity inter-
mediate layer was investigated to increase its permittivity. Wang et al. [62] found 
that strong interfacial polarization and low-loss tangent owing to the ohmic barrier 
effect increased permittivity. Table 6.6 showed some examples of negative polymeric 
composites that showed a negative dielectric constant.
6.5 
Summary 
This chapter provides a comprehensive examination of dielectric materials, high-
lighting their enormous variety in terms of both materials and manufacture. The 
majority of the materials included in this study are ceramics, metals (oxide, sulﬁde, 
and nitride), carbon-based materials, and polymers, which provide a clear distinction 
between their uses for energy storage, insulation, energy storage, and power transmis-
sion due to their dielectric properties. Both low-permittivity and high-permittivity 
materials that may be used in a variety of applications are distinguished by the 
materials discussed above. 
There is great potential in the development of hybrid polymer composites that 
include natural ﬁber reinforcement, and it is essential that researchers learn how to 
optimize their characteristics for use in industry. These composites have the potential 
to be employed as intrinsically conductive polymers (ICPs) in the semiconductor 
industry; nevertheless, lowering the material’s high contact resistance remains a 
challenge. When a change in pressure or temperature is given to a functional model, 
hybrid polymer composites are created to simplify the ﬂow of electricity in ICPs 
and maximize load transfers. Dielectric constants must be nominal for proper charge

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
183
Table 6.6 Dielectric characteristics of epsilon-negative polymeric composites 
Composites
Filler materials
Dielectric loss
Dielectric constant
Refs. 
Ti3AlC2-polyimide
Ti3AlC2
0.1–100 
(between 
10 MHz and 
1 GHz) 
−1200 toward 0 
(between 10 MHz and 
1 GHz) 
[63] 
Graphene/ 
polyvinylidene ﬂuoride 
Single-layer 
graphene 
0.1 lowest and 
1 M highest  
(between 
200 kHz and 
1 MHz)  
−7250 constant 
(between 200 kHz 
and 1 MHz)  
[64] 
Polydimethylsiloxane/ 
multi-walled carbon 
nanotubes (PDMS/ 
MWCNTs) 
Membranous 
metacomposite 
0.01–100 
(between 
10 MHz and 
1 GHz) 
300 toward −20 @ 
933 MHz (between 
10 MHz and 1 GHz) 
[65] 
Flexible graphene/ 
PDMS metacomposite 
Flexible graphene 
addition 
–
−61,250 toward − 
40,855 (between 
10 kHz and 1 MHz 
[66] 
MWCNT/TiN/CCTO
Sintered in argon 
and nitrogen 
1000 to 100 
(between 93 
and 683 MHz) 
−200 max (between 
93 and 683 MHz) 
[67] 
Ag/Al2O3/3D-BaTiO3/ 
epoxy 
Silver-conductive 
particles 
0.02 toward 10 
(between 
10 kHz and 
1 MHz)  
−4 M toward  0  
(between 10 kHz and 
1 MHz)  
[68]
export, and dielectric losses must be reduced to avoid the leakage of undesired charges 
that might harm the composite material at the working temperature. 
Even though ceramics have excellent dielectric properties, they cannot be used 
in current applications due to their high production temperature, high cost, and 
low mechanical strength. The great electrical performance of polymers and their 
composite combinations make them good material for use in integrated circuits and 
multilayer dielectric printed circuit boards. In an electric ﬁeld, polymer compos-
ites undergo polarization processes that give them a high dielectric constant while 
exhibiting little dielectric loss, similar to ceramic composites. Fiber-reinforced 
polymer composites (FRP) are a kind of polymer composite that may be used for 
speciﬁc purposes that might impact the cost, processing power, green material usage, 
and waste management of energy storage and insulation systems. 
Acknowledgements The authors would like to express their gratitude to the Indian Institute of 
Technology (Indian School of Mines) Dhanbad, India. 
Conﬂict of Interest The authors conﬁrm that there are no personal or professional conﬂicts of 
interest that may be seen as inﬂuencing the ﬁndings given in this chapter.

184
D. Nayak et al.
References 
1. Al-Muntaser AA, Pashameah RA, Sharma K, Alzahrani E, Farea MO, Morsi MA (2022) α-
MoO3 nanobelts/CMC-PVA nanocomposites: hybrid materials for optoelectronic and dielectric 
applications. J Polym Res 29:274 
2. Nayak D, Choudhary RB (2019) Augmented optical and electrical properties of PMMA-ZnS 
nanocomposites as emissive layer for OLED applications. Opt Mater 91:470–481 
3. Al-Muntaser AA, Adel Pashameah R, Sharma K, Alzahrani E, Hameed ST, Morsi MA 
(2022) Boosting of structural, optical, and dielectric properties of PVA/CMC polymer blend 
using SrTiO3 perovskite nanoparticles for advanced optoelectronic applications. Opt Mater 
132:112799 
4. Adimule V, Yallur BC, Bhowmik D, Gowda AHJ (2022) Dielectric properties of P3BT doped 
ZrY2O3/CoZrY2O3 nanostructures for low cost optoelectronics applications. Trans Electr 
Electron Mater 23:288–303 
5. Jha SN, Narsaiah K, Basediya AL, Sharma R, Jaiswal P, Kumar R, Bhardwaj R (2011) Measure-
ment techniques and application of electrical properties for nondestructive quality evaluation 
of foods—a review. JFST 48:387–411 
6. Jilani MT, Rehman AMK, Khan SMAMT (2012) A brief review of measuring techniques for 
characterization of dielectric materials. ITEE 1 
7. Venkatesh MS, Raghavan GSV (2005) An overview of dielectric properties measuring 
techniques. CSBE 47:7.15–7.30 
8. Saeed K, Shaﬁque MF, Byrne MB, Hunter IC (2012) Planar microwave sensors for complex 
permittivity characterization of materials and their applications. Applied Measurement 
Systems. InTech 
9. Qiu J, Gu Q, Sha Y, Huang Y, Zhang M, Luo Z (2022) Preparation and application of dielectric 
polymers with high permittivity and low energy loss: a mini review. J Appl Polym Sci 139:52367 
10. Silakaew K, Swatsitang E, Thongbai P (2022) Novel polymer composites of RuO2@nBaTiO3/ 
PVDF with a high dielectric constant. Ceram Int 48:18925–18932 
11. Deng Q, Huang Y, Chen B, Bo M, Feng Y (2022) Conductive V2C MXene and paralelec-
tric SrTiO3 containing polymer composites with high dielectric constant. Colloids Surf A: 
Physicochem Eng Asp 632:127763 
12. Zhang Z, Wu D, Jiang L, Liang F, Rui Y, Tang B (2022) One-step synthesis based on non-
aqueous sol-gel conductive polymer-coated SnO2 nanoparticles as advanced anode materials 
for lithium-ion batteries. J Alloys Compd 899:163274 
13. Dlamini DS, Mishra SB, Mishra AK, Mamba BB (2011) Comparative studies of the morpho-
logical and thermal properties of clay/polymer nanocomposites synthesized via melt blending 
and modiﬁed solution blending methods. J Compos Mater 45:2211–2216 
14. Ashirov T, Song KS, Coskun A (2022) Salt-templated solvothermal synthesis of dioxane-linked 
three-dimensional nanoporous organic polymers for carbon dioxide and iodine capture. ACS 
Appl Nano Mater 5:13711–13719 
15. Nayak D, Choudhary RB, Kandulna R, Mandal G (2019) Investigation of structural, optical 
and electrical performance of ZnS sensitized PMMA nanocomposite as an emissive layer for 
OLED application, p 020017 
16. Nayak D, Choudhary RB (2022) Inﬂuence of ZnS on the structural, morphological, optical and 
thermal properties of Polyindole for an emissive layer. Inorg Chem Commun 144:109824 
17. Choudhary RB, Nayak D (2021) Tailoring the properties of 2-DrGO-PPy-ZnS nanocomposite 
as emissive layer for OLEDs. Optik 231:166336 
18. Verma A, Choudhary RB, Nayak D, Mandal G (2020) Structural analysis with augmented opto-
electronic performance of polyindole–polypyrrole–cadmium sulﬁde nanohybrid: PIN/PPY/ 
CdS. J Inorg Organomet Polym Mater 30:2683–2691 
19. Jiang P, McFarland MJ (2004) Large-scale fabrication of wafer-size colloidal crystals, macro-
porous polymers and nanocomposites by spin-coating. J Am Chem Soc 126:13778–13786

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
185
20. Montméat P, Dechamp J, Enyedi G, Fournel F, Zavvou Z, Jousseaume V (2022) Initiated 
chemical vapor deposition of polysiloxane as adhesive nanolayer for silicon wafer bonding. 
Mater Sci Semicond Process 148:106808 
21. Wu J, Liu C, Sun P, Tang J, Wang X, Wu T (2022) A 1D zinc coordination polymer built from 
the in situ generated ligand of bisimidazole-tetrathiolate via solvothermal reaction. J Solid State 
Chem 312:123180 
22. Shi K, Zou H, Sun B, Jiang P, He J, Huang X (2020) Dielectric modulated cellulose paper/ 
PDMS-based triboelectric nanogenerators for wireless transmission and electropolymerization 
applications. Adv Funct Mater 30:1904536 
23. Das S, Chowdhury IH, Chakraborty A, Naskar MK, Sarkar M, Manirul Islam SK (2022) Porous 
organic polymer (POP) nanosheets: an efﬁcient photo-catalyst for visible-light assisted CO2 
reduction. Adv Mater 3:3165–3173 
24. Zhao X-Y, Liu H-J (2010) Review of polymer materials with low dielectric constant. Polym. 
Int 
25. Bahari A, Shahbazi M (2016) Electrical properties of PVP–SiO2–TMSPM hybrid thin ﬁlms 
as OFET gate dielectric. J Electron Mater 45:1201–1209 
26. Haque SM, Rey JAA, Masúd AA, Umar Y, Albarracin R (2017) Electrical properties of different 
polymeric materials and their applications: the inﬂuence of electric ﬁeld. In Properties and 
applications of polymer dielectrics. InTech 
27. Cao M, Li L, Bin HW, Wu SY, Chen XM (2021) Greatly enhanced permittivity in BaTiO3-epoxy 
dielectric composites with improved connectivity of ceramic phase. J Materiomics 7:1–7 
28. Zhu X, Yang J, Dastan D, Garmestani H, Fan R, Shi Z (2019) Fabrication of core-shell structured 
Ni@BaTiO3 scaffolds for polymer composites with ultrahigh dielectric constant and low loss. 
Compos Part A Appl Sci 125:105521 
29. Li L, Cheng J, Cheng Y, Han T, Liang X, Zhao Y, Zhao G, Dong L (2020) Polymer dielectrics 
exhibiting an anomalously improved dielectric constant simultaneously achieved high energy 
density and efﬁciency enabled by CdSe/Cd 1–x Zn x S quantum dots. J Mater Chem 8:13659– 
13670 
30. Qenawy SA, Nasrat LS, Ismail HM, Asaad JN (2020) Evaluation of dielectric strength of SiR/ 
TiO2 composites using feed-forward neural network. IET Nanodielectrics 3:74–80 
31. Kulkarni ND, Kumari P (2023) Development of highly ﬂexible PVDF-TiO2 nanocomposites 
for piezoelectric nanogenerator applications. Mater Res Bull 157:112039 
32. Alhusaiki-Alghamdi HM (2022) Molecular structural, optical analyses, and dielectric proper-
ties of PVDF/PVA-MK composites. Polym Bull 
33. Panda M, Sultana N, Singh AK (2022) Structural and optical properties of PVDF/GO 
nanocomposites. Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct 30:559–570 
34. Li T, Zhou W, Li B, Li Y, Cao D, Zhou J, Zuo J, Cai J, Wang G, Liu D, Cai H (2022) 
Enhanced dielectric and thermal properties of Zn/PVDF composites by tailoring core@double-
shell structured Zn particles. Compos Part A Appl Sci 157:106947 
35. Guo Y, Wu S, Liu S, Xu J, Pawlikowska E, Szafran M, Rydosz A, Gao F (2022) Enhanced 
dielectric tunability and energy storage density of sandwich-structured Ba0.6Sr0.4TiO3/PVDF 
composites. Mater Lett 306:130910. 
36. Wang B, Huang W, Chi L, Al-Hashimi M, Marks TJ, Facchetti A (2018) High- k gate dielectrics 
for emerging ﬂexible and stretchable electronics. Chem Rev 118:5690–5754 
37. Dang Z-M, Yan W-T, Xu H-P (2007) Novel high-dielectric-permittivity poly(vinylidene 
ﬂuoride)/polypropylene blend composites: the inﬂuence of the poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) 
concentration and compatibilizer. J Appl Polym Sci 105:3649–3655 
38. Li W, Jiang L, Zhang X, Shen Y, Nan CW (2014) High-energy-density dielectric ﬁlms based on 
polyvinylidene ﬂuoride and aromatic polythiourea for capacitors. J Mater Chem A 2:15803– 
15807 
39. Li R, Xiong C, Kuang D, Dong L, Lei Y, Yao J, Jiang M, Li L (2008) Polyamide 11/ 
poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) blends as novel ﬂexible materials for capacitors. Macromol Rapid 
Commun 29:1449–1454 
40. Nan C-W (1993) Physics of inhomogeneous inorganic materials. Prog Mater Sci 37:1–116

186
D. Nayak et al.
41. Zhao H, Chen L, Luan X, Zhang X, Yun J, Xu T (2017) Synthesis, pyrolysis of a novel liquid 
SiBCN ceramic precursor and its application in ceramic matrix composites. J Eur Ceram Soc 
37:1321–1329 
42. Rodeghiero E, Moore B, Wolkenberg B, Wuthenow M, Tse O, Giannelis E (1998) Sol-gel 
synthesis of ceramic matrix composites. Mater Sci Eng A 244:11–21 
43. Xu J, Wong CP (2007) Characterization and properties of an organic–inorganic dielectric 
nanocomposite for embedded decoupling capacitor applications. Compos Part A Appl Sci 
38:13–19 
44. Yi L, Zhang J, Yang J, Sun F, Zhang H, Zhao L (2018) Effect of annealing induced crystalline 
evolution on the scratch resistance of polylactide. Tribol Int 128:328–336 
45. Reaney IM, Iddles D (2006) Microwave dielectric ceramics for resonators and ﬁlters in mobile 
phone networks. J Am Ceram Soc, 060428035142006 
46. Youssef AM, Farag HK, El-Kheshen A, Hammad FF (2018) Synthesis of nano-structured 
strontium titanate by sol-gel and solid state routes. SILICON 10:1225–1230 
47. Imran Z, Raﬁq MA, Ahmad M, Rasool K, Batool SS, Hasan MM (2013) Temperature dependent 
transport and dielectric properties of cadmium titanate nanoﬁber mats. AIP Adv 3:032146 
48. Ganguly M, Rout SK, Sinha TP, Sharma SK, Park HY, Ahn CW, Kim IW (2013) Character-
ization and rietveld reﬁnement of A-site deﬁcient lanthanum doped barium titanate. J Alloys 
Compd 579:473–484 
49. Ismail FA, Osman RAM, Idris MS (2016) Review on dielectric properties of rare earth doped 
barium titanate. 090005 
50. Yasmm S, Choudhury S, Hakim MA, Bhuiyan AH, Rahman MJ (2011) Effect of cerium doping 
on microstructure and dielectric properties of BaTiO3 ceramics. JMST 27:759–763 
51. Leyet Y, Peña R, Zulueta Y, Guerrero F, Anglada-Rivera J, Romaguera Y, de la Cruz JP (2012) 
Phase transition and PTCR effect in erbium doped BT ceramics. MSEB 177:832–837 
52. Nayak S (2019) Dielectric properties of polymer–carbon composites, 211–234 
53. Mittal G, Dhand V, Rhee KY, Park S-J, Lee WR (2015) A review on carbon nanotubes and 
graphene as ﬁllers in reinforced polymer nanocomposites. J Ind Eng Chem 21:11–25 
54. Cho S, Kim M, Lee JS, Jang J (2015) Polypropylene/polyaniline nanoﬁber/reduced graphene 
oxide nanocomposite with enhanced electrical, dielectric, and ferroelectric properties for a high 
energy density capacitor. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 7:22301–22314 
55. Tabhane GH, Giripunje SM, Kondawar SB (2021) Fabrication and dielectric performance of 
RGO-PANI reinforced PVDF/BaTiO3 composite for energy harvesting. Synth Met 279:116845 
56. Al-Saleh MH (2019) Carbon-based polymer nanocomposites as dielectric energy storage 
materials. Nanotechnology 30:062001 
57. Wang Z, Han NM, Wu Y, Liu X, Shen X, Zheng Q, Kim J-K (2017) Ultrahigh dielectric 
constant and low loss of highly-aligned graphene aerogel/poly(vinyl alcohol) composites with 
insulating barriers. Carbon 123:385–394 
58. Fan G, Wang Z, Wei Z, Liu Y, Fan R (2020) Negative dielectric permittivity and high-frequency 
diamagnetic responses of percolated nickel/rutile cermets. Compos Part A Appl Sci 139:106132 
59. Fan G, Wang Z, Sun K, Liu Y, Fan R (2021) Doped ceramics of indium oxides for negative 
permittivity materials in MHz-kHz frequency regions. JMST 61:125–131 
60. Wang J, Shi Z, Mao F, Chen S, Wang X (2017) Bilayer polymer metacomposites containing 
negative permittivity layer for new high-k materials. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 9:1793–1800 
61. Engheta N (2002) An idea for thin subwavelength cavity resonators using metamaterials with 
negative permittivity and permeability. IEEE Antennas Wirel Propag Lett 1:10–13 
62. Wang Z, Sun K, Xie P, Hou Q, Liu Y, Gu Q, Fan R (2020) Design and analysis of negative 
permittivity behaviors in barium titanate/nickel metacomposites. Acta Mater 185:412–419 
63. Wu H, Mu Z, Qi G, Zhang Y, Wang X, Xie P, Wu N, Yuan H, Sui K, Fan R, Liu C (2021) Negative 
permittivity behavior in Ti3AlC2-polyimide composites and the regulation mechanism. J Mater 
Sci Mater 32:10388–10397 
64. Wang Z, Sun K, Qu Y, Wang Z, Tian J, Li X, Fan R (2021) Negative-k and positive-k layers 
introduced into graphene/polyvinylidene ﬂuoride composites to achieve high-k and low loss. 
Mater Des 209:110009

6
Effect of Nanoﬁllers-Reinforced Polymer Blends for Dielectric …
187
65. Sun K, Xie P, Wang Z, Su T, Shao Q, Ryu J, Zhang X, Guo J, Shankar A, Li J, Fan R, Cao 
D, Guo Z (2017) Flexible polydimethylsiloxane/multi-walled carbon nanotubes membranous 
metacomposites with negative permittivity. Polymer 125:50–57 
66. Sun K, Dong J, Wang Z, Wang Z, Fan G, Hou Q, An L, Dong M, Fan R, Guo Z (2019) 
Tunable negative permittivity in ﬂexible graphene/PDMS metacomposites. J Phys Chem C 
123:23635–23642 
67. Sun K, Yang P, He Q, Tian J, Duan W, Wu X, Qu Y, Du H (2021) Weakly negative permittivity 
of MWCNT/TiN/CCTO ternary ceramics sintered in argon and nitrogen atmosphere. Ceram 
Int 47:32297–32302 
68. Han M, Shi Z, Zhang W, Zhang K, Wang H, Dastan D, Fan R (2021) Signiﬁcantly enhanced 
high permittivity and negative permittivity in Ag/Al2O3/3D-BaTiO3/epoxy metacomposites 
with unique hierarchical heterogeneous microstructures. Compos Part A Appl Sci 149:106559

Chapter 7 
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric 
Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage: 
Opportunities and Challenges 
Minal Bafna, Nipun Bafna, Farah Deeba, and Ankur Jain 
Abstract In recent times, with devices becoming smaller, cheaper, and faster, it has 
become a dire need to provide devices that can store an abundant amount of energy, 
which gets delivered also nearly instantaneously. Such devices are not only for ﬁnding 
applications in complex military and medical needs but also for commercial day-to-
day applications too. Metal-oxide-based traditional capacitors do have high dielectric 
constant, but they inherit low breakdown ﬁeld strength resulting in low energy density 
and poor mechanical properties to be cast as high energy storage capacitors. Contrary 
to these, the polymeric materials, which are lightweight and easily amenable to be 
cast in various sizes and shapes and are cost-effective for mass production, possess 
relatively high breakdown strengths but very low values of dielectric constant and 
poor high-temperature performance become unﬁt for be manufactured as high energy 
storage devices. Polymer nanodielectrics are a new class of materials that combine 
the processability, breakdown ﬁeld strength, and low-loss features of polymers with 
the high dielectric constant of metal oxide ﬁllers. This chapter examines this class of 
materials, ﬁrst shedding light on their current level of development, including those 
created for both low-temperature and high-temperature applications. A meticulous 
summary of underlying theories and concepts that construe the correlation between 
physical property and the energy storage capability of materials has been presented. 
The contrast in electric behaviors of metallic nanoﬁllers and the host polymer tends 
to provide real challenges in achieving viable high energy storage materials. The last
M. Bafna envelope symbol
Department of Physics, Agrawal PG College, Jaipur, India 
e-mail: drminalphysics@rediffmail.com 
N. Bafna 
Mechanical and Industrial Engineering Department, IIT Roorkee, Roorkee, India 
e-mail: n_bafna@me.iitr.ac.in 
F. Deeba 
SS Jain Subodh P G College, Jaipur, India 
F. Deeba · A. Jain 
School of Applied Sciences, Suresh GyanVihar University, Jaipur, India 
A. Jain 
Center for Renewable Energy and Storage, Suresh GyanVihar University, Jaipur, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_7 
189

190
M. Bafna et al.
part of the review addresses mitigating such challenges and how and what future 
research should focus on. 
Keywords Energy storage · Composite dielectrics · Polymer nanodielectrics ·
Metallic nanoparticles dielectric constant · Dielectric breakdown strength · Energy 
density 
7.1 
Need for Dielectric Energy Storage 
In today’s world, electronics have become indispensable and are at the heart of human 
development as it gets consumed versatility in simple routine devices like mobiles, 
laptops, and TV screens to complex hybrid/electric vehicles, space machines, medical 
or defense, and surveillance equipment. For these electronic gadgets to be smarter, 
they need to have devices that are smaller, lighter, faster, ﬂexible, cheaper, and reliable 
in a wide range of temperatures and are environmentally sustainable. Hence, there is a 
growing demand for developing cost-efﬁcient and high-performance energy storage 
devices like batteries, electrolytic and electrochemical capacitors, fuel cells, etc., 
that can store an abundant amount of energy that gets delivered also nearly instanta-
neously [1–4]. The power transmission applications, electromagnetic appliances in 
the defense sector, and vehicle protection in the automobile industry all are looking 
forward to devices that perform excellently without withering in a varied range of 
temperatures (>100 °C) and that possess high-frequency stability and high energy 
and power density with enhanced efﬁciency [5, 6]. Among the available energy 
storage devices, the electrolytic or dielectric capacitors are favored in applications 
that require short-term charge storage and high-power density. The ultra-high-power 
density typically in the range of 108 w/kg allows the rapid release of large current 
densities in a very short period, making the charge/discharge speed in μs to ns, cost-
effectiveness, wide operating temperature range (−40 to 240 °C), and voltage range 
in kV, and signiﬁcant lifetimes compared to other energy storing alternatives are 
those attributes that make the dielectric capacitors potentially desirable component 
in an array of electrical applications ranging from personal appliances to complex 
systems [7, 8]. These capacitors when cast in thin ﬁlms have added advantage of being 
lighter and smaller and capable of enduring a high electric ﬁeld due to possession 
of low defect density [9, 10]. The dielectric capacitors need to improve upon their 
energy density performance to compete with the super-capacitors that are reported 
to possess an excellent energy density of around 30 J cm−3 [11]. Although super-
capacitors have better energy performance, yet they have the limitations of their 
being bulky, requiring large installation space, the threat of chemical spills, and lack 
of suitable constituent materials for electrodes or materials suffering from chem-
ical corrosion [8, 12–14]. The usual mechanism for the storage of electric energy in 
conventional batteries is according to the chemical interactions taking place between 
its electrolyte and electrodes, and due to these chemical reactions being slow and 
irreversible, these batteries take a long time to charge–discharge and have a short

7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics for Energy …
191
lifespan, and the capacitors, on the other hand, is devoid of such limitations as the 
very mechanism for the storage of electric energy in it is due to the phenomenon of 
electric ﬁeld-induced polarization [15–18]. However, the existing dielectric capaci-
tors need to improve upon the issue of possession of high energy and power density 
when they are made smaller and lighter for portable purposes and the processes need 
to be economically viable [19, 20]. 
Here, in this review, we initiate our discussion by explaining the fundamentals 
related to the factors responsible for enhancing the properties of the dielectric mate-
rial required for energy storage applications wherein we will explain the various 
mechanism of polarization and breakdown and then shall present an overview of the 
present state of the art of these materials and discuss the real challenges of achieving 
the viable high energy storage materials by synthesizing the metal-oxide–polymer 
dielectrics made by doping the two materials having contrast in electric behaviors. 
7.2 
Fundamentals of Dielectric Energy Storage Mechanism 
An electrolytic capacitor is an energy storage device that comprises a layer of a 
dielectric substance kept between two conducting electrodes (shown in Fig. 7.1) and 
works on the principle of storing electrical energy due to the segregation of equal 
amounts of charges of opposite polarity on either side of the dielectric substance when 
an external electric ﬁeld is applied. The process of storing electrical energy is termed 
the charging of the capacitor. This stored energy is released in the form of a pulse 
almost instantaneously and the process is known as discharging of the capacitor. As 
no electrochemical process is involved in this charge–discharge cycle, the discharge 
speed is in μseconds rendering the dielectric capacitors a high power density of 
around 100 W/kg [20, 21]. Apart from charge storage capability, the other key aspects 
that characterize the performance of a capacitor as an energy storage device are 
its charge–discharge proﬁle, energy and power density, potential scalability, and 
the cost incurred for such storage. All these stated parameters are related directly 
to electrical phenomena like polarization, conduction, and breakdown within the 
dielectric material ﬁlled inside the capacitor. Thus, the performance of the capacitor 
is quite detrimental to the thermo-physical characteristics of the dielectric material 
used within the capacitor. When developing a dielectric capacitor for large-scale 
energy storage, for ideal performance, the dielectric material within must possess 
a high value of dielectric constant epsilon Subscript r, large dielectric breakdown strength Eb, high  
discharge efﬁciency η, high resistivity, and must be capable of operating in a broad 
temperature window [20–23].
The atoms share the arrangement of their electrons to form a molecule. If the 
charge distribution of positive core and negative electrons is balanced, the molecules 
are non-polar. But during the rearrangement of electrons, if imbalances in charge 
distribution occur to develop a slight displacement in the center of mass of positive 
and negative charge distribution of the atom/molecule, then permanent dipoles get 
created within the material and the material is rendered to be polar and the process

192
M. Bafna et al.
Fig. 7.1 Schematic of a dielectric capacitor
is known as polarization. In absence of an external ﬁeld, the dipole moments of 
these are arbitrarily orientated; the resultant polarization may get nulliﬁed. Dielectric 
materials do not possess loosely bound free electrons; they act as electrical insulators 
in the context of charge conduction. However, they can be polarized by applying an 
external electric ﬁeld. {The various mechanisms of polarization have been discussed 
in Sect. 2.1}. The electric displacement (D) of induced dipoles, under the inﬂuence 
of the external electric ﬁeld (Eexternal), produces local internal electric ﬁelds (Einduced) 
within the dielectric material that counteract to decrease the applied ﬁeld (Eexternal— 
Einduced) and is expressed about the applied electric ﬁeld and induced polarization 
(P) as  
bo ld up er D
 equals epsilon 0 bold upper E plus bold upper P period
Here, P the induced polarization is the measure of dipole moment per unit volume and 
is given by up per P equals epsilon 0 chi Subscript e Baseline upper E, where epsilon 0 is free space permittivity (=8.854× 10−12 F/m) and 
chi  Subscri pt e Baseline equals epsilon 0 left parenthesis epsilon Subscript r Baseline minus 1 right parenthesisis the electrical susceptibility of the material. We deﬁne the electric 
ﬁeld as the gradient of electric potential so when the overall effective electric ﬁeld 
within the dielectric material gets reduced due to polarization, the potential (V) also  
diminishes resulting in an enhancement of the capacitance C = Q/V of the material. 
The ratio of C to C0 is termed as dielectric constant (epsilon Subscript r) or relative permittivity 
(also mentioned in certain related literature as k), where C and C0 represent the 
capacitances when dielectric materials are considered to be taken or not in between 
the plates of the capacitor. 
The more the electric displacement, the higher the value of the dielectric constant 
(epsilon Subscript r) or (k) for the material. The dielectric constant or electrical permittivity is a 
complex quantity expressed as a sum of its real and imaginary parts as eps ilon  Subscript r Baseline equals epsilon prime plus epsilon double prime. 
. The phase lag (delta) of  D to E is deﬁned as the dielectric loss given by tang en t 
delta equals epsilon double prime divided by epsilon Superscript prime Baseline periodHere, the real part epsilon prime demonstrates the ease of polarization of the material 
and determines the size of the surface charge densities on both sides of a dielectric 
and tan deltaor the losses develop as a result of bound charges moving in reaction 
to an applied electrical ﬁeld. All these dielectric parameters eps ilon prim e comma epsilon double prime comma and tangent deltaare

7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics for Energy …
193
Fig. 7.2 The P–E hysteresis loops of a linear dielectric and b nonlinear dielectric [21] 
measured by broadband dielectric spectroscopy or impedance analyzer. The capacity 
of a dielectric material to store energy is analyzed from its polarization–electric ﬁeld 
(P–E) hysteresis loop. The materials that do not exhibit hysteresis and their P–E 
relationship is a straight line are referred to as linear dielectrics and are shown in 
Fig. 7.2a where the shaded region of the graph depicts the recoverable energy storage 
density rendering these materials high breakdown strength (BDS) and lower energy 
loss and the reason for preference of these for energy storage applications. The 
dielectrics that exhibit hysteresis are termed nonlinear dielectric materials as shown 
in Fig. 7.2b. 
If D is the induced electric displacement within the dielectric material placed 
between the electrodes of a capacitor under the inﬂuence of an electric ﬁeld E, then 
we deﬁne the energy density to be the area enclosed by the displacement–electric 
ﬁeld curve of Fig. 7.1 and given by Eq. (7.2) 
upp e
r
 U S
ubscript e Baseline equals integral upper E partial differential upper D
Ue is energy density or electrical energy stored per unit volume in J/cm3. 
For linear dielectrics, when the material is isotropic, that is, the dielectric constant 
or relative permittivity of the material epsilon Subscript r does not change with the electric ﬁeld, the 
energy density or can be evaluated through Eq. (7.3). 
upp er U Subsc rip
t e Baseline
 equ
als 1 divided by 2 epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline upper E Subscript b Superscript 2 Baseline equals 1 divided by 2 upper C upper V Subscript m Superscript 2 Baseline divided by upper A d
where Eb is the threshold electric ﬁeld above which the breakdown of dielectric 
material occurs. Thus, it seems that having a large dielectric constant epsilon Subscript r and high 
breakdown strength, Eb will provide high energy density and will ideally spark the 
performance of a dielectric material as an excellent capacitor [8, 24].

194
M. Bafna et al.
Once the energy density is analyzed, it is easier to calculate the power density 
(Pe) for linear dielectrics. For energy density, Ue and loss tangent tan deltaalso deﬁned 
as the ratio of equivalent series resistance Rs to capacitive reactance Xc = 1/2 pif C, 
the power density (Pe) for linear dielectrics can be written using the expression 
bol d upper P Subsc ript e B a
seline equals upper U Subscript e Baseline divided by 2 upper R Subscript s Baseline upper C equals pi f upper U Subscript e Baseline divided by tangent delta
Thus, the above discussion brings forth that for energy storage applications why it 
is essential to have materials that exhibit large saturation polarization, small remnant 
polarization, high dielectric constant (epsilon Subscript r), and high dielectric breakdown strength. 
Hence, materials with high capacitance or high dielectric constant are sought after 
for energy storage applications. 
7.2.1 
Mechanism of Polarization 
The term dielectric constant (epsilon Subscript r) or dielectric permittivity (k) is the measure of 
the response of the dipoles (whether permanent or induced) within the dielectric 
material to the applied external electric ﬁeld. A material’s total permittivity may be 
inﬂuenced by some polarization mechanisms. The various mechanism through which 
dielectric polarization takes place are broadly classiﬁed as (i) electronic polarization, 
(ii) atomic/ionic polarization, (iii) orientation polarization, and (iv) space charge (i.e., 
ions and electrons/holes) polarization. Each type of polarization is accompanied by its 
dielectric loss at a speciﬁc frequency (Fig. 7.3). When atoms share the arrangement of 
their electrons, they combine to form a molecule. If the charge distribution of positive 
core and negative electrons is balanced, the molecules are non-polar. But during the 
rearrangement of electrons, if imbalances in charge distribution occur to develop a 
slight displacement in the center of mass of positive and negative charge distribution 
of the atom/molecule, then dipoles get created within the material and the material 
is rendered to be polar. As the dipole moments of these are arbitrarily orientated, 
the resultant polarization may get nulliﬁed. But when an external electric ﬁeld is 
applied to such dielectric material, there occurs a slight relative displacement of the 
negative electron cloud and positive nucleus in opposite directions causing electronic 
polarization of the material. Such effects are observed when an external electric ﬁeld 
is applied in the optical frequency range of 1015–1018 Hz. When an external ﬁeld 
in the infrared frequency range 1012–1015 Hz is applied to the dielectric material, 
there occur relative displacements in the mean position of the atomic nuclei within 
the molecules rendering the atomic/ionic polarization of the material. Atoms exhibit 
oscillatory behavior with damping effects resembling a mechanical spring and mass 
system. Any frequency other than the resonant frequency will have a tiny oscillation 
amplitude. The electronic and atomic polarizations are collectively termed resonance 
polarization and dominate the GHz range observed in power and radio frequency 
applications. The electronic and atomic systems are almost lossless and only make a 
minor continuous contribution to epsilon Subscript r Baseline prime well below resonance. Orientation polarization

7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics for Energy …
195
Fig. 7.3 Frequency-dependent polarization process 
is a relaxation process that arises when permanent molecular dipoles tend to align 
along the direction of the applied electric ﬁeld. The occurrence of such polarization 
depends on the molecular dynamics of the material and can take place in the frequency 
range of 1 Hz to 20 GHz. In space charge polarization actual physical movement of 
ionic species (ions/electrons/holes) occurs over nanometers of distance. 
In any dielectric material in which process of polarization shall be active 
depending on the frequency of operation, all sources of polarization are present at 
low frequencies, giving the materials a high value of k. As the frequency is increased, 
however, the dipoles become unable to orient themselves at such high frequencies, 
and as a result, only one or two sources of polarization or no sources of polarization are 
present, which results in a decrease in the k value with frequency [26]. The increase 
in temperature allows the motion of frozen dipoles, and hence, the value of k in 
material increases with the increase in temperature [27]. The dielectric constant in 
metal oxides is majorly caused due to ionic polarization mechanism where a slight 
displacement of the asymmetrical central cation takes place. The dielectric constant 
in polymers results due to orientation, ionic, and electronic polarization mechanisms 
depending upon the applied frequency. 
The mechanism of polarization in surfaces of multi-component systems is 
explained using Maxwell–Wagner–Sillars model and is referred to as MWS interfa-
cial polarization in literature [28–32]. Such heterogeneity can be seen in polymeric 
materials, where different phases coexist when the polymer is reinforced by a ﬁller 
or plasticizer [25, 26, 30], or in semi-crystalline polymers, where amorphous and 
crystalline phases coexist [28, 30], or in metal-oxide–polymer dielectrics, where two 
or more constituent substances, the conducting phase, and non-conducting phase, 
have distinctly different electrical properties. In metal-oxide–polymer dielectric, the 
dielectric material can be seen as composed of conducting regions separated by resis-
tive non-conducting boundaries. The application of an electric ﬁeld at low frequency 
(i.e., 100 Hz to 1 MHz) compels the unbound charges to move to the boundary 
of the phases, forming large dipoles such that at such frequencies, the conducting 
regions’ edges have time to accumulate charges, which causes epsilon Subscript r Baseline prime to rise. The inter-
faces within the material tend to trap the motion of the charges and allow them

196
M. Bafna et al.
to accumulate within boundaries where a slight distortion brought by the applied 
ﬁeld raises the material’s overall capacitance. At higher frequencies, however, as the 
charge displacement is minimal in comparison to the size of the conducting zone, the 
charges do not have time to concentrate along the material’s edges, and polarization 
does not take place. Thus, it can be understood that the dipoles induced at interfaces 
require sufﬁcient time to follow the variations of the applied electric ﬁeld, and hence, 
the interfacial polarization or the Maxwell–Wagner–Sillars effect is predominant at 
low frequencies in polymeric materials. 
7.2.2 
Mechanism of Breakdown 
The other parameter in the energy density equation stated in Eq. (7.2) is the break-
down strength Eb that scales quadratically in the energy density function and it 
appears that manipulating it may be the easiest approach to get the desired dielectric 
material. The breakdown or dielectric strength is the value of the threshold electric 
ﬁeld that can be applied to the material above which the breakdown of dielectric 
material occurs, i.e., it makes a transition from being insulating to conducting. The 
breakdown in materials may occur due to any of these three mechanisms—(i) Free 
volume breakdown, (ii) thermal breakdown, and (iii) mechanical breakdown. When 
the applied electric ﬁeld accelerates the free electrons at enough speed to collide and 
generate more free electrons within the material and disrupt the whole system, the 
breakdown is referred to as free volume breakdown [33]. The presence of defects and 
voids aids in lowering the electronic breakdown strength. When the energy dissi-
pated due to dielectric losses and conduction losses accumulates enough heat for the 
catastrophic failure of the device, the breakdown is termed thermal breakdown [34]. 
On application of a high electric ﬁeld, the induced stress when exceeds the yield 
stress of the material creates a fracture. Thus, in the process in which electrostatic 
attraction is far more than the mechanical strength, the material gets deformed and 
the process is classiﬁed as mechanical breakdown [35]. Hence, materials may be 
designed and developed for the high value of breakdown strength taking cognizance 
of these breakdown modes. 
7.2.3 
Charge–Discharge Proﬁle 
The parameter energy density is signiﬁcant in applications where the capacitor is 
desired to serve as an energy reservoir. The discharged energy density per unit of time 
known as power density is another signiﬁcant parameter in applications that require 
high power pulse where it needs to release high energy density in a short period. The 
charge–discharge proﬁle provides an evaluation of the capacitor’s performance and 
is measured by the parameter charge–discharge efﬁciency η, which is deﬁned as the 
ratio of the discharged energy density Ud to storage energy density, Ue i.e., η = Ud/

7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics for Energy …
197
Ue. This discharge energy density is signiﬁcantly controlled by losses. But to have 
materials with large epsilon Subscript r or K, materials have large high losses too. The dielectric loss 
also referred to as loss tangent (tan delta) provides a measure of the electrical energy 
dissipated during the charging–discharging process. Dielectric loss, conduction loss, 
or polarization hysteresis in ferroelectric materials although low at room temperature 
but signiﬁcant as temperature or electric ﬁeld increases makes the discharging process 
inefﬁcient thereby rendering low discharge energy. A low efﬁciency implies low 
discharged energy density as good points toward the thermal runaway of the device 
due to the generation of joule’s heat due to these losses and must be avoided. 
Apart from room temperature applications, these capacitors are required to 
perform at elevated temperature conditions like in aircraft, mining ﬁelds, or in hybrid 
electric vehicles where temperatures are above 120 °C. To maintain the peak perfor-
mance of these capacitors, we are currently employing a cooling system, which 
increases the overall size and mass of the device. 
Consequently, research on capacitive energy storage devices currently focuses on 
the development of high-performance dielectric materials that possess’ high energy 
density and those that can operate smoothly in wide temperature range with very 
low dielectric losses. The idea is to increase the degree of polarization throughout 
the dielectric while reducing losses. 
7.3 
Current State of Art for Materials for Dielectric Energy 
Storage Applications 
The basic deﬁnition of capacitance (up pe r C  equals epsilon Subscript r Baseline upper A divided by d) for a parallel plate capacitor 
suggests that the capacity can be enhanced either by increasing the area (A) of the  
plates or by reducing the distance (d) between the two plates or by ﬁlling a dielectric 
material of high epsilon Subscript r or k value. Augmenting the areas of the plate is not a judicious 
choice as it increases the device size too and restricts device miniaturization [36]. If 
the distance between the dielectric plates is tried to be reduced for attaining higher 
C, then after a certain limit of dielectric thickness ﬁlled between the plates, there are 
chances of dielectric breakdown or leakage current to start ﬂowing through it. So 
for obtaining enhanced capacitance, we are left with only one approach and that is 
to use materials having a high value of dielectric constant (k) material [37]. Based 
on the k values or the charge storage capability, the materials are categorized as 
high k materials and low k materials about the dielectric constant value of silicon 
nitride whose k value is 7 and less than that of silicon dioxide whose k value is 3.9, 
respectively. This deﬁnition originates from the need for miniaturization of micro-
electronic components, where we need to replace silicon dioxide or silicon nitride 
with materials that have a value of dielectric constant less than or more than that 
for materials having k values of mentioned silicon compounds [5]. Here, it can be 
recalled that air having dielectric constant k = 1 is the material with the lowest k and 
relaxor ferroelectrics have been reported to have the highest value of k up to ~24,000

198
M. Bafna et al.
at 1 kHz [4]. Low k materials are utilized for the fabrication of EMI shields [38–40], 
ultrafast IC packaging [41, 42], communication devices, etc. [43], but it is the high 
k materials that are sought after for energy storage applications besides their being 
widely used in gate dielectrics in MOS transistors and TFTs [44, 45]. 
7.3.1 
Dependence of k Value on Structural Attributes 
In an earlier section, we have seen that the mechanism of polarization and hence 
dielectric constant is highly dependent upon the frequency of applied electric ﬁeld 
and temperature around the material. Apart from these, the structural arrangement of 
the constituent atoms or molecules within the material like crystallite size, porosity, 
composition, and defects also affects the k value. For instance, the larger the crystallite 
size, more are the number of dipoles contained within it, resulting in a larger number 
of the orientation of dipoles on the application of an electric ﬁeld. So a large crystallite 
size shall produce material of a higher value of k compared to a material of small 
crystallite size [46, 47]. In contrast to it, a material with higher porosity shall have 
a low value of permittivity or k as air ﬁlled inside its random pores has the lowest 
value of k [48]. The dielectric constant of a composite is the resultant of the k values 
of its constituents. The effect of a constituent material of low k is to lower the overall 
effective value of k of the composite material. How much it can reduce will depend 
upon its percentage of concentration. Analogously a constituent material of high 
k will yield an increase in the overall effective value of k of the composite material 
when doped within percolation limits [49, 50]. The defects and grain boundaries 
present within the material also aid in enhancing the value of k. The bonds between 
atoms in a material are all the same. If any atom has less number of bonds than 
the bonds other atoms of the remaining bulk material possess, it is characterized 
as a defect, and the loose bonds are called dangling bonds. The larger the number 
of defects present within the material, the larger would be the number of dangling 
bonds and it implies that the higher would be the density of charge carriers to create 
dipoles lead to an increased polarization on the application of an external electric 
ﬁeld [51]. Sometimes atoms are missing in their regular geometrical distribution 
within a crystal. Such a missing atom is called vacancy which helps to trap the 
charge carriers. Hence, the presence of vacancies helps generate high polarization 
resulting in a large value for k [52, 53]. Defects are also introduced by introducing 
an impurity or ﬁller within the host material. The atom substituting the host atom 
place is referred to as a substitution defect and this too helps in trapping the charge 
carriers to produce greater polarization [54]. In a heterogeneous substance, due to the 
inhomogeneity of the phases of the constituent material interfaces gets developed, 
they  are also referred to as  grain boundaries. The grain boundaries aid to trap the 
charges at the boundary/interface and do not allow them to pass through. Hence, 
interfacial polarization enhances and grain boundaries contribute to the increased 
value of k. The greater the number of grain boundaries or interfaces larger the value 
of k for the material [55].

7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics for Energy …
199
7.3.2 
Ceramics and Metal Oxides 
Metal oxides represent an important class of ceramic materials that have attracted 
considerable research interest because metals form a large diversity of oxide materials 
that can adopt varied structural geometries with unique electronic band structures. 
Among these metal oxide dielectric materials, the perovskites having an ABO3 struc-
ture with A being metal and B a transition group metal is quite interesting; as the 
application of external electric ﬁeld on the usual symmetrical cubic perovskite struc-
ture distorts the structure creating a small displacement between the positive and 
negative charge center, and aligning the created dipoles in ferroelectric domains thus 
culminating in a ﬁnite polarization [36]. Due to the possession of very high values 
of dielectric constant, ceramics have always been potential contenders for dielectric 
capacitor applications. For a long time, the low-cost titanium dioxide (TiO2) and 
barium titanate (BaTiO3)-based inorganic ceramics have been at the core of capac-
itor development as these possess high dielectric constant as evident in Table 1, and 
could operate in a wide temperature range. But these ceramic capacitors are heavier 
and brittle, depend on manufacturing procedures that involve high temperatures, and 
possess very low dielectric breakdown strength (Eb < 50 MV/m). All this limits their 
use in ﬂexible, compact devices. Aluminum electrolytic is another class of elec-
trolytic capacitors which is easy to fabricate and can operate up to 600 V. But this is 
also bulkier than BOPP ﬁlm capacitor and tends to dry up at elevated temperatures 
and cannot bear ﬂuctuations and ripple currents [24, 26, 36]. 
In contrast to the nonlinear ferroelectric oxides, the linear metal oxide dielectrics 
possess a dielectric constant that is independent of the applied electric ﬁeld, has 
high breakdown strength, low energy loss, and better energy storage efﬁciency than 
other inorganic dielectric systems. Examples of a few linear dielectric metal oxides 
are the calcium titanium compounds, namely CaTiO3, CaZrTiO3, CaTiO3–BiScO3, 
CaSrTiZrO3, and SrTiO3. The dielectric properties exhibited by linear dielectric 
metal oxide CaTiO3 are quite fascinating. It exhibits k = 175 and has an exception-
ally high breakdown strength of 300 kV/cm and energy storage density of about 1.5 J/ 
cm3 and is quite stable in a wide temperature and frequency range. Its performance 
is hindered in high electric ﬁelds by the thermal breakdown and increased electrical 
conductivity due to electron hopping of multivalent titanium ions and charge migra-
tion favored by weak grain boundaries. Most of the other linear dielectric metal oxide 
do not have a such high dielectric constant (k), and their energy storage density is 
also quite low, less than 1 J/ cm3 [6, 7, 23, 24, 26, 36]. 
Besides having excellent dielectric properties, the metal oxides also exhibit good 
mechanical and optical properties and hence are potential candidates used for varied 
thin ﬁlm electronic systems. To name a few metal oxides Ta2O5, Nb2O5, Y2O3, TiO2, 
Al2O3, HfO2, and ZrO2 that have a high value of dielectric constant ranging between 
101 and 102 [36, 56, 57]. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is versatile and used in varied 
optoelectronic applications due to its high dielectric constant in its rutile form [59]. 
The other metal oxide with a high dielectric constant is Tin dioxide (SnO2) which is 
an n-type semiconductor having a direct band gap energy of 3.37 eV and has a stable

200
M. Bafna et al.
chemical, mechanical, and thermal attributes to be used in applications about spin-
tronics, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), and super-capacitors [60–63]. Another metal 
oxide ZnO, which is also a wideband gap semiconductor, exhibits not only superb 
dielectric properties but also exceptional thermo-physical properties. A literature 
survey reveals that these metal oxides offer greater dielectric constant when doped 
with some other metals, thereby meeting the requirements of energy storage devices. 
The oxides compounds of transition metals have undergone a huge development 
process, and with an efﬁcient volumetric efﬁciency and an innovative fabrication 
in multilayers, now the dielectric permittivity has been achieved in thousands as 
reported for CaCu3Ti4O12 (k = 17,000) and La2SrNiO4 (k = 10,000) by Lunken-
heimer et al. [57] and colossally a value in order 105 for Sr2TiMnO6 by Meher et al. 
[58]. 
Unfortunately, these metal oxide ceramic capacitors inherit very low breakdown 
ﬁeld strength resulting in low energy density and poor mechanical properties to be 
cast as high energy storage capacitors. The causes of low breakdown strength are 
ﬂaws in the fabrication process. A lot of literature reports on the various types of 
research undertaken to mitigate the defects of bulk ceramic material using techniques 
that involve high-temperature or high-pressure treatment are tedious and incurs huge 
cost. An alternative way is to prepare the nanoparticles (NP) of these dielectric 
materials and then form composites of these with materials like glass or polymers 
that are considered to be “defect-free” intrinsically. This method seems fascinating 
as the fabrication process can be done at low temperatures in an easy, cost-effective, 
simple manner with resulting material of improved performance. The only drawback 
is the formation of an interface between the dielectric NP and high breakdown glass 
or polymer matrix that creates ﬂaws that reduce the dielectric strength substantially. 
So the formation of NP of appropriate size, shape, and stoichiometry and their proper 
distribution in the host matrix is of great signiﬁcance for the best performance of 
the formed nanocomposite. The literature survey reveals several synthesis protocols 
and techniques applied for the production of such nanocomposites as enlisted in 
Table 1. The conventional method comprises grinding the desired ceramics into ﬁne 
powders and then heating them together at elevated temperatures (>1000 °C). Such 
procedures provide superb control of stoichiometry and produce ﬁne crystals but 
do not provide any regulation on particle size, and the procedures of grinding and 
heating are elaborate (Fig. 7.4).
7.3.3 
Polymeric Dielectrics 
Recent developments in the microelectronics industry require materials that facilitate 
the miniaturization of devices. The low values of dielectric permittivity, dielectric 
loss, and leakage currents aid the polymeric materials to be drawn in nano-scale layers 
while maintaining their functionality. Further, their ease of mass manufacturing and 
ﬂexibility to be drawn in myriad shapes and sizes at atmospheric conditions with 
minimal heat treatment has gained them a lot of attention to be used for transistor

7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics for Energy …
201
Metal-oxide nano-particle 
synthesis strategies 
Solution Process
Chemical Vapor 
Deposition Technique 
(CVD) 
Physical Vapor 
Deposition Technique 
(PVD) 
Sol-Gel Approach
Thermal Evaporation 
Co-precipitation method
Pulsed Laser Deposition 
Solvo-thermal Approach 
Sputtering Deposition 
Bio-mimetic Approach 
Molecular Beam Epitaxy 
Fig. 7.4 Various techniques for the synthesis of metal oxide nanoparticles
gate dielectrics applications. The low values of dielectric parameters are beneﬁcial in 
transistor gate dielectric applications, but for energy storage applications, a high value 
of dielectric permittivity is required as governed by Eq. (7.2), and the ferroelectric 
polymers that have a considerably large value of dielectric constant have been a 
subject of research for such applications. 
As mentioned earlier, the dielectric constant in polymers results due to orien-
tation, ionic, and electronic polarization mechanisms. Functional groups that have 
highly reactive electron clouds and the aromatic rings in a polymer are observed to 
cause electronic polarization and are included in the dielectric material to augment 
the dielectric constant. The dielectric constant due to electronic polarization for the 
organic polymers is associated with their band gap and has the highest value of 
3.6 when the band gap is 4 eV. Generally, the linear dielectric polymers exhibit 
a dielectric constant in the range of 2–5; as the dielectric constant due to atomic/ 
ionic polarization is less than 25% of the value due to electronic polarization, and 
hence for the polymers, the total of dielectric constant due to resonance polarization 
can reach up to a maximum of 4.5. Contrary to this, the atomic/ionic polarization 
is signiﬁcantly very high in metal oxide ceramics leading to high values of dielec-
tric constant for them. In the ﬁlm form of polymers, the mobility of the polymeric 
chains is constrained and hence the switching of the dipoles is pretty slow gener-
ating the dielectric constant due to orientation polarization to be less than 10. Here, 
one should note that the increase in chain mobility may lead to a phase transition 
of the polymer from glassy to viscous rubbery ﬂuid. One noteworthy example of

202
M. Bafna et al.
such polarization is the ferroelectric semi-crystalline polymer polyvinylidene ﬂuo-
ride (PVDF) with a chemical structure [CF2-CH2-]n, where the dipoles created by 
negatively charged ﬂuorine and positively charged hydrogen atoms stretch along the 
applied ﬁeld. Depending upon the trans and gauche arrangements of the molecules, 
PVDF is found to exist in four types of conformations (alp ha co mma beta comma gamma and delta), of which in 
the beta betaphase, where all the molecules align in all-trans manner is most electro-
active. The segregation of hydrogen and ﬂuorine atoms gives rise to discrete ferro-
electric domains that polarize on the application of electric ﬁeld and contribute to 
a high dielectric constant ~15. Thus, processes that form discrete charge-aligned 
regions are one of the ways to develop materials with high dielectric constant. Elec-
trical poling or mechanical stretching at high temperatures is such a process, and the 
PVDF molecules that predominantly exist in the alpha α phase are transformed into 
the β phase by them. Incorporation of bulky chlorinated co-monomers by irradia-
tion in PVDF forms copolymers like P(VDF-TrFE) and P(VDF-TrFE-CTFE) where 
the chlorinated co-monomer molecules facilitate all-trans conformations thereby 
increasing the polar phase resulting in a dielectric constant= 50 @ 1 kHz. Burlingame 
et al. [80] reported that inserting carbonyl atoms in urea to replace a few sulfur atoms 
increases the dipole interactions between inter-chains of poly-urea, thereby creating 
a strong local internal ﬁeld increasing dielectric constant. 
The capacitance of electric double layer (EDL) capacitors is observed to be 1000 
times that of a typical dielectric polymer ﬁlm such as BOPP. The contribution to 
such high values of dielectric constant comes from space charge polarization where 
the actual physical movement of ionic species (ions/electrons/holes) occurs over 
nanometers of distance. Such polarization is beneﬁcial for super-capacitor applica-
tions but becomes a major cause of dielectric loss in dielectric polymers and hence 
must be avoided. 
Although ferroelectric polymers exhibit high dielectric strength, they possess a 
low value of young’s modulus (a few hundred of MPa’s) and undergo mechanical 
breakdown phenomena. Of the various breakdown mechanisms discussed above, 
the thermal breakdown is of prime concern. In designing capacitive energy storage 
devices, care must be taken that resistive heating due to leakage currents must not 
increase the internal temperature of the device to melt and get decomposed. Dissado 
has reported that the electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity of material 
have the same degree of effect on breakdown strength, but the variation in electrical 
conductivity is of several orders of magnitude whereas variation in thermal conduc-
tivity is only of one order. Hence, electrical conductivity of the material is signiﬁcant 
for designing of the device and can be controlled by manipulating the degree of crys-
tallinity or incorporating dipole traps that conﬁne the accelerated electrons mitigating 
the prospects of any breakdown [34]. 
Thus, for developing high-performance dielectric materials, we need to incorpo-
rate additives or ﬁllers that reduce the free volume and have high thermal conductivity. 
Also, polymers with rigid backbones having high Young modulus (> 2 G Pa) must 
be preferred. 
The prime reason for using polymeric matrices is their high breakdown strength. 
The reported energy densities of neat polymer dielectric capacitors are over 15 J/

7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics for Energy …
203
cm3 in comparison to bulk ceramics capacitors that have energy densities over 3 J/ 
cm3. The energy storage function varies quadratically with breakdown strength and 
it seems that manipulating it may be the easiest approach to get the desired dielectric 
material. But literature survey suggests that for polymers Eb of around 1GV/m is 
already achieved [24, 26] which is quite close to the benchmark of 2 GV/m for 
diamond [4, 19] thus limiting the scope of its further enhancement. However, the 
dielectric constant for polymeric materials is often in the range of 2–10, thus there is 
an opportunity for improvement in achieving greater values, up to perhaps the range 
for water (about 80). 
7.4 
Metal or Metal-Oxide-Filled Polymer Composites 
for Enhanced Energy Storage: Opportunities 
and Challenges 
By far discussion has made it clear that to develop higher energy density capacitors, 
one needs to improvise on the material’s relative dielectric permittivity and electric 
breakdown strength without compromising on mechanical attributes and its perfor-
mance temperature window. The metal oxides possess a large value of k but have low 
breakdown strengths, and in contrast, the polymeric materials exhibit high breakdown 
strength (>500 MV/m) but with poor permittivity values (<3). So on combining the 
two electrically contrasting materials, it is intended to combine a highly polarizable 
dielectric (metal oxide) with a high linear dielectric strength (polymer) to achieve 
composites that have a balance of attributes of both and results in a material with 
high energy storage as clearly depicted schematically in Fig. 7.5. 
The response of the composite material is largely dependent on the attributes of 
the dispersed metal oxide and chosen host polymer and is signiﬁcantly dominated by 
the interfaces they create and interactions happening at these interfaces. The nano-
inclusion of metal oxides into the host polymer can have any of the electric behavior, 
i.e., it can be conductive, dielectric, or semiconductor, and can be in any shape— 
spherical-like particles, rods, or needle like or in the form of sheets. The morphology 
of the polymer within the composite too can be any spherical beads to granular
Fig. 7.5 Schematic representation of intent of developing polymer nanocomposite 

204
M. Bafna et al.
membranes, to ﬁbers. Based on the internal connectivity, order, and symmetry, there 
is a total of ten types of structures that can be fabricated for dual-phase composites 
namely (0–0), (0–1), (0–2), (0–3), (1–1), (2–1), (2–2), (2–3), (1–3), and (3–3). Here, 
the ﬁrst number represents the dimension of connectivity of the ﬁller and the second 
number stands for the dimension of connectivity of the polymer. A general polymer 
nanodielectric represented by (0–3) nomenclature implies that ﬁllers of spherical 
shape have been inserted in a three-dimensionally connected polymer matrix [35]. 
The initial interest in fabricating polymer nanodielectrics was to disperse high k 
metal oxides into a ferroelectric polymer. Li and coworkers [64] found that disper-
sion of 30% volume fraction of ethylene diamine-modiﬁed BaTiO3 nanoparticles into 
P(VDF-TrFE-CTFE) could enhance the energy density from 3 to 7 J/cm3. Similarly 
Dang et al. [65] reported the nickel dispersed PVDF composite to exhibit colossal 
k equal to400. But soon, it was realized that such permittivity contrast enhances 
the interfacial polarization, which however produces an unbalanced distribution of 
electric ﬁelds such that there is a strong ﬁeld experienced by the polymer molecule 
whereas almost negligible ﬁeld inside the metal ﬁller. So the approach of increasing 
the dielectric constant of material was coming at the expense of a signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in breakdown strength and was hence not promoted further. To obtain enhanced 
synergistic effects, metal oxides that had less contrast in dielectric nature were tried 
upon. Wang et al. [66] found metal oxides ZrO2 and TiO2 to have permittivity nearly 
close to that of PVDF copolymers and they reported that the 9 wt % ZrO2 in P(VDF-
TrFE) produces an energy density of 11.2 J/cm3 at 270 MV/m and 10 wt % of TiO2 in 
PVDF terpolymer produces total energy density of 6.9 J/cm3 at breakdown strength 
over 200 MV/m. The results of the approach of using a metal-oxide–polymer pair 
having comparable dielectric permittivity have been quite motivating, and several 
researchers have attempted this approach. Choudhary et al. have reported the varia-
tion in complex dielectric permittivity, electric modulus, AC electrical conductivity, 
and the impedance behavior with frequency and temperature for various metal-oxide-
doped polymers, and the results of their ﬁndings have been shown in Fig. 7.6 as an 
example [67]. Each polymer composite shows unique dielectric behavior. They have 
reported such variations for polymer blends too, e.g., poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and 
poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) blend matrix (50/50 wt%) dispersed with zinc oxide 
(ZnO) nanoparticles [68], a comparative study of the effect of metal oxide on the 
dielectric dispersion and relaxation processes and ionic conductivity in PEO-PMMA 
blend dispersed with 3% wt of Al2O3, SiO2, SnO2, and ZnO nanoparticles ﬁlms of 
PVDF/PEO blend with Al2O3, SnO2, TiO2, ZnO nanoﬁllers [69, 70]. Their ﬁnd-
ings show that the metal oxide nanoparticles produce signiﬁcant alterations in the 
polymer spherulitic morphology, create a large number of micro- to nano-sized pores, 
lower the β-phase content of the PVDF and crystalline phase of PEO, and also the 
degree of crystallinity of the host matrix. Among the investigated metal oxides, the 
Al2O3 nanoparticles were found to signiﬁcantly enhance the dielectric permittivity 
as well the AC electrical conduction. Bafna et al. have reported the variation of 
dielectric properties on insertion of carbon soot found formed from different oils in 
PMMA [71] metal salts like SnCl2 [60], FeCl3 [72], and metal oxides of potassium 
KMnO4 and K2CrO4 in PMMA [73, 74] and ZnO doped in polymer PVDF PMMA

7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics for Energy …
205
blend [75, 76]. Deeba et al. have reported a systematic study of variation of dielec-
tric parameters with frequency when a variety of metal oxides have been doped in 
PMMA and its copolymers or blends [77].
The only limitation of this approach is that composites with extremely high dielec-
tric constants cannot be achieved. To achieve this, the dispersion of core–shell or 
multi-core metal oxide into polymer has been done [78, 79]. The multi-core metal 
oxide is made in such a way that the high permittivity metal is kept in the core 
and material with gradually decreasing permittivity is onto it in such a fashion that 
permittivity reduces gradually from the core to the shell and ﬁnally is comparable to 
the value of the polymer matrix. 
Such an “interfacial engineering” idea was implemented by Marks and coworkers 
[80] who have used a series of metal oxides viz.BaTiO3, ZrO2, MgO, SrTiO3, TiO2, 
Ba0.5Sr0.5TiO3, and yttria-stabilized zirconia as core and Al2O3as shell in polypropy-
lene polymer. They demonstrated that in such materials the shell behaves as a buffer 
material between the equates the dielectric permittivity of ﬁller and host and high k-
valued core aids to raise the overall permittivity of the composite. Another interesting 
outcome of the study was that the Al2O3 shell also aids to reduce the dielectric losses 
signiﬁcantly and that the dielectric loss at the strong ﬁeld was largely proportional to 
the particle interfacial area, regardless of the constituent nanoparticle type. A similar 
multi-core strategy has been reported by Shen et al. for conductive Ag nanoﬁllers 
encapsulated by an organic shell and dispersed in an epoxy matrix resulting in a 
composite with improved permittivity and increased breakdown strength. 
The above study provides certain designing rules for viable metal-oxide–polymer 
dielectric composites as listed below.
(i) If high permittivity/high conductivity metal oxide nanoparticles such as ABO3 
perovskites are used as ﬁller, the dielectric losses alleviate owing to the internal 
AC conduction due to space charges. So metal oxides having bulk conductivity 
and permittivity matching to the host polymer like TiO2 (k = 30), ZrO2 (k 
= 25), SnO2, and ZnO should be preferred for dispersion as ﬁller. The bulk 
conductivity of these metal oxides can reach comparably to the low value of 
polymer, i.e., below 10–13 S/m. To avoid AC conduction issues, metal-oxide– 
polymer dielectrics should be preferably used in DC applications. A discovery 
of materials with high permittivity but poor conductivity is awaited. 
(ii) To build a high dielectric constant composite material, we require nano-
inclusions of high permittivity metal oxide in an amount before percolation 
sets in. But this reduces the breakdown strength of the composite. The solution 
to this is to increase the apparent dielectric constant of nanocomposites at low-
volume fractions. The use of 2D nanoﬁllers (rod-like or wire-like) is effective 
in increasing the dielectric constant considerably by 10% [26, 36]. But one has 
to cautiously implement such strategies as the use of nano-wire content close to 
the percolation threshold has been observed to reduce the breakdown strength 
substantially by 15% due to enhanced current leakage. The addition of a high 
permittivity interface, i.e., metals or conducting polymers although effectively 
increase the dielectric constant at a low ﬁller volume fraction but suffer from

206
M. Bafna et al.
Fig. 7.6 Variation of dielectric parameter with frequency and content of metal oxide dopant in 
PMMA [67]. Adapted with permission from Ref [67] Copyright (2021) (Elsevier)

7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics for Energy …
207
high dielectric loss initiated by leakage current through electron tunneling or 
ﬁeld electron emission mechanism [10].
(iii) While controlling the electrical behavior of materials through controlling the 
interactions at the interface, a delicate balance is required to achieve the advan-
tages of getting enhanced MWS interfacial polarization through effective elec-
tron trapping and mitigate the demerits of internal AC conduction and increased 
local electric ﬁeld in the polymer matrix. The fabrication of materials in layered 
geometry helps achieve this balance as layered interfacial charges serve as 
effective charge traps [79]. The multi-layer concept is yet to be explored to 
achieve the desired results. 
7.5 
Summary and Perspectives 
Polymers are preferred materials in micro- and nano-electronics as they can be easily 
cast into ﬁlm form using spin coating, dip coating, or solution cast technique. Owing 
to the fascinating properties of being thermo-mechanically stable, corrosion resis-
tant, easily and cost-effectively amenable to be cast in varied shapes and forms, and 
with a high dielectric breakdown strength, the polymers offer to be the most sought-
after materials for making composites by doping them with metal oxides that can 
infuse their characteristic high dielectric permittivity to the composite system. The 
fabrication of metal-oxide–polymer composites involves the dispersion of metal or 
metal oxide nanoparticles within the polymer phase via in situ strategies such as solu-
tion and melt blending, sol–gel processing, where polymerization occurs around the 
metal oxide nanoparticle or the ex situ strategies wherein the pre-synthesized metal 
oxide particle is directly incorporated into the polymer matrix by external mechan-
ical blending, etc. The overall thermo-physical properties of the composite material 
are largely determined by the (i) morphology of the host polymer: size, surface area, 
porosity, and shape of the micropores within the polymer determine the size and 
nature of the dispersed metal and metal oxides nanoparticles [81], (ii) concentration 
and nature of the functional group in it as it determines the host material’s ability 
to bind with metal complex, and (iii) the method of dispersion of the metal oxide 
in the host polymer. The dispersion of metal or metal oxides inside the polymer 
can be achieved through a combination of different mechanisms such as complex-
ation/chelation, electrostatic interactions, precipitation, or reduction reactions, etc. 
The diverse nature of the functional groups and the different factors controlling 
the sizes of the dispersed nanoparticles often make it a challenging task to synthe-
size and impart desired properties in the composite material. Presently the approach 
to developing metal-oxide-based polymer composite for targeted and tailored elec-
trical properties is by choosing the appropriate combination of host polymer matrix 
and ﬁller metal oxide, the correct amount of dispersion of metal oxide into the 
polymer, and controlling their interactions at the interfaces of the two. For these 
composites to act as favored energy harvesting materials, one needs to consider

208
M. Bafna et al.
both the real and imaginary parts of dielectric permittivity, the band gap, dielec-
tric breakdown strength, thermo-mechanical behavior, glass transition temperature, 
morphology, manufacturing procedure, and cost of the component of the desired 
composite. The appropriate dispersion of nano-metal/metal oxide particles develops 
a network of nano-capacitors within the host polymer, which can be charged and 
discharged as required, thus presenting themselves as energy storage devices. The 
amount of stored and retrieved energy can be enhanced by tailoring the properties of 
the interface between the ﬁller and polymer. 
The major challenge with these metal oxide polymer nanodielectrics is the uniform 
dispersion of the metal oxide within the polymer and maintaining the low perco-
lation threshold to achieve both high dielectric permittivity and high breakdown 
strength at a low-level loading. By increasing the polymer’s permittivity, today’s 
metal oxide ﬁllers weaken the material’s mechanical properties and decrease its 
dielectric breakdown strength. 
The enormous amount of research ﬁndings in the last decade has generated a 
wealth of data to be used with novel computational methods based on quantum 
mechanical ab initio methods, classical force-ﬁeld-based molecular dynamics simu-
lations, and data-driven paradigms, such as quantitative structure–property rela-
tionship and machine learning schemes to predict to design and develop novel 
metal-oxide polymer-based dielectrics for energy harvesting applications. 
Metal oxide polymer nanodielectrics offer themselves as a promising class of 
materials for use in energy storage applications such as capacitors and batteries. They 
offer several advantages over traditional dielectric materials, including high dielectric 
constant, low-loss tangent, and good thermal stability. Here in, we summarize the 
opportunities and challenges in these materials. 
Opportunities for metal oxide polymer nanodielectrics include: 
• Improving the energy density of capacitors, which could lead to smaller and more 
powerful electronic devices. 
• Increasing the power density of batteries, which could enable faster charging and 
longer-lasting devices. 
• Reducing the cost of energy storage by using less expensive materials. 
Challenges for metal oxide polymer nanodielectrics include: 
• Developing a synthetic method to produce metal oxide polymer nanodielectrics 
with controlled size, shape, and composition. 
• Improving the stability of the materials under different operating conditions. 
• Understanding the mechanism of charge storage and transport in the materials. 
Overall, metal oxide polymer nanodielectrics have a lot of potential for energy 
storage applications, but further research is needed to fully realize their capabilities.

7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics for Energy …
209
References 
1. SarjeantW J, Clelland IW, Price RA (2001) Capacitive components for power electronics. Proc 
IEEE 89(6):846–855 
2. Johnson RW, Evans JL, Jacobsen P, Thompson JR, Christopher M (2004) The changing 
automotive environment: high temperature electronics. IEEE Trans Electron Packag Manuf 
27:164–176 
3. Ahmed Z, Al S, Kamaruzzaman S, AmerAH (2020) Review of energy storage services, 
applications, limitations, and beneﬁts. Energy Rep 6(7):288–306 
4. Wentian G, Lu W, Gleb Y (2017) World scientiﬁc series in current energy issues energy storage. 
Capacitive Energy Storage, 167–214. https://doi.org/10.1142/9789813208964_0005 
5. Jow TR (2015) Pulsed power capacitor development and outlook. In: IEEE Pulsed Power 
Conference (PPC), 1–7 
6. Hassan YA, Hu H (2020) Current status of polymer nano-composite dielectrics for high-
temperature applications. Compos A 138:1060–1064 
7. Dang ZM, Yuan JK, Yao SH, Liao RJ (2013) Flexible nanodielectric materials with high 
permittivity for power energy storage. Adv Mater 25:6334–6365 
8. Chauhan A, Patel S, Vaish R, Bowen CR (2015) Anti-ferroelectric ceramics for high energy 
density capacitors. Materials 8:8009–8031 
9. Choi KJ (2004) Enhancement of ferro-electricity in strained BaTiO3 thin ﬁlms. Science 
306:1005–1009 
10. Wang Y, Zhou X, Cheng Q, Chu B, Zhang Q (2010) Recent development of high energy density 
polymers for dielectric capacitors. IEEE Trans Dielectrics, Elect Insulat 17:1036–1042 
11. Yao ZH, Song Z, Hao H, Yu ZY, Cao MH, Zhang SJ, Lanagan MT, Liu HX (2017) Homoge-
neous/inhomogeneous-structured dielectrics and their energy-storage performance. Adv Mater 
29:16017–16027 
12. Zhang Y, Feng H, Wu X, Wang L, Zhang A, Xia T, Dong H, Li X, Zhang L (2009) Progress of 
electrochemical capacitor electrode materials: a review. Int J Hydrogen Energy 34:4889–4899 
13. Wang G, Zhang L, Zhang J (2012) A review of electrode materials for electrochemical super-
capacitors. Chem Soc Rev 41:797–828 
14. Sharma P, Bhatti TS (2010) A review on electrochemical double-layer capacitor. Energy 
Convers Manage 51:2901–2912 
15. Chen Q, Shen Y, Zhang S, Zhang QM (2015) Polymer-based dielectrics with high energy 
storage density. Annu Rev Mater Res 45:433–458 
16. Shen Z, Wang X, Luoa B, Lia L (2015) BaTiO3–BiYbO3 perovskite materials for energy 
storage applications. J Mater Chem A 3:18146–18153 
17. Puli VS, Pradhan DK, Chrisey DB, Tomozawa M, Sharma GL, Scott JF, Katiyar RS (2013) 
Structure, dielectric, ferroelectric, and energy density properties of (1.2×)BZT–xBCT ceramic 
capacitors for energy storage applications. J Mater Sci 48:2151–2157 
18. Zou K, Dan Y, Xu H, Zhang Q, Lu Y, Huang H, He Y (2019) Recent advances in lead-free 
dielectric materials for energy storage. Mater Res Bull 113:190–201 
19. Zhu L (2014) Exploring strategies for high dielectric constant and low loss polymer dielectrics. 
J PhysChemLett 5(21):3677–3687 
20. Sarjeant WJ, Zirnheld J, MacDougall FW (1998) Capacitors. IEEE Trans Plasma Sci 26:1368– 
1392 
21. Balaraman AA, Dutta S (2022) J Phys D: Appl Phys 55:183002–183008. https://doi.org/10. 
1088/1361-6463/ac46ed 
22. Christen T, Carlen MW (2000) Theory of ragone plots. J Power Sources 91:210–216 
23. Zhu L, Wang Q (2012) Novel ferroelectric polymers for high energy density and low loss 
dielectrics. Macromolecules 45:2937–2954 
24. Riggs BC, Adireddy S, Rehm CH, PuliSV ER, Chrisey DB (2015) Polymer nanocomposites 
for energy storage applications. Mat Today: Proceed 2:3853–3863. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
matpr.2015.08.004

210
M. Bafna et al.
25. Siddabattuni S, Schuman TP, Dogan F (2013) Dielectric properties of polymer−particle 
nanocomposites inﬂuenced by electronic nature of ﬁller surfaces. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
5:1917–1927. https://doi.org/10.1021/am3030239 
26. Psarras GC (2018) Dielectric polymer materials for high-density energy storage chapter 2: 
fundamentals of dielectric theories. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813215-9.00002-6 
Elsevier Inc. 
27. Psarras GC (2010) Physical properties and applications of polymer nanocomposites chapter 2— 
conductivity and dielectric characterization of polymer nanocomposites. Woodhead Publishing 
Series in Composites Science and Engineering, 31–69. 
28. SteemanP AM, Turnhout JV (2003) Dielectric properties of inhomogeneous media. In: Kremer 
F, Schonhals A (eds) Broadband dielectric spectroscopy. Springer, Berlin, pp 4951–5022 
29. Boyd RH, Liu F, (1997) Dielectric spectroscopy of semicrystalline polymers. In: Runt JP, 
Fitzgerald JJ (eds) Dielectric spectroscopy of polymeric materials. American Chemical Society, 
Washington, DC, pp 1071–1136 
30. Hedvig P (1977) Dielectric spectroscopy of polymers. Adam Hilger Ltd., Bristol 
31. Korzhenko A, Tabellout M, Emery JR (1999) Inﬂuence of a metal-polymer interfacial 
interaction on dielectric relaxation properties of polyurethane. Polymer 40:7187–7195 
32. TsangarisGM PC, Kouloumbi N (1998) Electric modulus and interfacial polarization in 
composite polymeric systems. J Mater Sci 33:2027–2037 
33. Barber P, Balasubramanian S, Anguchamy Y, Gong S, Wibowo A, Gao H, Ploehn HJ, Loye 
HC (2009) Polymer composite and nanocomposite dielectric materials for pulse power energy 
storage. Materials 2(4):1697–1733 
34. Dissado LA, Fothergill JC (2008) Electrical degradation and breakdown in polymers 
35. Zhang G, Allahyarov E, Zhu L (2018) Nano/micro-structured materials for energy and biomed-
ical applications, chapter 1 polymer nanodielectrics: current accomplishments and future chal-
lenges for electric energy storage. Springer Nature Singapore Pvt. Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
978-981-10-7787-6_1 
36. Kaur D, Bharti A, Sharma T, Madhu C (2021) Dielectric properties of ZnO-based nanocom-
posites and their potential applications. Int J Opt. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/9950202 
37. Guang Z (2008) Handbook of advanced dielectric, piezoelectric and ferroelectric materials 
synthesis properties and applications. Woodhead Publishing, Sawston, UK 
38. Bafna M, Gupta AK, Khanna RK, Vijay YK (2020) Development of potassium permanganate 
(KMnO4) doped Poly methyl methacrylate (PMMA) composite using layered structure for 
electromagnetic shielding purpose. Mat Today: Proceed 30(6). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr. 
2020.03.736 
39. Gupta AK, Bafna M, Khanna RK, Shrivasata S, Vijay YK (2021) Study of electromagnetic 
shielding effectiveness of metal oxide polymer composite in their bulk and layered forms. 
Environ Sci Pollut Res 24(6):1–810.1007/s11356–020–09322-x 
40. Chang J, Zhai H, Hu Z, Li J (2022) Ultra-thin metal composites for electromagnetic interference 
shielding. Compos B Eng 246:110269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2022.110269 
41. Zadehnazari A (2022) Metal oxide/polymer nanocomposites: a review on recent advances in 
fabrication and applications. Polymer-Plastics Tech Mat. https://doi.org/10.1080/25740881. 
2022.2129387 
42. Nikolic MV, Vasiljevic ZZ, Auger S, Vidic J (2021) Metal oxide nanoparticles for safe active 
and intelligent food packaging. Trends Food Sci Technol 116:655–668 
43. Won JJ, Hwang HS, Choi D, Ma BC, Jung J, Chang M (2020) Hybrid polymer/metal oxide 
thin ﬁlms for high performance. Flexible Transis. Micro-Machines 11(3):264. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/mi11030264 
44. Sun Z, Wong R, Yu M, Li J, Zhang M, Mele L, Hah J, Kathaperumal M, Wong CP (2022) 
Nanocomposites for future electronics device Packaging: A fundamental study of interfacial 
connecting mechanisms and optimal conditions of silane coupling agents for Polydopamine-
Graphene ﬁllers in epoxy polymers. Chem Eng J 439:135621 
45. Held M, Schie SP, Miehler D, Gannott F, Zaumseil J (2015) Polymer/metal oxide hybrid 
dielectrics for low voltage ﬁeld-effect transistors with solution-processed, high-mobility 
semiconductors. Appl Phys Lett 107:083301. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4929461

7
Metal and Metal-Oxide-Based Polymeric Nanodielectrics for Energy …
211
46. Mote VD, Purushotham Y, Dole BN (2016) Structural, morphological, physical and dielectric 
properties of Mn doped ZnO nanocrystals synthesized by sol-gel method. Mater Des 96:99–105 
47. Ahmad MP, Rao AV, Babu KS, Rao GN (2019) Particle size effect on the dielectric properties 
of ZnO nanoparticles. Mater Chem Phys 224:79–84 
48. Mangalaraja RV, Manohar P, Gnanam FD, Awano M (2004) Electrical and magnetic properties 
of Ni0.8Zn0.2Fe2O4/silica composite prepared by sol-gel method. J Mat Sci 39(6):2037–2042 
49. Silva RLD, Franco A (2020) Effect of porosity on dielectric properties of ZnO ceramics. J Eur 
Ceram Soc 40(4):1307–1311 
50. Bergman DJ (1978) The dielectric constant of a composite material—A problem in classical 
physics. Phys Rep 43(9):377–407 
51. Sareni B, Krähenbühl L, Beroual A, Brosseau C (1997) Effective dielectric constant of random 
composite materials. J Appl Phys 81(5):2375–2383 
52. Mohamed GA, Abd El-Moiz AB, Rashad M (2005) Li-doping effects on the electrical properties 
of ZnO ﬁlms prepared by the chemical-bath deposition method. Physica B 370(1–4):158–167 
53. Huang D, Liu Z, Li Y, Liu Y (2017) Colossal permittivity and dielectric relaxation of (Li, In) 
co-doped ZnO ceramics. J Alloys Comp 698:200–206 
54. Khan R, Zulﬁqar F, Levartoski CI (2018) Inﬂuence of oxygen vacancies on the structural, 
dielectric, and magnetic properties of (Mn, Co) co-doped ZnO nanostructures. J Mater Sci: 
Mater Electron 29(12):9785–9795 
55. Silva R, Banerjee P, Júnior AF (2019) Functional properties of donor- and acceptor-co-doped 
high dielectric constant zinc oxide ceramics. Phys Chem Chem Phys 21(18):9456–9464 
56. Treichel H, Mitwalsky A, Tempel G (1995) Deposition, annealing and characterization of 
high-dielectric-constant metal oxide ﬁlms. Adv Mat Optics Elect 5(3):163–175 
57. Lunkenheimer P, Krohns S, Riegg S, Ebbinghaus SG, Reller A, Loidl A (2009) Colossal 
dielectric constants in transition-metal oxides. European Phys J Special Topics 180(1):61–89 
58. Meher K, Varma BR (2009) Colossal dielectric behavior of semiconducting Sr2TiMnO6 
ceramics. J Appl Phys, 105 
59. Huang X, PuZ TL, Wang Z, Liu X (2012) Preparation and dielectric properties of surface 
modiﬁed TiO2/PEN composite ﬁlms with high thermal stability and ﬂexibility. J Mater Sci: 
Mater Electron 23(12):2089–2097 
60. Bafna M, Garg N, Gupta AK (2018) Dielectric properties of stannous chloride doped PMMA 
composite ﬁlms. J Emerg Technol Innov Res 5:494 
61. Jahnavi VS, Tripathy SK, Rao AVNR (2019) Structural, optical, magnetic and dielectric studies 
of SnO2 nano particles in real time applications. Physica B 565:61–72 
62. Pradyumna E, Sreelekha N, Reddy DA, Gunasekhar KR, Subramanyam K (2015) Dopant 
induced room temperature ferromagnetism in spintronic SnO2: Co nanoparticles. Int J Adv 
Eng Nano Tech 2:22 
63. Zhao Q, Ma L, Zhang Q, Wang C, Xu X (2015) SnO2-Based nanomaterials: synthesis and 
application in lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors. J Nanomat 15 
64. Li J, Seok SI, Chu B, Dogan F, Zhang Q, Wang Q (2009) Nanocomposites of ferroelectric 
polymers with TiO2 nanoparticles exhibiting signiﬁcantly enhanced electrical energy density. 
Adv Mater 21:217–221. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200801106 
65. Dang ZM, Yan WT, Xu HP (2007) Novel high-dielectric-permittivity poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride)/ 
polypropylene blend composites: the inﬂuence of the poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) concentration 
and compatibilizer. J Appl Polym Sci 105:3649–3655 
66. Wang H, Xie H, Wang S, Gao Z, Li C, Hu GH, Xiong C (2018) Enhanced dielectric prop-
erty and energy storage density of PVDF-HFP based dielectric composites by incorporation 
of silver nanoparticles-decorated exfoliated montmorillonitenanoplatelets. Compos Appl Sci 
Manuf 108:62–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesa.2018.02.020 
67. Sengwa RJ, Dhatarwal P (2021) Polymer nanocomposites comprising PMMA matrix and ZnO, 
SnO2, and  TiO2 nanoﬁllers: a comparative study of structural, optical, and dielectric properties 
for multifunctional technological applications. Opt Mater 113:110837 
68. Choudhary S (2017) Dielectric dispersion and relaxations in (PVA-PEO)-ZnO polymer 
nanocomposites. Phys B: Conden Matt 522(1):48–56

212
M. Bafna et al.
69. Choudhary S, Sengwa RJ (2017) Effects of different inorganic nanoparticles on the structural, 
dielectric and ion transportation properties of polymers blend based nano-composite solid 
polymer electrolytes. Electrochimica Acta 247:924–941 
70. Sengwa RJ, Dhatarwal P, Choudhary S (2020) A comparative study of different metal 
oxide nanoparticles dispersed PVDF/PEO blend matrix-based advanced multifunctional 
nanodielectrics for ﬂexible electronic devices. Mater Tod Comm 25:101380–101392 
71. Tailor R, Vijay YK, Bafna M (2019) Environmental emissions. IntechOpen. https://doi.org/10. 
5772/intechopen.92389 
72. Bafna M, Gupta AK, Agarwal A, Sain N, Jain V (2021) Dielectric studies and alternating 
current conductivity studies of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) doped with ferric chloride 
(FeCl3) in varying concentration. Mat Today: Proceed38:1209–1213 
73. Bafna M, GuptaA K, Khanna RK (2018) Dielectric properties of potassium permanganate 
(KMnO4)—PMMA composite ﬁlms. J Emerg Techno Inno Res 5:433–436 
74. Bafna M, Gupta AK (2022) Study of dielectric permittivity and electrical modulus of K2CrO4 
doped. PMMA 67(6):890–893 
75. Deeba F, Gupta AK, Kulshestra V, Bafna M, Jain A (2022) Investigation of dielectric properties 
of PVDF-PMMA blends. Mat Today Proceed. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2022.06.417 
76. Deeba F, Gupta AK, Kulshestra V, Bafna M, Jain A (2022) Analysing the dielectric properties 
of ZnO doped PVDF/PMMA blend composite. J Mat Sci: Mat Elect 33:23703–23713 
77. Deeba F, Shrivastav K, Bafna M, Jain A (2022) Tuning of dielectric properties of polymers by 
composite formation: the effect of inorganic ﬁllers addition. J Compos Sci 6(12):355. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/jcs6120355 
78. Kao KC (2004) Dielectric phenomena in solids: with emphasis on physical concepts of 
electronic processes, electric polarization and relaxation, dielectric phenomena in solids 
10:41–114 
79. Vryonis O, Anastassopoulos DL, Vradis AA, Psarras GC (2016) Dielectric response and 
molecular dynamics in epoxyBaSrTiO3 nanocomposites: effect of nanoﬁller loading. Polymer 
95:82–90 
80. Sanida AS, Stavropoulos SG, Speliotis TH, Psarras GC (2017) Development, characteriza-
tion, energy storage and interface dielectric properties in SrFe12O19/epoxy nanocomposites. 
Polymer 120:73–81 
81. Rozenberg BA, Tenne R (2008) Polymer-assisted fabrication of nanoparticles and nanocom-
posites. Progress Polym Sci 33(1):40–112

Chapter 8 
Fabrication and Properties 
of Dielectric Elastomer-Based 
Nanocomposites 
Tajamal Hussain, Rabia Batool, Khurram Shehzad, Adnan Mujahid, 
Adeel Afzal, and Muhammad Zahid 
Abstract Dielectric elastomers (DEs) are one of the leading electroactive polymer 
(EAPs) technologies used for actuation application. These elastomers possess the 
beneﬁts of large strain and stresses, easy processability, fast speed, recovery, efﬁ-
ciency long life, and reliability. Due to their inherently low dielectric constant, 
nanoﬁllers are introduced into these elastomers to raise their dielectric constant 
for increased energy storage and large strain. Enhancement in dielectric constant 
is largely inﬂuenced by the surface functionalization of the nanoﬁller and struc-
tural design of the nanocomposites. In this chapter, we will review the recent devel-
opments regarding, the fabrication, characterization, and applications of dielectric 
elastomer-based nanocomposites. 
Keywords Dielectric elastomer · Electroactive polymer · Nanocomposites 
8.1 
Introduction 
Dielectric elastomers (DEs) are multi-functional, incompressible, stretchable, highly 
extensible, and soft poly-active polymer structures [1, 2]. DEs act basically on a trans-
duction mechanism. Being electromechanical transducers, DEs can convert electrical 
energy to mechanical energy; however, they act as reversible transducers, converting 
mechanical energy into electrical one as well. Dielectric elastomer actuators (DEAs), 
undergoing this reversible operation, are said to be working in electromagnetic
T. Hussain envelope symbol · R. Batool · A. Mujahid · A. Afzal 
School of Chemistry, University of the Punjab, Lahore 54590, Pakistan 
e-mail: tajamalhussain.chem@pu.edu.pk 
K. Shehzad 
School of Micro-Nano Electronics, ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientiﬁc and Technological 
Innovation Center, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang 311200, China 
M. Zahid 
Department of Chemistry, University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_8 
213

214
T. Hussain et al.
transduction-based generator mode [3, 4]. No doubt, DEs are seen to compete for 
actuators being used in many latest systems such as loudspeakers, cars, washing 
machines, and computers. DEAs are also named ‘artiﬁcial muscles’ [1, 5] and can be 
employed in the formation of soft robots [1, 6]. Large actuation strain, high speciﬁc 
energy density, low density, and low modulation make DEs superior over conven-
tional actuation technologies such as electrostrictive, shape memory, piezoelectric, 
and magnetostrictive materials [4]. Over a decade ago, it was discovered that dielec-
tric elastomers show about 100% strain by the inﬂuence of an electric ﬁeld [1, 7]. As 
sensors, they are employed to monitor pressure and strain [1, 8–10]. Along with this 
special characteristic, DE also exhibits low cost, low operation noise, lightweight, 
fast response, etc.; leading to its application in different ﬁelds as a transducer [10, 
11]. Thus, DEs ﬁnd vast applications in the ﬁelds of soft robotics [12–14], energy 
harvesting [15, 16], artiﬁcial muscles [17, 18], haptic interfaces [19–21], and tunable 
lenses [22, 23]. 
8.2 
Working Mechanism of Dielectric Elastomer 
The charged particles present in matter move with an applied voltage. As compared 
to a conductor, charged particles show movements over small distances in dielectric 
materials; where two coupled processes, i.e., polarization and deformation can be 
observed. All dielectric materials are electroactive, i.e., in an electric ﬁeld, they 
change shape or size [10]. 
The basic structure of DEA comprises a soft elastomer membrane sandwiched 
between two compliant electrodes. When a voltage is applied to the electrodes, an 
electric ﬁeld is generated. The presence of electrostatic force and induced Maxwell 
stress causes a decrease in thickness and expansion in the area of the membrane, as 
reported by Rontgen in 1880 [2]. The pre-strain behavior of DEs plays an important 
role; (i) thinning of the ﬁlm occurs in the width direction (ii) creation of large electric 
ﬁeld strength by applying a low voltage (iii) orientation of pre-strained elastomer in 
such directions which improve its resistance toward electric voltage [24]. Actuation 
mechanisms in DEAs are reported by the SRI International group when they used 
polyimide and silicone rubber layers to synthesize a bending actuator in 1998 [25] 
and showed 100% actuation strain in a DEA prepared using a pre-stretched acrylic 
elastomer [26]. This discovery gathered the attention of researchers to use DEAs in 
artiﬁcial muscle technology [27, 28]. 
When observed more closely, it was found that when a power source via a 
conducting wire is connected to the electrodes, a partial leakage of electric current 
from the conducting wire can be noted, adding charges to the electrodes partially. 
The presence of opposite charges on both electrodes creates polarizability in the 
dielectric material. The forces of attraction between these opposite charges expand 
the membrane but cause a decrease in its thickness; in this way, DE acts as an actu-
ator. However, when the DE membrane is pre-stretched and pre-charged and then 
undergoes relaxation in the circuit, the voltage between the electrodes is boosted,

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
215
Fig. 8.1 Working mechanism of DEs [28]. Adapted with permission from ref. [28]. Copyright 
(2019) (American Chemical Society) 
and the DE acts as a generator [29, 30]. For the best understanding of DEs, refer to 
Fig. 8.1 [28]. 
8.2.1 
DE Materials 
To achieve better efﬁciency of DEAs, dielectric elastomers with high electrical 
breakdown strength, low viscosity, low modulus, and high dielectric constant must 
be used. Employment of several materials with such properties has been reported 
by researchers; including ﬂuoroelastomers [31], styrene-ethylene-butylene-styrene 
[32], natural rubber [33], polyurethanes (PUs) [34], silicones [35], and acrylates [8]. 
Out of these, the last three materials are the most promising ones [36]. 
a. Polyurethane 
Owing to the presence of polar urethane groups, the higher dielectric constant value 
(up to 7) of polyurethane (Pus) enables them to work in DEAs at a low electric ﬁeld. 
On the contrary, polarity in the groups also leads to a lower breakdown strength 
[36, 37].

216
T. Hussain et al.
b. 
Silicones 
For the synthesis of DEAs, the most widely used silicone is polydimethylsiloxane 
(PDMS); which has a low viscosity loss, high conversion efﬁciency, long life span, 
fast response rate, weak intermolecular forces, longer bond lengths of the basic unit, 
i.e., Si–O, and higher ﬂexibility [36, 37]. 
c. Acrylates 
Low price, better adhesive properties, and good performance of commercially avail-
able adhesive tapes (VHB 4905/4910) make them excellent candidates to be used in 
DEAs. Pre-stretched acrylate materials show exceptionally high breakdown strength. 
However, acrylate-based DEAs have poor adaptability as compared to silicone 
rubber-based DEAs [8, 36]. 
8.2.2 
Electrodes Used in DE-Based Devices 
The functionality of DE-based machines is also affected by the electrodes being used 
in the formulation of DEAs. The use of stable, highly conductive, strongly adhesive, 
and good compliancy electrodes results in better working of DEAs. Carbon nanotubes 
(CNTs), carbon grease, graphite, and carbon powder are the most commonly available 
choices used for electrodes for this purpose [38–40]. Being cheap, easily accessible, 
and highly compatible, carbon grease is widely used, but it dries out after a long time. 
Graphite and carbon black are thin and easily applicable to the membrane’s surface, 
so more suitable to be used in multi-layers stacked DEAs. There is also a drawback in 
using these electrodes; when a high strain is applied, the contact between the powders 
is lost, reducing the conductivity values. The high transparency and conductivity of 
silver nanowires, self-healing, and optical transparency of ionic conductors make 
them applicable as electrodes in DEAs which are then employed in optical devices 
[41, 42]. 
8.2.3 
Deformation of Dielectric Elastomer 
A thin membrane is unstable and undergoes different morphological patterns such as 
buckling, crumpling, and wrinkling. If it is compressed by applying strain on bound-
aries, it undergoes buckling. If uniaxial tensile strength is applied to the membrane, 
it undergoes wrinkling. Wrinkling and buckling can be seen when the membrane 
undergoes non-uniform shrinkage. If we stretch the membrane over a liquid drop, 
symmetrical breakage can be observed leading to crumpling or wrinkling. In the case 
of DE, where a thin membrane of elastomer is sandwiched between two compliant 
electrodes; when the applied voltage reaches a particular value, the membrane exhibit 
instabilities [43].

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
217
As DE interconverts electrical and mechanical energies, polymer and electrodes 
must contract and stretch together [3]. For a considerable deformation of DE, elec-
trodes made up of softer objects with a relatively lower mechanical stiffness, such as 
carbon grease should be used. By applying a voltage, charged particles begin to ﬂow 
from one electrode of a transducer to the other. The presence of opposite charges on 
both electrodes causes the structure to expand in the plane and compress in thickness, 
leading to deformation in the DE [1, 10]. 
8.2.4 
Conﬁgurations of Dielectric Elastomers 
Based on the working mechanism of DEs, they are employed to create different 
conﬁgurations of DEAs such as zipping [44], multilayer stacked [45], rolled [46], 
balloon [47], cone-shaped [48], folded [49], hinge [50], rotary [51], bending [52], 
and planar [53]. 
The simplest DEA structure is single-layered. However, deformation in uni-
layered structures is too small to be utilized, so multi-layered stacking of DEs can 
be done to increase the deformation effect in them [54]. As reported by Kovacs and 
co-workers, increasing the number of DE layers causes difﬁculty in the synthesis 
of DEA. This problem was solved by the introduction of an automated process 
to fabricate DEA with reproducible properties [55]. Fiber-stiffened multi-layered 
stacked DE sheets can be used to produce a rolled DEA. DE membrane inﬂated into 
a balloon can achieve a high area strain and thus can be used in trigger actuators and 
volume ﬂuid pumps. Rossiter and co-workers [56] presented a cone-shaped DEA; 
the applied voltage reduces the tension and causes expansion of the DE membrane 
and it is deformed in the direction of bias force. A double-conical DEA conﬁguration 
was also formulated by Wang et al. [36]. In the form of an active hinge, DEA was 
prepared, where a pre-stretched DE membrane is attached on both sides of a hinge 
support structure [50]. On applying voltage on one side, the hinge structure rotates to 
the opposite side due to the reduction in the stress of the membrane. Although DEs 
are nowadays in limelight to be used in the development of soft robots, however, 
a rigid framework is not much favorable. So, self-organized dielectric elastomer 
minimum-energy structures (DEMES) are introduced by Kofod et al. [57], where 
DE is attached to a thin framework of a ﬂexible polymer, releasing a low amount of 
energy while regaining their original position. 
8.2.5 
State of Equilibrium in DE 
Four different variables affect the state of equilibrium in a DE-based transducer: 
voltage, force, charge, and displacement. Two of these states are dependent on the 
properties of the DE, while the other two can be varied according to the require-
ments. For example, in an electromechanical system of DE, transducer, force, and

218
T. Hussain et al.
voltage are variable, and it takes time to gain a state of equilibrium according to its 
capability of charge polarization and kinematic deformation. The whole process is 
called ‘relaxation’. The time required to achieve this new state of deformation is said 
to be viscoelastic relaxation time. The process of relaxation can also be explained 
in terms of the entangled polymer chains responding to the force applied to DE. In 
elastomers, a polymer network is formed, where ﬂexible polymer chains are inter-
connected; they may coil or twist or entangle with each other. Applying a force to 
DE can cause sliding or localized slipping of these entangled chains, resulting in the 
relaxation of the elastomer. In response to voltage, polarity is created in the elas-
tomers; the molecular dipoles re-orient themselves, causing dielectric relaxation in 
DE material. This process involves rotation and localized translation of molecules 
[29, 31, 58]. 
When a power source is connected to the dielectric material, current leakage takes 
place, i.e., transport of ions, electrons, or both causes a small current to ﬂow through 
the material. The density of this current leakage depends upon the applied ﬁeld; it 
increases with the increasing applied ﬁeld [58, 59]. 
8.2.6 
Theories for Dielectric Elastomer-Based Actuators 
The shrinkage in the size of the elastomer by applying a voltage across its electrodes 
is the result of Maxwell stress (interaction between quasistatic electric charges). The 
Maxwellian formula is derived based on a basic model of materials, assuming: (i) 
electrode materials have an inﬁnity value of conductivity and zero elastic modulus, 
(ii) there is ignorable current leakage and dielectric loss, (iii) the elastomer used is 
perfectly elastic and exhibit very low loss modulus, (iv) the polymer used is isotropic, 
(v) both elastomer and electrodes are incompressible, and (vi) elastomer shows a 
constant value of elastic modulus [59, 60]. 
The application of DEs in actuators is limited by the low dielectric permittivity 
of the elastomer being used in the actuator. So, Maxwell stress can be improved by 
increasing its permittivity values [61]. 
8.3 
Applications of Dielectric Elastomers 
8.3.1 
Actuators 
High ﬂexibility and capability to show large deformations allow DEs to be employed 
in the formulation of actuators such as tapered drivers, diamond drivers, folding 
drivers, and cylindrical drivers [36]. A bionic robot is made by Li et al. [12] using  
acrylic (3 M VHB) as the dielectric elastomer. The two ﬂexible electrodes used 
are (i) surrounding water and (ii) conductive ion gel. Water drawing was achieved

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
219
by using mechanical sections of DE material. Silicone rubber is used as a water-
impermeable encapsulant. Another kind of DEA was fabricated by Jun et al. [62] to  
control surface wettability. VHB 4905 was the DE material used; carbon black was 
used as the ﬂexible electrode. Electromechanical instability (EMI) phenomenon was 
employed in making this actuator. Wrinkling was observed in DE after relaxation 
time. Deformation of the material can be controlled by changing voltage and thus 
wettability can be adjusted accordingly [60]. 
8.3.2 
Generators 
Dielectric elastomers are known to interconvert electrical and mechanical energy; 
hence, they can also be used to generate electricity. Energies from different sources 
such as blowing wind, waves of an ocean, walking of humans, and ﬂowing eaters can 
be harvested using DEs [36, 63]. A generator to harvest energy from the motion of 
human bodies that can run low-consumption systems was formulated by Jean-Mistral 
and co-workers [64]. Energy from the human body, being cost-free, stable, and green 
energy, is advantageous over the other forms of energy. A heel generator consisting 
of a multi-layered DE membrane was developed by Stanford Institute (SRI) in the 
United States; this generator uses the effect of a heel to generate electric power. 0.8 J 
energy can be generated per step while walking. Its better illustration is given in 
Fig. 8.2 [63]. 
Kornbluh et al. [66] formulated a wave energy harvesting device that can be 
actuated by water wave ﬂuctuations; DE units employed in this device are disc-
shaped, ﬂoating on the sea and converting wave energy into electricity.
Fig. 8.2 Heel strike generator based on dielectric elastomer ﬁtted in the shoe and its cross-section 
view. Source SRI International [65]. Adapted with permission from ref. [65] Copyright (2012) 
(Springer Nature) 

220
T. Hussain et al.
8.3.3 
Sensors 
DEs-based sensors ﬁnd their applications in the ﬁeld of biomedicine, helping in the 
detection of prosthetic pressure, thus improving its comfort level [67]. DEs-based 
pressure sensors, bending sensors, and tension sensors have been developed by New 
Zealand Stretch Sense Company [36]. 
8.3.4 
Soft Robots 
Gripping objects of different types, sizes, and shapes is one of the biggest challenges 
in the formulation of soft robots; this problem is being resolved by the use of DEAs. 
Light weighted and greater capability to deform can be achieved by self-organization 
of the ﬂat state of DEMES into an out-of-plane complex structure. DEMES-based 
tulip-shaped soft gripper; based on a push–pull conﬁguration; that opens to hold an 
object when subjected to an electric ﬁeld was fabricated [68]. A multi-segmented 
gripper is also formulated by Araromi and co-workers; the multiple segments allow 
the gripper to envelop objects of different shapes and sizes [69]. Moreover, Shian 
et al. showed that the integration of stiff ﬁbers can induce bending and wrapping, 
providing aid in gripping objects [70]. DE balloons can also be utilized as a hydraulic 
source in the making of grippers in soft robots. 
The ﬁrst biomimetic walking robot was prepared by Eckerle and co-workers [8]; 
DEA used in this robot named FLEX has six legs with two degrees of freedom at 
each leg. However, the walking speed of this robot was too slow. Spring roll actuators 
were used to make a six-legged robot. Inspired by crawling natural creatures, crawling 
robots have also been made along with legged robots [71]. Electronic components are 
integrated into the feet of these robots, whose actions move them stably in forward 
and backward directions [72]. A tethered robot that can climb a wall is also made 
[73]. In the soft crawling robot formulated by Li et al. [74], oriented plastic ﬁbers in 
the form of a bundle are attached at both ends of the actuators; these bundles provide 
a fraction to the robot. Later on, the artiﬁcial nervous system was also integrated into 
a caterpillar-like crawling soft robot [75]. 
Hopping robots, jumping robots, ﬂying robots, swimming robots, and humanoid 
robots are also being designed using DEAs. 
8.4 
Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nano Composites 
No doubt, dielectric polymer materials are wonderful materials because of their 
ease in processibilities and high ﬂexibilities but their use is limited because of low 
dielectric constant value and low thermal stabilities. No single component possesses 
the multidimensional properties required for functional materials employed in the

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
221
recent day’s technology. Nanoparticles, ceramics, Mxene, and carbon-based mate-
rials (carbon nanotubes, graphene oxide, reduced graphene oxide, etc.) are famous 
for their excellent electrical, mechanical, and thermal properties and are incorporated 
as ﬁller in polymer matrix for the synthesis of polymer nanocomposites, a system, 
with excellent multidimensional features. Such dielectric elastomer-based nanocom-
posites (DENC) have extensive applications because of excellent conductivity and 
remarkable dielectric constant values with ultra-low tangent loss and high ﬂexibility 
on the addition of a minor quantity of ﬁllers. 
8.4.1 
Fabrication of Dielectric Elastomer-Based 
Nanocomposites 
Synthesis and designing of DENC because of their extensive applications have been 
the subject of a great number of research works reported in the last two decades. 
Solution mixing method, melt blending method, in situ polymerization, and injection 
molding are often used because of their unique features and advantages. 
a. Solution mixing method 
The solution mixing method is one of the simple, cost-effective, and less time-
consuming methods. In this approach, two main components of the composites (ﬁller 
and matrix) are mixed or dispersed in the same or two miscible solvents in two sepa-
rate containers followed by their mixing with the help of some external force like soni-
cation, mechanical mixing, etc. For the preparation of dielectric polymer composites, 
in most cases, the solvent selection is based on the ability of the dissolving polymer 
matrix to disperse ﬁllers and its non-reactive nature, and ease in removal of the 
solvent after the formation of the composites. This method is one of the commonly 
used methods since no sophisticated instruments or apparatus is required for this. 
The solution mixing method is not recommended for polymers that do have not 
good solubility in a solvent with low boiling points. In that case, the removal of the 
solvent becomes tedious. Usually, ultrasonication is considered a very effective tool 
for the good dispersion of MWCNTs and graphene-related materials in water and 
other common organic solvents. It helps in breaking the agglomerates into separate 
entities. It is reported that extensive or powerful sonication sometimes leaves adverse 
effects which could result in a lowering of the aspect ratio of ﬁllers like multi-walled 
carbon nanotubes. Synthesis of the polymer composites is not possible for polymers 
that are not well soluble in solvents with low boiling points. The solution mixing 
method can be used with slight modiﬁcation to have better results depending upon 
circumstances. AmronsakChankul and co-workers [76] prepared Zn+2/ZnO-based 
polydiacetylene composites [Zn+2/ZnO/PDA)] through the solution mixing method 
with a slight alteration. After mixing all the precursors, they kept the mixture for 
incubation at room temperature for different time intervals ranging from 0.5 to 24 h 
and from 4 to 70 °C overnight. After incubation, each sample was irradiated by UV

222
T. Hussain et al.
light to evaporate the solvent. They studied the effect of incubation temperature and 
time on the size of the prepared nanocomposites. 
b. 
Melt blending method 
It is also a mixing method as discussed in the previous section. In this method, the ﬁller 
is forced to mix with the help of some external force in the already melted polymer, 
or a mixture of ﬁllers and polymer matrix is fed into the heating chamber for melting. 
Melt blending is a solvent-free method and an environment-friendly one. This method 
is considered one of the best methods for polymers that have solubility issues and 
low melting points. The melt blending method is strongly recommended for large-
scale synthesis of the composites. On the other hand, this method is not considered as 
economical one as the solution mixing method. The use of this method is not suitable 
for the micro-level synthesis of the composites. A major limitation of this method is 
the synthesis of the composite of thermoset polymer as a matrix. At different places in 
the literature, it is observed that the melt bending method was used with slight modiﬁ-
cation for the synthesis of DENC with desired features. The melting process is carried 
out in a sealed environment at ultra-low pressure followed by quenching in ice-cold 
water. Such melt blending method is also known as the melt quenching method [77]. 
In the recent years, the use of two immiscible polymers as a matrix to obtain carbon-
related materials based on DENC with improved and unique dielectric properties 
is becoming a hot trend [78–80]. The mechanism behind the achievement of high 
dielectric constant and low tangent loss is the controlled migration of the MWCNTs 
in the interface of the immiscible polymers. For this purpose, various combinations 
of immiscible polymers like polystyrene-polymethylmethacrylate, polyvinylidene 
ﬂuoride-poly acetic acid, etc., can be used to control the migration of ﬁllers across 
the interface of their unfavorable and favorable polymers. For the synthesis of DECN 
using two immiscible polymers, the melt blending method is considered the most 
convenient approach. 
c. In situ polymerization method 
In situ polymerization method for the synthesis of the dielectric polymer compos-
ites is the best choice for polymers with high melting points and have solubility 
issues in commonly used low boiling point solvents [81]. In this mode of preparation 
of composites, polymerization of the polymer matrix has been carried out in the 
presence of the ﬁller. This method is very commonly used because of its excellent 
outcome in terms of highly uniform dispersion of the ﬁller in the matrix. It is one 
of the economical methods like the solution mixing method for the preparation of 
composites as no sophisticated instrumentation is required. When a series of compos-
ites are needed to be prepared with different concentrations of ﬁllers, to study the 
effect of the contents of ﬁller, this method is not considered as reliable as the solution 
mixing method and melt blending method. Polymerization is very much sensitive 
to the experimental conditions as far as the molecular weight and structure of the 
polymer are concerned. Any difference in molecular weight and structure of polymer 
for different composites with different ﬁller contents may inﬂuence the features of 
composites which leads to a wrong conclusion regarding the study of the effect of

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
223
ﬁller contents. This method is also not considered the best available choice when a 
composite of two immiscible polymers is required to be prepared. 
d. Injection molding method 
The injection molding method is considered one of the best methods to prepare 
DENC in any shape using a mold of a particular shape. The basic strategy of this 
method is analogous to the melt mixing method. A polymer containing the ﬁller is 
heated above its melting point and the ﬁller gets dispersed in this molten form with 
less viscosity. Finally, this melt is injected mechanically into a mold, where it gets 
cool down to give composites of the desired shape. The injection molding method is 
the most commonly used one for the industrial-scale production of composites. This 
method is only limited to thermoplastic polymer for the synthesis of the composites. 
Through control of the alignment of MWCNTs in composites prepared by injection 
molding method, tuning the dielectric properties of composites is a very reliable 
approach [82]. The injection molding method can be used in a versatile way and 
with the combination of the other techniques to have desired results in polymer 
composites. Physical foaming combined with the injection molding method for the 
synthesis of the composite will facilitate the generation of interesting microstructures 
which are desired to have required features in the composites [83]. A brief data of 
the synthesis method of the DENC with their claimed values of dielectric constant 
and dielectric loss is given in Table 8.1.
8.4.2 
Types of Fillers Used 
Different kinds of ﬁllers are being used in the formulation of DENC, mainly divided 
into two types: 
a. Ceramics 
b. 
Conductive ﬁllers 
The above-mentioned ﬁllers are of great importance, due to an effective polariza-
tion formed between ﬁller layers and polymer matrix [92, 93]. 
a. Ceramics 
Extremely high permittivity values of ceramics such as BaTiO3 [35, 94] and TiO2 
[35, 95] as compared to the polymer matrix, in which they are incorporated, make 
them an excellent candidate to be used in DENC. The incorporation of ceramics in 
DE composites improves their electrical properties to a great extent. The requirement 
of a relatively greater amount of ﬁller in this case endangers the value of breakdown 
voltage and ﬂexibility of the composite, making it less ﬂexible. On the other hand, 
conductive ﬁllers are more appealing to be used in DENC as the product composite 
is easily processible and exhibits high ﬂexibility. Moreover, these ﬁllers are required 
in a lesser amount as compared to ceramic-based composites. Although, the use 
of conductive ﬁllers results in a huge increase in the dissipation of electrical and

224
T. Hussain et al.
Table 8.1 Dielectric properties values of dielectric elastomer-based nanocomposites 
Polymer matrix
Nano ﬁllers
Dielectric permittivity
Dielectric loss
Synthesis method
References 
Polypropylene
0.34% MWCNT
30
0.06
Melt mixing and batch 
foaming 
[84] 
Polyimide
1 vol% graphene + 16 
vol%BaTiO3 
31
0.03
Solution mixing
[85] 
Polypyrrole
8 wt% MWCNT
44
0.07
Inverse micro-emulsion 
polymerization 
[86] 
Cyanoethyl pullulan polymer
0.06 wt% CNT + Reduced 
graphene oxide 
32
0.05
Solution mixing
[87] 
Polydimethyl-Siloxane
2 wt% graphene nanoplates
89
1.5
Solution mixing and 
vulcanization 
[88] 
Polysulfone
25 vol% MWCNT
55
0.05
Solution mixing and 
electrospinning 
[89] 
Polypropylene
1.25 vol% MWCNT
57.2
0.05
Melt mixing and injection 
molding 
[90] 
Polyvinylidene 
Fluoride 
30 vol% BaTiO3 nanoparticles + 3 
vol% BaTiO3 nanoﬁbers 
27
0.06
Solution mixing
[91] 
Polypropylene
1.25 wt% MWCNT
14.1
0.39
Compression molding
[90]

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
225
mechanical energy; affecting the stability and lifetime of the composites in which 
they are used [59]. 
b. 
Conductive ﬁllers 
The mostly employed conductive ﬁllers include carbon black [96], carbon nanotubes 
[97], graphene [59], metal nanoparticles [98], etc. It is observed that metal nanopar-
ticles used as ﬁllers are less effective as compared to carbon-based nanoﬁllers; based 
on the fact that polymer matrix has more afﬁnity with carbon-based nanoﬁllers. 
Recently, 1D (one-dimensional) and 2D (two-dimensional) carbon-based 
nanoﬁllers have grabbed much attention from researchers since they fabricate 
composites with high dielectric permittivity. These ﬁllers form a percolative network 
through the polymer matrix and thus improve the electric properties of the compos-
ites drastically. The percolation threshold value for the composite is greatly affected 
by the geometric factors of ﬁller particles and their afﬁnity with the matrix at the 
interface. Graphene nanosheets (2D) have a unique structure, i.e., a highly stable 
planar honeycomb made by single-atom thick sp2 C-atoms imparting remarkable 
electron mobility, a very high surface area, excellent electrical conductivity, and the 
sheets can easily contact with each other as compared to CNTs, thereby graphene 
nanosheets are known to have a lower percolation threshold value [99]. A relatively 
lower breakdown strength, high dielectric loss, and vast mechanical hysteresis caused 
due to the leakage of current between the conductive channels of graphene sheets 
formed in the polymer matrix are the main drawbacks to using graphenes, chemically 
different graphene-related materials such as graphene oxide and reduced graphene 
oxide for the fabrication of graphene/DEA composites. Thus, the synthesis of a stable 
and improved graphene-based DENC is one of the most notable ﬁelds that is being 
increasingly reported over time. 
The actuation behavior of the graphene-based polymer composite can be improved 
by seeking a solution to the above-mentioned problems, e.g., functionalization of 
graphene components or limiting the dielectric loss by decorating them with an 
insulating layer, hence, improving the compatibility between the conductive ﬁllers 
and matrix components [59]. 
8.4.3 
Factors Affecting the Functionalization of Composite 
a. Route used to synthesize the ﬁller 
The synthesis technique used to fabricate ﬁllers (e.g., graphene nanosheets) has a 
dramatic inﬂuence on the properties of the ﬁnal product; top-down and bottom-up 
being the most-preferable ones [100, 101]. On the other hand, bottom-up technique, 
synthesis on SiC surface [102], and mechanical exfoliation [103] are not suitable 
methods to synthesize graphene which is to be used in composites due to high cost 
and partial scalability [104]. Low yield, comparatively lower yield, and high cost

226
T. Hussain et al.
of graphene nanosheets synthesized through chemical vapor deposition of hydro-
carbons are not much recommended for this purpose [105]. Owing to the low-cost 
processability and high scalability of the liquid phase, exfoliation is a better suitable 
process [104]. Despite the lower quality of graphene obtained through the reduction 
of graphene oxide (GO), controlled costs and higher yield make this route a good 
choice for the production of graphene nanosheets which are to be incorporated into 
composites [106]. Hence, the most effective routes to be used for the synthesis of 
commercial graphene nanosheets are liquid phase exfoliation and reduction of GO. 
b. 
Functionalization of the ﬁller 
Modiﬁcation of the ﬁllers being employed, e.g., uniform dispersion or deagglomer-
ation, surface modiﬁcation, ways to enhance the strength of matrix-ﬁller interaction, 
synthesis of core–shell structures, use of complex ﬁllers, etc., plays an important 
role in the functioning of the composite [107, 108]. Several chemicals (covalent) 
[109] and physical (non-covalent) [110] techniques have been employed to achieve 
these functionalized ﬁllers. Covalent functionalization includes the organization of 
π-cloud for the conversion of sp2 carbon network into sp3 hybridized carbon [111]. 
On the other hand, non-covalent functionalization includes the use of electrostatic 
forces, Van der Waals forces, π-π interactions, physisorption, etc.; resulting in the 
formation of electron–hole puddles and causing changes in the doping density [112]. 
Preferably, functionalization methods mentioned later (non-covalent) are capable to 
stop the leakage of current, thus increasing the dielectric permittivity and allowing 
controllable energy dissipation. Hence, non-covalent modiﬁcation is more favorable 
to synthesizing highly efﬁcient nanoﬁllers incorporated composites [113]. 
c. Content of ﬁller in the composite 
Increasing the carbon to oxygen ratio of the ﬁller results in a better elastic modulus 
and improved dielectric permittivity. The growth rate of elastic modulus is lower 
as compared to dielectric permittivity. However, higher contents of ﬁller cause a 
decrease in electrical breakdown strength [59]. 
d. Interactions between matrix and ﬁller 
The electromechanical properties and microstructure of a composite are greatly 
affected by interactions between matrix and ﬁller particles. For instance, coating 
of hydrophilic, less toxic, and stable TiO2 on hydrophobic reduced graphene oxide 
(rGO) improves its surface wettability, (TiO2 acts as an insulator controlling the 
current leakage inside the composite) causing better interactions between the ﬁller 
and matrix, resulting in greater storage capability and loss modulus as compared to 
neat polymers [25, 59]. 
e. Use of complex ﬁller 
As reported, increasing the intensity of the electric ﬁeld reduces the thickness 
of the composite. However, a composite in which complex ﬁller is incorporated 
exhibits a much better actuation behavior. This was observed in an experiment 
performed, where the actuation behavior of PU/rGO and PU/1G-1 T was compared.

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
227
The composite with a complex ﬁller showed many results better than the other one 
[114]. 
8.4.4 
Design and Structure of the Composite 
As far as the efﬁciency and sensitivity of the composites are concerned, the structure 
and design of the composites are equally important as the selection of matrix and 
ﬁllers is vital. A lot of studies have been focused on the designing of composites 
with a speciﬁc structure that signiﬁcantly regulates the efﬁciency of the composites. 
Agglomeration of the ﬁller is one of the serious issues which limit the homogenous 
dispersion of the ﬁller in the matrix. Development of the elastomeric composites 
is often accomplished with cross-linking phenomena to obtain desired features in 
the composites. The vulcanization strategy, basically a high-temperature chemical 
cross-linking method, is commonly used to obtain the cross-linking network in the 
composite [78, 82, 83, 115]. Electron beam radiation is also considered the best choice 
for the development of a cross-linking network to have highly uniform dispersion of 
the ﬁller in the matrix. Cross-linking development by irradiation of electron beam is 
accompanied at ambient temperature which may lead toward cross-linking without 
thermal degradation in the polymer matrix and with highly homogenous dispersion 
of the ﬁller [115]. Filler orientation in DENC is one of the vital factors which inﬂu-
ence the dielectric permittivity values. It has been observed that the mean orientation 
angle demonstrates the resultant dielectric features of the electroactive composites. 
Theoretical models have been purposed to correlate the experimental data on dielec-
tric properties and numerical results obtained through proposed models and good 
agreement has been found between them [116]. Selective localization of the ﬁller 
in the matrix inﬂuences morphology which intern demonstrates the rheology and 
dielectric properties of the composites. Selective localization of the functional ﬁller 
in the polymer matrix is achieved by the addition of another immiscible polymer as 
ﬁller. It may result in multiple times improvements in the features of the composites. 
The addition of 3 wt% of GO in polyurethane-based polylactic acid results in about a 
400% increase in the value of dielectric constant as compared to that of polyurethane-
based polylactic acid composites without GO [26]. Similarly, the use of the third 
component as an additive to increase non-covalent interaction between the ﬁller and 
matrix is also proved very effective and it results in an improvement in the dielectric 
constant values of ternary composites [117]. In such polymer composites, uniform 
dispersion of the ﬁllers is obtained, because the third component helps in getting the 
maximum features of the ﬁller in the composite. The addition of the ﬁller in terms of 
masterbatch is also a very common strategy for preparing dielectric nanocomposites. 
Usually, the ﬁller is added in high concentration in a material called carrier materials 
and this resultant stuff is known as a masterbatch. Finally, this masterbatch is added 
to the main matrix. The compatibility of the carrier materials with the ﬁller and main 
matrix is taken into consideration while selecting the carrier material. Composites 
prepared with this method result high dielectric constant with ultra-low tangent value

228
T. Hussain et al.
[118]. The addition of a surfactant along the ﬁller in the polymer matrix is one of the 
commonly used strategies for the synthesis of composites with enhanced homoge-
nous dispersion. Control of agglomeration by using surfactants like DBSA, APTES, 
and CTAB helps ﬁllers in imparting maximum features to the polymer composites 
[24, 119]. Surfactant makes a spread network in the polymer matrix or gets attached 
to the surface of the nanoﬁllers and prevents or reduces the chances of interaction 
ﬁller and thus controls the agglomeration of the nanoﬁller. Uniform dispersion of the 
ﬁller in the nanocomposites helps in attaining signiﬁcant improvement in dielectric 
constant values. Multilayer polymer composites are well known because of their 
structure which allows tuning of the features by slight modiﬁcation in it. Dielectric 
constant and other electrical properties can be tuned in a very broad range just by 
increasing the number of layers or thickness of the layer of the same combination 
of ﬁller and matrix, and the preparation method of the composites. Layer assembly 
is not only helpful in achieving quantitatively good results in DENC but it is also 
considered a facile approach to attain out of the plane deformation. In many cases, 
shape reconﬁguration is essential in the working of soft robots [34, 120]. 
8.4.5 
Applications 
a. Tunable lenses 
Lifelike robots have a very important feature, i.e., eyes that can act exactly like a 
human eye, that can respond quickly and precisely by tuning the focal length [121, 
122]. The eye is connected to the ciliary body with the help of a ligament, i.e., ﬁbrous 
tissue ring attached at its equator. The relaxation and contraction processes of the 
ciliary body help in the tuning of the lens. Although most of the robots have digital 
camera-based eyes that move the components mechanically, thus tuning the focus, 
this process takes a lot of energy. Several soft actuators are employed to overcome this 
drawback; which tune the focal length by controlling the liquid droplet curvature; 
including stimuli-response [22], electromagnetic wave [23], electro-wetting[123], 
dielectrophoretic forces [17], electrochemistry [124], etc. The pre-stretching of a lens 
is carried out before using it in the robots. A Maxwell stress is created in the actuating 
system by inducing an electric ﬁeld; a shorter focal length is created by the lens if its 
height increases and diameter decreases, causing it to squeeze. The lens gets back to 
its actual dimensions, exhibiting a greater focal length and the dielectric elastomer 
actuator re-attains its shape when the applied voltage is turned off. Unfortunately, 
only a few DE materials including VHB 4910 and silicone are known to fabricate 
lenses exhibiting high performance. It has been reported by researchers that DE with 
incorporated dielectric ﬁllers [94] or DE blended with polymers [28] exhibit better 
electromechanical properties. Recently, a new model has been proposed, that consists 
of a hybrid structure where a ring made of DENC acts as an actuator and is connected 
to the lens made of a sphere made up of elastomer [125].

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
229
b. 
Artiﬁcial muscles 
Some materials undergo deformations in their structures when subjected to an 
external stimulus (pressure, electricity, light, humidity, heat, etc.); these materials are 
often referred to as ‘artiﬁcial muscles’. They ﬁnd their applications in different inter-
disciplinary ﬁelds [126–128]. Energy density, response time, output force, energy 
conversion efﬁciency, actuated strain, and fatigue life are the key features of an 
artiﬁcial muscle [129, 130]. Many types of artiﬁcial muscles exhibiting unique prop-
erties and advantages have been reported so far, such as natural muscles [131] and 
humidity/solvent actuation yarn [132, 133]. At some points, artiﬁcial muscles are 
capable to perform even better than naturally occurring human muscles. Recently, 
the deformable electrode is used by Shea’s group to formulate a stretchable EHD 
pump; this electrode consists of a dielectric elastomer/carbon black composite which 
is embedded with a tube made up of monolithic elastomer. Extraordinary mechan-
ical outputs are obtained from this pump, assuring a high mechanical strength. It 
is reported to be used to create a self-contained ﬂuidic muscle by integration with 
an elastomeric chamber; eliminating the use of the external compressing system 
for reversible bending actuation [129]. Miriyev et al. also fabricated a soft actuating 
composite by combining a polymer matrix like PDMS (poly(dimethylsiloxane) elas-
tomer) with a phase-changing material like ethanol [134]. The deformation of such a 
composite to maximum volume is done by transitioning the liquid phase of ethanol 
to the gas phase upon heating. 
Embedding magnetic particles into an elastomer matrix is an appealing route to 
develop soft magnetic actuators. For instance, a cylindrical glass rod was wrapped by 
a soft magnetic composite by Hu and co-workers [135]; the composite was magne-
tized by the application of a strong and uniform magnetic ﬁeld. The uniform external 
magnetic ﬁeld interacted with a spatially varying ﬁeld of magnetic composites; 
enabling the soft robot to change its shape by generating internal torque. This special 
method can be applied to fabricate robots out of artiﬁcial muscles that enable them 
to jump, crawl, walk, roll, transport objects, etc. 
c. Smart skin 
Taking inspiration from nature, i.e., natural skin, researchers are making attempts to 
create smart electronic skins that can practice LMC (learning-mimicking-creating) 
cycle; being quite helpful in health monitoring technologies, robotics, prosthetics, 
etc. The discovery of mechanoreceptors naturally integrated into human skin has 
opened up a gateway to smart ﬂexible electronics. The tactile sensation of human 
skin is mimicked by the sensors used inside the smart skin that can detect and respond 
to haptic stimuli. The idea to create unique features in smart skin such as changing 
color or shape has been taken from mussels, chameleons, octopuses, etc. Internal 
organs of the body are also designed in such a way as to derive the LMC cycle along 
with the external organs. Synaptic, implantable sensors, artiﬁcial neurons, energy 
harvesters, etc., are the major biocompatible electronic devices being used in smart 
skin [136]. 
Dielectric elastomer composites are widely employed for the fabrication of smart 
skin devices. Generally, pre-cured elastomer and conductive ﬁller suspension are

230
T. Hussain et al.
blended to form a composite. However, the conductive paths formed inside the matrix 
should be dispersed homogeneously to avoid variations in the conductivity from one 
location to another [137]. Several other methods such as the direct incorporation of 
a conductive network in the elastomer matrix are also being employed in the making 
of smart skin [138]. A carbonized plain weave cotton fabric was taken by Zhang 
et al.; it was then encapsulated in an elastomer matrix; resulting in the formula-
tion of a strain sensor [139]; stretchability and sensitivity of such a sensor can be 
customized according to the requirements. High gauge factors were also attained 
by an anisotropic conductive material while controlling its ﬂexibility to respond to 
pressing, bending, and twisting [140]. 
Implantable devices need bioresorbable batteries for the effective management of 
energy sources; whose working depends upon mechanical compliance, desorption 
rates, device dimensions, etc. [141]. The biochemical energy produced by internal 
body organs such as cardiac movements or breathing is scavenged by the energy 
devices used. A BD-TENG (biodegradable triboelectric nanogenerator) has been 
fabricated that can power inter-digit electrodes on which orientation of nerve cell 
growth was carried out; the BD-TENG consisted of electrode layers, encapsula-
tion structure (biodegradable), and friction layers [142]. An energy harvester was 
implanted in a smart skin device that can record breathing and heartbeat by Ma et al. 
[143]. However, large hysteresis and low response time are the main challenges being 
faced in the ﬁeld of smart skin sensors. 
d. Biomedical applications 
Neurostimulation, cardiac pacing, tissue regeneration, therapeutic delivery, biochem-
ical sensing, physiological monitoring, drug delivery, etc., are some of the most 
common applications of implantable biomedical devices (IMDs) [144–147]. Some 
of the main drawbacks being faced while using IMDs are the removal of the device 
when its life ends, and the risk of infection [144, 148]. To overcome these problems, 
devices have been formulated that can be degraded in different environments safely, 
named ‘biodegradable electronics’, or the devices which dissolve automatically in 
the bioﬂuids without causing toxicity, thus named ‘bioresorbable electronics’ [73, 
149]. These electronics can reduce the risks that can be caused by the removal surgery 
of conventional devices, and increase the human life span by up to three years [150]. 
IMDs consist of four elements; conductor, semi-conductor, encapsulant, and dielec-
tric. The elastic components in IMDs provide comparatively better integration with 
the tissues, in which the device is implanted. Sim et al. synthesized a bioelectronic 
patch, where ion gel (dielectric), polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) (encapsulant), and 
PDMS composite (semi-conductor) were interconnected; this patch provides elec-
tric simulation by harvesting energy from heartbeat [151]. Similarly, Schiavone and 
co-workers developed e-dura, an IMD where the electrode was coated with a PDMS 
composite and PDMS was used as encapsulate; which can apply stimulations to 
vertebral column electrically [152]. 
Ling Yu and co-workers proposed the synthesis of an artiﬁcial material, where 
polycaprolactone (3D skeletons) was incorporated into a dielectric elastomer; the

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
231
Fig. 8.3 Schematic diagram of the right ventricular myocardium with undulated, preferentially 
oriented cardiac muscle ﬁbers, showing anisotropic mechanical and electrical properties. Arrows 
indicate anatomically deﬁned circumferential and longitudinal axes [153]. Adapted with permission 
from ref. [153]. Open access under a CC BY 4.0 license. Copyright © 2022 Yun Ling et al. 
as-prepared composite whose contractions and relaxations were similar to that of 
heart muscles (Fig. 8.3 [153]). 
e. Micro-air vehicle 
Naturally occurring ﬂyers commonly show maneuvering and hovering ﬂights. Birds 
ﬂy in a vertical plane by ﬂapping their wings, and they can change pitch angle at 
a very small amount. On the other hand, insects ﬂy by ﬂapping their wings in the 
horizontal plane, they can change pitch angle at a very large amount [154]. Muscles 
are distributed evenly in the bird’s wings causing active wing actuation, however, 
the wings of insects have no muscles and their actuation is controlled by the thorax 
(passive wing actuation). Former is a relatively more complex form of actuation 
[155]. Muscles used in passive wing actuation are divided into two categories; neuro-
controlled signals synchronize the actuation process (synchronous ﬂight muscles) 
and neuro-controlled signals do not synchronize the actuation process (asynchronous 
ﬂight muscles) [156]. Based on these muscles, a passive ﬂight is classiﬁed as direct 
(each wing can be directly controlled by the muscle) or indirect ﬂight (simultaneous 
ﬂapping of wings does not allow the muscle to control individual wings) [155]. Thus, 
indirect ﬂight mechanism can be employed to create ﬂapping wings artiﬁcially [157]. 
Smart material actuators (SMAs) such as IPMC actuators, SMA actuators, DE 
actuators, and piezoelectric actuators have a great potential to design ﬂapping-wing 
mechanism-based devices as they provide high scalability, high damage tolerance, 
multi-functioning, compactness, high integrability, and high customization facility

232
T. Hussain et al.
[158]. Lau et al. combined a rolled DEA with a cross-ply laminate of carbon ﬁber-
reinforced polymer (CFRP ) to verify the feasibility of the insect wing mecha-
nism [159]. Dielectric elastomer devices have been reported to be employed in the 
fabrication of micro-air vehicles [59, 157]. 
8.5 
Conclusion 
Highly stretchable, multi-functional, extensible, incompressible, poly-active, and 
soft dielectric elastomers have gained the attention of researchers as promising candi-
dates to be used in vast ﬁelds of energy harvesters, haptic interfaces, soft robots, 
artiﬁcial muscles, and tunable lenses as generators, actuators, and sensors. They are 
being incorporated into polymer matrices to form a superior material that exhibits 
exceptional dielectric constant values coupled with excellent conductivity, and lower 
values of dielectric loss. Different kinds of ﬁllers (such as ceramics and conductive 
ﬁllers) can also be added to the DE-based polymer composites, thus improving 
their electrical properties, lifetime, and stability. Dielectric/polymer composites are 
being used mainly in artiﬁcial muscles, biomedical devices, soft robots, smart skin, 
micro-air vehicles, etc. 
Despite all the achievements made in the ﬁeld of dielectric nanocomposites based 
on elastomers, researches are facing different challenges including the need for a 
detailed understanding of mechanisms related to the dielectric behavior of nanocom-
posites, synthesis of cost-effective and scalable elastomer-based polymer composites 
at large scale, development of models for life-prediction and performance evaluation 
of dielectric materials, etc. Thus, further research for improvements in these highly 
applicable materials is being focused on by scientists. 
References 
1. Ciarella L, Richter A, Henke E-FM (2021) Digital electronics using dielectric elastomer 
structures as transistors. Appl Phys Lett 119:261901. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0074821 
2. Röntgen WC (1880) Ueber die durch Electricität bewirkten Form- und Volumenänderungen 
von dielectrischen Körpern. Ann Phys 247:771–786. https://doi.org/10.1002/andp.188024 
71304 
3. Pelrine R (2008) Electromechanical transduction effects in dielectric elastomers: actuation, 
sensing, stiffness modulation and electric energy generation. In: Dielectric elastomers as 
electromechanical transducers, pp 1–12 
4. Lu T, Ma C, Wang T (2020) Mechanics of dielectric elastomer structures: a review. Extreme 
Mech Lett 38:100752 
5. Bar-Cohen Y (2002) Electroactive polymers as artiﬁcial muscles: a review. J Spacecr Rocket 
39(6):822–827 
6. Gupta U, Qin L, Wang Y, Godaba H, Zhu J (2019) Soft robots based on dielectric elastomer 
actuators: a review. Smart Mat Struct 28(10):103002 
7. Pelrine R, Kornbluh R, Pei Q, Joseph J (2000) High-speed electrically actuated elastomers 
with strain greater than 100%. Science 287(5454):836–839

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
233
8. Kofod G, Kornbluh RD, Pelrine R, Sommer-Larsen P (2001) Actuation response of poly-
acrylate dielectric elastomers. In: Smart structures and materials 2001: electroactive polymer 
actuators and devices. SPIE, pp 141–147 
9. O’Brien B, Gisby T, Anderson IA (2014) Stretch sensors for human body motion 9056:905618. 
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2046143 
10. Suo Z (2010) Theory of dielectric elastomers. Acta Mech Solida Sin 23:549–578. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0894-9166(11)60004-9 
11. Carpi F (2010) Electromechanically active polymers. Polym Int 59(3):277–278 
12. Li T, Li G, Liang Y, Cheng T, Dai J, Yang X, Liu B, Zeng Z, Huang Z, Luo Y, Xie T, Yang W 
(2017) Fast-moving soft electronic ﬁsh. Sci Adv 3:e1602045. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv. 
1602045 
13. Gu G, Zou J, Zhao R, Zhao X, Zhu X (2018) Soft wall-climbing robots. Sci Robot 
3(25):eaat2874 
14. Christianson C, Goldberg NN, Deheyn DD, Cai S, Tolley MT (2018) Translucent soft robots 
driven by frameless ﬂuid electrode dielectric elastomer actuators. Sci Robot 3(17):eaat1893 
15. Huang J, Shian S, Suo Z, Clarke DR (2013) Maximizing the energy density of dielectric 
elastomer generators using equi-biaxial loading. Adv Funct Mater 23:5056–5061. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/adfm.201300402 
16. Ellingford C, Zhang R, Wemyss AM, Zhang Y, Brown OB, Zhou H, Wan C et al (2020) 
Self-healing dielectric elastomers for damage-tolerant actuation and energy harvesting. ACS 
Appl Mater Interfaces 12(6):7595–7604 
17. Ren H, Xianyu H, Xu S, Wu S-T (2008) Adaptive dielectric liquid lens. Opt Express 16:14954– 
14960. https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.16.014954 
18. Chen Y, Zhao H, Mao J, Chirarattananon P, Helbling EF, Hyun NSP, Wood RJ et al (2019) 
Controlled ﬂight of a microrobot powered by soft artiﬁcial muscles. Nature 575(7782):324– 
329 
19. Gao Y, Fang X, Tran D, Ju K, Qian B, Li J, Dielectric elastomer actuators based on stretchable 
and self-healable hydrogel electrodes. R Soc Open Sci 6:182145. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos. 
182145 
20. Ji X, Liu X, Cacucciolo V, Civet Y, El Haitami A, Cantin S, Perriard Y, Shea H (2021) 
Untethered feel-through haptics using 18-μm thick dielectric elastomer actuators. Adv Funct 
Mater 31:2006639. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202006639 
21. Ho TYK, Nirmal A, Kulkarni MR, Accoto D, Mathews N (2022) Soft actuator materials for 
electrically driven haptic interfaces. Adv Intell Syst 4(2):2100061 
22. Carpi F, Frediani G, Turco S, De Rossi D (2011) Bioinspired tunable lens with muscle-like 
electroactive elastomers. Adv Funct Mater 21:4152–4158. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201 
101253 
23. Pieroni M, Lagomarsini C, Rossi DD, Carpi F (2016) Electrically tunable soft solid lens 
inspired by reptile and bird accommodation. Bioinspir Biomim 11:065003. https://doi.org/ 
10.1088/1748-3190/11/6/065003 
24. Bashir F, Hussain T, Mujahid A, Shehzad K, Raza MA, Zahid M, Athar MM (2018) Tailoring 
electrical and thermal properties of polymethyl methacrylate-carbon nanotubes compos-
ites through polyaniline and dodecyl benzene sulphonic acid impregnation. Polym Compos 
39:E1052–E1059. https://doi.org/10.1002/pc.24485 
25. Dahl M, Liu Y, Yin Y (2014) Composite titanium dioxide nanomaterials. Chem Rev 114:9853– 
9889. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr400634p 
26. Azadi F, Khonakdar HA, Jafari SH, Arjmand M, Wagenknecht U, Ruckdäschel H, Altstädt V 
(2022) The effect of tailoring morphology on rheology and dielectric properties of poly (lactic 
acid)/thermoplastic polyurethane/graphene oxide nanocomposites. Mater Today Commun 
33:104497. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtcomm.2022.104497 
27. Duduta M, Hajiesmaili E, Zhao H, Wood RJ, Clarke DR (2019) Realizing the potential of 
dielectric elastomer artiﬁcial muscles. Proc Natl Acad Sci 116:2476–2481. https://doi.org/10. 
1073/pnas.1815053116

234
T. Hussain et al.
28. Qiu Y, Zhang E, Plamthottam R, Pei Q (2019) Dielectric elastomer artiﬁcial muscle: materials 
innovations and device explorations. Acc Chem Res 52:316–325. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
accounts.8b00516 
29. Fan P, Zhu Z, Hu Q (2022) Investigation on free relaxation process inﬂuencing energy 
harvesting performance of dielectric elastomer generators in intermittent motion. Sens 
Actuators Phys 347:113944. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2022.113944 
30. Gupta U, Qin L, Wang Y, Godaba H, Zhu J (2019) Soft robots based on dielectric elas-
tomer actuators: a review. Smart Mater Struct 28:103002. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-665X/ 
ab3a77 
31. Zhao X, Li C, Qi R, Guo H, Peng G (2022) Study on relaxation behavior of all-polymer 
PVDF-based ﬁlms containing dielectric ﬂuoroelastomer. Polymer 252:124933. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.polymer.2022.124933 
32. Zhu J, Zhang L, Zhao Y, Yin L-J, Zha J-W, Dang Z-M (2022) Advanced dielectric elastomer 
based on optimized thermoplastic polyurethane–styrene ethylene butylene styrene blend: 
experiment and simulation. J Appl Polym Sci 139:51595. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.51595 
33. Yu L, Hu T, Yang D, Wei Q (2022) Enhanced electromechanical performance of natural 
rubber dielectric elastomers achieved by in situ synthesis of silver nanoparticles on TiO2 
nanoparticles. IET Nanodielectrics 5:39–49. https://doi.org/10.1049/nde2.12030 
34. Ren C, Su Z, Su Y, Wang L (2022) Polyurethane elastomer layered nanocomposite material for 
sports grounds and the preparation method thereof. BioMed Res Int 2022:e5152911. https:// 
doi.org/10.1155/2022/5152911 
35. Ziegmann A, Schubert DW (2018) Inﬂuence of the particle size and the ﬁlling degree of barium 
titanate ﬁlled silicone elastomers used as potential dielectric elastomers on the mechanical 
properties and the crosslinking density. Mater Today Commun 14:90–98. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.mtcomm.2017.12.013 
36. Zhao Y, Yin L-J, Zhong S-L, Zha J-W, Dang Z-M (2020) Review of dielectric elastomers for 
actuators, generators and sensors. IET Nanodielectrics 3:99–106. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-
nde.2019.0045 
37. Bartlett MD, Fassler A, Kazem N, Markvicka EJ, Mandal P, Majidi C (2016) Stretchable, high-
k dielectric elastomers through liquid-metal inclusions. Adv Mater 28:3726–3731. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/adma.201506243 
38. Bhuyan P, Cho D, Choe M, Lee S, Park S (2022) Liquid metal patterned stretchable and 
soft capacitive sensor with enhanced dielectric property enabled by graphite nanoﬁber ﬁllers. 
Polymers 14:710. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym14040710 
39. Brochu P, Pei Q (2010) Advances in dielectric elastomers for actuators and artiﬁcial muscles. 
Macromol Rapid Commun 31:10–36. https://doi.org/10.1002/marc.200900425 
40. Low S-H, Lau GK (2014) Bi-axially crumpled silver thin-ﬁlm electrodes for dielectric elas-
tomer actuators. Smart Mater Struct 23:125021. https://doi.org/10.1088/0964-1726/23/12/ 
125021 
41. Haghiashtiani G, Habtour E, Park SH, Gardea F, McAlpine MC (2018) 3D printed electrically-
driven soft actuators. Extreme Mech Lett 21:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eml.2018.02.002 
42. Le Floch P, Molinari N, Nan K, Zhang S, Kozinsky B, Suo Z, Liu J (2020) Fundamental 
limits to the electrochemical impedance stability of dielectric elastomers in bioelectronics. 
Nano Lett 20:224–233. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b03705 
43. Godaba H, Zhang Z-Q, Gupta U, Foo CC, Zhu J (2019) Instabilities in dielectric elastomers: 
buckling, wrinkling, and crumpling. Soft Matter 15:7137–7144. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9S 
M01145E 
44. Mafﬂi L, Rosset S, Shea HR (2013) Zipping dielectric elastomer actuators: characterization, 
design and modeling. Smart Mater Struct 22:104013. https://doi.org/10.1088/0964-1726/22/ 
10/104013 
45. Shintake J, Ichige D, Kanno R, Nagai T, Shimizu K (2021) Monolithic stacked dielectric 
elastomer actuators. Front Robot AI 8 
46. Kunz A (2006) Spring roll dielectric elastomer actuators for a portable force feedback glove. 
Smart Struct Mater 2006 Electroact Polym Actuators Devices EAPAD

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
235
47. Ko UH, Kumar V, Rosen B, Varghese S (2022) Characterization of bending balloon actuators. 
Front Robot AI 9 
48. Yunguang L, Wang H, Zhu Y (2010) Design and implementation of cone dielectric elastomer 
actuator with double-slider mechanism. J Bionic Eng 7. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1672-652 
9(09)60237-7 
49. Carpi F, Salaris C, Rossi DD (2007) Folded dielectric elastomer actuators. Smart Mater Struct 
16:S300. https://doi.org/10.1088/0964-1726/16/2/S15 
50. Lochmatter P, Kovacs G (2008) Design and characterization of an active hinge segment 
based on soft dielectric EAPs. Sens Actuators Phys 141:577–587. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
sna.2007.10.029 
51. Wang NF, Guo H, Chen B, Cui C, Zhang X (2018) Design of a rotary dielectric elastomer 
actuator using topology optimization method based on pairs of curves. Smart Mater Struct 
27. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-665X/aab991 
52. Su Y, Ogden RW, Destrade M (2021) Bending control and stability of functionally graded 
dielectric elastomers. Extreme Mech Lett 43:101162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eml.2020. 
101162 
53. Carpi F, Chiarelli P, Mazzoldi A, de rossi D (2003) Dielectric elastomer planar actuators for 
small-scale applications. Proc SPIE—Int Soc Opt Eng. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.508694 
54. Palmi´c TB,  Slaviˇc J (2022) Single-process 3D-printed stacked dielectric actuator. Int J Mech 
Sci 230:107555. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2022.107555 
55. Maas J, Tepel D, Hoffstadt T (2015) Actuator design and automated manufacturing process for 
DEAP-based multilayer stack-actuators. Meccanica 50:2839–2854. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11012-015-0273-2 
56. Rossiter J, Walters P, Stoimenov B (2009) Printing 3D dielectric elastomer actuators for soft 
robotics. In: Electroactive polymer actuators and devices (EAPAD) 2009. SPIE, pp 149–158 
57. Kofod G, Paajanen M, Bauer S (2006) Self-organized minimum-energy structures for dielec-
tric elastomer actuators. Appl Phys A 85:141–143. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339-006-
3680-3 
58. Chiang Foo C, Cai S, Jin Adrian Koh S, Bauer S, Suo Z (2012) Model of dissipative dielectric 
elastomers. J Appl Phys 111:034102. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3680878 
59. Panahi-Sarmad M, Zahiri B, Noroozi M (2019) Graphene-based composite for dielectric 
elastomer actuator: a comprehensive review. Sens Actuators Phys 293. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.sna.2019.05.003 
60. Liu L, Han Y, Xing Z, Yong H (2022) Nonlinear deformation and instability of a dielectric 
elastomer tube actuator. Int J Non-Linear Mech 147:104235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnonl 
inmec.2022.104235 
61. Boldini A, Porﬁri M (2022) On Maxwell stress and its relationship with the dielectric constant 
in the actuation of ionic polymer metal composites. J Mech Phys Solids 164:104875. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2022.104875 
62. Jun K, Kim D, Ryu S, Oh I-K (2017) Surface modiﬁcation of anisotropic dielectric elastomer 
actuators with Uni-A nd bi-axially wrinkled carbon electrodes for wettability control. Sci Rep 
7. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-06274-0 
63. Kornbluh RD, Pelrine R, Prahlad H, Wong-Foy A, McCoy B, Kim S, Eckerle J, Low T (2011) 
From boots to buoys: promises and challenges of dielectric elastomer energy harvesting 
7976:797605. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.882367 
64. Jean-Mistral C, Basrour S, Chaillout J-J (2008) Dielectric polymer: scavenging energy from 
human motion. In: Electroactive polymer actuators and devices (EAPAD) 2008. SPIE, pp 
369–378 
65. Rasmussen L (2012) Electroactivity in polymeric materials. Springer, US, Boston, MA 
66. Kornbluh R, Pelrine R, Prahlad H, Wong-Foy A, McCoy B, Kim S, Eckerle J, Low T (2012) 
Dielectric elastomers: stretching the capabilities of energy harvesting. MRS Bull 37. https:// 
doi.org/10.1557/mrs.2012.41 
67. Lee YR, Kwon H, Lee DH, Lee BY (2017) Highly ﬂexible and transparent dielectric elastomer 
actuators using silver nanowire and carbon nanotube hybrid electrodes. Soft Matter 13:6390– 
6395. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7SM01329A

236
T. Hussain et al.
68. Kofod G, Wirges W, Paajanen M, Bauer S (2007) Energy minimization for self-organized 
structure formation and actuation. Appl Phys Lett 90:081916. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.269 
5785 
69. Araromi OA, Gavrilovich I, Shintake J, Rosset S, Richard M, Gass V, Shea HR (2015) Rollable 
multisegment dielectric elastomer minimum energy structures for a deployable microsatellite 
gripper. IEEEASME Trans Mechatron 20:438–446. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMECH.2014. 
2329367 
70. Shian S, Bertoldi K, Clarke DR (2015) Dielectric elastomer based “grippers” for soft robotics. 
Adv Mater 27:6814–6819. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201503078 
71. Guo Y, Liu L, Liu Y, Leng J (2021) Review of dielectric elastomer actuators and their 
applications in soft robots. Adv Intell Syst 3:2000282. https://doi.org/10.1002/aisy.202000282 
72. Cao J, Qin L, Liu J, Ren Q, Foo CC, Wang H, Lee HP, Zhu J (2018) Untethered soft robot 
capable of stable locomotion using soft electrostatic actuators. Extreme Mech Lett 21:9–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eml.2018.02.004 
73. Kuzma M, Gerhard E, Shan D, Yang J (2020) Advances in bioresorbable electronics and uses 
in biomedical sensing, pp 29–72 
74. Li J, Liu L, Liu Y, Leng J (2019) Dielectric elastomer spring-roll bending actuators: appli-
cations in soft robotics and design. Soft Robot 6:69–81. https://doi.org/10.1089/soro.2018. 
0037 
75. Ishige M, Umedachi T, Taniguchi T, Kawahara Y (2019) Exploring behaviors of caterpillar-
like soft robots with a central pattern generator-based controller and reinforcement learning. 
Soft Robot 6:579–594. https://doi.org/10.1089/soro.2018.0126 
76. Chanakul A, Saymung R, Seetha S, Traiphol R, Traiphol N (2021) Solution-mixing method 
for large-scale production of reversible thermochromic and acid/base-colorimetric sensors. 
Colloids Surf Physicochem Eng Asp 615:126241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2021. 
126241 
77. Nedelcu N, Chiroiu V, Rugin˘a C, Munteanu L, Ioan R, Girip I, Dragne C (2020) Dielectric 
properties of GeSbSe glasses prepared by the conventional melt-quenching method. Results 
Phys 16:102856. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rinp.2019.102856 
78. Hussain T, Malik T, Mujahid A, Mustafa G (2018) Polystyrene adsorbed multi-walled 
carbon nanotubes incorporated polymethylmethacrylate composites with modiﬁed percola-
tion phenomena. MRS Adv 3:25–30. https://doi.org/10.1557/adv.2017.625 
79. Zhang H, Jiang H, Huang Z-X, Qu J-P (2022) Toward high dielectric constant and low dielec-
tric loss nanocomposite via kinetical migration. Compos Sci Technol 221:109310. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2022.109310 
80. Zhou L, Tian Y, Xu P, Wei H, Li Y, Peng H-X, Qin F (2021) Effect of the selective localization 
of carbon nanotubes and phase domain in immiscible blends on tunable microwave dielec-
tric properties. Compos Sci Technol 213:108919. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2021. 
108919 
81. Danner PM, Iacob M, Sasso G, Burda I, Rieger B, Nüesch F, Opris DM (2022) Solvent-
free synthesis and processing of conductive elastomer composites for green dielectric elas-
tomer transducers. Macromol Rapid Commun 43:2100823. https://doi.org/10.1002/marc.202 
100823 
82. Arjmand M, Mahmoodi M, Park S, Sundararaj U (2013) An innovative method to reduce the 
energy loss of conductive ﬁller/polymer composites for charge storage applications. Compos 
Sci Technol 78:24–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2013.01.019 
83. Thomassin J-M, Pagnoulle C, Bednarz L, Huynen I, Jerome R, Detrembleur C (2008) Foams of 
polycaprolactone/MWNT nanocomposites for efﬁcient EMI reduction. J Mater Chem 18:792– 
796. https://doi.org/10.1039/B709864B 
84. Ameli A, Nofar M, Park CB, Pötschke P, Rizvi G (2014) Polypropylene/carbon nanotube 
nano/microcellular structures with high dielectric permittivity, low dielectric loss, and low 
percolation threshold. Carbon 71:206–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2014.01.031 
85. Liu J, Tian G, Qi S, Wu Z, Wu D (2014) Enhanced dielectric permittivity of a ﬂexible three-
phase polyimide–graphene–BaTiO3 composite material. Mater Lett 124:117–119. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.matlet.2014.02.105

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
237
86. Martinelli NG, Savini M, Muccioli L, Olivier Y, Castet F, Zannoni C, Beljonne D, Cornil J 
(2009) Modeling polymer dielectric/pentacene interfaces: on the role of electrostatic energy 
disorder on charge carrier mobility. Adv Funct Mater 19:3254–3261. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adfm.200901077 
87. Kim J-Y, Kim T, Suk JW, Chou H, Jang J-H, Lee JH, Kholmanov IN, Akinwande D, Ruoff RS 
(2014) Enhanced dielectric performance in polymer composite ﬁlms with carbon nanotube-
reduced graphene oxide hybrid ﬁller. Small 10:3405–3411. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201 
400363 
88. Tian M, Wei Z, Zan X, Zhang L, Zhang J, Ma Q, Ning N, Nishi T (2014) Thermally expanded 
graphene nanoplates/polydimethylsiloxane composites with high dielectric constant, low 
dielectric loss and improved actuated strain. Compos Sci Technol 99:37–44. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.compscitech.2014.05.004 
89. Gao J, Asadi K, Xu JB, An J (2009) Controlling of the surface energy of the gate dielectric in 
organic ﬁeld-effect transistors by polymer blend. Appl Phys Lett 94:093302. https://doi.org/ 
10.1063/1.3086894 
90. Ameli A, Wang S, Kazemi Y, Park CB, Pötschke P (2015) A facile method to increase the 
charge storage capability of polymer nanocomposites. Nano Energy 15:54–65. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2015.04.004 
91. Hu P, Shen Y, Guan Y, Zhang X, Lin Y, Zhang Q, Nan C-W (2014) Topological-structure 
modulated polymer nanocomposites exhibiting highly enhanced dielectric strength and energy 
density. Adv Funct Mater 24:3172–3178. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201303684 
92. Zhang G, Brannum D, Dong D, Tang L, Allahyarov E, Tang S, Kodweis K, Lee J-K, Zhu L 
(2016) Interfacial polarization-induced loss mechanisms in polypropylene/BaTiO3 nanocom-
posite dielectrics. Chem Mater 28:4646–4660. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b0 
1383 
93. Zhu L (2014) Exploring strategies for high dielectric constant and low loss polymer dielectrics. 
J Phys Chem Lett 5:3677–3687. https://doi.org/10.1021/jz501831q 
94. Yang D, Ni Y, Kong X, Wang Y, Zhang L (2019) A mussel-like inspired modiﬁcation of 
BaTiO3 nanopartciles using catechol/polyamine co-deposition and silane grafting for high-
performance dielectric elastomer composites. Compos Part B Eng 172:621–627. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2019.05.101 
95. Maiolino P, Galantini F, Mastrogiovanni F, Gallone G, Cannata G, Carpi F (2015) Soft 
dielectrics for capacitive sensing in robot skins: Performance of different elastomer types. 
Sens Actuators Phys 226:37–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2015.02.010 
96. Szadkowski B, Marzec A, Zaborski M (2020) Use of carbon black as a reinforcing nano-ﬁller 
in conductivity-reversible elastomer composites. Polym Test 81:106222. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.polymertesting.2019.106222 
97. Kim WJ, Cho S, Hong J, Hong JP (2022) Geometrically versatile triboelectric yarn-based 
harvesters via carbon nanotubes-elastomer composites. Compos Sci Technol 219:109247. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2021.109247 
98. Fredin LA, Li Z, Lanagan MT, Ratner MA, Marks TJ (2013) Sustainable high capacitance at 
high frequencies: metallic aluminum-polypropylene nanocomposites. ACS Nano 7:396–407. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/nn3044148 
99. Dang Z-M, Zheng M-S, Zha J-W (2016) 1D/2D carbon nanomaterial-polymer dielectric 
composites with high permittivity for power energy storage applications. Small 12:1688– 
1701. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201503193 
100. Kim H, Abdala AA, Macosko CW (2010) Graphene/polymer nanocomposites. Macro-
molecules 43:6515–6530. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma100572e 
101. Kuilla T, Bhadra S, Yao D, Kim NH, Bose S, Lee JH (2010) Recent advances in graphene 
based polymer composites. Prog Polym Sci 35:1350–1375. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpo 
lymsci.2010.07.005 
102. Wang Y, Gu P, Zhao Z, Zhou P, Li Z, Li Y (2020) Synthesis of graphene-like carbon ﬁlm on 
SiC substrate. J Cryst Growth 531:125356. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrysgro.2019.125356

238
T. Hussain et al.
103. Warner JH, Schaffel F, Rummeli M, Bachmatiuk A (2012) Graphene: Ffndamentals and 
emergent applications. Newnes 
104. Tour JM (2014) Scaling up exfoliation. Nat Mater 13:545–546. https://doi.org/10.1038/nma 
t3961 
105. Wang  X,  You H, Liu  F,  Li  M,  Wan L, Li S, Li Q, Xu Y, Tian R, Yu Z, Xiang  D,  Cheng J  
(2009) Large-scale synthesis of few-layered graphene using CVD. Chem Vap Depos 15:53–56. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/cvde.200806737 
106. Acik M, Lee G, Mattevi C, Pirkle A, Wallace RM, Chhowalla M, Cho K, Chabal Y (2011) 
The role of oxygen during thermal reduction of graphene oxide studied by infrared absorption 
spectroscopy. J Phys Chem C 115:19761–19781. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp2052618 
107. Huang X, Jiang P (2015) Core-shell structured high-k polymer nanocomposites for energy 
storage and dielectric applications. Adv Mater 27:546–554. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201 
401310 
108. Punetha VD, Rana S, Yoo HJ, Chaurasia A, McLeskey JT, Ramasamy MS, Sahoo NG, Cho 
JW (2017) Functionalization of carbon nanomaterials for advanced polymer nanocomposites: 
a comparison study between CNT and graphene. Prog Polym Sci 67:1–47. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.progpolymsci.2016.12.010 
109. Liao L, Xie Q, Guo X, Liu Z (2015) Fabrication of chemical graphene nanoribbons via edge-
selective covalent modiﬁcation. Adv Mater 27:4093–4096. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201 
501788 
110. Wang H, Bi S-G, Ye Y-S, Xue Y, Xie X-L, Mai Y-W (2015) An effective non-covalent 
grafting approach to functionalize individually dispersed reduced graphene oxide sheets with 
high grafting density, solubility and electrical conductivity. Nanoscale 7:3548–3557. https:// 
doi.org/10.1039/C4NR06710J 
111. Kumar S, Raj S, Kolanthai E, Sood AK, Sampath S, Chatterjee K (2015) Chemical func-
tionalization of graphene to augment stem cell osteogenesis and inhibit bioﬁlm formation on 
polymer composites for orthopedic applications. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 7:3237–3252. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/am5079732 
112. Sreeprasad TS, Berry V (2013) How do the electrical properties of graphene change with its 
functionalization? Small 9:341–350. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201202196 
113. Vasileiou AA, Kontopoulou M, Docoslis A (2014) A noncovalent compatibilization approach 
to improve the ﬁller dispersion and properties of polyethylene/graphene composites. ACS 
Appl Mater Interfaces 6:1916–1925. https://doi.org/10.1021/am404979g 
114. Chen T, Qiu J, Zhu K, Li J (2016) Electro-mechanical performance of polyurethane dielectric 
elastomer ﬂexible micro-actuator composite modiﬁed with titanium dioxide-graphene hybrid 
ﬁllers. Mater Des 90:1069–1076. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2015.11.068 
115. Prasad Sahoo B (2021) Fabrication of radiation crosslinked and MWCNT reinforced ethy-
lene acrylic elastomer nanocomposites: Evaluation of mechanical, dynamic mechanical, 
thermal and dielectric properties. Mater Today Proc 41:203–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
matpr.2020.08.692 
116. Wang Y, Kim S, Li GP, Sun LZ (2015) Filler orientation effect on relative permittivity of 
dielectric elastomer nanocomposites ﬁlled with carbon nanotubes. Comput Mater Sci 104:69– 
75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2015.03.022 
117. Hussain T, Jabeen S, Shehzad K, Mujahid A, Ahmad MN, Farooqi ZH, Raza MH (2018) 
Polyaniline/silver decorated-MWCNT composites with enhanced electrical and thermal 
properties. Polym Compos 39:E1346–E1353. https://doi.org/10.1002/pc.24219 
118. Song B (2022) Study on dielectric and thermal properties of ABS/multilayer graphene 
composites. J Phys Conf Ser 2247:012011. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2247/1/ 
012011 
119. Chonat A, Palatty S (2020) Enhanced electrochemical performance of a hybrid supercapac-
itive material based on ternary doped polyaniline/activated carbon composite. Energy Fuels 
34:10148–10159. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c01555 
120. Guin T, Settle MJ, Kowalski BA, Auguste AD, Beblo RV, Reich GW, White TJ (2018) Layered 
liquid crystal elastomer actuators. Nat Commun 9:2531. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-
04911-4

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
239
121. Li J, Wang Y, Liu L, Xu S, Liu Y, Leng J, Cai S (2019) A biomimetic soft lens controlled by 
electrooculographic signal. Adv Funct Mater 29:1903762. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201 
903762 
122. Xiao  Y,  Mao J, Shan Y, Yang T, Chen Z, Zhou  F,  He  J,  Shen  Y,  Zhao  J,  Li  T,  Luo Y  
(2020) Anisotropic electroactive elastomer for highly maneuverable soft robotics. Nanoscale 
12:7514–7521. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0NR00924E 
123. Krogmann F, Monch W, Zappe H (2008) Electrowetting for tunable microoptics. J Micro-
electromechanical Syst 17:1501–1512. https://doi.org/10.1109/JMEMS.2008.2007256 
124. Hwang T, Kwon H-Y, Oh J-S, Hong J-P, Hong S-C, Lee Y, Ryeol Choi H, Jin Kim K, Hossain 
Bhuiya M, Nam J-D (2013) Transparent actuator made with few layer graphene electrode and 
dielectric elastomer, for variable focus lens. Appl Phys Lett 103:023106. https://doi.org/10. 
1063/1.4812982 
125. Jiang L, Wang Y, Wang X, Ning F, Wen S, Zhou Y, Chen S, Betts A, Jerrams S, Zhou F-L 
(2021) Electrohydrodynamic printing of a dielectric elastomer actuator and its application in 
tunable lenses. Compos Part Appl Sci Manuf 147:106461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compos 
itesa.2021.106461 
126. Chen Y, Chen C, Rehman HU, Zheng X, Li H, Liu H, Hedenqvist MS (2020) Shape-memory 
polymeric artiﬁcial muscles: mechanisms, applications and challenges. Mol Basel Switz 
25:E4246. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules25184246 
127. Mirvakili SM, Hunter IW (2018) Artiﬁcial muscles: mechanisms, applications, and chal-
lenges. Adv Mater 30:1704407. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201704407 
128. Yang J, Wang S, Yao J, Yang X, Yu T, Wei K (2022) Mechanochemical characteristics and 
inﬂuence mechanisms of a biomass hydrogel artiﬁcial muscle based on different parameters 
of the sodium alginate adjustment. Smart Mater Struct 31:055002. https://doi.org/10.1088/ 
1361-665X/ac5aa6 
129. Wang J, Gao D, Lee PS (2021) Recent progress in artiﬁcial muscles for interactive soft 
robotics. Adv Mater 33:2003088. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202003088 
130. Zhang J, Sheng J, O’Neill CT, Walsh CJ, Wood RJ, Ryu J-H, Desai JP, Yip MC (2019) Robotic 
artiﬁcial muscles: current progress and future perspectives. IEEE Trans Robot 35:761–781. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2019.2894371 
131. Liang W, Liu H, Wang K, Qian Z, Ren L, Ren L (2020) Comparative study of robotic artiﬁcial 
actuators and biological muscle. Adv Mech Eng 12:1687814020933409. https://doi.org/10. 
1177/1687814020933409 
132. Chen P, Xu Y, He S, Sun X, Pan S, Deng J, Chen D, Peng H (2015) Hierarchically arranged 
helical ﬁbre actuators driven by solvents and vapours. Nat Nanotechnol 10:1077–1083. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2015.198 
133. Gu X, Fan Q, Yang F, Cai L, Zhang N, Zhou W, Zhou W, Xie S (2016) Hydro-actuation of 
hybrid carbon nanotube yarn muscles. Nanoscale 8:17881–17886. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C6NR06185K 
134. Miriyev A, Stack K, Lipson H (2017) Soft material for soft actuators. Nat Commun 8:596. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-00685-3 
135. Hu W, Lum GZ, Mastrangeli M, Sitti M (2018) Small-scale soft-bodied robot with multimodal 
locomotion. Nature 554:81–85. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25443 
136. Nie B, Liu S, Qu Q, Zhang Y, Zhao M, Liu J (2022) Bio-inspired ﬂexible electronics for smart 
E-skin. Acta Biomater 139:280–295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2021.06.018 
137. Yang Y, Zhao G, Cheng X, Deng H, Fu Q (2021) Stretchable and healable conductive elastomer 
based on PEDOT: PSS/natural rubber for self-powered temperature and strain sensing. ACS 
Appl Mater Interfaces 13:14599–14611. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c00879 
138. Rentals J, Wang C, Zhang X, Carey T, Chen K, Yin Y, Torrisi F (2016) Environmentally-
friendly conductive cotton fabric as ﬂexible strain sensor based on hot press reduced graphene 
oxide. Carbon 111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2016.10.045 
139. Zhang M, Wang C, Wang H, Jian M, Hao X, Zhang Y (2017) Carbonized cotton fabric for 
high-performance wearable strain sensors. Adv Funct Mater 27:1604795. https://doi.org/10. 
1002/adfm.201604795

240
T. Hussain et al.
140. Araromi OA, Graule MA, Dorsey KL, Castellanos S, Foster JR, Hsu W-H, Passy AE, Vlassak 
JJ, Weaver JC, Walsh CJ, Wood RJ (2020) Ultra-sensitive and resilient compliant strain gauges 
for soft machines. Nature 587:219–224. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2892-6 
141. Huang X, Wang D, Yuan Z, Xie W, Wu Y, Li R, Zhao Y, Luo D, Cen L, Chen B, Wu H, Xu 
H, Sheng X, Zhang M, Zhao L, Yin L (2018) A fully biodegradable battery for self-powered 
transient implants. Small Weinh Bergstr Ger 14:e1800994. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201 
800994 
142. Zheng Q, Zou Y, Zhang Y, Liu Z, Shi B, Wang X, Jin Y, Ouyang H, Li Z, Wang ZL (2016) 
Biodegradable triboelectric nanogenerator as a life-time designed implantable power source. 
Sci Adv 2:e1501478. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1501478 
143. Ma Y, Zheng Q, Liu Y, Shi B, Xue X, Ji W, Liu Z, Jin Y, Zou Y, An Z, Zhang W, Wang 
X, Jiang W, Xu Z, Wang ZL, Li Z, Zhang H (2016) Self-powered, one-stop, and multifunc-
tional implantable triboelectric active sensor for real-time biomedical monitoring. Nano Lett 
16:6042–6051. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01968 
144. Chatterjee S, Saxena M, Padmanabhan D, Jayachandra M, Pandya HJ (2019) Futuristic 
medical implants using bioresorbable materials and devices. Biosens Bioelectron 142:111489. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2019.111489 
145. Ramesh S, Lungaro L, Tsikritsis D, Weﬂen E, Rivero IV, Elﬁck APD (2018) Fabrication and 
evaluation of poly(lactic acid), chitosan, and tricalcium phosphate biocomposites for guided 
bone regeneration. J Appl Polym Sci 135:46692. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.46692 
146. Turner B, Ramesh S, Menegatti S, Daniele M (2022) Resorbable elastomers for implantable 
medical devices: highlights and applications. Polym Int 71:552–561. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
pi.6349 
147. Turner BL, Kilgour KM, Stine SJ, Daniele M, Menegatti S (2020) Dual-afﬁnity ratiometric 
quenching (DARQ) assay for the quantiﬁcation of therapeutic antibodies in CHO-S cell culture 
ﬂuids. Anal Chem 92:16274–16283. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.0c04269 
148. Singh R, Bathaei MJ, Istif E, Beker L (2020) A review of bioresorbable implantable medical 
devices: materials, fabrication, and implementation. Adv Healthc Mater 9:2000790. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/adhm.202000790 
149. Huang X (2018) Materials and applications of bioresorbable electronics. J Semicond 
39:011003. https://doi.org/10.1088/1674-4926/39/1/011003 
150. Lau EW (2017) Technologies for prolonging cardiac implantable electronic device longevity. 
Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 40:75–96. https://doi.org/10.1111/pace.12989 
151. Sim K, Ershad F, Zhang Y, Yang P, Shim H, Rao Z, Lu Y, Thukral A, Elgalad A, Xi Y, 
Tian B, Taylor DA, Yu C (2020) An epicardial bioelectronic patch made from soft rubbery 
materials and capable of spatiotemporal mapping of electrophysiological activity. Nat Electron 
3:775–784. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-020-00493-6 
152. Schiavone G, Fallegger F, Kang X, Barra B, Vachicouras N, Roussinova E, Furfaro I, Jiguet S, 
Seáñez I, Borgognon S, Rowald A, Li Q, Qin C, Bézard E, Bloch J, Courtine G, Capogrosso 
M, Lacour SP (2020) Soft, implantable bioelectronic interfaces for translational research. Adv 
Mater 32:1906512. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201906512 
153. Ling Y, Pang W, Liu J, Page M, Xu Y, Zhao G, Stalla D, Xie J, Zhang Y, Yan Z (2022) 
Bioinspired elastomer composites with programmed mechanical and electrical anisotropies. 
Nat Commun 13:524. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28185-z 
154. Shyy W, Lian Y, Tang J, Viieru D, Liu H (2007) Aerodynamics of low Reynolds Number 
ﬂyers. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
155. Grimaldi DA, Engel MS (2005) Evolution of the insects. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK and New York 
156. Karásek M (2014) Robotic hummingbird: Design of a control mechanism for a hovering 
ﬂapping wing micro air vehicle 
157. Chattaraj N, Ganguli R (2022) Mechatronic approaches to synthesize biomimetic ﬂapping-
wing mechanisms: a review. Int J Aeronaut Space Sci. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42405-022-
00527-7

8
Fabrication and Properties of Dielectric Elastomer-Based Nanocomposites
241
158. Gomis-Bellmunt O, Campanile LF (2009). Design rules for actuators in active mechanical 
systems. Springer Science & Business Media 
159. Xiao S, Hu K, Huang B, Deng H, Ding X (2021) A review of research on the mechanical 
design of hoverable ﬂapping wing micro-air vehicles. J Bionic Eng 18:1235–1254. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s42235-021-00118-4

Chapter 9 
Physical and Chemical Properties 
of Inorganic-Polymer Nanodielectrics 
and Their Applications 
Kavya Pulagam Srinivasa Babu, K. P. Chaithra, 
Arunkumar Chandrasekhar, and T. P. Vinod 
Abstract Organic polymers have been widely used as matrices in composite mate-
rials for electrical power equipment because of their reliability, ease of fabri-
cation, availability, and low cost. Nevertheless, they have comparatively poor 
electrical, thermal, and mechanical properties compared to metals and ceramics. Most 
of the polymer systems, such as copolymers, modiﬁed polymers, homopolymers, and 
blended polymers, are considered to have limitations in delivering the demands of the 
aforementioned applications. This challenge can be efﬁciently addressed by blending 
the polymers with inorganic particles such as metal chalcogenides, nanoclays, 
silica, transition metal oxides, nanometals, and metallic phosphates. Nanodielectrics, 
the dielectrics made of nanocomposites, can be prepared by combining inorganic 
polymer matrices with nanoscale ﬁllers. Inorganic polymer nanodielectrics thus 
formed show signiﬁcant improvements in their physical and chemical properties. The 
properties and applications of inorganic polymer nanodielectrics are discussed in this 
chapter. Advanced properties of inorganic polymer nanodielectrics are related to their 
intermolecular interactions, chain ﬂexibility, stability, crosslinking, tactility, dielec-
tric constant, thermal property, processability, texture structure, ﬂexibility, etc. This 
chapter also summarizes current and future scope of research in inorganic polymer 
nanodielectrics for applications such as partial discharge (PD) resistance, electric 
energy storage, and space charge suppression. 
Keywords Nanocomposite · Inorganic polymers · Nanodielectrics · Energy 
storage · Space charge suppression
K. P. S. Babu · K. P. Chaithra · T. P. Vinod 
Department of Chemistry, CHRIST (Deemed to be University), Hosur Road, Bengaluru 560029, 
India 
A. Chandrasekhar envelope symbol
Nanosensors and Nanoenergy Lab, Department of Sensors and Biomedical Technology, School of 
Electronics Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu, Vellore 632014, India 
e-mail: arunkumar.c@vit.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_9 
243

244
K. P. S. Babu et al.
9.1 
Introduction 
Polymers are one of the most commonly used classes of materials in various ﬁelds 
of technology and engineering. Common organic polymers like polyoleﬁns, nylons, 
polyesters, and polyurethanes are extensively used because of their salient features, 
which include excellent processability, durability, lightweight, ease of fabrication, 
and comparatively low cost [1, 2]. A major problem in polymer research is to extend 
the application window of such materials while preserving their useful properties 
while improving modulus, heat resistance, ﬁre performance, and strength. This can 
be achieved by reinforcing the polymer matrix with nanoscopic inorganic parti-
cles (silica, metallic phosphates, nanoclays, nanometals, transition metal oxides, 
and metal chalcogenides) which can be zero-dimensional (0D) nanoparticles, one-
dimensional (1D) nanotubes or nanoﬁbres, and two-dimensional (2D) layered sili-
cates or graphene (Fig. 9.1). Incorporation of these inorganic particles can lead to 
superior physical and mechanical properties compared to that of polymer composites 
ﬁlled with micro-sized additives. 
The combination of one or more additives, typically of the size of 10–100 Å with 
a polymer matrix, is known as polymer nanocomposites [4]. Inorganic particles of 
different morphologies and dimensionalities such as spherical, layered natural or 
artiﬁcial clays or micas, either intercalated or exfoliated are dispersed in various 
polymers. Three important features that distinguish polymer nanocomposites from 
conventional polymer micro composites are: (i) ﬁller size, (ii) ﬁller quantity, and (iii) 
large speciﬁc surface area. The inorganic particles used as additives can implement 
or improve optical properties, mechanical behavior, thermal properties, electronic 
response, optoelectronic properties, density, refractive index, etc. [5]. 
The characteristic properties of polymer nanocomposites make them useful for 
energy-related applications. One such usage of them is seen as dielectric materials, 
owing to the enhanced dielectric properties compared to conventional polymeric 
materials. A nanodielectric is a solid composite material composed of dielectric 
matrix (mostly polymer) with ﬁller particles, with sizes less than 100 nm. These
Fig. 9.1 Illustration of nanoﬁllers in different dimensions: 0D nanoparticles, 1D nanotubes, and 
2D layered silicates. Recreated with permission from Nature Communications, Copyright © 2021 
[3] 

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
245
Fig. 9.2 Number of publications with years graph obtained with the search for keywords 
nanodielectrics (a) and nanodielectrics and inorganic polymers (b). Data from Scopus October 
2022 
nanodielectrics exhibit notable improvements in dielectric strength and voltage 
endurance are so appealing, both commercially and in terms of basic science research. 
According to the statistics taken from Scopus in October 2022, it is evident that the 
number of publications in this area (nanodielectrics) are increasing every year owing 
to their applications in various ﬁelds (Fig. 9.2a). Inorganic polymer nanodielectrics 
are also gaining importance in the ﬁeld of research as seen in Fig. 9.2b. 
Preparation of inorganic polymer nanodielectrics can be done by various methods 
such as the sol–gel method, in situ polymerization, solution mixing, melt mixing, 
and in situ intercalative polymerization [1, 4–6]. The preparation process and type 
of inorganic nanomaterials used inﬂuence the physical and chemical properties of 
dielectric. This chapter will discuss the physical and chemical properties of inorganic 
polymer nanodielectrics and their applications (Fig. 9.3).
9.2 
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic Polymer 
Nanodielectrics 
9.2.1 
Electrical Properties 
The electrical charge transfer, dielectric breakdown, and endurance characteristics of 
the materials are signiﬁcantly impacted by incorporating nano-sized ﬁllers into the 
insulating polymers. Understanding these requires consideration of how the particles 
alter the morphology of the polymer as well as the physical structure of the polymer 
and the local chemistry. It is also important to take into account how electrical charac-
teristics are altered by electrostatic forces that form an interaction zone surrounding 
the particle surfaces [7]. Their dielectric behavior and conductivity are dependent on 
the electrical responses of the micro- or nanocomposites polymer matrix. As insu-
lating is the primary electrical character of polymers due to their lower concentration

246
K. P. S. Babu et al.
Fig. 9.3 Inorganic polymer nanodielectrics: Its physical and chemical properties align with their 
applications
of free charge carriers, polymer composites appear to be dielectrics. Classiﬁcation 
of polymer nanocomposites includes two main groups: (i) the insulating matrix-
dielectric reinforcing phase, and (ii) the insulating matrix-conductive reinforcing 
phase [8]. The electrical behavior of nanocomposites can be experimentally investi-
gated by means of broadband dielectric spectroscopy (BDS) and direct current (DC) 
conductivity measurements. 
Inorganic nanoﬁllers added to polymers in order to enhance electrical properties 
could be metallic, ceramic, or any allotropic form of carbon. An interesting group 
of ceramic inclusions includes the active or functional dielectrics, such as piezo-
electric, ferroelectric, and pyroelectric elements. Electrical characteristics include 
increase in the conductivity, dielectric permittivity, and dielectric strength at low 
nanoﬁller content. General electrical properties of nanodielectrics of nanocomposites 
are discussed below. 
(a) Breakdown strength: The capacity to withstand the induced electric ﬁeld is a 
basic requirement of electrical insulation. The applied electric ﬁeld is gradually 
increased until breakdown occurs in order to determine the material’s breakdown 
strength, which is dependent on the electrode geometry, immersion medium, 
sample thickness, and other factors. Weibull statistical distribution can be used 
to examine breakdown strength using shape and scale parameters [9, 10]. Shape 
parameters are analogous to the standard deviation in the normal distribution 
and scale parameters are analogous to the mean in the normal distribution [10].

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
247
DC breakdown data forms the basis for the current interest in employing nanocom-
posites as high-performance dielectric materials [11, 12]. A few examples from the 
literature showing the incorporation of inorganic materials in polymers as a dielec-
tric material with improved breakdown strength are: (i) the addition of differently 
sized 90 wt% boron nitride to the epoxy-based systems increased the breakdown 
strengthBreakdown strength with decrease in size of the ﬁllerFiller particle [13, 14]. 
(ii) the DC breakdown strength of polypropylene (PP) increased by roughly one-third 
when nanomagnesium oxide (MgO) was added and when PP is incorporated with 
5% hydrophobic fumed nanosilica, it resulted in an increase from 511 to 778 kV/ 
mm [15] and (iv) the addition of 5wt% silica (SiO2) to silica/cross-linked polyethy-
lene (XLPE) followed by surface treatment using ethenylsilane gives an increased 
breakdown strength when compared to polymer [16, 17] (Table 9.1). 
Any insulation material is subjected to dielectric breakdown when the applied 
electric ﬁeld reaches a certain threshold value, which is inﬂuenced by tempera-
ture, system geometry, and physical or chemical ﬂaws in the dielectric. Breakdown 
strength of various insulating polymers is listed in Table 9.2. Breakdown also occurs 
when the number of mobile charge carriers is suddenly and irreversibly multiplied 
under the effect of a high ﬁeld. It has been demonstrated that adding typical (micron-
sized) ﬁllers to polymer dielectrics decreases the ﬁeld electric breakdown (Ebd) [23, 
24]. The breakdown strength decreases with addition of nanoﬁller beyond certain 
point because of the nanoﬁller aggregation and it behaves like micro-sized inclusions. 
In other words, presence of sizable particles degrades breakdown performance. A few 
examples from the literature are: (i) addition of nanoscopic zinc oxide (ZnO) to low-
density polyethylene (LDPE) decreased strength with an increase in ﬁller amount, (ii) 
addition of titania (TiO2) nanoparticles to LDPE decreased DC breakdown strength 
with an increase in ﬁller amount [19].
Table 9.1 Ebd values of inorganic polymer nanodielectrics 
Material
Ebd (kV/mm)
References 
Bisphenol epoxy + TiO2 (10 wt % and 1.5 μm)
200 
Bisphenol epoxy + TiO2 (10 wt % and 38 nm)
280
[18] 
Bisphenol epoxy
332 
Bisphenol epoxy + TiO2 (10 wt % and 15 μm)
305 
Bisphenol epoxy + TiO2 (10 wt % and 23 nm)
391
[19] 
Bisphenol epoxy
347 
Bisphenol epoxy + MMT nanoclay (4–1/2 wt %)
531
[20] 
Silica/cross-linked polyethylene (XLPE)
269 
XLPE + SiO2 (5 wt % and 12 nm)
314
[21] 
Low-density polyethylene (LDPE)
630 
LDPE + MgO2 (2 wt % and 50 nm)
890
[22] 
Reused with permission from [21] Copyright © 2007, Springer 

248
K. P. S. Babu et al.
Table 9.2 Breakdown 
strength of various insulating 
polymers 
Polymer
Ebd (kV/mm) 
LDPE
200 
High-density polyethylene (HDPE)
200 
XLPE
220 
Polypropylene (Biaxially oriented)
200 
Polystyrene
200 
Polytetraﬂuoroethylene
88–176 
Poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride)
10.2 
Polycarbonate
252 
Polyester
300 
Polyimide
280 
Epoxy resin
25–45 
Reused with permission from [25] Copyright © 2009, Materials 
(b) Permittivity 
The number and nature of polarizable species present in the system, as well 
as their dynamics, are known as permittivity. Dielectric response is affected by 
its surrounding. Structural information about this can be obtained by dielectric 
spectroscopy. Permittivity of a material is given by Eq. 9.1 [26, 27]. 
eps ilon S ubsc
ri
p
t r Baseline equals epsilon Subscript r Baseline prime plus i epsilon Subscript r Superscript double prime
where, in relative permittivity, epsilon Subscript r Baseline prime is the real part, it is related to the energy stored in 
the system, e
ps
ilon Subscript r Superscript double prime is the imaginary part. 
The frequency dependence of the permittivity can be used to describe a material’s 
dielectric response. It is exempliﬁed by the Claussius–Mossotti Eq. 9.2 [28]. 
alpha equals StartFraction 3 epsilon 0 upper M Over upper N Subscript upper A Baseline rho EndFraction times StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript r Baseline minus 1 right parenthesis Over left parenthesis epsilon Subscript r Baseline plus 2 right parenthesis EndFraction
alph a equa ls StartFraction 3 epsilon 0 upper M Over upper N Subscript upper A Baseline rho EndFraction times StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript r Baseline minus 1 right parenthesis Over left parenthesis epsilon Subscript r Baseline plus 2 right parenthesis EndFraction
alph a equ
als StartFraction 3 epsilon 0 upper M Over upper N Subscript upper A Baseline rho EndFraction times StartFraction left parenthesis epsilon Subscript r Baseline minus 1 right parenthesis Over left parenthesis epsilon Subscript r Baseline plus 2 right parenthesis EndFraction
M stands for molecular mass, εr for relative permittivity/dielectric constant, ε0 for 
free space permittivity, NA for avagadro number, ρ for density, and α for molec-
ular polarizability. For multi-component systems like nanodielectrics, permittivity 
is given by Lichtenecker–Rother Eq. 9.3 [29]. 
log ep
si l on Subs cr
ip t  c Supe rs
c
ript prime Baseline equals normal empty set Subscript p Baseline log epsilon Subscript p Superscript prime Baseline plus normal empty set Subscript m Baseline log epsilon prime Subscript m
where normal empty set Subscript p stands for the volume fraction of particles and normal empty set Subscript m stands for the volume 
fraction of matrix, ep
silon prime Subscript c stands for the real permittivity of the composite, ep
silon prime Subscript p stands for 
the real permittivity of particles, and ep
silon prime Subscript m. stands for the real permittivity of matrix.

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
249
A few examples from the literature showing variation in permittivity due to the 
addition of inorganic materials are: (i) when excess amount of montmorillonite 
nanoﬁller is added into the epoxy matrix, variation in the permittivity from 4.6 to 
4.3 was observed [30]. (ii) The addition of SiO2 to LDPE-based nanocomposites-
Nanocomposites, the permittivity varied [31, 32]. When the amount of SiO2 reaches 
5%, the permittivity value reduces to that of the base polymer. (iii) When the wt% 
of silica nanoﬁller varied from 0.06 to 5.58, the permittivity values varied from 3.26 
to 2.27 [26]. 
It is concluded that adding nanoﬁllers “The surface performance was signiﬁcantly 
improved, and it was able to withstand the detrimental effects of partial discharges.” 
[33]. Two distinct processes, one physical and one chemical, are attributed to the 
advantageous effects of adding a nanoﬁller to a polymer. The physical consequence 
is that the surface barrier layer that forms as a result of localized nanoﬁller accumu-
lation following polymer ablation is thermally stable because the layer abundant in 
inorganic particles whereas the chemical consequence is that the nanoﬁller promotes 
the development of solid over gaseous decomposition products (char). 
Improvement in electric properties of nanodielectrics is useful for reducing the 
local electrical ﬁeld enhancements that is in ﬁled grading. Field grading is important 
in the construction of electrical assemblies, where the breakdown occurs. In this 
case, a dielectric with a higher breakdown strength must be used to level the stress 
and reduce the electric ﬁeld in the area of concern. Main application of polymeric 
dielectrics is to serve as outdoor insulation that is on overhead lines or as outdoor 
bushings. This reduces the corona activity and surface discharges which degrade the 
material. Addition of small quantity of nanoﬁller can be used to avoid these damages 
[34]. 
9.2.2 
Mechanical Properties 
High surface volume ratio of nanoﬁller makes nanodielectrics possess high 
reinforcing efﬁciency even at low concentrations. Many nanocomposites, where 
nanoﬁller addition is done to the polymer, change the morphology of the matrix 
leading to increase in the stiffness, toughness, elastic modulus, and mechanical 
strength. This increase occurs through modifying polymeric nanocomposite mate-
rials’ macroscopic mechanical characteristics. Using nanoﬁllers with matching 
coefﬁcient of thermal expansion results in improved discharge resistance, improved 
abrasion, long-term mechanical behavior, and wear resistance [35]. When the 
polymer is reinforced with nanomaterials, it is also discovered that the long-term 
mechanical properties of nanocomposite, such as wear and abrasion resistance, 
fatigue, and creep, are greatly enhanced. Knowing the characteristics of the matrix, 
ﬁllers, and other constituents present allows it to predict the general mechanical 
properties of the composites as a whole. Numerous theories can be used to predict the 
individual effects of the ﬁller aspect ratio, ﬁller/matrix volume ratio, ﬁller stiffness, 
etc., on the mechanical response of these composites [36]. The Mori–Tanaka method

250
K. P. S. Babu et al.
was developed to determine the elastic stress distribution within and around an 
ellipsoidal particle in an inﬁnite matrix. It was based on the principles of Eshelby’s 
particle inclusion model. Analysis of nanocomposites and a range of reinforcing 
geometries have both been successfully applied to unidirectional composites’ 
stiffness can be predicted by Halpin and Tsai’s theory. (i.e., nano ﬁber, spherical 
nanoparticles) [37, 38]. It is given by Eq. 9.4. 
up p e r E eq u
a
ls  n o
r
ma
l empty set Subscript f Baseline upper E Subscript f Baseline plus left parenthesis 1 minus normal empty set Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis upper E Subscript m
where and n ormal empty set Subscript f . is the ﬁller’s volume fraction, Ef for Young’s modulus of the ﬁller, 
and Em stands for Young’s modulus of the matrix. 
These theories demonstrate that, particularly for ﬁllers with high surface to volume 
aspect ratios, the fraction of the interfacial region increases signiﬁcantly as ﬁller size 
is reduced (to nanoscale). The region of the interphase containing nanotube (NT) and 
nanoplatelet (NP) in polymer matrix is graphically depicted in Fig. 9.4. In Fig.  9.5, 
the longitudinal modulus results of nanotube and nanoplatelet reinforced nanocom-
posites with same ﬁller level are shown [39]. It was demonstrated that nanotubes 
display more notable interphase effects on the elastic modulus than nanoplatelet 
ﬁllers for high aspect ratio nanoﬁllers. Addition of excess leads to insufﬁcient inter-
facial contact, interfacial slippage, and insufﬁcient dispersion in nanotubes. This 
results in decreased modulus [36, 40]. 
Mechanical properties of nanodielectrics of nanocomposites include: 
(a) Tensile strength 
The nanoencapsulated polymer composites will have improved mechanical proper-
ties but when more amount of ﬁllers are added, it leads to aggregation and irreg-
ular interfacial bonding [42]. Latest advancement of nanoﬁllers and their processing 
and chemical functionalization has helped to solve this issue. Liu et al. studied 
about single-walled carbon nanotube-polyvinyl alcohol (CNT-PVA) nanocompos-
ites for dielectric applications, where it is observed that the strength and Young’s
Fig. 9.4 Illustration of aligned a nanotube and b nanoplatelet nanocomposites with interphase 
region. Reused with permission from [41] Copyright © 2008 Composites Science and Technology

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
251
Fig. 9.5 Effects of interphase. Reused with permission from [41] Copyright © 2008 Composites 
Science and Technology
modulus are improved because of the hydrogen bonding between the polymer matrix 
and nanotubes [40]. Halpin–Tsai equations’ modulus prediction and experimental 
results have excellent agreement. Ramanathan et al. found that by loading an amide-
functionalized single-walled nanotube (SWNT) in a poly (methyl methacrylate) 
PMMA matrix, drastic improvement in the mechanical properties can be achieved 
[39, 43]. 
Addition of nanoparticles increases the stiffness and hence tensile modulus of 
nanocomposite. This can be explained using an example from literature, where addi-
tion of nanosilica to elastosil (E) [EX, x is weight %] increased the tensile strength. 
But with excess of nanosilica, tensile strength decreased [25, 29] (Fig. 9.6). This is 
due to the agglomeration and increased roughness of the surface of nanocomposites 
with increase in the amount of nanosilica [39, 44].
(b) Elastic Modulus 
The elastic modulus is the essence of stiffness of any material and it can be 
obtained using dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA). DMA results for the addi-
tion of nanosilica to elastosil at various wt% and temperature are showed in Fig. 9.7. 
These results shows that with increase in wt% of silica and decrease in temperature, 
the storage modulus (E') and loss modulus (E'') increase. The variation in E' and E''
with temperature is due to the increased mobility of the polymer chains [39]. With 
DMA, the optimum temperature and weight percentage to get the maximum stiffness 
can be determined.
Table 9.3 gives an overview of relation between upper E prime and upper E double prime with temperature and 
concentration [45]. Tan δ the dielectric loss tangent, (tan δ = ε''/ε') is widely used 
to measure the amount of electrical energy dissipated when a material undergoes 
electrical conduction, dielectric resonance, etc. This is indicative of increased ﬂex-
ibility or little interaction between the polymer and the ﬁller and is assessed at the 
glass transition temperature. A decrease in crosslinking density was correlated with

252
K. P. S. Babu et al.
Fig. 9.6 Tensile strength of 
nanocomposites. Reused 
with permission from [39] 
Copyright © 2021 
Nanomaterials
Fig. 9.7 DMA curves of nanocomposites: a storage modulus (upper E prime) and  b loss modulus (upper E double prime) with 
change in wt% and temperature. Reused with permission from [39] Copyright © 2021 Nanomaterials
an increase in the tan δ value in polysiloxane nanocomposites. The development 
of novel dielectric materials for high-frequency, high-voltage, and high-temperature 
applications depends on improving the glass temperature of polymeric insulation 
through appropriate nanocomposite engineering.
Inorganic ﬁller particles often boost stiffness while occasionally sacriﬁcing tough-
ness in polymer matrixes [9]. The mechanical strength and elastic modulus of 
many nanocomposites appear to be signiﬁcantly improved with large aspect ratio 
nanoﬁllers. Also, by altering the lengths of the polymeric nanocomposites, the 
macroscopic mechanical properties can be changed [46].

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
253
Table 9.3 Storage modulus (upper E prime) and loss modulus (upper E double prime) of nanocomposites with various temper-
atures 
Nanocomposites
tangent delta 
(−30 °C)
upper E prime−30 °C (MPa)
upper E prime 30 °C 
(MPa) 
upper E prime−0 °C  
(MPa) 
upper E double prime 30 °C (MPa) 
E0
0.101
14.2
8.7
10.5
0.8 
E5
0.099
22.3
13.6
16.5
1.1 
E10
0.111
31.2
17.4
21.7
1.7 
E15
0.112
41.2
22.0
28.2
2.3 
E20
0.119
52.5
26.4
34.6
3.1 
E25
0.134
75.0
32.7
45.8
4.7 
E30
0.135
95.0
39.1
56.3
5.9 
Reused with permission [39] Copyright © 2021 Nanomaterials
9.2.3 
Interface Properties 
Polymer composites are reinforced with several inorganic particles of nanometric 
size. As a size of ﬁllerFiller particle decreases, the total interphase volume gradually 
increases as the particular surface area increases [47]. This enhances the applications 
in the ﬁeld of dielectrics. A multi-core model presented out by Tanaka et al. gives the 
detailed hypothesis of the process underlying the improved performance due to the 
addition of inorganic materials. As per the model, the internal interfaces are composed 
of (a) bonded layer, (b) bound layer, (c) loose coupling layer, and (d) electrical double 
layer [48–50] (Fig. 9.8). Bonded layer is the thin layer [1] which is tightly bonded to 
organic and inorganic components with the help of suitable coupling agent. Bound 
layer is the layer (thickness < 10 nm) that is strongly interacting with the surface of the 
nanoparticle and/or bounded layer [51]. In this layer, chain mobility and crystallinity 
are restricted. The glass transition temperature is directly correlated with it. Loose 
coupling layer is loosely coupled to the ﬁrst and second layer. Chain mobility, chain 
conformations, crystallinity, etc., will be differing from undisturbed matrix. The next 
fourth layer which overlaps all the above three layers called electric double layer. 
The nanoparticles are charged and polymer contains sufﬁcient mobile charge carriers 
and it forms a long distance dipole. Some of the polymers like polypropylene (PP), 
polyethylene (PE), and ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) will have tendency to gain 
positively charge. Epoxy, polyamide, and silicone elastomers have a tendency to 
become negatively charged. This was found out from the triboelectric series (Fig. 9.9) 
[48, 52]. This mobile charge carriers in polymers effect electrical conductivity and 
dielectric properties.
The presence of interface will affect the properties of a system which are useful in 
dielectric applications. Epoxy composites (epoxy resins with layered silicates having 
large surface area, and large aspect ratio) are common dielectric substances. They 
have been developed as advanced, high-performing insulating materials. 
Models such as, the multi-core model (also known as Wilkes model), and the water 
shell model are developed to learn more about how nanoﬁllers added to polymers

254
K. P. S. Babu et al.
Fig. 9.8 Multicore model for nanocomposite. Reused with permission from [34] Copyright © 
2016 Polymers
will interact with one another. Experimental evidence supports the great effectiveness 
of coupling agents. Also, this statistic emphasizes the signiﬁcance of “the interac-
tion zone”. When silica-based nanoﬁllers are added to the organic polymers, silane 
coupling occurs. Silane coupling is a type of rather powerful bonding between organic 
polymers and inorganic materials (mostly, nanoﬁllers). Figure 9.10 illustrates how 
hydrogen bonds can be used to join two types of immiscible substances [34, 53].
9.2.4 
Optical Properties 
The optical properties of polymers embedded with nanoﬁllers in a dielectric have long 
attracted the interest of researchers. As the market for materials for optical appli-
cations expands, demand for novel materials with functionality and transparency 
increases. Addition of inorganic nanoparticle nanocomposites to polymers such as 
polyetherketone (PEK-c), poly (methylmethacrylate) (PMMA), bisphenol-A poly-
carbonate (PC), polystyrene (PS), and epoxy resin [54] has considerable promises 
since they can supply the essential and interesting optical properties. These properties

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
255
Fig. 9.9 Triboelectricity series of various kinds of materials. Reused with permission from [52] 
Copyright © 2015, Textile Research Journal
include high thermal stability, low optical loss, and good transparency at particular 
wavelength, refractive index, stability, and easy processability. Some of them are 
mentioned in Table 9.4 [55].
Transparency of the polymer nanocomposites relied on the spatial distribution 
and size of the ﬁllers that are added to the polymer matrix. Sarwar et al. [56] studied 
about the transparency of pure polyamide and polyamide with different amount of 
silica particles. The maximum was found for 5 wt% silica and it gradually decreased 
by increasing the wt % of the ﬁller. Another study by Chen et al. showed that polymer 
PDMS composites with different amount of nanosilica (MQ silicone resin) shows 
different transparency. As the loading of the ﬁller increases, transparency decreases 
and it is found maximum in (83% ﬁller addition) among all others with 64, 59, 56, 
and 21% addition of MQ silicone resin (Fig. 9.11). This decreasing transparency is

256
K. P. S. Babu et al.
Fig. 9.10 Hydrogen bonding of silane coupling of polymer. Reused with permission from [34] 
Copyright © 2016, Polymers
Table 9.4 Physical properties of some of the optical polymers. 
Materials
Refractive 
index 
Transparency 
(% at 
400–800 nm) 
Tg 
(°C) 
Optical loss 
(d normal beta slash cm right parenthesis
Dielectric constant 
Poly(methylmethacrylate) 
1.49
93
105
0.2 (at 
850 nm) 
2.2–2.3 
Polystyrene
1.59
90
100
–
2.7 
Polycarbonate
1.58
89
150
–
2.7–3.0 
Polyurethane
1.56
–
–
0.8 (at 633 
and 
1064 nm) 
– 
Epoxy resin
1.58
–
–
0.3 (at 
633 nm) 
and 0.8 (at 
10,640 nm) 
3.8 
Polyetherketone-c
1.51
90
228
<0.5 (at 
633 nm) 
3.2 
Reused with permission from [55] Copyright © 2010 Woodhead Publishing Limited

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
257
Fig. 9.11 Transmittance of the MQ silicone nanoﬁller and PDMS matrix. Reused with permission 
from [57] Copyright © 2015, Elsevier 
because of aggregations MQ silicone resin in PDMS matrix. It is seen that light is 
scattered and leads to opacity, which is veriﬁed by SEM and DLS [57]. 
Chai and coworkers reported that PMMA/La0.45 Ce0.45 Tb0.1 PO4 showed high 
transparency for visible range and intense green emission of Tb3+ (at 543 nm) on UV 
irradiation [54]. PMMA/SiO2 and PMMA/ZrO2 nanocomposites prepared by Wang 
et al. showed the transmittance in the visible region persist above 95% and it was 
increasing with the amount of the ﬁller. As the load increased, the overall light trans-
mittance in polycarbonate (PC)/alumina nanocomposites containing nanoparticles 
decreased. 
9.3 
Applications 
9.3.1 
Space Charge Suppression 
High-voltage direct current (HVDC) is the ideal environment for the injection from 
the electrode and the accumulation of space charge in the dielectrics. The local 
electric ﬁeld distribution will be distorted by the space charge, which will also grad-
ually accelerates the degradation of polymer chains. According to several published 
works, adding inorganic nanoparticles to polymer matrix is a feasible method for 
reducing the injection and accumulation of space charge [58]. Crosslinked polyethy-
lene (XLPE) was inserted to poly(stearyl methacrylate)-grafted SiO2 by Zhang et al.

258
K. P. S. Babu et al.
and measurements show that the space charge was effectively suppressed, leading to 
a limited internal ﬁeld distortion of 10.6% over a broad range of external DC ﬁelds 
from 30 to 100 kV/mm at room temperature. The charge dynamics in nanodielectrics 
has been explained using the creation of deep trap when nanoparticles are introduced 
into the material [58]. According to Zhang et al., nano-sized MgO will improve the 
trap depth in low-density polyethylene (LDPE) nanodielectrics. Hence, a consider-
able amount of space charge accumulated near the electrodes. Wang et al. investi-
gated the impact of a coupling agent (vinyl silane) on the electrical characteristics of 
Al2O3/LDPE nanodielectrics and found that the modiﬁed Al2O3 nanoparticles have 
a stronger space charge suppressing effect than the unmodiﬁed ones. Additionally, 
Zhou et al. thoroughly examined the space charge characteristic of polypropylene 
(PP)-based nanodielectrics, which have shown signiﬁcant potential as a recyclable 
HVDC cable insulation material [59]. 
9.3.2 
Electric Energy Storage 
Polymer-based dielectrics have substantial applications in ﬁeld-effect transistors 
(FETs), dielectric-based capacitors, actuators, communication devices, etc., which 
play a crucial role in electronic device and advanced intelligence equipment’s. Low 
permittivity values (usually k < 3.5, except PVDF) are the main disadvantage of 
the polymers, such as polyethylene, polypropylene, polyethylene terephthalate, poly 
(dimethylsiloxane), epoxy, and poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride) [60–66]. It is challenging to 
increase the permittivity (capability of a material to polarize in an alternating current 
electrical ﬁeld—according to dielectric theory) of a neat polymer because C-H bonds 
in polymers can only generate a small amount of polarization. It eventually limits the 
signiﬁcant improvement of the practical devices. In order to arouse stronger polar-
ization, high fraction of nano-sized inorganic ﬁllers like, semiconducting oxides, 
ceramics, giant dielectric oxide particles, carbon, or metals that are mixed with the 
material. 
These dielectrics are widely used as an insulating layer between electrically 
conducting surfaces when the need for electrical separation of charged materials 
arises. They have fast charging and discharging capability, hence, dielectric capac-
itors possessing electrical energy storage have been helping in development of 
advanced electrical power engineering. However, the main obstacle to their potential 
industrial uses is they have lower energy storage density on comparison with electro-
chemical energy storage devices [67, 68]. A material can have a high energy density 
if it has a number of polarizable domains because these domains will generate a 
lot of induced dipole moments on application of electric ﬁeld. Dielectric capacitors 
helps create large number of such dipoles which induces an electric ﬁeld opposing 
the applied electric ﬁeld in turn, the net electric ﬁeld will be lowered and it results 
in conduction pathways for dielectric loss and dielectric breakdown [69]. 
Energy storage density for linear dielectrics is given by Eq. (9.5) [70].

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
259
upper U S u
bs
crip t storage Baseline equals integral upper E d upper D equals one half epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline upper E squared
upper U  Su
bscript storage Baseline equals integral upper E d upper D equals one half epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline upper E squared
E-Applied electric ﬁeld and D-Electric displacement. 
For linear dielectric materials such as polyethylene, biaxially oriented polypropy-
lene, and polystyrene, the polarization and depolarization follow linear path. The 
energy density stored and recovered is same (area ABDA, Fig. 9.12). But practically, 
the majority of dielectric materials (such as polar polymers, polymers containing 
impurity ions, and immiscible polymer blends with poor interfaces) react nonlin-
early to an applied external electric ﬁeld. The polarization and depolarization curves 
generally take different routes resulting in hysteresis loop depicted by region ABCA 
[70]. This is due to greater coupling interaction in-between the dipole of charging 
and discharging materials. 
The applied electric ﬁeld and energy storage density are proportional in linear 
dielectrics (Eq. 9.5). However, for nonlinear dielectrics such as anti-ferroelectrics, 
ferroelectrics and, relaxor ferroelectrics, the relationship is not proportional due to 
residual polarization, Pr (the intercept D-E loop on the Y-axis) [53]. The polariza-
tion–electric ﬁeld and polarization axis hysteresis loop should be integrated to get 
discharge and charge energy densities, Eq. (9.6). 
The stored and released energy density (Eq. 9.6), for nonlinear [70, 71]. 
upper U S ub
scri
pt
 s
tora ge B aseline eq ua
ls i
nt
egr
al 
Underscript 0 Overscript upper P Subscript max Baseline Endscripts upper E d upper P and upper U Subscript released Baseline equals integral Underscript upper P Subscript r Baseline Overscript upper P Subscript max Baseline Endscripts upper E d upper P
where Pr is the residual polarization and Pmax is the maximum polarization.
Fig. 9.12 D-E hysterisis 
loops for energy storage, 
energy released, and energy 
loss calculation under 
high-ﬁled switching. Reused 
with permission from [70] 
Copyright © 2022, Polymer 

260
K. P. S. Babu et al.
The above equations show that the dielectric can achieve higher energy storage 
density by increasing the breakdown strength, polarization strength, and dielec-
tric constant of the material. The material should have a low conductivity and low 
dielectric loss to ensure practical applications under an external electric ﬁeld. 
Polymer-based nanocomposites with high breakdown strength and high permit-
tivity are anticipated with the advancement of distributed power production systems 
and the high compactness of the electronic circuits due to their adaptability and low 
cost. However, it is out of the scope of the present chapter to discuss detailed exper-
imental information. Analytical descriptions of the experimental techniques can be 
found elsewhere (Kremer and Arndt, 1997; Kremer and Schönhals, 2003; Riande 
and Díaz-Calleja, 2004; Vassilikou-Dova and Kalogeras, 2009) [69, 72, 73]. 
Polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF), a common ferroelectric polymer, it has been 
widely utilized as the host material to produce high energy storage nanodi-
electrics. As a result of PVDF’s high breakdown strength, a terpolymer of 
vinylidene ﬂuride, chlorotriﬂuoroethylene (CTFE), and triﬂuoroethylene (TrFE), 
known as PVDF-CTFE-TrFE, was created to create poly [(vinylidene ﬂuoride)-r-
(chlorotriﬂuoroethylene)]. These are referred to as single phase polymer dielectrics. 
These prepared polymers have high energy density but low dielectric permittivity 
and breakdown strength. This will make it very difﬁcult to attain high energy density 
along with high breakdown strength, Eb with minimal dielectric loss. 
This can be explained using moss rule, Eq. 9.7 
epsilon e qual s
 epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline equals 1 plus left parenthesis StartFraction italic h over two pi omega p Over upper E Subscript b Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis squared
ep
sil
on equals epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline equals 1 plus left parenthesis StartFraction italic h over two pi omega p Over upper E Subscript b Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis squared
Polymer nanocomposites are multiphase materials that provide another method 
for producing heterogeneous dielectric materials without compromising on the 
Moss rule. Polymer nanocomposite design consists of nanoscale phase-segregated 
ﬁllers with high electronic conductivity (yellow) and insulating polymer (green) that 
prevent inter-domain conduction and percolation. “Nanodipoles” are created when 
space charge accumulates at phase boundaries with an applied electric ﬁeld. The 
number density of polarizable domains is signiﬁcantly increased due to nanoscale 
size dipoles. As a result, dielectric materials have energy storage dominated by inter-
facial polarization. It is anticipated that by combining the high breakdown ﬁeld 
strength values and processability of polymers with the high relative permittivity, 
εr values of inorganic ceramics, next-generation polymer dielectrics ca–n meet the 
demands for power related applications (Fig. 9.13) [74].
Ceramic materials’ dielectric permittivity ranges from tens (TiO2, Al2O3) to  
thousands (BaTiO3), and it can even exceed 10,000 for CaCu3Ti4O12. Due  to  
which, numerous nanoparticle/polymer composites have been thoroughly studied. 
Owing to the percolation phenomenon that occurs when volume percent of the 
ﬁllers reaches the percolation threshold, conductive particle/polymer nanocompos-
ites for high energy density are of signiﬁcant interest. When utilized as conductive 
ﬁllers, graphene nanosheets, metal particles, and carbon nanotubes (CNT) show

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
261
Fig. 9.13 Block copolymers with nano- and micro-phase separation undergo interfacial polariza-
tion. Recreated with permission from [74] Copyright © 2022, Polymer
an exponential rise in permittivity near the percolation threshold. Additionally, 
a hierarchy structure for nanocomposites is built to concurrently increase break-
down strength and permittivity [63]. The incorporation of inorganic nanoﬁllers into 
polymers showed improved energy-related applications. A strawberry-like core– 
shell Ag/polydopamine/BaTiO3 nanocomposites with high dielectric performance 
was created by Yang et al. The Coulomb blockade effect of super-small nano-Ag 
explained the improvement in the performance of the nanocomposites [75]. Wang 
and his coworkers fabricated three-layer sandwich-like BaTiO3/PVDF nanocompos-
ites with varying BaTiO3 concentrations layer by layer. Luo et al. created a three-
dimensional BaTiO3 network in polymer composites and achieved an enhancement 
of the dielectric permittivity of polymer composites [76, 77]. 
9.3.3 
Nanodielectrics with Partial Discharge (PD) Resistance 
In order to assess the efﬁciency and durability of nanodielectrics for high-voltage 
applications such as the wires of randomly wound motors and the stator end wind-
ings of rotating machines, partial discharge resistance of an insulating material is 
a critical component. Partial discharge will erode the insulating materials which 
causes breakdown and degradation of polymer chain. It can be reduced by adding 
ceramic nanoparticles as they strengthen the bonds between the nano-sized ﬁllers and 
polymer matrices [78]. Ceramic nanoparticles operate as a barrier in the direction 
of high energy charges, shielding those charges from directly attacking the polymer 
[79]. 
Surface roughness, PD current, and the erosion depth are the main parameters 
for the evaluation of PD resistance that can be done using many conﬁgurations of 
electrode system like (a) Rod-to-plane electrode, which allows evaluation of surface 
roughness and erosion depth that can be helpful for the characterization of nanocom-
posite materials [this work was done by Krivda et al.] and (b) International Elec-
trotechnical Commission (IEC) electrode gives surface roughness (Fig. 9.14) [53, 
77, 79].

262
K. P. S. Babu et al.
Fig. 9.14 Electrode system for measuring PD resistance of a IEC(b) electrode, and b Rod-to-plane 
electrode. Reused with permission from [77] Copyright © 2018 IET Nanodielectrics 
It is proved from the results obtained by Krivda et al. that better protection against 
PD erosion is seen when combination of micro- and nano-sized ﬁllers is added in 
comparison with the base resin having either solely microﬁllers or solely nanoﬁllers. 
Demonstrations have been provided to show that PD resistance notably developed on 
nanoﬁller addition. Iizuka et al. analyzed and measured PD resistance of two different 
forms of epoxy/SiO2 nanocomposites such as aerosil (prepared by addition of nano 
SiO2) and nanopox (prepared by directly curing epoxy and nano SiO2 mixture). 
Aerosil had better PD resistance than nanopox among the nanocomposite studied 
[80]. Tanaka et al. also investigated that addition of fumed silica with XLPE nanocom-
posites increases PD resistance. Kozako et al. showed that 2 wt% incorporation of 
exfoliated layered silicate improves the PD resistance of polyamide nanocomposites. 
It is difﬁcult to achieve an evenly distributed electric ﬁeld in a high-voltage setting. 
There must be some locations where the local electric ﬁeld strength is greater than the 
breakdown strength of air domains, such as the endpoint of a high-voltage generator 
winding and cable insulation, where the local electric ﬁeld strength is greater than 
the air domains’ 30 kV/mm breakdown strength. 
9.3.4 
Nonlinear Field Grading 
The purpose of using ﬁeld grading material is to avoid the electrical breakdown (elec-
trical stress) and thermal problems that occurs in high-voltage and medium-voltage 
applications including generators, motors, cable accessories, and end windings. Field 
grading applications are used under alternating current (AC) and direct current (DC) 
conditions. 
The ﬁeld grading materials used in DC-applications have nonlinear I-V (current– 
voltage) properties which can be explained by this Eq. 9.8.

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
263
up per 
I  equals upper I 0 left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Over upper V 0 EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript alpha
up
per
 I equals upper I 0 left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Over upper V 0 EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript alpha 
where I0 and V 0 are material constants and alphais the nonlinearity exponent of the 
material. 
Numerous AC and DC high-voltage applications, such as surface ﬂashover protec-
tion of outdoor silicon rubber polymer insulators and corona protection of motor 
stator bars and cable accessories, are prevented from stress concentration by nonlinear 
ﬁeld grading, which homogenizes the electric ﬁeld distribution [81, 82]. 
There is a recent set of literature, in which some representative semiconducting 
nanoﬁllers are added to the polymer matrix to create nonlinear characteristics. 
Onneby et al. and Donzel et al. investigated the inﬂuence of semiconducting 
nanoﬁllers such as silicon carbide (SiC) and ZnO in polymer to nonlinear ﬁeld 
grading characterization, respectively. Other carbon-based materials, such as carbon 
nanotubes and graphene oxide, are used to examine the ﬁeld grading properties of 
nanocomposites in order to develop percolation systems, where percolation concept 
helps in understanding the non-ﬁled grading properties of nanocomposites with 
conducting/semiconducting nanoparticles and insulating matrix. It has been found 
that the percolation threshold of the composite gives the minimum volume percentage 
required to create a continuous network of ﬁller and the matrix. Percolation threshold 
of the composite increases with the volume fraction of ﬁllers added which depends 
on the geometry of the system [83]. Critically, the percolation threshold is affected 
by a variety of factors, including nanoparticle morphology, ﬁller distribution homo-
geneity, and the type of conduction between adjacent particles (e.g., tunneling or 
Schottky barriers), as illustrated in Fig. 9.15 [77].
9.4 
Conclusions 
Polymers play a major role in most of the technology related applications. However, 
they have relatively poor mechanical, optical, thermal, and electrical properties 
compared to metals and ceramics. Nanocomposites with polymer as matrix and 
nanoparticle as ﬁllers can be used for improved physical and chemical properties. 
These properties of polymer nanocomposites make them useful for energy-related 
applications. One such usage of nanocomposites is seen as nanodielectrics, owing to 
the enhanced dielectric properties compared to conventional polymeric materials. 
This chapter describes about the improvements seen in the physical and chemical 
properties including electrical, mechanical, optical, interfacial, and thermal proper-
ties. It brieﬂy discusses how addition of nano-ﬁller to polymers varies the electrical 
properties in terms of breakdown strength, and permittivity of the polymer. Break-
down strength of nanocomposite using Weibull statistical distribution with respect to 
shape and size parameters and the substantial improvements seen in the permittivity 
of the material due to the local accumulation of the nanoﬁller is explained. Morpho-
logical changes and increase in mechanical properties such as stiffness, toughness,

264
K. P. S. Babu et al.
Fig. 9.15 Conduction mechanism of various nanodielectric system. Reused with permission from 
[77] Copyright © 2018 IET Nanodielectrics
and elastic modulus, and mechanical strength using theories such as Halpin and Tsai, 
Mori–Tanaka are discussed. The impact of the size of ﬁllers to polymer matrix and 
their interactions studied by its interface properties using Wilkes multi-core model 
and their effects on refractive index, transparency, and dielectric constant are also 
explained. 
The nanocomposites with improved physical and chemical properties open the 
possibilities for nanodielectrics in energy-related applications. Various applications 
including energy storage, space charge suppression, partial discharge resistance, 
nonlinear ﬁeld grading using these composites are discussed in this chapter. 
Challenges in the ﬁeld of inorganic polymer nanodielectrics 
Nanodielectrics are a combination of polymer matrix and inorganic nanoparticles 
that have recently received extensive attention. Polymer matrix has a high breakdown 
strength and low loss, and inorganic nanoparticles have a high dielectric constant. 
However, due to non-uniformity in the electric ﬁeld distribution, the high permittivity 
contrast between ﬁllers causes these properties to be compromised. Current nanopar-
ticle/polymer interface models have limited applicability and are lacking in ﬁne 
details, which must be developed in the future research. In the recent developments, 
applications of nanodielectrics in energy-related applications such as space charge 
suppression, electrical energy storage, partial discharge resistance, and nonlinear 
ﬁeld grading have been demonstrated. In the future, research works are expected to

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
265
be carried out on biomedical applications and electrical power industries of these 
materials. 
References 
1. Jordan J, Jacob KI, Tannenbaum R, et al (2005) Experimental trends in polymer nanocompos-
ites—a review. Mater Sci Eng A 393:1–11 
2. Berta M, Lindsay C, Pans G et al (2006) Effect of chemical structure on combustion and 
thermal behaviour of polyurethane elastomer layered silicate nanocomposites. Polym Degrad 
Stab 91:1179–1191 
3. Shaw ZL, Kuriakose S, Cheeseman S et al (2021) Antipathogenic properties and applications 
of low-dimensional materials. Nat Commun 12:3897 
4. Dantas de Oliveira A, Augusto Gonçalves Beatrice C (2019) Polymer nanocomposites with 
different types of nanoﬁller. In: Nanocomposites—recent evolutions. IntechOpen 
5. Jeon I-Y, Baek J-B (2010) Nanocomposites derived from polymers and inorganic nanoparticles. 
Materials 3:3654–3674 
6. Murr LE, Martinez E, Hernandez J et al (2012) Microstructures and properties of 17-4 PH 
stainless steel fabricated by selective laser melting. J Mater Res Technol 1:167–177 
7. Nelson JK (ed) (2010) Dielectric polymer nanocomposites. Springer, US, Boston, MA 
8. Psarras GC (2010) Conductivity and dielectric characterization of polymer nanocomposites, 
In: Physical properties and applications of polymer nanocomposites. Elsevier, pp 31–69 
9. Fothergill JC (2010) Electrical properties. Dielectric polymer nanocomposites. Springer, US, 
Boston, MA, pp 197–228 
10. Weibull W (1951) A statistical distribution function of wide applicability. J Appl Mech 
11. Li Y, Zhou Y, Cheng S et al (2021) Polymer nanocomposites with high energy density utilizing 
oriented nanosheets and high-dielectric-constant nanoparticles. Materials 14:4780 
12. Tuncer E, Sauers I, James DR et al (2007) Enhancement of dielectric strength in nanocompos-
ites. Nanotechnology 18:325704 
13. Donnay M, Tzavalas S, Logakis E (2015) Boron nitride ﬁlled epoxy with improved thermal 
conductivity and dielectric breakdown strength. Compos Sci Technol 110:152–158 
14. Andritsch T (2010) Epoxy based nanodielectrics for high voltage DC applications: synthesis, 
dielectric properties and space charge dynamics 
15. Vaughan AS (2016) Nanodielectrics: the role of structure in determining electrical properties. 
Controlling the morphology of polymers. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 237–262 
16. John VL, Gomathi N, Joseph K et al (2022) Plasma functionalized CNT/Cyanate ester 
nanocomposites for aerospace structural applications. ChemistrySelect 7:e202201260 
17. Han Y, Xue Z, Liu D et al (2021) Research developments in XLPE nanocomposites and their 
blends: published papers, patents, and production, Presented at the. 
18. Smith RC, Nelson JK, Schadler LS (2010) Electrical behavior of particle-ﬁlled polymer 
nanocomposites, In: Physical properties and applications of polymer nanocomposites. Elsevier, 
pp 70–107 
19. Hu Y, Smith R, Nelson J et al (2006) Some mechanistic understanding of the impulse strength of 
nanocomposites, In: 2006 IEEE conference on electrical insulation and dielectric phenomena. 
IEEE, pp 31–34 
20. Sarathi R, Sahu RK, Kumar PR et al (2006) Understanding the performance of epoxy nano 
composites-a physico-chemical approach. IEEJ Trans Fundam Mater 126:1112–1120 
21. Roy M, Nelson JK, MacCrone RK et al (2007) Candidate mechanisms controlling the electrical 
characteristics of silica/XLPE nanodielectrics. J Mater Sci 42:3789–3799 
22. Murakami Y, Nemoto M, Okuzumi S et al (2008) DC conduction and electrical breakdown of 
MgO/LDPE nanocomposite. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 15:33–39

266
K. P. S. Babu et al.
23. Okuzumi S, Murakami Y, Nagao M et al (2008) DC breakdown strength and conduction 
current of MgO/LDPE composite inﬂuenced by ﬁller size. In: 2008 Annual report conference 
on electrical insulation and dielectric phenomena. IEEE, pp 722–725 
24. Takala M, Ranta H, Nevalainen P et al (2010) Dielectric properties and partial discharge 
endurance of polypropylene-silica nanocomposite. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 17:1259– 
1267 
25. Barber P, Balasubramanian S, Anguchamy Y et al (2009) Polymer composite and nanocom-
posite dielectric materials for pulse power energy storage. Materials 2:1697–1733 
26. Woodward WHH (2021) Broadband dielectric spectroscopy-a practical guide 
27. Jonscher AK (1999) Dielectric relaxation in solids. J Phys D Appl Phys 32:R57 
28. Zhu T, Yu Q, Zheng W et al (2021) Intrinsic high-k–low-loss dielectric polyimides containing 
ortho -position aromatic nitrile moieties: reconsideration on Clausius-Mossotti equation. Polym 
Chem 12:2481–2489 
29. Simpkin R (2010) Derivation of Lichtenecker’s logarithmic mixture formula from Maxwell’s 
equations. IEEE Trans Microw Theory Tech 58:545–550 
30. Tanaka T, Montanari GC, Mulhaupt R (2004) Polymer nanocomposites as dielectrics and 
electrical insulation-perspectives for processing technologies, material characterization and 
future applications. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 11:763–784 
31. Khaled U, Alzahrani S, Khan Y (2016) Dielectric properties improvement of LDPE based on 
nano ﬁllers. In: 2016 IEEE international conference on high voltage engineering and application 
(ICHVE) IEEE, pp 1–4 
32. Hui S, Chaki TK, Chattopadhyay S (2010) Dielectric properties of EVA/LDPE TPE system: 
effect of nanosilica and controlled irradiation. Polym Eng Sci 50:730–738 
33. Frechette M, Larocque RY, Trudeau M et al (2008) Nanostructured polymer microcomposites: 
a distinct class of insulating materials. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 15:90–105 
34. Ple¸sa I, No¸tingher P, Schlögl S et al (2016) Properties of polymer composites used in high-
voltage applications. Polymers (Basel) 8:173 
35. Grifﬁth G, Tucker S, Milsom J et al (2000) Problems with modern air-cooled generator stator 
winding insulation. IEEE Electr Insul Mag 16:6–10 
36. Irwin P, Zhang W, Cao Y et al (2010) Mechanical and thermal properties. Dielectric polymer 
nanocomposites. Springer, US, Boston, MA, pp 163–196 
37. Affdl JCH, Kardos JL (1976) The Halpin-Tsai equations: a review. Polym Eng Sci 16:344–352 
38. Halpin JC, Pagano NJ (1969) The laminate approximation for randomly oriented ﬁbrous 
composites. J Compos Mater 3:720–724 
39. Radu ER, Panaitescu DM, Andrei L et al (2021) Properties of polysiloxane/nanosilica 
nanodielectrics for wearable electronic devices. Nanomaterials 12:95 
40. Liu L, Barber AH, Nuriel S et al (2005) Mechanical properties of functionalized single-walled 
carbon-nanotube/poly(vinyl alcohol) nanocomposites. Adv Funct Mater 15:975–980 
41. Liu H, Brinson LC (2008) Reinforcing efﬁciency of nanoparticles: a simple comparison for 
polymer nanocomposites. Compos Sci Technol 68(6):1502–1512. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compscitech.2007.10.033 
42. Podsiadlo P, Kaushik AK, Arruda EM et al (2007) Ultrastrong and stiff layered polymer 
nanocomposites. Science (1979) 318:80–83 
43. Ramanathan T, Liu H, Brinson LC (2005) Functionalized SWNT/polymer nanocomposites for 
dramatic property improvement. J Polym Sci B Polym Phys 43:2269–2279 
44. Liu W, Hoa S, Pugh M (2005) Fracture toughness and water uptake of high-performance epoxy/ 
nanoclay nanocomposites. Compos Sci Technol 65:2364–2373 
45. Roy N, Bhowmick AK (2012) Novel in situ silica/polydimethylsiloxane nanocomposites: facile 
one-pot synthesis and characterization. Rubber Chem Technol 85:92–107 
46. Chiulan I, Panaitescu DM, Radu E-R et al (2020) Comprehensive characterization of silica-
modiﬁed silicon rubbers. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 101:103427 
47. Roy M, Nelson JK, MacCrone RK et al (2005) Polymer nanocomposite dielectrics—the role 
of the interface. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 12:629–643

9
Physical and Chemical Properties of Inorganic-Polymer …
267
48. Tanaka T, Kozako M, Fuse N et al (2005) Proposal of a multi-core model for polymer 
nanocomposite dielectrics. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 12:669–681 
49. Frechette MF, Trudeau ML, Alamdari HD et al (2004) Introductory remarks on nanodielectrics. 
IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 11:808–818 
50. Ajayan PM, Schadler LS, Braun PV (2003) Nanocomposite science and technology 
51. Lewis TJ (1994) Nanometric dielectrics. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 1:812–825 
52. Liu S, Hua T, Luo X et al (2015) A novel approach to improving the quality of chitosan blended 
yarns using static theory. Text Res J 85:1022–1034 
53. Tanaka T (2005) Dielectric nanocomposites with insulating properties. IEEE Trans Dielectr 
Electr Insul 12:914–928 
54. Chai R, Lian H, Yang P et al (2009) In situ preparation and luminescent properties of 
LaPO4:Ce3+, Tb3+ nanoparticles and transparent LaPO4:Ce3+, Tb3+/PMMA nanocomposite. 
J Colloid Interface Sci 336:46–50 
55. Li AD, Liu WC (2010) Optical properties of ferroelectric nanocrystal/polymer composites, In: 
Physical properties and applications of polymer nanocomposites. Elsevier, pp 108–158 
56. Sarwar MI, Zulﬁqar S, Ahmad Z (2008) Polyamide–silica nanocomposites: mechanical, 
morphological and thermomechanical investigations. Polym Int 57:292–296 
57. Chen D, Chen F, Hu X et al (2015) Thermal stability, mechanical and optical properties of 
novel addition cured PDMS composites with nano-silica sol and MQ silicone resin. Compos 
Sci Technol 117:307–314 
58. Zhang L, Zhou Y, Tian J et al (2014) Experiment and simulation of space charge suppression 
in LDPE/MgO nanocomposite under external DC electric ﬁeld. J Electrostat 72:252–260 
59. Zhou Y, Hu J, Dang B et al (2017) Effect of different nanoparticles on tuning electrical properties 
of polypropylene nanocomposites. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 24:1380–1389 
60. Carpi F, Bauer S, De RD (2010) Stretching dielectric elastomer performance. Science (1979) 
330:1759–1761 
61. McKay TG, O’Brien BM, Calius EP et al (2011) Soft generators using dielectric elastomers. 
Appl Phys Lett 98:142903 
62. Molberg M, Crespy D, Rupper P et al (2010) High breakdown ﬁeld dielectric elastomer 
actuators using encapsulated polyaniline as high dielectric constant ﬁller. Adv Funct Mater 
20:3280–3291 
63. Dang Z-M, Zheng M-S, and Zha J-W (2016) 1D/2D carbon nanomaterial-polymer dielectric 
composites with high permittivity for power energy storage applications. Small 12:1688–1701 
64. Guo Y, Liu L, Liu Y et al (2021) Review of dielectric elastomer actuators and their applications 
in soft robots. Adv Intell Syst 3:2000282 
65. Chen Q, Shen Y, Zhang S et al (2015) Polymer-based dielectrics with high energy storage 
density. Annu Rev Mater Res 45:433–458 
66. Zhao Y, Yin LJ, Zhong SL et al (2020) Review of dielectric elastomers for actuators, generators 
and sensors. Iet Nanodielectrics 3(4):99–106 
67. Zha J-W, Zheng M-S, Fan B-H et al (2021) Polymer-based dielectrics with high permittivity 
for electric energy storage: a review. Nano Energy 89:106438 
68. McKay T, O’Brien B, Calius E et al (2010) Self-priming dielectric elastomer generators. Smart 
Mater Struct 19:055025 
69. Rabufﬁ M, Picci G (2002) Status quo and future prospects for metallized polypropylene energy 
storage capacitors. IEEE Trans Plasma Sci 30(5):1939–1942 
70. Yang Z, Yue D, Yao Y et al (2022) Energy storage application of all-organic polymer dielectrics: 
a review. Polymers (Basel) 14:1160 
71. Zhu L, Wang Q (2012) Novel ferroelectric polymers for high energy density and low loss 
dielectrics. Macromolecules 45:2937–2954 
72. Barshaw EJ, White J, Chait MJ et al (2007) High energy density (HED) biaxially-oriented 
poly-propylene (BOPP) capacitors for pulse power applications. IEEE Trans Magn 43:223–225 
73. Chung TM (2012) Functionalization of polypropylene with high dielectric properties: appli-
cations in electric energy storage. Green Sustain Chem 2(02):29

268
K. P. S. Babu et al.
74. Hardy CG, Islam MdS, Gonzalez-Delozier D et al (2012) Oligoaniline-containing supramolec-
ular block copolymer nanodielectric materials. Macromol Rapid Commun 33:791–797 
75. Yang K, Huang X, He J et al (2015) Strawberry-like core-shell Ag@Polydopamine@BaTiO3 
hybrid nanoparticles for high-k polymer nanocomposites with high energy density and low 
dielectric loss. Adv Mater Interfaces 2:1500361 
76. Luo S, Shen Y, Yu S et al (2017) Construction of a 3D-BaTiO 3 network leading to signiﬁcantly 
enhanced dielectric permittivity and energy storage density of polymer composites. Energy 
Environ Sci 10:137–144 
77. Zhong S, Dang Z, Zhou W et al (2018) Past and future on nanodielectrics. IET Nanodielectrics 
1:41–47 
78. Xiao-hong Z, Jun-guo G, Jin-mei Z, et al Characteristics of electrical breakdown and partial 
discharge of polyethylene/montmorillonite nano-composites 
79. Tanaka T, Bulinski A, Castellon J et al (2011) Dielectric properties of XLPE/Sio2 nanocom-
posites based on CIGRE WG D1.24 cooperative test results. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 
:1482–1517 
80. Iizuka T, Uchida K, Tanaka T (2011) Voltage endurance characteristics of epoxy/silica 
nanocomposites. IEEJ Trans Fundamentals Mater 94:65–73 
81. Pradhan M, Greijer H, Eriksson G et al (2016) Functional behaviors of electric ﬁeld grading 
composite materials. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 23:768–778 
82. Onneby C, Martensson E, Gafvert U et al (2001) Electrical properties of ﬁeld grading materials 
inﬂuenced by the silicon carbide grain size, In: ICSD’01. Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE 7th 
international conference on solid dielectrics (Cat. No.01CH37117). IEEE, pp 43–45 
83. Cherney EA (2005) Silicone rubber dielectrics modiﬁed by inorganic ﬁllers for outdoor high 
voltage insulation applications, pp 1108–1115

Chapter 10 
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based 
Polymeric Composites for Energy 
Storage Devices 
Debajani Tripathy, Ankita Subhrasmita Gadtya, Bibhuti B. Sahu, 
and Srikanta Moharana 
Abstract Graphene is a promising nanocarbon material with exceptional features 
such as a large surface area and outstanding electrical and thermal properties. It has 
the potential to be a new creation of reinforcing material for polymer composites 
owing to its low mass density, large speciﬁc surface area, excellent compatibility, the 
inexpensive cost to create compared to carbon nanotubes, and attractive ﬂexibility. 
The several approaches for synthesizing graphene and distributing it in polymer 
matrices are explored. This chapter focuses on a summary of the surface alterna-
tion of graphene with various synthetic techniques and the preparation and proper-
ties of graphene-based different polymer nanocomposites. This chapter provides a 
broad overview of the nanocomposite synthesis, properties, and ﬁnally prospective 
application of polymer-graphene nanocomposites in various energy storage sectors. 
Keywords Graphene · Graphene surface alternation · Polymer composites ·
Energy storage 
10.1 
Introduction 
Nanoscience is a new ﬁeld that is growing very quickly right now. It can be bene-
ﬁcial to several different sectors, including computing, sensors, biology, and tech-
nology, among others. Nanoparticles of different sizes, shapes, and properties have 
been found, which has led to a lot of interesting progress in this ﬁeld. Researchers 
have found that nanoscale ﬁllers in polymer nanocomposite composites make them
D. Tripathy · A. S. Gadtya · S. Moharana envelope symbol
Department of Chemistry, School of Applied Sciences, Centurion University of Technology and 
Management, R.Sitapur, Paralakhemundi, Odisha 761211, India 
e-mail: srikantanit@gmail.com; srikanta.moharana@cutm.ac.in 
B. B. Sahu 
Basic Science and Humanities Department, Nalanda Institute of Technology (NIT), Bhubaneswar, 
Odisha 751024, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_10 
269

270
D. Tripathy et al.
better at mechanical, electrical, thermal, and optical performances [1–3]. There are 
various types of multifunctional nanocomposite materials are made with the use 
of nanoﬁllers like carbon nanotubes, nano-clay, graphene, and metal or ceramic 
nanoparticles. Recent years have seen extensive research into conductive nanoﬁllers-
reinforced polymer composites due to their exceptional multifunctional capabili-
ties when compared to those of traditional conductive polymer composites [4–7]. 
However, with the incorporation of electrically conductive nanoparticles into non-
conducting polymers, electron conduction is obtained [8]. Antistatic materials, elec-
tromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding, sensors, and conductors are just a few of 
the many uses for conducting polymer composites, which are advantageous over 
intrinsic conducting polymers due to their ease of production, cost-effectiveness, 
and adaptability in electrical characteristics. Because of the low ﬁller levels possible 
with these conductive ﬁllers, the composites either keep or improve the electrical 
and mechanical recital of the matrix. Thus, the composite system with nanomaterial 
reinforcements ought to have enhanced thermal conductivity [9–11]. The various 
carbon-based allotropes including carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene-based 
materials are used to generate superior-performing electrically directing composites 
[12]. These composites are among the most promising nanoﬁller materials owing to 
their outstanding mechanical and thermal capabilities, remarkable chemical inert-
ness, and the ability to have their electrical properties modiﬁed [13]. There are 
different parameters including complex processing, poor surface chemistry control, 
weak interfacial contact with the polymeric matrix, and agglomeration are some of 
the CNT’s drawbacks [14]. The high cost of producing carbon nanotubes (CNTs) is 
another issue with their use as nanoﬁllers [15]. Thus, it is difﬁcult to mass-produce 
useful composite materials based on CNTs. When carbon ﬁbers will not cut it and 
nanotubes are out of reach due to cost, where does a frugal materials scientist turn 
for a workable conductive composite? [16]. Graphene is the name of the material 
in the issue, and it exists exclusively in a two-dimensional form. Graphene-based 
materials have recently emerged as a viable choice for application in state-of-the-art 
high-performance nanocomposites [12]. 
The growing number of research papers on graphene shows that academics and 
businesses are becoming more interested in this material. Over the past few times, 
the number of graphene patents has steadily grown. These patents have been ﬁled 
for a wide range of uses, such as characterization, polymer composites, transparent 
displays, transistors, capacitors, solar cells, biosensors, conductive inks, windows, 
saturable absorbers, and photodetectors [17]. The total number of newly found 
fullerenes climbed substantially over the decade from 2005 to 2014. Yet, graphene 
is the most recently formed nanocarbon and also shows the greatest rate of growth. 
Although just a few hundred papers were published on graphene in its ﬁrst three years, 
interest in the material grew rapidly. Graphene studies have increased rapidly in popu-
larity. As compared to articles on carbon nanotubes (CNTs), those on graphene were 
on par in 2013, but in 2014, they substantially exceeded their CNT counterparts. 
In terms of where nanocarbon research has been published, the United States and 
China stand out as the most proliﬁc authors, responsible for well over half of all such 
studies. This is especially true when it comes to the two hottest nanomaterials of

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
271
the moment, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and graphene [18]. Signiﬁcant progress in 
the investigation of graphene polymer nanocomposites is being driven by the revo-
lutionary improvement in polymer properties, such as mechanical, electrical, and 
thermal conductivity, and chemical, optical, and gas impermeability at a low-level 
concentration of ﬁller [19]. There are numerous excellent studies based on unaltered 
graphene-reinforced polymer nanocomposites available. Moreover, surface function-
alization plays an important impact in the enhancement of the electrical and mechan-
ical characteristics of the polymer nanocomposite. This typical chapter focuses on 
graphene and its properties, as well as its production process. The methods utilized 
to covalently and non-covalently change surfaces are analyzed in depth and brought 
up to date in this work. We conclude with a discussion of the varied electronic 
uses for graphene-based polymer nanocomposites and the consequence that surface 
functionalization has on the electrical conductivity of these materials. 
10.2 
Graphene-Based Two-Dimensional Nanostructured 
Materials 
Graphene is a two-dimensional carbon allotrope with a thickness of just one atom. It 
is composed of a honeycomb arrangement of hexagonal crystalline structure with sp2 
carbon atoms in a conjugated system. Although graphene was theoretically conceived 
in the 1940s, it lacked the thermodynamic stability required for reliable operation 
in everyday environments [20–22]. In a 2004 tabletop experiment [21], Geim and 
colleagues at Manchester University successfully distinguished individual graphene 
layers. The thinnest known substance has been discovered thanks to this ground-
breaking discovery, which has opened up new avenues of investigation in the domains 
of physics, chemistry, biology, and materials science [22, 23]. Graphene has a low 
coefﬁcient of thermal expansion (CTE), thermal conductivity, young’s modulus (1 
TPa), and superior optical transmittance along with other desirable characteristics 
[20]. This graphene-based material shows more perspective than other nanostructured 
carbon allotropes, like 0D fullerenes and 1D nanotubes. 
10.2.1 
Preparation of Graphene-Based Materials 
There are two different techniques for synthesizing graphene: either from the top-
down (a) or from the bottom-up (b) approach. Top-down methods that aim to lessen 
the van der Waals contacts between graphene layers include mechanical (Scotch 
tape), chemical (solution-based exfoliation, graphite oxide exfoliation or reduction), 
and electrochemical (oxidation or reduction and exfoliation) (as shown in Fig. 10.1) 
[24]. On the other hand, graphene is made via bottom-up techniques, which entail the 
assembly of minuscule molecular building blocks into sole or many-layered graphene

272
D. Tripathy et al.
assemblies through catalytic (e.g., CVD), thermal (e.g., SiC breakdown), or chemical 
(e.g., organic synthesizing) processes [25]. Graphene is a 2D carbon allotrope, where 
every single carbon atom connects with every other carbon atom via sp2. Carbon 
atoms arrange themselves in honeycomb crystal symmetry, with a bond length of just 
0.141 nm. A typical density of graphene is 0.77 g/cm3. Graphene’s surface area per 
unit mass is thought to be around 2600 m2/gm2 [20, 26]. Graphene has amazing elec-
trical, thermal, mechanical, electronic, and optical characteristics, making it the most 
appealing nanomaterial today. However, it is the reediest and toughest composite 
ever examined. Tensile strength tests have shown that graphene is comparable to 
or even exceeds that of carbon nanotubes (CNT), and signiﬁcantly exceeds that of 
steel, Kevlar, and additional polymers [27]. To determine the modulus of elasticity 
of single-layered graphene sheets created by chemically reducing graphene oxide, 
academic and industrial researchers used the tip of an atomic force microscope to 
make a small indentation in the core of a modiﬁed sheet of graphene. Moreover, an 
elastic modulus (1TPa) and an inherent strength (130 GPa) have also been calculated 
for a defect-free monolayer graphene sheet [28, 29]. However, the thermal conduc-
tivity of graphene [5000 W/(m3K)] by its electrical conductivity is close to 6000 S/ 
cm [30, 31]. Due to its semi-metallic nature, graphene exhibits several fascinating 
electrical characteristics. The extraordinary thermodynamic and electrical conduc-
tivity of graphene is owing to its exceptionally elevated charge carrier mobility (10 
cm2V s−1) [32]. The edge states and any adsorbed or intercalated species have a 
signiﬁcant impact on graphene’s magnetic properties [33, 34]. 
Fig. 10.1 Schematic illustration for preparation of materials based on graphene

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
273
10.2.2 
Surface Alternation of Graphene 
Graphene-based materials tend to stick together more in a polymer matrix, which 
makes them less friendly to large molecules like polymeric chains [35]. To modify 
their physiochemical characteristics, graphene and its derivatives are often chem-
ically functionalized. The potential beneﬁts of graphene sheets are immense, but 
only if the material can be made operational and widely disseminated. Covalent 
functionalization involves the formation of chemical bonds, while non-covalent 
functionalization relies only on van der Waals forces. 
(a) Covalent Functionalization 
Covalent superﬁcial alteration of graphene causes hybridization of one or additional 
sp2 carbon atoms of the aromatic ediﬁce, leading to forfeiture of electronic conju-
gation and a strain in the plane. As the hybridization has changed, the carbon atoms 
(sp2hybridized) which are ordinarily in a ﬂat plane must now adopt the sp3 tetrahedral 
geometry. Speciﬁcally, this is because carbon atoms at the edge of a molecule are 
more likely to undergo covalent addition processes [36]. Graphene’s dispersibility 
in organic solvents and water can be improved by covalent organic functionaliza-
tion, and its characteristics can be combined with those of extra-functional materials 
like chromophores or polymers [37]. Functionalization can transpire on the inter-
face, the boundaries, and the defects of materials. The chemical techniques used to 
create graphene are not without problems, including damage to the carbon lattice, 
structural errors, and the random adsorption of solvent molecules [38, 39]. There 
are various classes of covalent functionalization have been reported in recent times, 
which include free radical adding, atomic radical addition, nucleophilic addition, 
cycloaddition, and electrophilic substitution. 
(i) Cycloaddition Reactions 
In cycloaddition reactions, bond breaking and bond creating occur simultaneously 
deprived of the creation of anions or cations as intermediates, resulting in a cyclical 
motion of electrons. The graphene molecule has undergone cycloadditions [2 + 1], 
[2 + 2], [3 + 2], and [4 + 2]. The most well-known kind of cycloaddition is the 1,3-
dipolar and [3 + 2] cycloaddition reaction [40, 41]. Other cycloaddition reactions 
including (i) [2 + 1] cycloaddition similar to the Bingel reaction, interactions with 
nitrenes and leading to the creation of cyclopropane or aziridine adducts [42], (ii) [2 
+ 2] cycloaddition with an aryne or benzyne [43] and (iii) [4 + 2] cycloaddition are 
two ways to create a cycle with four carbon atoms. An electron-rich diene and an 
electron-poor dienophile can undergo a cycloaddition via the Diels–Alder mechanism 
(electron-deﬁcient species) [44]. Graphene has a wide variety of potential uses owing 
to its capability of functioning as either the diene or dienophile in the Diels–Alder 
process. Graphene has the potential to induce unanticipated consequences, and it 
is notoriously difﬁcult to regulate surface modiﬁcations. Nitrides and carbenes, in 
particular, are capable of reacting with solvents as well as one another [45].

274
D. Tripathy et al.
(ii) Free radical Reactions 
Covalent bonds are formed between the aromatic structure of graphene and free 
radicals, which are extremely reactive organic molecules. These modiﬁcations have 
been accomplished through thermodynamic or photochemical processes. Though, 
by using superior-energy reactants, unwanted side reactions or lack of homogeneity 
might occur in the functionalization reaction [46]. The use of aryl diazonium salts 
in radical addition reactions is widespread. Peroxide addition, Bergman cycliza-
tion [47], and Kolbe electro-synthesis [48] are a few such processes. The reactivity 
of aryl diazonium salts is the subject of this subsection. Tour and his co-workers 
[49] suggested ﬁrst successfully putting aryl diazonium salts into graphene. In this 
step, nitrogen removal, the aryl diazonium ion transforms into an aryl radical. It is 
hypothesized that the radical aryl moiety contributes an electron to the sp2-hybridized 
graphene [50]. This process, however, can generate organic radicals that are not only 
capable of covalently reacting with graphene but also of self-polymerizing [51]. The 
amount of graphene sheets has a signiﬁcant impact on this reaction. Moreover, the 
bi or multilayer graphene, the reactivity of a solitary graphene slip is found to be 10 
times higher, as reported by Strano and his co-workers [52]. 
(iii) Nucleophilic Reactions 
Graphene is the material of choice when it comes to making a nucleophilic addi-
tion that accepts electrons. The chemical reaction between graphene and poly-
9,9'-dihexyﬂuorene carbazole Nitrogen anions are created on carbazole when it 
is subjected to the action of a base, which results in the formation of the anionic 
moiety. Once the two substances react with one another, a covalent connection is 
created between the nitrogen anion and the surface of the graphene [53, 54]. 
(iv) Reaction with atomic Radii 
By using hydrogen, ﬂuorine, and oxygen from the periodic table instead of organic 
free radicals, the number of unwanted byproducts is kept to a minimum. As a result, 
the functionalized graphene becomes even as well as consistent. Hydrogenation 
makes it facile to procedure the secondary C-H bonding because it changes the 
shape of the lattice when the ﬁrst hydrogen atom is added. Graphene in its fully 
hydrogenated form is known as graphene. Graphene can be hydrogenated when 
subjected to hydrogen-based plasmas [54]. When you ﬂuorinate graphene, you make 
a single bond between ﬂuorine and carbon, which is similar to hydrogenation but 
much stronger. There is a lot of functionalization after ﬂuorination, much like there 
is after hydrogenation [55]. It has been hypothesized that ﬂuorographene will act 
as an insulator. Typically, one of three techniques is used: The three methods for 
exfoliating bulk graphite ﬂuoride are: (i) by exposing it to XeF2 [56], (ii) by etching 
it with a ﬂuorinated reagent [57], and (iii) by using a liquid phase. 
(v) Electrophilic Reactions 
Graphene’s abundance of free electrons makes it amenable to this class of processes. 
The Friedel–Crafts acylation [58] and the hydrogen–lithium exchange are two types

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
275
of substitution processes. Metal-functionalized aromatics are more reactive than their 
simpler counterparts. Before the hydrogen–lithium exchange, BuLi deprotonates and 
carbometallizes graphene. An electrophile then interacts with the lithium graphene 
derivative. The lithium graphene derivative undergoes an instantaneous reaction upon 
electrophile addition, leading to the conception of covalent bonding [59]. 
(b) Noncovalent functionalization 
Non-covalent interactions, such as hydrophobic, van der Waals, and electrostatic 
interactions, can cause molecules to stick to the surface of graphene [60]. This 
method of functionalization is noteworthy because it allows molecules to be immo-
bilized straightforwardly and reversibly without disrupting the electrical network 
[61]. Functionalized non-covalent is essential for the immobilization of proteins, 
enzymes, medicines, and DNA, particularly in the background of devices, because 
even a small change in the electrical properties of the system could result in an entire 
alteration in the structure and characteristics of the system [62, 63]. There has been 
extensive research into complexes based on graphene, including interactions between 
non-polar gases and H+, cations, and anions. Three parts are responsible for its attrac-
tive strength: electrostatic, dispersive, and inductive interactions. To make sodium 
cholate, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, polyvinylpyrrolidone, triphenylene, and 
pyrene derivatives are only some of the surfactants that may be employed in an exfo-
liation approach to creating functionalized graphene from graphite without the use of 
covalent bonds [64]. On the other hand, along with the single-layer variety, a sizeable 
amount of few-layered graphene or scattered graphite is likewise produced. Coronene 
carboxylate produces layers around 100 nm thick [65, 66]. For instance, Bai and his 
co-workers have developed larger graphene ﬂakes that can be manufactured using 
perylene derivatives [67, 68]. 
10.3 
Synthesis Process of Graphene-Based Polymer 
Composites 
Graphene-based materials have high strength and high electrical and thermal conduc-
tivity making them a potential contender for usage in an extensive range of commer-
cial products, like polymer composites, conductive coatings, fuel cell batteries, and 
ultra-capacitors. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD), exfoliation, liquid-phase exfoli-
ation, etc., are all examples of top-down ways to make graphene, which can be further 
divided into bottom-up ways. Owing to their outstanding material characteristics, 
including yield métier, robustness, electrical and thermal conductivity, and optical 
properties, polymer nanocomposites (PNC) research has advanced greatly over the 
last decade, and their applications have grown substantially as a result [69–73]. 
Graphene possesses excellent dimensional stability, high thermal stability, high gas 
impermeability, elevated strength and elastic modulus, and high electrical and thermal 
conductivity [72]. Adding graphene to polymers at a tiny volume percentage may 
dramatically enhance their characteristics. Furthermore, graphene may be employed

276
D. Tripathy et al.
at a lower volume percentage since it has a better surface-to-volume ratio than 
carbon nanotubes [73]. It may enhance a wide variety of polymer matrix charac-
teristics. As an example, graphene-based nanocomposites are in high demand for 
use in photovoltaic devices like solar cells because of their low resistivity and high 
carrier mobility, and because (i) used in lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) such as power 
density, energy density, and speed of charging in hydrogen fuel cells, (ii) they are 
used in thermoelectric materials, (iii) used in photovoltaic devices including solar 
cells owing to their low resistivity and high carrier mobility, and (iv) used as an 
electrode to raise the electro-catalytic performances [71]. 
One deﬁnition of nanocomposite is a material, which is having any one dimension 
in the nanoscale. It has made strides in the areas of light, electricity, and magnetism 
and has desirable features like thermal stability and mechanical strength. Polymer, 
metal, or ceramic matrices are used to create nanocomposites, which are then ﬁlled 
with nanoparticles (graphene, nanotubes, and clays) [74]. The material’s mechanical, 
thermal, and electrical characteristics are all improved by adding ﬁllers. Polymeric 
nanocomposites are the most adaptable of all nanomaterials, ﬁnding use in several 
ﬁelds such as energy, electronics, health care, and more [71, 72]. Micro-composites, 
intercalated nanocomposites, and exfoliated nanocomposites are the three main cate-
gories of polymer composites based on the distribution of nanosized layers. In the 
micro-composites’ structure, the graphene sheets are disseminated as particles inside 
the polymer matrix, yet the graphene platelets themselves are unharmed [75]. When 
distinct polymer chains are inserted between graphene layers, this creates an intro-
duced structure. The exfoliated amalgams’ graphene ﬁlms are evenly distributed 
throughout the polymer backbone. Since exfoliation maximizes the surface area 
of contact between the polymer and the ﬁller, it is the preferred morphology for 
nanocomposites. This leads to improved bonding and superior mechanical charac-
teristics [76]. Graphene nanocomposites’ characteristics are affected by a number 
of factors, including the ﬁller’s chemical compatibility with the matrix, the ﬁller’s 
volume fraction, and processing conditions, including dispersion and exfoliation. 
For optimal performance, it is necessary to use suitable manufacturing techniques. 
Additionally, the recital eminence of nanomaterials is closely correlated with the rate 
of dispersity. In-situ polymerization, melt intercalation, and exfoliation adsorption 
are the three main ways to create polymer nanocomposites [75–77]. 
Heat or radiation can be used to start polymerization in place by mixing adapted 
graphene through a monomer or pre-polymer to make a steady chemical bonding 
and then adding the opposite initiator. It improves stress transfer by making sure that 
the ﬁller particles are evenly spread throughout the polymer milieu and by swelling 
the contact between the ﬁller and polymer in the ﬁnished composite [46]. These are 
the primary beneﬁts of in-situ polymerization: (a) It is easier to control the ﬁller’s 
distribution and interaction with the polymer’s surface. (b) High-ﬁlled composites 
may be cast-off as a master batch and melt-mixed with other polymers to generate 
comparable composites, and (c) they might be utilized to manufacture high-ﬁll and 
ultra-superior relative molecular mass nanocomposites. As it does not involve using 
lots of organic solvents, it is better for the planet than solution intercalation [46, 
78]. However, graphene-based polymer nanocomposites may have their mechanical,

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
277
electrical, and thermal characteristics vastly improved by in-situ polymerization. By 
reacting with the polymer, the functionalized graphene forms a chemical connection 
at the interface that is both robust and long-lasting. The surface of graphene oxide is 
abundant in oxygen-containing functional groups, so polymers are typically selected 
whose monomers or pre-polymers can form stable chemical bonds with these oxygen-
containing functional groups, like polyimide, polyurethane, epoxy resin, polyaniline, 
and polyvinyl alcohol. Polyaniline (PANI) and graphene oxide (GO) ﬁlms remained 
made via in-situ polymerization by Zhu and his co-workers [79]. With impressive 
water dispersibility qualities and a beneﬁcial synergistic impact on anti-corrosion 
performance, the produced PANI-GO nanocomposite material impressed. In addi-
tion, the coating layer’s ability to prevent water penetration increases, which may 
serve as a kind of electro-active defense. Zhu et al. [80] have cast-off an in-situ poly-
merization method to manufacture a GO-polypyrrole (PPy) nanocomposite ﬂick. 
Waterborne epoxy (WEP) coatings were shown to be more corrosion-resistant after 
being coated with this layer. Passivation by conductive PPy and the impermeable 
property of graphene oxide sheets are both present in the GO-PPy nanocomposites 
that were made. As the ﬁrst step of in-situ inter-calative polymerization, graphene 
or altered graphene is stretched in the liquid monomer. Typically, polymerization 
instigates with the addition of an appropriate originator, followed by the application 
of heat or radiation [81, 82]. The various composites including polystyrene (PS)– 
graphene [83], polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)-based expanded graphite (EG) 
[84], polystyrene sulfonate (PSS), polyimide (PI), and polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET)-based layer double hydroxide (LDH) [85–87] have been successfully reported 
by using this technique. 
In this chapter, we have reported many strategies used in the literature to produce 
graphene and characterize its properties. Camphor, graphitic oxide, nanodiamonds, 
and silicon carbide are only a few of the precursors that have been inspected aimed 
at their possible usage in the production of graphene. Graphene aqueous disper-
sals may be manufactured using these methods. A new route for producing graphene 
using the hydrothermal method, cryo-milling, and lyophilization has been described. 
The exfoliation of graphene sheets into individual layers has been achieved by a 
variety of methods, including heat exfoliation and ultrasonication. In addition, the 
numerous characterization techniques used to verify the ﬁller’s nanostructure have 
been discussed. As a result of Geim and his co-worker’s (2004) successful isolation 
of graphene, many methods for its production have been uncovered [88]. Scotch tape 
was proposed as a viable option for physically exfoliating graphite to directly create 
graphene. A piece of graphite was taped together using this method. Repeated folding 
and peeling of the tape produced progressively thinner layers of graphite. Finally, 
a single sheet of carbon called graphene is created by this process. CVD, chemical 
exfoliation, carbon nanotubes (slicing), and the direct sonication of carbon sheets are 
only a few of the methods shown in the many research studies to produce graphene. 
Tkalya et al. [89] created dispersions (aqueous) of graphene by oxidation and exfo-
liation of graphite, trailed by lessening in the occurrence of a surfactant. Graphite 
oxide was manufactured using a method similar to that developed by Hummer and

278
D. Tripathy et al.
used for many years. The Sonic Vibracell VC750, which has a horn with a cylin-
drical tip, was used to exfoliate the graphene oxide (GO). The reduction procedure, 
which used hydrazine, took 72 h, and was conducted at a temperature of 120 °C. 
GO platelets were characterized via atomic force microscopy (AFM). The majority 
of the analyzed platelets had thicknesses of less than 1 nm or two or three atomic 
layers. The results conﬁrmed the efﬁcacy of sonic exfoliation and another case of 
graphene production using a more conventional hydrothermal method. Hummer’s 
method successfully produced graphite oxide, an intermediate in the manufacture 
of graphene. Graphite oxide went through a series of chemical reactions to become 
GO. Sonicating an uneven mixture of GO and water, then reducing it with hydrazine 
hydrate, produced reduced GO. There are two techniques were employed to inves-
tigate the structure of graphene: XRD and FTIR spectroscopy. Reducing GO led to 
the formation of graphene (GR) sheets, as revealed by the presence of characteristic 
FTIR signals indicating the formation of the sp2 carbon structure [90]. Pure graphite 
oxide was synthesized from natural ﬂake graphite powder using Hummer’s method. 
Boiling tetra-ethylene glycol (TEG) was used to dissolve the resultant graphite oxide. 
Microwave-assisted solvothermal (MW-ST) reduction was utilized at 300˚C to 
lessen the yellowish-brown colloidal suspension. Indicating that graphite oxide was 
successfully reduced to graphene nanosheets (GNS) and the solution generated 
during the reduction process had a dark black hue [91]. X-ray photoelectron spec-
troscopy (XPS) measurements showed that GO had a higher oxygen concentration 
than graphene did, at 30.2% against 8.3%. These ﬁndings agreed with those obtained 
using the hydrazine reduction technique [92, 93]. To add insult to injury, the process 
was conducted in an alkaline medium at a relatively low temperature of around 
180 °C. The process caused a quick change in color from yellow to brown then 
black which indicates that the −ve charged oxygen functional groups of graphite 
oxide were swiftly deoxygenated. In order to make graphite oxide, a variant of 
Hummer’s method was utilized. Ultrasonic exfoliation was used to create GO. To 
produce aqueous graphene dispersion, water, hydrazine, and ammonia solutions were 
mixed chemically together. SEM and TEM pictures were used to examine the micro-
graph of GR sheets. They exhibited that 2D structures can be made thermodynami-
cally stable by bending, and they did it by scrolling and entwining GR sheets. The 
success of the successive exfoliation and reduction of graphite to create graphene 
is shown here. According to the XRD form, the inter-planar spacing of graphene 
(0.36 nm) is greater than that of graphite (0.34 nm) [94]. It has been shown that the 
random orientation (turbostratic) of the GR sheets caused by exfoliation is related to 
the size of the inter-planar spacing and the resulting widening trend [95]. The results 
of X-ray diffraction (XRD) [96] on graphene samples made this way are the same 
as those made by chemical reduction. GNS was made by applying heat exfoliation 
and chemical reduction to graphite oxide made using the Staudenmaier process [97]. 
McAllister et al. [98] have previously shown that a temperature of roughly 1050 °C 
is enough for thermal exfoliation and an in-situ decrease in GO during this method. 
The XRD peaks of GO, pure graphite, and graphene were compared to prove that 
graphene was synthesized. Ripples in the graphene layer plane were perceived in 
the TEM image, a signature of the material due to its thermal variability [99]. GO

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
279
was synthesized from graphite by a variation of Hummer’s method. Using hydrazine 
hydrate as a reductant, graphene was manufactured out of GO [100]. To create the 
exfoliated GO nanosheets, graphene oxide was either subjected to a solvent exfolia-
tion or a heat exfoliation method. The hydrophilicity of graphite oxide makes solvent 
exfoliation possible, since water molecules may be introduced between the stacked 
layers. Mechanical exfoliation, accomplished by ultrasonication or constant stirring, 
was used to fabricate GO sheets. The resulting graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets were 
reduced using reducing chemicals like hydrazine hydrate to create reduced graphene 
oxide (RGO) or graphene [101]. For instance, Patole and his co-workers [102] have  
suggested the process of creating thermally expanded graphene (EG) from expand-
able graphite, as seen in Fig. 10.2. The procedure was supported in a chemical vapor 
deposition apparatus. The size, composition, and structure of EG and GR have been 
investigated using X-ray diffraction, SEM, and TEM. 
In the SEM micrographs, there are several graphene layers were seen in the EG. 
After being subjected to greater temperatures, the EG samples were shown to have a 
reduced number of GR layers. Raman spectroscopy ﬁndings reveal that graphene has 
both G and 2D bands. Most graphene 2D bands have a prominent peak at roughly 
2670 cm−1 [103]. When graphene sheet thickness declines, so does the intensity 
of the D band. Raman spectroscopy’s G, D, and 2D bands provide striking visual 
representations of the graphene structure’s sp2 carbon atoms. We adapted Hummer’s 
method, using EG as a starting point. Lyophilization and freeze-drying were used 
to create GNS. Many researchers have employed lyophilization procedures to create
Fig. 10.2 Graphene sheets are gradually modiﬁed using PS nanoparticles [102]. Adapted with 
permission from Ref. [102] Copyright (2010) (Elsevier) 

280
D. Tripathy et al.
cellulose nano-whiskers. These nano-whisker powders may be easily redistributed in 
organic environments due to their low van der Waals interactions and loose packing 
[104, 105]. Using the same method, GNS powders were produced and found to 
be easily dispersed in solvents for further functionalization. It was found that the 
resulting GNS granules in this situation were airy and light [106–109]. Core-level-
shifts X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis conﬁrmed that graphite oxide and 
GNS had been decreased. The GNS XRD pattern did not exhibit any peaks, in 
contrast to graphite oxide’s pattern, which included a signiﬁcant peak at 12 °C. With 
the use of AFM measurements, it was found that the GNS had fully exfoliated [110]. 
Chaturvedi et al. [111] used a powerful oxidizing chemical to treat graphite powder 
before ultrasonic processing in a volatile solvent. Thermal shockwave therapy was 
used to lessen according to the FTIR spectral task of GR, which exhibited a peak at 
1628 cm−1, consistent with the unoxidized graphite realms, GR was not reduced to 
zero after being subjected to thermal shock treatment. Analogous ﬁndings were also 
reported by Che et al. [112]. Mechanical exfoliation of graphite on an SU-8 exterior 
yielded graphene with tailor-made atomic layer thicknesses and orientations. Raman 
spectroscopy was used to pinpoint the monolayer in graphene [113]. Graphite oxide 
was created by the response of graphite with H2SO4, HNO3, and potassium chlorate. 
For this procedure, we used a quartz tube with a rubber stopper and a sealed end. 
After a quick ﬂush by argon gas via the elastic plug, the tube was proximately heated 
to roughly 1050 °C in a conduit incinerator. To make GO, graphite was imperiled 
to an adapted Staudenmaier procedure. The resultant graphite oxide was exfoliated 
into GO nanosheets using ultrasonics. The resulting nanosheets were then treated 
with ammonia and glucose in the appropriate proportions, therefore lowering GO. 
Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy (UV–vis) was measured to conﬁrm the lowering of 
GO with glucose. The disappearance of the C 1/4 O peak indicates a decrease in GO. 
Once GO was reduced, the conjugated C–C bond could once again exist, and this 
change inﬂuenced a redistribution of the 14-C bond’s peak. According to Liu et al. 
[114], RGO was synthesized from GO. 
In this case, hydrazine monohydrate was included in the last stages of preparation 
for the RGO-polyaniline (PANI) nanomaterial. GO production has been improved 
by revising Hummer’s methodology [115]. With this method, NaNO3 was removed, 
while KMnO4 concentration was raised, a change inspired by Hummer’s method. 
This reaction, which produced graphite oxide, was agreed out using a solution of 
sulfuric acid and hydrogen phosphate. The graphite oxide produced by this process 
was more oxidized than that produced by Hummer’s technique. Thermal reduction 
at 200 °C for 30 min was used to transform the GO into RGO. The width of the RGO 
sheets was found to be 1.5 nm using AFM. Additionally, 2D thin sheets of RGO 
could be seen in SEM images [116]. Zeng et al. [117, 118] reported the synthesis 
of graphite oxide using a variation of Hummer’s technique. Resin-grafted graphite 
oxide (RGO) was made by further sonicating graphite oxide and then reducing it 
with hydrazine monohydrate. 
There was a signiﬁcant difference in the BET surface area between camphor, 
graphite, and diamond samples. It was found that the samples could take in up to 
3% by weight of hydrogen. Graphene with a speciﬁc surface area of 156 m2 g−1 was

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
281
found to absorb just 0.4% of the hydrogen; it was subjected to in a separate study. 
In a simple test, the amount that a commercial graphite intercalation compound 
grew when it was heated was measured. The EG intercalation compound was mixed 
with ultrasonic waves in tetrahydrofuran (THF) for 60 min to help it spread out. 
Sonication resulted in the formation of GnPs with a thickness of 3.57 and 0.50 nm, 
respectively. Researchers have seen a potential trend toward using GnPs instead of 
CNTs for making polymer nanocomposite materials [119]. Table 10.1 summarizes 
the methods used to create graphene-based polymer nanocomposites as well as their 
beneﬁts and limitations. 
Table 10.1 Graphene-polymer nanocomposites: various preparative methods 
Different 
techniques 
Techniques used for the 
preparation of 
graphene-polymer 
nanocomposites 
Beneﬁts
Limitations 
Solution mixing 
technique 
Mechanical mixing, magnetic 
agitation, or large energy 
sonication is used to combine 
the graphene-solvent mixture 
with the polymer solution, 
and in the end, evaporating 
the solvent yields a composite 
Dispersed 
graphene oxide 
composites 
Eliminating solvents is a 
major problem 
In-situ 
polymerization 
technique 
By reacting monomers or 
pre-polymers with graphene 
and graphene-based 
polymeric composites can be 
made 
Consistently 
distributed 
composites with 
enhanced 
characteristics 
The viscosity of 
polymerized materials 
tends to increase during 
the process, making 
them difﬁcult to 
manipulate and reducing 
their load fraction. 
Evaporating away the 
solvent is a challenge 
Melt blending
Graphene and polymer 
mixing facilitated by elevated 
temperature 
Sustainable, 
cheap, and 
amenable to 
industrial-scale 
production 
The large shear stress 
may diminish the 
graphene aspect ratios, 
which would prohibit 
the composites from 
achieving their ideal 
minimum percolation 
threshold and good 
electrical conductivity

282
D. Tripathy et al.
10.4 
Graphene-Filled Different Polymer Composites 
Several studies on polymer nanocomposites using various nanoﬁllers have been 
published. Nonetheless, additional study into graphene-based nanocomposites for 
high-performance polymers is required. Graphene’s usefulness as a nanoﬁller is 
demonstrated through the use of a wide variety of polymeric systems. They include 
epoxy, polystyrene (PS), polyaniline (PANI), polyurethane (PU), polyvinylidene 
ﬂuoride (PVDF), Naﬁon, polycarbonate (PC), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), etc. 
Several academic and industrial researchers have been developing novel polymer-
graphene nanocomposites for a variety of applications and may beneﬁt from the 
subsequent discussion and details on graphene-based polymer nanomaterials. 
10.4.1 
Epoxy-Graphene Nanocomposites 
Epoxy composites containing graphene oxide sheets have their thermal expansion 
measured using a thermo-mechanical analyzer. The heat conductivity of the epoxy 
resin was further reduced by the addition of graphene sheets. The embellishments of 
only 1% GO improved the heat conductivity of epoxy resins as much as ﬁlling them 
with 1% SWNT. The heat conductivity of an epoxy resin encumbered with GO at a 5 
wt% was 1 W/mK, which is four-fold greater in contrast with the conductivity of raw 
epoxy resin. The values stated in the literature are strengthened by these ﬁndings. 
However, 20 wt% of GO, according to the research, might boost thermal conductivity 
to 6.44 W/mK. According to our ﬁndings, the graphene composite shows promise as 
a heat-conducting thermal interface material. Below the glass transition temperature, 
thermal extension related to experiments of graphene composites showed a similar 
inﬂuence of the SWNTs on the bulk CTEs (T g). As compared to normal epoxy resin, 
which has a CTE of around 8.2 105 C1, epoxy composites containing 5 wt% graphite 
exhibit a decrease in CTE below T g of 31.7%. The epoxy/graphene compounds have 
been fabricated on-site, and EMI shielding studies were conducted on them [120]. 
The critical phenomena of the percolation threshold in epoxy-graphene composites 
are described by the DC conductivity, 
m eq uals h left
 parenthesis c right parenthesis t left parenthesis 1 right parenthesis comma
where the parameters are interchangeable good agreement is found between 
the conductivity of polymer-graphene compounds and the percolation behavior 
perceived by Eq. (10.1). The data-ﬁtting procedure yielded a percolation threshold 
of c = 0.52 vol%. Other two-dimensional ﬁllers and an isocyanate-modiﬁed PS-
based GO nanocomposite also achieved a low percolation threshold [121]. This 
occurred because the graphene-based sheets were evenly distributed inside the 
epoxy matrix and had a high aspect ratio. When a consistent graphene-based sheet 
network was constructed conducting in nature in the sequestering epoxy matrix, the

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
283
EMI-defending efﬁcacy improved by enhancing graphene loading over the whole 
frequency assortment. However, the epoxy-based graphene compounds with a 15% 
graphene load attained the desired value (20 dB) for an EMI-defending composite. 
The results showed that polymer-graphene composite material could be used in manu-
facturing as light, operative composites to block electromagnetic radiation. Epoxy-
graphene composites have been made using in-situ polymerization, and their ability 
to block EMI is evaluated [120, 122]. Graphene loading improved EMI shielding 
performance across the board. Thus, epoxy-graphene composite materials might be 
utilized as efﬁcient, lightweight materials for protecting electronic equipment from 
electromagnetic radiation. We utilized a thermo-mechanical analyzer to determine 
the thermal expansion of epoxy composites reinforced with graphene oxide sheets 
[123]. The graphene slips were able to greatly upsurge the heat conductivity of the 
epoxy resin, which was previously quite weak. An epoxy resin ﬁlled with 5% GO 
composites has four times the heat conductivity of an unﬁlled epoxy resin [124]. Heat 
may be dissipated via the use of graphene composites and other thermal interface 
materials. 
10.4.2 
Polystyrene (PS)–Graphene Nanocomposites 
The fabrication of polystyrene (PS)-based-isocyanate-modiﬁed graphene composites 
in N, N dimethylformamide (DMF) as solvent through a solution mixing approach 
The composites were reduced with dimethyl hydrazine for 24 h at 80˚C. To precipi-
tate the composites, a DMF solution was added very slowly to a very huge capacity of 
violently stirring methanol (10:1 regarding the bulk of DMF cast-off). It seemed that 
almost all of the composites were ﬁlled with graphene sheets, despite only having a 
ﬁller loading of 2.4% vol (found in SEM images). The electrical conductivity perco-
lation threshold in PS with 0.1 vol.% GO was achieved. As graphene is so uniformly 
distributed and has such an enormously superior aspect ratio, it exhibits a percolation, 
i.e., three times less compared to that seen for any other two-dimensional ﬁller [125]. 
Thin ﬁlms loaded at around 0.15 vol.% with the composites met the antistatic criterion 
for conductivity (106 S m−1), which is rather high. The value increased signiﬁcantly 
between 0.4 and 1% of the load. The material’s electric conduction varied from 0.1 
to 1 Sm−1 at 2.5 vol. PS/GNPIL materials are developed in a manner analogous to 
the development of PS/graphene adapted with isocyanate. Compression-molded thin 
sheets were used to test the composite sample for electrical conductivity and thermal 
stability (2 mm). 
Pure PS has a conductivity of around 1014 S/m when measured using a four-probe 
system. Adding 0.38 vol.% GNPIL signiﬁcantly raised the electrical conductivity of 
the PS matrix to 5.77 S m1. In this article, the thermal stability of pure polystyrene is 
contrasted with that of the PS/GNPC8P composite material. The 2nd-step depriva-
tion temperature of the PS-GNPC8P composite was almost 50 °C higher compared to 
pure PS. These point to a robust connection among the polymer matrix and GNPC8P 
at the boundary, which might slow down the movement of polymer shackles in the

284
D. Tripathy et al.
proximity of contact which upsurge the nanocomposites’ resistance to heat. Eda 
et al. [126] used a solution mixing method to produce PS-FGS thin ﬁlms composite 
exhibit semiconducting behavior. The thin ﬁlm displayed an ambipolar ﬁeld effect. 
The composite thin ﬁlms’ 1–24 Sm−1 electrical conductivity was in close pact with 
the known standards for bulk composites. During further cooling, the conduction 
of the reedy coatings increased somewhat once the temperature had fallen to about 
50 K. Thin ﬁlms of reduced graphene oxide [128] and graphitic ﬂakes [127] exhib-
ited the same peculiar behavior. Below 50 K, electron–phonon scattering may limit 
carrier mobility. Nevertheless, the composite material shifts from n-type to p-type as 
the temperature increases. Each FGS and sheet-to-sheet connection has a ﬂaw that 
makes it hard for carriers to move freely. The performance gap between organic and 
inorganic devices is expected to close as material parameters and reduction condi-
tions are optimized. Hu and his co-workers [129] recently developed in-situ emulsion 
polymerization techniques used in the production of PS-graphene nanosheet (GNS) 
nanocomposites. The creation of PS-GNS nanocomposites is shown in simpliﬁed 
form in the diagram below. It was discovered that polystyrene microspheres ranging 
in size from 90 to 150 nm were embedded in the graphene superﬁcially, predomi-
nantly in the crevices between the slanted nanoﬁlms. This demonstrates the compat-
ibility between PS microspheres and GNS, which allows for nanosized dispersion to 
be produced without further surface treatment. When pure GNS (0.37 nm) was put 
next to PS/GNS nanocomposites (0.41 nm), the distance between the layers grew. To 
reduce the strength of the van der Waals forces and increase the inter-planar distance 
between the slanted nanosheets, PS microspheres may be attached to the edges of 
the nanosheets. Raman spectra of pure GNS nanocomposites and PS/GNS hybrids 
are shown. It was determined that pure GNS has two distinct properties, the D band 
at 1331 cm−1 and the G band at 1594 cm−1. The peak intensity ratio, I(D)/I(G), for 
the PS-GNS nanocomposites, was 1.156. As a result, it is possible that the chemical 
grafting of polymers to the GNS surface is facilitated by the presence of localized 
areas of sp3 blemishes within the sp2 network of carbon [130]. Nanocomposites have 
100 °C higher thermal stability than pure PS. Increased T g may be traced back to 
a strong interaction between the polymer matrix PS and GNS, as seen below. At a 
GNS content of 2.0 wt%, the electrical conductivity of the PS/GNS nanocompos-
ites was found to be 2.9 102 S m1. It was, however, mentioned that pure PS had a 
conductivity of around 1.0 1010 S m1 [131]. It was recently reported that a nanostruc-
tured poly(styrene–isoprene-styrene) block copolymer had PS domains containing 
functionalized graphene sheets (FGS) (SIS). Analysis of AFM images reveals that 
poly(styrene-b-isoprene-b-styrene) is made up of well-ordered, spherical PS block 
domains that are perpendicular to the free surface (SIS). Cylindrical PS domains have 
been found dispersed perpendicular and corresponding to the free exterior in SIS and 
FGS composites. Mean diameters of 20 nm (and their long-range order) were found 
in both the clean matrix and the cylindrical domains of the nanocomposites. T g for 
the PS block increased from 78 °C for pure SIS to 84 degrees Celsius for the SIS/FGS 
composite, whereas the T g for the PI block stayed relatively constant at around 58 
degrees Celsius for both materials. T g increases because chain mobility in PS domains 
is impeded. The researchers claim that by incorporating 2D particles into BC, BC is

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
285
endowed with robust electrical properties that are essential for optoelectronic uses. 
The solution blending method using DMF as the solvent was used to produce modi-
ﬁed graphene composites, including PS and isocyanate [132]. The compounds were 
coagulated by gradually adding DMF to a large volume of CH3OH. These composites 
seemed to be nearly ﬁlled using a graphene sheet, although they contained just 2.4% 
ﬁller by volume. The conductivity of a composite material may be understood as a 
function of the volumetric proportion of ﬁller loading. By using a similar method, 
Liu et al. [133] were able to produce a PS-ionic liquid-functionalized graphene 
composite that displayed enhanced electrical conductivity compared to unmodiﬁed 
PS. Functionalized graphene sheet (FGS) materials have been developed by solu-
tion amalgamation [126]. Thin layers of semiconducting composites exhibited the 
interfacial ﬁeld effect. The thin coatings’ conductivity decreased at temperatures as 
high as 50 K and then slightly increased with subsequent cooling. These results were 
also seen in thin ﬁlms of diminished GO and graphitic ﬂakes [128, 134]. For their 
nanocomposites, Hu and his research team [135] used in-situ emulsion polymer-
ization to make graphene nanosheets (GNS) materials. Including PS microspheres 
with GNS may lead to non-sized dispersion without the need for any further surface 
preparation. The nanocomposite was 100 ˚C more stable at high temperatures than 
pristine PS. The electric conduction process of the PS-GNS nanomaterial is greatly 
more sophisticated than that of pristine PS. 
10.4.3 
Polyaniline (PANI)-Graphene Nanocomposites 
To synthesize PANI-based graphene composite paper, aniline was electro-
polymerized in-situ on graphene paper (GPCP) [136]. A three-electrode anodic 
electro-polymerization cell was used to conduct the polymerization. Graphite paper 
was used as the active electrode, while a Pt plate was used as the counter electrode 
and a standard calomel electrode (SCE) as the reference electrode. The electrolyte 
was composed of aniline and sulphuric acid (at a concentration of 0.5 m) (0.05 M). 
During a long length of time, PANI was electro-polymerized in situ on graphene paper 
using a constant potential of 0.75 V against the SCE (60, 300, and 900 s). However, 
the GPCP’s morphology was studied with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). 
The presence of homogeneous PANI coatings on a single graphene sheet was demon-
strated by the identiﬁcation of nitrogen, carbon, and oxygen that were uniformly 
distributed throughout the whole surface of the PANI-graphene sheet. In contrast to 
the regular arrangement of PANI on each 2D graphene, the 3D structure of GPCP 
is inhomogeneous. The results from cyclic voltammetry (CV) on graphene paper 
(GP) and graphene-enhanced carbon nanotubes (GPCP). It is because of the transi-
tion between quinone and hydroquinone classes, GP has a single redox peak. It is 
observed that the two groups of redox peaks were seen in the GPCP, indicating the 
presence of pseudo-capacitive PANI in the composites [136]. 
The redox characteristics of GP and GPCP are examined in a Nyquist plot 
(Fig. 10.3a). The higher resistance is owing to the increased concentration of GPCP,

286
D. Tripathy et al.
and this may be owing to the build-up of poorer conducting PANI. On the other hand, 
GPCP demonstrated much higher cycle stability than GP (Fig. 10.3b). An excellent 
composite of PANI-graphene electrodes was developed using a spin coating method 
[136, 137]. However, a pure aqueous dispersion of GO sheets was deposited via a 
deep coating method on a quartz substrate and then thermally reduced to create a 
graphene layer. The graphene sheets were then spin-coated with a dark blue PANI 
solution in NMP. According to morphological tests, the PANI-graphene electrodes 
had far smoother surfaces than that of the indium tin oxide (ITO) or PANI-ITO elec-
trodes. The current density of the CV at the PANI-ITO electrodes reduced dramati-
cally after being subjected to 100 cycles at 20 mV s−1 in 1 mol L−1 H2SO4, and the 
potential change among the oxidation and reduction increased from 87 to 106 mV. 
When applied to a PANI-graphene electrode, the same process showed negligible 
impact on the material’s overall qualities. So, when making electrochromic devices, 
the PANI-graphene electrode is better than an ITO electrode. After a few cycles of 
potential switching, the ITO electrode’s performance signiﬁcantly decreased, despite 
its initial high optical contrast and short switching time. However, when the voltage 
was altered, the electrochromic devices using graphene electrodes showed only a 
slight decrease in performance. The PANI-GNS-CNT composite was fabricated 
using in-situ polymerization [136, 138]. Electrodes were made by dissolving electro-
active materials like carbon black and polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) in ethanol. The 
resulting slurry was spread with a spatula on a nickel substrate before being baked 
at 100 °C for 12 h under a vacuum. The speciﬁc capacitance of the synthesized 
PANI composites and pure PANI is presented in Fig. 10.4 as a function of scan rates. 
The PANI-GNS-CNT composites greatly outperformed pure PANI and PANI-CNT 
composites in terms of speciﬁc capacitance. An increased speciﬁc capacitance was 
attributed to a synergistic effect between GNS and PANI [136, 139]. 
Fig. 10.3 Comparison of cyclic voltammograms captured in 1 M H2SO4 at rates ranging from 2 to 
20 mV/s (a). The Nyquist plots of the G-paper and GPCP (60 s, 300 s, and 900 s) (b), with stability 
at 50 mV/s cycling [136]. Adapted with permission from Ref. [136] Copyright (2010) (Elsevier)

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
287
Fig. 10.4 Capacitance data 
at varying scan rates for 
polyaniline, carbon nanotube 
polyaniline, graphene 
nanosheets polyaniline, and 
graphene nanosheet carbon 
nanotube polyaniline. The 
GNS-PANI electrode 
material was found to be 
superior since it had the 
largest speciﬁc capacitance 
[136]. Adapted with 
permission from Ref. [136] 
Copyright (2010) (Elsevier) 
10.4.4 
Naﬁon-Graphene Nanocomposites 
Graphene and Naﬁon were combined in a solution to create an electrode modi-
ﬁed with tris(2,2-bipyridyl) ruthenium (II) (Ru(bpy)3 2+) [140]. The electrode was 
soaked for 30 min in a 1 M Ru(bpy)3 2+ solution to produce a Ru(bpy)3+ modi-
ﬁed electrode. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) of the modiﬁed Naﬁon-graphene elec-
trode suggests that graphene’s conductivity improves in electron transport. Electro-
chemical catalysis of TPA oxidation by the Ru(bpy)3 2+)-Naﬁon-graphene composite 
ﬁlm is demonstrated by an increase in the anodic peak current upon addition of 
TPA. With the modiﬁed electrode, oxalate ions were detected with high sensi-
tivity, selectivity, and stability. Graphene-Naﬁon-tris(2,21-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) 
(Ru(bpy)3]2+) Graphene and Naﬁon were combined in a solvent to create special-
ized electrodes [141, 142]. The synthesized electrode was subsequently exposed 
to 1 M [Ru(bpy)3]2+ solution. The responsiveness, selectivity, and stability of the 
modiﬁed electrode signiﬁcantly increased. 
10.4.5 
Poly(Vinyl Alcohol) (PVA)-Graphene Nanocomposites 
Liang and his co-workers [143] have reported that the poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)-
based graphene nanocomposites comprise GO as ﬁllers, PVA as a polymer matrix, 
and water as the processing solvent. The synthesized GO and PVA-based GO 
nanocomposites were analyzed by X-ray diffraction studies (as shown in Fig. 10.5). 
It was found that the peak at 20.9° that crystallized matched the GO and suggested 
that the GO had exfoliated into individual sheets.
It is reported that the PVA-based graphene nanocomposites performed better 
mechanically than pure PVA. However, the tensile strength was observed to increase 
by 76% (from 49.9 to 87.6 MPa) and Young’s modulus by 62% (from 2.13 to

288
D. Tripathy et al.
Fig. 10.5 X-ray diffraction 
(XRD) patterns of 
a graphene oxide (GO), 
b graphene-polyvinyl 
alcohol (PVA) 
nanocomposite with 0.5 wt% 
of GO, and c neat PVA 
[143]. Adapted with 
permission from Ref. [143] 
Copyright (2009) (Willey)
3.45 GPa), when the GO loading was increased from 0% to 0.7 wt% (0.41 vol.%). 
There are various factors for the molecular-level dispersion of graphene sheets in the 
PVA matrix and their strong interfacial adhesion owing to their H-bonding with the 
PVA matrix. The incorporation of 0.7 wt% of GO into PVA-graphene nanocom-
posites corresponded with a rise in glass transition temperature (T g) from 37.5 
to 40.8 °C. This raise in T g may be due to the H-bonding of graphene and PVA 
matrix. It has been found that DSC can be used to detect the hydrogen bonding of 
graphene and PVA. These nanocomposites have better crystallographic and thermal 
stability than neat PVA. Further, these graphene nanosheets and extensively exfoli-
ated PVA-based nanocomposites were made using a facial aqueous solution [149]. 
When graphene nanosheets were mixed into the PVA matrix, the resulting compos-
ites showed increased strength. A tensile strength of 42 MPa was demonstrated by 
the composite containing 1.8% graphene by volume, an increase of 150% over the 
corresponding pure PVA sample. The addition of more graphene relatively signiﬁ-
cantly raised the tensile strength from 42 to 43 MPa. When graphene loading was 
increased, the composites’ elongation at break reduced dramatically and unexpect-
edly. The presence of 1.8 vol. % graphene reduced the elongation at break from 220% 
in the neat sample to 98% in the composite. The study found that graphene-based 
nanocomposites have a high aspect ratio and well contact with the polymer matrix 
slowed down the chain’s mobility. 
10.4.6 
Polyurethane (PU)-Graphene Nanocomposites 
Nanocomposites made from FGS and water-based polyurethane were produced 
using an in-situ approach (WPU). The morphological analysis of the nanocomposite 
showed that the FGS particles were spread out evenly over the WPU matrix. These

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
289
nanocomposites have superior electrical conductivity owing to their uniform distribu-
tion of FGS particles throughout the WPU matrix. However, the percolation threshold 
was reached at a loading of only 2% FGS. Once an electrically conducting channel 
formed in the polymer matrix, the electrical conductivity of the polymer changed. 
Lee and his co-workers have made FGS-WPU nanocomposites that have a higher 
conductivity [144]. A DSC study found that adding FGS to nanocomposites raises 
both the melting temperature and the heat of fusion (Hm) of the soft segment of 
WPU. In contrast, hard segment crystallinity decreased with increasing FGS loading 
in the nanocomposites. 
Besides, three different nanocomposites were developed by Liang et al. through 
the use of solution mixtures. They used graphene that had been treated with 
isocyanate, sulfonate, or reduction as the nanoﬁller and thermoplastic polyurethane 
(TPU) as the matrix polymer [145]. According to TGA testing, the thermal break-
down rate of TPU nanocomposites made from reduced and sulfonated graphene 
was much lower than that of isocyanate-modiﬁed graphene. Graphene sheets that 
have been sulfonated have fewer functional groups attached than graphene that 
has been changed with isocyanate. The infrared-triggered actuation performance 
of TPU-graphene nanocomposites comprising 1 wt.% sulfonated graphene was 
fascinating and durable. When exposed to infrared light, this infrared-responsive 
nanocomposite decreased and rapidly raised a 21.6 g weight of 3.1 cm (0.21 N). 
There are several cycling tests yielded a maximum energy density of 0.40 Jg−1. 
Furthermore, the isocyanate-modiﬁed graphene-TPU nanocomposites exhibited a 
poor shape recovery rate and IR-triggered actuation (Fig. 10.6), whereas TPU-
sulfonated graphene nanocomposites had improved electrical and mechanical perfor-
mances. Nanocomposites made with 1% TPU-sulfonated graphene had their tensile 
strength (100% strain) rise by 75%, and their Young’s modulus goes up by 120%. 
This improvement in mechanical characteristics may be due to the uniform dispersion 
of graphene in the polymer matrix.
10.4.7 
Poly(Vinylidene Fluoride) (PVDF)-Graphene 
Nanocomposites 
Graphene oxide and expanded graphite (EG) were used in a solution processing and 
compression molding process to create a PVDF based on functionalized graphene 
sheets (FGS) [146]. The structure and thermal stability of the composites were 
analyzed through X-ray diffraction and dynamic scanning calorimetric technique. 
However, it is observed that modiﬁed composites have superior mechanical perfor-
mance than those of pristine polymer and unmodiﬁed ones. It is noticed that at 
25 °C, pure PVDF had a storage modulus of 1275 MPa, but adding 2 wt% FGS or 
EG raised it to 1859 or 1739 MPa. Further, with the incorporation of 4 wt% ﬁller into 
the PVDF matrix, the storage modulus rises to 2460 and 2695 MPa, respectively. The 
DMA results demonstrated that the nanoﬁller’s reinforcing impact contributed to the

290
D. Tripathy et al.
Fig. 10.6 Infrared optical pictures of nanocomposites using graphene as the active material [145]. 
Adapted with permission from Ref. [145] Copyright (2009) (American Chemical Society)
nanocomposites’ improved Tg. At a loading of 5% EG in PVDF-FGS composites 
and 2% FGS in PVDF-EG composites, the percolation of electrical conductivity was 
shown to be very signiﬁcant, owing to their larger aspect ratio, FGS has a lower 
percolation threshold and a better-conducting network than EG. The inﬂuence of 
temperature on the electrical conductivity of the PVDF-EG nanocomposites was 
also studied at temperatures ranging from 20 to 170 °C. This nanocomposite resis-
tivity increased steadily with increasing temperature, increasing rapidly after the 
polymer melt. As the ﬁller particles are so much farther apart at melting, they offer 
considerably more resistance. It was thought that nanocomposite materials could 
be used as positive temperature coefﬁcient (PTC) materials because the resistivity 
changes by three orders of magnitude as the amount of EG changes. 
10.4.8 
Poly(3,4-Ethyldioxythiophene)-Graphene 
Nanocomposites 
Using in-situ polymerization, a composite of poly (3,4-ethyl dioxythiophene) 
(PEDOT) and sulfonated graphene was developed [147]. This novel hybrid mate-
rial has excellent transparency, electrical conductivity, outstanding ﬂexibility, and 
high thermal stability, and it can be easily treated in both aqueous and organic 
solvents. Optical transmittances at 550 nm were found to be 96%, 76%, 51%, and

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
291
Fig. 10.7 Graphene oxide, sulfonated graphene, and graphene-PEDOT FTIR spectra [147]. 
Adapted with permission from Ref. [147] Copyright (2009) (Springer Nature) 
36% for PEDOT-graphene ﬁlms of thicknesses of 33, 58, 76, and 103 nm, respec-
tively (Fig. 10.7). The conductivity of the composite ﬁlms produced on quartz and 
PMMA substrates was 7 and 10.8 Sm−1, respectively, regardless of the ﬁlm thickness. 
PEDOT-graphene composites are favorable owing to their superior thermal stability. 
Moreover, the temperature of 297 and 325 °C, the composite material exhibits mass 
loss, and below 325 °C, mass loss reached roughly 19%. The PEDOT-graphene 
composite also showed improved thermal stability over PEDOT-PSS composites. 
10.4.9 
Polyethylene Terephthalate and Polycarbonate-Based 
Graphene Nanocomposites 
Melt compounding was used to create graphene nanocomposites based on polyethy-
lene terephthalate (PET) [148]. The morphological analysis of the nanocomposites 
revealed that the graphene network is composed of several thin stacks of a few sheets 
of monolayer graphene. The wrinkly, overlapping graphene sheets that come out of 
this process may have a high electrical conductivity because they connect the indi-
vidual graphene sheets well and move a lot of current [149]. Melt compounding was 
used to make composites of polycarbonate (PC) and functionalized graphene sheets 
(FGS) or graphite. The structural, morphological, and rheological study of the PC-
FGS composites revealed that the FGS layers were signiﬁcantly exfoliated and had 
viscoelastic properties. After being annealed for 10,000 s, the PC-FGS composites 
show stiffness percolation at 1wt% to 1.5t5 of FGS loading into the PC matrix. In

292
D. Tripathy et al.
contrast, a graphite loading of 3–5 wt% was sufﬁcient to achieve this percolation. 
These composites with a weight percentage of (0.5 wt %) of FGS contents have inter-
esting reversibility among solid and liquid performance, and this is impacted by prior 
processing. However, the electrical properties of the resultant composites with lower 
FGS loadings might still result in electrical conductivity percolation, in comparison 
with utilizing graphite ﬁller. It has been found that PC-FGS nanocomposites have 
a greater tensile modulus than pure PC. Because of the FGS loading, the CTEof 
the composites was also greatly diminished. Graphite- and FGS-reinforced polycar-
bonate ﬁlms were subjected to N2 and He penetration tests at 35 °C. Both enhancers 
have the potential to make nitrogen and helium in the air less harmful. However, 
FGS composites had signiﬁcantly lower permeability than graphite composites. Gas 
molecules diffuse slower across membranes because a uniform distribution of FGS 
with a large aspect ratio may produce complex routes, lowering the cross-sectional 
area available for penetration [150]. 
10.5 
Application of Polymer-Graphene Composites 
for Energy Storage Devices 
In recent times, one of the most promising methods of energy storage is the super 
capacitor since it has a high power density, is quick to charge and discharge, and 
has a long cycle life. The electrodes in super capacitors would be made from a 
3D graphene-based conductive structure owing to its elevated speciﬁc charge, low 
density, and superior surface area. The optimum electrode materials for pseudocapac-
itors are typically mixtures of conducting polymers (PANI and PPy) and graphene that 
have a high theoretical capacitance owing to their unique redox characteristics [151]. 
However, the conducting polymer to 3D graphene for supercapacitors stabilizes the 
polymer chain in the network, increases electrolyte ions’ surface accessibility, mini-
mizes their diffusion distance, and improves the composite performance [152]. The 
3D graphene-based polymer nanocomposites can be created by cross-linking organic 
molecules with 3D graphene using a self-assembled method followed by in-situ poly-
merization. Liu et al. [153] also made a graphene supercapacitor that can withstand 
a lot of pressure. They also came up with a way to make 3D PPy-graphene (PPy-G) 
foam in place by cross-linking organic molecules. The good porosity, conductivity, 
and mechanical durability of PPy-G foam electrodes kept their CV curves and capac-
itive even after 1000 recorded cycles with a 50% strain. Moreover, the compact PPy 
sheets and pure 3D graphene have speciﬁc capacitances that are substantially lower 
than the discharge slope prediction of 350 F/g−1. Figure 10.8 shows different appli-
cation analyses of graphene, from conductive ink to chemical sensors to LEDs to 
composites to energy to touch screens and high-frequency electronics.
Kulkarni et al. [154] used an in-situ polymerization technique to fabricate PANI 
nanoﬁbers with a diameter of 20–100 nm using a 3D graphene template. With a 
current density of 4 mA/cm2, it was thought that the battery would keep 86.5%

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
293
Fig. 10.8 Use of graphene-based materials in a variety of disciplines
of its original capacity after 5000 cycles of charging and discharging. The active 
PANI nanoﬁbers have huge speciﬁc surface area and the graphene backbone’s efﬁ-
cient conducting routes enhanced cycle stability and rate capability, resulting in 
a surprising synergistic efﬁciency for better super capacitive performance. When 
scanned from 150 to 800 mV at 10 mV s−1, composite electrodes had a maximum 
speciﬁc capacitance of 1024 F g−1 in 1 M H2SO4. Another study that used soni-
cation or reduction to make a 3D graphene-poly(anthraquinonyl sulﬁde) (PAQS) 
composite was conducted by Zhang et al. [155]. This composite could be used as a 
bendable cathode in LIBs and NaIO2 batteries (SIBs) if it was put under mechanical 
pressure. As a result of the stacking relationship between the graphene sheets, the 
polymer particles (100–200 nm) were evenly dispersed across the graphene surface 
and enclosed within the graphene sheets. The improved composite has very good 
cycling stability (71.4% capacity retention after 1000 cycles at 0.5 °C) and excellent 
rate performance (102 mAh g−1 for LIBs at 20 °C and 72 mAh g−1 for SIBs at 
5 °C). To make it easier for active polymers to react electrochemically, PAQS parti-
cles were spread out evenly and encased in 3D graphene with a porous structure that 
was built up in layers [156]. This allowed for reliable ion transport channels and a 
viable electron transport path. The microbial fuel cell (MFC) used as a bio-oxidation 
method is another way to turn chemical energy from organic substrates like sugar, 
fatty acids, and proteins into electricity [157, 158]. However, the high porosity in the

294
D. Tripathy et al.
3D graphene structures allows the bacteria and a growth medium access to the inside 
of the electrode. Yang et al. [159] have reported that the hydrophilic conducting 
polymer PANI is on 3D graphene by polymerizing it. This made it easier for bacteria 
to stick to the surface and form bioﬁlms [160]. Bacteria colonized the PANI-coated 
graphene surface and established an extensive bioﬁlm. The middle PANI polymers 
acted as conductive nanowires to increase extracellular electron transport between 
the electrode and the microorganisms by engaging directly with the redox-active 
proteins on the bacterial membrane [161, 162]. It has been reported that after 150 h 
(Fig. 10.9a), the power density of the graphene-PANI MFC as still signiﬁcantly 
higher than that of carbon cloth. Furthermore, the charge-transfer resistance of the 
graphene-PANI MFC was only around 100 (as shown in Fig. 10.9a). Moreover, the 
3D graphene-PANI MFC composites reached a maximum power density of about 
768 mW/m2 (Fig. 10.9b). Figure 10.9c demonstrates that the high bacterial loading 
and efﬁcient EET gave the 3D graphene-PANI anode a naturally high output power 
density (extracellular electron transfer). Chitosan was used as a backbone for 3D-
GPNCs along with conducting polymers because it is biocompatible, can absorb, and 
is good for the environment. Chen et al. [162] made a 3D chitosan-vacuum-stripped 
graphene scaffold using a self-assembly method. The hierarchically porous structure 
with layered, branched macropores, mesopores, and micropores increased bacterial 
colonization and electron transfer from redox-active compounds. The highest power 
density in MFC came from a 50% graphene scaffold at 1530 mWm−2, and this is 78 
times more powerful than a carbon cloth anode. 
Xia and his co-workers [163] have made a composite material by decorating func-
tionalized graphene sheets with Fe2O3 quantum dots (QDs, 2 nm) (FGS) through a 
facile technique and used it as a supercapacitor electrode (as shown in Fig. 10.10). 
The speciﬁc capacitance of these Fe2O3 QDs-FGS composites in 1 M Na2SO4
Fig. 10.9 a MFCs with carbon cloth or graphene-based PANI foam anodes have different power 
density output time courses, b polarization curves of the two MFC types (I-V relation inset) c This 
picture shows S. oneidensis MR-1 bacteria and a 3D graphene-PANI monolith electrode interacting 
with each other [162]. Adapted with permission from Ref. [162] Copyright (2012) (American 
Chemical Society)

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
295
Fig. 10.10 A schematic representation of the creation of an asymmetric supercapacitor and design 
of the composite electrodes
between -1 and 0 V vs Ag–AgCl can reach up to 347 F/g−1. The Fe2O3-FGS-MnO2-
FGSasymmetric supercapacitor has a power density of 100 W kg−1 and an energy 
density of 50.7 Wh kg−1, and it has outstanding cycling stability. 
10.6 
Conclusions 
Graphene research and development is progressing at a breakneck pace right now, 
with huge breakthroughs being made every day. Recent progress in our under-
standing of graphene polymer nanocomposites can be traced to the dramatic improve-
ments in polymer properties, such as mechanical, electrical, thermal conductivity, 
chemical, optical, and gas impermeability, which can be made with low concentra-
tions of ﬁller. In this chapter, we focused on the precise incorporation of surface-
functionalized graphene into different polymer matrices to realize their potential 
applications in ﬁelds of energy storage sectors including electronics and composite 
materials. The enhanced characteristics are a result of the uniform distribution of 
changed graphene and improved polymer-graphene compatibility via a variety of 
reactive functional groups on modiﬁed graphene. Graphene’s emergence as viable 
nanoﬁllers has ushered in a new era in the development of low-cost, high-performance 
composites for a wide variety of uses. 
Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge the support provided by Centurion 
University of Technology and Management, Odisha, India, for carrying out the present research 
work. 
Conﬂicts of Interest The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

296
D. Tripathy et al.
References 
1. Okada A, Kawasumi M, Usuki A, Kojima Y, Kurauchi T, Kamigaito O (1990) Synthesis 
and properties of nylon-6/clay hybrids. Polymer-based molecular composites. In: MRS 
symposium proceedings, Pittsburgh, vol 171, pp 45–50 
2. Nurazzi NM, Sabaruddin FA, Harussani MM, Kamarudin SH, Rayung M, Asyraf MRM, 
Khalina A (2021) Mechanical performance and applications of CNTs reinforced polymer 
composites-a review. Nanomater 11(9):2186 
3. Wazalwar R, Sahu M, Raichur AM (2021) Mechanical properties of aerospace epoxy compos-
ites reinforced with 2D nano-ﬁllers: current status and road to industrialization. Nanoscale 
Adv 3(10):2741–2776 
4. Essabir H, Raji M, Bouhﬁd R, Qaiss AEK (2021) Hybrid nanocomposites based on 
graphene and nano-clay: preparation, characterization, and synergistic effect. In: Graphene 
and nanoparticles hybrid nanocomposites: from preparation to applications, pp 153–181 
5. Bhanushali H, Amrutkar S, Mestry S, Mhaske ST (2022) Shape memory polymer nanocom-
posite: a review on structure–property relationship. Polym Bull 79(6):3437–3493 
6. Karki S, Gohain MB, Yadav D, Ingole PG (2021) Nanocomposite and bio-nanocomposite 
polymeric materials/membranes development in energy and medical sector: a review. Int J 
Biol Macromol 193:2121–2139 
7. Siwal SS, Zhang Q, Devi N, Thakur VK (2020) Carbon-based polymer nanocomposite for 
high-performance energy storage applications. Polymer 12(3):505 
8. Benny Mattam L, Bijoy A, Abraham Thadathil D, George L, Varghese A (2022) 
Conducting polymers: a versatile material for biomedical applications. ChemistrySelect 
7(42):e202201765 
9. Kruželák J, Kvasniˇcáková A, Hložeková K, Hudec I (2021) Progress in polymers and polymer 
composites used as efﬁcient materials for EMI shielding. Nanoscale Adv 3(1):123–172 
10. Shahapurkar K, Gelaw M, Tirth V, Soudagar MEM, Shahapurkar P, Mujtaba MA, Ahmed 
GMS (2022) Comprehensive review on polymer composites as electromagnetic interference 
shielding materials. Polym Polym Compos 30:1–17 
11. Samsudin SS, Abdul Majid MS, MohdJamir MR, Osman AF, Jaafar M, Alshahrani HA 
(2022) Physical, thermal transport, and compressive properties of epoxy composite ﬁlled 
with graphitic-and ceramic-based thermally conductive nanoﬁllers. Polym 14(5):1014 
12. Minisha S, Vedhi C, Rajakani P (2022) Methods of graphene synthesis and graphene-
based electrode material for supercapacitor applications. ECS J Solid State Sci Technol 
11(11):111002 
13. Sethulekshmi AS, Jayan JS, Appukutta S, Joseph K (2021) MoS2: Advanced nanoﬁller for 
reinforcing polymer matrix. Phys E Low Dimens Syst Nanostruct 132:114716 
14. Lian C, Gu Z, Zhang Y, Ma Z, Qiu H, Gu J (2021) Structural design strategies of polymer 
matrix composites for electromagnetic interference shielding: a review. Nano-Micro Lett 
13(1):181 
15. Li Y, Huang X, Zeng L, Li R, Tian H, Fu X, Zhong WH (2019) A review of the electrical 
and mechanical properties of carbon nanoﬁller-reinforced polymer composites. J Mater Sci 
54:1036–1076 
16. Ansari MNM, Sayem MA (2023) Microwave-assisted activated carbon: a promising class 
of materials for a wide range of applications. In: Radiation technologies and applications in 
materials science, pp 331–368 
17. Hecht DS, Hu L, Irvin G (2011) Emerging transparent electrodes based on thin ﬁlms of carbon 
nanotubes, graphene, and metallic nanostructures. Adv Mater 23(13):1482–1513 
18. El-Kady MF, Shao Y, Kaner RB (2016) Graphene for batteries, supercapacitors and beyond. 
Nat Rev Mater 1(7):1–14 
19. Kumar SSA, Bashir S, Ramesh K, Ramesh S (2021) New perspectives on graphene/ 
graphene oxide based polymer nanocomposites for corrosion applications: the relevance of 
the graphene/polymer barrier coatings. Prog Org Coat 154:106215

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
297
20. Mohan VB, Lau KT, Hui D, Bhattacharyya D (2018) Graphene-based materials and their 
composites: a review on production, applications and product limitations. Compos B Eng 
142:200–220 
21. Shmavonyan G, Cheshev D, Averkiev A, Tran TH, Sheremet E (2022) Nanospectroscopy of 
graphene and two-dimensional atomic materials and hybrid structures. Opt Nanospectroscopy 
401 
22. Moharana S, Mahaling RN (2017) Silver (Ag)-Graphene oxide (GO)-Poly (vinylidene 
ﬂuoride-co-hexaﬂuoropropylene)(PVDF-HFP) nanostructured composites with high dielec-
tric constant and low dielectric loss. Chem Phys Lett 680:31–36 
23. Novoselov KS, Geim AK, Morozov SV, Jiang D, Zhang Y, Dubonos SV (2004) Electric ﬁeld 
effect in atomically thin carbon ﬁlms. Sci 306:666–669 
24. Asghar F, Shakoor B, Fatima S, Munir S, Razzaq H, Naheed S, Butler IS (2022) Fabrica-
tion and prospective applications of graphene oxide-modiﬁed nanocomposites for wastewater 
remediation. RSC Adv 12(19):11750–11768 
25. Ashraf G, Aziz A, Iftikhar T, Zhong ZT, Asif M, Chen W (2022) The roadmap of 
graphene-based sensors: electrochemical methods for bioanalytical applications. Biosensors 
12(12):1183 
26. Moharana S, Mahaling RN (2021) Enhancement investigations on dielectric and electrical 
properties of niobium pentoxide (Nb2O5) reinforced poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride)(PVDF)-
graphene oxide (GO) nanocomposite ﬁlms. J Asian Ceram Soc 9(3):1183–1193 
27. Nitin MS, Suresh Kumar S (2022) Ballistic performance of synergistically toughened Kevlar/ 
epoxy composite targets reinforced with multiwalled carbon nanotubes/graphene nanoﬁllers. 
Polym Compos 43(2):782–797 
28. Dubey PK, Hong J, Lee K, Singh P (2023) Graphene-based materials: synthesis and 
applications. In: Nanomater, pp 59–84 
29. Patra L, Pandey R (2022) Mechanical properties of 2D materials: a review on molecular 
dynamics based nanoindentation simulations. Mater Today Commun 31:103623 
30. Balandin AA (2011) Thermal properties of graphene and nanostructured carbon materials. 
Nat Mater 10(8):569–581 
31. Jung I, Dikin DA, Piner RD, Ruoff RS (2008) Tunable electrical conductivity of individual 
graphene oxide sheets reduced at “low” temperatures. Nano Lett 8(12):4283–4287 
32. Chauhan AK, Gupta SK, Taguchi D, Manaka T, Jha P, Veerender P, Iwamoto M (2017) 
Enhancement of the carrier mobility of conducting polymers by formation of their graphene 
composites. RSC Adv 7(20):11913–11920 
33. Matte HR, Subrahmanyam KS, Rao CNR (2009) Novel magnetic properties of graphene: 
presence of both ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic features and other aspects. J Phys 
Chem C 113(23):9982–9985 
34. Guo Q, Dedkov Y, Voloshina E (2020) Intercalation of Mn in graphene/Cu (111) interface: 
insights to the electronic and magnetic properties from theory. Sci Rep 10(1):21684 
35. Geng Y, Wang SJ, Kim JK (2009) Preparation of graphite nanoplatelets and graphene sheets. 
J Colloid Interface Sci 336(2):592–598 
36. Vacchi IA, Ménard-Moyon C, Bianco A (2017) Chemical functionalization of graphene family 
members. Phys Sci Rev 2(1) 
37. Ioni¸t˘a M, Vl˘asceanu GM, Watzlawek AA, Voicu SI, Burns JS, Iovu H (2017) Graphene and 
functionalized graphene: extraordinary prospects for nanobiocomposite materials. Compos B 
Eng 121:34–57 
38. Acik M, Chabal YJ (2011) Nature of graphene edges: a review. Jpn J Appl Phys 50(7R):070101 
39. NebolSin VA, Galstyan V, Silina YE (2020) Graphene oxide and its chemical nature: multi-
stage interactions between the oxygen and graphene. Surf Interfaces 21:100763 
40. Shi L, Xia W (2012) Photoredox functionalization of C-H bonds adjacent to a nitrogen atom. 
Chem Soc Rev 41(23):7687–7697 
41. Cao Y, Osuna S, Liang Y, Haddon RC, Houk KN (2013) Diels-Alder reactions of graphene: 
computational predictions of products and sites of reaction. J Am Chem Soc 135(46):17643– 
17649

298
D. Tripathy et al.
42. Guday G (2019) Surface chemistry of low-dimensional carbon materials: synthesis and 
functionalization of graphene. Freie Universitaet Berlin (Germany) 
43. He J, Qiu D, Li Y (2020) Strategies toward aryne multifunctionalization via 1, 2-benzdiyne 
and benzyne. Acc Chem Res 53(2):508–519 
44. Rkein B, Bigot A, Birbaum L, Manneveau M, De Paolis M, Legros J, Chataigner I (2021) 
Reactivity of 3-nitroindoles with electron-rich species. Chem Commun 57(1):27–44 
45. Ratwani CR, Abdelkader A(2022) Self-healing by Diels-Alder cycloaddition in advanced 
functional polymers: a review. Prog Mater Sci, p 101001 
46. Ashfaq A, Clochard MC, Coqueret X, Dispenza C, Driscoll MS, Ula´nski P, Al-Sheikhly M 
(2020) Polymerization reactions and modiﬁcations of polymers by ionizing radiation. Polymer 
12(12):2877 
47. Shabbir M, Raza ZA, Shah TH, Tariq MR (2022) Recent progress in graphenes: 
synthesis, covalent functionalization and environmental applications. J Nanostructure Chem 
12(6):1033–1051 
48. Majumder M, Thakur AK (2019) Graphene and its modiﬁcations for supercapacitor 
applications. Surf Eng, pp 113–138 
49. Lomeda JR, Doyle CD, Kosynkin DV, Hwang WF, Tour JM (2008) Diazonium function-
alization of surfactant-wrapped chemically converted graphene sheets. J Am Chem Soc 
130(48):16201–16206 
50. Chua CK, Pumera M (2013) Covalent chemistry on graphene. Chem Soc Rev 42(8):3222– 
3233 
51. Johns JE, Hersam MC (2013) Atomic covalent functionalization of graphene. Acc Chem Res 
46(1):77–86 
52. Sharma R, Baik JH, Perera CJ, Strano MS (2010) Anomalously large reactivity of single 
graphene layers and edges toward electron transfer chemistries. Nano Lett 10(2):398–405 
53. Xu X, Chen J, Luo X, Lu J, Zhou H, Wu W, Li Z (2012) Poly (9, 9'-diheylﬂuorene carbazole) 
functionalized with reduced graphene oxide: convenient synthesis using nitrogen-based 
nucleophiles and potential applications in optical limiting. Chem Eur J 18(45):14384–14391 
54. Li PP, Chen Y, Zhu J, Feng M, Zhuang X, Lin Y, Zhan H (2011) Charm-bracelet-type Poly (N-
Vinylcarbazole) functionalized with reduced graphene oxide for broadband optical limiting. 
Chem Eur J 17(3):780–785 
55. Wojtaszek M, Tombros N, Caretta A, Van Loosdrecht PHM, Van Wees BJ (2011) A road to 
hydrogenating graphene by a reactive ion etching plasma. J Appl Phys 110(6):063715 
56. Medeiros PV, Mascarenhas AJ, de Brito MF, de Castilho CM (2010) A DFT study of halogen 
atoms adsorbed on graphene layers. Nanotechnology 21(48):485701 
57. Robinson Jeremy T, James S, Chad Junkermeier E, Stefan Badescu C, Thomas L, Keith Perkins 
F, Maxim ZK (2010) Properties of ﬂuorinated graphene ﬁlms. Nano Lett 10(8):3001–3005 
58. Chua CK, Pumera M (2012) Friedel-crafts acylation on graphene. Chem Asian J 7(5):1009– 
1012 
59. Yuan C, Chen W, Yan L (2012) Amino-grafted graphene as a stable and metal-free solid basic 
catalyst. J Mater Chem 22(15):7456–7460 
60. Zhan J, Lei Z, Zhang Y (2022) Non-covalent interactions of graphene surface: mechanisms 
and applications. Chem 8(4):947–979 
61. Mao HY, Lu YH, Lin JD, Zhong S, Wee ATS, Chen W (2013) Manipulating the electronic and 
chemical properties of graphene via molecular functionalization. Prog Surf Sci 88(2):132–159 
62. Guo X (2013) Single-molecule electrical biosensors based on single-walled carbon nanotubes. 
Adv Mater 25(25):3397–3408 
63. Lin Y, Taylor S, Li H, Fernando KS, Qu L, Wang W, Sun YP (2004) Advances toward 
bioapplications of carbon nanotubes. J Mater Chem 14(4):527–541 
64. Ma H, Shen Z (2020) Exfoliation of graphene nanosheets in aqueous media. Ceram Int 
46(14):21873–21887 
65. Brisebois PP, Siaj M (2020) Harvesting graphene oxide–years 1859 to 2019: a review of its 
structure, synthesis, properties and exfoliation. J Mater Chem C 8(5):1517–1547

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
299
66. Ghosh A, Rao KV, George SJ, Rao CNR (2010) Noncovalent functionalization, exfoliation, 
and solubilization of graphene in water by employing a ﬂuorescent coronene carboxylate. 
Chem Eur J 16(9):2700–2704 
67. Englert JM, Röhrl J, Schmidt CD, Graupner R, Hundhausen M, Hauke F, Hirsch A (2009) 
Soluble graphene: generation of aqueous graphene solutions aided by a perylenebisimide-
based bolaamphiphile. Adv Mater 21(42):4265–4269 
68. Bai H, Xu Y, Zhao L, Li C, Shi G (2009) Non-covalent functionalization of graphene sheets 
by sulfonated polyaniline. Chem Commun 13:1667–1669 
69. Ibrahim A, Klopocinska A, Horvat K, Abdel Hamid Z (2021) Graphene-based nanocompos-
ites: synthesis, mechanical properties, and characterizations. Polym 13(17):2869 
70. Lawal AT (2020) Recent progress in graphene based polymer nanocomposites. Cogent Chem. 
6(1):1833476 
71. Zhou T, Zheng Y, Gao H, Min S, Li S, Liu HK, Guo Z (2015) Surface engineering and 
design strategy for surface-amorphized TiO2@graphene hybrids for high power Li-ion battery 
electrodes. Adv Sci 2(9):1500027 
72. Shi S, Chen F, Ehlerding EB, Cai W (2014) Surface engineering of graphene-based 
nanomaterials for biomedical applications. Bioconjug Chem 25(9):1609–1619 
73. Azizi-Lalabadi M, Hashemi H, Feng J, Jafari SM (2020) Carbon nanomaterials against 
pathogens; the antimicrobial activity of carbon nanotubes, graphene/graphene oxide, 
fullerenes, and their nanocomposites. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 284:102250 
74. Bhattacharya M (2016) Polymer nanocomposites—a comparison between carbon nanotubes, 
graphene, and clay as nanoﬁllers. Mater 9(4):262 
75. Nandee R, Chowdhury MA, Ahmed MU, Shuvho BA, Debnath UK (2019) Performance and 
characterization of two-dimensional material graphene conductivity-a review. Mater Perform 
Charact 8(1):183–196 
76. Clancy AJ, Bayazit MK, Hodge SA, Skipper NT, Howard CA, Shaffer MS (2018) Charged 
carbon nanomaterials: redox chemistries of fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, and graphenes. 
Chem Rev 118(16):7363–7408 
77. Cui Y, Kundalwal SI, Kumar S (2016) Gas barrier performance of graphene/polymer 
nanocomposites. Carbon 98:313–333 
78. Zhao HY, Yu MY, Liu J, Li X, Min P, Yu ZZ (2022) Efﬁcient preconstruction of three-
dimensional graphene networks for thermally conductive polymer composites. Nano-Micro 
Lett 14(1):129 
79. Zhu X, Ni Z, Dong L, Yang Z, Cheng L, Zhou X, Chen M (2019) In-situ modulation of interac-
tions between polyaniline and graphene oxide ﬁlms to develop waterborne epoxy anticorrosion 
coatings. Prog Org Coat 133:106–116 
80. Zhu Q, Li EN, Liu X, Song W, Li Y, Wang X, Liu C (2020) Epoxy coating with in-situ synthesis 
of polypyrrole functionalized graphene oxide for enhanced anticorrosive performance. Prog 
Org Coat 140:105488 
81. Zheng W, Lu X, Wong SC (2004) Electrical and mechanical properties of expanded graphite-
reinforced high-density polyethylene. J Appl Polym Sci 91:2781–2788 
82. Hu HT, Wang JC, Wan L, Liu FM, Zheng H (2010) Preparation and properties of graphene 
nanosheets—polystyrene nanocomposites via in-situ emulsion polymerization. Chem Phy 
Lett 484:247–253 
83. Ye L, Meng XY, Ji X, Li ZM, Tang JH (2009) Synthesis and characterization of expand-
able graphite-poly(methyl methacrylate) composite particles and their application to ﬂame 
retardation of rigid polyurethane foams. Polym Degrad Stab 94:971–979 
84. Chen G, Wu D, Weng W, Wu C (2003) Exfoliation of graphite ﬂakes and its nanocomposites. 
Carbon 41:619–621 
85. Kornmann X (2001) Synthesis and characterization of thermoset-layered silicate nanocom-
posites. Ph.D. thesis. Sweden, Lulea Tekniska Universitet 
86. Moujahid EM, Besse JP, Leroux F (2003) Poly(styrene sulfonate) layered double hydroxide 
nanocomposites Stability and subsequent structural transformation with changes in tempera-
ture. J Mater Chem 13:258–264

300
D. Tripathy et al.
87. Hsueh HB, Chen CY (2003) Preparation and properties of LDHs=polyimide nanocomposites. 
Polym 44:1151–1161 
88. Novoselov KS, Geim AK, Morozov SV (2004) Electric ﬁeld effect in atomically thin carbon 
ﬁlms. Science 306:666–669 
89. Tkalya E, Ghislandi M, Alekseev A (2010) Latex-based concept for the preparation of 
graphene-based polymer nanocomposites. J Mater Chem 20:3035–3039 
90. Latif I, Alwan TB, Al-Dujaili AH (2012) Low frequency dielectric study of PAPA-PVA-GR 
nanocomposites. Nanosci Nanotechnol 2:190–200 
91. Murugan AV, Muraliganth T, Manthiram A (2009) Rapid, facile microwave-solvothermal 
synthesis of graphene nanosheets and their polyaniline nanocomposites for energy strorage. 
Chem Mater 21:5004–5006 
92. Fan X, Peng W, Li Y (2008) Deoxygenation of exfoliated graphite oxide under alkaline 
conditions: a green route to graphene preparation. Adv Mater 2:4490–4493 
93. Park S, An J, Jung I (2009) Colloidal suspensions of highly reduced graphene oxide in a wide 
variety of organic solvents. Nano Lett 9:1593–1597 
94. Jiang L, Shen XP, Wu JL (2010) Preparation and characterization of graphene/poly (vinyl 
alcohol) nanocomposites. J Appl Polym Sci 118:275–279 
95. Bourlinos AB, Gournis D, Petridis D (2003) Graphite oxide: chemical reduction to graphite 
and surface modiﬁcation with primary aliphatic amines and amino acids. Langmuir 19:6050– 
6055 
96. Wang G, Shen X, Yao J (2009) Graphene nanosheets for enhanced lithium storage in lithium 
ion batteries. Carbon 47:2049–2053 
97. Staudenmaier L (1898) Verfahren zur darstellung der graphitsa¨ure. Ber Dtsch Chem Ges 
31:1481–1499 
98. Michael J, McAllister J-L (2007) Single sheet functionalized graphene by oxidation and 
thermal expansion of graphite. Chem Mater 19:4396–4404 
99. Zhang HB, Zheng WG, Yan Q (2010) Electrically conductive polyethylene terephthalate/ 
graphene nanocomposites prepared by melt compounding. Polym 51:1191–1196 
100. Potts JR, Dreyer DR, Bielawski CW (2011) Graphene based polymer nanocomposites. 
Polymer 52:5–25 
101. Hu H, Wang X, Wang J (2010) Preparation and properties of graphene nanosheets–polystyrene 
nanocomposites via in situ emulsion polymerization. Chem Phys Lett 484:247–253 
102. Patole AS, Patole SP, Kang H (2010) A facile approach to the fabrication of graphene/ 
polystyrene nanocomposite by in situ microemulsion polymerization. J Colloid Interface 
Sci 350:530–537 
103. Ni Z, Wang Y, Yu T (2008) Raman spectroscopy and imaging of graphene. Nano Res 1:273– 
291 
104. Gawryla MD, van den Berg O, Weder C (2009) Clay aerogel/cellulose whisker nanocompos-
ites: a nanoscale wattle and daub. J Mater Chem 19:2118–2124 
105. Van den Berg O, Capadona JR, Weder C (2007) Preparation of homogeneous dispersions of 
tunicate cellulose whiskers in organic solvents. Biomacromol 8:1353–1357 
106. Chen W, Yan L, Bangal PR (2010) Preparation of graphene by the rapid and mild thermal 
reduction of graphene oxide induced by microwaves. Carbon 48:1146–1152 
107. Chen W, Yan L (2010) Preparation of graphene by a low temperature thermal reduction at 
atmosphere pressure. Nanoscale 2:559–563 
108. Zhou X, Liu Z (2010) A scalable, solution-phase processing route to graphene oxide and 
graphene ultra large sheets. Chem Commun 46:2611–2613 
109. Vickery JL, Patil AJ, Mann S (2009) Fabrication of graphene–polymer nanocomposites with 
higher-order three dimensional architectures. Adv Mater 21:2180–2184 
110. Cao Y, Feng J, Wu P (2010) Preparation of organically dispersible graphene nanosheet powders 
through a lyophilization method and their poly (lactic acid) composites. Carbon 48:3834–3839 
111. Chaturvedi A, Tiwari A, Tiwari A (2013) Spectroscopic and morphological analysis of 
graphene vinylester nanocomposites. Adv Mater Lett 4:656–661

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
301
112. Che J, Shen L, Xiao Y (2010) A new approach to fabricate graphene nanosheets in organic 
medium: combination of reduction and dispersion. J Mater Chem 20:1722–1727 
113. Gong L, Kinloch IA, Young RJ (2010) Interfacial stress transfer in a graphene monolayer 
nanocomposite. Adv Mater 22:2694–2697 
114. Liu P, Huang Y, Wang L (2013) Preparation and excellent microwave absorption prop-
erty of three component nanocomposites: Polyaniline-reduced graphene oxide-CO3O4 
nanoparticles. Synth Met 177:89–93 
115. Marcano DC, Kosynkin DV, Berlin JM (2010) Improved synthesis of graphene oxide. ACS 
Nano 4:4806–4814 
116. Kumar SK, Castro M, Saiter A (2013) Development of poly (isobutylene-coisoprene)/reduced 
graphene oxide nanocomposites for barrier, dielectric and sensing applications. Mater Lett 
96:109–112 
117. Zeng X, Yang J, Yuan W (2012) Preparation of a poly (methyl methacrylate)-reduced graphene 
oxide composite with enhanced properties by a solution blending method. Eur Polym J 
48:1674–1682 
118. Subrahmanyam K, Vivekchand S, Govindaraj A (2008) A study of graphenes prepared by 
different methods: characterization, properties and solubilization. J Mater Chem 18:1517– 
1523 
119. Zaman I, Kuan HC, Dai J (2012) From carbon nanotubes and silicate layers to graphene 
platelets for polymer nanocomposites. Nanoscale 4: 4578–4586 
120. Yu J, Lu K, Sourty E, Grossiord N, Koning CE, Loos J (2007) Characterization of conductive 
multiwall carbon nanotube/polystyrene composites prepared by latex technology. Carbon 
45:2897–2903 
121. Li J, Vaisman L, Marom G, Kim JK (2007) Br treated graphite nanoplatelets for improved 
electrical conductivity of polymer composites. Carbon 45:744–750 
122. Wang S, Tambraparni M, Qiu J, Tipton J, Dean D (2009) Thermal expansion of graphene 
composites. Macromolecules 42:5251–5255 
123. Kuilla T, Srivastava SK, Bhowmick AK (2009) Rubber/LDH nanocomposites by solution 
blending. J Appl Polym Sci 111:635–641 
124. Yu A, Ramesh P, Itkis ME, Elena B, Haddon RC (2007) Graphite nanoplatelet-epoxy 
composite thermal interface materials. J Phys Chem C 111:7565–7569 
125. Liu N, Luo F, Wu H, Liu Y, Zhang C, Chen J (2008) One step ionic-liquid assisted elec-
trochemical synthesis of ionic-liquid-functionalized graphene sheets directly from graphene. 
Adv Funct Mater 18:1518–1525 
126. Eda G, Chhowalla M (2009) Graphene-based composite thin ﬁlms for electronics. Nano Lett 
9:814–818 
127. Mu Q, Feng S (2007) Thermal conductivity of graphite/silicone rubber prepared by solution 
intercalation. Thermochim Acta 462:70–75 
128. Zhang HB, Zheng WG, Yan Q, Yang Y, Wang J, Lu ZH (2010) Electrically conduc-
tive polyethylene terephthalate/graphene nanocomposites prepared by melt compounding. 
Polymer 51:1191–1196 
129. Hu H, Wang X, Wanga J, Wana L, Liu F, Zheng H (2010) Preparation and properties of 
graphene nanosheets-polystyrene nanocomposites via in situ emulsion polymerization. Chem 
Phys Lett 484:247–253 
130. Stankovich S, Dikin DA, Piner RD, Kohlhaas KA, Kleinhammes A (2007) Synthesis of 
graphene-based nanosheets via chemical reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide. Carbon 
45:1558–1565 
131. Zhao X, Zhang Q, Chen D (2010) Enhanced mechanical properties of graphene-based 
poly(vinyl alcohol) composites. Macromolecules 43:2357–2363 
132. Stankovich S, Dikin DA, Dommett GHB, Kohlhaas KM, Zimney EJ, Stach EA (2006) 
Graphene-based composite materials. Nature 442:282–286 
133. Liu N, Luo F, Wu H, Liu Y, Zhang C, Chen J (2008) One step ionicliquidassisted electro-
chemical synthesis of ionic-liquid-functionalized graphene sheets directly from graphene. 
Adv Funct Mater 18:1518–1525

302
D. Tripathy et al.
134. Mu Q, Feng S (2007) Thermal conductivity of graphite=silicone rubber prepared by solution 
intercalation. Thermochim Acta 462:70–75 
135. Hu HT, Wang JC, Wan L, Liu FM, Zheng H (2010) Preparation and properties of graphene 
nanosheets—polystyrene nanocomposites via insitu emulsion polymerization. Chem Phys 
Lett 484:247–253 
136. Kuilla T, Bhadra S, Yao D, Kim NH, Bose S, Lee JH (2010) Recent advances in graphene 
based polymer composites. Prog Poly Sci 35(11):1350–1375 
137. Peponi L, Tercjak A, Verdejo R, Lopez-Manchado MA, Mondragon I, Kenny JM (2009) 
Conﬁnement of functionalized graphene sheets by triblock copolymers. J Phys Chem 
113:17973–17978 
138. Wang DW, Li F, Zhao J, Ren W, Chen ZG, Tan J (2009) Fabrication of graphene/polyaniline 
composite paper via in situ anodic electro-polymerization for high-performance ﬂexible 
electrode. ACS Nano 7:1745–1752 
139. Zhao L, Zhao L, Xu Y, Qiu T, Zhi L, Shi G (2009) Polyaniline electrochromic devices with 
transparent graphene electrodes. Electrochim Acta 55:491–497 
140. Yan J, Wei T, Fan Z, Qian W, Zhang M, Shen X (2010) Preparation of graphene nanosheet/ 
carbon nanotube/polyaniline composite as electrode material for supercapacitors. J Power 
Sources 195:3041–3045 
141. Mazinani S, Ajji A, Dubois C (2009) Morphology, structure and properties of conductive 
PS=CNT nanocomposite electrospun mat. Polym 50:3329–3342 
142. Bourlinos AB, Gournis D, Petridis D, Szabo T, Szeri A, Dekany I (2003) Graphite oxide: 
chemical reduction to graphite and surface modiﬁcation with primary aliphatic amines and 
amino acids. Chem Mater 19:6050–6055 
143. Liang J, Huang Y, Zhang L, Wang Y, Ma Y, Guo T (2009) Molecular-level dispersion of 
graphene into poly(vinyl alcohol) and effective reinforcement of their nanocomposites. Adv 
Funct Mater 19:2297–2302 
144. Lee YR, Raghu AV, Jeong HM, Kim BK (2009) Properties of waterborne polyurethane/ 
functionalized graphene sheet nanocomposites prepared by an in situ method. Macromol 
Chem Phys 210(15):1247–1254 
145. Liang J, Xu Y, Huang Y, Zhang L, Wang Y, Ma Y (2009) Infraredtriggered actuators from 
graphene-based nanocomposites. J Phys Chem 113:9921–9927 
146. Ansari S, Giannelis EP (2009) Functionalized graphene sheetpoly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) 
conductive nanocomposites. J Polym Sci Part B Polym Phys 47:888–897 
147. Xu Y, Wang Y, Jiajie L, Huang Y, Ma Y, Wan X (2009) A hybrid material of graphene and 
poly(3,4-ethyldioxythiophene) with high conductivity, ﬂexibility, and transparency. Nano Res 
2:343–348 
148. Kim H, Macosko CW (2009) Processing–property relationships of polycarbonate/graphene 
nanocomposites. Polym 50:3797–3809 
149. Cussler EL, Hughes SE, Ward WJ III, Aris R (1988) Barrier membrane. J Membr Sci 38:161– 
174 
150. Halperin BI, Feng S, Sen PN (1985) Differences between lattice and continuum percolation 
transport exponents. Phys Rev Lett 54:2391–2394 
151. Moussa M, El-Kady MF, Zhao Z, Majewski P, Ma J (2016) Recent progress and perfor-
mance evaluation for polyaniline/graphene nanocomposites as supercapacitor electrodes. 
Nanotechnology (27):442001 
152. Tai Z, Yan X, Xue Q (2012) Three-dimensional graphene/polyaniline composite hydrogel as 
supercapacitor electrode. J Electrochem Soc 159(10):A1702 
153. Liu H, Wang Y, Gou X, Qi T, Yang J, Ding Y (2013) Three-dimensional graphene/polyaniline 
composite material for high-performance supercapacitor applications. Mater Sci Eng 5:293– 
298 
154. Kulkarni SB, Patil UM, Shackery I, Sohn JS, Lee S, Park B, Jun S (2014) High-performance 
supercapacitor electrode based on a polyaniline nanoﬁbers/3D graphene framework as an 
efﬁcient charge transporter. J Mater Chem A 14:4989–4998

10
Surface Engineering of Graphene-Based Polymeric Composites …
303
155. Zhang Y, Huang Y, Yang G, Bu F, Li K, Shakir I, Xu Y (2017) Dispersion–assembly approach 
to synthesize three-dimensional graphene/polymer composite aerogel as a powerful organic 
cathode for rechargeable Li and Na batteries. ACS Appl Mater Interf 18:15549–15556 
156. Li WW, Yu HQ, He Z (2014) Towards sustainable wastewater treatment by using microbial 
fuel cells-centered technologies. Energy Environ Sci 3:911–924 
157. Xie X, Criddle C, Cui Y (2015) Design and fabrication of bioelectrodes for microbial 
bioelectrochemical systems. Energy Environ Sci 12:3418–3441 
158. Zou L, Qiao Y, Wu ZY, Wu XS, Xie JL, Yu SH, Li CM (2016) Tailoring unique mesopores of 
hierarchically porous structures for fast direct electrochemistry in microbial fuel cells. Adv 
Energy Mater 4:1501535 
159. Yang Y, Dong R, Zhu Y, Li H, Zhang H, Fan X, Chang H (2020) High-performance direct 
hydrogen peroxide fuel cells (DHPFCs) with silver nanowire-graphene hybrid aerogel as 
highly-conductive mesoporous electrodes. Chem Eng J 381:122749 
160. Du Q, An J, Li J, Zhou L, Li N, Wang X (2017) Polydopamine as a new modiﬁcation material 
to accelerate startup and promote anode performance in microbial fuel cells. J Power Sources 
343:477–482 
161. Tang C, Zhang Q (2016) Can metal–nitrogen–carbon catalysts satisfy oxygen electrochem-
istry? J Mater Chem A 14:4998–5001 
162. Yong YC, Dong XC, Chan-Park MB, Song H, Chen P (2012) Macroporous and monolithic 
anode based on polyaniline hybridized three-dimensional graphene for high-performance 
microbial fuel cells. ACS Nano 6(3):2394–2400 
163. Xia H, Hong C, Li B, Zhao B, Lin Z, Zheng M, Aldoshin SM (2015) Facile synthesis of 
hematite quantum-dot/functionalized graphene-sheet composites as advanced anode materials 
for asymmetric supercapacitors. Adv Funct Mater 25(4):627–635

Chapter 11 
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials 
for High-Performance Dielectric 
Applications 
Anupam Sahoo, Sangita Kumari Swain, and Sukanta Kumar Swain 
Abstract Green energy is a relatively new kind of energy that is gaining considerable 
interest from nations all over the globe as a solution to the problem of environmental 
pollution on a global scale as well as the current energy crisis (Luo et al. in Adv Energy 
Mater 9(5):1803204, 2019 [1], Wang et al. in J Mater Chem A 8(22):11124–11132, 
2020 [2], Wang et al. in Nano Energy 78:105247, 2020 [3], Zheng et al. in Compos Sci 
Technol 222:109379, 2022 [4]). Owing to numerous applications in the electronic 
and electrical industries, such as transistors, actuators, and capacitors, dielectric 
materials having low dielectric loss and high dielectric constant have gained growing 
consideration in recent years (Zheng et al. in Compos Sci Technol 222:109379, 2022 
[4], He et al. in Compos A Appl Sci Manuf 93:137–143, 2017 [5], Huang and Jiang in 
Adv Mater 27(3):546–554, 2015 [6], Wang et al. in IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 
17(4):1036–1042, 2010 [7]). In this chapter, various types of core–shell nanoparticles 
are discussed for high-performance dielectric applications. 
Keywords Core–shell nanoparticles · Dielectric materials · Polymer 
nanocomposites · High-k materials 
11.1 Introduction 
High dielectric constant materials (high-k) possess various implications in organic 
thin-ﬁlm electroluminescent devices [8], organic ﬁeld effect transistors (OFETs) [9– 
11], actuators, and [12, 13] energy storage devices [14–16], and electrical stress
A. Sahoo envelope symbol
Department of Chemistry, Sri Krushna Chandra Gajapati (Autonomous) College, 
Paralakhemundi, Odisha, India 
e-mail: anupamchem0@gmail.com 
S. K. Swain 
Centre of Excellence, Berhampur University, Berhampur, Odisha, India 
S. K. Swain 
Department of ECE, Indian Institute of Information Technology, Ranchi, Jharkhand, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_11 
305

306
A. Sahoo et al.
control applications[17–19]. High-k materials have the ability to signiﬁcantly lower 
the surface electric stress and maintain it at a level that is lower than the breakdown 
strength of air that may ﬁnally lead to the elimination of the surface discharge. A 
seamless high-k material has the characteristics such as high dielectric constant, 
high breakdown strength, minimal dielectric loss, and superior processability. These 
are the general features of an ideal high-k material. In general, polymers based 
on organic molecules have a high breakdown strength and are simple to produce, 
however the vast majority of organic polymers have disadvantage of low dielectric 
constant, e.g., around 2.0–5.0. Despite the fact that many have very high dielectric 
constants, the dielectric loss of these materials is often rather considerable, especially 
when subjected to strong electric ﬁelds [20]. In addition to having enormous dielectric 
constants that range from ~1000 to 10,000, dielectric ceramics like BaTiO3 have 
lower breakdown strengths and/or substantial dielectric loss [21]. Additionally, their 
lack of ﬂexibility and low processability severely restrict their use. In general, it is 
challenging to discover a single material that combines all the required qualities for 
real-world applications. Therefore, it may be anticipated that combining the beneﬁts 
of ceramics with polymers would be a successful strategy for developing new high-k 
materials. 
When compared with microparticles, the interlinked area that polymer material 
has with nanoparticles is much higher. Nanoparticles impart larger interconnected 
areas in comparison with micro-sized particles, with the polymer nanocomposites. 
As a result, nanoparticles are the potential materials that exhibit signiﬁcantly higher 
polarization levels, mechanical enhancements, and breakdown strength. Addition-
ally, they provide more opportunities to tune and optimize the characteristics of the 
polymer matrix. Further, the smaller size of nanomaterials makes them feasible to 
lower the fabrication dimensions of devices based on polymer nanocomposites. This 
is a feature that is of the utmost signiﬁcance for the ongoing process of shrinking the 
size of electronic devices. In the case of embedded planar capacitors, for instance, the 
dielectric ﬁlm must be very thin in order to provide a higher capacitance; normally, 
this is accomplished using ﬁlms on the micrometer scale. When measured on this 
scale, an enhancement in the size of the high-k particles from 100 nm to 2 μm results 
in a considerable reduction in the capacitance density of polymer composite ﬁlms 
[22]. These exciting factors make nanoparticles most signiﬁcant for the development 
of high-k dielectric materials. 
Although the incorporation of nanoparticles into the design of high-k polymer 
composites has a number of opportunities for improvement, the realization of high-
performance nanocomposites presents a number of obstacles. The synthesis of 
homogenously dispersed nanoparticles and the tuning of interfaces between polymer 
and nanoparticle are typical examples of existing problems. Both of these factors 
play signiﬁcant roles in producing appropriate electrical and other characteristics. 
Surface modiﬁcation of nanoparticles by coupling agents [18], hydroxylation [23], 
surfactants, phosphoric acids, and other organic compounds [24–26] has been exten-
sively employed to enhance the performance of polymer nanocomposites to achieve 
a high-k material. However, these approaches still have certain drawbacks in terms of 
achieving the complete potential of a high-performance polymer matrix. This is due

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
307
to the fact that the surface modiﬁers themselves do not often exhibit huge participation 
in the enhancement of the dielectric characteristics of the nanocomposites. 
Over the past few years, considerable efforts has been invested in the synthesis 
and design of core–shell nanoparticles, with the goal of realizing the full potential 
that nanoparticles have to offer in terms of improving the characteristics of polymer 
nanocomposites. Figure 11.1 provides many generic ways for manufacturing high-k 
polymer nanocomposites utilizing core–shell methodologies. As an example, this 
ﬁgure uses BaTiO3 as its subject. These approaches may be broken down into the 
following four categories: 
(i) Core–shell nanoparticles that have been fabricated by “grafting from” [27–29] 
(ii) Core–shell nanoparticles that have been fabricated by “grafting to” [30–33] 
(iii) The use of organic–inorganic based core–shell nanoparticles as ﬁller materials 
[34, 35] and 
(iv) The use of other varieties of core–shell nanoparticles as ﬁller materials [36–39]. 
This chapter focuses mostly on reviewing these developing approaches. In order 
to successfully use high-k polymer nanocomposites, it is essential to strike an 
appropriate balance between the dielectric loss, dielectric constant, and break-
down strength[40–42]. For this reason, a focus is made by virtue of core–shell 
techniques in attaining lower dielectric loss and strong breakdown strength while 
simultaneously preserving the high dielectric constant of the various nanocomposite
Fig. 11.1 Methods adopted for the synthesis of core–shell nanoparticles for high-k polymer 
nanocomposite matrix 

308
A. Sahoo et al.
matrices. However, it is important to know about the advantages and classes of core– 
shell nanoparticles. The following section describes a brief idea about core–shell 
nanoparticles. 
11.2 Classiﬁcation of Core–Shell Nanomaterials 
Nanoparticles may be classiﬁed into simple, core/shell, and composite categories, 
depending on whether they are composed of a single substance or many compo-
nents. In general, nanoparticles that are classiﬁed as simple are constructed using 
just a single kind of material. On the other hand, particles classiﬁed as composite 
or core/shell are made up of two or more types of materials. The core–shell type of 
nanoparticles may be broadly characterized as nanoparticles that consist of an inner 
core material and an exterior shell material (outer layer material). These may be 
made up of a broad variety of distinct combinations that are interacting closely with 
one another, such as components that are organic/organic, organic/inorganic, inor-
ganic/organic, or inorganic/organic. The ﬁnal application and purpose often have 
a signiﬁcant impact on the material that is selected to function as the shell of the 
core–shell nanoparticle. Figure 11.2 provides a schematic representation of many 
distinct types of core–shell nanoparticles. Concentric spherical core/shell nanoparti-
cles are considered to be the most common kind of nanoparticle (Fig. 11.2a), which 
consists of a basic spherical core particle that is entirely covered by a shell made 
of a different substance. Due to the fact that they each possess their own unique set 
of characteristics, various core/shell nanoparticles have also sparked a signiﬁcant 
amount of research interest. When a core is not spherical, as illustrated in Fig. 11.2b, 
different shaped core/shell nanoparticles will often occur.
Multiple core core–shell particles may be created, as shown in Fig. 11.2c when a 
single layer of shell material is deposited concurrently over a large number of rela-
tively small core particles. This can result in the formation of multiple core/shell parti-
cles. Nanoshells are shown as having alternating coatings of dielectric core material 
and metal shell material onto each other in Fig. 11.2d. These nanoshells are concentric 
in nature. These nanoshells have an A/B/A structure conﬁguration. In this structure, 
nanoscale spacer layers made of dielectric material are employed to separate concen-
tric layers of metallic material. These sorts of nanoparticles are known as nanomate-
rial or multi-layered metal-dielectric nanostructures. Such materials possess unique 
plasmonic properties. 
The plasmonic features of these types of particles are the major reason for their 
signiﬁcance. After applying a bilayer coating of the core material and then using the 
proper procedure to remove the ﬁrst layer, it is also feasible to fabricate a movable 
core particle that is contained inside a hollow spherical shell material (shown in 
Fig. 11.2e). This can be done after a double-layer coating of the core material [43].

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
309
Fig. 11.2 Various types of core–shell nanoparticles; a Spherical, b Hexagonal, c Multicore single 
shell, d Multi-layered nanomaterial, e Movable core in the shell
11.3 Approaches for the Development of Core–Shell 
Polymer Nanocomposites with High-k 
11.3.1 
Core–Shell Nanoparticles Produced Using 
the “Grafting-From” Technique 
This technique is based on the in situ polymerization of monomers on the surfaces 
of nanoparticles that have been functionalized with an initiator. This results in 
the production of nanocomposites. The incorporation of an adequate number of 
starting sites onto the surfaces of the nanoparticles is the essential component of this 
technique. The controlled or live radical polymerization approach, which includes 
techniques such as 
a. Reversible addition-fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT) 
b. 
Atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), 
These are the potent “grafting from” methods. These methods offer many beneﬁts 
as follows [27–29, 35]. 
(i) The shell layer may be formed as a matrix to form highly stable core–shell 
materials with high-quality and highly ﬁlled materials free of voids, pores, and 
defects. 
(ii) The nanoparticle aggregation has been prevented by the outer layer (shell) of 
the core material. 
(iii) The feed ratio of the monomer and the functionalized initiator nanoparticles 
may be modiﬁed to change the nanoparticle concentration.

310
A. Sahoo et al.
(iv) Any polymer chains are ﬁrmly attached to the surfaces of the nanoparticles, 
creating a sturdy nanoparticle/matrix composite with an intact interface. 
(v) A wide variety of monomers may be converted into polymers. 
Jiang and Huang utilized polystyrene (PS) and poly (methyl methacrylate) 
[PMMA] nanocomposites and adopted RAFT and ATRP to synthesize high-k core– 
shell PS@BaTiO3 and PMMA@BaTiO3 nanoparticles correspondingly [28, 29]. 
The schematic representation has been shown in Fig. 11.3. In both these types of 
nanoparticles homogeneous dispersion has been observed. The dielectric constant 
was increased from 2.80 to 24 with the 48 vol% BaTiO3in PS@BaTiO3 nanocom-
posite while compared with pure PS. The dielectric loss was mostly as low as pure 
PS. The result depicted that the dielectric loss and dielectric constant remained stable 
over a wide scale of frequencies. This result provided the potential for this material to 
be used in various functional devices and exhibits a stable and insensitive operation 
with varying frequencies. 
Electrical vehicles, consumer electronics pulse-power systems, and electric grids 
make extensive use of capacitors made from biaxially oriented polypropylene 
(BOPP) ﬁlm because of the unique blend of properties that it possesses. These 
properties include high breakdown strength, low energy loss, and low-capacity loss 
even under conditions like high sealability, frequencies, ﬂexibility, and lightweight. 
However, due to the lower dielectric constant of polypropylene (PP), the use of 
BOPP is restricted from being utilized in potential future applications that may call
Fig. 11.3 Schematic representation of the preparation procedure for high-k PMMA and PS 
nanomaterials by RAFT and ATRP polymerization techniques, correspondingly 

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
311
Fig. 11.4 Schematic presentation of synthetic routes of PP core–shell nanocomposite matrix [32]. 
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [32]. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society 
for the speedy transmission of signiﬁcant amounts of energy. An efﬁcient approach 
for the fabrication of PP-based high-k and low-loss nanocomposites was reported 
to have been developed by the Marks research group in the year 2007 [32, 44–47]. 
In this procedure, initially the nanoparticles (e.g., Al, TiO2, SrTiO3, BaTiO3, MgO,  
ZrO2, and Ba0.5Sr0.5TiO3) were treated with a co-catalyst methylaluminoxane (MAO) 
which enabled the formation of Al-O bond with covalent character (Fig. 11.4). 
Further, the nanoparticles that had been treated with MAO were put through a reac-
tion with a catalyst acethylenebisindenyl zirconium chloride (EBIZrCl2) for metal-
locene oleﬁn polymerization. The surface functionalization of MAO on nanoparticles 
utilizing EBIZrCl2 led to the development of species active for polymerization, being 
anchored on the surfaces of the nanoparticles. These polymerization-active species 
had the ability to initiate the in situ propylene polymerization, which ultimately 
resulted in the production of isotactic PP (isoPP) nanocomposites. In comparison 
with pure PP, the isoPP nanocomposites that were synthesized, displayed signiﬁcantly 
increased energy storage capacity as a result of their increased dielectric constant, 
as well as their suitably high breakdown strength. 
Even though this approach only works with a small number of monomers, it offers 
a number of special advantages: 
(i) The production of nanocomposites is quite feasible. 
(ii) Large local hydrostatic pressures caused by the propagating polyoleﬁn chains 
from the active catalyst centers may prevent nanoparticle agglomeration in the 
ﬁnal nanocomposites. 
Most signiﬁcantly, this technology offers a practical approach to reducing the 
amount of electrical mismatch that exists between the matrix and the nanoparticles. 
Speciﬁcally, the nanoparticles are covered with a material (Al2O3) having a dielec-
tric constant that is lower than that of the nanoparticles but higher than that of the 
matrix themselves. It is worth noting that the large dielectric constant mismatch is the 
primary cause of the reduction in the breakdown strength of high-k polymer compos-
ites. Keeping this in mind, the incorporation of Al2O3 may prove to be advantageous 
in preserving the high breakdown strength of nanomaterials. In speciﬁcally, Al-iso 
PP nanocomposites show a remarkable breakdown strength[47]. According to the 
ﬁndings that were published by Marks, even at a high concentration (12.4 vol%) of 
metal nanoparticles, the Al-iso PP composites exhibit a high breakdown strength of 
almost 80 MV m−1. Even when the particle concentration is well below the percola-
tion threshold, polymer composites ﬁlled with conductive particles typically display

312
A. Sahoo et al.
a very lower breakdown strength as a consequence of the electrical conduction that 
occurs as a result of inter-particle tunneling. This is the case even when the particle 
concentration is extremely low [48]. In this case, the isoPP nanocomposite matrix 
having a high amount of Al nanoparticles shows high breakdown strength. This 
may be due to the surface modiﬁcation by Al2O3 layer, which hinders the tunneling 
current among particles. This is the case because these nanocomposites have a higher 
percentage ratio of Al nanoparticles in the composite. 
11.3.2 
Core–Shell Structure Fabricated Using 
the “Grafting-To” Method 
This technique includes the production of nanomaterials by grafting the pre-
synthesized polymers onto the surface of the nanoparticles. This grafting takes place 
as a result of an interaction between the functional groups on the surfaces of nanopar-
ticles and the polymer end-groups. In contrast to the “grafting from” method, the 
“grafting to” method enables us to exercise greater command over the molecular 
composition as well as the molecular mass of the polymer molecules. This gives 
us the ability to tailor the ultimate nanocomposites to achieve the desired level of 
performance. 
Click chemistry is a universal approach that can be utilized to join reactants. It 
possesses the beneﬁts of insensitivity to solvents, high efﬁcacy, and mild reaction 
parameters. Click chemistry was developed in the 1970s. As a result, click reactions 
are an adaptable approach for the grafting of polymer molecules to the surfaces 
of nanoparticles. Vaia and Tchoul et al. have used a Cu(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne 
click reaction (CuAAC) to create a sequence of core–shell PS@TiO2 nanocomposite 
matrix [30]. 
The core–shell PS nanocomposites having 27 vol% TiO2 had a dielectric constant 
of 6.4 at 1000 Hz, while the dielectric loss tangent was as low as 0.625%. The 
nanocomposites were made with 100 kg mol−1 of PS. In order to obtain high carrier 
mobility and low leakage current in thin-ﬁlm-transistors based on organic semi-
conductors, the composite can be utilized as the gate dielectric in these devices 
[31]. 
Due to its high complexation with azides and triazoles, the CuBr catalyst utilized 
in the CuAAC process cannot be readily recovered from the nanocomposites. This 
strong complexation has the potential to create strong frequency-dependent dielec-
tric characteristics as well as substantial dielectric loss. In contrast to the CuAAC 
reaction process, the thiol-ene click chemistry is very effective and does not produce 
any undesirable by-products. Further, it does not need the transition metals for the 
catalytic process to progress. The fabrication of core–shell polymer nanocomposites 
is made signiﬁcantly easier by the use of the thiol-ene click reaction. Utilizing thiol-
ene reaction method, Huang and Jiang developed polymer@BaTiO3 nanocomposite 
matrices. The preparation procedure is depicted in Fig. 11.5a [49].

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
313
Fig. 11.5 Schematic presentation of synthetic procedure for PS@BaTiO3 and PMMA@BaTiO3 
nanomaterials utilizing the thiol-ene click reaction [49]. Adopted with permission from Ref. [49] 
copyright@2014, American Chemical Society 
By employing the thiol-ene click reaction macromolecules are grafted 
onto vinyl-functionalized BaTiO3nanoparticle surface to synthesize core–shell 
polymer@BaTiO3 nanoparticles. Using RAFT polymerization, initially, thiol-ended 
PMMA or PS macromolecules of various molecular mass were developed. Except for 
extremely low frequencies, the nanocomposites displayed a considerably improved 
dielectric constant, although the dielectric loss remained just as low when compared 
with pure polymer. This investigation also demonstrated that the dielectric prop-
erties of the polymer@BaTiO3core–shellcomposite depended upon two factors. 
These factors include the grafting density of the core–shell structured nanoparti-
cles and the molecular mass of the polymer chains, particularly at low frequencies. 
In particular, the dielectric loss was shown to be related to the molecular mass of the 
polymer molecules. High molecular mass polymer chains frequently have a propen-
sity to cause poor grafting density and hence show a signiﬁcant dielectric loss in 
nanocomposites [50]. 
Except for click reaction, the technique of producing core–shell structured high-
k nanocomposites may make use of any alternative reaction to facilitate a linkage 
between nanoparticle surface and organic molecule chains. Maliakal et al. are able 
to afﬁx oleic acid-terminated TiO2 nanoparticle surfaces and phosphonate end-
functionalized PS and effectively create core–shell high-k PS@TiO2 nanocom-
posite dielectrics. This was done in an effort to ﬁnd organic thin-ﬁlm semiconductor 
transistors with high-k [31]. 
When the volume percentage of TiO2 reached 18.2% the nanocomposite matrix 
exhibited a high dielectric constant (9.4), and the transistor that was produced demon-
strated good mobility, which was desirable. Kim and Jung synthesized core–shell 
nanomaterials by surrounding BaTiO3 with a PS-based copolymer. The name of 
the copolymer was polystyrene-block-poly (styrene-co-vinylbenzylchloride) [PS-b-
PSVBC]. This resulted in a novel core–shell material in which the positively charged 
PSVBC was protected by the negatively charged PS shell. In such a case, the charged 
PSVBC shell resulted in improvements in the dielectric constant, while the PS shell

314
A. Sahoo et al.
operated to lower the amount of leakage current and minimize the formation of break-
down channels. Both effects were achieved via the combined efforts of the two shells. 
The increase in the dielectric constant may be traced back to the primary reason, 
which is the increased interfacial polarization that can be found between the PSVBC 
shell and the PS shell. In conclusion, the shielding of the PS shell on the charged 
PSVBC shell is responsible for the decrease in leakage currents as well as the rise 
in breakdown strength. The nanocomposite materials demonstrated a substantially 
enhanced energy storage density, and the PS-b-PSVBC composite matrix composed 
of 75 weight percent BaTiO3 was discovered to have the greatest energy density deter-
mined theoretically. The energy density was found to be 9.7 J cm−3. The nanocom-
posites also showed a signiﬁcant reduction in the amount of space required to store 
the energy [33]. 
When it comes to the preparation of high-k nanocomposites on a large scale, 
the use of polymers that are readily available on the market as shells is the more 
appealing option. In recent work, Huang and Jiang generated polymer@BaTiO3core– 
shell nanocomposites by adopting the “grafting to” technique with high-k. They 
accomplished this by employing poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride-co-hexaﬂuoropropylene) 
[PVDF-HFP] functionalized with commercially available poly (glycidyl methacry-
late) [PGMA] [51]. The PGMA-functionalized PVDF-HFP generated a strong and 
durable layer on the surface of BaTiO3, providing a homogeneous distribution 
of BaTiO3 in PVDF-HFP matrix. Additionally, the energy density and dielectric 
constant of the nanocomposite matrix improved with increasing BaTiO3 concentra-
tion, although the dielectric loss dropped moderately. This was seen despite the fact 
that the dielectric loss increased to some extent. 
11.3.3 
Nanoparticles Comprised of an Organic Core 
Surrounded by an Inorganic Shell Used as Fillers 
This method refers to the synthesis of polymer matrix by inserting core–shell inor-
ganic–organic nanomaterial into a nanocomposite, analogous to the usual solution-
mixing and melt-mixing processes for preparing composites. The ability to accurately 
control the concentration of inorganic nanoparticles within the nanocomposites as 
well as the qualities that are closely connected with the nanoparticle concentration is 
one of the most signiﬁcant beneﬁts of this technology. The importance of this method 
lies in the fact that it enables an individual to gain a basic understanding of the function 
exhibited by the interface in determining the electrical characteristics of the nanocom-
posite matrix. Huang and co-worker explored the effect of matrix/shell physical 
interface interactions on the dielectric properties of nanocomposites composed of 
ﬂuoro-polymer@BaTiO3 nanoparticles and ferroelectric polymers [35]. They started 
with preparing core–shell ﬂuoro-polymer@BaTiO3 nanoparticles, which not only 
had differing thicknesses of polymer shell but also had different molecular struc-
tures. This was accomplished by inserting two different kinds of monomers based on

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
315
ﬂuoroalkyl acrylate by RAFT polymerization. These are speciﬁcally, triﬂuoroethyl 
acrylate (TFEA), and 1H, 1H, 2H, 2H-heptadecaﬂuorodecyl acrylate (HFDA). The 
nanocomposites were made by ﬁrst combining the ﬂuoro-polymer with the BaTiO3 
nanoparticles, and then adding the PVDF-HFP. The authors discovered that the shell 
structure of the ﬂuoro-polymer@BaTiO3 was closely connected with the dielectric 
characteristics and energy storage capacity of the nanocomposite matrix. The authors 
hypothesized that the ordered chain structure of PHFDA led to lower inter-chain 
interactions and lower chain mobility between PHFDA@BaTiO3 and the PVDF-
HFP composite matrix, whereas the irregular arrangement of the chain structure of 
PTFEA led to higher inter-chain interactions and higher chain mobility between 
PTFEA@BaTiO3 and the PVDF-HFP composite matrix. This led to a more robust 
suppression of the space charge. Because of this, the PTFEA@BaTiO3 nanocom-
posites were able to attain a reduced dielectric loss, a higher breakdown strength, 
and a greater capacity for energy storage. The effect that the shell/matrix chemical 
interaction plays (also known as interfacial bonding) in determining the dielectric 
characteristics of high-k polymer nanocomposites was another aspect that Huang 
and Jiang looked at. They did this by comparing the dielectric characteristics of 
single-core double-shell nanocomposite matrix (NC I) and single-core single-shell 
nanoparticle-ﬁlled nanocomposites (NC II). In this case, the matrix of NC II and the 
outer shell of NC I shared an identical chemical structure [52]. 
Functionalizing hyperbranched aromatic polyamides (HBP) onto the surfaces of 
the BaTiO3 nanoparticles was the initial step in the process of making single-core 
single-shell nanoparticles, which they referred to as HBP@BaTiO3. Then, they grew 
PMMA on the surface of HBP@BaTiO3 nanoparticles in order to construct nanocom-
posite I (also known as PMMA@HBP@BaTiO3). This was done by using ATRP. The 
nanocomposite known as nanocomposite II (PMMA/HBP@BaTiO3) was created by 
combining core–shell HBP@BaTiO3 nanocomposite with PMMA [52]. 
Both nanocomposites displayed a nanoparticle dispersion that was homogeneous 
across their structures and strong adhesion between their interfaces. Dielectric anal-
ysis, on the other hand, revealed that the two types of nanocomposites displayed 
signiﬁcantly distinct sets of properties. The PMMA@HBP@BaTiO3 nanomate-
rials show high electrical insulation. This exhibited low electrical conductivity at 
low frequencies. Electrical conductivities were substantially frequency dependent, 
whereas dielectric properties were only mildly frequency dependent. Because of their 
high dielectric constant, these materials are particularly appealing for use in appli-
cations involving energy storage and gate dielectrics. On the other hand, the highly 
loaded PMMA/HBP@BaTiO3 nanocomposites exhibited dielectric characteristics 
that were comparable with those of percolative composites. 
To be more speciﬁc, the electrical conductivity of the nanocomposites was not 
affected by frequency. However, the dielectric constant and dielectric loss of the 
nanocomposite exhibited a signiﬁcant increase at low frequencies, while simulta-
neously demonstrating a rapid decrease as the frequency was increased. In spite of 
the extremely high dielectric constant that was attained, the PMMA/HBP@BaTiO3 
nanocomposites are not desirable for use in any power energy storage or dielectric

316
A. Sahoo et al.
application. This is because the nanocomposites have substantial electrical conductiv-
ities and dielectric loss. In a different study, Huang and Jiang created mixes of ﬂuoro-
tripolymer and HBP@BaTiO3. It was observed that the core–shell HBP@BaTiO3 
nanoparticles were not compatible with the ﬂuoro-tripolymer matrix [53]. 
The researchers investigated that when the composites were subjected to relatively 
high concentrations of HBP@BaTiO3 (i.e., concentrations that were more than 20% 
by volume), the composites started to demonstrate properties of dielectric materials 
that were comparable with those of percolative nanocomposites. According to the 
ﬁndings of the two observations that were just discussed, the establishment of inter-
facial interaction is typically the most important feature that plays a role in realizing 
required dielectric characteristics in composites when the matrix and the introduced 
inclusion have a signiﬁcant difference in their electrical conductivity. In the instance 
of single-core double-shell nanomaterials, the inner shell was covalently bound to 
the outer shell. The outer shell was capable to prevent the passage of charge carriers 
by acting as a shield on the charge-rich inner shell. This caused poor interfacial polar-
ization and a lower leakage current density, which in turn enhanced the dielectric 
properties of the nanocomposites and resulted in a low dielectric loss. 
A number of the core–shell polymer@BaTiO3 documented in the literature still 
now, have been based on commercially accessible BaTiO3 nanoparticles, which is 
a technique that is quite viable and might potentially save time. However, these 
approaches are not able to control the size of the nanoparticles, and as a result, 
their electrical properties are size-dependent. More recently, the research team led 
by Lin presented an exciting technique to manufacture core–shell nanocomposites, 
comprising the core–shell polymer@BaTiO3 [54, 55]. They started by preparing star-
like gigantic molecules, as shown in Fig. 11.6. For this purpose, poly (acrylic-acid)-
block-polystyrene (PAA-b-PS) was generated from a core comprised of cyclodextrin 
using ATRP and process of hydrolysis. Further, they added the inorganic precursor, 
and by selecting the appropriate solvent, they were able to force the precursor to 
concentrate in the hydrophilic core poly (acrylic-acid) of the PAA-b-PS. Condensa-
tion at elevated temperatures ﬁnally produced single-crystalline BaTiO3 nanoparti-
cles that were the same size as that of the PAA core. By utilizing this method, it was 
possible to regulate the size of the crystalline BaTiO3 nanoparticles by adjusting the 
core size of the PAA. It was found that two different types of core–shell nanoparti-
cles with varying BaTiO3 sizes (11 and 27 nm) were effectively synthesized. These 
core–shell nanoparticles resulted in high dielectric constants than that of formerly 
published core–shell nanomaterials. It was primarily because of the higher size 
(approximately 50–140 nm) of commercially accessible BaTiO3 nanoparticles [34, 
54].
It is interesting to note that the core–shell nanoparticles are also known to be 
used as ﬁllers during the synthesis of high-k polymer nanocomposites based on 
deblock copolymer (PS-b-PMMA). PS@BaTiO3 was injected selectively into the 
cylindrical PS nanodomains in PS-b-PMMA, yielding in nanocomposites with verti-
cally oriented PS nanocylinders ﬁlled with PS@BaTiO3. This is in contrast to the 
nanocomposites that were created using conventional mixing techniques, in which

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
317
Fig. 11.6 Scheme displaying synthetic approach of PS@BaTiO3 core–shell nanocomposite
the nanomaterials were arbitrarily dispersed throughout a polymer matrix. The PS-
b-PMMA/PS@BaTiO3 nanocomposites exhibited high dielectric constants (greater 
than 18) independent of frequency. Additionally, a negligible dielectric loss was 
observed even at a high-frequency range of 2–15 GHz. These nanocomposites also 
showed tremendous potential for dielectric and energy storage applications[34]. 
11.3.4 
Core–Shell Nanoparticles of Other Types as Fillers 
In addition to core–shell structured inorganic–organic nanoparticles, to create 
high-k polymer nanocomposites, different varieties of core–shell nanocomposites 
have also been utilized as ﬁller materials. These nanoparticles include inorganic-
inorganic (e.g., SiO2 @ BaTiO3 and TiO2@BaTiO3) [38, 56], organic-organic (e.g., 
PDVB@PANI, and poly divinyl benene@polyaniline) hybrids, metal-inorganic (e.g., 
TiO2 @ Ag), and Al2O3 @Al [36, 39], and metal–organic (e.g., C@Ag) [37, 57, 58]. 
The core–shell structured TiO2 @ BaTiO3 nanoparticles as well as the associated 
PVDF nanocomposites were synthesized by Yao and Rahimabady [56]. They made 
a startling discovery when they compared the dielectric characteristics of the PVDF/ 
TiO2@BaTiO3 nanocomposites with those of the PVDF/BaTiO3 nanocomposites: 
the PVDF/TiO2 @BaTiO3 nanocomposites exhibited a considerable improvement. 
Speciﬁcally, the PVDF/TiO2 @BaTiO3 nanocomposites exhibited an increase in

318
A. Sahoo et al.
both the dielectric constant and the breakdown strength. Discharged energy density 
of the nanocomposite with 30 vol% TiO2 @BaTiO3 was 12.2 J cm−3 at 340 MV 
m−1, which is almost three times as high as the discharged energy density of pure 
PVDF (4.1 J cm−3). In polymer nanocomposites containing high-k particles, the large 
increase in dielectric constants is often achieved at the price of a reduction in break-
down strength. This is a conclusion that has been widely accepted based on research. 
Considering this interpretation, the ﬁndings of Yao and Rahimabady’s study provide 
a signiﬁcant piece of the puzzle necessary to reconcile this well-known discrepancy. 
The insertion of a TiO2 layer, which resulted in a reduction in the local electric ﬁeld 
distortion, was credited by the authors as the cause of the improvement in dielectric 
performance. The “buffer layer” hypothesis that had been developed by the Marks 
group is basically compatible with this ﬁnding. Wong and Xu are considered to be 
pioneers in the fabrication of core–shell structured Al2O3@Al nanoparticles for use 
in low-loss, high-k polymer nanocomposites[39]. 
It has been claimed that the dielectric constant may reach the highest value as 
60 when the proportion of Al nanoparticles (about 100 nm in size) in the mate-
rial is 50 weight percent, while the dielectric loss can reach a lower value of 0.02. 
The Al core which is electrically conductive causes a rise in electric ﬁeld strength 
inside the polymer nanocomposite, which adds to a rise in the dielectric constant 
of nanocomposite matrix. As a consequence of the shielding Al2O3 layer that is 
located surrounding the Al core, electron transport between the Al nanoparticles is 
restricted, which in turn results in a minimal dielectric loss. Since Ag is an excellent 
electrical conductor, Ag-ﬁlled polymer composites function as conventional percola-
tion systems. When the Ag nanoparticle loading is far below the percolation threshold 
in these systems, the dielectric constant of the composites grows slowly, and when 
it is close to the percolation threshold, it increases quickly. Since Ag is an excellent 
electrical conductor, Ag-ﬁlled polymer composites may function as characteristic 
percolation systems. After passing the percolation threshold, the composites even-
tually become electrically conductive, and after that, there is a sudden drop in the 
dielectric constant [59]. 
The creation of conductive routes between neighboring Ag nanoparticles is inhib-
ited after the Ag nanoparticles have been enclosed by an insulating polymer shell. 
Additionally, the tunneling currents between neighboring Ag nanoparticles decrease 
as the shell thickness increases. Nanocomposite with an Ag core encapsulated by 
an insulating shell behave as insulating material even a considerable amount of Ag 
present after the shell width reaches a threshold value at which the tunneling current 
reduces to a minimal value. In this scenario, the nanocomposites will demonstrate 
both a high dielectric constant as well as a low dielectric loss at the same time. 
When the concentration of Ag nanoparticles was higher than 20 vol%, Shen and Nan 
discovered that the dielectric constant increased by more than two times in magni-
tude when the epoxy nanocomposite is ﬁlled with core–shellC@Ag nanoparticles as 
ﬁllers. On the other hand, a little enhancement (i.e., from 2 to 4%) in the dielectric 
loss tangent was observed [37, 57]. 
Additionally, it is important to note that the shell thickness has an effect on the 
dielectric characteristics of the epoxy/C@Ag nanocomposites and that this effect

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
319
may be modiﬁed. Coulomb blockade and quantum conﬁnement effects may take 
place if the diameter of a nanocrystal is shrunk to a size that is sufﬁciently small 
[60]. In this scenario, a metallic particle may acquire insulating properties against 
electrical current. In addition, there will be a restriction placed on the movement 
of electrons from one particle to its adjacent particle. In this scenario, one may 
make use of the coulomb blockade effects and quantum conﬁnement of ultra-small 
metal nanomaterials in order to reduce the amount of leakage current and to improve 
the breakdown strength of nanocomposites. Based on this concept, Huang and Xie 
discovered that in contrast with BaTiO3 nanomaterials, nanocomposite matrix packed 
with BaTiO3 decorated with ultra-small Ag (such as Ag@BaTiO3) hybrid nanopar-
ticles had increased breakdown strength and lower dielectric loss [61]. Scientists 
inferred that the presence of coulomb-blockade effect in Ag@BaTiO3 nanocompos-
ites based on the dramatically reduced electrical conductivities of the nanocomposite. 
Core–shell nanoparticles that are based on inorganic and metal cores often have a high 
density, which might cause the target devices to become unnecessarily heavy. The use 
of completely organic ﬁllers is encouraged as a means of lowering the device’s overall 
weight while keeping the device’s functioning intact. Opris and Molberg devel-
oped high-k poly diomethyl siloxane (PDMS) nanomaterials by utilizing polyaniline 
functionalized poly divinyl benzene (PDVB@PANI) core–shell particles [58]. 
Surprisingly, when dielectric constant PDMS/PDVB@PANI composites were 
compared with pure PDMS, an enhancement in dielectric constant was observed, 
however, exhibited a breakdown strength that was equivalent to that of pure PDMS. 
For instance, the dielectric constant rose from 2.3 for pure PDMS to 7.6 for compos-
ites containing 31.7% PDVB@PANI nanoparticles at 100 Hz, whereas the break-
down strength of the composites only exhibited a minor drop (going from 66.1 to 
64.1 V m−1) throughout this same time period. 
Strawberry-like core–shell BaTiO3-polydopamine-Ag (BT-PDA-Ag) hybrid 
nanocomposites were produced by Xingyi Huang et al., along with the 
related poly (vinylideneﬂuoride-co-hexaﬂuroro propylene) P(VDF-HFP)/BT-PDA-
Ag nanocomposites (Fig. 11.7). The PDA shell not only made it easier to disperse the 
BT nanoparticles homogeneously throughout the P (VDF-HFP) matrix, but it also 
improved the interfacial interaction between the polymer matrix and the nanoparticle. 
In order to properly introduce the Coulomb-blockade effect into the nanocomposites, 
the nano-Ag was painted in a homogeneous manner onto the PDA shell. In compar-
ison with P (VDF-HFP)/BT-PDA and P (VDF-HFP)/BT, the polymer matrix with 
BT-PDA-Ag displays exceptional electric properties. These excellent electric prop-
erties include reduced remnant polarization, suppressed dielectric loss, enhanced 
energy efﬁciency, and energy density as well as breakdown strength. Therefore, the 
nanocomposites that were produced as a consequence have a great deal of promise 
for use in dielectric and energy storage applications. This discovery also paves the 
way for the development of novel methods for the preparation of nanocomposites 
that have a high energy density and a low dielectric loss [62].
BaTiO3 nanowires with a TiO2 shell layer encapsulation were produced by Xingyi 
Huang and co-workers in order to construct polymer nanocomposites with a high 
capacity for energy storage. According to the ﬁndings of the research, the shell

320
A. Sahoo et al.
Fig. 11.7 Schematic representation of strawberry like BT-PDA-Ag nanoparticles [62]. Adopted 
with permission from Ref. [62] copyright@ 2015 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 
Weinheim
width of the buffer layer on the nanoﬁllers plays an essential role in the process of 
customizing the performance of the nanocomposites that are created in this way. 
By using nanowires with a core–shell structure rather than bare one, it was possible 
to drastically reduce both the dielectric loss and the leakage current. Additionally, 
the introduction of TiO2 shell layers helped to improve the reduction in the break-
down strength of these nanocomposites that included raw nanowires. The decrease of 
dielectric loss and the ampliﬁcation of electric ﬁelds in polymer nanocomposites was 
another area where the ﬁnite element analysis validated the superiority of TiO2 shell 
layer-encased nanowires. In light of this fact, the nanocomposites that had TiO2 shell 
layers that enclosed BaTiO3 NWs demonstrated a signiﬁcantly enhanced capacity 
for the storage of energy in contrast to those that contained naked nanowires. The 
extensive analysis of the core–shell nanowires’ electrical properties revealed that the 
performance of the nanocomposites does not rise in a linear fashion with increasing 
shell thickness. Instead, the performance of the nanocomposites was shown to be 
something that could be optimized by varying the shell thickness. This opens the 
door for the construction of high-energy-density polymer nanocomposites that are 
appropriate for use in applications involving the next generation of energy storage 
capacitors (Fig. 11.8) [63].
Core–shell BT@Al2O3 nanoparticles were developed by Yao Wanga and Yuan 
Deng et al., and then integrated into the PVDF matrix to generate ﬂexible composite 
ﬁlms. This was accomplished via a heterogeneous nucleation approach. There were 
discernible impacts of the uniform Al2O3 shell on the nanocomposite’s resultant 
dielectric properties, and these effects were detected. The nanocomposite with bare 
BT NPs had a dielectric loss of about 0.02 and a conductivity of about 2.3 × 10–8 
Sm−1, whereas the composite with 20 vol% BT@ Al2O3 NPs had conductivity 
that was about 2.3 × 10–8 Sm−1. This represents a decrease of about 48% and

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
321
Fig. 11.8 Schematic diagram of the preparation of mTiO2@BaTiO3 NWs followed by synthesis of 
nanocomposite ﬁlm [63]. Adopted with permission from Ref. [63] copyright@2017, Royal Society 
of Chemistry
78.8%, respectively, from the nanocomposite with bare BT NPs. The use of an Al2O3 
shell layer has been shown to effectively reduce interfacial polarization as well as 
electric conduction and electric ﬁeld concentration in composites. This has led to 
an increase in dielectric breakdown strength as well as a reduction in energy loss 
without causing degradation in the dielectric constant or discharged energy storage 
density. They revealed an efﬁcient approach for obtaining dielectric materials with 
fairly low dielectric loss and decreased energy storage loss. These are extremely 
signiﬁcant factors for assessing the performances of high-power systems, and the 
method demonstrates how it may be done [5] (Fig. 11.9).
Sandwiched polymer ceramic-based dielectrics were developed by Chung Ming 
Leung and co-workers. These dielectrics show the possibility for use in energy storage 
devices owing to their large power density, excellent ﬂexibility, and cheaper cost. 
The poor energy storage density, however, continues to be the barrier in this process. 
These nanocomposite ﬁlms are designed by keeping the poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride) 
(PVDF) as the middle layer integrated with BaTiO3 (BT) coated Ag nanomaterials 
(Ag@BT NPs). The bottom/top layers are composed of PVDF-embedded 2D layered 
MXene nanosheets. This results in the formation of sandwiched polymer-ceramic 
nanocomposite ﬁlms. It is interesting to note that the composite best performed with 
a reversible energy storage density (UeWre) as high as 22.3 J/cm3 and an efﬁciency 
of 77% at a low electric ﬁeld of 270 MV/m that are reached for the ﬁlm with a 
middle layer that contains 5 weight percent DA@Ag@BT/PVDF. The high-energy 
storage ability may be attributed to the strong interfacial coupling, ionic contact, and 
higher breakdown strength owing to the Coulomb-blockade effect in the hierarchical

322
A. Sahoo et al.
Fig. 11.9 Schematic presentation of 
a Synthesis of BaTiO3@Al2O3 
nanoparticles and 
b BaTiO3@Al2O3/PVDF [5]. Adopted with permission from Ref. [5] copyright@ 2016, Elsevier 
Ltd.
structures that include a variety of ﬁllers. In addition, the results of the phase-ﬁeld 
simulation demonstrated that enough quantity of DA@Ag@BT NPs can effectively 
avoid the creation of conductive networks, suppress dielectric loss, and increase 
breakdown strength. This hierarchical technique offers an appropriate route for the 
fabrication of high-performance polymer nanocomposites (Fig. 11.10) [64]. 
Poly (p-phenylenebenzobisoxazole) (PBO) is a kind of polymer that maintains 
its structural integrity at high temperatures. However, its employment in high-
performance dielectrics is limited due to its poor processability as well as its 
low inherent dielectric constant. Xiaoyun Liu and Qixin Zhuang produced PBO 
using the precursor technique, and the preparation of polymer ﬁlms is carried out 
using solution casting, which is a more time- and labor-efﬁcient approach than the
Fig. 11.10 Schematic representation of the synthesis of DA@Ag@BT, MXene, and sandwiched 
structure of MP-xDA@Ag@BT/PVDF [64]. Adopted with permission from Ref. [64] copyright@ 
2022, Elsevier Ltd. and Techna Group S.r.l 

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
323
conventional way of processing. In addition to this, a hierarchically organized one-
dimensional Al2O3@NaNbO3 is fabricated and then injected into the PBO matrix. 
The nanocomposite has signiﬁcantly improved dielectric characteristics and break-
down strength as a result of both its high aspect ratio and its unique structure, 
which is Al2O3@NaNbO3. The nanocomposite that is ﬁlled with 3 volume percent 
Al2O3@NaNbO3exhibits the maximum breakdown strength of 286 kV mm−1. In  
addition, maintains a high dielectric constant of 6.68 as well as a low dielectric 
loss of 0.035 at 1 kHz. Further, the energy density enhanced to 1.64 J cm−3 at 
250 kV mm−1. This is about 200% higher than the pure PBO and the nanocom-
posite has a low dielectric loss. In addition, the dielectric characteristics of 3 vol% 
Al2O3@NaNbO3-PBO demonstrate remarkable thermal stability from 25 to 250 °C. 
This great thermal stability may be due to the heat resistance of both PBO and 
Al2O3@NaNbO3, which are both present in the material. This study demonstrates 
a potentially useful method for the fabrication of polymeric dielectrics that may be 
used in harsh conditions [65]. 
In the constantly emerging areas, the synthesis of multifunctional epoxy resins 
using environmentally friendly processes is signiﬁcant (AI, 5G, IoT, electrical and 
electronics appliances). In order to accomplish this goal, a multifunctional nanocom-
posite was manufactured by Yiting Xu et al. by utilizing electrostatic interactions and 
hydrogen bonding to functionalize a coating of bio-based polyelectrolyte (containing 
chitosan and phytate) on the surface of boron nitride in an environmentally friendly 
manner. This coating was done in order to create a multifunctional nanoparticle 
with multiple applications. Most signiﬁcantly, the building process makes no use 
of any organic solvents and does not rely on any outside sources of heat. Further, 
this nanoparticle with several functions is used in the process of functionally modi-
fying epoxy resin. The LOI value of the functionalized epoxy resin is increased to 
32.8% at a reduced adding quantity of 7 weight% because of the synergistic action 
of polyelectrolyte and boron nitride at the nanoscale. In addition, when subjected 
to a vertical combustion test, the modiﬁed epoxy resin demonstrated a quick extin-
guishing phenomenon that lasted for just 0.5 s after the ﬁre source was turned off. 
When compared with clean EP, the peak heat release rate (pHRR) and total smoke 
production (TSP) both show reductions of 54.3% and 33.0%, respectively. Addi-
tionally, the multifunctional nanoparticles confer excellent thermal conductivity, 
mechanical characteristics, and dielectric properties on the modiﬁed epoxy. Overall, 
the results of this study provide a sustainable approach to the production of epoxy 
resins with several functionalities (Fig. 11.11) [66].
Due to the high dielectric constant that may be attained around the percolation 
threshold, conductive ﬁller-ﬁlled polymer composites have shown a great deal of 
promise. However, the substantial dielectric loss that is connected with these compos-
ites prevents their widespread use in reality. In recent years, considerable effort has 
been put toward encapsulating conductive ﬁllers within an insulating shell, with the 
intention of limiting the dielectric loss. This conundrum begs the issue of whether or 
not core–shell structured ﬁllers are ultimately useful for the dielectric performance of 
composites, which is an area that has received less investigation. For this purpose, Zhi-
Min Dang evaluated the properties of polymer nanocomposites that include a variety

324
A. Sahoo et al.
Fig. 11.11 Schematic representation of a green synthetic procedure for BN@PEC [66]. Adopted 
with permission from Ref. [66] copyright@ 2022, Elsevier Ltd.
of Al@Al2O3 nanoﬁllers with varying shell thicknesses. It demonstrates that a rapid 
intra-particle polarization and a sluggish inter-particle polarization both contribute to 
the high dielectric constant of percolative composites. The formation of an insulating 
shell makes it possible to exercise separate control over the two polarizations, which, 
in ordinary percolative composites, would otherwise be linked (meaning that they 
would increase or decrease simultaneously). The core–shell structured nanocompos-
ites are able to obtain a high dielectric constant, while simultaneously having a low 
dielectric loss, which is a signiﬁcant improvement over the unmodiﬁed nanoﬁller 
composites. This is accomplished by promoting polarization within the particle and 
suppressing polarization between the particles. In addition to that, both the thermal 
conductivity and the high ﬁeld resistivity have been increased, which brings about 
an operating temperature that is both consistent and low. This study presents a new 
paradigm for the design of percolative polymer composites, which have the potential 
to increase thermomechanical characteristics in addition to having a high dielectric 
constant and a low dielectric loss [67]. 
Inorganic nanoparticles with a high dielectric constant (
1
r) have been used 
to strengthen dielectric polymer nanocomposites, which have been the subject of 
much research for energy storage functions in modern electronics and electrical 
devices. Although the integration of inorganic nanoparticles with a high
1
r-value 
can enhance the
1
r-value of the composite matrix to a certain level, it will also 
certainly decrease the inclusive breakdown strength (Eb) of the complex matrix. This 
eventually hampers the effective enhancement of the energy storage efﬁcacy of the 
composites. Xin Zhang et al. developed a method to fabricate high-
1
r BaTiO3 (BTO) 
nanoparticles with polyimide polymer (PI) shells (PI@BTO) through an in situ poly-
merization technique using poly etherimide (PEI)-based nanocomposites. Because 
of the modiﬁed PI shell, the interaction between the organic or inorganic interface has

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
325
been improved, which has led to a uniform distribution of nanoparticles throughout 
the PEI composite matrix. Speciﬁcally, the normal electrostatic interaction between 
the PEI matrix and polymer chains present in the PI shell increases the Eb of the 
PEI/PI@BTO nanocomposite in comparison with pure PEI. This, in turn, results in 
a high charge–discharge efﬁciency (η) of more than 80% and a high-energy storage 
density (Ue) of 6.2  J/cm3 in the PEI nanocomposites, which is an improvement of 
150% than that of pure PEI. The work proposes a facile and efﬁcient approach for 
surface functionalization to increase the compatibility between the interfaces and Eb 
of polymer nanocomposite matrix. Furthermore, the remarkably improved perfor-
mances in energy storage of the synthesized nanocomposite matrix provide great 
potential for the fabrication of high-performance capacitors to meet the growing 
demands for more compact, energy-efﬁcient, and cost-effective electrical device 
electronics[68]. 
Filling an organic dielectric with inorganic nanoparticles that have a high dielec-
tric constant is an efﬁcient method that may be used to improve the energy storage 
capability of the dielectric. On the other hand, the dielectric difference between 
polymer and ceramic produces early breakdown, which in turn restricts the storage 
density of ceramic/polymer nanocomposites when they are used for dielectric capac-
itors. Liang Cao and Huixing Lin et al. used magnesium oxide (MgO) as a buffer 
barrier because of its high medium dielectric constant and insulation. This was done 
to diminish the difference in dielectric characteristics that were present between 
the poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride-hexaﬂuoropropylene) (P (VDFHFP)) substrate and 
BaTiO3 (BT) nanoparticles. A straightforward chemical precipitation procedure was 
used to coat the spherical BT with the foreign oxide, resulting in the formation 
of a BaTiO3@MgO (BT@MgO) core–shell nanostructure. This structure has been 
meticulously analyzed by EDS and TEM. As a result of the BT-MgO heterogeneous 
interfacial region’s provision of carrier channels and promotion of charge movement, 
both the dielectric constant and the potential shift have been greatly improved. The 
BT@MgO/P (VDF-HFP) nanocomposite with a ﬁlling ratio of 1 volume percent 
gave the greatest energy density Ud. The  Ud value extends up to 5.6 J/cm3, which is 
55.6% and 40.0% larger than that of the BT-ﬁlled counterpart and host matrix with 
the same ﬁller quantity. The BT@MgO core–shell nanostructure is an example of 
an alternate method that may effectively increase the energy storage functioning of 
polymer/ceramic composite dielectrics. Due to MgO’s high insulation and medium 
dielectric constant, it has been decided to use it as a buffer barrier between the BT 
nanoparticles and the P (VDF-HFP) substrate in this research. This helped to reduce 
the dielectric mismatch that existed between the two. The core–shell BaTiO3@MgO 
nanoparticles have a heterogeneous interfacial area that is composed of BTMgO. 
This region functions to create pathways for carriers and enhance charge mobility. 
Therefore, the inclusion of an MgO shell considerably improved the energy storage 
qualities. The BT@MgO-reinforced composite dielectric with a 1 volume % ﬁlling 
ratio achieved the highest possible Ud value for energy density. At 4235 kV/cm 
this value reached 5.6 J/cm3, which is larger by 40.0% than that of the host matrix 
and 55.6% more than that of BT-loaded dielectric with similar ﬁller composition. 
In the meanwhile, it maintains a high-energy usage efﬁcacy, with a value of 51.3%

326
A. Sahoo et al.
for the coefﬁcient. The core–shell-structured BT@MgO nanoﬁller is an example of 
an alternate approach that may effectively enhance the energy storage function of 
polymer/ceramic dielectric composites [69]. 
11.4 Conclusion 
In conclusion, this chapter discusses the various methods of preparation of high-
k core–shell nanomaterials for dielectric applications. Core–shell techniques have 
made signiﬁcant strides in enhancing nanocomposites with high-k for dielectric appli-
cations and energy storage, however, these techniques suffer from certain problems. 
These problems include producing high-k nanocomposites that concurrently display 
a low dielectric loss, high breakdown strength, and other desired features at large 
production scales while preserving ﬁne control over the nanostructures of the core– 
shell nanoparticles. Utilizing one-core multiple-shell systems, including nanopar-
ticles with desired nanoeffects in the shells, and developing advanced synthesis 
processes for core–shell nanomaterials may give technological means to transcend 
these limitations. 
References 
1. Luo S, Yu J, Yu S, Sun R, Cao L, Liao WH, Wong CP (2019) Signiﬁcantly enhanced electrostatic 
energy storage performance of ﬂexible polymer composites by introducing highly insulating-
ferroelectric microhybrids as ﬁllers. Adv Energy Mater 9(5):1803204 
2. Wang PJ, Zhou D, Guo HH, Liu WF, Su JZ, Fu MS, Singh C, Trukhanov S, Trukhanov A 
(2020) Ultrahigh enhancement rate of the energy density of ﬂexible polymer nanocomposites 
using core–shell BaTiO3@ MgO structures as the ﬁller. J Mater Chem A 8(22):11124–11132 
3. Wang P-J, Zhou D, Li J, Pang L-X, Liu W-F, Su J-Z, Singh C, Trukhanov S, Trukhanov A (2020) 
Signiﬁcantly enhanced electrostatic energy storage performance of P (VDF-HFP)/BaTiO3-Bi 
(Li0. 5Nb0. 5) O3 nanocomposites. Nano Energy 78:105247 
4. Zheng W, Ren L, Zhao X, Li H, Xie Z, Li Y, Wang C, Yu L, Yang L, Liao R (2022) Tuning 
interfacial relaxations in P(VDF-HFP) with Al2O3@ZrO2 core-shell nanoﬁllers for enhanced 
dielectric and energy storage performance. Compos Sci Technol 222:109379 
5. He D, Wang Y, Chen X, Deng Y (2017) Core–shell structured BaTiO3@Al2O3 nanoparticles 
in polymer composites for dielectric loss suppression and breakdown strength enhancement. 
Compos A Appl Sci Manuf 93:137–143 
6. Huang X, Jiang P (2015) Core–shell structured high-k polymer nanocomposites for energy 
storage and dielectric applications. Adv Mater 27(3):546–554 
7. Wang Y, Zhou X, Chen Q, Chu B, Zhang Q (2010) Recent development of high energy density 
polymers for dielectric capacitors. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 17(4):1036–1042 
8. Chen Y, Xia Y, Sun H, Smith GM, Yang D, Ma D, Carroll DL (2014) Solution-processed 
highly efﬁcient alternating current-driven ﬁeld-induced polymer electroluminescent devices 
employing high-k relaxor ferroelectric polymer dielectric. Adv Funct Mater 24(11):1501–1508 
9. Ortiz RP, Facchetti A, Marks TJ (2010) High-k organic, inorganic, and hybrid dielectrics for 
low-voltage organic ﬁeld-effect transistors. Chem Rev 110(1):205–239 
10. Li J, Sun Z, Yan F (2012) Solution processable low-voltage organic thin ﬁlm transistors with 
high-k relaxor ferroelectric polymer as gate insulator. Adv Mater 24(1):88–93

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
327
11. Kim Y-J, Kim J, Kim YS, Lee J-K (2013) Erratum to “TiO2-poly (4-vinylphenol) nanocom-
posite dielectrics for organic thin ﬁlm transistors. Org Electron 14:3406–3414; 2(15):640 
(2014) 
12. Zhang QM, Bharti V, Zhao X (1998) Giant electrostriction and relaxor ferroelectric 
behavior in electron-irradiated poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride-triﬂuoroethylene) copolymer. Science 
280(5372):2101–2104 
13. Zhang Q, Li H, Poh M, Xia F, Cheng Z-Y, Xu H, Huang CJN (2002) An all-organic composite 
actuator material with a high dielectric constant. Nature 419(6904):284–287 
14. Dang ZM, Yuan JK, Yao SH, Liao RJ (2013) Flexible nanodielectric materials with high 
permittivity for power energy storage. Adv Materi 25(44):6334–6365 
15. Chu B, Zhou X, Ren K, Neese B, Lin M, Wang Q, Bauer F, Zhang QJS (2006) A dielectric 
polymer with high electric energy density and fast discharge speed. Science 313(5785):334–336 
16. Alam MA, Azarian MH, Pecht MG (2012) Effects of moisture absorption on the electrical 
parameters of embedded capacitors with epoxy-BaTiO3 nanocomposite dielectric. J Mater Sci 
Mater Electron 23:1504–1510 
17. Dang Z-M, Yuan J-K, Zha J-W, Zhou T, Li S-T, Hu G-H (2012) Fundamentals, processes and 
applications of high-permittivity polymer–matrix composites. Progr Mater Sci 57(4):660–723 
18. Huang X, Xie L, Yang K, Wu C, Jiang P, Li S, Wu S, Tatsumi K, Tanaka T (2014) Role of 
interface in highly ﬁlled epoxy/BaTiO3 nanocomposites. Part I-correlation between nanopar-
ticle surface chemistry and nanocomposite dielectric property. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 
21(2):467–479 
19. Shariﬁ E, Jayaram SH, Cherney EA (2010) Temperature and electric ﬁeld dependence of stress 
grading on form-wound motor coils. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 17(1):264–270 
20. Hwang SK, Bae I, Cho SM, Kim RH, Jung HJ, Park C (2013) High performance multi-level 
non-volatile polymer memory with solution-blended ferroelectric polymer/high-k insulators 
for low voltage operation. Adv Funct Mater 23(44):5484–5493 
21. Arbatti M, Shan X, Cheng ZY (2007) Ceramic–polymer composites with high dielectric 
constant. Adv Mater 19(10):1369–1372 
22. Das RN, Lauffer JM, Markovich VR (2008) Fabrication, integration and reliability of 
nanocomposite based embedded capacitors in microelectronics packaging. J Mater Chem 
18(5):537–544 
23. Li J, Seok SI, Chu B, Dogan F, Zhang Q, Wang Q (2009) Nanocomposites of ferroelectric 
polymers with TiO2 nanoparticles exhibiting signiﬁcantly enhanced electrical energy density. 
Adv Mater 21(2):217–221 
24. Kim P, Jones SC, Hotchkiss PJ, Haddock JN, Kippelen B, Marder SR, Perry JW (2007) 
Phosphonic acid-modiﬁed barium titanate polymer nanocomposites with high permittivity and 
dielectric strength. Adv Mater 19(7):1001–1005 
25. Kim P, Doss NM, Tillotson JP, Hotchkiss PJ, Pan MJ, Marder SR, Li J, Calame JP, Perry 
JW (2009) High energy density nanocomposites based on surface-modiﬁed BaTiO3 and a 
ferroelectric polymer. ACS Nano 3(9):2581–2592 
26. Hu P, Shen Y, Guan Y, Zhang X, Lin Y, Zhang Q, Nan CW (2014) Topological-structure 
modulated polymer nanocomposites exhibiting highly enhanced dielectric strength and energy 
density. Adv Funct Mater 24(21):3172–3178 
27. Paniagua SA, Kim Y, Henry K, Kumar R, Perry JW, Marder SR (2014) Surface-initiated 
polymerization from barium titanate nanoparticles for hybrid dielectric capacitors. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces 6(5):3477–3482 
28. Xie L, Huang X, Wu C, Jiang P (2011) Core-shell structured poly (methyl methacrylate)/ 
BaTiO3 nanocomposites prepared by in situ atom transfer radical polymerization: a route to 
high dielectric constant materials with the inherent low loss of the base polymer. J Mater Chem 
21(16):5897–5906 
29. Yang K, Huang X, Xie L, Wu C, Jiang P, Tanaka T (2012) Core–shell structured polystyrene/ 
BaTiO3 hybrid nanodielectrics prepared by in situ RAFT polymerization: a route to high 
dielectric constant and low loss materials with weak frequency dependence. Macromolecular 
Rapid Commun 33(22):1921–1926

328
A. Sahoo et al.
30. Tchoul MN, Fillery SP, Koerner H, Drummy LF, Oyerokun FT, Mirau PA, Durstock MF, Vaia 
RA (2010) Assemblies of titanium dioxide-polystyrene hybrid nanoparticles for dielectric 
applications. Chem Mater 22(5):1749–1759 
31. Maliakal A, Katz H, Cotts PM, Subramoney S, Mirau P (2005) Inorganic oxide core, polymer 
shell nanocomposite as a high K gate dielectric for ﬂexible electronics applications. J Am Chem 
Soc 127(42):14655–14662 
32. Li Z, Fredin LA, Tewari P, DiBenedetto SA, Lanagan MT, Ratner MA, Marks TJ (2010) In situ 
catalytic encapsulation of core-shell nanoparticles having variable shell thickness: dielectric 
and energy storage properties of high-permittivity metal oxide nanocomposites. Chem Mater 
22(18):5154–5164 
33. Jung HM, Kang JH, Yang SY, Won JC, Kim YS (2010) Barium titanate nanoparticles with 
diblock copolymer shielding layers for high-energy density nanocomposites. Chem Mater 
22(2):450–456 
34. Pang X, He Y, Jiang B, Iocozzia J, Zhao L, Guo H, Liu J, Akinc M, Bowler N, Tan XJN (2013) 
Block copolymer/ferroelectric nanoparticle nanocomposites. Nanoscale 5(18):8695–8702 
35. Yang K, Huang X, Huang Y, Xie L, Jiang P (2013) Fluoro-polymer@ BaTiO3 hybrid nanopar-
ticles prepared via RAFT polymerization: toward ferroelectric polymer nanocomposites with 
high dielectric constant and low dielectric loss for energy storage application. Chem Mater 
25(11):2327–2338 
36. Dang ZM, You SS, Zha JW, Song HT, Li ST (2010) Effect of shell-layer thickness on dielectric 
properties in Ag@ TiO2 core@ shell nanoparticles ﬁlled ferroelectric poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride) 
composites. Phys Status Solidi (A) 207(3):739–742 
37. Shen Y, Lin YH, Nan CW (2007) Interfacial effect on dielectric properties of polymer 
nanocomposites ﬁlled with core/shell-structured particles. Adv Funct Mater 17(14):2405–2410 
38. Yu K, Niu Y, Bai Y, Zhou Y, Wang H (2013) Poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride) polymer based nanocom-
posites with signiﬁcantly reduced energy loss by ﬁlling with core-shell structured BaTiO3/SiO2 
nanoparticles. Appl Phys Lett 102(10):102903 
39. Xu J, Wong CP (2005) Low-loss percolative dielectric composite. Appl Phys Lett 87(8):082907 
40. Wang YU, Tan DQ (2011) Computational study of ﬁller microstructure and effective property 
relations in dielectric composites. J Appl Phys 109(10):104102 
41. Balasubramanian B, Kraemer KL, Reding NA, Skomski R, Ducharme S, Sellmyer DJ (2010) 
Synthesis of monodisperse TiO2−parafﬁn core−shell nanoparticles for improved dielectric 
properties. ACS Nano 4(4):1893–1900 
42. Ducharme S (2009) An inside-out approach to storing electrostatic energy. ACS Nano 
3(9):2447–2450 
43. Ghosh Chaudhuri R, Paria S (2012) Core/shell nanoparticles: classes, properties, synthesis 
mechanisms, characterization, and applications. Chem Rev 112(4):2373–2433 
44. Guo N, DiBenedetto SA, Tewari P, Lanagan MT, Ratner MA, Marks TJ (2010) Nanoparticle, 
size, shape, and interfacial effects on leakage current density, permittivity, and breakdown 
strength of metal oxide− polyoleﬁn nanocomposites: experiment and theory. Chem Mater 
22(4):1567–1578 
45. Guo N, DiBenedetto SA, Kwon DK, Wang L, Russell MT, Lanagan MT, Facchetti A, Marks 
TJ (2007) Supported metallocene catalysis for in situ synthesis of high energy density metal 
oxide nanocomposites. J Am Chem Soc 129(4):766–767 
46. Fredin LA, Li Z, Ratner MA, Lanagan MT, Marks TJ (2012) Enhanced energy storage 
and suppressed dielectric loss in oxide core–shell–polyoleﬁn nanocomposites by moderating 
internal surface area and increasing shell thickness. Adv Mater 24(44):5946–5953 
47. Fredin LA, Li Z, Lanagan MT, Ratner MA, Marks TJ (2013) Substantial recoverable energy 
storage in percolative metallic aluminum-polypropylene nanocomposites. Adv Funct Mater 
23(28):3560–3569 
48. Stoyanov H, Mc Carthy D, Kollosche M, Kofod G (2009) Dielectric properties and electric 
breakdown strength of a subpercolative composite of carbon black in thermoplastic copolymer. 
Appl Phys Lett 94(23):232905

11
Core–Shell Structured Nanomaterials for High-Performance Dielectric …
329
49. Yang K, Huang X, Zhu M, Xie L, Tanaka T, Jiang P (2014) Combining RAFT polymerization 
and thiol–ene click reaction for core–shell structured polymer@ BaTiO3 nanodielectrics with 
high dielectric constant, low dielectric loss, and high energy storage capability. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces 6(3):1812–1822 
50. Pirzada B, Sabir S (2018) Polymer-based nanocomposites for signiﬁcantly enhanced dielectric 
properties and energy storage capability. In: Polymer-based nanocomposites for energy and 
environmental applications. Elsevier, pp 131–183 
51. Xie L, Huang X, Yang K, Li S, Jiang P (2014) “Grafting to” route to PVDF-HFP-GMA/BaTiO3 
nanocomposites with high dielectric constant and high thermal conductivity for energy storage 
and thermal management applications. J Mater Chem A 2(15):5244–5251 
52. Xie L, Huang X, Huang Y, Yang K, Jiang P (2013) Core@ double-shell structured BaTiO3– 
polymer nanocomposites with high dielectric constant and low dielectric loss for energy storage 
application. J Phys Chem C 117(44):22525–22537 
53. Xie L, Huang X, Huang Y, Yang K, Jiang P (2013) Core-shell structured hyperbranched 
aromatic polyamide/BaTiO3 hybrid ﬁller for poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride-triﬂuoroethylene-
chloroﬂuoroethylene) nanocomposites with the dielectric constant comparable to that of 
percolative composites. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 5(5):1747–1756 
54. Pang X, Zhao L, Han W, Xin X, Lin Z (2013) A general and robust strategy for the synthesis 
of nearly monodisperse colloidal nanocrystals. Nature Nanotechnol 8(6):426–431 
55. Guo HZ, Mudryk Y, Ahmad MI, Pang XC, Zhao L, Akinc M, Pecharsky VK, Bowler N, Lin 
ZQ, Tan X (2012) Structure evolution and dielectric behavior of polystyrene-capped barium 
titanate nanoparticles. J Mater Chem 22(45):23944–23951 
56. Rahimabady M, Mirshekarloo MS, Yao K, Lu L (2013) Dielectric behaviors and high energy 
storage density of nanocomposites with core–shell BaTiO3@ TiO2 in poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride-
hexaﬂuoropropylene). Phys Chem Chem Phys 15(38):16242–16248 
57. Shen Y, Lin Y, Li M, Nan CW (2007) High dielectric performance of polymer composite ﬁlms 
induced by a percolating interparticle barrier layer. Adv Mater 19(10):1418–1422 
58. Molberg M, Crespy D, Rupper P, Nüesch F, Månson JA, Löwe C, Opris DM (2010) High 
breakdown ﬁeld dielectric elastomer actuators using encapsulated polyaniline as high dielectric 
constant ﬁller. Adv Funct Mater 20(19):3280–3291 
59. Zhu L, Wang QJM (2012) Novel ferroelectric polymers for high energy density and low loss 
dielectrics. Macromolecules 45(7):2937–2954 
60. Balberg I (2011) Electrical transport mechanisms in three dimensional ensembles of silicon 
quantum dots. J Appl Phys 110(6):13 
61. Xie L, Huang X, Li BW, Zhi C, Tanaka T, Jiang P (2013) Core–satellite Ag@ BaTiO3 
nanoassemblies for fabrication of polymer nanocomposites with high discharged energy 
density, high breakdown strength and low dielectric loss. Phys Chem Chem Phys 15(40):17560– 
17569 
62. Yang K, Huang X, He J, Jiang P (2015) Strawberry-like core–shell Ag@ polydopamine@ 
BaTiO3 hybrid nanoparticles for high-k polymer nanocomposites with high energy density 
and low dielectric loss. Adv Mater Interfaces 2(17):1500361 
63. Wang G, Huang Y, Wang Y, Jiang P, Huang X (2017) Substantial enhancement of energy 
storage capability in polymer nanocomposites by encapsulation of BaTiO3 NWs with variable 
shell thickness. Phys Chem Chem Phys 19(31):21058–21068 
64. Zhu J, Wang D, Liu Z, Leung CM, Chen J, Zeng M, Lu X, Gao X, Liu J-M (2022) Superior 
energy storage of sandwiched PVDF ﬁlms by separate introduction of core-shell Ag@BT 
nanoparticles and 2D MXene nanosheets. Ceram Int 48(13):19274–19282 
65. Li J, Jiang J, Cheng Q, Cui Z, Liu X, Zuo P, Zhuang Q (2022) Construction of a ﬂexible 
1D core–shell Al2O3@NaNbO3 nanowire/poly(p-phenylene benzobisoxazole) nanocomposite 
with stable and enhanced dielectric properties in an ultra-wide temperature range. J Mater Chem 
C 10(2):716–725 
66. Xia L, Wang X, Ren T, Luo L, Li D, Dai J, Xu Y, Yuan C, Zeng B, Dai L (2022) Green 
construction of multi-functional ﬁre resistant epoxy resins based on boron nitride with core-
shell structure. Polym Degrad Stab 203:110059

330
A. Sahoo et al.
67. Cheng S, Zhou Y, Li Y, Yuan C, Yang M, Fu J, Hu J, He J, Li Q (2021) Polymer dielectrics 
sandwiched by medium-dielectric-constant nanoscale deposition layers for high-temperature 
capacitive energy storage. Energy Storage Mater 42:445–453 
68. Zeng J, Yan J, Li B-W, Zhang X (2022) Improved breakdown strength and energy storage 
performances of PEI-based nanocomposite with core-shell structured PI@BaTiO3 nanoﬁllers. 
Ceram Int 48(14):20526–20533 
69. Chen J, Huang F, Zhang C, Meng F, Cao L, Lin H (2022) Enhanced energy storage density 
in poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride-hexaﬂuoropropylene) nanocomposites by ﬁlling with core-shell 
structured BaTiO3@MgO nanoparticals. J Energy Storage 53:105163

Chapter 12 
Transition Metal Oxide-Based 
Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy 
Storage 
Priyambada Mallick, Srikanta Moharana, L. Biswal, 
and Santosh Ku Satpathy 
Abstract With the improvement of the global economy, one of the greatest chal-
lenges in the world is to provide energy requirements, which are exponentially rising 
and is projected to triple at the end of the century. Therefore, the improvement of 
renewable energy sources and electrochemical energy storage systems is essential. 
Fuel cells, rechargeable supercapacitors, and lithium-ion batteries are three intriguing 
contenders in the ﬁeld of energy and power densities with long life spans, lightweight, 
and eco-friendly. The most promising materials for such devices with high perfor-
mance or high conversion efﬁciency are transition metal oxide (TMO)-based 
nanomaterials because of their distinctive properties like environmental friendliness, 
innovative size effects, improved kinetics, greatly enhanced conductivity, activity, 
excellent redox properties, electrochemical stability, high speciﬁc power, and sustain-
ability. TMO-based nanomaterials as electrode materials typically exhibit excep-
tional capacitance and very high energy densities. Due to distinctive conﬁgurations of 
d electron, the synergistic effect of multi-metal atoms, low cost, and outstanding elec-
trochemical stability nature of TMO-based nanomaterials, the energy storage mech-
anism of electrochemical supercapacitors, batteries, and fuel cells can be enhanced 
signiﬁcantly. However, the current issues and potential future of TMO-based 
nanomaterials in energy conversion and storage applications depend on our ability to 
comprehend the innovative synthesis, application performance, and catalytic mecha-
nism of these nanomaterials. In this chapter, TMO-based nanomaterials such as NiO, 
SnO2 RuO2, MnO2, V2O5, Co3O4, Mn3O4, TiO2–V2O5, and NiMn2O4, etc., and their 
morphological and electrochemical properties will be studied extensively. Detailed 
descriptions of energy storage mechanisms and key concepts will be provided in 
order to fully grasp the promising impact of metal oxides in energy storage devices.
P. Mallick · S. Moharana · S. K. Satpathy envelope symbol
School of Applied Sciences, Centurion University of Technology and Management, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
e-mail: santosh.satpathy@cutm.ac.in 
L. Biswal 
Department of Physics, School of Applied Sciences, KIIT Deemed to be University, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha 751024, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_12 
331

332
P. Mallick et al.
This chapter aims to highlight the synthesis, characteristics, applications as well 
as the recent development, accomplishments, ﬂaws, challenges, potential solutions, 
and future aspects of TMO-based nanomaterials in advanced energy storage systems 
such as rechargeable supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), PV cells, and so 
on. In particular, new advancements in the synthesis of TMO-based nanomaterials 
and their uses in energy storage and conversion will be discussed. 
Keywords Transition metal oxide · Super capacitor · Batteries · Fuel cells ·
Advanced energy storage system 
12.1 
Introduction 
To meet the rapid development of the world’s energy requirements, we have to 
give priority on green or renewable energy sources including solar, wind, tidal, 
etc., rather than fossil fuels in order to conserve natural energy, reduce energy 
consumption, and reduce environmental pollution [1]. Because the utilization of 
fossil fuels rises the average temperature of the earth by emitting carbon dioxide 
(CO2), methane (CH4), nitrogen oxide (N2O), etc., which are very dangerous to living 
and nonliving beings of the Earth [2]. The world’s energy requirement increases the 
motivation for research on advanced energy storage systems. Therefore, the develop-
ment of renewable energy sources and electrochemical energy storage systems with 
lightweight, low cost, and eco-friendly is essential. Among all the non-conventional 
energy devices, fuel cells, rechargeable supercapacitors, and lithium-ion batteries are 
three intriguing contenders in the ﬁeld of energy and power densities with long life 
spans. Having high speciﬁc power, medium energy density, excellent cycling life, 
long durability, electrochemical stability, and rapid charging or discharging rate, 
these electrochemical energy devices are used in portable electronic devices and 
hybrid vehicles, where electrochemical reactions convert chemical energy to elec-
trical energy. The most promising materials for such devices with high performance 
or high conversion efﬁciency are transition metal oxide (TMO)-based nanomaterials 
[3, 4] because of their distinctive properties like environmental friendliness, inno-
vative size effects, large speciﬁc surface area, improved kinetics, greatly enhanced 
electrical conductivity, activity, electrochemical stability, high speciﬁc power, and 
sustainability. The discharging time, speciﬁc energy, and speciﬁc power of some 
advanced energy storage system are given in Table 12.1.
This chapter mainly focuses on the recent development of transition metal oxides 
(TMO)-based nanomaterials and their excellent properties as well as the effect of 
these transition metal oxide-based nanomaterials on the advancement of society. 
This chapter also focuses on the recent researchs on the synthesis and electrochem-
ical performance of transition metal oxide-based nanomaterials. Finally, the limi-
tations, prospects, and suggestions for improving the performance of TMO-based 
nanomaterials in energy storage systems are discussed.

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
333
Table 12.1 Speciﬁc energy, speciﬁc power, and discharging time of various energy storage systems 
[1] 
Energy storage devices
Speciﬁc energy (Wh/kg) 
Speciﬁc power (kW/kg) 
Discharging time 
Fuel cells
100–1000
0.01–0.1
10 h 
Conventional batteries
10–100
0.05–1
1 h  
Supercapacitors
1–10
0.5–10
1 s  
Conventional capacitors 
0.01–0.5
10–100
0.03 s
12.2 
Transition Metal Oxide Nanomaterials 
Nanomaterial having size 1–100 nm possesses comparatively better mechanical, 
electronic, magnetic, thermal, catalytic, and optical properties [5] with high surface 
area, surface energy than bulk materials with macroscopic size. However, the most 
difﬁcult problem is nanoparticle aggregation, which effectively increases the strain 
for electrolyte ion diffusion within the nanoparticles at the electrode surface. With 
nanotechnology, any substance or material can be reduced in weight with increased 
stability and functionality. Although proton diffusion and electron hopping within 
nanoparticles are intrinsic properties of nanoparticles, the resistance caused by intra-
particle electron hopping can be reduced by loading the nanoparticles on a stable 
metal oxide. It has also been observed practically that loading a stable metal oxide 
affects the increase of a proton’s diffusion barrier within active materials, which 
results from the loss of effective sites [2]. From the literature survey, it was found 
that the development of advanced high-performance energy storage systems depends 
highly on the electrode materials, synthesis techniques, nature of the used electrolyte, 
and range of voltage potential [6]. Transition metal oxide nanomaterials (TMOs) as 
functional materials which are composed of negative oxygen ions and positive tran-
sition metals such as ruthenium oxide (RuO2), titanium oxide (TiO2), manganese 
oxide (MnO2), tin oxide (SnO2), nickel oxide (NiO), zinc oxide (ZnO), cobalt oxide 
(Co3O4), and vanadium oxide (V2O5) are new-generation stable and robust mate-
rials. These materials attracted vast attention as electrode materials from researchers, 
scientists, and industrialists due to their variable oxidation states, various structures, 
good chemical stability, high electrical conductivity, small resistance, wide band gap, 
excellent energy density, and high speciﬁc capacitance (100–3000 F/g) as given in 
Table 12.2. Besides these oxides, other metal oxides including BiFeO3 [7], PbZrO3, 
BaTiO3, PbTiO3, etc., rare earth/transition metals such as Gd, Sm [8], Ni, La, Nd, 
Mg, Co, and Cu doped oxides [9, 10] and transition metal ferrites including ZnFe2O4 
[11], MgFe2O4, CoFe2O4 [12], CuFe2O4 [13], etc., are most investigated materials 
for advanced energy storage system in the ﬁeld of non-volatile memory, electronic 
devices, and power backup systems. However, the practical application of TMO-
based devices is still a long way off, owing to the lack of controllable preparation 
techniques and a thorough understanding of the growth mechanisms involved in the 
synthesis of TMO nanomaterials. As a result, numerous scientiﬁc challenges remain

334
P. Mallick et al.
Table 12.2 Comparison of 
the theoretical speciﬁc 
capacitances of different 
TMOs 
Transition metal oxides
Speciﬁc capacitance (F/g) 
RuO2
1400 
MnO2
1370 
V2O5
375 
NiO
2584 
Co3O4
1780 
TiO2–V2O5
526 
SnO2
420 
to overcome in order to fully exploit the exceptional performance of TMO nanomate-
rials [14]. Unfortunately, the easy agglomeration of TMOs at high mass loading, poor 
cyclability, and conductivity properties is the factors that impede achieving a high 
speciﬁc capacity in TMOs. Thus, incorporating conductive materials, such as EDLC 
materials, with TMOs can signiﬁcantly improve ionic and electrical conductivity due 
to the synergistic effect of various components [1]. 
12.2.1 
Ruthenium Oxide (RuO2) 
Ruthenium oxide with oxidation state +4 is the most used nanomaterial in the ﬁeld of 
advanced energy storage systems due to its high speciﬁc capacitance (1400–2200 F/ 
g), high ionic conductivity, rapidly reversible redox reactions, high reversible oxida-
tion states, excellent electrical conductivity, high chemical and thermal stability, 
high rate capability, and long cyclic life. RuO2 is widely used as positive electrode 
material for supercapacitors and Li-ion batteries. Although the preparation of RuO2 
is costly, this oxide has the potential to improve the speciﬁc energy of advanced 
energy systems, especially for supercapacitors. The reversible storage of protons in 
interaction with the electrolyte causes charge transfer on the RuO2 surface, which 
is inﬂuenced by the crystalline phase of the oxide. RuO2 can form two preferen-
tial crystalline structures, the tetragonal with space groups of P42/mnm and cubic 
systems with space groups of Pa ModifyingAbove 3 With quotation dashPa ModifyingAbove 3 With quotation dash. Doping of rare earth and transition metals or 
other nanostructures with RuO2 can suppress the resistance of charge transfer which 
results in the improvement of the efﬁciency of RuO2. 
Park et al. [15] obtained Ru and RuO2 thin ﬁlms by thermal metallorganic CVD 
using ruthenocene precursor in the presence of oxygen and concluded that with 
an increasing ﬂow rate of oxygen, the phase transition from Ru to RuO2 occurred 
with the increasing deposition rate. At a ﬁxed substrate temperature and ﬂow rate of 
oxygen, a decrease in precursor partial pressure led to RuO2 formation. 
Dao et al. [16] observed that ruthenium oxide-based nanocomposite (RGO) has 
136.7 F/g speciﬁc capacitance at a scan rate of 20 mVs−1 which is suitable for 
energy storage applications. Nisha et al. [17] synthesized RuO2 successfully by

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
335
using a bottom-up approach and found a crystallite size of 9.5 nm from the XRD 
analysis. Figure 12.1a and b represent the curves between current—voltage and 
potential—time which were obtained from the analysis of cyclic voltammetry (CV). 
It is observed from the study of electrochemical properties that the value of speciﬁc 
capacitance decreases from 209 to 115 F/g with increasing scanning rate as shown 
in Fig. 12.1c. According to the galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) study, there is 
a gradual decrease in the corresponding speciﬁc capacitance with current densities 
ranging from 167 to 45 F/g, as shown in Fig. 12.1d. Due to charge transfer and ion 
diffusion over the working electrode (RuO2 coated over the carbon sheet), RuO2 
has long-term cyclic stability (98% retained after 1000 cycles of charge–discharge 
cycles), as shown in Fig. 12.1e. This demonstrated that the prepared RuO2 material 
has long-term electrochemical stability as well as a high degree of charge–discharge 
reversibility, proving excellent stability and performance.
12.2.2 
Manganese Oxide (MnO2) 
As a transition metal element, manganese exists in a variety of stable oxides (MnO, 
Mn3O4, Mn2O3, and MnO2). Manganese dioxide (MnO2) is one of the most widely 
and competitively used faradaic materials which can be used as electrodes in the 
battery as well as super capacitance due to its high speciﬁc capacity, high elec-
tronic and ionic conductivity, cost-effective, absorption of toxic ions, excellent oper-
ating potential, small toxicity, natural abundance, easily available, and good environ-
mental compatibility. However, due to its poor conductivity and slow ion transport 
rate, its application in supercapacitors is severely limited. The structural parame-
ters are important in determining and optimizing the electrochemical behaviors of 
MnO2 for advanced energy storage systems. For the synthesis of MnO2, several tech-
niques are adopted including sol-gel, co-precipitation, electrochemical deposition, 
hydrothermal, etc. The manganese oxide can store charge in two ways: (i) the addi-
tion of electrolytic cations (C+, Li+, Na+, and K+) into reactions mainstream of the 
electrode (ii) adsorption of electrolyte cations on the MnO2 electrode surface. But 
because of its low ionic and electrical conductivity, the practical application and rate 
capability of MnO2-based nanomaterials were affected [1]. Though the theoretical 
capacitance of MnO2 is 1370 F/g, experimentally it exhibits speciﬁc capacitance 
within the range of 50–200 F/g. But by doping other metal elements such as Co, 
Fe, Sn, Ag, and Au or oxides like RuO2, NiO, Co3O4, etc., in MnO2, the speciﬁc 
capacitance and electrical conductivity increase which in turn enhances the charge 
and energy storage capacity. The investigation of MnO2 anode is relatively complex 
due to the existence of various forms such as α, β, γ, ε, and δ type [18] with speciﬁc 
capacitance ranging between 100 and 300 F/g.

336
P. Mallick et al.
Fig. 12.1 (a) Current versus potential graph from CV study, (b) charging discharging study, 
(c) speciﬁc capacitance versus scan rate graph, (d) speciﬁc capacitance versus current graph, 
(e) cyclic stability graph. Reprinted the ﬁgure with Copyright (2020) permission from Elsevier 
[17]
Meng and his team et al. [19] prepared α-MnO2-based nanocomposite using the 
solid-state technique. From the cyclic Voltammograms, as shown in Fig. 12.2, a good 
cycling performance with a reversible capacity of 610 mAh g−1 over more than 200 
cycles at a 99% coulombic efﬁciency is conﬁrmed which makes it suitable as a LIB 
anode.

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
337
Fig. 12.2 Variation of 
capacity and columbic 
efﬁciency with cycle number 
for α-MnO2 (green), 
Ni-α-MnO2 (red), 
Ni-α-MnO2/RGO (blue). 
Reprinted with permission 
from [19]. Copyright (2021) 
American Chemical Society 
12.2.3 
Vanadium Pentoxide (V2O5) 
Among the promising cathode materials and the redox-active TMOs for next-
generation advanced energy systems, vanadium oxide/pentoxide is considered to 
be the most promising material and has gained much attention because of its high 
energy density, various oxidation states (V2+ to V5+), unique layered structure, better 
cycle life, low cost, easy synthesis process, abundant sources, non-toxic in nature, 
adequate safety, and high speciﬁc capacity [20]. The theoretical capacity of V2O5 is 
approximately 294 mAh/g, which is signiﬁcantly higher than the theoretical capaci-
ties of commonly used cathode materials. But its practical application is limited due 
to its poor cycling stability, and low electrical conductivity which can be overcome 
by controlling synthesis approaches, and morphology of the nanostructures. Vana-
dium oxide is not only used for battery applications but also used as an electrolyte 
in supercapacitors. 
Sakunthala et al. [21] reported that by doping niobium (Nb) and tantalum (Ta) 
ions with V2O5, the electrochemical performance of V2O5 was enhanced with 96% 
chemical stability. Xie et al. [22] observed from CV graphs as shown in Fig. 12.3 
that V2O5 attains a high value of speciﬁc capacitance, i.e., 350 F/g with 75% retains 
capacitance showing great potential for high-performance applications in thin-ﬁlm 
energy storage devices.
Boruah et al. [23] and his team proposed that vanadium pentoxide can be used as 
photo cathode material in the advanced energy storage system that can be charged 
directly up to 2.82 V along with 2.6% conversion efﬁciency and good cycling stability 
by light without any external solar cell or power sources which are higher than other 
systems.

338
P. Mallick et al.
Fig. 12.3 Speciﬁc 
capacitance versus scan rate 
graph of V2O5 oxides. 
Reprinted from [22]. 
Copyright (2018) with 
permission from Elsevier
12.2.4 
Cobalt Oxide (Co3O4) 
Cobalt oxide (Co3O4) is a cubic structure with AB2O4 spinel conﬁguration with a 
theoretical super capacitance of about 3560 F/g. Because of exceptionally good 
reversible redox properties, stable catalytic behavior, theoretically high speciﬁc 
capacitance, small rate capability, excellent corrosion, and chemical stability, good 
electronic conductivity, low cost, high surface area to volume ratio, short life cycle, 
and simple synthesis, cobalt oxide (Co3O4) has been proven especially appealing as 
an ideal electrode material in the recent years, potentially replacing the use of high-
cost and ecologically unfriendly RuO2. The electrochemical properties of Co3O4 are 
highly affected by the structural morphology of the material and the electronic states 
of the metal (Co3+ or Co2+), and thus, various strategies have been dedicated to the 
development of various forms of Co3O4 nanocomposites to obtain the improvement 
in the charge storage performance. The main disadvantage of Co3O4 is its poor cycla-
bility and structural rigidity due to swelling and shrinking during cycling, which can 
be overcome by doping other elements or metal oxides such as cadmium (Cd), nickel 
(Ni), and nitrogen (N), etc. [24]. 
The porous Co3O4 was fabricated by a hydrothermal process [25] and consid-
ered as a potential electro-active material for a pseudo-super capacitor. The study 
of cyclic Voltammograms showed that by decreasing calcination temperature from 
500 to 300 °C, the speciﬁc capacitance increases from 101.3 to 226.3 F/g at 10 mV/ 
s with 76% of retention capacity after 5000 cycles. Xie et al. [26] prepared Co3O4 
by hydrothermal technique and conﬁrmed from the electrochemical studies that the 
prepared materials can be useful in the fabrication of energy storage systems because 
of their excellent speciﬁc capacitance values of up to 263 F/g at a charge–discharge 
current density of 1 A/g with 10.6% decay in the available capacity and electrochem-
ical stability with ∼98.8% coulombic efﬁciency. The speciﬁc capacitance of cobalt

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
339
oxide can be enhanced up to 761.25 F/g [27] by synthesizing the metal oxides using 
the sol-gel technique which can be applied for energy storage applications. 
12.2.5 
Titanium Oxide (TiO2) 
TiO2, an n-type oxide is one of the most popular investigated anode materials for an 
advanced storage system with a lower capacity at higher potential, high resistive, high 
dielectric constant, good stability, high charging/discharging potential, low toxicity, 
less expensive, easily available, eco-friendly, and other electrochemical behaviors. 
Having these excellent properties, these nanomaterials can be applied in various 
areas including solar cells, gas sensors, and most importantly lithium-ion batteries. 
However, due to its low electronic and ionic conductivities, there arise some serious 
problems that can be overcome by developing nanostructure engineering. Titanium 
dioxide-based nanomaterials can be in several forms including amorphous, rutile, and 
anatase which are based on the fabrication techniques and preparing temperature. 
Lee et al. [28] prepared TiO2 nanostructures for lithium-ion storage with a storage 
capacity of 228 mAh/g over 100 cycles and reported that TiO2 can be used as a 
suitable electrode material for energy storage mechanism due to long-term cycling 
and excellent energy storage capacity. Ray et al. [29] prepared TiO2–V2O5 by wet 
chemical method successfully and reported that by increasing the ratio of vanadium 
in the samples, the speciﬁc capacitance of the prepared sample is increased up to 
310 F/g at 2 mV/s scan rate as shown in Fig. 12.4 which can be used as an electrode 
material for a supercapacitor as well as a lithium-ion battery.
The poor electrical conductivity nature of TiO2 limits its practical device appli-
cations. The combination of TiO2 with low valence atoms or oxides including 
chromium (Cr), aluminum (Al), cobalt (Co) [30], and vanadium oxide (V2O5) results 
in an overall improvement of electrochemical activity and cycle stability because 
of the decrease in the intra-particle electron-hopping resistance. Due to the three-
dimensional, mesoporous, interlinked tube-like ordered architecture of TiO2–V2O5 
nanocomposite, it has a large surface area by the formation of Ti–O–V bonds. Thus, 
TiO2–V2O5 nanocomposite may be a viable candidate for supercapacitor electrodes 
in the near future [2]. Fomekong et al. [30] reported that by doping Co in titanium 
oxide, the n-type TiO2 exhibits p-type conductive properties and alters the electronic 
properties as well cycle stability. 
12.2.6 
Nickel Oxide-Based Nanomaterials (NiO) 
Like other TMO-based nanomaterials, nickel oxide (NiO), a p-type semiconductor 
having a cubic crystal phase is a suitable electrode material for fuel cells, super-
capacitors, lithium-ion batteries, etc., due to its non-toxicity, low preparation cost,

340
P. Mallick et al.
Fig. 12.4 (a) Electrochemical performance, (b) current density versus potential curves at different 
scan rates, (c) charging/discharging plots at different current densities, (d) speciﬁc capacitance 
versus current density, (e) energy density versus power density plot, (f) cycling stability at the 
different current density of TiO2–V2O5. Reprinted with permission from [29]. Copyright (2018) 
American Chemical Society
short diffusion process, high surface area, wide band gap, a wide range of work func-
tion, excellent capacitance, thermal, chemical, mechanical, and catalytic properties 
[31]. NiO-based nanomaterial can be easily prepared by various techniques including 
hydrothermal, chemical vapor deposition, electrodeposition processes, etc. [1]. But 
its practical applications restrict due to the poor intrinsic conductivity. 
The coexistence of Ni and Mn in the lattice of this binary oxide has been shown 
to improve the electrochemical charge storage capability of the electrodes due to 
increased electronic or ionic conductivity [2]. One of the most attractive ternaries of 
single-phase metal oxide is NiMn2O4 having excellent electrochemical and electrical 
conductivity properties at low cost and is non-toxic in nature. This electrochemical 
nature helps to obtain high power and energy density which makes these metal oxides 
suitable to use as electrodes for the advanced energy storage system. Also, these 
materials offer a higher surface-to-volume ratio and shorter electron-ions transport 
channels which makes them more appropriate than traditional bulk materials as 
electrode materials for advanced energy storage systems including supercapacitors, 
batteries, etc. 
NiO nanoparticles were synthesized using the green route by Lamba et al. [32] 
for use as electrode materials in supercapacitors and reported from the study of 
cyclic Voltagramms (CV) that NiO has good capacitive properties with a speciﬁc 
capacitance of 85.31 F/g. The NiO nanoparticle was fabricated by hydrothermal 
technique and S.D Dash et al. [33] investigate from the CV study as shown in Fig. 12.5 
that NiO can have speciﬁc capacitance up to 132 F/g with 75% retention, i.e., excellent

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
341
Fig. 12.5 CV curves and speciﬁc capacitance versus scan rate curves of NiO nanoparticle. 
Reprinted the ﬁgure with Copyright (2020) permission from Elsevier et al. [33] 
stability by taking KOH electrolyte making it as a potential candidate for energy 
storage applications. 
12.2.7 
Tin Oxide (SnO2) 
Because of the low cost and high power density, SnO2-based nanomaterials have 
drawn a lot of attention as promising electrode materials for supercapacitors. SnO2 
has potential applications in a wide range of ﬁelds including sensors [9] and solar 
cells [10]. Because of its superior electrochemical performance, SnO2 appears to 
be a promising electrode material for energy storage devices such as lithium-ion 
batteries and supercapacitors [11]. Though SnO2 has a better response to the speciﬁc 
capacitance of supercapacitors, its applicability is still limited due to poor electrolyte 
ion transport within the SnO2 matrix and poor electrical conductivity. 
Velmurugan et al. [34] prepared SnO2-based nanomaterials using wet chemical 
methods and concluded from the study of electrochemical behavior that by adding 
graphene, the tin oxide can exhibit high speciﬁc capacitance up to 818.6 F/g with

342
P. Mallick et al.
Fig. 12.6 Speciﬁc capacitance versus scan rate and capacitance retention versus cycle number 
curves. Reprinted the ﬁgure with Copyright (2016) permission from Elsevier et al. [34] 
95.1% retention capacity as shown in Fig. 12.6 which may be applicable for high-
performance advanced energy storage systems. 
12.3 
Fabrication of TMO-Based Nanomaterials 
Indeed, transition metal oxide nanostructures have become the focus of recent 
researches due to their potential use in high-performance energy storage devices. 
Furthermore, the morphology, particle, and crystallite size of these nanostructures 
appear to inﬂuence their physical and electrochemical properties. The method of 
synthesis should be eco-friendly, easy handling, and low preparation cost. As a 
result, fabricating metal oxide nanomaterials with controlled morphology and size 
that also have good electrical conductivity is a challenge for their use in energy 
storage devices like batteries, solar cells, and electrochemical supercapacitors with 
high efﬁciency [35]. There are various methods for preparing TMO-based nanomate-
rials, namely physical processes including low-pressure gas evaporation, sputtering, 
plasma-induced, high energy ball milling process, etc., and chemical techniques 
including sol-gel, electrospinning (ES), co-precipitation method, spraying, laser abla-
tion, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and hydrothermal synthesis, etc., which can 
have a signiﬁcant impact on both dimensions and the nature of nanomaterials. The 
main purpose of synthesis is to produce single-phase nanoparticles and to reduce 
the preparation cost. However, some techniques are quite complex, time-consuming, 
and expensive, which can limit the large-scale production and reproducibility of 
the as-prepared nanomaterials. Thus, it is signiﬁcant to develop a simple and time-
saving route to fabricate nanomaterials. In this section, widely adopted chemical 
methods including sol-gel, hydrothermal, co-precipitation, and chemical vapor depo-
sition techniques are summarized below because these are straightforward, lead to

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
343
tunable properties (diameter, morphology, and composition), and can be scaled-up 
for industrial production. 
12.3.1 
Sol-Gel Synthesis 
Although the sol-gel process is one of the outdated bottom-up chemical synthesis 
approaches in which components of atomic dimensions are assembled to form nano-
materials, the importance of this process in material fabrication has been growing 
rapidly since the development of this technique in 1940 [8]. Sol-gel processes have a 
remarkable advantage for preparing superﬁne metal oxides (MO) as well as nanopow-
ders of non-oxide materials having the same size with high purity at a low-temperature 
range and low cost. It is also able to produce two or more nanoparticles simultane-
ously [36]. Here, sol stands for dispersed solid colloidal ions or particles in a solvent 
of solution which still contains water or solvent, and gel is a 3D porous intercon-
nected network structure in the liquid phase which is produced when the solvent 
from the sol begins to evaporate [9]. 
Several steps are taken in this process to convert sol into a gel. Dispersed solid 
nanoparticles (sols with diameters ranging from 1 to 100 nm) are mixed in a homo-
geneous liquid medium and agglomerated to form a continuous three-dimensional 
network (gel) in the liquid phase with pore diameters in the sub-micrometer domain. 
The ﬁnal product is produced by following several irreversible chemical reactions. 
The reaction rate of this technique can be raised by using a proper catalyst which can 
be removed after the reaction [36]. The beneﬁt of this technique is that particle size 
and homogeneity can be controlled. It is a method of wet chemical synthesis used to 
produce ﬁbers, thin ﬁlms, powders of ceramic, dielectric, and glass materials. In this 
method, metal alkoxides and chlorides are typically utilized as precursors. During 
the synthesis technique, pH must be managed because this process is sensitive to it 
and it will help to prevent precipitation and create a homogeneous gel. The synthesis 
process is controlled by many factors including pH, temperature, concentration, type 
of solvent, etc. Siswanto et al. [37] reported that in sol-gel synthesis, pH is an impor-
tant factor to control the size of nanoparticles. He noticed that with the rise in pH 
from 7 to 12, the crystallite size of zinc oxide increases from 10.94 to 74.04 nm. 
The different stages of the sol-gel process from solution to nanosphere and 
nanorod are shown in Fig. 12.7.
R. S. Dubey and his team successfully synthesized titanium oxide nanoparticles 
by sol-gel as well as solvothermal technique and conﬁrmed pure crystal phase having 
crystallite size 13 nm and 11 nm corresponding to sol-gel and solvothermal tech-
niques from the study of X-ray diffraction (XRD) peaks without any impurities as 
shown in Fig. 12.8.
Priyadarshini and her team et al. [27] successfully prepared cobalt oxide nanopar-
ticles by using this technique revealing the cubic phase (Fd3m) of crystallite size 
13.76 nm from the XRD technique and conﬁrmed that the sol-gel technique is a better 
choice for the preparation of transition metal oxides in the energy storage system.

344
P. Mallick et al.
Fig. 12.7 Different steps of sol-gel method. Copyright © 2021 Dmitry Bokov et al. [36]
Fig. 12.8 X-ray diffraction patterns of TiO2 nanoparticle using a sol-gel technique, b solvothermal 
technique. Reprinted the ﬁgure with Copyright (2019) permission from Elsevier et al. [38]
TiO2–V2O5 nanomaterial was prepared using the sol-gel technique by Ngaotrakan-
wiwat et al. [39] and the excellent energy storage ability with the highest initial 
charging rate is conﬁrmed.

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
345
12.3.2 
Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) 
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a most promising technique for the direct depo-
sition of different precursors such as thin ﬁlms of metals on speciﬁc structures and 
substrates because of the various advantages such that short processing time, ﬂex-
ibility, deposition of high-purity nanomaterials, narrow size distribution, etc. This 
technique is mostly used in the semiconductor industry for the synthesis of nano-
metric layers of inorganic materials on the surface of 3D substrates and for depositing 
thin ﬁlms of various materials. It is an important technology for creating a thin, high-
purity coating. At lower temperatures, different types of catalysts are used for the 
deposition of metallic coatings. As the solid ﬁlms are deposited on surfaces, it is 
called chemical vapor synthesis or chemical vapor condensation. There are three 
successive steps involved in this process: (i) introduction of the volatile or vaporized 
precursors (may be solid, liquid, or gas under ambient conditions) by carrier gas 
to the reactor chamber; (ii) adsorb of the substrate to one or more volatile at a high 
temperature which favors homogeneous nucleation and the formation of intermediate 
products; and (iii) decomposition of these products on the heated substrate followed 
by heterogeneous nucleation and growth of the solid layer/grains, and the formation 
of volatile by-products under certain conditions (temperature, pressure, substrate, 
etc.) and their removal from the chamber by the carrier gas. 
The important factors such as type and quality of precursors, property of solvent, 
reaction temperature and pressure in the chamber, chemical properties of substrate 
and gas carrier, time and rate of deposition inﬂuenced the CVD techniques and the 
quality of the products. The most important factor which affects the crystal structure, 
size, and morphology of the particle is the temperature at the time of preparation. 
Laser chemical vapor deposition (LCVD) is a CVD variation that uses a laser beam 
to heat the surface of a substrate to a suitable temperature for localized synthesis. The 
ability to instantly modify and control the growth rate is what distinguishes LCVD 
from conventional CVD. In 2014, the synthesis of cobalt oxide using LCVD tech-
niques has been reported, and various factors affecting the density and crystallization 
of cobalt oxide fractal shapes consisting of the cubic CoO and Co3O4 phases, as well 
as the hexagonal Co phase, have been investigated [40]. 
Cobalt oxide with cubic crystal phase was synthesized using a novel precursor 
(Cobalt β-diketonate) through chemical vapor deposition technique by Armelao [41] 
and concluded that the used precursor is a versatile and suitable for the preparation 
of cobalt oxide. It was also observed that by controlling pressure and temperature 
of reactor and substrate, the other hybrids of cobalt including CoO, Co3O4, CoO  
+ Co3O4 etc can be obtained. Maruyama et al. [42] prepared amorphous nickel 
oxide by using CVD techniques and from the study of Coulometry, electrochromic 
efﬁciency was found to be 44 cm2/C. Lee et al. [43] with his team prepared vanadium 
pentoxide (V2O5) successfully by using the CVD technique and reported that the 
prepared sample exhibits amorphous nature at lower temperatures while at the higher 
temperature, the materials exhibit a single crystalline phase without any impurities.

346
P. Mallick et al.
The particle and crystallite size was calculated from the XRD peaks and observed 
that both values increase with increasing preparation temperature. 
12.3.3 
Co-precipitation Technique 
Among the various synthetic approaches, the co-precipitation method is regarded 
as one of the best and potentially advantageous in comparison to other methods 
for producing pure phase formation of transition metal oxide-based nanomaterials 
without any impurities at low temperatures. Synthesis of metal oxide nanoparti-
cles using this technique is increasing day by day due to excellent properties such 
as simple processing, less agglomeration, controllable particle size with high purity, 
and small path for diffusion. [35]. The supersaturation state of certain species soluble 
in the solvent is induced using this method. The supersaturating conditions required 
for the precipitation of the species are typically caused by a chemical reaction. A 
precipitation agent is a solution containing soluble metal cations and another solution 
called a co-precipitation solution. Co-precipitation agents can be either inorganic or 
organic in nature. Temperature, mixing rate, pH, and concentration are all adjusted 
to achieve the desired products and their physical properties, such as product size, 
morphology, particle size distribution, and so on. Following precipitation, the precip-
itate can be removed via centrifugation, ﬁltration, or decantation and then dissolved 
in acids or an organic solvent, such as isobutyl methyl ketone, to be measured. 
Nickel oxide nanoparticles were prepared by using this technique by Khanda-
gale and her team [44] and amorphous nature was identiﬁed from the XRD data. 
Using this method, Buraso and his team et al. [45] synthesized titanium oxide taking 
titanium isopropoxide as the initial material. He noticed that the particle and crystal-
lite size increased, while the energy band gap decreased with increasing calcination 
temperature. 
12.3.4 
Hydrothermal Synthesis 
The hydrothermal process gained much more attention for the synthesis of nanoma-
terials as in this technique grain size, the shape of the particle, crystalline state, and 
surface morphology of materials can be changed by controlling various factors such 
as the property of solvent, the concentration of reactants, temperature, aging and 
pH time, and additives [4]. Hydrothermal synthesis (also known as solvothermal) is 
an easy and fast process with low cost, controlled shape, and size to prepare ultra-
ﬁne nanomaterials under a hydrothermal environment (i.e., neither the solution is 
non-aqueous nor aqueous) at low temperature in the range of 100–374 °C without 
the use of milling and calcination process. The basic principle of this technique is a 
reaction in an aqueous solution or suspension of the precursors at high temperatures

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
347
and pressure [11]. This high pressure decreases the boiling point and increases the 
solubility of the precursors providing better growth of crystals. 
This process possesses excellent consistency and particle uniformity with 
appropriate size which possesses higher mechanical or electrical properties. In a 
hydrothermal method, nanoparticles are created through hydrolysis processes that 
take place at high temperatures and vapor pressure. In this process, materials are 
obtained by the crystallization of phases under high temperatures and pressure. The 
method can be used at room temperature and below critical pressure. This tech-
nique is dependent on the solubility of minerals in hot, high-pressure water. Factors 
affecting the hydrothermal synthesis process are the initial pH of the solution, dura-
tion, temperature, and pressure in the autoclave. Typically, an autoclave is used 
to perform the hydrothermal technique. In this process, a metal precursor solution 
is mixed in a hydrolyzing solution and kept at a high temperature for 10–24 h in 
an autoclave, then cooling it down to ambient temperature for crystallization. The 
resulting crystals are collected using ﬁltration, washing, and drying. Large particle 
size nanocrystals can be synthesized using the hydrothermal method which is useful 
to increase the dielectric constant of the material and hence, increases the dielectric 
properties of the synthesized materials. Nanomaterials synthesized using this method 
tend to withstand high frequencies and high temperatures, and therefore, can be used 
in semiconductor devices. The schematic diagram for the preparation of nickel oxide 
nanoparticles by using the hydrothermal technique is shown in Fig. 12.9. 
After preparing titanium dioxides using four different techniques including sol-
gel, hydrolysis, co-precipitation, and hydrothermal, Liu and his team et al. [46] 
concluded that the hydrothermal process is the best synthesis technique than others 
as it provides the least grain size with excellent photo-catalytic behavior which can be 
applicable for advanced energy storage systems. Feng et al. [6] successfully prepared
Fig. 12.9 Hydrothermal techniques for the preparation of NiO nanoparticles. Reprinted the ﬁgure 
with Copyright (2020) permission from Elsevier et al. [33] 

348
P. Mallick et al.
two α-MnO2 using the hydrothermal method and the same crystallographic phases are 
conﬁrmed by XRD patterns which are critical for evaluating the relationship between 
electrochemical performances and morphologies of MnO2 crystals as anodes for 
lithium-ion batteries. Vanadium pentaoxide (V2O5) was also prepared using this 
technique by Li et al. [47], and the orthorhombic phase with space group Pmmn was 
conﬁrmed from the XRD data which makes it suitable for supercapacitor applications. 
12.4 
TMO-Based Nanomaterials in the Advanced Energy 
Storage System 
The expansion of the global economy leads to increased consumption of fossil fuels, 
which has two major consequences. The ﬁrst is the acceleration in the depletion of 
fossil fuel resources, and the second is environmental problems caused by increased 
greenhouse emissions and pollution of water and air. All of this contributes to the 
need for alternative, clean, and sustainable energy sources, as well as new energy 
storage technologies. To meet the future requirements of advanced energy storage 
systems, TMO-based nanomaterials can provide high energy, high power density, 
low cost, eco-friendliness, and fast availability. The growing demand for affordable, 
environmentally friendly energy for the world’s growing population has sparked 
intense research into efﬁcient energy storage systems. The majority of research has 
concentrated on lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors. Lithium-ion batteries with 
high energy density, long durability, and a consistent rate of charge/discharge are 
widely used in daily life as portable batteries for phones, computers, and watches, as 
well as backup power devices. Supercapacitor research as advanced energy systems is 
gaining traction due to their high power density (10 kW kg−1), fast charge/discharge 
rate, and long cycle life (>104 cycles) [24]. 
12.4.1 
Lithium Ion Batteries (LIBs) 
Rechargeable non-aqueous lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have advanced rapidly in 
the past twenty years which can store electrical energy in the form of mechanical 
energy with much-improved energy density, no memory effect, wide voltage range, 
low maintenance, good performance rate, and are widely used in day to day life 
such as a portable electronic, electrical vehicle, medical devices, and backup power 
devices. However, high costs and safety concerns make current LIBs less appealing 
for large-scale stationary EES, where cost, safety, and cycle life, in addition to energy 
density, become important considerations [48]. Synthesizing transition metal oxide-
based nanomaterials with unique structures can enhance safety, storage capacity, and 
other storage properties and also able to reduce the cost of lithium-ion batteries [49].

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
349
Fig. 12.10 Electrochemical performance of MnO2 using four different electrolytes where EC 
stands for ethylene carbonate, DEC is diethyl carbonate, DMC refers to dimethyl carbonate and 
EMC stands for ethyl methyl carbonate. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from [54]. Copyright 
(2019) 
Thus, TMO-based nanomaterials can be the most promising negative electrodes for 
next-generation LIBs. 
Ei-Deen et al. [50] found that titanium dioxide of 20 nm particle size prepared by 
sol-gel method is a promising electrode material having a speciﬁc capacity of 174 
mAh/g and improved electrochemical performance for lithium-ion battery. Later Q. 
He et al. [51] proposed that by doping nitrogen in TiO2, the nanomaterials show a 
speciﬁc capacity of 350 mAh/g which makes them suitable electrode materials for 
lithium-ion battery. In 2019, Rana and his team et al. [52] transition metal oxides 
especially hybrid material of MnO2 are very much suitable to achieve high Li storage 
capacity having a speciﬁc capacity value above 1100 and 500 mAh/g at a discharge 
current density of 25 mA/g and 5 A/g, respectively, with coulombic efﬁciency of 
97.5%. Xu et al. [53] reported that ruthenium oxide can also be served as electrodes 
for lithium-ion batteries because of their large cyclability, low sensitivity, and high 
volumetric charge capacity. Tsai et al. [54] fabricated MnO2 as anodes in lithium-ion 
battery by taking four different electrolytes and observed that its discharge capacity 
rises from 813 to 962 mAh/g. The electrochemical performance of MnO2 using four 
different electrolytes is shown in Fig. 12.10. 
12.4.2 
Supercapacitors (SCs) 
From the last decade of the twentieth century, supercapacitors also known as elec-
trochemical capacitors or ultra-capacitors are gaining much more attention in the 
energy sector for the development of energy storage systems because of their high 
power density, large storage capacity, high conductivity and tunable speciﬁc capac-
itance, fast-charged/ discharged rate, long cycle life, lightweight, easy operational

350
P. Mallick et al.
Super 
Capacitors 
Electrochemical 
Double Layer 
Capacitors (EDLCs) 
1. Carbon Electrode Materials 
2. High specific surface area, excellent electrical 
conductivty and mechanical stability but low 
specific capacitance 
3. No faradaic reaction, charge store 
electrostatically 
Pseudo Capacitors 
(PCs) 
1. Transition metal oxides and Conducting 
Polymers 
2. better intrinsic conductivity, high specific 
energy and capacitance but poor cycling stability 
3. Revesible faradaic reaction, charge store 
electrochemically   
Hybrid Capacitors 
(HCs) 
1. Combination storage mechanism of both 
EDLCs and PCs 
2. charge store both electrostatically and 
electrochemically 
Fig. 12.11 Classiﬁcation of supercapacitors with its advantages and disadvantages 
technique. With these excellent properties, supercapacitors can be used in the ﬁeld 
of electronics, especially in computers and memory storage devices, power backup 
devices, transport devices, public securities, medical and military services [55], 
etc. By the production of electrolyte ions on the surface of electro-active materials 
through reversible redox reactions, the supercapacitors acquire a distinct ability to 
store energy. According to the charge and energy storage mechanism, supercapaci-
tors are classiﬁed [2] into (i) electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs), (ii) 
pseudo-supercapacitors (PCs), and (iii) hybrid supercapacitors (HCs) as shown in 
Fig. 12.11. 
As the energy density of a supercapacitor depends on capacitance and operating 
voltage, so by increasing the potential window and using an electrode material with 
high capacitance, the energy storage capacity of the supercapacitor can be enhanced 
[56]. The choice of electrode materials is what makes it possible for supercapacitors 
to have great electrochemical performance. The electrode materials used in super 
capacitors should have mesoporous behavior with a high speciﬁc surface area. From 
the literature review, it is conﬁrmed that TMO-based nanomaterials are more suit-
able electrodes for supercapacitors than others due to their high speciﬁc power and 
capacitance [2], multiple valency states, dielectric properties, electrical conductivity 
[1], stability, polarizability, long life cycles, easy scaling, eco-friendly, and sustain-
ability [57]. Several studies on the physicochemical and electrochemical properties 
of TMO-based nanomaterials, such as RuO2, MnO2, V2O5, NiO, and Co3O4 are 
made for the development of high-efﬁciency SCs which depends on their capaci-
tive behavior, oxidation states, charging and discharging rate, chemical composition, 
the crystalline phase, particle size, ion exchange capacity, and inherent thermal and 
chemical stability, etc. By combining expensive metal oxides with other low-cost 
metal oxides, the cost of electrode materials can be reduced and the electrochemical 
performance of the material can be enhanced. 
Dung et al. [18] prepared Co and Fe-doped manganese oxide using the sol-gel tech-
nique for supercapacitor and reported that Co-doped MnO2 exhibits a speciﬁc capac-
itance of 186.2 F/g with 84% stability while Fe-doped MnO2 shows high speciﬁc

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
351
capacitance of 298.4% with 83% stability. Mevada et al. [58] synthesized SnO2– 
RuO2-based nanocomposite to reduce the cost of the materials. From the electro-
chemical study, it was observed that the composite attains maximum speciﬁc energy 
of 0.91 Wh/kg with 87.5% of capacitance retention which makes it a promising elec-
trode for supercapacitor applications. Kuo et al. [59] synthesized a supercapacitor 
electrode by combining tin oxide and ruthenium oxide and the speciﬁc capacitance 
of the composite is found to be 670 F/g with a speciﬁc energy of 0.5 Wh/kg. 
12.5 
Future Prospective 
The main disadvantage of TMOs is their low conductivity, which prevents them 
from achieving a high theoretical speciﬁc capacitance value. The main component 
of advanced energy storage systems including supercapacitors and battery is the elec-
trodes. Thus, electrodes with sufﬁcient electrical conductivity, adequate mechanical 
properties, and cost-effectiveness should be researched and encouraged. TMO-based 
nanomaterials may be mixed with other metal oxide, carbon-based nanomaterials, 
polymers, etc., to enhance the properties such as surface area, surface activities, 
charge transfer processes, and to reduce electron–hole recombination which will 
provide greater efﬁciency in practical applications, especially in advanced storage 
system. Recently, TMOs derivatives have been shown to deliver high electrical 
conductivity, they should be modiﬁed into various types that can serve several multi-
functionalities. Separators are normally electrical insulators, ionically conducting, 
and withstand high mechanical stresses caused by expansion, compression, etc. It 
is the interface between the electrodes but many separators nowadays hardly serve 
the multipurpose function needed, hence must have excellent interfacial adhesion to 
provide sufﬁcient mechanical stability in conjunction with multifunctional matrices 
for high-performance supercapacitors. 
The cost of supercapacitors is still very high because the technology required 
for their production is still sophisticated; hence, it is difﬁcult for it to replace 
batteries effectively irrespective of its numerous advantages nowadays. We strongly 
recommend the following future prospects below: 
(a) Better simple and low-cost fabrication techniques to control the surface 
morphology and the issue of self-discharging. 
(b) Scientists and researchers should focus on improving cycling stability, lifespan, 
and fast charging time of advanced energy storage systems. 
(c) TMO-based hybrid materials need to be examined effectively because of their 
high speciﬁc surface area, which improves storage systems.

352
P. Mallick et al.
12.6 
Conclusion 
To meet the requirement of sustainable and renewable energy storage for a variety 
of applications, such as electronic devices, hybrid electric vehicles as well in large 
industrial machinery, advanced energy storage systems such as batteries, PV cells, 
and supercapacitors have been acknowledged as ideal storage devices in fulﬁlling 
future demands. The discovery of supercapacitors and lithium-ion battery as some 
substitute systems to meet the requirement of storing renewable energy appeared 
enticing because it possesses numerous properties including high power density, 
cycle stability, fast rate of charge or discharge, and other electrochemical performance 
which suit them for many applications such as (i) emergency power back up systems, 
(ii) electronic devices, (iii) battery buffers, (iv) electric vehicles, and (v) medical 
devices. 
The performance of advanced energy storage systems is largely affected by the 
selection of electrode materials. TMOs are the most favored electrode materials due 
to their enlarged speciﬁc surface area, long durability, better chemical stability, higher 
energy density, speciﬁc capacity, and comparatively high conductive than polymers 
which can greatly enhance ion/electron transport than other materials and polymers. 
In this chapter, we have summarized recent developments of TMOs-based electrode 
materials for lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors including fabrication, and 
electrochemical performances. RuO2 is the ideal TMOs electrode material, but high 
cost and toxicity are its fatal shortcomings. Co3O4,MnO2,TiO2, vanadium pentoxide, 
and other metal oxides are supposed to substitute RuO2. However, existing problems 
like low conductivity hinder their practical application in electrode materials. 
However, the design and optimum conditions for preparing nanomaterials with 
superior features remain a great challenge, and therefore, some factors including the 
morphology, pore size, and surface area of the nanomaterials should be taken into 
consideration. In this chapter, recent progress in TMO-based nanomaterials has been 
pointed out and reviewed. Although TMO-based nanomaterials can deliver a good 
electrochemical performance, these individual electrode materials still suffer from 
some limitations including the poor conductivity of TMO, which contributes to a 
low speciﬁc capacitance and causes the structural destruction of the TMO materials 
during the doping-developing process, thus leading to an inferior stability perfor-
mance. Although the ideal synthesis of TMO-based nanomaterials is believed to 
overcome the disadvantages of each component, further improvements in the electro-
chemical performances of the materials, that is, speciﬁc capacitance, speciﬁc energy, 
and long-term stability are needed for scalable and ﬂexible energy storage devices. 
It is highly recommended to fabricate TMO-based nanomaterials by combining 
two electrode materials with different potential windows. This hybrid electrode 
design could broaden the potential window, thus exhibiting high speciﬁc energy. 
In short, tremendous efforts in advancing TMO-based nanomaterials should be 
made to enlarge the scopes of energy storage systems into ﬂexible, stretchable, and 
compressible devices.

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
353
References 
1. Abdah MAAM, Azman NHN, Kulandaivalu S, Sulaiman Y (2020) Review of the use of 
transition-metal-oxide and conducting polymer-based ﬁbres for high-performance superca-
pacitors. Mater Des 186:108199 
2. Ray A, Roy A, Saha S, Das S (2019) Transition metal oxide-based nano-materials for energy 
storage application. Sci Technol Adv Appl Supercapacitors, 1–17 
3. Mallick P, Satpathy SK, Behera B (2022) Investigation on the structural, electrical and ther-
mistor parameters of La-doped BiFeO3–PbZrO3 for energy storage devices. Bull Mater Sci 
45(4):1–11 
4. Mallick P, Champati L, Biswal SK, Satpathy SK (2022) Experimental investigation on 
structural, dielectric, and transport properties of copper doped SrTiO3. Integr Ferroelectr 
230(1):156–162 
5. BahariMollaMahaleh Y, Sadrnezhaad SK, Hosseini D (2008) NiO nanoparticles synthesis 
by chemical precipitation and effect of applied surfactant on distribution of particle size. J 
Nanomater 
6. Majumdar D, Maiyalagan T, Jiang Z (2019) Recent progress in ruthenium oxide-based 
composites for supercapacitor applications. ChemElectroChem 6(17):4343–4372 
7. Sahu AK, Satpathy SK, Rout SK, Behera B (2020) Dielectric and frequency dependent transport 
properties of gadolinium doped bismuth ferrite. Trans Electr Electron Mater 21(2):217–226 
8. Mallick P, Satpathy SK, Behera B (2022) Study of structural, dielectric, electrical, and magnetic 
properties of samarium-doped double perovskite material for thermistor applications. Braz J 
Phys 52(6):1–15 
9. Sahu AK, Mallick P, Satpathy SK, Behera B (2021) Effect on structural, electrical and 
temperature sensing behavior of neodymium doped bismuth ferrite. Adv Mater Lett 12(7):1–7 
10. Mallick P, Sahu AK, Biswal SK, Satpathy SK, Behera B (2022) Investigation on structural, 
dielectric, thermistor parameters and negative temperature coefﬁcient behaviour of Nd, Gd, 
and la-doped bismuth ferrite. Trans Electr Electron Mater, 1–13 
11. Mohanty D, Mallick P, Biswal SK, Behera B, Mohapatra RK, Behera A, Satpathy SK (2020) 
Investigation of structural, dielectric and electrical properties of ZnFe2O4 composite. Mater 
Today Proc 33:4971–4975 
12. Mohanty D, Naik AU, Nayak PK, Behera B, Satpathy SK (2021) Structural and electrical 
properties of magnesium-doped CoFe2O4. Powder Metall Met Ceram 59(9):507–514 
13. Mohanty D, Satpathy SK, Behera B, Mohapatra RK (2020) Dielectric and frequency dependent 
transport properties in magnesium doped CuFe2O4 composite. Mater Today Proc 33:5226– 
5231 
14. Diao F, Wang Y (2018) Transition metal oxide nanostructures: premeditated fabrication and 
applications in electronic and photonic devices. J Mater Sci 53(6):4334–4359 
15. Park SE, Kim HM, Kim KB, Min SH (2000) Metallorganic chemical vapor deposition of Ru 
and RuO2 using ruthenocene precursor and oxygen gas. J Electrochem Soc 147(1):203 
16. Dao VD, Hoa ND, Vu NH, Quang DV, Van Hieu N, Dung TTN, Viet NX, Hung CM, Choi HS 
(2019) A facile synthesis of ruthenium/reduced graphene oxide nanocomposite for effective 
electrochemical applications. Sol Energy 191:420–426 
17. Nisha B, Vidyalakshmi Y, Razack SA (2020) Enhanced formation of ruthenium oxide nanopar-
ticles through green synthesis for highly efﬁcient supercapacitor applications. Adv Powder 
Technol 31(3):1001–1006 
18. Dang TD, Le TTH, Hoang TBT, Mai TT (2015) Synthesis of nanostructured manganese 
oxides based materials and application for supercapacitor. Adv Nat Sci Nanosci Nanotechnol 
6(2):025011 
19. Meng Y, Liu Y, He J, Sun X, Palmieri A, Gu Y, Zheng X, Dang Y, Huang X, Mustain W, Suib 
SL (2021) Large scale synthesis of manganese oxide/reduced graphene oxide composites as 
anode materials for long cycle lithium ion batteries. ACS Appl Energy Mater 4(6):5424–5433 
20. Yao J, Li Y, Massé RC, Uchaker E, Cao G (2018) Revitalized interest in vanadium pentoxide 
as cathode material for lithium-ion batteries and beyond. Energy Storage Mater 11:205–259

354
P. Mallick et al.
21. Sakunthala A, Reddy MV, Selvasekarapandian S, Chowdari BVR, Selvin PC (2011) Energy 
storage studies of bare and doped vanadium pentoxide, (V1.95M0.05)O5, M = Nb, Ta, for lithium 
ion batteries. Energy Environ Sci 4(5):1712–1725 
22. Xie JD, Li HY, Wu TY, Chang JK, Gandomi YA (2018) Electrochemical energy storage 
of nanocrystalline vanadium oxide thin ﬁlms prepared from various plating solutions for 
supercapacitors. ElectrochimicaActa 273:257–263 
23. Boruah BD, Wen B, De Volder M (2021) Light rechargeable lithium-ion batteries using V2O5 
cathodes. Nano Lett 21(8):3527–3532 
24. Zallouz S, Réty B, Vidal L, Le Meins JM, MateiGhimbeu C (2021) Co3O4 nanoparticles 
embedded in mesoporous carbon for supercapacitor applications. ACS Appl Nano Mater 
4(5):5022–5037 
25. Jang GS, Ameen S, Akhtar MS, Kim E, Shin HS (2017) Electrochemical investigations of 
hydrothermally synthesized porous cobalt oxide (Co3O4) nanorods: supercapacitor application. 
ChemistrySelect 2(28):8941–8949 
26. Xie L, Li K, Sun G, Hu Z, Lv C, Wang J, Zhang C (2013) Preparation and electrochemical 
performance of the layered cobalt oxide (Co3O4) as supercapacitor electrode material. J Solid 
State Electrochem 17(1):55–61 
27. Priyadharsini CI, Marimuthu G, Pazhanivel T, Anbarasan PM, Aroulmoji V, Siva V, Mohana 
L (2020) Sol-gel synthesis of Co3O4 nanoparticles as an electrode material for supercapacitor 
applications. J Sol-Gel Sci Technol 96(2):416–422 
28. Lee DH, Lee BH, Sinha AK, Park JH, Kim MS, Park J, Shin H, Lee KS, Sung YE, Hyeon T 
(2018) Engineering titanium dioxide nanostructures for enhanced lithium-ion storage. J Am 
Chem Soc 140(48):16676–16684 
29. Ray A, Roy A, Sadhukhan P, Chowdhury SR, Maji P, Bhattachrya SK, Das S (2018) Elec-
trochemical properties of TiO2-V2O5 nanocomposites as a high performance supercapacitors 
electrode material. Appl Surf Sci 443:581–591 
30. LontioFomekong R, Saruhan B (2019) Synthesis of Co3+ doped TiO2 by co-precipitation route 
and its gas sensing properties. Frontiers in Materials 6:252 
31. Napari M, Huq TN, Hoye RL, MacManus-Driscoll JL (2021) Nickel oxide thin ﬁlms grown by 
chemical deposition techniques: potential and challenges in next-generation rigid and ﬂexible 
device applications. InfoMat 3(5):536–576 
32. Lamba P, Singh P, Singh P, Kumar A, Singh P, Kumar Y, Gupta M (2021) Bioinspired synthesis 
of nickel oxide nanoparticles as electrode material for supercapacitor applications. Ionics 
27(12):5263–5276 
33. Dhas SD, Maldar PS, Patil MD, Nagare AB, Waikar MR, Sonkawade RG, Moholkar AV (2020) 
Synthesis of NiO nanoparticles for supercapacitor application as an efﬁcient electrode material. 
Vacuum 181:109646 
34. Velmurugan V, Srinivasarao U, Ramachandran R, Saranya M, Grace AN (2016) Synthesis of tin 
oxide/graphene (SnO2/G) nanocomposite and its electrochemical properties for supercapacitor 
applications. Mater Res Bull 84:145–151 
35. Yadav S, Rani N, Saini K (2022) A review on transition metal oxides based nanocomposites, 
their synthesis techniques, different morphologies and potential applications. IOP Conf Ser 
Mater Sci Eng 1225(1):012004 
36. Bokov D, TurkiJalil A, Chupradit S, Suksatan W, Javed Ansari M, Shewael IH, Valiev GH, 
Kianfar E (2021) Nanomaterial by sol-gel method: synthesis and application. Adv Mater Sci 
Eng 
37. Rochman NT, Akwalia PR (2017) Fabrication and characterization of Zinc Oxide (ZnO) 
nanoparticle by sol-gel method. J Phys Conf Ser 853(1):012041 
38. Dubey RS, Krishnamurthy KV, Singh S (2019) Experimental studies of TiO2 nanoparticles 
synthesized by sol-gel and solvothermal routes for DSSCs application. Results Phys 14:102390 
39. Ngaotrakanwiwat P, Meeyoo V (2012) TiO2–V2O5 nanocomposites as alternative energy 
storage substances for photocatalysts. J Nanosci Nanotechnol 12(1):828–833 
40. Haniam P, Kunsombat C, Chiangga S, Songsasen A (2014) Synthesis of cobalt oxides thin 
ﬁlms fractal structures by laser chemical vapor deposition. Sci World J

12
Transition Metal Oxide-Based Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy …
355
41. Barreca D, Massignan C, Daolio S, Fabrizio M, Piccirillo C, Armelao L, Tondello E (2001) 
Composition and microstructure of cobalt oxide thin ﬁlms obtained from a novel cobalt (II) 
precursor by chemical vapor deposition. Chem Mater 13(2):588–593 
42. Maruyama T, Arai S (1993) The electrochromic properties of nickel oxide thin ﬁlms prepared 
by chemical vapor deposition. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells 30(3):257–262 
43. Le HA, Chin S, Park E, Bae G, Jurng J (2012) Chemical vapor synthesis and physico-chemical 
properties of V2O5 nanoparticles. Chem Vap Deposition 18(1–3):6–9 
44. Pooja K, Dipali S (2017) Synthesis and characterization of nickel oxide nanoparticles by using 
co-precipitation method. Int J Adv Res 5(5):1333–1338 
45. Buraso W, Lachom V, Siriya P, Laokul P (2018) Synthesis of TiO2 nanoparticles via a simple 
precipitation method and photocatalytic performance. Mater Res Express 5(11):115003 
46. Liu Z, Wang R, Kan F, Jiang F (2014). Synthesis and characterization of TiO2 nanoparticles. 
Asian J Chem 26(3) 
47. Li M, Ai T, Kou L, Song J, Bao W, Wang Y, Wei X, Li W, Deng Z, Zou X, Wang H (2022) 
Synthesis and electrochemical performance of V2O5 nanosheets for supercapacitor. AIP Adv 
12(5):055203 
48. Teng X (2019) Transition metal oxides nanomaterials for aqueous electrochemical energy 
storage (No. DOE-UNH-SC0010286). XiaoweiTeng/University of New Hampshire 
49. Wu HB, Chen JS, Hng HH, Lou XWD (2012) Nanostructured metal oxide-based materials as 
advanced anodes for lithium-ion batteries. Nanoscale 4(8):2526–2542 
50. El-Deen SS, Hashem AM, Abdel Ghany AE, Indris S, Ehrenberg H, Mauger A, Julien CM 
(2018) Anatase TiO2 nanoparticles for lithium-ion batteries. Ionics 24(10):2925–2934 
51. He Q, Sun Z, Shi X, Wu W, Cheng J, Zhuo R, Zhang Z, Wang J (2021) Electrochemical 
performance enhancement of nitrogen-doped TiO2 for lithium-ion batteries investigated by a 
ﬁlm electrode model. Energy Fuels 35(3):2717–2726 
52. Rana M, Avvaru VS, Boaretto N, Víctor A, Marcilla R, Etacheri V, Vilatela JJ (2019) High 
rate hybrid MnO2@ CNT fabric anodes for Li-ion batteries: properties and a lithium storage 
mechanism study by in situ synchrotron X-ray scattering. J Mater Chem A 7(46):26596–26606 
53. Xu L, Thompson CV (2020) Mechanisms of the cyclic (de) lithiation of RuO2. J Mater Chem 
A 8(41):21872–21881 
54. Tsai YC, Kuo CT, Liu SF, Lee YT, Yew TR (2021) Effect of different electrolytes on MnO2 
anodes in lithium-ion batteries. J Phys Chem C 125(2):1221–1233 
55. Obodo RM, Nwanya AC, Hassina T, Kebede MA, Ahmad I, Maaza M, Ezema FI (2019) 
Transition metal oxide-based nanomaterials for high energy and power density supercapacitor. 
In: Electrochemical devices for energy storage applications. CRC Press, pp 131–150 
56. Liang R, Du Y, Xiao P, Cheng J, Yuan S, Chen Y, Yuan J, Chen J (2021) Transition metal 
oxide electrode materials for supercapacitors: a review of recent developments. Nanomaterials 
11(5):1248 
57. Quispe-Garrido V, Cerron-Calle GA, Bazan-Aguilar A, Ruiz-Montoya JG, López EO, Baena-
Moncada AM (2021) Advances in the design and application of transition metal oxide-based 
supercapacitors. Open Chem 19(1):709–725 
58. Mevada C, Mukhopadhyay M (2020) High mass loading tin oxide-ruthenium oxide-based 
nanocomposite electrode for supercapacitor application. J Energy Storage 31:101587 
59. Kuo SL, Wu NL (2003) Composite supercapacitor containing tin oxide and electroplated 
ruthenium oxide. Electrochem Solid-State Lett 6(5):A85

Chapter 13 
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics 
for Energy Storage Application 
Anindita Mukherjee, Anupam Ghosh, and Barnali Dasgupta Ghosh 
Abstract Growing demand for advanced energy storage systems (ESSs) leads to 
the synthesis of novel materials with the ability to store high-power density and elec-
trical energy. Film capacitors based on ﬂuoropolymers like poly(vinylidene ﬂuo-
ride) (PVDF) and its copolymers (PVDF-HFP, and PVDF-TrFe) have enormous 
applications for energy storage portable devices due to high dielectric constant and 
breakdown strength with low discharge efﬁciency. The electroactive structure of ﬂuo-
ropolymers initiates a micro-capacitance and develops high polarizability. Thus, this 
chapter investigates the properties, applications, and opportunities of ﬂuoropolymers 
with high-energy storage performance. Also, it elucidates the structural dependence 
due to the inherent polarity (C–H and C–F bond) of polymers to the dielectric constant 
(charge storage mechanism), ferroelectric polarization, and low leakage current for 
a high capacitive response. This chapter will mostly stress PVDF, due to its low cost, 
easy availability, stability, and ﬂexibility for enormous electrical applications. The 
introduction of high k dielectric materials into polymers increases their dielectric 
constant, energy storage density, and thermal stability to appreciable value. There-
fore, it is essential to investigate the capacitive properties of PVDF-based composites 
loaded with ceramics and metal oxide. Overall, the chapter provides the readers with 
the elaborated signiﬁcance of ﬂuoropolymers and composites as a capacitor for future 
high-ﬁeld applications. 
Keywords Fluoropolymers · Polarizability · Energy storage performance ·
Breakdown strength · Applications
A. Mukherjee · B. Dasgupta Ghosh envelope symbol
Department of Chemistry, Birla Institute of Technology Mesra, Ranchi 835215, India 
e-mail: barnalidg@bitmesra.ac.in; barnali.iitkgp@gmail.com 
A. Ghosh 
Department of Management, Birla Institute of Technology Mesra, Ranchi 835215, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_13 
357

358
A. Mukherjee et al.
13.1 
Introduction 
The alternate solution of nonrenewable energy sources is one of the very promising 
research areas in terms of both academia and industries. The solution for this is the 
development of energy storage devices like chemical batteries, dielectric capacitors, 
and supercapacitors. Compared to supercapacitors and chemical batteries dielectric 
capacitors are mostly preferred [1]. It possesses an ever-increasing demand for energy 
storage devices, their usage leads to the sustainable growth of modern society. It is 
one of the crucial parts of our daily lives since the manufacture of such dielectric 
capacitors is highly cost-effective. A dielectric capacitor has a role in the energy-
storing ability of a capacitor. Also, it exhibits ultrafast charging ability and this 
leads to its tremendous usage in pulsed power generation, medical deﬁbrillators, 
high-frequency inverters, and hybrid electric vehicles. Dielectric ﬁlms, due to its 
ﬂexibility and facile fabrication impart an important integrated part within electrical 
energy storage devices (EESD) [2]. The discharge energy density is represented 
through Eq. (13.1). 
up er
 
U
 Subs
cri
pt e Baseline equals integral Underscript upper D Subscript max Baseline Overscript 0 Endscripts upper E d upper D
The efﬁciency is computed as in Eq. (13.2): 
eta
 equals StartFraction upper U Subscript discharged Baseline Over upper U Subscript discharged Baseline plus upper U Subscript loss Baseline EndFraction
eta equals S tartFrac
tion upper U Subscript discharged Baseline Over upper U Subscript discharged Baseline plus upper U Subscript loss Baseline EndFraction
However, for linear dielectric materials, the energy density is given through 
Eq. (13.3). 
up er U Subscript e Baseline equals one half epsilon Subscript r Baseline epsilon 0 upper E Subscript b Superscript 2
upper U Sub
s
cript e Baseline equals one half epsilon Subscript r Baseline epsilon 0 upper E Subscript b Superscript 2
As per the above equation, the discharge energy density depends upon the 
breakdown strength, dielectric permittivity, and dielectric loss (tan δ). Dielectric 
permittivity is the intrinsic property of a dielectric material. However, low break-
down strength could develop mechanical, thermal, and electrical issues. Also, the 
discharged energy density is square to the power of breakdown strength, proving 
the importance of breakdown strength for high energy storage performance. Overall, 
the material should have high permittivity along with high breakdown strength [3]. 
Thus, ﬂuoropolymers are effective for high capacitive performance. Its electroac-
tive structure produces high permittivity and its monophase structure, creates high 
breakdown strength (Fig. 13.1) [4]. According to Eq. (13.2), the efﬁciency increases 
with the increase in the left parenthe sis upper U Subscript discharged Baseline minus upper U Subscript loss Baseline) value, due to the respective increase 
of discharge density as compared to energy loss. The high increment of discharge 
energy density with respect to energy loss density would decrease the denominator

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
359
and would thereby increase the efﬁciency. Single-phase dielectric capacitor reduces 
the dielectric loss and energy loss density as well. Thus, the usage of the polymer as 
a dielectric capacitor increases the overall efﬁciency of the capacitor. Even though 
the polymers exhibit a high breakdown strength, still possess very low permittivity. 
A high dielectric constant and permittivity are required for the high polarization 
represented in the P-E loop. Similar to the charging and discharging phenomena 
of the capacitor, the P-E loop also represents the capacitance behavior of a dielec-
tric capacitor. High polarization increases the energy storage density of the capac-
itor (represented through an orange part in Fig. 13.1). Therefore, the application of 
polymer with electroactive features is the solution for the manufacture of energy 
storage devices with capacitors of high energy storage density. The electroactivity 
is mostly present in polymers with ionic bonds in their chain. For example, ﬂuo-
ropolymer like PVDF, P(VDF-HFP), and PVDF-TrFE has a high dielectric permit-
tivity as compared to other amorphous and semicrystalline polymers. Due to their 
high polarizability, ﬂuoropolymers possess efﬁcient electrical properties like high 
piezoelectric, dielectric, and ferroelectric properties. Still, the permittivity needs to 
be enhanced within such polymer to meet the requirement of high-energy storage 
portable devices. The polarization or the permittivity could be increased through 
poling. Poling like corona poling is an effective method for the synthesis of polymer 
with a highly dipole-oriented structure. It involves the usage of both electric ﬁelds 
and heating for orientation. A high electric ﬁeld ionizes the gas within the poling 
chamber. These gases induce the polymer dipole to orient in a certain axial direction. 
The heat treatment mobilizes the dipole. After the heating, cooling is done so that 
it permanently freezes the dipole in its speciﬁc axial direction. Another method is 
the addition of insulative ﬁllers like ZnO, BaTiO3, and PZT. The morphology of the 
grain of such insulative ﬁller has an enormous effect on energy storage density as 
the asymmetric structure (nanorod, nanowires, nanoplates, and nanograins) produces 
higher polarizability. The mentioned shape possesses a high aspect ratio. High aspect 
ratio ﬁller exhibits high surface area interaction with the polymer. Thus, the incor-
poration or loading of even a small amount of such ﬁller increases the dielectric 
constant. Therefore, the combination of the high-aspect ﬁller with ﬂuoropolymers 
produces composites with high energy storage density. However, the inclusion of 
ﬁller diminishes its overall efﬁciency as a capacitor and increases the dielectric loss. 
The breakdown strength and dielectric loss could be modiﬁed for low dissipation 
through surface functionalization of the ﬁller where its outside surface is surrounded 
by organic parts to decrease the agglomeration and increase the interaction of the 
ﬁller with the polymer matrix.
In summary, this chapter focuses on the energy storage properties of ﬂuo-
ropolymer. This chapter gives an idea about the structure of monomers, different 
phases, and the effect of ﬂuorine on the polarizability as well as the dielectric, piezo-
electric, ferroelectric, and energy storage properties. Also, the chapter elaborates on 
the dependence of the energy storage property of a PVDF ﬁlm in terms of its dielectric 
constant and breakdown strength. The manufacture or fabrication process has a huge 
role in the synthesis of the ﬁlm with high thermal stability, energy storage density,

360
A. Mukherjee et al.
Fig. 13.1 Representation of discharged energy density (orange part), energy loss density (green 
part), energy efﬁciency, and discharge energy density for the linear dielectric
and low dielectric loss. Here three such methods are discussed electrospinning, solu-
tion casting, and hot-press method. Finally, the energy storage properties of some 
earlier research works are also represented. These include PVDF, P(VDF-HFP), and 
PVDF-TrFE composites with asymmetric ﬁllers exhibiting the properties discussed 
above. However, the properties will mostly focus on PVDF composites, due to their 
high dielectric constant and easy availability. 
13.2 
Fluoropolymers 
The replacement of hydrogen with ﬂuorine creates a tremendous change in the prop-
erties of ﬂuoropolymer. Fluorine helps to improve thermal and thermo oxidative 
stability, mechanical property, and chemical resistance in comparison to their non-
ﬂuorinated analogues [5]. Therefore, ﬂuoropolymers can be used in a wide range 
of applications due to their superior properties. Improvement in thermal resistance 
properties helps to widen its application from low-temperature to high-temperature 
regions. Fluoropolymers show higher ﬂexibility, it does not easily break under pres-
sure. So can be easily mouldable and different complicated shape products can be 
obtained with the application of cables and covers. Due to the chemical inertness of 
ﬂuoropolymers such polymers could be used in a harsh and aggressive environment. 
Similarly, it has its application in the medical ﬁeld due to its biocompatibility feature. 
Among the polymer, ﬂuoropolymers exhibit the highest energy storage density due 
to their high dielectric constant with high breakdown strength. The energy storage

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
361
performance is dependent on the structural feature of such polymers. Thus, this 
section discusses the structural properties of PVDF and PVDF-based copolymers. 
PVDF is a semicrystalline polymer with the repeat unit of –CF2–CH2–. The struc-
ture consists of negatively charged ﬂuorine and positively charged hydrogen, thereby 
the structure is inherently polar [6]. Figure 13.2a describes the crystalline form of 
PVDF. According to the relative orientation of atoms, the nine crystallines are divided 
into four categories of α, β, and γ Here β has an all-trans chain with the same parallel 
orientation of CH2 and CF2, while α form has antiparallel TGTG1 conﬁrmation with 
nonpolar structure. The crystal transformation of the α phase to β phase could occur 
from mechanical stretching and annealing. These external processes rotate the C–C 
bond in PVDF and thereby affecting the relative orientation. On a molecular level, the 
processes destroy the spherulite structure of PVDF and convert it into the stretched 
part with highly aligned oriented-lamelle as shown in Fig. 13.2b. Such a high polar 
structure creates strong micro-capacitance and increases the dielectric constant and 
energy storage density. 
Poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride-co-hexaﬂuoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) is a copolymer 
of PVDF with extra four ﬂuorine atoms. This makes it hydrophobic and less crys-
talline [7]. However, the presence of ﬂuorine atoms and hydrogen atoms develops a 
strong dipole moment (Fig. 13.3). Introduction of TrFE into VDF crystallizes to form 
PVDF-TrFE polymer. The introduction of TrFE greater than 11%, creates enough 
defect by the bulky ﬂuorine group preventing the formation of Trans-Gauche conﬁr-
mation. Overall TrFE addition transforms directly the α phase to the β phase without 
any mechanical stretching and annealing [8].
Fig. 13.2 a α, β, γ forms of PVDF and b formation of oriented lamelle through a drawing of a 
spherulite 

362
A. Mukherjee et al.
Fig. 13.3 Structure of a PVDF-HFP and b PVDF-TrFE 
13.2.1 
Synthesis of Fluoropolymer 
The synthesis of PVDF involves free radical polymerization of 1,1-diﬂuoroethylene. 
The free radical polymerization initiates with a highly active initiator. Such initiators 
are usually free radical since it is susceptible to a chain reaction. The radicals react 
with the required monomer here as 1,1-diﬂuoroethylene and form a new radical. 
This new radical is similar to the initiator, is highly reactive, and thereby undergoes 
a chain-growth polymerization. The required polymerization leads to the synthesis 
of polyvinylidene ﬂuoride. The respective copolymers of PVDF (PVDF-HFP and 
PVDF-TrFE) are produced through radical copolymerization reaction [9]. Similar 
to free radical polymerization, here a radical monomer is initially formed for either 
part of the copolymer. The free radical monomer being reactive enough, attacks the 
monomer of another part forming a new radical. This process continues as the chain 
growth copolymerization forms the ﬁnal copolymers of PVDF-HFP and PVDF-TrFE. 
The initial radical of radical copolymerization is usually formed in the presence of 
an initiator, UV, or other radiation. The mode of attack and the basic reactivity and its 
kinetics depend upon the groups or the functional groups present in the monomer. For 
example, the highly electronegative ﬂuorine group present in 1,1-diﬂuoroethylene 
makes the monomer susceptible to attack from an electron-donating monomer or 
radical. 
13.2.2 
Electrical Properties of Fluoropolymer 
As discussed above structural properties of PVDF and its copolymers inﬂuences the 
polarity of the overall polymer. The polarity of the polymer increases the dielectric 
constant, ferroelectric, and energy storage properties. Therefore, this section focuses 
on the piezoelectric, ferroelectric, dielectric, and energy storage properties of PVDF 
and its copolymers.

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
363
13.2.2.1
Piezoelectric Properties 
Piezoelectricity is the generation of electricity through pressure (direct piezoelectric 
effect) and the development of strain in the material on the application of an electric 
ﬁeld (indirect piezoelectric effect). Bilal Zaarour et al. synthesized THF-treated elec-
trospun PVDF for developing a piezoelectric nanogenerator (PNG). He synthesized 
three different ﬁlms according to the amount of treatment. Here, THF(100%)-treated 
electrospun showed the highest voltage about 2.98 V [10]. Simadri Badatya et al. 
fabricated graphene quantum dots reinforced PVDF-HFP composite and investigated 
the piezoelectric output from the compressive force, wrist movement, and breathing 
condition. Here graphene quantum dots reinforcement within polymer matrix showed 
an excellent piezoelectric response of about 6 V and a current of 25 nA (Fig. 13.4) 
[11]. Pi et al., fabricated thin ﬁlm PVDF-TrFE through a spin coating technique and 
investigated the piezoelectric response on variation in strain% applied within the 
ﬁlm. The output voltage was about 7 V and the short circuit current was about 58 nA 
in the given piezoelectric nanogenerator (PVDF-TrFE) (Fig. 13.5) [12]. 
Fig. 13.4 Piezoelectric a output voltage, b output current on compressive force, output voltage, 
c on wrist motion, d neck movement (Badatya et al. [11]. Reproduced with permission)

364
A. Mukherjee et al.
Fig. 13.5 Piezoelectric a output voltage, b output current on constant strain, but with variation in 
frequency, c output voltage, d output current on constant frequency, but with strain variation (Pi 
et al. [12]. Reproduced with permission) 
13.2.2.2
Ferroelectric Properties 
Ferroelectricity is the presence of polarization in the absence of an electric ﬁeld. 
These are represented in terms of remanent polarization (Pr), maximum polarization 
(Pm), and coercive electric ﬁeld (Ec). Maya Sharma et al. synthesized PVDF and 
investigated its ferroelectric properties through mechanical rolling, poling, annealing, 
and a combination of these processes. Here, the inﬂuence of mechanical rolling and 
the combination of rolling and annealing showed the highest ferroelectric properties 
[13]. Smaranika Dash et al., synthesized surface hydroxylated BZT/BCT embedded 
in PVDF-HFP with variation in weight% from 0 to 40 wt%. The ﬁlms were of 
75 μm thickness, and further the respective ferroelectric properties investigation 
proved 15 wt% loading as the optimum concentration due to excellent ferroelectric 
properties. It also proved that 15 wt% showed the highest interfacial interaction 
between polymer and ﬁller (Fig. 13.6) [14]. Nan Meng et al., blended PVDF/PVDF-
TrFE and investigated its ferroelectric properties. Low crystallinity, processing cost, 
and low Curie point were tackled by such polymer melt blending. This approach 
tackled the immiscible nature of PVDF and PVDF-TrFE and produced a strong

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
365
Fig. 13.6 P-E loop of 
h-BZT-BCT (0–40) wt%/ 
PVDF-HFP with variation in 
weight% of h-BZT-BCT 
(Dash et al. [14]. Reproduced 
with permission) 
interaction in the melt. It enhanced the ferroelectric properties by increasing the 
remanent polarization from 0.040 C m-2 to 0.077 C m−2 [15]. 
13.2.2.3
Dielectric Properties 
Dielectric properties comprise of two components of dielectric constant and dielectric 
loss. The combination of these dielectric components determine the energy storage 
properties of a dielectric polymer composite [16, 17]. Vineet Tiwari et al, synthe-
sized PVDF polymer ﬁlms and investigated the crystallinity, β phase content and 
dielectric properties through annealing and quenching temperature conditions. PVDF 
showed the highest β phase content corresponding to an annealed temperature of 
80 °C and quenching temperature of 20 °C. Also, the dielectric constant of the 
synthesized PVDF represented the highest around 60 [18]. Feng et al. fabricated 
PVDF-HFP with embedded BT nanowires and BT nanoparticles through in-situ 
polymerization. The high aspect ratio of BT nanowires developed an excellent inter-
facial polarization between ﬁller and polymer as compared to the contribution of BT 
nanoparticles. Therefore, BT nanowires enhanced the dielectric properties tremen-
dously as compared to BT nanoparticles [19]. Arshad et al., fabricated PVDF-TrFE 
composite ﬁlms incorporated with (1–7) wt% MgO through a spin-coating technique. 
Here, PVDF-TrFE/MgO (7 wt%) showed the highest β content with no observ-
able defects. However, the dielectric properties were highest for PVDF-TrFE/MgO 
(3 wt%) (Fig. 13.7) [20].

366
A. Mukherjee et al.
Fig. 13.7 a Dielectric constant versus frequency of PVDF-TrFE/MgO (0–7 wt%) and b dielec-
tric loss versus frequency of PVDF-TrFE/MgO (0–7 wt%) (Arshad et al. [20]. Reproduced with 
permission) 
13.2.2.4
Energy Storage Properties 
Wenjing Li et al, fabricated α, β, and γ PVDF ﬁlms and investigated the energy storage 
properties of these ﬁlms. The β PVDF showed the lowest breakdown strength with 
an energy density of 1.5 J/cm3 for an electric ﬁeld of 150 MV/cm. The α phased 
PVDF represented enhanced breakdown strength but also showed a high energy loss 
density below 350 MV/cm. However, γ PVDF showed breakdown strength beyond 
350 MV/cm with a high energy storage density of 14 J/cm3, which makes it desir-
able for high-ﬁeld capacitor application (Fig. 13.8) [21]. Kishor Kumar et al., fabri-
cated PVDF-HFP composites with high energy storage density and increased break-
down strength through loading of Lanthanum Zirconium Oxide (LZO) using a spin 
coating technique. A computational model represented the optimum quantity of 
LZO for high energy density with a low dielectric loss so that there is no further 
wastage of ﬁller. Here, PVDF-HFP/LZO (15 wt%) showed a better energy storage 
density of about 16.5 J/cm3 at 530 MV/m [22]. Hong Zhu et al., synthesized ArPTU/ 
PVDF-TrFE-CTFE through solution blending followed by the Hot-Press method. 
The required blending improved the energy density and decreased the dielectric 
loss of the composite ﬁlms. Here, ArPTU/PVDF-TrFE-CTFE (15/85) showed a 
maximum energy density of about 19.2 J/cm3 at 700 MV/m, along with an energy 
storage efﬁciency of 85% [23].

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
367
Fig. 13.8 Computational results of a energy storage density, b breakdown strength of PVDF-HFP/ 
LZO and c experimental results of energy storage density of PVDF-HFP/LZO (Kishor and Kalathi 
[22]. Reproduced with permission) 
13.3 
Dependence of Film Thickness and Filler Size 
on Dielectric Properties 
The breakdown strength of the sample depends upon the ﬁlm thickness. The ﬁlm with 
lower thickness exhibits high breakdown strength. However, the dielectric constant 
possesses different properties than the breakdown strength [24]. For example, when 
the thickness of PVDF-TrFE decreases lower than 100 nm, the crystallization process 
gets hindered (Fig. 13.9a) [25]. The electric ﬁeld becomes more uneven with the 
increment in ﬁlm thickness over the edges. An uneven electric increases defect and 
heat dissipation which further leads to a decrease in breakdown strength. The break-
down strength dependence on thickness was carried out by synthesizing polymer 
ﬁlms from the range of 8–76 μm and investigating the respective dielectric strength. 
It represented an increase in dielectric strength with a decrease in ﬁlm thickness [26]. 
The space charge dynamic model under DC electric ﬁeld determines the dependence 
on ﬁlm thickness. The simulation results provided the concept of a rate-dependent 
decrease of breakdown strength with the increment in thickness of polymer ﬁlm

368
A. Mukherjee et al.
Fig. 13.9 a Dependence of dielectric constant of PVDF-TrFE with thickness of ﬁlm, b dependence 
of dielectric constant with a thickness of polymer ﬁlm, c dielectric dependence of polymer ﬁlm to 
thickness through dielectric spectroscopy, d thermal stability in accordance with the dimensional 
change in polymer ﬁlm (Wu et al. [24]. Reproduced with permission) 
[27]. Also, when the thickness decreases to (10–100 μm), the breakdown strength 
becomes either constant or decreases in certain cases [28, 29]. 
K. Dransfeld et al., synthesized thin PVDF-TrFE ﬁlms for a thickness of about 
0.2–1.8 μm and investigated the dielectric constant of each ﬁlm. The experimental 
results represented a decrease in the dielectric constant with the decrease in the given 
polymer ﬁlm thickness [30]. It was observed that when the polymer ﬁlm thickness 
decreases below 1000 nm, the dielectric constant decreases drastically. Above the 
1000 nm thickness of the ﬁlm, the dielectric constant remains almost independent of 
the thickness of the ﬁlm (Fig. 13.9b) [31]. The experimental results by Kahouli et al. 
showed that the dielectric constant increases as a power law with the thickness of 
the ﬁlm. Thickness below 1000 nm, increases the voids and discontinuities which 
decreases the dielectric constant (Fig. 13.9c) [32]. Stretching operation in transverse 
and machine directions produces thermally unstable polymer ﬁlms. Thus, a varia-
tion in dielectric constant and breakdown strength is observed with an increase in 
stretching operation (Fig. 13.9d) [24]. 
The size of the ﬁller also has a signiﬁcant contribution to energy storage proper-
ties. Mendes et.al, fabricated PVDF/BaTiO3 composites and compared the dielectric 
properties results with nanosized ﬁller to submicron size ﬁller. The results signiﬁed 
enhanced dielectric properties of composites with nanosized ﬁller due to increment 
in space-charge interfacial interaction between polymer matrix and ﬁller [33].

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
369
13.4 
Fabrication Method for High-Energy Storage 
Performance 
As discussed above for a dielectric ﬁlm with high-energy storage, the thickness of 
the ﬁlms should be controlled for a high dielectric constant with high breakdown 
strength. Accordingly, the fabrication method must be selected carefully for the 
manufacturing of polymer ﬁlm with efﬁcient dielectric properties. Thus, this section 
discusses the important fabrication techniques for energy storage properties. 
13.4.1 
Solution Casting 
Solution casting is based on the principal of Stokes’ law. It involves the addition and 
intermixing of polymer to a homogeneous solution of ﬁller in a speciﬁc solvent. The 
ﬁller forms a van der Waals interaction with the polymer chain. The homogeneous 
solution so formed is casted in a clean petri-dish, followed by the evaporation of the 
solvent. The solvent swells the polymer chain and undergoes polymer chain breakage. 
Also, it decreases the viscosity and maintains the ordering of ﬁller or micro-domains 
in the polymer composite solution The desorption of solvent is accompanied by 
increasing van der Waals’ forces between the polymer chain and ﬁller and decreases 
the entropy of the solution. Solution evaporation intercalates a new polymer chain 
along with ﬁller forming a polymer composite [34]. 
L. Sunet al. synthesized PVDF and PVDF/CNF (1, 3, 5, 7, and 15 wt%) ﬁlms 
through a solution casting method with a thickness of 70 μm. Here, 1.5 g of PVDF 
was added in 10 ml of DMF and magnetic stirred at 70 °C. CNF was ultrasonicated 
to remove the air bubbles and improve the dispersion of ﬁller into the polymer. The 
intermixed solution of CNF and PVDF was solution casted at 70 °C to completely 
evaporate the solvent [35]. Md. Ataur Rahmanet al. fabricated PVDF and PVDF-
graphene nanocomposites through the solution casting method. The dried GO was 
ultra-sonicated for 2 h at about 60 °C. Separately 2.5 g of PVDF was magnetically 
stirred in 50 ml DMF for 2 h at 30 °C. A varying concentration of GO (0–0.5 wt%) 
solution was added to the PVDF solution. The overall composite solution was stirred 
for perfect dispersion of GO in PVDF at 500 rpm for 1 h at about 60 °C. The homo-
geneous solution was casted in a clean petri dish using a casting knife at about 70 °C 
to evaporate the solvent [36]. Ye Yang et al. synthesized polydopamine-modiﬁed 
BaTiO3/PVDF composite ﬁlms through the solution casting method. Here, mass 
fractions of PDA@BTO (5, 9, 13, 17, 21 wt%) w.r.t PVDF were dispersed in DMF 
and ultrasonicated for 30 min. Later on, a stoichiometric amount of PVDF was 
added and stirred at 60 °C for about 4 h for the homogenous mixture of PVDF 
composite solution. The solution was casted into clean petri-dish at 90 °C for 1 h 
(Fig. 13.10)[37]. Srikanta Moharana et al. fabricated Ag–GO–PVDF-HFP composite 
ﬁlms through the solution casting method. Ag–GO was ultrasonicated in DMF for 
2.5 h to avoid any agglomeration. Now, PVDF-HFP was stirred and dissolved in

370
A. Mukherjee et al.
Fig. 13.10 Procedure for the synthesis of PVDF-HFP/TiO2 nanocomposite ﬁlms (Chakhchaoui 
et al. [39]. Reproduced with permission) 
DMF. The Ag–GO solution was dispersed into PVDF-HFP solution for a homoge-
nous composite solution. The composite solution was casted into a petri-dish at 
80 °C in an oven [38]. Nabil Chakhchaoui synthesized PVDF-HFP and PVDF-HFP/ 
TiO2 composite ﬁlms through the solution casting method. Here TiO2 was ultra-
sonicated in DMAc for 3 min. Separately PVDF-HFP was dissolved in DMAc at 
65 °C for 1 h. The mixture of both solutions was dissolved for another 1 h at 65 °C. 
The composite ﬁlms were casted in glass plates at a temperature of 65 °C [39]. 
L. Wu et al. designed PVDF-TrFE/graphene composite ﬁlms with high piezoelec-
tricity through the solution casting method. The solution casting procedure increased 
the piezoelectric voltage to 12.43 V [40]. Rajesh Sahoo et al. synthesized PVDF-
TrFE/Z(1−x)Fe(x)O composite ﬁlms through the solution casting method. It involved 
the dissolution of 10 g of PVDF-TrFe at 60 °C for  2 h. Later  on,  Z(1−x)Fe(x)O was  
added to the polymer solution maintaining the 1 wt% of PVDF-TrFE. The composite 
solution was casted in petridish and dried at 80 °C in an oven [41]. 
13.4.2 
Hot Press Method 
The procedure of hot-press incorporates melting of the polymer near its melting 
point followed by cooling for the ﬁnal polymer ﬁlm with enhanced energy storage

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
371
Fig. 13.11 Hot-pressing process 
density [42]. Here, the temperature and pressure play a crucial role in enhanced 
electrical application in polymer ﬁlm through the Hot-Press method (Fig. 13.11). 
Remelting of polymer ﬁlm near its melting point produces a polymer ﬁlm with an 
increased internal cross-linking and adhesion. It reduces porosity in the polymer 
ﬁlm which in turn improves the internal crystal structure. Improved crystal structure 
decreases the dielectric loss of the polymer ﬁlm and increases the breakdown strength. 
However, the important step to consider in this procedure is that the temperature 
shouldn’t be very high. High temperature causes shrinkage of polymer ﬁbres and 
affects the crystal structure of polymer ﬁlm. High temperature creates internal defects 
and thereby forms a ﬁlm of poor quality with high dielectric loss. High dielectric 
loss possessing polymer ﬁlm is unable to bear high breakdown strength. Therefore, 
the energy storage density performance is reduced. Thus, for the synthesis of PVDF 
and PVDF composites with high-energy storage properties the Hot-Press technique 
should be performed at optimized pressure and temperature [43]. 
Weiyan Li et al. fabricated MXene/PVDF composite ﬁlms. Firstly, the PVDF 
solution was stirred at 60 °C in DMF. The polymer solution was later spin-coated at 
300 rpm followed by drying at 80 °C in an oven for 8 h. The spin coating method is 
followed by spray painting MXene solution through a nozzle size of 0.2 mm and pres-
sure of 50 psi. The dried MXene/PVDF and PVDF composite ﬁlms were detached 
from the glass substrates. Finally, the MXene/PVDF and PVDF composite ﬁlms 
were overlapped into each other as per the stiochimetricx MXene/yPVDF (where, 
x = layer numbers of MXene and y = layer numbers of PVDF) through the Hot-
Press method at 180 °C for 15 min [44]. Yunjin Fu et al. prepared PVDF/mica 
composite ﬁlms with volume ratios of 98:2, 95:5, 92:8, and 90:10. The composite 
solution of mica nanosheets and PVDF was stirred for 3 h followed by ultrasonica-
tion. Later on, the solution was vacuumed for removing the bubbles formed in the 
solution. The solution was casted and later hot pressed by following preheating at 
180 °C for 20 min. This leads to the formation of dense and homogeneous PVDF/ 
mica composite ﬁlms. The pressure was maintained at about 20 MPa [45]. N. Angu-
lakshmi et al. synthesized PVdF-HFP/chitin/LiClO4 composite ﬁlms through the 
Hot-Press method. Earlier the ﬁlms were vacuum dried at 50 °C for 5 days. Later

372
A. Mukherjee et al.
on, the stoichiometric amount of ﬁlms were taken and hot pressed for 20 min under 
a pressure of 20 MPa at 110 °C. The synthetic procedure produces homogeneous 
and strong membrane ﬁlms with a thickness of 30–50 μm [46]. Boor Singh Lalia 
et al. fabricated PVDF-HFP through the hot-pressed method. PVDF-HFP was taken 
separately at about 10, 12, and 15 wt% in a solution of a binary mixture of acetone 
and dimethylacetamide within a ratio of 7:3. The respective solution was put into 
the glass syringe for obtaining electrospun PVDF-HFP ﬁbres. The ﬁlms were later 
hot press through household iron. The temperature of the surface of iron was greater 
than the melting temperature of PVDF-HFP. The ﬁlms were covered with A4 size 
paper so that the surface of iron does not affect directly the membrane of the polymer 
and does not damage the ﬁbres of the polymer. The iron was pressed on both the 
bottom and top surface of the ﬁlm and moved for about 1–2 s across [47]. Qinghua 
Yang et al. fabricated PbTiO3/P(VDF-TrFE) composite ﬁlm through the Hot-Press 
method. The initial composite ﬁlm of P(VDF-TrFE) and PbTiO3 was synthesized 
through solution casting. The nanowires of PbTiO3 were dispersed in DMF and ultra-
sonicated. P(VDF-TrFE) was added to the solution and stirred for 3 h at 70 °C. The 
homogeneous solution was casted in a glass substrate and kept in an oven at 80 °C for 
12 h. The dried ﬁlms were cut for about 0.02 gm and mounted in a cylindrical mold. 
It was kept for about 20 min at 120 °C. This was followed by the application of 3 MPa 
pressure for 15 min [48]. K.H. Lam et al. fabricated 65PMN–35PT/P(VDF-TrFE) 
0–3 bulk composite ﬁlms through the Hot-Pressing method. The polymer powder 
was dissolved in MEK solvent and later on, the crystal powder was added to it. The 
solution was ultrasonicated for homogeneous dispersion of powder into the matrix. 
Finally, the mixture was casted at 80 °C in the oven for overnight. For the prepara-
tion of bulk composite, the dried ﬁlms were cut into small pieces. These pieces were 
molded at 230 °C and later hot pressed with a pressure of 0.1 MPa at 120 °C for a 
duration of 2 h [49]. 
13.4.3 
Electrospinning Method 
The procedure of the electrospinning process involves the formation of nanoﬁbers 
through the passage of polymer solution in the form of a jet in the presence of the 
applied electric ﬁeld. Under the inﬂuence of an electric ﬁeld, the polymer solution is 
held at the end of the capillary tube through its surface tension. The applied electric 
ﬁeld generates charge around the polymer solution held through surface tension. 
The charge induced in the solution undergoes mutual repulsion with the applied 
electric ﬁeld. This creates opposing forces between each other. With the increase 
in the intensity of the electric ﬁeld, the mutual repulsion increases, and thereby the 
shape of the hemispherical drop elongates and changes into a conical shape called 
Taylor Cone. But, at a certain critical value of the electric ﬁeld, the mutual repulsion 
between the forces is overcome and a jet of the solution is ejected. However, now the 
electric ﬁeld controls the motion of the polymer solution jet. In the presence of air,

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
373
Fig. 13.12 Electrospinning procedure 
the solvent present in the polymer solution evaporates and this leads to the formation 
of charged polymer ﬁbres lying on the metal screen or the collector (Fig. 13.12) [50]. 
Avinash Baji fabricated nano-structured BaTiO3/PVDF composite ﬁlms through 
a two-step electrospinning process. In the ﬁrst step, the BaTiO3 was synthesized 
through the sol-gel process, followed by its synthesis of BaTiO3 ﬁbres through the 
electrospinning technique. The so obtained ﬁbres of ﬁller are dispersed into PVDF 
solution and electrospun to obtain BaTiO3/PVDF composite ﬁlms. The solvent used 
here is DMF. The electrospinning was carried out under an electric ﬁeld of 15 kV 
with a spacing of 15 cm between the collector and needle along with a feed rate of 
0.12 mm/min [51]. Chang Mou Wu synthesized PVDF/CNT nanoﬁbers through an 
electrospinning technique. The PVDF pellets were dissolved in DMF at 100 °C for 
2 h. Separately CNT was ultrasonicated in DMF. A stoichiometric amount of CNT 
was added to the solution. The solution was stirred at 100 °C and later on, acetone 
was added to it to undergo easy evaporation. The applied voltage was about 20 kV. 
The working distance is about 200 mm here and the ﬂow rate is about 0.5 mL/h [52].

374
A. Mukherjee et al.
13.5 
Energy Storage Application 
PVDF and its copolymers have an electroactive structure, which produces a high 
energy storage density. The ﬂexibility and reliability of such polymers lead to their 
integration as dielectric capacitors. However, the dielectric permittivity is enhanced 
with the introduction of ﬁller within its matrix. Thus, it is important to investigate 
the energy storage performance of such PVDF and its copolymers composites for its 
future energy storage application in portable devices. AbhishekSasmal et al. synthe-
sized SmFeO3 nanoparticles through the Sol-Gel method. The gel was dried and 
calcinated to form SFO (SmFeO3) powder. After this 1 wt%, 5 wt%, 10 wt% of 
SFO were added in different batches of PVDF solution in DMF. The solution was 
later on casted and hot-pressed for 20 min. The addition of SFO nanoparticles didn’t 
increase the electrical performance as expected. This was due to the formation of a 
local electric ﬁeld in addition to SFO according to the approximation model. But the 
loading of 10 wt% SFO within the matrix increased the energy storage efﬁciency as 
compared to neat PVDF [53]. 
Xiaoying Xiong et al. demonstrated the inﬂuence of the BST@SiO2 nanotubes 
prepared through energy storage performance on the energy storage properties of 
PVDF. The modiﬁcation of BST through tubular structure and control of the SiO2 
coating thickness around BTO showed tremendous improvement in dielectric permit-
tivity and also reduced the dielectric loss. Here, low ﬁller content in PVDF enhanced 
and improved the breakdown strength and reduced the dielectric loss compared to the 
neat PVDF, which is due to the generation of homogenous electric ﬁeld distribution 
by high aspect ratio ﬁller BST@SiO2 and the high interface between polymer and 
ﬁller. The composites were prepared through a simple solution-casting method. In 
comparison with the pure PVDF (Ud = 11.25 J/cm3 at 465 MV/m, η = 59.87%), 
loading of PVDF with 2 vol% BST@SiO2, enhanced the energy storage density 
(Ud) to about ~18.08 J/cm3 (at breakdown strength of 525 MV/m) and appreciable 
efﬁciency (η) of 70.06%. Therefore, the novel approach of introducing BST@SiO 
nanotubes ﬁller with a high aspect ratio in PVDF satisﬁed the demand for efﬁcient 
energy storage composite capacitors (Fig. 13.13) [54].
Chi Qingguo et al. fabricated sandwich-structured PVDF composites loaded 
with BZT-BCT nanoﬁbers having one-dimensional morphology deposited with 
CoFe2O4 nanoparticles. BZT-BCT was synthesized through electrospinning, while 
CFO@BZT-BCT was synthesized through hydrothermal synthesis. Later on, the 
inorganic ﬁller was surface modiﬁed through PDA. The surface modiﬁcation 
improved the interfacial polarization. The ﬁnal sandwich structure was fabricated 
through the Hot-Press method. The Improved energy storage density of the synthe-
sized composite was originated due to the low redistributed electric ﬁeld between 
the middle layer present in the sandwich fabricated structure, according to the CSF 
theory. Here, P/5 vol% BZT-BCT NFs-P/P showed the highest energy storage density 
of about ~11.3 J/cm3 and dielectric constant of about 20.1 at 100 Hz. It showed 
an appreciable efﬁciency of 55.5%. The multi-layer fabricated sandwich structure

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
375
Fig. 13.13 a Unipolar hysteresis loop, b Dmax and Dmax–Dr versus electric breakdown strength, 
c discharged energy density, and d energy storage efﬁciency of BST@SiO2/PVDF composites 
(Xiong et al. [54]. Reproduced with permission)
hindered the growth of leakage energy density and improved the electrical breakdown 
strength of the composite (Fig. 13.14) [55].
Abhishek Sasmal et al. reported the synthesis of PVDF-ZnO@ZnSnO3 for its 
energy storage properties. ZnSnO3 and ZnO@ZnSnO3 were synthesized through 
hydrothermal technique. Both of these ﬁllers were incorporated in the PVDF polymer 
matrix with the variation in wt% of 5%, 10%, and 15%. ZnSnO3 incorporated 
polymer composite ﬁlms were termed 5ZS, 10ZS, and 15ZS. Similarly, the inclu-
sion of ZnO@ZnSnO3 incorporated polymer composite ﬁlms was termed 5ZNZS, 
10ZNZS, and 15ZZNZS. The composite ﬁlms were fabricated through the drop-
casting method, addition of the ﬁllers increased the properties of the composite ﬁlms 
like polarity, energy harvesting capabilities, dielectric, and energy storage perfor-
mance. In comparison to the PVDF-ZS composite ﬁlms, the incorporation of 10 wt% 
ZnO@ZnSnO3 enhanced the total electroactive properties up to ~87%, energy storage 
density to 134.98 μJcm−3 at 1 Hz. This reduction was approximately 6.6% of PVDF 
(Fig. 13.15) [56].
Wang et al. showed a strategy to enhance the dielectric permittivity of PVDF-HFP 
by loading silver nanoparticles organically modiﬁed with montmorillonite (OMMT) 
nanoplatelets. The modiﬁcation involved ﬁrst exfoliating pristine OMMT powder 
in DMF solution followed by continuous stirring for 24 h, then it was exposed to 
centrifugation at 2500 rpm for at least 30 min, the latter was ﬁltered and dried at 80 °C

376
A. Mukherjee et al.
Fig. 13.14 a1 Dielectric constant, a2 dielectric loss, b1 discharged energy density and b2 storage 
efﬁciency of PVDF/CFO@BZT-BCT NFs-PVDF/PVDF composite (Chi et al. [55]. Reproduced 
with permission)
Fig. 13.15 Frequency-dependent: a energy storage density, b efﬁciency, and c ﬁller-dependent 
energy storage density and energy storage efﬁciency (Sasmal et al. [56]. Reproduced with 
permission)
to obtain the Ag–OMMT nanoplates which are then incorporated into PVDF-HFP in 
order to increase the breakdown strength and dielectric constant. The silver nanopar-
ticles were set down on the surfaces and sandwiched between the galleries of OMMT 
nanoplates by an in-situ reduction in exfoliated OMMT dispersions. The subsequent 
OMMT nanoplate was incorporated into the PVDF-HFP which result in the prepara-
tion of PVDF-HFP/Ag–OMMT composites. The introduction of nanoplates initiated 
the formation of nano-capacitors. Nano-capacitors are responsible for the increased

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
377
Fig. 13.16 a Hysteresis loop and b energy storage performance of Ag–OMMT/PVDF-HFP 
composites (Wang et al. [57]. Reproduced with permission) 
dielectric constant of the whole system. Also, the morphology of nanoplates is very 
crucial for reduced dielectric loss and increased polarization. The high aspect ratio of 
nanoplates enhances the interfacial interaction between polymer and inorganic ﬁller. 
If the ﬁller is organically modiﬁed, then the interaction is more enhanced leading to 
high energy storage properties. This phenomenon is explained in this work in terms 
of the “electric barrier effect of OMMT modiﬁcation.” The enhancement of both 
breakdown strength and dielectric constant has been accomplished upon combining 
the Ag-OMMT nanoplates with PVDF-HFP where 4 vol% of Ag–OMMT and found 
to reach 10.51 J cm−3 at 400 MV m−1 (Fig. 13.16) [57]. 
Shewli Pratihar et al. fabricated a nanocomposite with enhanced dielectric permit-
tivity, ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties. The enhancement was due to the 
addition of a third phase in the MWCNT in ZnO/PVDF composites. ZnO was synthe-
sized through the drop-casting method. While the PVDF composite was synthe-
sized through the drop-casting method. Here, 15 wt% ZnO/0.1 wt% MWCNT/PVDF 
composite showed the highest energy storage density nearly about 110 μJ/cm3. The  
energy storage density is computed through the ferroelectric P-E loop. Usually, the 
ﬁllers are randomly oriented. But, the application of an electric ﬁeld orients the 
ﬁller and enhances the polarization properties in the P-E loop. The enhancement of 
polarization increases the area for energy storage density. It was observed that the 
incorporation of ZnO nanorod increased polarization. However, the polarization was 
more pronounced through the addition of MWCNT [58]. Lei Gao et al. introduced 
and developed a novel scheme that improved interfacial interaction between ﬁller and 
polymer. The improved interfacial interaction improved the energy storage density 
of the system. Most of the organic coupling agents undergo van-der Waals interaction 
with the inorganic ﬁller. The most effective method is the hydroxylation of inorganic 
ﬁller by pretreatment with hydrogen peroxide followed by the addition of coupling 
agents like DN-101. This procedure is followed for the surface modiﬁcation of BT 
in this work. The surface-modiﬁed BT was incorporated in the PVDF solution and 
the composite solution was cast to obtain the ﬁnal ﬂexible composite ﬁlm (D-h-BT/ 
PVDF) with high energy density. As a result, the ﬁnal composite exhibited enhanced 
dielectric polarization with improved breakdown strength. The dielectric polarization

378
A. Mukherjee et al.
of D-h-BT/PVDF was about 6.41 μC cm−2. The surface modiﬁcation reduced the 
agglomeration within the ﬁller particles. Thus, the breakdown strength was improved 
to 240 MV m−1. The synergistic effect between the coupling agent and hydroxylated 
BT improved the energy storage density to 9.01 J cm−3 and discharged energy density 
to 4.31 J cm−3[59]. Yu Fenga et al. developed a PVDF-HFP composite containing 
a double layer of polymer and incorporated it with BTO nanowires. According to 
the formula of calculation of efﬁciency of energy storage performance of a dielectric 
capacitor, the role of energy loss density supersedes the recoverable energy storage 
density. Therefore, it is crucial for the reduction of energy loss density for high 
energy storage efﬁciency. Thus, here the PVDF-HFP double layer was fabricated. 
The dielectric constant of the double layer is lower than the dielectric constant of the 
single layer. But the breakdown strength of such fabricated structure is much higher 
than that of a single layer of PVDF-HFP. The BTO nanowires were prepared through 
the hydrothermal method. The BTO nanowires were incorporated into the polymer 
according to 2.5, 5, and 10 vol% stoichiometry. The initial solution was prepared 
through physical blending. This was followed by the Hot-Pressing technique. The 
breakdown strength was calculated theoretically through the ﬁnite element method. 
It was observed that the experimental result was similar to FEA results. The experi-
mental results showed high breakdown strength of the double layer as compared to 
the single layer. Thus, the double layer possesses enhanced energy storage properties 
[60]. 
Yang Yu et al. made the usage of MnO2 ﬁller to enhance the energy storage 
properties of PVDF composites. The inorganic MnO2 ﬁller was added with variations 
of 5, 10, 15, 20 wt% within PVDF. The mixture of ﬁller and polymer were stirred and 
casted in a petri-dish and dried. The composite ﬁlms were hot-pressed for 1 h under 
a pressure of 10 MPa. The dielectric constant of composite with 15 wt% loading of 
MnO2 was found to be 27 at 100 Hz. However, the composite with 10 wt% loading 
presented the maximum breakdown strength. As a result, the energy storage density 
of MnO2 10%/PVDF was high about 1.67 J/cm3. Also, the energy storage efﬁciency 
was about high as 81.9%. Thus, the loading of MnO2 improved the dielectric constant, 
polarization, breakdown strength and with low dielectric loss [61] (Table 13.1).
13.6 
Conclusion 
In summary, this chapter represents the energy storage properties of ﬂuoropolymers. 
It elucidated the principal and equations representing the energy storage properties of 
dielectric polymer composites. It demonstrated the high permittivity of ﬂuoropoly-
mers due to their intrinsic high dipole structure. High intrinsic dipole structures 
developed within the ﬂuoropolymers make them suitable for enormous electrical 
applications like piezoelectric, dielectric, ferroelectric, and energy storage proper-
ties. Such energy storage properties or dielectric properties depend upon the thickness 
of the ﬁlm. It elaborated on the fact that the two important parts of electric storage 
i.e., breakdown strength and dielectric permittivity varies with the thickness of the

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
379
Table 13.1 Energy storage density, efﬁciency and dielectric permittivity of some PVDF, PVDF-
based copolymer and its composites 
S. No.
Sample name
Energy storage 
density (Ud) 
Efﬁciency 
(η) (%)  
Dielectric constant/ 
permittivity (E') 
References 
1
(10 wt%) 
SmFeO3–PVDF 
–
43.62
–
[53] 
2
2 vol%  
BST@SiO2/PVDF 
18.08 J/cm3
70.06
–
[54] 
3
P/5 vol% 
BZT-BCT 
NFs-PVDF/PVDF 
11.3 J/cm3
55.5
20.1
[55] 
4
10ZNZS/PVDF
134.98 μJ cm−3
58.41
–
[56] 
5
4 vol% of  
Ag–OMMT/ 
PVDF-HFP 
10.51 J cm−3
–
–
[57] 
6
15 wt% ZnO/ 
0.1 wt%MWCNT/ 
PVDF 
~110 μJ/cm3
–
–
[58] 
7
D-h-BT/PVDF
4.31 J cm−3
–
–
[59] 
8
10 wt% MnO2/ 
PVDF 
1.67 J/cm3
81.9
27
[61]
synthesized ﬁlm. The properties of a synthesized polymer ﬁlm or composite mainly 
depend upon the fabrication process. Fabrication undergoes variations in thickness as 
well as defects and voids in the material. Thus, some of the major fabrication tech-
niques like electrospinning, solution casting and Hot-Press method are discussed 
here. Finally, the energy storage properties are elucidated for the ﬂuoropolymers. 
The investigation of the energy storage-based performance of PVDF and its based 
composites is important due to its enhancement in daily usage. It has become an 
integral part of various electronic devices like energy storage piezoelectric devices. 
The important part of such a device is to have a high energy storage density with low 
energy dissipation. Therefore, ﬂuoropolymers and their composites play a crucial 
role in the fabrication of portable electronic devices with high capacitive response 
for energy storage applications. 
13.7 
Challenges and Author’s Viewpoint 
Dielectric-based capacitor ﬁlm is highly useful in energy storage applications 
compared to chemical batteries and electrochemical capacitors. This is due to the 
high power density and low toxicity of the capacitor. However, still, the most impor-
tant challenge faced during the fabrication of ﬂuoropolymers by scientists is the low 
energy density of such dielectric-based capacitors. A high energy storage density is

380
A. Mukherjee et al.
required to replace the electrochemical-based capacitor. Another issue is the dissipa-
tion factor of such fabricated ﬁlm. For the longevity of the working of the dielectric 
ﬁlm, it should exhibit low dielectric loss and high breakdown strength. So, even after 
the long hours of usage of the capacitor, the heat dissipation is low and the capacitor 
could be used safely. 
Scientists still are working for improved energy storage density materials. For 
this, there is a requirement for constructing a dielectric ﬁlm with enhanced polariza-
tion and dielectric constant. High polarization increases the integral area for energy 
storage density. Such fabrication requires the incorporation of high permittivity ﬁller 
in a ﬂuoropolymer matrix. It would induce the transformation of thermodynami-
cally stable and non-polar α phase to highly polar β phase. Also, it depends on the 
morphology of the ﬁller being introduced, i.e., its respective alignment as 1D or spher-
ical. A highly aligned 1D ﬁller possesses a uniaxial orientation of its macrodomain 
dipole and a high surface interaction area. This facilitates the increased heterogeneity 
in the composite and micro-capacitors at the interface of the ﬁlm. Later on, it needs 
to be kept in mind to fabricate a dielectric ﬁlm with reduced leakage current and 
high breakdown strength. Such factors are also responsible for a high integral area of 
energy storage density by reducing the hysteresis loss and increasing the breakdown 
voltage endurance. The synthesis procedure usually involves the surface function-
alization of the inorganic ﬁller by an organic core-shell, to improve the interfacial 
adhesion and compatibility between organic ﬂuoropolymer and inorganic ﬁller. By 
governing the above points, a highly compatible dielectric material can be fabricated, 
which could be easily used for high-energy storage portable devices. 
References 
1. Chen C, Xing J, Cui Y et al (2020) Designing of ferroelectric/linear dielectric bilayer ﬁlms: 
an effective way to improve the energy storage performances of polymer-based capacitors. J 
Phys Chem C 124 
2. Xie B, Zhu Y, Marwat MA et al (2018) Tailoring the energy storage performance of polymer 
nanocomposites with aspect ratio optimized 1D nanoﬁllers. J Mater Chem A Mater 6 
3. Zhang X, Li BW, Dong L et al (2018) Superior energy storage performances of polymer 
nanocomposites via modiﬁcation of ﬁller/polymer interfaces. Adv Mater Interfaces 5 
4. Shalu S, Roy S, Mukherjee A et al (2022) Effect of Mn-doping on the morphological and 
electrical properties of (Ba0.7Sr0.3) (MnxTi1−x)O3 materials for energy storage application. 
Ceram Int 48:25816–25825 
5. Dasgupta B, Banerjee S (2010) A study of gas transport properties of semiﬂuorinated poly 
(ether imide) membranes containing cardodiphenylﬂuorene moieties. J MembSci 362:58–67 
6. Vinogradov A, Holloway F (1999) Electro-mechanical properties of the piezoelectric polymer 
PVDF. Ferroelectrics 226 
7. Polat K (2020) Energy harvesting from a thin polymeric ﬁlm based on PVDF-HFP and PMMA 
blend. Appl Phys A Mater Sci Process 126 
8. Oliveira F, Leterrier Y, Sereda O et al (2014) Process inﬂuences on the structure, piezoelectric, 
and gas-barrier properties of PVDF-TrFE copolymer. J PolymSci B Polym Phys 52 
9. Feng CY, Khulbe KC, Matsuura T, Ismail AF (2013) Recent progresses in polymeric hollow 
ﬁber membrane preparation, characterization and applications. Sep Purif Technol 111

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
381
10. Zaarour B (2021) Enhanced piezoelectricity of PVDF nanoﬁbers via a plasticizer treatment for 
energy harvesting. Mater Res Express 8 
11. Badatya S, Kumar A, Sharma C et al (2021) Transparent ﬂexible graphene quantum dot-(PVDF-
HFP) piezoelectric nanogenerator. Mater Lett 290 
12. Pi Z, Zhang J, Wen C et al (2014) Flexible piezoelectric nanogenerator made of 
poly(vinylideneﬂuoride-co-triﬂuoroethylene) (PVDF-TrFE) thin ﬁlm. Nano Energy 7 
13. Sharma M, Madras G, Bose S (2014) Process induced electroactive β-polymorph in PVDF: 
effect on dielectric and ferroelectric properties. In: Physical chemistry chemical physics 16 
14. Dash S, Thakur VN, Kumar A et al (2021) Enhancing functional properties of PVDF-HFP/ 
BZT-BCT polymer-ceramic composites by surface hydroxylation of ceramic ﬁllers. Ceram Int 
47 
15. Meng N, Zhu X, Mao R et al (2017) Nanoscale interfacial electroactivity in PVDF/PVDF-TrFE 
blended ﬁlms with enhanced dielectric and ferroelectric properties. J Mater Chem C Mater 5 
16. Shalu S, Kar P, Krupka J, Dasgupta Ghosh B (2018) Synthesis, characterization, thermal, 
dynamic mechanical, and dielectric studies of Ba0.7Sr0.3TiO3/polystyrene composites. Polym 
Compos 39 
17. Shalu S, Dasgupta Ghosh B (2019) Synthesis, characterisation and dielectric properties of 
low-loss Zr-doped barium strontium titanate materials. Adv Appl Ceram 118 
18. Tiwari V, Srivastava G (2014) Effect of thermal processing conditions on the structure and 
dielectric properties of PVDF ﬁlms. J Polym Res 21 
19. Feng Y, Li WL, Hou YF et al (2015) Enhanced dielectric properties of PVDF-HFP/BaTiO3-
nanowire composites induced by interfacial polarization and wire-shape. J Mater Chem C 
Mater 3 
20. Arshad AN, Wahid MHM, Rusop M et al (2019) Dielectric and structural properties of 
poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) (PVDF) and poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride-triﬂuoroethylene) (PVDF-
TrFE) ﬁlled with magnesium oxide nanoﬁllers. J Nanomater 
21. Li W, Meng Q, Zheng Y, et al (2010) Electric energy storage properties of poly(vinylidene 
ﬂuoride). Appl Phys Lett 96 
22. Kishor KK, Kalathi JT (2020) Investigation on the dielectric performance of PVDF-HFP/LZO 
composites. J Alloys Compd 843 
23. Zhu H, Liu Z, Wang F (2017) Improved dielectric properties and energy storage density of 
poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride-co-triﬂuoroethylene-co-chlorotriﬂuoroethylene) composite ﬁlms with 
aromatic polythiourea. J Mater Sci 52 
24. Wu X, Chen X, Zhang QM, Tan DQ (2022) Advanced dielectric polymers for energy storage. 
Energy Storage Mater 44 
25. Zhang QM, Xu H, Fang F et al (2001) Critical thickness of crystallization and discontinuous 
change in ferroelectric behavior with thickness in ferroelectric polymer thin ﬁlms. J Appl Phys 
89. 
26. Cygan S, Laghari JR (1987) Dependence of the electric strength on thickness area and volume 
of polypropylene. IEEE Trans Electr Insul EI-22 
27. Chen G, Zhao J, Li S, Zhong L (2012) Origin of thickness dependent dc electrical breakdown 
in dielectrics. Appl Phys Lett 100 
28. Neusel C, Schneider GA (2014) Size-dependence of the dielectric breakdown strength from 
nano- to millimeter scale. J Mech Phys Solids 63 
29. Tan DQ (2020) The search for enhanced dielectric strength of polymer-based dielectrics: a 
focused review on polymer nanocomposites. J Appl Polym Sci 137 
30. Glatz-Reichenbach J, Li-Jie LJ, Schilling D et al (1990) Dielectric and piezoelectric properties 
of very thin ﬁlms of VDF-TrFE copolymers. Ferroelectrics 109. 
31. Liang T, Makita Y, Kimura S (2001) Effect of ﬁlm thickness on the electrical properties of 
polyimide thin ﬁlms. Polymer (Guildf) 42 
32. Kahouli A (2012) Effect of ﬁlm thickness on structural, morphology, dielectric and electrical 
properties of parylene C ﬁlms. J Appl Phys 112 
33. Mendes SF, Costa CM, Caparros C et al (2012) Effect of ﬁller size and concentration on the 
structure and properties of poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride)/BaTiO3 nanocomposites. J Mater Sci 47

382
A. Mukherjee et al.
34. Das R, Pattanayak AJ, Swain SK (2018) Polymer nanocomposites for sensor devices. 
In: Polymer-based nanocomposites for energy and environmental applications. Woodhead 
Publishing series in composites science and engineering, Chapter 6 :185-203 
35. Sun LL, Li B, Zhao Y et al (2010) Structure-induced high dielectric constant and low loss of 
CNF/PVDF composites with heterogeneous CNF distribution. Nanotechnology 21 
36. Rahman MA, Chung GS (2013) Synthesis of PVDF-graphene nanocomposites and their 
properties. J Alloys Compd 581:724–730 
37. Yang Y, Pan H, Xie G et al (2020) Flexible piezoelectric pressure sensor based on 
polydopamine-modiﬁed BaTiO3/PVDF composite ﬁlm for human motion monitoring. Sens 
Actuators A Phys 301:111789 
38. Moharana S, Mahaling RN (2017) Silver (Ag)–Graphene oxide (GO)—Poly (vinylidene 
ﬂuoride-co-hexaﬂuoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) nanostructured composites with high dielectric 
constant and low dielectric loss. Chem Phys Lett 680:31–36 
39. Chakhchaoui N, Farhan R, Eddiai A et al (2019) Improvement of the electroactive b-
phase nucleation and piezoelectric properties of PVDF-HFP thin ﬁlms inﬂuenced by TiO2 
nanoparticles. Mater Today Proc 39 
40. Wu L, Jing M, Liu Y et al (2019) Power generation by PVDF-TrFE/graphene nanocomposite 
ﬁlms. Compos B Eng 164:703–709 
41. Sahoo R, Mishra S, Unnikrishnan L et al (2020) Enhanced dielectric and piezoelectric properties 
of Fe-doped ZnO/PVDF-TrFE composite ﬁlms. Mater Sci Semicond Process 117:105173 
42. Shalu S, Dasgupta K, Roy S et al (2021) Thermal, mechanical, and dielectric properties of low 
loss PbZr0.3Ti0.7O3/polystyrene composites prepared by hot-press method. Polym Compos 42 
43. Lu L, Ding W, Liu J, Yang B (2020) Flexible PVDF based piezoelectric nanogenerators. Nano 
Energy 78 
44. Li W, Song Z, Zhong J et al (2019) Multilayer-structured transparent MXene/PVDF ﬁlm with 
excellent dielectric and energy storage performance. J Mater Chem C Mater 7 
45. Fu Y, Wang Y, Wang S et al (2019) Enhanced breakdown strength and energy storage of PVDF-
based dielectric composites by incorporating exfoliated mica nanosheets. Polym Compos 40. 
46. Angulakshmi N, Thomas S, Nahm KS et al (2011) Electrochemical and mechanical properties 
of nanochitin-incorporated PVDF-HFP-based polymer electrolytes for lithium batteries. Ionics 
(Kiel) 17 
47. Lalia BS, Guillen-Burrieza E, Arafat HA, Hashaikeh R (2013) Fabrication and characterization 
of polyvinylideneﬂuoride-co-hexaﬂuoropropylene (PVDF-HFP) electrospun membranes for 
direct contact membrane distillation. J Memb Sci 428 
48. Yang Q, Shi Z, Ma D et al (2018) Flexible PbTiO3-nanowires/ P(VDF-TrFE) composite ﬁlms 
and their dielectric, ferroelectric and pyroelectric properties. Ceram Int 44:14850–14856 
49. Lam KH, Chan HLW, Luo HS, et al (2003) Dielectric properties of 65PMN-35PT/P(VDF-TrFE) 
0–3 composites. In: Microelectronic engineering 
50. Doshi J, Reneker DH (1995) Electrospinning process and applications of electrospun ﬁbers. J 
Electrostat 35 
51. Baji A, Mai YW, Li Q, Liu Y (2011) Nanoscale investigation of ferroelectric properties in 
electrospun barium titanate/polyvinylidene ﬂuoride composite ﬁbers using piezoresponse force 
microscopy. Compos Sci Technol 71 
52. Wu CM, Chou MH (2016) Polymorphism, piezoelectricity and sound absorption of electrospun 
PVDF membranes with and without carbon nanotubes. Compos Sci Technol 127 
53. Sasmal A, Sen S, Devi PS (2020) Synthesis and characterization of SmFeO3 and its effect on 
the electrical and energy storage properties of PVDF. Mater Res Bull 130:110941 
54. Xiong X, Zhang Q, Zhang Z et al (2021) Superior energy storage performance of PVDF-based 
composites induced by a novel nanotube structural BST@SiO2 ﬁller. Compos Part A Appl Sci 
Manuf 145 
55. Chi Q, Ma T, Zhang Y et al (2018) Excellent energy storage of sandwich-structured PVDF-
based composite at low electric ﬁeld by introduction of the hybrid CoFe2O4@BZT-BCT 
nanoﬁbers. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 6

13
Fluoropolymer-Based Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage Application
383
56. Sasmal A, Medda SK, Devi PS, Sen S (2020) Nano-ZnO decorated ZnSnO3 as efﬁcient ﬁllers 
in PVDF matrixes: toward simultaneous enhancement of energy storage density and efﬁciency 
and improved energy harvesting activity. Nanoscale 12 
57. Wang H, Xie H, Wang S et al (2018) Enhanced dielectric property and energy storage density 
of PVDF-HFP based dielectric composites by incorporation of silver nanoparticles-decorated 
exfoliated montmorillonite nanoplatelets. Compos Part A Appl Sci Manuf 108 
58. Pratihar S, Patra A, Sasmal A et al (2021) Enhanced dielectric, ferroelectric, energy storage and 
mechanical energy harvesting performance of ZnO-PVDF composites induced by MWCNTs 
as an additive third phase. Soft Matter 17 
59. Gao L, He J, Hu J, Li Y (2014) Large enhancement in polarization response and energy storage 
properties of poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) by improving the interface effect in nanocomposites. J 
Phys Chem C 118 
60. Feng Y, Li JL, Li WL et al (2019) Effect of BaTiO3 nanowire distribution on the dielectric and 
energy storage performance of double-layer PVDF-based composites. Compos Part A Appl 
Sci Manuf 125:105524 
61. Yu Y, Wang X, Wang X et al (2020) Enhanced energy storage efﬁciency in PVDF based 
composite ﬁlms using MnO2 nano-ﬁllers. J Mater Sci Mater Electron 31

Chapter 14 
Application of Organic–Inorganic 
Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage 
Nupur Saxena, P. Sakthivel, D. Sridharan, and Pragati Kumar 
Abstract Organic–inorganic nanodielectric materials are frequently employed for 
energy storage due to their superior electrical, thermal, and mechanical capabilities. 
While organic dielectrics, which have a grace failure mechanism and a self-healing 
feature, contributed to the high capacitance of electrolytic capacitors and the minia-
turization of multilayer ceramic capacitor (MLCC) construction, the high dielectric 
constant (K) of inorganic dielectrics allowed for reliable operation and higher capac-
itance stability. Polypropylene (PP), a nonpolar polymer dielectric, has steadfastly 
maintained its position as the industry benchmark despite signiﬁcant efforts being 
made to investigate these methods. In addition to having the lowest dielectric loss 
and the highest dielectric strength, this dielectric also offers manufacturing maturity 
in its widely used ﬁlm form. There may be an improvement in the dielectric constant 
(
1
r) and dielectric breakdown strength (Eb) of dielectric materials, which would 
be advantageous for a capacitor. It is seen that the size of the ﬁllers is causing the 
improved characteristics. The creation of an improved capacitor made of metalized 
electrodes sandwiched between dielectric ﬁlms or sheets is one of the most signiﬁ-
cant uses. For the implementation of more compact energy storage and conversion 
devices, advancements in the energy density and operating temperature of capacitors 
have become crucial.
N. Saxena 
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Jammu, Jammu 181221, India 
e-mail: n1saxena@gmail.com 
P. Sakthivel 
Centre for Materials Science, Department of Physics, Science and Humanities, Faculty of 
Engineering, Karpagam Academy of Higher Education, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu 641021, India 
e-mail: sakthivel.p@kahedu.edu.in 
D. Sridharan 
Vioma Motors Pvt Ltd., Mumbai, Maharashtra 400028, India 
P. Kumar envelope symbol
Nano Materials and Device Lab, Department of Nanoscience and Materials, Central University of 
Jammu, Samba, Jammu, J & K 181143, India 
e-mail: pkumar.phy@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_14 
385

386
N. Saxena et al.
Keywords Organic–inorganic nanodielectrics · Energy storage · Supercapacitor ·
Lithium battery · High-voltage direct current cables 
14.1 
Introduction 
Energy conversion and storage are critical for our future sustainable energy model, 
and they are ﬁelds where electrochemistry is conventionally foremost and hybrid 
materials are emerging as strong candidates. Batteries and supercapacitors (SCs) are 
electrochemical energy storage devices. Regular capacitors employ a purely electro-
physical mechanism to store nominal energy while providing it quickly, that is, at 
high current and high power. Due to their large surface area and short charge separa-
tion distance, double-layer SCs were an inventive way to harness charge separation 
between electrode and electrolyte interphase and store more energy than conventional 
capacitors. 
Many novel nanocomposites (NC) materials have recently succeeded by incorpo-
rating macromolecular species into 2D-layered transition metal oxides. Over the last 
few years, conducting polymer-based NC has established a lot of consideration for 
their ability to proﬁtably integrate many appropriate properties of both conducting 
polymer and transition metal oxide [1, 2]. As a result, the organic–inorganic hybrids 
are combined at the nanoscale level; numerous novel properties emerge, such as 
improved electrochemical storage ability, due to synergistic effects [3]. 
Over the last decade, researchers have paid close attention to organic–inorganic 
NC, composed of more than two components of various natures. Subsequently, their 
use in convenient energy storage systems and devices such as batteries and SCs has 
gained critical importance in everyday life in recent years. SCs are broadly used in 
electrical power backup systems, portable electronic devices, and electric vehicles 
due to their higher power density and longer cycle life when compared with Lithium-
ion batteries (LIB) [4]. SCs are mainly classiﬁed into two types based on their 
charge-storage mechanism: electrochemical double layer supercapacitor (EDLSC), 
which has capacitance due to charge separation at the electrode/electrolyte inter-
face, and pseudo-SC, which have capacitance on account of surface Faradaic redox 
reactions [5]. Carbon-based electrodes are used in EDLC, whereas polymers and 
transition metal oxides are used in pseudocapacitors. The recent focus of super-
capacitor research is on advancing hybrid nanocomposite materials with enhanced 
energy density. In addition, asymmetric electrode formation increases supercapacitor 
energy density by expanding the device’s overall potential window [6].

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
387
Fig. 14.1 Structures of conducting polymers (from top to bottom): polypyrrole, polythiophene, 
polyparaphenylene, polyaniline 
14.1.1 
Conducting Polymers 
Conducting-organic polymers have been extensively researched as promising novel 
materials, with reports on their potential use for rechargeable batteries [7] and electro-
chemical capacitors [8]. Conducting polymers such as polyaniline (PANI), polythio-
phenes, polypyrroles, polyphenylenevinylenes, and others are particularly appealing 
for electronic applications (Fig. 14.1). Furthermore, conducting polymers can be 
hybridized with transition metal nanoparticles as well as nano-carbons. 
14.1.2 
Transition Metal Oxide 
A comparison of the use of transition metal oxides as sole and their nanocomposites 
with other materials as anodes in rechargeable lithium batteries and supercapacitors 
shows that when these materials form nanocomposites, many properties such as 
improved charge storage capacity emerge due to combined properties of constituent 
materials [9]. Vanadium pentoxide (V2O5), MoO3, and WO3 are common oxidizing 
hosts in conducting polymer-based nanocomposite for supercapacitors.

388
N. Saxena et al.
14.1.3 
Reduced Graphene Oxide (rGO) and CNT 
On the other hand, reduced graphene oxide (rGO) is an ideal supercapacitor electrode 
material due to excellent electrical conductivity, large surface area, excellent rate 
capacity, adaptable electronic characteristics, and ease of synthesis methods. The 3D 
MoS2 with rGO and CNT complex composite was used as an electrode material for a 
stretchable supercapacitor. With the introduction of CNTs as beneﬁcial components, 
the group of probable hybrid combinations for energy storage is closed with hybrids 
prepared of polymers and transition metal oxides, and hybrids made of conducting 
polymers and CNTs [10]. 
14.1.4 
Synthesis of Organic–Inorganic (O–I) 
Nanocomposites 
Hybrid O–I materials have employed a vital role in the growth of cutting-edge func-
tional materials, such as innovative materials in the energy ﬁeld in recent energy tech-
nology. Polymers have many advantages, including ease of production and handling, 
chemical and structural range, not high weight, and ﬂexibility. As a result, hybrid 
inorganic/organic nanocomposites composed of conducting polymers comprising 
metallic nanoparticles, CNTs, and graphene have substantial potential for use in 
supercapacitors and non-volatile memory devices. 
Nanostructured materials have different characteristics depending on their size 
and shape. Semiconductor particles in magnetic materials are all founded to be size-
dependent properties. Simple mixing, and nanoﬁller synthesis in a polymer, can all be 
used to create nanocomposites. Nanoparticles coated with a polymer are signiﬁcantly 
more robustly opposed to accumulation than bare particles because of a signiﬁcant 
reduction in surface energy. The existence of polymers on the surface of a nanopar-
ticle can modify. As a result, the better nanocomposite conductivity. Van der Waals 
interactions, electrical double-layer interactions, and steric interactions [39] are  the  
three primary forces between particles in nanocomposites. 
Metals are well known for being the most excellent conductive materials on the 
planet as their high free electron density. Metallic nanoparticles (MNP) are used in 
various applications, including surface-enhanced catalysis, microelectronics, LEDs, 
PV cells, and biological applications. Furthermore, the synthesis method plays a crit-
ical role to ﬁnalize the various properties of nanoparticles. Many physical and chem-
ical nanoparticle synthesis techniques have been developed to date. Pure nanoparti-
cles clump together easily. They are protected from aggregation by surfactants and 
polymers. Composites of metal nanoparticles and polymers are essential in Nano-
electronics devices because charge transfer interaction is critical to their functionality. 
Polymers with N or S elements in their repeating unit are interesting contenders for 
fabricating organic/nanoparticle nanocomposites.

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
389
Nanocomposite’s application potential as an electrode material for electrochem-
ical supercapacitors has been examined, with the better enrichment of double layer 
capacitance of poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (PEDOT–MoO3) nanocomposites 
(300 mFg−1) compared to pristine MoO3 (40 mFg−1). The enhanced electrochem-
ical performance is ascribed to the intercalation of electronically conducting PEDOT 
between MoO3 layers with increased bidimensionality and surface area. 
Hybrid materials for polyoxometalates and supercapacitors are combined with 
conducting polymers. Polyoxometalates are usually prepared by W or Mo oxides and 
are the most similar to an oxide quantum dot. They are electroactive oxides that have 
been reduced to their smallest size. Incorporating this metal oxide into conducting 
polymers resulted in the progress of novel electroactive hybrids for supercapacitors 
[11]. The hybrid PMo12O40/PANI as an active electrode material in a supercapacitor 
is demonstrated signiﬁcant advantages. The results exhibit the capacitance evolves 
during cycling up to 120 F/g and the increased capacitance over the ﬁrst 300 cycles 
observed. This electrode is caused by progressive penetration with the electrolyte, 
which indicates the performance of supercapacitor material with optimization of 
the microstructure, resulting in a maximal electrode–electrolyte interface. Exam-
ples of this type were hybrids based on V2O5 xerogels and various intercalated 
conducting polymers, such as polyaniline (PANI) [12], polythiophene (PTH), and 
polypyrrole (PPy), and were offered as cathode material for rechargeable LIBs [13]. 
MoO3in batteries was also investigated as interactive matrices to form hybrids with 
polyphenylenevinylene (PPV) [14] and PANI. 
14.1.4.1
PEDOT–V2O5 Nanocomposite 
The PEDOT–V2O5 nanocomposite is synthesized and characterized by various 
analytical tools. The XRD studies on nanocomposite reveal the understated struc-
tural variations upon intercalation [54]. The interlayer spacing is directly related to 
the most substantial peak observed at the low angle corresponding to the (0 0 1) 
plane of the layered V2O5 structure. A strong diffuse scattering noticeably forms the 
V2O5 diffraction arrays, and the d-spacing rises from 4.3 to 14.1 Å in the compos-
ites. This implies that the expansion continues, creating a polymer monolayer and 
the V2O5 ﬁlms. It is noticed that the hybrids’ (h k  l) pattern corresponds to those 
of pristine V2O5. HRTEM reveals that the V2O5 host comprises several conducting 
polymer nanoribbons. The low scattering power results in high contrast for white 
lines, each about 1.4 nm long and located among double dark fringes of vanadate 
layers. It is observed the highly crystalline V2O5 in this hybrid material is separated 
by alternating conducting polymer nanoribbons. 
After redox polymer intercalation, XPS is a surface-speciﬁc technique for studying 
the polymer–V2O5 interaction and vanadium (V5+/V4+) oxidation state. XPS results 
identify the V 2p and O 1s core levels of polymer intercalated nanocomposite. The 
spectra are observed at 517.2 eV, and a low Binding Energy is visible, along with 
V5+. The low BE at 515.7 eV, ascribed to V4+, is visible after the deconvolution of 
the 2p core levels [15]. The nature of charge transport is determined by the relative

390
N. Saxena et al.
carriers’ mobility, as revealed by the conductivity of PEDOT–V2O5 is 102 times 
greater than V2O5. 
The PEDOT–V2O5 nanocomposite has a higher capacity during the charging 
than during the discharging. It causes the existence of V4+, which can be easily 
oxidized electrochemically, as previously observed in PPy–V2O5 and PTH–V2O5 
nanocomposites. It is worth noting that the PEDOT–V2O5 nanocomposite has the 
highest reversibility (330 mAh/g). The nanocomposites have a higher capacity when 
compared with pure V2O5, which is due to increased conductivity, resulting in 
improved dimensionality. 
14.1.4.2
PEDOT–MoO3 Nanocomposite 
The PEDOT–MoO3 nanocomposite shows promise as a material for non-aqueous 
supercapacitors. Polymer intercalated PEDOT–MoO3 nanocomposite X-ray diffrac-
tion pattern. However, a rise in the interlayer distance of the pure oxide, MoO3, for  
PEDOT–MoO3 composite from d = 6.93 (0 2 0) to 13.46 A (0 0 1) shows signiﬁ-
cant assimilation of polymeric material between the layers. As a result, considerable 
bonding interaction between organic and inorganic components is estimated, most 
likely as hydrogen bonding. The XRD conﬁrmed the composite forms a homo-
geneous matrix with a lamellar morphology, and the combination of PEDOT into 
the MoO3 results in surface modiﬁcation. More importantly, the S 2p core level 
from PEDOT peaks at 164 eV, typical for thiophene sulfur. However, after interca-
lation, there is a widening on the lower BE side with the evolution of a second peak. 
The ethylenedioxy group is responsible for the C 1 s peak around 286 eV, and the 
thiophene carbon atoms are responsible for the lower BE peak at 284 eV. PEDOT– 
MoO3 composite, 3d5/2 core level at 232.5 eV is distinctive for MoO3 [60], and 
XPS suggests oxidation of PEDOT after intercalation into MoO3 as well as charge 
transfer from sulfur to MoO3. Accordingly, the XPS studies agree well with XRD 
and other characterization techniques. While pristine MoO3 is an insulator with an 
ambient temperature conductivity of 3.78 × 10−5 S/cm, the ambient temperature 
conductivity of the PEDOT–MoO3 nanocomposite is 1.82 × 10−1 S/cm, which is 
four orders of magnitude higher than pristine MoO3 [16]. 
The CVs of pristine MoO3 and PEDOT–MoO3 nanocomposite were recorded 
with electrolyte 1 M LiClO4, demonstrating a signiﬁcant variation in CV response 
caused by polymer inclusion. It is worth noting that the EDLC rises from pristine 
MoO3 ∼ 40 mFg−1 to after polymer intercalation ∼300 Fg−1. The crystalline MoO3 
undergoes a well-known phase transformation in the ﬁrst cycle scan, that is, when 
the potential variations from −1.5 to 0.25 V versus the Ag/AgCl reference electrode, 
and the stabilization indicates that the structural change is stable. Furthermore, the 
Vander Waals interactions between the interlamellar layers agree for faster Li+ ion 
insertion in the ribbons than in MoO3. In contrast, there is no evidence of irreversible 
structural modiﬁcation in the PEDOT–MoO3 hybrids, but the broad cathodic peak 
resembles that of 2D inorganic layered compounds. PEDOT–MoO3 nanocomposite

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
391
is used as nonaqueous type supercapacitors and the hybrid approach employed at 
this point offers a capable method of fabricating low-cost supercapacitor electrodes. 
14.1.4.3
Poly-(5-Cyanoindole) P5ICN–WO3 Nanocomposite 
P5ICN was polymerized with WO3 after being composited. When compared to 
pure WO3, the surface of the P5ICN/ WO3 material exhibited more wrinkles, effec-
tively increasing the surface and proving the successful preparation of the composite 
material. Electrochromic-supercapacitor device (ESD) is a type of multifunctional 
supercapacitor that can be used to visually evaluate the device’s level of energy 
storage through color change. With the increasing importance of energy and envi-
ronmental issues, supercapacitors are regarded as promising energy storage devices 
due to their high-power density and long cycle life [12]. Electronic devices in recent 
times, researchers have paid increasing consideration to intelligent systems and 
electronic devices. Multifunctional supercapacitors, such as ﬂexible supercapaci-
tors, self-healing supercapacitors, and electrochromic supercapacitors, have been 
reported to meet these demands [17]. The new multifunctional electrode mate-
rial has developed the recent research focus on energy storage devices. The elec-
trochromic supercapacitor material can vary in color through the device’s charging 
and discharging processes. Both functions can be combined into a single device to 
create an electrochromic-supercapacitor device (ESD) [18]. 
ESD electrode materials comprise metal oxides and conducting polymers [19]. 
WO3 has been employed due to its high theoretical capacitance, better cyclic stability, 
and high color contrast [20]. Many researchers have focused their efforts in recent 
years on improving the electrochromic properties of WO3 to know its application 
in ESD [21], as WO3 constituents can change color between colorless and blue 
in the oxidation and reduction process. However, it is hoped that the electrode 
will have further-color deviations in applying intelligent supercapacitors to enable 
optical observation of altered energy storage devices. ESD made from conducting 
polymer has recently developed a hot topic due to their rich electrochromic-color 
variations and high-energy storage capacity [22]. Polyindole, a good conducting 
polymer material, exhibits good electrochemical activity and better thermal stability 
[23]. 
FT-IR spectra were used to characterize the prepared P5ICN/WO3 hybrid mate-
rials. The stretching vibration of W–O–W was observed in the 700–1000 cm−1 range. 
The small amount of water may be responsible for 3446 and 1621 cm−1 [24]. XPS 
was used to characterize the prepared P5ICN/WO3 composites. The interaction of 
tungsten and nitrogen atoms may be responsible for the peak at 398.1 eV. The peaks 
at 35.7 eV and 37.8 eV corresponded to the W6+ state caused by W 4f7/2 and W 4f5/2, 
respectively. The W4f XPS spectrum of P5ICN/WO3 was observed after composited 
of P5ICN and WO3. After composition, the peaks of W 4f7/2 and W 4f5/2 shifted to 
35.1 eV and 37.2 eV, respectively. The interaction between P5ICN and WO3 could 
explain the peak shift phenomenon [25].

392
N. Saxena et al.
P5ICN/WO3 can switch between blue-green, yellow, and green. The synthesized 
ESD, made of P5ICN/WO3, has a high energy storage capacity and visible-color 
variations. The ESD has a speciﬁc capacitance of 38.6 mFcm−2 and a coloration 
efﬁciency of 548 cm2 C−1. Furthermore, the intelligent ESD’s stored energy level 
can be visually monitored via rapid, reversible color changes. As a result, the ESD 
can light up an LED in practical applications. In addition, the ESD demonstrates good 
electrochromic stability and is to be developed for other applications of electronic 
devices. 
14.1.4.4
Polymer–Graphene Nanocomposites 
Various carbon-based nanoparticles have been developed in recent years. Because of 
their chemical inertness, hardness, and better electrical and thermal properties, such 
as fullerenes, carbon nanoparticles, onion-like particles, nanotubes, graphenes, and 
nanofoams have sparked widespread scientiﬁc interest and applications [26]. The 
absorption spectrum of graphene nanosheets is broad, with a maximum of 320 nm, 
similar to that of graphene. It is caused by π–π* transitions in aromatic sp2 domains. 
Graphene absorbs 2.3% of incident light in a single layer. Measurements revealed a 
signiﬁcant difference between a graphene sheet’s in plane and transverse conductiv-
ities. Mechanical graphite cleavage, chemical vacuum deposition, epitaxial growth, 
and microwave and laser exfoliations are well-known processes [27]. 
The simple techniques to create graphene–polymer composites include mixing, 
blending, and in-situ polymerization. It is simple and requires no special equipment 
to prepare polymer composites by solution mixing method. The polymer–graphene 
interface is critical in the preparation of advanced graphene-based nanocompos-
ites. Hydrophobic graphene is incompatible with organic polymers and does not 
form homogeneous composites. The poor solubility of graphene in organic solvents, 
particularly nonpolar ones, severely limits its processability, acting as a bottleneck for 
graphene incorporation into most polymer matrices. It should also be noted that recent 
research indicates that graphene’s hydrophobicity is caused by airborne hydrocarbon 
contamination. A clean graphite surface is mildly hydrophilic with a water contact 
angle of 64° [17]. The π–π interactions are what caused the graphene sheets to be 
restacked. When the electron densities of both π systems are very similar, disper-
sion interactions predominate. When one system is electron-rich and another one is 
electron-deﬁcient, the resulting complexes are forced by initiation interactions, as 
when the negative charge is transferred from benzene to hexaﬂuorobenzene [28]. N-
methyl pyrrolidone and ortho dichlorobenzene exhibit the best graphene interaction 
and solubility along with good solubility in the mixture of perﬂuorinated organic and 
water–ethanol. Besides, many aromatic molecules such as porphyrin, tetracyanoquin-
odimethane, tryptophan, 1,5-naphthalene diamine, 9,10-dimethylanthracene, and 
ionic liquids signiﬁcantly improve graphene solubility. Non-covalent functionaliza-
tion is also done with inorganic materials. According to recent research, graphene 
can promote nanoscale clusters of metals with manageable size distributions, feasibly 
opening up a novel method for the synthesis of nanoparticles.

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
393
Noble metals such as gold, platinum, palladium, and silver are used in the new 
graphene-based nanocomposites; on the other hand, there is increasing attention on 
the use of metals such as cobalt, zinc, etc. A stable graphene–copper nanocom-
posite can quickly form 100 nm thin ﬁlms that are stable, transparent, and highly 
conducting. The superconductivity of tin nanoparticle-activated graphene is observed 
[29]. Graphene nanomaterial composites are in high demand for solar cells, Li-ion 
batteries, and supercapacitors due to their excellent electronics, optics, etc. proper-
ties. TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, MnO2, Co3O4, Fe3O4, Fe2O3, NiO, Cu2O, RuO2, CdS, and 
CdSe are just a few of the semiconductor nanomaterials that have synthesized with 
graphene-based templates. The quenching of the ﬂuorescence intensity from CdSe/ 
ZnS nanocrystals by a factor of 70 indicates this energy transfer. An “insulating 
layer” can prevent ﬂuorescence quenching by graphene oxide. 
The formation of the composite is electrostatic forces between the two 
constituents. The presence of organic aliphatic molecules improves the solubility 
of composite in organic solvents such as toluene. Because of this insulating layer, 
the composite exhibited a distinct ﬂuorescence spectrum following quantum dot 
photoexcitation. The thickness of the organic molecule layer typically adjoining 
the quantum dots is critical in achieving effective energy transfer efﬁciencies into 
graphene [20]. Covalent functionalizations create stable graphene inks and polymer 
composites. However, while graphene dispersion in the polymer is signiﬁcantly 
enhanced, conductivity frequently reduces when covalent functionalization is used. 
The polymer-graphene nanocomposite conductivity is higher than pure polymer but 
remains considerably lower than that of pristine graphene. PANI is a popular host 
polymer due to its high capacitive property and inexpensive. The naﬁon-graphene 
nanocomposite produced good outcomes with the resistance 1030 Ω/sq, however, 
the transmittance was reduced to 50.5% [30]. It is clear that the presence of addi-
tional contacts between carbon nanomaterial and polymer via metal nanoparticles 
signiﬁcantly improves conductivity. The schematic diagram of various CV responses 
of capacitors is shown in Fig. 14.2.
14.1.5 
Electrochemical Measurements 
14.1.5.1
Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) 
Based on a surface charge transfer process, the CV curves of the nanocomposite 
electrode materials indicate pseudocapacitive behavior and that the oxidation reaction 
is greater than the reduction reaction. The nonrectangular form of the CV curve 
shows the material’s pseudocapacitive behavior. In addition, the rise in current on 
both anodic and cathodic sides with increasing scan rate demonstrates the faradic 
redox reactions on the electrode. Figure 14.3 depicts schematic illustration of organic, 
inorganic nanocomposites for supercapacitors.
Using Eq. 14.1 [31], the speciﬁc capacitance values of the nanocomposite samples 
were calculated from the CV curves

394
N. Saxena et al.
Fig. 14.2 Schematic diagram of cyclic voltammetry response of EDLC, pseudocapacitive elec-
trode, and Faradaic electrode
Fig. 14.3 Schematic 
illustration of 
organic–inorganic 
nanocomposites for 
supercapacitors
Specific  Capacitance  left parenthesis
 
up per  C r
ight parenthesis equals 2 left bracket m s left parenthesis normal upper Delta v right parenthesis right bracket Superscript negative 1 Baseline integral upper I left parenthesis upper V right parenthesis d v
where m is the mass of the active material (g), s is the scan rate (Vs−1), Δv is the 
potential window (V), and I dv represents the area.

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
395
14.1.5.2
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) 
EIS measurements were performed in an electrolyte over a frequency range of 
0.01 Hz to 100 kHz to determine the electrochemical properties of the supercapac-
itor electrodes. According to the Nyquist plots (NP), the electrode has a semicircle 
arc and straight line in the high and low-frequency regions respectively [32]. At 
lower frequencies, the vertical shape indicates pseudocapacitive behavior and indi-
cates ion diffusion in the electrode structure. The NP straight lines have a steeper 
response, representing faster ion movement and behavior shown to ideal capacitors. 
The semicircle arc of the composite electrode in the high-frequency region is negli-
gible, indicating that the former has improved conductivity due to the incorporation 
of rGO and metal oxides [33]. 
14.1.5.3
Galvanostatic Charge–Discharge Curves 
Over a potential range, the galvanostatic charge–discharge performances of 
nanocomposite electrodes are measured. The tests are performed in an aqueous elec-
trolyte with a current density of 6 Ag−1. The pseudocapacitive behavior of sample 
caused by redox reactions is conﬁrmed by nonlinear discharge curves. However, the 
nanocomposite has a long discharge time at constant current density, indicating that 
the capacitance response has improved. Using Eq. 14.2 the speciﬁc capacitance of 
the electrode materials was measured. 
Specific  capacitance  left parenthesi
s upper C right parenthesis equals upper I divided by m period d t slash d v
where I is the current dv/dt is the potential scan rate, and m is the mass of active 
material in the electrode. 
14.2 
Organic–Inorganic Nanocomposites 
for Supercapacitors 
In contrast to batteries (volumetric charge storage), supercapacitors store charge 
on the surface of electrodes, and thus, they can offer high-power densities due to 
their capability to release energy more simply from the sub-surface layer rather than 
the bulk. Furthermore, supercapacitors have remarkable cycling ability and a short 
charging time because charging-discharging takes place at the surface, which does 
not cause severe structural changes in the electroactive materials. Because of these 
unique characteristics, supercapacitors are considered one of the most promising 
energy storage devices. Supercapacitors are classiﬁed into two types based on their 
operation mechanism: EDLCs and pseudocapacitors. The energy in EDLCs is stored 
electrostatically at the interface of the electrode and electrolyte in the double layer,

396
N. Saxena et al.
whereas charging storage in pseudocapacitors proceeds in the redox reactions on the 
electrode. Carbon-based materials like carbon allotropes, carbon compounds along 
with their nanocomposites, metal oxides/hydroxides, as well as conducting polymers 
are the three signiﬁcant electrode materials used in supercapacitors. Every material 
possesses its own distinct set of merits and demerits. Conducting polymers have high 
capacitance, good conductivity, low costs, and ease of fabrication but poor mechan-
ical stability and cycle life. Graphene and conducting polymers can be amalgamated 
to form a hybrid supercapacitor, which combines EDLC and pseudocapacitors. The 
development of capacitors, which include a Faradaic electrode and a capacitor-type 
electrode to associate with the beneﬁts, is an encouraging way to permit improved 
cell voltage and energy density [34]. Nanocomposites prepared by graphene are 
considered to have a bright prospect in supercapacitors. 
The components and their interfacial features determine nanocomposite electrode 
characteristics. The performance of nanorod-PANI-graphene composites was consid-
erably developed. The maximum speciﬁc capacitance value of the graphene oxide/ 
PANI composite was 1136 Fg−1. Recently, conductive graphene/SnO2 nanocompos-
ites with higher and more stable speciﬁc capacitance than graphene were created. It 
was made from polyaniline/SnO2 nanocomposites, which contained SnO2 nanopar-
ticles embedded in a polyaniline matrix. This composite material has a threefold 
higher energy storage density than sole SnO2 and a speciﬁc capacitance decay rate 
of only 4.5% after 500 cycles [35]. 
14.3 
Nanocomposite XLPE Insulated HV Direct Current 
Cables 
14.3.1 
Exploration of XLPE 
By cross-linking polyethylene, high-density cross-linked polyethylene (XHDPE) or 
cross-linked low-density polyethylene (XLDPE) is created. These materials have 
strong mechanical qualities, a longer useful life, and an increased working limit 
at high temperatures. It might result from the development of 3D structures. The 
polymer’s tensile strength, heat stability, and 198 R are all enhanced by this struc-
ture. Jose Varghese et al. enhances chemical resistance and hardness. There are 
three ways to trigger PE cross-linking: Radiation, adding peroxide or silane, or both. 
The use of silane, which Dow Corning patented in the late 1960s, did not alter the 
base polymer’s crystalline properties as reported earlier and also enhanced the ﬂex-
ibility via cross-linking (Si–O–Si) rather than making the process more challenging 
[36]. This is particularly intriguing since it ensures that each Si atom possesses 
three active sites, enabling it to attach to up to six network bridges and six polymer 
chains. However, when mechanical, chemical, and thermal resistances are needed, 
manufacturing condition optimization is helpful for better performance. Cross-linked 
polyethylene is currently utilized in several industries, including the cable and wire

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
397
industry, hot water pipe manufacturing, and steam-proof food packaging. In addition 
to this, the majority of XLPE investigations rely on cross-linking LDPE with peroxide 
or silane. Cross-linked polyethylene (XLPE) replaces oil paper insulated systems and 
high voltage AC cables because of its high working temperature, performance, and 
well-controlled extrusion technique. The base matrix is polyethylene (PE), which can 
be cross-linked using peroxide. Cross-linking is thought to be important, however 
low-density polyethylene (LDPE) melts more readily at temperatures around 100 °C, 
which reduces its mechanical stability [37]. Contrarily, linear high-density polyethy-
lene (HDPE) exhibits a high melting point and may operate at a higher temperature. 
Today, HV cable insulation uses XLPE on a large scale. Today, a radical reaction 
with an organic peroxide was one of the most popular cross-linking processes. The 
developments in the ﬁeld of electrical insulation are illustrated in Fig. 14.4. 
However, the residual cross-linking byproducts reveal some electrical property 
loss, leading to space charge accumulation. Degassing is required for XLPE insu-
lating cables to lessen these pollutants. Because of its superior thermo-mechanical 
and dielectric properties, XLPE has been employed extensively as power line insu-
lation. High voltage direct current (HVDC) transmission systems, XLPE has the
Fig. 14.4 Developments in the ﬁeld of electrical insulation 

398
N. Saxena et al.
inherent disadvantage of HVDC cable insulation because the cross-linking by-
products can signiﬁcantly reduce the electrical lifetime of cable insulation and 
generate large space charge accumulation. Since XLPE is a thermoset plastic, 
it cannot be recycled or used again after the cables have been retired, which 
results in signiﬁcant reuse costs and environmental issues. As a result, recyclable 
high-performance thermoplastic cable insulation is widely coveted. 
14.3.2 
Signiﬁcance of XLPE 
Because of the inclusion of nanoparticles, the electrical characteristics of XLPE 
nanocomposites have improved greatly. According to literature reviews, nanoparti-
cles are a strong option for use in DC and AC cables, insulations, and semiconductor 
screens. SiO2 and various kinds of nano clay are examples of nanoparticles that are 
utilized in both AC and DC cable applications. In comparison to virgin polymers, 
the addition of silica nanoparticles in the polymer signiﬁcantly increased the AC 
and DC breakdown voltage by 15%. As a result, medium and low-voltage cables 
are made of SiO2-based XLPE nanocomposites. Alumina/silicate/nanoclay based 
nanocomposites are effective for low-voltage insulation applications, while SiC-
based XLPE nanocomposites are ideal for DC cable insulation. The XLPE matrix’s 
thermal and chemical stability and mechanical strength were both increased by the 
addition of SiO2, Al2O3, and TiO2 nanoparticles. According to reports, carbon black-
based nanocomposites are employed for semiconductor screens whereas MgO-based 
nanocomposites are used for DC cable applications [38]. To conﬁrm the space charge 
trapping qualities and the long-term performance of these new materials before they 
are made available for use in power cables, appropriate levels for the design ﬁeld, as 
well as cost-effectiveness, must be deﬁned [39]. This is true although several XLPE-
based nanocomposites outperform the unﬁlled PE polymer in terms of electrical and 
thermal properties. 
14.3.3 
Types of HVDC Cables 
The types of HVDC cables are shown in Fig. 14.5. It is suggested to use extruded 
polymeric cables as a power grid since they are economical and environmentally 
friendly. Networks will be able to boost their operational voltage levels so they can 
resist the ensuing rise in electric stress through the usage of HVAC and HVDC cables. 
It is preferred to use an XLPE matrix with fewer contaminants. The General Electric 
Global Research Center developed a brand-new insulating material to support direct 
current (DC) applications. It incorporates nanoclay particles to support the N-EPR 
insulating performance of ethylene propylene rubber (EPR). Space charge propaga-
tion is present in N-EPR when compared to XLPE insulation. The structural design 
of N-EPR insulation allows for the restriction of electrical enhancement. In addition

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
399
Fig. 14.5 Types of HVDC cables 
to these beneﬁts, N-EPR offers greater power density and skips the time-consuming 
and expensive degassing required for XLPE insulation. Due to its excellent dielectric 
qualities, processing viability, acceptable chemical properties, and eco-friendliness, 
cross-linked polyethylene (XLPE) is frequently used for cable insulation. These 
characteristics aid in the distribution and transmission of electrical energy [40]. It 
is a good contender for the cable industry due to its strong resilience to thermal 
shocks and tuneable thickness. For the application of XLPE in subterranean electric 
cables, these qualities were used. In addition to its beneﬁts, cross-linked polyethy-
lene (XLPE) is better able to withstand heavy ﬁller loadings than uncross-linked 
polyethylene, which becomes brittle when ﬁllers are added. Insulation material’s 
dielectric, electrical, and thermal characteristics very slightly improve when NPs are 
added. The particles are bound and trapped inside the polymer matrix as a result 
of cross-links forming [41]. As a result, XLPE would give reinforcement at quan-
tities of ﬁller that are undesirable and cause the polymer to crack. The qualities of 
polyethylene can be improved through cross-linking, and these improved properties 
can be used in cable installation, heat-resistive food packaging (till 200 °C), thermal 
insulation foams, and chemical-resistant sealing. 
14.3.4 
Role of XLPE 
The polyethylene with nanoparticles incorporation can be treated using the etching 
process. The dispersion of nanoparticles, spherulite structure, and the prevention of 
the overlap between interaction zones can all be improved by properly modifying 
the surface using an effective coupling agent. The usage of commercial (AC grade) 
XLPE and its nanocomposite for DC applications have also been tested. According 
to reports, adding nanoﬁller (such as nanosilica) increased the material’s breakdown 
strength in the DC step test [42]. At a concentration of 1 wt%, SiC nanoparticles 
are said to prevent the buildup of space charges. Further increases in concentration 
inhibited the effect of NPs on the generation of space charges [43]. There will be a lot 
of space between NPs when there is a low concentration of them. Previous studies on 
MgO XLPE composites indicated the presence of deep traps surrounding the MgO 
nanoparticles, which drew charges to the MgO NPs. An NP can be made electrically

400
N. Saxena et al.
neutral by surrounding it with either electrons or holes [44]. Another element that 
inﬂuences the aging of the insulation material is moisture mixed with electrical stress. 
The partial discharge of the substance that results from this action can be followed 
by disintegration. When water and contaminants on the insulating surface combine, 
the ﬂash voltage can be signiﬁcantly reduced. The conductivity of the droplets, the 
roughness of the insulation surface, and the arrangement of the moisture droplets are 
the main variables that determine the properties of insulation materials. According 
to [45], the ﬂashover voltage decreases as the moisture content’s conductivity rises. 
MgO/XLPE nanocomposites (0.5 wt%) were reported to have better ﬂashover perfor-
mances than PE. This explains why the ﬂash overvoltage is improved by the NP 
addition. This is a result of NPs restricting the migration of surface charges. The 
type of NPs affects how many are present in the polymer matrix. As was mentioned 
above at the optimal concentration, an insulating material’s properties can decline. 
The dispersion of NPs can be improved by a surface-modifying insulating mate-
rial to increase the bond between nanoﬁllers and the polymer matrix. As a result, 
breakdown strength (AC/DC), electrical and water tree resistance, permittivity, and 
dielectric loss will all signiﬁcantly improve. The Partial discharge—A schematic 
representation is shown in Fig. 14.6 
Fig. 14.6 Partial discharge—A schematic representation: a unmodiﬁed, b agglomerated, c surface 
modiﬁed, d ideally dispersed XPLE nanocomposites. Adopted with permission from Ref. [40] ©  
2021, Springer Nature

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
401
Compared to pure XLPE, XLPE nanocomposite exhibits increased crystallinity. 
Gibbs Thomson equation provides a relationship between the melting point (T m) and 
lamellar thickness (L). 
up p
er L eq
uals StartFraction 2 sigma Subscript e Baseline upper T Subscript m Superscript 0 Baseline Over left parenthesis upper T Subscript m Superscript 0 Baseline minus upper T Subscript m Baseline right parenthesis normal upper Delta upper H 0 EndFraction
upp er L  equals S
tartFraction 2 sigma Subscript e Baseline upper T Subscript m Superscript 0 Baseline Over left parenthesis upper T Subscript m Superscript 0 Baseline minus upper T Subscript m Baseline right parenthesis normal upper Delta upper H 0 EndFraction
where σ e = free surface energy, up pe
r T Subscript m Superscript 0 = equilibrium melting temperature (414.6 K), 
T m = melting temperature of the tested material. Equation demonstrates that the 
thickness of the lamellar layer grows with melting temperature. The crystallinity 
subsequently rises as a result. It is an accepted idea that the increasing lamellar thick-
ness causes the higher value of crystallinity to indicate the more densely connected 
chains (i.e., intact spherulite structures) [46]. 
Therefore, to break the chains, a strong electrical ﬁeld is needed. After thermal 
aging in pure XLPE, the lamellar thickness is greatly reduced (because of the 
lower crystallinity). As a result of the reduced chemical bonds, this reduces the DC 
breakdown strength. However, the crystallinity is somewhat reduced in the XLPE 
nanocomposite. In comparison to pure XLPE, the deep trap density is much higher. 
As a result, the charges would continue to be trapped in the deep traps and would 
need a very strong electric ﬁeld to release them. It is hypothesized that the XLPE 
nanocomposite’s driving parameter is the high density of the deep traps [47]. 
14.4 
Nanocomposite Solid Insulated Switchgear 
Partial discharges frequently occur at triple points in the gas–solid insulating systems 
used in high-voltage equipment like switchgear when the electric ﬁeld approaches 
the initiation threshold ﬁeld. 
Regulations prohibiting the use of SF6 have made it more urgent to investigate 
alternate dielectrics, such as CO2 and vacuum [48], which are employed in gas circuit 
breaker technology. Researchers have looked into the characteristics and impacts of 
alternative gases on surface ﬂashover. The ﬁnal length that creeping discharges take 
in SF6 is shorter as compared to other gases, showing a dependence between gas and 
discharges, according to Sadaoui [49], who observed the creeping discharges under 
DC in SF6, N2, and CO2. By comparing the ﬂashover voltages of SF6/N2 mixtures 
with those of air, N2, and N2/O2 mixtures, Rokunohe [50] examined these mixtures. 
It was demonstrated that pressure as well as gas dielectric strength had a signiﬁcant 
impact on surface ﬂashover voltages. The DC ﬂashover voltage of polymers like 
PTFE, PMMA, and nylon in N2 and SF6 was measured in earlier work. In different 
matrices including epoxy, silicone rubber, and polyethylene, nanoparticles’ unique 
nanometric structure, and particular effects produce novel dielectric characteristics. 
Our previous study resulted in the production of nanocomposites with improved

402
N. Saxena et al.
dielectric breakdown strength, lower permittivity, and greater surface ﬂashover volt-
ages in a vacuum. Epoxy resin is essential for the electrical insulation of machinery 
like gas-insulated switchgear (GIS) and motors [51]. However, the buildup of space 
charges or the concentration of electric ﬁelds in electrical apparatus leads epoxy 
resin to age more quickly. By adding the right amount of semiconducting ﬁllers, like 
silicon carbide (SiC), to the polymer matrix, epoxy resin is created with an on-linear 
conductivity property. This kind of composite, also known as nonlinear resistive ﬁeld 
grading composite or stress grading composite, is extremely useful for preventing 
the buildup of space charges and homogenizing the distribution of the electric ﬁeld 
in various pieces of machinery or components, such as motor ends, GIS spacers, and 
bushings. 
14.5 
Organic–Inorganic Hybrids in Lithium Batteries 
Scarceness of non-renewable fuels, serious environmental problems, and increasing 
energy demand are enforced to develop efﬁcient, cost-effective, and environment-
caring green energy conversion/storage devices. Lithium batteries, which are typical 
electrochemical energy storage devices that can convert and store electricity in a 
chemical form, may be one of the most striking and promising solutions. However, 
poor stability, sluggish reaction kinetics, limited active sites, high price, etc. are 
the numerous key factors that result in their unsatisfactory performance and thus 
hindered their real-world execution [52–55]. Therefore, to improve their perfor-
mance researchers are focusing on the development of appropriate materials for efﬁ-
cient electrodes, separators, electrolytes, etc. Among various functional materials, 
organic–inorganic hybrids have attracted much attention as they offered speciﬁc prop-
erties due to the synergetic effect along with the characteristics of both constituents. 
The organic part expands the range of available matrices, provides low density, 
and facilitates tunable physical or chemical properties, whereas, the inorganic part 
enables good stability and electro-catalytic active species [56]. The suitable choice 
and proper hybridization of organic and inorganic precursors deliver desirable prop-
erties. The organic–inorganic hybrids are persisting in consistent devotion for the last 
few decades due to their speciﬁc properties, like; high structural and compositional 
diversity that enable requirements as per application, large surface area which offers 
a high ratio of accessible active sites, and tunable porous structure that can accelerate 
the diffusion of electrolyte/reactants and act as a sieve/host, etc. Besides, they deliver 
diminish damages during insertion/extraction caused by large volume variation of 
reactants. Such advantages improve the comprehensive performance of Li batteries 
including the storage capacity, temporal stability, and so on. To date, several organic– 
inorganic nanocomposites have been studied and utilized as electrodes/separators/ 
electrolytes materials in lithium batteries [57–59]. 
By the nature of the interface and their importance, organic–inorganic hybrids 
are classiﬁed into two families say Class I and Class II [60]. The class I hybrids are 
those in which the interaction forces between organic and inorganic parts are week

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
403
like van der Waals forces, electrostatic attraction, hydrogen bonds, etc. Contrary, the 
primary bonds like covalent or ionic bonds alone or jointly with secondary bonds 
connect the organic and inorganic parts in the class II hybrids. However, the properties 
of class II hybrids are preliminarily governed by strong bonds. In general, Class 
I hybrids possess the advantages of relatively easy and feasibility for removal of 
the organic part on demand without damaging the whole structure along with the 
drawbacks of stability and durability that limit their usage. In contrast, many superior 
properties are offered by class II hybrids due to the strong bindings between the 
organic and inorganic parts. Thus, the well-deﬁned and controlled processing of class 
II hybrids facilitates the desired structure and properties, control over the hydrophilic 
and hydrophobic balance, etc. Therefore, extensive devotion is paid to the synthesis, 
study, and application of Class II hybrids during the past few decades. 
Both the conventional and ﬂexible lithium batteries need four main components: 
an electrolyte, a separator, an anode, and a cathode as illustrated in Fig. 14.7. Each 
component should be low-cost, non-toxic, safe, and lightweight. In addition, ﬂex-
ible electrodes must be bendable and should have low self-discharge, high capacity, 
stable. This section presents an overview of broadly used hybrid materials for the 
development of the aforementioned components. 
Fig. 14.7 Schematic diagram of electrodes for Li battery. Adopted from Ref. [61] © 2018, (IEEE 
Access an open-access journal of IEEE)

404
N. Saxena et al.
14.5.1 
Electrolytes 
Despite the high ionic conductivity of liquid and liquid-based electrolytes, their 
utility as electrolytes in lithium batteries is limited because of their low mechanical 
stability, short range of operational temperature, safety issues (i.e. explosion, leakage, 
electrode corrosion), and capacity fade over time [62, 63]. On the other hand, solid 
electrolytes (SEs) may avoid dendrite growth, leakage, short-circuiting, and elec-
tronic conduction during the crossover of Li+ between anode and cathode [64] and 
offer higher thermal stability, energy and power density, and cycle life [65], therefore 
are suitable replacement of liquid electrodes. Typically, SSEs are categorized into 
two; inorganic solid electrolytes (ISEs) and solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs). The 
practical applications of polymeric SPEs are limited due to low ionic conductivity at 
ambient temperature, poor mechanical strength, and a narrow operational window. 
Whereas the brittleness, grain boundary resistance, chemical, and electrochemical 
stability with the electrodes i.e. poor contact with electrodes, high cost, and lack of 
processability limits the utilities of inorganic ISEs [66]. In contrast, organic–inor-
ganic hybrids offer advantages for each component with the removal of their ﬂaws 
due to speciﬁc synergetic effect and thereby demonstrates multifold as illustrated in 
Fig. 14.8 [67]. In practice, the ionic conductivity and structure stability of polymeric 
SSEs is enhanced through the ﬁlling of a polymer matrix with inorganic or organic– 
inorganic composite materials. To date, several inorganic ﬁllers have been utilized 
for the fabrication of organic–inorganic-based hybrid solid electrolytes (HSEs) for 
lithium batteries [68–74].
14.5.2 
Ion Conduction Mechanism in HSEs 
The ion conduction mechanism (ICM) in HSEs differs from the ICM for both the 
ISEs (usually occurs by ion hopping and is determined by the concentration and 
distribution of the defects) and SPEs (jointly arises from ion movement and jumping) 
and also depends on the nature of ﬁller materials [67]. For example, the Lewis acid– 
base theory and the suppression of polymer crystallization are the two mechanisms 
proposed for inert ﬁller HSEs. While in the case of HSEs with active ﬁllers ICMs are 
intricated because the active ﬁllers can affect the polymer chain structure and create 
additional Li+ pathways (active ﬁller, polymer, and polymer/active ﬁller interface) 
simultaneously [67]. 
The Lewis acid-base theory for HSE systems considered Li-ion as Lewis acid, 
the solvating groups of polymers and ClO4− anions as Lewis bases, and the ﬁllers 
as Lewis acid or base depending on their surface chemistry. The acidic surface may 
attract the polymer solvating groups or ClO4−, release associated Li+ cations, and the 
basic surface attracts Li-ions and polymer functional groups, improving the dissoci-
ation of Li+–ClO4− ion pairs [75]. The enhanced conductivity due to increment in

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
405
Fig. 14.8 Ranking of properties of solid electrolytes (Best = 5, Worst = 1). Adopted from Ref. 
[67] (Frontiers in Energy Research an open-access journal of Frontiers)
segmental dynamics induced by crystallinity suppression of polymer in some poly-
mers (like PEO) based electrolyte systems is noticed [76, 77]. Besides, these two 
ICMs in HSEs with inert ﬁllers, the possibility of the governance of other mecha-
nisms is also under consideration based on some observations. As an illustration, 
the ionic conductivity for a PEG-based electrolyte is found to be increased via the 
addition of neutral, acidic, or basic inert ﬁller Al2O3 [78]. Similarly, the addition 
of fumed silica particles into PEG-based electrolytes with lithium salts increases 
the conductivity of the composite electrolyte, irrespectively whether PEG is polar or 
non-polar [79]. Contrary, Hanson et al. [80] reported that the lithium-ion diffusivities 
in PEO/TiO2 reduce with enhanced particle loading. The contradictions discussed 
above may show the contribution of other causes or ICMs operating simultaneously, 
which are still not clear. On the other hand, active ﬁllers like Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) 
[81, 82], Li3xLa2/3−xTiO3 (LLTO) [83, 84], and Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3(LATP) [85–87] 
create new Li+ pathways that govern ICMs together with Li-ion concentration and 
ion mobility. 
14.5.3 
Separator 
In lithium batteries, the separator is a material that prevents any possible electrical 
short circuits within the device and avoids the problem of thermal runaway, burning,

406
N. Saxena et al.
Fig. 14.9 Relationship of different abuse conditions. Adopted from Ref. [61] © 2018, (IEEE Access 
an open access journal of IEEE) 
and even explosions [88]. The relationship of different abuse conditions that results 
in thermal runway is illustrated here in Fig. 14.9. 
The high ionic conductivity, large electrolyte wettability, and superior electrolyte 
uptake are the key features of the perfect separator [89]. Instead of poor wettability 
towards polar liquid electrolytes, polyoleﬁn-based materials are still the commonly 
used separators in LIBs [89]. Therefore several separators including organic–inor-
ganic nanocomposites were engineered and employed for better performance of 
LIBs [72, 89–92]. Currently, the most practical approaches used for the fabrica-
tion of hybrid separators are the coating of inorganic submicron nanomaterials 
onto the surface of PE or PP membranes [93, 94] and direct surface modiﬁcation 
methods like grafting methods or the layer-by-layer (LbL) self-assembly process 
[89, 95–97]. For instant, Xu et al. [89] developed a poly(-acrylic acid) (PAA)/ZrO2 
modiﬁed polyethylene (PE) separator using the LbL self-assembly method. They 
reported that the LiCoO2/Li half-cell assembled with (PAA/ZrO2)1 PAA-modiﬁed 
PE and (PAA/ZrO2)3-modiﬁed PE separators show improved discharge capacities 
as compared to pristine PE upon diverse discharge current densities from 0.2 to 
7 C. Further, the Nyquist plots indicate much better stability of the (PAA/ZrO2)3-
modiﬁed PE than those of pristine PE and (PAA/ZrO2)1 PAA-modiﬁed PE. Whereas 
PP separators coated with Al2O3 or TiO2 using atomic layer deposition (ALD) 
showed reduced thermal shrinkage and improved wettability without any increment 
in overall separator thickness [98, 99]. To address the issue of mechanical brittle-
ness, the introduction of GO to integrate with the organic–inorganic hybrids fabricate 
robust and ﬂexible membranes was carried out. For instance, Biaet al. fabricated a 
MOF@GO separator with a size window around 9 Å by using Cu3(BTC)2(HKUST-
1) and GO that selectively sieves Li+ and block polysulﬁdes signiﬁcantly [55]. 
Such a separator possessed high capacity (799 mA h g after 500 cycles at C/2) 
and had a low capacity decay rate. An effective separators was also prepared by 
replacing Cu3(BTC)2(HKUST-1) by Zn3(BTC)2 (Zn-HKUST-1) [100]. Further, Li

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
407
et al. [101] developed four different MOF-based separators through integrating CNTs 
and demonstrated that rather than the internal pore size of the MOFs, the chemical 
stability and packing morphology of MOF particles are more imperative in deter-
mining the performance of the separator. Indeed few efforts have been made to design 
novel and efﬁcient membranes, but still, it needs large efforts. 
14.5.4 
Anode 
As we know the anode i.e. the −ve electrode discharges lithium ions into the elec-
trolyte, is transported to the cathode (+ve electrode), and then absorbed as shown in 
Fig. 14.1. This is the energy discharging process in lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). Thus 
anode plays a very critical role in rechargeable batteries and based on its properties 
and morphology, the overall performance of the whole battery changes remark-
ably. In commercial (LIB) cell, earlier used Li metals as an anode materials was 
replaced by graphite since 1991due to safety concern. Unfortunately, the low energy 
density, cost, stability, and safety with graphite anode is also hindered from further 
applications in transportation and large-scale stationary energy storage [102]. As a 
replacement of graphite, Si could be a promising anode material, owing to its high 
capacity (~3500 mAh g−1 at room temperature, which is10 times better than that of 
commercial graphite anodes), low discharging potential, low cost due to abundance 
on the earth, and nontoxicity due to environmental friendly. However, the commer-
cialization of Si anode manly stuck due to its huge volume changes and technical 
issues allied during lithiation and delithiation [103]. Likewise common problems 
with the other inorganic materials are their low capacity utilization, lower rate capa-
bility, lesser cycling stability, or even complete electrochemical inactivity in LIBs. 
Though, they shows great interest as anode materials due to various advantageous 
features like good crystallinity, excellent conductivity and redox properties. Addi-
tionally, they offer easy pathway for the transportation of Li+ ions and electrons 
that allows better accommodation of ions. Contrary, electrodes based on organic 
materials that can be broadly categorized in to conducting polymers (polyacety-
lene, polyaniline, polypyrrole, polythiophene), organosulfurs, organic salts, nitrox-
ideradicals, nonconjugated or conjugated polymers and carbonyl compounds. The 
carbonyl compounds generally possess classic redoxactivity due to their reversible 
redox stability, adjustable structure, high theoretical capacity, and multi-electro reac-
tion, whereas they suffer with the dissolution issue in organic electrolytes that result 
in the fading capacity during the cycling and the inherent poor electrical conductivity 
that slow down their reaction kinetics, high-voltage hysteresis and high irreversible 
capacity. In contrast, conducting polymers typically exhibit good electrical conduc-
tivity and high coulombic efﬁciency and hence they can be cycled hundreds or thou-
sands of times but having common issues of low capacity in terms of lithium insertion 
and extraction process i.e. the inclination in their characteristic discharge curve. Thus, 
the problems with inorganic and organic anode materials can be minimize by the use 
of hybrid materials of two. There are signiﬁcant works on hybrid of organic and

408
N. Saxena et al.
inorganic compounds that includes conducting polymers and carbonyl compounds/ 
inorganic (metal alloys, metal oxides, ceramics etc.) composites and carbon mate-
rials (carbon nanotube, carbon ﬁbers, graphene, carbon clothe, carbon fabric, carbon 
textile, expanded graphite paper, and carbon foam etc.)/inorganic composites, metal 
organic frame works (MOFs)/inorganic etc. [104–110]. For instance, layered transi-
tion metal sulﬁde (MoS2) has S–Mo–S layer that exhibit a structure similar to graphite 
along with van der Waals forces and thus can facilitate Li+ insertion/extraction. But 
possess poor conductivity between two adjacent S–Mo–S sheets that can be enhanced 
by making its composite with PANI and thus designed anode materials exhibiting 
high capacity and good cyclability for Li-ion batteries [111]. Similarly, the issue 
of the poor conductivity and large volume variation during the battery’s charge– 
discharge process with promising anode materials like silicon, tin, and antimony 
can be overcome by the designing the anode of these materials with MOFs [103, 
112, 113]. Likewise, the most common approaches, to omit the large volume varia-
tion issue with transition metal dichalcogenides and phosphides during their utility 
as anode in LIBs, is fabricating their porous structures in the presence of conduc-
tive carbon materials. For example, the anode of one-dimensional FeS2@C porous 
nanowires facilitated transfer of electrons and ions along with mitigation of volu-
metric shrinkage/expansion and hence delivered much improved speciﬁc capacities 
of 889 mA h/g and 521 mA h/g at 0.1 A/g and 10 A/g, respectively [114]. 
14.5.5 
Cathode 
The inorganic and organic materials used for the development of cathodes in lithium 
batteries possess the certain limitation in a similar manner as they used for the devel-
opment of other components for the lithium batteries. As an illustration, LiCoO2 
was the ﬁrst commercially used cathode material in LIBs. However, the use of 
LiCoO2 is limited due to number of factors that includes environmental pollution, 
overcharging, unsafe, high cost and the poor storage capacity [1]. Subsequently, 
many alternative inorganic materials like LiNiO2, LiMn2O4, LiNi(1−x−y)MnxCoyO2 
(NMC) and LiNi(1−x−y)CoxAlyO2 (NCA) were studied. However, each of the limited 
due to certain challenges like challenge in manufacturing, limited temperature and 
rate capability or problem of deformation during the cyclic process, fast degrada-
tion of capacity or safety and long cyclic life etc. on the other hand lithium iron 
phosphate (LiFePO4) cathodes exhibit long cycle life, higher thermal stability, and 
low cost along with environmental friendly and safer. Therefore, broadly used as 
an inorganic cathode material. However, the low electron conduction and inade-
quate Li-ion diffusion limits its performance. Researchers dilutes the aforemen-
tioned issues by reducing LFP’s particle size, multi-element doping and hybridizing 
it with organic material. Till date, numerous organic hybrid materials including 
carbon and its allotropes, and polymers etc. have been used to design the cathode 
with improving performance of lithium batteries. Figure 14.10 illustrates the various 
carbon allotropes that have been hybrid with LiFePO4 (LFP). For instant Jeon et al.

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
409
synthesized LFP/r-GO hybrid without using an organic solvent and demonstrated that 
at high current rates, hybrid cathode can store larger amount of charges and possess 
high cycling stability than conventional LFP cathodes with capacity of 37 mA h g−1 
at a very high current rate (2040 mA g−1). Whereas at such a high current rate, 
the conventional LFP-based electrodes fabricated with poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) and 
carbon black in an organic solvent, exhibited negligible capacity (<1 mA h g−1). 
They observed that the capacity retention levels of the hybrid and conventional 
LFP/PVdF/carbon electrode after 1000 cycles at 3400 mA g−1 from 1.5 to 4.5 V 
(vs. Li/Li+) were 88% and 38% respectively [115]. While, Chen et al. designed 
cathode using nanocrystalline LiFePO4/graphene-carbon nanotubes (LFP-G-CNT) 
composite and noticed that designed network provides highly conductive paths for 
electron transfer during the intercalation/deintercalation procedure, facilitates elec-
tron migration throughout the secondary particles, accelerates the penetration of the 
liquid electrolyte into the LFP-G-CNT composite in all directions and enhanced the 
diffusion of Li ions. Further, a high initial discharge capacity of 168.4 mAh g−1 at 0.1 
C and 103.7 mAh g−1 at 40 C with an excellent cycling stability was observed for the 
composite with a low content of G and CNT [116]. Whereas, Lian and coworkers used 
composite of polyaniline (PANI)/active carbon (a-C)/LFP as cathode and observed 
remarkable improvement in the capacity and rate performance of PANI/a-C/LFP 
cathode in comparison to a-C/LFP cathode [117]. 
Alternatively, Li-rich cathode materials (LRM) like xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiTMO2 
(TM = Ni, Mn, Co, etc.), have been regarded as one of the most promising candidates
Fig. 14.10 Schematic of possible carbon allotropes for LFP. Adopted from Ref. [118] (Batteries 
an open access journal of MDPI) 

410
N. Saxena et al.
Fig. 14.11 Schematic diagram summarizing the challenges and strategies of LRM cathode mate-
rials in different stages from crystal structure to practical application. Adapted with the permission 
ref. [121] © 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH 
for next-generation cathode materials for rechargeable LIBs due to their prominent 
speciﬁc capacity particularly when x = 0.5. Besides, LRM cathodes are relatively 
low cost, environmental friendly, and high thermal stability with the reduced use of 
expensive Co. However, inherent features like low initial Coulombic efﬁciency (ICE), 
poor rate capacity, and serious voltage fading of LRM restricts their use in realtime 
applications. Figure 14.11 summarizes the challenges and strategies of LRM cathode 
materials at various stages from crystal structure to practical application. The chal-
lenges could be addressed with the use of composites of LRM with organic materials. 
For example; Wu and co-workers illustrated the better rate capability and cycling 
properties of PEDOT:PSS/LRM (Li1.2Ni0.2Mn0.6O2) composite than LRM with an 
excellent initial discharge capacity of 286.5 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 C 
and discharge capacity remained 146.9 mA h g−1 at 1 C after 100 cycles [119]. While, 
Zheng et al. demonstrated a high reversible capacity (289.5 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C), excel-
lent rate capability (263.6, 218.9, 182.9, and 108.6 mA h g−1 at 0.5, 1, 5, and 10 C, 
respectively), and superior cycling stability (with a high capacity retention of 88.5% 
at 5 C after 500 cycles) of ﬂuorine-doped carbon/LRM (Li1.2Mn0.54Ni0.13Co0.13O2) 
composite [120]. 
14.6 
Conclusions 
The increasing energy demands around the globe require multiple sources of energy 
to fulﬁll them. In this row, the requirement for energy storage is a great challenge 
to overcome. To deal with this challenge, organic–inorganic nanocomposites play a

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
411
decisive role. This chapter outlines the developments in the ﬁeld of organic–inorganic 
nanodielectrics-based applications in energy storage. Several nanocomposites viz. 
PEDOT–V2O5, PEDOT–MoO3, P5ICN–WO3 and polymer–graphene are discussed 
for their synthesis and properties. Further, the measurement methods and expressions 
are detailed. The applications of these nanodielectrics in supercapacitors, XLPE 
insulated high voltage direct current cables, insulated switchgear and lithium batteries 
are presented in detail. It may be concluded that semiconductor like SiC ﬁlled polymer 
are the outstanding nanocomposite for reducing space charge and enhancing the 
uniform distribution of electric ﬁeld in various machinery components. Carbon-based 
materials are a good choice for the cathode in lithium batteries. A comprehensive 
review of various nanodielectrics used for electrolyte, separator, anode and cathode 
in lithium batteries is presented to provide an analytical approach. 
References 
1. Conway BE (1991) J Electrochem Soc 138:1539 
2. Jeong YU, Manthiram A (2001) J Electrochem Soc 148:A189–A193 
3. Murugan AV, Kwon CW, Campet G, Kale BB, Mandale AB, Sainker SR, Gopinath CS, 
Vijayamohanan K (2004) J Phys Chem B 108:10736–10742 
4. Bulakhe RN, Nguyen VH, Shim JJ (2017) New J Chem 41:1473–1482 
5. Bai Y, Rakhi RB, Chen W, Alshareef HN (2013) J Power Sources 233:313–319 
6. Chen W, Rakhi RB, Hu L, Xie X, Cui Y, Alshareef HN (2011) Nano Lett 11:5165–5172 
7. Gomez-Romero P (2001) Adv Mater 13:163–174 
8. Ryu KS, Kim KM, Park NG, Park YJ, Chang SH (2002) J Power Sources 103:305–309 
9. Murugan AV, Viswanath AK, Campet G, Gopinath CS, Vijayamohanan K (2005) Appl Phys 
Lett 87 
10. Baibarac M, Lira-Cantu M, Oro-Sole J, Casan-Pastor N, Gomez-Romero P (2006) Small 
2:1075–1082 
11. Cuentas-Gallegos AK, Lira-Cantú M, Casañ-Pastor N, Gómez-Romero P (2005) Adv Func 
Mater 15:1125–1133 
12. Powell AV, Kosidowski L, McDowall A (2001) J Mater Chem 11:1086–1091 
13. Lira-Cantu M, GoHmez-Romero P (1999) J Solid State Chem 147:601 
14. Boyano I, Bengoechea M, de Meatza I, Miguel O, Cantero I, Ochoteco E, Grande H, Lira-
Cantú M, Gomez-Romero P (2007) J Power Sources 174:1206–1211 
15. Nazar LF, Zhang Z, Zinkweg D (1992) J Am Chem Soc 114:6239–6240 
16. Wagner CD (1979) Handbook of x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy: a reference book of 
standard data for use in x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Perkin-Elmer 
17. Mane AT, Navale ST, Pawar RC, Lee CS, Patil VB (2015) Synth Met 199:187–195 
18. Yan J, Li S, Lan B, Wu Y, Lee PS (2019) Adv Funct Mater 30 
19. Wang F, Wu X, Yuan X, Liu Z, Zhang Y, Fu L, Zhu Y, Zhou Q, Wu Y, Huang W (2017) Chem 
Soc Rev 46:6816–6854 
20. Li Z, Wang Y, Kozbial A, Shenoy G, Zhou F, McGinley R, Ireland P, Morganstein B, Kunkel 
A, Surwade SP, Li L, Liu H (2013) Nat Mater 12:925–931 
21. Zhu M, Huang Y, Huang Y, Meng W, Gong Q, Li G, Zhi C (2015) J Mater Chem A 3:21321– 
21327 
22. Wang R, Yao M, Niu Z (2019) InfoMat 2:113–125 
23. Huo X, Shen W, Li R, Zhang M, Guo M (2020) Scripta Mater 174:1–5 
24. Wang WQ, Wang XL, Xia XH, Yao ZJ, Zhong Y, Tu JP (2018) Nanoscale 10:8162–8169 
25. Dai Y, Li W, Zhao R, Huang Q, Xu N, Yuan F, Zhang C (2019) Electrochim Acta 318:322–332

412
N. Saxena et al.
26. Nie G, Zhou L, Yang H (2011) J Mater Chem 21 
27. Yang G, Takei T, Yanagida S, Kumada N (2019) Appl Surf Sci 498 
28. Novoselov KS, Fal’ko VI, Colombo L, Gellert PR, Schwab MG, Kim K (2012) Nature 
490:192–200 
29. Kim H, Abdala AA, Macosko CW (2010) Macromolecules 43:6515–6530 
30. Jenny Malig AWIS, Wagner P, Wallace GG, Ofﬁcer DL, Guldi DM (2012) Chem Commun 
48:8745–8747 
31. Ajayi OA, Anderson NC, Cotlet M, Petrone N, Gu T, Wolcott A, Gesuele F, Hone J, Owen 
JS, Wong CW (2014) Appl Phys Lett 104 
32. Potts JR, Dreyer DR, Bielawski CW, Ruoff RS (2011) Polymer 52:5–25 
33. Ni G-X, Zheng Y, Bae S, Tan CY, Kahya O, Wu J, Hong BH, Yao K, Ozyilmaz B (2012) ACS 
Nano 6:3935–3942 
34. Jamal M, Razeeb KM, Shao H, Islam J, Akhter I, Furukawa H, Khosla A (2019) Sci Rep 
9:4659 
35. Ramachandran R, Mani V, Chen S-M, Saraswathi R, Lou B-S (2013) Int J Electrochem Sci 
8:11680–11694 
36. Jeanene Willcox P, Howie DW, Schmidt-Rohr K, Hoagland DA, Gido SP, Pudjijanto S, Kleiner 
LW, Venkatraman S (2000) Journal of Polymer Science: Part B: Polymer Physics, 37 (2000) 
3438–3454. 
37. Andritsch T, Vaughan A, Stevens GC (2017) IEEE Electr Insul Mag 33 
38. Thomas J, Joseph B, Jose JP, Maria HJ, Main P, Rahman AA, Francis B, Ahmad Z, Thomas 
S (2019) Ind Eng Chem Res 58:20863–20879 
39. Montanari GC (2011) IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 18:339–364 
40. Jose Varghese R, Vidya L, Joseph TM, Gudimalla A, Harini Bhuvaneswari G, Thomas S (2021) 
Potential applications of XLPE nanocomposites in the ﬁeld of cable insulation. In: Thomas 
J, Thomas S, Ahmad Z (ed) Crosslinkable polyethylene based blends and nanocomposites. 
Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd., Singapore, pp 197–213 
41. Yang J, Han CR, Duan JF, Xu F, Sun RC (2013) Nanoscale 5:10858–10863 
42. Rahim NH, Lau KY, Muhamad NA, Mohamad N, Rahman WAWA, Vaughan AS (2019) IEEE 
Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 26:284–291 
43. Basnet P, Chatterjee S (2020) Nano-structures & Nano-objects 22 
44. Sima W, Shi J, Yang Q, Huang S, Cao X (2015) IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul 22:380–390 
45. Ahmadi-Joneidi I, Majzoobi A, Shayegani-Akmal AA, Mohseni H (2013) IEEE Trans 
Dielectrics Electr Insul 20:212–220 
46. Ashish Sharad P, Kumar KS (2017) Nanocomposites 3:30–41 
47. Paramane A, Chen X, Dai C, Guan H, Yu L, Tanaka Y (2020) Polym Compos 41:1936–1949 
48. Kharal, Kamran, Ullah, Saleem, Alvi, Processes, 7 (2019). 
49. Shihu Y, Shengtao L, Shihang W, Yin H, Nazir MT, Phung BT (2018) IEEE Trans Dielectr 
Electr Insul 25:1567–1576 
50. Rokunohe T, Yagihashi Y, Endo F, Oomori T (2006) Electrical Engineering in Japan 155:9–17 
51. Wang Y, Yan J, Yang Z, Liu T, Zhao Y, Li J (2019) Energies 12 
52. Yang Y, Zheng G, Cui Y (2013) Chem Soc Rev 42:3018–3032 
53. Ma TY, Dai S, Qiao SZ (2016) Mater Today 19:265–273 
54. Jiao Y, Zheng Y, Jaroniec M, Qiao SZ (2015) Chem Soc Rev 44:2060–2086 
55. Bai S, Liu X, Zhu K, Wu S, Zhou H (2016) Nat Energy 1:16094 
56. Nicole L, Rozes L, Sanchez C (2010) Adv Mater 22:3208–3214 
57. Mehtab T, Yasin G, Arif M, Shakeel M, Korai RM, Nadeem M, Muhammad N, Lu X (2019) 
J Energy Storage 21:632–646 
58. Wang L, Han Y, Feng X, Zhou J, Qi P, Wang B (2016) Coord Chem Rev 307:361–381 
59. Xu G, Nie P, Dou H, Ding B, Li L, Zhang X (2017) Mater Today 20:191–209 
60. Judeinstein P, Sanchez C (1996) J Mater Chem 6:511–525 
61. Zhang J, Zhang L, Sun F, Wang Z (2018) IEEE Access 6:23848–23863 
62. Agrawal RC, Pandey GP (2008) J Phys D Appl Phys 41:223001 
63. Xiao Y, Wang Y, Bo S-H, Kim JC, Miara LJ, Ceder G (2019) Nat Rev Mater 5:105–126

14
Application of Organic–Inorganic Nanodielectrics for Energy Storage
413
64. Ren D, Feng X, Liu L, Hsu H, Lu L, Wang L, He X, Ouyang M (2021) Energy Storage Mater 
34:563–573 
65. Pomerantseva E, Bonaccorso F, Feng X, Cui Y, Gogotsi Y (2019) Science 366:969 
66. Gai J, Ma F, Zhang Z, Sun D, Jin Y, Guo Y, Kim W (2019) ACS Sustain Chem Eng 7:15896– 
15903 
67. Han L, Lehmann ML, Zhu J, Liu T, Zhou Z, Tang X, Heish C-T, Sokolov AP, Cao P, Chen 
XC, Saito T (2020) Front Energy Res 8:1–19 
68. Adebahr J, Byrne N, Forsyth M, MacFarlane DR, Jacobsson P (2003) Electrochim Acta 
48:2099–2103 
69. Appetecchi GB, Passerini S (2000) Electrochim Acta 45:2139–2145 
70. Kumar B (2004) J Power Sources 135:215–231 
71. Zhao Y, Huang Z, Chen S, Chen B, Yang J, Zhang Q, Ding F, Chen Y, Xu X (2016) Solid 
State Ionics 295:65–71 
72. Meyer M, Vechambre C, Viau L, Mehdi A, Fontaine O, Mourad E, Monge S, Chenal J-M, 
Chazeau L, Vioux A (2014) J Mater Chem A 2:12162–12165 
73. Vélez JF, Procaccini RA, Aparicio M, Mosa J (2013) Electrochim Acta 110:200–207 
74. Yuan C, Li J, Han P, Lai Y, Zhang Z, Liu J (2013) J Power Sources 240:653–658 
75. Croce F, Persi L, Scrosati B, Serraino-Fiory F, Plichta E, Hendrickson MA (2001) Electrochim 
Acta 46:2457–2461 
76. Tan R, Gao R, Zhao Y, Zhang M, Xu J, Yang J, Pan F (2016) ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
8:31273–31280 
77. Zhu P, Yan C, Dirican M, Zhu J, Zang J, Selvan RK, Chung C-C, Jia H, Li Y, Kiyak Y, Wu 
N, Zhang X (2018) J Mater Chem A 6:4279–4285 
78. Marcinek M, Bac A, Lipka P, Zalewska A, Zukowska G, Borkowska R, Wieczorek W (2000) 
J Phys Chem B 104:11088–11093 
79. Fan J, Fedkiw PS (1997) J Electrochem Soc 144:399–408 
80. Hanson B, Pryamitsyn V, Ganesan V (2013) ACS Macro Lett 2:1001–1005 
81. Murugan R, Thangadurai V, Weppner W (2007) Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 46:7778–7781 
82. Tao X, Liu Y, Liu W, Zhou G, Zhao J, Lin D, Zu C, Sheng O, Zhang W, Lee HW, Cui Y 
(2017) Nano Lett 17:2967–2972 
83. Le HTT, Kalubarme RS, Ngo DT, Jadhav HS, Park C-J (2015) J Mater Chem A 3:22421–22431 
84. Liu W, Liu N, Sun J, Hsu PC, Li Y, Lee HW, Cui Y (2015) Nano Lett 15:2740–2745 
85. Chen XC, Sacci RL, Osti NC, Tyagi M, Wang Y, Palmer MJ, Dudney NJ (2019) Mol Syst 
Des Eng 4:379–385 
86. Goodenough JB, Hong HYP, Kafalas JA (1976) Mater Res Bull 11:203–220 
87. Peng J, Xiao Y, Clarkson DA, Greenbaum SG, Zawodzinski TA, Chen XC (2020) ACS Appl 
Polym Mater 2:1180–1189 
88. Azadmanjiri J, Wang J, Berndt CC, Yu A (2018) J Mater Chem A 6:3824–3849 
89. Xu W, Wang Z, Shi L, Ma Y, Yuan S, Sun L, Zhao Y, Zhang M, Zhu J (2015) ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces 7:20678–20686 
90. Xiao W, Gong Y, Wang H, Liu J, Yan C (2016) New J Chem 40:8778–8785 
91. Moon J, Jeong JY, Kim JI, Kim S, Park JH (2019) J Power Sources 416:89–94 
92. Zhao H, Deng N, Kang W, Cheng B (2020) Chem Eng J 390 
93. Jeong H-S, Lee S-Y (2011) J Power Sources 196:6716–6722 
94. Liu H, Xu J, Guo B, He X (2014) Ceram Int 40:14105–14110 
95. Jiang X, Zhu X, Ai X, Yang H, Cao Y (2017) ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 9:25970–25975 
96. Kim M, Park JH (2012) J Power Sources 212:22–27 
97. Zhu X, Jiang X, Ai X, Yang H, Cao Y (2016) J Membr Sci 504:97–103 
98. Liu Y, Ai K, Lu L (2014) Chem Rev 114:5057–5115 
99. Chen H, Lin Q, Xu Q, Yang Y, Shao Z, Wang Y (2014) J Membr Sci 458:217–224 
100. Bai S, Zhu K, Wu S, Wang Y, Yi J, Ishida M, Zhou H (2016) J Mater Chem A 4:16812–16817 
101. Li M, Wan Y, Huang J-K, Assen AH, Hsiung C-E, Jiang H, Han Y, Eddaoudi M, Lai Z, Ming 
J, Li L-J (2017) ACS Energy Lett 2:2362–2367 
102. Thackeray MM, Wolverton C, Isaacs ED (2012) Energy Environ Sci 5:7854

414
N. Saxena et al.
103. Zhu C, Han K, Geng D, Ye H, Meng X (2017) Electrochim Acta 251:710–728 
104. Lu J, Chen Z, Pan F, Cui Y, Amine K (2018) Electrochem Energy Rev 1:35–53 
105. Mai HD, Raﬁq K, Yoo H (2017) Chemistry 23:5631–5651 
106. Meng X (2017) J Mater Chem A 5:18326–18378 
107. Nzereogu PU, Omah AD, Ezema FI, Iwuoha EI, Nwanya AC (2022) Appl Surf Sci Adv 
9:100233 
108. Sengodu P, Deshmukh AD (2015) RSC Adv 5:42109–42130 
109. Wang H, Yao C-J, Nie H-J, Wang K-Z, Zhong Y-W, Chen P, Mei S, Zhang Q (1922) J Mater 
Chem A 8(2020):11906–11911 
110. Cheng N, Ren L, Xu Z, Du Y, Dou SX (2020) Mater Today Phys 15 
111. Yang L, Wang S, Mao J, Deng J, Gao Q, Tang Y, Schmidt OG (2013) Adv Mater 25:1180–1184 
112. Guo Y, Zeng X, Zhang  Y,  Dai Z, Fan  F,  Huang Y, Zhang  W,  Zhang H, Lu J, Huo  F,  Yan Q,  
Appl ACS (2017) Mater Interfaces 9:17172–17177 
113. Yu L, Liu J, Xu X, Zhang L, Hu R, Liu J, Yang L, Zhu M (2017) ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
9:2516–2525 
114. Zhang F, Wang C, Huang G, Yin D, Wang L (2016) J Power Sources 328:56–64 
115. Jung J-W, Cho S-H, Nam JS, Kim I-D (2020) Energy Storage Mater 24:512–528 
116. Chen YT, Zhang HY, Chen YM, Qin G, Lei XL, Liu LY (2018) Mater Sci Forum 913:818–830 
117. Lian J, Wang X, Zhang W, Huang Y, Xia T, Lian Y (2016) J Nanosci Nanotechnol 16:6494– 
6497 
118. Ramasubramanian B, Sundarrajan S, Chellappan V, Reddy MV, Ramakrishna S, Zaghib K 
(2022) Batteries 8 
119. Wu F, Liu J, Li L, Zhang X, Luo R, Ye Y, Chen R (2016) ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
8:23095–23104 
120. Zheng F, Deng Q, Zhong W, Ou X, Pan Q, Liu Y, Xiong X, Yang C, Chen Y, Liu M (2018) 
ACS Sustain Chem Eng 6:16399–16411 
121. He  W,  Guo W, Wu H, Lin  L,  Liu Q, Han  X,  Xie Q, Liu  P,  Zheng H, Wang L, Yu X, Peng DL  
(2021) Adv Mater 33:e2005937

Chapter 15 
Metal Oxide Nanoﬁller-Introduced 
Polymer-Based Nanocomposite 
Dielectrics for Advanced Energy Storage 
Devices 
Pravati Panda, Subhendu Chakroborty, Anchit Modi, 
and Srikanta Moharana 
Abstract The modern scientiﬁc community is very interested in using polymeric 
nanodielectrics in capacitors and other forms of improved energy storage devices. 
Hybridization of inorganic metal or metal oxide NPs as nanoﬁllers with a high dielec-
tric constant and the polymer as a matrix with a high breakdown strength is funda-
mental in fabricating polymer nanodielectric ﬁlms. Findings from this study show, 
for example, that a higher NP ﬁller concentration results in a higher dielectric permit-
tivity and a lower dielectric loss in the nanodielectric ﬁlm, making it an attractive 
candidate for use in the fabrication of high-voltage storage capacitors. This chapter 
provides a concise overview of the methods for preparing highly ﬂexible polymer 
nano dielectrics with enhanced thermostability for the fabrication of electronic and 
microelectronic devices, including using various metal and metal oxide NPs as cores 
and a variety of polymer matrices as shells. 
Keywords Metal oxide · Nanoﬁller · Polymer · Nanocomposites · Energy storage 
15.1 
Introduction 
Nowadays, there is a continuous depletion of energy sources like fossil fuels world-
wide; hence there is a huge demand for the generation and storage of energy using 
renewable energy sources [1, 2]. Currently, most of the research development sectors
P. Panda 
Department of Basic Sciences, RIE, Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar, India 
S. Chakroborty envelope symbol · A. Modi 
Department of Basic Sciences, IITM, IES University, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh 462044, India 
e-mail: drsubhendu.chakroborty@iesuniversity.ac.in 
S. Moharana 
School of Applied Sciences, Centurion University of Technology and Management, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7_15 
415

416
P. Panda et al.
focus on generating plenty of energy, particularly electrical energy using tidal, wind, 
and solar energy resources, etc. To store the generated electricity, there is a need for 
highly reliable and efﬁcient energy storage devices such as capacitors [3–5]. In this 
regard, dielectric capacitors in energy storage devices are a better alternative than 
electrochemical capacitors and batteries because of their long lifetime, high power 
density with high-voltage tolerance capability, and higher cycling stability [6]. All 
these interesting characteristics associated with dielectric capacitors make them a 
promising material of choice for renewable energy storage and distribution systems 
[7]. Capacitors possessing high dielectric constants are much needed for cable insu-
lation, electrocaloric cooling, etc. Marketed dielectrics are generally polymer or 
ceramic-based [8]. Though ceramic dielectrics have their advantages, it has some 
limitations, such as high density, low breakdown strength with poor ﬂexibility, low-
temperature tolerance capability, etc. [9, 10]. Thus, there is a need for another kind of 
material that will possess opposite characteristics to the traditionally used materials. 
In this connection, the scientiﬁc community suggested polymeric dielectrics as 
an alternative energy storage device. The associated properties, like high-voltage 
endurance with dielectric strength and low resistance with less dielectric loss, made 
dielectric polymers an incomparable material of choice for a wide range of electrical 
insulation and energy storage applications [8–11]. As for wire and cable insulation, 
the polymer coating protects the internal shielding and conductors from mechanical, 
external moisture, ultraviolet (UV), and ozone damage [4, 5]. For tape and capacitor 
insulation, polymer ﬁlms/sheets work as fundamental building blocks that provide 
electrical current handling capability and electrical charge build-up barriers [12]. 
Polymeric core-shell devices containing nanoﬁllers, generally known as nanodi-
electrics are highly advantageous and quite appealing for energy storage purposes 
and application in capacitors [13]. After many hits and trials, it was signiﬁed that the 
performance of metal or metal oxide-based NPs as nanoﬁller is more enthusiastic. 
Due to the small particle size and the high surface area of NPs [14–19], the bonding 
between polymer matrix and NPs is quite superior. Polymers with a strong polarizing 
tendency and exceptional effectiveness, such as poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride) (PVDF), 
PVDF-based copolymers and terpolymers, and linear polymers like polyetherimide 
(PEI) and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), were chosen as a matrix for this 
application [5–7]. 
Moreover, it was veriﬁed that, for metallic/polymer NP dielectrics, ﬁeld elec-
tron emission from metallic NPs under a high ﬁeld tends to decrease the dielec-
tric breakdown strength and, thus, increase the electronic conduction [1–3]. The 
charming features associated with nanodielectrics include high energy density, high 
capacitance density, high voltage, high current handling capability, high thermal 
conductivity, high temperature, lightweight, and environmental reliability. The addi-
tion of nanoﬁllers impressively increased the ﬂexibility, dielectric constant, break-
down strength, and thermostability with low dielectric loss of the polymer matrix 
[20]. 
This chapter brieﬂy summarizes the preparation and application of different metal 
or metal oxide-doped polymer-based nanodielectrics in different energy storage 
devices.

15
Metal Oxide Nanoﬁller-Introduced Polymer-Based Nanocomposite …
417
15.2 
Application 
In order to study its potential against HV insulating systems like HVDC cables, 
ZnO nanoparticles were selectively distributed on polyethylene (PE) mix and ther-
moelastic polymer (TPE) comprising polystyrene-b-poly(ethylene-co-butylene)-b-
polystyrene grafted maleic anhydride (SEBS-MA). The generated blended nanocom-
posites of PE/SEBS-MA/ZnO were analyzed and compared with a homopolymeric 
PE–ZnO nanocomposite for their mechanical and dielectric characteristics. Agglom-
eration of metal oxide NPs made them less compatible with the polyoleﬁn matrix, 
leading to a compatibility problem. ZnO NPs were observed to be solely restricted 
inside the polymeric lattice and to be situated at the interface between SEBS-MA and 
PE, but in the case of SEBS-MA/ZnO and PE/SEBS-MA/ZnO, improved compati-
bility between SEBS-MA and the NPs occurred, resulting in good dispersion of the 
NPs. Additionally, PE/SEBS-MA/ZnO nanocomposites showed improved dielectric 
characteristics over PE/SEBS-MA nanocomposites because of the increased disper-
sion of ZnO NPs (unﬁlled blend). When compared with free PE/SEBS-MA, plane 
PE, and PE/ZnO nanocomposite, the blended nanomaterial showed reduced dielectric 
loss at higher power with temperatures 80 and 45 °C percent improved resistance to 
surface erosion value. Upon high loading of NPs, the blended nanomaterials exhib-
ited decreased breakdown strength than unﬁlled material. Moreover, the blended 
nanocomposites displayed high mechanical ﬂexibility with low reduction value due 
to the quality dispersion of the NPs (Figs. 15.1 and 15.2) [21].
Go/Au (prepared by doping of Au on GO) and GO–Cu (prepared by doping 
of Cu over GO) integrated over poly vinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF)-based new and 
ﬂexible nanocomposites were generated following the solution casting process. The 
presence of GO/Cu and GO/Au nanoﬁllers increased the quantity of electroactive 
crystalline phases of PVDF. Low dielectric loss with high dielectric constant and 
a high content of electroactive phases made it a suitable candidate for fabricating 
over ﬂexible high-performance nanodielectric materials like electronic devices and 
sensors. An increase in the concentration of the nanoﬁllers leads to a rise in the elec-
troactive phase due to the presence of electrostatic interactions between the nanoﬁller 
and CH2–CF2 dipoles of PVDF, as conﬁrmed by FTIR spectra. Along with this, it 
did not display any absorption band related to the non-polar α phase in the FTIR 
spectrum. For PVDF ﬁlled with 1% GO/Au nanoﬁller, the maximum value of the 
electroactive phase content was found to be 95% which was around 2.5 times greater 
than neat PVDF, as demonstrated through FTIR. Compared with GO/Cu, GO/Au-
based nanocomposites possessed an increased number of electroactive phases, which 
XRD determined. From capacitance, inductance, and LCR (resistance) measurement, 
nanomaterials exhibited increasing nanoﬁller content with high dielectric constant 
with low dielectric loss, which made it an interesting material of choice to fabricate 
over simple and ﬂexible high-performance nanodielectric materials (Figs. 15.3, 15.4 
and 15.5) [22].

418
P. Panda et al.
Fig. 15.1 SEM of unmodiﬁed PE–SEBS-MA (a), PE–SEBS-MA/1 (b), PE–SEBS-MA/5 (c), 
and PE–SEBS-MA/10 (d) composites. Reprint and Copyright permission obtained from Elsevier 
publication [21] 
Fig. 15.2 Resistance to surface erosion through PE–ZnO as a function of PE–SEBS-MA–ZnO 
nanocomposites. Reprint and Copyright permission obtained from Elsevier publication [21]

15
Metal Oxide Nanoﬁller-Introduced Polymer-Based Nanocomposite …
419
Fig. 15.3 FTIR spectra of neat PVDF and PVDF-based nanocomposites with different contents of 
GO–Au (a) and GO–Cu nanoﬁller (b). Reprint and Copyright permission obtained from Elsevier 
publication [22] 
Fig. 15.4 XRD spectra of pristine PVDF and PVDF-based nanocomposites with different content 
of a GO–Au and b GO–Cu nanoﬁller. Reprint and Copyright permission obtained from Elsevier 
publication [22]
Dielectric polymeric nanocomposite matrices were prepared by the embedment 
of molybdenum disulﬁde (MoS2) and polydopamine (PDA)–encapsulated hydrox-
ylated barium titanate (BTH) over [poly (arylene ether nitrile)] (PEN) matrix. 
The nanoﬁllers, i.e., MoS2/PDA@BTH-1 were prepared through polydopamine 
deposition technology involving H-bonding interactions. The introduction of PDA 
contributed to the formation of nanocapacitor networks and multiple interfaces, 
enhancing interfacial polarization. Experimentally, it was found that the polymeric 
nanocomposite matrix exhibited a dielectric constant value of 17.3 at 1 kHz upon 
15 wt% MoS2/PDA–BTH-1 loading. The matrix also maintained low dielectric loss 
at the meant time. The plausible mechanism of the synergistic effect of MoS2/PDA– 
BTH-1 upon the enhancement of the dielectric properties of the composite matrix

420
P. Panda et al.
Fig. 15.5 Frequency dependence of dielectric constant and dielectric loss of pristine PVDF 
nanocomposites with different contents of GO–Au (a, c) and GO–Cu (b, d) nanoﬁllers. Reprint 
and Copyright permission obtained from Elsevier publication [22]
was proposed, which was assumed that the dielectric constant value becomes stabi-
lized upon reaching 158 °C as suggested by temperature-permittivity data. Thus, the 
developed ﬁlm could be used in capacitors up to a temperature 150 °C, which was 
quite higher than that of most polymeric capacitors. The high-temperature tolerance 
nature and high dielectric constant (k) value of the developed material made it a 
demandable material for application in embedded devices as well as electrostatic 
capacitors (Figs. 15.6 and 15.7) [23].
Polymeric nanocomposite ﬁlms containing carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC)-
polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) (30/70 wt%) blend and Au NPs (0.36 wt%) as host polymer 
matrix were synthesized through the casting of aqueous solutions. The required Au 
NPs for synthesizing the polymeric matrix were successively generated from the 
leaf extract of Morus nigra (M. nigra). It was then irradiated under a nanosecond 
laser at a different time interval. The presence of functional groups in the CMC/PVA 
polymer interacted through H-bonding interactions, and simultaneously, the intensity 
of the spectral lines signiﬁcantly increased upon irradiation and the addition of Au 
nanoparticles, as implied by FTIR. An increase in the absorbance intensity leading to 
a blue shift and appearance of SPK peak in the UV-Visible spectra conﬁrmed the well 
dispersion of Au MPs upon the polymeric matrix. The TEM study conﬁrmed that

15
Metal Oxide Nanoﬁller-Introduced Polymer-Based Nanocomposite …
421
Fig. 15.6 Synthesis of MOS2–PDA–BTH-1 and MOS2–PDA–BTH-A–PEN nanocomposite ﬁlm. 
Reprint and Copyright permission obtained from Elsevier publication [23] 
Fig. 15.7 SEM and TEM micrographs of BTH (a, b), MOS2 (c, d), PDA@BTH (e, f), and MOS2– 
PDA–BTH-1 (g, h) particles. Reprint and Copyright permission obtained from Elsevier publication 
[23]
laser irradiation reduced the particle size and spherical shape of Au NPs. It exhib-
ited high dielectric constant value and dielectric permittivity, making it a valuable 
material for further application in optoelectronic and electronic devices [24].

422
P. Panda et al.
Polymeric nanocomposite ﬁlms were developed by the incorporation of different 
weight percentages of ZnO NPs upon poly (vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) and poly (ethy-
lene oxide) (PEO) blend matrix. The developed blended matrix was studied for its 
application in preparing next-generation microelectronic and optoelectronic devices. 
The structure and morphology of the nano polymeric ﬁlm were studied using SEM, 
FTIR, XRD, etc. It was found that the incorporation of different amounts of ZnO 
NPs inside the polymer matrix signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced the polymer-polymer, porous 
spherulite morphology, semicrystalline structure, and polymer-nanoparticle interac-
tions of the materials. UV-Vis spectra were used to determine the optical properties 
such as optical band gap, refractive index, Urbach tail energy, and ZnO surface 
plasmon resonance energy. Increasing the concentration of ZnO in the polymeric 
ﬁlm decreased the optical band gap. DRS spectroscopy was used to study its impli-
cation in the ﬂexible nanodielectrics from 20 Hz to 1 MHz. The permittivity of the 
complex was found to increase linearly up to 3 wt% ZnO loading with respect to 
an increase in temperature, then a slight decrease in the value was noticed at 5%. 
However, with increased temperature, the electrical conductivity and the dielectric 
relaxation time obeyed the Arrhenius manner. Experimentally, it was observed that 
the dielectric constant of the ﬁlm increased upon loading of ZnO nanoparticles [25]. 
Dispersion of Fe3O4 NPs was carried out in one step over polyethylene oxide 
(PEO)/chitosan (CS) based nanocomposite using laser ablation at different time inter-
vals. The as-produced nanocomposite ﬁlm containing PEO/CS/Fe3O4 was analyzed 
properly using XRD, SEM, TEM, FTIR, and UV-Visible spectroscopy. Also, the 
authors measured the nanoﬁlm’s electrical conductivity and dielectric characteris-
tics. The crystallinity of the nanocomposite ﬁlm gets enhanced by the fabrication and 
well interaction of the PEO–CS matrix with Fe3O4 NPs. The average particle size of 
the Fe3O4 NPs generated under laser ablation was found to be 45 nm. FTIR spectra 
also conﬁrmed the stable interaction present in the PEO–CS–Fe3O4 nanocomposite 
ﬁlm. The appearance of the bright spots over the surface of the sample in the SEM 
image conﬁrmed the successive dispersion of the NPs over the nanocomposite ﬁlm. 
The optical characteristic of the generated material was conﬁrmed by the appear-
ance of an absorption peak at 218 nm, which shifted toward a higher wavelength 
region with respect to the rise in laser ablation time, also simultaneous decrease in 
the energy gap to 4.43 eV from 5.35 eV for direct transition and to 2.49 eV from 
4.91 eV for indirect transition. It was also studied that the electrical conductivity of 
the sample increased with a simultaneous increase in Fe3O4 NPs. PEO–CS–Fe3O4 
NPs achieved a high conductivity value of ∼8.47 × 10−6 S/cm at a laser ablation 
time of 20 min. The developed nanomaterial exhibited high electrical conductance, 
which can be applied in different electronics (Figs. 15.8 and 15.9) [26].
Dispersion of carbon fabricated Ni NPs was carried out over epoxy-based photore-
sist material (SU-8), doped over metal polymer composites (MPC), and used in-
depth high-voltage dielectric characterization. The integration of MPC involved three 
stages: deagglomeration, surface functionalization, and dispersion in a polymeric 
matrix following the sonochemical process. In the end, the MPC ﬁlms were deposited 
over silicon wafers through spin-coating and ﬁnally used to fabricate metal–insu-
lator–semiconductor (MIS) capacitors. The dielectric permittivity was observed to

15
Metal Oxide Nanoﬁller-Introduced Polymer-Based Nanocomposite …
423
Fig. 15.8 XRD spectra of PEO–CS blend and PEO–CS–Fe3O4 blend at various laser ablation 
times. Reprint and Copyright permission obtained from Elsevier publication [26] 
Fig. 15.9 FTIR and UV-Vis spectra of PEO–CS and PEO–CS–Fe3O4 blend with various ablation 
times. Reprint and Copyright permission obtained from Elsevier publication [26]
be enhanced to approximately 116% with 0.32 loss at 5 kHz. The measured high-
voltage dielectric properties indicated the 2e− ﬁeld mechanism without electrical 
aging or dielectric breakdown less than ±0.38 MV/cm. The developed wafer-scale 
ﬁlm fabrication process of MPCs was quite reliable and can be applied to manufacture 
pleasant miniaturization of high-voltage capacitors [27].

424
P. Panda et al.
The increasing variety of uses for hybrid nanocomposites made from organic 
and inorganic elements has increased their popularity in recent years. The in-situ 
bulk polymerization method was utilized to synthesize [poly(methyl methacrylate)] 
(PMMA) and its binary and ternary nanocomposites using varying amounts of rGO 
and Fe2O3 NPs. PMMA; based ternary nanocomposites comprising 2:2 wt% of 
RGO:Fe2O3 NPs showed the greatest dielectric constant value up to 308 and also 
demonstrated a dielectric loss of 0.12 at 25 Hz, according to the results of the dielectric 
characteristics study conducted in the frequency range of 25 Hz to 1 MHz. The 
dielectric characteristics of ternary PMMA nanocomposites were predicted to be 
superior to those of binary nanocomposites containing only one interface, possibly 
as a result of the accumulation of a greater number of charges at the latter’s interface. 
The synergistic reduction in thermal resistance of together Fe2O3 NPs and rGO 
(2:2 wt%) compared with 2 wt% of PMMA–RGO and PMMA–Fe2O3-based binary 
nanocomposites at 1.04 W/m K and 0.98 W/m K, respectively, resulted in an increased 
thermal conductivity value of 2.04 W/m K in the ternary nanomaterials. Therefore, 
the ternary nanocomposite showed promise as a heat-control mechanism component. 
The nanomaterial spectra data indicated a robust interaction of the nanoﬁllers with 
the PMMA matrix [28]. 
Cast synthesis was used to create bendable nanocomposite ﬁlms using 
carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), polyethylene oxide (PEO), and ZnO/GO NPs as 
nanoﬁller. Nanocomposite ﬁlms were analyzed for their shape, crystallinity, and 
structure using XRD and FTIR spectra, which showed that ZnO/GO NPs inter-
acted effectively with the PEO/CMC mixture. The optical properties, including 
Urbach energy and energy band gap of the nanocomposite and pure PEO/CMC 
blend, were measured by UV-Vis spectroscopy. It was studied that increasing the 
weight percentage of ZnO–GO NPs decreased the energy band gap with an increase 
in the Urbach energy. AC-impedance spectroscopy was used to compute the ionic 
conductivity of the polymer nanocomposites. For PEO–CMC composite ﬁlm, the 
calculated ionic conductivity was found to be ∼10–9 S/cm, which increased to 
∼10–7 S/cm by adding 8% ZnO–GO nanoﬁller at room temperature. Increasing the 
frequency increased the AC electrical conductivity; however, it reduced the values of 
ε' and ε'' of PEO–CMC and ZnO–GO nanocomposites. Surprisingly, increasing the 
concentration of ZnO–GO NPs increased the ε' and ε'' values of the nanocomposites. 
Hence, PEO/CMC nanocomposite ﬁlms prepared by using 8 wt% ZnO–GO NPs with 
enhanced dielectric, optical, and electrical properties can further be employed for 
different industrial purposes like ﬂexible energy storage devices, i.e., optoelectronic 
and electric devices [29]. 
(CMC/PAM)/Li4Ti5O12-based polymeric nanocomposite ﬁlms were prepared by 
the fabrication of Li4Ti5O12 NPs with particle size <55 nm over a carboxymethyl 
cellulose/polyacrylamide (CMC–PAM) blend matrix involving a solution casting 
process. The optical, dielectric, structural, mechanical, and thermal properties of the 
nanocomposites were determined through various spectral studies. The existence 
of coordination and hydrogen bonds in the nanocomposite samples with increased 
CMC/PAM structural amorphous areas was revealed through FTIR and XRD. The 
absorption maximum of the nanocomposite samples was signiﬁcantly enhanced by

15
Metal Oxide Nanoﬁller-Introduced Polymer-Based Nanocomposite …
425
the reduction of the energy band gap which was determined by UV-Vis spectra. The 
inclusion of Li4Ti5O12 NPs, ﬁne dispersion, and well interaction between the NPs 
and polymer enhanced the thermal stability of the CMC/PAM at a high temperature 
which was proved by the TGA study. Moreover, the addition of nanoﬁllers improved 
the mechanical properties of the nanocomposite. Tuning of the dielectric param-
eters like modulus spectra and dielectric permittivity of the nanocomposite ﬁlms 
can be achieved by tuning of Li4Ti5O12 NP content in the CMC/PAM blend which 
illustrates its novel applicability in the biodegradable polymer nanodielectrics. The 
advantageous features like the development of polymer electrolyte, optical band gap 
tuner, and controllable dielectric permittivity etc., associated with the nanocomposite 
made it a suitable material for application in high-density energy storing/advanced 
microelectronic devices [30]. 
Polymer-perovskite-based hybrid nanocomposites are highly demanding because 
their integration into electronic and optoelectronic devices enhances the physical and 
chemical properties of the target material. SrTiO3 NPs fabricated PVA–CMC-based 
nanocomposites were synthesized following the solution casting method. Increasing 
the content of SrTiO3 NPs decreased the degree of crystallinity of the nanocom-
posites, which was demonstrated through XRD, whereas it enhanced the optical 
characteristics of the material as studied by UV-Vis spectra. An FTIR spectrum was 
used to study the inﬂuence of the SrTiO3 nanoparticles upon the functional groups 
of the PVA–CMC hybrid system. SEM images conﬁrmed a rise in the surface rough-
ness with respect to the increase in the NP content. The authors also examined the 
dielectric dispersion and relaxation characteristics of the prepared PNC ﬁlms, which 
signiﬁed that the polymeric nanocomposites possessed a high value of dielectric 
constant with a low dielectric loss than pure PVA–CMC blend. Thus, the observed 
outcomes depicted its further potential attribution in advanced optoelectronic devices 
[31]. 
Nanocomposites containing poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) matrix and 
SnO2, ZnO, and TiO2 as nanoﬁllers were designed and synthesized by a sonicated 
suspension of NPs in polymeric solutions following the casting process. DRS, XRD, 
and UV-Vis techniques characterized the prepared nanomaterial well. The succes-
sive formation of the nanocomposite with appropriate composition was conﬁrmed 
by XRD and SEM studies. The dielectric permittivity of the PNC was also demon-
strated. The band gap and the UV-Vis absorbance of the material were found to 
be tunable as characterized by UV-Vis. For a particular nanoﬁller concentration, 
maximum absorbance was displayed by PMMA/TiO2 ﬁlms, and it was decreased for 
PMMA/SnO2 ﬁlms. For equal PMMA/TiO2 composite composition, increasing the 
thickness of the material reduced the energy band gap with an enhancement of UV-Vis 
absorbance, as observed by the thickness study. For nanocomposites containing SnO2 
and ZnO as nanoﬁller, the high dielectric permittivity value was found to be directly 
proportional to the concentration of the respective nanoﬁllers; however, for TiO2 NP-
containing ﬁlms, a decrease in the permittivity value was noticed when compared 
with the host matrix ﬁlm at 30 °C. Moreover, enhancing the experimental electric 
ﬁeld frequency to 1 MHz from 20 Hz gradually decreased the permittivity of the 
nanocomposite. Hence, the associated versatile properties make the nanocomposite

426
P. Panda et al.
ﬁlm a promising candidate for further application in the development of different 
advanced organoelectronic, nanodielectric insulators, and optoelectronic devices and 
to architect the coming generation of ﬂexible electronic devices [32]. 
Polymeric nanocomposites (PNCs) are considered the key moiety present in 
the ﬂexible type of advanced microelectronic devices based on polymer engi-
neering and technology. A three-phase hybrid nanocomposite consisting of SiO2 NPs 
dispersed over PNC ﬁlms of poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride)/poly (ethylene oxide) (PVDF– 
PEO) blend was designed, synthesized, and characterized through various spectral 
methods. Experimentally, increasing the concentration of SiO2 NPs decreased the 
relative fraction of PVDF β-phase crystals and degree of crystallinity and simultane-
ously modiﬁed the spherulitic morphology of the PVDF/PEO blend matrix. More-
over, the loading of 5 wt% SiO2 nanoﬁller enhanced the dielectric permittivity and 
improved the dielectric constant at a frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz. The 
tunable dielectric and structural properties made them a suitable candidate for succes-
sive application in appealing polymeric nanodielectrics, including organoelectronic 
and energy storage devices [33]. 
Flexible dielectric nanocomposites with excellent energy storage properties make 
it an alternative choice able material for its potential application in electrostatic capac-
itors. With an intention to eliminate the inconveniences stimulated by the interfacial 
polarization of two different components in the nanocomposite, authors prepared 
PVDF–HFP/HfO2–BT nanocomposites by the fabrication of HfO2–BT NPs over 
poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride-co-hexaﬂuoropropylene) ﬁlm following solution casting 
process. Due to the high resistivity and moderate dielectric permittivity nature of 
the HfO2, it acts as a buffering barrier. Its inclusion in the nanocomposite reduces 
dielectric mismatch between the P (VDF-HFP) matrix and BT NPs. The addition of 
nanoﬁller substantially enhanced the energy density (Ue) and breakdown strength 
(Eb) of the nanocomposite. The maximum Ue value of 10.7 J/cm3 was exhibited 
by P (VDF-HFP)–HfO2–BT nanocomposites at 450 MV/m, around 36% and 59% 
greater than that of nanocomposite ﬁlled by only BT nanoparticles and also that 
of pristine P (VDF-HFP). Additionally, it possessed a charge–discharge efﬁcacy of 
72%, which was quite superior to the reported values. It is concluded that adding 
nanoﬁllers containing a passivation layer might be an effective route to enhance the 
energy storage capacity of the ﬂexible nanodielectrics [34]. 
Polymeric nanocomposites were prepared by the embedment of MWCNTs/Au 
NPs over PEO (polyethylene oxide) samples following the casting process. The inter-
action between the polymer and the nanoparticles was conﬁrmed by FTIR spectra. 
Reduction in the crystallinity phase of PEO due to the incorporation of MWCNTS-
Au NPs as well as the semicrystalline nature of the nanocomposite was conﬁrmed 
through XRD. MWCNTs having a diameter of 10–25 nm and the spherical shape of 
the NPs with 2–25 nm particle size was predicted by TEM analysis. The absorption 
maximum shifted toward the red region, which indicated the decrease in the energy 
band gap with good reactivity between the polymer matrix and the nanoﬁllers, as 
calculated by Tauc’s relation. An increase in the thermal stability of the nanocom-
posite was predicted by TGA analysis. Dielectric spectroscopy was used to measure

15
Metal Oxide Nanoﬁller-Introduced Polymer-Based Nanocomposite …
427
the dielectric and electric spectra of the samples, which suggested its favorable appli-
cation in the production of electroactive materials as well as for the preparation of 
electrical insulating polymeric nanodielectrics [35]. 
PEO/PMMA/MMT-based hybrid polymeric nanocomposite (HPNC) ﬁlms were 
designed and synthesized by the dispersion of different composition ratios of organic 
(PEO and PMMA) and inorganic (MMT, montmorillonite) polymer blend matrices 
via solution-cast process followed by the melt-press method. The characteristics, 
properties, and structure of the polymer blend were analyzed by different spectral 
studies, i.e., SEM, XRD, DSC, dielectric spectroscopy, UV-Vis, etc. The authors also 
explored the inﬂuence of MMT nanoﬁller concentration and PEO/PMMA blend 
compositional ratio upon the degree of crystallinity, melting temperature of PEO 
crystallites, homogeneity, and variation in intercalated MMT structures, etc. It was 
demonstrated that the quantity of the constituents along with polymer–nanoﬁller, 
and polymer–polymer interphases in the HPNC and PB materials had a signiﬁcant 
inﬂuence upon the UV-Vis absorbance with energy band gap, electrical conductivity, 
dielectric dispersion, and relaxation processes, and other optical parameters of the 
nanocomposites. Loading of MMT with PMMA blending enhanced the thermal 
stability of the PEO. It exhibited high dielectric permittivity in the lower frequency 
range, i.e., from 105 to 2 × 101 Hz, mostly due to the interfacial polarization that 
made them applicable in the ﬂexible and tunable dielectrics [36]. 
5 wt% of different metal oxides (Al2O3, SnO2, TiO2, ZnO) NPs were used as 
nanoﬁllers and were fabricated over PVDF/PEO (75/25 wt/wt%) blend considered 
as host to generate polymeric nanocomposite (PNC) ﬁlms following casting process. 
The as-prepared nanocomposite ﬁlms were successively characterized by XRD, 
FTIR, SEM, UV-Vis, DRS, etc. The inﬂuence of nanoﬁllers upon the dielectric, 
optical, and structural properties of the polymeric blend was discussed. The pres-
ence of metal oxide nanoparticles signiﬁcantly altered the spherulitic morphology 
of the polymer, created a huge number of micro- to nano-sized pores, and lowered 
the degree of crystallinity of the host matrix and also the β-phase content of the 
PVDF and crystalline phase of PEO. At ambient temperature, among the used metal 
oxides, Al2O3 NPs signiﬁcantly enhanced the dielectric permittivity, whereas other 
nano inclusions altered the MWS relaxation and dielectric polarization processes of 
the PNC ﬁlms in the frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz. Additionally, Al2O3 
NPs exhibited high electrical conduction, and a considerably decreased value was 
noticed for ZnO nanoparticles containing PNC ﬁlms [37]. 
PEO–PMMA–SiO2 and PEO–PMMA–SnO2-based nanocomposite ﬁlms were 
prepared by blending SiO2 and SnO2 nanoﬁllers over PEO/PMMA polymeric matrix 
under ambient temperature. Experimentally, it was conﬁrmed that, with respect to 
the increase in the concentration of the nanoﬁllers and the applied electrical ﬁeld 
frequency, the dielectric permittivity of the ﬁlms gets decreased to 2.8 from 3.4. They 
also explored the effect of various NP sizes and dielectric constants on the dielectric 
permittivity of the ﬁlm. The results suggested a relatively low nanodielectric loss 
with a dipolar relaxation at high frequency; however, the radiofrequency electrical 
conductivity of the HPNCs was increased linearly to 10−4 S/cm from ∼10−8 S/ 
cm, and it was found to have not any connectivity with the concentration of the

428
P. Panda et al.
nanoﬁller. Hence, the ﬁlm’s high dielectric and electrical properties made it a material 
of choice for the development of radiofrequency operative ﬂexible-type electrical and 
electronic components and devices [38]. 
Hybrid nanocomposite ﬁlms were prepared by the dispersion of the 5 wt% of 
different metal oxides NPs like Al2O3, ZnO, TiO2, or SnO2 over the PVDF/PEO 
blend matrix and were characterized by various spectral studies, including DSC 
and RF-IA. The degrees of the crystallinity of PVDF and PEO were measured 
over HPNC through DSC, which were found to be dependent upon the physical 
characteristics of metal oxide NPs. With respect to the increase in the radio wave 
electric ﬁeld frequency to 109 Hz from 106 Hz, a nonlinear decrease in the dielec-
tric permittivity of the medium was observed. Among the NPs, Al2O3 exhibited a 
high dielectric permittivity value. The alternating current of the medium displayed 
linear progress with the frequency variation and was found not to have been inﬂu-
enced by the concentration of the NPs. Hence, the high dielectric constant with 
permittivity value, high density, lower particle size, and high ﬂexibility made it a 
promising material for application in different nanodielectric insulators and techno-
logically advanced radio frequency devices [39]. Highly functional core-shell NPs 
in the polymer (PVDF) were prepared using a cost-effective process and applied as 
nanodielectrics in different energy storage devices. For this Al NPs were chosen as 
the core NP, and a thin layer of Al2O3 worked as a capping shell and provided elec-
trical insulation to the prepared polymeric ﬁlm. It also prevented the agglomeration 
of Al NPs. The resulting polymeric ﬁlm exhibited high dielectric permittivity, low 
dielectric loss, and high energy storage capacity [40]. 
Nanocomposite ﬁlms of PVP/PEO/MoO3 were prepared by casting MoO3 
nanoplates over PVP/PEO. XRD revealed that the addition of MoO3 NPs upon the 
PVP/PEO blend increased the amorphous domain of the PNC ﬁlms. The favorable 
interaction between PEO and PVP via H-bonding and the miscibility was conﬁrmed 
by DFT/FTIR study. Also, it indicated a co-coordinative interaction existing between 
the C–O–C group of PEO/C=O group of PVP with MoO3 NPs. Increasing the amount 
of MoO3 NPs decreased the optical band gap of the PNC ﬁlms and enhanced the 
electrical conductivity, as adding NPs increased the number of charge carriers. They 
also explored the dielectric dispersion and relaxation process of the PNC ﬁlms, 
which were explained mechanistically using a barrier hopping model. The relaxation 
process followed a non-Debye one [41]. 
BCZT-P (VDF-HFP)-based polymeric nanocomposites were synthesized using 
different volume concentrations of BCZT nanoﬁller and studied their dielectric 
energy storage efﬁcacy. Sol-gel process was followed for the synthesis of BCZT 
nanopowder through the citrate precursor process. XRD and TEM analysis analyzed 
the structural and morphological properties. To get superior ceramic interface 
coupling, the surface of the nanopowder was functionalized by a different aromatic 
ligand, naphthyl phosphate (NPh), which was validated through XPS and TGA anal-
ysis. The dielectric constant value of ~155 was estimated for surface passivated BCZT 
NPs through the slurry technique; however, due to higher innate surface conductivity, 
the dielectric permittivity of pristine BCZT nanopowder could not be measured. The 
PNC ﬁlms were dispersed by ceramic ﬁllers via the solution casting method, which

15
Metal Oxide Nanoﬁller-Introduced Polymer-Based Nanocomposite …
429
was examined by SEM. Nano BCZT/PVDF-HFP ﬁlms modiﬁed by NPh ligands 
exhibited maximum energy storage capacity at 5% ﬁller concentration than untreated 
nano BCZT-P (VDF-HFP) and even pure polymer ﬁlms. 8.5 J cm−3 was found as 
the maximum energy storage density value at 10% ﬁller concentration for the PNC 
ﬁlms of thickness 10 μm [42]. 
15.3 
Conclusion and Future Perspective 
In conclusion, this chapter puts the limelight on the signiﬁcance of polymer nanodi-
electrics in the development of cost-effective and innovative high-voltage storage 
capacitors. Fabrication of metal or metal oxide NPs as nanoﬁllers greatly increased 
the dielectric constant and dielectric permittivity of the polymeric ﬁlm, which was 
rather difﬁcult to attain with ceramic material. In some cases, the nanoﬁller func-
tionalization was done to achieve high dispersion quality and to get better interaction 
between the polymer and the nanoﬁller. It was also found to enhance the breakdown 
strength of polymeric material with low dielectric loss, thus providing stability by 
increasing the energy density of the ﬁlm. Though the results are quite satisfactory, 
the research work still needs more polish. Rather than using the chemical prepara-
tion method of PNC ﬁlms, the scientiﬁc community should adopt a greener and atom 
economical approach to designing and developing PNC ﬁlms. Also, rather than using 
the metal or metal oxide NPs to fabricate over PNC ﬁlms, people should use the one-
step functionalization of the polymer nanocomposite by a suitable functionalizing 
agent to attain ﬂexibility and high dielectric constant value. 
Acknowledgements PP is thankful to the Department of Basic Sciences, RIE, Bhubaneswar, 
Odisha, India. SC is grateful to the School of Sciences, IES University, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, 
India. 
Conﬂict of Interest The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. 
References 
1. Dang Z-M, Yuan J-K, Yao S-H, Liao R-J (2013) Flexible nanodielectric materials with high 
permittivity for power energy storage. Adv Mater 25:6334–6365 
2. Siwal SS, Zhang Q, Devi N, Thakur VK (2020) Carbon-based polymer nanocomposite for 
high-performance energy storage applications. Polymers 12:505–535 
3. Zhang G, Li Q, Allahyarov E, Li Y, Zhu L (2021) Challenges and opportunities of polymer 
nanodielectrics for capacitive energy storage. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 13:37939–37960 
4. Tan DQ (2020) The search for enhanced dielectric strength of polymer-based dielectrics: a 
focused review on polymer nanocomposites. J Appl Polym Sci 137:49379 
5. Cheng L, Chi X, Yan C, Xie D, Liu X, Wen Y, Liu W, Li S (2018) Polypropylene nanocomposite 
for power equipment: a review. IET Nanodielectrics 1:92–103

430
P. Panda et al.
6. Barber P, Balasubramanian S, Anguchamy Y, Gong S, Wibowo A, Gao H, Ploehn HJ, zur Loye 
H-C (2009) Polymer composite and nanocomposite dielectric materials for pulse power energy 
storage. Materials 2:1697–1733 
7. Hu J, Zhang S, Tang B (2021) 2D ﬁller-reinforced polymer nanocomposite dielectrics for 
high-k dielectric and energy storage applications. Energy Storage Mater 34:260–281 
8. Huang X, Sun B, Zhu Y, Li S, Jiang P (2019) High-k polymer nanocomposites with 1D ﬁller 
for dielectric and energy storage applications. Prog Mater Sci 100:187–225 
9. Zhang G, Allahyarov E, Zhu L (2018) Polymer nanodielectrics: current accomplishments and 
future challenges for electric energy storage. In: Nano/micro-structured materials for energy 
and biomedical applications. Springer, pp 1–48 
10. Wei J, Zhu L (2020) Intrinsic polymer dielectrics for high energy density and low loss electric 
energy storage. Prog Polym Sci 106:101254 
11. Pirzada BM, Sabir S (2018) Polymer-based nanocomposites for signiﬁcantly enhanced dielec-
tric properties and energy storage capability. In: Polymer-based nanocomposites for energy 
and environmental applications. Woodhead Publishing series in composites science and 
engineering, pp 131–183 
12. Tan DQ (2020) Review of polymer-based nanodielectric exploration and ﬁlm scale-up for 
advanced capacitors. Adv Func Mater 30:1808567 
13. Luo H, Zhou X, Ellingfor C, Zhang Y, Chen S, Zhou K, Zhang D, Bowen CR, Wan C (2019) 
Interface design for high energy density polymer nanocomposites. Chem Soc Rev 48:4424– 
4465 
14. Pal K, Chakroborty S, Panda P, Nath N, Soren S (2022) Environmental assessment of wastewater 
management via hybrid nanocomposite matrix implications—an organized review. Environ Sci 
Pollut Res 29:76626–76643 
15. Panda P, Chakroborty S (2022) Optical sensor technology and its application in detecting 
environmental efﬂuents: a review. J Environ Anal Chem. https://doi.org/10.1080/03067319. 
2022.2098480 
16. Chakroborty S, Panda P (2022) Nanovaccinology against infectious disease. In: Nanovacci-
nology as targeted therapeutics. Wiley, pp 95–113 
17. Panda P, Barik A, Unnamatla MVB, Chakroborty S (2021) Synthesis and antimicrobial abilities 
of metal oxide nanoparticles. In: Bio-manufactured nanomaterials. Springer, Cham, pp 41–58 
18. Soren S, Panda P, Chakroborty S (2023) Nanotechnology in water and wastewater treatment. 
In: Agricultural and environmental nanotechnology. Springer, 127–143 
19. Chakroborty S, Panda P, Unnamatla MVB, Chandra P, Varela-Guerreroc V (2023) Green 
nanotechnology research avenue in medicinal biology. In: Green nanoarchitectonics. Jenny 
Stanford Publishing, pp 167–195 
20. Wu X, Chen X, Zhang QM, Tan DQ (2022) Advanced dielectric polymers for energy storage. 
Energy Storage Mater 44:29–47 
21. Helal E, Pottier C, David E, Fréchette M, Demarquette NR (2018) Polyethylene/thermoplastic 
elastomer/zinc oxide nanocomposites for high voltage insulation applications: dielectric, 
mechanical and rheological behavior. Eur Polymer J 100:258–269 
22. Fakhria P, Mahmood H, Jaleh B, Pegoretti A (2016) Improved electroactive phase content 
and dielectric properties of ﬂexible PVDF nanocomposite ﬁlms ﬁlled with Au- and Cu-doped 
graphene oxide hybrid nanoﬁller. Synth Met 220:653–660 
23. Feng M, Li C, He M, Huang Y, Luo J (2020) Poly(arylene ether nitrile) ternary dielectric 
composites modulated via polydopamine-assisted BaTiO3 decorating MoS2 sheets. Ceram Int 
46:19181–19190 
24. Morsi MA, Asnag GM, Rajeh A, Awwad NS (2021) Nd:YAG nanosecond laser induced growth 
of Au nanoparticles within CMC/PVA matrix: multifunctional nanocomposites with tunable 
optical and electrical properties. Compos Commun 24:100662 
25. Choudhary S (2018) Structural, optical, dielectric and electrical properties of (PEO–PVP)–ZnO 
nanocomposites. J Phys Chem Solids 121:196–209 
26. Menazea AA, Ibrahium HA, Awwad NS, Moustapha ME, Farea MO, Bajaber MA (2022) Facile 
synthesis and high-performance dielectric properties of polyethylene oxide-chitosan-iron oxide 
nanocomposite for electrical applications. J Market Res 18:2273–2281

15
Metal Oxide Nanoﬁller-Introduced Polymer-Based Nanocomposite …
431
27. Alfonso MS, Lapeyronie C, Goubet M, Viala B, Tortai J-H (2021) Enhanced dielectric proper-
ties of epoxy-based photoresist nanocomposites using carbon-coated nickel nanoparticles for 
high voltage integrated capacitors. Compos Sci Technol 216:109063 
28. Ul-Haq Y, Murtaza I, Mazhar S, Ullah R, Iqbal M, Zeeshan-ul-Huq, Qarni AA, Amin S (2020) 
Dielectric, thermal and mechanical properties of hybrid PMMA/RGO/Fe2O3 nanocomposites 
fabricated by in-situ polymerization. Ceram Int 46:5828–5840 
29. Al-Harbi LM, Alsulami QA, Farea MO, Rajeh A (2023) Tuning optical, dielectric, and elec-
trical properties of polyethylene oxide/carboxymethyl cellulose doped with mixed metal oxide 
nanoparticles for ﬂexible electronic devices. J Mol Struct 1272:134244 
30. Morsi MA, Abdelrazek EM, Ramadan RM, Elashmawi IS, Rajeh A (2022) Structural, optical, 
mechanical, and dielectric properties studies of carboxymethyl cellulose/polyacrylamide/ 
lithium titanate nanocomposites ﬁlms as an application in energy storage devices. Polym Testing 
114:107705 
31. Al-Muntaser AA, Pashameah RA, Sharma K, Alzahrani E, Hameed ST, Mors MA (2022) 
Boosting of structural, optical, and dielectric properties of PVA/CMC polymer blend 
using SrTiO3 perovskite nanoparticles for advanced optoelectronic applications. Opt Mater 
132:112799 
32. Sengwa RJ, Dhatarwal P (2021) Polymer nanocomposites comprising PMMA matrix and ZnO, 
SnO2, and  TiO2 nanoﬁllers: a comparative study of structural, optical, and dielectric properties 
for multifunctional technological applications. Opt Mater 113:110837 
33. Dhatarwal P, Sengwa RJ (2020) Tunable β-phase crystals, degree of crystallinity, and dielectric 
properties of three-phase PVDF/PEO/SiO2 hybrid polymer nanocomposites. Mater Res Bull 
129:110901 
34. Chen C, Xie Y, Liu J, Li J, Wei X, Zhang Z (2020) Enhanced energy storage capability of P(VDF-
HFP) nanodielectrics by HfO2 passivation layer: preparation, performance and simulation. 
Compos Sci Technol 188:107968 
35. Morsi MA, Rajeh A, Al-Muntaser AA (2019) Reinforcement of the optical, thermal and elec-
trical properties of PEO based on MWCNTs/Au hybrid ﬁllers: nanodielectric materials for 
organoelectronic devices. Compos B 173:106957 
36. Sengwa RJ, Dhatarwal P (2022) Toward multifunctionality of PEO/PMMA/MMT hybrid 
polymer nanocomposites: promising morphological, nanostructural, thermal, broadband 
dielectric, and optical properties. J Phys Chem Solids 166:110708 
37. Sengwa RJ, Dhatarwal P, Choudhary S (2020) A comparative study of different metal 
oxide nanoparticles dispersed PVDF/PEO blend matrix-based advanced multifunctional 
nanodielectrics for ﬂexible electronic devices. Mater Today Commun 25:101380 
38. Dhatarwal P, Sengwa RJ, Choudhary S (2022) Broadband radio frequency dielectric permit-
tivity and electrical conductivity of dispersed tin oxide and silica nanoparticles in poly(ethylene 
oxide)/poly(methyl methacrylate) blend matrix-based nanocomposites for nanodielectric 
applications. J Macromol Sci 61:111–120 
39. Sengwa RJ, Dhatarwal P (2022) Crystalline phases thermal behaviour and radio frequencies 
dielectric properties of PVDF/PEO/metal oxides hybrid polymer nanocomposite ﬁlms. J Polym 
Res 5 
40. Badi N, Mekala R, Herdandez FR (2013) Synthesis of Al–Al2O3/PVDF core shell nanodi-
electrics for energy storage applications. In: Technical proceedings of the 2013 clean technology 
conference and trade show. TechConnect Briefs, pp 330–333 
41. Al-Muntaser AA, AlSaidi RAM, Sharma K, Alamri HR, Makhlouf MM (2022) Structural, 
optical, electrical, and DFT studies on polyvinyl pyrrolidone/polyethylene oxide polymer blend 
ﬁlled with MoO3 nanoplates for ﬂexible energy-storage devices. Int J Energy Res 46:13832– 
13843 
42. Sadhu SPP, Siddabattuni S, Muthukumar SV, Varma KBR (2018) Enhanced dielectric properties 
and energy storage density of surface engineered BCZT/PVDF-HFP nanodielectrics. J Mater 
Sci: Mater Electron 29:6174–6182

Index 
A 
Advanced energy storage system, 332–335, 
337, 340, 342, 347, 348, 351, 352, 
357 
Applications, 1–16, 18–20, 25–30, 32, 34, 
37, 41, 43, 45, 46, 48, 49, 51, 52, 
59–64, 67, 75, 76, 92, 98–101, 105, 
107–109, 111, 116, 123, 125–127, 
130, 131, 134, 136–143, 151, 152, 
159, 164, 165, 167, 168, 171–176, 
178–183, 189–191, 193–202, 205, 
208, 213, 214, 218, 220, 221, 
228–230, 243–246, 249, 250, 
252–254, 257, 258, 260–264, 269, 
270, 275, 277, 282, 292, 295, 305, 
306, 308, 310, 315–317, 319, 320, 
323, 326, 331–335, 337, 339–341, 
348, 351, 352, 357, 359, 360, 363, 
366, 371, 372, 374, 377–379, 
387–389, 391, 392, 398, 399, 
402–404, 407, 410, 411, 416, 417, 
420–422, 425–428 
B 
Batteries, 2, 6, 8, 9, 15, 19, 38, 97, 98, 116, 
152, 190, 200, 208, 230, 275, 276, 
292, 293, 331–335, 337, 339–342, 
348, 349, 351, 352, 358, 379, 386, 
387, 389, 393, 395, 402, 403, 
407–409, 416 
Biomedical application, 143, 230, 265 
Breakdown strength, 11, 14, 15, 27, 51, 61, 
62, 97–99, 101–103, 106–117, 124, 
127, 129, 132, 136–140, 168, 176, 
189, 193, 196, 199, 200, 202–205, 
208, 215, 216, 225, 246–249, 
260–264, 306, 307, 310–312, 314, 
315, 318–324, 326, 357–360, 
366–369, 371, 374–378, 380, 
399–401, 415–417, 426, 429 
C 
Ceramic dielectrics, 46, 132, 151, 168, 326, 
416 
Ceramic nanoparticles, 127, 133, 139, 261, 
270 
Characterization of materials, 261 
Composite dielectrics, 29, 108, 325 
Conducting nanoparticles, 174 
Core@shell nanoparticles, 307–309, 316 
D 
Dielectric breakdown strength, 2, 123, 124, 
132, 137, 174, 191, 194, 199, 207, 
208, 321, 385, 402, 416 
Dielectric elastomer, 18, 143, 213–221, 
224, 228–230, 232 
Dielectric materials, 3, 4, 10, 11, 14, 15, 18, 
19, 26, 27, 29, 30, 32, 44, 45, 51, 
59–67, 69, 71, 89, 97, 100–102, 108, 
127, 129, 135, 143, 144, 151–153, 
155–159, 162, 166–168, 176, 181, 
182, 191–197, 199–203, 208, 214, 
218, 232, 244, 247, 252, 259, 260, 
305, 306, 308, 316, 321, 357, 358, 
380, 385 
Dielectric nanomaterials, 1–6, 8, 14, 15, 
18–20, 34
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license 
to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Moharana et al. (eds.), Emerging Nanodielectric Materials for Energy Storage, 
Nanostructure Science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40938-7 
433

434
Index
Dielectric permittivity, 8, 11, 26, 27, 32, 
38–40, 47, 61, 65, 80, 85, 98, 99, 
103–105, 107–110, 117, 124, 127, 
129, 139, 159, 160, 166, 171–173, 
176–179, 182, 194, 200, 201, 
203–205, 207, 208, 218, 224–227, 
246, 260, 261, 358, 359, 374, 375, 
377–379, 415, 421, 422, 425–429 
Dielectric properties, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 14, 
15, 18, 25–28, 30–32, 35, 38, 39, 43, 
45, 47, 52, 60, 68, 71, 76, 85, 86, 89, 
99, 103, 105, 113, 114, 116, 124, 
134, 135, 138, 142, 143, 151, 162, 
164, 165, 172, 174–176, 180–183, 
199, 200, 204, 222–224, 227, 244, 
253, 263, 313–316, 320, 323, 347, 
350, 365, 367–369, 378, 397, 419, 
423 
Dielectrics, 1–10, 14, 15, 18–20, 25–32, 34, 
37–41, 43, 44, 46, 47, 49–52, 59–69, 
71, 75–78, 80–85, 87–90, 97–103, 
105–117, 123–125, 127–131, 
133–137, 139, 140, 142–144, 
151–163, 166–168, 171–183, 
189–208, 213, 215, 218, 220–225, 
227, 228, 230, 232, 243–251, 253, 
254, 256–261, 264, 305–308, 
310–326, 339, 343, 347, 357–362, 
365–369, 371, 374–380, 385, 
399–401, 415–417, 419–429 
E 
Electroactive polymer, 16, 143, 213 
Electronics, 1–3, 6, 9–11, 15, 18, 26, 27, 
31, 32, 34, 41, 46, 50–52, 59, 65–67, 
81, 98, 100, 131, 132, 139, 141, 152, 
158, 167, 168, 172–176, 178–181, 
190, 194–196, 199, 201, 207, 208, 
220, 229, 230, 244, 258, 260, 
271–273, 276, 283, 292, 295, 305, 
306, 310, 323–325, 332, 333, 335, 
338–340, 348, 350, 352, 379, 
386–388, 391–393, 404, 415–417, 
421, 422, 425, 426, 428 
Electrospinning, 36, 37, 52, 224, 342, 360, 
372–374, 379 
Energy, 4–10, 14–17, 19, 20, 26, 27, 33, 35, 
46, 51, 64, 65, 69, 76, 78, 79, 82, 89, 
91, 92, 97–102, 107–109, 113, 123, 
127, 129, 132–134, 136, 139, 140, 
142, 144, 152, 154, 156, 158, 159, 
162, 164, 165, 168, 172, 173, 176, 
189–191, 193, 196, 197, 199, 207, 
208, 213, 214, 217, 219, 225, 226, 
228–230, 232, 244, 248, 251, 259, 
261, 263, 264, 274, 276, 281, 285, 
292, 293, 305, 310, 311, 314, 
319–321, 325, 331–334, 337, 342, 
346, 348–352, 357–360, 366, 375, 
378, 379, 386, 388, 389, 391–393, 
395, 396, 399, 401, 402, 404, 405, 
407, 410, 415, 416, 422, 424–427 
Energy density, 10, 14, 27, 37, 77, 97, 98, 
101, 102, 107, 109–117, 124, 127, 
133, 137, 139, 143, 168, 176, 189, 
190, 193, 194, 196, 197, 200, 
202–204, 208, 214, 229, 258–260, 
276, 289, 295, 314, 318, 319, 323, 
325, 331–333, 337, 340, 348, 350, 
352, 358, 360, 366, 375–379, 385, 
386, 407, 416, 426, 429 
Energy storage, 1–5, 8–10, 14, 25, 37, 60, 
97–103, 109, 111, 112, 115–117, 
123–125, 131, 139, 142, 179, 182, 
183, 189–191, 193, 194, 197–203, 
208, 213, 243, 258–260, 264, 269, 
292, 295, 311, 314, 315, 317, 
319–321, 324–326, 331–335, 
337–339, 341–344, 348–350, 352, 
357–362, 365–371, 374–380, 385, 
386, 388, 391, 392, 395, 396, 402, 
407, 410, 411, 415, 416, 424, 426, 
428, 429 
Energy storage performance, 102, 110, 112, 
114, 357, 358, 361, 369, 374, 375, 
377, 378 
F 
Filler, 4, 8, 11, 12, 18, 36, 37, 40, 41, 46, 
51, 59, 61, 66, 69, 85–87, 97, 99, 
102–108, 110–117, 123, 124, 127, 
129–137, 139, 141, 143, 167, 172, 
175, 179, 180, 183, 189, 195, 198, 
202, 204, 205, 207, 208, 221–229, 
232, 243–247, 249–255, 257, 258, 
260–264, 269–271, 276, 277, 282, 
283, 285, 287, 289, 290, 292, 295, 
307, 314, 316–319, 322, 323, 325, 
359, 360, 364–369, 373–378, 380, 
385, 399, 402, 404, 405, 415, 428, 
429 
Flexible dielectric Nanocomposites, 15, 426 
Fluoropolymers, 174, 176, 315, 357–360, 
362, 378–380 
Fuel cells, 36, 98, 116, 179, 190, 275, 276, 
293, 331–333, 339

Index
435
Functionalization, 66, 93, 124, 213, 225, 
226, 250, 271, 273–275, 280, 311, 
325, 359, 380, 392, 393, 422, 429 
G 
Graphene, 111, 112, 135, 139, 168, 180, 
181, 183, 221, 224–226, 244, 260, 
263, 269–295, 341, 363, 369, 370, 
388, 392, 393, 396, 408, 409, 411 
H 
High-k materials, 197, 198, 306 
High voltage direct current cables, 411 
Hydrothermal method, 31, 32, 51, 277, 278, 
347, 348, 378 
I 
Inorganic polymers, 243, 245–247, 264 
L 
Lithium battery, 387, 402–405, 408, 411 
M 
Metal Oxide, 1, 3, 4, 7, 8, 11, 14, 25, 30, 
31, 34–36, 139, 176, 179, 189, 195, 
199–201, 203–208, 331, 333, 
338–340, 342, 343, 346, 350–352, 
357, 389, 391, 396, 408, 415–417, 
427–429 
N 
Nanocomposites, 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 14–16, 18, 
25–28, 32, 36–41, 46, 47, 51, 52, 
59–61, 66–69, 73, 75–79, 85–87, 
89–92, 97, 99, 102, 103, 106–117, 
123, 129–131, 133, 134, 136, 139, 
141–143, 167, 180, 200, 205, 213, 
221, 222, 224, 227, 228, 232, 
243–247, 249–255, 257, 260–264, 
269–271, 275–277, 281–285, 
287–292, 295, 306, 307, 309–326, 
334, 336, 338, 339, 351, 369, 370, 
377, 386–390, 392–396, 398–402, 
406, 410, 411, 417–422, 424–429 
Nanodielectric materials, 3, 9, 10, 25–34, 
36–39, 41, 43–47, 49–51, 59–62, 66, 
67, 70, 92, 139, 417 
Nanodielectrics, 1–4, 6, 7, 9–12, 16, 25, 
27–29, 31, 40, 50–52, 59–62, 66, 75, 
92, 123–126, 131, 134–138, 140, 
141, 143, 144, 243–246, 248–250, 
258, 260–264, 411, 415, 416, 422, 
426–428 
Nanoﬁllers, 4, 12, 14, 27, 61, 67–79, 90, 
92, 93, 99, 105, 108–112, 114, 116, 
117, 124, 129, 130, 133, 134, 151, 
175, 181, 204, 213, 225, 226, 228, 
244, 246, 247, 249, 250, 252, 254, 
257, 261–263, 270, 282, 289, 295, 
320, 324, 326, 388, 399, 400, 
415–417, 419, 420, 424–429 
Nanotechnology, 3, 51, 60, 333 
O 
Organic-inorganic nanodielectrics, 385, 411 
P 
Polarizability, 62–65, 153, 157, 173, 214, 
248, 350, 357, 359 
Polymer, 1–4, 6–9, 11, 12, 14–16, 18, 20, 
25–29, 31, 36–41, 46–48, 51, 52, 59, 
61, 66–71, 75, 76, 85, 87, 90–92, 
97–99, 102–117, 123–125, 127, 
130–137, 139, 141–144, 151, 152, 
160, 167–176, 178–183, 189, 195, 
200–205, 207, 208, 213, 217, 218, 
220–224, 227, 228, 232, 243–249, 
251–261, 263, 264, 269–273, 
275–277, 281–284, 289, 290, 
292–295, 306, 307, 310, 312–326, 
351, 352, 357, 359–362, 364, 365, 
367–374, 377–379, 386–393, 396, 
398, 399, 401, 404, 405, 407, 408, 
411, 415–417, 420, 422, 424–429 
Polymer composites, 6, 26, 61, 103, 
105–108, 110, 111, 115, 128, 139, 
142, 144, 151, 168–170, 175, 
180–183, 203, 204, 207, 221–223, 
225, 227, 228, 232, 244, 246, 250, 
253, 260, 261, 269, 270, 275, 276, 
282, 306, 311, 318, 323, 324, 369, 
375, 378, 392, 393, 422 
Polymer dielectrics, 124, 130, 132, 142, 
144, 151, 167, 191, 195, 202, 205, 
247, 260, 385 
Polymer matrix, 2–4, 6–8, 14, 15, 37, 39, 
40, 46, 61, 66–69, 71, 73, 78, 79, 86, 
88, 92, 97, 99, 103, 105–117, 123, 
124, 127, 129–131, 133, 136, 137,

436
Index
142, 169, 172, 175, 200, 204, 205, 
207, 221–225, 227–229, 232, 244, 
245, 250, 251, 255, 257, 261, 263, 
264, 269, 273, 276, 283, 284, 
287–289, 295, 306, 314, 317, 319, 
359, 368, 375, 392, 399, 400, 402, 
404, 415, 416, 420, 422, 426 
Polymer nanodielectrics, 46, 123–125, 127, 
130, 134–136, 189, 208, 243, 245, 
246, 264, 415, 425, 429 
S 
Sensors, 1–4, 7–10, 13, 15, 16, 18, 19, 50, 
124, 143, 214, 220, 229, 230, 232, 
269, 270, 292, 339, 341, 417 
Sol-gel, 29–31, 34, 42, 51, 75, 88, 89, 127, 
132, 169, 172, 178, 207, 245, 335, 
339, 342–344, 347, 349, 350, 373, 
374, 428 
Space charge suppression, 9, 60, 137, 138, 
243, 257, 264 
Spray pyrolysis, 41–46, 51 
Super capacitor, 9, 10, 14, 97, 98, 116, 292, 
294, 295, 331–335, 337–342, 
348–352, 358, 386–391, 393–396, 
411 
T 
Theory of dielectrics, 62, 66 
Transition metal oxide, 8, 243, 244, 
331–334, 342, 343, 346, 348, 349, 
386–388

