Franck–Hertz Experiment
241
F
Franck–Hertz Experiment
Friedel Weinert
In 1913 Bohr took Rutherford’s nucleus model of the hydrogen atom as the basis
for his quantized atom model ( Bohr’s atomic model; Rutherford atom). Although
it was not the ﬁrst, it was the ﬁrst successful atom model. A year later, two Berlin
experimenters, James Franck (1882–1964) and Gustav Hertz (1887–1975),unaware
of Bohr’s model and its implications, performed an experiment which later turned
out to be one of its strongest corroborations. For the so-called Franck–Hertz exper-
iment, they were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1925. In this experiment
 electrons are ejected from a cathode, C, into a tube ﬁlled with mercury gas (see
Fig. 1). The energy of the electrons can be increased in a controllable manner by
accelerating them towards the positively charged grid, G, through the potential dif-
ference Va. Electrons ﬂy through the grid towards anode A. Between G and A, a
small retarding voltage, Vr, decelerates the electrons. They will only reach the an-
ode A, if their energies V exceed Vr, where they will be recorded by the ammeter A.
Collisions between the atoms and the electrons will occur. Only electrons with
sufﬁcient energy will cause the mercury atoms to make transitions to higher states
of energy. The electrons will lose their energy to the atoms. When Va = 4.9 V, the
curve drops very sharply.
The two experimenters initially thought they had measured mercury’s ionization
potential.
As Bohr pointed out in August 1915 but Franck and Hertz only realized in 1917,
the Bohr atomic model provides a perfect explanation for this behaviour. The elec-
trons near the grid lose all their energy to the mercury atoms and are unable to
overcome the small retarding potential, Vr, to reach the anode. A drop in the current,
Ia, is observed. When Va = 9.8 V, another drop in the curve occurs. The electrons
either excite the atoms to higher energy levels or lose 4.9 V more than once. The
excited mercury atoms in turn will return to their ground energy state and emit pho-
tons with energies corresponding to the energy intake. The experiment displayed
+
+
-
-
Ia
A
Va
Vr
Fig. 1 Franck–Hertz experiment (1914)

242
Franck–Hertz Experiment
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
5
10
15
Va (volts)
Ia (current)
Fig. 2 Frank–Hertz experiment (1914): Dependence of current (Ia) on accelerating potential (Va)
the loss of the electronic energy at discrete levels. Later, more precise experiments
conﬁrmed that the higher states of energy of the atoms corresponded to the discrete
energy levels calculated from the Bohr model. The observable results are shown in
Fig. 2.
As in quantum mechanics there is a traditional distinction between the wave and
the particle picture, we should note that the Franck–Hertz experiment illustrates the
particle picture of quantum mechanical processes. (For the wave-picture  Stern–
Gerlach experiment and  Davisson–Germer experiment) In this experiment the
particle picture gives rise to a probabilistic notion of causality, since we are not in
a position to predict which electron will collide with which mercury atom and how
much energy it will transfer.
Primary Literature
1. J. Franck, G. Hertz: ¨Uber Zusammenst¨oße zwischen Elektronen und den Molek¨ulen des
Quecksilberdampfes und die Ionisierungsspannung desselben. Verhandlungen der Deutschen
Physikalischen Gesellschaft 16, 457–67 (1914). With supplementary texts and commentary by
Armin Hermann in: Die Elektronenstoßversuche (Battenberg, M¨unchen 1967, Dokumente der
Naturwissenschaft 9)
2. J. Franck, P. Jordan: Anregung von Quantensp¨ungen durch St¨oße (Springer, Berlin 1926)
Secondary Literature
3. A. P. French, E. F. Taylor: An Introduction to Quantum Physics (Stanley Thornes Publishers,
Cheltenham 1998, 30–1, Chapman & Hall 1979)
4. K. Krane: Modern Physics (Wiley, New York 1983, 169–70)
5. P. A. Tipler: Modern Physics (Worth Publishers, New York 1978, 155–7)

Functional Integration; Path Integrals
243
F
6. H. Geiger, K. Scheel eds.: Quanten (Springer, Berlin 1926, Handbuch der Physik 23)
7. J. Lemmerich: Max Born, James Franck: Physiker in ihrer Zeit (Reichert, Wiesbaden 1982)
8. J. Lemmerich: Aufrecht im Sturm (Spektrum, Berlin 2005) (Biography of J. Franck)
9. J. Kuczera: Gustav Hertz (Teubner, Leipzig 1985)
Functional Integration; Path Integrals
Cecile DeWitt-Morette
Deﬁnitions
Functional integral is, by deﬁnition, an integral over a space of functions. The func-
tions are the variables of integration. When the variables are paths, the functional
integral is usually called a “path integral”. For example, let x be a path parameter-
ized by time t ∈T , taking its values in a D-dimensional manifold MD, i.e.
x : T →MD
by
t →x(t),
(1)
a sum over all paths x is a path integral.
To compute a path integral

X
Dx F(x),
x ∈X,
(2)
one needs to deﬁne the domain of integration X, a norm on X, a volume element
Dx on X, and choose an integrable functional F on X.
If the variable of integration is a ﬁeld, a functional integral is sometimes called
“a sum over histories”.
Functional integration is a rich and powerful mathematical technique because the
domain of integration X is an inﬁnite dimensional space. Short of having intuitive
understanding of inﬁnite dimensional spaces of functions, we have extensive studies
of such spaces developed during the last century.
Path Integrals, A Modern Approach to  Quantization
Functional integration entered physics in 1942 in the doctoral dissertation of Richard
P. Feynman, “The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics” [1]. The goal
was a formulation of  quantum electrodynamics beginning with quantum me-
chanics formulated in terms of the classical action functional S of a given system.

