188
Electron Interferometry
Secondary Literature
6. J. Cushing, E. McMullin eds.: Philosophical Consequences of Quantum Theory. (University of
Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, Indiana 1989)
7. D. Howard: Holism, Separability, and the Metaphysical Implications of the Bell Experiments,
in Cushing/McMullin eds. (1989), 224–53
8. D. Howard: Einstein’s Philosophy of Science. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring
2004 Edition), Edward N. Zalta ed., URL =<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2004/entries/
einstein-philscience/>.
9. M. Lange: The Philosophy of Physics. (Blackwell, London 2002, Ch. 9)
Electron Interferometry
J.C.H. Spence
Massive-particle interferometry can provide tests of fundamental ideas in quantum
mechanics, due to the presence of mass and charge, not possible with the more
familiar optical interferometry. Most importantly, since the ﬁrst observation of elec-
tron diffraction in 1927 by Davisson, Germer and Thomson [1] (and the observation
of electron Fresnel edge fringes by Boersch in 1940 [2]), it has been clear that matter
diffracts, according to de Broglie’s 1924 hypothesis. ( Davisson–Germer Experi-
ment) The subsequent demonstration of Young’s pinhole and biprism experiments
(discussed below) with  electrons about ﬁfty years ago has since led to aston-
ishing demonstrations of, for example, the diffraction of beams of buckyballs by a
grating [3] and effects of gravity on neutron interferometry [4]. For neutrons and
electrons, both Fermions, new effects due to  spin and the  exclusion principle
might also be expected, not seen with photons ( light quantum). Perhaps the most
famous experiments to date have been tests of the  Aharonov–Bohm effect us-
ing electrons, and those using neutrons to see the effects of gravity on interference,
but there have been many more (including an electron Sagnac interferometer and
experiments on  decoherence). The separate but closely related ﬁeld of electron
holography has come to prominence in recent decades, with applications in mate-
rials science and superconducting vortex imaging. Here we brieﬂy review work on
electron interferometry, ﬁrst reviewed at an early stage by Denis Gabor [5], and also
provide some guidance to the rapidly growing contemporary electron holography
literature. Historically, it is of interest to note that the analysis of multiple scat-
tering, and the role of the mean inner potential, in the experiments of Davisson and
Germer by H. Bethe in his thesis work introduced Floquet’s theorem into condensed
matter physics for periodic structures, leading to the review article which founded
modern condensed matter physics [6]. Bethe and Bloch were both students of A.
Sommerfeld in 1928.

Electron Interferometry
189
E
The construction of an electron interferometer requires a beam-splitter and a
small, bright source of electrons. This should be of sufﬁciently small size ds to
produce a spatial coherence width Lc which spans the beam-splitter. (Lc ∼λ/Θc
for a source at distance L = ds/(2Θc) from the beamsplitter). Prior to the devel-
opment of the ﬁeld-emission electron source in 1968 [7] the use of heated tungsten
wire pointed ﬁlaments produced values of Lc < 1 micrometer, so that early workers
understood the need for an extremely small beamsplitting device, which limited de-
velopment of the ﬁeld. But even before the peak of interest in the Aharonov–Bohm
effect in the 1960s, both amplitude and wavefront dividing beamsplitters had been
demonstrated for electron beams. The ﬁrst, using Bragg scattering [8], has since
been abandoned in favor of the Mollenstedt and Duker electrostatic biprism, which
may be said to have founded the ﬁeld of electron interferometry [9].
(The convenient ability to adjust fringe spacing with a biprism using the applied
voltage, and lack of inelastic scattering background favored it over the Bragg beam-
splitter). The biprism uses a micron-sized wire (originally spider’s web, then quartz
ﬁbers) held at a small potential running across the beam (normal to the page at B) as
shown in Fig. 1. The charge on this wire creates a ﬁeld which deﬂects rays from the
source S around it such that they appear to come from virtual sources S′ and S′′. In
fact a cone of rays is deﬂected, so that S′ and S′′, being images of S, are coherent if
S is small. These act as Young’s pin-holes to produce the interference fringes at F by
exact analogy with an optical biprism. For these experiments it was natural to use the
recently developed electron microscope, which produced a very high quality beam
of electrons at a kinetic energy of about E = 100 keV, corresponding to a relativis-
tically corrected  de Broglie wavelength of about λ = 0.004 nm = |k|−1. (The
longitudinal coherence length of an electron beam, Lz ∼λ E/(2E) is maximized
by reducing electronic ﬂuctuations E in the accelerating voltage E. The largest
possible values of Lc and Lz are needed by modern transmission electron micro-
scopes to produce high resolution phase-contrast images of atoms; they therefore
provide the highest quality electron beams for interferometry, together with high
mechanical and thermal stability. Low-energy biprism instruments are discussed
below). The earliest pioneering work on the development of the electron biprism
was undertaken at the University of T¨ubingen and used to measure Lc and Lz. Soon
after, it became clear that by placing an electron-transparent sample in one arm of
the interferometer at D, an off-axis electron hologram could be formed. (The in-line
geometry was being investigated at the same time by Mulvey, Gabor and Haine in
the UK – Gabor’s original Noble-prize winning proposal for holography was de-
voted to electron interference, not light. The history of electron interferometry is
therefore inextricably linked with that of electron holography). Modern work uses
electron microscopes ﬁtted with a ﬁeld-emission electron source. This emits elec-
trons from a source size of about ds = 2 nm diameter with a brightness (measured in
particles per unit solid angle per unit area) which exceeds that of current generation
synchrotrons [10]. The dramatic success of electron interferometry is due primarily
to these two inventions – the biprism and the ﬁeld-emission electron gun.
Using an electron biprism, Feynman’s “only one mystery” of quantum mechanics
can immediately be demonstrated. Figure2 shows Young’s fringes obtained using

190
Electron Interferometry
S
S'
S''
B
C
D
F 
a
a
b
x
Fig. 1 The electron biprism
Fig. 2 Young’s fringes formed using coher-
ent electrons of very low intensity, recorded as
a function of increasing exposure time. There
is only one electron in the interferometer at
any instant, yet an interference pattern devel-
ops with time [11]
coherent electrons and a biprism [11]. The important point is that the intensity has
been reduced to such a low value that the electrons arrive one at a time, and the
ﬂight time of the electrons is much shorter than the time between their arrival at the
detector. Nevertheless, the statistical buildup of an interference pattern is observed.
(A similar experiment was undertaken for light by G.I.Taylor in 1909 [12]).
Despite the brightness of ﬁeld-emission sources, if intense focussing by lenses
is avoided, electron–electron interactions can normally be neglected in an electron
microscope beam, and each electron reaches the detector before the next leaves
the source. Then spin interactions can be neglected and the scalar theory of ﬁrst-
order optical coherence [29] (for bosons) can be applied to electron interferometry
(fermions). If each of the beams in Fig. 1 are of unity amplitude, the fringe intensity
recorded on the screen at F is then
I(x) = 2 + 2|μ| cos(2πqx + ϕc + ϕ(x))
(1)
where the complex degree of coherence is μ = |μ| exp(iϕc), q = |k| a (a is
the angle between beams arriving at the detector, controlled by the voltage on the
biprism wire, and setting the period of the fringes) and φ is the phase difference
along the two optical paths a and b from source to detector point x. The complex
degree of coherence may be expressed as a product of factors describing spatial
and temporal coherence. These factors are proportional to the Fourier transform

Electron Interferometry
191
E
of the source intensity distribution (spatial coherence) and the distribution of wave
numbers (temporal coherence). The biprism therefore offers a method of measuring
both types of coherence. (Temporal coherence measurement requires a variable time
delay to be introduced, by passing one beam along the axis of a cylinder held at a
ﬁxed potential [11]).
To understand the effect of the addition of ﬁelds into one or both arms of the
interferometer, we require an expression for the refractive index of a medium with
ﬁnite permeability traversed by an electron beam. For the  Aharonov–Bohm effect
we might imagine a solenoid at C in Fig. 1, with axis normal to the page, and return
ﬂux at inﬁnity. (A clear description of the Aharonov–Bohm effect is given in the
undergraduate lectures of R. Feynman [30]). For electron holography, an electron-
transparent thin sample with internal ﬁelds might be placed at D. The refractive
index expression was ﬁrst given by Ehrenberg and Siday in 1949 [13], however the
implications of this paper were not fully appreciated until the work of Aharonov and
Bohm [14] a decade later. The precise form of the interaction had been controversial
at that time. These papers showed that an electron would experience a measurable
phase-shift even in the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld B = curl A, (or resulting clas-
sical force), provided the vector potential A was non-zero. (This emphasis on the
fundamental nature of potentials coincided with Maxwell’s original formulation of
electrodynamics, and differs from the standard modern form of his equations in
terms of ﬁelds, ﬁrst published by Heaviside long after Maxwell’s death). For poten-
tials weak compared with the accelerating potential, the phase shift is given by
ϕ = σ

a−b
V (r)dz −2πe
h

a+b
A(r)ds
(2)
for electrostatic potential V , interaction constant σ = 2π |e|/hν and electron veloc-
ity v with charge e. The optical paths a (SaX) and b (SbX) are indicated in Fig. 1.
Since the ﬁrst test of equation 2 with V = B = 0 at the electron trajectory in
1960, many experimental tests of the Aharnonov–Bohm effect have been published
(see [15] for a review). All conﬁrm the existence of a measurable phase-shift ac-
cording to equation 2 if A is ﬁnite. Early objections regarding leakage of ﬁelds and
the proximity of the return ﬂux were met in the most sophisticated experiment, in
which a torroidal magnet, coated with superconductor, was inserted into one arm of
an electron interferometer, with the beam passing along its axis. The Meissner effect
in the coating then conﬁnes the ﬂux below Tc to within the torroid, and the ﬁeld on
its axis is zero [15].
The effects of inelastic scattering in one arm of the interferometer have been
analysed in several papers, and the results have important implications for electron
holography.An energy change as small as 4×10−15 eV results in a beat frequency of
1 Hz in the observed fringes, and fringe motion (consistent with the  Heisenberg
uncertainty relations). This effect has been observed [16] using the doppler shift
from a moving electron mirror, or ramped electric or magnetic ﬁelds in one path.
(Related effects are observed in the interference fringes observed very brieﬂy due to

192
Electron Interferometry
interference between different lasers, if the recording time is less than the beat pe-
riod). For electron holography, this has the remarkable effect that, for long recording
times, we may consider that images reconstructed from off-axis electron holograms
are formed from purely elastic scattering in the sample, since electrons loosing more
than 4×10−15 eV while traversing the sample (e.g. due to phonon excitation) cannot
produce stable time-independent fringes by interference with the reference wave
(which has not lost energy). Electron holography therefore acts as a very efﬁcient
elastic energy ﬁlter [16]. There has been considerable discussion in the literature re-
garding  “which way” experiments, in which a small energy loss in one arm might
be used to signal the path taken by an electron [11].
For some purposes a low-energy table-top electron interferometer has advan-
tages. Typical values of E/E (which controls the temporal coherence) for electron
microscopes operating at hundreds of kilovolts are 10−6, whereas the spatial co-
herence width is proportional to λ, which increases at low energy. But stray ﬁelds
and potentials, to which low-energy instruments are extremely susceptible, make
their design very challenging. (The effect of time-dependent stray magnetic ﬁelds,
for example, may result in enlargement of the virtual electron source size within
a ﬁeld-emission tip, resulting in loss of coherence [17]). Such a small instrument
of 30 cm length with high performance has been constructed at the University of
T¨ubingen [18]. This instrument includes a Wien ﬁlter, which imparts a different
group velocity to the  wave packet in one arm of the interferometer, without
introducing a phase difference (the wavepackets in each arm are thus shifted longi-
tudinally). The instrument operates at 150eV−3 keV using a ﬁeld-emission source,
includes three biprisms, quadrupole lenses (to magnify the fringes) and extensive
magnetic shielding. The fringes are detected on a channel plate, viewed by a charge-
coupled device. Since it is powered by batteries, it may readily be rotated, and so has
been used to form the electron equivalent of a Sagnac interferometer, with the path
SaXbS taking the place of the loop in the Sagnac optical interferometer. The obser-
vation of an electron Sagnac effect [19] demonstrates that the coupling of inertial
potentials and ﬁelds is independent of charge.
Most recently, this instrument has been used to demonstrate the electron an-
tibunching effect [20]. Unlike the bunching of photons observed in the Hanbury
Brown and Twiss experiment, the Pauli  exclusive principle for electrons prevents
overlapping wavetrains due to antisymmetrization of the  wave function [21]. The
result is a reduced probability (compared with classical particles) of detecting two
electrons within a coherence time τ = Lc/v. The electron arrival times are more
uniformly distributed than Boltzman classical particles, and ﬂuctuations reduced.
A strong antibunching effect requires crowding of electrons in phase space, yet the
degeneracy of a ﬁeld-emitter is only about 10−4 (electrons per cell in phase space –
maximum two, with opposite spins), unlike the values of 1015 for lasers (unrestricted
Bosons). The degeneracy (and coherence parameters) may be measured from ob-
servations of Fresnel edge fringes [22]. In addition, electron detectors with time
resolution τ ∼10−14 s do not exist. Nevertheless, by detecting the arrival times at
two detectors of an electron beam whose coherence patch spanned both detectors it
has been possible recently to detect electron antibunching by comparing the results

Electron Interferometry
193
E
of coherent and incoherent illumination [20]. Finally, a variant of this instrument
has been used to observe decoherence effects directly [23] ( decoherence, exper-
imental observation of decoherence), as discussed above for inelastic scattering in
electron holography [16]. The transition to classical behaviour of a quantum sys-
tem is supposed to occur as a result of  entanglement of its wave function with
the environment, resulting in an incoherent mixture of states and loss of interfer-
ence effects. Under these conditions of classical behaviour it should be possible to
determine which path the electron took. Anglin and Zurek [24] proposed an inter-
ferometric experiment to test this idea, which has recently been implemented by
electron interferometry. Both beams of the biprism interferometer pass over a resis-
tive plate (tens of microns above it), in which they may induce polarization charges
and Joule heating. The fringes are observed as a function of the height of the beam
above the plate. The fading of the fringes with decreasing gap is clearly seen as cou-
pling with phonon excitations in the plate increases [23]. A variety of more exotic
electron interference experiments have been proposed by M. Silverman [21], such as
those which test many-particle, multivalued wavefunction, and spin effects. These
require a more subtle interpretation of Dirac’s famous dictum that “each electron
interferes only with itself”. The simplest directly observable many-body effect in
electron beams is the Boersch effect, in which Coulomb interactions along the di-
rection of travel broaden the energy distribution. Lateral coulomb repulsion causes
an angular divergence, which degrades the spatial resolution in time-resolved elec-
tron microscopy. At present, as a result of this effect, resolution is limited to a few
nanometers, unlike the Angstrom level of resolution possible in CW mode.
Gabor’s original proposal for electron holography in 1948 had the aim of elim-
inating the aberrations of electron lenses. This aim was ﬁnally achieved in 1995,
when, for the ﬁrst time, atomic-resolution images were reconstructed from an off-
axis electron hologram whose resolution (about one Angstrom) exceeded that of the
same state-of-the-art instrument in its conventional (Scherzer) imaging mode [25].
Since that time, aberration-correction devices have provided a simpler approach
to this resolution, and electron holography has undergone a recent renaissance for
other reasons – including the ability to map out electric and magnetic ﬁelds inside
materials and nanostructures, from semiconductor devices to magnetic bacteria, fer-
roelectrics [26] and computer memory elements [27]. Other applications include the
ability to image vortices and their quantization in superconductors at low tempera-
ture, and the ability to image magnetic domain structures in nanoparticles (see [28]
for a review). Most recently, three-dimensionalelectron holography of internal ﬁelds
has been developed, with important implications for semiconductor devices. At the
same time, new solutions to the phase problem have been developed, which allow
“interferometry without an interferometer” by extracting the phase difference in-
formation which is encoded within scattered intensities. It has recently been shown
that this phase information may be extracted if scattering is sampled at the Shannon
sampling interval (for a review of this ﬁeld, see [31]).

194
Electron Interferometry
Primary Literature
1. C.J. Davidson, L.H. Germer: Diffraction of electrons by a crystal of nickel. Phys.Rev.30,
705–15 (1927)
2. H. Boersch: Fresnelsche Beugeung im Elecktrononmikroskop. Naturwissenschaften 28,
709–12 (1940)
3. L. Hackermuller, S. Uttenthaler, K. Hornberger, E. Reiger, B. Brezger, A. Zeilinger, M. Arndt:
Wave nature of biomolecules and ﬂuorofullerenes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 090408 (2003)
4. R. Colella, A.W. Overhauser, S.A. Werner: Observation of gravitationally induced quantum
interference” Phys.Rev. Lett. 34, 1472–74 (1975)
5. D. Gabor: Theory of electron interference experiments. Rev Mod Phys. 28, 260–76 (1956)
6. H. Bethe, A. Sommerfeld in: Handbuch der Physik. Ed H. Geiger Vol 14 (1928, Ch 3, p.333)
7. A.V. Crewe: Electron gun using a ﬁeld-emission source. Rev. Sci. Instrum 39, 576–88 (1968)
8. L. Marton: Electron beam interferometer. Phys. Rev. 90, 490–91 (1953)
9. G. Mollenstedt, H. Ducker: Fresnelscher Interferenzversuch mit einem Biprism fur Electro-
nenwellen. Naturwissenschaften 42, 41–41 (1955)
10. J.C.H. Spence, M. Howells: Synchrotron soft X-ray sources and electron sources: a compari-
son. Ultramic 93, 213–22 (2002)
11. H. Lichte: Electron interference: mystery and reality”. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A360,
897–20 (2002)
12. G.I. Taylor: Interference fringes with feeble light. Proc. Camb. Philos. Soc. 15, 114–15 (1909)
13. W. Ehrenberg, R. Siday: The refractive index in electron optics and the principles of dynamics.
Proc. Phys. Soc. B62, 8–21 (1949)
14. Y. Aharonov, D. Bohm: Signiﬁcance of electromagnetic potentials in quantum theory. Phys
Rev. 115, 485–91 (1959)
15. M. Peshkin, A. Tonomura: The Aharonov-Bohm effect”. Lecture notes in physics Vol. 340
(Springer, Berlin 1989). See also Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 792–94 (1986)
16. D. van Dyck, H. Lichte, J.C.H. Spence. Ultramic 81, 187–99 (2000). See also Ultramic 106,
1012–18 (2006) and references therein.
17. M. Scheinfein, W. Qian, J.C.H. Spence. “Aberrations of emission cathodes: Nanometer diam-
eter ﬁeld-emission electron sources”. J. Appl. Phys. 73, 2057–68 (1993)
18. F. Hasselbach: A ruggedized miniature UHV electron biprism interferometer for fundamental
experiments”. Z. Phys. B (Cond. Matter.) 71, 443–48 (1988)
19. F.
Hasselbach,
M.
Nicklaus:
Sagnac
experiment
with
electrons.
Phys.
Rev.
A48,
143–51 (1993)
20. H. Kiesel, A. Renz, F. Hasselbach: Observation of Hanbury-Brown Twiss anticorrelations for
free electrons. Nature 418, 392–94 (2002)
21. M.P. Silverman: On the feasibility of observing electron antibunching in a ﬁeld-emission beam.
Phys Lett. A120, 442–46 (1987)
22. J.C.H. Spence, W. Qian, M.P. Silverman: Electron source brightness and degeneracy from Fres-
nel fringes. J. Vac. Sci. Tech. A12(2), 542–47 (1994)
23. P. Sonnentag, F. Hasselbach: Decoherence of electron waves due to induced charges moving
through a nearby resistive material. Braz. J. Phys. 35, 385–90 (2005)
24. J.R. Anglin, J.P. Paz, W.H. Zurek: Deconstructing decoherence. Phys Rev. A55, 4041–45
(1997)
25. A. Orchowski, W. Rau, H. Lichte: Electron holography surmounts resolution limit of electron
microscopy”. Phys. Rev Lett. 74, 399–02 (1995)
26. M. Lehmann, H. Lichte: Electron holographic materials analysis at atomic dimensions. Cryst.
Res. Technol. 40, 149–60 (2005)
27. H. Hu, H. Wang, M. McCartney, D. Smith: Switching mechanisms for nanoscale Co elements
studied by electron holography. Phys. Rev. B73, 153401 (2006)
28. A. Tonomura. Electron holography and the A-B effect. Nucl. Instrum Meth. A314, 297–05
(1992)

Electrons
195
E
Secondary Literature
29. R. Loudon: The quantum theory of light (Oxford University Press, Oxford 2000)
30. The Feynman Lectures on Physics (Addison-Wesley 2005, Vol. 3)
31. J.C.H. Spence: Lensless (Diffractive) Imaging, in: Science of Microscopy. P. Hawkes,
J.C.H. Spence Eds. (Springer, Berlin 2007, Ch. 19)
Electrons
Theodore Arabatzis
The discovery of the electron was a complex and extended process, stretching from
Faraday’s investigation of electrolysis to Millikan’s oil-drop experiments [18]. The
results of four different ﬁelds (electrochemistry, electromagnetic theory,  spec-
troscopy, and  cathode rays) converged to support the existence of a novel
subatomic constituent of matter. Faraday’s experiments on electrolysis, interpreted
from the perspective of the atomic theory of matter, implied that electricity has
an atomic structure [4]. That is, electricity appears in naturally occurring units. In
1891 George Johnstone Stoney (1826–1911) named those units “electrons” ([13],
p. 583, [30]).
In 1894 Stoney’s electrons were appropriated by Joseph Larmor (1857–1942) to
overcome certain empirical and conceptual problems faced by Maxwell’s electro-
magnetic theory ([6], pp. 806 ff.). Larmor’s electrons were supposed to be universal
constituents of matter and were represented as structures in the all-pervading ether.
On the continent a similar electromagnetic theory had been proposed by Hendrik
Antoon Lorentz (1853–1928),who developed a synthesis of British and Continental
traditions in electromagnetism [7]. Lorentz’s theory incorporated Maxwell’s sug-
gestion that electromagnetic phenomena are wave processes in the ether and the
suggestion of continental theorists (e.g., Wilhelm Weber) that these phenomena are
due to the action of charged particles. Lorentz named those particles “ions”, in anal-
ogy with the ions of electrolysis.
A crucial event for the development of Larmor’s and Lorentz’s theories was
an experimentally discovery by Pieter Zeeman (1865–1943). In 1896 Zeeman ob-
served that the spectral lines of sodium widen under the inﬂuence of a magnetic ﬁeld
( Zeeman effect). Drawing on Lorentz’s theory, he attributed the modiﬁcation of
the sodium spectrum to the inﬂuence of magnetism on the mode of vibration of the
“ions”. From the observed widening he was able to calculate their charge to mass
ratio, which to everyone’s surprise turned out to be three orders of magnitude larger
than that of the electrolytic ions [17]. That was the ﬁrst indication that Lorentz’s
ions, as well as Larmor’s electrons, were much smaller than ordinary ions. In 1899
Lorentz changed the name of his “ions” to “electrons” [18].

