460
Particle Tracks
Particle Tracks
Brigitte Falkenburg
Particle tracks are sequences of adjacent position measurements caused by sub-
atomic particles. As quantum phenomena to which the particle picture applies
( Franck–Hertz experiment), they constitute the empirical basis of  particle
physics. The dynamic properties of the underlying particles are measured by means
of a semi-classical measurement theory. The generation of particle tracks, how-
ever, is explained in the wave picture by the quantum mechanics of scattering.
 Davisson–Germer experiment; Stern–Gerlach experiment; Schr¨odinger equation.
History
In 1912 particle tracks were ﬁrst observed and photographed in Wilson’s cloud
chamber. They stemmed from radioactive radiation sources. For α-rays only a con-
tinuous track was visible, while for β-rays ( electrons) the individual measurement
points could be clearly distinguished [1]. Since the 1920s, Wilson’s cloud chamber
helped to investigate particle tracks from cosmic rays, the most famous being the
positron track observed by Anderson in 1932 [2]. Since the 1950s, particle tracks
are also generated in the accelerator experiments of high energy physics.
Measuring Devices
The ﬁrst decades of particle physics were based on various methods of taking pho-
tographs [3]. The cloud chamber developed by Charles T.R. Wilson (1869–1959)
was ﬁlled with over-saturated steam. Charged particles ionize the hydrogen atoms
 Bohr’s atom model of the steam, giving rise to observable condensation droplets.
In the 1940s, nuclear emulsions made it possible to record the tracks of charged par-
ticles from cosmic rays and to develop their pictures photographically with a very
high spatial resolution (of 1 μm). In the bubble chamber, developed in the 1950s by
Donald A. Glaser (∗1926) for the  scattering experiments performed in particle
accelerators, the ionization gives rise to gas bubbles in liquid hydrogen instead of
condensation droplets in steam. The bubble chamber made it possible to detect and
photograph a variety of particle tracks at the same time.
In modern electronic particle detectors, the particle tracks are no longer ob-
servable on a photograph. They are recorded electronically and reconstructed by
computer programs. For example, a drift chamber detects and ampliﬁes the electric
currents caused by the passage of charged particles through a grid of wires. In this

Particle Tracks
461
P
way, the observable particle tracks of the ﬁrst decades of particle physics have been
replaced by electronic data and their reconstruction. Only after a lengthy process
of data analysis by means of reconstruction programs do they become visible on a
computer display.
Measurement Theory
Particle tracks have characteristic phenomenological features, above all, the density
of the measurement points, the curvature in a magnetic ﬁeld, the track length, and
the temporal order of the single position measurements (i.e., the ﬂight direction).
They give important hints for particle identiﬁcation. In the ﬁrst decades of particle
physics, they made it possible to estimate the mass and charge of unknown particles.
The ﬂight direction can be inferred from the energy loss along a track which results
in a characteristic increase of the track curvature. (In this way, Anderson identiﬁed
the positive electrons as a particle with the electron’s mass and charge, of opposite
sign.)
In order to measure the dynamic properties of the underlying particle, the points
of a particle track in space-time are connected or “ﬁtted” by the trajectory of a
massive charged particle. The trajectory is the data model [10] of a particle track.
This data model is based on the classical model of a massive charged particle of
mass m, charge q, and momentum
→p = m
→v , which loses energy along the track
due to subsequent inelastic collisions with the detector atoms. In the model, the
track ends when the particle is stopped. The track length indicates the kinetic energy
lost during the passage of the particle through the detector. An empirical law, the
so-called energy-range relation, connects the kinetic energy of a massive charged
particle to its range (or track length) in different materials.
Based on this model, the particle tracks taken in an experiment are analyzed
by means of a semi-classical measurement theory. This measurement theory
contains [12]:
1. The classical Lorentz force F = q/c (E +
→v ×B). It describes the momentum
change of a massive charged particle in an external electric ﬁeld E or magnetic
ﬁeld B. According to the Lorentz force, the momentum of a particle of known
mass and charge can be determined from the track curvature.
2. The laws of relativistic kinematics for particles of high energy, in particular, the
law of energy-momentum conservation.
3. A dissipation term E/x for the average energy loss E per ﬁnite detector
length x along the track [5]. The differential energy loss dE per path length
dx obtained from dE/dx ≈E/x is combined with the Lorentz force, giving
rise to a differential equation for the mean momentum decrease due to energy
dissipation along the track of a charged particle.
4. The empirical energy-range relation for charged particles in a given material,
giving rise to a rough estimate of the average energy loss E/x. The average

462
Particle Tracks
range in a given material was measured for charged particles of known energy,
for many materials [1, 23].
5. Quantum electrodynamic predictions for the dissipation of energy and the deﬂec-
tion of charged particles by subatomic scattering processes. They are based on
the quantum mechanics of scattering [4] and the  quantum electrodynamic de-
scription of ionization,  bremsstrahlung, pair creation, and multiple scattering
[5, 6].
6. Quantum mechanical conservation laws for  spin,  parity, isospin and other
internal dynamic properties of subatomic particles, associated with the group
theoretical deﬁnition of particles as the irreducible representations of  symmetry
groups.
The quantum electrodynamic laws which enter the measurements are supported
by empirical laws. These empirical laws make it possible to test the quantum
electrodynamic formulae independently. During the phase of consolidation of quan-
tum electrodynamics, experimenters like Anderson exerted substantial effort to
determine the mass and charge of particles by improvements in such independent
semi-empirical measurement procedures. After the consolidation of quantum elec-
trodynamics, the semi-empirical methods remained in the measurement theory. To
the present day, they make it possible to perform several consistency checks on the
measurements.
Mott’s Idealized Quantum Mechanical Model
Strictly speaking, however, quantum mechanics is incompatible with the classical
trajectories of the above measurement theory. So, how do they ﬁt together?
Shortly after the development of quantum mechanics it was shown that the gen-
eration of particle tracks in a Wilson chamber is perfectly compatible with quantum
mechanical scattering theory. As Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976) stressed in his
1930 book on quantum mechanics, the probability of α-particle deﬂection due to
repeated ionization of molecules in the vapour is non-zero only if the connecting
line of the two molecules runs parallel to the velocity direction of the α-particles
[7]. The calculation was ﬁrst carried out by Nevill F. Mott (1905–1996) in 1929
[8], based on Born’s 1926 quantum mechanics of scattering which gave rise to the
 probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics [4]. According to quantum me-
chanics, the scattering is not due to the impact of a particle but to the diffraction of
a wave, lacking the classical trajectory of a deﬂected particle and the corresponding
classical impact parameter. The squared  wave function predicts the probability of
particle detections at a certain scattering angle.
Mott calculated the probability for two subsequent collisions of an α-particle
and a hydrogen atom  Rutherford atom with the effect of the ionization of both
atoms. The ionized atoms give rise to observable measurement points, where the
observation of a droplet is a position measurement. But the observation of the
particle deﬂection given by straight lines drawn between the adjacent droplets is a

Particle Tracks
463
P
momentum measurement. Heisenberg showed in 1930 that the uncertainty relation
for position and momentum holds for any ionization process along the track. Due
to the ﬁnite size of the water molecules in the Wilson chamber, the position and
momentum measurement cannot both be sharp [7]. The inaccuracy of the position
measurement for individual measurement points of a particle track and the measure-
ment error of the particle momentum obtained from a curved particle track using the
expression for the Lorentz force are typically more than 12 (!) orders of magnitude
larger than  Heisenberg’s uncertainty relation.
Thus, the quantum mechanical explanation of single measurement points of
a particle track is in perfect correspondence to the classical particle picture,
the only difference being the unobservable classical path between the position
measurements.
Mott’s and Heisenberg’s calculations neglect the energy loss associated with the
ionization processes that give rise to the observable measurement points. The parti-
cle is described as if it did not transfer a deﬁnite amount of energy to the hydrogen
atom when ionizing it. The calculations deal with the amplitudes of inelastic col-
lisions, but they are performed as if the momentum state of the charged particle
remained unaffected by the energy transfer that gives rise to ionization. This ‘un-
realistic’ neglect of the momentum transfer is reasonable, since the energy loss of
an α-particle due to ionization of hydrogen atoms is very small compared to the
kinetic energy of the α-particle. Therefore the momentum of an α-particle remains
practically unchanged along its track in the Wilson chamber.
Under such idealized conditions, the classical and quantum descriptions of a
track agree for any sequence of measurement points. This  correspondence be-
tween the classical and the quantum cases holds not only for the straight particle
tracks calculated by Mott and Heisenberg but also for the curved tracks in a mag-
netic ﬁeld. For a weak external ﬁeld, the  Schr¨odinger equation for a stationary
beam of particles predicts approximately the classical beam deﬂection which is de-
scribed by the Lorentz force [11].
Realistic Tracks with Energy Loss
In the case of a substantial amount of energy loss along a particle track, the agree-
ment between the classical and the quantum descriptions vanishes. Nevertheless,
the  semi-classical model has to be maintained for the data analysis of individual
particle tracks.
The ﬁrst quantum mechanical calculation of non-negligible energy loss was
given by Hans Bethe (1906–2005) in 1930 [5, 12]. Bethe’s  semi-classical model
adds classical assumptions about the individual scattering processes along a parti-
cle track to Born’s quantum mechanics of scattering. The calculation is performed
in time-dependent perturbation theory. It results in a formula for the quantum me-
chanical expectation value ⟨E⟩, the mean energy loss per atom and per incoming
particle (in the limit of inﬁnitely many incoming particles, Nin →∞). Then the

464
Particle Tracks
result is applied to the scattering processes along an individual particle track, giv-
ing rise to an expression for the mean energy loss E per length x of matter.
Hence, the  semi-classical model assumes that the expectation value ⟨E⟩means
the average energy loss of a charged particle by successive scatterings from many
detector atoms along an individual track, normalized to the number of atoms per
path x.
Mott’s and Bethe’s calculations hold for the non-relativistic domain. According
to Bethe’s 1930 results, energy loss due to ionization is small and the shape of par-
ticle tracks is smooth. For relativistic particles, however, the semi-classical picture
breaks down.  Quantum Electrodynamics predicts that a particle does not lose
its energy smoothly. Due to quantum ﬂuctuations, the energy loss along a particle
track may become completely irregular and extreme deviations from the classical
path may occur. Several kinds of processes may give rise to large ﬂuctuations in the
energy loss. In addition to energy loss due to ionization, quantum electrodynamics
predicts processes of  bremsstrahlung and pair creation, that is, the emission of
a photon or an electron–positron pair, respectively. These processes are associated
with large ﬂuctuations in the energy loss along a particle track. They give rise to
irregular deﬂections which violate the classical shape of a track predicted by Mott
in 1929 and presupposed also by Bethe in his 1930 energy loss calculation. In the
data analysis of modern high energy  scattering experiments, these ﬂuctuations
have to be corrected at the probabilistic level.
Primary Literature
1. E. Rutherford, J. Chadwick, C.D. Ellis: Radiations from Radioactive Substances. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 1930. Repr.: Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1951.
2. C.D. Anderson: The Apparent Existence of Easily Deﬂectable Positives. Science 76 (1932),
238. The Positive Electron. Phys. Rev. 43 (1933), 491–94.
3. C.F. Powell, P.H. Fowler, D.H. Perkins: The Study of Elementary Particles by the Photographic
Method. London: Pergamon Press 1959.
4. M. Born: Zur Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorg¨ange. Z. F. Phys. 37 (1926), 863–67 Engl. transl.
in [9]. M. Born, Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorg¨ange. Z. f. Phys. 38 (1926), 803–27.
5. H. Bethe: Zur Theorie des Durchgangs schneller Korpuskularstrahlen durch Materie. Ann.
Phys. 53 (1930), 25–400.
6. H. Bethe: Bremsformel f¨ur Elektronen relativistischer Geschwindigkeit. Z. f. Phys. 76 (1932),
293–99. W. Heitler and F. Sauter: Stopping of Fast Particles with Emission of Radiation and the
Birth of Positive Electrons. Nature 132 (1933), 892. F. Bloch: Bremsverm¨ogen von Atomen mit
mehreren Elektronen. Z. f. Phys. 81 (1933), 363–76. H. Bethe and W. Heitler: On the Stopping
of Fast Particles and on the Creation of Positive Electrons. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 146 (1934),
83–112.
7. W. Heisenberg: Physikalische Prinzipien der Quantentheorie. Leipzig: Hirzel 1930. Engl.
Transl.: The Physical Principles of Quantum Theory. Transl. by C. Eckart and F.C. Hoyt.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1930, 70.
8. N.F. Mott: The Wave Mechanics of α-Rays. Proc. R. Soc. A 126 (1929), 79–84. Repr. in [9].
9. J.A. Wheeler and W.H. Zurek: Quantum Theory and Measurement. Princeton (N. J.),
Guildford: Princeton University Press 1983.

Parton Model
465
P
Secondary Literature
10. P. Suppes: Models of Data. In: E. Nagel, P. Suppes, and A. Tarski (eds.): Logic, Methodology
and Philosophy of Science. Proceedings of the 1960 International Congress. Stanford: Stanford
University Press 1962, 252–61.
11. N.F. Mott, H.S. Massey: The Theory of Atomic Collisions. Oxford: Clarendon Press 1965.
12. B. Falkenburg: Particle Metaphysics. A Critical Account of Subatomic Reality. Springer:
Heidelberg 2007, p. 169–87.
Parton Model
O.W. Greenberg
The parton model pictures hadrons as a collection of pointlike quasi-free particles.
The model describes the cross section for high-energy scattering of hadrons with
another particle as an incoherent sum of the cross sections of the pointlike partons
in the hadron with the other particle. The hadronic factors in the cross sections
are parametrized by “structure functions.” The parton model expresses the structure
functions in terms of parton distribution functions that give the longitudinal momen-
tum distribution of the partons in the given hadron. The parton distribution functions
are found from experimental data in a given process and are used in the description
of other processes (Fig. 1).
The prototype process for the parton model is eN →e′X, where e and e′ are
the incident and scattered electron, N is the target nucleon, and X is the set of
ﬁnal state hadrons. The particles in the ﬁnal state X are not measured, so the cross
section is for the sum over all hadronic ﬁnal states, an “inclusive” cross section. This
contrasts with an “exclusive” cross section in which the ﬁnal states are restricted
to a speciﬁc subset. In the prototype process, eN →e′X, the kinematics of the
inclusive scattering depends on the momentum transfer q = k−k′ from the electron
to the hadrons and the invariant mass, W, of the hadronic ﬁnal state, where W2 =
(p+q)2 = M2+2Mν+q2, and M is the mass of the target nucleon or other hadron.
Here k and k′ are the energy-momentum 4-vectors of the incident and scattered
electron, p is the energy-momentum 4-vector of the target hadron, and ν = E −E′
is the energy transfer to the target hadron in its rest frame.
J.D. Bjorken [1] predicted that the hadronic factor in the cross section would
depend only on the ratio x = (−q2)/(2p · q) = (−q2)/(2Mν), rather than on
ν and −q2 separately, on the basis of an algebra of local currents. This prop-
erty, called “scaling,” was expected to hold in the “deep inelastic” limit in which
the energy transfer and momentum transfer are much larger than the target hadron
mass. R.P. Feynman [2] interpreted scaling in terms of constituents of the nucleon
that he called “partons.” Bjorken and E.A. Paschos [3, 4] gave early discussions
of electron-nucleon and neutrino-nucleon scattering in the deep inelastic limit. The

