G
Gabriel Biel
PEKKA KA¨RKKA¨INEN
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Gabriel Biel (c. 1410–1495) was a theologian in Tu¨bingen
and a leader among the Brethren of Common Life. He was
the most widely known representative of the late medieval
via moderna, which was much inﬂuenced by fourteenth
century thought. He was the ﬁrst professor of theology to
teach via moderna at the University of Tu¨bingen, and he
also had a remarkable inﬂuence on the Brethren of Com-
mon Life. Biel studied in Heidelberg, Erfurt, and Cologne.
After graduation, he was a cathedral preacher in Mainz
and joined the Brethren of Common Life before receiving
a professorship of theology in Tu¨bingen. Biel’s main works
consist of a commentary on the mass, Canonis missae
expositio, and a Sentences commentary, Collectorium in
quattuor libros Sententiarum. Both in philosophy and in
theology, Biel was a close but not unoriginal follower of
William of Ockham. Biel’s Sentences commentary is for-
mally an abridgement of Ockham’s commentaries, but
several other authorities, including Thomas Aquinas,
Bonaventure, John Duns Scotus, Gregory of Rimini,
Peter of Ailly, and John Gerson are cited extensively. In
metaphysical and epistemological views, Biel closely
followed Ockham, adopting his criticism of intelligible
and sensory species, but rejecting his notion of multiplic-
ity of substantial forms. Biel’s ethics was mostly inspired
by Ockham, but also by Scotus and Gregory of Rimini.
Gabriel Biel was born in Speyer in about 1410. He was
already an ordained minister when, in 1432, he matricu-
lated in the faculty of arts at the University of Heidelberg.
There he received the baccalaureate degree in 1435 and the
master’s degree in 1438. Thereafter, he served as a master
in Heidelberg, but in 1451 he took up with study of
theology in Erfurt, where he matriculated in the faculty
of arts. In 1453, Biel matriculated in the faculty of theology
at the University of Cologne, but in 1457, he received
a licentiate of theology in Erfurt, although he never earned
a master’s degree.
Soon after receiving the licentiate degree, Biel moved to
Mainz, where he served as a cathedral preacher and vicar
for several years. In the struggle over the see of Mainz, Biel
sided with Adolf of Nassau, who was appointed as Arch-
bishop by the Pope. In the course of the controversy, Biel
even had to ﬂee Mainz and subsequently wrote a treatise
entitled Defense of the Apostolic Obedience. During his
years as a cathedral preacher, Biel joined the order of the
Brethren of Common Life and subsequently stayed in
Brethren Houses at Marienthal, Butzbach, and Urach.
During that time, he became an inﬂuential leader among
the Brethren. In 1484, Biel was appointed as professor of
theology at the University of Tu¨bingen and became the ﬁrst
professor to represent the via moderna on the theological
faculty. In 1485 and 1489, Biel was elected Rector of the
university. During his last years, Biel retired from academic
life and served as provost of the Brethren House of St.
Peter’s at Einsiedeln in Scho¨nbuch. There he died in 1495.
The main corpus of Biel’s philosophical writings, most
of which date back to his early years as a master in Hei-
delberg, has not been thoroughly studied. The focus of
research has been on his mature theology, although the
philosophical views of his major theological works have
also attracted some attention. In his philosophical views,
Biel seems to have been a close follower of Ockham. This
impression may partly be due to the fact that in the ﬁrst
book of his Sentences commentary, which is the main
source for Biel’s philosophical views, he mainly abbrevi-
ated Ockham’s more elaborate discussions. In his discus-
sion of theological issues, Biel also utilized extensively the
views of other authorities, such as John Duns Scotus,
Gregory of Rimini, Peter of Ailly, John Gerson, and even
Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventure.
Biel based his metaphysical and epistemological views
on Ockhamist conceptualism and ontological principle of
parsimony. These included the views that all entities in the
world are either singular substances or accidents and that
there are no universal entities, but rather universals are
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

merely accidents in the human mind. In Biel’s theory of
knowledge, the starting point is found in the intuitive
cognition of present singular entities based on sense per-
ception, which are a presupposition for further cognitions.
According to Biel, the mind forms universal concepts out
of similarities between the concepts of singular entities,
and therefore the universal concepts are not conventional,
but rather natural mental signs of the extramental simi-
larities (convenientia rerum), insofar as the mind appre-
hends such similarities. In accordance with Ockham, Biel
rejected the notions of intelligible and sensory species as
unnecessary. Biel also discussed the ﬁctum-theory of uni-
versal concepts adopted by early Ockham, but clearly
opted for Ockham’s mature theory of universal concepts
as acts of thinking about many things at once.
In his psychology, Biel did not slavishly follow Ockham,
although it is noteworthy that, unlike most of the contem-
porary via moderna, he shared Ockham’s criticism of the
species theory of cognition and even defended it with the
help of a detailed analysis of the sensory process. However,
following the common view of the via moderna, Biel
rejected the view, shared by Ockham, of multiplicity of
substantial forms in a human being. According to Biel,
intellectual and sensitive souls are not really distinct entities,
but merely names of faculties of one, undivided intellectual
soul, which is the substantial form of the human body.
Biel’s ethics is largely based on Ockham’s views. Moral
qualities of the external actions are primarily judged
according to their underlying intentions, which should
be consonant with the will of God. While sharing much
of Ockham’s ethics of divine command, Biel placed more
emphasis on natural reason in agreement with Scotus and
Gregory of Rimini. Therefore, Biel rejected the possibility
that God would let human beings have the intention to
hate God. The main undertone of Biel’s ethics still remains
voluntarist
and
consonant
with
ethical
positivism.
According to Biel, God does not will anything because it
is good or right. Furthermore, God can do something that
he himself has declared to be unjust, yet whatever it is
becomes morally right whenever it is done by God. While
aware of the shortcomings of this position, Biel often
argued for the immutability of moral order as an actually
established order of creation.
According to Biel, the moral reasoning takes place
through inborn faculties dedicated to this purpose:
synderesis, conscience, and right reason. These faculties
rely on different kinds of laws, which are hierarchically
ordered under the supreme law, the eternal law, which is
identical with God’s will. Knowledge of the eternal law is
gained through three kinds of inferior laws: natural, bib-
lical, and positive human laws. Among these, natural law
has precedence, since it is directly derived from the eternal
law, and its commands are known to all men through the
dictate of right reason. Biel also acknowledged the possi-
bility of an error in conscience, which delivers the ﬁnal
recommedation for particular actions to be done, and he
tried to solve the related problem of conﬂicting moral
precepts.
See also: ▶Species, Sensible and Intelligible ▶William of
Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Biel
Gabriel
(1510)
Sermones.
Hagenau
(urn:nbn:de:bvb:12-
bsb00007734-3)
Biel Gabriel (1968) Defensorium obedientiae apostolicae, ed. and trans.
Oberman HA, Zerfoss DE, Courtenay WJ. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge
Biel Gabriel (1963–1976) Canonis missae expositio, ed. Oberman HA,
Courtenay WJ. Franz Steiner, Wiesbaden
Biel
Gabriel
(1973–1992)
Collectorium
circa
quattuor
libros
Sententiarum, ed. Werbeck W, Hofmann U. Mohr, Tu¨bingen
Biel Gabriel (s.a.) Tractatus de potestate et utilitate monetarum. Oppen-
heim (urn:nbn:de:bvb:12-bsb00005927-1)
Secondary Sources
Burkard FJ (1974) Philosophische Lehrgehalte in Gabriel Biels Sentenzen-
kommentar
unter
besonderer
Beru¨cksichtigung
seiner
Erkenntnislehre. Anton Hain, Meisenheim am Glan
Ernst W (1972) Gott und Mensch am Vorabend der Reformation St.
Benno, Leipzig
Grane L (1962) Contra Gabrielem: Luthers Auseinandersetzung mit
Gabriel Biel in der Disputatio contra scholasticam theologiam
1517. Gyldendal, København
Oberman HA (1983) Harvest of medieval theology: Gabriel Biel and late
medieval nominalism, 3rd edn. Labyrinth, Durham
Galen, Arabic
IVAN GAROFALO
Dipartimento di Studi Classici
Siena University
Siena
Italy
Abstract
Galen of Pergamum (c. 129–c. 216) is one of the main
authors of the Imperial period and the most inﬂuential
medical writer in the medieval Greek, Latin, and Arabic
worlds, as well as in the Renaissance. The translations of
376 G
Galen, Arabic

almost the whole of his work that were made into Arabic
had an enormous impact on the Mediterranean civiliza-
tion. These Arabic translations were in turn translated
into Latin and had a huge inﬂuence on the Latin world
up to the sixteenth century, to say the least. Moreover, the
Arabic (or Arabo-Latin) translations are of great impor-
tance for establishing the text of the Greek Galen, even
when the Greek text is extant, since these were made from
Greek models much older than our manuscripts.
While recent literature has well explored the immense
fortune of Galen in the Arabic world, both as a physician
and as a philosopher (Pormann and Smith 2008), here
I will limit myself to review the perspective that follows the
history of Galen’s tradition. I will address the Arabic and
Arabo-Latin translations of Galenic works, namely of the
translations of the Compendia, of ‘‘Ioannes’’’ Synopsis, of
the Arabic commentaries of Alexandrian origin (Ibn
Rid˙wa¯n, Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-T˙ayyib, ‘Ali ‘Abba¯s al-Ma¯ju¯sı¯,
etc.), and, only selectively, the indirect tradition of the
translations (H˙ unayn, al-Ra¯zı¯, al-Ruhawı¯, al-Kaskarı¯,
al-Biru¯nı¯, etc.). Excellent repertories are available for this
analysis: Sezgin (1970), Ullmann (1970), Strohmaier
(1994, 2007), and Boudon-Millot (2007).
Biography
The Arabic sources go back to the late Alexandrian schol-
arship (‘‘Ioannes Grammatikos’’). As for their reliability or
unreliability, they preserve genuine information along
with a sometimes bizarrely incorrect chronology. These
sources transmit a longer life span for Galen than the Suda,
which grants him 70 years (129–199/200). This extension
of Galen’s life allows to better distribute the great number
of Galen’s elderly works. According to Nutton (2005), who
argued the best for the new date (now generally accepted)
Galen lived up to 216/217. This is also accepted by
Schlange-Scho¨ningen (2003).
The following is a list of editions (full or partial) of
Galen’s works translated into Arabic. The ﬁrst part
includes those of the Alexandrian Canon, while in the
second part the editions are grouped per genera.
De sectis: edition of the Arabic translation by Selim Selim,
Cairo 1977; the MS Princeton Garrett 1075 has been
used by Garofalo (2007).
Ars medica (Selim): Arabic translation used by V. Boudon-
Millot in her edition, Paris 2000.
De pulsibus (Selim): Arabic translation used by Garofalo
(2009b).
Ad Glauconem: Arabic translation by Selim, used by
Serena Buzzi, with Garofalo’s assistance, for her
edition of the Galenic work (in preparation).
Minor Anatomy (De oss. De musc. diss., De ven. art. diss.):
critical
edition
of
De
nerv.
diss.
by
Dubaya¯n
(2001) (and of the compendium: v. infra), Arabic
translations used by Garofalo in Galien, tome VII
and tome VIII, Paris 2005 and 2008.
De temperamentis (also De inaequali intemperie, De bono
habitu): study by Garofalo (2006).
De elementis: Arabic translation used for the edition of De
Lacy (1996).
De nat. fac.: see the compendium, infra.
De febr. diff.: two editions online, De Stefani (2004) and
Wernhard (2004).
De pulsibus, major work (De diff. puls., De caus. puls., De
dignot. ex puls.): see compendia.
De crisibus: the Arabic translation has been used by
Alexanderson for his edition of the Greek text.
De diebus decretoriis: Garofalo (2003b).
De locis affectis: Garofalo (1995).
De sanitate tuenda: the compendium and the Synopsis of
‘‘Ioannes Grammatikos’’ have been studied, v. infra.
De methodo medendi: Arabic translation and Arabo–Latin
translation used by V. Lorusso for the edition of books
I–II (thesis, Pisa, Scuola Normale Superiore 2010).
Excerpts in Ra¯zı¯: Savage-Smith (1996).
synopsis of De methodo medendi: Arabic translation of
the second book discovered by I. Garofalo in ms.
Princeton Garrett 1075, containing the Arabic transla-
tion of some compendia of the Alexandrians (v. infra),
Garofalo (1999).
Noncanonical works
Biography
De libris suis, De ordine librorum suorum: Arabic trans-
lations used by V. Boudon-Millot, Galien tome I, Paris
2007 (with bibliography).
Philosophy
De
propriis
placitis.
Known
until
Boudon-Millot–
Pietrobelli’s edition (2007), only in the Arabo–Latin
translation edited by Nutton (1999), now available in Greek
(from MS Vlatadon 14). A comparison with the Arabo-Latin
translation allows a better evaluation of the (poor) method
used by the translator in rendering the Arabic.
De placitis Hippocratis et Platonis: Strohmaier in De
Lacy’s edition 1996. The Arabs knew a tenth book in
addition to the nine known to the Greek tradition.
Logic
De demonstratione. The great work (15 books) that was
lacunary in H˙ unayn’s times is known through scanty
Galen, Arabic G
377
G

fragments in Greek and quotations in Arabic authors that
have not yet been fully collected. The edition promised by
Pines (1986) never appeared.
Ethics
De indolentia: the edition by Boudon-Millot (2008) allows
to place the fragments of the Arabic indirect tradition.
More use can be made from it to constitute the Greek text.
Quod optimus medicus sit quoque philosophus: the edi-
tion of the Arabic translation (Bauchmann 1985) has been
used by Boudon-Millot (2007).
Protrepticus: excerpts of the Arabic indirect tradition
(also Arabic-Hebrew) used by Boudon-Millot (2000b).
Anatomy
Anatomicae administrationes: edition of the Greek text
(I–IX) and of the Arabic translation by Garofalo (1996,
2000) (Italian translation of the whole work by Garofalo
2001).
Physiology
De motibus dubiis: Arabic translation with the Arabic-
Latin one, edited by V. Nutton and G. Bos (in press/2011).
Diagnostics
De symptomatum diff., De sympt. causis (Liber de causis):
O. Overwien examines the Arabic tradition of De symp.
diff. in CMG V 5, 1 ed. by B. Gundert (2009), pp 103–152.
Medicine
De methodo medendi: Ursula Weisser (1997) studied Ra¯zı¯’s
excerpts of this work.
Pharmacology
Most of Galen’s pharmacological works, De comp. med. per
locos and per genera, have been excerpted by al-Ra¯zı¯, Ibn
al-Bayt:ar, and many others.
Hippocratic Commentaries
All the Arabic translations of the Hippocratic Commen-
taries should be reexamined, in particular:
Commentary on Nat. hom. Used in German transla-
tion by Mewaldt. The lemmata have been edited by
Mattock and used by Jouanna in his edition of De nat.
hom., CMG 1 1.3. The hypothesis may be advanced that
H˙ unayn did not dispose of a commentary with lemmata
and has inserted the lemmata from a manuscript of
Hippocrates akin to our manuscript (see Jouanna introd.
p. 99 ff.).
The commentary on De frac. is lost; excerpts in al-Ra¯zı¯.
Commentary on Acute Diseases: A. Pietrobelli used the
Arabo-Latin translation (the`se Paris 2008).
Commentary on Ar. aq. loc.: Sezgin (2001) published
a facsimile of the Cairo manuscript, critically edited by
Strohmaier.
Commentary on Aph. The lemmata, edited by Tytler
(1832) form a (quasi) continuous text used by Caroline
Magdelaine (in collaboration with I. Garofalo), for her
edition, the`se Paris 1994.
Commentaries on Epidemics I, II, III, VI. The pioneer
work of Pfaff on the translations of the commentaries on
Epid. needs to be updated; Vagelpohl and Hallum are
preparing the edition of the Arabic translations of
Epid. I and Epid. II. Project of Swain-Pormann (2008),
http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/arts/history/chm/activities/
galen/(with Bibliography). The mistakes, omissions, arbi-
trary interpolations by Pfaff are innumerable, see Garofalo
(2009) (Epidemics I and II), Garofalo (2010) (Epid. III
and VI).
Commentary on Hum. Garofalo (2005b, 2009b). Col-
lection of the fragments in preparation.
Commentary on Off. Partially preserved in Arabic,
edited by Mattock, now used by Raiola-Garofalo for crit-
ical edition (see Raiola 2005).
Pseudo-Galen
Many
pseudo-Galenic
books
produced
in
late-
Alexandrian age enjoyed great appreciation in the Arabic
world and were translated ﬁrst into Arabic and then par-
tially into Latin, therefore greatly inﬂuencing western
medicine. A few examples follow: De dissolutione continua,
Bos and Garofalo (2005), Arabic-Hebrew and Arabic-
Latin translations. The pseudo-Galenic commentary on
De septimanis, edited by Bergstra¨sser (1915), of some
utility for the Greek text, seems of non-Greek origin.
On Iusiurandum: Overwien (2009). On De nat. pueri:
Giorgianni (2010) in view of the edition in CMG;
a compilation of non-Greek origin.
Compendia and Synopses, Arabic
Commentaries
A great inﬂuence on the Arabic world was exercized by the
Alexandrian Compendia of the 16 groups of the works of
Galen, also through ‘Alı¯ Abba¯s and the excerpts in al-Ra¯zı¯:
Garofalo
(1999,
2003),
Pormann
(2003)
(with
Bibliography).
Compendium of Ad Glauconem: Garofalo (1995).
Compendium of De diebus decretoriis, with Italian trans-
lation of the compendium of the III book: Garofalo
(2000).
378 G
Galen, Arabic

Compendium of Nat. fac.: Paola Annese, Thesis, Siena,
2005.
The Synopsis of ‘‘Ioannes Grammaticus,’’ a compendium
of the 16 groups of books, with an introduction
explaining the Canon: Garofalo (2001).
The Commentary of Ibn al-T˙ayyib on the Ars medica:
Garofalo (2004).
The Commentary of Ibn al-T˙ayyib on De temperamentis
and De elementis: Garofalo (in preparation).
The Commentary of Ibn Rid˙wan: Boudon (2000a).
Indirect Tradition
The indirect tradition of the Arabic Galen is immense.
To mention just a few names: ‘Alı¯Abba¯s, who depends also
on the Compendia; al-Ra¯zı¯, whose H˙ a¯wı¯ is a treasure of
excerpts from the Arabic Galen; the translations and the
Compendia, and many works by H˙ unayn (Garofalo
2009b),
Maimonides
(Bos
2004.
2007);
al-Kaskarı¯
(Pormann 2009), al-Ruhawı¯ (Overwien 2009; Muggittu
2010). Alı¯ ‘Abba¯s’ Liber regius and Ra¯zı¯’s Ha¯wı¯ were trans-
lated into Latin. A great part of Galen was virtually known
to the medieval West, in addition to the pre-Salernitan
translations (Palmieri 2005; Garofalo 2009d).
The Translators
The most recent study after the basic works by Bergstra¨sser
(1913) and Meyerhof (1926) is Micheau (1997), who also
gives information on H˙ unayn and his school’s patrons
and commissioners. For the Arabic-Latin translators/
Constantin the African, Gerard of Cremona, Marc of
Toledo, etc., see Jacquart and Micheau (1990).
Galen and Hippocrates
Galen has been the most important intermediary for the
knowledge of Hippocrates in the late-Alexandrian period
and in the Arabic medicine. The direct translations of
Hippocratic works are not numerous, while many more
were created by collecting the lemmata of the Galenic
Commentaries (Overwien 2008).
Language
The language of the translators H˙ unayn, H˙ ubaysh, ‘I¯sa¯,
and others, ﬁrst studied by Bergstra¨sser, has been often
examined. Now we have the fundamental instrument, the
Wo¨rterbuch (2002–) with two supplements 2006 and
2007, by M. Ullmann, who discusses problems of attribu-
tion of the translations (in part. De loc. aff. attributed to
H˙ unayn (contra Garofalo 1999)). In general, H˙ unayn has
a freer style, H˙ ubaysh and ‘I¯sa¯ are more literal. The more
frequent stylistic features are hendiadys, parataxis, and
change of rhetorical interrogations into statements. Mis-
interpretations are rare.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯’
(Rhazes) ▶Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Medicine
▶Medicine and Philosophy ▶Medicine in the Arab World
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Editions and Translations
Greek
(1966)
Quod optimus
medicus
sit
quoque philosophus,
Galens
Abhandlung daru¨ber, daß der vorzu¨gliche Arzt Philosoph sein
muß, arabisch u. deutsch hrsg., Nachr. d. Akademie d. Wiss. in
Go¨ttingen, I. philol. hist. Kl. 1965, 1, Go¨ttingen
(1996) De elementis, ed. De Lacy Ph. CMG V 1.2, Akademie Verlag, Berlin
(1978) De placitis Hipp. et Platonis, ed. De Lacy Ph. CMG V 1, 2, second
ed. Akademie Verlag, Berlin
(1999) Galeni De propriis placitis, edidit, in linguam Anglicam vertit,
commentatus est Nutton V. CMG V 3,2. Berlin
(2000a) Ars medica, ed. Boudon V. Les Belles Lettres, Paris
(2000b) Protrepticus = Adhortatio ad artes addiscendas, ed. Boudon V.
Les Belles Lettres, Paris
(2004) Maimonides, Aphorismi, Maimonides Medical Aphorisms:
Treatises 1–5 (Maimonides, Moses, Complete Medical Works of
Moses Maimonides), ed. By G. Bos, Brigham Young University
Press, Provo, UT
(2005a) De ossibus, de musc. diss. = Galien Tome VII. Les os pour les
de´butants/L’anatomie des muscles/Texte e´tabli par Garofalo I, traduit
par Garofalo I, Debru A. Les Belles Lettres, Paris
(2005b) De propriis placitis, ed. Boudon-Millot V, Pietrobelli A. Galien
ressuscite´: e´dition princeps du texte grec du De propriis placitis.
Revue des E´tudes Grecques 118:168–213
(2007) Maimonides, Moses. Medical aphorisms: Treatises 6–9, ed. and
trans. Bos G. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago
(2007) Quod optimus medicus sit quoque philosophus, ed. Boudon V.
Les Belles Lettres, Paris
(2008) De indolentia, ed. V. Boudon-Millot, A. Pietrobelli, Un traite´
perdu de Galien miraculeusement retrouve´, le Sur l’inutilite´ de se
chagriner: texte grec et traduction franc¸aise. Pre´sentation, premie`re
e´dition et traduction du traite´. In: La science me´dicale antique:
nouveaux regards: e´tudes re´unies en l’honneur de Jacques Jouanna,
sous la direction de Ve´ronique Boudon-Millot, Alessia Guardasole,
Caroline Magdelaine. Beauchesne, DL, Paris
(2008) De nerv. diss., De ven. art. diss. = Galien Tome VIII L’anatomie des
nerfs/L’anatomie des veines et des arte`res, Texte e´tabli par Garofalo I,
traduit par Garofalo I, Debru A. Les Belles Lettres, Paris
(2009) De symptomatum differentia, ed. B. Gundert, Berlin 2009, Corpus
Medicorum Graecorum, Bd. V 5,1. Akademie Verlag, Berlin
Arabic
(1832) Aphor. (only lemmata). Tytler. Calcutta. In de aer. aquis. loc.
Strohmaier, in preparation
(1915) Ps. Galen In Hp. Septim. comm. = In Hippocratis De septimanis
commentarium, versio arabica, ed. Bergstra¨sser G. CMG XI 2,1.
Teubner, Leipzig/Berlin, 1914
(1965) Quod animi mores, ed. Biesterfeldt H; Quod optimus medicus sit
quoque philosophus, ed. Bachmann P. Nach Ak Wiss Go¨ttingen
Ph-hist Kl
(1972) Ad Glauconem, ed. Selim. S. al-Hay’a al-mis˙riyya al-ʿa¯mma li-l-
Kita¯b, Cairo
(1978) Ars medica, ed. Selim. S. al-Hay’a al-mis˙riyya al-ʿa¯mma li-l-
Kita¯b, Cairo
Galen, Arabic G
379
G

(1977) De sectis, ed. Selim S. al-Hay’a al-mis˙riyya al-ʿa¯mma li-l-Kita¯b,
Cairo
(1985) De puls., ed. Selim S. al-Hay’a al-mis˙riyya al-ʿa¯mma li-l-Kita¯b,
Cairo
(1986/2000) Anatomicae administrationes, ed. Garofalo I. Galeni
Anatomicarum administrationum libri qui supersunt novem,
earundem interpretatio arabica Hunaino Isaaci ﬁlio ascripta, ed.
Garofalo I, tomus prior, Istituto Universitario Orientale, Neapoli
1986, tomus alter libros V–IX continens, Istituto Universitario
Orientale,
Neapoli
2000.
Italian
translation:
Galeno
(2001)
Procedimenti anatomici. Rizzoli, Milan
(2000)
De
nerv.
diss.,
ed.
al-Dubayan
AM.
Schwarz,
London
(Islamkundliche Untersuchungen 228)
(in preparation) De motibus dubiis, ed. Bos G
in Hipp. Epid. II. Hallum Bink, in preparation
Lyons, Mattok (1970) Epid. I (only lemmas). Cambridge, Heffer;
Vagelpohl Uwe, in preparation
Secondary Sources
Bergstra¨sser G (1913) Hunain ibn Ish:a¯k˙ und seine Schule. Brill, Leiden
Bachmann (1965): see editions quod optimus medicus (Arabic)
Bos (2004) (2007): see editions Maimonides, Aphorisms (Arabic)
Bos G and Garofalo I: A Pseudo-Galenic Treatise on Regimen: The
Hebrew and Latin Translations from H˙ unayn ibn Isha¯q’s Arabic
Version, Alef 2007, No. 7: 43–95
Boudon-Millot (2007): see editions Ars medica, Protrepticus, Quod
optimus medicus
Boudon-Millot (2008): see editions (Greek)
De Stefani (2004): see edititions de differentiis febrium (Arabic)
Garofalo I (1986): see editions Anatomicae administrationes
Garofalo I (1990) Galeno e l’anatomia di Ippocrate. In: Tratados
hipocraticos, Actas del VIIe colloque international hippocratique
(Madrid 1990), ed. Lopez Ferez JA. Madrid 1992, pp 609–622
Garofalo I (1994) La traduzione araba dei compendi alessandrini delle
opere del Canone di Galeno. Il compendio dell’ Ad Glauconem. Med
nei Secoli 6:329–348
Garofalo I (1995) La traduzione araba del De locis affectis di Galeno. SCO
45:13–63
Garofalo I (1999) La traduzione araba del commento di Ioannes
Grammatikos al De puls. di Galeno. In: Garzya A, Jouanna J (eds)
Napoli, I testi medici greci, tradizione e ecdotica, atti del III
Convegno Internazionale Napoli 15–18 ottobre 1997. D’Auria,
Napoli, pp 195–218
Garofalo I (1999) Una nuova opera di Galeno in traduzione araba, la
Sinossi del De meth. med. SCO 47:8–19
Garofalo I (2000a): see editions anatomicae administrationes
Garofalo I (2000b) Il Sunto di Ioannes grammatikos delle opere del
Canone di Galeno. In: Manetti D (ed) Studi su Galeno, Firenze,
2000, 135–151
Garofalo I (2002) Alcune questioni sulle fonti greche nel Continens di
Razes. Med nei Secoli 14:383–406
Garofalo I (2003a) I sommari degli Alessadrini. In: Galenismo e medicina
tardoantica. Fonti greche, latine e arabe, Atti del Seminario
Internazionale di Siena 9–10 settembre 2002, a cura di Garofalo I,
Roselli A. Istituto Universitario Orientale, Napoli: 203–227
Garofalo I (2003b) Note sui giorni critici in Galeno. In: Palmieri N (ed)
Rationel et irrationel dans la me´decine ancienne et me´die´vale,
Aspects historiques, scientiﬁques et culturels. St. E´tienne, Universite´
de Saint E´tienne: 45–58
Garofalo I (2005b) Galen’s commentary on Hippocrates’ De humoribus.
In: van der Eijk PJ (ed) Hippocrates in context: papers read at the
XIth International Hippocrates Colloquium University of Newcastle
upon Tyne, 27–31 August 2002. Brill, Boston/Leiden
Garofalo I (2005c): see editions de ossibus, De musculorum dissectione
Garofalo I (2006) La traduzione araba del de temperamentis, del de
optima constitutione e del de bono habitu A. Garzya - J. Jouanna,
Ecdotica e ricezione dei testi medici greci, D’Auria, Napoli 2006:
125–136
Garofalo I (2007) La traduzione araba del De sectis e il sommario degli
alessandrini. Galenos 1:191–209
Garofalo I (2008a) Il commento di Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn at:-Tayyib all’Ars
medica di Galeno. In: Palmieri N (ed) L’Ars medica (Tegni) de
Galien: Lectures antiques et me´die´vales. Saint-E´tienne, pp 67–125
Garofalo I (2008b): see editions De nerv. diss.
Garofalo I (2009a) Il falso commento di Galeno al de humoribus, in
I. Garofalo, A. Lami, A. Roselli (eds), La tradizione indiretta dei
testi medici, IEPI, Pisa Roma: 201–218
Garofalo (2009b) La traduzione araba del de pulsibus ad tirones, in:
V. Boudon-Millot, J. Jouanna, A. Garzya, A. Roselli (eds), Histoire
de la tradition et e´dition des me´decins grecs - Storia della tradizione
e edizione dei medici greci, D’Auria, Napoli: 89–108
Garofalo I, Lami A, Roselli A (eds) (2009) Sulla traditzione indiretta dei
testi medici greci. In: Atti del II Seminario Internazionale di Siena,
Certosa di Pontignano, 19–20 settembre 2008. Pisa
Giorgianni F (2010) La traduzione araba del de natura pueri ippocratico,
in: S. Fortuna, I. Garofalo, A. Lami, A. Roselli, La tradizione indiretta
dei testi medici, le traduzioni, Atti del terzo colloquio internazionale,
Siena 2009, Pisa, IEPI: 21–42
Jacquart D, Micheau F (1990) La me´decine arabe et l’Occident me´die´val.
Collection Islam-Occident, 7. Maisonneuve et Larose, Paris
Magdelaine C (1994) Histoire du texte et e´dition critique, traduite et
commente´e des Aphorismes d’Hippocrate. Universite´ Sorbonne-
Paris IV (dactyl.)
Meyerhof M (1926) New light on Hunain ibn Ishaq and his period. Isis
8:686–723
Micheau F (1997) Me´ce`nes et me´decins a` Bagdad au IIIe/IXe sie`cles. Les
commanditaires des traductions de Galien par Hunain ibn Ishaq. In:
Jacquart D (ed) Les voies de la science grecque. Droz, Gene`ve: 47–179
Muggittu (2010) Nuove considerazioni sul Canone Alessandrino di
Galeno e le testimonianze di al-Ruhawi. In: Garofalo I, Fortuna S,
Lami A, Roselli A (eds) La tradizione indiretta dei testi medici. Le
traduzioni, Atti del III seminario internazionale, Siena, 18–19
settembre 2009. IEPI, Pisa, Rome, pp 91–121
Nutton V (2005) Ancient medicine. Routledge, London
Overwien (2009) Die Bedeutung der orientalischen Tradition fu¨r die antike
U¨ berlieferung des hippokratischen Eides. In: Garofalo I, Lami A,
Roselli A (eds) Sulla tradizione indiretta dei testi medici greci, Atti
del II Seminario Internazionale di Siena, Certosa di Pontignano,
19–20 settembre 2008. Pisa, IEPI, Pisa-Roma, pp 79–98
Palmieri (2005) Agnellus de Ravenne, Lectures gale´niques : le De pulsibus
ad tirones, Introduction, texte latin (adiuuante Ivan Garofalo),
traduction franc¸aise, notes explicatives, bibliographie et index par
Nicoletta Palmieri, Me´moires XXVIII du Centre Jean Palerne, 2005
Pines (1986) Razi critique de Galien. Studies in Arabic versions of Greek
texts and in medieval science. The collected works of S. Pines, II.
Leiden, pp 480–487 (original 1953)
Pormann P (2003) Jean le grammarien et le De sectis dans la litte´rature
me´dicale d’Alexandrie, in: I. Garofalo, A. Roselli (eds.), Galenismo
e medicina tardoantica: fonti greche, latine e arabe (Naples, 2003):
233–63
Pormann P (2008) Case notes and clinicians: Galen’s commentary on the
Hippocratic Epidemics in the Arabic. Arabic Sci Philos 18:247–284
380 G
Galen, Arabic

Pormann PE (2009) Al-Kaskarı¯(10th cent.) and the quotations of classical
authors. A philological study. In: Garofalo I, Lami A, Roselli A (eds)
Sulla tradizione indiretta dei testi medici greci, Atti del II Seminario
Internazionale di Siena, Certosa di Pontignano, 19–20 settembre
2008. IEPI, Pisa-Roma pp 99–132
Pormann PE, Smith ES (2008) Medieval Islamic medicine. Edinburgh
University Press, Edinburgh
Raiola T (2005) Per l’edizione del commento di Galeno a Ofﬁcina del
medico, Atti del V colloquio internazionale di ecdotica, in:
V. Boudon-Millot A. Garzya, J. Jouanna, A. Roselli (edd.), Ecdotica
e ricezione dei testi medici greci, Napoli 2006, pp. 187–197
Schlange-Scho¨ningen H (2003) Die ro¨mische Gesellschaft bei Galen:
Biographie und Sozialgeschichte. de Gruyter, Berlin/New York.
Sezgin (1970) Medizin-Pharmazie-Zoologie-Tierheilkunde bis ca
430 H. Gesch Arab Schr 3, Brill, Leiden
Swain-Pormann
(2008)
http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/arts/history/
chm/activities/galen/
Strohmaier G (2007) Antike Naturwissenschaft in orientalischem
Gewand/Lettre AKAN-Einzelschriften; Bd 6. Antike Naturwis-
senschaft und ihre Rezeption. Wissenschaftlicher, Trier
Ullmann M (1970) Die Medizin im Islam. Brill, Leiden
Weisser U (1997) Die Zitate aus Galens De Methodo medendi im Hawi
des Razi. In: Endress G, Kruk R (eds) The Ancient tradition in
Christian and Islamic Hellenism. Studies on the transmission of
Greek philosophy and sciences, dedicated to H. J. Drossaart Lulofs
on his ninetieth birthday. CNWS Publications. Leiden University,
Leiden, pp 279–318
Garlandus the Computist
JOHN MARENBON
Trinity College
University of Cambridge
Cambridge
UK
Abstract
Garlandus is the author of a Dialectica, probably written
late in the eleventh century or at the turn of the twelfth.
The treatise covers the whole of the Aristotelian–Boethian
curriculum. It is remarkable for its consistency in treating
logic as a discipline concerned with language, rather than
things in the world. In this respect, it has strong afﬁnities
with what appear to have been the views of Roscelin of
Compie`gne.
MS Orle´ans Bib. mun. 260 contains a logical treatise which
is named, in the incipit, as ‘‘the rules of Master Gerlandus
about dialectic’’; the same treatise also exists, anony-
mously, in MS Paris BNF lat. 6438. The identity of its
author (Gerlandus, Garlandus, Iarlandus) is disputed.
There is reason to believe that he was one of three scholars
of this name who were connected with Besanc¸on. The
work’s editor, De Rijk (Garlandus Compotista 1959:xvii–
xxvi) attributed it to the earliest of the three, St Garlandus,
who taught at Besanc¸on in the 1080s and died in 1100 as
Bishop of Agrigento, on the ground that the Paris MS
dates from the late eleventh century and so the other two
candidates would have been too young to write the trea-
tise. Yukio Iwakuma, however, on the basis of expert
advice, redated the Paris MS to the early twelfth century
and proceeded to argue that the treatise was written by
a Garlandus who taught in Besanc¸on in 1118 and lived at
least until 1149. He dates the Dialectica to the ﬁrst years of
the twelfth century (Iwakuma 1992:47–54). In fact, how-
ever, there is no decisive reason to choose between these
two
Garlandusses,
or
indeed
a
third,
who
was
a schoolmaster at Metz in 1111–1128. And the time of
composition of the work could be anything from the 1070s
to the 1120s, although a date early in this range seems
more likely (cf. Marenbon forthcoming:194–195).
The parts of the Dialectica correspond to the main
logical textbooks in use at the time. It begins with
a treatment of the ﬁve predicables (Isagoge) and it goes
on to discuss the Ten Categories (Categories) and then how
propositions are built up from words, and their logical
relations to one another (On Interpretation), before con-
sidering topical arguments (De topicis differentiis) and
categorical
and
then
hypothetical
syllogisms
(De
syllogismo categorico, De syllogiso hypothetico). At times,
Garlandus refers to ‘‘the book,’’ which seems to be a text,
perhaps adapted, of Boethius’ logical treatises (Garlandus
Compotista 1959:xlvi–xlix).
Garlandus seems to be one of a group of logicians,
mostly identiﬁed from second-hand accounts, who in the
late eleventh century, and perhaps later, expounded the
logical textbooks of Aristotle and Boethius in voce rather
than in re: that is to say, they took the logical terms
discussed by Porphyry and Aristotle, such as ‘‘genus,’’
‘‘accident,’’ ‘‘substance,’’ ‘‘quality,’’ as words which, in the
context of logic, signify other words, rather than things
(cf. Iwakuma 1992; Marenbon 2004:27–34; Marenbon
forthcoming; Cameron forthcoming – for a critique).
‘‘Genus,’’ for instance, signiﬁes genus words, such as
‘‘animal,’’ or ‘‘substance,’’ substance words, such as
‘‘man’’ or ‘‘horse.’’ Garlandus sticks to this way of
interpreting even where the authoritative ancient texts
would be much more easily read as discussions about
words that signify things. For example, when Porphyry
deﬁnes an accident as that which comes to and is absent
from a subject without the subject’s being corrupted, he
seems to have in mind, as what is signiﬁed by ‘‘accident,’’
some sort of thing, such as Socrates’ whiteness, which he
Garlandus the Computist G
381
G

loses when he acquires a suntan. Garlandus (1959: 10, l.
25–11, l. 6), however, gives a contorted exegesis that makes
the statement apply to substance words and accident
words. Recent work by C.J. Martin, still in progress,
suggests that this strategy might derive from a quite
sophisticated and consistent view about the constituents
of reality, which is close to that developed by Roscelin at
the end of the eleventh century.
Another striking feature of the Dialectica is the fre-
quent presence of sophisms – what Garlandus calls
sophisticae cavillationes. These are arguments in which
a contradiction – usually that ‘‘man is not man’’ – is
shown to follow from a certain proposition by an (often
over-elaborate) logical deduction. The solution to such
sophisms often involves the clariﬁcation of the proposi-
tion in question or its context.
See also: ▶Boethius ▶Roscelin of Compie`gne
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Compotista Garlandus (1959) Dialectica, ed. de Rijk LM. Van Gorcum,
Assen
Secondary Sources
Cameron M (forthcoming) The development of early twelfth century
logic: a reconsideration. In: Rosier-Catach I (ed) Arts du langage et
the´ologie aux conﬁns des XIe-XIIe sie`cle: conditions et enjeux d’une
mutation. Brepols, Turnhout
Iwakuma Y (1992) ‘‘Vocales’’, or early nominalists. Traditio 47:37–111
Marenbon J (2004) Abelard’s intellectual contexts. In: The Cambridge
companion to Abelard, ed. Brower J, Guilfoy K. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp 13–44
Marenbon J (forthcoming) Logic at the turn of the twelfth century:
a synthesis. In: Rosier-Catach I (ed) Arts du langage et the´ologie
aux conﬁns des XIe-XIIe sie`cle: conditions et enjeux d’une mutation.
Brepols, Turnhout
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad
TANELI KUKKONEN
Department of History
University of Jyva¨skyla¨
Jyva¨skyla¨
Finland
Abstract
There have long been two contending narratives when it
comes to situating Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad al-G˙ aza¯lı¯
(Algazel/Algazali) (1056–1111), Islam’s most renowned
theologian, within the history of philosophy. According
to one, G˙ aza¯lı¯ proved the scourge of the Arabic philoso-
phers when he pointed out their various pretensions and
self-contradictions and when he advocated a retreat to
ﬁdeism as well as a practically oriented mysticism. On
this view, G˙ aza¯lı¯’s philosophical explorations were of
a
uniformly
dialectical
character,
aiming
solely
at
defending the faith, in keeping with the tradition of
Islamic speculative theology (kala¯m). The competing
story has it that G˙ aza¯lı¯ became so enamored of philosophy
that, against his protestations, he became a crypto-
Avicennian himself. On this reading, G˙ aza¯lı¯ either sal-
vaged philosophy for the uses of Muslim theology and
mysticism, or else fatally corrupted the two with its taint.
Both views have it right, and wrong. G˙ aza¯lı¯’s criticisms of
the Arabic Aristotelians are piecemeal and local, and he
certainly appropriates from the philosophers far more
than he rejects. At the same time, G˙ aza¯lı¯’s commitments
do not lie with the Peripatetics any more than with the
Ashʿarite school of theology, a tradition which he also
criticizes. Rather, G˙ aza¯lı¯ is involved in developing a fresh
synthesis that would reﬂect the insights he sees as crucial
to authentic wisdom: the world’s profound contingency,
the role played by the divine attributes in shaping this
world, the rational soul’s ultimate destiny in the next,
and the need for constant spiritual striving and prophetic
guidance in purifying the soul to the point where it can
attain its destiny.
Life and Works
A fair amount is known about G˙ aza¯lı¯’s life and career. This
has less to do with his purported autobiography, The
Deliverer from Error – which, aside from being an intellec-
tual treatise rather than an actual biography, is also very
much a literary construct – and more with G˙ aza¯lı¯’s fame
and notoriety already during his lifetime. Many came to
accept G˙ aza¯lı¯’s immodest self-evaluation according to
which he was the sixth Islamic century’s appointed
‘‘renewer’’ of the Muslim faith; those who did not
suggested less elevated motives for his various activities
(see Griffel 2009).
G˙ aza¯lı¯ was born in 1056 in T˙u¯s, Iran. His studies in the
Islamic sciences took him ﬁrst to Jurja¯n, then to Nı¯sha¯pu¯r,
where he studied under the famed Ashʿarite theologian al-
Juwaynı¯ (1028–1085). G˙ aza¯lı¯’s early reputation was built
as a lawyer in the moderate tradition of al-Sha¯ﬁ‘ı¯. In 1091
the powerful vizier to the Seljuq sultan, Niza¯m al-Mulk,
invited G˙ aza¯lı¯ to teach at the Caliphate’s ﬂagship college in
Baghdad. The appointment effectively thrust G˙ aza¯lı¯ into
the spotlight as a rising star within the Sunni learned
382 G
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad

community. G˙ aza¯lı¯ proceeded to write expositions of
speculative theology, among them The Mean in Belief,
and tracts defending Sunni orthodoxy against the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯
sect, then in control of Fa¯timid Egypt, as well as ‘‘the
philosophers’’ – in actuality, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Avicenna.
In the Incoherence of the Philosophers (4.3–5.4), G˙ aza¯lı¯
justiﬁes this procedure by postulating that these two
most accurately convey the thought of Aristotle, who in
turn is by common consent the ‘‘absolute philosopher’’
and ‘‘ﬁrst teacher.’’ It is, then, with a Platonically tinged
Aristotelianism that G˙ aza¯lı¯ had to grapple; and it is
notable that the philosophical notions most attractive to
him – the immaterial nature and otherworldly orientation
of the rational soul, the creative role of the ideas in the
divine mind – carry a Platonic stamp.
In 1095, G˙ aza¯lı¯ experienced a spiritual crisis which
resulted in him resigning from his post at the Niza¯miyya.
G˙ aza¯lı¯ came to regard his own pugnacious academic per-
sona as displaying disdainful intellectual pride; he also
found it impossible to accept anymore the patronage of
worldly rulers, given that he would then also be expected
to serve their worldly aims and become complicit in their
corrupt rule. After an initial bout of seclusion and pil-
grimage, G˙ aza¯lı¯ taught privately for a period of 10 years,
during which time he completed his masterwork, The
Reviviﬁcation of the Religious Sciences, a practically ori-
ented guide to disclosing the spiritual signiﬁcance of pre-
scribed Muslim practices.
G˙ aza¯lı¯ eventually resumed teaching at a state school,
though, as he himself insisted, this was not a return to
what once was (Deliverer, 49.23–24). No longer dogmatic
or dialectic, G˙ aza¯lı¯’s late works all urgently preach the need
for salvation and a virtuous life. These works, hortative
and allusive in character, advance a series of provocative
stances seen from the standpoint of traditional Muslim
theology, stances that in places are closely aligned with the
Arabic Peripatetic tradition.
G˙ aza¯lı¯ died in T˙u¯s in 1111, his reputation as both
Avicennian and anti-Avicennian already ﬁrmly established.
His works quickly gained currency in the Islamic world,
which they have since enjoyed uninterruptedly.
Thought
Although G˙ aza¯lı¯ did not call himself a philosopher, his
writings contain much philosophically interesting mate-
rial. G˙ aza¯lı¯’s observations regarding the philosophers’ the-
oretical ediﬁce are illuminating, and his assaults on its
weak spots incisive. (Because of the pithiness of his sum-
maries, G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Intentions of the Philosophers became
a widely used textbook in Latin and Hebrew circles. The
scholastics only learned of G˙ aza¯lı¯’s anti-Avicennian
polemics with the 1328 translation of Averroes’ response,
The Incoherence of the Incoherence.) Because of his asserted
independence from the various schools and refusal to
accept anything on authority or taqlı¯d (e.g., Deliverer,
10.21–11.7, 15.9–14; Frank 1991–1992), G˙ aza¯lı¯ is also
free to take his thoughts in striking new directions.
But for all the inherent interest in the notions he puts
forward, G˙ aza¯lı¯ has proved a notoriously slippery thinker.
Ideas often remain underdeveloped, alluded to more than
ﬂeshed out, and it is sometimes unclear whether their
implications have been worked out at all. Part of the
problem lies in G˙ aza¯lı¯’s adaptable attitude toward termi-
nology, which led to Averroes’ memorable complaint that
‘‘with the Ashʿarites he was an Ashʿarite, with the Suﬁs
a Suﬁ, and with the philosophers a philosopher’’ (Fas:l,
22.6–7; cp. G˙ aza¯lı¯, Deliverer, 10.10–20; on G˙ aza¯lı¯’s vocab-
ulary see Lazarus-Yafeh 1975). Part of it stems from the
1095 rupture in G˙ aza¯lı¯’s career. Though G˙ aza¯lı¯ never
disowned his earlier work, there are discrepancies between
the early legal and dogmatic works and the later spiritual
ones that are not easily explained away. For instance,
G˙ aza¯lı¯ early on subscribes to a divine commandment
theory of ethics, which sits uneasily with the more natu-
ralistic view of the good that the later works assume. Still,
certain basic tenets carry throughout G˙ aza¯lı¯’s career.
Demonstration and Doubt
It is useful to start with G˙ aza¯lı¯’s legal condemnation of
the philosophers. On three counts, the Arabic Aristotelians
are to be regarded as unbelievers: because (1) the philos-
ophers subscribe to the pre-eternity of the world, (2) deny
that God knows particulars, and (3) reject bodily resur-
rection, the fala¯sifa fall foul of the creedal confession of the
Muslims. (On an additional 17 charges, the philosophers
are to be deemed heretics). These positions are offensive
not so much because they contradict the apparent mean-
ing of Scripture – G˙ aza¯lı¯ is prepared to reinterpret revela-
tion where reason demands – but because of the
necessitarian line of reasoning that has brought the phi-
losophers to them. In G˙ aza¯lı¯’s mind, the philosophers
presume to dictate the terms on which God’s encounter
with creation must take place, a procedure that unduly
restricts God’s absolute power (qudra). Because the con-
clusion is unacceptable, the philosophers’ reasoning must
be faulty.
Because G˙ aza¯lı¯ accepts the demonstrative scientiﬁc
ideal endorsed by the Muslim philosophers from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
onward, he needs to ﬁnd fault either with the philoso-
phers’ formal inferences or with their premises. Typically
he concentrates on the latter, claiming that what the phi-
losophers regard as the necessary and self-evident starting
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad G
383
G

points for knowledge are in fact anything but that. For
instance, the common conviction that certain things are
causes for others is ultimately indemonstrable, since all
we ever perceive are things happening concurrently
(Incoherence, 166.1–168.10). The philosophers’ rejection
of a ﬁrst moment of time at which God created the world
from nothing is likewise untenable. They may claim that
this is a necessary truth of reason, but the simple fact that
not all people share the same intuition shows that it
cannot be a primary, axiomatic truth, nor can the philos-
ophers demonstrate their thesis inferentially (Incoherence,
17.6–15). The same approach is employed time and again
both in the Incoherence and in other polemical works:
G˙ aza¯lı¯ cleverly exploits the distinction between conceiv-
ability and imaginability, maintaining that many things
that do not fall within the parameters of our everyday
experience may nevertheless be possible to a transcendent
agent (see Kukkonen 2006).
G˙ aza¯lı¯’s methodological skepticism in the Deliverer is
to be viewed in this light. To accept straightforwardly
G˙ aza¯lı¯’s description of a self-induced skeptical crisis is
to ignore the profoundly literary character of the work.
Stephen Menn has situated G˙ aza¯lı¯’s autobiography in
a line of philosophical self-assertion that stretches from
Galen to Descartes (Menn 2003). The narrative is similarly
ﬁltered through G˙ aza¯lı¯’s later association with the ‘‘sober’’
Suﬁsm of al-Junayd (Ormsby 1991). The Deliverer’s pas-
sages on doubt and certainty ultimately aim at pointing
the way toward an epistemology whereby God acts as the
guarantor of all veridical perceptions, whether sensory,
intellectual, or supraintellectual. Even so, there are impor-
tant self-imposed limits to G˙ aza¯lı¯’s radicalism, starting
with his willingness to defer to reason as a yardstick for
determining which beliefs are warranted. This differenti-
ates his position from the thoroughgoing ﬁdeism of the
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s,
whose
irrationalism
G˙ aza¯lı¯
opposed
(see
Kukkonen 2010).
Contingency and Necessity
As already noted, G˙ aza¯lı¯ advocates the adoption of Peri-
patetic logic as a tool for Muslim theology. He grounds
his endorsement in the assertion that Muh:ammad
himself employed logic when arguing with the heathens
(see The Just Balance, passim). The claim serves two pur-
poses, since in addition to justifying the teaching of logic
among Muslims it can be made to substantiate the
claim that logical reasoning is by no means exclusive to
the
Aristotelians,
but
instead
reﬂects
a
universal
human capacity, one that which all are equally well
equipped to exercise (Deliverer, 9.16–18; Incoherence,
22.10–23.3).
The philosophers’ necessitarianism, however, meant
that their logic needed to be conceptualized along new
lines if it was to be domesticated for the uses of
a voluntarist theology. The single most valuable tool in
this realignment is G˙ aza¯lı¯’s fresh consideration of the
modal notions. Building on Aristotle’s deﬁnition of the
potential as that which may or may not be (Metaphysics,
9.3–4) and Avicenna’s rephrasing of the same in terms of
‘‘contingency of existence’’ (mumkin al-wuju¯d), G˙ aza¯lı¯
forcefully emphasizes the contingency of the entire created
order. Against the Arabic Aristotelians, whose analysis of
the modal terms standardly proceeded along temporal and
statistical lines (the necessary is that which is true always,
the possible sometimes, the impossible never), G˙ aza¯lı¯
maintains that possibilities are not to be judged in relation
to the actual world at all. Instead, ‘‘the possibility to which
they have alluded reduces to an intellectual judgement’’
(qad˙a¯’ al-‘aql: Incoherence, 42.2), where the judgment in
question has to do with whether two propositions are
mutually compatible. A single thing cannot be at once
temporal and eternal, for instance, nor can something be
human without being an animal; by contrast, there is
nothing to preclude one from saying that God was (ﬁrst
alone) and that He then was with the world (31.13–20,
32.14–33.18).
On G˙ aza¯lı¯’s view, impossibilities do not constitute
objects of God’s power (Incoherence, 175.5). Because all
impossibilities ultimately reduce to explicit contradic-
tions, this in no way threatens divine omnipotence
(38.17–18). This also means that several questions of
a broadly metaphysical nature – e.g., whether secondary
causality is real, whether the soul is ultimately material or
immaterial – do not require a deﬁnitive resolution, since
both possibilities are real for God and because either
solution will yield a sufﬁcient understanding of the world’s
contingency in relation to God, who is the only true
necessary existent. G˙ aza¯lı¯’s noncommittal stance on
such issues signals neither obfuscation nor confusion,
but instead a carefully weighted attitude to what is demon-
strable and what is not (also important, from the salviﬁc
point of view). This we can see from the one thesis to
which strict adherence is required, namely that the world
has a temporal beginning (Incoherence, 40.15): for here, to
believe with the philosophers that the world is eternal is to
fall into the temporal-frequency trap when interpreting
the modalities. (An eternal world would include all possi-
bilities,
just
as
the
Neoplatonic
philosophers
had
suggested, but leaving nothing out implies that God had
no choice but to include everything). Instead, the world’s
very createdness ensures its contingency, and hence the
role of the divine will in making a difference between
384 G
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad

alternatives that are in themselves indifferent with respect
to existence or nonexistence.
Taken together, G˙ aza¯lı¯’s suggestions amount to the
view that possibilities are to be judged in terms of
compossibility.
This
preﬁgures
John
Duns
Scotus’
pioneering work in possible-worlds semantics, although
G˙ aza¯lı¯ nowhere draws out the systematic implications of
his innovations the way Scotus does (see Kukkonen 2000).
G˙ aza¯lı¯’s interest does not lie in modal metaphysics as
such, but in developing a modal theory that would
produce theologically acceptable results. Nevertheless,
G˙ aza¯lı¯’s further theologically motivated remarks to the
effect that this is the best of all possible worlds generated
a lively debate among Muslim theologians, one whose
theoretical dimensions are as yet inadequately researched
(see Ormsby 1984).
The Divine Attributes, God-Talk, and Creation
One of the most fertile problems in early Muslim theology
concerned the reality of the divine attributes. By introduc-
ing Aristotelian predication and semantics as a framework
for tackling the problem, G˙ aza¯lı¯ was able to shift the
terms of the debate. In so doing, he prepared the
ground for further Platonically inﬂuenced thinkers in the
mould of Ibn al-‘Arabı¯ (1165–1240), though in the pro-
cess, some of the ﬁnesse of the earlier Islamic discussions
was lost.
G˙ aza¯lı¯’s position is that the unity of the divine attri-
butes is a case of Aristotelian accidental unity or identity
(Met. 5.6.1015b18–20, 5.9.1017b26–27). The idem quod of
the sentence ‘‘The First is the same as the Last’’ is one and
the same, namely, God, but distinct from either the osten-
sible subject or the predicate term (Beautiful Names,
29–31). This resembles the identity theory of predication
advanced concurrently by Peter Abelard, although again
by comparison G˙ aza¯lı¯’s remarks appear undercooked. At
any rate, for G˙ aza¯lı¯ the further fact that the meaning of
each term (‘‘God,’’ ‘‘ﬁrst,’’ ‘‘last’’) is distinct from the
others signals that each refers to a distinct quiddity and
reality, whose meaning we can begin to uncover through
observing its manifestations on the material plane. Not-
withstanding his intentional reading of the divine names,
then, G˙ aza¯lı¯ regards the attributes not only as real but as
the blueprint according to which creation proceeds.
They are given to the world ﬁrst in the very act of
God granting existence to things, second in the teleo-
logically oriented imitation in which each thing is
allowed to become what it most truly is (Beautiful
Names, 79–82). The two phases correspond to Avicennian
efﬁcient and ﬁnal causality, and more generally to the
Neoplatonic motions of procession and return (Gr.
pro´odos, epistrophe¯). They also make possible the human
act of cognizing and thereby the speciﬁcally human mode
of perfection, which consists in knowing the realities of
things
(h:aqa¯’iq
al-ashya¯’:
Beautiful
Names,
82–84,
146–147).
G˙ aza¯lı¯’s insistence on understanding the revealed
names ﬁrst and foremost in the context of divine perfec-
tion allows him to sidestep the thorny issue of analogical
versus equivocal predication when it comes to divine and
worldly properties. Though we have no recourse but to use
words in the light of their mundane reference, a believer
will take it on faith that each of the revealed names of God
refers primarily and absolutely to a transcendent form of
perfection. A full disclosure of the real semantic range
of such perfection terms remains conclusively out of
our reach, while an imperfect understanding of them will
depend on the dual process of abstraction from worldly
particulars and illumination from above (Beautiful
Names, 50–58, 162–171). The latter constitutes our
primary task and vocation, as per Muh:ammad’s exhorta-
tion for us to meditate on the divine names. G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
cosmology thus becomes intimately intertwined with his
psychology.
Psychology
As in many respects, so in psychology it is difﬁcult to
gauge the actual distance between G˙ aza¯lı¯’s views and
those of the philosophers whom he criticizes. In some
places, G˙ aza¯lı¯ speaks of the soul as if it were a bodily
accident in the kala¯m sense, while in others he advances
the Avicennian picture of soul as separate substance and
hylomorphic form. He also insists on the reality of bodily
resurrection in the Incoherence, yet describes the pleasures
and pains of the afterlife in imaginative and incorporeal
terms
in
the
ﬁnal
section
of
the
Reviviﬁcation.
G˙ aza¯lı¯ even declares the reality of the heart (his
preferred term for soul) a mystery on a par with the divine
essence.
Such vacillations notwithstanding, G˙ aza¯lı¯ in his
mature work clearly adapts the explanatory framework
of Peripatetic teaching, with the ﬁve outer senses feeding
the ﬁve inner senses, which in turn are in charge of unify-
ing the perceptual ﬁeld and providing information for the
purposes of action and contemplation – the provinces of
the practical and theoretical intellects, respectively. G˙ aza¯lı¯
also appropriates Platonic moral psychology, in which the
appetitive and irascible impulses are unruly elements to be
brought under the rational soul’s control, and the
Avicennian understanding of the soul’s executive powers
(see, e.g., Reviviﬁcation, bk. 21 and the Jerusalem Ascent,
passim).
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad G
385
G

The central problem that G˙ aza¯lı¯ encountered in his
philosophical sources had to do with how the vaunted
‘‘true realities,’’ that is, essences of things are grasped. In
true Aristotelian fashion, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ had emphasized the
role of abstraction (tajrı¯d) in the acquisition of knowledge,
while the school of al-Kindı¯(d. c. 870), extending at least as
far as al-‘A¯mirı¯, contended that the eye of the intellect
opens up to a world all its own, in a process from which
the senses are excluded. Avicenna appears to have wanted
to split the difference, with an elaborate process of abstrac-
tion leading up to an emanation of the intelligibles from
the Agent Intellect (see Gutas’ and Hasse’s contributions to
Wisnovsky 2001). G˙ aza¯lı¯ more or less follows Avicenna,
with two important differences: (1) the highest intelligibles
are the divine attributes themselves, for which no true
likeness exists in the created world and whose emanation
therefore cannot be a matter of necessity, (2) the prepara-
tory work required for the reception of these exalted prin-
ciples need not be exclusively the province of the scientist
or Suﬁ, instead, the puriﬁcatory virtues available to all are
sufﬁcient for such a diffusion of divine grace to take place.
G˙ aza¯lı¯ sees an allusion to this doctrine in the Prophetic
tradition citing God’s ‘‘gusts of beneﬁcence,’’ and also in
the famous ‘‘light verse’’ of the Qurʾa¯n (24:35). The latter
gave rise to a whole elaborate exegesis in G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Niche of
Lights, the most notorious of his mystical treatises.
Ethics
G˙ aza¯lı¯ enthusiastically embraces the Platonic simile of the
soul as a mirror in need of polishing. His ethics, therefore,
essentially form a propaedeutic to the realization of the
contemplative ideal. Still, by emphasizing the particular
nature of the various ailments which afﬂict individual
human souls, G˙ aza¯lı¯ gets to add a distinctive Islamic
ﬂourish to an otherwise Hellenic system. Since few can
aspire to be scientists or hermits, and because the active
life puts all kinds of obstacles in the aspirant’s way, as does
basic human weakness, philosophy with its universal pre-
scriptions cannot hope to aid effectively each and every
individual. In the face of this quandary, the Law handed
down by the Prophet shows its truly miraculous character;
whosoever follows its prescriptions, ﬁnds his or her soul
improved, and discovers that there are limitless depths to
its application. The marvelous character of the divine Law
is shown precisely in its applicability to each and every
human situation. Muh:ammadan prophecy effectively per-
forms the same function as theurgy did for the late ancient
Platonists, allowing for divinity to reach directly to the
individual level, past the restrictions associated with the
general
Platonic
perfecting
mechanism
of
soul-
approximating reason.
On a practical level, G˙ aza¯lı¯’s ethics owe much to Abu¯
Ta¯lib al-Makkı¯’s (d. 996) Nourishment of the Hearts as well
as to the ‘‘reformation of character’’ literature exempliﬁed
by Miskawayh’s (d. 1030) treatise of the same name (see
Sherif 1975; Gramlich 1992–1995). Some of the salient
features include G˙ aza¯lı¯’s choice of metriopatheia both as
an ideal and as a practically attainable goal against an
apathetic intellectualism; an emphasis on constant vigi-
lance and merciless scrutiny in examining one’s own moti-
vations, which often are shown to be more venal than one
would like (G˙ aza¯lı¯ attributes these systemic moral failings
to the whisperings of the devil mentioned in the Qurʾa¯n,
which
appear
to
constitute
an
active
principle
counteracting the divine purpose); and an overall two-
tier system, whereby a small elite is given the rareﬁed
task of
pursuing
a
truly contemplative
happiness,
while the majority of believers are left to lead a more
rounded, if also mundane, life in accordance with the
outward
prescriptions
of
Muh:ammad’s
religion
(Kukkonen 2008).
See also: ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad
ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avi-
cenna) ▶Miskawayh, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ ▶Philosophy, Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯Al-Iqtis:a¯d fı¯ l-i‘tiqa¯d (The mean in belief), ed. Cubukcu AI, Atay
H. Nur Matbaasi, Istanbul
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1963) Ma‘a¯rij al-quds fı¯ mada¯rij al-ma‘rifa al-nafs (The Jerusa-
lem ascent on the steps of knowing the soul). al-Maktaba al-tija¯riyya
al-kubra¯, Cairo
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1964) Fad˙a¯’ih: al-ba¯t:iniyya wa-fad˙a¯’il al-mustaz˙hiriyya (The
infamies of the esotericists and the virtues of the Mustaz˙hiri party),
ed. Badawı¯ ‘A. Da¯r al-qawmiyya, Cairo
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯(1969) Al-Munqidh min al-d˙ala¯l (The deliverer from error), 2nd
edn, ed. Ayya¯d K, S˙alı¯ba J, printed together with Farid Jabre’s French
translation in the UNESCO bilingual edition Erreur et de´liverance.
Librairie Orientale, Beirut
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1982) Al-Maqs:ad al-asna¯ fı¯ sh:arh ma‘a¯nı¯ asma¯’ Alla¯h al-h:usna¯
(The
highest
summit
in
explaining
the
meanings
of
the
beautiful names of god), 2nd edn, ed. Shehadi F. Da¯r al-mashriq,
Beirut
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1986) Al-Qist:a¯s al-mustaqı¯m (The just balance), ed. Chelhot V.
Da¯r al-mashriq, Beirut
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1998) The niche of lights, ed. after Aﬁﬁ, trans. Buchman D.
Brigham Young University Press, Provo
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯(2000) The incoherence of the philosophers, 2nd rev. edn, ed. after
Bouyges, trans. Marmura ME. Brigham Young University Press, Provo
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (2002) Ih:ya¯’ ‘ulu¯m al-dı¯n (The reviviﬁcation of the religious
sciences), 5 vols. Da¯r al-kutub al-‘ilmiyya, Beirut
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (2003) Maqa¯s:id al-fala¯sifa (The intentions of the philosophers).
Da¯r al-kutub al-‘ilmiyya, Beirut
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (2005) Ayyu-ha¯ al-walad (‘‘O Boy’’). Letter to a disciple, ed. and
trans. Mayer T. Islamic Texts Society, Cambridge
386 G
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad

Ibn Rushd (1930) Taha¯fut al-taha¯fut (The incoherence of the incoher-
ence), ed. Bouyges M. Imprimerie Catholique, Beirut
Ibn Rushd (2001) Abu¯ al-Walı¯d Muh:ammad ibn Ah:mad [Averroes],
Kita¯b fas:l al-maqa¯l wa-taqrı¯r ma¯ bayna al-sharı¯‘a wa-l-h:ikma min
al-ittis:a¯l (The decisive treatise in determining the connection
between the law and wisdom). Decisive treatise & epistle dedicatory,
ed. and trans. Butterworth CE. Brigham Young University Press,
Provo
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1959) Abu¯ ‘Alı¯ [Avicenna] Al-Shifa¯’: Kita¯b al-nafs (The Healing:
on the soul). Avicenna’s De anima, ed. Rahman F. Oxford University
Press, Oxford
Secondary Sources
Frank RM (1991–1992) Al-Ghaza¯lı¯ on Taqlı¯d. Scholars, theologians, and
philosophers. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geschichte der arabisch-islamischen
Wissenschaften 7:207–252
Frank RM (1992) Creation and the cosmic system: Al-Ghaza¯lı¯ &
Avicenna. Carl Winter Universita¨tsverlag, Heidelberg
Frank RM (1994) Al-Ghaza¯lı¯ and the Ashʿarite school. Duke University
Press, Durham/London
Gramlich R (1992–1995) Die Nahrung der Herzen. Abu¯ T˙a¯lib al-Makkı¯’s
Qu¯t al-qulu¯b eingeleitet, u¨bersetzt und kommentiert, 4 vols. Franz
Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart
Griffel F (1999) Apostasie und Toleranz im Islam. Die Entwicklung zu
al-Gaza¯lı¯s Urteil gegen die Philosophie und die Reaktionen der
Philosophen. E. J. Brill, Leiden
Griffel F (2009) Al-Ghaza¯lı¯’s philosophical theology. Oxford University
Press, Oxford
Hourani GF (1984) A revised chronology of Ghaza¯lı¯’s writings. J Am
Orient Soc 104(2):289–302
Kukkonen T (2000) Possible worlds in the Taha¯fut al-fala¯sifa. Al-Ghaza¯lı¯
on creation and contingency. J Hist Philos 38(4):479–502
Kukkonen T (2006) Mind and modal judgement: Al-Ghaza¯lı¯ and
Ibn Rushd on conceivability and possibility. In: Hirvonen V,
Holopainen T, Tuominen M (eds) Mind and modality. E. J. Brill,
Leiden, pp 121–139
Kukkonen T (2008) The self as enemy, the self as divine. A crossroads
in the development of Islamic anthropology. In: Remes P,
Sihvola J (eds) The self in ancient philosophy. Springer, Dordrecht,
pp 205–224
Kukkonen T (2010) Al-Ghaza¯lı¯’s skepticism revisited. In: Lagerlund
H (ed) Skepticism in medieval philosophy. Brill, Leiden
Lazarus-Yafeh H (1975) Studies in al-Ghazzali. Magnes Press, Jerusalem
Marmura ME (2010) Probing in Islamic philosophy. Studies in the phi-
losophies of Ibn Sina, al-Ghazali and other major Muslim thinkers.
Global Academic, Binghamton
Menn S (2003) The discourse on method and the tradition of intellectual
autobiography. In: Miller J, Inwood B (eds) Hellenistic and early
modern philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 141–191
Ormsby EL (1984) Theodicy in Islamic thought: the dispute over al-
Ghaza¯lı¯’s ‘Best of all possible worlds’. Princeton University Press,
Princeton
Ormsby EL (1991) The taste of truth: the structure of experience in al-
Ghaza¯lı¯’s Al-Munqidh Min al-Dala¯l. In: Hallaq WB, Little DP (eds)
Islamic studies presented to Charles J. Adams. E. J. Brill, Leiden, pp
133–152
Sherif MA (1975) Ghazali’s theory of virtue. The State University of New
York Press, Albany
Wisnovsky R (ed) (2001) Aspects of Avicenna. Markus Wiener,
Princeton
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ʾs Maqa¯s:id al-Fala¯sifa,
Latin Translation of
JULES JANSSENS
De Wulf-Mansion Centre
KU Leuven
Leuven
Belgium
Abstract
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Maqa¯s:id was translated at the end of the twelfth
century into Latin in Toledo, and in all likelihood without
the introduction (which in the Arabic tradition might well
have been added at a later time). The Latin Scholastics were
not completely wrong in considering it a philosophical
compendium largely inspired by Avicennian ideas, insofar
as the text is indeed largely based on Avicenna’s Da¯nesh-
Na¯meh. In this sense, it is understandable that they used it
only as a secondary rather than as a primary source.
Translation
In Toledo, toward the end of the twelfth century,
Dominicus Gundissalinus together with the still enigmatic
‘‘Magister John (of Spain)’’ (Burnett 2002), translated al-
G˙ aza¯lı¯’s work known as Maqa¯s:id al-fala¯sifa (The Intentions
of the Philosophers). However, the title of the work given by
the Latin translators was not Intentiones philosophorum,
but Summa theoreticae philosophiae – the former title only
appearing in the translation of the prologue, which is
absent in all manuscripts except for Paris, BN, lat. 16096,
which dates to the last quarter of the thirteenth century
(Salman 1936:118). On the basis of the stemma codicum,
Lohr (1965:229) inclines to believe that the prologue was
not included in the original translation. Important differ-
ences in terminology, but, above all, the articulation of al-
G˙ aza¯lı¯’s name in the nominative as ‘‘Abuhamedin
Algazelin’’ and the use of De philosophorum intentionibus
as the (new) title of the work (Salman 1936:125) make it
even less probable that the prologue was translated
together with the main text, and rather point to an anon-
ymous later translator. Furthermore, the almost complete
ignorance of the prologue by the vast majority of the
thirteenth
(and
even
fourteenth)
century
authors
undoubtedly corroborates this view. Roger Bacon seems
to constitute the one notable exception, and even then
only in one of his later works, that is, the Communium
naturalium. Bacon is to be contrasted with Raimundus
Marti (d. 1285 c.) a Spanish missionary, who in his
major work Pugio ﬁdei quotes passages of several works
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ʾs Maqa¯s:id al-Fala¯sifa, Latin Translation of G
387
G

of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ among which are the Taha¯fut (but not the
Maqa¯s:id) and who detected in the latter a defender of the
faith against the (all too) rational philosophy. Bacon in
contrast continues to detect in al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ a genuine philos-
opher, and hence he clearly ignored the true nature of the
Taha¯fut, whose title is translated in the prologue as Liber
controversiae philosophorum, not as Ruina philosophorum
as Marti had done. For Bacon the prologue, like the
introduction to Avicenna’s Shifa¯’, intends to make clear
that the present work does not offer a full expose´ of the
most profound philosophical insights; nevertheless, beau-
tiful philosophical secrets have been hidden in it (Bacon,
III, 250). Finally, the prologue may have already been
absent from the Arabic manuscript at the disposal of
Dominicus Gundisalvi and Magister John. Indeed, the
prologue, in which the title of the work is indicated as
Maqa¯s:id al-fala¯sifa, in all likelihood was added at a later
time (Hana 1972:892–895). Moreover, the work reveals
itself to be a slightly interpretative translation into Arabic
of Avicenna’s Persian encyclopedia Da¯nesh-Na¯meh and
thus shows up as a kind of student’s thesis, commonly
designated at the time as ta‘liq (Janssens 2006a, VII, XI).
Ultimately, the commonly accepted intimate link between
the Maqa¯s:id and the Taha¯fut – the former work being
a neutral presentation of the doctrines of the philosophers
so that the reader could better understand the refutation of
these doctrines in the latter – is highly questionable, espe-
cially in view of important terminological differences as
well as the use in the Maqa¯s:id of only Avicennian texts
(Reynolds 2002; Janssens 2006a, X). Hence, the absence of
the prologue is not necessarily the result of an historical
misfortune in the transmission of the text, whether in the
Arabic or in the Latin tradition, or of any deliberate omis-
sion. It might simply reﬂect the oldest state of the text. Also
the very title of the work as given by the Latin translation,
again, Summa theoreticae philosophiae, offers perhaps an
indication of a reliance on a primitive version, insofar as it
presents itself almost as a possible, although not very
literal, translation of the Persian Da¯nesh-Na¯meh (Book of
Knowledge or: Book of Science). Whatever the case may be,
the Latin translation was not always transmitted in its
original unity. The several parts were often copied sepa-
rately, and especially the treatise on logic seems to have
been regarded as a more or less independent unit (Lohr
1965:232). The other two parts – metaphysics and physics
(in that order in full accordance with Avicenna’s Da¯nesh-
Na¯meh) – were sometimes designated as Philosophia
Algazelis. This helps explain why in 1506 P. Liechtenstein
published the work in Venice under the title Logica et
philosophia Algazelis arabis, of which a second edition
appeared in 1532 (Daiber 1990:232). It might also be
worthwhile to note that Ramo´n Llull made a compendium
of Arabic logic in Latin, titled Compendium logicae
Algazelis, which he based mainly, although not exclusively,
on the logical part of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Maqa¯s:id Llull set it more-
over into Catalan verses as Logica de Gatzell (d’Alverny
1994, VII, 7).
Reception
The work was well known among most thirteenth-century
Scholastic thinkers. The earliest quotations are probably
those found in one of the independent works of one
of the translators, that is, Gundissalinus’ De divisione
philosophiae, although without any explicit reference to
the Maqa¯s:id (Gundissalinus 2007, passim). Also the anon-
ymous treatise from around 1225, De anima et de potentiis
eius, uses al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s work without mentioning it (Hasse
2000:192). This was not an uncommon practice, as can be
shown by the case of Godfrey of Fontaines (Wippel 1981,
72, n. 88). Therefore, one may suspect that many other
writings of this time include such implicit quotations.
Whatever be the case, one also ﬁnds a large number of
explicit references to it in a wide variety of authors. Many
times the reference is simply to ‘‘Algazel’’, and frequently in
direct combination with Avicenna, that is, as Avicenna et
Algazel. In this latter form, it appears inter alia in Roland
of Cremona (Hasse 2000:41–42) and John Quidort
(Quidort 1964 33:131), as well as in such major Scholastic
thinkers as Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas, and Siger of
Brabant. The very intimate link between Algazel and Avi-
cenna is particularly stressed by Albert the Great, who in
his De homine states that al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s positions are
a summary, abbreviatio, of those of Avicenna and that
the former follows the latter’s footstep (sequens eius
vestigia) (Hasse 2000:63). In the same vein, Dietrich of
Freiburg calls al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ an abbreviator of Avicenna (Die-
trich 1977:144). Henry of Ghent, in his turn, presents al-
G˙ aza¯lı¯ as expositor Avicennae, someone who explains Avi-
cenna (Henry of Ghent 1984:117). As for William of
Auvergne, he sees al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, together with Avicenna and
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, as a follower of Aristotle, sequax Aristotelis (Wil-
liam of Auvergne 1674:112b). Finally Robert Grosseteste
refers to him as Algazel philosophus (Grosseteste 1995:73),
and as such he is also considered in the (Pseudo-?)-Giles of
Rome’s Errores philosophorum, where in Chapter 9 men-
tion is made of 18 philosophical errors related to his
thought (Giles of Rome 1944:44–47). In 1376, this list of
errors was included in the Directorium inquisitorum of
Nicholas Eymerich (Lohr 1965:231). Concerning the
work itself, it never seems to have been referred to by
a general title, but always by its parts, designated most of
the time as Logyca and Metaphysica, as especially attested
388 G
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ʾs Maqa¯s:id al-Fala¯sifa, Latin Translation of

by Roger Bacon. In the latter’s commentary on the Secret of
Secrets, one also ﬁnds mentioned the part on Naturalibus
(Bacon, V, 11), but this does not seem to have been a very
common designation. Matthew of Aquasparta preferred
the designation Philosophia when referring to an item
related to the physical part (Matthew of Aquasparta
1959:158), and thus, in all likelihood, considered both
parts of metaphysics and physics as constituting one
unity, as seems to be frequently the case with the title
Metaphysica. It should also be noted that when John
Blund calls al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s metaphysics commentum primae
philosophiae, he is not necessarily referring to a title, but
may simply be offering a description of the work as written
in the tradition of a speciﬁc Aristotelian book (Hasse
2000:20).
On the doctrinal level, in view of the very nature of the
work, that is, as a slightly interpretative translation of
Avicenna’s Da¯nesh-Na¯meh that is complemented now
and then with variations from other Avicennian writings,
it is not surprising that the vast majority of the central
ideas have their counterparts in Avicenna as well. This is
the case, for example, for the logical thesis that the
unknown can only be known by something already
known, for the psychological doctrine of the two faces of
the soul, and for the metaphysical distinction between
essence and existence. The notion of ‘‘Giver of forms’’,
Dator formarum, is one of the rare cases where al-G˙ aza¯lı¯
presented a new idea, at least for his Latin readers (since
they had no access to Avicenna’s Ta‘lı¯qa¯t, which consti-
tuted most probably al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s source [Janssens 2006b]).
Otherwise one looks in vain for any systematic use of
new – at least, compared to the Avicenna Latinus – phil-
osophical ideas in the Maqa¯s:id, and when they do occur, it
is only by minor additions, for example, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s intro-
duction of the example of the camel in order to illustrate
the theory of the evil eye, mentioned by Robert
Grosseteste, Roland of Cremona, and Peter of Spain
(Hasse 2000:168–169 and 290). Hence, one easily under-
stands why for Thomas Aquinas, and almost all Scholas-
tics in agreement with him, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ was neither a very
important nor an original thinker (Hanley 1982). In the
fourteenth century, explicit references to the Maqa¯s:id
became rare, except perhaps in Spain where one ﬁnds an
anonymous Castillian manuscript offering many quota-
tions (Lohr 1965:231). However, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s name did not
disappear
totally
in
fourteenth-century
Scholastic
thought, and, in fact, it appears many times in a list of
several philosophers, as is the case in John of Jandun
(Brenet 2003, 246, n. 1) and John of Ripa (Combes 1956,
166, n. 2). All in all though, the inﬂuence of the Latin
translation of the Maqa¯s:id remained rather limited.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Arabic Texts: Natural
Philosophy, Latin Translations of ▶Arabic Texts: Philos-
ophy, Latin Translations of ▶Dietrich of Freiberg
▶Dominicus Gundissalinus ▶Godfrey of Fontaines
▶Henry of Ghent ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn
Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of ▶John of Jandun
▶Matthew of Aquasparta ▶Peter of Spain ▶Ramon Llull
▶Robert Grosseteste ▶Roger Bacon ▶Siger of Brabant
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶William of Auvergne
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Algazel (1963) Maqa¯s:id al-falaˆsifa o intenciones de los ﬁlo´sofos, trans.
into Spanish, intro. and annot.: Alonso Alonso M. Juan Flors,
Barcelona
Bacon Roger (1905–1940) Opera hactenus inedita, ed. Steele R et al.
Clarendon, Oxford
Dietrich of Freiburg (1977) Schriften zur Intellekttheorie, ed. Mojsisch
B. F. Meiner, Hamburg
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1506) Logica et philosophia. Venice (Repr. Minerva, Frankfurt,
1969), P. Liechtenstien
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1933) Algazel’s metaphysics. A mediaeval translation, ed.
Muckle JT. St. Michael’s College, Toronto (includes in fact the trans-
lation of both parts of the metaphysics and the physics)
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1965) Logica Algazelis, ed. Lohr Ch. Traditio 21:223–290
Giles of Rome (1944) Errores philosophorum, ed. Koch J, trans. Riedl J.
Marquette University Press, Milwaukee
Grosseteste Robert (1995) Expositio in epistolam sancti Pauli ad Galatas,
ed. McEvoy J. Brepols, Turnhout
Gundissalinus Dominicus (2007) De divisione philosophiae. U¨ ber die
Einteilung der Philosophie. Lateinisch-Deutsch, ed., trans. into Ger-
man and annot.: Fidora A, Werner D. Herder Verlag, Freiburg/Basel/
Wien
Henry of Ghent (1984) Quodlibet IX, ed. Macken R. Leuven University
Press, Leuven
Matthew of Aquasparta (1959) Quaestiones disputatae. De anima
separata. De anima beata. De ieiunio et de legibus, ed. PP. collegii
S. Bonaventurae Collegium S. Bonaventurae, Quaracchi
Quidort John (1964) Commentaire sur les Sentences: Reportation, ed.
Muller J. Orbis catholicus, Rome
William of Auvergne (1674) Opera omnia, ed. Hotot F. Orle´ans/Paris
(repr. Minerva, Frankfurt, 1963), Andreas Prallard
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Brenet J-B (2003) Transferts du sujet. La noe´tique d’Averroe`s selon Jean de
Jandun. Vrin, Paris
Hasse DN (2000) Avicenna’s De anima in the Latin West. The Warburg
Institute/Nino Aragno, London/Torino
Janssens J (2006a) Ibn Sı¯na¯ and his Inﬂuence on the Arabic and Latin
World. Ashgate/Variorum, Aldershot
Wippel J (1981) The metaphysical thought of Godfrey of Fontaines.
A study in late thirteenth century philosophy. Catholic University
of America Press, Washington D.C.
Collections
Daiber H (1990) Lateinische U¨ bersetzungen arabischer Texte zur
Philosophie und ihre Bedeutung fu¨r die Scholastik des Mittelalters.
In: Hamesse J, Fattori M (eds) Rencontres de cultures dans la
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ʾs Maqa¯s:id al-Fala¯sifa, Latin Translation of G
389
G

philosophie me´die´vale. Traductions et traducteurs de l’antiquite´
tardive au XIVe sie`cle. U.C.L./Univ. degli studi di Cassino, Louvain-
la-Neuve/Cassino, pp 203–250
d’Alverny M-Th (1994) Algazel dans l’Occident latin. In: d’Alverny M-Th
(ed) La transmission des textes philosophiques et scientiﬁques
au Moyen Age, ed. Burnett Ch. Ashgate/Variorum, Aldershot,
chapter VII
Hana Gh-G (1972) Die Hochscholastik um einer Autorita¨t armer. In:
Festschrift fu¨r Hermann Heimpel zum 70. Geburtstag. Vandenhoeck
und Ruprecht, Go¨ttingen, pp 884–899
Reynolds GS (2002) A philosophical odyssey: Ghazza¯lı¯’s Intentions of the
Philosophers. In: Inglis J (ed) Medieval philosophy and the classical
tradition in Islam, Judaism and Christianity. Curzon, Richmond, pp
37–50
Journal Articles
Burnett Ch (2002) John of Seville and John of Spain: a mise au point. Bull
Philos Me´die´v 44:61–78
Combes A (1956) Pre´sentation de Jean de Ripa. Arch Hist Doctrin Litt
M-Aˆ ge 23:145–242
Hanley T (1982) St. Thomas’ use of al-Ghaza¯lı¯’s Maqa¯s:id al-fala¯sifa.
Mediev Stud 44:243–271
Janssens J (2006b) The notions of Wa¯hib al-s:uwar (Giver of forms) and
Wa¯hib al-‘aql (Bestower of intelligence) in Ibn Sı¯na¯. In: Ca´ndida
Pacheco M, Meirinhos JF (eds) Intellect and imagination in medieval
philosophy. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 551–562
Salman D (1936) Algazel et les latins. Arch Hist Doctrin Litt M-Aˆ ge
10–11:103–127
Gennadios II
▶George Scholarios (Gennadios II)
George Gemistos Plethon
GEORGE KARAMANOLIS
Department of Philosophy and Social Studies
University of Crete
Rethymno
Greece
Abstract
George Gemistos Plethon was a signiﬁcant philosopher
during the last years of Byzantium (c. 1360–1454). His
adopted surname Plethon was deliberately chosen as an
allusion to Plato. Born in Constantinople, Plethon later
moved to Mystras in Peloponnese, and took part in the
Byzantine delegation to the council of Ferrara-Florence in
1438/1439, where the issue of the Church union was
discussed. Plethon was a Platonist, inspired in his inter-
pretation of Plato by several ancient Platonists including
Neoplatonists. His most comprehensive philosophical
work is the Book of Laws, modeled on Plato’s homony-
mous work, which was condemned posthumously by the
Orthodox Church on allegations of the paganism of its
author. His most famous treatise On the Differences
Between Plato and Aristotle launched a long debate
among Byzantines and Italian Humanists regarding the
merits of the two classical philosophers.
Little is known about the descent and the early years of
Plethon, originally named George Gemistos, and almost
nothing is certain of his life until 1407. Presumably, he was
born sometime between 1355 and 1360, given the testi-
mony
of
George
Trapezountios
(Comparationes
philosophorum Aristotelis et Platonis, Chap. 3) that at his
death in 1454, Plethon was almost 100 years old
(Woodhouse 1986:5). References to members of the
Gemistos family in documents of the church in the thir-
teenth and fourteenth centuries suggest that he was Con-
stantinopolitan with close ties to the church (Woodhouse
1986:17–18). The only testimony regarding the early edu-
cation of Plethon comes from a possibly biased source, his
later adversary, George Scholarios. He suggests that
Plethon was educated by a certain Elissaeus, a Jew, other-
wise unknown (Scholarios, Letter to the Princess of
Peloponnese, Opera IV.152–153, Letter to Exarch Joseph,
Opera
IV.162;
Woodhouse
1986:23–25).
Scholarios’
report, written after Plethon’s death, raises suspicions,
because it aims to substantiate the polemical claim that
Plethon entertained heretical beliefs. The practice of asso-
ciating alleged heretics with Jews was common among
Byzantines.
Plethon must have taught at Constantinople from the
late 1390s to 1409. One of his students from this period
was Markos Eugenikos, the future bishop of Ephesos and
later the main opponent to Church union at the council of
Florence. While in Constantinople, Plethon must have
been in contact with Demetrios Kydones, as can be
inferred from a letter of Plethon to Bessarion (Mohler
1942:III.467.18). Gemistos left the capital of Byzantium
for Mystras in 1409. Scholarios (Letter to the Princess of
Peloponnese, Opera IV.152–3) suggests that Plethon was
sent into exile to Mystras by the emperor Manuel II, but
this is almost certainly false. Most probably Plethon was
sent to Mystras out of imperial favor. This is testiﬁed by
a document dated in 1433 written by Theodore II, despot of
Mystras, according to which Plethon was loyal to the impe-
rial family and came to Mystras at the request of his father
Manuel II (Lambros, Palaiologeia kai Peloponnisiaka, 1930,
IV.106–109), presumably because the latter sent to
Mystras trustworthy persons to support the regime of his
390 G
Gennadios II

son Theodore (Masai 1956:59–63). In Mystras, Plethon
undertook considerable activity, educational and political.
The circle of his students included the future Cardinal
Bessarion and Isidore of Monemvasia, probably the future
bishop of Monemvasia, while at the same time he
composed two political works, the Address to the Emperor
Manuel on Affairs in the Peloponnese and the Advisory
Address to the Despot Theodore on the Peloponnese
(Lambros 1926 III.246–265, 1930 IV.113–135). In them,
Plethon expresses deep dissatisfaction with the political
situation and exhorts the imperial court to change the
administrative, military, and economic policies in Pelo-
ponnese, while he argues for a social and political refor-
mation
inspired
by
Plato’s
Republic
(see
below,
Philosophy). Similar contemporary political writings are
Chrysoloras’ exhortation to the emperor (1413/1414) and
the anonymous Lucianic satire Mazaris’ Journey to Hades
(1415).
In 1426, the emperor John the VIII solicited Plethon’s
advice on the question of summoning a council for
Church union (Woodhouse 1986:111), a highly contro-
versial issue in Byzantium, with the ultimate vision of
mounting a joint military campaign against the Ottoman
Turks. By autumn 1437, the emperor had accepted the
Pope’s invitation for a council at Ferrara. The Byzantine
delegation included Plethon and two of his students,
Markos Eugenikos and Bessarion. The onset of plague
necessitated the change of venue to Florence, under the
patronage of Cosimo de’Medici. Plethon’s role in the
council was not very active, although he reportedly
defended Markos Eugenikos (Woodhouse 1986:173),
which means that he resisted the unionist position
(Masai 1956:323–327). Plethon was more interested in
debating with the Italian humanists, being particularly
concerned with the question of how the philosophies of
Plato and Aristotle compare. While in Florence, he wrote
a short treatise On the Differences Between Plato and
Aristotle (De differentiis) in which he advocates the
view that the philosophy of Aristotle is fallacious on
many counts and as such inferior to that of Plato; he
claims further that this verdict was shared by ancient
thinkers.
Plethon’s work gave rise to a long controversy over the
relative value of the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle
(Monfasani 1976; Karamanolis 2002). Four or ﬁve years
after the publication of De differentiis in 1439, Scholarios
published a long and carefully argued refutation, Against
Plethon’s Objections to Aristotle, to which Plethon replied
5 years later (i.e., 1448/1449) with a work (Against
Scholarios’ Tenets) more scholarly than the De differentiis.
Scholarios did not reply, yet the scenery was set for
a controversy which lasted after the death of Plethon.
Theodore Gazes wrote against Plethon and in defense of
Aristotle, to which Michael Apostoles replied, criticizing
Aristotle’s doctrine of substance. To this replied Gazes’
cousin, Andronikos Kallistos, defending Aristotle against
the criticisms of Plethon and Apostoles. The most power-
ful advocate of Aristotle was George Trapezountios, whose
work Comparationes philosophorum Aristotelis et Platonis,
being the ﬁrst written on the subject in Latin, introduces
the subject to Italian humanists. A scholarly reply to
Trapezountios
comes
from
Bessarion
in
his
In
calumniatorem Platonis, which highlights the merits of
Plato without dismissing Aristotle, arguing that the
ancients considered their philosophies as being largely in
agreement.
Plethon was particularly active in the last 14 years of
his life. The majority of the surviving autographs of his
were written at this time (Diller 1956:28–29). Plethon
must have been engaged especially with the writing of his
magnum opus, the Book of Laws. The work survives in
part, since Scholarios, after becoming the ﬁrst Ottoman-
era patriarch of Constantinople in 1454, ordered the burn-
ing of all copies posthumously, on the grounds that it
propagates paganism (Letter to Exarch Joseph, Scholarios
Opera IV.155–172; Woodhouse 1986:356–360; Monfasani
1992:49–50). Plethon died most probably in 1454 in
Mystras (Monfasani 1976:206–214). In 1464, his admirer
Sigismondo Malatesta transferred Plethon’s remains and
reburied them in his neo-pagan temple in Rimini
(Woodhouse 1986:374–5).
Philosophy
Plethon is a Platonist, inspired in his interpretation of
Plato mainly by Plutarch (ﬁrst century CE), Numenius,
Atticus (second century CE), Plotinus (third century), and
Proclus (ﬁfth century). Plethon maintains the agreement
of Zoroastrian, Pythagorean, and Platonic philosophy
(Book of Laws III.43, 252–6), which is reminiscent of
Numenius’ claim about the diffusion of truth to ancient
sages (fr. 1 Des Places; cf. Laws III.43, 253–256), and
considers the Persian Magi to be disciples of Zoroaster
and interpreters of his thought in the Chaldean Oracles,
which explains his fascination with them (Athanassiadi
2002). Like Numenius and Plotinus, Plethon maintains
the hierarchical structure of intelligible reality, while he
also relates metaphysical principles with pagan gods and
shows a tendency for religious prescriptions, which is
characteristic of Proclus.
Plethon’s most important philosophical works are the
De differentiis and the Book of Laws. More comprehensive
is the Book of Laws, which must have been written over
George Gemistos Plethon G
391
G

a long period of Plethon’s life. It is a loose and repetitive
composition divided into three books, none of which
focuses on a single theme; chapters on ethics and politics
appear in books I and III, chapters on metaphysics occur
in books I and II, while some chapters such as II.6, on fate,
were probably independent treatises (Hladky 2007:
198–209). In the ﬁrst chapter, Plethon argues that his
work aims to present the laws and the best constitution
according to which intelligent people should live in order
to achieve happiness (Laws III.43, 248). Plethon maintains
that human happiness cannot be determined unless one
inquires ﬁrst into the nature of human beings and the
nature of the universe, where man lives (Laws I.1, 22),
a view he also defends in his treatise On Virtues (A2, p. 3
Tambrun-Krasker). Accordingly, Plethon suggests that
ethics depends on physics, and physics depends on
theology.
Plethon maintains the Platonist division of reality
into intelligible and sensible realms and argues for its
hierarchical order. He adopts a Pythagorean and Plato-
nist distinction of three kinds of essences. The ﬁrst is the
father or originator of everything else (Laws III.15, 96),
which Plethon identiﬁes with Zeus (Laws III.15, 96) and
apparently also with the Form of the Good (III.35, 222)
which is beyond being (Republic 509b), as can be inferred
from his description according to which the ﬁrst god is
supremely one and simple (Laws III.15, 100), pre-eternal
(propatoˆr, Laws III.35, 204), being itself (autooˆn; III.34,
132), good itself (autoagathos; Laws III.34, 132), and
beyond being (hyperousios; I.5, 46). Noticeably, Plethon
uses vocabulary found in Numenius (frs. 16, 17, 21 Des
Places)
and
the
Chaldean
Oracles
(XXXI-II).
Like
Numenius and Plotinus, Plethon maintains that the ﬁrst
god brings about a second entity, an image of himself
(Laws III.15, 96–98), through whom the ﬁrst god creates
the universe (De differentiis X.336.20–23). This is the
realm of the intelligible Forms, which is characterized by
multiplicity (De differentiis X.337.7–13; Laws I.5, 56). The
Forms are the immediate causes of the things in the
sensible world (De differentiis X.341.39–342.1), yet God
or Zeus is the ultimate cause of everything (Laws III.15,
102). Plethon identiﬁes the Forms with the supra-celestial
gods, who are divided into two kinds, the Olympian and
the Titans (Laws I.5, 46–52). The ﬁnal kind of essence is
the soul, which is identiﬁed with the subcelestial gods
(Laws I.5, 52–54). Each kind of essence generates an onto-
logically inferior entity (Laws III.15, 94–96, 102): the ﬁrst
God generates the intellect and the Forms, identiﬁable
with a certain class of gods, they in turn generate lower
gods, until we reach the demons and the mortal beings
(Laws I.5, 52).
Plethon is a determinist, maintaining two axioms that
‘‘whatever occurs must necessarily do so from some cause’’
and that ‘‘every cause must produce whatever effect it may
have in both a necessary and a determinate way’’ (De
differentiis VIII, 332.24–334.4). Plethon relates the effect
of the causes with the activity of the gods, arguing that
the gods are the causes of everything that happens
(Laws II.6, 64–66), with the ﬁrst god, Zeus, in particular
to be the source of necessity, as he is unchangeable
(Laws II.6, 67). Plethon claims that the rejection of deter-
minism leads to atheism (Laws II.6, 66), of which he
accuses Aristotle (De differentiis VIII). Being confronted
with the question of human freedom that his position
entails, Plethon takes a view similar to that of the
Stoics, arguing that man is free in his most rational part,
yet this does not mean absence of necessity. This is
imposed by the gods and the ﬁrst god in particular, but
it is always for the good since the ﬁrst god is absolute
goodness; man, being rational, can always decide to side
with the divine necessity and live a good life, or not and be
miserable (Laws II.6, 67, 72–74; Letter to Bessarion, Mohler
1942:I.462; Bargeliotes 1975; Hladky 2007:117–120).
Accused by Bessarion that this is a Stoic view (Letter to
Plethon II, Mohler 1942:III.464), Plethon refers to the
role of the soul in Epinomis (Letter to Bessarion II, Mohler
1942:III.466).
Regarding cognition, Plethon argues that reason is
the best and most divine criterion by means of which we
can attain truth and achieve happiness (Laws I.2, 34).
Also divine are the common notions by means of which
we think, which Plethon apparently identiﬁed with
the intelligible Forms, as can be inferred from the fact
that in De differentiis X he argues that the Forms solve
the problem of how man cognizes the essences of things.
These forms or common notions are sown into the souls
by the divine intellect, and this is how each soul has
acquired reasons of things (Magian Oracles XVI; Hladky
2007:45).
Being a Platonist, Plethon defends the immortality of
the soul and criticizes Aristotle for rejecting the Platonist
position (De differentiis IX–X). Plethon adopts the Pla-
tonic view that man consists in a mortal and in an immor-
tal part, which correspond to our animal and divine
nature (Laws III.43, 246–8), and argues that man is the
bond between the mortal and the immortal part of the
universe (Laws III.43, 246, Summary of the Doctrines of
Zoroaster and Plato, Alexandre Traite´ des Lois, 1858, 267).
He argues that the soul uses an ethereal body as a means
for moving into an actual body (Reply to Scholarios
XXIX.474.25–30, Magian Oracles XV). Plethon adds
some new arguments in support of the Platonic thesis in
392 G
George Gemistos Plethon

his two funeral orations on the empresses Cleope and
Helen. He points out that this is an ancient belief
widely accepted (On Cleope 171.7–172.8), and also claims
that the desire on the part of humans for immortality
suggests that this can be satisﬁed. Plethon further argues
that humans would not be prepared to kill themselves,
unless the human soul would survive, because no animal
seeks its own destruction (On Cleope 173.9–174.4). Being
the boundary (methorion) between the mortal and
immortal world, man connects the two and contributes
to the universal harmony (Laws III.43, 258–60; Hladky
2007:109).
Plethon’s view that man is composite of a mortal and
an immortal part shapes also his ethics. Assuming that
man is a creature of god and akin to its creator by virtue of
reason (Laws III.34, 148), he claims that man can become
like god, who is perfectly good (On Virtues A2:3),
defending the view of the Theaetetus 176b that happiness
consists in attaining assimilation to god (On Virtues A1,
Laws II.6, 74, III.34, 144). Virtue is deﬁned as ‘‘the dispo-
sition (hexis) according to which we are good’’ (On Virtues
A1:1). Like Plotinus and later Neoplatonists, Plethon
appears to distinguish between civic virtues, which beneﬁt
society (A11:12), and dianoetic virtues, pertaining to
man’s immortal part. In the ﬁrst category, he distinguishes
four cardinal virtues in hierarchical order, prudence, jus-
tice, courage, and temperance. In order to acquire virtue,
we must have a perfect understanding of it as well as
practice and training (A14:14). Yet the most eminent
activity by means of which man comes close to the divine
is contemplation (Laws III.43, 246–248).
Plethon’s political views are outlined in the Book of
Laws and in his advisory orations to the emperor
Manuel and the Despot of Mystras, Theodore. In the
political orations and in his two funeral orations on the
empresses Cleope and Helen, Plethon uses historical
and mythological examples and talks about the Byzan-
tines in a historical perspective, linking them with the
Romans and the ancient Greeks. In his addresses to the
imperial court, Plethon proposed economic, adminis-
trative, and military reforms in the organization of
Peloponnese. Inspired by the Republic, Plethon argues
for a three-tiered social structure, the ruling class (the
imperial court), the service providers (e.g., merchants,
retailers), and the laborers (e.g., farmers), while in his
oration to Theodore, Plethon distinguishes three kinds
of constitution, monarchy, oligarchy, and democracy,
himself leaning towards an enlightened monarchy, that
is, a ruler assisted with good counselors and relying on
good laws. This appears to be at odds with the ideal
constitution
of
the
Republic,
but
perhaps
Plethon
considered the ruler and his advisors as the ruling class
(Hladky 2007:10–12).
Plethon also had scientiﬁc, historical, and theological
interests; he was the author of a geographical treatise
(Diller 1937), of an astronomical manual (Tihon-
Mercier), of a historical work on the aftermath of the
battle of Mantineia (Maltese 1989), and of a theological
treatise about the procession of the Holy Spirit, in which
he defended the Byzantine position (Alexandre Traite´ des
Lois 300–311). Scholarios’ accusations of Plethon for
attachment to Proclus (Letter to the Exarch Joseph, Opera
IV.153.23–24), commitment to, and diffusion of pagan-
ism, distort the proﬁle of the complex thinker and
should be resisted (Monfasani 1992, against Masai 1956;
Woodhouse 1986). Plethon had an impact on Byzantines
and Italian humanists. He probably introduced to Italy
Strabo’s Geography, studied also by Christopher Colum-
bus (Woodhouse 1986:183), and was responsible for the
diffusion of the Chaldean Oracles to Ficino’s circle (Wilson
1992:91–92; Tambrun-Krasker 2006:9–33), who mentions
Plethon in the preface of his translation of Plotinus’
Enneads.
See
also:
▶Basil
Bessarion
▶Demetrios
Kydones
▶Epistemology, Byzantine ▶Ethics, Byzantine ▶George
Scholarios (Gennadius II) ▶Metaphysics, Byzantine
▶Philosophical
Theology,
Byzantine
▶Platonism,
Renaissance ▶Political Philosophy, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Plethon (1858) Book of laws, ed. Alexandre C. Plethon: Traite´ des Lois.
Didot, Paris (repr Amsterdam, 1966)
Plethon (1858) Summary of the doctrines of Zoroaster and Pletho, ed.
Alexandre C, Plethon: Traite des Lois. Didot, Paris, pp 262–268 (repr
Amsterdam, 1966)
Plethon (1926) Address to the emperor Manuel on affairs in the Pelopon-
nese, ed. Lambros SP, Palaiologeia kai Peloponnisiaka, vol III.
Athens, pp 246–265
Plethon (1926) Funeral oration on Helen Palaiologina, vol III, ed.
Lambros SP. Athens, pp 266–280
Plethon (1930) Αddress to the despot Theodore on the Peloponnese, vol
IV, ed. Lambros SP. Athens, pp 113–135
Plethon (1930) Funeral oration on the venerable empress Cleope, vol IV,
ed. Lambros SP. Athens, pp 161–175
Plethon (1942) Letters to Bessarion I–II, ed. Mohler L, Kardinal Bessarion
als Theologe, Humanist und Staatsmann, vol III. Quellen und
Forschungen aus der Geschichte, Paderborn, pp 458–468
Plethon (1973) On the differences of Aristotle from Plato, ed. Lagarde B,
Le “De Differentiis” de Plethon d’apres l’autographe de la Marcienne.
Byzantion 43:312–343
Plethon (1974) Response to some inquiries, ed. Benakis L, Γεωργίου
Γεμιστού Πλήθωνος, Προς Z᾽ρωτημένα α᾽´ττα α᾽πόκρισις. Φιλοσοφία
4:330–376
George Gemistos Plethon G
393
G

Plethon (1987) On virtues, ed. Tambrun-Krasker B, Georges Ge´miste
Plethon Traite´ des vertus. Academy of Athens, Athens
Plethon
(1988)
Reply
to
Scholarios’
defence
of
Aristotle,
ed.
Maltese E, Contra Scholarii pro Aristotele obiectiones. Teubner,
Leipzig
Plethon (1989) On the aftermath of the battle of Mantineia, ed. Maltese E,
Georgii Gemisti Plethonis Opuscula de historia Graeca. Teubner,
Leipzig
Plethon (1995) The Magian oracles of Zoroaster’s Magi, ed. Tambrun-
Krasker B, Tardieu M, Oracles chaldaı¨ques. Recension de Georges
Ge´miste Ple´thon. Academy of Athens, Athens
Plethon (1998) A method of ﬁxing the sun, moon, conjunctions, full
moons, and period of planets by tables established by himself,
ed.
Tihon A, Mercier R. Georges Ge´miste Ple´thon, Manuel
d’astronomie. Corpus des Astronomes Byzantins IX, Academia
Bruylant, Louvain-la-Neuve
Scholarios (1928–1936) Opera omnia, ed. Petit L, Siderides X, Jugie M,
Oeuvres Comple`tes de Gennade Scholarios, vols I–VIII. Maison de la
Bonne Presse, Paris
Secondary Sources
Athanassiadi P (2002) Byzantine commentators on the Chaldean Ora-
cles: Psellos and Plethon. In: Ierodiakonou K (ed) Byzantine phi-
losophy and its ancient sources. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp 237–252
Bargeliotes L (1975) Fate and Heimarmene according to Pletho. Diοtίma
3:137–149
Benakis LG, Baloglou XP (2002) Proceedings of the international congress
on Plethon and his time. Etaireia Plithonikon kai Bizantinon
Meleton, Mystras
Blum W (1988) Georgios Gemistos Plethon. Politik, Philosophie und
Rhetorik in spatbyzantinischen Reich (1355–1452). Bibliothek der
Griechischen Literatur, Stuttgart
Diller A (1937) A geographical treatise by Georgius Gemistus Pletho. Isis
27:441–451
Diller A (1956) The autographs of Georgius Gemistus Pletho. Scriptorium
10:27–41
Hladky V (2007) Plato’s second coming. An outline of the philosophy of
George Gemistos Plethon. Unpublished PhD thesis, Praha
Karamanolis GE (2002) Plethon and Scholarios on Aristotle. In:
Ierodiakonou K (ed) Byzantine philosophy and its ancient sources.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 253–282
Masai F (1956) Plethon et le platonisme de Mystras. Les Belles Lettres,
Paris
Monfasani J (1976) George of Trebizond. A study of his rhetoric and logic.
Brill, New York
Monfasani J (1992) Platonic Paganism in the ﬁfteenth century. In:
Di Cesare M (ed) Reconsidering the Renaissance. Center for
Medieval and Early Renaissance Studies, New York, pp 45–61 (repr
Monfasani
J
(1995)
Byzantine
scholars
in
Renaissance
Italy:
Cardinal Bessarion and other Emigre´s, essay X. Variorum, London)
Monfasani J (2006) Pletho’s date of death and the burning of his Laws.
Byz Z 98:93–97
Nikolaou Th (1982) Georgios Gemistos Plethon und Proclus. Plethon’s
Neoplatonismus am Beispiel seiner Psychologie. Jahrb O¨ sterr Byz
32:387–399
Tambrun B (2006) Plethon. Le Retour de Platon. Vrin, Paris
Wilson N (1992) From Byzantium to Italy. Greek studies in the Italian
Renaissance. Duckworth, London
Woodhouse CM (1986) Gemistos Plethon. The last of Hellenes. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
George Pachymeres
GEORGE ZOGRAFIDIS
Department of Philosophy
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Thessaloniki
Greece
Abstract
George Pachymeres (1242–c. 1310) was a Byzantine phi-
losopher and teacher, learned in many ﬁelds (polyhistor),
and the leading historian and scholar of his time. A proliﬁc
writer and copyist of Greek philosophical texts, he was one
of the most productive Byzantine commentators. He con-
tributed signiﬁcantly to the understanding of Aristotle’s
philosophy by presenting in an abridged accessible form
the entire Aristotelian corpus (Philosophia). He also
played an important role in the revival of Platonic studies
in Late Byzantium by teaching Plato and reading the
Neoplatonists. His commentary on Pseudo-Dionysius
shows his Christian approach to issues raised within the
Platonic tradition. Pachymeres is one of the most repre-
sentative scholars of the Early Palaiologan Renaissance.
Biographical Information
Born in Nicaea 1242 – died in Constantinople c. 1310.
Byzantine philosopher and scholar, proliﬁc miscellaneous
writer, teacher and ecclesiastical man, representative of the
intellectual movement in the Early Palaiologan Renais-
sance (middle thirteenth to middle fourteenth century),
and perhaps the most important historian of his age.
Pachymeres was member of a Constantinopolitan family
that after the Latin occupation moved to Nicaea; there he
received his encyclical education and returned to Constan-
tinople after its recovery (1261). Until 1267, he studied
rhetoric, the quadrivium, and philosophy with Gregory of
Cyprus at the School of George Akropolites.
In Constantinople, the new dynasty of Palaiologans
could not reestablish Byzantium as a powerful Empire but
the Emperors encouraged the intense study and re-
appreciation of the Greek past that the Byzantines had
inherited. Well-educated high ofﬁcials formed a learned
elite that, besides its occupation with state affairs, found
scholarly interest, intellectual excitement, and sometimes
relief in the world of ancient Greek literary, philosophical,
and artistic culture. The Fourth Crusade and the looting of
Constantinople heavily affected higher education, since
the texts that used to be easily available in the capital’s
libraries were destroyed or scattered. Thus, the rediscovery
394 G
George Pachymeres

and reproduction of these texts were one of the main
preoccupations of Early Palaiologan scholars.
In this milieu, Pachymeres began his clerical and
teaching career. He was only a deacon (1265), but his
acknowledged abilities and his knowledge of civil and
canon law helped him to ascend to the high ofﬁce of
protekdikos (a member of an ecclesiastical tribunal, 1285)
and of dikaiophylax (judge, 1277) by imperial appoint-
ment. He had involvement in state and ecclesiastical affairs
that he describes in his History. Before 1275, Pachymeres
held a chair as oikoumenikos didaskalos (high degree
teacher) in the so-called Patriarchal School, where he
taught philosophy, the quadrivium, and perhaps rhetoric.
He earned great reputation through his teaching activity,
and his role as a teacher was strongly emphasized by his
contemporaries.
Pachymeres, besides his philosophical work, wrote an
extensive history, a paraphrase of the Coprus dionysiacum,
a treatise On the Holy Spirit (PG 144, 923–930), manuals
on the four sciences of the quadrivium, many rhetorical
exercises, a commentary on the Iliad (1275–1276), and few
poems. For this reason, he has been called an ‘‘early
humanist.’’
Thought
Pachymeres’ extensive work came out from his long teach-
ing activity, and his didactic style is present in his scientiﬁc
works. His acquaintance with many aspects of Greek cul-
ture, including sciences, is evident throughout his work;
for example, in his History Pachymeres refers to Plato’s
Laws and to Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics when he
exposes his own views on the right government. One of
his main concerns was to read, teach, and interpret phil-
osophical texts. For this reason, he copied philosophical
texts by Plato and Aristotle as well as commentaries by the
Neoplatonists or earlier Byzantine scholars.
His philosophical activity went together with his
teaching of the sciences. The Quadrivium (c. 1300) written
perhaps as notes for Pachymeres’ teaching served as
a textbook. It contains sections on mathematics (based
on Diophantus and Nicomachus of Gerasa), astronomy
(based on many writers from Aratus to Theon), music
(based on Claudius Ptolemy), and geometry (based on
Euclid). This manual, although not original, was much
used (as the number of its manuscripts suggests), contrib-
uted to the revival of the study of physics and mathemat-
ics, and reﬂected the interests of the philosophers and
scholars of the Early Palaiologan period.
Pachymeres, especially, while commenting on Pseudo-
Dionysius, is careful not to adopt Platonic or Aristotelian
views that contradict Christian doctrine, like, for instance,
the existence of the Platonic ideas or the pre-existence of
matter. For him ‘‘philosophy is like a divine gift such that
has never been given and will never be given to humans by
God’’ (Philosophia, Book 1, f.2r). And it is the occupation
with philosophy that permits someone to detach himself
from the uncertainty of human life (a reality too familiar
to a historian as Pachymeres) and to achieve assimilation
to God.
Until recently, Pachymeres has been known as an Aris-
totelian, in virtue of his Philosophia (last decades of thir-
teenth century). This much-read work is preserved in
35 manuscripts and consists of 12 books that epitomize
the Aristotelian writings with the exception of Poetics,
Rhetoric, and History of Animals. As later titles indicate,
Philosophia is an Epitome of the entire philosophy of Aris-
totle. Pachymeres’ concern about Aristotle can also be
attested in his running commentaries on the Organon,
Physics, Metaphysics, and Nicomachean Ethics and in his
codices that contain works such as Physics and On the Parts
of Animals with Michael of Ephesus’ Commentary.
Pachymeres was familiar with the Platonic Corpus and
the Neoplatonists. Two of his codices are important for
Late Byzantine Platonic studies, containing many Platonic
dialogues and commentaries. The Platonic dialogues that
he copied are not identical with the ones that were usually
commented on by the Neoplatonists nor their order is the
same with the order that was established from ﬁfth cen-
tury onward. This fact and the references to the Platonic
corpus indicate that perhaps he systematically taught
Plato’s works. He has also been proved not a mere copyist
but he has made critical remarks to certain Platonic texts
(Republic, Symposium). He copied three Platonic com-
mentaries that ﬁrst reappeared in the thirteenth century,
namely Proclus’ on Parmenides and on the First Alcibiades
and Hermias’ on Phaedrus (we owe to him its ﬁrst extant
manuscript). After copying Proclus’ unﬁnished Commen-
tary
on
Parmenides
he
copied
also
as
a
sequel
a Commentary that is now attributed to him because of
its similarity to his exegetical method. This text is the only
extant late Byzantine commentary on Plato.
All these show that Pachymeres was not another Byz-
antine Aristotelian or interested only in Aristotelian phi-
losophy. Actually, he was one of the main pioneers in
reviving the study of the Platonic tradition. Even his com-
mentary on the Coprus areopagiticum cannot be seen sep-
arately from his preoccupation with Proclus. Pachymeres,
studying an unquestionable Christian authority, con-
cludes accurately that there are afﬁnities, even in the
vocabulary,
between
Pseudo-Dionysius
and
Proclus
(PG 3, 116A); but – as he believes that the writer of Corpus
was Paul’s pupil – he assured that ‘‘the Athenian
George Pachymeres G
395
G

philosophers
appropriated
Dionysius’
treatises
and
concealed this fact, in order to be considered as the fathers
of his divine discourse.’’ Nevertheless, the commentary on
Pseudo-Dionysius shows an objective link between the
long Platonic tradition and Byzantine, theological and
philosophical, thought.
At his introductory letter to the Paraphrase of
Corpus dionysiacum Pachymeres deﬁnes himself neither
as an ‘‘interpreter’’ (exeˆgeˆteˆs) nor as a ‘‘paraphrasist’’
(paraphrasteˆs) but as a simple ‘‘listener’’ (akroateˆs) to
Dionysius’ text (PG 3, 112B), that is, a reader. His exten-
sive paraphrases of the Corpus seem more an adaption of
the earlier commentary of Maximus Confessor (seventh
century). Pachymeres does not simply paraphrase but he
analyzes the obscure points. He makes references to the
Bible, to earlier Byzantine writers (mostly Dionysius’ com-
mentators) and to Greek literature, and he adds his per-
sonal thoughts.
In Philosophia, Pachymeres does not always use the
same method. He selects and copies passages to interpret
them, he simpliﬁes the text, he is paraphrasing it, or he
interpolates his own statements. Thus, his text is
a condensed introductory interpretation of the whole
Aristotelian philosophy. In his (mostly unedited) running
commentaries, Pachymeres returned to the Late Antiquity
tradition of extent commentaries, dividing the text into
lemmas and commenting on the entire text.
In
his
History
(about
the
years
1255–1308)
Pachymeres, although involved in public life, succeeds in
offering a moderate narration of events that he knew form
ﬁrst hand, adding only few personal comments. The ref-
erence to unexplained phenomena that he attributes to
divine intervention does not change his rather pessimistic
outlook on human and especially Byzantine affairs.
His ideas about the proper conduct of rulers are based
on Nicomachean Ethics and they are dispersed in the
History. For Pachymeres, ‘‘truth is the soul of history and
he who prefers lies to the truth is sacrilegious. It is better to
be silent than to repeat facts inaccurately’’ (Histories, I.23).
His rhetorical works were not intended as public ora-
tions nor they have to do with his involvement in public
affairs. They are connected to rhetorical theory and have
their models in Late Antiquity and particularly in the
Second Sophistic. Pachymeres went beyond the prepara-
tory phase of progymnasmata and wrote also more
demanding rhetorical studies. Few of them, taking Antiq-
uity as their subject, have theoretical/political interest. In
the ﬁrst, Pachymeres makes an encomium of democracy
putting it in the mouth of the Athenian statesman Pericles.
In the second, the philosopher has persuaded the tyrant to
resign and claims for himself the title of ‘‘tyrannicide.’’ The
philosopher (and philosophy) proves to be useful to the
city, when he uses against political power his own
weapons, namely the knowledge of the beings and science!
Pachymeres gained his reputation as a philosopher in
virtue of his Philosophia, a work that was imitated by later
thinkers as Joseph Rhakendytes or Philosopher in his
Encyclopedia (a compilation of Pachymeres’ Philosophia
and Nikephoros Blemmydes’ Epitome), and Theodoros
Metochites.
Philosophia’s
rich
manuscript
tradition
shows that it was read and copied until the eighteenth
century. The part on music of the Quadrivium inﬂuenced
Manuel Bryennios in his Harmonica. Pachymeres’ teach-
ing and writings played a signiﬁcant role during the Early
Palaiologan Renaissance and his manuals were used for
a long time and, translated into Latin, by Italian
humanists.
See also: ▶Logic, Byzantine ▶Maximos Planoudes
▶Nikephoros
Blemmydes
▶Philosophy,
Byzantine
▶Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Adaption of a translation of Boethius’ De topicis differentiis: Boethius
(1990) De topicis differentiis, ed. Nikitas DZ. Academy of Athens,
Athens, pp 233–239
Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics: Psellos Michael (2008) A brief
and most clear explanation of Aristotle’s Physics, ed. Benakis L.
Academy of Athens, Athens (attributed by Golitsis (2007) to
Pachymeres)
Commentary on Plato’s Parmenides: Pachymeres George (1989) Com-
mentary on Plato’s Parmenides (Anonymous sequel to Proclus’
Commentary), ed. Westerink LG et al. Academy of Athens, Athens
Histories: Pachyme´re`s Georges (1984–2000) Relations historiques, 5 vols,
ed. Failler A, Laurent V. Les Belles Lettres, Paris;
(1835) Georgii Pachymeris de Michaele et Andronico Palaeologis libri
tredecim, vol 2, ed. Bekker I. Weber, Bonn;
Failler A (2001–2002) Le version bre`ve des Relations Historiques de
Georges Pachyme´re`s, 2 vols. Institut Franc¸ais d’E´tudes Byzantines,
Paris
Paraphrase of Corpus Dionysiacum: Patrologia graeca, 3, 4 (Paris, 1857)
Philosophia:
Book
6,
On
the
parts
of
animals:
Pachymeres
Georgios (2008) Philosophia Buch 6, ed. Pappa E. Academy of
Athens, Athens
Philosophia: Book 10, Metaphysics: Pachymeres Georgios (2002)
Philosophia Buch 10, ed. Pappa E. Academy of Athens, Athens
Philosophia: Book 11, Nicomachean Ethics: GeoRgioB PawumeRZB
(2005) Filosofiabiblinendekaton, ed. Oikonomakos C. Acad-
emy of Athens, Athens
Quadrivium: Pachymeres George (1940) Quadrivium de Georges
Pachyme`re, ed. Tannery P, Stephanou RPE. Studi e Testi 94.
Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Vatican
Rhetorical exercises: Progymnasmata: Walz C (1832) Rhetores Graeci, 1.
Cotta, Stuttgart, pp 549–596 (repr 1968). Declamationes: (1848)
Georgii Pachymeris Declamationes XIII, ed. Boissonade JF. Dumont,
Paris, (repr 1966)
396 G
George Pachymeres

Secondary Sources
Arnakis GG (1966–1967) George Pachymeres – a Byzantine humanist.
Greek Orthodox Theol Rev 12:161–167
Couloubaritsis L (2002) Georges Pachyme`re et le Parme´nide de Platon. In:
Barbanti M, Romano, F (eds) Il Parmenide di Platone e la sua
tradizione. CUECM, Catania pp 355–370
Ebbesen S (1996) George Pachymeres and the Topics. Cahiers de l’institut
du Moyen-aˆge grec et latin 66:169–185
Golitsis P (2007) Un commentaire perpetuel de Georges Pachyme`re a` la
Physique d’Aristote, faussement attribue´ a` Michael Psellos. Byz Z
100:637–676
Golitsis P (2008) Georges Pachyme`re comme didascale. Jahrb O¨ sterr Byz
58:53–68
Harlﬁnger D (1971) Die Textgeschichte der pseudo-aristotelischen Schrift
Perια᾽tόmon grammω˜n. Hakkert, Amsterdam
Lampakes
S
(2004)
Geώrgiος
PawυmέrZς:
protέkdikος
kaι
dikaiοfύlax.
Eιsagogikο
dοkίmiο
(G.P.:
Protekdikos
and
Dikaiophylax. An introductory Essay). National Hellenic Research
Foundation, Athens
Pappa E (1998) Die Kommentare des Georgios Pachymeres zum Orga-
non. In: Vassis I (ed) Lesarten: Festschrift fu¨r A. Kambylis. W. de
Gruyter, Berlin, pp 198–210
Terezis C (1996) George Pachymeres’s Commentary on Boethius’s De
Differentiis Topicis. Cahiers de l’institut du Moyen-aˆge grec et latin
66:156–168
Westerink LG (1987) Un chainon me´connu de la tradition proclienne:
George Pachyme`re. In: Proclus, The´ologie platonicienne: Livre 5, ed.
Saffrey HD, Westerink LG. Les Belles Letters, Paris, pp lvii–lxix
George Scholarios (Gennadios II)
JOHN A. DEMETRACOPOULOS
Department of Education
University of Patras
Patras
Greece
Abstract
The ﬁrst patriarch of Constantinople (1454–1456) after
the capture of Constantinople by the Turks. His principal
interests were theological; still, he proved one of the most
versatile and proliﬁc Byzantine authors and the most
fervent Byzantine Thomist and Aristotelian. An opponent
to the religiously colored Platonic philosophy of the only
non-Christian thinker of the Byzantine era, George
Gemistos (Plethon), he combated him by means of the
Christian Aristotelianism of Thomas Aquinas, whom he
regarded as one of the best Christian authors that had ever
existed. He also regarded Aristotle as the best philosopher
and his philosophy as fully compatible with Christianity.
A huge part of his literary work consists of translations of
scholastic writings (by Aquinas, Radulphus Brito, Peter of
Spain, and Armadur of Bellovisu). He tried to create
a synthesis of Aristotle, Aquinas, and the Patristic and
Byzantine theological thought.
Life
Scholarios (c. 1400–1472), born in a rich family, studied the
traditional
philosophical
curriculum.
His
teachers
implanted into him a love for Orthodoxy but also for the
Latin theological tradition, and especially Thomas Aquinas,
the greatest – according to Scholarios – Latin theologian
and one of the greatest Christian thinkers of all times. In the
context of the pro-union politics of the emperor John VIII
Palaiologos (1425–1448) and of the patriarch Metrophanes
II (1440–1443), he participated in the council of Florence
(1438–1439) by promoting an ‘‘economical union’’ with the
Roman see ‘‘for the nation’s sake.’’ From 1443 onward,
he adopted an extremely antiunionist attitude. In 1450,
removed from court by the new emperor (1448–1453)
Constantine XI Palaiologos, he became a monk, taking
the name ‘‘Gennadios.’’ After the fall of Constantinople,
Mehmed II the Conqueror, who knew of his strong anti-
Latin stand, made him a patriarch (Gennadios II; early
1454). Soon he resigned and retired on Mount Athos and
in a monastery near Serrhai (northern Greece), where he
devoted himself to writing up to his death.
Thought
Scholarios was primarily interested in theology. Yet, his
wide knowledge of the ancient Greek philosophical liter-
ature and his thorough study of the Greek translations of
some major Latin Christian works (such as Augustine’s De
Trinitate and Aquinas’ two Summae) in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries, in combination with his knowledge
of Latin, made him interested in philosophy, especially
Aristotle, and in the question of the place of this philoso-
phy in Christian thought.
He developed his views on it in the context of his
polemics (1443 onward) against the religious philosophy
of
George
Gemistos
(Plethon).
Scholarios
wrote
a refutation of Plethon’s short but bitter anti-Aristotelian
lecture in Florence (1439) On the Issues on Which Aristotle
Disagrees with Plato, labeled Against the Impasses Igno-
rantly Imputed by Plethon to Aristotle (1443–1444). The
topics treated there are God and his relation with the
world; Aristotle’s doctrine of the homonymy of ‘‘being’’;
his doctrine of ‘‘primary substance’’; his conception of the
‘‘universal’’ as ‘‘matter’’ and the ‘‘particular’’ as ‘‘form’’; his
view on the simultaneity of the ‘‘relatives’’; his principle of
contradiction and its implications on determinism; vari-
ous matters of human psychology; the Aristotelian con-
ception of virtue as ‘‘meanness’’; the ultimate end of
George Scholarios (Gennadios II) G
397
G

human being; the famous cosmological ether problem;
whether the source of sun’s heat is its nature or, as Aristotle
said, its rapid motion; the question of the cause of the
motion of stars; teleology in nature and its relation with
Providence; Aristotle’s rupture of the universal law of
causality by construing human deliberation as ultimate
principle of many things; his conception of ‘‘movement’’
or ‘‘change’’ in general; and Aristotle’s rejection of Plato’s
forms.
The central discrepancy between Scholarios and
Plethon stems from Plethon’s rejection of Aristotle’s doc-
trine of ‘‘entelechy’’ as immanent in everything and cause of
the transition from ‘‘potentiality’’ to ‘‘actuality’’; Plethon’s
Neoplatonic metaphysics postulated a hierarchy of beings,
each of them responsible for the existence and the qualities
of its inferior. Scholarios objected in a clearly Thomist spirit
that God is the causa remota of whatever goes on in the
world and governs the world by having implanted to each
sort of creature a power to directly produce some concrete
effects, this power being Aristotle’s self-‘‘actualization.’’
Scholarios was so ﬁlled with indignation at reading
Plethon’s major work, the Laws, where a highly elaborated
pagan, anti-Christian utopia was described, that he threat-
ened the author to burn him alive (in fact, he ﬁnally burnt
Plethon’s writing). He regarded Aquinas’ Christian Aris-
totelianism as a perfect tool to combat Plethon. Radical-
izing some arguments of Aquinas, he claimed that
Aristotle did not believe in the eternity of the world and
that God, to Aristotle, is the cause not only of the move-
ment in the world but also of the very existence of the
universe.
Scholarios
also
compiled
a
Florilegium
Thomisticum, both from the Summa contra Gentiles and
the Summa theologiae, which he intended to use as
a source of arguments for producing a refutation of
Plethon’s
Laws,
as
well
as
another
Florilegium
Thomisticum, from the Summa contra Gentiles (III, 84–
106), in order to refute especially ch. II, 6 of Plethon’s
masterpiece, which circulated as an independent treatise
On Fate. Scholarios, taken up with his anti-Catholic strug-
gle, did not ﬁnd time to write these refutations; still, the
Thomistic arsenal of the intended refutation, as well as his
systematic treatises On the Divine Providence and Predes-
tination, stand as a mark of what he had in mind when
saying that Plethon’s philosophy is insane. Instead of
Plethon’s Platonic doctrine of the incorruptibility of the
human intellect, which postulates the eternal preexistence
of the human soul, Scholarios deemed the Thomistic
doctrine of the simultaneity of coming-into-existence of
body and soul as more consistent. Instead of Plethon’s
Neoplatonic-Averroist
doctrine
of
the
faculty
of
‘‘phantastikon’’ as the ‘‘medium’’ between intellect and
body, Scholarios adopted the Aristotle-based Thomistic
doctrine of how a created soul forms a ‘‘direct’’ union with
body. Against Plethon’s doctrine of fate, Scholarios
adopted Thomas’ doctrine of the way and the degree the
superlunar world affects humans in the context of God’s
Providence as well as of Predestination and free will.
Scholarios also produced a Thomistic interpretation of
Gregory Palamas’ distinction between God’s ‘‘essence’’ and
‘‘energies.’’ God’s energeiai are intentiones/epinoiai, whose
mode of existence is partly objective and partly subjective;
God’s simplicity is grasped multifariously through the
results of His creative and gratifying activity. Scholarios
also suggests that Palamas’ solution to the problem of
God’s simplicity and multiplicity is close to John Duns
Scotus’ application of the distinctio formalis to God.
Scholarios also commented upon or paraphrased – in
part or as a whole – Porphyry’s Isagoge and several logical
and physical works of Aristotle (Categories, Physica, De
caelo et mundo, De anima, Parva naturalia, Meteorologica).
He resorts, sometimes explicitly and sometimes implicitly,
less to the ancient Greek and Byzantine commentators
than to the medieval Latin ones, the latter deemed by
him as superior. Of Aquinas’ oeuvre, he translated the De
ente et essentia along with Armadur de Bellovisu’s Com-
mentary on it (into which he inserted an interesting dis-
cussion of the problem of the divine simplicity in
Thomistic, Scotist, and Palamite terms), the Commentar-
ies on Aristotle’s De interpretatione and De anima and
a part of the Commentary on Physics, and the pseudo-
Thomistic De fallaciis. Besides, he elaborated an abridg-
ment of Thomas’ Summa contra Gentiles and of the Ia and
the Ia IIae of the Summa theologiae. His version of Aquinas’
Commentary on the Posterior Analytics is not extant. He
also translated the greater part of Petrus Hispanus’
Summulae
logicales,
Gilbertus
Porretanus’
De
sex
principiis, and a part of Radulphus Brito’s Ars vetus (on
Intention/epinoia). He also wrote a short treatise On the
Compatibility of Aristotle’s and Plotinus’ Deﬁnitions of
Human Happiness.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶George Gemistos
Plethon ▶Gregory Palamas ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Tho-
mism, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Demetracopoulos John A (2002) Georgios Gennadios II – Scholarios’
Florilegium Thomisticum. His early abridgment of various chapters
and Quæstiones of Thomas Aquinas’ Summae and his anti-
Plethonism. Rech The´ol Philos Me´die´v 69(1):117–171
398 G
George Scholarios (Gennadios II)

Demetracopoulos John A (2007) Georgios Gennadios II – Scholarios’
Florilegium Thomisticum II (De fato) and its anti-Plethonic tenor.
Rech The´ol Philos Me´die´v 74(1):301–378
Petit Louis, Side´ride`s Xe´nophon A, Jugie Martin (eds) (1928–1936)
Œuvres comple`tes de Gennade Scholarios, vols I–VIII. Maison de
la Bonne Presse, Paris (philosophical works and works with philo-
sophical interest are contained in vols I, IV, and VIII; translations and
abridgments of as well as commentaries on such works are contained
in vols V, VI, VII, and VIII)
Secondary Sources
Barbour HC (1993) The Byzantine Thomism of Gennadios Scholarios
and his translation of the commentary of Armadur de Bellovisu on
the ‘‘De ente et essentia’’ of Thomas Aquinas. Studi Tomistici, 53.
Citta` del Vaticano
Blanchet M-H (2008) Georges-Gennadios Scholarios (vers 1400–vers
1472). Un intellectuel orthodoxe face a` la disparition de l’empire
byzantin. Archives de l’Orient chre´tien, 20. Institut Franc¸ais d’Etudes
Byzantines, Paris
Demetracopoulos JA (2006) Georgios Gemistos-Plethon’s dependence
on Thomas Aquinas’ Summa contra Gentiles and Summa theologiae.
Archiv fu¨r mittelalterliche Philosophie und Kultur 12:276–341
Guichardan S (1933) Le proble`me de la simplicite´ divine en Orient et
Occident aux XIVe et XVe sie`cles: Gre´goire Palamas, Duns Scot,
Georges Scholarios. E´tude de the´ologie compare´e. Lyon
Jugie M (1939) Georges Scholarios, professeur de philosophie. Studi
Bizantini e Neoellenici 5:382–394
Tinnefeld F (2002) Georgios Gennadios Scholarios. In: Conticello CG,
Conticello V (eds) La the´ologie byzantine et sa tradition. II (XIIIe–
XVIIIe s.). Brepols, Turnhout, pp 479–549 (493–522: list of primary
sources; 536–541: list of secondary sources)
Gerard Odonis
CHRISTOPHER SCHABEL
Department of History and Archaeology
University of Cyprus
Nicosia
Cyprus
Abstract
Gerard Odonis (c. 1285/90–1349) was a Franciscan from
the south of France who taught theology at Toulouse in the
1310s and lectured on the Sentences at Paris in 1327–1328.
He was elected minister general of his order in 1329 and,
after a controversial reign in which he supported Pope
John XXII on the issue of apostolic poverty, was named
patriarch of Antioch and administrator of Catania in 1342.
Gerard wrote an inﬂuential Ethics commentary, an impor-
tant Sentences commentary, a Quodlibet, an economics
treatise, and numerous tracts on topics in logic, metaphys-
ics, and natural philosophy. Although his thought can be
characterized as Platonist in many ways, he is most con-
spicuous for being intrepid. As a natural philosopher,
Gerard is best known as an atomist, but he also held
innovative views on projectile motion and the possible
plurality of worlds. As a theologian, Gerard defended
unpopular positions on a number of issues, most
famously the beatiﬁc vision. In metaphysics, he was
a strong realist. In ethics, where his impact was most
pronounced, Gerard espoused opinions that furthered
the voluntarist tendencies of his order. Even as an eco-
nomic theorist, Gerard’s defense of the legitimacy of what
were considered usurious practices put him outside the
mainstream of his time.
Gerard Odonis – also known as Gerardus/Geraldus/
Giraldus Otto/Oddo/Odon/Hodonis and, in the vernacu-
lar, Guiral Ot – was born c. 1285–1290 in Camboulit,
a village in southern France near Figeac, where he joined
the Friars Minor. Rising in the Franciscan educational
system, by early 1316 he was bachelor of theology
at Toulouse, where he composed a short tract on signs
of the Last Judgment and the economics treatise
De contractibus. He also read the Sentences at Toulouse,
making a name for himself with the reportationes that
circulated from these lectures, although only a few ques-
tions from book II survive, incorporated into Gerard’s
later Parisian commentary from the late 1320s. Between
these lecture series, Gerard probably penned at least
a portion of the philosophical treatises preserved primar-
ily in a Madrid manuscript, some of which may stem from
his Toulouse Sentences commentary. The logical works and
the De intentionibus have been published, while those on
metaphysics and natural philosophy are in preparation.
Also presumably during this phase, Gerard wrote his most
inﬂuential work, the ﬁrst Franciscan Ethics commentary,
which survives in 18 codices, received two incunabula
editions, and earned Gerard the nickname Doctor moralis.
With these writings and his pastoral works, sermons, and
biblical commentaries, Gerard was thus already well
known when the Franciscans assigned him to lecture on
the Sentences at Paris, which he did during the 1327–1328
academic year. Although the popularity of Gerard’s writ-
ten version suffered because of the ensuing decades of
decline in Franciscan theology, nevertheless 11 manu-
scripts preserve one or more books of this almost
completely unpublished commentary, which incorporates
material from his earlier philosophical questions and his
Ethics commentary.
Gerard was promoted soon afterward, since as master
of theology, with the backing of Pope John XXII, Gerard
was elected Franciscan minister general on June 10, 1329,
Gerard Odonis G
399
G

replacing the deposed Michael of Cesena. During his tur-
bulent reign, Gerard sided with Pope John against rebel-
lious Franciscans on the issue of apostolic poverty, and he
even defended John’s controversial views on the beatiﬁc
vision, writing a treatise – now published – based on
a quodlibetal disputation he held in Paris in Advent
1333. Afterward Gerard devoted himself to the adminis-
tration of his order and acted as papal nuncio in Central
Europe ﬁghting the Bogomile heresy, before stepping
down as minister general in late 1342 when the new
Pope Clement VI appointed him Latin patriarch of Anti-
och. Since Antioch was in Muslim hands, Gerard received
the see of Catania in Sicily, where he died in 1349 during
the Black Death.
As a thinker and author Gerard was remarkably bold,
clear, succinct, independent, often original, and some-
times brilliant. Some of the pioneers of the study of medi-
eval science – Pierre Duhem, Anneliese Maier, and John
Murdoch – recognized this, even though they usually had
access to mere fragments of Gerard’s oeuvre. Since
Gerard’s Toulouse Sentences commentary has not been
identiﬁed, his precise relationship with such contempo-
raries as Henry of Harclay and Francis of Marchia is
unclear. For example, in De motu and later in distinction
14 of his Parisian commentary on II Sentences, Gerard
discussed the old problem of how projectiles continue in
motion after contact with the mover has ceased, defending
the following conclusions: ‘‘First, a projectile separated
from the thrower is not moved by the containing medium.
Second, it is not moved by a virtus impressa impressed on
the containing medium. Third, it is moved by a virtus
derelicta left in it by the thrower.’’ Gerard thus rejected
the prevailing Aristotelian view and endorsed what his
Franciscan confrere Marchia defended at much greater
length. The two extant versions of Gerard’s text appear
to postdate Marchia’s, but what had Gerard taught at
Toulouse? Whatever the relationship between Marchia
and Gerard, their idea of a virtus derelicta – a force left
behind – in the projectile was surely adopted and devel-
oped by John Buridan later in his theory of impetus.
In natural philosophy, Gerard is most famous for his
atomism. Henry of Harclay (d. 1317), chancellor of the
University of Oxford, was the ﬁrst important atomist in
medieval western Christendom – unless Gerard proposed
an indivisibilist theory at Toulouse, in which case they
came up with their opinions simultaneously. By the early
1320s, Gerard and the Oxford theologian Walter Chatton
were espousing the theory, which Nicholas of Autrecourt
would later adopt, against ﬁerce opposition from many
scholars. Gerard presented his anti-Aristotelian theory in
the treatise De continuo, preserved in two manuscripts plus
a fragment and recently published. Gerard was at pains to
make his opinion known, for two other versions of the text
were incorporated into his Parisian Sentences commen-
tary, in book I, distinction 37, and book II, distinction 44,
so that ten witnesses carry all or part of the work: this was
a medieval best-seller, known to John the Canon, Nicholas
Bonet, Nicholas of Autrecourt, and, directly or indirectly,
early modern authors.
Nicholas Bonet called Gerard a ‘‘Platonist’’ with regard
to his brand of atomism, and Platonism does run through
Gerard’s works, even his Ethics commentary. On the sub-
ject of a possible plurality of worlds, treated in distinction
44 of his commentary on II Sentences, Gerard went beyond
his scholastic predecessors and contemporaries, explicitly
arguing in favor of Plato over Aristotle in defending God’s
power to make more than one world. Rather than just
state this as fact, as required after the Condemnation of
1277, Gerard gave analogies to show by example how
different worlds of the same type would each have differ-
ent centers to which and from which heavy and light
objects would fall or rise, without the different worlds
interfering with each other, contrary to what Aristotle
had maintained. Gerard reasoned that the circulation of
the blood in different humans works this way, and he
surmised that similar phenomena are observed in the
northern and southern hemispheres with respect to oppo-
site poles. In his discussion, Gerard hints that there is
a mutual attraction between a heavy body and the center
of the world. To Aristotle’s claim that beyond the heavens
of this world there is neither place nor body, Odonis
asserts not only that the contrary is possible, but
‘‘I would not even consider it very untoward if in reality,
right now, de facto, one said that beyond the heavens there
is a place and an inﬁnite space, although an empty vac-
uum.’’ If in expressing similar views later Nicholas Oresme
drew inspiration from any scholastic, the best candidate is
Gerard Odonis.
In metaphysics, in his Sentences commentary and sep-
arate treatises Gerard opposed the prevailing denial of
extramental existence to universals. He also supported
the univocity of the concept of being, holding that there
is a nature common to God and creatures in extramental
reality, and common to particular and universal nature.
It has been said that Gerard’s rather strong realism has
a ‘‘Platonic ﬂavour.’’ Thus in distinction 1 of his commen-
tary on II Sentences, Gerard enumerates and deﬁnes nine
different kinds of being that a creature has before it
receives ‘‘posited being’’ with creation: producible being,
ideal being, intelligible being, intellected being, willable
being, willed being, possible being, positive being, and
quiddative being.
400 G
Gerard Odonis

As a theologian also, Gerard put forth radical views. In
his Quodlibet, he defended Pope John XXII’s very unpop-
ular assertion that the saints in heaven do not experience
the beatiﬁc vision until after the Last Judgment. One need
not maintain that Gerard did this solely to score points
with the pope, for Gerard espoused many unpopular opin-
ions on matters unrelated to papal proclamations. For
example, except for Matthew of Aquasparta, Latin theolo-
gians since 1054 agreed that the Last Supper took place as
a Passover meal, when unleavened bread was in use. In
distinction 12 of book IV of his Sentences commentary,
Gerard rejects the consensus and interprets the Gospels as
the Greeks did: the meal happened before Passover, when
leavened bread was eaten – although Gerard claims that
Jesus instituted a new rite, employing unleavened bread.
One could maintain that Gerard’s ‘‘Platonic’’ procliv-
ities show up in his brand of Augustinian theology. In the
contexts of divine foreknowledge and predestination, he
proposed radical interpretations of two Augustinian dicta:
for foreknowledge, ‘‘God does not know what is to happen
differently from what has happened,’’ and for predestina-
tion, ‘‘This will of God cannot be unjust, for it springs
from deeply hidden merits.’’ For Gerard, the ﬁrst passage
entails that God knows the future as past, while the second
leads Gerard in the direction of semi-Pelagianism,
abandoning the prevailing view that the predestination
(of the elect) stems solely from God’s will. This is in line
with what Gerard emphasizes in his Ethics commentary:
man can do good by himself through free will; although
man needs God’s help, God cannot do it alone, without
man’s consent. For Gerard, ethics is none other than the
study of human free will, because without the will’s free
ability to choose and determine itself there is no basis for
morality. Gerard’s discussion is squarely Franciscan,
exhibiting much of the fascinating Franciscan analysis of
human free will in the 1320s, but Gerard seems to have
worried less than most of his confreres about the burden of
theological tradition. Gerard’s Ethics commentary heavily
inﬂuenced John Buridan and European thought in
general.
Finally, even Gerard’s economic thought is remarkable.
In his economics treatise, in essence, Gerard justiﬁes what
was called usury, providing a theory for acceptable banking
practices in which interest is justly charged as compensa-
tion for the loss of utility of the money lent to the borrower.
These are only a few of the topics on which Gerard
expressed opinions that deserve our attention for their
intrinsic interest and their impact on the history of ideas.
See also: ▶Atomism ▶Augustine ▶Economic Thought
in the Middle Ages ▶Ethics ▶Francis of Marchia
▶Henry of Harclay ▶Impetus ▶John Buridan ▶Natural
Philosophy ▶Nicholas of Autrecourt ▶Nicholas Oresme
▶Realism ▶Universals ▶Walter Chatton
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(forthcoming) Tractatus Giraldi Oddonis de contractibus secundum Io.
Schotum, in four manuscripts, ed. Ceccarelli G, Piron S.
(1482) Sententia et expositio cum quaestionibus super libros ethicorum
Aristotelis cum textu eiusdem, Brescia (repr. Venice, 1500)
(1997) Giraldus Odonis OFM, Opera philosophica I: Logica, ed. de Rijk
LM. Brill, Leiden (editions of De sillogismis, De suppositionibus, and
De principiis scientiarum)
(2001) La vision de Dieu aux multiples formes. Quodlibet tenu a` Paris en
decembre 1333, ed. and trans. Trottmann C. Vrin, Paris
(2005) Giraldus Odonis OFM, Opera philosophica II: De intentionibus.
With a study on the medieval intentionality debate up to ca. 1350, ed.
de Rijk LM. Brill, Leiden
Bakker PJJM (2003) Guiral Ot et le mouvement autour de la question De
motu conserve´e dans le manuscrit Madrid, Biblioteca nacional, 4229.
Early Sci Med 8(4):298–319 (edition of De motu)
de Boer SW (2005) Gerardus Odonis O.F.N. over het continuum. Een
ﬁlosoﬁsch-historische studie met een editie van ‘De continuo’. MA
thesis, University of Nijmegen (edition of De continuo)
Ga´l G (1992) Geraldus Odonis on the univocity of the concept of being.
Francisc Stud 52:23–51 (edition of I Sentences, d. 3, part I)
Schabel C (2002a) Non aliter novit facienda quam facta. Gerard Odonis’
questions on divine foreknowledge. In: Bakker PJJM (ed) Chemins
de la pense´e me´die´vale. E´tudes offertes a` Ze´non Kaluza. Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 351–377 (edition of I Sentences, d. 38 and d. 39, q. 1)
Schabel C (2002b) Landulph Caracciolo and Gerard Odonis on predesti-
nation: opposite attitudes toward Scotus and Auriol. Wiss Weish
65(1):62–81 (edition of I Sentences, d. 41, q. 2)
Secondary Sources
de Rijk LM (1997) Guiral Ot (Giraldus Odonis) O.F.M. (1273–1349): his
view of statemental being in his commentary on the sentences. In:
Marmo C (ed) Vestigia, Images, Verba. Semiotics and logic in medi-
eval theological texts (XIIth–XIVth century). Brepols, Bologna,
pp 355–369
de Rijk LM (2005) Girald Odonis on the real status of some second
intentions.
Documenti e Studi sulla tradizione
philosophica
medievale 16:515–551
Duba W, Schabel C (eds) (2009) Gerald Odonis, Doctor Moralis and
Franciscan Minister General. Studies in honour of L.M. de Rijk.
Brill, Leiden, with contributions by P.J.J.M. Bakker–S.W. de Boer, S.
F. Brown, G. Ceccarelli–S. Piron, W. Duba, R. Lambertini, C. Porter,
C. Schabel, and J. Spruyt
Kent B (1984) Aristotle and the Franciscans: Gerard Odonis’ commentary
on the Nicomachean ethics. PhD dissertation, Columbia University
Langholm O (2002) Economics in the medieval schools. Wealth,
exchange, value, money and usury according to the Paris theological
tradition 1200–1350. Brill, Leiden
Schabel C (2004) The Sentences commentary of Gerardus Odonis, OFM.
Bull Philos Me´die´vale 46:115–161
Spruyt J (1996) Gerardus Odonis on the universal. Archives d’Histoire
Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen Age 63:171–208
Trottmann C (2001) Guiral Ot: de l’e´ternite´ au temps et retour. Conjectures
a` partir du De multiformi visione Dei. In: Porro P (ed) The medieval
Gerard Odonis G
401
G

concept of time. Studies on the scholastic debate and its reception in
early modern philosophy. Brill, Leiden, pp 287–317
Walsh JJ (1975) Some relationships between Girald Odo’s and John
Buridan’s
commentaries
on
Aristotle’s
ethics.
Francisc
Stud
35:237–275
Zoubov VP (1959) Walter Catton, Gerard d’Odon et Nicolas Bonet.
Rivista di storia della scienza 1(4):261–278
Gerard of Cremona
▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of
▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r
Gerson, John
▶John Gerson
Gersonides
STEVEN NADLER
Department of Philosophy
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI
USA
Abstract
Gersonides (Levi ben Gershom [acronym RaLBaG], 1288–
1344), one of the most important ﬁgures in the history
of Jewish philosophy, was a fourteenth-century rabbi,
philosopher, scientist, and Bible commentator who
ﬂourished within the Jewish community in the tolerant
environment of Provence. The primary inﬂuences on his
thought are Aristotle (through the commentaries of
Averroes) and Maimonides. His most important philo-
sophical work, The Wars of the Lord, is a wide-ranging
treatise in the tradition of Maimonidean rationalism.
Its ﬁve books cover topics such as the immortality of the
soul; dreams, divination, and prophecy; divine knowledge
and providence; free will; and creation and cosmology. He
is also the author of treatises of biblical exegeses, including
inﬂuential commentaries on the Pentateuch, Job, and
Song of Songs, as well as work in astronomy, mathematics,
and halakhah.
Biography
Little is known about Gersonides’ life. He was born in
Provence in 1288 and was probably the son of the Talmu-
dic scholar Gershom of Be´siers. Under the rule of the Duke
of Anjou and, later, the Pope (then based in Avignon
during the Papal schism), Jews in Provence enjoyed
a relatively high degree of toleration, even support, and
a rich intellectual tradition was able to ﬂourish in this
hospitable environment. While Gersonides, unlike Mai-
monides, was not a major religious leader in the commu-
nity, his stature in Provence and beyond was high, both
during his lifetime and after. He died in 1344.
The primary inﬂuences on Gersonides’ philosophy are
Aristotle (through the commentaries of Averroes) and
Maimonides. He wrote all his works in Hebrew, and it is
uncertain whether he knew Latin, Arabic, or even
Provenc¸al. His Bible commentaries include works on the
Pentateuch, Job, Song of Songs, Daniel, Esther, and Ruth,
and several of these serve as useful supplements to his
philosophical writings; they often provide an accessible
discussion, through Biblical texts, of philosophical mat-
ters treated more technically in his supercommentaries on
Averroes and, especially, in his own original philosophical
masterpiece, The Wars of the Lord (Sefer Milhamot ha-
Shem, completed around 1329).
In many respects, Gersonides was a more radical
thinker than Maimonides, less deferential to either Aris-
totle or rabbinic tradition, and willing to depart from
traditional views when philosophical reasoning demanded
it. Thus, while he agreed with Maimonides in rejecting
Aristotle’s views on the eternity of the world, he also
rejected creation ex nihilo and favored the Platonic posi-
tion of divine creation operating on a preexisting material
substrate.
Philosophy
Gersonides’ most important, systematic, and inﬂuential
treatment of philosophical matters is The Wars of the Lord.
The monumental treatise is divided thematically into six
books: Immortality of the Soul; Dreams, Divination, and
Prophecy; Divine Knowledge; Divine Providence; Heavenly
Bodies and Their Movers, the Relationships Among These
Movers, and the Relationship Between Them and God; and
Creation of the World. His discussions are often character-
ized by scholastic style, ﬁrst explaining and refuting the
views of others and then presenting his own opinions,
supported by both logical argument and biblical citation.
Nowhere is Gersonides’ philosophical originality and
technical virtuosity on greater display than in his treat-
ment of three issues of major concern to medieval philos-
ophers: the immortality of the soul, theodicy and the
402 G
Gerard of Cremona

nature of divine providence, and the problem of reconcil-
ing divine foreknowledge and human freedom.
Immortality of the Soul
Gersonides offers a thoroughly Aristotelian conception of
the human soul and of its capacity for immortality, but
one that also stands in stark contrast to the views of other
latter-day Aristotelians, such as Alexander of Aphrodisias
and Averroes. The topic of the immortality of the soul is of
supreme importance for Gersonides, for upon it depends
not just the metaphysical fate of the soul, but also human
happiness and well-being – and not only in the afterlife,
but in this life as well.
Gersonides begins his discussion by singling out that
part of the soul that is the prime candidate for immortal-
ity. The soul is composed both of parts that use the body in
their functioning (such as sensibility and imagination)
and of pure intellect. That part of the soul that does
depend on the body – and, in particular, the senses and
the imaginative faculty – for its operations is called the
material intellect. The material intellect is pure potential-
ity, the bare capacity for thought. Like all potentialities, it
must reside in a subject; it cannot be a substance in its own
right. Gersonides argues at length against the view that the
subject of this disposition is a soul understood as an
incorporeal substance distinct from the body. If such
were the case, the disposition would belong to an actual
intellect – a form – and would not have any potentialities.
In fact, the material intellect is a disposition of the body
(with ‘‘body’’ understood in Aristotelian
terms as
a substance composed of both matter and form). It is
a capacity or potentiality that the animated human body
has, because it is informed by the soul and its faculty of
imagination, to contribute to the acquisition of knowledge
through the mediation of sensation. It is basically the
living human organism’s capacity to transform sensory
input into knowledge. The material intellect is also, there-
fore, along with the body, corruptible and mortal – it
comes to an end with a person’s physical death.
Left to its own devices, the material intellect will not
generate knowledge. True knowledge is the intellectual
grasp of abstract, universal truths – it is conceptual in
nature, not sensory – and the unaided material intellect
can receive only the images of particular things. The senses
and the imagination give us only limited access to indi-
vidual objects in the world around us. What supplements
the material intellect and makes it possible for a knower to
transcend this acquaintance with particulars and appre-
hend more general things – such as essences, mathematical
truths, and natural laws – is what Gersonides calls the
Agent Intellect. Understanding just how this higher
intellect functions requires a brief excursion into the cos-
mos itself.
In
the
medieval
Aristotelian
cosmology
that
Gersonides inherits, the universe is a series of concentric
material spheres. On most accounts, there is, ﬁrst, an
outermost sphere encompassing the universe as a whole;
its turning initiates the motions of the inner spheres.
Gersonides himself, however, rejects such a starless sphere
undergoing diurnal motion. For him, the outermost
sphere of the universe is the sphere holding the ﬁxed
stars. Within this sphere lie the other spheres that, in
their perpetual circular motion, each carry around either
one of the ﬁve known planets, the sun, or the moon. At the
center of the universe, within the innermost sphere of the
moon, stands the earth itself. The spheres are animate
beings. Like all substances, they are constituted out of
matter and form. They are also, therefore, intelligent,
ensouled beings, and their motion is explained in part by
their desire and volition.
Associated with each sphere, but distinct from it, is
a separate intellect. This is the immaterial spirit or incor-
poreal intelligence that governs that sphere. It needs to be
distinguished from the indwelling soul that animates each
sphere. In fact, the separate intellect is that whose perfec-
tion each sphere’s indwelling soul desires to emulate. Each
separate intellect explains (again, only in part) the motion
of its corresponding sphere (as the desire to emulate
a perfect being gives rise to circular – that is, perfect –
motion) and the arrangement of its contents. All of the
separate intellects ﬂow from God, and serve as God’s
intermediaries for the spheres they govern.
The separate intellect governing the sublunary realm –
that is, the earth and the phenomena that lie between the
earth and the moon – is called the Agent (or Active)
Intellect. This eternal and incorporeal soul plays two
roles in the world. First, it is causally responsible for all
of the physical phenomena in nature: their natures, their
arrangements and sequences, their interactions, and espe-
cially the laws that govern these. While God is the remote
and ultimate cause of everything in the sublunar realm,
the more proximate agent (and working on God’s behalf)
is the Agent Intellect. It is the agent responsible for the
existence of things in the sublunar world: primarily by
being the generative source of all the forms constituting
natural things, but also by being the cause of the order and
hierarchy of things, as well as of the general course of
nature. The Agent Intellect actively governs the dynamics
of the natural world.
Because the Agent Intellect is an intelligent cause, it
possesses full knowledge – the maker’s knowledge – of the
order it imposes on things in the world. The Agent
Gersonides G
403
G

Intellect contains the concepts of all beings, organized
comprehensively and systematically, such that the totality
of what the Agent Intellect knows constitutes an exhaus-
tive body of science. Its knowledge is a kind of complete
and archetypal blueprint for the world it governs.
Gersonides, in fact, calls it ‘‘the rational order of the
terrestrial world,’’ although its science also includes
knowledge of all celestial phenomena as well. It is an
eternal and incorruptible order, in contrast to the chang-
ing, corruptible, and temporal ordering of things and
events that instantiate and dynamically exempliﬁes it.
This knowledge in the Agent Intellect exists in ‘‘a perfect
and uniﬁed manner.’’
The second role played by the Agent Intellect is epis-
temological, related to human knowledge. It is a role
made possible, in fact, by its ﬁrst role as intelligent cause.
The Agent Intellect is responsible for illuminating human
minds and generating human cognition of the general
concepts of things and of universal truths, that is, true
science. Because of the intellectual union between the
human intellect and this higher, separate intellect, the
potential of the material intellect can be actualized and
the human being can acquire a knowledge of things that
goes beyond mere sensory acquaintance through particu-
lar images. The world, in effect, becomes intelligible to the
human intellect via the Agent Intellect. If knowledge is the
apprehension of the forms of things, the grasp of their
essential and general features, then what the Agent Intel-
lect does is, through its own knowledge of the forms, cause
the human intellect’s understanding of them.
The forms of things are just their general natures. The
general nature of horse is in every horse. Through repeated
sensory perception, through the reception of particular
images in the imaginative faculty of the material intellect,
the intellect (moved by the Agent Intellect) can abstract
from the particularities that distinguish one speciﬁc sensi-
ble encounter with an object of a certain kind from another
of the same kind and reach an understanding of that com-
mon nature. After seeing a number of horses, one comes to
understand what a horse is essentially. The Agent Intellect
makes this process possible by illuminating the human
intellect with that eternal order it contains; it informs the
human intellect with the general knowledge required for it
to make intelligible sense of sensible particulars.
What we are ultimately after is, in fact, not just the
essence of this or that particular kind of being. Part of
what is contained in a nature is a set of functions that will
allow one to see a thing in all of its intrinsic and relational
characters. What we truly seek is a complete and uniﬁed
system of such truths. The real object of knowledge for
a human being is the intelligible order of things as
contained within the Agent Intellect. Because this order
is eternal, universal, and immutable, it exclusively pos-
sesses the characteristic features of true knowledge. This,
then, is how the human mind – initially limited by its
union with a material body – moves past sensible cogni-
tion via images to the apprehension of the intelligibles, of
the forms of things without their matter. Through this
process, aided by the intelligent cause of the world’s order,
the human mind comes to an understanding of the true
order of the world. Its knowledge grows, in fact, to mirror
(as much as possible for human beings) the knowledge
that is in the Agent Intellect itself.
The result of all of this in the knower – the cognition of
the very order inherent in the Agent Intellect – is what
Gersonides calls the acquired intellect. Gersonides notes,
"
it is clear that the acquired intellect is the perfection
of the material intellect brought about by the Agent
Intellect (Wars of the Lord [Wars], Book I.11, Gersonides
1984:212–213).
The acquired intellect is a body of conceptual knowl-
edge. It is an intellectual attainment on the part of the
knower; it just is that person’s knowledge of eternal truths.
Because it is only a partial grasp of a larger whole, and
a not entirely systematic one at that, the acquired intellect
is not identical with the knowledge in the Agent Intellect
itself. But the content of the acquired intellect reﬂects to
some degree the knowledge in that higher spirit. What is
immortal in a human being, for Gersonides, is nothing
beyond the acquired intellect. Despite the fact that the
acquired intellect is generated in us, it does not follow
that it is corruptible; Gersonides rejects Aristotle’s claim
that everything generated is corruptible. Because the ratio-
nal order of the world in the Agent Intellect is eternal and
incorruptible, our knowledge of that order (once it is
acquired) must likewise be eternal and incorruptible,
since knowledge takes its character from the object
known. Moreover, he argues, the acquired intellect (unlike
the material intellect) is both immaterial and separable
from the body, and thus not subject to the forces that
destroy the body. Hence, he concludes, the acquired intel-
lect is immortal. When a person dies, the soul understood
as the material intellect ceases along with the body. As
a result, all further acquisition of knowledge necessarily
comes to an end as well. But the acquired intellect remains.
The immortality available to any human being consists
only in this persistence, after the death of the body, of the
knowledge that he or she has acquired in this lifetime.
To his contemporaries, Gersonides must have seemed
to be treading perilously close to – if not right into to the
eye of – the Averroist storm. Among the Arabic
404 G
Gersonides

Aristotelian’s greatest sins, at least in the eyes of his Chris-
tian critics, was the denial of an individual, personal
immortality. Averroes had argued that the material intel-
lect in a human being is not a particular product of the
union of a body (matter) and an individual soul (form),
but rather simply the manifestation in that person of the
single, all-embracing Agent Intellect. Thus, a person’s soul
– the form animating his body – is nothing but the Agent
Intellect itself; and his cognitive powers and achievements
are simply the direct activity in him of that higher intellect,
which actualizes certain potentialities in his body. All
human beings, that is, literally share the same form – the
Agent Intellect is common to them all. And a person
thinks only because of his union or conjunction with
the Agent Intellect and the intelligibles it contains.
Although in itself general, the Agent Intellect undergoes
a temporary process of individuation when it is attached
to and embodied in an individual human being in
a lifetime. But since the Agent Intellect is, in truth, one,
and thus the same in and for all individuals, when
a person dies all such individuation acquired through
the body disappears and his soul reverts back to its tran-
scendent, separate, impersonal existence as the pure
Agent Intellect. There is no personal immortality for
Averroes.
Gersonides is aware of the philosophical problems here.
For example, if all human beings literally share the same
intellect, he argues, then how can we account for the
different intellectual attainments of different people? But
of even greater importance, it seems, are the religious and
theological objections he has in mind. As Gersonides goes
to great lengths to distinguish his own view of the soul from
that of Averroe¨s, he concentrates especially on the issue of
personal immortality. If the human intellect is really noth-
ing but the Agent Intellect, then immortality is of no
practical value or moral consequence. For, he suggests, it
would follow that all human beings, whatever their char-
acter or virtue – ‘‘be he fool or sage,’’ good or evil – will,
because they literally share the same eternal soul, obtain
this alleged immortality. Moreover, if immortality is indeed
a totally impersonal affair, as Averroe¨s claims, then it can
have no relevance for our very particular lives. Gersonides
believes that his doctrine of personal immortality avoids
these problems. Each person’s acquired intellect is, he
argues, a unity, numerically one, and thus can be distin-
guished – without any reference to the body at all – from
other acquired intellects, even if those intellects have some
knowledge in common.
"
One piece of knowledge can be common to Reuben and
Simon yet differ in them insofar as the kind of unity differs
in them; so that, for example, the unity in the acquired
intellect of Reuben differs from the unity in the acquired
intellect of Simon (Wars I.13, Gersonides 1984:224).
What gives each acquired intellect its unity and iden-
tity is both the amount of knowledge it involves and the
content or character of that knowledge – not just its items,
but also the way they are connected or synthesized. Dif-
ferent people acquire different, and different amounts of,
intellectual knowledge. This will presumably allow one
disembodied acquired intellect to be distinguished from
another. And Gersonides seems to think that a sense of
selfhood will accompany this unity. He speaks of the
happiness and pleasure that the immortal soul will feel
when, having been released from the body, it will contem-
plate the knowledge it acquired during its temporal,
embodied existence.
Divine Knowledge and Future Contingents
The problem of divine knowledge for Gersonides is
centered on two basic questions: Does God have knowl-
edge of particulars, especially the particular actions of
individual human beings? And how can an omniscient
God’s knowledge of future contingent events leave the
contingency of those events unaffected? If God knows
from eternity that a person will commit a certain action,
then it would seem impossible for that person not to
commit that action; thus, the problem runs, the act
would not really be free and the person could not be
held morally responsible for performing it. This is the
classic problem of how to reconcile divine foreknowledge
with human freedom.
With regard to God’s knowledge of particulars,
Gersonides tries to steer a middle course between the
Aristotelian view that God does not know particulars at
all, but only universals (including the species of things),
and Maimonides’ view (which Maimonides claims is the
only one consistent with Torah) that God knows every
particular in all its particularity. Gersonides says that God
does have knowledge of particulars, but not in their par-
ticularity. God lacks the right kind of cognitive faculties,
such as sense organs, to grasp the temporal, mutable
features that distinguish different individuals of the same
kind. What God does know of particulars is all of those
aspects of them that are determined by the species to
which they belong and the more general laws of nature
that govern them. Just as God knows of every molecule of
water that it will contain two hydrogen atoms and one
oxygen atom, and of every grain of salt that it is soluble in
water, so He knows of every single human being that he
will have reason and certain instincts. God has knowledge
Gersonides G
405
G

of particular events only to the extent to which they are
‘‘ordered in a determinate and certain way’’ by the laws of
nature; He knows how things in general behave according
to their kinds. And this knowledge covers most of what
happens in nature.
But for Gersonides, there is a certain domain of events
in the world of which God has no particularized knowl-
edge, namely, the free choices of human beings. These are
not determined by the species or laws – otherwise they
would not be free – and so they escape the eternal knowl-
edge of regularities that God has. God may know the
general patterns of things, but these patterns can be
disrupted by human volitions. For this reason, Gersonides
denies that
"
God knows this affair with respect to this particular man as
a definite individual (Wars III.5, Gersonides 1987:136).
God may know what a human being of a certain kind
would, in general, do in certain circumstances; but there is
always the possibility that in such circumstances a free
agent will not do what a member of the species will
ordinarily do. Thus, God does not know for certain how
such an agent will act.
This account of God’s knowledge of particulars
provides Gersonides with an easy (although highly
controversial) answer to the problem of reconciling
divine foreknowledge and human freedom. Essentially,
Gersonides says that God does not in fact have fore-
knowledge of free human actions before they occur.
God may know that human beings, given their native
endowments, will sin, but He does not know whether
or not a particular human being will sin in certain
circumstances.
Gersonides is not concerned that this position under-
mines divine omniscience. For him, omniscience does not
mean knowing everything; rather, it means knowing
everything that is in principle knowable. And, he insists,
future contingents are simply not knowable. Unlike events
in the past, the particularities of contingent events that
have not yet taken place have no determinate truth-value
and therefore cannot be known.
Divine Providence
Gersonides’ account of providence is, as he himself
explicitly notes, much like that of Maimonides. He
begins with the question of whether divine provi-
dence extends to individuals or is (as Aristotle claims)
limited only to eternal and unchanging things? The
phenomenon of prophecy, evidence of God’s commun-
ication
with
particular
individuals,
rules
out
the
Aristotelian option (a position that, he insists in his
Commentary on the Book of Job, also represents Job’s
despondent view). So now the question is simply
whether providence extends to all individuals (and at all
times) or only to some individuals. Gersonides argues
against providence being connected to all the actions of
all individuals – the view he attributes to Job’s friends
Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar – on the grounds that
(a) this would involve God in actively causing evils, for
we frequently see people suffer; and (b) it is clearly falsiﬁed
by experience, which seems to present a good deal of
disorder and a lack of justice in the distribution of the
world’s goods. The challenge for Gersonides, then, is to
explain how divine providence extends to some but not all
individuals (the view he attributes to Elihu) even though
God has no knowledge of particulars as particulars, and
to do so in a way that accounts for the suffering of
the righteous and the prospering of the wicked in this
world. His solution is to place immediate responsibility
for human ﬂourishing upon individual human beings
themselves.
"
God has endowed man with reason so that he can avoid
these evils as far as possible (Wars IV.3, Gersonides
1987:169).
Gersonides, again like Maimonides, is concerned with
two species of providence, both of which are explained in
naturalistic terms within an Aristotelian framework. First,
there is a general providence that extends across all of
nature and, thereby, to all human beings. Second, there
is what he calls special or individual providence. This is the
protection that, as on Maimonides’ account, comes only
to a certain class of human beings, namely, those who,
through the use of their intellects, achieve a union with the
Agent Intellect and a consequent insight into the ways of
nature.
The source of evil, Gersonides says, is never God.
Nor does it come from the forms of things. Rather, evil
has its origins either in matter or in chance. By ‘‘matter,’’
he means the mixture of elements in material nature
(including human bodies) and the human choices that
may be inﬂuenced by this. By ‘‘chance,’’ Gersonides under-
stands the unfortunate effects upon human beings of
occurrences of nature. These occurrences are as causally
ordered as anything else in the sublunar realm: they are
‘‘the evils that befall man from the patterns determined by
the arrangements of the heavenly bodies.’’ What is acci-
dental and a matter of chance is the evilness of their results
relative to human beings and their ends; it is an evil that is
unforeseen and unintended by the natural causes of such
things, and bears no relationship to peoples’ deserts. As
Gersonides notes, it is the
406 G
Gersonides

"
evil resulting from these events [for human beings] that is
due to chance (Wars IV.3, Gersonides 1987:169).
Now nature has provided in a general way for all
creatures through the endowments of the species. Each
type of animal has been given the appropriate means
necessary for its survival. And the more noble the creature,
the greater its capacities for self-preservation. General
providence, then, derives, like all the determined aspects
of nature, from the ordinary causal course of nature
as this is driven by celestial bodies and through the
Agent Intellect. All individual human beings are thus
endowed by nature with the faculties and instincts that
they need for survival in a world governed by laws which
themselves derive from the same celestial inﬂuences. The
heavenly spheres provide us with desires, thoughts, and
intentions for action that are to our beneﬁt. The general
celestial providence thus takes care of all individuals
qua members of the human species, but not qua partic-
ulars. It extends to all humans as humans in their inter-
actions both with material nature and with each other,
without taking any account of their particularities,
especially their moral differences, their virtues and
vices. Naturally, although this general ordering of nature
aims for the best, and generally results in good, some-
times it brings about evil, or accidental misfortunes.
Although we have, by general providence, the where-
withal to deal for the most part with what fortune brings
our way, we are not, by nature alone, prepared to deal
with all the threats to our well-being. Nature is still
a risky environment, full of potential harm and obstacles
to our ﬂourishing.
This is where special providence comes in. Although
God has not ordered the patterns of the heavens such that
no evil is to occur, nonetheless
"
he has given man an instrument whereby these evils can
be avoided – reason (Wars IV.6, Gersonides 1987:184).
Thus, in addition to the astral-based (general) provi-
dence, there is also an intellect-based providence available
to human beings, through the achievement of which they
can escape (or at least limit) the occasional unfortunate
effects of general providence. Through the proper use of
his intellect, an individual human being perfects himself
and becomes closer to the Agent Intellect, discerns that
Intellect’s maker’s knowledge of the essences of things and
of the patterns and laws of nature, and thereby attains
a higher degree of protection from nature’s vicissitudes.
The person enjoying special providence is a person who,
through the actualization of his intellect and the acquisi-
tion of higher knowledge, is better equipped to obtain
what is good and avoid any evils impending from the
ordinary course of nature. As the human mind comes to
an understanding of the true order of the world and its
knowledge grows, in fact, to mirror (as much as possible
for human beings) the knowledge that is in the Agent
Intellect itself, one becomes enlightened. Unlike the gen-
eral run of people,
"
who are not within the scope of divine providence
except in a general way as members of the human species
(Wars IV.4, Gersonides 1987:174).
this person knows how nature operates; he can predict
what, according to nature’s laws, the future will bring and
generally be able to put nature’s ways to his own use.
"
His providence with respect to individual men consists
[precisely] in informing them of the good or evil that is
to come upon them, so that they will avoid the evil and
pursue the good (Wars IV.5, Gersonides 1987:178).
This kind of communication between the Agent Intel-
lect (and, ultimately, God, from whom its knowledge
derives) and a particular human being does not require
any knowledge of or action upon particulars as partic-
ulars on God’s or the Agent Intellect’s part. The knowl-
edge acquired by the person who has developed his
intellect is neither itself particular nor aimed at anyone
in particular. It is general information – perhaps best
captured by a system of conditional propositions (if x
occurs, then y occurs) – that is there for anyone to pursue
and tap into. Still, as a matter of fact, only the truly
righteous – those who are guided by reason – will attain
it. If virtue is the pursuit of intellectual perfection – as
Gersonides believes – then this special providence is the
natural product and reward of virtue. The truly righteous
person will, for the most part and just because of his
intellectual achievements, obtain the goods that this
world has to offer and avoid its evils. Sinners, on the
other hand, will in general be punished – not directly,
through some particular directive from God (since God
cannot be the cause of evil, nor can he know particulars as
particulars), but by being left out in the cold. Those who
do not pursue virtue, who do not perfect their intellects,
will be subject to the vicissitudes of nature. Without the
knowledge possessed by the virtuous, sinners cannot
properly navigate their way through nature and guard
themselves accordingly.
Why, then, is it the case that evil things do sometimes
happen to righteous people and good things to sinners?
Why do we see the virtuous suffer while the wicked pros-
per? In Gersonides’ own words, a righteous person occa-
sionally does ‘‘become the target of the arrows of fortune,’’
Gersonides G
407
G

as these are ordered by the heavenly bodies, that is, by
nature. Is this not a counterexample to Gersonides’ theory
of providence?
Gersonides offers a two-pronged response to this
objection. First, he focuses on the impersonal universal
and deterministic forces that bring the goods and evils in
question to individuals independently of their deserts.
He notes that just because the wicked person is abandoned
to chance, to whatever nature may bring his way, there
should be little wonder that sometimes nature will bring
along things that beneﬁt him. What is important is that his
acquisition of these beneﬁts is due entirely to accident, and
not to any judgment about what he is due in terms of
reward and punishment. Similarly, Gersonides concedes
that in this life no one, not even the most virtuous,
can completely escape nature’s inconveniences. Reason
does indeed afford the righteous a relatively high degree
of well-being in this world, but the protection is not
complete.
Gersonides then downgrades the importance of those
alleged goods that sinners seem to enjoy and the alleged
evils that afﬂict the righteous. When we examine the
nature of the goods and afﬂictions in question, we should
realize that these are almost always material beneﬁts and
evils, affections of one’s body and one’s material well-
being. And in the ultimate scheme of things, these are
not the true goods for a human being; when it comes to
our proper happiness, they are of little consequence when
compared to the true good, knowledge. The righteous,
through their virtue – their intellectual perfection – do
in fact succeed in obtaining the true good; the wicked, on
the other hand, never fail to fall short of proper human
happiness (although they may not realize this). The celes-
tially determined distribution of material beneﬁts in this
world is not necessarily governed by justice in all of its
details; that is why sometimes the righteous suffer and the
wicked prosper with respect to these ‘‘goods.’’ But the
distribution of the true good necessarily is just and right.
Ultimately, Gersonides grants, even this supreme spir-
itual condition is achieved only imperfectly in this world,
given the persistent demands of the body. True happiness,
an undisturbed state of perfection, is attained only in the
world-to-come, the afterlife wherein the intellect experi-
ences pure spiritual joy unencumbered by the inconve-
niences of the body.
Gersonides’ second approach to the objection is to go
beyond the generalities of nature and explain why, in fact,
the virtuous are sometimes afﬂicted with even these lesser
evils. He offers three speciﬁc reasons for this phenome-
non. First, and most important, not even righteous indi-
viduals are immune to the pleasures of the senses, and thus
sometimes the union between a person’s intellect and
God through which providence is conveyed is loosened,
even broken. In this case, the individual, although gen-
erally virtuous, enjoys no more protection than the
wicked. They, of course, are responsible for their own
misfortunes. Second, God may dispense evils to a
person in order to prevent greater evils that would
come by the ordinary course of nature. Finally, God
sometimes brings evils upon a good person for the pur-
pose of ediﬁcation, to save him from some minor sin he is
about to commit.
Still, there will be many cases that cannot be so ratio-
nalized, and one can then ask why God does not act
directly to prevent all such injustices, to keep evil things
from happening to righteous people and good things
from happening to wicked people, especially the ones
that occur simply by the ordinary course of nature? Or,
since Gersonides’ God does not really act at all once the
moment of creation has passed, why did not God institute
a different plan, one that does not result in any natural but
accidental and undeserved evils (or fewer evils) for righ-
teous individuals nor any beneﬁts for sinners? Does not
this situation serve to undermine God’s justice?
Gersonides argues that although there are indeed
‘‘infrequently occurring evils’’ as a result of the celestial
patterns – general providence – nonetheless the ordering
imposed by these patterns and directed by the Agent
Intellect is, on the whole, for the best. The ordinary course
of events, as embedded in the general and providential
laws of nature, represents the best of all possible worlds (to
use a somewhat later phrase). Yes, sometimes these laws do
have unfortunate consequences. But it is important to
realize that whatever goods accrue to sinners does not
come to them because they are sinners (i.e., as an intended
reward for their sin). Lacking the special providence
belonging to the virtuous, sinners are abandoned to the
‘‘accidents that are ordered by the heavenly bodies’’; they
are left to their own rather meager devices. Sometimes
what that order brings along to them is, in fact, bad
fortune; but sometimes what it brings happens to contrib-
ute to their worldly prosperity. Such are the (ordered)
accidents of nature. But these consequences do not repre-
sent an intended evil in nature, since its arrangements are,
on the whole, the best possible. The generality of the
course of nature will sometimes have unfortunate but
unintended consequences in individual cases. But if the
general order is truly the best, then it must not be changed
or contravened for the sake of achieving or avoiding some
particular effects. In this regard, Gersonides’ theodicy
resembles that of later philosophers such as Leibniz and
Malebranche.
408 G
Gersonides

See also: ▶Alexander of Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristote-
lianism ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Ara-
bic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn
Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Moses Maimonides
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Levi ben Gershom (1866) Sefer Milhamot ha-Shem. Leipzig
Levi ben Gershom (1946) Commentary on the book of Job, trans. Lassen
AL. Bloch, New York
Levi ben Gershom (1984, 1987, 1999) The wars of the lord, trans. Feldman
S, 3 vols. Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia
Levi ben Gershom (1998) Commentary on song of songs, trans. Kellner
M. Yale University Press, New Haven
Secondary Sources
Dahan G (ed) (1991) Gesonide en son temps. Peeters, Louvain
Davidson H (1992) Gersonides on the material and active intellects. In:
Freudenthal (ed) Studies on Gersonides: a fourteenth-century Jewish
philosophy-scientist. Brill, Leiden
Eisen R (1995) Gersonides on providence, covenant, and the Jewish
people. SUNY, Albany
Feldman S (1978) Gersonides on the possibility of conjunction with the
agent intellect. Assoc Jewish Stud Rev 3:99–120
Kellner M (1974) Gersonides, providence, and the rabbinic tradition.
J Am Acad Relig 42:673–85
Manekin C (1998) On the limited-omniscience interpretation of
Gersonides’ theory of divine knowledge. In: Ivry A, Wolfson E,
Arkush A (eds) Perspectives on Jewish thought and mysticism.
Harwood, Amsterdam, pp 135–170
Nadler S (2000) Gersonides on providence: a Jewish chapter in the history
of the general will. J Hist Ideas 62:37–57
Rudavsky T (1983) Divine omniscience and future contingents in
Gersonides. J Hist Philos 21:513–536
Samuelson N (1972) Gersonides’ account of God’s knowledge of partic-
ulars. J Hist Philos 10:399–416
Staub J (1982) The creation of the world according to Gersonides.
Scholars, Chico
Touati C (1973) La Pense´e philosophique et the´ologique de Gesonide.
Editions de Minuit, Paris
Gilbert of Poitiers
LUISAVALENTE
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Sapienza Universita` di Roma
Roma
Italy
Abstract
Born: Poitiers after 1085, Died: Poitiers 1154. According to
Gilson, Gilbert was the greatest metaphysician of the
twelfth century. He was a profound thinker, original and
coherent, famous in his time for the complexity and bold-
ness of his philosophical theology. He provoked both
violent disapproval and great enthusiasm. Brought to
trial for heresy in 1148, he came out of it without being
condemned; rather, his thought had a considerable num-
ber of followers in the so-called Porretan School. Through
his followers, he exercised a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the
theology of the second half of the twelfth century. In his
mature thinking, he went far beyond what he had learned
during his apprenticeship: at Chartres, philosophy of
a Platonic stamp based on the Timaeus and on the Conso-
lation of Philosophy and Opuscula sacra of Boethius; at
Laon, theology founded on Biblical exegesis and the
Fathers. In his Commentary on Boethius’ Opuscula sacra,
his fundamental work, he developed a profoundly inno-
vative ‘‘rational’’ theology and an autonomous and
broadly coherent philosophical reﬂection. It combines
the Platonic doctrine of the preeminence of form with
a keen sense of the primacy of the concrete and the singu-
lar. It consists of, principally, an ontology, a philosophy of
language, and an epistemology, all closely interconnected.
Only the principles (God, prime matter, ideas) are simple,
and only in God is being everything that he is. Created
entities, by contrast, receive their being from something
other than themselves (from God) and they are composed
of an ordered aggregation of forms. Forms are always
inherent in a substrate. Common natures do not exist;
everything, compounds and forms, is singular: the
humanity of every man is similar to but different from
that of any other man. But not everything that is singular
is an individual – only concrete entities and the com-
pounds of forms that constitute the complete form of
every concrete entity are individuals: their individuality
consists in the fact that, if they are considered as wholes,
they are dissimilar from any other compound thing. Uni-
versals are collections of singular forms gathered together
by the intellect on the basis of the resemblance that is
found between the singular entities. A name signiﬁes
a concrete entity and one of its properties or forms; the
subject of the proposition represents the concrete entity,
and the predicate represents a form inherent in it.
The language of the philosophy of nature reﬂects what
it investigates: the compound constitution of creation. It
lends its own terms and its own formal structures to
the other two speculative sciences, mathematics and the-
ology.
The
correct
understanding
of
a
text
is
attained when, by distinguishing the appropriate disci-
pline to which it belongs, the interpreter gathers, beneath
the surface of the words the ‘‘meaning in the author’s
mind.’’
Gilbert of Poitiers G
409
G

Biography, Apprenticeship, and General
Characteristics of His Philosophy
Gilbert was born in Poitiers shortly after 1085 and began
his studies there under Hilary of Poitiers. Later he moved
to Chartres where he was one of the students of Bernard.
At Poitiers and Chartres, he studied the liberal arts, in
particular grammar, dialectic, and rhetoric – in which his
knowledge was legendary – and Platonic philosophy. He
studied Plato’s Timaeus with Calcidius’ commentary, and
Boethius’ Opuscula sacra and Consolation of Philosophy.
From Chartres he moved to Laon, where under Anselm
and Ralph he was educated in the understanding of the
Fathers and Scripture. He was a master at Chartres from
1124 at the latest (at least according to most scholars, but
see Gross-Diaz 1996), and, starting sometime between
1137 and 1141, at the cathedral school of Paris, where he
had John of Salisbury among his students. John remarked
that his teaching appeared obscure and arcane to the
beginners, but that the experts, used to his original termi-
nology and complex style, found it to be of great profun-
dity. His teaching at Paris was cut short in 1142 when he
was named Bishop of Poitiers, where he died in 1154. The
rational and philosophical style of doing theology earned
Gilbert, among others, an accusation of heresy by Bernard
of Clairvaux (who also persecuted Abelard), from which
he had to defend himself in front of the Pope in 1147, and
later,
in
1148
(Maioli
1979:XVI–XXI;
Nielsen
1982:30–38). He was accused, in particular, of holding
that the divine nature was identical, not with God but
with a form, just as in the case of humanity, which is not
identical to man but with the form thanks to which a man
is a man; and of holding that the properties (generatio,
ﬁliatio, processio) through which the three persons of the
Trinity are distinguished are distinct from the persons
themselves (Pater, Filius, Spiritus Sanctus). Although Gil-
bert emerged from the trial without being formally
condemned, there remained an aura of suspicion about
him and his work. Nonetheless, his thought and his special
terminology were appropriated, and reworked to various
degrees, by a certain number of thinkers working in the
second half of the twelfth century, who are usually known
collectively as the ‘‘Porretan School’’ (Marenbon 1988;
Marenbon 2002; Catalani 2009). These masters in turn,
and in particular Alain of Lille, exerted an inﬂuence on
other teachers of the period, above all with regard to the
semantics and the logic of theological language (Valente
2008a). Among the works of Gilbert, the fundamental one
is his Commentary on the Opuscula sacra of Boethius
(except for De ﬁde catholica), edited by N.M. Ha¨ring.
Other certainly authentic works, unedited except for
some fragments, are a commentary on the Psalms (studied
by Gross-Diaz 1996) and one on the epistles of St. Paul
(some passages are edited and discussed in Nielsen 1982).
Various other writings attributed to Gilbert by editors
are found to be inauthentic (Nielsen 1982:40–46); in par-
ticular, the so-called Liber sex principiorum, already attrib-
uted to him by Albert the Great (Lewry 1987), is not
Gilbert’s.
Ontology
Forms and Substances
The ontology of Gilbert (general accounts in Jolivet
1992b:141–146;
Marenbon
1998:168–171;
Jacobi
1996:12–14; Jacobi 2002:74–76), which has pertinently
been called a ‘‘metaphysics of the concrete’’ (Maioli
1979), is a combination of doctrines, broadly coherent,
but not without indeterminate elements. It is distin-
guished from the philosophy of nature practiced at
Chartres by, above all, the theory of forms, of individuals
and of universals. It also adopts an original vocabulary,
whose basic elements are the terms: subsistens, subsistentia,
concretio, tota forma.
Subsistens (which will be translated below as ‘‘sub-
sistent’’) corresponds to Boethius’ id quod est (De
hebdomadibus), that is, ‘‘the <thing> which is’’ (cfr. de
Rijk 1988:75), the determinate entity, which is such from
the inherence of a multiplicity of forms. As a synonym for
subsistens, Gilbert uses the term substantia, in virtue of the
fact that it ‘‘is under’’ (sub-stat) the accidents; substantia,
however, is ambiguous, because it is also able to refer to
forms.
Subsistentia (‘‘subsistence’’) corresponds to the esse or
id quo of Boethius, ‘‘that through which the <thing>
which is is,’’ the formal principle, which makes the
subsistent exist and which confers on it its substantial
properties. The subsistentia is referred to also as natura,
nativorum forma, esse. The subsistentiae can be simple or
composed of other subsistentiae: humanitas is composed
of animalitas and rationalitas, etc. Of the subsistent
Gilbert says that ‘‘it has’’ (habet) the subsistentiae, or
‘‘participates’’ (participat) in them. To include under one
general name both subsistents and subsistences, Gilbert
uses the neutral plural (e.g., singularia) or the term
substantiae. In the constitution of the subsistent, the
accidental forms are added to the subsistence: they confer
on the subsistent its accidental characteristics of quality
and extension (quantity).
Concretio (‘‘concretion’’) is a term that refers to the
ordered aggregation of the many subsistences and acci-
dental forms that constitute the subsistent. These forms
support (con-crescere) one another, beginning from the
410 G
Gilbert of Poitiers

more generic and descending gradually in ever-increasing
determinateness: they are related to one another as
generales and differentiales; in this way, the formal struc-
ture of the subsistent follows the order of Porphyry’s tree.
The more general forms are the causes of the increasingly
less general forms that adhere (adsunt, adhaerent; e.g.,
albedo to corporeitas) to them, in a relation of consequence
(complexionis consequentia). The ﬁrst subsistence, the
most general, is preceded only by the primary cause and
constitutes the basis of the process of ordered aggregation
of forms that constitutes the subsistent (Comm. De
hebdomadibus, p. 209, ll. 67–85). It is not clear, however,
if this ﬁrst subsistence is a maximally indeterminate sub-
stantial form, which ‘‘precedes’’ the corporeitas and the
spiritualitas, the two most general forms that distinguish
the corporeal from incorporeal things, or if it is one of
these two.
Tota forma (‘‘complete form’’): the subsistences of
a single subsistent taken together and in their totality
constitute the tota or propria forma or proprietas (in the
case of Socrates, it can be called socrateitas), which confers
to the subsistent at a time that it is something and its unity.
The tota forma is made up of all the subsistences and all of
the accidental forms of quality and extensive quantity,
which the subsistent actually (actu) has had, has, and
will have in the future, and even those which it will never
have, but could possibly have according to the potentiality
of its own nature (naturaˆ or potestate: Comm. De trinitate
p. 144, ll. 75–77; cf Comm. Contra Euticen p. 274, ll.
81–82). In one passage, Gilbert says that the forms that
constitute a complete form are inﬁnite (Comm. De
trinitate p. 90, l. 50). The numerousness of the forms that
make up the complete form, which extends to the future
and the possible, makes impossible an adequate under-
standing of this by man: ﬁnite reason cannot but proceed
through partial representations of things (Maioli 1979:46;
Jacobi 1995a:80s., 1996:14). The unifying principle that
holds together in an individual and organic whole the
totality of the substantial and accidental forms that con-
stitute the tota forma is God as simplex auctor or qui est
solum bonum (Comm. De hebdomadibus, p. 219, ll. 42–57),
from which every subsistent ‘‘ﬂows’’ (ﬂuxit: p. 220, l. 81).
Yet Gilbert also speaks of the unitas of the subsistent as
deriving from the ‘‘coaccidental unity’’ (unitas coaccidens)
that accompanies every form, substantial or accidental
(Comm. Utrum Pater, p. 176, ll. 15–22). The accidental
determinations of non-extensive quantity and the other
seven categories do not make up a part of the total form;
these seven categories do not correspond to forms but
only indicate extrinsic relations that the subsistent main-
tains with other subsistents (extrinsecus afﬁxa, status).
As can be seen, concepts of simplicity and composi-
tion are fundamental to Gilbert’s ontology. Entities are
either simple or composite. Above all, the principles, also
called genuina, that constitute the object of theology –
God, prime matter (yle, silva), the archetypal ideas – are
simple entities because they do not derive their being from
a multiplicity of other entities. In the Commentary on
Boethius, Gilbert does not dwell on the contrast between
the theory of the plurality of principles and Christian
doctrine, while in the biblical commentaries he adopts
Augustine’s view of the creation of matter (Jolivet
1992a). The forms or subsistentiae, which go on to consti-
tute subsistents, originate as images or copies or reﬂec-
tions (the manner of this derivation is not better speciﬁed)
of the exemplary (exemplar, ydea) ideas. Of these forms,
those are simple which are not in turn composed of other
forms, like corporeitas or albedo; but they are not simple in
the same respect as the principles, as the forms do not exist
if they are not within a compound. Most entities are
composite, that is to say, created subsistents (nativa) and
the greater part of their forms. Subsistents are composite
both in the sense that, in order to constitute them, their
esse or formal principle must inhere in something (this
type of composition is called coniunctio), and in the sense
that their complete form is constituted of a multiplicity of
forms (concretio). Moreover, some subsistents are made
up by putting together a number of subsistents as their
parts, such as man, constituted of his body and his soul,
which constitute his parts, each with their own forms. The
forms of the subsistent parts are at the same time forms of
the whole subsistent: the rationality of the soul of Socrates
and the whiteness of his body are the rationality and
whiteness of Socrates.
The moment of origin of the constitution of
a subsistent through the coniunctio of esse in it is the divine
act, which makes the forms inhere in the subsistent. It is
called generatio or creatio. With respect to this original
moment, the theory of Gilbert seems to present a serious
problem: ‘‘what the quo est makes into the quod est cannot
be the quod est itself – so what is it?’’ (Marenbon
1998:169). A possible response is that there is no substrate,
in which the forms inhere to constitute the subsistents,
except for a subset of the forms that constitute the whole;
so that, supposing we were mentally to abstract all the
forms from the subsistent, nothing would remain: ulti-
mately, the subsistent would be identical with the total
form. But this solution is a speculation that goes beyond
Gilbert’s text (Jacobi 1996:16). Another possible reply,
closer to Gilbert’s text, is that the original substrate in
which the forms inhere is the ‘‘primordial cause,’’ which
is spoken of in Comm. De hebdomadibus (p. 209, ll.
Gilbert of Poitiers G
411
G

67–85), that ‘‘precedes,’’ in concretio, the most general
form. But the problem remains, what is this primary
cause: prime matter, God, the ideas? In any case, how is
the most general subsistence related to the primordial
cause? The response that Gilbert would probably have
made is that man cannot give an answer to this question,
as his knowledge, discursive and distinct, is limited to the
world of compounds (philosophy of nature) and the
forms abstracted from these (mathematics), and cannot
raise itself so as to grasp their relation with the absolute
simplicity of the principle from which they originate.
Singularity and Modal Theory of Individuality
Gilbert’s theory of individuality is clearly distinct from
a long tradition, in which Boethius, Eriugena, Anselm of
Canterbury, William of Champeaux, Thierry of Chartes,
but not Abelard concur (called STI: ‘‘Standard Individua-
tion Theory’’ by Gracia 1988; cfr. Maioli 1974:LI–LII).
According to STI it is the accidents alone, which make
individuals of the same species being numerically one
and the same unique ‘‘communal quality’’ (qualitas
communicata) is found complete (tota) in every individual
of the same species: Cato and Cicero are one identical
entity – idem – in that, belonging to the same species
Man, they share the same humanitas; while they are
numerically different from one another – plures – only
because of the diversity of their accidents. For Gilbert,
rather, the numerical diversity of subsistents is due, not
only to the accidents, but to all of the forms, accidental
and substantial, which come together to constitute them:
there exist as many diverse humanitates as men. The dif-
ferences in the accidents do not provide the basis for the
numerical diversity of subsistents, but merely indicate it.
Singularity, that is, being numerically one, is an intrinsic
characteristic of every entity, whether it is a compound or
a form, and is presented in Gilbert’s ontology as a primary,
non-deducible given. Moreover, unlike his predecessors,
Gilbert in consequence considers the concepts of singu-
larity and individuality to be different. The set of individ-
uals is a subset of the set of singulars: everything that exists
is singular, but not all that exists is both singular and
individual. Only subsistents and complete forms of
subsistents are singular and individual. The subsistent
(e.g., Socrates) and the tota forma of each subsistent
(socrateitas), are singulars and individuals, that is to say
not dividuals, because they are not similar to any other
entity either in act or just in potency (Comm. Contra
Euticen, p. 272, l. 45–274, l. 93). By contrast, a form is
dividual which, whether simple (rationality) or com-
pound (humanity), turns out to be, judging from its
effects, similar to other forms, if not in act then at least
in potency. On the basis of this similarity these forms are
said to be conformes to each other (the humanity of
Socrates and that of Plato are similar in potential and in
act; the being-the-sun of the sun is similar not in act but at
least in potential to the being-the-sun of another sun,
which does not exist, did not exist, and will never exist,
but could exist: Comm. Contra Euticen, p. 273, ll. 68–74).
Finally, those entities which, though dissimilar from every
other entity, are nonetheless part of another individual are
not themselves individuals, for they share their own for-
mal characteristics with the compound whole. The soul is
not therefore an individual since it shares its formal char-
acteristics with man, of which, with the body, it is a part.
Since it is not an individual, the soul is not a person
either, according to the Boethian deﬁnition of the person
as ‘‘naturae rationabilis individua substantia’’ (Comm.
Contra Euticen, p. 271, l. 14–274, l. 95). It should be
observed, however, that Gilbert gives this deﬁnition with
an important clariﬁcation and modiﬁcation: the clariﬁca-
tion is that no person can be part of a person; the modi-
ﬁcation is that for him the characterization of person as
rational is purely conventional, due to the usage of
philosophers. Strictly speaking, even plants and animals
are persons: for they are individual substances, which are
each dissimilar to every other entity and are not parts of
any further compound entity (Comm. De trinitate, p. 146,
ll. 14–23). In this sense, it would seem that Gilbert does
not make a real distinction between person and individual
(Elswijk 1966:192; Maioli 1979:339; but the interpreters
disagree over Gilbert’s characterization of the concept of
person; cf. Nielsen 1982:62–64; Marenbon 1988:346;
Jacobi 1996:17–19).
It has been observed (Knuuttila 1987, 1993:75–82;
recalling Nielsen 1982:62–64, 180, 184) that, since he
considers that the properties the subsistent does not ever
effectively possess but could possess according to the
potency of its own nature are parts of the total form, he
is proposing a ‘‘modal’’ theory of individuality. This con-
ception presupposes the idea of possible worlds and pos-
sible alternative histories of the world and the conviction,
not really argued for, of the stability of individual identity
across various possible worlds and various possible histo-
ries (Knuuttila 1993:81). But Gilbert’s modal deﬁnition of
individuality seems to have the undesirable consequence
of dissolving the very individuality he wishes to deﬁne:
indeed, if taken literally, Gilbert’s deﬁnition seems to
imply that the complete form of every individual of
a species includes all the possible determinations of
every other individual of that species. It follows that the
412 G
Gilbert of Poitiers

complete forms of individuals of the same species would
all be similar to each other, and so dividuae (Marenbon
1998:171). Gilbert’s appeal to a modal deﬁnition of indi-
viduality, and thus to the idea of different worlds and
histories, can be traced to a keenly felt need to conserve
as far as possible God’s omnipotence, which is not subject
to any necessity whatsoever except in that of certain basic
rules of logic set out in the theory of topical argumenta-
tion. Of which parts the various subsistents are composed,
and of which general, differential, and accidental subsis-
tences the complete forms of the subsistents of different
species are composed also depends on God’s omnipotence
and will and is not necessary in an absolute sense. Such
compositions are governed by the merely relative necessity
of the habitual course of things (consuetudo rerum) and of
the usual condition of natural beings (usus nascentium, qui
vocatur natura: Comm. De trinitate, p. 164, ll. 34–41;
Comm. Contra Euticen, p. 304, ll. 83–91).
Universals and the Realism of Forms
According to Gracia (1988:164) the bases of Gilbert’s
doctrine of universals are constituted by two postulates:
the singularity of everything, whether forms or subsis-
tents; and the individuality of the complete forms of sub-
sistents, and of subsistents themselves, which are not parts
of any composite. In addition to these, there is the simi-
larity (similitudo) or conformity (conformitas) between
singular entitites, whether both subsistences and subsis-
tents. Indeed, even though the latter are individuals and
thus different from every other being, they are, neverthe-
less, similar to different groups of other individuals if their
formal determinations are considered separately (Socrates
is similar to Plato and to Cicero if one considers their
respective whiteness, rationality, etc.). According to Van
Elswijk (1966:200), the similarity between groups of
beings seems to be a third postulate of Gilbert’s ontology.
But Maioli (1974:326–328, 1979:344–347) maintains that,
for Gilbert, the conformitas is to be explained by
the derivation of native forms from exemplary ideas.
Whatever the case, the universal (genus or species) is
a collection (collectio) of a multiplicity of forms that are,
in themselves, singular. It is constituted by the intellect
on the basis of similarities apprehended between groups
of singular entities. According to Gilbert – who in this
respect can be placed beside Abelard – the unity of
a species, like that of a genus, does not correspond to
any common nature but is the product of abstraction
(‘‘humana ratio abstrahit’’) and language (‘‘dicuntur
unum et idem’’). At the level of reality only singular beings
exist, some of which are also individuals, which are
grouped into those similar to each other (Maioli
1979:341–364; Valente 2008b). Inasmuch as subsistences
are formal constituents of particular subsistents, one can
speak of a ‘‘realism of forms’’ in Gilbert (Jolivet 1992b).
However, one certainly cannot speak of a realism of uni-
versals, even though his theory seems to postulate
a foundation in re of the universal, consisting in the
similitudo or conformitas of individuals belonging to
a group according to the consuetudo rerum.
Philosophy of Language
Hermeneutics
Gilbert’s philosophy of language takes as its starting
point the Boethian–Aristotelian triad vox-intellectus-res
(De interpretatione 16a4) and the grammatical conception
of names as signifying substances and qualities (Priscian,
Institutiones grammaticae II, 18 and 19). But what distin-
guishes it above all is its ‘‘pragmatic’’ and ‘‘hermeneutic’’
approach: language is perceived principally as an instru-
ment for communicating meaningful contents between
human beings. Gilbert very often refers to the speaker
(locutor), the author of a written text (auctor), the hearer
(auditor), the reader (lector), the interpreter (interpres); he
speaks of the sense or concept in the mind of the one
who speaks (sensus/conceptus/intellectus mentis eius, qui
loquitur) and of the vigilance (vigilantia), attention
(attentio), and intelligence (intelligentia) of the addressee.
In Comm. De trinitate, prol., 21–24, he brings to light an
intrinsic and inevitable discrepancy between the three
levels of language, thought and reality, both from the
speaker’s point of view (from the res through the concept
to the word) and from that of the interpreter (from the
word through the concept to the res). Although things can
be thought thanks to concepts and signiﬁed through
words, the range of the real is much vaster than that
which can be conceived in thought. The sphere of thought
is, in turn, much broader than the sphere of what can be
expressed in words.
This is true both for discourse about God and for that
about creatures. There cannot be a concept of God nor
a proper way for him to be expressed, because of his
simplicity, which does not allow any particular aspect to
be isolated in a concept or word. Analogically but
inversely, an adequate concept of a creature cannot be
formed due to the inexhaustible complexity of its formal
structure. Language is even weaker than thought because
of the frequent lack of appropriate words (inopia
verborum), the improper use of language (translatio,
usus), and the inevitable ambiguity of many terms
Gilbert of Poitiers G
413
G

(multiplicitas, ambiguitas). As a consequence (Jolivet
1998; Valente 2004:168–171), the correct interpretation
of a text requires taking this discrepancy into account: it
would be misleading to believe that one could pass directly
from the intellection of spoken or written words
(intellectus quem scripta faciunt) to the truth of things.
One should be constantly aware that these two instances
are mediated by the thought of the author of the text
(intellectus ex quo <scripta> facta sunt) – a thought that
corresponds only to a certain degree to the letter of the text
as it has been written, on the one hand, and to the reality of
things, on the other.
Starting from taking into consideration in this way
the mediating role of the concept in the mind of the
author, the process of interpretation unfolds. From the
letter of the text (signiﬁcatio) the interpreter seeks, above
all, to reach the thought of the author (conceptus – or
intellectus – auctoris) in order to judge the written text in
relation to it.
Second, the interpreter seeks to specify in what mea-
sure the author’s thought grasps the truth of things, in the
constant awareness that this measure is necessarily limited,
and to evaluate the discourse that has been made in
relation to the things themselves that have been conceived.
It is particularly important to take into account the con-
ceptus auctoris when analyzing theological discourse,
which is always improper in its literal meaning and is to
be interpreted taking into account that it is inevitably
based on an (albeit nonarbitrary) transposition of terms
and linguistic forms taken from natural philosophy
(proportionalis
transumptio).
Besides
the
conceptus
auctoris, another aspect to be taken account of in the
interpretation of a text, in every discipline, is usage (usus,
auctorum usus), which does not always respect lexical
proprieties or syntactic rules and which, in time, can also
modify the meaning of terms from that of their original
institution (vis/natura nominis). Moreover, according to
Gilbert, a fundamental requirement for reaching a true
understanding of a text and avoiding misunderstandings
is to pay great attention to the propositional context (ratio
propositi). Gilbert refers particularly to the vigilantia
lectoris and the ratio propositi, because it is well known
that propositions with the same name as subject, but are
placed on different disciplinary levels – those of the
philosophy of nature, of logic and of mathematics (see
below) – speak of different things. The determination of
the level of discourse to which a passage in fact belongs is
not attributed, as in the logic of terms, to the distinction
between different forms of suppositio (a concept Gilbert
himself often uses, almost always in the sense of a reference
to subsistents by way of the subject term of a proposition:
Valente, to be published) or, as is the case in certain
logical and theological texts of the twelfth century, to
the identiﬁcation of a particular improper rhetorical
use of language (transumptio, translatio; cfr. Kneepkens
2000:257). Rather, Gilbert proposes a reconstruction and
general contextualization of whatever is being considered
in order to arrive at a correct intelligentia of a text in each
of the different sciences: besides the grammatical and
logical rules and the improper use of language studied in
rhetoric, one should consider the nature of things, as
taught by the philosophers, as well as the intention of
the author. Whoever remains attached to words and
their functions, and does not seek to understand beyond
and above them the ‘‘meaning in the mind of the one who
speaks,’’ understands neither others nor himself and is
a source of great danger (Comm. Contra Eutichen, p. 296,
l. 31– 298, l. 97).
The Meaning of Nouns and the Theory of
Predication in the Philosophy of Nature
Gilbert’s theories of the meaning of names and of predi-
cation are intrinsically connected not only to the gram-
matical conceptions of his time which derived from
a Platonic reading of Priscian’s grammar, and to the foun-
dations of the logica vetus, but also to his own personal
ontology. Ordinary language, to which the language of
natural philosophy is led back, reﬂects the ontological
structure of created reality, albeit in the limited manner
already discussed (Jacobi 1995a:96–100). If Priscian
afﬁrms that the noun signiﬁes substance and quality, this
is to be understood in the sense that it signiﬁes both the
subsistent and the subsistence or form. Homo signiﬁes as
much the particular man (substantia nominis, id quod est)
as the form humanitas (qualitas nominis, id quo est). It is
for the context (ratio propositi) to suggest which of the two
meanings is actually intended by the author in different
propositions: in ‘‘Homo est risibilis’’ the singular man, in
‘‘Homo est individuorum forma’’ the form humanitas
(Comm. Contra Eutichen, p. 296, l. 31–297, l. 66). Like
the signiﬁcate of the noun, predication also reﬂects the
duality of subsistents and forms that dominates the cre-
ated
world
(Maioli
1979:79–99).
In
natural
non-
metaphorical discourse the author refers to (supponit) by
means of a noun in the subject-position the subsistent or
id quod est as that of which is being spoken; through the
predicate the author expresses the inherence of the form
or the id quo est, which the predicate signiﬁes in the
subsistent referred to by the subject term: in ‘‘Socrates est
homo,’’ ‘‘est homo’’ expresses the inherence of the form
humanitas in the individual represented by the name
‘‘Socrates.’’
414 G
Gilbert of Poitiers

Every subsistent has many names according to which
of the forms it is being considered under: Socrates is called
‘‘Socrates’’ if his proper form socrateitas is being consid-
ered, ‘‘white’’ if his accidental form of whiteness is being
considered, ‘‘man’’ if his substantial form of humanity is
being considered, and so on. When a proposition is for-
mulated to afﬁrm something about the subsistent, ﬁrst of
all one of its possible names is chosen in order to indicate
it as the object of discourse. But such names are chosen in
view of what one wishes to predicate: ‘‘we do not predicate
in order to supposit so much as supposit in order to
predicate’’ (Comm. Contra Euticen p. 349, l. 50 s.).
Among the predications of natural philosophy, which are
true in a proper sense, in some the form signiﬁed by the
predicate stands in a relation of consequence to that sig-
niﬁed by the subject, which is its cause according to the
internal order of the agglomeration of generic and speciﬁc
forms
that
constitutes
the
subsistent
(complexionis
consequentia). For example, ‘‘corporeum est album’’ –
given that the form of whiteness is an effect of corporeity;
corporeity cannot exist without some color-form. Such
propositions are called consequentes. But there are also
cases of propositions which, although they have the exter-
nal form of subject + predicate and are true in a proper
sense and not the result of metaphorical discourse, never-
theless do not respect the complexionis consequentia. An
example is ‘‘corporeum est rationale’’: although Socrates
really is corporeal and rational, there is no relation of
consequence between his form rationality and his form
corporeity. For rationality is caused by the spirituality of
Socrates’ soul and not by the corporeity of his body,
signiﬁed by the term corporeum. Such propositions are
called accidentales tamen verae conexiones and provide
a model for interpreting various theological propositions.
For example, the proposition ‘‘God has died’’ is true since
Christ is God and Christ has died, even though he died
inasmuch as he was a man, and not inasmuch as he is God
(Comm. Contra Euticen, p. 345, l. 29–348, l. 8; de Rijk
1987:164–170).
The predications of natural philosophy are also fur-
ther distinguished in relation to the substantial or acci-
dental function within the ontological structure of the
subsistent of the form signiﬁed by the predicate, as well
as
in
relation
to
Aristotle’s
classiﬁcation
of
the ten categories (Maioli 1979:83–101; Comm. De
Hebdomadibus, p. 198, ll. 76–90). Substantial predications
express
the
irreplaceable
elements,
which
cause
a subsistent to be and to be this particular subsistent –
its subsistentiae, the forms that make up its substantial
being (esse aliquid in eo quod est). Accidental predications
express characteristics of a subsistent, which may or may
not be found in it without producing or destroying its
being or its being this or that particular subsistent. They
express only its accidental being (tantum esse aliquid).
A further, different distinction is made between predica-
tions secundum rem or inhaerentium and those that are
extrinsecus comparatae or non inhaerentium (De trinitate,
p. 134, l. 77– 138, l. 78). Independently of their being
accidental or substantial to a given subsistent, the forms
signiﬁed by predications of substance, quality, and exten-
sive quantity are always inherent in the subsistent and the
predications which express them are thus ‘‘according to
the thing.’’ On the other hand, predications of non-
extensive quantity as well as of the remaining seven cate-
gories express, despite their subject–predicate form, not
true inherence but external circumstances or relations of
various types between subsistents and things other than
themselves (status). Gilbert therefore calls them ‘‘extrinsi-
cally compared.’’
The Three Speculative Sciences
Gilbert mentions a broad range of branches of human
knowledge. In Comm. De trinitate (p. 115, ll. 3 s.), he
lists the following facultates: naturalis, mathematica,
theologica, civilis, rationalis, which differ on the basis of
the different genera of their respective objects of study. In
Comm. De hebdomadibus (p. 189, ll. 52–60), he considers
the disciplinae: mathematics, ‘‘a discipline of the highest
rank,’’ which consists of the four arts of the quadrivium:
arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy; as well as the
‘‘other disciplines such as those of the Categories and the
Analytics.’’ In all these disciplines, one proceeds by way of
demonstration, beginning from terms or rules that con-
stitute the starting-points for deduction and induction.
Central to Gilbert’s system, however, is the triad of spec-
ulative sciences that consists of physics or philosophy of
nature, mathematics and theology, which is set out by
Boethius in his Commentary to Porphyry’s Isagoge, second
edition, and in the De trinitate, but goes back to Aristotle
(Haas 1987; Jolivet 1990; Jacobi 1995b). Natural philoso-
phy studies concrete subsistents and their inherent forms.
It is the fundamental science in the sense that from it takes
place the transfer (transumptio) of terms and forms to all
the other sciences. In Gilbert’s sense of the term (which is
not the usual one) mathematics considers forms, which in
reality can only exist in subsistents, as abstracted from
them. Thus, in mathematics predications (e.g., ‘‘homo est
individuorum forma’’) express only an apparent inherence.
The case of theological predication is analogous,
because in God there is no difference between form and
subsistent, so that in theology predication does not
express any inherence and is therefore not predication
Gilbert of Poitiers G
415
G

in the strict sense. Due to the lack of adequate expres-
sions for speaking about God, the patristic auctoritates
and the theologians transfer and apply improperly names
and categories proper to natural scientia and, thus, to
natural language. But they do so, on the basis of rational
proportion (rationis proportio). And so when, for example,
it is stated that God is a substance, or a certain substance,
this should not be understood in the same sense as when it
is stated that something is a substance in nontheological
discourse. The ratio for which something can be said to be
a substantia is its substare; subsistences as well as subsis-
tents are called ‘‘substances’’ inasmuch as they serve as
substrates – substant – for accidents. But in God there is
no distinction between substance and accident. There-
fore, when the category of substance is predicated of
God, it is done improperly, on the basis of the ratio
according to which God ‘‘sustains’’ all things (‘‘substat
omnibus’’; Comm. Contra Euticen, p. 284, ll. 74–90) as
cause and principle. At the same time, however, it is God
alone who properly is in the fullest sense, just as it is of
God alone that one can say in a full sense that he is good.
All other things that are not God are and are good in
a
lesser
and
derived
sense,
that
is,
through
a denominativa transumptio o transumptiva denominatio
(Jolivet 1987; Valente 2008a:123–149). As can be seen, in
philosophy of nature and in theology a chiastic relation
between language and being is established: on the level of
language, discourse about nature founds the discourse
about God, whereas on the ontological level it is the divine
being which is the foundation and source of created being
(which derives from it through ﬂuxus). Moreover, given
that names in natural discourse denote objects on the
basis of their forms, discourse about nature could not be
constituted if there were not, thanks to mathematics,
a way of considering separately forms, which in reality
are inseparable from subsistents. Yet natural discourse
not only lends the terms and formal structures for
theology but also for mathematics itself, in the discourse
of
which
they
are
used
differently
from
their
original deﬁnition and from the valid norms of natural
discourse. The three speculative discourses are thus
interrelated in a complex way, by reciprocal foundational
relations and transfer of terms and formal structures.
The role of mathematics as a discipline, however,
was not well deﬁned by Gilbert and would be given
closer attention by some of his followers (Marenbon
2002).
See also: ▶Alain of Lille ▶Being ▶Boethius ▶Categories
▶Epistemology ▶Logic ▶Metaphysics ▶Modal Theo-
ries and Modal Logic ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Platonism
▶Realism ▶Substance, Accident and Modes ▶Supposi-
tion Theory ▶Trinitarian Logic ▶Trinity ▶Twelfth Cen-
tury Schools ▶Universals
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Authentic Works in Complete Editions
(1966) Commentaria in Boethii opuscula sacra, ed. Ha¨ring NM The
commentaries on Boethius by Gilbert of Poitiers. Studies and texts 13.
PIMS, Toronto. Some particularly important passages have been
translated into English in de Rijk (1988–1989)
Secondary Sources
Catalani L (2009) I Porretani. Una scuola di pensiero, tra alto e basso
medioevo. Nutrix 2. Brepols,Turnhout
Colish M (1987) Gilbert, the early Porretans, and Peter Lombard: sematics
and theology. In: Jolivet J et al (eds) Gilbert de Poitiers et ses
contemporains. . ., pp 229–250
Gauvin J (1987) Les sens de ‘nichil’ chez Gilbert de la Porre´e. In:
Jolivet J et al (eds) Gilbert de Poitiers et ses contemporains, pp
173–181
Gracia JE (1988) Introduction to the problem of individuation in the early
Middle Ages, 2nd edn. Philosophia Verlag, Mu¨nchen and Wien (in
part. pp 155–178)
Gross-Diaz Th (1996) The Psalms commentary of Gilbert of Poitiers:
from Lectio Divina to the lecture room. Brill, Leiden-New York-Ko¨ln
Haas M (1987) Die Wissenchaftsklassiﬁkation des Gilbert von Poitiers.
In: Jolivet J et al (eds) Gilbert de Poitiers et ses contemporains. . .,
pp 279–295
Ha¨ring NM (1957) Sprachlogik und philosophische Voraussetzungen
zum Versta¨ndnis der Christologie Gilberts von Poitiers. Scholastik
32:373–398
Kneepkens CH (2000) Grammar and semantics in the twelfth century:
Petrus Helias and Gilbert de la Porre´e on the substantive verb. In:
Kardaun M, Spruyt Y (eds) The winged, pp 237–276 chariot: col-
lected essays on Plato and Platonism in honour of L .M. de Rijk. Brill,
Leiden – Boston–Ko¨ln, pp 237–276
Jacobi K (1995a) Sprache und Wirklichkeit: Theorienbildung u¨ber
Sprache im fru¨hen 12. Jahrhundert. In: Ebbesen S (ed) Geschichte
der Sprachteorie 3 Sprachtheorien in Spa¨tantike und Mittelalter.
Narr, Tu¨bingen, pp 77–108 (in part. 96–100)
Jacobi K (1995b) Natu¨rliches Sprechen – Theoriesprache – Theologische
Rede. Die Wissenshaftslehre des Gilbert von Poitiers. Z Philos Forsch
49:511–528
Jacobi K (1996) Einzelnes – Individuum – Person. Gilbert von Poitiers’
Philosophie des Individuellen. In: Aertsen JA, Speer A (eds)
Individuum und Individualita¨t im Mittelalter. Walter de Gruyter,
Berlin-New York, pp 3–21
Jacobi K (1998) Gilbert of Poitiers. In: Craig E (ed) Routledge
encyclopedia of philosophy, vol IV. Routledge, London-New York,
pp 68–72
Jacobi K (2002) Philosophische und theologische Weisheit. Gilbert
von
Poitiers’
Interpretation
der
‘Regeln’
des
Boethius
(De
hebdomadibus). In: Berndt R, Lutz-Bachmann M, Stammberger
RMW (eds) ‘‘Scientia’’ und ‘‘Disciplina.’’ Wissenstheorie und
Wissenschaftspraxis im 12. und 13. Jahrhundert. Akademie Verlag,
Berlin, pp 71–78
Jolivet J (1987) Rhe´thorique et the´ologie dans une page de Gilbert de
Poitiers. In: Jolivet J, de Libera A (eds) Gilbert de Poitiers et ses
416 G
Gilbert of Poitiers

contemporains. . ., 183–198. Also in Id., Aspects de la pense´e
me´die´vale: Abe´lard. Doctrines du langage, Vrin, Paris, pp 293–310
Jolivet J (1990) Le jeu des sciences the´ore´tiques selon Gilbert de Poitiers. In:
Knuuttila S, Tyo¨rinoja R, Ebbesen S (eds) Knowledge and the sciences
in medieval philosophy. Proceedings of the eighth international
congress of medieval philosophy (SIEPM), II, Yliopistopaino,
Helsinki, pp 71–88
Jolivet J (1992a) La question de la matie`re chez Gilbert de Poitiers.
In: Westra HJ (ed) From Athens to Chartres. Neoplatonism and
medieval thought. Studies in honour of Edouard Jeauneau. Brill,
Leiden-New-York-Ko¨ln, pp 247–257
Jolivet J (1992b) Trois versions me´die´vales sur l’universel et l’individu:
Roscelin, Abe´lard, Gilbert de la Porre´e. Rev Me´taphys Morale 97:
111–155
Jolivet J (1998) Tournures et de´faillances du dire. Trois textes du douzie`me
sie`cle. In: Legendre P (ed) Du pouvoir de diviser les mots et les
choses, Maison des sciences de l’homme, Bruxelles, pp 57–69
Jolivet J, de Libera A (eds) (1987) Gilbert de Poitiers et ses contemporains
aux origines de la Logica modernorum, Actes du septie`me sympo-
sium europe´en d’histoire de la logique et de la se´mantique
me´die´vales, Poitiers 17–22 Juin 1985, Bibliopolis, Napoli
Lewry O (1987) The Liber sex principiourm, a supposedly Porretanean
work. A study in ascription. In: Jolivet J, de Libera A (eds) Gilbert de
Poitiers et ses contemporains. . ., pp 251–278
Knuuttila S (1987) Possibility and necessity in Gilbert of Poitiers. In:
Jolivet
J,
de
Libera
A
(eds)
Gilbert
de
Poitiers
et
ses
contemporains. . ., pp 199–218
Knuuttila S (1993) Modalities in medieval philosophy. Routledge,
London-New York (in part. pp 75–82)
Maioli B (1974) Gli universali. Storia antologica del problema da Socrate
al XII secolo. Bulzoni, Roma (in part. pp 302–348)
Maioli B (1979) Gilberto Porretano. Dalla grammatica speculativa alla
metaﬁsica del concreto. Bulzoni, Roma
Marenbon J (1988) Gilbert of Poitiers. In: Dronke P (ed) A history of
twelfth-century western philosophy. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 328–352
Marenbon J (1998) The twelfth century. In: Marenbon J (ed) Routledge
history of philosophy. vol. III, Routledge, London, pp 166–171
Marenbon J (2002) Gilbert of Poitiers and the Porretans on Mathematics
in the division of the sciences. In: Berndt R et al (eds) ‘‘Scientia’’ und
‘‘Disciplina’’. . ., pp 37–78
Nielsen LO (1976) On the doctrine of logic and language of Gilbert
Porreta and his followers. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen Age grec
et latin 17:40–69
Nielsen LO (1982) Theology and philosophy in the twelfth century.
A study of Gilbert Porreta’s thinking and the theological expositions
of the doctrine of the incarnation during the period 1130–1180. Brill,
Leiden
Pelster F (1949) Gilbert de la Porre´e, Gilbertus Porretanus oder Gilbertus
Porreta? Scholastik 20–24:401–403
de Rijk LM (1987) Gilbert de Poitiers, ses vues se´mantiques et
me´taphysiques. In: Jolivet J, de Libera A (eds) Gilbert de Poitiers et
ses contemporains. . ., pp 147–171
de Rijk LM (1988–1989) Semantics and metaphysics in Gilbert of
Poitiers. A chapter of twelfth century Platonism. Vivarium 26:73–
113, 27:1–35
Schmidt MA (1956) Gottheit und Trinita¨t nach den Kommentaren des
Gilberts Porreta zu Boethius, De trinitate. Verlag fu¨r Recht und
Gesellschaft, Basel
Spruyt J (2000) Gilbert of Poitiers on the application of language to the
transcendent and sublunary domains. In Kardaun M, Spruyt J (eds)
The winged chariot. Collected essays on Plato and Platonism in
honour of L. M. de Rijk. Brill, Leiden, pp 205–236
Valente L (2004) Virtus signiﬁcationis, violentia usus. Porretan views on
Theological Hermeneutics. In: Maieru` A, Valente L (eds) Medieval
theories on assertive and non-assertive language. Olschki, Firenze,
pp 163–184
Valente L (2008a) Logique et the´ologie. Les e´coles parisiennes entre 1150
et 1220. Vrin, Paris
Valente L (2008b) Un realismo singolare: forme e universali in Gilberto di
Poitiers e nella Scuola Porretana. Documenti e studi sulla tradizione
ﬁlosoﬁca medievale, 19:191–246
Valente L (in stampa). Supposition theory and Porretan theology: Gilbert
of Poitiers, Summa Zwettlensis and Dialogus Ratii et Everardi. In:
Bos EP (ed) Rise and development of supposition theory. Brepols,
Turnhout
Van Elswijk HC (1966) Gilbert Porreta. Sa vie, son euvre, sa panse´e.
Universite´ catholique de Louvain, Leuven
Vanni-Rovighi S (1956) La ﬁlosoﬁa di Gilberto Porretano. In: Miscellanea
del Centro di Studi Medievali LVIII, pp 1–64 (repr. in Ead., Studi di
ﬁlosoﬁa medioevale I, Vita e pensiero, Milano 1978)
Williams ME (1951) The teaching of Gilbert Porreta on the trinity as found
in his commentaries on Boethius. Universita` Gregoriana, Roma
Giles of Rome, Political Thought
CHRIS JONES
Department of History
University of Canterbury
Christchurch
New Zealand
Abstract
Giles of Rome (c. 1243/1247–1316) was the ﬁrst member
of the order of Augustinian Hermits to be appointed
regent master of theology at the University of Paris and
later became archbishop of Bourges. By 1282, he had
composed On the Rule of Princes a manual of instruction
for secular rulers dedicated to the future French king
Philip IV. The work, which proved immensely popular
throughout the later Middle Ages, drew heavily upon
Aristotelian ideas to offer a portrait of the ideal ruler.
Giles considered a well-educated hereditary king free
from any form of limitation to be best able to obtain the
common good of those he ruled. During the 1290s and
ﬁrst years of the fourteenth century Giles became closely
associated with Pope Boniface VIII and subsequently
involved in his struggle with Philip IV over issues of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction. In the course of one of these
Franco-papal disputes Giles composed On Ecclesiastical
Power, a work which drew on Aristotelian language to
establish and defend an inﬂuential vision of society’s
Giles of Rome, Political Thought G
417
G

structure in which temporal power was entirely subordi-
nated to spiritual power. Giles argued not only that all
legitimate secular rule, but even all legitimate right to
property, was ultimately derived from the church. His
model equated the power vested in the church with the
power vested in the papal ofﬁce and thereby established
the pope as the ultimate authority in both spiritual
and temporal affairs. The pope possessed an authority
free from any effective limitations, although Giles argued
he should, in imitation of God’s governance of the
universe, seek to restrain himself from interfering in tem-
poral affairs in all but exceptional circumstances. The
two phases of Giles’ political thought have sometimes
been considered contradictory although they share
a similar view of hierarchical structures and the nature of
rulership.
Biographical Information
Giles of Rome (c. 1243/1247–1316) is known as ‘‘Blessed
Doctor’’ (Doctor beatus), ‘‘Most Fundamental Doctor’’
(Doctor fundatissimus), and ‘‘Verbose Doctor’’ (Doctor
verbosus). The occasional attribution of the surname
Colonna to Giles is probably due to his origins in
a speciﬁc district of the city of Rome, rather than to any
association with the powerful family of that name (Boase
1933). At approximately the age of 15 Giles joined the
newly established Augustinian Hermits, entering the
order’s Roman convent. Moving to study in Paris, he
completed the arts course sometime in the 1260s and
became a bachelor of theology around 1270, after which
he lectured on the Sentences of Peter Lombard and wrote
commentaries on several of Aristotle’s works. It is proba-
ble that he attended the lectures of Thomas Aquinas
between 1269 and 1272. The ﬁrst period of Giles’ Parisian
career was brought to an abrupt end in 1277 when he
was censured as part of a more general condemnation of
Aristotelian ideas by the bishop of Paris, Etienne Tempier.
Giles’ activities and location between the end of 1277
and his appearance at his order’s Chapter General held in
Padua in 1281 remain unclear. Traditional assertions that
he served as a tutor to the future French king, Philip IV the
Fair, in the years after he was censured are not supported
by any extant evidence. After a period spent in Italy, Giles
was able to resume his academic career in Paris in 1285
becoming the ﬁrst regent master in theology to be
appointed from the Augustinian Hermits. In 1287, his
opinions were declared to be the ofﬁcial position of
his order. This was followed by a rapid series of promo-
tions, including his election as prior general of the order
in 1292 and his appointment as archbishop of Bourges
in 1295.
From 1297, Giles spent much of his time in Italy in the
service of Pope Boniface VIII during the latter’s conﬂicts
with the Colonna cardinals and Philip IV. By 1304, fol-
lowing Boniface’s death, Giles had returned to Bourges
and, in 1305, he took part in the enquiry that censured
the Eucharistic views of John of Paris. In the following
years Giles dedicated works to Philip IV’s uncle, Robert,
count of Clermont-en-Beauvaisis, and the Angevin king
of Naples, Robert I. He adopted a position favorable to
Philip IV in the process which led to the condemnation
of the Templars at the Council of Vienne in 1311–12.
Giles died at the papal curia at Avignon on December
22, 1316.
Overview
According to one contemporary source – possibly written
by a fellow Parisian scholar, Godfrey of Fontaines – by the
mid-1280s Giles enjoyed a greater reputation in Paris
than any other inhabitant. This reputation was primar-
ily built upon his philosophical and theological works.
Giles’ philosophical ideas were expressed in a series of
commentaries, six quodlibeta held between 1286 and
1291 and in a number of collections of Disputed Questions
(Quaestiones disputatae). Much of his theological thought
was summarized and developed in the 76 sermons he
preached in the course of his career. In the theological
and metaphysical positions he adopted Giles was highly
inﬂuenced by the thought of Thomas Aquinas. Despite an
association with Thomist ideas that contributed, at least in
part, to his censure in 1277, Giles was not, however,
unwilling to criticize and modify Aquinas’ thought on
numerous points. With regard to metaphysics, Giles was
a particular exponent of the doctrine of the unity of
substantial form and argued strongly in favor of a ‘‘real
distinction’’ between essence and existence in opposition
to the contemporary position of Henry of Ghent.
Giles’ exploration of what may be considered ‘‘politi-
cal’’ topics represents a mere fraction of the verbose doc-
tor’s literary output. The essence of his political thought
appears in two works, although elements of it are also
reﬂected in an oration – if a sixteenth-century tradition
is to be given credence – that he preached at Philip IV’s
coronation in January 1286 (Del Punta et al 1993), in his
tract On the Abdication of the Pope (De renunciatione pape,
c. 1297), in at least one of his sermons (Luna 1992) and in
his later commentaries on the Sentences (c. 1309)
(McAleer 1999). His thought may be divided into two
distinct phases. In the 1270s and early 1280s, Giles con-
sidered the ideal organization of temporal power and the
process by which a secular ruler capable of achieving the
common good could be fashioned. From the late 1290s, he
418 G
Giles of Rome, Political Thought

turned his attention to the nature of spiritual power and
questions of the proper relationship that ought to exist
between the temporal and spiritual powers and the
nature – and limitations – of the keystone of the spiritual
power, the pope.
On the Rule of Princes
Context
The ﬁrst phase of Giles’ political thought, his exploration
of the organization of the temporal power and the ideal
ruler, is contained in his treatise On the Rule of Princes (De
regimine principum). Probably written at the request of the
French king Philip III, the work was intended as an edu-
cational tool for the instruction of Philip’s son, the future
Philip IV. That this treatise was complete by 1282 is con-
ﬁrmed by the existence of a dated French translation
commanded by the king. Traditionally, the treatise has
been seen as a product of the years after Giles’ university
career ended abruptly in 1277, although it could date from
as early as 1270, the year of Philip III’s accession. Despite
his royal dedicatee, the treatise was written, according to
its author, with a much broader audience in mind: it was
Giles’ intention to instruct not only the future king in
rulership, but also his subjects (1.1.1).
Structure
On the Rule of Princes’ 209 chapters are distributed
between three books, themselves subdivided into ten
parts. The ﬁrst of these books concerns the ruler’s gover-
nance of himself. Its four parts begin by explaining that
a ruler will achieve the greatest happiness by loving God
and acting prudently. The book continues with an explo-
ration of the nature of the virtues, the passions and the
behavior of men in varied circumstances. In his second
book Giles’ focus shifts to the governance of the family.
Here, in three parts, he explores marriage and the conduct
of women, the education of children, and the management
of a ruler’s household. In the work’s ﬁnal book the scope
broadens to consider the manner in which a political unit
is to be governed. Giles begins by considering – and often
refuting – the views of philosophers concerning the nature
and organization of states. In the ﬁnal two parts he
explores how government is to be conducted in times of
peace and ends with a treatise on warfare.
Key Concepts
For Giles the ideal model for political units is the king-
dom. At the core of his conception of the ruler of such
a kingdom is the belief that the ideal king should be
unshackled by any limitations. It is preferable that
kingship be ‘‘regal,’’ in which the ruler makes the law, as
opposed to ‘‘political,’’ in which those governed make the
law (for the distinction: 2.1.14). Government by a regal
ruler, who is distinguished from a despotic ruler by his
focus on the common good, is the most perfect form of
government because the position of such a ruler is a more
perfect reﬂection of the natural ordering and hierarchy of
the universe. Such a king should accept counsel, and will
wish to do so, but Giles makes clear that nothing obliges
him to do so.
In considering the various forms in which secular
power may be exercised, Giles displays an unreserved
preference for hereditary kingship. While he recognizes,
in theory, that elective kingship would be a preferable
method of selection, all practical experience indicates
that hereditary kingship offers greater stability. This is, in
part, because the people will more easily accept the sons of
previous rulers and, in part, because the knowledge that
his progeny will succeed him will ensure the quality of
a king’s rule (3.2.5).
Giles assumes that, if properly educated, a ruler will
always seek to uphold the common good (Renna 1978).
He makes no provision for the possibility that such a ruler
will seek his own good and, in so doing, become a tyrant.
Nor, in this ﬁrst phase of his political thought, does Giles
seek to address two issues in particular. In common with
Peter of Auvergne, he offers no analysis of the relationship
that will exist between his regal king and the spiritual
power (Renna 1978). Nor does his assessment take any
account of the existing feudal structures of contemporary
society (Krynen 1993).
Foundations
In its purpose, the instruction of the ruler, Giles’ treatise
can be categorized as part of the ‘‘mirrors for princes’’
genre. More speciﬁcally, it can be considered part of
a uniquely Capetian tradition that began with the instruc-
tion manual offered by the Dominican Vincent of Beauvais
to Philip III. Giles’ portrait of secular rule is differentiated
from the majority of contemporary mirrors for princes by
the fact that many of its key concepts originate in the
Aristotelian corpus. Engelbert of Admont was one of very
few authors who attempted a similar cross-pollination
(Blythe 1992). Alongside Aristotle’s works, Giles employed
Vegetius’ De re militari in the ﬁnal part of his third book as
a source for military matters.
Giles was keen to present his treatise as a simple
vulgarization of Aristotle. While this is true to a certain
extent – the work draws heavily upon the Politics and the
Nicomachean Ethics, conspicuously avoiding the use of
Scripture and the Fathers more common in mirrors for
Giles of Rome, Political Thought G
419
G

princes – Giles’self-assessment is slightly misleading. Giles
is, ﬁrstly, heavily reliant on Aquinas for his interpretation,
particularly the latter’s commentaries on the Politics and
the Summa theologiae (Lambertini 1995). At the same
time, Giles moves beyond both Aquinas and Aristotle,
drawing conclusions neither would have been likely to
ﬁnd acceptable. Aristotle, and following him Aquinas, for
example, drew a distinction between civil and domestic
government; Giles’ belief in a natural universal hierarchy
tends to break down the Aristotelian distinction and he is
inclined to use the family as a model for the discussion of
modes of rulership (Blythe 1992). More striking still, while
basing his arguments on material drawn from Aristotle,
Giles will often draw conclusions diametrically opposed to
those originally intended. In the most signiﬁcant case he
adapts Aristotle’s criticism of kingship to present an argu-
ment which purports to demonstrate the Greek philoso-
pher’s preference for regal rule over all other forms of
government and employs a similar approach to demon-
strate Aristotle’s alleged support for hereditary kingship
(Lambertini 1995).
Giles had been the earliest Parisian scholar to prepare
a commentary on Aristotle’s Rhetoric (c. 1280). As he
employed Aristotelian concepts drawn from the Politics
and the Ethics to construct his model of regal kingship,
so too did he draw upon the Rhetoric in his general struc-
turing of On the Rule of Princes and to imbue his ideal ruler
with one of his key characteristics: Giles’ king, above all,
needed to know what an orator needed to know, that is
how to persuade those under his rule so that they might act
in the interest of the common good (Coleman 1998).
It may be the case that for Giles, as for other contem-
porary Parisian authors writing in the mirrors for princes
genre, the model of the ideal king that lay behind his
abstract ﬁgure is the French king Louis IX (Genet 2003).
Giles’ marked preference for hereditary kingship may also
ﬁnd its origins in contemporary circumstances, in partic-
ular in the chaos that had erupted in the contemporary
Empire – in which an elective system operated – after the
death of the Emperor Frederick II in 1250. The imperial
experience stood in stark contrast alongside the relative
peace of contemporary France where an hereditary system
prevailed.
Influence
With the exception of the pseudo-Aristotelian Secret of
Secrets (Secretum secretorum), On the Rule of Princes
proved to be the most successful product of the mirrors
for princes genre and enjoyed considerable longevity, with
approximately 300 Latin manuscripts surviving and 11
printings between 1473 and 1617. To the 31 surviving
manuscripts of the earliest – simpliﬁed – French transla-
tion by Henri of Gauchy (1282), can be added a further 20
manuscripts containing two alternative French transla-
tions and versions in German, Italian, Swedish, English,
Castilian, Catalan, Portuguese, and Hebrew. This popu-
larity probably arose from Giles’ presentation of his trea-
tise as a systematic exposition of Aristotle. The work was
one of a limited number to cross the boundaries between
the lecture theatre – where it was employed from the
fourteenth century as part of the University of Paris’ arts
curriculum (Briggs 1999) – and the rest of society. Multi-
ple copies, in both Latin and French, resided in the royal
library of the French king Charles V, while translations
were commissioned by men such as the lieutenant of the
bailiff of Orle´ans (Merisalo 1998; Briggs 1999). The work
was mentioned by Dante and Bartolus of Sassoferrato,
while the French version was employed by Christine de
Pizan (Krynen 1993; Briggs 1999).
On Ecclesiastical Power
Context
The second phase of Giles’ political thought developed as he
became enmeshed in the controversies that marked the
pontiﬁcate of Boniface VIII (r. 1294–1303), the man
responsible for his promotion to the archbishopric of
Bourges. Giles’ initial exploration of the nature of the
papal ofﬁce came in his On the Abdication of the Pope
where he set out to defend Boniface against the claims of
the Colonna cardinals that he had unjustly usurped the
position of his predecessor, Celestine V. Giles sought to
establish both the legitimacy of papal resignation and also
that the nature of the papal ofﬁce, whose incumbent was
responsible to God alone, meant that a pope could not be
removed except of his own free will (Eastman 1990). John
of Paris later adapted and reinterpreted elements of this
work in his On Royal and Papal Power (De potestate regia et
papali). In the opening years of the fourteenth century Giles
was led to develop his concept of the papal ofﬁce more fully
and to incorporate it into a much broader study of the
relationship between spiritual and temporal power in the
treatise On Ecclesiastical Power (De ecclesiastica potestate).
Although Giles’ authorship of On Ecclesiastical Power
was questioned in the early-twentieth century, it has been
since established convincingly (Kuiters 1958). The precise
date of the treatise is unknown but it was certainly written
before November 1302 and probably composed either in
the ﬁrst half of that year or in the latter part of 1301. It is
generally accepted that the work was produced as a defense
of papal authority in the wake of the conﬂict that arose
between Philip IV and Boniface VIII after Philip’s ofﬁcers
420 G
Giles of Rome, Political Thought

arrested the bishop of Pamiers in July 1301. While Giles’
assertion that he was writing because of the hostility of
much of the laity toward the church’s exercise of authority
in temporal matters (1.1) tends to support this, one alter-
native theory suggests that the treatise was part of a broader
papal response to Thomist–Aristotelian trends that were
considered threatening to the traditional cosmology
(Ullmann 1976).
Structure
On Ecclesiastical Power is formally divided into three parts.
It is loosely organized and includes a great deal of repeti-
tion, features that suggest the work may have been com-
posed in haste (Dyson 2003). Nominally, the ﬁrst part
concerns the relationship between the temporal and the
ecclesiastical powers and the second the relationship
between the ecclesiastical power and property. The ﬁrst
three chapters of the latter may have originated as
a separate treatise in defense of the right of the church to
own property against the extreme claims of the Spiritual
Franciscans (Dyson 2003). In the third part Giles foresees
and seeks to address possible objections to parts one and
two based, primarily, on the decretals of Popes Alexander
III and Innocent III.
Key Concepts
The second phase of Giles’ political thought is marked by
three key ideas, which when combined offer the ultimate
hierocratic theory embodying the most extensive claims on
behalf of papal authority to emerge in the Middle Ages.
Firstly, Giles argues that the exercise of temporal authority
is only legitimate when it is sanctioned by the ecclesiastical
power and, indeed, such authority is ultimately derived
from the church. The temporal and spiritual powers remain
separate - there remain, in Bernard of Clairvaux’s terms,
two swords as Giles is keen to emphasize (1.7–9; 2.13–15) –
but the temporal is completely subordinate to the spiritual
power, just as the body is, of right, subordinate to the soul
(1.7). Secondly, it is not only possible for the church to own
property but legitimate ownership of all property, even lay
property, is ultimately dependent upon the church. The
man who inherits property from his father possesses it
only imperfectly; to possess it justly his possession must be
perfected by the church via baptism and penance (2.7).
Finally, all the power that exists in the church is vested in
the person of the pope as Peter’s successor.
The pope possesses a fullness of power (plenitudo
potestatis) that effectively makes him the spiritual equiva-
lent of the regal king described in On the Rule of Princes. In
common with that king, the pope is unshackled by the
requirement that he obey the law but, again in common
with his portrait of the ideal secular ruler, Giles does not
expect the pope to exercise his power in an arbitrary
manner. While God possesses the power to suspend the
rules governing the natural operation of the Universe, He
chooses to do so only in exceptional circumstances. Giles
contends that the pope should act similarly with regard to
temporal affairs. The pope, while possessing a ‘‘superior
and primary’’ lordship (dominium), will normally impose
a bridle and halter on himself and refrain from its exercise
(3.7). He will only suspend the ‘‘immediate and execu-
tory’’ power of the temporal ruler in exceptional cases.
While in theory such cases may encompass virtually any-
thing (3.5–8), Giles believes it is those which threaten
peace that should be the pope’s particular concern (2.10).
While Giles is not concerned with relations between
temporal powers in either phase of his political thought,
he does express a clear preference for the ultimate subor-
dination of all temporal power to that of the Roman
emperor in On Ecclesiastical Power (2.13). At the same
time, somewhat paradoxically, the treatise does, at certain
points, appear to accept the existence of multiple inde-
pendent temporal rulers as of right (e.g. 1.5).
Foundations
Giles’ theory of the relationship between ecclesiastical and
temporal power is rooted in his acceptance of a thoroughly
Augustinian analysis of man, one that implicitly rejects
Aristotelian arguments in favor of the naturalness of polit-
ical organization and property. Lordship for Giles, either
over people or over property, is essentially unnatural to man
and a consequence of the Fall. In order for either rulership or
property to be legitimized man must be reconciled to God
and such reconciliation is only possible through grace
administered via the church. The total subordination of
the temporal to the spiritual is reinforced by Giles’ view
that, following principles drawn from Aristotle’s natural
philosophy, in a properly ordered universe inferiors must
be subject to superiors. The order, hierarchy, and relation-
ships that underpin Giles’ model are reminiscent of the
feudal structures of contemporary society (Dyson 2003).
The arguments of On Ecclesiastical Power are drawn
primarily from scriptural sources and the Fathers. Giles is
particularly keen to ﬁnd historical precedents in Scripture
that support the preeminence of the spiritual power both
in terms of dignity and in terms of precedence. He relies
heavily on Aristotelian reasoning to argue his case, but few
of the points he makes could be considered novel. The
argument that the spiritual precedes the temporal in time
and dignity, for example, is drawn from Hugh of Saint-
Victor, while his case for the subordination of the tempo-
ral to the spiritual originates in Bernard of Clairvaux and
Giles of Rome, Political Thought G
421
G

his argument in favor of the pope as the pinnacle of society
is ultimately derived from the canonists. Giles’ theory of
property is rooted in Augustinian thought (Dyson 2003),
although it is possible that this, and his broader concep-
tion of papal power, have more speciﬁc origins in ideas
developed by John Pecham (Coleman 1987). While Giles
is not entirely in agreement with his sources – he departs,
for example, from the position of both Pope Innocent IV
and Aquinas when he declares that inﬁdels can never
legitimately own property (McIlwain 1932) – the novelty
of Giles’ position is founded primarily upon his ability to
synthesize a consistent theory of ecclesiastical and papal
power from his sources.
Influence
Giles’ claim that his work was intended for the education
of all Christian people (2.12) is reminiscent of the
approach he adopted in On the Rule of Princes. The trea-
tise’s style and complexity, however, appear to have
resulted in a much more restricted audience and only six
manuscripts remain extant from the period before 1500.
The treatise provided a source for those who drafted the
papal bull Unam sanctam (November 18, 1302) (Rivie`re
1926). It was also employed in future defenses of papal
power written by the Augustinian Hermits James of
Viterbo and Augustinus Triumphus and the Franciscan
Alvarus Pelagius, although James, Giles’ former student,
deviated from his master’s position on several points
(Boase 1933; Dyson 2003).
Consistency
It has been sometimes suggested that Giles’ thought
underwent a profound change between its ﬁrst and second
phase and that, in effect, he chose to abandon a novel
Aristotelian
perspective
inspired
by
the
recently
rediscovered Politics in favor of a more traditional Augus-
tinian perspective (Scholz 1903). It is more probable
that each phase represents Giles’ thought on a different
conceptual level (McCready 1974). On the Rule of Princes
considers a microcosm: the best means of organizing the
secular state and the formation of its ideal ruler. On Eccle-
siastical Power is strikingly different in tone but only
because the author’s perspective has altered to consider
a
larger
structure
within
which
the
secular
state
appears as simply a component part. In fact, two features
of Giles’ thought offer striking examples of consistency: he
subscribed to a conception of hierarchy that led him to
favor models of unrestrained regal rule and, echoing
ideas found in Aquinas and most Thomists (Wilks 1963),
he also suggested that such rulers, whether kings or popes,
should and will impose limitations on themselves.
See also: ▶Henry of Ghent ▶James of Viterbo ▶John of
Paris ▶John Pecham ▶Mirrors for Princes ▶Parisian
Condemnation of 1277 ▶Peter of Auvergne ▶Thomas
Aquinas, Political Thought ▶Thomism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
On the Rule of Princes
Giles of Rome (1607) De regimine principum libri tres. Bartholomæum
Zannettum, Rome
Giles of Rome (1899) Li livres du gouvernement des rois. A XIIIth century
French version of Egidio Colonna’s treatise De regimine principum,
ed. Molenaer SP. Columbia University Press, New York
On the Abdication of the Pope
Giles of Rome (1992) Aegidius Romanus, De renunciatione pape, ed.
Eastman JR. Edwin Mellen, Lampeter
On Ecclesiastical Power
Giles of Rome (1908) Un trattato inedito di Egidio Colonna, ed. Bofﬁto G,
Oxilia GU. Successori Seeber, Florence
Giles of Rome (1929) Aegidius Romanus De ecclesiastica potestate, ed.
Scholz R. Hermann Bo¨hlaus Nachfolger, Weimar
Giles of Rome (2004) Giles of Rome’s On ecclesiastical power. A medieval
theory of world government, ed. and trans. Dyson RW. Columbia
University Press, New York
Secondary Sources
Blythe JM (1992) Ideal government and the mixed constitution in the
high Middle Ages. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Boase TSR (1933) Boniface VIII. Constable, Oxford
Briggs CF (1999) Giles of Rome’s De regimine principum: reading and
writing politics at court and university, c. 1275–c.1525. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Coleman J (1987) The two jurisdictions: theological and legal justiﬁca-
tions of church property in the thirteenth century. Stud Church Hist
24:75–110
Coleman J (1998) Some relations between the study of Aristotle’s Rhe-
toric, Ethics and Politics in late thirteenth-century and early four-
teenth-century university arts courses and the justiﬁcation of
contemporary civic activities (Italy and France). In: Canning J,
Oexle OG (eds) Political thought and the realities of power in
the Middle Ages (Politisches Denken und die Wirklichkeit der
Macht im Mittelalter). Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Go¨ttingen,
pp 127–157
Del Punta F et al (1993) Egidio Romano. In: Dizionario Biograﬁco degli
Italiani. Treccani, Rome 42:319–341
Dyson RW (2003) Normative theories of society and government in ﬁve
medieval thinkers: St Augustine, John of Salisbury, Giles of Rome, St.
Thomas Aquinas, and Marsilius of Padua. Edwin Mellen, Lewiston
Eastman JR (1990) Giles of Rome and Celestine V: the Franciscan revo-
lution and the theology of abdication. Catholic Hist Rev 76(2):195–
211
Genet J-P (2003) L’e´volution du genre des Miroirs des princes en Occi-
dent au Moyen Aˆ ge. In: Cassagnes-Brouquet S, Chauou A, Pichot D,
Rousselot L (eds) Religion et mentalite´s au Moyen Aˆ ge. Me´langes en
l’honneur d’Herve´ Martin. Presses Universitaires de Rennes, Rennes,
pp 531–541
Krynen J (1993) L’empire du roi. Ide´es et croyances politiques en France
XIIIe–XVe sie`cle. Gallimard, Paris
422 G
Giles of Rome, Political Thought

Kuiters R (1958) Aegidius Romanus and the authorship of In utramque
partem and De ecclesiastica potestate. Augustiniana 8:267–280
Lambertini R (1995) The Prince in the mirror of philosophy. Uses of
Aristotle in Giles of Rome’s De regimine principum. In: Baza´n BC,
Andu´jar E, Sbrocchi LG (eds) Les philosophies morales et politiques au
Moyen Aˆge/Moral and political philosophies in the Middle Ages. Pro-
ceedings of the ninth international congress of medieval philosophy,
Ottawa, 17–22 August 1992. Publications du Laboratoire de la pense´e
ancienne et me´die´vale, Universite´ d’Ottawa, Ottawa, pp 1522–1534
Luna C (1992) Un nuovo documento del conﬂitto fra Bonifacio VIII
e Filippo il Bello: il discorso ‘De potentia domini pape’ di Egidio
Romano (con un’appendice su Borromeo di Bologna e la ‘Eger cui
lena’). In: Punta FD, Fioravanti G, Garfagnini GC, Leonardi C (eds)
Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale, 3:1. Centro
italiano di studi sull’alto medioevo, Spoleto, pp 167–243
McAleer G (1999) Giles of Rome on political authority. J Hist Ideas 60
(1):21–36
McCready WD (1974) Papal plenitudo potestatis and the source of
temporal authority in late medieval papal hierocratic theory. Specu-
lum 48(4):654–674
McIlwain CH (1932) The growth of political thought in the West: from the
Greeks to the end of the Middle Ages. Macmillan, New York
Merisalo O (1998) William, translator of Aegidius Romanus. In: Hamesse
J (ed) Roma, magistra mundi: itineraria culturae medievalis.
Me´langes offerts au Pe`re L. E. Boyle a` l’occasion de son 75e
anniversaire, 2. Fe´de´ration Internationale des Instituts d’E´tudes
Me´die´vales, Louvain-la-Neuve, pp 585–596
Miethke J (2000) De potestate papae. Die pa¨pstliche Amtskompetenz im
Widerstreit der politischen Theorie von Thomas von Aquin bis
Wilhelm von Ockham. Mohr Siebeck, Tu¨bingen
Renna T (1978) Aristotle and the French monarchy, 1260–1303. Viator
9:309–324
Rivie`re J (1926) Le proble`me de l’E´glise et de l’E´tat au temps de Philippe le
Bel. E´tude de the´ologie positive. Champion, Paris
Scholz R (1903) Die Publizistik zur Zeit Philipps des Scho¨nen und
Bonifaz’
VIII.
Ein
Beitrag
zur
Geschichte
der
politischen
Anschauungen des Mittelalters. Enke, Stuttgart
Ullmann W (1976) Boniface VIII and his contemporary scholarship.
J Theol Stud 27(1):58–87
Wilks MJ (1963) The problem of sovereignty in the later Middle Ages. The
papal monarchy with Augustinus Triumphus and the Publicists.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola
M. V. DOUGHERTY
Department of Philosophy
Ohio Dominican University
Columbus, OH
USA
Abstract
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (1463–1494) was an Italian
Renaissance polymath. Although best known for his Ora-
tion on Human Dignity (Oratio de dignitate hominis),
regarded by some historians as a manifesto of Renaissance
humanism, Pico composed other philosophical, theolog-
ical, and literary works. A constant throughout his philo-
sophical writings was his attempt to synthesize competing
philosophical views. Pico resurrected the ancient proposal
that Plato and Aristotle were not opposed on major phil-
osophical principles. His outlook sought to bring about
a concordia or resolution among philosophical schools,
and his most dramatic effort in this regard was
a planned public disputation of 900 theses drawn from
philosophical, theological, and esoteric sources. Because
of his concordist tendencies, he cannot be identiﬁed as
a strict Aristotelian, Platonist, Thomist, or adherent of
any particular philosophical school. One of the ﬁrst
Christians
to
explore
the
Kabbalah,
he
examined
Hebrew texts for conﬁrmations for Christian theological
tenets with the hope that such connections could be of
service in apologetics. Pico’s bibliophilic passion, joined
with his facility with languages, placed him in a position
unrivaled in his time to gather views from a wide variety
of sources. His famous library was replete with texts of
major as well as obscure ﬁgures, and his studies of
Arabic, Greek, and Hebrew gave him a range of source
materials unparalleled in his day. Pico dwelled in the
highest
literary
circles
of
his
time,
and
counted
among his contacts were the Florentine Platonist and
translator Marsilio Ficino, the powerful Lorenzo de’
Medici, the humanist Angelo Poliziano, and the Domin-
ican Girolamo Savonarola. His later works included
a metaphysical treatise On Being and Unity (De ente
et uno), a massive anti-astrological diatribe called the
Disputations against divinatory astrology (Disputationes
adversus
astrologiam
divinatricem),
and
biblical
commentaries.
Biographical Information
Giovanni Pico was born in his family’s castle in Mirandola.
Heir to the Counts of Mirandola and Concordia, Pico was
in a privileged situation to pursue academic interests free
from ﬁnancial concerns. In his early years, he pursued
a wide-ranging education at many major centers of learn-
ing. Among the many subjects of his interest, he studied
canon law in Bologna, classics in Ferrara, Aristotelian and
Averroistic philosophy in Padua, and medieval scholasti-
cism in Pavia and Paris. He learned to read and write
Greek, Arabic, and Hebrew, in addition to possessing
a powerful command of the humanist Latin of his day.
Our knowledge of the elements of Pico’s short life is aided
by the Vita or Life penned by his nephew, Gianfrancesco
Pico della Mirandola, who was a philosopher in his own
right and served as the literary executor of Giovanni’s
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola G
423
G

works, posthumously publishing his uncle’s Opera omnia
in 1496.
Pico’s signiﬁcant literary contacts for the transmission
of Arabic and Hebrew ideas included the Averroist philos-
opher Elijah del Medigo; the unsavory Flavius Mithri-
dates, who at Pico’s request translated a large body of
Hebraic writings into Latin, which largely served as
Pico’s introduction to Kabbalah; and Yohanan Alemmano,
a friend of Pico’s who served as an important conduit for
Jewish philosophical ideas.
The year 1486 was a signiﬁcant one for Pico. It marked
a period of intense literary productivity and included
unusual public events that required the interventions of
Lorenzo de’ Medici. On the way to Rome to dispute his
900 theses, Pico abducted the wife of a tax ofﬁcial of the
Medici family. It is possible that she was complicit in this
plan. Nevertheless, Pico was imprisoned and only
released by the inﬂuence of Lorenzo de’ Medici. When
Pico’s Roman plans for a disputation failed and he had to
ﬂee church authorities, again Lorenzo stepped in, and his
offer to the pope to keep Pico under his watchful
eye extricated the young philosopher from a difﬁcult posi-
tion. It should be noted that Pico played a minor role in
shaping the Florentine political scene; Pico was responsi-
ble for persuading Lorenzo to bring Savonarola to
Florence.
From 1488 onward, Pico spent most of his time in
Florence under the protection of Lorenzo de’ Medici.
Pico’s interests during his later period appear theological,
since he worked on biblical commentaries and short spir-
itual works, of which two letters to Gianfrancesco stand
out as exemplary. In 1494, Pico was rehabilitated when
Pope Alexander VI rescinded all condemnations of Pico’s
works. Clothed in the Dominican habit, Pico died in
Florence in November 1494. At his side was Savonarola,
who later gave Pico’s funeral oration. There are hints that
Pico may have been poisoned, but the evidence is at
present inconclusive. Pico was buried in the Dominican
church of San Marco in Florence. In 2007, his remains
were examined forensically for evidence of the cause of his
death.
After Gianfrancesco’s publication of Giovanni’s Opera
omnia, English-speaking readers were ﬁrst introduced to
Pico by the translations by Sir Thomas More of some of
Pico’s letters, religious opuscula, and Gianfrancesco’s Vita
in the early sixteenth century.
Thought
From Pico’s epistolary corpus, the June 3, 1485 missive to
the Venetian humanist Hermolao Barbaro stands out for
its fame as well as its philosophical content. In this piece,
which he later titled On the Mode of Discourse Appropriate
for Philosophers (De genere dicendi philosophorum), Pico
revived the ancient debate on the relation of philosophy
and the discipline of rhetoric. Pico champions the superi-
ority of scholastic Latinity over its classical counterpart,
yet does so while employing a wide range of rhetorical
techniques. The apparent contrast between the style and
substance of the letter has puzzled generations of inter-
preters. A reply to Pico, until recently attributed to Philip
Melanchthon, continued the ancient debate among later
literary ﬁgures. Pico’s ﬁrst philosophical work of substan-
tive length, however, is his Commentary on a Canzone of
Love of Girolamo Benivieni (Commento sopra una canzone
d’amore di Girolamo Benivieni) of 1486. Using the pretext
of a commentary, Pico explores issues in Neoplatonic
metaphysics, and in some passages implicitly critiques
the views of Marsilio Ficino.
Without doubt, Pico’s best-known work is the Oratio
de dignitate hominis. The Oratio was never published in
Pico’s lifetime, though in a preface, Gianfrancesco implied
the work’s early circulation in manuscript form when he
ﬁrst published it in the 1496 Opera omnia. In the ﬁrst part
of the Oratio, Pico famously sets forth the view that
human beings have no nature or form, and by choice
humans are free to become the higher and lower natures
in the hierarchy of being, where ultimate unity with God is
championed as the highest option. The work can be read
as a philosophical exploration of the traditional doctrine
of human deiﬁcation found in the Neoplatonic and Chris-
tian traditions. Pico employs the literary device of
a conversation between God and the ﬁrst man to expound
his view, and he implies that moral choices determine an
individual’s acquired form or nature. In addition to these
remarks on the human condition, the Oratio also defends
other views. The middle portion of the work can be read as
either a protreptic or an apology for the discipline of
philosophy, and the latter part of the work examines
Pico’s proposal for a public debate.
Pico’s remarks on the human condition in the Oratio
have been subject to a wide variety of interpretations.
While the claim that human beings lack a nature or form
may appear to some to anticipate elements of twentieth-
century existentialist philosophy, some commentators
have questioned whether a myth presented in the context
of an oration can be a source for metaphysical views.
At least, the style of the Oratio is far removed from the
traditional genres of philosophical writing, even though
Pico uses traditional scholastic terminology. Neverthe-
less, the Oratio is arguably the most famous philosoph-
ical text of the Renaissance period. In presenting the
view that human beings lack a ﬁxed nature, Pico is
424 G
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola

perhaps anticipated by some Patristic and medieval
texts. The views of Origen and Boethius may have been
direct inﬂuences on him in this view, and judging from
the extant lists of the contents of his library and the
references he gives to their works throughout his writ-
ings, Pico was familiar with the writings of both
thinkers.
The Oratio was intended merely to serve as the open-
ing preface to Pico’s planned disputation of his 900 Theses
(Conclusiones DCCCC), which he published in Rome in
1486. The 900 Theses consisted of a collection of author-
itative views garnered from well-known as well as obscure
authorities from philosophy, theology, and other disci-
plines. Pico’s collection of theses for the Roman debate
was not his ﬁrst attempt to compile authoritative opin-
ions; in the Vita, Gianfrancesco reported that as a young
student of canon law, Pico anthologized a digest of decre-
tals. At the end of the published 900 Theses, Pico appended
an advertisement offering to pay the traveling expenses of
any philosopher or theologian willing to join him for the
disputation. Pico envisioned that the Pope would preside
over the event with the College of Cardinals in attendance.
The public event, however, never occurred; Pope Innocent
VIII convened a group of theologians to investigate the
orthodoxy of the theses. Of the 900, 13 theses were iden-
tiﬁed as either being outright heretical or exhibiting
a propensity to heresy.
Pico’s response to the condemnation was a quickly
penned defense called the Apology (Apologia) published
the following year. In it, Pico criticized the commission’s
ﬁndings severely and defended the orthodoxy of his sus-
pect theses. He argued that his theses were set forth as
proposals to be disputed, and should not be approached in
the way one approaches ordinary academic writing. Pico’s
Apology exhibited no contrition, and spectacularly failed
to secure exoneration. Pico ﬂed Rome to France, only to
return safely to Italy with the protection and favor of
Lorenzo de’ Medici.
Pico’s next major work, Heptaplus, On the Sevenfold
Exposition of the Six Days of Genesis (Heptaplus de
septiformi sex dierum Geneseos enarratione), dates from
1489. In this biblical commentary on the early part of
Genesis, Pico explicitly rejected the traditional fourfold
medieval modes of exegesis that examined biblical texts in
terms of the literal, allegorical, moral, and anagogical
senses.
Instead,
Pico
approached
Genesis
as
an
esoteric
work
containing
latent
philosophical
doctrines. Pico argued that Moses was a philosopher of
the ﬁrst order who placed philosophical truths under
guise of images and ﬁgures in the work. The Heptaplus
presupposes
a
complex
hermeneutical
theory
that
seeks to unpack a latent Neoplatonic emanationist meta-
physical scheme from the beginning of the Hebrew
scriptures.
Another metaphysical treatise, the short On Being and
the One (De ente et uno), was completed by Pico in the
early 1490s but not published in his lifetime. It was
intended to be part of a larger planned work reconciling
the metaphysical principles of Plato and Aristotle. In this
treatise, Pico contends that Plato and Aristotle were not in
disagreement on the relationship of being and unity, and
Pico examines texts from Plato’s Parmenides and Sophist
and Aristotle’s Metaphysics in his attempt to bring
the two philosophers together. In attempting such
a reconciliation, Pico places himself in an ancient tradition
whose exponents sought a harmony between Platonism
and Aristotelianism.
Pico’s longest work is his posthumously published
diatribe
against
astrology,
the
Disputations
against
Divinatory Astrology (Disputationes adversus astrologiam
divinatricem). In 12 books, Pico engaged in a multi-
pronged polemic against adherents of astrology. Pico was
careful to distinguish between natural causes and occult
ones, and he condemned the latter. He separated human
causes from celestial ones, and ridiculed the presupposi-
tions of ancient and contemporary astrological views.
Finally, in the last book of the work, Pico presented
a striking history of astrological theory and practice.
Numbered among Pico’s works are also short religious
opuscula including an unﬁnished commentary on the
Psalms.
The works of 1486–1487 as well as the later De ente et
uno exhibit Pico’s commitment to ﬁnding concordia or
harmony
among
seemingly
opposed
philosophical
views. For this reason, he has been regarded by some
historians as a syncretist. While the designation of syn-
cretism is in many ways a ﬁtting characterization of his
thought from the period, it should be noted that Pico did
not espouse the
view
that all philosophers were
defending the same position using different terms and
expressions; Pico privileges the claims of Christianity and
sought external conﬁrmations of them. Similarly, he
ﬁnds in ancient poetry veiled references to Neoplatonic
metaphysics, and the writings of Kabbalah are used to
conﬁrm some tenets of Christianity. The hermeneutical
tools used by Pico in his project of concordia involve
allegorical and ﬁgurative readings of ancient texts. Insofar
as Pico is willing to apply his interpretive techniques to
classical poetry, again in search of ﬁnding conﬁrmation of
metaphysical and theological tenets, he can be rightly
viewed as a sophisticated Renaissance exponent of prisca
theologia.
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola G
425
G

See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Astronomy and Astrol-
ogy in the Arab World ▶Metaphysics ▶Platonism,
Renaissance
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1942) De hominis dignitate, Heptaplus, De ente et uno, e Scritti vari,
ed. Garin E. Vallecchi, Florence (in addition to the works
mentioned in the title, this work also contains an edited text of the
Commento)
(1946–1952) Disputationes adversus astrologiam divinatricem, 2 vols, ed.
Garin E. Vallecchi, Florence (the modern edition of Pico’s anti-
astrological polemic)
(1969) Opera omnia, 2 vols. Hildesheim, Olms (repr. 2005) (a reprint of
the Basel 1557–1573 edition of the Opera omnia)
(1971) Opera omnia. Bottega D’Erasmo, Turin (a reprint of the Basel 1572
edition of the Opera omnia)
(1998) Syncretism in the West: Pico’s 900 theses (1486): the evolution of
traditional religious and philosophical systems, ed. and trans. Farmer
SA. Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies, Tempe (contains
a newly edited text of the Conclusiones DCCCC)
Secondary Sources
Bausi
F
(1996)
Nec
rhetor
neque
philosophus:
Fonti,
lingua
e stile nelle prime opera latine de Giovanni Pico della Mirandola
(1484–87). Leo S. Olschki, Florence (philological study of Pico’s
Latinity)
Craven WG (1981) Giovanni Pico della Mirandola: symbol of his age:
modern interpretations of a Renaissance philosopher. Libraire Droz,
Geneva (critical historiographical study of 20th century approaches
to Pico’s works)
Crofton B (2006) Pico’s heptaplus and biblical hermeneutics. Brill, Leiden
(important study of Pico’s interpretive theory)
Di Napoli G (1965) Giovanni Pico della Mirandola e la problematica
dottrinale del suo tempo. Descle´e, Rome (contains a detailed account
of Pico’s plans for the Roman disputation)
Dougherty MV (ed) (2008) Pico della Mirandola: new essays. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge (essays on the history of Pico scholar-
ship and new approaches to Pico’s work)
Garfagnini GC (ed) (1997) Giovanni Pico della Mirandola: Convegno
internazionale di studi nel cinquecentesimo anniversario della morte
(1494–1994), 2 vols. Leo S. Olschki Editore, Florence (important
collection of essays on Pico)
Garin E (1937) Giovanni Pico della Mirandola: Vita et dottrina. Felice le
Monnier, Florence (an important monograph on Pico’s life and work
by the dean of 20th century Pico scholarship)
Kibre P (1936) The library of Pico della Mirandola. Columbia University
Press, New York (repr. AMS Press, New York, 1966) (identiﬁes the
contents of Pico’s legendary library)
Kristeller PO (1965) Giovanni Pico della Mirandola and his Sources. In:
L’Opera e il pensiero di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola nella storia
dell’Umanismo, vol 1. Nella Sede dell’Instituto, Firenze, pp 35–133;
reprinted in Kristeller PO (1993) Studies in Renaissance thought and
letters, vol III. Edizione di storia e di letteratura, Rome, pp 227–304;
reprinted in Black R (ed) (2006) The Renaissance: critical concepts in
historical studies. vol IV: Anti-humanism and anti-Renaissance.
Routledge, London, pp 202–281 (the classic study of Pico’s doctrinal
sources)
L’Opera e il pensiero di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola nella storia
dell’Umanismo, 2 vols (1965). Nella Sede dell’Instituto, Florence
(contains seminal essays on Pico)
Quaquarelli
L,
Dougherty
MV
(2007)
Bibliograﬁa
XIX
e
XX
Secolo. Leo S. Olschki, Florence (catalogues the secondary literature
on Pico)
Quaquarelli L, Zanardi Z (eds) (2005) Pichiana: Bibliograﬁa delle edizioni
e degli studi. Leo S. Olschki, Florence (identiﬁes editions of Pico’s
works as well as secondary literature)
Wirszubski, Chaim (1989) Pico della Mirandola’s encounter with Jewish
mysticism. Harvard University Press, Cambridge (the standard work
on Pico’s approach to Kabbalah)
Godfrey of Fontaines
CATHERINE KO¨ NIG-PRALONG
De´partement de philosophie
Universite´ de Fribourg
Fribourg
Switzerland
Abstract
Godfrey of Fontaines was one of the most inﬂuential
masters of the University of Paris from the last quarter of
the thirteenth century. Against Henry of Ghent, for whom
theology is endowed with reason that is eminent, univer-
sal, and all-encompassing, Godfrey defends the autonomy
of philosophical reason within its own domain. In inter-
disciplinary ﬁelds, where theology and philosophy come
into contact, he advocates a perspectivist epistemology,
and he defends a probabilistic conception of scientiﬁc
truth. Among the theologians after the Condemnation of
1277, he was one of the most fervent defenders of philos-
ophy. He further develops the theories of masters of the
Arts Faculty in the 1270s and employs them against the
theologies of contingency that ﬂourished in the interim.
Godfrey of Fontaines was born in the principality of Lie`ge
(modern Belgium) shortly before 1250. We know nearly
nothing about his life outside the university (Wippel 1981:
xv–xxi). At the University of Paris, however, we know that
this secular priest was one of the most famous masters of
theology during the last quarter of the thirteenth century.
He died c. 1306–1309.
Godfrey studied at the Arts Faculty of Paris probably
from 1270 onward. There, he would have been able to hear
the lectures of the ‘‘Averroist’’ masters who defended the
autonomy of philosophical research, notably Boethius
of Dacia, Siger of Brabant, and later, Jacques of Douai.
426 G
Godfrey of Fontaines

He would have also attended the debates that provided
the grounds for the condemnation of Aristotelianism
issued on March 7, 1277. He could also have gone to the
lectures of Thomas Aquinas, who had a second regency as
master in the Faculty of Theology of Paris between 1268
and 1272.
From this ﬁrst period dates a precious student’s note-
book, started by Godfrey in 1271 and ﬁnished around
1277 (Glorieux 1931). This collection witnesses the
author’s taste for philosophical works: among other
texts, it contains the treatise On the Eternity of the World
(De aeternitate mundi) by Siger of Brabant, and that
by Thomas Aquinas, abbreviations of some works by
Boethius of Dacia, and a reportatio of Siger of Brabant’s
Questions
on
the
Metaphysics
(Quaestiones
in
Metaphysicam). Moreover, it also carries transcriptions
of theological texts from a little later, such as the
Theoremata on the Body of Christ (Theoremata de corpore
Christi) composed by Giles of Rome between 1274 and
1276, and some notes taken during Henry of Ghent’s ﬁrst
quodlibetal disputation (Christmas 1276).
From 1274, Godfrey was a student in theology at the
University of Paris. He studied under Henry of Ghent and
Servais of Mont Saint Elias. He was promoted to master in
1285 and served as regent master until 1298/1299. In the
faculty of theology, his main colleagues were Henry of
Ghent and Giles of Rome, with whom he held running
debates
that
lasted
for
years.
Fourteen
Quodlibets
(Quodlibeta) stand as witness to his intellectual activity
during these 14 years of teaching. In 1298, he left
the university to fulﬁll ecclesiastical missions. Then he
held a second regency in the Faculty of Theology around
1303/1304; his 15th Quodlibet comes from this period
(Table 1). Godfrey’s literary production also includes
Ordinary Questions, of which some have been preserved
(notably the Disputed Questions on the Virtues).
Godfrey had an important personal library that
included numerous contemporary works, which he left
to the College of the Sorbonne. The 37 surviving manu-
scripts comprise one of the major sources for the docu-
mentation of the debates on the eternity of the world and
the distinction between being and essence in the period
between 1272 and 1300 (Duin 1959).
In the controversies that engulfed the Faculty of The-
ology during the years 1280–1300, Godfrey frequently
opposed his fellow theologians and revived solutions
defended in the 1270s by the arts masters condemned in
1277. He repeatedly protested the continuation of this
condemnation (Quodl. VII, q. 18, 404; Quodl. XII, q. 5,
102), which also touched upon some of Thomas Aquinas’
positions. Godfrey’s inﬂuence is particularly clear on
James of Viterbo, who succeeded Giles of Rome as
Augustinian master of theology in 1293. His inﬂuence is
also very important on the German master Dietrich of
Freiberg, for whom Godfrey served as a conduit: Godfrey
provides at least partially the means for Dietrich’s aware-
ness of the Parisian theological controversies, and trans-
mits to Dietrich the elements of the philosophy of the arts
masters of the 1270s.
1. Godfrey’s work is remarkable for its reﬂections on
methodology. From the middle of the century, the
University of Paris was the battleground for a war
between the faculties (and maybe also between disci-
plines). Before 1275, some arts masters (like Siger of
Brabant) had defended the autonomy of philosophical
research against the attacks of theologians who wanted
to reduce its scope and pretensions. At the same time,
the theologians felt obliged to specify the status of
their discipline. In spite of being a master of theology,
Godfrey did not make all other disciplines a uniﬁed
ﬁeld over which theology alone reigned supreme.
Against Henry of Ghent, he challenged the notion
that theology was a science properly speaking (Quodl.
IX, q. 20). Theological knowledge is a form of wisdom
(sapientia), while the philosophical disciplines, ﬁrst of
all metaphysics, are sciences (scientiae). Theology nec-
essarily presupposes faith. The truths that are most
certain are not thereby also evident (Quodl. IX, q.
20), such as the trinity (Quodl. VII, q. 2). Clearly,
Theology provides understanding of what is believed,
and it facilitates the interpretation of sacred texts; but
biblical exegesis only produces probable knowledge
(Quodl. VIII, q. 7). On the other hand, metaphysics,
the highest of the sciences, knows the truths that are
evident to natural reason. This is why propositions
about God, known evidently, belong to metaphysics
Godfrey of Fontaines. Table 1 Dating of the Quodlibets
according to Wippel (1981:xxvii–xxviii)
Quodlibet I
Christmas 1285
Quodlibet VIII
1292/1293
Quodlibet II
Easter 1286
Quodlibet IX
1293/1294
Quodlibet III
Christmas 1286
Quodlibet X
1294/1295
Quodlibet IV
1287
Quodlibet XI
1295/1296
Quodlibet V
1288
Quodlibet XII
1296/1297
Quodlibet VI
Christmas 1289
Quodlibet XIII
1297/1298
Quodlibet VII
1290/1291 or
1291/1292
Quodlibet XIV
1298/1299
Quodlibet XV
1303/1304
Godfrey of Fontaines G
427
G

and not to theology, as is the case concerning the
propositions that afﬁrm that God is the ﬁrst being,
that He is simple, in act, pure intellect, and so on
(Quodl. IX, q. 20).
In so doing, Godfrey challenges Henry of Ghent’s
understanding of theology, in particular its epistemic
nature. According to Henry, theology is the most uni-
versal and the most certain science, and the certitudes
of the other forms of scientiﬁc knowledge proceed from
it. Godfrey, on the other hand, holds that theology
furnishes a less certain knowledge than that provided
by other sciences with respect to their proper objects.
Godfrey defends an epistemological perspectivism that
grants each discipline its object and certitude.
On Godfrey’s reading, Aristotle’s metaphysical sci-
ence is autonomous, absolutely speculative, and it
concerns human happiness insofar as it is attainable
on Earth. On the other hand, theology is a composite
discipline, both speculative and practical. It must pro-
vide speculative knowledge of what is the ultimate
goal, but this goal – the beatiﬁc vision of God – is
only attained in the afterlife. Theology is therefore also
a practical science, concerned with the life of the
faithful and with the preparations for obtaining future
beatitude (Quodl. XIII, q. 1).
From his ﬁrst Quodlibet (q. 5) on, Godfrey criti-
cizes the superﬁcial and irrational (‘‘irrationabilitas’’)
attacks on philosophy by some theologians. He con-
demns the vanity (‘‘curiositas’’) of his fellow theolo-
gians who construct complicated theoretical ediﬁces
to explain the status of the dead body of Christ and the
possibility that it was or was not burned (Quodl. III,
q. 6). Godfrey’s approach becomes particularly evident
in his positions on interdisciplinary questions, that is,
in considering issues at the border of theology and
philosophy. Here, Godfrey establishes a probabilistic
epistemology.
Anthropology is one of these frontier zones.
Theological truth – christology in this case – touches
upon natural philosophy, because Christ is both God
and man. Some theologians, such as John Pecham,
the author of the London condemnation of April 30,
1286,
reconﬁgured
anthropology
to
meet
the
requirements of dogma. To guarantee the identity
of the living and dead body of Christ, they believed
they had to impose a pluralist anthropology. Accord-
ingly (and against what Thomas Aquinas believed),
man is not substantially informed by the rational
soul alone, but by a succession of natural forms:
the forms of the elements, of mixtures, the body,
the nutritive soul, the sensitive soul and, ﬁnally, the
form of the rational soul. At death, the soul is
separated from the body, but the latter remains
univocally body in virtue of the permanence of
the form of corporeity. Henry of Ghent developed
a simpler solution, positing a dimorphism that
makes the form of the body and the rational soul
cohabit the same being.
According to Godfrey, John of Pecham was out of
line (Quodl. III, q. 5, 207: ‘‘graviter excessisse’’) in
censuring
the
unicist
anthropology
of
Thomas
Aquinas as propounded by Richard Knapwell. In
1286, the same year as the London condemnation,
Godfrey broached the question twice (Quodl. II, q. 7
and Quodl. III, 5). His treatment has two goals: (a) to
protect philosophy from theological incursions (b) to
relativize the certitude obtained in interdisciplinary
ﬁelds.
(a) Godfrey insists that Christ is a man like any other,
if one considers his humanity in the light of
human reason. The body of Christ after death
need not be substantially the same as that before
death. That it is identical is neither evident by faith
proceeding from authority, nor is it evident to
natural reason. Therefore, one should not infer
anthropological consequences from it. According
to Thomist anthropology, the body of the living
Christ and his cadaver could be different substances,
as it is the case for Peter’s body (when alive), and his
cadaver.
(b) Godfrey likewise shows that the unicist thesis of
Thomas Aquinas is the most reasonable and philo-
sophically the most coherent. It explains the unity of
man without injury to major ontological principles,
such as matter’s pure potentiality. Nevertheless,
Godfrey counsels prudence when treating questions
that touch on theology. Examining the theses of
others, he establishes a hierarchy of levels of certi-
tude: the unicist thesis is the most probable, followed
by Henry of Ghent’s dimorphism (see also Quodl. X,
q. 10), and in last place is the pluralist position
that was dominant at the time, which, from
a philosophical point of few is weak and thus the
least probable. Even when theological and philo-
sophical interests collide, Godfrey claims that each
has its own speciﬁc objects and methods.
2. In metaphysics, Godfrey begins by distinguishing four
‘‘terms’’ he describes as ‘‘the most general’’ (Quodl. XIII,
q. 3, 193): being and nonbeing, act and potency.
These four terms form two analogous pairs of oppo-
site and exclusive principles. Potency is related to act
428 G
Godfrey of Fontaines

as nonbeing to being. From 1285 (Quodl. I, q. 7) until
the end of his career, Godfrey incessantly insists on
this bipolarity. In this sense, Godfrey’s metaphysics is
a metaphysics of the excluded middle. There is no
intermediate way of being, such as relational being,
between being and nonbeing. Likewise, potency is
opposed to act in an absolutely primary sense, such
that there is no intermediary. Potency designates
a thing that absolutely does not exist and it designates
such a thing insofar as it is still in its cause (e.g., the
artifact in the mind of the artisan or the fruit in the
seed). The copula potency/act is a copy of the pair
nonbeing/being, and explains the dynamics of con-
tingent beings (i.e., every being except God). A
fortiori, starting from the experience of beings existing
in act, the notion of potency permits the postulation of
a nonbeing capable of coming to be.
In 1286, Godfrey took part in an important
debate on essence (essentia) and existence (esse)
where Giles of Rome opposed Henry of Ghent. Giles
took the real distinction between existence and essence
sketched by Thomas a generation earlier to an
extreme. Henry of Ghent defended a moderate thesis:
existence does not differ really from essence. Never-
theless
the
distinction
between
existence
(esse
existentiae) and essence (esse essentiae) is not solely
one of reason; it is ‘‘intentional,’’ since the essence of
something can be conceived as nonexistent. Following
Avicenna, Henry posited a sort of intermediate state
for essence, independent of or ‘‘indifferent’’ to its
being conceived in the mind and to its being brought
to be in extramental reality. Each in their own way,
Giles and Henry wanted to explain the contingent
character of created essences: they were able not to
have been. Godfrey rejects Giles’ real distinction and
Henry’s intermediate solution, which postulates an
absurd third way of being between being and nonbeing
(Quodl. II, q. 2). He repeats the ‘‘Averroist’’ solution
defended by Siger of Brabant c. 1273; like Siger,
Godfrey places the question in a semantic context
(Quodl. III, q. 1). Being (esse) and essence (essentia)
differ as two ways of signifying. The word ‘‘being’’
signiﬁes the being concretely, as the word ‘‘to run’’
signiﬁes the action of the person who runs; the word
‘‘essence’’ signiﬁes the abstract being, as the noun
‘‘running’’ signiﬁes the activity of running in an
abstract manner. On an ontological level, one should
not postulate any other way of being than that of the
being itself: concrete, individual, and determinate. The
creator’s omnipotence sufﬁciently explains the contin-
gency of the world.
3. In ontology, the primary distinction is that between
substance and accident (Quodl. I, q. 20; Quodl. VI,
q. 4). Since substances are what exist absolutely, acci-
dents only exist by attribution to a substance. Like
Albert the Great and Dietrich of Freiberg, Godfrey
follows the Averroist interpretation
of Aristotle
according to which an accident is only a disposition
(dispositio) of a substance. This dependence on sub-
stance excludes any rational explanation for an acci-
dent persisting without substance, as happens in the
sacrament of the Eucharist. Any philosophical justiﬁ-
cation of the per se subsistence of accidents would
amount to denying the distinction between substance
and accident, that is, the primary distinction in ontol-
ogy (Quodl. VI, q. 5).
This distinction grounds a theory of the analogy of
being (Quodl. III, q. 1). The concept of being is onto-
logically (in essendo) and semantically (in signiﬁcando)
analogous. The notion of being is predicated of all
subjects. Neither equivocal (homonymous), nor univ-
ocal in the sense of a genus, being is diversiﬁed by
itself, and not by a differentia. It does not have the
unity of a genus or a species, but rather it accompanies
confusedly every conception of something real. The
notion of ‘‘being’’ is predicated of all subjects in the
same sense, but to greater or lesser degrees, according
to prior and posterior; substance is more primarily
being than accident, which is only called being by
attribution to substance. The unity of the concept of
being is a unity of order that relates diverse elements
according to a common characteristic shared by each
of them to different degrees. Although Socrates is an
animal just as a dog is an animal, Socrates is not in the
way a dog is, nor like the white that is in him is, nor like
God is. ‘‘Being’’ signiﬁes all beings, supposing their
reciprocal relations and the order established between
them according to their degrees of perfection with
relation to the ﬁrst being (substance from an ontolog-
ical point of view, God from a metaphysical point of
view).
4. In natural philosophy, Godfrey applies his vision of
exclusive opposition between act and potency. Matter
is pure potency; only form is act (Quodl. X, q. 9).
Therefore, matter cannot be created without form. In
1285 (Quodl. I, q. 4), Godfrey tries to rehabilitate this
position,
associated
with
Thomas
Aquinas
and
condemned in 1277 by Etienne Tempier. In 1297/
1298 (Quodl. XIII, q. 3), he defends the same princi-
ples in order to refute the Augustinian theory
according to which the seminal reasons of things are
Godfrey of Fontaines G
429
G

already present in prime matter. He challenges the
theory of Henry of Ghent, for whom matter has some-
thing essential proper to it, the Franciscan theories
that grant matter a minimal actuality, as well as Peter
John Olivi’s description of matter – Godfrey does not
even admit that matter joins with an ‘‘aptitude’’ before
its union to form.
5. In psychology, Godfrey agrees with Thomas’ inter-
pretation of De anima III (Quodl. VI, 15). The possi-
ble intellect and the agent intellect are two faculties of
the same individual soul. Human cognition necessar-
ily proceeds from the sensible thing. Godfrey explains
intellectual cognition without positing illumination
of the soul (Henry of Ghent) or innate ideas. The
agent intellect’s work of abstracting from sensations
sufﬁces to bring about cognition in the soul (Quodl.
V, q. 9–10; Quodl. VII, q. 9). Cognition of the object
comes about when the possible intellect receives
the species (species) of the thing known, a species
stripped of its individuating and material conditions.
Godfrey insists on the receptive phase of the process:
the intellect alone cannot cause efﬁciently and for-
mally the cognition, because a created power cannot
reduce itself from potency to act (Quodl. I, q. 7;
Quodl. IX, q. 19; Quodl. XII, q. 1). The received spe-
cies, however, does not coincide with the object
known: it is not what is known, but that by which
the mind knows the extramental object (Quodl. I, q. 9;
Quodl. VI, q. 6).
In the important debate on the relative functions and
nobility of the intellect and the will, Godfrey takes
a strong intellectualist position. Against the Franciscan
positions and the Condemnation of 1277, he defends the
unconditional superiority of the intellect over the will
(Quodl. VI, q. 10). The intellect takes pride of place, both
because its object is speciﬁc and because it plays a causal
role with respect to the will; the will only desires some-
thing if the speculative intellect ﬁrst apprehends that thing
and if the practical intellect brings about the voluntary act.
Against Henry of Ghent, Godfrey states again the ﬁrst
principle of his metaphysics: a power cannot move itself
(Quodl. VI, q. 7). The will, a power of the soul, cannot be
cause of its own act. The intellect causes the voluntary act
not only in terms of formal causality (in making present to
the will a desirable object), but also in terms of efﬁcient
causality (insofar as the will follows the judgment of the
intellect).
When he treats the moral question of free choice
(Quodl. VIII, q. 16), Godfrey criticizes the Giles of
Rome’s compromise solution, and through it, the position
of Thomas Aquinas. Free choice is not formally situated in
the will alone, even if the apprehended object is present in
it. The action of the intellect is at least as free as that of the
will. The intellect is eminently free and sovereign in deter-
mining the will’s choice. To defend such a thesis, once
again, Godfrey brings back elements of the philosophy of
the arts masters in the 1270s, particularly the discussions
of Siger of Brabant on necessity.
Alongside these philosophical themes, Godfrey’s work
has a great many discussions pertaining to ecclesiology,
canon law, religious practices, and pastoral care.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Boethius of Dacia
▶Dietrich of Freiberg ▶Essence and Existence ▶Form
and Matter ▶Giles of Rome, Political Thought ▶Henry
of Ghent ▶Intuitive and Abstractive Cognition ▶John
Pecham ▶Metaphysics ▶Parisian Condemnation of 1277
▶Siger of Brabant ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Voluntarism and
Intellectualism ▶Will
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Godfrey of Fontaines (1904–1937) Les Quodlibets de Godefroid de
Fontaines, ed. De Wulf M, Pelzer A, Hoffmans J, Lottin O. Institut
Supe´rieur de Philosophie de l’Universite´ de Louvain, Louvain
Godfrey of Fontaines. Quaestiones disputatae (1930–1981): some of them
have been edited either in whole or in part. For a list, see Wippel JF
(1981) The metaphysical thought of Godfrey of Fontaines. A study in
late thirteenth-century philosophy. Catholic University of America
Press, Washington, xxxi–xxxiii
Secondary Sources
Brown
SF
(1995)
Godfrey
of
Fontaines
and
Henry of
Ghent:
individuation
and the condemnations of 1277. In: Wlodek
S (ed) Socie´te´ et E´glise. Textes et discussions dans les Universite´s
d’Europe Centrale pendant le Moyen Age tardif. Brepols, Turnhout,
pp 193–207
Ce´leyrette J, Sole`re J-L (2002) Godefroid de Fontaines et la the´orie de la
succession dans l’intensiﬁcation des formes. In: Bakker PJJM et al
(eds) Chemins de la pense´e me´die´vale. E´tudes offertes a` Ze´non
Kaluza. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 79–112
Coˆte´ A (2007) L’objet et la cause de la connaissance selon Godefroid de
Fontaines. Freib Z Philos Theol 54:407–429
Duin J (1959) La bibliothe`que philosophique de Godefroid de Fontaines.
Estudios Lulianos 3:1–36, 137–160
Glorieux P (1931) Un recueil scolaire de Godefroid de Fontaines. Rech
The´ol Ancienne Me´die´v 3:37–53
Ko¨nig-Pralong C (2005) Ave`nement de l’aristote´lisme en terre chre´tienne.
L’essence et la matie`re: entre Thomas d’Aquin et Guillaume d’Ock-
ham. Vrin, Paris
Ko¨nig-Pralong C (2006) Eˆtre, essence et contingence. Henri de Gand,
Gilles de Rome, Godefroid de Fontaines. Les Belles Lettres, Paris
Lottin O (1937) Le libre arbitre chez Godefroid de Fontaines, Le
thomisme de Godefroid de Fontaines en matie`re de libre arbitre.
Rev Ne´oscolast Phil 40:213–241, 554–573
430 G
Godfrey of Fontaines

Marmursztejn E (2006) A normative power in the making. In: Schabel
C (ed) Theological quodlibeta in the Middle Ages: the thirteenth
century. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 345–402
Marmursztejn E (2007) L’autorite´ des maıˆtres. Scolastique, normes et
socie´te´ au XIIIe sie`cle. Les Belles Lettres, Paris
Putallaz FX (1995) Insolente liberte´. Controverses et condamnations au
XIIIe sie`cle. E´ditions Universitaires/E´ditions du Cerf, Fribourg/Paris
Sylla E (1981) Godfrey of Fontaines on motion with respect to quantity of
the Eucharist. In: Maieru` A, Paravicini A (eds) Studi sul XIV secolo in
memoria di Anneliese Maier. Storia e Letteratura, Roma, pp 105–141
Tihon P (1966) Foi et the´ologie selon Godefroid de Fontaines. Descle´e de
Brouwer, Paris/Bruges
Wippel JF (1981) The metaphysical thought of Godfrey of Fontaines.
A study in late thirteenth-century philosophy. Catholic University
of American Press, Washington
Wippel JF (1984) Possible sources for Godfrey of Fontaines’ views on the
act–potency composition of simple creatures. Mediaev Stud 46:222–
244
Wippel JF (2001) Godfrey of Fontaines at the University of Paris in the last
quarter of the thirteenth century. In: Aertsen JA, Emery K, Speer
A (eds) Nach der Verurteilung von 1277. Philosophie und Theologie
an der Universita¨t von Paris im letzten Viertel des 13. Jahrhunderts.
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 357–389
Wippel JF (2006a) Godfrey of Fontaines’ Quodlibet XIV on justice as
a general virtue: is it really a quodlibet? In: Shabel C (ed) Theological
quodlibeta in the Middle Ages. The thirteenth century. Brill, Leiden/
Boston, pp 287–344
Wippel JF (2006b) Godfrey of Fontaines on intelligible species. In:
Pacheco MC, Meirinhos JF (eds) Intellect et imagination dans la
philosophie me´die´vale. Actes du XIe Congre`s International de
Philosophie Me´die´vale de la SIEPM, vol II. Brepols, Turnhout, pp
1131–1141
Graeco-Arabic Doxographies
▶Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic
Greek Texts Translated into
Hebrew
MAURO ZONTA
Dipartimento di Studi Filosoﬁci ed Epistemologici
Universita` di Roma
Rome
Italy
Abstract
Only few Greek philosophical texts by Aristotle and by
some of his main interpreters were partially or totally
translated into Hebrew during the Middle Ages in Spain,
France, and Italy; all these translations were based upon
the previous Arabic and Latin ones. In the twelfth century,
part of chapter 1 of book I of Aristotle’s De anima was
translated from the Latin translatio vetus. Some transla-
tions were made in the thirteenth century, from the medi-
eval Arabic versions by Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q, H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯q,
Ish:a¯q ibn H˙ unayn, Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯, and ‘I¯sa¯ ibn Zur‘a.
Aristotle’s Meteorologica was translated by Samuel ibn
Tibbon; Themistius’ Paraphrase of book XII of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics, and Pseudo-Aristotle’s Problemata Physica,
were translated by Moses ibn Tibbon; Themistius’ Para-
phrase of Aristotle’s De caelo et mundo, and Aristotle’s De
generatione et corruptione and De anima, were translated
by Zerahyah Hen; Aristotle’s Historia animalium, De
partibus, and De generatione animalium were translated
from Michael Scot’s Arabic-into-Latin version. Other
translations were made in the fourteenth century, from
the Arabic versions by Eustatius, Ish:a¯q ibn H˙ unayn,
Tha¯bit ibn Qurra, and Naz˙ı¯f ibn Ayman. Aristotle’s Poste-
rior Analytics, Physics, and books I–X and XII of his
Metaphysics, as found in Averroes’ Long Commentaries
on them, were translated by Qalonymos ben Qalonymos;
Qalonymos also translated Nicolaus Damascenus’ De
plantis. Book I of Alexander of Aphrodisias’ De anima
was translated by Samuel of Marseilles; the De intellectu
ascribed to Alexander was translated as found in Averroes’
commentary on it; ‘‘Bryson’’’s Economics was translated by
David ibn Ya‘ish. All the translations of Aristotle or
Pseudo-Aristotle’s works made in the ﬁfteenth century
were based upon the medieval Latin versions by William
of Moerbeke, Durand of Alvernia, Leonardo Bruni, and
John Argiropoulos. They include the Nicomachean Ethics,
translated by Meir Alguadez; books I and III of the Eco-
nomics, translated by an anonymous scholar; books I–IV
of the Physics, translated and commented on by Judah
Messer Leon; books I–XII of the Metaphysics, translated
by
Baruch
ibn
Ya‘ish.
Baruch
also
translated
the
Nicomachean Ethics and the Economics, and might have
translated Aristotle’s De anima, as found in the Latin
version of Averroes’ Long Commentary on it.
In medieval Jewish thought, an important role was played
by two main currents of Ancient Greek philosophy:
Neoplatonism and Aristotelianism. However, the Jewish
approach to each of them appears to have been different.
Neoplatonism was mostly known to medieval Jewish
authors working in Islamic lands (Muslim Spain, Tunisia,
Egypt, and Iraq) through the medieval Arabo-Islamic
interpretations of it, as found in a number of ninth- and
tenth-century Arabic works: Pseudo-Aristotle’s Theology,
the Liber de causis, Pseudo-Empedocles’ Book of the Five
Greek Texts Translated into Hebrew G
431
G

Substances, and the Encyclopaedia of the Brethren of Purity.
Medieval Neoplatonic Jewish authors knew Arabic well, so
that they did not need Hebrew translations of these texts.
The case of Jewish Aristotelianism is different. In Spain,
France, and Italy a number of medieval Jewish philoso-
phers, working in the period 1150–1500, show to have
known Aristotle’s thought and doctrine. In reality, most
of them approached Aristotelian philosophy via Arabic
paraphrases and summaries of Aristotle; they particularly
employed those by Averroes, where Aristotle’s original
words were not literally reproduced, but ‘‘interpreted’’
and adapted by the Arabic philosopher to his own
thought. However, the knowledge of Arabic language
was not so diffused among European Jewish philosophers,
as it was among their colleagues living in Islamic lands; on
the other hand, not all of them seem to have known
medieval Latin language, into which the whole of
Aristotle’s works were translated during the thirteenth
century. They had to use the work of more or less profes-
sional Jewish translators, who rendered into Hebrew
a number of the extant philosophical Arabic texts; after
1400, some of them continued this translation work by
applying it to a number of medieval Latin texts. To sum
up, only few Greek philosophical texts, mostly by Aristotle
and some of his followers (Pseudo-Aristotle, Nicolaus
Damascenus, Alexander of Aphrodisias, Themistius),
were translated into Hebrew during the Middle Ages;
some of them are part of Averroes’ Long Commentaries,
where the original words of Aristotle were literally quoted
not in their original Greek text, but according to some
of their medieval Arabic translations. Also, a non-
Aristotelian Greek text, ascribed to the Neoplatonic
author Bryson, was translated into Hebrew. A ﬁrst list
and partial examination of the characters of these trans-
lations was made at the end of the nineteenth century
(Steinschneider 1893:42–275); a tentative historical sketch
of them was made at the end of the twentieth century
(Zonta 1996a), mostly on the basis of the critical editions
of some of them.
Probably, the ﬁrst Greek philosophical text translated
into Hebrew included the ﬁrst paragraphs of Aristotle’s De
anima, book I, chapter 1 (402a1–403a2). This short pas-
sage was put at the beginning of an anonymous Latin-
into-Hebrew translation of Dominicus Gundissalinus’ De
anima; since it covers a series of questions about man’s
soul, the translator probably inserted it in order to intro-
duce some of the themes discussed in Gundissalinus’
work. This partial translation, extant in a unique manu-
script, was probably made in Spain, maybe in Catalogna
(Teicher 1956:409–414). It was allegedly based upon
a medieval Greek-into-Latin translation even older than
found in the so-called old translation (translatio vetus) of
the De anima; but from an attentive analysis, it seems to
depend on the latter instead (Zonta 1996a:193–195). Since
the ‘‘old translation’’ was made around 1150, this Hebrew
version should be put after that date, possibly at the end of
the twelfth century.
The ﬁrst complete, albeit not yet literal translation of
a Greek philosophical–scientiﬁc text into Hebrew, based
upon an Arabic version, was made at the beginning of the
thirteenth century by one of the main medieval Arabic-
into-Hebrew translators: Samuel ibn Tibbon. A well-
known Provenc¸al Jewish philosopher of Spanish origin,
Samuel wrote his version of Aristotle’s Meteorologica
while he was sailing the Mediterranean Sea, in 1210; it
was published in a very accurate critical edition, based
upon ﬁve or six of the many extant manuscripts and
upon a comparison of the medieval Arabic and Latin
versions of Aristotle’s work, and translated into English
(Fontaine 1995). Samuel’s version is not a mere transla-
tion of Aristotle’s work. He states in the introduction to it
that he began to base it upon the early-ninth-century
Arabic version by Yah:ya¯ ibn al-Bit:rı¯q, which is still extant;
however, he found Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q’s version so confused,
that he decided to correct it by consulting a number of
manuscripts of it, as well as a lost Arabic translation of
Alexander of Aphrodisias’ Greek commentary on the
Meteorologica (second century). As shown by a detailed
analysis (Fontaine 1995:lxii–lxxi), Samuel interpreted and
commented on some passages of Aristotle’s work by refer-
ring not only to Alexander (whose Greek original is still
extant), but also to Avicenna’s part 5 of the section on
the Physics of his The Cure (al-Shifa¯’), to Averroes’
Middle Commentary on the Meteorologica, and to another
unidentiﬁed Arabic source. The textual transmission of
Samuel ibn Tibbon’s version appears to be rather intricate:
he might have written a ﬁrst ‘‘rough’’ version of his work
(a sort of ‘‘working-copy’’), but he might have also revised
his translation after having copied and diffused it among
scholars (Fontaine 1995:xxi–xxviii).
A more literal, less ‘‘interpreted’’ version of a Greek
philosophical text was made some decades after by
another member of the Ibn Tibbons family: Moses ibn
Tibbon, Samuel’s son, who worked in Provence as
a philosopher and a translator of philosophical and scien-
tiﬁc works in the period 1240–1283 c. In 1255, he trans-
lated into Hebrew, from the Arabic version by Ish:a¯q ibn
H˙ unayn, the Paraphrase of book XII (lambda) of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics by the Greek rhetor and philoso-
pher Themistius (317–388). Themistius’ work includes
a nonliteral reworking of the contents of Aristotle’s,
according to a Neoplatonic interpretation of them; the
432 G
Greek Texts Translated into Hebrew

original Greek text is lost, but the Arabic version of it is
still extant. Moses ibn Tibbon’s translation is preserved by
a number of manuscripts, and was published in a critical
edition (Landauer 1903). A sixteenth-century Latin ver-
sion of this translation, made by Moses Finzi, was ﬁrst
published in 1558; however, the best modern version of
Themistius’ text as found in Arabic and Hebrew, which is
based upon a tentative reconstruction of the contents of
the original text, appeared in French (Themistius 1999).
Moses ibn Tibbon also translated into Hebrew part of
another Greek philosophical work: Pseudo-Aristotle’s
Physical Problems (Problemata physica). His literal trans-
lation was made in 1264 from the ninth-century Arabic
version by H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯q. This Arabic version, which is
still extant, is not directly based upon the original text,
but rather upon a later Greek revision of it, surely made
after the end of the second century, maybe at the sixth-
century by the Alexandrian school of Aristotle’s inter-
preters. The Hebrew version covers only the ﬁrst 4 of the
17 books of the Arabic text; it is found in three manu-
scripts, and was published in a critical edition (Filius
1999:663–793).
Zerahyah ben Isaac ben Shealtiel Hen was a Jewish
philosopher and translator of philosophical and medical
works from Arabic into Hebrew; he was from Barcelona,
but worked in Rome in the period 1275–1290 c. He had
a rather good knowledge of Arabic, a language that was
almost unknown among Jews in Rome; for Roman Jews
he wrote a number of translations, including those of
some Greek-into-Arabic versions of Ancient philosophical
works. His translations are usually literal, but are often
marred by mistakes or omissions: he seems to have written
many of them in the same period, possibly in a hurry.
Some of Zerahyah’s versions probably aimed at creating
a sort of Corpus Aristotelicum Hebraicum, a collection
of works by and about Aristotle, which should have
been a Jewish parallel to the Latin Corpus (Zonta
1996a:222–225). According to what Zerahyah states in
a passage of his Corpus, he ﬁnished these versions in
Rome in 1284; they included three important Greek phil-
osophical works. The ﬁrst and most interesting of them is
Themistius’ Paraphrase of Aristotle’s De caelo et mundo.
Zerahyah’s translation of Themistius’ work is very pre-
cious for the knowledge of it, since the text is lost both
in its Greek original, and in its medieval Arabic version,
apparently made by Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯, and no trace of
another translation of it (in Syriac, or in medieval Latin)
is extant. The Hebrew translation is preserved in four
manuscripts. Two of them, dating back to the ﬁfteenth
century, were employed for the ﬁrst edition of the work
(Landauer 1902); however, the editor failed to notice the
existence of the other two manuscripts. The most ancient
of them, probably copied in Rome in 1284 and now in
Florence (Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, II.II.528), is
surely the archetype of the textual tradition of the work,
and should be employed for preparing a new critical
edition of Themistius’ Paraphrase (Zonta 1994a). As
a matter of fact, also the partially reworked Latin transla-
tion of the text, made by Moses Alatino in 1568–1573, was
apparently based upon this archetype.
Probably immediately after Themistius’ Paraphrase,
Zerahyah
translated
Aristotle’s
De
generatione
et
corruptione. Here, the original Greek text is obviously
extant; however, Zerahyah’s translation is useful for the
reconstruction
of
the
medieval
Arabic
version
of
Aristotle’s work. In fact, the original text of this Arabic
version, probably made (according to Zerahyah’s own
statement) by Ish:a¯q ibn H˙ unayn, is lost; its terminology
and textual variants can be reconstructed both from
Zerahyah’s translation,
and from another medieval
translation of it: the Latin version by Gerard of Cremona
(1175 circa). Something similar happens as for Zerahyah’s
translation of Aristotle’s De anima: he rendered into
Hebrew the ﬁrst two books and chapters 1–7 of book III
from Ish:a¯q ibn H˙ unayn’s lost Greek-into-Arabic version,
made before 910, and chapters 7–13 of book III from
another lost Greek-into-Arabic version, by Abu¯ ‘Alı¯ ‘I¯sa¯
ibn Zur‘a (943–1008). Both translations by Zerahyah were
published in critical editions (Tessier 1984; Bos 1994) on
the basis of two extant manuscripts, found in London and
in Rome and copied in Italy during the ﬁfteenth century.
However, both editors failed to notice the existence of
a third manuscript, found in Jerusalem (National Library
of Israel, 4 1108): the text of it, probably copied in the ﬁrst
quarter of the ﬁfteenth century, is clearly independent
from that of the other ones, and might be employed for
correcting some points of them (Zonta 2007:379).
Another important work by Aristotle was rendered
into Hebrew, possibly in the same period when Zerahyah
worked on his own translations: Aristotle’s Book on Ani-
mals (Liber de animalibus). This was the name given by the
medieval Latin tradition to the collection of the three
main zoological works written by the Greek philosopher:
the Historia animalium, the De partibus animalium, and
the De generatione animalium, covering 19 books as
a whole. The Book on Animals was translated into Hebrew
neither from the Greek original text, nor from the Arabic
translation ascribed to Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q, but from the Latin
version of the latter, made by Michael Scot in southern
Italy around 1220. The Hebrew translation was apparently
made by a certain Samuel ha-Levi in an unknown date.
It is preserved in four manuscripts, one of which (found in
Greek Texts Translated into Hebrew G
433
G

London, British Library) appears to be the oldest, and
probably also the most faithful one: it was written down
at the end of the thirteenth century, in Sephardic script,
but it includes some glosses in a northern French dialect
(Furlani 1922:255–256). This fact would suggest that the
translator was not Samuel ha-Levi Abulaﬁa, who rendered
from Castilian into Hebrew some scientiﬁcal text around
1275, but another Hebrew scholar, having the same name
but working in northern France. Since the translation was
clearly employed as a source in Gershom ben Solomon’s
encyclopedia, The Gate of Heavens (1275–1300 circa), its
possible date should be probably put not much before
1300 (Zonta 1996a:195–196, 1999:48–52).
A number of Arabic-into-Hebrew translations of Greek
philosophical works were made by a well-known Jewish
translator: Qalonymos ben Qalonymos of Arles (born
around 1287 – died after 1328). He worked in Provence in
the period 1307–1320 circa, and his translations covered
many texts; some of them were made in a hurry, and were
later corrected by other scholars – or even by Qalonymos
himself – according to a reexamination of the Arabic text.
In 1314, Qalonymos translated Nicolaus Damascenus’ Book
on Plants (De plantis) from the Arabic translation by Ish:a¯q
ibn H˙ unayn and Tha¯bit ibn Qurra. Qalonymos’ transla-
tion, found in some manuscripts, was published in
a
critical
edition (Drossaart
Lulofs and Poortman
1989:407–436); however, it appears to be not very useful
for the reconstruction of the lost Greek original text, since
the latter is partially or totally transmitted through
a number of other versions (into Syriac, Arabic, Latin,
and even medieval Greek). The Spanish philosopher
Shem Tov ibn Falaquera (1225–1295 circa), who knew
and quoted some Greek philosophical texts in his own
works (Zonta 2004), inserted into book IV of his own
philosophical encyclopedia, The Opinions of the Philoso-
phers, many passages from an otherwise unknown Alex-
andrian Summary (Summa Alexandrinorum) of Nicolaus’
Book on Plants, which he himself translated from Arabic
into Hebrew (Drossaart Lulofs and Poortman 1989:388–
405; see also Zonta 1993:337–340); however, this ‘‘sum-
mary’’ might be ‘I¯sa¯ ibn Zur‘a’s compendium of the Arabic
translation of Nicolaus’ work.
In other cases, Qalonymos made an Arabic-into-
Hebrew version of a Greek philosophical text from
Averroes’ Long Commentary on it: in a Long Commentary,
the Arabic translation of the Greek original text is divided
into a number of passages, and each of these passages is
commented on by Averroes himself in detail. By this way,
Qalonymos translated three Aristotle’s works: the Posterior
Analytics, the Physics, and the Metaphysics. Averroes’ Long
Commentary on the Posterior Analytics was translated by
Qalonymos at the end of 1314 (Steinschneider 1893:95–
96): it includes both books of the commentary, so being
very useful for the reconstruction of the text of Averroes’
commentary on book II, which is lost in Arabic and is
preserved by a medieval Latin translation only. (Its utility
for the textual history of the still extant Arabic translation
of the Posterior Analytics, by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus,
has not yet been examined.) Around 1315, Qalonymos
also translated Averroes’ Long Commentary on the Physics
(Steinschneider 1893:122–123). His version included
Ish:a¯q ibn H˙ unayn’s still extant Arabic translation of
Aristotle’s text, and Averroes’ commentary on it, which is
lost in its original text and is otherwise known in
a medieval Latin translation. Possibly in the same period,
Qalonymos might have translated Averroes’ Long Com-
mentary on the Metaphysics: this translation was ﬁrst
edited and then totally revised by Moses ben Solomon of
Salon, possibly a pupil of Qalonymos (Zonta 1996a:243).
Averroes’ commentary covers only books I–X and XII of
Aristotle’s work. However, it is really important for the
textual reconstruction of the Arabic transmission of
the Metaphysics, since it is the only one extant witness of
the medieval Arabic translations of some parts of it: that
of book I, by Ish:a¯q ibn H˙ unayn, that of book II, by Naz˙ı¯f
ibn Ayman, and that of books III–X and XII, mostly by
Eustathius.
(Moreover,
the
original
Arabic
text
of
Averroes’ Long Commentary is transmitted by only one
manuscript, where some parts of the text are missing,
so that the Hebrew versions by Qalonymos and Moses of
Salon, together with the medieval Latin version, have been
very usefully employed for reconstructing and editing the
whole text of Averroes’ work: Averroe`s, 1938–1952.)
Another important case of an Arabic-into-Hebrew
translation of a Greek philosophical work made in Pro-
vence is that of Alexander of Aphrodisias’ Book on the Soul
(De anima). This translation was based upon Ish:a¯q ibn
H˙ unayn’s medieval Arabic version, which is now lost; it
covers only book I of the whole work, and was made by
a contemporary of Qalonymos ben Qalonymos: Samuel
ben Judah of Marseilles. Samuel stated in the introduction
to his own translation (Berman 1978:317–320) that he had
written a ﬁrst version of this work while he was in Murcia
(Spain), in 1323, but revised this version later, while he
was in Monte´limar (Provence), in 1340. This revised ver-
sion, preserved in three manuscripts, is not yet published
(apart from an initial passage: Gu¨nsz 1886). However, it
was employed for the critical edition of the Greek text of
Alexander’s work (Bruns 1887), published in the series
Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca, whose apparatus
includes a number of references to the variant readings
found in the relevant passages of Samuel’s translation
434 G
Greek Texts Translated into Hebrew

(rendered into German). Samuel of Marseilles might have
been the Arabic-into-Hebrew translator of another work,
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Long Commentary on Aristotle’s Categories:
a number of shorter or longer passages of an anonymous
translation of this work, whose original Arabic text is lost,
are found in the unique manuscript of a work by a late-
medieval Jewish philosopher, Judah ben Isaac Cohen, and
were published and translated into English (Zonta 2006c).
Probably in the same period and in the same geographical
area, another short work ascribed to Alexander of
Aphrodisias was translated from Arabic into Hebrew: the
De intellectu. This text was rendered into Hebrew as
included into an Arabic commentary on it, Averroes’
Commentary on Alexander of Aphrodisias’ On the Intellect,
which was based upon Ish:a¯q ibn H˙ unayn’s Greek-into-
Arabic version. Averroes’ work is transmitted by two ways.
An incomplete copy of the original Arabic text, still extant
in a Judeo-Arabic work by the Spanish Jewish philosopher
Joseph ibn Waqqar (1360 c.) and translated into Hebrew,
was published in a noncritical edition (Zonta 2001a).
Another, direct Hebrew translation of the Arabic text of
Averroes’ work, covering only the ﬁrst part of it, was
probably made before 1340 and appeared in a critical
edition (Davidson 1988); this translation was commented
on by the Provenc¸al Jewish philosopher Moses Narboni,
who might have ordered it or even made it by himself.
After 1350, only one Greek philosophical text was ren-
dered into Hebrew from its Arabic version: a short book
on the administration of the house, the Economics,
ascribed to the Greek philosopher Bryson. The original
text of ‘‘Bryson’’’s work is lost, but its contents are pre-
served in some different medieval Arabic and Latin ver-
sions. One of these anonymous Arabic versions was
translated into Hebrew by David ben Solomon ibn
Ya‘ish, a member of a famous family of Spanish Jewish
physicians and scholars, who wrote it in Sevilla around
1375; Ibn Ya‘ish’s Arabic-into-Hebrew translation, which
is really very useful for reconstructing the lost original text
of ‘‘Bryson’’’s work, was published in a critical edition
(Plessner 1928:145–203).
In the ﬁfteenth century, Arabic was no more the main
and most important language of philosophy and science
among European Jewish thinkers; a number of them, not
only in Italy but also in Spain, read and employed medieval
Latin texts instead. Therefore, some translations of Greek
philosophical texts by Aristotle or ascribed to him, many of
which were still ignored or almost neglected by Jewish
philosophers, were made in this period. These translations
were not based upon their Greek-into-Arabic versions, as
most of the previous ones, but were made from the medi-
eval Greek-into-Latin or Arabic-into-Latin ones. Around
1400, a Jewish physician of the king of Castile, Meir
Alguadez, translated into Hebrew Aristotle’s Nicomachean
Ethics for another Jewish scholar, Benveniste ibn Labi. In
his
introduction
to
the
translation
(Steinschneider
1893:210–212), he states to have based it upon a Latin
version, since the extant Arabic version of the work,
already translated into Hebrew (in reality, Averroes’ Mid-
dle Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics), was full of
mistakes and alterations; he allegedly consulted also medi-
eval Latin commentaries on Aristotle’s work. Alguadez
ascribes the Latin version he employed for his own trans-
lation to Boethius; in reality, a philologic–terminological
analysis of Alguadez’s version (Rothschild 1993:697–698)
shows that it was based upon the medieval Greek-into-
Latin translation by Robert of Lincoln (d. 1253), as revised
by William of Moerbeke around 1260–1270. Alguadez’s
Latin-into-Hebrew translation is found in a number of
manuscripts; it was published in a noncritical edition,
accompanied by a commentary, at the end of the eigh-
teenth century (Satanow 1790). Another Latin-into-
Hebrew translation of the Nicomachean Ethics was made
later, by a Jewish philosopher and translator working in
Castile or in southern Italy from 1460 (or 1480) to 1490 c.:
Baruch ibn Ya‘ish. The latter translation is preserved in only
one manuscript, found in Hamburg; the analysis of some
key-passages of it has shown that it was based upon two
ﬁfteenth-century Greek-into-Latin versions of Aristotle’s
work, both of which were made in Italy: that by Leonardo
Bruni of Arezzo, written in 1416–1420, and that by John
Argiropoulos, going back to the period 1456–1470 (Zonta
1996a:273–274). Ibn Ya‘ish’s translation was employed by
Samuel Altortos, a pupil of him, for writing down
a commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics, apparently
based upon Ibn Ya‘ish’s own interpretation of Aristotle’s
words (Zonta 2006c:111, 119–120).
In
his
above-mentioned
introduction
to
the
Nicomachean Ethics, Alguadez wrote that he intended to
translate also Aristotle’s Economics and Politics. In reality,
although no Hebrew translation of Aristotle’s Politics is
extant, there were at least two anonymous, partial Latin-
into-Hebrew translations of the Economics falsely ascribed
to Aristotle (Zonta 1996a:260–262, 274, b). Both of them
include only book I and III of the work, about household
and about the importance of having a good wife. The older
translation, made before 1440 circa, is found in a number of
manuscripts; in some of them, it includes an introduction,
ascribed to a certain ‘‘Abraham ibn Tibbon,’’ where it is
stated that this work was based upon the original Greek
text. The name of the translator appears to be ﬁctitious, and
was probably added by a later copyist for giving more value
to the translation; the real translator might have been
Greek Texts Translated into Hebrew G
435
G

a Spanish Jew (maybe the Castilian Jewish philosopher
Joseph ibn Shem Tov, died around 1460). This translation
was based upon the Latin version of the Economics by
Durand of Alvernia, made in Anagni near Rome in
1295, and was revised according to the commentary on
Pseudo-Aristotle’s Economics by Leonardo Bruni (1420–
1421). Bruni himself retranslated books I and III of the
Economics into Latin: this version was employed by
another anonymous Jewish author (probably, Baruch ibn
Ya‘ish) for writing a new Latin-into-Hebrew translation of
the pseudo-Aristotelian work, found in one manuscript
(Zonta 2006c:112).
Baruch ibn Ya‘ish translated into Hebrew another
work by Aristotle: books I–XII of the Metaphysics. Baruch
based this translation, written around 1485 for Samuel
Sarfati, upon the thirteenth-century Greek-into-Latin
version
by
William
of
Moerbeke
(Steinschneider
1893:157–158). This translation, preserved in some man-
uscripts, includes a long introduction by the translator:
here, Baruch states that he made this work, since the
previous Hebrew translation of the Metaphysics, based
upon the Greek-into-Arabic version (found in Averroes’
Long Commentary), was so altered with respect to the
original Greek text, that not only its words, but even its
contents were substantially different from those found in
Aristotle’s work. Another work, including an Aristotelian
text, might have been translated from the Latin by
Baruch ibn Ya‘ish: Averroes’ Long Commentary on
Aristotle’s De anima. An anonymous Hebrew translation
of it, based upon the medieval Latin version ascribed to
Michael Scot (ﬁrst half of the thirteenth century), was
made before 1470 circa, and is extant in four manuscripts.
Very probably, the same translator rendered into Hebrew
a Latin Scholastic work, John of Jandun’s Quaestiones in
De anima (Zonta 1994b; see also Zonta 2006c:113–114);
according to a hypothesis that has not yet been conﬁrmed
by sure proofs, this translator was Baruch ibn Ya‘ish
(Wolfson 1963:100–104).
Also the ﬁrst half of Aristotle’s Physics was translated
from Latin into Hebrew in the second half of the ﬁfteenth
century, and a great part of this translation is still extant.
According to David Messer Leon, his father Judah Messer
Leon wrote a very big commentary on books I–IV of the
Physics while he was in Mantua (1473–1475); in this
work, he reproduced and commented on not only
Averroes’ Long and Middle Commentaries on the Physics,
but also the ‘‘Christian text’’ (in Hebrew: ha-nusha’ ha-
nozrit) of Aristotle’s work. The original text of books I–III
of Messer Leon’s commentary was found in three manu-
scripts (two in Milan and one in Cambridge: Zonta
2001b); two more manuscripts (copied from the above
ones) were found in Budapest and in Moscow (Zonta
2006c, 142 notes 24–25), while the text of book IV seems
to be missing. From a philological examination of the
text as found in the ﬁve extant manuscripts, it is clear that
the above-mentioned ‘‘Christian text’’ employed by
Judah Messer Leon was a Hebrew translation of books
I–IV of the Physics as found in the medieval Greek-into-
Latin version by William of Moerbeke. Probably, the trans-
lator of Moerbeke’s version was Messer Leon himself, who
knew very well both Latin language and Latin texts about
the Physics (Zonta 2006c:214–280), and was a very impor-
tant
member
of
the
ﬁfteenth-century
‘‘Hebrew
Scholasticism.’’
See also: ▶Alexander of Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristote-
lianism ▶Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy
▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Arabic Philosophical Texts, Jewish
Translations of ▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Trans-
lations of ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r
▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶Plato, Arabic ▶Porphyry, Arabic ▶Tha¯bit ibn Qurra
▶Themistius, Arabic ▶Translations from Greek into
Arabic ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Averroe`s (1938–1952) Tafsir ma ba‘d at-tabi‘at (Grand Commentaire de la
Me´taphysique), Notice + 3 vols, ed. Bouyges M. Dar al-Machreq,
Beirut
Bos Gerrit (1994) Aristotle’s De anima translated into Hebrew by
Zerahyah ben Isaac ben Shealtiel Hen. Brill, Leiden
Bruns Ivo (1887) Alexander Aphrodisiensis liber De anima cum mantissa.
G. Reimer, Berlin
Davidson Herbert (1988) Averroes’ commentary on Alexander of
Aphrodisias’ Treatise On the Intellect (in Hebrew). Jerus Stud Jew
Thought 7:205–217
Drossaart Lulofs Hendrik J, Poortman ELJ (1989) Nicolaus Damascenus
De plantis, ﬁve translations. North Holland, Amsterdam
Filius Lourus S (1999) The Problemata physica attributed to Aristotle.
The Arabic version of Hunain ibn Ishaq and the Hebrew version of
Moses Ibn Tibbon. Brill, Leiden
Fontaine Resianne (1995) Otot ha-shamayim. Samuel Ibn Tibbon’s
Hebrew version of Aristotle’s meteorology. Brill, Leiden
Gu¨nsz Aron (1886) Die Abhandlung Alexanders von Aphrodisias u¨ber
den Intellekt. H. Itzkowski, Berlin
Landauer Samuel (1902) Themistii in libros Aristotelis De caelo
paraphrasis hebraice et latine. G. Reimer, Berlin
Landauer Samuel (1903) Themistii in Aristotelis Metaphysicorum librum
L paraphrasis hebraice et latine. G. Reimer, Berlin
Plessner Martin (1928) Der OIKONOMIKOS der Neupythagora¨ers
Bryson und sein Einﬂuss auf die islamiche Wissenschaft. Winter,
Heidelberg
Satanow Isaac (1790) Sefer ha-middot le-Aristoteles. Orientalische
Buchdruckerey, Berlin
436 G
Greek Texts Translated into Hebrew

Tessier Andrea (1984) La traduzione arabo-ebraica del De generatione et
corruptione di Aristotele. Atti dell’Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei.
Memorie della Classe di Scienze Morali VIII(28):5–122
Themistius (1999) Paraphrase de la me´taphysique d’Aristote, livre Lamda
(trans: Brague R). J. Vrin, Paris
Zonta Mauro (2001a) La tradizione giudeo-araba ed ebraica del De
intellectu di Alessandro di Afrodisia e il testo originale del
Commento di Averroe`. Annali di Ca’ Foscari 40(s.or. 32):17–35
Zonta Mauro (2006a) Al-Farabi’s Long Commentary on Aristotle’s
Categoriae in Hebrew and Arabic: a critical edition and English
translation of the newly-found extant fragments. Studies in Arabic
and Islamic culture, vol II, ed. Abrahamov B. Bar-Ilan University
Press, Ramat-Gan, pp 185–254
Zonta Mauro (2006b) Hebrew scholasticism in the ﬁfteenth century.
A history and source book. Springer, Dordrecht
Secondary Sources
Berman LV (1978) Ibn Rushd’s middle commentary on the Nicomachean
ethics in medieval Hebrew literature. Multiple Averroe`s, ed. Jolivet J.
Les Belles Lettres, Paris, pp 287–321
Furlani G (1922) Le antiche versioni araba, latina ed ebraica del De partibus
animalium di Aristotele. Rivista degli studi orientali 9:237–257
Rothschild J-P (1993) Du latin a` l’hebreu: quelques proble`mes pose´s par
des traductions me´die´vales. Rashi (1040–1990). Hommage a`
Ephraı¨m E. Urbach, ed. Sed-Rajna G. Cerf, Paris, pp 695–712
Steinschneider
M
(1893)
Die
hebraeischen
U¨ bersetzungen
des
Mittelalters und die Juden als Dolmetscher. Kommissionsverlag des
Bibliographischen Bureaus, Berlin
Teicher J (1956) The Latin–Hebrew school of translators in Spain in the
twelfth century. In: Homenaje a Millas-Vallicrosa, vol II. Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Cientiﬁcas, Barcelona, pp 403–444
Wolfson HA (1963) Revised plan for the publication of a Corpus
commentariorum Averrois in Aristotelem. Speculum 38:88–104
Zonta M (1993) Shem Tob Ibn Falaquera e la ﬁlologia ebraica medievale.
Sefarad 53:321–343
Zonta M (1994a) Hebraica Veritas: Temistio, Parafrasi del De coelo.
Tradizione e critica del testo. Athenaeum 82:403–428
Zonta M (1994b) Osservazioni sulla tradizione ebraica del Commento
grande di Averroe` al De anima di Aristotele. Annali di Ca’ Foscari
33(s.or. 25):15–28
Zonta M (1996a) La ﬁlosoﬁa antica nel Medioevo ebraico. Paideia, Brescia
Zonta M (1996b) La tradizione ebraica degli scritti economici greci.
Athenaeum 84:549–554
Zonta M (1999) The zoological writings in the Hebrew tradition.
Aristotle’s animals in the Middle Ages and Renaissance, ed. Steel C,
Guldentops G, Beullens P. Leuven University Press, Leuven, pp 44–68
Zonta M (2001) Aristotle’s physics in late–medieval Jewish philosophy
(14th–15th century) and a newly-identiﬁed commentary by Yehudah
Messer Leon. Micrologus 9:203–217
Zonta M (2004) Hebrew transmission of Arabic philosophy and science:
a reconstruction of Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera’s Arabic Library.
L’interculturalita` dell’Ebraismo, ed. Perani M. Longo, Ravenna,
pp 121–137
Zonta M (2006c) The knowledge of Latin philosophical literature among
Jewish philosophers in 15th century Italy. Scholastic sources in
Yehudah Messer Leon’s commentary on Aristotle’s Physics. Hebrew
to Latin, Latin to Hebrew. The mirroring of two cultures in the age of
humanism, ed. Busi G. Institut fu¨r Judaistik/Nino Aragno Editore,
Berlin/Turin, pp 133–166
Zonta M (2007) La tradizione medievale arabo-ebraica delle opere di
Aristotele: stato della ricerca. Elenchos 28:369–387
Gregoras, Nikephoros
▶Nikephoros Gregoras
Gregory Akindynos
GEORGI KAPRIEV
Faculty of Philosophy
Soﬁa University St. Kliment Ochridski
Soﬁa
Bulgaria
Abstract
Gregory Akindynos (1300–1348) is one of the most
important ﬁgures during the ﬁrst phase of the hesychastic
controversy
in
Byzantium.
Practicing
himself
the
hesychastic way of life, he attacked the main thesis of
Palamas, who differentiates natural and creative energy
of God in connection with Creation. He does not deny
the essential uncreated energy of God, but he considers it
identical to the divine essence itself. This energy is
embraced by the creative energies of God. Akindynos’
teaching is entirely christological. According to him,
there can be no other access to Divinity except for Christ
and the practicing of supernatural love, called forth by the
sacramental participation. In order to prove his theses,
Akindynos develops a precise hermeneutic teaching
concerning the works of the Christian Fathers.
Biography
Gregory Akindynos was born about 1300 in Prilapos
(Prilep). Gregory is his monastic name and Akindynos
(faultless, trustworthy) is a byname. He received his
education in Thessaloniki, studying predominantly rhe-
toric, ancient philosophy, and Christian Literature.
Among his teachers, one could mention Gregory
Bryennios and Thomas Magistros. Toward the 20s, he
became acquainted with Gregory Palamas. Akindynos
visited him after 1331 on the Athos and wanted to be
introduced by him in the spiritual practice. In 1332, he
moved once again to Thessaloniki, but after 1333, he
stayed more often in Constantinople. In Thessaloniki,
he met Barlaam of Calabria but did not become his
student. In 1336, Palamas sent to Akindynos, who
already knew the ﬁrst version of Palamas’ Apodeictic
Treatises (1334), a letter in which he criticizes the syllogis-
tic doctrine of Barlaam in his anti-Latin treatises. In regard
Gregory Akindynos G
437
G

to the problem of the possibility of an apodeictic syllogism
concerning God, Akindynos defends the view of Palamas
and rejects Barlaam’s radical apophantics. Until 1341, he,
himself practicing the hesychastic way of life (but not the
psychosomatic technique), played the role of a mediator
between Palamas and Barlaam. In the course of time, he
got closer to the patriarch John XIV Kalekas and to the
princess Irene Choumnena Paleologina, who supported
him as her spiritual father. Akindynos, who acted mean-
while as the leader of one of the four main spiritual trends
in Constantinople at the time, criticized in 1340 Barlaam’s
treatise Against the Messalians by attacking his view on
the hesychastic prayer technique and on the Light of
Transﬁguration. He wrote ﬁve books altogether against
Barlaam. This is the reason why he was indignant at his
being made equal with Barlaam by the Council in July
1341, although the ﬁrst doubt in him about the Palamite
theology was already casted. During the Civil war,
Akindynos carried out intense anti-Palamite activity.
From that time, most of his texts are against Palamas,
his Antirrhetika being the main work. In 1347 a,
Council explicitly condemned his doctrine, and John
Cantacuzenos sent him into exile. Akindynos died before
May 1348. In fact, he was anathematized only after his
death by the Palamite molded Council of May 27, 1351,
and his name was entered in the Synodicon of Orthodoxy
among the heretics.
The Doctrine
The activity of Akindynos is connected to the con-
troversies of the time. He refutes the main thesis of
Palamas who distinguishes, with regard to creation, one
natural and one creative energy of God. According to
Akindynos’ critical account, this thesis points to an
objective and real division of God in essence and ener-
gies, introduces multiplicity in the simplicity of divine
nature and, moreover, establishes a mediator between
God and creation.
Akindynos himself differentiates between two uses
of the term ‘‘energy.’’ ‘‘Energy’’ in its improper sense
denotes the natural qualities of God, which are identical
with
the
indivisible
divine
essence.
This
highest
‘‘energy’’ is uncreated and not shared in, absolutely
inaccessible and indeed invisible. ‘‘Energy’’ in its proper
sense is used for the Charismata, Gifts, and the other
creations of God, which are created for our good. This
created energy is the visible action by which God’s deeds
are expressed. Unlike Barlaam, Akindynos does not deny
the presence of the uncreated energies within creation.
But the created grace is the bearer of the uncreated one,
which enables the deiﬁcation of man, i.e., the realization
of the uncreated grace. The deiﬁcation takes place,
thanks to the Incarnation of the divine Logos. The
teaching
of
Akindynos
is
entirely
christological.
According to him there can be no other access to divin-
ity except for Christ, the sacraments and the practicing
of supernatural love, called forth by the sacramental
participation.
Akindynos does not reject the opportunity for man to
participate in God, but he insists that the mystery of God
and his actions are not intelligible. God can be partaken of
only in the way the center of a circle is shared by all radii
and the circumference of the circle; these do proceed from
the center of the circle, without coinciding with it or
comprising it completely. Here no distinction is presumed
between essence and energies. It should be also noticed
that by the different beings God is partaken of in
a different way, depending on the potential of their
essence. This fact would remain completely unexplicable,
Akindynos argues, if we had to do with a participation in
the eternal divine essence, whereby it would necessarily be
an eternal participation of the creature in God. Thus the
created would be coeternal with the Creator.
The actual participation in God is not accomplished
in the ﬁeld of the essential being. It is likening to
God through uniﬁcation with Him within divine love.
The participation in God is neither essential identity, nor
a possession of a common energy, but an interpersonal
community
of
love.
Love
is
characterized
as
an
‘‘uninhabited relation.’’ A decisive peculiarity of this rela-
tion is the metaphysical gap between the loving and
the loved. Within the relation of love takes place the
union of man and God and exactly in it occurs the deiﬁ-
cation of man.
Akindynos does not accept the negative syllogistic of
Barlaam. He claims that his own theses are based entirely
on the tradition of the Fathers and their adequate inter-
pretation. The authenticity is said to be the decisive
criterion for the truth of the theological statements.
Akindynos’ argumentation relies fundamentally on liter-
ary critics, which is applied in terms of a scrupulous
hermeneutic. Тhe basic principle here is studying the
language of the Fathers and separating the polemical,
metaphorical, and analogical expressions from the prop-
erly dogmatic statements. From that point of view is raised
the requirement for taking also into consideration the
spiritual context, in which the given text appeared, as
well as the intertextual connections in which the concrete
statement is made. Akindynos aims to show that Palamas
uses the statements of the Fathers incorrectly, with no
438 G
Gregory Akindynos

consideration for their own context, undertaking arbitrary
abbreviations and even additions. Besides, Akindynos
claims that Palamas did not comprehend the symbolic
character of the theological discourse and its symbolic
ﬁgures.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Barlaam of Calabria
▶Demetrios Kydones ▶Gregory Palamas ▶Metaphysics,
Byzantine ▶Nicholas Chamae¨tos Kabasilas ▶Nikephoros
Gregoras ▶Philosophical Theology, Byzantine ▶Philos-
ophy, Byzantine ▶Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
▶Thomism, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1959) La Confesio´n de fe antipalamı´tica de Gregorio Acı´ndyno, ed.
Candal M. In: Orientalia christiana periodica, 25. pp 215–264
(1983) Letters of Gregory Akindynos (Greek text and English translation),
ed. Hero AC. Corpus fontium historiae Byzantinae 21. Dumbarton
Oaks Center for Byzantine Studies, Washington
(1995) Gregorii Acindyni refutationes duae operis Gregorii Palamae cui
titulus dialogus inter orthodoxum et Barlaamitam, ed. Nadal
Can˜ellas J. Corpus Christianorum: Series Graeca 31. Brepols,
Turnhout
Akı´ndyno Gregorio (2002) Discurso ante Juan Kalekas (Greek text and
Catalunian translation), ed. Nadal Can˜ellas J. In: Conticello CG,
Conticello V (eds) La the´ologie byzantine et sa tradition, vol 2.
Brepols, Turnhout, pp 258–284
Pitsakes K (1972) Gregoriou Akindunou anekdoti pragmateia peri
(Konstantinou;) Armenopoulou. EKEID 19:188–206
Secondary Sources
Boiadjiev T (2000) Gregorios Akindynos als Ausleger des Dionysios
Pseudo-Areopagita. In: Boiadjiev T, Kapriev G, Speer A (eds) Die
Dionysius-Rezeption im Mittelalter (Rencontres de philosophie
me´die´vale 9). Brepols, Turnhout, pp 105–122
Boiadjiev T (2005) Meriston symbolon. Gregorios Acindynos and the
debate on tabor light. Synthesis Philosophica 39(1):57–71
Meyendorff J (1954) L’origine de la controverse palamite. La premie`re
lettre de Palamas a` Akindynos. Qeologίa 25:602–661
Nadal J (1990) Gregorio Akindinos, ‘eslavo o bizantino’ Rivista di studi
bizantini e neoellenici 27:259–265
Nadal J (1996) Denys l’Are´opagite dans le Traite´s de Gre´goire Akindynos.
In: De Andia Y (ed) Denys l’Are´opagite et sa poste´rite´ en Orient et en
Occident. Paris, pp 553–562
Nadal JS (1974) La critique par Acindynos de l’herme´neutique patristique
de Palamas. Istina 19:297–328
Nadal Can˜ellas J (2002) Gregorio Akı´ndinos. In: Conticello CG,
Conticello V (eds) La the´ologie byzantine et sa tradition, vol 2.
Brepols, Turnhout, pp 189–256
Nadal Can˜ellas J (2006) La re´sistance d’Akindynos a` Gre´goire Palamas:
enqueˆte historique, avec traduction et commentaire de quatre traite´s
e´dite´s re´cemment, 2 vols. Spicilegium sacrum Lovaniense: E´tudes et
documents; fascicules 50 et 51. Brepols, Turnhout
Gregory of Rimini
RUSSELL L. FRIEDMAN1, CHRISTOPHER SCHABEL2
1Institute of Philosophy, De Wulf-Mansion Centre for
Ancient, Medieval and Renaissance Philosophy
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Leuven
Belgium
2Department of History and Archaeology
University of Cyprus
Nicosia
Cyprus
Abstract
Gregory of Rimini (d. 1358) was an Italian member of the
Augustinian Hermits active toward the middle of the four-
teenth century. His major work of theology and philosophy,
his commentary on the ﬁrst and second book of Peter
Lombard’s Sentences, reveals a powerful and organized
mind, widely read in the philosophical and theological
literature from antiquity to his own time, and unafraid of
taking seemingly radical views on pressing issues of the day.
He had a large impact on many areas of the Scholastic
debate right into the sixteenth century. This article concen-
trates on two of the most inﬂuential areas of his thought: his
theory of cognition and his ideas on divine foreknowledge,
predestination, and God’s power to change the past.
Life, Works, and Thought
The Augustinian Hermit Gregory of Rimini (aka de
Arimino, Ariminensis) was born around 1300 in or near
the Italian city of Rimini on the Adriatic coast, about
160 km south of Venice. He probably joined the Augus-
tinians in his hometown, where he would have begun his
elementary studies. We are uniquely fortunate to have
detailed information about his career from a papal letter
of January 1345, in which Clement VI supports Gregory’s
ambition to be promoted to master of theology at the
University of Paris. The data the Pope provides suggest
that the Augustinians sent Gregory to their Paris convent
to study theology in 1322 or 1323, when Clement (Pierre
Roger, OSB) was himself active in Paris as a theologian.
For six years, Gregory remained at his order’s main
studium generale, attached to the university, where he
would have learned the theories of John Duns Scotus,
Durand of Saint Pourc¸ain, and Peter Auriol, perhaps via
contact with such Augustinian scholars as Gerard of Siena,
James of Pamiers, and Michael of Massa.
Gregory of Rimini G
439
G

From 1328 or 1329, his order assigned him to teach
theology at important Augustinian studia in northern and
central Italy: Bologna, Padua, and Perugia. Separate doc-
umentary evidence conﬁrms that, at least from late 1332 to
early 1337, Gregory was lector at the order’s studium in
Bologna, the city that housed the greatest law faculty of the
medieval world. Since the General Chapter of the Augus-
tinian Order was held at Siena in 1338, perhaps this was
the occasion of his being transferred from Bologna.
Clement’s letter suggests that Gregory ﬁrst went to
Padua and then to Perugia, but it is possible that his stay
in one of those cities took place before his sojourn in
Bologna. Although he could have come into contact with
the works of the Oxford Franciscans William of Ockham
and Walter Chatton while at Paris, is it probable that his
extensive knowledge of their writings and certainly those
of later Oxonian theologians, especially the Franciscan
Adam Wodeham and the secular Richard FitzRalph, was
acquired in Italy, whither exciting new English ideas had
spread by the 1330s.
During the academic year 1340–1341, perhaps at the
Augustinian General Chapter meeting in Montpellier in
1341, the Augustinians ordered Gregory to return to
Paris, this time to teach as bachelor of theology at the
central studium of his order’s school system. After a year or
two of preparation, it seems that Gregory delivered his
lectures on the Sentences during the 1343–1344 school
year. It is likely that Pope Clement’s letter had the desired
effect and that Gregory became Parisian master of theol-
ogy in 1345. Traditionally, he would have been obliged to
remain at Paris to act as regent master, and in 1345–1346
he would have presided over and determined a quodlibetal
disputation while making revisions on his Sentences
commentary, removing certain passages for the ﬁnal
written version (these deleted passages are known, coun-
terintuitively, as the additiones, and have been included
in the recent critical edition of Gregory’s Sentences
commentary).
In late 1346, as master of theology, Gregory was back
home in Rimini, but in 1347 he was again teaching at the
Augustinians’ Padua studium. He spent several years in
Padua, until in 1351 the Augustinian General Chapter at
Basel assigned him to return again to Rimini to teach
theology at the newly founded studium there. He was no
doubt still based in Rimini when, on 20 May 1357, he was
elected prior general of the Augustinian Order at the
General Chapter held in Montpellier, replacing another
towering ﬁgure in Augustinian theology, Thomas of
Strasbourg. It was perhaps as prior general that Gregory
produced his question on usury. He remained at the head
of the order until his death in late 1358.
Gregory’s doctrinal inﬂuence earned him the nick-
names Lucerna splendens, Doctor acutus or authenticus,
and ‘‘Torturer of Infants.’’ Compared to most other
major Scholastics, however, very little survives from
Gregory’s pen. Some of his correspondence as prior gen-
eral has been preserved, as well as biblical commentaries.
A disputed question De usura, of philosophical interest,
was printed in 1508 and 1622. But his reputation is built
on his partial Sentences commentary based on his Paris
lectures, covering the ﬁrst two books of Lombard’s text-
book. Numerous medieval manuscripts – 20 complete
witnesses for book I alone – and some eight printings
from 1482 to 1532 attest to its popularity, and at least
one section, part 2 of book I, distinction 17, De intensione
et
remissione
formarum
corporalium,
circulated
as
a separate treatise. It is one of the few large theological
works of the fourteenth century to have received
a complete critical edition, in six volumes.
Gregory’s work is generally characterized by clear and
well-organized exposition; he most often endeavors to
distinguish and explain various senses of the most impor-
tant terms he is using on any issue, thereafter dealing with
a number of earlier and contemporary views on the mat-
ter, in the process giving his own opinion. His thought
exhibits, in the terms of Damasus Trapp (1956), both
a logico-critical attitude and a historico-critical attitude.
The ﬁrst of these involves a critical stance toward the
elaborate metaphysical systems that were popular espe-
cially in the thirteenth century; it also involves privileging
the extramental singular in both ontology and cognition.
The second of these attitudes is characterized by an atten-
tion to detail when it comes to citing and quoting other
thinkers, from very recent authors like Peter Auriol,
William of Ockham, and Adam Wodeham, to important
earlier writers like Aristotle, Anselm, and, most signiﬁcant
of all to Gregory, Augustine. In addition to those two
attitudes, perusal of Gregory’s Sentences commentary
reveals a thinker who routinely draws razor-sharp distinc-
tions, constructs arguments and analyses of impressive
logical rigor, and offers coherent and often startling posi-
tions on a great number of issues. Indeed, Gregory was
clearly rather uninhibited when it came to maintaining
unusual views. Thus, he argued, against most of the Aris-
totelian tradition, for the possibility of actual inﬁnites,
prompting Anneliese Maier to call him ‘‘a radical inﬁnitist’’
(Maier 1964:82–84), and in defending this view and the
consequences of it for the continuum Gregory develops
an analysis of the inﬁnite that ‘‘represents a huge advance
on that of his predecessors and contemporaries’’ (Cross
1998:109). In philosophical theology, Gregory argues
for
a
fully deductive
science
of
theology
(Brown
440 G
Gregory of Rimini

1998:653–655), he stresses God’s absolute simplicity to
such a degree that he denies any distinction whatsoever
between the divine attributes and the divine essence, and
he develops a Trinitarian theology of radical minimalism
on which person, personal property, and essence are all
strictly identical, while nevertheless the one God is three
really distinct persons (Friedman 2010:158–164).
Cognition, Philosophical Psychology, and
Theory of Knowledge
Gregory of Rimini developed a detailed theory of cogni-
tion that would be the subject of critical discussion into
the sixteenth century. The foundation of his view is that
cognition comes in two varieties: intuitive cognition
involves no representational intermediaries, whereas
abstractive cognition does involve representational inter-
mediaries. The intermediaries at issue here were called
‘‘species.’’ Species were taken to be representational enti-
ties that came in several kinds. ‘‘Species in the medium’’
were held to convey information about some extramental
thing from the thing itself to a cognizer’s external senses;
‘‘sensory species’’ were posited to convey that information
further through a series of internal senses in the brain
(e.g., common sense, imagination); and ﬁnally, as what
was called an ‘‘intelligible species,’’ the relevant informa-
tion was conveyed in immaterial form further still to the
immaterial intellect. In addition to their role in conveying
information, species were appealed to as the means by
which we could recall information that we had earlier
obtained; thus, the species of, say, gold found in the
imagination could be recalled even when not in the pres-
ence of gold, and upon recollection it could be used, for
example, in creating an image of a golden mountain.
Gregory’s theory of cognition is predicated upon the
adoption of the theory of species. This was not an entirely
obvious move: many Scholastics in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries had rejected species outright, per-
haps most famously William of Ockham. Gregory takes
Ockham to task on several grounds. First, he claims that
Ockham contradicted explicit and implicit testimony of
the saints, and particularly St. Augustine. Second, he
argues that certain cognitive functions that we know we
have, like memory, are impossible to explain without the
preservation of some representational entity; the repre-
sentational entity in question is a species.
Gregory draws his account of species into the heart of
his cognitive theory by basing upon it his own use of the
then-popular distinction between intuitive and abstractive
cognition. For Gregory, intuitive cognition is direct cog-
nition of some object, and he holds that intuitive cogni-
tion is the foundation for all further cognition. In contrast,
we have abstractive cognition when we perceive an object
through some sort of representation, that is, through
a species. In fact, all abstractive cognition is essentially
linked with an intuitive cognition, inasmuch as an intui-
tive cognition of the species is a necessary precondition for
having an abstractive cognition of the object represented
by the species (if I just had an intuitive cognition of the
species, without the further abstractive cognition, then
I would be thinking about the species and not about
what the species represents). This is why Gregory, again
disagreeing with Ockham, claims that intuitive cognition
has no necessary link with the existence of some
extramental object (Tachau 1988:358–370).
Thus, Gregory claims that intuitive cognition of sin-
gular extramental things is the origin of all our knowledge,
providing us with the raw material to then go on and
remember, imagine, analyze, think, and reason. Gregory
says:
"
. . . the first knowledge of the intellect, namely by the
primacy of generation, is intuitive knowledge of some
sensible singular . . . if it were asked, which singular is
that first knowledge of, it should be said that it is of that
singular that first moves the senses with a sufficient
motion, after the child is able to understand (I Sent., d. 3,
q. 3, in Gregory of Rimini 1979–1984, vol 1 [1981]:409, ll.
2–4, 10–11).
Here we see clear evidence for Trapp’s view that Gregory
gave the singular extramental thing a privileged position
in his philosophy.
With regard to propositional knowledge, Gregory
rejects the view of such important Scholastics as Ockham
and John Buridan that thought has a compositional
nature, and further that concepts are arranged into mental
propositions much like words are arranged into sentences
in spoken and written language (i.e., as a mental lan-
guage). Gregory claims instead that mental propositions
are formed all at once as a unity; their semantic complexity
is in no way mirrored by any compositionality of mental
acts or objects. Gregory argues for this view by asking how
one could explain the difference between the following
two mental propositions ‘‘every whiteness is an entity’’
and ‘‘every entity is a whiteness.’’ In spoken or written
language these two sentences, one true and the other false,
would be made unambiguously distinct by the spatial or
temporal ordering of the component words. But there is
no such ordering to be found in the immaterial intellect.
Thus, according to Gregory, the only way to explain
the distinction between the two propositions is to hold
that mental propositions are formed all at once as
a unity (Ashworth 1981:73–75; Panaccio 1999:292–296).
Gregory of Rimini G
441
G

Although Gregory did not originate the ‘‘unity’’ view of
the mental proposition, his name became associated with
the position into the early modern period.
When we turn from mental propositions to mental
attitudes like knowing and believing, we come to yet
another development that Gregory became renowned
for: the complexe signiﬁcabile. The view descends from
the English theologian Adam Wodeham (d. 1358).
Wodeham had claimed that the object of knowledge and
belief is neither extramental things (Walter Chatton’s
view)
nor
propositions
about
extramental
things
(Ockham’s view), but rather it is ‘‘what is able to be
signiﬁed complexly’’ or ‘‘propositionally,’’ that is, the
complexe signiﬁcabile, which he also says is the total object
of a proposition. In trying to keep his ontology lean,
Wodeham
rejects
that
the
complexe
signiﬁcabile
is
a thing; it is merely a mode of being, an item with
a special ontological status outside of the Aristotelian
categories and postulated solely to explain how our
knowledge and beliefs can track reality. In adopting
Wodeham’s view, Gregory made several changes, includ-
ing his explicit acceptance that, with the term ‘‘thing’’
understood
correctly,
one
could
call
the
complexe
signiﬁcabile a ‘‘thing.’’ This lack of concern for strict onto-
logical parsimony made Gregory’s view a target for such
later thinkers as Buridan (Zupko 1994–1997; Bermon
2007). It was through Gregory’s work that Wodeham’s
complexe signiﬁcabile was passed on to the continental
universities, and thus it was in general his understanding
of the position that was the center of attention into the
sixteenth century (Ashworth 1978).
Philosophical Theology: Divine
Foreknowledge, Predestination, and God’s
Power to Change the Past
Gregory’s doctrine and impact on the interrelated prob-
lems of divine foreknowledge and predestination have
been well documented, and in addition, his view on
God’s power to change the past has received some atten-
tion. Gregory’s treatment of foreknowledge is primarily in
reaction to Peter Auriol’s radical position from the 1310s.
Auriol held that, although we cannot comprehend how
God knows the future, this occurs in a way that leaves
propositions about the contingent future neither true nor
false, but neutral. For Auriol, this protected both the
immutability of divine knowledge and the freedom of the
human will, the main source of contingency in the world,
for if anything, including foreknowledge and the truth or
falsity of propositions, preceded the future, that future
would be necessary, not contingent. In this, Auriol claimed
the support of Aristotle in De interpretatione, ch. 9.
Gregory agreed with Auriol on some of these points:
that how God knows the future is incomprehensible; that,
contrary to the view of some prominent theologians,
Aristotle had indeed denied that propositions about the
contingent future are true or false; and even that true (and
false) propositions about the future would always and
immutably be true (or false) up until the time to which
the propositions refer. But Gregory’s conclusion is the
opposite of Auriol’s, for Aristotle and Auriol are mistaken:
all propositions about the future are either true or false,
since de facto either the Antichrist will exist or will not
exist at time x, and therefore either ‘‘the Antichrist will
exist at time x’’ is determinately true and ‘‘the Antichrist
will not exist at time x’’ is determinately false, or vice versa.
Is the future not therefore necessary? Gregory appeals
to elements of the common position that had been devel-
oping at Paris and Oxford, especially since the time of
Scotus. Only God is absolutely necessary; all else is con-
tingent, because God’s will is free and acts contingently
with respect to creation. Since it is logically possible for
things to have been and to be other than they are, while it
is nevertheless the case that true propositions about the
contingent future have always been immutably and deter-
minately true, ultimately those propositions are only con-
tingently true and not necessarily so. Gregory went on to
appeal to common logical devices, such as the distinctions
between the composite and divided senses of propositions
and between conditional and absolute necessity, to explain
how there could be contingency – and human freedom –
in the world (Schabel 2000:264–274).
By the fourteenth century, discussions of predestination
had often been reduced from a mass of subtopics to the
speciﬁc issue of whether humans play any role in their
salvation and damnation and, if so, how. Following
the late-antique controversy over pelagianism and semi-
pelagianism, most early-medieval views tended to the oppo-
site extreme and left little real room for human causality,
even in the case of damnation. In the thirteenth century, the
standard position was more nuanced, focusing on God as
the cause of salvation and humans as the cause of damna-
tion. Starting with Peter Auriol, a number of theologians
proposed theories that tended toward semi-pelagianism,
especially the Franciscans William of Ockham, Walter
Chatton, and Gerald Odonis, and Gregory’s confrere
Thomas of Strasbourg (Schabel 2002).
Gregory of Rimini strove to destroy this trend. In a series
of ﬁve conclusions, Gregory attacks every proposed solu-
tion. The ﬁrst conclusion states that no one is predestined
because of a good use of free will, that is, there is no positive
cause of predestination on the part of those predestined.
The second opposes Auriol: no one is predestined because it
442 G
Gregory of Rimini

is foreknown that he will be without a habitual or actual
obstacle to grace, which for Gregory means original or
actual sin. The third is that predestination comes solely
from God’s mercy. Having thus rejected the positions that
allowed for some human causation in salvation, Gregory
goes much further. In conclusion four, he asserts that no one
is reprobate because of a foreseen bad use of free will, and
the ﬁnal conclusion is that no one is reprobate because of
a foreseen obstacle to grace. If Gregory had stopped with his
third conclusion, his position would not have been very
different from those of Aquinas and Scotus, but his last
two conclusions put him in the company of some early
medieval adherents of what has been called double-predes-
tination, drastically limiting humans’ causal role in the
process of damnation (Vignaux 1934; Halverson 1998).
Can God change the past? Since Gregory asserts that
the past is not strictly speaking necessary, but rather con-
tingent, one might think that God can change the past. Yet
Gregory never asserts this, although he avoids denying it as
well. Certainly for us the past is immutable and, unlike the
future, we cannot make it so the past did not exist. Given
his analysis of propositions that include past and future
elements, such as ‘‘God foreknew that Peter would sin at
time A,’’ it seems that Gregory does maintain that the past
simply cannot be changed. He writes:
"
One must know that some of the propositions about the
past depend on the truth of some propositions about the
future in order for them to be true, just as this proposition
[‘God foreknew that Peter is going to sin at time A’]. For in
order for it to be true, it is required that this proposition be
true: ‘Peter will sin at A,’ which indeed is about the future. . .
But there are some propositions whose truths do not
depend on the truths of any propositions about the future,
for instance these: ‘God created the world,’ ‘God was incar-
nated,’ ‘Peter was white,’ and innumerable other proposi-
tions. But whatever the case about these last propositions, it
is agreed concerning the first ones that they are contingent,
if the propositions about the future, on which they depend,
are contingent. . . (I Sent., d. 38, q. 2, a. 3 in Gregory of Rimini
1979–1984, vol 3 [1984]:302, l. 30–303, l. 5).
It seems, then, that Gregory does draw a modal distinc-
tion between the past and the future, and that, in agreement
with the Oxford opinio communis of his day, some sort of
ﬁxity applies to the past that does not apply to the future.
Impact
Gregory of Rimini’s inﬂuence on later philosophy and
theology has not been sufﬁciently investigated. We do
know that Gregory’s ideas on mental propositions and the
complexe signiﬁcabile were the subject of a lively debate in
the early sixteenth century (Ashworth 1978:esp. 88–99,
Ashworth 1981). In philosophical theology, there is evi-
dence for Gregoriistae and a via Gregorii in the early six-
teenth century, when Gregory’s works were available in
print, but whether this was a general trend or rather applies
primarily to Augustinian Hermits or only to speciﬁc issues
is a matter of debate. Given the limited scope of his perti-
nent surviving writings, the existence of a school of thought
is prima facie questionable, yet the ﬁrst two books of the
Sentences provided a forum for discussion on a broad
range of topics (Oberman 1981). Little more can be said
until we examine in greater detail a number of issues in the
period between the Black Death and the Reformation.
With that said, Gregory certainly exerted a pervasive inﬂu-
ence on several leading Parisian theologians of the late
fourteenth century, the secular Peter of Ailly, for example,
and there is no doubt that his clear stance on the issue of
divine foreknowledge remained current throughout the
later Middle Ages. When Ailly’s colleagues Henry of
Langenstein and Henry Totting of Oyta migrated to
Vienna to establish the new university’s theology faculty,
they brought Gregory of Rimini with them, notably in
their positions on foreknowledge. For the next half cen-
tury, if not longer, Gregory, via Langenstein and Oyta, was
the explicit basis for the Viennese doctrine. More impor-
tantly, on predestination, where Langenstein and Oyta
were largely silent, the Viennese adopted Gregory’s teach-
ing as well. Gregory’s position was more extremely pre-
destinarian than that of any other major Scholastic, and
the dominance of his view at what was arguably the lead-
ing university in Germanic lands suggests that Luther had
to have known early on about the main later-medieval
advocate of the doctrine that he himself would famously
defend. Indeed, Luther singles out Gregory as the one
scholastic who upholds the true Augustinian doctrine of
predestination (Oberman 2002:123–124).
See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶Durand of St. Pourc¸ain
▶Gerald Odonis ▶John Buridan ▶John Duns Scotus
▶Michael of Massa ▶Peter Auriol ▶Peter Lombard
▶Peter of Ailly ▶Richard Fitzralph ▶Walter Chatton
▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Gregory of Rimini (1508) Tractatus de imprestantiis Venetorum et de
usura. Ludovicus de Mazalis, Reggio Emilia (repr Rimini, 1622)
GregoryofRimini (1979–1984) GregoriiAriminensis Lectura superprimum
et secundum Sententiarum, 6 vols, ed. Trapp D, Marcolino V,
Eckermann W, Santos-Noya M, Schulze W, Simon W, Urban W,
Vendland V. De Gruyter, Berlin
Gregory of Rimini G
443
G

Secondary Sources
Ashworth EJ (1978) Theories of the proposition: some early sixteenth
century discussions. Francisc Stud 38:81–121 (repr Ashworth EJ
(1985) Studies in post-medieval semantics. Variorum Reprints,
London, Ch. IV)
Ashworth EJ (1981) Mental language and the unity of propositions:
a semantic problem discussed by early sixteenth century logicians.
Francisc Stud 41:61–96 (repr Ashworth EJ (1985) Studies in post-
medieval semantics. Variorum Reprints, London, Ch. VI)
Bermon P (2002) La Lectura sur les deux premiers livres des Sentences de
Gre´goire de Rimini O.E.S.A. (1300–1358). In: Evans GR (ed) Medi-
aeval commentaries on Peter Lombard’s Sentences, vol I. Brill,
Leiden, pp 267–285
Bermon P (2007) L’assentiment et son object chez Gre´goire de Rimini.
Vrin, Paris
Brown SF (1998) Declarative and deductive theology in the early four-
teenth century. In: Aertsen JA, Speer A (eds) Was ist Philosophie im
Mittelalter? de Gruyter, Berlin, pp 648–655
Courtenay WJ (1972–1973) John of Mirecourt and Gregory of Rimini on
Whether God can undo the past. Recherches de The´ologie ancienne
et me´die´vale 39:224–253, 40:147–174
Cross R (1998) Inﬁnity, continuity, and composition: The contribution of
Gregory of Rimini. Mediev Philos and Theol 7:89–110
Friedman RL (2010) Medieval trinitarian thought from Aquinas to
Ockham. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Gregorio da Rimini ﬁlosofo (2003) Atti del Convengo – Rimini, 25
novembre 2000. Raffaelli, Rimini
Halverson J (1998) Peter Aureol on Predestination: a challenge to late
medieval thought. Brill, Leiden
Leff G (1961) Gregory of Rimini: tradition and innovation in fourteenth
century thought. Manchester University Press, New York
Maier A (1964) Diskussionen u¨ber das aktuell Unendliche in der ersten
Ha¨lfte
des
14.
Jahrhunderts.
In:
Ausgehendes
Mittelalters:
Gesammelte Aufsa¨tze zur Geistegeschichte des 14. Jahrhunderts,
vol 1. Storia e letteratura, Rome, pp 41–85
Oberman HA (ed) (1981) Gregor von Rimini: Werk und Wirkung bis zur
Reformation. De Gruyter, Berlin
Oberman HA (2002) Forerunners of the Reformation. The shape of late
medieval thought. James Clarke, Cambridge (repr)
Panaccio C (1999) Le discours inte´rieur de Platon a` Guillaume d’Ockham.
Seuil, Paris
Schabel C (2000) Theology at Paris, 1316–1345. Peter Auriol and the
problem of divine foreknowledge and future contingents. Ashgate,
Aldershot
Schabel C (2002) Parisian commentaries from Peter Auriol to Gregory of
Rimini and the problem of predestination. In: Evans GR (ed) Medi-
eval commentaries on Peter Lombard’s Sentences, vol I. Brill, Leiden,
pp 359–377
Tachau KH (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham: optics,
epistemology and the foundations of semantics, 1250–1345. Brill,
Leiden
Trapp D (1956) Augustinian theology of the 14th century. Notes on
editions,
marginalia,
opinions
and
book-lore.
Augustiniana
6:146–274
Vignaux P (1934) Justiﬁcation et Pre´destination au XIVe sie`cle: Duns
Scot, Pierre d’Aureole, Guillaume d’Occam. Gre´goire de Rimini.
Leroux, Paris
Zupko J (1994–1997) How it played in the Rue de Fouarrre: the reception
of Adam Wodeham’s Theory of the Complexe Signiﬁcabile in the
Arts Faculty at Paris in the Mid-Fourteenth Century. Francisc Stud
54:211–225
Gregory Palamas
GEORGI KAPRIEV
Faculty of Philosophy
Soﬁa University St. Kliment Ochridski
Soﬁa
Bulgaria
Abstract
Gregory Palamas (1296–1357) is the acknowledged system-
atizer of Hesychasm. His philosophical–theological synthe-
sis is focused on the so-called ‘‘energy’’ doctrine. According
to this doctrine, every existing essence has its powers and
expresses two types of energies or activities, which can be
deﬁned respectively as ‘‘causal’’ and ‘‘existential’’; though
the essence of every being remains unknowable in itself, it
becomes knowable by means of its realization in action. The
energies of the ﬁrst type have a beginning and an end in
their end product, while the latter are the very life of the
essence, their existential expression ad extra. Palamas is
regarded as the last teacher of Orthodoxy hitherto, and
his doctrine underlies the theological systems of the con-
temporary Orthodox Churches.
Biography
Gregory Palamas was born in Constantinople in the family
of the senator Constantine Palamas. He received classical
education for the purpose of a public career. Among his
teachers, one mentions Theodore Metochites by whom
Palamas, among other things, gained knowledge of
Aristotle’s doctrines. In 1314, however, he chose the monas-
tic life and went to Athos. For 2 years, he was under the
spiritual guidance of the hesychast Nikodemos. After his
death (1316), Palamas became a monk in the Great Laura.
During the Turkish invasion in Athos, he went in 1322 to
Thessalonici, where he was ordained to priesthood. In 1326,
he became a hermit near Veroia. In 1331, he was again in
Athos as a hermit at St. Sabbas. In 1333/34, he was an abbot
of the Esphigmenu monastery. His ﬁrst writings date from
this time. In the second half of the 30s, within the course of
the disputation with Barlaam, he began to expose his teach-
ing in written form as a polemic defense of hesychasm and
systematization of the hesychastic views. The ﬁrst part of the
debate
(1335–1337)
concerned
the
possibility
of
constructing apodeictic syllogisms about divinity and the
way of applying Aristotle’s doctrine and apophatic theology;
thus knowing God and the limits of knowledge were put
into question. Meanwhile, Barlaam attacked the practice of
the hesychasts. Central was the question as to whether the
444 G
Gregory Palamas

Tabor light, the vision of which the hesychasts experienced,
is created or not. This phase of the hesychast controversy
ended in 1341 through the ofﬁcial acceptance of the
Palamite teaching and the condemnation of Barlaam. The
second phase, which was marked by the controversy with
Gregory Akindynos, developed during the period of the
Civil War in the Byzantine Empire (1341–1347) and was
strongly politically colored as Palamas and his followers
supported Kantakouzenos’ party. Palamas was temporarily
put in prison, and a synod called by the patriarch John XIV
Kalekas excommunicated him on November 4, 1444. After
Kantakouzenos ascended the throne (1347), Palamas was
ordained bishop of Thessaloniki. At that time began the
attacks of Nikephoros Gregoras against Palamas. The
synod of 1351 anathematized Barlaam and Akindynos,
reprehended Gregoras and his followers severely and
proclaimed Palamas’ doctrine a dogma. This state of affairs
did
not
change
even
after
the
dethronement
of Kantakouzenos (1354). The last years of his life
was devoted to his duties as a bishop. He died on November
4, 1357. The council of 1368 declared him a saint. Palamas is
considered as the last teacher of Orthodoxy hitherto, and his
teaching is accepted as the ofﬁcial doctrine of the contem-
porary Orthodox Churches.
Among the writings of Palamas, one should mention
the two published 1335–1336 treatises about the procession
of the Holy Spirit as well as the Anepigraphae, directed
against Beck. As his main writing one considers the Triads,
produced
between
1338
and
1340,
which
contains
a polemic defense of the hesychastic way of life. Worth
mentioning is the dialogue Theophanes which appeared
in 1343. An important source is the detailed Antirrhetika
against Gregory Akindynos and Nikephoros Gregoras. The
mature works of Palamas are the 150 Psychical, Theological
and Ethical Chapters that elucidate in systematic form the
Palamite mode of thinking. Palamas is also the author of
a large number of small treatises, letters, and 63 homilies.
The Doctrine
The focus of Palamas’ system is the so-called ‘‘energy’’
doctrine, which is developed by him to its ultimate con-
sequences. This doctrine, being based on Book IX of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics, was discussed by the Aristotelian
commentators and especially by the Neoplatonists and, as
early as the fourth century, a number of prominent Greek-
speaking theologians adopted it in their teachings. It con-
stitutes a crucial element of the metaphysical views of
most of the Byzantine philosophers and theologians, how-
ever, without necessarily being the center of those doc-
trines. According to this doctrine, each existing essence
has its powers and gives expression to two types of energies
or activities, which can be deﬁned respectively as ‘‘causal’’
and ‘‘existential’’; though the essence of every being
remains unknowable in itself, it becomes knowable by
means of its realization in action. The energies of the
ﬁrst type have a beginning and an end in their end prod-
uct, while the latter are the very life of the essence, its
existential expression ad extra. From this perspective
Palamas differentiates the creative and the deifying energy
of God. According to Palamas, the saints are able, without
becoming God by nature, to receive by grace the very
essential or natural energy of God, which is uncreated
and deﬁned as the proper divine existence. The energies
are realities (pragmata) but not essences (ousiai). The
energy is not identical with the essence, nor does it con-
stitute a separate substance, being the activity of the
essence par excellence. This distinction is neither concep-
tual nor yet a real division (pragmatike diairesis); it is
rather an actual differentiation (pragmatike diakrisis).
The Light of Tabor is, according to the hesychasts, the
expression of the natural divine energy on the part of Christ.
The participation in this energy is exactly the deiﬁcation,
which can be received already in this life. In this connection
Palamas underlines the free cooperation (synergia) of man;
with the experience of the divine, man lives the life of God in
God Himself. The Palamite Christocentrism is based exactly
on the personal presence of the Savior – by essence, by
energy and by hypostasis – in history. Through Christ peo-
ple obtain the possibility of direct communion with God,
not mediated, say, by the hierarchy of angels. This existential
participation in the essential energies of God does in no way
replace the sacramental participation. It rather presupposes
the sacramental life in Christ and is construed by Palamas
precisely on the basis of the Eucharist.
Palamas does not underestimate the natural intellect
and philosophy; he treats them as divine gifts, which are
the condition and the cause of any knowledge. Thereby
God is recognized as the cause of being. Nevertheless, the
knowledge of God achieved in this way by man is only
partial. The proper knowledge of God is the direct vision
of the natural divine energy. This supernatural light is
given to all, but only the saints see it. It is a positive
existential experience and practice beyond rational knowl-
edge, including the speculative theology. This positive
experience goes beyond the cataphatic as well as the
apophatic way of knowing God. Palamas does not refer
to a next phase in the process of knowing, but to another
sphere of knowledge, which is the ﬁeld of true encounter
with the living God. Both spheres of knowledge are not
only subordinated, but also coordinated within man.
Palamas insists that human nature is superior to that
of the angels, precisely because man has ﬂesh. This is why
Gregory Palamas G
445
G

man receives life not only as essence, but also as energy and
man’s spirit (pneuma) is life given to the body. Exactly, the
body is the organ which coordinates between the natural
and supernatural energies of man that are subordinated in
the nous and are sent out of the ﬂesh in the world. Palamas
rejects the psychological interpretation of man and con-
siders human beings as psychosomatic entities; thus the
stress is not on the nature, but on the hypostasis, which is
conceptualized as the boundary and the center of the world.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Barlaam of Calabria
▶Demetrios Kydones ▶Gregory Akindynos ▶Meta-
physics,
Byzantine
▶Nicholas
Chamaetos
Kabasilas
▶Nikephoros Gregoras ▶Philosophical Theology, Byz-
antine ▶Philosophy, Byzantine ▶Pseudo-Dionysius the
Areopagite ▶Thomism, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Chrestou P et al (eds) (1962) Greogoriou tou Palama Suggramata, vol 5.
Thessaloniki. I 1962 (21988), II 1966, III 1970, IV 1988, V 1992
Meyendorff J (1959, 1973) Gre´goire Palamas. De´fense des saints
he´sychastes, vol 2. Louvain
Migne Patrologia Graeca, vols 150 and 151
Sinkewicz RE (1988) The one hundred and ﬁfty chapters. Toronto
Secondary Sources
Demetrakopoulos G (1997) Augoustinos kai Gregorios Palamas. Athens
Flogaus R (1997) Theosis bei Palamas und Luther: ein Beitrag zum
o¨kumenischen Gespra¨ch. Go¨ttingen
Gunnarson H (2002) Mystical realism in the early theology of Gregory
Palamas. Go¨teborg
Kapriev G (2005) Gregorios Palamas. In: Id., Philosophie in Byzanz.
Wu¨rzburg, pp 249–308
Kuhlmann J (1968) Die Taten des einfachen Gottes: eine ro¨misch-
katholische Stellungnahme zum Palamismus. Wu¨rzburg
Lison J (1994) L’Esprit re´pandu: la pneumatologie de Gre´goire Palamas. Paris
Meyendorff J (1974) A study of Gregory Palamas. New York
Podskalsky G (1977) Theologie und Philosophie in Byzanz. Mu¨nchen, pp
124–160
Rigo A (ed) (2004) Gregorio Palamas e oltre: studi e documenti sulle
controversie teologiche del XIV secolo bizantino. Firenze
Savvidis K (1997) Die Lehre von der Vergo¨ttlichung des Menschen bei
Maximos dem Bekenner und ihre Rezeption durch Gregor Palamas.
St. Ottilien
Sinkewicz RE (2002) Gregory Palamas. In: Conticello CG, Conticello
V (eds) La the´ologie byzantine et sa tradition, vol 2. Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 131–182
Grosseteste, Robert
▶Robert Grosseteste
Guido Terreni
THOMAS TURLEY
Department of History
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara
USA
Abstract
Best known for his theological works, the early fourteenth-
century philosopher Carmelite Guido Terreni demon-
strated considerable independence and originality in his
philosophical views. A follower of Godfrey of Fontaines
and Aquinas, his defense of Aristotelian positions some-
times took original turns, and he departed from Aristotle
in important respects, for example, on forms. He denied
that universals actually exist, challenged Aquinas’ deﬁni-
tion of natural law and the derivation of human law, and
developed economic theories that may have inﬂuenced
Buridan and Oresme.
Born in Perpignan between 1260 and 1270, Guido Terreni
(Guy Terre´, Guiu Terrena) entered the Carmelite order
around 1290. He studied with Godfrey of Fontaines at
Paris at the turn of the fourteenth century and by 1312
had become the third Parisian master of theology pro-
duced by his order. From 1313 to 1317 Guido served as
Carmelite regent master at Paris; his students included
fellow-Carmelites Sibert of Beek and John Baconthorpe.
Elected Prior General of the Carmelites in 1318, Guido
became a prominent theological advisor of Pope John
XXII. In 1321 he was elevated to the bishopric of Majorca;
in 1332 he was transferred to the diocese of Elne. Through-
out this period he continued to produce theological com-
mentaries and polemics. Guido died in 1342. He is
commonly called ‘‘Doctor Breviloquus’’ or ‘‘Doctor
Melliﬂuus.’’
As a master at Paris, Guido was very active, producing
not only a commentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard
but sixquodlibets, 13 quaestiones disputatae, 12 quaestiones
ordinariae, and commentaries on Aristotle’s Ethics, Phys-
ics, Metaphysics, Politics, and De anima. His major theo-
logical works are the Concordia evangelica (a Gospel
harmony),
a
commentary
on
Gratian’s
Decretum,
a Summa de haeresibus, and two major responses on the
Franciscan poverty question, the De perfectione vitae and
its subsequent Defensorium de perfectione vitae. His theo-
logical works insured Guido’s reputation. Particularly
446 G
Grosseteste, Robert

important were the Summa de haeresibus and the
Concordia evangelica, both on subjects of broad interest.
They were widely distributed in manuscript and later in
early modern printed editions.
Guido’s works on philosophical subjects were less for-
tunate. The Carmelites came late to the medieval univer-
sities and never had a large representation there;
consequently, they failed to construct the apparatus nec-
essary to assure the widespread copying of their masters’
works. This seems the reason that many of Guido’s early
philosophical works are no longer extant, including his
commentaries on the Physics, Politics, Metaphysics, and the
Sentences. The loss of the latter has been particularly
serious for scholars, as these lectures presented key ele-
ments of a medieval philosopher’s thought early in his
career. Guido did address many of the most important
philosophical questions of his era in three surviving
works – his quodlibetal questions, commentary on the
Ethics, and De anima – but even here there are difﬁculties.
The quodlibetal questions are preserved in a single, very
corrupt manuscript, and the De anima survives only in
fragments reproduced in topical manuscript collections
and in Guido’s later theological works.
Generally, Guido adhered to the views of his master
Godfrey of Fontaines on major questions; however, his
philosophy also shows the strong inﬂuence of Thomas
Aquinas, Durand of Saint-Pourc¸ain, and other prominent
Dominicans. For example, on the problem of knowledge
he followed Thomas and Godfrey. But on some issues he
took eclectic positions that he felt conformed better with
the positions of the church fathers. His theological discus-
sions also reﬂect this concern to harmonize patristic and
modern thought.
The surviving questions of Guido’s De anima give
a clear picture of his views on the intellect and knowledge.
The intellect is prior to the will both in knowledge and in
the contemplation of God. While charity can be said to be
prior in a relative sense during the soul’s earthly life,
knowledge (vision) is prior in an absolute sense in that it
will be the happiness the soul will ultimately enjoy.
Terreni’s approach to the problem of knowledge generally
follows Aristotle. Humans can understand the essences of
things through the action of the agent intellect alone. No
special illumination of the sort posited by Augustine is
necessary. The knowledge thus gained must be knowledge
of the essences of things, because only that which has being
can effectively move the intellect or more generally act as
causes. Accidents, perceived in mere sensory experiences,
cannot effectively cause, as they have being only in
a secondary sense. Any epistemological theory that holds
that the senses bring knowledge must be wrong. Guido
even contends that interpreters of Augustine have misun-
derstood his meaning regarding illumination. The light
Augustine speaks of is, according to Terreni, the light of
the agent intellect as it participates in the divine light.
Guido holds that the sensitive and vegetative powers
reside in the composite of body and soul, while the intellect
and will reside only in the soul. The intellect issues directly
from the soul, and the will issues from the intellect, because
only one effect can ﬂow immediately from one principle
that is entirely simple. The intellective soul relative to its
faculties is not active, but passive or potential, just as any
subject contains its faculties only potentially. Guido also
identiﬁes the agent intellect with the possible intellect on
the grounds that realities should not be multiplied without
reason. (Here he contradicts his commentary on the Ethics,
which distinguishes the two intellects.) On the relation of
the faculties of the soul to the essence of the soul, Guido
maintains that the faculties are different from the soul and
are permanent qualities – again, because only one effect
can follow from a simple principle.
The soul is humanity’s substantial form, according to
Terreni. For him this means that it is found in every part of
the body because all forms are extended in their quantiﬁed
matter. His demonstration that the human powers of
intellect and will are spiritual rather than organically
based ignores Aquinas’ argument that the intellect is
immaterial because humans can comprehend the general
concepts and instead relies on the human capacity to
understand inﬁnity. Since no material thing is inﬁnite,
Guido declares, the intellect that gives humans the capac-
ity to understand inﬁnity must itself be immaterial.
Terreni denies that universals actually exist. For him
they are only discernible resemblances between substances
that are, in fact, individually distinct. Their resemblance is
merely a relation based in substances being compared and
discernible to the intellect, that is, a conformity of sense
perceptions. Thus, genus and species are conformities of
sense perception; they differ only in that species are pred-
icated less generally than genera. The inﬂuence of Godfrey
of Fontaines, Gerard of Bologna, and Henry of Harclay is
clear in this discussion.
Guido’s treatment of forms varies from Aristotle’s in
some respects. For Guido, form is the principle of indi-
viduation. Responding to Scotus’ claim that things can be
formally distinct without being really distinct, he argues
that, since forms are real, a formal distinction is a real
distinction. The same form can be both identical to
another form and different from it, depending on how it
is related to other things. And formalities may differ in
Guido Terreni G
447
G

that one form may connote something another does not,
despite being identiﬁed in the same subject. Guido rejects
Richard of Mediavilla’s claim that forms can evolve into
one another by citing the traditional Aristotelian notion
that substantial change occurs suddenly, after a number
of accidental changes. He also denies Giles of Rome’s
assertion that accidental forms can vary.
Although Terreni often stays close to Aristotelian and
Dominican teachings, his solutions can be surprising and
untraditional. For example, the analysis of economic theory
found in his commentary on the Ethics and his De
perfectione vitae offers an apparent defense of the Aristote-
lian virtues that depend on wealth, such as magnanimity.
These were normally ignored or viewed with suspicion by
later Christian theorists. Further, Guido provides an unusu-
ally sophisticated analysis of supply and demand conditions
as determinants of value, and demonstrates an understand-
ing of the economic impact of government alteration of
money, especially the debasement of coinage, that probably
inﬂuenced Buridan and Oresme decades later. Similarly,
Guido proposes a unique perspective on law. Inspired by
Aquinas but simplifying his position considerably, Guido
deﬁnes natural law as the act of human reason – not the
power of reason, as Aquinas had said, but the act, function-
ing properly and with God’s grace. In opposition to
Thomas, Guido declares that all human laws are derived
from natural law, as long as they are either direct conclu-
sions or remote deductions from common principles.
His unusual views on the rational soul, on universals,
and on ethics distinguish Guido Terreni as a philosopher.
The extent of his inﬂuence on subsequent scholarly debate
is still to be determined.
See also: ▶Durand of St. Pourc¸ain ▶Godfrey
of
Fontaines ▶Henry Harclay ▶John Baconthorpe ▶John
Buridan
▶Nicholas
Oresme
▶Poverty
▶Thomas
Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Etzwiler James P (1974) Some fragments from the commentary on the De
anima of Guido Terreni. Carmelus 21:198–232
Etzwiler James P (1988) Six questions of Guido Terreni, O. Carm.
({ 1342). Carmelus 35:138–177
Gracia Jorge JE (1972) Tres quaestiones de Guido Terrena sobre los
trascendentales. Analecta Sacra Tarraconensia 45:87–130
Gracia Jorge JE (1973a) Guido Terrena y la unidad real del universal:
Quodlibeto IV, q. 2. Dia´logos 9:117–131
Marcuzzi Pier Giorgio (1979) Una soluzione teologico-giuridico al
problema dell’usura in una questione de quolibet inedita di Guido
Terreni (1260–1342). Salesianum 41:647–684
Secondary Sources
Fournier P (1927) Gui Terre´ (Guido Terreni), the´ologien. Histoire
litte´raire de la France 36:432–473
Glorieux P (1925) La litte´rature quodlibe´tique de 1260 a` 1320, I. Le
Saulchoir (Belgique), Kain, pp 169–174
Glorieux P (1933) Re´pertoire des maıˆtres en the´ologie de Paris au XIIIe
sie`cle, 2. Vrin, Paris, pp 339–343
Gracia JJE (1973b) The convertibility of unum and ens according to
Guido Terreni. Francisc Stud 40:143–170
Langholm O (1992) Guido Terreni. In: Economics in the medieval
schools. Brill, Leiden, pp 491–507
Lohr
C (1968)
Medieval Aristotle
Latin commentaries.
Traditio
24:190–191
Melsen J (1939) Guido Terreni, Ord. Carm. (1260?–1342) Iurista. Tip.
Poliglotta Cuore di Maria, Rome
Schabel C (2003) Early Carmelites between giants: questions on future
contingents by Gerard of Bologna and Guy Terrena. Rech The´ol
Philos Me´die´v 70:139–205
Schabel C (2007) Guy Terrena. In: Theological Quodlibeta in the Middle
Ages. Brill, Leiden, pp 517–523
Turley T (1978) Guido Terreni and the Decretum. Bull Mediev Canon Law
n.s. 8:29–34
Xiberta BFM (1923–1926a) De magistro Guidone Terreni, priore generali
ordinis nostris, episcopo Maioricensi et Elnensi. Analecta Ordinis
Carmelitarum 5:113–206
Xiberta BFM (1923–1926b) De doctrinis theologicis magistri Guidonis
Terreni. Analecta Ordinis Carmelitarum 5:233–276
Xiberta BFM (1932) Guiu Terrena, Carmelita de Perpinya`. Institucio´
Patxot, Barcelona
448 G
Guido Terreni

