High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes
with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
Kanghwan Kim, Fan Wu, Komal Kampasi, John P. Seymour,
Kensall D. Wise, and Euisik Yoon
Contents
1
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
469
2
Development of Optoelectrodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
471
2.1
History of Michigan Probes: Implantable Planar Electrode Arrays
for In Vivo Electrophysiology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
472
2.2
Integration of Light Sources onto Probes for Electrophysiology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
474
K. Kim
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA
Center for BioMicrosystems, Brain Science Institute, Korea Institute of Science and Technology,
Seoul, South Korea
e-mail: khankim@umich.edu
F. Wu
Diagnostic Biochips, Glen Burnie, MD, USA
e-mail: fan@diagnosticbiochips.com
K. Kampasi
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA
e-mail: kampasi1@llnl.gov
J. P. Seymour · K. D. Wise
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA
e-mail: seymourj@umich.edu; wise@umich.edu
E. Yoon ()
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA
Center for Nanomedicine, Institute for Basic Science (IBS) and Graduate Program of Nano
Biomedical Engineering (Nano BME), Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
e-mail: esyoon@umich.edu
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_22
467

468
K. Kim et al.
3
Fiberless Multicolor Optoelectrodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
477
3.1
Prototype Waveguide Optoelectrodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
478
3.2
Design of ILD-GRIN Waveguide Optoelectrode. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
479
3.3
Fabrication and Assembly Processes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
482
3.4
Independent Control of Distinct Neural Populations Using
Multicolor ILD-GRIN Optoelectrodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
485
4
MicroLED Optoelectrodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
487
4.1
Design of μLED Optoelectrode: Monolithic Integration
of μLEDs onto Silicon Probe Shanks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
487
4.2
LED-on-Silicon Technology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
490
4.3
Fabrication Process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
492
4.4
High-Resolution Optical Stimulation Using MicroLED Optoelectrode. . . . . . . . . .
495
5
Discussion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
497
6
Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
498
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
498
Abstract
The study of a localcuit inside the brain requires a tool to precisely modulate
a few selected neurons and simultaneously monitor the neuronal responses.
Optogenetics provides the capability to excite or inhibit activities of speciﬁc
neurons in intact animals with millisecond precision. This light-induced stimula-
tion technique can be combined with electrophysiology to enable simultaneous
control of target neurons and recording of the associated neuronal activities
in the brain. In this chapter, we introduce the state-of-the-art optoelectrodes
that enable precise optical stimulation and electrical recording in behaving
animals. For experiments with behaving animals, it is important that the light
sources are integrated within the headstage so that light can be delivered to
multiple stimulation sites without causing a tethering problem. Two ﬁberless
implementation approaches that promote easier scaling are discussed in detail:
the integration of optical waveguides on the probe shank for light delivery to
a distal end located near the recording electrodes and the direct integration of
neuron-sized (∼10 μm) microLEDs in the vicinity of the recording electrodes.
The design principles and the fabrication processes, as well as the advantages
and the limitations of each approach, will be presented along with the results of
in vivo validation experiments.
Keywords
Electrophysiology · Neural probes · Optogenetics · MicroLEDs ·
Waveguides · Monolithic integration
Abbreviations
AAV
Adeno-associated virus
ALD
Atomic layer deposition
Arch
Archaerhodopsin(-3)
CaMKII
Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II
ChR2
Channelrhodopsin-2

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
469
DPSS
Diode-dumped solid state
DRIE
Deep reactive-ion etching
EEG
Electroencephalogram
EMI
Electromagnetic interference
GRIN
Gradient-index lens
HFO
High-frequency oscillation
IC
Integrated circuit
ILD
Injection laser diode
INT
Interneuron
IQE
Internal quantum efﬁciency
LED
Light-emitting diode
LFP
Local ﬁeld potential
LPCVD
Low-pressure chemical vapor deposition
MEMS
Microelectromechanical system
MQW
Multi-quantum well
NpHR
Halorhodopsin
PCB
Printed circuit board
PECVD
Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition
PV
Parvalbumin (positive interneuron)
PYR
Pyramidal (neuron)
RI
Refractive index
RIE
Reactive-ion etching
SEM
Scanning electron microscope
SOI
Silicon on insulator
SWR
Sharp wave-ripple
1
Introduction
The human brain is a complicated system consisting of approximately 85 billion
neurons that are intertwined with one another across 100 trillion synapses [1]. It
has been estimated that the connectivity of a human brain is strikingly similar
to that of the expanding universe [2]. A neuron is a highly specialized cell that
communicates with other neurons by means of ions and chemicals. The origin of
these neuronal signals – the combinations of which encode every action, emotion,
and memory – is also extremely complex [3]. Holistic activities of single neurons
within a network of connections should be interrogated in a live brain, and only in
an awake and behaving animal can the natural behavior of the neurons be monitored
[4, 5]. The scale of density and complexity of the brain requires a sensing tool that
can support high-resolution recordings at a large scale. Various technologies have
been developed in different modalities to understand brain functions by monitoring
its signal propagations through MRI [6], chemical sensing [7], optical imaging [8,
9], and electrical recording [10, 11].
Methods for in vivo electrical recording of brain activity can be categorized
according to the location of recording sites. In general, there is a trade-off between
signal ﬁdelity and invasiveness in the recording modality. For example, electroen-
cephalogram (EEG) is a noninvasive recording method using electrodes placed
outside of the scalp [12]. However, each electrode can only record a spatiotemporal
average of neuronal activities (local ﬁeld potential or LFP), integrated in an array

470
K. Kim et al.
Fig. 1 Mapping neuronal functions using implantable neural probes: the positions of pyramidal
cells (PYR, red triangle) and interneurons (INT, blue circle) are calculated by triangulation of the
recorded spikes from the electrodes. Red lines indicate excitatory outputs from PYR, and blue lines
indicate inhibitory outputs from INT. Cross-correlograms of spike timings between two selected
neuronal pairs, each of which suggests the existence of a monosynaptic connection between the
neurons, are presented as well. Adapted with permission from [5]; Copyright 2004, Springer Nature
covering an area of around 10 cm2 [13]. In contrast, invasive electrodes are
implanted into the brain to record directly from individual cells (action potentials
or spikes). Figure 1 illustrates the capability of an array of electrodes implanted
inside a brain to map individual cells and identify their functions by recording
the corresponding extracellular potentials [5]. While it is also possible to record
intracellular potentials with even higher signal ﬁdelity than extracellular recordings
by using patch clamps [14], this technology is not scalable to simultaneously record
hundreds of neurons in a large-scale neural network as shown in Figure 1.
Analysis of causality within a complicated system also requires neuromodula-
tion, preferably at high resolution and precise selectivity, together with large-scale
high-resolution recording capability. Electrical stimulation of the nervous system,
dating back to year 1780 when Luigi Galvani observed twitching of a frog’s leg
muscles by passing electrical current through attached metal electrodes, has brought
tremendous insight on its functions [13, 14]. However, since it indiscriminately
stimulates all neuronal processes – somata, dendrites, and axons – within its path
in a complex manner [15], electrical stimulation could not provide the resolution
and selectivity required for analysis of a complex neural system.
Over the past few decades, a number of neurostimulation techniques have been
developed and have proven their utility in a number of different applications. These
include the use of magnetic ﬁeld [16], chemicals [17], heat [18], and vibration [19].
More recently, techniques that take advantage of genetic engineering and enable

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
471
neuronal stimulation with light [20] and with synthetic chemicals [21] have been
added to the list of tools for neuromodulation. Generally, techniques that do not
require any genetic modiﬁcation are favored for human clinical applications due to
their accessibility and safety. On the other hand, genetic techniques can provide
better speciﬁcity and therefore are favorable for neuroscience experiments with
animal subjects.
Optogenetics was ﬁrst introduced in 2005 [20] and has since matured over the
years [22, 23]. Optogenetics enables selective activation (excitation) or silencing
(inhibition) of target neurons of speciﬁc types, hence providing the means to
perturb the local circuits of a neural system in a controlled manner [22]. Typically,
it involves the introduction of photosensitive proteins, called opsins, into cells
of speciﬁc types. Each opsin has its speciﬁc wavelength to which it preferably
responds. Among a variety of opsins developed to date, channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2,
an excitatory opsin, blue range), halorhodopsin (NpHR, an inhibitory opsin, yellow
range), and archaerhodopsin-3 (Arch, an inhibitory opsin, yellow range) are the
most popular ones, as shown in Figure 2. Neurons that express these opsins can
be selectively stimulated by visible light of a given wavelength, and cell-type
speciﬁcity can be achieved with well-controlled spatial and high temporal (order of
milliseconds) resolutions [20]. Multiple opsins can be expressed in the same cell so
that it can be either depolarized or hyperpolarized by the corresponding wavelengths
[24]. Likewise, through cell-type-speciﬁc gene delivery methods, different opsins
can be expressed in intermingled neuronal populations and enable independent
temporal control of the target populations [24, 25]. This speciﬁc targeting allows for
sophisticated manipulation of neural activity and spike timing during speciﬁc neural
tasks and behaviors at the resolution of individual sub-circuits within the brain.
This chapter reviews the development of scalable implantable technologies for
high-resolution optical stimulation combined with extracellular electrical recording
arrays. These technologies provide unique capabilities for advancing neuroscience
to understand neural circuit functions and behaviors. Some devices fabricated with
these technologies have already enabled a few signiﬁcant neuroscience discoveries
[26–28], and it is anticipated that more tools will be disseminated to and used by
many laboratories in the world, which will lead to numerous interesting discoveries
in the years to come.
2
Development of Optoelectrodes
The earliest implantable electrode for extracellular recording was a simple
microwire developed more than 60 years ago, which was able to record from
single neurons [29]. Since then, the microwire technology has evolved into tetrode
[30, 31] and polytrode [32] conﬁgurations, which can be used to pinpoint (or
triangulate) the location of neurons, by measuring the relative signal amplitudes
picked up by a group of electrodes. It was estimated that more than 100 neurons
can be identiﬁed within 50 μm of a tetrode and separated after signal processing
and that within 140 μm of a tetrode, more than 1,000 neurons can be detected (not
yet separable). These devices are readily available at low cost. However, the density

472
K. Kim et al.
Fig. 2 Optogenetic tools for modulating membrane voltage potential. The neurons that express
nonselective cation channel channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) can be stimulated using blue light to
depolarize and trigger an action potential. Light stimulation of halorhodopsin (NpHR) variants,
which are chloride pumps, hyperpolarizes neurons and inhibits spikes in response to yellow light.
Light-driven proton pumps, such as archaerhodopsin-3 (Arch), Mac, bacteriorhodopsin (eBR), and
rhodopsin-3 (GtR3) can also be used to hyperpolarize neurons and block signaling. Ca2+, calcium;
ChETA, channelrhodopsin-2 mutant E12ET; mV, millivolts; Na+, sodium; nm, nanometer; SFO,
step-function opsin; VChR1, Volvox-derived channelrhodopsin-1. Adapted with permission from
[24]; Copyright 2011, Springer Nature
of the electrodes is limited by the pitch between the neighboring tetrodes, which
cannot be accurately controlled using manual assembly.
2.1
History of Michigan Probes: Implantable Planar Electrode
Arrays for In Vivo Electrophysiology
Kensall D. Wise ﬁrst pioneered the adaptation of microfabrication and microma-
chining techniques to develop microprobes at Stanford University [33]. Later, the
technology has been continuously developed at the University of Michigan by Wise

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
473
Fig. 3 Schematic diagram of
a Michigan probe. Adapted
with permission from [35];
Copyright 2008, IEEE
and his group and since then acquired a name as the “Michigan Probe” [34–37]. The
Michigan Probe is fabricated with its components (electrodes and interconnects)
integrated on a planar substrate, followed by bulk micromachining processes to
shape the substrate into a needle-shaped shank (Figure 3). Typically, multiple
stimulating/recording electrodes can be lithographically deﬁned at the probe tip,
and the interconnecting leads carry signals from/to the ribbon cable at the back end.
The Michigan planar architecture offers several advantages. Firstly, a large number
of electrodes can be precisely deﬁned on a probe shank using photolithography,
instead of one electrode per shank (or needle). Secondly, the probe shank length can
be made as long as several millimeters so that it can be easily tailored to target deep
regions in the brains of small animals.
Because of the tremendous scalability and versatility of the planar probe
processes, it has been the central platform for the development of high-density
probes to monitor a large number of neurons in the brain. Statistically, the number
of recording electrodes has been doubling every 7 years, mimicking Moore’s law;
yet, advanced neuroscience studies demand more [38]. The challenges in scaling up
the number of electrodes are severalfold. Firstly, even with the increased number of
electrodes, the shank width should be kept at a minimum to avoid excessive insertion
damage. Secondly, the incorporation of an integrated circuit (IC) for multiplexing
the large number of channels is necessary to avoid oversized assembly and tethering
problems. Thirdly, to expand the recording coverage, it is desirable to stack multiple
2-D probes into a 3-D array. Figure 4a shows a demonstration of high-density
integration of electrodes (64 electrodes on a 60 μm-wide probe shank) through the
advanced electron beam patterning process [39]. Figure 4b shows a monolithically
integrated IC on a probe shank to reduce the number of interconnection lines and
external cables [40]. Figure 4c shows the Michigan probe design that demonstrated
a 128-channel, 3-D stacked array from multiple 2-D probes [41].

474
K. Kim et al.
Fig. 4 Recent progresses in Michigan probes: toward larger-scale recording with an increased
number of recording sites and monolithic integration of active recording circuit components. (a)
64-channel probe using e-beam patterning. Adapted with permission from [39], Copyright 2011,
PLOS. (b) monolithically integrated circuits on probe shank. Adapted with permission from [40];
Copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons. (c) 3-D stacking of planar probes. Adapted with permission
from [41]; Copyright 2011, IEEE
2.2
Integration of Light Sources onto Probes for
Electrophysiology
Optogenetics is considered one of the best neural modulation techniques to be
utilized in combination with electrical recording. The advantages of optogenetics
are not limited to its high temporal resolution and cell-type speciﬁcity. Optogenetics
also enables experiments where the stimulation target and the recording target are
located next to each other in a small volume of the brain. This combination allows
for monitoring the target neurons, while their activities are modulated optically
in real time. This capability is essential for the study of local circuit network
connectivity in the brain, for which experiments require accurate recording of all
activities of the neurons within the circuit while inducing precise modulation of a
few target neurons within the circuit [42].
Although optogenetics promises exciting new possibilities for neuroscience
research, there still has been an unmet need for reliable implantable tools to
precisely deliver light to the targeted neurons and to simultaneously record the
electrical signals from the individual neurons. Typically, optical stimulation has
been achieved by placing a single light source on the surface of the brain [43]
or a thick ﬁber in the brain parenchyma a few hundred microns away from the
recording sites [44–49]. This approach inevitably activates many unmonitored
neurons, making the separation between direct and population-mediated effects
impossible. The high intensity used to activate deep neurons may generate multiple
superimposed spike waveforms [50] and considerable light artifacts [45, 48, 49].

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
475
The study of a neural circuit requires the capability to selectively stimulate a small
population of neurons and simultaneously monitor their activities. The approach of
using a separate light source inevitably results in a mismatch between the volume
of the optical stimulation and the electrical recording. Therefore, the capability to
deliver light from the same implantable device, which records neural signals, is
required.
Combining precise optogenetic control with reliable electrophysiological readout
has been a technical challenge. Early solutions involved manual assembly of
commercially available optical ﬁbers and recording components (wires), resulting
in a bulky device assembly (Figure 5a) [51, 52]. In order to address this issue,
efforts have been made to integrate light sources locally close to the recording
sites. For example, thinned optical ﬁbers (Figure 5b) and waveguides (Figure 6a, b)
were assembled or integrated on multielectrode silicon probes [53, 54]. More recent
advances have led to the direct integration of light sources such as light-emitting
diodes (LEDs, Figure 6c) on a polymer probe substrate [55].
Implantable devices that provide the combined capabilities of optical stimulation
and electrical recording (optoelectrodes) can be categorized into two groups: (1)
waveguide-based optoelectrodes, in which the light sources are located away from
the stimulation site and the light is delivered through waveguides, and (2) LED-
based optoelectrodes, in which the light sources are directly integrated at the
stimulation site.
Most waveguide-based optoelectrodes use a conﬁned light delivered through an
optical ﬁber from a diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) laser source to the waveguide
on the neural probe. This approach is not scalable because the introduction of
light at multiple brain sites independently would require multiple ﬁber connections
to external light sources, which would constrain animal movement due to the
stiff optical ﬁber bundles. Some waveguide-based optoelectrodes attached the light
source at the end of the optical ﬁber in the headstage to mitigate this problem. Stark
et al. reported a novel assembly of the light source (LED chips and/or laser diodes)
attached to a tapered optical ﬁber, which was manually glued on a commercial
silicon recording probe (Figure 5b) [54]. While the device enabled multicolor
optical stimulation, the assembly procedure was completely manual and labor-
intensive, hence not scalable. Schwaerzle et al. reported a silicon optoelectrode
consisting of an optical waveguide and recording electrodes, on which multiple
bare laser diodes (LDs) were directly mounted to provide multicolor stimulation
[56, 57]. Due to the limited thermal budget from direct mount and butt coupling,
the device, however, was not capable of providing simultaneous optical stimulation
from multiple LDs, therefore limiting its scalability.
Direct placement of LEDs in proximity to the recording sites would possibly
eliminate a cumbersome assembly of multiple bulky light sources on the back end.
Kim et al. reported hybrid integration of small (∼50 × 50 μm) LEDs on a polymer
probe [55]. The LEDs were fabricated separately on a sapphire substrate ﬁrst and
then transferred onto the probe shank, where the recording electrodes are formed.
The process margin required for die transfer and the consequent post-fabrication

476
K. Kim et al.
Fig. 5 Manually assembled optoelectrodes. (a) a 200 μm-diameter multimode ﬁber with attached
tetrodes mounted on a mechanical drive. Adapted with permission from [51]; Copyright 2011,
Springer Nature. (b) Tapered optical ﬁbers glued to 6-shank silicon probes. Adapted with
permission [54]; Copyright 2012, The American Physiological Society

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
477
Fig. 6 Optoelectrodes with integrated waveguides and/or light sources. (a) Grating-coupled
waveguide optoelectrode. Adapted with permission from [53]; Copyright 2015, IEEE. (b) Laser
diode (LD)-coupled waveguide optoelectrode. Adapted with permission from [56]; Copyright
2013, IEEE. (c) Polymer optoelectrode with hybrid integrated GaN LEDs. Adapted with permis-
sion from [55]; Copyright 2013, American Association for the Advancement of Science
process make the dimension of the optoelectrode larger than optimal (∼400 μm in
width), resulting in signiﬁcant tissue damage. Devices with multiple monolithically
integrated LEDs have been reported [58, 59]. These devices consist of multiple
LEDs, all integrated on either a sapphire [58] or silicon [59] substrate. While these
devices were capable of multisite optical stimulations, the devices lack recording
capabilities and therefore could not be independently used for experiments without
accompanying recording electrodes.
In the following sections, we review two scalable optoelectrode approaches. One
is an injection laser diode-gradient-index lens (ILD-GRIN) waveguide optoelec-
trode, which is capable of delivering light of different wavelengths at the distal end
of tips in a multi-shank conﬁguration. The other is a μLED optoelectrode, which is
capable of illuminating multiple sites across the probe shanks at high resolution but
with single color. Both approaches provide simultaneous extracellular recording of
neurons in the same local circuit of the brain, where optical stimulation is induced.
These devices are ideal for enabling long-sought neuroscience experiments and
possibly bringing forth a number of exciting discoveries.
3
Fiberless Multicolor Optoelectrodes
One of the most straightforward ways to provide light to a deep-brain region is
to deliver light generated from the outside to the target stimulation site by means
of a waveguide. Photolithography-deﬁned waveguides can be built directly on the
neural probe platform with a minimal cross-sectional dimension (several microns by
several tens of microns) and therefore would induce considerably less tissue damage
than an optical ﬁber, whose diameter typically exceeds 100 μm.

478
K. Kim et al.
3.1
Prototype Waveguide Optoelectrodes
An implantable neural optoelectrode with integrated waveguides, optical mixers,
and optical splitters is illustrated in Figure 7 [60, 61]. This approach provides
spatially conﬁned stimulation of simultaneously monitored neurons by enabling
local light delivery precisely above the recording sites at speciﬁc wavelengths of
choice. The lithographically deﬁned shank was designed with minimal dimensions
(with a cross-sectional area measuring approximately 100 μm by 30 μm) to contain
all necessary optical and electrical components in order to minimize insertion-
induced tissue damage and foreign body reactions as well as to reduce alignment
tolerance between the optical stimulation site and the electrical recording sites.
Initially, the waveguide was composed of an SU-8 core (refractive index of 1.70)
with a bottom oxide-cladding layer (refractive index of 1.46) that can transmit
light at a speciﬁc wavelength for optical stimulation of targeted neurons. A U-
groove was lithographically deﬁned on the silicon substrate at the proximal end
of the waveguide for self-alignment with an optical ﬁber. Various optical waveguide
conﬁgurations were integrated for different applications [60]. An SU-8 structure
with two curved branches and a straight branch was patterned to form an optical
splitter (Figure 7a) or an optical mixer (Figure 7b) for the steering of the light to
attain optical functions. For example, a dual-shank optoelectrode was realized as
shown in Figure 7c by integrating two optical mixers for multicolor stimulation at
the distal ends, each independently controlled by the corresponding light sources
[61]. The transmission efﬁciency of blue light (λ = 473 nm) from the ﬁber to the
stimulation site through the SU-8 waveguide was measured as ∼0.67%.
Fig. 7 Schematics of waveguide conﬁgurations designed for the ﬁrst-generation integrated waveg-
uide probes, showing designs with (a) an optical splitter and (b) an optical mixer. Adapted with
permission from [60]; Copyright 2011, IEEE. (c) A dual-shank conﬁguration for multicolor,
multisite stimulation is shown as well. Adapted with permission from [61]; Copyright 2011, IEEE

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
479
The optoelectrodes using SU-8 waveguide cores were functional right after the
ﬁber assembly. However, no light was detected at the stimulation sites after a while.
The source of failure was identiﬁed as the damage in the SU-8 waveguide due to
heating during the prolonged test. In addition, SU-8 could absorb ambient moisture
[62] and affect transmission and coupling efﬁciencies.
Optical transmission efﬁciency was signiﬁcantly improved by replacing the SU-
8 waveguide with a dielectric waveguide composed of silicon oxynitride (SiOxNy)
as shown in Figure 8. The overall shank dimensions can be designed to minimize
tissue damage while maintaining sufﬁcient mechanical strength for insertion and
providing enough room to contain all optical and electrical components. Silicon-on-
insulator (SOI) wafers were chosen because the buried oxide layer can work as a
natural etch-stop layer to precisely deﬁne the shank thickness. The shank thickness
is determined by the top silicon layer, which is customized at 15 μm in thickness
with an accuracy of ±0.5 μm. A lithographically deﬁned sharp silicon tip allows
the thin optoelectrode to easily penetrate the pia mater with minimal tissue damage
along its insertion path. For this particular optoelectrode design, the shank width
can be as small as 70 μm, which is the minimum dimension to incorporate eight
interconnection lines and a waveguide given the fabrication process constraints. The
interconnection lines carry electrical signals from the eight recording electrodes to
the bonding pads, which are then wirebonded to a custom-made printed circuit board
(PCB). The waveguide delivers light from an aligned optical ﬁber to the stimulation
site. The U-groove at the back end of the optoelectrode can be designed to perfectly
ﬁt a 125 μm-diameter optical ﬁber, having the ﬁber core (50 μm in diameter) in
a self-aligned position with the integrated waveguide as shown in Figure 8b. The
optical ﬁber delivers light from an external DPSS laser source to the waveguide
integrated on the silicon probe substrate. The optical waveguide is composed of
a 5 μm-thick oxynitride core (index of refraction: 1.51) surrounded by a 3 μm-
thick oxide cladding (index of refraction: 1.46) on each side (top and bottom).
The waveguide width is tapered from 28 μm at the proximal end (coupling to an
optical ﬁber) to 14 μm at the distal end (illumination site at the probe tip). The
larger cross-sectional area at the proximal end allows higher coupling efﬁciency
to the optical ﬁber core, while the smaller cross-sectional area at the distal end
(Figure 8c) gives a compact spatial conﬁnement of light exiting from the waveguide
and minimizes tissue damage. With a light output of 0.5 mW at the waveguide tip,
all recording electrodes can be within a light cone of an intensity above 7 mW/mm2
(Figure 8d), which is sufﬁcient to activate/silence single units in vivo [54]. The
waveguide optoelectrode has been validated in vivo with light-induced activation of
ChR2+ neurons in the rat hippocampus [63].
3.2
Design of ILD-GRIN Waveguide Optoelectrode
Although the prototype waveguide optoelectrode introduced in the previous section
proved its utility in vivo, it is not scalable to incorporate multiple optical ﬁbers
for multisite and multicolor implementation. One approach of eliminating multiple

480
K. Kim et al.
1000
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
–100
300
250
5 μm
3 μm
15 μm
Silicon shank
200
150
100
60 mm
20 mm
140 mm
Waveguide
Electrode
50
0
–50
0
Width (mm)
d
c
b
a
Depth (mm)
waveguide
8 Recording
electrodes (red)
A-A’ cross-section
A’
A
5 mm shank
Bonding pads
> 7 mW/mm2
< 7 mW/mm2
50
100
Intensity
(mW/mm2)
10 mm
waveguide
Optical fiber
Fig. 8 Design of single-shank, monolithically integrated dielectric waveguide probe. (a) 3-D
schematics of overall probe design. (b) Coupling junction between the optical ﬁber and the
integrated waveguide. (c) A-A’ cross section showing the waveguide with SiOxNy core (purple)
and SiO2 cladding (blue). (d) Simulation results of light intensity distribution as light propagates
through the brain tissue. Adapted with permission from [63]; Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing
optical ﬁbers is to integrate light sources directly onto the printed circuit board in a
headstage on which the waveguide optoelectrode is mounted. It is advantageous to
use laser diodes (or injection laser diodes, ILD) as a light source for this ﬁberless
implementation. Thanks to the nature of coherent and highly collimated light from
ILDs, it is suitable to make a simple butt-coupling to the waveguide.
The wavelength of the ILDs can be determined by the opsins and the type of
experiments. For multicolor stimulation, one should choose the emission wave-
lengths that are sufﬁciently separated from each other so that the light at a given
wavelength would exclusively induce the target opsin without cross talk to others.
Among many candidates, two ILDs of 405 nm and 635 nm in emitting wavelength
have been chosen. In this prototype optoelectrode, the neurons that express ChR2
and Arch opsins can be stimulated mutually exclusively at their given wavelength
but not by the other (ChR2 at 405 nm and Arch at 635 nm, respectively).
When the laser diodes are coupled to a waveguide, optical loss can occur at the
junction. The optical loss at this coupling joint results from either angular diffraction

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
481
of the ILD emission or misalignment between the ILD and the waveguide. A
collimation mechanism can be utilized to optimize the coupling efﬁciency between
a divergent laser beam and a step-graded waveguide. Typically, spherical or plano-
convex lenses are used for beam collimation in an open system. However, such
systems require a large form factor due to the long focal length of the lenses. In
contrast, a GRIN lens [64–66] can provide good collimation with a relatively short
distance. Since a GRIN lens has a continuous change of refractive index (RI) within
the lens material, light rays can be continuously bent within the lens until they are
ﬁnally focused on a spot.
GRIN lens design parameters, including numerical aperture (NA), working
distance, and mechanical length (Z), can be optimized to achieve the desired
magniﬁcation (M < 1) for maximizing the optical coupling. Primary GRIN design
equations are as follows: RI at radius r, N(r) = N0 [1 – (A/2)r2] [64]; mechanical
length, Z = 2πP/ √A [64]; numerical aperture, NA = no sin(θa), where No is the RI
at the central axis of the lens; √A is the designed index gradient constant (mm-1),
which depends on lens material and wavelength; P is a lens pitch (a fraction of a full
sinusoidal period of the ray path); no is the RI of the surrounding medium around
GRIN; and θa is the lens acceptance angle. The custom GRIN lens was ordered from
NSG, Japan, via Go!Foton lens distributors in Somerset, NJ, USA.
As in the other waveguide optoelectrodes, a considerable amount of light is lost
as it propagates through a medium and crosses the interface between two different
media. The total optical loss of each waveguide (LT) can be expressed in dB as
LT = Lcoupling + Lpropagation + Lradiation, where Lcoupling is coupling loss, Lpropagation
is propagation loss, and Lradiation is radiation loss. The total coupling loss, calculated
using material properties of the waveguide, was <0.925 dB, including a reﬂective
(Fresnel) loss of 0.462 dB. Figure 9 shows a ray tracing model of an optical mixer
waveguide (7.04 mm total length) coupled to ILDs to deliver multicolor output at
the single waveguide port, simulated by Zemax (Zemax LLC, Kirkland, WA, USA).
GRIN lenses facilitate high optimal coupling between the ILDs and the waveguide,
by allowing the maximum misalignment tolerance. A full-pitch (P = 1) GRIN lens
with a high NA gives a focused beam at the output. After traveling exactly one full
cycle of a pitch, the beam is focused on the other end (Figure 9, inset). The focused
beam enters the waveguide mixer arms, which taper down from a width of 50 μm
to 30 μm and then converge into a 5 mm-long straight waveguide (cross section:
30 μm × 7 μm).
In order to integrate multiple stimulation sites, the arms of optical mixers should
be bent before they converge at a junction. The bending radius of the mixer arms
should be maximized to reduce radiation (mode conversion) losses. The design
challenge is to maintain the smallest possible form factor while maximizing the
radius of curvature of each mixer arm. Figure 10 shows the waveguide mixer arm
geometries designed for four distal stimulation sites from eight optical inputs. Mixer
arms 2 and 3 were implemented with the same bending radius of 2.335 mm, while
mixer arm 4 had a bending radius of 1.370 mm [68] [69]. The width for all mixer
arms was 15 μm, except the width of arm 4, which was increased from 15 μm to 24
μm to compensate for the higher radiation loss due to sharper bending (Fig. 10).

482
K. Kim et al.
Fig. 9 Zemax optical model of an optical mixer waveguide (7.04 mm total length) coupled to ILDs
to deliver multicolor output at the single waveguide port. The model consists of two ILDs (405 nm
and 635 nm) coupled to the two arms (each 2 mm long) of an optical mixer via 405 nm (2.38 mm
long) and 635 nm (2.54 mm) GRIN lenses, respectively. The schematic in the inset shows a full-
pitch GRIN lens collimating and focusing a divergent ILD laser beam into the waveguide mixer
arm (WG). L1 and L2 denote object and image distances, respectively, that can ﬁt well within the
device fabrication and assembly precision. Adapted with permission from [67], Copyright 2016,
Springer Nature
The propagation loss, attenuation due to scattering and absorption as light travels
through the waveguide, is calculated for two wavelengths generated from blue and
red ILDs. Since a short wavelength light (blue, 405 nm) suffers more scattering
loss than a longer wavelength light (red, 635 nm), the ILDs are arranged in such a
manner that 405 nm ILDs are coupled with the mixer arm with a lower loss (arm 1)
and 635 nm ILDs are coupled with the mixer arm with a higher loss (arm 4). The
waveguide and mixer design can provide two different wavelengths by switching
blue and red LEDs with the total loss of 9.43 dB on average [27].
3.3
Fabrication and Assembly Processes
Fabrication of ILD-GRIN waveguide optoelectrodes follows the standard microfab-
rication processes developed for the Michigan probes [63, 67, 70]. The fabrication
starts with an SOI wafer with a top silicon layer of 22 μm (Figure 11a). A 0.7
μm-thick low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) silicon dioxide/silicon
nitride/silicon dioxide (O/N/O) ﬁlm stack is ﬁrst deposited for stress compensation
and electrical insulation. This is followed by lift-off patterning of Cr/Au and
Ti/Pt/Ir layers for deﬁnition of interconnection/wirebonding pads and recording
sites, respectively (Figure 11b). A 500 Å-thick aluminum oxide (Al2O3) ﬁlm is
then deposited under the waveguide ﬁlms as an etch-stop in order to avoid potential
damage to the metal surfaces underneath. A multilayer dielectric stack consisting

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
483
Fig. 10 Waveguide mixer arm geometries and optical wave propagation simulated by Zemax. The
mean value of total transmission efﬁciency is ∼3% for both transmitting wavelengths (405 nm and
635 nm) in all waveguide ports. Mixer arm 1 is a straight waveguide. Mixer arms 2 and 3 are
identical with a bending radius of 2.335 mm. Arm 2 transmits 635 nm wavelength and arm 3
transmits 405 nm wavelength, resulting in a small variation in the optical intensity at the output
of each arm. Mixer arm 4 has a bending radius of 1.370 mm. Since a short wavelength (405 nm)
suffers more dispersive loss than a higher one (635 nm), the mixer arm with the minimum loss (arm
1) is allocated to transmit 405 nm, while the mixer arm with the maximum loss (arm 4) is allocated
to transmit 635 nm. Adapted with permission from [27], Copyright 2018, Springer Nature
of 2 μm-thick silicon dioxide (SiO2, RI = 1.46), 7 μm-thick silicon oxynitride
(SiOxNy, RI = 1.52), and another 2 μm-thick SiO2 ﬁlm is deposited using plasma-
enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) and then subsequently patterned
with reactive-ion etching (RIE) to deﬁne the waveguide (Figure 11c). The next step
consists of RIE of silicon dioxide and wet etching of 500 Å-thick aluminum oxide
with buffered hydroﬂuoric acid (BHF) solution to open the contacts for wirebonding
pads and recording electrodes. The probe shape is deﬁned by deep reactive-ion
etching (DRIE) of silicon substrate from the front side, and then optoelectrodes
are released using DRIE from the wafer backside (Figure 11d).
The jig on which the ILDs and the GRINs are mounted (ILD-GRIN jig) can be
separately fabricated using a simple three-mask process as shown in Figure 11e–g. A
(100)-orientation silicon wafer with a 2 μm-thick top SiO2 was used for fabrication
of the ILD-GRIN jig (Figure 11e). First, Cr/Pt/Au metal traces and In/Au ILD ﬂip-
chip bonding pads are deﬁned with lift-off patterning (Figure 11f). These metal
layers are also used to deﬁne the alignment marks for ILD placement. Front-side
DRIE is used to etch the GRIN slots on the silicon substrate, and then the wafer is
diced to release individual ILD-GRIN jigs (Figure 11g).

484
K. Kim et al.
Fig. 11 Optoelectrode fabrication and assembly on a PCB. Device fabrication along A-A’. (a) A
starting silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafer; (b) LPCVD O/N/O stack deposition; lift-off of Cr/Au
and Ti/Pt/Ir; (c) deposition and patterning of PECVD-grown waveguide ﬁlms; dry plasma etching
and wet etching; (d) front-side DRIE, backside thinning for release; (e) ILD-GRIN fabrication on a
silicon wafer with a 2 μm-thick top silicon dioxide (SiO2); (f) deposition and pattering of Cr/Pt/Au
and In/Au; (g) front-side DRIE and dicing for release; and (h) ﬁnal assembly of device components
on PCB. Adapted with permission from [67], Copyright 2016, Springer Nature
Figure 12 shows microscopic images of the optoelectrode during the fabrica-
tion steps. Figure 12a shows optical microscope images of the optoelectrode tip
following several key fabrication steps shown in Figure 11a–d. Figure 12b shows
the scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the released optoelectrode with a
magniﬁed view of the waveguide structure fabricated on the top of the silicon shank.
Figure 12c shows the image of the released ILD-GRIN jig, both with and without
the assembled components.
The optoelectrode is constructed by assembling the microfabricated components
on a custom-designed PCB (Figure 11h) [3]. First, the ILDs are aligned and ﬂip-
chip bonded onto the released ILD-GRIN jig. A low-temperature (200 ◦C) eutectic
bonding is performed with In-Au for epi-down bonding of the ILDs on the ILD-
GRIN jig. The optoelectrode is then temporarily mounted on a rectangular probe jig
made of diced silicon wafer so that the vertical alignment between the probe and
the ILD-GRIN jig can be precisely controlled. Once aligned in a vertical plane, the
waveguide mixer can be also aligned to the ILDs in a horizontal plane, and GRIN
lenses are secured in the GRIN slots using an index-matching UV-curable epoxy
(NOA 61, Norland Products, NJ, USA; RI = 1.56). Since the GRIN-waveguide
optical junction is more susceptible to angular misalignment errors, the index-
matching epoxy should not be applied at this junction. The assembled devices are
wirebonded on the PCB, and two Omnetics connectors (A79006-001 and A790022-
001, Omnetics Connector Corporation, Minneapolis, MN, USA) are soldered to
provide electrical interfaces to external current sources and neural signal ampliﬁers.

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
485
Figure 13 shows the fully assembled prototype of the device. The GRIN assembly is
enclosed in a micromachined lightweight Derlin lid (Derlin acetal resin, McMaster-
Carr, Aurora, OH, USA). The lid, which has a gold-sputtered exterior and ventilation
holes, prevents any light that escaped the optical assembly from affecting the
experiment and also provides an electrical shielding for the signal-carrying metal
traces from external electromagnetic interference (EMI) sources.
3.4
Independent Control of Distinct Neural Populations Using
Multicolor ILD-GRIN Optoelectrodes
The feasibility of dual-color ILD-GRIN optoelectrodes was validated with a
demonstration of independent control of different types of neurons in vivo [27].
The assembled four-shank ILD-GRIN optoelectrodes with 4 dual-color waveguide
ports and 32 recording sites were used to record neural activity in awake head-
ﬁxed mice (Fig. 13, right). Recordings were obtained from the dorsal CA1 of
head-ﬁxed awake PV-Cre mice that had previously been injected with adeno-
associated viruses (AAVs) encoding calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
II (CaMKII) promoter-driven ChR2 and Cre-dependent ChrimsonR, yielding
expression in pyramidal neurons (PYR) and PV+ interneurons (PV), respectively.
After each experimental session, activities of individual neurons were identiﬁed by
sorting action potential spikes from the recorded signals.
Spontaneous neural activities were observed from all four shanks, while light-
modulated neuronal activity was observed only from the illuminated neural shank
(Figure 14). Pulsed 405 nm illumination (100 ms, 200 μW) elicited spiking in a
subset of the pyramidal neurons, while pulsed 635 nm illuminations with different
powers (300 ms long, 340 μW, 420 μW, and 500 μW) elicited spiking in a subset
of putative PV interneurons. All signals were recorded from the electrodes on the
same stimulated shank (Figure 15). All PYR showed robust response to 405 nm
light stimulation and no response to 635 nm light stimulation (Figure 15, pink cell).
It is worth noting that the dual-color stimulation from the waveguide optoelec-
trode can provide useful insights about potential synaptic connections between
different cell types in the local circuit. Two putative PV interneurons (Figure 15,
green and orange cells) showed increasing spiking responses to different levels of
635 nm illuminations and also to 405 nm stimulation. These cells were found to
have excitatory monosynaptic connections from two other ChR2 expressing PYR
cells (Figure 15, light blue and dark blue cells) and, hence, ﬁre during 405 nm
stimulation. One more interesting effect observed from one of the monosynaptic
pairs (Figure 15, dark blue and orange cell) was that increasing intensity of 635 nm
illumination reduces the spiking rate of the PV interneuron (Figure 15, orange cell)
within the 405 nm illumination period, suggesting that the interneurons synaptically
inhibit the PYR (Figure 15, dark blue cell) in this pair. This synaptic inhibition
results in the reduced spiking of PYR, which in turns reduces the excitatory input
to PV.

486
K. Kim et al.
Fig. 12 (continued)

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
487
4
MicroLED Optoelectrodes
Despite the tremendous excitement of both neuroscience and engineering commu-
nities, single-illumination-site-per-shank optoelectrode conﬁguration is not optimal
for practical neuroscience studies [63]. The key challenge is in scaling the number
of sites for both recording and stimulation while keeping the entire system in a small
form factor and lightweight. This is especially critical for chronic animal studies of
brain regions in which neurons are densely populated within a small volume, such as
the hippocampus. In a mouse, for example, the hippocampal CA1 region is roughly
50 μm thick with 4 to 6 layers of neurons. The next-generation optoelectrodes
should offer scalability in quantity and resolution to enable cellular-level local
circuit analysis in behaving animals by integrating multiple optical stimulation sites
close to the recording sites.
4.1
Design of μLED Optoelectrode: Monolithic Integration
of μLEDs onto Silicon Probe Shanks
The speciﬁcations for the next-generation optoelectrodes can be summarized as
follows:
1. The dimensions of shanks should be kept at a minimum similar to those of
typical silicon recording probes. In other words, the additional integration of light
sources should not increase the physical size of probes.
2. The number of shanks should be increased to at least four to provide sufﬁcient
coverage over the entire lateral span of the target region of the brain.
3. The number of optical stimulation sites should be maximized at a given shank
dimension, with a volume of illuminated regions extending out to the neighboring
recording electrodes.
4. The entire assembly weight should be no more than ∼10% of a rodent’s body
weight (e.g., ∼3 g for an adult male mouse).
◀
Fig. 12 Microscopic images of the probe. (a) Optical microphotographs of the probe following
several key fabrication steps: (top left) lift-off of Cr/Au for interconnects and bond pads and Ti/Pt/Ir
for recording electrodes; (top right) deposition and patterning of SiO2/SiOxNy/SiO2 waveguide
stack followed by contact opening of Ir electrodes; and (bottom) front DRIE of Si substrate
to deﬁne the probe shank perimeter. (b) SEM images of the waveguide: (left) monolithically
integrated integrated dielectric waveguide with iridium electrodes in Buzsaki8 conﬁguration, and
(right) high-magniﬁcation SEM image of the dielectric waveguide tip (7 μm core with 2 μm top
and 2 μm bottom cladding). Adapted with permission from [67], Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.
(c) Optical images of the fabricated ILD-GRIN jig: (left) showing GRIN slots and ILD alignment
marks, and (right) ILD-GRIN jig assembled with epi-side down ﬂip-chipped 405 nm and 635 nm
ILDs and GRIN lenses. Adapted with permission from [67], Copyright 2016, Springer Nature

488
K. Kim et al.
Fig. 13 Prototype waveguide optoelectrodes assembled on a PCB. (left) Single-shank prototype
optoelectrode with simultaneous blue and red light emission at the tip. Inset (a) shows the enlarged
view of the optical mixer at the back end of the probe with GRIN lens coupling into the two arms
of the waveguide mixer. Inset (b) shows the enlarged probe tip with mixed light illuminating at
the 30 μm × 7 μm waveguide tip. Adapted with permission from [67], Copyright 2016, Springer
Nature. (right) Assembled multi-shank ILD-GRIN optoelectrode prototype on a PCB compared to
a US dime in size. Adapted with permission from [27], Copyright 2018, Springer Nature
Fig. 14 Wideband (0.1–7,500 Hz) spiking activity recorded on a four-shank probe from the CA1
pyramidal cell layer of an awake mouse whose pyramidal cells express ChR2 and parvalbumin
positive interneurons express ChrimsonR. The illuminated shank shows spiking activity during
a 200 μW 405 nm light pulse (100 ms, 40 mA) and 450 μW 635 nm light pulse (300 ms,
50 mA). Note that the spontaneous activities are observed in all shanks, while the induced spiking
is observed only from the illuminated shank during the ILD pulse driving. Adapted with permission
from [27], Copyright 2018, Springer Nature

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
489
Fig. 15 Independent multicolor excitation of pyramidal neurons (PYR) and interneurons (PV).
The spiking data is quantiﬁed for 37 well-isolated cells (35 PYR and 2 PV interneurons) recorded
simultaneously from CA1 (same animal and session as in Fig. 14). Inset of the probe tip shows
the vertical location of ﬁve light-modulated cells (3 PYR and 2 PV) relative to the probe sites,
estimated by the differences of the intensity of the action potentials measured from multiple
electrodes. Plots in the center show spike waveforms and autocorrelation histograms in the lack of
any illumination. Histogram plots on the right show spiking response to 50 ms-long 405 pulses and
400 ms-long 635 nm pulses (for three different intensities) in a ChR2+ PYR and two monosynaptic
pairs of ChR2+ PYR and a ChrimsonR+ PV. Note the excitatory synapse from light blue to green
cell and from dark blue to orange cell. Also note the reduction of the intensity of blue light-induced
excitation of an interneuron (orange cell) due to higher-intensity 635 nm illumination
In order to meet these requirements for optical stimulation, it is inevitable that
light sources should be directly integrated onto each shank of the neural probe.
LEDs can be the best candidate for direct light source integration, since they
generate light with a high efﬁciency, which is favorable for low power consumption
and low heat generation. Several manufactures have demonstrated that LEDs with
only several tens to a few hundred square microns of surface area can be reliably
fabricated and utilized for display applications [71]. These miniature, micron-sized
LEDs (μLEDs) can then be integrated on the shank in the vicinity of the recording
electrodes.
One approach is hybrid integration, where the separately fabricated LEDs are
assembled onto probe shanks by die transfer [55]. The large surface area on the
substrate that has to be reserved for the potential misalignment of transfer-integrated
components – also known as the process margin – required for hybrid assembly,
however, prevents the fabricated optoelectrode from being scaled to higher density
at high throughput to meet the challenging requirements listed above. The other

490
K. Kim et al.
Fig. 16 3-D schematics of
the four-shank neural probe
monolithically integrated
with 32 recording electrodes
(gold) and 12 μLEDs (blue)
[26]
approach is monolithic integration, where both LEDs and recording electrodes
are photolithographically deﬁned and fabricated together on the same shank using
microfabrication and MEMS (microelectromechanical system) technologies.
The monolithic integration of μLEDs offers several advantages over the waveg-
uide approach. The ﬁrst and most obvious advantage is that multiple light sources
can be densely integrated in a small area on each shank [26]. The second is that
the volume of optical stimulation can be precisely conﬁned in the volume of
electrical recording, allowing for possible cellular resolution. The ﬁnal is that the
assembly and packaging can be simpler, because optical alignment between the
waveguide and light source is not needed; thus, there is no optical coupling loss.
These advantages enable high-resolution, large-scale optical stimulation that none
of the preexisting technologies had ever offered.
The ﬁrst prototype μLED optoelectrode was implemented with three μLEDs
monolithically integrated with eight recording electrodes on each shank in a four-
shank conﬁguration as illustrated in Figure 16. Twelve total μLEDs distributed
across four probe shanks provide 480 million (= 12!) possible combinations
of stimulation sequence that can be programmed to manipulate the spike tim-
ing at 12 different locations. The capability of highly versatile manipulation of
high-resolution neural circuits opens the door to new exciting experiments for
fundamental understanding of microcircuits in the brain, such as those inside the
hippocampus during memory formation and consolidation.
4.2
LED-on-Silicon Technology
Design of a neural probe with monolithically integrated μLEDs requires an appro-
priate choice of substrate material to grow LED quantum wells, which determine
the emission wavelength(s), emission efﬁciency, and process compatibility [72, 73].

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
491
Among a number of available material options, gallium nitride/indium gallium
nitride multi-quantum well (GaN/InGaN MQW) grown on a gallium nitride-on-
silicon (GaN-on-Si) wafer was chosen as the substrate for μLED optoelectrode
fabrication. This combination of substrate material and LED layers provides
process compatibility with Michigan probe fabrication while enabling high-density
integration of μLEDs with sufﬁcient optical power for stimulating opsins in vivo.
LEDs generate photons at a speciﬁc wavelength through the recombination of
electrons and holes inside a semiconductor material. This radiative recombination
requires the material of a direct bandgap so that the recombination energy results
in generation of photons (light) more preferably than the generation of phonons
(heat). In the active region of LEDs, electrons and holes are electrically injected
to induce recombination, and photons are generated with the same energy as
the bandgap of the semiconductor material. Because the wavelength of light is
inversely proportional to the energy of photons, the bandgap of the semiconductor
material determines the wavelength of the emitted light. Among the number of direct
bandgap materials, InGaN has become a preferred choice for visible light LEDs. The
bandgap of InGaN can be easily modiﬁed by tuning the indium-to-gallium ratio,
and the resulting wavelength can be tailored across a wide range within the visible
spectrum [74].
GaN-based optical devices are usually fabricated in the form of thin ﬁlm
epitaxially grown on a substrate other than GaN [75–77]. The heterogeneous
epitaxial growth of GaN on a substrate with a different material composition induces
stress in the GaN ﬁlm, resulting in dislocations and other forms of defects due
to lattice mismatch. Typically, GaN-based LEDs are fabricated on top of sapphire
or SiC substrates where lattice mismatch is tolerable [78]. McAlinden et al. have
reported that miniaturized LEDs can be fabricated on sapphire substrates and have
analyzed the LED efﬁciencies and thermal budget for potential use of optogenetic
applications [58]. However, sapphire is extremely difﬁcult (or almost impossible) to
etch into a desirable, needle-like shape and is not compatible with the conventional
micromachining techniques.
Silicon substrate is an ideal choice because well-established micromachining
techniques can be used. The same fabrication processes developed for the Michigan
probes can be employed to accurately deﬁne the probe shape either by the
dissolved wafer process [34, 35, 79] or by DRIE [60, 63, 80]. Also, silicon has
an approximately ﬁve times higher thermal conductivity than that of the sapphire,
allowing effective dissipation of the heat generated by LED operation [81]. In
addition, having an opaque silicon substrate helps to conﬁne light emission to only
the top side of the LEDs as opposed to LEDs-on-sapphire, which can emit light
isotropically even through the transparent sapphire substrate.
Recently, GaN-on-Si technology has made tremendous advancements, and GaN
MQW layers can be reliably and reproducibly grown on silicon substrate. Introduc-
tion of lattice-matching buffer layers can greatly reduce interface defects [82–86].
Signiﬁcant progress has been made to further optimize the interface between GaN
and silicon thanks to the emerging LED lighting business and market. The primary
goal of reducing LED costs boosted the development of new technologies that take

492
K. Kim et al.
advantage of large-scale silicon wafer processing [82], and now custom GaN-on-Si
LED wafers are commercially available.
One of the drawbacks of GaN-on-Si wafers is that the interface defect density of
GaN MQW layers is roughly ten times higher than that grown on sapphire [82]. As
a result, the LED efﬁciency is expected to be lower. Theoretical calculation and
benchtop testing have validated that, in spite of the lower efﬁciency than those
fabricated on more traditional substrates, GaN-on-Si can generate light sufﬁcient
enough for optical stimulation of neurons without an excessive heating of the
surrounding tissue (preferably < 1◦C increase in temperature to prevent permanent
damage to the tissue [87]). The plug efﬁciency (η0), or the efﬁciency of electrical
to optical power conversion, can be approximated by η0 = ηi × ηr × ηe, where
the ﬁrst term ηi is deﬁned as the injection efﬁciency of LEDs, ηr is the internal
quantum efﬁciency (IQE), and ηe is the extraction efﬁciency. Because GaN-on-Si
has a dislocation density more than one order of magnitude higher (5 × 109 cm-2)
than that of GaN-on-sapphire (DD ∼3 × 108 cm-2), the IQE of GaN-on-Si LEDs
would be approximately 33% of that of GaN-on-sapphire LEDs [88], resulting in
low plug efﬁciency.
The optical and electrical characteristics of fabricated μLEDs on silicon substrate
are shown in Figure 17. The average peak plug efﬁciency was 0.87%, similar to
that of theoretical estimation. Despite low efﬁciency, the fabricated μLEDs were
able to generate optical ﬂux of several microwatts, which results in irradiance of
sufﬁciently higher than 1 mW/mm2, the threshold for ChR2 activation [54]. The
optical output can be precisely controlled by adjusting the current, allowing for high-
resolution optical stimulation with the illumination conﬁned to a target brain region.
The majority of the electrical power consumed by the LEDs that is not converted
to light is dissipated as heat. The heat generated from the μLEDs during optical
stimulation, which is in the range of several tens to hundreds of microwatts, does
not induce signiﬁcant heating of the brain tissue [26]. If operated in a properly duty-
cycled mode (typical for optogenetic experiments), even prolonged in vivo usage of
μLED optoelectrodes is considered safe [26].
4.3
Fabrication Process
The fabrication process of μLED optoelectrodes begins with commercially avail-
able GaN-on-Si GaN/InGaN MQW LED wafers. The bandgap of InGaN quantum
wells can be tailored to have an emission spectrum centered at 470 nm for the
activation of ChR2. The epitaxial layers are etched down to expose n-type GaN
(n-GaN), forming an isolated LED mesa structure. Then, PECVD SiO2 is deposited
to insulate the mesa sidewalls. P-GaN contacts are made by etching the SiO2 layer
on top of the LED mesa, and a semitransparent Ni/Au layer is deposited for ohmic
contact to the p-GaN. Also, additional small openings in the SiO2 layer are formed
near the LED mesa to provide a contact to the n-GaN layer. Next, a Ti/Al/Ti/Au
layer is deposited and lifted off to deﬁne the electrical interconnection lines for the
recording electrodes as well as for the LEDs. After deﬁning the LEDs, the GaN layer

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
493
Fig. 17 Measured characteristics of μLEDs across a large bias range (top) and near the threshold (bottom)

494
K. Kim et al.
Fig. 18 (continued)

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
495
in the ﬁeld region (outside of the probe shank) is etched to completely expose the
GaN sidewalls and the underlying silicon substrate. A dielectric bilayer composed
of atomic layer deposition (ALD) Al2O3 and PECVD SiO2 is added to form a
protection layer from moisture [89]. This also electrically insulates the GaN layers
and the metal interconnects. The dielectric bilayer is then patterned and etched to
open the contact at the recording sites, and Ti/Ir is sputtered over the contacts to
form the recording electrodes. Finally, the silicon shanks are formed by etching
silicon from the top as well as from the bottom using a double-side DRIE process
to release the probes from the wafer. Figure 18a shows microscope images of probe
tips to highlight some of the key fabrication steps. Figure 18b shows further details
of the fabricated optoelectrode.
4.4
High-Resolution Optical Stimulation Using MicroLED
Optoelectrode
The μLED optoelectrodes were ﬁrst tested acutely using urethane-anesthetized
CaMKII::ChR2 mice, in the CA1 pyramidal layer inside the hippocampus [26].
Spontaneous activities were observed when the electrodes were positioned in
the CA1 pyramidal layer. Characteristic sharp wave-ripples (SWRs) were easily
observed, conﬁrming that the electrodes were in the hippocampus. Identiﬁable
activities included single units of PYR and interneurons (INT). Figure 19 shows
light-induced activities recorded at the same location in which spontaneous activi-
ties were recorded. There was clear entrainment of neural activity by light, as can be
seen from robust spiking (green trace in Figure 19b). Recordings from the electrodes
on adjacent shanks (red and blue traces) showed spontaneous activities only. Similar
local neuronal stimulation effects were observed at different locations with different
sites of optical stimulation.
Chronic experiments further validated the capabilities of the μLED optoelec-
trodes [26]. Four optoelectrodes, each of which was mounted on a movable
micro-drive, were implanted in the brains of two CaMKII::ChR2 and two wild-
type mice. The mice were allowed to recover over the course of 1 week, and then
recordings and stimulation were carried out in the hippocampal CA1 layer. The
optoelectrodes were advanced slowly at a rate of 70 μm per day while observing the
◀
Fig. 18 Microscopic images of the probe tip (a) following several key fabrication steps (all scale
bars = 15 μm): 1. LED mesa structures deﬁned with a stack of MQW, p-GaN, and Ni/Au after
n-contacts are opened; 2. lift-off of Ti/Al/Ti/Au to form interconnects; 3. removal of GaN in the
ﬁeld region to expose the silicon substrate; 4. patterning of Ir recording electrodes; 5. front DRIE of
silicon substrate to deﬁne probe shank perimeter; and 6. after backside silicon etching to release the
probes from the substrate. (b) SEM images of the released probe at the tip (scale bar = 35 μm);
(inset 1) a magniﬁed picture of a μLED and metal interconnects (scale bar = 6 μm); (inset 2)
μLED mesa formed by plasma etching (scale bar = 1 μm); (inset 3) μLED mesa etched with Cl2
plasma (scale bar = 1 μm)

496
K. Kim et al.
6
a
b
c
Ripple power [Z]
7
8
9
S1
S2
S3
S4
40
S2 units
S3 units
30
20
C2.2 stim
Gain
C3.3 stim
10
0
20
10
0–π
0
Phase [rad]
π –π
0
π
50 ms
50 μV
Fig. 19 (a) Layout of somata and spatial distribution of ripple power during spontaneous activity;
(b) probe layout and wideband, artifact-free traces from three shanks during sine-wave stimulation
on shank 3 (5 Hz, 0–3.6 V, central LED – black circle). Note the local induction of entrained
spikes on shank 3 (green trace). (c) Group data, shown separately for units recorded on shank 2
(S2) and on shank 3 (S3; PYR in red, INT in blue). Different rows show the neuronal activity
during polarization of the central shank 2 LED (C2.2) and of the top LED on shank 3 (C3.3). Note
localized entrainment of cells on shank 3
signals from the electrodes. All four optoelectrodes showed spontaneous spiking and
SWRs indicating the accurate position of the optoelectrode tips. A 5 Hz sine-wave
stimulation waveform was also used to drive the μLEDs in both CaMKII::ChR2
mice and wild-type mice. The amplitude of the sine wave varied between 0 V
and a peak value ranging from 2.5 V to 4 V. The effects of the optical stimulation
were clearly observed in the CaMKII::ChR2 animals and were intensity dependent:
spikes were induced at low intensities (as low as 37 nW, 0.25 mW/mm2 intensity),
and high-frequency oscillations (HFOs) were induced at higher intensities (as low as
about 350 nW, 2.3 mW/mm2 intensity). In contrast, no effects on spiking or HFOs
were seen in any of the wild-type animals, despite the fact that the optoelectrodes
were recording spikes and SWRs from the CA1 pyramidal cell layer. This evidence
rejected the hypothesis that the electrical current used to drive the μLEDs can also
generate spikes due to capacitive, inductive, or thermal effects.
High spatial resolution, which can be achieved using low-power optical stimu-
lation, was further demonstrated [26]. As the optical power generated from each
of two adjacent μLEDs was varied from 0 to 0.8 μW (4.9 mW/mm2), the changes
in the ﬁring activities of the neurons in the vicinity of the stimulation site were
observed. Multiple cases validating spatial conﬁnement of optical stimulation were
observed, mostly involving a pair of PYRs within a 20 μm diameter from a
μLED being strongly phase-locked by optical stimulation from the LED but not by
stimulation using any other neighboring LEDs. As shown in Figure 20, independent
and exclusive stimulation of two single cells separated from each other by as close
as 50 μm was observed as well.

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
497
Fig. 20 Sub-layer resolution control of spiking in the CA1 pyramidal layer shown by independent
control of distinct cells on shank 4 between the bottom and middle μLEDs using same bias
conditions: (a) bottom μLED generated phase-locked spiking of a well-isolated PYR (pink) next
to the μLED, but not of another well-isolated PYR (red) at the opposite side of the pyramidal layer;
(b) middle μLED generated phase-locked spiking of the adjacent PYR (red) but not of the distant
PYR (pink)
5
Discussion
Fiberless optoelectrodes have enabled interesting new experiments for the study of
local circuits in the brain. Still, there is room to improve, and many more mysteries
of the brain can be elucidated through tools with more functionalities beyond the
current state-of-the-art optoelectrodes. For example, high-density multicolor μLED
probes would be a natural extension toward scaling the number of illumination sites
for larger coverage of the brain region even at a higher resolution. Various opsins
are transfected in speciﬁc target neurons, for example, pyramidal neurons with
channel rhodopsin and interneurons with archaerhodopsin, and multicolor μLED
probes can selectively modulate the complicated neural circuits in a controlled
manner at high temporal and spatial resolutions. For high-density optoelectrodes,
the fundamental scaling limitation comes from lead connection. Signal processing
ICs (integrated circuits) should be assembled in a headstage in a small form factor
for amplifying and multiplexing the recorded signals and driving the light-emitting
devices. It is anticipated that both the number of recording channels and the number
of stimulation sites will exceed a hundred or even a thousand in the near future.
Another direction that can assist the advances in science would be to integrate all
the optical (stimulation sites) and the electrical (recording) components on a ﬂexible
platform. This would make the optoelectrode more mechanically compliant and is

498
K. Kim et al.
thus expected to extend the duration of its chronic use in vivo once the optoelectrode
is successfully implanted and securely placed in the target region. More importantly,
the ﬂexible optoelectrode could allow long-term recording and manipulation of the
same neurons at the same location.
Optogenetics has changed the way neuro-electrophysiology is being conducted
and contributed to rapid advances in the associated enabling technologies. Major
areas of advancement in optogenetics include the genomic expansion of various
opsin developments, reﬁning the molecular engineering for optimized functionality,
wavelengths, and temporal resolution, and genetic targeting strategies for various
biological systems and animal models. Engineering opsins with higher efﬁciency
and better expression selectivity would be of substantial value. Technological
advancement toward high-speed targets and causal control of intact neural circuit
function is expected to continue. There is a pressing need for improved scale,
density, and speciﬁcity for continuous breakthroughs in neuroscience research.
Parallel advancements in the ﬁelds of optoelectronic semiconductor materials,
micro- and nano-fabrication technologies, integrated circuits, and microsystem
packaging together will help inch closer toward this goal. Altogether, these inno-
vations will keep pushing the discovery of molecular biology and technologies alike
in coming years. In parallel, continuous innovations need to be explored toward
the development of reliable and scalable neurotechnologies for long-term chronic
research and clinical use.
6
Conclusion
We introduced two different ﬁberless optoelectrodes, each of which enabled a
novel mode of experiments that will lead to answers to fundamental questions in
neuroscience by revealing functional connectivity inside local circuits. Depending
on the type of analysis required for a speciﬁc set of neurons inside a circuit, either a
multicolor optical stimulation in the same location or a high-resolution, multisite
optical stimulation can be conducted along with simultaneous recording of the
resulting neuronal activities. With progresses in both microfabrication technology
and in molecular engineering, improved versions of ﬁberless optoelectrodes are
expected to be implemented and utilized in larger-scale, more complex neuroscience
experiments to answer critical questions about a wide range of neural circuits inside
the brain.
References
1. Azevedo, F.A., Carvalho, L.R., Grinberg, L.T., Farfel, J.M., Ferretti, R.E., Leite, R.E., Jacob
Filho, W., Lent, R., Herculano-Houzel, S.: Equal numbers of neuronal and nonneuronal cells
make the human brain an isometrically scaled-up primate brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 513(5), 532–
541 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.21974
2. Krioukov, D., Kitsak, M., Sinkovits, R.S., Rideout, D., Meyer, D., Boguna, M.: Network
cosmology. Sci. Rep. 2, 793 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep00793

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
499
3. Frackowiak, R.S.J.: Human Brain Function, 2nd edn. Elsevier Academic Press, Amster-
dam/Boston (2004)
4. Lin, L., Chen, G., Xie, K., Zaia, K.A., Zhang, S., Tsien, J.Z.: Large-scale neural ensemble
recording in the brains of freely behaving mice. J. Neurosci. Methods. 155(1), 28–38 (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2005.12.032
5. Buzsaki, G.: Large-scale recording of neuronal ensembles. Nat. Neurosci. 7(5), 446–451
(2004). https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1233
6. Goebel, R.: Localization of brain activity using functional magnetic resonance imaging. Med.
Radiol. Diagn. Imaging, 9–51 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-49976-3_2
7. Pradhan, T., Jung, H.S., Jang, J.H., Kim, T.W., Kang, C., Kim, J.S.: Chemical sensing
of neurotransmitters. Chem. Soc. Rev. 43(13), 4684–4713 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1039/
c3cs60477b
8. Sinha, S.R., Saggau, P.: Simultaneous optical recording of membrane potential and intra-
cellular calcium from brain slices. Methods. 18(2), 204 (1999). https://doi.org/10.1006/
meth.1999.0773
9. Perron, A., Akemann, W., Mutoh, H., Knopfel, T.: Genetically encoded probes for optical
imaging of brain electrical activity. Prog. Brain Res. 196, 63–77 (2012). https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-444-59426-6.00004-5
10. Hoogerwerf, A.C., Wise, K.D.: A three-dimensional neural recording array. In: TRANS-
DUCERS ‘91: 1991 International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators.
Digest of Technical Papers, 24–27 June 1991, pp. 120–123 (1991). https://doi.org/10.1109/
SENSOR.1991.148816
11. Kim, S., Bhandari, R., Klein, M., Negi, S., Rieth, L., Tathireddy, P., Toepper, M., Oppermann,
H., Solzbacher, F.: Integrated wireless neural interface based on the Utah electrode array.
Biomed. Microdevices. 11(2), 453–466 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10544-008-9251-y
12. Olejniczak, P.: Neurophysiologic basis of EEG. J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 23(3), 186–189 (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.wnp.0000220079.61973.6c
13. Buzsaki, G., Anastassiou, C.A., Koch, C.: The origin of extracellular ﬁelds and currents–EEG,
ECoG, LFP and spikes. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13(6), 407–420 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1038/
nrn3241
14. Kodandaramaiah, S.B., Franzesi, G.T., Chow, B.Y., Boyden, E.S., Forest, C.R.: Automated
whole-cell patch-clamp electrophysiology of neurons in vivo. Nat. Methods. 9(6), 585–587
(2012). https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1993
15. Butovas, S., Schwarz, C.: Spatiotemporal effects of microstimulation in rat neocortex: a
parametric study using multielectrode recordings. J. Neurophysiol. 90(5), 3024–3039 (2003).
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00245.2003
16. Barker, A.T., Jalinous, R., Freeston, I.L.: Non-invasive magnetic stimulation of human
motor
cortex.
Lancet.
325(8437),
1106–1107
(1985).
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(85)92413-4
17. Krnjevi´c, K.: Chemical nature of synaptic transmission in vertebrates. Physiol. Rev. 54(2),
418–540 (1974). https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.1974.54.2.418
18. Nakayama, T., Hammel, H.T., Hardy, J.D., Eisenman, J.S.: Thermal stimulation of electrical
activity of single units of the preoptic region. Am. J. Physiol.-Legacy Content. 204(6), 1122–
1126 (1963). https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplegacy.1963.204.6.1122
19. Harvey, E.N.: The effect of high frequency sound waves on heart muscle and other irritable
tissues. Am. J. Physiol.-Legacy Content. 91(1), 284–290 (1929). https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajplegacy.1929.91.1.284
20. Boyden, E.S., Zhang, F., Bamberg, E., Nagel, G., Deisseroth, K.: Millisecond-timescale,
genetically targeted optical control of neural activity. Nat. Neurosci. 8(9), 1263–1268 (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1525
21. Armbruster, B.N., Li, X., Pausch, M.H., Herlitze, S., Roth, B.L.: Evolving the lock to ﬁt the
key to create a family of G protein-coupled receptors potently activated by an inert ligand.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104(12), 5163 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0700293104
22. Bernstein, J.G., Boyden, E.S.: Optogenetic tools for analyzing the neural circuits of behavior.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 15(12), 592–600 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.10.003

500
K. Kim et al.
23. Yizhar, O., Fenno, L.E., Davidson, T.J., Mogri, M., Deisseroth, K.: Optogenetics in neural
systems. Neuron. 71(1), 9–34 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.06.004
24. Pastrana, E.: Optogenetics: controlling cell function with light. Nat. Methods. 8, 24 (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.f.323
25. Sohal, V.S., Zhang, F., Yizhar, O., Deisseroth, K.: Parvalbumin neurons and gamma rhythms
enhance cortical circuit performance. Nature. 459(7247), 698–702 (2009). https://doi.org/
10.1038/nature07991
26. Wu, F., Stark, E., Ku, P.C., Wise, K.D., Buzsaki, G., Yoon, E.: Monolithically integrated mu
LEDs on silicon neural probes for high-resolution Optogenetic studies in behaving animals.
Neuron. 88(6), 1136–1148 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.10.032
27. Kampasi, K., English, D.F., Seymour, J., Stark, E., McKenzie, S., Vöröslakos, M., Buzsáki, G.,
Wise, K.D., Yoon, E.: Dual color optogenetic control of neural populations using low-noise,
multishank optoelectrodes. Microsyst. Nanoeng. 4(1), 10 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41378-018-0009-2
28. English, D.F., McKenzie, S., Evans, T., Kim, K., Yoon, E., Buzsáki, G.: Pyramidal cell-
interneuron circuit architecture and dynamics in hippocampal networks. Neuron. 96(2),
505–520.e507 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.09.033
29. Strumwasser, F.: Long-term recording from single neurons in brain of unrestrained mammals.
Science. 127(3296), 469–470 (1958)
30. Gray, C.M., Maldonado, P.E., Wilson, M., McNaughton, B.: Tetrodes markedly improve the
reliability and yield of multiple single-unit isolation from multi-unit recordings in cat striate
cortex. J. Neurosci. Methods. 63(1–2), 43–54 (1995)
31. Harris, K.D., Henze, D.A., Csicsvari, J., Hirase, H., Buzsaki, G.: Accuracy of tetrode
spike separation as determined by simultaneous intracellular and extracellular measurements.
J. Neurophysiol. 84(1), 401–414 (2000)
32. Blanche, T.J., Spacek, M.A., Hetke, J.F., Swindale, N.V.: Polytrodes: high-density silicon
electrode arrays for large-scale multiunit recording. J. Neurophysiol. 93(5), 2987–3000 (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.01023.2004
33. Wise, K.D., Angell, J.B., Starr, A.: An integrated-circuit approach to extracellular
microelectrodes. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 17(3), 238 (1970). https://doi.org/10.1109/
Tbme.1970.4502738
34. Yao, Y., Gulari, M.N., Wiler, J.A., Wise, K.D.: A microassembled low-proﬁle three-
dimensional microelectrode array for neural prosthesis applications. J. Microelectromech. Syst.
16(4), 977–988 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1109/Jmems.2007.896712
35. Wise, K.D., Sodagar, A.M., Yao, Y., Gulari, M.N., Perlin, G.E., Najaﬁ, K.: Microelectrodes,
microelectronics, and implantable neural microsystems. Proc. IEEE. 96(7), 1184–1202 (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1109/Jproc.2008.922564
36. Kim, C., Wise, K.D.: A 64-site multishank CMOS low-proﬁle neural stimulating probe. IEEE
J. Solid-State Circuits. 31(9), 1230–1238 (1996). https://doi.org/10.1109/4.535406
37. Wise, K.D., Anderson, D.J., Hetke, J.F., Kipke, D.R., Najaﬁ, K.: Wireless implantable
microsystems: high-density electronic interfaces to the nervous system. Proc. IEEE. 92(1),
76–97 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1109/Jproc.2003.820544
38. Stevenson, I.H., Kording, K.P.: How advances in neural recording affect data analysis. Nat.
Neurosci. 14(2), 139–142 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2731
39. Du, J., Blanche, T.J., Harrison, R.R., Lester, H.A., Masmanidis, S.C.: Multiplexed, high density
electrophysiology with nanofabricated neural probes. PLoS One. 6(10), e26204 (2011). https:/
/doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0026204
40. Ruther, P., Herwik, S., Kisban, S., Seidl, K., Paul, O.: Recent progress in neural probes using
silicon MEMS technology. IEEJ Trans. Electr. Electron Eng. 5(5), 505–515 (2010). https://
doi.org/10.1002/tee.20566
41. Merriam, M.E., Dehmel, S., Srivannavit, O., Shore, S.E., Wise, K.D.: A 3-D 160-site
microelectrode array for cochlear nucleus mapping. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 58(2), 397–
403 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/Tbme.2010.2088122

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
501
42. Buzsáki, G., Stark, E., Berényi, A., Khodagholy, D., Kipke Daryl, R., Yoon, E., Wise, K.D.:
Tools for probing local circuits: high-density silicon probes combined with Optogenetics.
Neuron. 86(1), 92–105 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.01.028
43. Huber, D., Petreanu, L., Ghitani, N., Ranade, S., Hromadka, T., Mainen, Z., Svoboda, K.:
Sparse optical microstimulation in barrel cortex drives learned behaviour in freely moving
mice. Nature. 451(7174), 61–64 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06445
44. Airan, R.D., Thompson, K.R., Fenno, L.E., Bernstein, H., Deisseroth, K.: Temporally precise
in vivo control of intracellular signalling. Nature. 458(7241), 1025–1029 (2009). https://
doi.org/10.1038/nature07926
45. Cardin, J.A., Carlen, M., Meletis, K., Knoblich, U., Zhang, F., Deisseroth, K., Tsai, L.H.,
Moore, C.I.: Targeted optogenetic stimulation and recording of neurons in vivo using cell-
type-speciﬁc expression of Channelrhodopsin-2. Nat. Protoc. 5(2), 247–254 (2010). https://
doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2009.228
46. English, D.F., Ibanez-Sandoval, O., Stark, E., Tecuapetla, F., Buzsaki, G., Deisseroth, K.,
Tepper, J.M., Koos, T.: GABAergic circuits mediate the reinforcement-related signals of striatal
cholinergic interneurons. Nat. Neurosci. 15(1), 123–U155 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1038/
nn.2984
47. Halassa, M.M., Siegle, J.H., Ritt, J.T., Ting, J.T., Feng, G.P., Moore, C.I.: Selective optical drive
of thalamic reticular nucleus generates thalamic bursts and cortical spindles. Nat. Neurosci.
14(9), 1118–1120 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2880
48. Han, X., Qian, X., Bernstein, J.G., Zhou, H.H., Franzesi, G.T., Stern, P., Bronson, R.T.,
Graybiel, A.M., Desimone, R., Boyden, E.S.: Millisecond-timescale optical control of neural
dynamics in the nonhuman primate brain. Neuron. 62(2), 191–198 (2009). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuron.2009.03.011
49. Kravitz, A.V., Freeze, B.S., Parker, P.R.L., Kay, K., Thwin, M.T., Deisseroth, K., Kreitzer,
A.C.: Regulation of parkinsonian motor behaviours by optogenetic control of basal ganglia
circuitry. Nature. 466(7306), 622–U627 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09159
50. Royer, S., Zemelman, B.V., Losonczy, A., Kim, J., Chance, F., Magee, J.C., Buzsaki, G.:
Control of timing, rate and bursts of hippocampal place cells by dendritic and somatic
inhibition. Nat. Neurosci. 15(5), 769–775 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3077
51. Anikeeva, P., Andalman, A.S., Witten, I., Warden, M., Goshen, I., Grosenick, L., Gunaydin,
L.A., Frank, L.M., Deisseroth, K.: Optetrode: a multichannel readout for optogenetic control
in freely moving mice. Nat. Neurosci. 15(1), 163–U204 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.
2992
52. Gradinaru, V., Thompson, K.R., Zhang, F., Mogri, M., Kay, K., Schneider, M.B., Deisseroth,
K.: Targeting and readout strategies for fast optical neural control in vitro and in vivo. J.
Neurosci. 27(52), 14231–14238 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1523/Jneurosci.3578-07.2007
53. Hoffman, L., Welkenhuysen, M., Andrei, A., Musa, S., Luo, Z.X., Libbrecht, S., Severi, S.,
Soussan, P., Baekelandt, V., Haesler, S., Gielen, G., Puers, R., Braeken, D.: High-density
optrode-electrode neural probe using SixNy photonics for in vivo optogenetics. In: 2015 IEEE
International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) (2015)
54. Stark, E., Koos, T., Buzsaki, G.: Diode probes for spatiotemporal optical control of multiple
neurons in freely moving animals. J. Neurophysiol. 108(1), 349–363 (2012). https://doi.org/
10.1152/jn.00153.2012
55. Kim, T.I., McCall, J.G., Jung, Y.H., Huang, X., Siuda, E.R., Li, Y.H., Song, J.Z., Song, Y.M.,
Pao, H.A., Kim, R.H., Lu, C.F., Lee, S.D., Song, I.S., Shin, G., Al-Hasani, R., Kim, S.,
Tan, M.P., Huang, Y.G., Omenetto, F.G., Rogers, J.A., Bruchas, M.R.: Injectable, cellular-
scale optoelectronics with applications for wireless optogenetics. Science. 340(6129), 211–216
(2013). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1232437
56. Schwaerzle, M., Seidl, K., Schwarz, U.T., Paul, O., Ruther, P.: Ultracompact optrode with
integrated laser diode chips and SU-8 waveguides for optogenetic applications. In: 2013 IEEE
26th International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), 20–24 Jan
2013, pp. 1029–1032 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/MEMSYS.2013.6474424

502
K. Kim et al.
57. Schwaerzle, M., Ringwald, P., Paul, O., Rüther, P.: First dual-color optrode with bare
laser diode chips directly butt-coupled to hybrid-polymer waveguides. In: 2017 IEEE 30th
International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), 22–26 Jan 2017,
pp. 526–529 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/MEMSYS.2017.7863459
58. McAlinden, N., Massoubre, D., Richardson, E., Gu, E., Sakata, S., Dawson, M.D., Mathieson,
K.: Thermal and optical characterization of micro-LED probes for in vivo optogenetic neural
stimulation. Opt. Lett. 38(6), 992–994 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1364/Ol.38.000992
59. Scharf, R., Tsunematsu, T., McAlinden, N., Dawson, M.D., Sakata, S., Mathieson, K.:
Depth-speciﬁc optogenetic control in vivo with a scalable, high-density μLED neural probe.
Sci. Rep. 6, 28381 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep28381. https://www.nature.com/articles/
srep28381#supplementary-information
60. Im, M., Cho, I., Wu, F., Wise, K.D., Yoon, E.: Neural probes integrated with optical
mixer/splitter waveguides and multiple stimulation sites. In: 2011 IEEE 24th International
Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, 23–27 Jan 2011, pp. 1051–1054 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MEMSYS.2011.5734609
61. Im, M., Cho, I., Wu, F., Wise, K.D., Yoon, E.A.: Dual-shank neural probe integrated with
double waveguides on each shank for optogenetic applications. In: 2011 Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 30 Aug–3 Sept 2011,
pp. 5480–5483 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091398
62. Seymour, J.P.: Advanced polymer-based microfabricated neural probes using biologically
driven designs. Dissertation, University of Michigan (2009)
63. Wu, F., Stark, E., Im, M., Cho, I.J., Yoon, E.S., Buzsaki, G., Wise, K.D., Yoon, E.: An
implantable neural probe with monolithically integrated dielectric waveguide and recording
electrodes for optogenetics applications. J. Neural Eng. 10(5), 056012 (2013). https://doi.org/
10.1088/1741-2560/10/5/056012
64. Riedl, M.J.: Optical design fundamentals for infrared systems. SPIE Publications, Bellingham
(2001)
65. Smith, W.J.: Modern Optical Engineering; The Design of Optical Systems. McGraw-Hill, New
York/Toronto (1966)
66. Kampasi, K., Seymour, J., Na, K., Wise, K.D., Yoon, E.: Fiberless multicolor optoelectrodes
using Injection Laser Diodes and Gradient-index lens coupled optical waveguides. In: 2015
Transducers – 2015 18th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and
Microsystems (TRANSDUCERS), 21–25 June 2015, pp. 273–276 (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1109/TRANSDUCERS.2015.7180914
67. Kampasi, K., Stark, E., Seymour, J., Na, K., Winful, H.G., Buzaski, G., Wise, K.D., Yoon, E.:
Fiberless multicolor neural optoelectrode for in vivo circuit analysis. Sci. Rep. 6, 30961 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep30961
68. Hunsperger, R.G.: Integrated Optics, Theory and Technology. Springer Series in Optical
Sciences, vol. 33, 2nd edn. Springer-Verlag, Berlin/New York (1984)
69. Marcatili, E.A.J.: Bends in optical dielectric guides. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 48(7), 2103–2132
(1969). https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1969.tb01167.x
70. Wise, K.D.: Silicon microsystems for neuroscience and neural prostheses. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. 24(5), 22–29 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1109/Memb.2005.1511497
71. Li, Y.-L., Liu, Y.-T.: MicroLED display: the next-generation display technology, vol. 11304.
SPIE OPTO. SPIE (2020)
72. Shields, A.J.: Semiconductor quantum light sources. Nat. Photonics. 1(4), 215–223 (2007).
https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2007.46
73. Bhattacharya, P., Fornari, R., Kamimura, H. (eds): Comprehensive semiconductor science and
technology. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2011)
74. Song, K.M., Park, J.: Effects of the growth pressure of a-plane InGaN/GaN multi-quantum
wells on the optical performance of light-emitting diodes. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 28(1),
015010 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1088/0268-1242/28/1/015010
75. Khan, M.A., Yang, J.W., Simin, G., Gaska, R., Shur, M.S., Zur Loye, H.C., Tamulaitis, G.,
Zukauskas, A., Smith, D.J., Chandrasekhar, D., Bicknell-Tassius, R.: Lattice and energy band

High-Density Fiberless Optoelectrodes with Integrated Waveguides and μLEDs
503
engineering in AlInGaN/GaN heterostructures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 76(9), 1161–1163 (2000).
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.125970
76. Cheng, A.T., Su, Y.K., Lai, W.C.: Improved light output of nitride-based light-emitting diodes
by lattice-matched AlInN cladding structure. IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 20(9-12), 970–972
(2008). https://doi.org/10.1109/Lpt.2008.922937
77. Avrutin, V., Silversmith, D.J., Mori, Y., Kawamura, F., Kitaoka, Y., Morkoc, H.: Growth of
bulk GaN and AlN: Progress and challenges. Proc. IEEE. 98(7), 1302–1315 (2010). https://
doi.org/10.1109/Jproc.2010.2044967
78. Lee, J.H., Lee, D.Y., Oh, B.W., Lee, J.H.: Comparison of InGaN-based LEDs grown on
conventional sapphire and cone-shape-patterned sapphire substrate. IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices. 57(1), 157–163 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1109/Ted.2009.2034495
79. Hoogerwerf, A.C., Wise, K.D.: A three-dimensional microelectrode array for chronic neural
recording. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 41(12), 1136–1146 (1994). https://doi.org/10.1109/
10.335862
80. Norlin, P., Kindlundh, M., Mouroux, A., Yoshida, K., Hofmann, U.G.: A 32-site neural
recording probe fabricated by DRIE of SOI substrates. J. Micromech. Microeng. 12(4), 414–
419 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/12/4/312. Pii S0960-1317(02)32547-6
81. Mion, C., Chang, Y.C., Muth, J.F., Rajagopal, P., Brown, J.D.: Thermal conductivity of GaN
grown on silicon substrates. Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 798, 381–386 (2003)
82. Zhu, D., McAleese, C., McLaughlin, K.K., Haberlen, M., Salcianu, C.O., Thrush, E.J.,
Kappers, M.J., Phillips, W.A., Lane, P., Wallis, D.J., Martin, T., Astles, M., Thomas, S.,
Pakes, A., Heuken, M., Humphreys, C.J.: GaN-based LEDs grown on 6-inch diameter Si
(111) substrates by MOVPE. Proc Spie 7231, Unsp 723118 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1117/
12.814919
83. Haberlen, M., Zhu, D.D., McAleese, C., Zhu, T.T., Kappers, M.J., Humphreys, C.J.: Disloca-
tion reduction in GaN grown on Si(111) using a strain-driven 3D GaN interlayer. Phys. Status
Solidi B. 247(7), 1753–1756 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1002/pssb.200983537
84. Fang, X.L., Wang, Y.Q., Meidia, H., Mahajan, S.: Reduction of threading dislocations in GaN
layers using in situ deposited silicon nitride masks on AlN and GaN nucleation layers. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 84(4), 484–486 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1642274
85. Dadgar, A., Schulze, F., Wienecke, M., Gadanecz, A., Blasing, J., Veit, P., Hempel, T.,
Diez, A., Christen, J., Krost, A.: Epitaxy of GaN on silicon-impact of symmetry and surface
reconstruction. New J. Phys. 9, 389 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/9/10/389. Pii
S1367-2630(07)50094-7
86. Krost, A., Dadgar, A.: GaN-based optoelectronics on silicon substrates. Mater. Sci. Eng.
B-Solid. 93(1–3), 77–84 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-5107(02)00043-0. Pii S0921-
5107(02)00043-0
87. Sharma, H.S., Hoopes, P.J.: Hyperthermia induced pathophysiology of the central nervous sys-
tem. Int. J. Hyperth. 19(3), 325–354 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1080/0265673021000054621
88. Zhu, D.D., McAleese, C., Haberlen, M., Salcianu, C., Thrush, T., Kappers, M., Phillips, A.,
Lane, P., Kane, M., Wallis, D., Martin, T., Astles, M., Hylton, N., Dawson, P., Humphreys, C.:
Efﬁciency measurement of GaN-based quantum well and light-emitting diode structures grown
on silicon substrates. J. Appl. Phys. 109(1), 014502 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3530602
89. Xie, X.Z., Rieth, L., Williams, L., Negi, S., Bhandari, R., Caldwell, R., Sharma, R., Tathireddy,
P., Solzbacher, F.: Long-term reliability of Al2O3 and Parylene C bilayer encapsulated Utah
electrode array based neural interfaces for chronic implantation. J. Neural Eng. 11(2), 026016
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/11/2/026016

