A
Aharonov–Bohm Effect
Holger Lyre
The Aharonov–Bohm effect (for short: AB effect) is, quite generally, a non-local
effect in which a physical object travels along a closed loop through a gauge ﬁeld-
free region and thereby undergoes a physical change. As such, the AB effect can be
described as a holonomy. Its paradigmatic realization became widely known after
Aharonov and Bohm’s 1959 paper – with forerunners by Weiss [1] and Ehrenberg
and Siday [2]. Aharonov and Bohm [3] consider the following scenario: A split
electron beam passes around a solenoid in which a magnetic ﬁeld is conﬁned. The
region outside the solenoid is ﬁeld-free, but nevertheless a shift in the interference
pattern on a screen behind the solenoid can be observed upon alteration of the mag-
netic ﬁeld. The schematic experimental setting can be grasped from the following
ﬁgure:
e−beam
-


ZZZZZZZZZ
Z
ZZZZZZZZZ
Z


screen




solenoid
The phase shift can be calculated from the loop integral over the potential,
which – due to Stokes’ theorem – relates to the magnetic ﬂux
χ = q

C
A dr = q

S
B ds = q Φmag.
(1)
Convincing arguments can be given that the effect is no artifact of some improper
shielding of the ﬁelds involved. On the one hand, the magnetic ﬁeld can perfectly be
conﬁned by the usage of toroidal magnets [15], the unavoidable penetration of the
quantum  wave function into the solenoid, on the other hand, is not known to be
correlated to any scaling of the effect with the quality of the solenoid’s shielding.
While the above experimental setting is called the magnetic AB effect, it is also
possible to consider the electric pendant where the phase of the wave function
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
1
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

2
Aharonov–Bohm Effect
depends upon varying the electric potential for two paths of a particle travelling
through regions free of an electric ﬁeld. Moreover, Aharonov and Casher [4] de-
scribed a dual to the AB effect, called the  Aharonov–Casher effect, where a phase
shift in the interference of the magnetic moment in an electric ﬁeld is considered.
The discovery of the AB effect has caused a ﬂood of publications both about the
theoretical nature of the effect as well as about the various experimental realizations.
Much of the relevant material is covered in Peshkin and Tonomura [14]. The theo-
retical debate can basically be centered around the questions, whether and in which
sense the AB effect is of (1) quantum, (2) topological, and (3) non-local nature.
1. Contrary to a widely held view in the literature, the point can be made that
the AB effect is not of a genuine quantum nature, since there exist classical gravi-
tational AB effects as well ([5]; [6]; [7]). A simple case is the geometry of a cone
where the curvature is ﬂat everywhere except at the apex (which may be smoothed).
Parallel transport on a loop enclosing the apex leads to a holonomy. Also, the second
clock effect in Weylian spacetime can be construed as an AB analogue, as Brown
and Pooley [8] have pointed out. In Weylian spacetime, a clock travelling on a loop
through a ﬁeld free region enclosing a non-vanishing electromagnetic ﬁeld under-
goes a shift. It has been shown that the AB effect can be generalized to any SU(N)
gauge theory ([9]; [10]).
2. The AB effect does not depend on the particular path as long as the region
of the non-vanishing gauge ﬁeld strength is enclosed. It is therefore no instance
of the  Berry phase, which is a path-dependent geometrical quantum phase. It
does depend on the topology of the conﬁguration space of the considered physical
object (in case of the electric AB effect this space is homeomorphic to a circle).
Nevertheless, the AB effect can still be distinguished from topological effects within
gauge theories such as monopoles or instantons, where the topological nature can
be described as non-trivial mappings from the gauge group into the conﬁguration
space (this incidentally also applies to the magnetic AB effect, but generally not to
SU(N) or gravitational AB effects).
3. It is obvious that the AB effect is in some sense non-local. A closer inspection
depends directly on the question about the genuine entities involved, and this ques-
tion has been in the focus of the philosophy of physics literature. In the magnetic
AB effect, the electron wave function does not directly interact with the conﬁned
magnetic ﬁeld, but since the vector gauge potential outside the solenoid is non-zero,
it is a common view to consider the AB effect as a proof for the reality of the gauge
potential. This, however, renders real entities gauge-dependent. Healey [11] there-
fore argues for the holonomy itself as the genuine gauge theoretic entity. In both
the potential and the holonomy interpretation the AB effect is non-local in the sense
that it is non-separable, since properties of the whole – the holonomy – do not su-
pervene on properties of the parts. As a third possibility even an interpretation solely
in terms of ﬁeld strengths can be given at the expense of violating the principle of
local action. The case can be made that this is an instance of ontological underde-
termination, where only the gauge group structure is invariant (and, hence, a case in
favour of structural realism [12]).

Aharonov–Casher Effect
3
A
Remarkably, van Kampen [13] has argued that the AB effect is in fact instan-
taneous, but that this cannot be directly observed since the instantaneous action
of the magnetic effect is accordingly cancelled by the electric AB effect.  Also
Berry’s Phase.
Primary Literature
1. P. Weiss: On the Hamilton-Jacobi Theory and Quantization of a Dynamical Continuum. Proc.
Roy. Soc. Lond. A 169, 102–19 (1938)
2. W. Ehrenberg, R.E. Siday: The Refractive Index in Electron Optics and the Principles of
Dynamics. Proc. Phys. Soc. Lond. B 62, 8–21 (1949)
3. Y. Aharonov, D. Bohm: Signiﬁcance of Electromagnetic Potentials in the Quantum Theory.
Phys. Rev. 115(3), 485–491(1959)
4. Y. Aharonov, A. Casher: Topological Quantum Effects for Neutral Particles. Phys. Rev. Lett.
53, 319–321(1984)
5. J.-S. Dowker: A Gravitational Aharonov–Bohm Effect. Nuovo. Cim. 52B(1), 129–135 (1967)
6. J. Anandan: Interference, Gravity and Gauge Fields. Nuovo. Cim 53A(2), 221–249 (1979)
7. J. Stachel: Globally Stationary but Locally Static Space-times: A Gravitational Analog of the
Aharonov–Bohm Effect. Phys. Rev. D 26(6), 1281–1290 (1982)
8. H.R. Brown, O. Pooley: The origin of the spacetime metric: Bell’s ‘Lorentzian pedagogy’ and
its signiﬁcance in general relativity. In C. Callender and N. Huggett, editors. Physics meets
Philosophy at the Planck Scale. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 2001)
9. T.T. Wu, C.N. Yang: Concept of Nonintegrable Phase Factors and Global Formulation of Gauge
Fields. Phys. Rev. D 12(12), 3845–3857 (1975)
10. C.N. Yang: Integral Formalism for Gauge Fields. Phys. Rev. Lett. 33(7), 445–447(1974)
11. R. Healey: On the Reality of Gauge Potentials. Phil. Sci. 68(4), 432–455 (2001)
12. H. Lyre: Holism and Structuralism in U(1) Gauge Theory. Stud. Hist. Phil. Mod. Phys. 35(4),
643–670 (2004)
13. N.G. van Kampen: Can the Aharonov-Bohm Effect Transmit Signals Faster than Light? Phys.
Lett. A 106(1), 5–6 (1984)
Secondary Literature
14. M.A. Peshkin, A. Tonomura: The Aharonov-Bohm Effect. (Lecture Notes in Physics 340.
Springer, Berlin 2001)
15. A. Tonomura: The Quantum World Unveiled by Electron Waves. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
1998)
Aharonov–Casher Effect
Daniel Rohrlich
In 1984, 25 years after the prediction of the  Aharonov–Bohm (AB) effect,
Aharonov and Casher [1] predicted a “dual” effect. In both effects, a particle is

