Superselection Rules
771
S
P2(an). Interference effects are absent for an incoherent superposition or a statistical
mixture of states. We cannot describe a statistical mixture using an “average state
vector”. In general, when dealing with a statistical mixture, probabilities enter at
two levels. The initial information about the system is given in terms of probabili-
ties, and the predictions of Quantum Mechanics are probabilistic.
A simple example:
Let the operator B be the Hamiltonian of the system, B = H, b1 = E1, b2 = E2,
and let |ψ(0)⟩= λ1|ψ1⟩+ λ1|ψ2⟩. Then |ψ(t)⟩= λ1 exp(−iE1t/ℏ)|ψ1⟩+ λ2
exp(−iE2t/ℏ)|ψ2⟩, and
P (an)= |λ1|2 P1 (an) + |λ2|2 P2 (an)
+2Re(λ1λ∗
2 × exp(−i (E1 −E2) t/ℏ)⟨an|ψ1⟩⟨ψ2|an⟩)
P(an) now is time dependent and oscillates with a frequency ν12 = (E1 −E2)/h.
We observe quantum beats.
Primary Literature
1. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, F. Lalo¨e: Quantum Mechanics, Volume One (Wiley, New York
1977)
Secondary Literature
2. P.A.M. Dirac: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 4th edn. (Oxford University Press, Oxford
1958)
Superselection Rules
Domenico Giulini
General Notion
The notion of superselection rule (henceforth abbreviated SSR) was introduced in
1952 by Wick (1909–1992), Wightman, and Wigner (1902–1995) [9] in connection
with the problem of consistently assigning intrinsic parity to elementary particles.
They understood an SSR as generally expressing “restrictions on the nature and
scope of possible measurements”.
The concept of SSR should be contrasted with that of an ordinary  selec-
tion rule (SR). The latter refers to a dynamical inhibition of a certain transition,

772
Superselection Rules
usually due to the existence of a conserved quantity. Well known SRs in Quantum
Mechanics concern radiative transitions of atoms. For example, in case of electric
dipole radiation, they take the form J = 0, ±1 (except J = 0 →J = 0) and
MJ = 0, ±1. They say that the  quantum numbers J, MJ associated with the
atom’s total angular momentum may at most change by one unit. But this is only true
for electric dipole transitions, which, if allowed, represent the leading-order contri-
bution in an approximation for wavelengths much larger than the size of the atom.
The next-to-leading-order contributions are given by magnetic dipole and electric
quadrupole transitions, and for the latter J = ±2 is possible. This is a typical
situation as regards SRs: They are valid for the leading-order modes of transition,
but not necessarily for higher order ones. In contrast, a SSR is usually thought of
as making a more rigorous statement. It not only forbids certain transitions through
particular modes, but altogether as a matter of some deeper lying principle; hence
the “Super”. In other words, transitions are not only inhibited for the particular dy-
namical evolution at hand, generated by the given  Hamiltonian operator, but for
all conceivable dynamical evolutions.
More precisely, two states ψ1 and ψ2 are separated by a SR if ⟨ψ1 | H | ψ⟩= 0
for the given Hamiltonian H. In case of the SR mentioned above, H only contains
the leading-order interaction between the radiation ﬁeld and the atom, which is the
electric dipole interaction. In contrast, the states are said to be separated by a SSR
if ⟨ψ1 | A | ψ2⟩= 0 for all (physically realisable)  observables A. This means
that the relative phase between ψ1 and ψ2 is not measurable and that coherent su-
perpositions of ψ1 and ψ2 cannot be veriﬁed or prepared. It should be noted that
such a statement implies that the set of (physically realisable) observables is strictly
smaller than the set of all  self-adjoint operators on  Hilbert space. For example,
A =| ψ1⟩⟨ψ2 | + | ψ2⟩⟨ψ1 | is clearly self-adjoint and satisﬁes ⟨ψ1 | A | ψ2⟩̸= 0.
Hence the statement of a SSR always implies a restriction of the set of observables
as compared to the set of all (bounded) self-adjoint operators on Hilbert space. In
some sense, the existence of SSRs can be formulated in terms of observables alone
(see below).
Since all theories work with idealisations, the issue may be raised as to whether
the distinction between SR and SSR is really well founded, or whether it could, after
all, be understood as a matter of degree only. For example, dynamical  decoher-
ence is known to provide a very efﬁcient mechanism for generating apparent SSRs,
without assuming their existence on a fundamental level [11] [14].
Elementary Theory
In the most simple case of only two superselection sectors, a SSR can be char-
acterised by saying that the  Hilbert space H decomposes as a direct sum of
two orthogonal subspaces, H = H1 ⊕H2, such that under the action of each ob-
servable vectors in H1,2 are transformed into vectors in H1,2 respectively. In other
words, the action of observables in Hilbert space is reducible, which implies that
⟨ψ1 | A | ψ2⟩= 0 for each ψ1,2 ∈H1,2 and all observables A. This constitutes

Superselection Rules
773
S
an inhibition to the  superposition principle in the following sense: Let ψ1,2 be
normed vectors and ψ+ = (ψ1 + ψ2)/
√
2, then
⟨ψ+ | A | ψ+⟩= 1
2

⟨ψ1 | A | ψ1⟩+ ⟨ψ2 | A | ψ2⟩

= Tr(ρA),
(1)
where
ρ = 1
2

| ψ1⟩⟨ψ1 | + | ψ2⟩⟨ψ2 |

.
(2)
Hence, considered as state (expectation-value functional) on the given set of ob-
servables, the  density matrix ρ corresponding to ψ+ can be written as non-trivial
convex combination of the (pure) density matrices for ψ1 and ψ2 and therefore
deﬁnes a  mixed state rather than a pure state ( states, pure and mixed). Relative
to the given observables, coherent  superpositions of states in H1 with states in
H2 do not exist.
In direct generalisation, a characterisation of discrete SSRs can be given as fol-
lows: There exists a ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite family {Pi | i ∈I} of mutually
orthogonal (PiPj = 0 for i ̸= j) and exhaustive (
i∈I Pi = 1)  projection
operators (P †
i = Pi, P 2
i = Pi) on Hilbert space H, such that each observable com-
mutes with all Pi. Equivalently, one may also say that states on the given set of
observables (here represented by density matrices) commute with all Pi, which is
equivalent to the identity
ρ =

i
PiρPi.
(3)
We deﬁne λi := Tr(ρPi) and let I ′ ⊂I be the subset of indices i for which λi ̸= 0.
If we further set ρi := PiρPi/λi for i ∈I ′, then (3) is equivalent to
ρ =

i∈I ′
λiρi,
(4)
showing that ρ is a non-trivial convex combination if I′ contains more than one
element. The only pure states are the projectors onto rays within a single Hi. In
other words, only vectors (or rays) in the union (not the linear span) @
i∈I Hi can
correspond to pure states. If, conversely, any non-zero vector in this union deﬁnes
a pure state, with different rays corresponding to different states, one speaks of an
abelian superselection rule. The Hi are then called superselection sectors or coher-
ent subspaces on which the observables act irreducibly. The subset Z of observables
commuting with all observables is then given by Z := :
i aiPi | ai ∈R;. They
are called superselection- or classical observables.
In the general case of continuous SSRs H splits as direct integral of an uncount-
able set of Hilbert spaces H(λ), where λ is an element of some measure space &,
so that
H =

&
dμ(λ)H(λ)
(5)

774
Superselection Rules
with some measure dμ on &. Observables are functions λ →O(λ), with O(λ) act-
ing on H(λ). Closed subspaces of H left invariant by the observables are precisely
given by
H() =


dμ(λ)H(λ) ,
(6)
where  ⊂& is any measurable subset of non-zero measure. In general, a single
H(λ) will not be a subspace (unless the measure has discrete support at λ).
In the literature, SSRs are discussed in connection with a variety of superselection-
observables, most notably univalence, overall mass (in non-relativistic QM), electric
charge, baryonic and leptonic charge, and also time.
Algebraic Theory of SSRs
In  Algebraic Quantum Mechanics, a system is characterised by a C∗–algebra
C. Depending on contextual physical conditions, one chooses a faithful represen-
tation π : C →B(H) in the (von Neumann) algebra of bounded operators on
Hilbert space H. After completing the image of π in the weak operator-topology on
B(H) (a procedure sometimes called dressing of C [12]) one obtains a vonNeumann
sub-algebra A ⊂B(H), called the algebra of (bounded) observables. The physical
observables proper correspond to the self-adjoint elements of A.
The commutant S′ of any subset S ⊆B(H) is deﬁned by
S′ := {A ∈B(H) | AB = BA , ∀B ∈S} ,
(7)
which is automatically a von Neumann algebra. One calls S′′ := (S′)′ the von Neu-
mann algebra generated by S. It is the smallest von Neumann sub-algebra of B(H)
containing S, so that if S was already a von Neumann algebra one has S′′ = S; in
particular,

π(C)
′′ = A.
SSRs are now said to exists if and only if the commutant A′ is not trivial, i.e.
different from multiples of the unit operator. Projectors in A′ then deﬁne the sec-
tors. Abelian SSRs are characterised by A′ being abelian. A′ is often referred to
as gauge algebra. Sometimes the algebra of physical observables is deﬁned as the
commutant of a given gauge algebra. That the gauge algebra is abelian is equiva-
lent to A′ ⊆A′′ = A so that A′ = A ∩A′ =: Ac, the centre of A. An abelian
A′ is equivalent to Dirac’s requirement, that there should exist a complete set of
commuting observables [7] (cf. Chap. 6 of [14]).
In  Quantum Logic a quantum system is characterised by the lattice of propo-
sitions (corresponding to the closed subspaces, or the associated projectors, in
Hilbert-space language). The subset of all propositions which are compatible with
all other propositions is called the centre of the lattice. It forms a Boolean sub-lattice.
A lattice is called irreducible if and only if its centre is trivial (i.e. just consists of
0, the smallest lattice element). The presence of SSRs is now characterised by a
non-trivial centre. Propositions in the centre are sometimes called classical.

Superselection Rules
775
S
SSRs and Conserved Additive Quantities
Let Q be the operator of some charge-like quantity that behaves additively un-
der composition of systems and also shares the property that the charge of one
subsystem is independent of the state of the complementary subsystem (here we
restrict attention to two subsystems). This implies that if H = H1 ⊗H is the Hilbert
space of the total system and H1,2 those of the subsystems, Q must be of the form
Q = Q1 ⊗1 + 1 ⊗Q2, where Q1,2 are the charge operators of the subsystems.
We also assume Q to be conserved, i.e. to commute with the total Hamiltonian that
generates time evolution on H. It is then easy to show that a SSR for Q persists
under the operations of composition, decomposition, and time evolution: If the den-
sity matrices ρ1,2 commute with Q1,2 respectively, then, trivially, ρ = ρ1 ⊗ρ2
commutes with Q. Likewise, if ρ (not necessarily of the form ρ1 ⊗ρ2) commutes
with Q, then the reduced density matrices ρ1,2 := Tr2,1(ρ) (where Tri stands for
tracing over Hi) commute with Q1,2 respectively. This shows that if states violating
the SSR cannot be prepared initially (for whatever reason, not yet explained), they
cannot be created though subsystem interactions [10]. This has a direct relevance for
 measurement theory, since it is well known that an exact von Neumann measure-
ment of an observable P1 in system 1 by system 2 is possible only if P1 commutes
with Q1, and that an approximate measurement is possible only insofar as system 2
can be prepared in a superposition of Q2 eigenstates [2].
As already indicated, the foregoing reasoning does not explain the actual ex-
istence of SSRs, for it does not imply anything about the initial nonexistence of
SSR violating states. In fact, there are many additive conserved quantities, like
momentum and angular momentum, for which certainly no SSRs is at work. The
crucial observation here is that the latter quantities are physically always understood
as relative to a system of reference that, by its very deﬁnition, must have certain
localisation properties which exclude the total system to be in eigenstate of relative
(linear and angular) momenta. Similarly it was argued that one may have superposi-
tions of relatively charged states [1]. A more completeaccount of this conceptually
important point, including a comprehensive list of references, is given in Chap. 6
of [14].
SSRs and Symmetries
Symmetries in quantum mechanics are often implemented via unitary ray- repre-
sentations rather than proper unitary representations (here we discard anti-unitary
ray-representations for simplicity). A unitary ray-representation is a map U from the
symmetry group G into the group of  unitary operators on Hilbert space H such
that the usual condition of homomorphy, U(g1)U(g2) = U(g1g2), is generalised to
U(g1)U(g2) = ω(g1, g2) U(g1g2) ,
(8)

776
Superselection Rules
where ω : G × G →U(1) := {z ∈C | |z| = 1} is the so-called multiplier that
satisﬁes
ω(g1, g2)ω(g1g2, g3) = ω(g1, g2g3)ω(g2, g3) ,
(9)
for all g1, g2, g3 in G, so as to ensures associativity: U(g1)

U(g2)U(g3)

=

U(g1)U(g2)

U(g3). Any function α : G →U(1) allows to redeﬁne U →U′
via U′(g) := α(g)U(g), which amounts to a redeﬁnition ω →ω′ of multipliers
given by
ω′(g1, g2) = α(g1)α(g2)
α(g1g2)
ω(g1, g2) .
(10)
Two multipliers ω and ω′ are called similar if and only if (10) holds for some func-
tion α. A multiplier is called trivial if and only if it is similar to ω ≡1, in which
case the ray-representation is, in fact, a proper representation in disguise.
The following result is now easy to show: Given unitary ray-representations
U1,2 of G on H1,2, respectively, with non-similar multipliers ω1,2, then no
ray-representation of G on H = H1 ⊕H2 exists which restricts to U1,2 on H1,2
respectively. From this a SSR follows from the requirement that the Hilbert space
of pure states should carry a ray-representation of G, since such a space cannot
contain invariant linear subspaces that carry ray-representations with non-similar
multipliers.
An example is given by the SSR of univalence, that is, between states of integer
and half-integer  spin. Here G is the group SO(3) of proper spatial rotations.
For integer spin it is represented by proper unitary representations, for half integer
spin with non-trivial multipliers. Another often quoted example is the Galilei group,
which is implemented in non-relativistic quantum mechanics by non-trivial unitary
ray-representations whose multipliers depend on the total mass of the system and
are not similar for different masses.
Such derivations have sometimes been criticised (e.g. in [15]) for depending cru-
cially on one’s prejudice of what the symmetry group G should be. The relevant
observation here is the following: Any ray-representation of G can be made into a
proper representation of a larger group ¯G, which is a central extension of G. But no
superselection rules follow if ¯G rather than G were required to be the acting sym-
metry group on the set of pure states. For example, in case of the rotation group,
G = SO(3), it is sufﬁcient to take ¯G = SU(2), its double (and universal) cover.
For G the 10-parameter inhomogeneous Galilei group it is sufﬁcient to take for ¯G
an extension by the additive group R, which may even be motivated on classical
grounds [6].
SSRs in Local Quantum Field Theories
In  quantum ﬁeld theory SSRs can arise from the restriction to (quasi) local ob-
servables. Charges which can be measured by ﬂuxes through closed surfaces at
arbitrarily large spatial distances must then commute with all observables. A typ-
ical example is given by the total electric charge, which is given by the integral

Superselection Rules
777
S
over space of the local charge density ρ. According to Maxwell’s equations, the
latter equals the divergence of the electric ﬁeld E, so that Gauß’ theorem allows to
write
Q = lim
R→∞

∥x∥=R
(n · E)dσ ,
(11)
where n is the normal to the sphere ∥x∥= R and dσ its surface measure. If A is
a local observable its support is in the causal complement of the spheres ∥x∥= R
for sufﬁciently large R. Hence, in the quantum theory, A commutes with Q. It is
possible, though technically far from trivial, that this formal reasoning can indeed
be justiﬁed in Local  Quantum Field Theory [8]. For example, one difﬁculty is
that Gauß’ law does not hold as an operator identity.
In modern local quantum-ﬁeld theory [13], representations of the quasi-local al-
gebra of observables are constructed through the choice of a preferred state on that
algebra (GNS-construction), like the Poincar´e invariant vacuum state, giving rise
to the vacuum sector. The superselection structure is restricted by putting certain
selection conditions on such states, like e.g. the Doplicher–Haag–Roberts(DHR) se-
lection criterion for theories with mass gap (there are various generalisations [13]),
according to which any representation should be unitarily equivalent to the vacuum
representation when restricted to observables whose support lies in the causal com-
plement of a sufﬁciently large (causally complete) bounded region in spacetime.
Interestingly this can be closely related to the existence of  gauge groups whose
equivalence classes of irreducible unitary representations faithfully label the supers-
election sectors. Recently, a systematic study of SSRs in “locally covariant quantum
ﬁeld theory” was started in [5]. Finally we mention that SSRs may also arise as a
consequence of non-trivial spacetime topology [3].
Environmentally Induced SSRs
The ubiquitous mechanism of  decoherence effectively restricts the local veriﬁ-
cation of coherences [14]. For example, scattering of light on a particle undergoing
a  double-slit experiment delocalises the relative-phase information for the two
beams along with the escaping light. Hence effective SSRs emerge locally in a
practically irreversible manner, albeit the correlations are actually never destroyed
but merely delocalised. The emergence of effective SSRs through the dynamical
process of decoherence has also been called einselection [11]. For example, this
idea has been applied to the problem of why certain molecules naturally occur in
eigenstates of chirality rather than energy and  parity, i.e. why sectors of different
chirality seem to be superselected so that chirality becomes a classical observable.
This is just a special case of the general question of how classical behaviour can
emerge in Quantum Theory. It may be asked whether all SSRs are eventually of
this dynamically emergent nature, or whether strictly fundamental SSRs persist on
a kinematical level [14]. The complementary situation in theoretic modelling may

778
Superselection Rules
be characterised as follows: Derivations of SSRs from axiomatic formalisms lead
to exact results on models of only approximate validity, whereas the dynamical ap-
proach leads to approximate results on more realistic models.
SSRs in Quantum Information
In the theory of  quantum communication a somewhat softer variant of SSRs is
deﬁned to be a restriction on the allowed local operations (completely positive and
trace-preserving maps on density matrices) on a system [4]. In general, it therefore
leads to constraints on (bipartite)  entanglement. Here the restrictions consid-
ered are usually not thought of as being of any fundamental nature, but rather for
mere practical reasons. For example, without an external reference system for the
deﬁnition of an overall spatial orientation, only “rotationally covariant” operations
O : ρ →O(ρ) are allowed, which means that O must satisfy
O#U(g)ρU†(g)$ = U(g)O(ρ)U†(g)
∀g ∈SO(3) ,
(12)
where U is the unitary representation of the group SO(3) of spatial rotations in
Hilbert space. Insofar as the local situation is concerned, this may be rephrased
in terms of the original setting of SSRs, e.g. by regarding SO(3) as gauge group,
restricting local observables and states to those commuting with SO(3). On the
other hand, one also wishes to consider situations in which, for example, a local
bipartite system (Alice and Bob) is given a state that has been prepared by a third
party that is not subject to the SSR.
Primary Literature
1. Y. Aharonov, L. Susskind: Charge superselection rule. Phys. Rev., 155(5), 1428–1431 (1967)
2. H. Araki, Y. Mutsuo M. Measurement of quantum mechanical operators. Phys. Rev., 120(2),
622–626 (1960).
3. A. Ashtekar, A. Sen. On the role of space–time topology in quantum phenomena: Superselec-
tion of charge and emergence of nontrivial vacua. J. Math. Phys., 21(3), 526–533 (1980).
4. S. D. Bartlett, H. M. Wiseman. Entanglement constrained by superselection rules. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 91(9), 097903 (2003)
5. R. Brunetti, G. Ruzzi.
Superselection sectors and general covariance. I. Commun. Math.
Phys., 270(1), 69–108 (2007)
6. D. Giulini. On Galilei invariance in quantum mechanics and the Bargmann superselection
rule. Ann. Phys. (New York), 249(1), 222–235 (1996)
7. Josef Maria Jauch. Systems of observables in quantum mechanics. Helvetica Phys. Acta 33,
711–726 (1960)
8. Franco Strocchi and Arthur Strong Wightman. Proof of the charge superselection rule in local
relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory. J. Math. Phys., 15(12), 2198–2224 (1974) Erratum: J. Math.
Phys., 17(10), 1930–1931 (1976)
9. G. C. Wick, A. S. Wightman, E. P. Wigner. The intrinsic parity of elementary particles. Phys.
Rev., 88(1), 101–105 (1952)

Symmetry
779
S
10. G. C. Wick, A. S. Wightman, E. P. Wigner. Superselection rule for charge. Phys. Rev., 1(12),
3267–3269 (1970)
11. W. H. Zurek. Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the classical. Rev. Mod.
Phys., 75, 715–775 (2003)
Secondary Literature
12. N.N. Bogolubov et al: General Principles of Quantum Field Theory, volume 10 of ‘Mathemat-
ical Physics and Applied Mathematics’. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1990
13. R. Haag: Local Quantum Physics: Fields, Particles, Algebras. ‘Texts and Monographs in
Physics’. Springer Verlag, Berlin, second revised and enlarged edition, 1996.
14. E. Joos et al: Decoherence and the Appearence of a Classical World in Quantum Theory.
Springer Verlag, Berlin, second revised and enlarged edition, 2003.
15. S. Weinberg: The Quantum Theory of Fields. Volume I Foundations. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1995
Symmetry
K. Mainzer
Symmetry concepts play a central role in physics [13]. The  invariance ( covari-
ance) properties of a system under speciﬁc symmetry transformations can either be
related to the conservation laws of physics or be able to establish the structure of the
fundamental interactions. This is the most essential aspect of symmetry as it con-
cerns the basic principles of physics and the interactions themselves and not only
the properties of a particular system [14].
In geometry, ﬁgures or bodies are called symmetrical when they possess com-
mon measures or proportions. Thus the Platonic bodies can be rotated and turned
at will without changing their regularity. Similarity transformations, for example,
leave the geometric form of a ﬁgure unchanged, i.e. the proportional relationships
of a circle, equilateral triangle, rectangle, etc. are retained, although the absolute
dimensions of these ﬁgures can be enlarged or decreased. Therefore one can say
that the form of a ﬁgure is determined by the similarity transformations that leave
it unchanged (invariant). In mathematics, a similarity transformation is an example
of an automorphism [12]. In general an automorphism is the mapping of a set (e.g.
points, numbers, functions) onto itself that leaves unchanged the structure of this set
(e.g. proportional relations in Euclidean space). Automorphisms can also be charac-
terized algebraically in this way: (1) Identity I that maps every element of a set onto
itself, is an automorphism. (2) For every automorphism T an inverse automorphism
T ’ can be given, with T ·T ’ = T ’·T = I. (3) If S and T are automorphisms, then so
is the successive application S · T . A set of elements with a composition that fulﬁls
these three axioms is called a group. The symmetry of a mathematical structure is
determined by the group of those automorphisms that let it unchanged (invariant).

