Which-Way or Welcher-Weg-Experiments
845
W
of local measurements [6,7] or be useful when performing quantum teleporation [8]
 quantum communication. To conclude, the relation between  entanglement and
non-locality is fascinating and full of open questions!
Literature
1. J. S. Bell: On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox. Physics 1, 195 (1964)
2. N. Gisin: Bell’s inequality holds for all non-product states. Phys. Lett. A 154, 201 (1991)
3. R. F. Werner: Quantum states with Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen correlations admitting a hidden-
variable model. Phys. Rev. A 40, 4277 (1989)
4. J. Barrett: Nonsequential positive-operator-valued measurements on entangled mixed states do
not always violate a Bell inequality. Phys. Rev. A 65, 042302 (2002)
5. G. Toth, A. Ac´ın: Genuine tripartite entangled states with a local hidden-variable model. Phys.
Rev. A 74, 030306 (2006)
6. S. Popescu: Bell’s inequalities and density matrices: revealing “hidden” nonlocality. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 74, 2619 (1995)
7. N. Gisin: Hidden quantum nonlocality revealed by local Filters. Phys. Lett. A 210, 151 (1996)
8. S. Popescu: Bells inequalities versus teleportation: What is nonlocality? Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 797
(1994)
Which-Way or Welcher-Weg-Experiments
Paul Busch and Gregg Jaeger
The issue of the  wave-particle duality of light and matter is commonly illus-
trated by the  double-slit experiment, in which a quantum object of relatively
well deﬁned momentum (such as a photon, electron, neutron, atom, or molecule)
is sent through a diaphragm containing two slits, after which it is detected at a cap-
ture screen. It is found that an interference pattern characteristic of wave behaviour
emerges as a large number of similarly prepared quantum objects is detected on the
screen. This is taken as evidence that it is impossible to ascertain through which
slit an individual quantum object has passed; if that were known in every individ-
ual case and if the quantum objects behaved as free classical particles otherwise, an
interference pattern would not arise.
The notion that a description of atomic objects in terms of deﬁnite classical par-
ticle trajectories is not in general admissible is prominent in Werner Heisenberg’s
seminal paper [1] of 1927 on the  Heisenberg uncertainty principle; there he notes:
“I believe that one can fruitfully formulate the origin of the classical ‘orbit’ in this
way: the ‘orbit’ comes into being only when we observe it.” In the same year, in
his famous Como lecture, Niels Bohr introduced the  complementarity princi-
ple, which entails that deﬁnite particle trajectories cannot be deﬁned or observed

846
Which-Way or Welcher-Weg-Experiments
for atomic objects because according to it their spatiotemporal and causal descrip-
tions are mutually exclusive [2]. Bohr cited the uncertainty relation as a symbolic
expression of complementarity but recognized that this relation also offered room
for approximately deﬁned simultaneous values of position and momentum. Still in
the same year, at the 1927 Solvay conference, Albert Einstein questioned the im-
possibility of determining the path taken by an individual particle in a double-slit
interference experiment [21]; he proposed an experimental scheme wherein he con-
sidered it possible to infer through which slit the particle passed, without thereby
destroying the interference pattern by measuring the recoil of the double-slitted di-
aphragm. This was the ﬁrst instance of a welcher-weg or which-way experiment. As
Bohr reported in his 1949 tribute to Einstein [3], he was able to demonstrate that
Einstein’s proposal was in conﬂict with the principles of quantum mechanics.
In subsequent years, different variants of such a welcher-weg experiment were
considered as thought experiments illustrating the mutual exclusive options of either
determining the path of a quantum object or observing its interference behaviour. Al-
though Einstein’s proposal of measuring the recoil of the double-slit system to infer
the path was shown by Bohr to lead to an uncertainty of the slit location sufﬁcient to
blur the interference pattern, Feynman [22] later argued that any attempt to observe
the path of an electron by shining light on it will lead to random momentum kicks
on it in line with the uncertainty principle, thus washing out the interference.
A more rigorous quantum mechanical model and analysis of Einstein’s which-
way thought experiment was undertaken by Wootters and ˙Zurek in 1979 [4]. The
initial slit through which the photons are sent is suspended with a spring, and its
centre-of-mass motion is described quantum mechanically as that of particle sub-
jected to a harmonic potential. This allows for a choice of measurements that can
be performed on the slit once the photon ( light quantum) has passed it and pro-
ceeds through the double-slit system towards the ﬁnal screen. If an (approximate)
measurement of the position of the slit is made, it is found that the photons imping-
ing on the ﬁnal screen build up an interference pattern; on the other hand, if the
momentum of the initial slit is determined sufﬁciently precisely so as to allow the
determination of the photon’s path, the interference pattern does not develop. The
fact that both choices are possible after the photon has passed the screen is due to
quantum correlations ( entanglement) developing between states of the photon and
the initial screen; the experiment can thus be considered an instance of Wheeler’s
 delayed-choice experiment [5]. (For a recent experimental realization, see [6].)
Wootters and ˙Zurek also gave an information-theoretic characterization of the
trade-off between the quality of the path determination and the concurrent degrada-
tion of the interference contrast. They noted that even at 99% path certainty, there
is still an interference pattern with a crest to valley ratio of 3/2. In this way, they
demonstrated that Bohr’s initially strict notion of complementarity is compatible
with the notion of graded or quantitative complementarity (to which Bohr had al-
ready hinted in 1927 [2]), under which the exclusivity of the experimental options
for path determination and interference observation are characterized more precisely
and reconciled in a certain sense. This conclusion was subsequently corroborated by
demonstrations of the joint approximate measurability of noncommuting observ-
ables, such as complementary path and interference observables measured in the

Which-Way or Welcher-Weg-Experiments
847
W
context of Mach-Zehnder interferometry. (Examples and references can be found in
the review [23].) In the 1980s, the discovery of novel information-theoretic uncer-
tainty relations (e.g., [7–9]) and a related Mach-Zehnder interferometric which-way
experiment performed with laser light [8] boosted interest in the investigation of
quantitative wave-particle duality.
In the Wootters- ˙Zurek model, path information is obtained by effecting a mo-
mentum exchange between the photon and the initial slit screen. In 1991, Scully,
Englert and Walther proposed a radically new variant [10]. In their experiment,
each laser-excited atom of a beam passes through an initial double-slit diaphragm
and its possible paths are then directed through two auxiliary microwave cavities
that can be conﬁgured so as to allow the path information to be obtained before
it exits another double-slit diaphragm (see Figure 1). This allows entanglement to
arise between atomic-path and cavity occupation states. The interaction involved
is too weak to lead to any signiﬁcant momentum transfer, which therefore cannot
account for the destruction of the ﬁnal interference pattern. As also shown in [10],
the interference pattern can be restored if a suitable observable of the auxiliary sys-
tem not commuting with the path indication operator is precisely measurable in
an alternative conﬁguration. Because the path information that would be present is
then no longer available, this phenomenon is called quantum erasure; it was ﬁrst de-
scribed by Scully and Dr¨uhl in 1982 [11]; an experimental realization incorporating
the delayed-choice feature was reported in [12].
The Scully–Englert–Walther apparatus allowing one to switch between two such
conﬁgurations is a modiﬁcation of the  double-slit experiment. By appropriately
switching between conﬁgurations, information associated with one or the other
non-commuting observable is erased. In the standard double-slit experiment, in
the conﬁguration with both slits open, strong quantum interference is observed for
the input pure state ( states, pure and mixed) |ψ⟩=
1
√
2(|ψ1⟩+ |ψ2⟩), where
|ψi⟩is the state corresponding to entry with certainty into slit i = 1, 2, even when
elementary particles enter one by one; there are two paths that the initially pre-
pared members of the  ensemble could take from preparation to the measurement.
In another conﬁguration where only one of the two slits is available at a time, so
that complete path information is obtained, then no interference pattern appears on
the detection screen; there is only one path history possible from preparation to
point of detection for each particle. In these two conﬁgurations, non-commuting
 observables are measured, one in each case.
The Scully–Englert–Walther experiment adds an auxiliary system capable of be-
coming entangled with the primary quantum system. The enlarged apparatus allows
alternation between the above two cases, with the option to make the choice of con-
ﬁguration at any time before the ﬁnal screen is contacted. The auxiliary system can
deﬁnitively indicate, although indirectly, which slit was entered by the primary sys-
tem by exploiting state entanglement [10, 14]. The primary and auxiliary systems
are arranged so as to interact in such a way that phenomena which would have oc-
curred in one conﬁguration are not exhibited in the other. The incoming quantum
ensemble is that of a beam of Rydberg atoms rather than of elementary particles,
a laser is introduced as the ﬁrst apparatus element and is oriented perpendicularly
to the atom beam so as to allow its excitation, an auxiliary system consisting of

848
Which-Way or Welcher-Weg-Experiments
Fig. 1 Apparatus for quantum erasure: A modiﬁed version of the standard  double-slit appara-
tus, where two intermediate microcavities with internal shutters (dark dashed lines) and a radiation
absorber (thick solid line) have been introduced and excited atoms are input that de-excite with cer-
tainty within one of the cavities. (a) Atom detections when shutters are opened; path information is
unavailable because radiation is indiscriminately absorbed. (b) Atom detections when the radiation
absorber is unreachable, so that radiation is selectively contained in one cavity or the other; path
information, which is incompatible with interference, is available. Opening the shutters, even after
each atom has passed the double-slitted diaphragm, effectively erases path information, which is
irretrievable from the common radiation absorber, taking case (b) to case (a)
a pair of micro-cavities is placed after it, and an additional double-slit diaphragm
placed after the cavities, as shown Fig. 1. The two micro-cavities are each of a length
such that the atoms will de-excite with extremely high probability between the their
entrances and exits. Each cavity will therefore capture any radiation emitted from
atoms entering it, allowing the atoms of the beam to become entangled with the
cavity pair before entering the remainder of the system. The two cavities constitut-
ing the auxiliary system are adjacent but separated by a wall covered on each side
by shutters which, when opened, allow captured radiation to be absorbed from ei-
ther cavity without the discriminating from where it came. Rapid switching of the
shutters between open and closed positions allows the choice of conﬁguration to be
delayed until very near the time each atom strikes the screen.
In order to allow path information to be stored, the laser of this new apparatus
is sufﬁciently powerful that, when turned on, it will excite every one of the beam
atoms from its ground state to its excited state. The state of the atomic system is thus
prepared as |ψ(r)⟩|j⟩=
1
√
2(|ψ1(r)⟩+|ψ2(r)⟩)|j⟩, where the position coordinate of
the elementary particles of the standard experiment is replaced by that of the atomic
center-of-mass position coordinate r and the atomic internal states are written |j⟩,
j = 0, 1, the ground and excited states, respectively. Without the laser on, all atoms

Which-Way or Welcher-Weg-Experiments
849
W
are in the ground state |0⟩. The atom beam is then described by the pure product
state |ψ(r)⟩|0⟩, so that its squared magnitude, the probability density of detected
atoms at the ﬁnal screen position r = R is
p(R) = 1
2

||ψ1(R)⟩|2 +||ψ2(R)⟩|2
+

⟨ψ2(R)|ψ1(R)⟩+⟨ψ1(R)|ψ2(R)⟩

⟨0|0⟩,
with ⟨0|0⟩= 1, that is, one ﬁnds the sort of interference pattern observed in the stan-
dard double-slit experiment when both slits are available. With the laser is turned on
and the shutters kept closed, with the atoms prepared in |ψ(R)⟩|1⟩, atomic radiation
is deposited into one of the cavities and the state of the enlarged system must be
considered, namely,
|⟩=
1
√
2

|ψ1⟩|0⟩|1C10C2⟩+ |ψ2⟩|0⟩|0C11C2⟩

=
1
√
2
|ψ1⟩|1C10C2⟩+ |ψ2⟩|0C11C2⟩|0⟩
where the subscripts {Ci} indicate the cavity pair with eigenstates |kC1lC2⟩, with
k = 0, 1 indexing the occupation eigenvalue of cavity 1 feeding slit 1 and l = 0, 1
indexing that of cavity feeding slit 2.
Thus, with the laser turned on and cavity shutters kept closed, the external atomic
state and the occupation state of the two-cavity system become entangled, whereas
the internal atomic state factors out. The probability density for arrival of atoms at
point R on the screen is that shown in case (b) of Figure 1:
p = 1
2
#
(||ψ1⟩|2 + ||ψ2⟩|2) + ⟨ψ1|ψ2⟩⟨1C10C2|0C11C2⟩
+⟨ψ1|ψ2⟩)⟨0C11C2|1C10C2⟩
$
⟨0|0⟩
where here, as in the previous equation, the position argument R in p(R), |(R)⟩,
and |ψi(R)⟩has been omitted but is implied. Then, ⟨1C10C2|0C11C2⟩= 0 and
⟨0C11C2|1C10C2⟩= 0 imply that the terms including them are zero. The observed
interference pattern of atoms striking the ﬁnal screen is thus p(R) = 1
2||ψ1(R)⟩|2 +
1
2||ψ2(R)⟩|2, a simple probability sum corresponding to state mixture; the introduc-
tion of the cavities which selectively interacting with passing atoms depending on
their proximity to each slit allows for distinguishability in principle of the paths of
the atoms as long as their interior shutters are kept closed. The atomic detection pat-
tern can be understood to occur because the enlarged system contains entangled sub-
systems. However, the path information encoded in this de facto two-cavity memory
can readily be erased by switching instead to the conﬁguration in which the internal
shutters of the two cavities are opened, which allows the stored radiation to reach the
photon absorber. In that case, because the radiation in the cavities from which path
information might be retrievable is instead lost from them to the absorber, taking
both cavity states to their ground states |0C10C2⟩, which then factor out:

850
Which-Way or Welcher-Weg-Experiments
|⟩=
1
√
2

|ψ1⟩|0⟩|0C10C2⟩+ |ψ2⟩|0⟩|0C10C2⟩

=
1
√
2

|ψ1⟩+ |ψ2⟩

|0⟩|0C10C2⟩.
The path information is therefore no longer encoded in them. Interference reappears,
as in case (a) of Fig. 1:
p = 1
2

||ψ1⟩|2 + ||ψ2⟩|2
+

⟨ψ2|ψ1⟩+ ⟨ψ1|ψ2⟩

⟨0|0⟩⟨0C10C2|0C10C2⟩.
The ﬁrst realization of a welcher-weg experiment with individual atoms simi-
lar to the proposal of Scully, Englert and Walther was obtained by D¨urr, Nonn and
Rempe in 1998 [15]. It is shown there that neither mechanical momentum transfers
nor the position-momentum uncertainty relation are relevant for the explanation of
the destruction of interference. Nevertheless duality relations have been found that
describe a quantitative trade-off between the quality of path determination and in-
terference visibility [16–18] which have been shown to be instances of appropriate
uncertainty relations [23].
A neutron-interferometric double resonance experiment involving neutrons and
photons allowing simultaneous observation of interference and individual energy
losses have also been used to test Einstein’s related ‘Einweg’ assumption, in dis-
cussions with Bohr, that particles take single deﬁnite paths despite these paths
being unknown to experimenters [19, 24]. For a penetrating philosophical discus-
sion of the issues and debates arising from the seminal paper of Scully, Englert and
Walther [10] the reader is referred to [25].
Primary Literature
1. Heisenberg, W.: ¨Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und
Mechanik. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 43, 172-198 (1927). The quotation is taken from the English
translation in [20].
2. Bohr, N.: The quantum postulate and the recent development of atomic theory. Nature 121,
580-590 (1928).
3. Bohr, N.: Discussion with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in Atomic Physics, in Al-
bert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, ed. P. Schilpp (Library of Living Philosophers, Evanston,
1949).
4. Wootters, W.K./Zurek, W.H.: Complementarity in the double-slit experiment: Quantum non-
separability and a quantitative statement of Bohr’s principle. Physical Review D 19, 473-484
(1979).
5. Wheeler, J.A.: The past and the delayed-choice double-slit experiment, in Marlow, A.R. (ed.),
Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory (Academic Press, New York, 1978).
6. Jacques, V./Wu, E./Grosshans, F./Treussart, F./Grangier, P./Aspect, A./Roch, J.-F.: Experi-
mental realization of Wheelers delayed-choice GedankenExperiment, arxiv:quant-ph/0610241
(2006).
7. Deutsch, D.: Uncertainty in Quantum Measurements. Physical Review Letters 50, 631-633
(1983).
8. Mittelstaedt, P./Prieur, A./Schieder, R.: Unsharp particle-wave duality in a photon split beam
experiment. Foundations of Physics 17, 891-903 (1987).
9. Greenberger, D.M./Yasin, A.: Simultaneous wave and particle knowledge in a neutron interfer-
ometer. Physics Letters A 128, 391-394 (1988).

Wigner Distribution
851
W
10. Scully, M.O./Englert, B.-G./Walther, H.: Quantum optical tests of complementarity. Nature
351, 111-116 (1991).
11. Scully, M.O./Dr¨uhl, K.: Quantum eraser - A proposed photon correlation experiment concern-
ing observation and delayed choice in quantum mechanics. Physical Review A 25, 2208-2213
(1982).
12. Kim, Y.-H./Yu, R./Kulik, S.P./Shi, Y./Scully, M.O.: Delayed ‘Choice’ Quantum Eraser. Physi-
cal Review Letters 84, 1-5 (2000).
13. Wheeler, J. A.: Law without law, in Wheeler, J.A./Zurek, W.H. (eds.), Quantum Theory and
Measurement (Princeton, New Jersey, 1983, pp. 182-213).
14. Scully, M.: Quantum Optics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997, Section 20.1).
15. D¨urr, S./Nonn, T./Rempe, G.: Origin of quantum-mechanical complementarity probed by a
‘which-way’ experiment in an atom interferometer. Nature 395, 33-37 (1998).
16. Jaeger, G./Shimony, A./Vaidman, L.: Two interferometric complementarities. Physical Review
A 51, 54-67 (1995).
17. Englert, B.-G.: Fringe Visibility and which-way information: An inequality. Physical Review
Letters 77, 2154-2157 (1996).
18. Englert, B.-G./Bergou, J.A.: Quantitative quantum erasure. Optics Communications 179, 337-
355 (2000).
19. Vigier, J.-P. /Rauch, H.: Proposed neutron interferometry test of Einstein’s ‘Einweg’ assump-
tion in the Bohr-Einstein controversy. Physics Letters A 151, 269-275 (1990).
Secondary Literature
20. Wheeler, J.A./Zurek, W.H. (eds.), Quantum theory and measurement (Princeton, New Jersey,
1983).
21. Bacciagaluppi, G./Valentini, A.: Quantum mechanics at the crossroads: Reconsidering the 1927
Solvay Conference (Cambridge University Press, UK, 2009).
22. Feynman, R./Leighton, R./Sands, M.: The Feynman Lectures on Physics Vol. III (Addison
Wesley, 1965).
23. Busch, P./Shilladay, C.R.: Complementarity and uncertainty in Mach-Zehnder interferometry
and beyond. Physics Reports 435, 1-31 (2006).
24. Rauch, H./Werner, S.: Neutron interferometry (Oxford, 2000).
25. Falkenburg, B.: Particle Metaphysics – A Critical Account of Subatomic Reality (Springer
2007, Sec. 7.4 and 7.5.).
Wigner Distribution
R.F. O’Connell
In contrast to classical physics, the language of quantum mechanics involves
 operators and  wave functions (or, more generally,  density operators). How-
ever, in1932, Wigner formulated quantum mechanics in terms of a distribution
function W(q, p), the marginals of which yield the correct quantum probabilities
for q and p separately [1]. Its usefulness stems from the fact that it provides a
re-expression of quantum mechanics in terms of classical concepts so that quantum

