6
Algebraic Quantum Mechanics
the electrons with the original magnetic moment, we end up with magnetic moments
that all point in the same direction, i.e. with a straight line of magnetic ﬂux. Hence
the original line of electrons must have been straight. We see intuitively that the
effects are dual only for a straight line of charge.1
Primary Literature
1. Y. Aharonov, A. Casher: Topological quantum effects for neutral particles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 53,
319–21 (1984).
2. A. Cimmino, G. I. Opat, A. G. Klein, H. Kaiser, S. A. Werner, M. Arif, R. Clothier: Observation
of the topological Aharonov–Casher phase shift by neutron interferometry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 63,
380–83 (1989).
3. W. J. Elion, J. J. Wachters, L. L. Sohn, J. D. Mooij: Observation of the Aharonov–Casher effect
for vortices in Josephson-junction arrays. Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 2311–314 (1993).
4. K. Sangster, E. A. Hinds, S. M. Barnett, E. Riis: Measurement of the Aharonov–Casher phase
in an atomic system. Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 3641–3644 (1993); S. Yanagimachi, M. Kajiro,
M. Machiya, A. Morinaga: Direct measurement of the Aharonov–Casher phase and tensor
Stark polarizability using a calcium atomic polarization interferometer. Phys. Rev. A65, 042104
(2002).
5. M. K¨onig et al.: Direct observation of the Aharonov–Casher Phase. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 076804
(2006).
6. Y. Aharonov, P. Pearle, L. Vaidman: Comment on Proposed Aharonov–Casher effect: Another
example of an Aharonov–Bohm effect arising from a classical lag. Phys. Rev. A37, 4052–055
(1988).
Secondary Literature
7. For a review, see L. Vaidman: Torque and force on a magnetic dipole. Am. J. Phys. 58, 978–83
(1990).
1 I thank Prof. Aharonov for a conversation on this point.
Algebraic Quantum Mechanics
N.P. Landsman
Algebraic quantum mechanics is an abstraction and generalization of the  Hilbert
space formulation of quantum mechanics due to von Neumann [5]. In fact, von Neu-
mann himself played a major role in developing the algebraic approach. Firstly, his
joint paper [3] with Jordan and Wigner was one of the ﬁrst attempts to go beyond
Hilbert space (though it is now mainly of historical value). Secondly, he founded
the mathematical theory of operator algebras in a magniﬁcent series of papers [4, 6].

Algebraic Quantum Mechanics
7
A
Although his own attempts to apply this theory to quantum mechanics were unsuc-
cessful [18], the operator algebras that he introduced (which are now aptly called
von Neumann algebras) still play a central role in the algebraic approach to quantum
theory. Another class of operator algebras, now called C∗-algebras, introduced by
Gelfand and Naimark [1], is of similar importance in algebraic quantum mechanics
and quantum ﬁeld theory. Authoritative references for the theory of C∗-algebras and
von Neumann algebras are [14] and [21]. Major contributions to algebraic quantum
theory were also made by Segal [7, 8] and Haag and his collaborators [2, 13].
The need to go beyond Hilbert space initially arose in attempts at a mathemati-
cally rigorous theory of systems with an inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom, both
in quantum statistical mechanics [9, 12, 13, 19, 20, 22] and in quantum ﬁeld theory
[2, 13, 20]. These remain active ﬁelds of study. More recently, the algebraic ap-
proach has also been applied to  quantum chemistry [17], to the quantization and
 quasi-classical limit of ﬁnite-dimensional systems [15, 16], and to the philosophy
of physics [10, 11, 16].
Besides its mathematical rigour, an important advantage of the algebraic ap-
proach is that it enables one to incorporate  Superselection Rules. Indeed, it was
a fundamental insight of Haag that the superselection sectors of a quantum system
correspond to (unitarily) inequivalent representations of its algebra of  observ-
ables (see below). As shown in the references just cited, in quantum ﬁeld theory
such representations (and hence the corresponding superselection sectors) are typ-
ically labeled by charges, whereas in quantum statistical mechanics they describe
different thermodynamic phases of the system. In chemistry, the chirality of certain
molecules can be understood as a superselection rule. The algebraic approach also
leads to a transparent description of situations where  locality and/or  entangle-
ment play a role [11, 13].
The notion of a C∗-algebra is basic in algebraic quantum theory. This is a com-
plex algebra A that is complete in a norm ∥· ∥satisfying ∥ab∥⩽∥a∥∥b∥for all
a, b ∈A, and has an involution a →a∗such that ∥a∗a∥= ∥a∥2. A quantum system
is then supposed to be modeled by a C∗-algebra whose self-adjoint elements (i.e.
a∗= a) form the observables of the system. Of course, further structure than the
C∗-algebraic one alone is needed to describe the system completely, such as a time-
evolution or (in the case of quantum ﬁeld theory) a description of the localization of
each observable [13].
A basic example of a C∗-algebra is the algebra Mn of all complex n×n matrices,
which describes an n-level system. Also, one may take A = B(H), the algebra of
all bounded operators on an inﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space H, equipped with
the usual operator norm and adjoint. By the Gelfand–Naimark theorem [1], any
C∗-algebra is isomorphic to a norm-closed self-adjoint subalgebra of B(H), for
some Hilbert space H. Another key example is A = C0(X), the space of all con-
tinuous complex-valued functions on a (locally compact Hausdorff) space X that
vanish at inﬁnity (in the sense that for every ε > 0 there is a compact subset
K ⊂X such that |f (x)| < ε for all x /∈K), equipped with the supremum norm
∥f ∥∞:= supx∈X |f (x)|, and involution given by (pointwise) complex conjugation.
By the Gelfand–Naimark lemma [1], any commutative C∗-algebra is isomorphic to

8
Algebraic Quantum Mechanics
C0(X) for some locally compact Hausdorff space X. The algebra of observables of
a classical system can often be modeled as a commutative C∗-algebra.
A von Neumann algebra M is a special kind of C∗-algebra, namely one that
is concretely given on some Hilbert space, i.e. M ⊂B(H), and is equal to its
own bicommutant: (M′)′ = M (where M′ consists of all bounded operators on H
that commute with every element of M). For example, B(H) is always a von Neu-
mann algebra. Whereas C∗-algebras are usually considered in their norm-topology,
a von Neumann algebra in addition carries a second interesting topology, called the
σ-weak topology, in which its is complete as well. In this topology, one has conver-
gence an →a if Tr ˆρ(an−a) →0 for each density matrix ˆρ on H. Unlike a general
C∗-algebra (which may not have any nontrivial projections at all), a von Neumann
algebra is generated by its projections (i.e. its elements p satisfying p2 = p∗= p).
It is often said, quite rightly, that C∗-algebras describe “non-commutative topol-
ogy” whereas von Neumann algebra form the domain of “non-commutativemeasure
theory”.
In the algebraic framework the notion of a state is deﬁned in a different way from
what one is used to in quantum mechanics. An (algebraic) state on a C∗-algebra A is
a linear functional ρ: A →C that is positive in that ρ(a∗a) ⩾0 for all a ∈A and
normalized in that ρ(1) = 1, where 1 is the unit element of A (provided A has a unit;
if not, an equivalent requirement given positivity is ∥ρ∥= 1). If A is a von Neumann
algebra, the same deﬁnition applies, but one has the ﬁner notion of a normal state,
which by deﬁnition is continuous in the σ-weak topology (a state is automatically
continuous in the norm topology). If A = B(H), then a fundamental theorem of von
Neumann [5] states that each normal state ρ on A is given by a  density matrix
ˆρ on H, so that ρ(a) = Tr ˆρa for each a ∈A. (If H is inﬁnite-dimensional, then
B(H) also possesses states that are not normal. For example, if H = L2(R) the
Dirac eigenstates |x⟩of the position operator are well known not to exist as vectors
in H, but it turns out that they do deﬁne non-normal states on B(H).) On this basis,
algebraic states are interpreted in the same way as states in the usual formalism, in
that the number ρ(a) is taken to be the expectation value of the observable a in the
state ρ (this is essentially the  Born rule).
The notions of pure and mixed states can be deﬁned in a general way now.
Namely, a state ρ : A →C is said to be pure when a decomposition ρ =
λω + (1 −λ)σ for some λ ∈(0, 1) and two states ω and σ is possible only if
ω = σ = ρ. Otherwise, ρ is called mixed, in which case it evidently does have
a nontrivial decomposition. It then turns out that a normal pure state on B(H) is
necessarily of the form ψ(a) = (Ψ, aΨ ) for some unit vector Ψ ∈H; of course,
the state ρ deﬁned by a density matrix ˆρ that is not a one-dimensional projection
is mixed. Thus one recovers the usual notion of pure and mixed states from the
algebraic formalism.
In the algebraic approach, however, states play a role that has no counterpart in
the usual formalism of quantum mechanics. Namely, each state ρ on a C∗-algebra
A deﬁnes a representation πρ of A on a Hilbert space Hρ by means of the so-
called GNS-construction (after Gelfand, Naimark and Segal [1, 7]). First, assume
that ρ is faithful in that ρ(a∗a) > 0 for all nonzero a ∈A. It follows that (a, b) :=

Algebraic Quantum Mechanics
9
A
ρ(a∗b) deﬁnes a positive deﬁnite sesquilinear form on A; the completion of A in the
corresponding norm is a Hilbert space denoted by Hρ. By construction, it contains
A as a dense subspace. For each a ∈A, deﬁne an operator πρ(a) on A by πρ(a)b :=
ab, where b ∈A. It easily follows that πρ(a) is bounded, so that it may be extended
by continuity to all of Hρ. One then checks that πρ : A →B(Hρ) is linear and
satisﬁes πρ(a1a2) = πρ(a1)πρ(a2) and πρ(a∗) = πρ(a)∗. This means that πρ is a
representation of A on Hρ. If ρ is not faithful, the same construction applies with
one additional step: since the sesquilinear form is merely positive semideﬁnite, one
has to take the quotient of A by the kernel Nρ of the form (i.e. the collection of all
c ∈A for which ρ(c∗c) = 0), and construct the Hilbert space Hρ as the completion
of A/Nρ.
As in group theory, one has a notion of unitary (in)equivalence of representations
of C∗-algebras. As already mentioned, this provides a mathematical explanation for
the phenomenon of superselection rules, an insight that remains one of the most
important achievements of algebraic quantum theory to date. See also  operational
quantum mechanics; relativistic quantum mechanics.
Primary Literature
1. I.M. Gelfand & M.A. Naimark: On the imbedding of normed rings into the ring of operators in
Hilbert space. Mat. Sbornik 12, 197–213 (1943)
2. R. Haag & D. Kastler: An algebraic approach to quantum ﬁeld theory. J. Math. Phys. 7,
848–861 (1964)
3. P. Jordan, J. von Neumann & E. Wigner: On an algebraic generalization of the quantum me-
chanical formalism. Ann. Math. 35, 29–64 (1934)
4. F.J. Murray & J. von Neumann: On rings of operators I, II, IV. Ann. Math. 37, 116–229 (1936),
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 41, 208–248 (1937), Ann. Math. 44, 716–808 (1943)
5. J. von Neumann: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer, Berlin 1932).
English translation: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton University
Press, Berlin 1955)
6. J. von Neumann: On rings of operators III, V. Ann. Math. 41, 94–161 (1940), ibid. 50, 401–485
(1949)
7. I.E. Segal: Irreducible representations of operator algebras. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 61, 69–105
(1947)
8. I.E. Segal: Postulates for general quantum mechanics. Ann. Math. 48, 930–948 (1947)
Secondary Literature
9. O. Bratteli & D.W. Robinson: Operator Algebras and Quantum Statistical Mechanics. Vol 1:
C* and W*-algebras, Symmetry Groups, Decomposition of States; Vol. 2: Equilibrium States,
Models in Quantum Statistical Mechanics, Second Edition (Springer, Heidelberg 1996, 2003)
10. J. Butterﬁeld & J. Earman (ed.): Handbook of the Philosophy of Science Vol. 2: Philosophy of
Physics (North-Holland, Elsevier, Amsterdam 2007)
11. R. Clifton, J. Butterﬁeld & H. Halvorson: Quantum Entanglements - Selected Papers (Oxford
University Press, Oxford 2004)
12. G.G. Emch: Mathematical and Conceptual Foundations of 20th-Century Physics (North-
Holland, Amsterdam 1984)

10
Anyons
13. R. Haag: Local Quantum Physics: Fields, Particles, Algebras (Springer, Heidelberg 1992)
14. R.V. Kadison & J.R. Ringrose: Fundamentals of the Theory of Operator Algebras. Vol. 1:
Elementary Theory; Vol. 2: Advanced Theory (Academic, New York 1983, 1986)
15. N.P. Landsman: Mathematical Topics Between Classical and Quantum Mechanics (Springer,
New York 1998)
16. N.P. Landsman: Between classical and quantum, in Handbook of the Philosophy of Science
Vol. 2: Philosophy of Physics, ed. by J. Butterﬁeld and J. Earman, pp. 417–554 (North-Holland,
Elsevier, Amsterdam 2007)
17. H. Primas: Chemistry, Quantum Mechanics and Reductionism, Second Edition (Springer,
Berlin 1983)
18. M. Redei: Why John von Neumann did not like the Hilbert space formalism of quantum me-
chanics (and what he liked instead). Stud. Hist. Phil. Mod. Phys. 27, 493–510 (1996).
19. G.L. Sewell: Quantum Mechanics and its Emergent Macrophysics (Princeton University Press,
Princeton 2002)
20. F. Strocchi: Elements of Quantum mechanics of Inﬁnite Systems (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
1985)
21. M. Takesaki: Theory of Operator Algebras. Vols. I-III. (Springer, New York 2003)
22. W. Thirring: Quantum Mathematical Physics: Atoms, Molecules and Large Systems, Second
Edition (Springer, New York 2002)
Angular Momentum
 See Spin; Stern–Gerlach experiment; Vector model.
Anyons
Jon Magne Leinaas
Quantum mechanics gives a unique characterization of elementary particles as be-
ing either bosons or fermions. This property, referred to as the  quantum statistics
of the particles, follows from a simple symmetry argument, where the  wave func-
tions of a system of identical particles are restricted to be either symmetric (bosons)
or antisymmetric (fermions) under permutation of particle coordinates. For two
spinless particles, this symmetry is expressed through a sign factor which is as-
sociated with the switching of positions
ψ(r1, r2) = ±ψ(r2, r1) ,
(1)
with + for bosons and −for fermions. From the symmetry constraint, when ap-
plied to a many-particle system, the statistical distributions of particles over single
particle states can be derived, and the completely different collective behaviour of
systems like  electrons (fermions) and photons (bosons) ( light quantum) can be
understood.

