476
Pilot Waves
Photon
See  Light Quantum.
Pilot Waves
Basil James Hiley
The notion of a pilot wave was ﬁrst proposed by Louis de Broglie (1892–1987)
in his doctorate thesis in 1924 [1] and eventually published in 1927 [2]. Earlier
experiments on the  photoelectric effect showed the need to introduce the notion
of a ‘packet’ of electromagnetic energy, the photon, into what had till then been
thought to be a purely wave phenomena. How then was it possible to bring together
the particle and the wave, two apparently contradictory physical notions into one
theory?
De Broglie summarised his ideas in what he called “the theory of the double solu-
tion”. In this approach he proposed that the equations of  wave mechanics would
admit two kinds of solution. One solution would be a continuous wave solution,
, and the other would be a singular solution which would represent the physical
“particle”. This singular solution would be localised and incorporated within the
extended wave phenomena. De Broglie’s brilliant perception [3] was that this idea
could be applied, not only to photons ( light quantum), but to quantum particles in
general, namely those with non-zero rest mass. What was missing was the general
non-linear wave equation which would unite wave behaviour with particle behaviour
in one comprehensive theory.
To a ﬁrst approximation, de Broglie [10] argued that we can treat the two so-
lutions separately provided we ﬁnd some way of locking the particle to the 
wave, which he assumed would satisfy the  Schr¨odinger equation. To achieve
this de Broglie ﬁrst noticed that a particle has an internal energy, m0c2 = hν0,
so that it can be compared with a small clock of proper frequency ν0. When the
particle is in motion with a velocity v, relativity tells us that its frequency would
be ν = ν0(1 −v2/c2)1/2. This is different from the frequency of a wave which
transforms as ν1 = ν0/(1 −v2/c2)1/2. However combining these two results gives
ν1 = ν(1 −v2/c2), a relation which we will now exploit.
How does this result ‘lock’ the wave and particle aspects together? Notice that
an observer will see the moving particle represented by a wave ψ = sin(2πν1t). If
at time t = 0 there is agreement between the internal phase of the particle described
by ψ and the phase of the wave , then we want this agreement in phase to persist
throughout the movement of the particle.
At time t, the particle will have moved a distance x = vt from its original posi-
tion. Its internal motion will then be represented by ψ = sin[2π(x/v)ν1]. Now the
-wave at this point will be given by

