Werner States
843
W
Werner States
Antonio Ac´ın
In our macroscopic world, correlations are established by means of a set of clas-
sical instructions, that could be agreed in advance or come from a source. Using
these pre-established instructions, distant parties that are unable to communicate
can behave in a correlated manner. Assume for instance a scenario where two dis-
tant parties are asked different questions from a set of m possible questions with
n possible answers. We denote by x and y the question asked to Alice and Bob,
while a and b label their responses. The correlations between the parties will be
described by a joint probability distribution p (a, b|x, y). If the parties received in
advance correlated instructions, denoted by λ, but are not able to communicate, the
probability distributions can generically be written as
pc(a, b|x, y) =

λ
p (λ)p (a|x, λ)q(b|y, λ).
(1)
In what follows, correlations of this form are called local, since they can be repro-
duced by means of a (local) model that uses only classical correlations, given by λ,
and local responses, namely p (a|x, λ) and q(b|y, λ).
Are these correlations modiﬁed if the parties share a quantum state of two par-
ticles, ρAB, instead of classical instructions? Here, after receiving the question, the
parties apply a local measurement, which depends on the question, on each particle
and decide the response depending on the obtained result. Any probability distribu-
tion that can be obtained in this way can be written, using the standard  Born rule
for probabilities, as
pq(a, b|x, y) = Tr(ρABMx
a ⊗My
b ),
(2)
where Mx
a and My
b are the operators describing the measurements by Alice and Bob.
Interestingly, not all the probability distributions having this quantum origin can be
written as (1), which means that  correlations in quantum mechanics are more
powerful than their classical counterparts.
All this discussion is nothing but a reformulation of the well-known fact that
quantum states violate Bell’s inequalities [1]. Indeed, beyond their clear fundamen-
tal importance, Bell’s inequalities can also be understood as constraints satisﬁed
by all probability distributions achievable by means of shared classical correlations
(1).  Bell’s Theorem, then, represents a seminal result for the understanding of
quantum mechanics, but also shows that quantum states can be used to establish
correlations between distant parties that are not achievable by classical means. A
quantum state is said to display non-local correlations when it leads to the violation
of a Bell’s inequality.

844
Werner States
A natural question then emerges: Do all quantum states contain non-local
correlations? It is relatively easy to see that (i) all entangled pure states ( states,
pure and mixed) that are not of product form, |ψ⟩̸= |α⟩|β⟩violate a Bell’s inequal-
ity [2], while (ii) measurements on separable states, i.e. states that can be written
as a mixture of product states ρAB = 
i pi |αi⟩|βi⟩⟨αi| ⟨βi|, always allow a local
description. Remarkably, there exist entangled mixed states, i.e. states that are not
separable, whose measurement correlations can also be described by a local model.
Thus, these states, despite being entangled, do not violate any Bell’s inequality. The
ﬁrst examples of such states were derived in 1989 by Werner [3]. These states are
now known as Werner states and play a fundamental role in foundations of quantum
mechanics and quantum information theory.
Werner states, ρw, are those states belonging to a composite space Cd ⊗Cd that
remain unchanged when the two parties apply the same unitary operation, (U ⊗
U)ρw(U ⊗U)† = ρw. For the sake of simplicity, we restrict here the considerations
to the simplest case of two-dimensional systems, d = 2. In this case, Werner states
are given by the mixture of a singlet state,
ψ−
= (|01⟩−|10⟩)/
√
2, and completely
depolarized noise,
ρw = p
ψ− 
ψ− + (1 −p)
11
4 .
(3)
Werner proved that these states are entangled whenever p > 1/3. If Alice and
Bob perform local  spin measurements on directions ˆnA and ˆnB, the obtained
correlations read
p (a, b|ˆnA, ˆnB) = 1 −p × ab × ˆnA · ˆnB
4
.
(4)
Here, ˆnA and ˆnB represent the labels for the local measurements by Alice and Bob,
while the measurement outcomes are a, b = +1, −1. The goal is to be able to
reproduce this probability distribution by means of classical correlations. Werner
built a local model achieving this. It works as follows: the classical correlations
are given by normalized real vectors, ˆnλ ∈R3. Alice’s response is governed by
the overlap between the received vector and the vector deﬁning her measurement,
pw(+1|ˆnA, λ) = (1 + ˆnA · ˆnλ)/2, as in the quantum case. Bob’s response is equal
to +1 if ˆnA · ˆnλ < 0, otherwise is −1. Putting all these things together, one can see
that the obtained correlations are the same as in the quantum case (4) with p = 1/2.
Therefore, Werner states with 1/3 < p ⩽1/2 have a local description despite being
entangled.
It is clear that Werner’s result represents a seminal and surprising achievement:
the fact that a state is entangled is not sufﬁcient to display non-local correlations.
Since Werner’s original derivation, a few results have been able to generalize his
ﬁndings to other situations. Among them, there is the extension of Werner’s model
to completely general measurements [4] or to tripartite states [5]. At this point, it is
worth mentioning that even if the correlations between measurement outcomes on a
quantum state admit a local description, this state may have some hidden forms of
 non-locality: for instance, it may display non-local correlations after sequences

Which-Way or Welcher-Weg-Experiments
845
W
of local measurements [6,7] or be useful when performing quantum teleporation [8]
 quantum communication. To conclude, the relation between  entanglement and
non-locality is fascinating and full of open questions!
Literature
1. J. S. Bell: On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox. Physics 1, 195 (1964)
2. N. Gisin: Bell’s inequality holds for all non-product states. Phys. Lett. A 154, 201 (1991)
3. R. F. Werner: Quantum states with Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen correlations admitting a hidden-
variable model. Phys. Rev. A 40, 4277 (1989)
4. J. Barrett: Nonsequential positive-operator-valued measurements on entangled mixed states do
not always violate a Bell inequality. Phys. Rev. A 65, 042302 (2002)
5. G. Toth, A. Ac´ın: Genuine tripartite entangled states with a local hidden-variable model. Phys.
Rev. A 74, 030306 (2006)
6. S. Popescu: Bell’s inequalities and density matrices: revealing “hidden” nonlocality. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 74, 2619 (1995)
7. N. Gisin: Hidden quantum nonlocality revealed by local Filters. Phys. Lett. A 210, 151 (1996)
8. S. Popescu: Bells inequalities versus teleportation: What is nonlocality? Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 797
(1994)
Which-Way or Welcher-Weg-Experiments
Paul Busch and Gregg Jaeger
The issue of the  wave-particle duality of light and matter is commonly illus-
trated by the  double-slit experiment, in which a quantum object of relatively
well deﬁned momentum (such as a photon, electron, neutron, atom, or molecule)
is sent through a diaphragm containing two slits, after which it is detected at a cap-
ture screen. It is found that an interference pattern characteristic of wave behaviour
emerges as a large number of similarly prepared quantum objects is detected on the
screen. This is taken as evidence that it is impossible to ascertain through which
slit an individual quantum object has passed; if that were known in every individ-
ual case and if the quantum objects behaved as free classical particles otherwise, an
interference pattern would not arise.
The notion that a description of atomic objects in terms of deﬁnite classical par-
ticle trajectories is not in general admissible is prominent in Werner Heisenberg’s
seminal paper [1] of 1927 on the  Heisenberg uncertainty principle; there he notes:
“I believe that one can fruitfully formulate the origin of the classical ‘orbit’ in this
way: the ‘orbit’ comes into being only when we observe it.” In the same year, in
his famous Como lecture, Niels Bohr introduced the  complementarity princi-
ple, which entails that deﬁnite particle trajectories cannot be deﬁned or observed

