Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for
Neural Interface
Elisa Castagnola, X. Sally Zheng, and X. Tracy Cui
Contents
1
Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
1.1
Structural and Dimensional Properties of Materials: Mechanical Strategies . . . . . .
85
2
Flexible Central Nervous System (CNS) Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
2.1
Introduction of Different CNS Interface Device Types. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
3
Flexible Devices for PNS Interfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
3.1
Flexible Extrafascicular PNS Electrodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
3.2
Flexible Intrafascicular PNS Electrodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
4
Conclusion and Future Prospective. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124
Abstract
The stability of the interface between neural tissue and chronically implanted
devices is crucial for interrogation for both the central and peripheral nervous
systems. One of the main challenges of chronic implants is the degradation
of recording and stimulation performance over time. This is partly due to
the inﬂammatory host tissue responses to the implanted devices, resulting in
decreased density and health of neuronal elements at the electrode vicinity and
scar encapsulation. In the last decade, a signiﬁcant effort has been made in the
E. Castagnola () · X. S. Zheng
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
e-mail: elc118@pitt.edu;; xiz149@pitt.edu
X. T. Cui ()
McGowan institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Center for Neural Basis of Cognition, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
e-mail: xic11@pitt.edu
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_5
79

80
E. Castagnola et al.
development of devices that have subcellular features and/or made with soft,
ﬂexible, and stretchable materials. These strategies can trigger less foreign body
response and improve the integration of the implanted device and neural tissue.
In this chapter, we will discuss the most recent strategies adopted to tune the
structural, functional, and dimensional properties of materials with the aim to
match the mechanical, chemical, and electrical properties of the nervous system.
We will discuss these strategies applied to different components of an implanted
device from insulation substrate and conductive electrode materials to soft tethers
and modulus-matching coatings.
Keywords
Soft material · Flexible electronics · Neural interfaces · Biodegradable
materials · Conductive polymer · Hydrogels · Biodegradable materials ·
Carbon · Penetrating electrodes · μECoG arrays · Nerve electrodes
Abbreviations
BBB
Blood-brain barrier
BNB
Blood nerve barrier
CNS
Central nervous system
CNT
Carbon nanotube
DA
Dopamine
E
Young’s Modulus
EEG
Electroenceophalography
F
Force
FINE
Flat interface nerve electrode
G
Conductance G
GPa
GigaPascals
I
Moment of inertia
ITO
Indium tin oxide
MECH
Micropatterned electrically conductive hydrogel-based elastronics
MEMS
Microelectromechanical systems
MS
Microspheres
NET
Neural integration, ultraﬂexiblenanoelectronic thread
PDMS
Polydimethylsiloxane
PEDOT
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PEG
Poly(ethyleneglycol)
PLGA
Poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid
PNS
Peripheral nervous system
PPy
Polypyrrole
PSS
Polystyrene sulfonate
SCP
Slow cortical potential
SCS
Spinal cord stimulation
SMP
Shape-memory polymer
Tf-LIFE
The thin-ﬁlm longitudinal intrafascicular electrodes
Tg
Glass transition temperature
TIME
Transverse intrafascicular multichannel electrodes
μECoG
Micro-electrocorticography

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
81
μIPs
Micro-invasive probes
μ-ILED
Microscale-inorganic LED
USEA
Utah slanted microelectrode array
1
Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural
Interface
Neurological, psychiatric, and developmental disorders affect around 1.5 billion
people worldwide [1, 2], representing the leading cause of disabilities and resulting
in enormous social and economic burdens. A deeper understanding of the underly-
ing complex electrochemical and electrical dynamics of the neural signals involved
in these conditions will provide more effective treatments [3–5], speciﬁcally where
it is necessary to continuously monitor the state of the neural environment and
respond by modulating it with an appropriate stimulus, thus achieving a closed-
loop control [4]. Examples are experimental devices to treat essential tremors and
Parkinson’s disease through adaptive deep brain stimulation, and others that keep
track of anomalous epileptic electrophysiological signals and deliver stimuli to
suppress the seizure [4, 5]. Although signiﬁcant advances have been made, one
of the most signiﬁcant technical challenges is still the lack of implantable devices
capable of providing accurate, precise, and long-lasting bidirectional interaction
with the neural tissue.
The ability to stably interface with chronically implanted devices is crucial for
recording and modulation of both central nervous system and peripheral nervous
system (CNS and PNS) [17–24] (Fig. 1). The main issue of chronic implants is the
foreign body response, which is triggered by acute device implantation and chronic
agitation of neural tissue around the implanted device [25].
Indeed, neuronal loss and degeneration, axonal damage, and demyelination,
together with scar tissue encapsulation, may affect the performance of the device
for signal recording, electrical and optical stimulation, as well as microﬂuidic
probing [3, 25]. The probe placement into the neural tissue creates an acute
damage, resulting in the destruction of cells, extracellular matrices and capillaries
and the breach of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) [25]. While such a damage may
recover to a certain degree, repeated micromotion of the implanted device relative
to the surrounding tissue due to respiration, heartbeat, or locomotion has been
demonstrated to aggravate the inﬂammatory responses [25, 26], which is worsened
by the mechanical mismatch between neural tissue and implantable neural probes.
Indeed, neural tissue is soft, with elastic moduli of the order of a few kPa, while
standard materials used in neural probes, such as silicon (Si) and metals, have ﬁve to
six orders of magnitude larger elastic moduli, ranging up to hundreds of gigapascals
(GPa) (Young’s modulus values of traditional materials and tissues are reported in
Tables 1, 2, 3, and 4). It has been proposed that ﬂexible probes may help to minimize
perpetual mechanical trauma caused by micromotion between the probe and the
surrounding tissue, especially when devices are anchored to the skull. Additionally,
the spinal cord and the PNS are subjected to more aggressive bending which needs
to be accommodated using soft and stretchable devices.

82
E. Castagnola et al.
Fig. 1 (a) Types of brain-interfacing electrodes and their location in reference to the brain.
Less invasive systems (blue background) provide recordings of lower resolution in comparison
with intracortical electrodes. Used with permission [7]. a1. A 1000-channel close-packed silicon
microelectrode fabricated combining electron beam and standard photolithography. Adapted with
permission [7]. Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). a2. 10 × 10 Utah electrode array
fabricated from thick substrates by dicing and etching, size of the array is roughly 4 × 4 mm.
Adapted with permission [11]. Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). a3. Tucker
Davis’ 32-channel layered polyimide-insulated tungsten wire array assembled onto custom PCB.
Adapted with permission [7]. Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). a4. Example of
a 64-electrode ECoG array with 12.5 × 27.5-mm total recording area and 200-μm-diameter
recording sites. Adapted with permission [13]. Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
(b) Schematic illustration of the placement of intraspinal microstimulation (ISMS) electrodes
and epidural stimulation electrodes caudal to a spinal cord injury. ISMS electrodes penetrate
the spinal cord to target the intermediate and ventral gray matter for activation of local spinal
circuits. Epidural stimulation electrodes reside on the dorsal surface of the spinal cord, most likely
activating the dorsal root entry zones or dorsal columns. Adapted with permission [10]. Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY) b1, b2. Photograph of a fabricated soft electrode array and
placement of the electrode array relative to the cervical spinal cord. Adapted with permission [9].
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license. (c) Schematic drawing of
types of nerve interface cuff electrode (left), longitudinal intrafascicular electrode (LIFE) (center),
transverse intrafascicular multichannel electrode (TIME) (right). Used with permission [12]. c1,
c2) extraneural and intraneural nerve interfaces, i.e., ﬂat interface nerve electrode (FINE) and
TIME. Adapted with permission [8]. Copyright © 2020, Springer Nature C3. Photographs of
silicon cuffs. Adapted with permission [6]. Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature
Table 1 Young’s moduli of various neural tissues
Rat
hippocampus Rat cortex
Mouse
cortex
Spinal
cord
Nerve
Muscle
Rat dura
mater
Human
dura mater
0.1–1.2 kPa
[6, 7]
0.03–1.75
kPa [7]
∼7 kPa
[8]
40–62
kPa [9]
67–780 kPa
[10, 11]
25–100
kPa [12]
0.4–1.2
MPa [13, 14]
32–62 MPa
[15, 16]

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
83
Table 2 Properties of materials used as substrates of ﬂexible devices
Polymer
materials
Mechanical
properties
Electrical
properties
Optical
properties
Chemical
properties
Physical
properties
Parylene C
YM: 4.8 GPa
Tensile
strength:
69 MPa [74]
Dielectric
constant: 3.10
[74]
Volume
resistivity:
6 × 1014 m
[74]
Refractive
index
(RI): 1.63
Resist chemical
attack in organic
solvents up to
150 ◦C.
Dissolvable in
naphthalene at
175 ◦C [75]
Water contact
angle (WCA):
86.7 ± 0.9◦O2
plasma creates
surface carboxylic
groups [76]
Density:
1.289 g/cm3
[74]
Coefﬁcient of
friction: 0.29
(dynamic)
[74]
Polyimide
YM:
1.3–4 GPa
[77]
PR: 0.34
Tensile
strength:
72–120 MPa
[77]
Dielectric
constant:
3.1–3.55 [77]
Conductivity:
14–
18 × 105 cm
[77]
RI:
1.57–1.74
[78]
Chemically
resistant,
withstand
temperatures up to
500 C. Can be
functionalized via
chloromethylation
and
surface-initiated
ATRP [79]
WCA: 92 ± 0.3◦
[80]
Density:
1.31–
1.43 g/cm3;
glass
transition
temperature
250–340 ◦C
CoF: 0.48
[81]
Thermal
conductivity:
0.12 W/mK
[81]
SU-8
YM:0.7–
7.4 GPa [82]
Poisson ratio
(PR): 0.22
[82]
Tensile
strength:
3.5–6 GPa
[82]
Dielectric
constant: 2.85
[83]
RI:
1.67–1.8
[82]
Chemically stable
Functionalizable
using silane
chemistry [84]
WCA: 79◦[85]
Density:
1.19 g/cm3
[86]
Thermal
conductivity:
0.2 W/mK
[87]
PDMS
YM:
360–870 kPa
[88]
PR: 0.5 [89]
Dielectric
constant:
2.3–2.8 [89]
Conductivity:
4 × 1013 m
[89]
RI: 1.4
[89]
WCA:
114.9±4.8◦[75]
Functionalizable
using silane
chemistry [90]
Density:
0.97 kg/m3
[89]
Speciﬁc heat:
1.46 kJ/kg/K
[89]
Thermal
conductivity:
0.15 W/mK
[89]
Shape-memory
polymers
2 GPa–20 MPa
[91]
109 m
[91]
WCA: 80◦[92]
Tg: 40–60 ◦C
[91]
(continued)

84
E. Castagnola et al.
Table 2 (continued)
Polymer
materials
Mechanical
properties
Electrical
properties
Optical
properties
Chemical
properties
Physical
properties
Silicon
130.2–
187.5 GPa
PR:
0.0064–0.361
[93]
Tensile
strength:
2 GPa [68, 94]
Resistivity:
3–4 μcm
[95]
RI: 3.678
[95]
Functionalizable
with
neuroadhesive
protein coating
[96], zwitterionic
poly-
mer/polydopamine
coating [97],
superoxide
scavenging
coating [98]
Density:
2.329 g/cm3
Melting point:
1414 ◦C
Speciﬁc heat:
0.75 j/g/K
Table 3 Properties of metals used as conductive sites of microelectrodes
Metals
Mechanical
properties
Electrical
properties
Optical
properties
Chemical
properties
Physical
properties
Gold
Young’s modulus:
76–81 GPa [139]
PR: 0.415–0.425
[139]
Tensile strength:
100–220 MPa
[139]
Resistivity:
2–3 × 10−8 m
[139]
RI: 0.14
[140]
Density: 19.25–
19.35 mg/m3
Melting point:
1330–1338 K
Speciﬁc heat:
125–135 J/kg/K
[139]
Platinum
YM:
127–155 GPa
[141]
PR: 0.4–0.52
[141]
125–165 MPa
[142]
Conductivity:
9.4 × 106 S/m
RI: 0.46
[143]
Melting point:
1769 ◦C [142]
Iridium
YM:
525–545 GPa
Tensile strength:
550–1320 MPa
[144]
PR: 0.255–0.265
Resistivity:
5–6 × 10−8 m
[144]
RI: 1.42
[145]
Density:
22.1–22.6 mg/m3
Melting point:
2710–2720 K
[144]
Tungsten
YM:
340–405 GPa
Tensile strength:
1670–3900 MPa
[146]
Resistivity: 5.4–
6 × 10−8 m
[146]
RI: 3.8
[147]
Highly
ﬂammable
Density:
19.25 mg/m3
[146]
In the last decade, a signiﬁcant effort has been dedicated to the development of
soft, ﬂexible, and stretchable devices in order to reduce the mechanical mismatch
between the implanted device and the neural tissue [3, 27–29] and, consequently,
improve their multimodal interaction performance and longevity. In this chapter, we

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
85
Table 4 Properties of conducting polymer and other carbon-based materials
Novel Materials Mechanical properties
Electrical properties
Optical
properties
PEDOT:PSS
YM: 0.8–2.4 GPa [178, 179]
Tensile strength: 200–435 MPa
[180]
Conductivity:
0.2 S/cm–2100 S/cm
[181]
RI: 1.2–1.6 [182]
Carbon ﬁber
YM: 315 GPa [183]
Tensile strength: 4.58 GPa
[183]
Resistivity:
1.4 × 10−3 cm [184]
Graphene
YM: 250GPa–1TPa [185]
Tensile strength: 12 GPa [185]
Conductivity: 102 S/m
[186]
RI: 2.75–1.56i
[187]
will discuss the most recent strategies adopted to tune the structural, functional, and
dimensional properties of materials in order to match the mechanical, chemical, and
electrical properties of the neural tissue. Advances made in different components
of neural interface devices including insulation substrate, conductive leads and
electrodes, soft tethers, and modulus-matching coatings will be introduced.
1.1
Structural and Dimensional Properties of Materials:
Mechanical Strategies
To match the mechanical properties of the nervous system, different strategies have
been used to increase the device ﬂexibility with the aim to minimize the tissue
reactions and extend their long-term functionality.
To accommodate tissue movement, the bending stiffness (k) of a probe tethered
to the skull/vertebrae plays a crucial role and indicates the ﬂexibility of the implant.
This is deﬁned as the force (F) required for achieving a certain deﬂection (D):
k =
F
D =
48EI
L3 , where E is the composite Young’s modulus for the probe, I
is the moment of inertia, and L is the length of the probe [3, 30]. Accordingly,
the probe ﬂexibility is determined both by the Young’s modulus of the materials
used as substrate and conductors and by the moment of inertia of the structure. The
moment of inertia (I) is deﬁned as the capacity of a cross section to resist bending
with respect to h (axis of rotation), which can be calculated using the following
equations:
Icylinder, h = 1 + 1
2M

r2
o + r2
i

(1)
Icuboid, h = 1
12M

w2 + t2
; Icuboid, w = 1
12M

h2 + t2
(2)
These equations are used to calculate the moment of inertia for both cylindrical
and cuboidal devices, where M is the mass of the device, ro is the outer radius, ri
is the inner radius of a cylindrical device, w is the width, h is the height, and t is

86
E. Castagnola et al.
the thickness of a cuboid device. Consequently, the ﬂexibility of a device can be
increased, not only using a material with a low elastic modulus but also reducing
the cross-sectional area of cylindrical devices, increasing the length or decreasing
the thickness of planar shanks.
During the miniaturization process, the size of conductive traces should also be
considered. Conductive traces carry signals from the tissue to an external electrical
device. Their conductance affects the electrode site’s ability to record and stimulate
neural signals. Conductance G is calculated from Eq. (3):
G = σA
l
(3)
where A is the cross-sectional area of the conductor trace, l is the length, and σ is
the electrical conductivity in Siemens per meter (S·m−1) [31].
The purpose of this section is to summarize the approaches used to tune the
device ﬂexibility through their dimensional and mechanical properties. Speciﬁcally,
the approaches are to reduce the size of probes made with traditional hard materials,
to use ﬂexible/soft polymeric substrates combined with metal and/or organic
conductors, and to use modulus-matching device encapsulations [31].
1.1.1
Reduction of Feature Size of Traditional Materials in the Range
of GPa
The dimensional properties, i.e., size and geometry, of devices made with GPa
moduli materials can be tuned in order to reduce the insertion trauma and to
minimize the modulus mismatch between the device and the surrounding tissue.
1.1.1.1 Silicon-Based Electronics
Traditionally, silicon (Si) has been used as hard (few hundreds of GPa elastic
modulus) substrates for microfabricated multielectrode arrays, such as Michigan
probes and Utah arrays, initially developed by the University of Michigan and
University of Utah, respectively (Fig. 1a). The shank thickness of standard Michigan
probes (NeuroNexus) ranges from 15 μm to 50 μm, varying by design. Utah
arrays (Blackrock Microsystems) have 16–96 silicon conical needles (0.5–1.5 mm
length, with a diameter of 325 μm at the bottom and 23–36 μm at the tip)
disposed in an array with an electrode pitch of 400 μm. However, thanks to the
recent advances in semiconductor nanomembrane (NM) fabrication technology
[32, 33], silicon-based electronics [34, 35] and optoelectronics [36] can be made
ultrathin (range of hundreds of nm), foldable, and consequently very ﬂexible. The
silicon NM fabrication process includes ﬁrst a selective etching release of the top
functional membrane layer, i.e., the crystalline semiconductor, from its original
growth substrate, followed by its transfer printing onto the targeted substrate [32,
33]. The silicon NM devices are bendable and ﬂexible when in the form of a thin
layer (nanometer scale), and can be transferred to a variety of foreign substrates,
including polymers, plastics, and biodegradable nanoﬁbril papers [32, 33]. The
ability to transfer bendable ultrathin active silicon-based electronics onto ﬂexible

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
87
substrates enables the fabrication of ﬂexible high-density and high-channel count
microelectrode arrays [34, 36, 40].
As another example, ﬂexible, foldable, actively multiplexed, micro-electrocorti-
cography (μECoG) arrays that support >1,000 electrodes per square centime-
ter, with transistors at each node for local signal ampliﬁcation and multiplexed
addressing, have been developed. Doped silicon nano-ribbons (260 nm) on a silicon-
on-insulator wafer (SiO2(1,000 nm)/Si) were prepared using a high-temperature
diffusion process (950–1,000 ◦C) in a rapid thermal annealing system and then
transferred onto a polyimide substrate (12.5 μm). These ECoGs have been suc-
cessfully used for mapping the spatial properties of cat brain activity [34] (Fig. 2a)
and to record evoked cortical responses in rat auditory cortex, with higher temporal
and spatial resolution compared to conventional passive μECoG arrays [35].
Flexible silicon can also be incorporated in penetrating devices. An optoelec-
tronic penetrating microprobe array was fabricated by transfer printing ultrathin Si
photodetectors prefabricated on a silicon-on-insulator wafer onto thin polyimide
substrates (6 μm) [36]. The thin penetrating microprobes are supported by the
polyimide substrate and bent vertically through magnetic actuation. The polyimide
substrate can form intimate contact and create seamless integration with the soft
curvy surfaces, and the Si layer improves the rigidity of the microprobes to facilitate
device insertion. The feasibility of these probes to spatially map the light intensity in
vivo has been veriﬁed, opening the possibility for a multifunctional penetrating array
for bio-integrated applications, such as optogenetics and deep brain stimulation [36]
(Fig. 2b).
In comparison with passive arrays of electrodes, the active electronics in
such systems provide appealing and sometimes essential levels of functionality,
performance, and scalability. However, they also demand long-lived, perfect bioﬂuid
barriers to prevent corrosive degradation of the active electronics and electrical
damage to the adjacent tissues. To overcome this issue, ultrathin encapsulating
layers of SiO2 derived from thermal growth on the surfaces of silicon wafers
(t-SiO2) have been shown to undergo a slow hydrolysis process in physiological
conditions, presenting an effective barrier to bioﬂuids [41]. These SiO2 layers can
simultaneously serve as dielectrics for capacitive coupling to underlying electronic
systems for electrophysiological sensing [41]. The integration of highly doped
silicon nanomembranes to thin, thermally grown layers of SiO2 has been recently
adopted to fabricate leakage-free, chronically stable, conductively coupled inter-
faces. This material strategy enables a ﬂexible, long-lived, and multiplexed active
implant capable of electrophysiological recording and stimulation via faradaic
charge injection [40].
1.1.1.2 Carbon Fiber and CNT Fiber Microelectrodes
Carbon ﬁber microelectrodes, with Young’s modulus of the order of hundreds of
GPa and diameters as small as individual neuronal cell bodies (∼7 μm in diameter),
have a stiffness (k) of 4,540 N/m (calculated from the cross-sectional area (A),
elastic modulus (E), and length implanted into the cortex (l)), which is 2 orders
of magnitude smaller than a conventional silicon microelectrode of the same length,

88
E. Castagnola et al.
Fig. 2 (a) Photograph of a 360-channel high-density ﬂexible, foldable, actively multi-
plexed, micro-electrocorticography (μECoG) array (left). The electrode size and spacing were
300 × 300 μm and 500 μm, respectively. Inset, a closer view showing a few unit cells. Photograph
of the high-density active electrode array placed on the visual cortex (right). Adapted with
permission [34]. Copyright © 2019 Springer Nature. (b) A schematic illustration of a conformal
ultrathin transfer printed Si optoelectronic penetrating microprobe arrays (left). The inset is
an exploded structure of a single probe. Example of deformation of ﬂexible 3D penetrating
microprobe array on a convex surface (scale bar, 3 mm, right). Adapted with permission [36].
Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. (c) 1. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of a
carbon ﬁber (CF) coated with 800-nm poly(p-xylylene) as the insulator and with the recording
site coated with PEDOT:PSS. Adapted with permission [37]. Copyright © 2012, Springer Nature.
2. A fully assembled array comprising eight neurochemical probes integrated on a circuit board.
3. Close-up of the outlined area in (2) showing eight parylene-coated CF probes with individual
lengths of 5.5 mm. 4. Scanning electron microscopy image of the outlined area in (3), showing
exposed 200-μm-long CF sensing tip and the parylene-insulated CF below this exposed tip and the
delineation (arrowhead) between exposed sensing CF (ﬁbrous structure) and parylene insulation
(smooth structure). The diameter of the exposed CF is 7 μm, and the parylene-insulated CF is
8.5 μm, which represents the maximal diameter of the probe. Adapted with permission [38].
Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. (d) Scanning electron microscopy imaging
of two-channel CNT ﬁber microelectrodes, fabricated by twisting single ﬁlaments of a 43-μm-
diameter CNT ﬁber, coated with a 3-μm layer of PS-b-PBD (scale bar 200 μm). Adapted with
permission [39]. Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
89
∼151,000 N/m. The small feature size of carbon ﬁber microelectrodes is similar
to the size of a single trace of a conventional silicon neural probe, but they are
sufﬁciently robust and ﬂexible as a stand-alone electrode [37].
Single [37, 42] (Fig. 2c1,4) carbon ﬁber and carbon ﬁber microelectrode arrays
[38, 43–47] (Fig. 2c2,3), insulated with a poly(p-xylylene)-based thin-ﬁlm coating
and with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)
recording site, have been used as subcellular-scale probes for electrophysiological
recordings. They have demonstrated promising results in chronic in vivo recordings
with markedly reduced immune response [44]. A 16-channel “microthread” carbon
ﬁber array, with a cross section of approximately 26 μm, comparable with single
microwires in commercial microwire arrays, provided stable multiunit recording
and ﬁring patterns during singing over timescales of months in zebra ﬁnches
[43]. Furthermore, such microinvasive probes (μIPs) provided stable monitoring
of sub-second evoked DA ﬂuctuations in rats for over a year [42] and in non-
human primates for over 100 days [45]. Similarly, carbon nanotube (CNT) ﬁber
microelectrodes [39] (Fig. 2d) recorded stable neural activity for weeks and also
stimulated neurons as effectively as metal electrodes with ten times larger surface
areas while eliciting a signiﬁcantly reduced inﬂammatory response in Parkinsonian
rodents.
1.1.2
Use of Flexible and Soft Polymeric Insulation Substrates
In the last decade, a signiﬁcant effort has been dedicated to the development of
devices to reduce the mechanical mismatch with the neural tissue [3, 27–29], and
improve their multimodal interaction performance and longevity (Young’s modulus
values of traditional materials and tissues are reported in Tables 1, 2, 3, and 4).
Thanks to the recent advances in material science and lithography microfab-
rication techniques, thin polymeric insulation substrates, i.e., polyimide, poly(p-
xylylene), parylene C, SU-8, and silicone, can be used to substitute the materials
traditionally used as a dielectric layer in neural probes, i.e., silicon-based microma-
chined penetrating microelectrode arrays [54–56], or arrays of metal microwires
[57, 58], insulated with Teﬂon, glass, and fused silica [31, 59]. Parylene C,
polyimide, and SU-8 have Young’s moduli on the order of several GPa, at least two
orders of magnitude less than silicon and metal, and they can be microfabricated
using photolithography and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) down to a thickness
of a few microns or less, becoming extremely compliant [13]. If compared with
silicon, these polymers cannot be considered “low-modulus” materials. However,
by tuning their thickness, they can be extremely ﬂexible, and present an excellent
conformability, thus minimizing perpetual mechanical trauma caused by micromo-
tion between the probe and the surrounding tissue, while maintaining mechanical
stability [28, 60] (see Sects. 1.1.1.1, 1.1.1.2, and 1.1.1.3). On the other hand,
the lithography patterning of the silicone material, such as polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS), in thin layers is technically challenging, but PDMS material presents very
interesting properties, such as high viscoelasticity and very low Young’s modulus
(<1 MPa), that can be tailored to obtain stretchable silicone elastomer substrates,
which can promote the biointegration and functionality within the brain and spinal

90
E. Castagnola et al.
cord [61] (see Sect. 1.1.1.4). Other emerging soft insulation materials are shape-
memory polymers (SMP), which present the advantage to be able to soften from
the GPa range (for easy manipulation and insertion) to the MPa range under
physiological conditions, matching the mechanical properties of the neural tissue
(see Sect. 1.1.1.5).
Most recently, a new class of soft and ﬂexible interfaces has been introduced
adopting a silk ﬁbroin-based strategy, which relies on substrates and superstrates
of non-transient water-stable silk to support the electrode constructs. This design
has successfully shown neural recording from the peripheral nerve and the cortex
in a rodent model [62] (see Sect. 1.1.1.6). Other than soft and ﬂexible, to match the
mechanical properties of the neural tissue and accommodate its movements, an ideal
insulator would be thin and have a low dielectric constant, high dielectric strength,
and minimal potential for water absorption, preventing parasitic capacitance from
allowing the signal to leak into the tissue or into adjacent conductors [31]. These
properties will enable packing thin electrical traces in a small area while limiting
parasitic capacitance and cross talk, thus limiting signal loss or attenuation [31].
This section will detail the properties of these materials and their respective
applications in neural probes (Table 2).
1.1.2.1 Polyimide
Polyimides are high-performance polymers of imide monomers which contain
two acyl groups (C=O) bonded to nitrogen (N). They present an exceptional
combination of thermal stability (>500 ◦C), mechanical toughness, and chemical
resistance. They have excellent dielectric properties and low coefﬁcient of thermal
expansion (Table 2). The majority of PI-based materials used for biomedical
devices are ﬁlms of aromatic polyimides, which are planar imidic macromolecules
containing rigid aromatic rings and various ﬂexible, heteroaliphatic, unsymmetrical,
bulky, or pendant structural motifs [48]. In general terms, polyimides are formed by
a one- or two-stage reaction between a diamine and a dianhydride in a polar aprotic
solvent, which follows a polycondensation mechanism. The chemical structure of
a conventional polyimide is shown in Fig. 3a (left). Two main polyimide types are
generally employed in biomedical devices: non-photosensitive and photosensitive.
Both variations are commercially available as liquids or varnishes, which are cast
or spin-coated on various substrates and thermally cured until a totally imidized
ﬁlm is obtained. Non-photosensitive PI ﬁlms are processed by photolithography
and dry/wet etching requiring a photoresist or hard mask as an etch template. On
the other hand, the photosensitive material is patterned through UV exposure and
developer chemicals, which eliminates some processing steps. A disadvantage of
the photo-deﬁnable versions is its susceptibility to water sorption and uptake, which
requires additional stabilizers [48].
Several commercial polyimides (Kapton, Durimide 7050, Durimide 7510,
PI2611, PI2525, U-Varnish S) have been widely employed as substrates for
CNS and PNS neural electrodes [13, 63, 64] and further evaluated for their
biocompatibility, functionality, and long-term stability in vitro and in vivo [48, 65–
67]. These studies have shown that polyimides are suitable for long-term intraneural

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
91
Fig. 3 (a) Chemical structure of a standard polyimide, adapted with permission [48]. Copyright
© 2019 Licensee MDPI, open access (left) and example of application (right): PI-based intraneural
ﬂexible electrode implanted in a human amputee with the aim of controlling a robotic hand.
Adapted with permission [49]. Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. (b) Chemical structure
of parylene C (left) and example of application: NeuroGrid placed on the surface of the rat
somatosensory cortex. The edge of the resected dura is visible at the top left of the craniotomy
(scale bar, 1 mm). Adapted with permission [28]. Copyright © 2015, Springer Nature. (c) Chemical
structure of SU-8 (left), and example of application (right): ﬂexible mesh-like electrodes adapted
with permission [240]. Copyright © 2015, Springer Nature. (d) Chemical structure of PDMS
(left) adapted and example of application (right): implantable, battery-free, wireless optoﬂuidic
neural probe systems with simultaneous activation of μ-ILEDs and ﬂuid delivery via a two-
channel wireless energy harvester. Adapted with permission [50]. Copyright © John Wiley &
Sons, (e) 1. Chemical structures of the shape-memory polymer constituents [51] and (2) example
of a device [52] SMP intracortical probes. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.
3. Chemical structures of the constituents of stimuli-responsive mechanically adaptive polymer
nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission [53]. Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society
implants and do not cause toxicity after up to 6 months of implantation in a rabbit
retina. Furthermore, polyimide-based micro-ECoGs have been approved for human
use to record somatosensory-evoked potentials (SEPs) elicited by median nerve
stimulation in patients undergoing brain surgery for tumor resection [68].
In the PNS, polyimide-based intrafascicular ﬂexible electrode devices have also
advanced to human testing. Such devices were implanted in the median and ulnar
nerves of a human amputee (after upper limb amputation) for controlling a robotic
hand [49] (Fig. 3a, right). After a 4-week in vivo test period, the polyimide
implant was proven safe and stable despite the appearance of ﬁbrotic tissues
covering the device upon removal. Furthermore, to restore sensory feedback to
better control leg prosthesis, three transfemoral amputees have been implanted with
four intrafascicular multichannel intraneural stimulation electrodes in their sciatic
nerves [69, 70]. The prosthetic legs were equipped with foot and knee sensors

92
E. Castagnola et al.
that drive nerve stimulation, providing real-time tactile and emulated proprioceptive
feedback. After the ﬁrst month, different outcomes were evaluated such as walking
speed, conﬁdence, metabolic consumption, and mental effort. Overall, the results of
these studies demonstrate that induced sensory feedback can be integrated to restore
functional abilities of the missing leg and that the polyimide-based electrodes are
suitable for long-term neural stimulations [69, 70].
1.1.2.2 Parylene C
Parylene is the common name to deﬁne a family of chemical vapor deposited poly(p-
xylylene) polymers used as moisture and dielectric insulation barriers. Among them,
parylene C is the most popular due to its combination of barrier properties, cost,
and other processing advantages. The chemical structure of parylene C is reported
in Fig. 3b (left). During the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process, the dimer
precursor [2.2] paracyclophane (or di-para-xylylene) is ﬁrst vaporized and then
undergoes vacuum pyrolysis at temperatures above 550 ◦C to yield the reactive
monomer. The monomers adsorb onto the substrate surface and spontaneously
polymerize at room temperature to form linear, high molecular weight parylene
ﬁlms. This process, called the Gorham, enables control of the deposition parameters
and full conversion of the precursor into parylene. The substrates are kept at
room temperature during deposition, enabling parylene to be coated onto a variety
of heat-sensitive substrates without thermal damages [71]. Parylene C allows for
thinner pinhole-free coatings, compared to polyimides that show highly conformal
nature and low water absorption (swelling) [72]. Parylene C presents other unique
characteristics such as chemical inertness, high dielectric strength, thermal and UV
stability, high ﬂexibility, and mechanical strength [13, 64, 73]. Furthermore, the
ability to form smooth ﬁlms with minimal optical scattering and high transmittance
in the visible spectrum makes parylene C suitable for transparent applications [73].
Due to its good biocompatibility and biostability, parylene C has been widely
evaluated as ﬂexible substrates and/or coatings for chronic neural probes [13, 99–
101]. Biostability assessment of parylene C-based chronic implants showed minimal
degradation in vitro and in vivo physiological conditions for 6 months [101].
Parylene C has been used as a substrate for NeuroGrid (4 μm thick), an
ultrathin and conformable high-density microelectrode arrays with 10 × 10-μm2
PEDOT:PSS sites, which can closely adhere to the complex curvilinear surfaces of
the brain [28] (Fig. 3b, right). Thanks to the combination of high electrode density,
low impedance recording sites, and the superior conformability of the parylene
substrate, NeuroGrid was able to isolate single-unit action potentials from the
surface of rat brain, without requiring intracortical penetration [28]. More impres-
sively, NeuroGrids have been placed on the pia surface of the human brain and
used for intraoperative ECoG recordings in patients undergoing epilepsy resection
surgery. Because of the conformability and hydrophobic surface of parylene C,
the NeuroGrids made stable electrical and mechanical contact with the cortical
surface despite brain pulsations, enabling the recording of cortical slow oscillations
interspersed with higher-frequency activity.

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
93
1.1.2.3 SU-8
SU-8 is a negative, epoxy-type, near-UV photoresist composed of bisphenol-
A novolac epoxy (low molecular weight polymers derived from phenols and
formaldehyde) that is dissolved in an organic solvent and up to 10 wt% of mixed
triarylsulfonium/hexaﬂuoroantimonate salt as the photoacid generator. SU-8 derives
its name from the presence of eight epoxy groups, as reported in the chemical
structure in Fig. 3d (left).
When exposed to UV light, SU-8’s long molecular chains cross-link causing the
polymerization of the material, resulting in a high tensile strength polymer. It can
be photolithographically patterned as thick as up to several millimeters with high
aspect ratio for bio-MEMS applications, or extremely thin (<1 um) and compliant as
neural probe substrates [13, 102]. SU-8 is a low-cost negative photoresist that can be
easily patterned and does not require curing at high-temperature/inert atmosphere.
Furthermore, SU-8 exhibits excellent optical transparency above 400 nm and hence
is suitable for the fabrication of optical components. However, to optimize its
ﬂexibility, the baking conditions (temperature and time) and UV dosage adopted
during the microfabrication process need to be carefully considered, as they affect
the thermal and mechanical properties of the resulting coating [103]. Indeed, the
molecules of SU-8 cross-link and form a network structure during thermal baking;
consequently, the material converts from ductile to brittle during the process.
Residual stress formed during the curing process was observed to be sensitive to
the moisture absorption in humid environments, but the stress can recover to the
original state upon drying. Baking for a longer time could decrease the sensitivity
of the material to the environmental humidity due to the high cross-linking density.
Thus, a trade-off between ﬂexibility and moisture absorption should be considered.
Furthermore, higher UV dosage creates a more homogeneous coating [103]. In
vitro and in vivo evaluation of SU-8 biocompatibility did not exhibit any cytotoxic
effects, and histocompatibility study in mice indicates a muted immune response to
subcutaneous SU-8 implants [13, 102].
To match the dimensional and mechanical properties of the neural tissue, 3D
neural probe, ﬂexible mesh-like electrodes (example reported in Fig. 3d right), and
ultra-ﬂexible nanoelectronic thread (NET) probes that combine ultra-ﬂexibility and
subcellular features have been fabricated on SU-8 substrates (1 μm), showing long-
term recording stability and seamless neural tissue integration in rodent brains [104–
106].
1.1.2.4 PDMS
PDMS is a silicone elastomer with attractive properties for the development of
devices for biomedical applications, such as chemical inertness, thermal stability,
permeability to gases, impermeability to water, low cost, and simple fabrication.
In addition, PDMS is transparent (above ∼230 nm) and nonﬂuorescent. PDMS
is usually composed of a prepolymer (base) and a cross-linker (curing agent)
components, mixed in a 10:1 ratio and thermally cured at 80 ◦C for ∼2 h on a
master template. Typically, PDMS structures are obtained as negative replicas of a
master template fabricated using conventional micromachining methods [107]. One

94
E. Castagnola et al.
alternative rapid prototyping approach is to directly pattern PDMS by making it
sensitive to UV, by the addition of photoinitiators, such as benzophenone and 2,2-
dimethoxy 2-phenylacetophenone [107, 108].
Soft implants have been prepared with elastic materials shown to meet the
demanding dynamic environments of spinal and brain tissues [61, 109]. PDMS
presents high viscoelasticity, a low dielectric constant, and a low Young’s modulus
(<1 MPa) (see Table 2). These properties can be tailored to obtain stretchable
silicone elastomer networks with high electromechanical stability [110]. Addi-
tionally, commercially available medical-grade PDMS meets both USP Class VI
and ISO 10993 requirements [13, 111]. Several existing PDMS formulations are
medical grade and commonly used in FDA-approved medical devices and implants,
including deep brain stimulators and ECoG arrays [13].
E-dura, a soft PDMS-based neural electrode device, mimicking the shape and
mechanical behavior of the dura mater, with integrated interconnects, electrodes,
and compliant ﬂuidic microchannel, has been shown to display long-term biointe-
gration and multimodal functionality within the brain and spinal cord [61]. Starting
from a transparent silicone substrate (120 μm in thickness), Minev et al. patterned
compliant microﬂuidic channels for drug delivery (100 μm by 50 μm in cross
section), and soft platinum/silicone electrodes (300 μm in diameter), and stretchable
gold interconnects (35 nm in thickness), for transmitting electrical excitations and
transferring electrophysiological signals. E-dura extracted high-resolution neural
recording in freely behaving animals and delivered electrical and chemical spinal
neuromodulation that restored locomotion after paralyzing spinal cord injuries [61].
Other multimodal PDMS-based soft electronic platforms with optoﬂuidic func-
tionalities have been used for in vivo optogenetics and pharmacology exper-
iments in freely behaving animals [50, 112, 113] (Fig. 3d, right). The fully
implantable, battery-free, wireless optoﬂuidic system consists of an array of μ-
ILEDs (220 μm × 270 μm × 50 μm), a ﬂexible microﬂuidic probe, a stretchable
two-channel RF wireless energy harvester, and a thermally actuated ﬂuid reservoir.
The implantable optoﬂuidic probe is six times thinner and approximately ﬁve orders
of magnitude more compliant than the conventional metal cannula (80 μm thick,
13–18 N m−1 in bending stiffness) and presents higher ﬂexibility compared to other
existing SU-8 microﬂuidic probes (≈1 MPa for PDMS). Thanks to its small size
and biocompatible features, this technology allows conformable and untethered
integration into critical locations in the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves,
showing promise for complex neuroscience experiments and clinical applications
[50, 112, 113].
1.1.2.5 Emerging Material: Modulus-Changing Materials
Another approach to minimize the mechanical mismatch and improve the
device-tissue interaction is the use of softening polymers that are stiff enough
to manipulate and insert while their mechanical modulus decreases under
physiological conditions. A family of high-Tg thiol-ene SMP, synthesized by
the thiol-ene/acrylate monomer and 1 wt% poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate
as a cross-linker, has been developed for the fabrication of softening cortical

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
95
probes [115, 116], thin-ﬁlm multielectrode cuffs [117–119], and spinal cord
stimulation arrays [117]. Common monomers used include di- and trifunctional
alkenes, thiols, and acrylates, such as 1,3,5-triallyl-1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6(1H,3H,5H)-
trione (TATATO), trimethylolpropanetris(3-mercaptopropio-nate) (TMTMP), and
2
tris[2-mercaptopropionyloxy)ethyl]isocyanurate
(TMICN).
2-Dimethoxy-2-
phenylacetophenone (DMPA) is used for the initiation of the photopolymerization
of the monomer solution.
The softening of the thiol-ene/acrylate SMP polymers is induced by a change
in temperature and by the introduction of a solvent, typically water. The solvent
molecules become absorbed in the polymer and plasticize the polymer by reducing
the interaction forces in the polymer network [114]. This plasticizing effect makes
the polymer chains more ﬂexible and lowers the glass transition temperature (Tg),
deﬁned as the temperature at which the polymer transitions from a hard, glassy
material to a soft, rubbery material. When the polymers are cooled below this
temperature, they become hard and brittle, similar to glass, while when they are used
above this temperature, they are soft and ﬂexible. The Tg of these thiol-ene/acrylate
SMP has been tuned to be (50–56.5 ◦C) in air [51], by tailoring the monomer ratio
and the cross-link density [51, 52]. After being soaked in PBS, Tg of these polymers
decreased by 15–20 ◦C. Such a polymer is stiff enough (0.7–2 GPa) at near body
temperature for insertion and softens (20–40 MPa) following implantation into the
body upon absorbing less than 1.1% of water [51, 114].
SMP thin-ﬁlm multielectrode softening cuffs (MSC) were able to record and
selectively stimulate neural signals from rat nerves, with reduced foreign body
response compared to silicone cuffs [115]. This was attributed to the combination of
soft material and thin-ﬁlm manufacturing (30-μm-thick cuffs with 300-nm layers of
Au/TiN). While the SMP material is not as soft as silicone (550 MPa at physiological
conditions), the ﬂexural forces of the SMP cuff are about 70–700 times lower in the
MSC devices due to the 30-μm-thick ﬁlm compared to the 600-μm-thick walls of
the silicone cuffs [115]. In another application, softening spinal cord stimulation
(SCS) array made from SMP has been demonstrated to be functional for up to
29 weeks of simulation, without signiﬁcant degradation. MRI and histology showed
that softening SCS produced less tissue deformation than parylene C arrays [116].
However, these polymers contain ester groups in their backbone which are
vulnerable to hydrolytic degradation under moist conditions, potentially limiting the
long-term stability of SMP devices. In order to increase the durability of thiol-ene
networks while maintaining the glass transition temperature and cross-link density
tenability, an ester-free thiol-ene-based SMP formulation has also been optimized
using an ester-free monomer. The novel SMP presents similar in vivo softening
capabilities and improved stability in the biological environment if compared with
the ester-containing polymer [117]. The chemical structures of the constituents of
SMP and ester-free SMP are reported in Fig. 3E1, together with an example of
intracortical SMP probes (Fig. 3e2).
Another type of materials that change their mechanical properties upon exposure
to physiological conditions, biomimetic stimuli-responsive nanocomposites, has
been investigated as neural probe substrates [118]. These materials were produced

96
E. Castagnola et al.
by introducing percolating networks of cellulose nanoﬁbers, or “whiskers,” into
poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAc), poly(butyl methacrylate) (PBMA), and blends of these
polymers. The hydrophobicity and glass transition temperature (Tg) of the polymer
matrix determined the water-induced mechanically dynamic behavior. In particular,
the incorporation of whiskers (15.1–16.5% v/v) increased the tensile storage moduli
(E) of the pure polymers from MPa to GPa at above Tg temperature. Upon
exposure to physiological condition, the modulus drastically decreases from 5.2 GPa
to 12.7 MPa. The stiffness change is primarily a consequence of the designed
mechanism of altered whisker-whisker interactions. Upon exposure to physiological
conditions, the materials slowly absorb aqueous ﬂuid, which plasticizes the PVAc
and reduces Tg from 42–60 ◦C to ∼20 ◦C, i.e., from above to below physiological
temperature. Thus, upon implantation, the matrix undergoes a slow phase transition,
changing from a glassy to a rubbery amorphous material. In addition, the whisker-
whisker interactions are switched off because of competitive hydrogen bonding with
the water. In order to decrease the swelling behavior of the nanocomposite, cellulose
whisker nanocomposites with PBMA and PBMA/PVAc have been investigated,
being that PBMA more hydrophobic than PVAc, but possessing a similar Tg
(PBMA, 70 ◦C; PVAc, 42–60 ◦C) [118, 119]. The chemical structure of the polymer
components is reported in Fig. 3e3.
1.1.2.6 Emerging Material: Non-transient Silk
Silk presents excellent biocompatibility, robust mechanical properties, and pro-
grammable lifetime ranging from a few seconds to years [60, 120, 121]. Moreover,
hydrated water-processed silk is soft and highly ﬂexible [60, 122], showing excellent
afﬁnity to wet surfaces and thus ideal for in vivo conditions.
Even though a different silk ﬁbroin has been used for the development of
resorbable devices for in vivo applications [60], they rely on the capability of silk
ﬁbroin to resorb into the biology with programmable dissolution kinetics, limiting
the scope of use for silk ﬁbroin in the design of stable neural interfaces. Recently,
Nitish’s group introduced a non-transient implantable silk ﬁbroin bionic interfaces
and demonstrated their effectiveness for direct electrical recording of a variety of
biopotentials such as neural activity from the peripheral nerves (see Sect. 3, Fig. 10c)
and the cortex [62]. This demonstrated a novel mode of use for the silk-based
devices as non-dissolvable, ﬂexible, and conformal neural interfaces, presenting the
ﬁrst signiﬁcant leap toward non-dissolvable silk bioelectronics for in vivo use [62].
The key enabling concepts include:
1. SILK-SEAL that involves integration of two thin (∼15 μm thick) dry silk
layers serving as the substrate and the insulation, housing a conducting layer
in between, to yield a silk “sandwich” device.
2. QUICK-SILK that employs a bilayer bandage of resorbable silk and curable
medical-grade elastomer to facilitate quick conformal positioning and integration
of the ﬂexible silk arrays onto the target tissue surfaces [62].

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
97
1.1.3
Metal and Organic Conductors on Flexible Substrate
To fabricate functional neural interfaces, multiple materials need to be integrated
into the same device, including substrate materials and materials for electrodes
and interconnects. In the previous section (1.1.2), we focused on the materials
used for the device substrates; here, we summarize materials used for electrodes
and interconnects, emphasizing the strategies used to integrate them onto soft
substrates, achieving mechanical ﬂexibility and stretchability while maintaining
good electrical conductivity. Brieﬂy, an ideal recording electrode should be as
small as possible to reduce perturbation of the local electric ﬁeld and improve
spatial selectivity. However, decreasing electrode size usually results in increased
impedance which then increases the thermal noise and reduces the quality of
the recorded signal. Meanwhile, for neural stimulation, electrodes should be
capable of injecting relatively large currents for effective and spatially resolved
electrical stimulation. However, high stimulation charge density can cause electrode
degradation and tissue damage due to faradaic reactions. This requires that the
materials possess high charge injection limit, which often increase with decreasing
impedance. A common approach to decrease the microelectrode impedance and
increase their charge injection limit is to increase their effective surface area.
Different high-electrochemical-surface area coatings have been investigated for this
purpose [123–128].
1.1.3.1 Metals
Noble metals, such as platinum, gold, and iridium, are frequently used for electrodes
and interconnections [3, 51, 134] (Table 3). They can be directly patterned on to
ﬂexible/stretchable substrates, with high resolution and high degree of mechanical
deformability via techniques such as photolithography, electron beam lithography,
and micro-contact printing. Porous platinum [3, 51, 134], nanostructured gold [128,
135], electrodeposited Pt/Ir, and iridium oxide [3, 51, 134] coatings have been
extensively used to reduce the impedance and to increase the charge injection
capacity of electrodes used for recording and stimulation.
Special considerations must be given to stretchable electronics, where the
conductor is required to remain functional during complex deformation such as
muscle contraction. Gold is often preferred because it presents high electrical
conductivity and higher malleability compared to other metals. Based on the
consideration that a material’s bending stiffness will decrease with the decrease
in thickness, rigid gold could afford out-of-plane shape rearrangement without
introducing cracks or delamination if it is sufﬁciently thin, whereas microcracked
gold remains conductive upon stretching and has been used as stretchable conductor
in implantable devices [136]. To develop stretchable interface, various strategies
have been adopted, including the use of strain relief structures such as serpentine
buckling and origami layouts [137, 138], or more sophisticated fractal constructs,
i.e., Peano, Greek cross, Vicsek [129] (Fig. 4a).

98
E. Castagnola et al.
Fig. 4 (a) Optical (left) and scanning electron microscopy (right) images of third-order Peano-
based wires on the skin and a skin replica (colorized metal wires), respectively, showing the
conformal contact of the wires on the substrate. Scale bar in (left), 2 mm. Scale bar in (right),
500 μm. Adapted with permission [129]. Copyright © 2014, Springer Nature. (b) Soft and
stretchable electrode grids made of Au-TiO2NW conductors embedded in PDMS and comprise
32 electrodes with 200-μm pitch. The stretchability allows the device to establish conformal
contact around curved surfaces. The SEM image of the electrode shows how the Pt-coated Au-
TiO2NWs are partially embedded in the PDMS. Adapted with permission [109]. Copyright ©
John Wiley & Sons. (c) (1). Digital photo of the all-polymeric electrode pasted on the wrist and
after being stretched (25%); (2) optical images of the multielectrode array; (3) optical images of the
multielectrode array on ITO glass (left) and SEM magniﬁcation of the PPy nanowires synthesized
on the PPy electrode surface. Adapted with permission [130]. Copyright © John Wiley & Sons,
Inc. (d) Details of a GC neural probe. (1) A 15-channel aGC ECoG probe, (2) FIB cross section of
the GC microelectrode taken at the edge between GC and Durimide is shown revealing a seamless
integration of the layers; in inset: magniﬁed SEM image of a single microelectrode in the ECoG
probe, (3) expanded view of FIB cross section taken at a GC wire trace leading to one of the
microelectrodes, (4) high-resolution (50,000×) FIB image of a cross section taken through a GC
wire trace. Adapted with permission [131]. Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. (e) Examples
of scanning electron micrograph of the most commonly used conductive coatings, i.e., PEDOT-
CNT (1, 2), PEDOT nanotubes (3), PPY nanotubes (4), CNT directly grown on Pt by chemical
vapor deposition (5). Adapted with permission [123, 128, 132, 133]. Copyright © 2011, American
Chemical Society and Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V
Furthermore, intrinsically ﬂexible nanostructures of gold, such as gold nanowires
[148, 149], gold nanomesh [150], and gold nanoparticles [63], have been adopted to
replace the rigid bulk gold ﬁlm.

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
99
A novel inert high-performance stretchable conductor, based on gold-coated
titanium dioxide nanowires (Au-TiO2NWs), has been developed for the fabrication
of high-density, stretchable electrode grids for neural recording (Fig. 4b). The
Au-TiO2NW composite presented good conductivity (≈16,000 S cm−1), electrome-
chanical properties, and excellent strain cycling stability when cycled 1000 times at
20%, 50%, and 100% strain [109].
1.1.3.2 Conductive Polymers and Their Composite
Conducting polymers, such as PPy and PEDOT, have been receiving attention as
neural electrode coatings, due to their lower moduli and superior electrochemical
and stability properties compared to those of metals [124, 151–153] (Table 4). They
can signiﬁcantly decrease electrochemical impedance due to their high surface area
and high ionic mobility. These features enable high SNR recordings and high charge
injection capacity [28, 100, 154, 155]. With a modulus of 0.8–2.4 GPa (Table 4),
PEDOT:PSS coating may also mediate the large mechanical mismatch between
the hard metal sites and soft neural tissue. Due to its proven recording enhancing
capability, PEDOT:PSS is offered as available electrode coating on many of the
commercial neural electrode products. Several of the most advanced ﬂexible neural
electrode designs utilize PEDOT:PSS, including the NeuroGrid [28], Neuralink
[156], and SU-8-based NET devices [27].
Material scientists are continuing to develop strategies to improve the long-
term stability of PEDOT-based coating. Derivative of PEDOT has been synthesized
to improve the adhesion of PEDOT onto the substrates [157–159]. Alternatively,
other dopants have been explored including tetraﬂuoroborate [160], single-walled
carbon nanohorns [161], and acid-functionalized carbon nanotubes [123, 126, 151,
153]. PEDOT-CNT-coated subcellular electrodes (Fig. 4e1,2) demonstrated signif-
icant improvement in chronic neural recording stability over 4 months compared
to PEDOT-PSS recording sites [151] and reduced neuronal death/damage and
inﬂammatory response induced by electrical stimulation compared to non-coated
controls [125]. PEDOT-CNT coatings, incorporated onto carbon ﬁbers and gold
microelectrodes, enabled high sensitivity and selectivity for detection of resting
level of dopamine (DA) in the rat striatum using square wave voltammetry [162].
Another conducting polymer that has been investigated for neural electrode
application is polypyrrole (PPy) [163, 164]. PPy nanowires electropolymerized onto
a high conductive PPy ﬁlm (Young’s modulus: 450 kPa) serve as the conductive
electrodes and interconnections [130]. The stretchable polymeric microelectrode
arrays (MEAs) resulted in high stretchability (≈100%), good electrode-substrate
adhesion, and excellent recycling stability (10,000 cycles of stretch) (Fig. 4c).
As a proof of concept, they have been successfully used for cortical recordings
from rat brain in normal and epileptic conditions and for peripheral nerve stimula-
tion.
1.1.3.3 Carbon-Based Materials
Carbon-based materials, such as CFEs [37, 42], CNT ﬁbers [39], and CFE arrays
[38, 43–47, 165] (see Sect. 1.1.1.2), carbon nanotubes (CNTs) [128], graphene

100
E. Castagnola et al.
[166, 167], and glassy carbon (GC) [168, 169] present intriguing properties, such
as capacitive electrochemical behavior, wide electrochemical window, fast electron
transfer kinetics [131, 170–172], and superior electrochemical stability compared
to metal and conductive polymer [39, 167], combined with chemical inertness and
biocompatibility [39, 131, 173]. Thus, they are becoming increasingly popular as
electrode materials [124, 151–153] (Table 4).
CNTs have attracted special attention due to their high aspect ratio, high electri-
cal conductivity, and mechanical strength [39, 174, 175]. CNT directly synthesized
by CVD on the tip of sharp metal microelectrodes (Fig. 4e5) demonstrated to
outperform electropolymerized CNT – nanocomposite coatings (PPy-CNT and
Au-CNT) – through direct comparison on similar microelectrodes, showing low
impedance, high charge injection limit, and a superior electrochemical stability
[128].
Transparent graphene microelectrode demonstrated crosstalk-free integration of
two-photon microscopy, optogenetic stimulation, and cortical recordings in the same
in vivo experiment, enabling multimodal neuronal interrogations [176] (see Sect.
2.1.1). On the other hand, porous graphene electrodes obtained by laser pyrolysis
exhibited very low impedance and high injection capability for macrostimulation
application, thanks to the high surface area, good electrical conductivity, and
electrochemical stability under prolonged current pulse stimulation [167].
Devices made of glassy carbon (GC) and interconnections housed on ﬂexible
polyimide substrate, without the need for any kind of intermediate adhesion of
conductive metal layer, can be fabricated using a new two-step, double-sided pattern
transfer method for GC structures [131]. GC electrodes allow extended long-term
electrical stimulation with no electrode material degradations and have shown
low noise signal recording and high sensitivity in electrochemical detection of
neurotransmitter [131, 177]. Cross-sectional characterization through FIB and SEM
imaging demonstrates strong attachment enabled by hydroxyl and carbonyl covalent
bonds between GC microstructures and top insulating and bottom substrate layers
[131] (Fig. 4d).
1.1.4
Modulus-Matching Coatings
Another strategy used to reduce the mechanical mismatch between the implanted
device and tissue is to use modulus-matching coatings and encapsulations [133,
188–190].
Hydrogels are particularly attractive for this purpose due to their low elastic
moduli with tissue-like mechanical property, and their established biocompatibility
[189, 191]. Hydrogels act as an electronic insulator (i.e., no electron ﬂow) [192] and
can be used as substrate or hydrogel encapsulations. The latest commonly serves as
modulus-matching coatings [189, 191], biological drug release systems, antifouling
coatings [193], or protective coatings to avoid the direct exposures of PEDOT-PSS-
CNT to the human brain [126, 190].
Soft poly(ethylene glycol) [194] and poly(vinyl alcohol) [195] hydrogel coatings
have been used to encapsulate stiffer implants and have shown to effectively reduce

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
101
the degree of glial scarring and neural cell loss by minimizing the induced strain
ﬁeld during brain micromotions.
pHEMA soft synthetic permanent biocompatible hydrogels have been devel-
oped to reduce the mechanical tissue-implant mismatch and to avoid the direct
contact between the neural tissue and the PEDOT-PSS-CNT coatings, by acting
as a biocompatible protective barrier against potential nanomaterial detachment
[190] (Fig. 5a). Immunoﬂuorescence revealed that implant of the microsphere
microelectrodes produces a contained tissue response at 2 and 4 weeks, without
impedance and signal recording degradation. Furthermore, hydrogels can provide
biofunctional interfaces through the incorporation of adhesion molecules [196],
nerve growth factors [197], and anti-inﬂammatory drugs [198] in the hydrogel
matrix and their subsequent release into the surrounding neural tissue, to further
alleviate inﬂammatory responses during chronic in vivo implantations.
As an example, a PEG hydrogel that contains poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
(PLGA) microspheres loaded with anti-inﬂammatory cyclosporin A (CsA) has been
developed to coat the surface of the microwell cuff electrode (MCE) [193] (Fig. 5b).
The coated electrode showed a signiﬁcantly decreased ﬁbrous tissue growth and
increased axonal density in animal tests.
Several types of electronically conductive materials, including metallic nanopar-
ticles, CNTs, and conductive polymers, have been incorporated into the hydrogel
matrix to obtain hydrogel composites with both ionic and electronic conductivities
while maintaining hydrogels’ unique biomechanical beneﬁts. An example of con-
ductive hydrogel, a combination of alginate and PEDOT, can be selectively formed
by electropolymerization of PEDOT monomers into the alginate encapsulation
around the neural probe (Fig. 5c).
Despite the advantages that hydrogels bring in biocompatibility and modulus
matching, they lack many of the other material properties necessary for functional
performance, such as electrical characteristics, mechanical strength, and durability.
When used to minimize modulus mismatch between stiff probes and soft tissue, a
thick layer of hydrogel is often required, increasing the distance between electrode
and target neurons [191, 200], with a consequent decrease in interface sensitivity.
Furthermore, the swelling of hydrogel materials, which can occur if the hydrophilic-
ity, cross-link density, and weight of the polymer are not properly optimized, can
create a bigger impact of the device on the surrounding tissue, aggravating neural
damage during implantation, which can lead to cell loss and glial activation that
persists [201]. Additionally, electrically conductive hydrogels, where conductive
material grows from the electrode site through the hydrogel encapsulation, increase
the geometrical size of the electrodes, reduce the spatial selectivity, and increase the
risk of current shunting and cross-talking between channels.
To demonstrate that these limitations can be overcome by tuning the hydrogel
properties, an electrically conductive hydrogel-based elastic microelectronics with
Young’s modulus values in the kilopascal range has been presented [192] (Fig. 5d).
The system consists of a highly conductive soft hydrogel made of specially treated
PEDOT-PSS as a conductor and a ﬂuorinated elastomer as a stretchable insulation
material. The electrode arrays on this thin-ﬁlm hydrogel “elastronics” have shown

102
E. Castagnola et al.
Fig. 5 (a) SEM micrographs of (1) pHEMA-encapsulated PEDOT-PSS-CNT microsphere and (2)
higher magniﬁcation of the pHEMA coating. Adapted with permission [190]. (b) Cross-sectional
SEM images of the surface-coated cuff electrode with CsA-loaded PLGA, MS, and PEG hydrogel.
CsA-loaded MS was well distributed in the hydrogel layer. The PEG hydrogel embedded with CsA-
loaded MS was evenly covered across the surface of the microwell-type cuff electrode. Adapted
with permission [193]. Copyright © 2016 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. (c)
Optical micrograph of deposited PEDOT (black color) on electrode site (top view), in the right, the
side view shows vertical growth of PEDOT from an electrode site and through the alginate hydrogel
scaffold. Adapted from [133, 199], reprinted with permission from Wiley. (d). 1. A freestanding
MECH elastronic electrode array pressed against a soft jelly. Scale bar, 2 mm. 2 Zoomed-in image
of MECH electrodes (dark lines) with PFPE-DMA encapsulation. 3 Schematic of an elastronic
electrode. 4, 5 A MECH electrode array stretched under 20% tensile strain shows no cracks. Scale
bar, 5 mm. Inset: zoomed-in image of a MECH encapsulated in PFPE. Adapted with permission
[192]. Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature
a signiﬁcantly reduced interfacial impedance with tissue, ∼30 times higher current-
injection density compared to platinum electrodes, and stable electrical performance
under strain. Finally, these microelectrodes have demonstrated to be effective in
nerve electrical stimulation with high current density at ultralow voltages in a mouse
model in vivo [192].

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
103
1.1.5
Biodegradable Materials
Biodegradable materials constitute a deﬁned family of materials that are designed
to erode in an aqueous environment in time periods from seconds to months, with
biologically safe degradation products. Biodegradable materials used in biomedical
application include metals, polymers, inorganics, and semiconductors [202, 203].
The most common bioresorbable metals are magnesium (Mg), zinc (Zn), and
molybdenum (Mo). They react with water molecules through hydrolysis and
generate Mg (OH)2, Zn(OH)2, and H2MoO4. These corrosion products dissolve
slowly in aqueous conditions. The proper dose of bioresorbable metals is determined
by their corrosion rates, their body tolerance of hydrogen gas, and their cytotoxicity.
Most biodegradable polymers are completely aliphatic polyesters, such as poly-
lactic acid (PLA), polyglycolic acid (PGA), poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA),
and poly-ε-caprolactone (PCL). They can be degraded either through hydrolysis or
enzymes in biological environments. Inorganic materials are mostly used as coating
layers to protect bioresorbable implants or as constituent materials in composites.
They present low dissolution rates and high chemical stability. As an example,
silicon dioxide (SiO2) is used as a passivation material to protect the electronic
devices from a surrounding aqueous environment. The reaction product of SiO2
hydrolysis is silicic acid Si (OH)4, which is a naturally occurring component
in bioﬂuids with a typical concentration in serum ranging from 14 × 10−6 to
39 × 10−6 M.
The most frequently used semiconductor material is Si, which has been proven
to be biologically safe. Si is generally considered to be a chemically stable
material, but Si nanomembranes (Si NMs) of nanoscale thickness can dissolve under
physiological conditions by hydrolysis to yield silicic acid, at rates that depend
strongly on the ionic content of the surrounding solution, pH, temperature, and
other factors, including the doping level (few days to weeks). Speciﬁcally, Si forms
neutral orthosilicic acid Si(OH)4 through an initial oxidation step to SiO2 or through
a direct equilibrium Si + 4H2O ↔Si(OH)4 + 2H2 [204]. Bioresorbable materials
offer advantages in transient neural interface applications. In the clinic, they could
be used for pre- and postoperative monitoring of brain function, thus reducing risks
and costs due to surgical extraction of nonbiodegradable devices.
Implantable, multifunctional Si sensors, fully fabricated with materials
resorbable via hydrolysis and/or metabolic action, have been developed and are
capable of precisely monitoring intracranial pressure and temperature [204, 216]
(Table 5).
Si-based bioresorbable electronics, both ﬂexible ECoG array (Fig. 6c) and high-
channel density metal-oxide-semiconductor ﬁeld-effect transistors (MOSFETs)
(Fig. 6a), have also been used to record normal and epileptiform neural activity, both
in acute (∼hours) and chronic (up to 33 days) use. Their recording performances
were comparable to standard clinical systems, but they elicited reduced tissue
reactions [204].
The electrodes and interconnections were formed by a photolithographically
patterned n-doped monocrystalline silicon (Si NMs, 300 nm thick), while a foil
of PLGA (thickness ∼30 μm) and a ﬁlm of SiO2 (100 nm thick) serve as a

104
E. Castagnola et al.
Table 5 Properties of biodegradable materials
Mechanical
property
Electrical
property
Optical
property
Chemical
property
Physical property
Silicon
(semiconductor)
YM: 150 GPa
PR: 0.17
Conductivity:
0.01–94 cm for
n-type; 0.025–
[205]
110 cm for
p-type [205]
RI: 3.4
[205]
Density:
2.33 g/cm3
Thermal
conductivity: from
1.25 ± 0.19 w/cm
C◦at 30 ◦C to
0.46 ± 0.07 w/cm
C◦at 425 ◦C
Magnesium
(conductor)
YM: 249 GPa
PR: 0.18
Conductivity:
2.3 × 107 m
RI:
0.36–5.35
[206]
Very
reactive
toward
halogens
Density:
1.738 g/cm3
Melting point:
2800 ◦C
Thermal
conductivity:
42 W/mK
Speciﬁc heat:
877 J/kg/K [207]
Zinc
(conductor)
YM: 90 GPa
Tensile
strength:
90 MPa [208]
Resistivity: 5–
6.5 × 10−8 m
[208]
RI: 1.17
[147]
Highly
ﬂammable
Density:
7.14 g/cm3
Thermal
conductivity:
100–125 W/mK
Speciﬁc heat:
380–410 J/kg/K
Molybdenum
(conductor)
YM:
315–343 GPa
Tensile
strength: 380–
2100 MPa
[209]
Resistivity: 5.2–
6 × 10−8 m
[209]
RI: 3.7
[147]
Highly
ﬂammable
Density:
10.22 g/cm3
Thermal
conductivity:
138 W/mK
Tm: 2880–2895 K
Speciﬁc heat:
255–275 J/kg/K
[209]
Silk ﬁbroin
(substrate)
YM:
10–17 GPa
Tensile
strength:
300–740 MPa
[210]
Resistivity:
9.8 kg/m2 (log)
[210]
Permittivity in
vacuum:
(8.85 × 10−14
Fcm−1 [211]
RI: 1.56
[212]
Fibrous
protein
with a
semicrys-
talline
structure
[213]
Density:
1.4 g/cm3 [214]
Hydrogel
10−1–100 kPa
[195]
10−3–10−2 S/m
[215]
bioresorbable substrate and encapsulating layer, respectively. Additionally, for the
MOSFET fabrication, Mo was used for the source, drain, and gate electrodes,
and SiO2 (∼100 nm) for the gate dielectrics. In this example, the key enabling
chemistry involves hydrolysis of Si NMs following immersion in physiological

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
105
Fig. 6 (a) 1. Schematic illustration of an actively multiplexed sensing system for high-resolution
ECoG, in a fully bioresorbable construction. This 8 × 8 embodiment includes 128 metal-
oxide-semiconductor ﬁeld-effect transistors (MOSFETs) where Si NMs serve as both the active
semiconductor material and the neural interface electrodes. The metallization, the gate dielectric,
and the interlayer dielectric rely on thin ﬁlms of Mo (∼300 nm thick) and SiO2 (∼100 nm thick)
and trilayers of SiO2 (∼300 nm thick)/Si3N4 (∼400 nm thick)/SiO2 (∼300 nm thick), respectively.
A second layer of Mo (∼300 nm thick) deﬁnes column interface lines. A similar trilayer serves
as the encapsulation. A ﬁlm of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA; ∼30 μm thick) forms the
substrate. 2. Optical micrograph images of a pair of unit cells at various stages of fabrication (left)
and a picture of a complete system (right). 3. Images collected at several stages of accelerated
dissolution of a system immersed into an aqueous buffer solution (pH 12) at 37 ◦C. Adapted
with permission [204]. Copyright © 2016, Springer Nature; (b) 1. Schematic of an implantable,
biodegradable electronic device. 2. An image of a biodegradable electronic device consisting of Si
nanomembranes, Mg, MgO, and silk. 3. A wireless, biodegradable electronic system was used in
sustained, nonpharmacological neuroregenerative therapy. Adapted [203]. Copyright © 2019. (c)
Photograph of a four-channel bioresorbable electrode array placed on the cortical surface of the
left hemisphere of a rat. Adapted with permission [204]. Copyright © 2016 Springer Nature. (d)
Image of electrode array on feline brain: 76 μm (1), 2.5-μm (2), and 2.5-μm mesh (3) electrode
arrays, respectively. Adapted with permission [60]. Copyright © 2010 Springer Nature
environment, with the production of biocompatible compounds. The dissolution
has been observed to occur in an exceptionally controlled, predictable process
(∼11 nm/day rate), without cracking, ﬂaking, shedding particulates, or reduction
in surface smoothness that often occur in dissolution of metals [204]. This device
has been estimated to completely degrade in 2 months, with Si and SiO2 dissolving
within a month and 2 weeks, respectively, followed by PLGA (∼4–5 weeks) [204].
Another material strategy adopted for bio-interfaced system is based on ultrathin
electronics supported by bioresorbable substrates of silk ﬁbroin. Once these devices
were disposed on the brain, the silk dissolution initiated a spontaneous, conformal
wrapping process driven by capillary forces at the biotic/abiotic interface [60].
The specialized mesh designs together with the ultrathin electronics have shown
to induce minimal stresses on the tissue and highly conformal coverage. In vivo,
neural mapping experiments on feline animal models illustrate one mode of use

106
E. Castagnola et al.
for this class of technology [60]. The conformability progressively improved with
reduced thickness, during the silk dissolution, and with the introduction of the
mesh (Fig. 6d1–3). The intimate integration of the electrodes with the living tissue
has clearly demonstrated to improve the physiological measurements of brain
activity [60].
2
Flexible Central Nervous System (CNS) Devices
The following section will provide a review of current developments in ﬂexible
CNS devices, thanks to the development of soft, ﬂexible, and conformable electrode
substrates.
2.1
Introduction of Different CNS Interface Device Types
Brain signals can be recorded using devices with different levels of invasiveness,
which are proportional to the level of resolution that they can extract from the
brain. Electroencephalographic (EEG) electrodes, the least invasive, are placed on
the scalp, several millimeters away from the brain, and they can record several types
of neural signals, such as slow cortical potentials (SCPs), sensorimotor rhythms
(SMRs), and event-related potential P300 waves.
Conventional EEG electrodes are metal disc electrodes (mms to cm range in
diameter) placed on the scalp and are kept in place by electrode cap or using
a conductive adhesive [217]. The skin is often prepared by the application of
conductive gel or paste in order to make a conductive bridge between the scalp and
the bulk metal of the electrode. The degradation of the electrical and mechanical
properties of this interface with the skin makes the existing EEG technologies non-
suitable for long-term use. To overcome this issue, different versions of dry EEG
electrode that replace the gel with needles [218], capacitive disks [219], silicone
conductive rubber [220], or nanowires [221] have been investigated.
Despite their promising opportunity to enable continuous monitoring for weeks,
they still present multiple limitations, such as the need for multistep preparations,
handling several wiring interfaces, and/or cumbersome mechanical ﬁxtures. Thanks
to the ﬂexible materials and design strategies introduced before, ultrathin, foldable
EEG electrodes have been developed. They consist of an ultrathin soft system
that is conformable to the skin on the complex surface topology of the auricle
and the mastoid for more than 2 weeks, providing high-ﬁdelity and long-term
capture of EEG signals while avoiding signiﬁcant thermal, electrical, or mechanical
loading of the skin. The design includes mesh electrodes for recording, ground,
and reference, wired by a stretchable interconnect, on a soft (modulus, 20 kPa),
elastomeric substrate (thickness, 3 μm). The conductive interconnections consist
of Au serpentine traces (300-nm-thick and 30-μm-wide patterns of Au with
1.2-μm-thick layers of polyimide above and below) organized in fractal layout

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
107
(Peano conﬁguration), in order to maximize the stretchability in all directions.
The overall device results in a compliant system with effective modulus lower
than that of the skin (∼130 kPa), presenting conformability and good adhesion
to the skin [218]. Furthermore, dry, unperceivable temporary tattoo electrodes
have been fabricated. They are created via inkjet printing of conducting polymer
onto commercial decal transfer papers. When transferred on the user’s chest,
these tattoos recorded stable electrocardiograph with no degradation in signal
quality. Additionally, these electrodes remained intact despite the regrown hair that
perforated the electrode substrates. However, further investigation on their long-
term performances is warranted [222]. Invasive electrodes do provide rich neuronal
information which is more beneﬁcial for the control of prosthetic limbs [223–225].
Electrocorticography (ECoG) uses electrodes placed in the epidural or subdural
space to record synchronized postsynaptic potentials (local ﬁeld potentials) directly
from the cerebral cortex, providing a reasonable compromise between invasiveness
and signal ﬁdelity. The ECoG approach, compared to scalp EEG, improves the
spatial resolution and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), widens the frequency range,
and reduces the training requirements [223, 224]. At the same time, compared
to intracortical implants, it minimizes brain tissue injuries and lowers the risk of
infections [224]. However, because a craniotomy is required to implant the electrode
grid, ECoG is considered an invasive procedure. Depending on the device type,
different degrees of ﬁbrotic encapsulation have been reported, which compromises
long-term recording ﬁdelity [226]. Since their development in the 1950s, ECoG-
electrode arrays have been used for recording and stimulation of the cortex in
surgical epileptological investigation and cortical functional mapping, in order to
identify critical regions of the cortex to be avoided during surgery. Different studies
have shown that micro-ECoG (μECoG) arrays, which are characterized by smaller
recording sites and reduced inter-electrode spacing relative to typical clinical ECoG
electrodes, could also provide motor cortical signals carrying an information density
adequate for multiple degrees-of-freedom neuroprosthesis control [224]. However,
ECoG and μECoG technology can only acquire information from the superﬁcial
layer of the brain and have very limited ability in resolving single-unit neuronal
activity.
Penetrating microelectrodes, the most invasive, are able to record single-unit
activity from single neurons or small groups of neurons from different brain regions.
The ability to monitor neural activity at the single neuron level greatly facilitates
neuroscience research in understanding neural circuitries. Such a high-resolution
recording from a large population of neurons using intracortical arrays has enabled
seven degrees of freedom of control of robotic arms in humans [227]. Unfortunately,
despite their superior neural recordings in terms of accuracy, bandwidth, and
resolution, the state-of-the-art intracortical microelectrodes, metal microwire arrays
[57, 58], and silicon-based neural probes [54, 55, 57] tend to show recording
quality degradation over long-term implantation, partly due to acute and chronic
inﬂammatory reactions to the trauma of insertion and persistent agitation of the
brain tissue due to mechanical mismatch, as previously discussed.

108
E. Castagnola et al.
The long-term reliability of neural implants has been a signiﬁcant challenge
for clinical applications; as such, tremendous efforts have been devoted to (1)
minimizing the inﬂammatory tissue reactions induced by invasive electrodes and (2)
promoting more intimate contact between the electrodes and neurons. Utilizing the
various biocompatible soft, ﬂexible, and conformal materials and device technolo-
gies outlined in the last section, many ﬂexible surface and penetrating devices have
been developed. Designs of modern ﬂexible neural implants and their respective
implantation methods will be discussed in the following section.
2.1.1
Surface Electrodes
In the case of brain surface electrodes, such as micro-ECoG arrays, the use
of a conformable substrate enables accommodation of both brain curvature and
movement, keeping each electrode in the array in intimate contact with the cortical
surface and improving the electrical coupling with neural elements [28, 109, 228].
Furthermore, miniaturized recording sites and interconnections allow a smaller
inter-electrode distance, enhancing the spatial resolution. To enhance the electrode
sensitivity with smaller electrodes, softer highly conductive microelectrodes with
low impedance are integrated. All of these device features have resulted in an
increase in the information content of the recorded signal.
Ultra-ﬂexible and conformable polyimide-based micro-ECoG arrays (<10 μm)
of submillimeter recording sites electrochemically coated with high surface area
conductive polymer-carbon nanotube composites have been used to improve their
brain-electrical coupling capabilities [153, 190]. Similar devices (8 μm thick and
with electrode sizes as low as 10 μm in diameter) have been used to record
electrically and visually evoked slow oscillations in the cerebral cortex network both
from in vitro slices and from in vivo anesthetized animals [229].
Soft, high-density, stretchable electrode grids have been fabricated on an inert,
high-performance composite material with gold-coated titanium dioxide nanowires
as conductive traces, embedded in a PDMS matrix as stretchable substrate and
insulator (Fig. 7a). Due to their ﬂexible and stretchable nature and the ultrathin
design, these devices present different advantages, such as conformation to the tissue
and self-expansion after insertion through a pinhole craniotomy (Fig. 7a, bottom).
This device was capable of recording up to 3 months in freely moving rats with
ﬁdelity [109].
Additionally, the increased need for multimodal neural interrogation triggered
interest in the development of transparent electrode arrays on ﬂexible substrates,
which allow for concurrent imaging and electrophysiological recording [150, 230–
232], electrical stimulation [233], or optogenetic interrogation [234], providing
insight into the physiological mechanism of the complex cortical functions. For
this purpose, different transparent conductors have been investigated as electrode
materials to be integrated on ﬂexible parylene C and SU-8 substrates. Transparent
ITO-μECoG arrays (Fig. 7b), consisted of indium tin oxide (ITO) traces embed-
ded in a transparent parylene C, have been demonstrated to enable optogenetic
manipulation and recording from the surface of the brain of rodents and non-human
primates [234] (Fig. 7b). However, ITO is brittle and is susceptible to mechanical

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
109
Fig. 7 (a) Optical image of soft high-density, stretchable electrode grids (top) and implantation
of the same, showing the probe in a craniotomy lying on the surface of the brain and the ability
of the probe to be inserted in smaller craniotomy than the probe geometry (bottom). Adapted
with permission [109]. Copyright © John Wiley & Sons. (b) ITO transparent μECoG used in
the non-human primate model: image of the 96-channel array (top). The large (400 × 600 μm)
perforations are designed to allow viral injections and insertion of electrodes or optical ﬁbers for
intracortical stimulation and recording and μECoG covering primary motor (M1) and primary
somatosensory (S1) cortices in non-human primate brain (bottom). Reprinted with permission
[234]; Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. (c) Design of the graphene microelectrode array (top).
Each electrode is a 100 μm × 100-μm square, and the spacing in-between two adjacent electrodes
is 300 μm (edge-to-edge). Scale bar, 500 μm. Bright-ﬁeld image of an exposure with graphene
microelectrode array. Graphene electrodes and wires in the center of the array are not visible, but
the gold wires for connection to the ampliﬁer board. Scale bar, 500 μm. Adapted with permission
[176]. Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. (d) Three different types of graphene multielectrode
arrays with varying electrode site diameters (100, 150, 200 μm) (1, top); graphene micro-ECoG
array with 16 transparent electrode sites and a ZIF PCB connector (2, top), SEM image at 420×
magniﬁcation of a single graphene electrode site (3, top); visualization of the ﬂuorescent neural
response after stimulation with a single graphene electrode site (marked with a red triangle).
Adapted with permission [236]. Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society
degradation when applied for situation where ﬂexibility is desired. An emerging
material for transparent multimodal neural device is graphene, due to its high
electron mobility, low thermal noise, ﬂexibility, and optical transparency [176].
Transparent graphene microelectrode arrays have been demonstrated to enable
crosstalk-free integration of a two-photon microscopy, optogenetic stimulation, and
cortical recordings in the same in vivo experiment, enabling multimodal neuronal
interrogations [176]. The design of a graphene microelectrode array is reported in
Fig. 7c. However, the relatively high impedance of the graphene electrodes affects
the sensitivity in neural recording measurements [235].
The electrodeposition of platinum nanoparticles (PtNPs) on transparent graphene
electrodes can overcome this issue by drastically reducing the electrode impedance
while maintaining optical transparency. Graphene/PtNP microelectrode arrays
demonstrated simultaneous in vivo calcium imaging of cellular activity at multiple
cortical depths and recording ﬁeld potentials generated by neural populations from
the cortical surface [235]. Furthermore, fully transparent graphene electrodes

110
E. Castagnola et al.
have been demonstrated suitable for electrical stimulation and simultaneous
calcium imaging of the underlying neural tissues in GCaMP6f mice, providing a
method to understand electrical stimulation and potentially improve therapeutic
electrical stimulation [236] (Fig. 7d). As previously reported in Sect. 1.1.1.1,
the possibility to transfer bendable ultrathin active silicon-based electronics onto
ﬂexible substrates enables the fabrication of ﬂexible high-density and high-channel
count microelectrode arrays [34, 36, 40]. Recently, ﬂexible, foldable, active μECoG
arrays have also been developed on transparent 1.2-μm-thick parylene substrate
[237]. These devices consist of transparent organic electrochemical transistors
(OECTs) and transparent Au grid wirings (with 60% transparency at 475-nm
wavelength) with a total thickness as small as 3 μm, including the top encapsulation
of a 1.2-μm-thick photoresist epoxy (SU-8) layer, resulting in high ﬂexibility
and conformability. These transparent transistors have shown comparable high
performance with OECTs with nontransparent electrodes/wirings. They have been
successfully validated for mapping evoked signal response from the cortex of an
optogenetic rat stimulated by a laser beam, showing lower light artifacts and low
noise level. Such a technology opens the possibility of precise investigation of
a neural network system using direct light stimulation [237]. Designs of modern
ﬂexible neural implants and their respective implantation methods will be discussed
in the following section.
2.1.2
Penetrating Electrodes
Different from surface electrodes, penetrating devices inevitably break blood-brain
barriers and induce insertion trauma that cause neuronal damage and inﬂammatory
responses in the brain parenchyma. While some of the acute damage can subside,
a chronic inﬂammation persists for most of the penetrating arrays. This is believed
to be aggravated by the mechanical mismatch between the stiff implant and soft
brain tissue. One way to reduce the mechanical stress on nearby cells is to use
ﬂexible tethers to minimize the movement of the implant relative to the tissue.
Another strategy is to make the entire implant ﬂexible or as soft as the brain tissue,
minimizing the strain-induced inﬂammation and degeneration [27, 29, 106]. As
introduced brieﬂy, to minimize the disparity between the device and the brain,
efforts have been made to employ softer materials, both for substrate and active
sites. To match the dimensional and mechanical properties of the neural tissue,
3D macroporous nanoelectronic neural probe, which combines ultra-ﬂexibility
and subcellular features, has been fabricated on SU-8 substrates in a mesh-like
conﬁguration with integrated built-in strains designed to promote integration with
the brain tissue [106] (Fig. 8a). The ultra-ﬂexible mesh design, presenting a 2D
80% porosity and feature sizes to sub-10-μm scale, has been shown to promote
mechanical interactions with tissue in the range of cellular forces, thanks to the
exceptional small bending stiffness of 0.64 × 10−15 N m2, four to seven orders
of magnitude smaller than conventional Si [238], carbon ﬁber [37], and thin
polyimide neural probes [239]. By further reducing the dimension of the SU-8
mesh element down to thickness (∼900 nm) and width (0.6–4 μm), neuron-like
electronics (NeuE), where the key building blocks mimic the subcellular structural

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
111
features and mechanical properties of neurons, have been fabricated [104]. The main
consequence of the reduction in feature widths of the NeuE building blocks is a
5–20 times reduction in the mechanical stiffness (∼0.1 fN m2) compared to the
most ﬂexible state-of-the-art reported probes [3, 29, 106, 240]. Also, the estimated
percentage of occupied volume for the implanted NeuE probes (0.07–0.3%) is up to
20 times lower than the macroporous mesh probes [106]. 3D mapping, histological,
and electrophysiological investigations showed a structurally and functionally stable
NeuE-brain interface and intimate interpenetration of NeuE with the neuronal and
glial networks [104]. The injection of the mesh electronics utilizes a needle, which
could introduce a large insertion trauma, and the horizontal lines in the mesh may
also cut neural elements as the mesh expands in the tissue.
To eliminate these issues, ultra-ﬂexible nanoelectronic thread (NET) probes [27,
29, 243, 244] have been designed. These probes are fabricated on SU-8 substrate
with a total thickness of 1 μm, satisfying subcellular dimensions and cellular
surgical footprint requirements. NET probes have been shown to reliably detect
and track single-unit neural signals for months, maintaining stable impedance,
noise level, and single-unit recording yield during long-term implantations. NET
ﬂexibility ensures complete compliance to tissue micromovements and minimizes
probe-tissue interfacial force to the range of cellular force (nanonewtons) [106].
Furthermore, the ultrathin thickness of NETs (1 μm) greatly reduces the strain on
the device upon deformation, which, together with an improved adhesion between
SU-8 layers, prevents the formation of structural defects [27].
Neuralink, a neurotech company, founded by Elon Musk in 2016 with the aim
to develop ultrahigh bandwidth brain-machine interfaces to connect humans and
computers, has built high-density arrays of small and ﬂexible electrode “threads” on
polyimide substrates, with 3072 electrodes per array distributed across 96 threads
(Fig. 8b). The electrode array is packaged into a small implantable device that
contains custom chips for low-power onboard ampliﬁcation and digitization. They
demonstrated the rapid implantation of 96 polymer threads, each thread with 32
electrodes, achieving a spiking yield of up to 70% in chronically implanted rodents
[156].
While the above devices utilize off-the-shelf commercial polymer materials
and achieve ﬂexibility by reducing dimension, others develop new materials with
ultralow modulus. One example is a novel class of ultrasoft microwires [125]. The
electrically conducting core of the microwire is made with a blend of poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(ethylene glycol) copolymer [PEDOT-PEG] blended
with PDMS elastomer, while the electrically insulated outer coating is made of
ﬂuorosilicone. The ratio of PEDOT/PDMS was optimized to have high conductivity
while maintaining a low Young’s modulus of 974 kPa, which is ﬁve orders of
magnitude lower than tungsten and signiﬁcantly lower than other polymer-based
neural electrode materials. In vitro cell culture experiments demonstrated higher
neuronal attachment and a twofold reduction in inﬂammatory microglia attachment
on soft devices compared to stiff controls. Furthermore, the soft microwires showed
functionality in recording single-unit activity and in neural stimulation in vivo.
When implanted, they demonstrated signiﬁcantly reduced inﬂammatory tissue

112
E. Castagnola et al.
Fig. 8 (a) Micrograph of the macroporous nanoelectronic 3D neural probes. Scale bar, 200 μm
with zoomed-in view of the outward bent supporting arm and sensor outlined by the yellow-
dashed box in 2. In inset: bright-ﬁeld micrograph of two typical Pt electrode voltage sensors
each with 4 μm × 20-μm area. Scale bar, 5 μm. Adapted with permission [106]. Copyright ©
2015, Springer Nature. (b) “Linear Edge” probes (Neuralink) with 32 electrode contacts spaced
by 50 μm. The increased magniﬁcation of individual electrodes for the thread design is reported
in inset. On the right, an example perioperative image showing the cortical surface with implanted
threads. Adapted with permission [156]. Copyright © 2019 BioRxiv, Neuralink. (c) 1. SEM images
of a 29-G soft wire made with a blend of PDMS and C12-PEG-PEDOT-PEG-C12. 1–4 are images
of the as-extruded uncoated wire, while 5 and 6 are images of the ﬂuorosilicone-coated wire.
The section of the wire core (B and F) shows a relatively homogeneous distribution of the two
materials in the blend, and conducting and non-conducting domains cannot be distinguished even
at 6000× resolution (6). The ﬂuorosilicone coating (5) appears homogenous and defect-free. White
arrows denote areas of homogeneity, whereas yellow arrows indicate phase separation. Reprinted
with permission [125]. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. (d) 1. Fabrication
steps involved in assembly of the preform, including a PC waveguide core, COC cladding, gCPE
electrodes, hollow channels, and protective sacriﬁcial PC cladding. 2. A photograph of the design
I preform at the transition part where it was drawn into the ﬁber. Inset: a photograph showing
a section of the drawn ﬁber wrapped around a ﬁnger 3. A photograph of a bundle of ﬁber
before etching of the sacriﬁcial PC cladding. 4. Cross-sectional photograph of the preform before
thermal drawing. 5. Cross-sectional microscope image of the multimodal ﬁber produced by thermal
drawing of the preform in 4. Adapted with permission [241, 242]. Copyright © 2015 Springer
Nature, Copyright © 2017 Springer Nature
response, reduced blood-brain barrier leakage, less neuronal degradation at week
8 compared to tungsten wires of similar dimension, and surface chemistry [125,
245] (Fig. 8c).

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
113
Multifunctional neural interface devices that can measure multiple brain signals
from electrical and physiological to chemical and/or modulate neural activity via
different modalities are desired for many neuroscience research applications and
closed-loop therapies. The quality and reliability of these multimodal devices could
also beneﬁt from ﬂexible material and design. For this purpose, multiple functional
features, including electrodes, optical waveguides and light sources, chemical
sensing, and delivery modules, have been integrated into ﬂexible probes [3, 50, 112,
241–243, 246]. For example, a new class of multi-material ﬁbers, fabricated using a
thermal drawing process, have been successfully created to simultaneously perform
drug delivery, neural recording, and optical stimulation [241] (Fig. 8d). The multiple
components of the ﬁbers, i.e., optical waveguides, electrodes, and microﬂuidic
channels, are fabricated from polycarbonate (PC; refractive index n = 1.58; glass
transition temperature (Tg) = 145 ◦C; Young’s modulus E = 2.38 GPa), conductive
polyethylene (CPE) loaded with 5% graphite, and cyclic oleﬁn copolymer (COC;
n = 1.52, Tg = 158 ◦C, E = 3.0 GPa), respectively. The multimodal ﬁbers have
1–2 microﬂuidic channels, 2–4 recording electrodes (∼5-μm and ∼23-μm inter-
electrode space), and a cylindrical waveguide, with a total diameter ranging from 85
to 416 μm that can be further reduced by selective etching of sacriﬁcial claddings.
Their bending stiffness can be as low as 4–7 N/m for 85-μm-diameter ﬁbers,
one order of magnitude less than that of the 125-μm steel microwires commonly
used in electrophysiological recordings, and 83.5 N/m for 200-μm-diameter ﬁbers,
substantially lower than that of silica optical ﬁbers of comparable dimensions (93.6–
104.8 N/m) [240, 247]. To improve the stretchability of these ﬁbers and conform
them to the spinal cord during normal movements, a uniform 1-μm-thick conductive
layer of AgNWs has been deposited over the COC cladding. The entire structure
was then encapsulated within a layer of PDMS (5 μm) to minimize direct contact of
AgNW with tissue and prevent surface oxidation and mechanical degradation. It was
hypothesized that the mesh formed by AgNWs would be more resilient to bending
and stretching deformation compared to a uniform metal ﬁlm while presenting high
conductivity [240]. Fibers with a diameter of 200 μm, consisting of 6 recording
electrodes (20–25 μm), 2 microﬂuidic channels (∼15 μm), and optical waveguide
(∼68 μm), have been used for the recording of extracellular potentials in the spinal
cords of freely moving mice up to 3 months after implantation, simultaneously
with optical neuromodulation. Due to their compliance, no signiﬁcant inﬂammatory
reaction of spinal cord tissue was observed around these elastomeric ﬁber probes
[240]. This new all-polymer concept of probes has offered an optimal solution to
combining optogenetics with other neural interrogations while reducing the elastic
mismatch between the implanted devices and the tissues.
2.1.3
Insertion Methods for Intracortical Devices
The ultra-ﬂexibility of this new generation of probes mechanically precluded their
self-supported penetration through the brain tissue and limited the precise targeting
of brain area. Different insertion methods have been used to implant highly ﬂexible
neural probes, including the use of stiffening agents to the temporary alteration of
the probe’s rigidity [47, 248, 249], rigid shuttle guides [29, 250], freezing techniques

114
E. Castagnola et al.
[106], syringe injection [243], specially designed ﬂuidic microdrives [201], and
robotic insertion approach [156]. Here are examples of insertion methods.
To insert ultrasoft wires into the brain, these wires were glued into the cavity of
a prefabricated half-needle shuttle with a 45 wt% solution of PEG in acetonitrile
to build the implant assembly (Fig. 9a) [245]. The PEG glue was designed to hold
the soft wire and shuttle together during insertion but to quickly dissolve within
about 30 s after implantation to enable removal of the shuttle while leaving the
microelectrode in place. Tweezers were not needed to hold the stiff wire electrodes
in place while removing the shuttle. However, shuttle devices with dimensions
larger than 100 μm can potentially result in unrecoverable damage and persistent
scarring [27, 201]. To overcome this limitation, more sophisticated strategies have
been attempted by using a temporary engaging mechanism and shuttle devices made
of carbon ﬁbers and tungsten microwires with diameters as small as 7 μm [27]. The
engaging mechanism was enabled by a micropost at the end of each shuttle device
fabricated using focused ion beam (FIB). During delivery, the micropost engages
into the microhole and pulls the NET probe to the desired depth, after which the
shuttle device is retracted. In this case, the overall insertion footprint was as small
as 10 μm across, which reduces surgical damage. This insertion method has been
demonstrated effective in reducing the tissue reactions and in chronic monitoring of
the single-unit activity in a mouse model.
Flexible mesh electronics have been delivered into 3D structures by syringe
injection, with subsequent relaxing and interpenetration within the internal space
of the biological materials (Fig. 9b) [243, 251]. The syringe-injectable electronics
concept involves:
1. Loading the mesh electronics into a syringe and needle (Fig. 9b, inset)
2. Insertion of the needle into the material or internal cavity and initiation of mesh
injection (Fig. 9b1)
3. Simultaneous mesh injection and needle withdrawal to place the electronics into
the targeted region (Fig. 9b2)
4. Delivery of the input/output (I/O) region of the mesh outside the material
(Fig. 9a3) for subsequent connections and measurements [243, 244].
The major limitation of the insertion method is that it requires the use of
temporary stiffening agents or rigid shuttle, and/or syringes which are likely to
increase the implant size, thus potentially increasing the acute tissue damage.
A novel microﬂuidic strategy to implant and microactuate ﬂexible microelec-
trodes, i.e., CNT ﬁbers (CNTf), deep into neural tissue has been developed
[201]. The speciﬁcally designed “ﬂuidic microdrives” use viscous ﬂuid ﬂow in
a microﬂuidic channel to maintain tension in the electrode structure, effectively
stiffening it without increasing the implant footprint. This ﬂuidic microdrive
technology demonstrated the prevention of buckling and enablement of accurately
syringe-injectable electronics microelectrodes following ﬂuidic implantation were
successfully demonstrated in small organisms, acute mouse brain slices, and the
brain of anesthetized rats [201]. The microﬂuidic microdrives were fabricated from

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
115
Fig. 9 (a) Illustration of fabricated parts, implant assembly, insertion, and wire electrode release.
From top: original needle; fabricated half-needle shuttle; mount soft/stiff wire; PEG-facilitated
assembly; wire detachment in vivo. Inset on the top right corner: SEM image of fabricated
soft wire tip. Scale bar = 100 μm. Adapted with permission [245]. Copyright © 2017 Elsevier
B.V. (b) 1–3. Schematics of injectable electronics. Red-orange lines highlight the overall mesh
structure and indicate the regions of supporting and passivating polymer mesh layers. Yellow lines
indicate metal interconnects between I/O pads (green-ﬁlled circles) and recording devices (blue-
ﬁlled circles). Adapted with permission [243]. Copyright © 2015 Springer Nature. (c) Device
layout and microﬂuidic-assisted insertion of ﬂexible CNTf microelectrodes in vitro. 1 Schematic
of the two-layer PDMS microﬂuidic device. Microelectrodes are placed and aligned manually
inside the channel (top). The device is then inverted and bonded to a glass substrate (bottom).
Push-down actuation valves (green) provide on-chip ﬂow control. 2 False-colored SEM image
of a 12-μm-diameter microelectrode inside the PDMS channel. (c) Velocity ﬁeld and ﬂow path
lines in the microﬂuidic device. More than 93% of the total volume of ﬂuid injected is deviated
to the side venting ports, which minimizes the amount of ﬂuid delivered to the outlet channel.
(d) Microﬂuidic-assisted insertion of a 12-μm microelectrode in a brain phantom: the drag force
produced by the ﬂuid drives the ﬁber 4.5 mm into the phantom without evidence of bending. When
mechanical insertion is attempted (e), the microelectrode irreversibly buckles upon contact with
the agarose surface and does not penetrate inside the phantom. Adapted with permission [201].
Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Needle pincher cartridge compared with a
penny for scale. (A) Needle. (B) Pincher. (C) Cartridge (left). Insertion process into an agarose
brain proxy (right) 1. The inserter approaches the brain proxy with a thread. (i) Needle and cannula.
(ii) Previously inserted thread. 2. The inserter touches down on the brain proxy surface. 3. Needle
penetrates the tissue proxy, advancing the thread to the desired depth. (iii) Inserting the thread. 4.
The inserter pulls away, leaving the thread behind in the tissue proxy. (iv) Inserted thread. Adapted
with permission [156]. Copyright © 2019 BioRxiv, Neuralink
two layers of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) using conventional replica molding
techniques. The device layout is reported in Fig. 9c, together with an example of
microﬂuidic-assisted insertion of ﬂexible CNTf microelectrodes in vitro. The CNTf
microelectrodes are placed and aligned manually inside the channel; then the device

116
E. Castagnola et al.
is inverted and bonded to a glass substrate. Push-down actuation valves were able
to provide on-chip ﬂow control, and the drag force produced by the ﬂuid drives
the ﬁber 4.5 mm into the phantom without evidence of bending. This was not
possible using a standard mechanical insertion, where the microelectrode buckled
upon contact with the agarose surface and did not penetrate the phantom [201].
Compared to syringe injection, ﬂuidic microdrives present the advantage to not
penetrate the brain and prevent changes in intracranial pressure by diverting ﬂuid
away from the implantation site during insertion and actuation. Furthermore, there
is no need of temporary stiffening agents or rigid shuttle that temporarily increase
the electrode size and stiffness, potentially aggravating the acute neural damage due
to the insertion. Similar advantages are presented by the robotic strategy recently
developed by Neuralink for a rapid and reliable insertion of large numbers of ﬂexible
probes targeted to record from speciﬁc brain regions. The robot’s insertion head
is mounted on a globally accurate, 400 × 400 × 150-mm travel, 10-μm three-
axis stage and holds a small, quick-swappable “needle-pincher” assembly (Fig. 9d,
left). The needle is milled from 40-μm-diameter tungsten-rhenium wire-stock
electrochemically etched to 24 μm diameter along the inserted length (Fig. 9d, left).
The tip of the needle is designed both to hook onto insertion loops – for transporting
and inserting individual threads – and to penetrate the meninges and brain tissue.
The needle is driven by a linear motor, allowing variable insertion speeds and rapid
retraction acceleration (up to 30,000 mm/s2) to encourage separation of the probe
from the needle. The pincher is a 50-μm tungsten wire bent at the tip and driven
both axially and rotationally (Fig. 9d, left). It serves as a support for probes during
transport and as a guide to ensure that threads are inserted along the needle path.
Fig. 9d reports a sequence of photographs of the insertion process into an agarose
phantom.
3
Flexible Devices for PNS Interfaces
Unlike the central nervous system, the PNS is a more mechanically dynamic and
electrically challenging environment to interface with. In the CNS, the electrode
displacement is largely limited by the micromotions of the brain ﬂoating in the
cerebral spinal ﬂuid. Additionally, signals recorded from the neuronal soma are
signiﬁcantly higher than that from the axons. On the other hand, in the PNS,
the longitudinal excursion of sciatic nerves during limb mobilization can range
between 1 and 17 mm [252]. This requires that the electrodes maintain intimate
physical contact with the nerve during all phases of locomotion while ensuring
noise shielding and ﬂuid shunting. The peripheral nerves are axonal extensions
of neurons in the dorsal root ganglia and spinal cord, brain stem, or sympathetic
and parasympathetic ganglia [253]. These peripheral nerve structures are different
than the central nervous system neural tissue structures. Nerves contain connective
tissues invested in their structures as well as blood vessels supplying tissues with
nutrients. The outer surface of the nerve is a layer of ﬁbrous connective tissue
called the epineurium. Within the nerve, axons are grouped into bundles of fascicles;

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
117
each bundle is wrapped with their layer of connective tissue called the perineurium.
On the inside of the perineurium lie axons that are wrapped by loose connective
tissues called the endoneurium. These connective tissues create different layers of
electrically resistive barriers for interfacing with the electrically active axons [254].
State-of-the-art electrodes have been developed to achieve bidirectional commu-
nication between the peripheral nerves and the external instrumentation. Depending
on the application, electrodes may be wrapped around or penetrate the nerve.
Cuff electrodes are the least invasive. They are wrapped around the nerve and do
not penetrate the epineurium, avoiding the disruption of the blood-nerve barrier.
However, this conﬁguration suffers from poor axonal selectivity, resulting in limited
resolution of information. To increase the selectivity of the cuff-style electrode, the
Durand group developed the ﬂat interface nerve electrode (FINE), which ﬂattens
the nerve such that distances between axons that were in the center of the nerve and
the electrode contacts are reduced, thereby increasing selectivity [255].
Alternatively, for increased selectivity, the penetrating Utah slanted microelec-
trode array (USEA) has been developed. These USEAs have graded shank lengths
which allow for interfacing with axons at different depths within the cross section
of the nerve. However, the shanks of the USEAs are made of silicon with platinum
or iridium tips [261], with Young’s moduli of 184.8 GPa, a millionfold higher than
that of nerve tissue, with increased risk for chronic inﬂammation and scarring [262,
263], reducing the performance of the device and the health of the tissue [264].
3.1
Flexible Extrafascicular PNS Electrodes
Cuff electrodes are an example of extrafascicular PNS electrode. The cuff wraps
the nerve, and the conductive sites come in contact with the nerve epineurium to
record or stimulate the axons within the nerve. Since connective tissues, as well as
interstitial ﬂuid, exist between the conductive sites and the axons within the delicate
nerve, if the cuffs are wrapped too loosely, the interstitial ﬂuid can easily shunt the
current which not only necessitates increased currents for stimulation but also results
in poor signal acquisition. On the contrary, if the cuffs are wrapped too tightly, we
not only risk cutting off blood supply to the nerves, which can lead to compressive
neuropathy, but if the cuff material is rigid, the scar formation around the device
can further reduce cuff performance. Therefore, it is crucial that the materials that
make up the cuff electrodes conform to the nerve such that the electrical contact
with the nerve is intimate and stable, and there is minimal chronic inﬂammation.
Cuff electrodes used in the laboratory have been made with ﬂexible nonconductive
base substrates such as silicone (PDMS) [265], parylene [266], and polyimide [267].
Advances have been made utilizing new materials such as the thiol-ene/acrylate-
based SMP. Speciﬁcally, the SMP substrate softens from 2380 to 550 MPa after
soaking in PBS at 37 ◦C and wraps around the nerve like a hook. Their most
recent design has up to 16 electrical contacts to enable selective peripheral nerve
stimulation as well as recording [256] (Fig. 10a). The application of SMP in the PNS
has driven more ingenious peripheral nerve electrode designs. Zhang et al. designed

118
E. Castagnola et al.
Fig. 10 (a) multichannel softening cuff made with SMP substrate. (Top row) Multi-size adaptabil-
ity of the MSC-16 cuff adapts to metal rods of different diameters (100–1000 μm). (Bottom row)
SMP cuffs implanted snugly onto nerves of different diameters: pudendal nerve (200 μm), vagus
nerve (600 μm), common peroneal nerve (800 μm), and sciatic nerve (1000 μm). Arrowheads
point to the sutures used as cuff closing mechanism. Adapted with permission [256]. Copyright
© 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Electrically conductive hydrogel. Wrapping around the sciatic nerve
(top). Neuroﬁlament was used to label axons within the sciatic nerve, next to the micropatterned
electrically conductive hydrogel (MECH). Adapted with permission [188]. Copyright © 2018,
Springer Nature. (c) Silk bionic links in the form of thin ﬂexible non-transient silk electrode array.
Left top, schematic view of the construction. Left bottom, photograph of a silk nerve array with two
recording channels. Right, image of a silk array wrapped around a small cylindrical silicone tube.
Adapted with permission [62]. Copyright © Elsevier. (d) Transverse intrafascicular multichannel
electrodes (left, middle), and implantation procedure (right). Adapted with permission [257]. (e)
Spiked ultra-ﬂexible neural interface electrode. Adapted with permission [258]. (f) Intrafascicular
soft wire elastomeric electrode made of PEDOT-PEG, CNT, and PDMS with ﬂuorosilicone
insulation. Adapted with permission [259]. (g) Elastic and regenerative microchannel electrodes
with thin-gold ﬁlm metallization. Adapted with permission [260]. Copyright © Springer Nature
twining electrodes for the PNS borrowing the idea of twining plants in nature.
This electrode substrate utilizes SMP, which has permanent shape reconﬁgurability
(from 2D to 3D) and shape-memory recoverability at body temperature. Upon
implantation, the temporarily ﬂattened 2D stiff planar electrode can naturally self-
climb onto nerves and form 3D ﬂexible neural interfaces with minimal constraint on
the nerves. The device also makes use of a mesh serpentine design for the insulating
and conducting substrates [268]. The serpentine design adds stretchability, thus
enabling conformity to the dynamic nerve movements. The conducting substrate
consists of layers of 10-nm Ti and 200-nm Au, which were deposited onto the
surface of polyimide ﬁlm using electron beam evaporation. The resulting electrode
is capable of stimulating the vagus nerve to reduce heart rate, as well as high signal-
to-noise ratio recording of compound nerve action potential in the sciatic nerves of
rabbits.

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
119
For nonelectrical interfacing with the peripheral nerves, a battery-free, fully
implantable optoﬂuidic cuff system has been developed for wireless optogenetics
and pharmacological modulation of peripheral nerves [246]. This design consists of
a low-modulus, elastomeric cuff (∼3 MPa) which closely mimics the mechanical
modulus of the peripheral nerves than both metal- and polyimide-based devices.
Additionally, there are four channels of thin microﬂuidic structures, each of
which has cross-sectional areas of 60 μm by 60 μm that terminates at the cuff
for localized delivery of pharmacological agents from a base station containing
ﬂuid reservoirs, programmable pumping microsystems, and hardware for wireless
processes. Moreover, the cuff also houses high efﬁciency, microscale inorganic
light-emitting diodes for optically interfacing with the nerve. The use of a serpentine
design allows for mechanically compliant electronic interconnects to join the μ-
ILED to the base station. This device is capable of operating at ultralow power, in
freely moving animals, without the need for external device manipulation, and has
been shown to be stable and cause minimal nerve damage for up to 10 weeks.
Recently, in an effort to revolutionize electronic wearable devices that conform to
human movement, elastic and stretchable electronics or “elastronics” have emerged.
Micropatterned electrically conductive hydrogel (MECH)-based elastronic arrays
with Young’s modulus values in the kPa range have been developed, and their
suitability for localized low-voltage electrical stimulation of the sciatic nerve in live
mice has been demonstrated [192] (Fig. 10b). The conductive hydrogel was formed
by blending an ionic liquid 4-3(-butyl-1-imidazolio)-1-butanesulfonic acid triﬂate,
with the PEDOT:PSS solution which was subsequently dried to form an ion gel.
The dried sample exhibits aligned and interconnected microstructures that swell in
water to form the electrically conductive hydrogel. The PEDOT polymer network in
the hydrogel is interconnected and allows continuous electrical conduction. In vitro
soaking test showed that MECHs have stable impedances in PBS for 19 days. In vivo
biocompatibility study for 6 weeks showed that the MECH induced signiﬁcantly less
foreign body response than ﬂexible PET cuff electrodes.
Furthermore, non-transient silk nerve arrays have been developed by Nitish’s
group (Fig. 10c). This technology represents a paradigm shift in the way silk is
used, from resorbable to water-stable (non-transient). The construction of the device
uses SILK-SEAL and QUICK-SILK in which SILK-SEAL involves integration
of two ∼15-μm-thick dry silk layers serving as the substrate and the insulation,
sandwiching a conductive layer. QUICK-SILK employs a bilayer bandage of
resorbable silk and curable medical-grade elastomer to facilitate quick conformal
deployment into the tissue. A 3-month in vitro test and acute in vivo testing of this
device suggest the feasibility of the device to record stimulate or serve as scaffold
for regenerating nerves [62].
3.2
Flexible Intrafascicular PNS Electrodes
Despite increased invasiveness, intrafascicular electrodes provide a closer contact
with axons within a nerve bundle. By increasing axonal selectivity, we increase

120
E. Castagnola et al.
the likelihood of obtaining increased resolution of information. The insertion
of an intrafascicular electrode will inadvertently disrupt the blood-nerve barrier
(BNB), which consists of endoneurial microvessels within the nerve fascicle and
the surrounding perineurium [269]. The BNB restricts permeability between the
blood and the nerve; the endoneurium microenvironment is protected from drastic
concentration changes in the vascular and other extracellular space. Not only
the drastic changes to extracellular space due to BNB disruption trigger local
inﬂammation, the constant BNB agitation due to modulus mismatch between the
device and the nerve can further break down BNB, worsening the nerve health.
Miniaturizing the implant footprint while reducing the Young’s modulus of the
implanted device can reduce the acute and chronic agitation to the delicate nerve,
ultimately preserving device performance and tissue health.
3.2.1
Thin-Film Longitudinal Intrafascicular Electrodes
The thin-ﬁlm longitudinal intrafascicular electrodes (tf-LIFEs) and transverse
intrafascicular
multichannel
electrodes
(TIMEs)
are
ﬂexible
intrafascicular
electrodes made from polyimide substrates and with sputtered platinum electrode
contacts [257] (Fig. 10d). When implanted in the sciatic nerves, tf-LIFEs have been
demonstrated to selectively activate different muscle groups in the hind limb of rats.
This ﬂexible electrode is inserted via the use of Kevlar ﬁber attached to a needle.
The Kevlar guides the middle segment of the double-layer thin-ﬁlm electrode, and
the needle was used to puncture the nerve. Once the electrode is in place, the
Kevlar is cut and is disposed with the needle (Fig. 10d, right). Despite being only
10 μm in thickness, there was dramatic encapsulation, up to 20 μm in capsule
thickness [270] at 32 weeks post implantation. However, by replacing the substrate
with parylene C but retaining the same dimensions as the polyimide implant, there
was a signiﬁcantly larger capsule formation at 32 weeks, up to 50 μm in capsule
thickness [99]. The authors attributed the differences in foreign body response to
their differences in chemical structure and surface hydrophobicity. The aromatic
rings in polyimide are in stable conﬁgurations, whereas parylene C is known to
have non-saturated radicals at the carbon atoms that might yield differences in zeta
potentials that inﬂuence interaction with proteins at the substrate-tissue interface
[271, 272]. Moreover, some hydrophilic surfaces have been found to promote less
macrophage adhesion but a higher cytokine production [273]. While both materials
have contact angles ranging from 80 to 100◦, parylene C is slightly more hydrophilic
than polyimide [274, 275], which might lead to higher matrix deposition as a result
of a more severe inﬂammatory environment. More fundamental studies should
be conducted to test these potential mechanisms. Despite thick scar formation,
the axons outside of the scar remain relatively healthy for both polyimide and
parylene C.
3.2.2
Ultra-Flexible 3D Spiked Microelectrode Array
Using standard microfabrication processes, a unique, ultra-ﬂexible 3D spiked
microelectrode array has been developed using both polyimide as the substrate
and parylene C as the insulating material (Fig. 10e). These ﬂexible substrates

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
121
were paired with gold for electrical connection. To combine the ﬂexible insulating
substrate with the stiffer gold electrical contact, SU-8 pillars were fabricated on top
of the base gold substrate using the double-drawing lithography process. After the
ﬁrst drawing process, the device was heated to allow reﬂow of SU-8. This resulted in
a gradual connection between the spike structure and the bottom electrode, creating
improved electrical connectivity by sputtering additional metal [258]. For in vivo
validation of device functionality, a 500-μm spike height was chosen to interface
with the rat’s sciatic nerves (∼1 mm). The spike electrode topography enabled
recordings of small-amplitude nerve signals with high signal-to-noise ratio in an
acute setting (also see “Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor
Architectures for Neural Probing” chapter).
3.2.3
Carbon Nanotube-Incorporated Elastomeric Intrafascicular
Electrode
To maintain ﬂexibility while ensuring device resilience, carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
are an attractive candidate to be incorporated in PNS electrodes. Zheng et al.
reported a design of an elastomeric intrafascicular electrode made from a composite
of 12 wt% PEDOT-PEG copolymer, 8 wt% carbon nanotubes, and 80 wt% PDMS
(Fig. 10f). The composite is extruded from a 31-G hypodermic needle, humidity
cured, and coated with a thin layer of ﬂuorosilicone insulation. Electrode contact
is exposed by cutting off the tip of the electrode wire. The ﬁnished device has
a Young’s modulus of ∼660 kPa and more closely mimics the modulus to the
nerve tissue than polyimide-based devices. The electrode wires are inserted into
the nerve by ﬁrst penetrating the nerve with a 27-G hypodermic needle. The
needle is connected to a vacuum which feeds the electrode wire into the nerve of
interest. Once the electrode wire is in place, the needle is removed, and the wire is
secured onto the epineurium via sutures. Acute in vivo functionality showed that this
electrode wire is capable of selectively recruiting the gastrocnemius muscles when
placed at different locations of the sciatic nerve of rats. Chronically, the thickness
of encapsulation and macrophage inﬁltration around the elastomeric soft wire is
signiﬁcantly lower than a polyimide implant of the same dimension [259].
3.2.4
Regenerative PNS Electrodes
To interface with injured peripheral nerves, regenerative PNS electrodes may be
used. Many regenerative PNS electrodes use the sieve design or a combination of
the sieve and microchannels to be placed between the stumps of severed nerves
to stimulate and record from regenerating axons. Different ﬂexible materials have
been used as the substrates. Using similar fabrication techniques as the tf-LIFE
electrodes, sieve electrodes can be made from polyimide multilayer structure with
platinum metallization [276]. Macro-sieve electrodes (MSE) have been reported by
MacEwan et al. [277]. This sieve electrode contains nine large transition zones
for axonal regrowth, with areas for nerve regeneration ∼285 mm2 surrounded
by either platinum- or iridium-metalized electrode sites. The MSE can be used
with or without glial-derived neurotrophic factors for guiding and promoting
axonal regeneration. In vivo validation showed that at 3 months’ post-implant, the

122
E. Castagnola et al.
regenerated axons show healthy morphology, and stimulation of the regenerated
axons was capable of evoking innervated muscle contractions. Microchannel-based
regenerative scaffold reported by Srinivasan et al. consists of 100 μm × 100-μm
cross-sectional areas which support and direct the regeneration of axons [278]. This
interface utilizes top-and-bottom PDMS layers with SU-8 walls, which forms a
series of adjacent microchannels to allow axonal regeneration. In vivo evaluation
showed that the axons within the regenerated nerve showed a high degree of
organization and adoption of the microchannel architecture. Notably, spontaneous,
sensory evoked, and electrically evoked single and multiunit action potentials were
recorded at 5 months after implantation [278]. Musick et al. reported the design of a
multichannel neural recording regenerative microchannel electrode which consists
of an 8-by-12 matrix of parallel microchannels of 120 μm × 110-μm cross-
sectional area, and 4 mm in length [260] (Fig. 10g). Thin-gold ﬁlm was deposited
on PDMS membrane to maintain device elasticity. In vivo validation of the device
showed spiking activity from the sciatic nerves of rats after 3 months.
4
Conclusion and Future Prospective
Recent progress on material science, soft materials, and microfabrication techniques
opens the possibility of creating neural interfaces that can be more intimately
integrated with the neural tissue, providing tools for a deeper understanding of
the complex dynamics of the nervous system and more effective treatments to
neurological conditions. To realize the potential of these new classes of devices,
it is necessary to fully assess their longevity and stability and identify strategies to
translate these technologies into products and therapies that will improve the lives of
patients. Here, we have described the diverse strategies through which form factor
and material properties can be engineered to develop soft and ﬂexible devices for
CNS and PNS applications. Although advances in soft materials and manufacturing
techniques have progressed tremendously in producing ﬂexible neural interfaces,
many challenges remain to be addressed for these devices to be translated from
research into the clinic. Addressing these challenges requires interdisciplinary
efforts from neuroscientists, material scientists, engineers, and physicians.
It is widely accepted that reducing the form factor of the implant to the
subcellular scale (1–10 μm) could escape the immune response and maintain a
seamless interface without scarring. Reducing the width and thickness of thin-
ﬁlm device also provides the ultra-ﬂexibility which is beneﬁcial to reducing
mechanical mismatch and improving biocompatibility. However, reducing form
factors increases the requirement for material functionality and durability. For
example, thinner insulation and conducting leads are more prone to failure, such as
cracking and delamination, especially at points of defects. Additionally, mandatory
smaller electrode sites require advanced coatings for effective recording and
stimulation. Although functionality and tissue integration of different ultra-ﬂexible
and ultrasmall devices have been proven to be promising in chronic rodent models

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
123
[104–106], the long-term mechanical and electrochemical stability of these devices
needs to be further tested in vivo, in particular in large animal models.
Another challenge associated with the soft and ﬂexible probes is the difﬁculty
of handling and implantation. While this is less of a challenge for less invasive
devices, i.e., ECoG and cuff electrodes, there is an urgent need for the development
of automated methods for delivering soft and ﬂexible penetrating devices to the
desired location with high precision and minimal insertion trauma. The common
insertion methods that utilize temporary stiffening agents or rigid shuttles limit
the insertion precision and aggravate the acute neural damage due to the larger
insertion trauma [27, 29, 245] (see Sect. 2.1.3). A few alternative techniques have
been developed in order to automate the probe insertion [156, 201], such as the
ﬂuidic microdrives and the robotic strategy reported in Sect. 2.1.3 (Fig. 9c, d).
However, they have only been tested in small animals with a small number of
shanks or at superﬁcial depth. Signiﬁcant research efforts need to be devoted to
insertion procedures for high-channel count devices and for targeting deeper brain
regions. Furthermore, if such devices are intended for clinical application, safe
retrieval is a necessity, which is a daunting task. On the other hand, if a temporary
functional neural interface is required, e.g., for pre- and postoperative monitoring of
function in tumor and epilepsy neurosurgery, bioresorbable materials/devices offer
the incredible advantages of eliminating the risks and costs associated with surgical
extraction (see Sect. 1.1.5; Fig. 6).
The input/output connection from the control unit (experimental and/or ther-
apeutic hardware) to the soft neural electrode should be improved such that the
entire system matches the mechanical properties to the soft, delicate, and dynamic
environments encountered within the brain. Connectors and cables are still the most
used interconnect solutions in all current prototypes, while wireless systems are
rare. Wireless recording systems have been developed for freely moving animal
models. Wireless technology is still limited in terms of trade-offs between power
consumption, performance in data transmission, quality of signals, and device
size [279]. Transmission protocols and security are an area of research that need
extensive development. Moreover, it is important to receive data without the need
for a large number of cables and connectors that limit the mobility of the subjects,
and in behavioral studies where the animals are tethered to a recording system
[215]. Furthermore, unifying the mechanical property of the entire implantable
system can reduce recording artifacts due to stress imposed onto the electrical
connections. Further efforts will be needed for the development of systems that
integrate different active electronic functionalities (sensing, data processing, and
power transfer elements) into a single conformable system, i.e., soft electronics.
As an intermediate stage of soft-electronics development, one can design a hybrid
solution where some parts of the system (e.g., digitalization and communication
modules) will continue to be made with conventional rigid electronic elements
that will be paired to the soft interfaces. Adequate engineering strategies must
be developed to bridge the two worlds, from both an electrical and a mechanical
aspect [134, 228], starting from the miniaturization and developments of ad hoc
integrated circuits. Finally, to make the hybrid system implantable, they need to be

124
E. Castagnola et al.
encapsulated with inert materials to protect the electronics from failure due to the
biological ﬂuid percolation in physiological environment [228].
Some of the devices described here, such as grids for ECoG recording during
epilepsy and tumor resection [8, 101] and PNS electrodes for peripheral neural
prosthesis [69, 70], have been already tested in humans and will ultimately seek
clinical implementation for diagnostics and therapeutics. For clinical translation,
these implantable devices need to go through the rigorous and lengthy regulatory
approval process. For clinical approval of a new device, requirements are deﬁned by
regional regulation authorities [280]. The generally required tests are:
1. In vitro evaluation and validation of the mechanical robustness of the devices.
This requires the use of a speciﬁc electromechanical standardized test and
sterilization test.
2. Preclinical in vivo validation to assess the safety, long-term functionality, and
efﬁcacy in large animal models. Pigs or sheep are typically employed for
biocompatibility studies, while non-human primates are used in translational
research for applications in neural interfaces.
3. A clinical validation is required to demonstrate safety and effectiveness of the
device when in contact with the patient. The introduction of new materials
into medical devices requires additional tests such as cytotoxicity and systemic
toxicity tests.
Finally, all these steps need to be rigorously documented and archived for
future device certiﬁcation and commercialization. The timeline of the testing
and regulatory approval process can be lengthy, which could delay the use of
innovation in clinical practice. To ensure a smooth and speedy process, the material
selection and device design must take into account all the clinical translation
requirements and involve the input from regulatory agencies, starting from the stage
one of development. Ultimately, to achieve widespread adoption in clinics, the next
generation of soft and ﬂexible devices must outperform the existing clinical tools
and enable new treatment with dramatically improved therapeutic outcomes.
References
1. Jablensky, A., Johnson, R., Bunney, W., Cruz, M., Durkin, M., Familusi, J., Gourie-Devi, M.,
Jamison, D., Jenkins, R., Kaaya, S.: Neurological, psychiatric, and developmental disorders;
meeting the challenge in the developing world. In: Institute of Medicine. The National
Academies Press, Washington, DC (2001). https://doi.org/10.17226/10111
2. Nirmala, B.P., Vranda, M.N.: Burden, coping and functionality of the patients with neurolog-
ical disability availing treatment at neuro rehabilitation ward. Indian J. Neurosci. 3(3), 88–91
(2017)
3. Park, S., Loke, G., Fink, Y., Anikeeva, P.: Flexible ﬁber-based optoelectronics for neural
interfaces. Chem. Soc. Rev. 48(6), 1826–1852 (2019)
4. Moritz, C.T.: Now is the critical time for engineered neuroplasticity. Neurotherapeutics. 15(3),
628–634 (2018)

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
125
5. Chapman, C.A., Goshi, N., Seker, E.: Multifunctional neural interfaces for closed-loop
control of neural activity. Adv. Funct. Mater. 28(12), 1703523 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/
adfm.201703523
6. Elkin, B.S., Azeloglu, E.U., Costa, K.D., Morrison Iii, B.: Mechanical heterogeneity of the
rat hippocampus measured by atomic force microscope indentation. J. Neurotrauma. 24(5),
812–822 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1089/neu.2006.0169
7. Elkin, B.S., Ilankovan, A., Morrison III, B.: Age-dependent regional mechanical properties
of the rat hippocampus and cortex. J. Biomech. Eng. 132(1) (2009). https://doi.org/10.1115/
1.4000164
8. Sharp, A.A., Ortega, A.M., Restrepo, D., Curran-Everett, D., Gall, K.: In vivo penetration
mechanics and mechanical properties of mouse brain tissue at micrometer scales. IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 56(1), 45–53 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2008.2003261
9. Karimi, A., Shojaei, A., Tehrani, P.: Mechanical properties of the human spinal cord under
the compressive loading. J. Chem. Neuroanat. 86, 15–18 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jchemneu.2017.07.004
10. Ju, M.-S., Lin, C.-C.K., Chang, C.-T.: Researches on biomechanical properties and models of
peripheral nerves – a review. J. Biomech. Sci. Eng. 12(1), 16-00678 (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1299/jbse.16-00678
11. Borschel, G.H., Kia, K.F., Kuzon Jr., W.M., Dennis, R.G.: Mechanical properties of acel-
lular peripheral nerve. J. Surg. Res. 114(2), 133–139 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-
4804(03)00255-5
12. Ogneva, I.V., Lebedev, D.V., Shenkman, B.S.: Transversal stiffness and Young’s modulus of
single ﬁbers from rat soleus muscle probed by atomic force microscopy. Biophys. J. 98(3),
418–424 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2009.10.028
13. Weltman, A., Yoo, J., Meng, E.: Flexible, penetrating brain probes enabled by advances
in polymer microfabrication. Micromachines (Basel). 7(10), 180 (2016). https://doi.org/
10.3390/mi7100180
14. Maikos, J.T., Elias, R.A.I., Shreiber, D.I.: Mechanical properties of Dura mater from the
rat brain and spinal cord. J. Neurotrauma. 25(1), 38–51 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1089/
neu.2007.0348
15. Choi, H.-Y.: Numerical human head model for traumatic injury assessment. KSME Int. J.
15(7), 995–1001 (2001)
16. McGarvey, K.A., Lee, J.M., Boughner, D.R.: Mechanical suitability of glycerol-preserved
human dura mater for construction of prosthetic cardiac valves. Biomaterials. 5(2), 109–117
(1984). https://doi.org/10.1016/0142-9612(84)90011-5
17. González-González, M.A., Kanneganti, A., Joshi-Imre, A., Hernandez-Reynoso, A.G., Ben-
dale, G., Modi, R., Ecker, M., Khurram, A., Cogan, S.F., Voit, W.E.: Thin ﬁlm multi-electrode
softening cuffs for selective neuromodulation. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 1–15 (2018)
18. Szostak, K.M., Grand, L., Constandinou, T.G.: Neural interfaces for intracortical recording:
requirements, fabrication methods, and characteristics. Front. Neurosci. 11, 665 (2017)
19. Zelechowski, M., Valle, G., Raspopovic, S.: A computational model to design neural
interfaces for lower-limb sensory neuroprostheses. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 17(1), 1–13 (2020)
20. Greiner, N., Barra, B., Schiavone, G., James, N., Falleger, F., Borgognon, S., Lacour, S.,
Bloch, J., Courtine, G., Capogrosso, M.: Recruitment of upper-limb motoneurons with
epidural electrical stimulation of the primate cervical spinal cord. Nat. Commun. 12(435),
1–19 (2021)
21. Mondello, S.E., Kasten, M.R., Horner, P.J., Moritz, C.T.: Therapeutic intraspinal stimulation
to generate activity and promote long-term recovery. Front. Neurosci. 8, 21 (2014)
22. Fernández, E., Greger, B., House, P.A., Aranda, I., Botella, C., Albisua, J., Soto-Sánchez,
C., Alfaro, A., Normann, R.A.: Acute human brain responses to intracortical microelectrode
arrays: challenges and future prospects. Front. Neuroeng. 7, 24 (2014)
23. Rijnbeek, E.H., Eleveld, N., Olthuis, W.: Update on peripheral nerve electrodes for closed-
loop neuroprosthetics. Front. Neurosci. 12, 350 (2018)

126
E. Castagnola et al.
24. Castagnola, E., Ansaldo, A., Maggiolini, E., Ius, T., Skrap, M., Ricci, D., Fadiga, L.: Smaller,
softer, lower-impedance electrodes for human neuroprosthesis: a pragmatic approach. Front.
Neuroeng. 7, 8 (2014)
25. Polikov, V.S., Tresco, P.A., Reichert, W.M.: Response of brain tissue to chronically implanted
neural electrodes. J. Neurosci. Methods. 148, 1–18 (2005)
26. Agorelius, J., Tsanakalis, F., Friberg, A., Thorbergsson, P.T., Pettersson, L.M.E., Schouen-
borg, J.: An array of highly ﬂexible electrodes with a tailored conﬁguration locked by gelatin
during implantation – initial evaluation in cortex cerebri of awake rats. Front. Neurosci. 9,
331 (2015)
27. Luan, L., Wei, X., Zhao, Z., Siegel, J.J., Potnis, O., Tuppen, C.A., Lin, S., Kazmi, S., Fowler,
R.A., Holloway, S.: Ultraﬂexible nanoelectronic probes form reliable, glial scar–free neural
integration. Sci. Adv. 3(2), e1601966 (2017)
28. Khodagholy, D., Gelinas, J.N., Thesen, T., Doyle, W., Devinsky, O., Malliaras, G.G., Buzsáki,
G.: NeuroGrid: recording action potentials from the surface of the brain. Nat. Neurosci. 18(2),
310–315 (2015)
29. Zhao, Z., Li, X., He, F., Wei, X., Lin, S., Xie, C.: Parallel, minimally-invasive implantation of
ultra-ﬂexible neural electrode arrays. J. Neural Eng. 16(3), 035001 (2019)
30. Beer, F.P.: Vector mechanics for engineering. McGraw-Hill Education, New York City (1972)
31. Wellman, S.M., Eles, J.R., Ludwig, K.A., Seymour, J.P., Michelson, N.J., McFadden, W.E.,
Vazquez, A.L., Kozai, T.D.: A materials roadmap to functional neural interface design. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 28(12), 1701269 (2018)
32. Seo, J.H., Zhang, K., Kim, M., Zhao, D., Yang, H., Zhou, W., Ma, Z.: Flexible phototransistors
based on single-crystalline silicon nanomembranes. Adv. Opt Mater. 4(1), 120–125 (2016)
33. Liu, D., Zhou, W., Ma, Z.: Semiconductor nanomembrane-based light-emitting and photode-
tecting devices. In: Photonics 2016, vol. 2, p. 40. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute
(2016). https://doi.org/10.3390/photonics3020040
34. Viventi, J., Kim, D.-H., Vigeland, L., Frechette, E.S., Blanco, J.A., Kim, Y.-S., Avrin, A.E.,
Tiruvadi, V.R., Hwang, S.-W., Vanleer, A.C.: Flexible, foldable, actively multiplexed, high-
density electrode array for mapping brain activity in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 14(12), 1599 (2011)
35. Escabí, M.A., Read, H.L., Viventi, J., Kim, D.-H., Higgins, N.C., Storace, D.A., Liu, A.S.,
Gifford, A.M., Burke, J.F., Campisi, M.: A high-density, high-channel count, multiplexed
μECoG array for auditory-cortex recordings. J. Neurophysiol. 112(6), 1566–1583 (2014)
36. Sim, K., Rao, Z., Li, Y., Yang, D., Yu, C.: Curvy surface conformal ultra-thin transfer printed
Si optoelectronic penetrating microprobe arrays. NPJ Flex. Electron. 2(1), 2 (2018)
37. Kozai, T.D.Y., Langhals, N.B., Patel, P.R., Deng, X., Zhang, H., Smith, K.L., Lahann, J.,
Kotov, N.A., Kipke, D.R.: Ultrasmall implantable composite microelectrodes with bioactive
surfaces for chronic neural interfaces. Nat. Mater. 11(12), 1065–1073 (2012)
38. Schwerdt, H.N., Kim, M.J., Amemori, S., Homma, D., Yoshida, T., Shimazu, H., Yerram-
reddy, H., Karasan, E., Langer, R., Graybiel, A.M.: Subcellular probes for neurochemical
recording from multiple brain sites. Lab Chip. 17(6), 1104–1115 (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1039/C1106LC01398H
39. Vitale, F., Summerson, S.R., Aazhang, B., Kemere, C., Pasquali, M.: Neural stimulation and
recording with bidirectional, soft carbon nanotube ﬁber microelectrodes. ACS Nano. 9(4),
4465–4474 (2015)
40. Li, J., Song, E., Chiang, C.-H., Yu, K.J., Koo, J., Du, H., Zhong, Y., Hill, M., Wang,
C., Zhang, J.: Conductively coupled ﬂexible silicon electronic systems for chronic neural
electrophysiology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115(41), E9542–E9549 (2018)
41. Fang, H., Zhao, J., Yu, K.J., Song, E., Farimani, A.B., Chiang, C.-H., Jin, X., Xue, Y., Xu, D.,
Du, W.: Ultrathin, transferred layers of thermally grown silicon dioxide as bioﬂuid barriers
for biointegrated ﬂexible electronic systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113(42), 11682–11687
(2016)
42. Schwerdt, H.N., Zhang, E., Kim, M.J., Yoshida, T., Stanwicks, L., Amemori, S., Dagdeviren,
H.E., Langer, R., Cima, M.J., Graybiel, A.M.: Cellular-scale probes enable stable chronic

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
127
subsecond monitoring of dopamine neurochemicals in a rodent model. Commun. Biol. 1(1),
144 (2018)
43. Guitchounts, G., Markowitz, J.E., Liberti, W.A., Gardner, T.J.: A carbon-ﬁber electrode array
for long-term neural recording. J. Neural Eng. 10(4), 046016 (2013)
44. Patel, P.R., Zhang, H., Robbins, M.T., Nofar, J.B., Marshall, S.P., Kobylarek, M.J., Kozai,
T.D., Kotov, N.A., Chestek, C.A.: Chronic in vivo stability assessment of carbon ﬁber
microelectrode arrays. J. Neural Eng. 13(6), 066002 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-
2560/13/6/066002
45. Schwerdt, H.N., Shimazu, H., Amemori, K.-i., Amemori, S., Tierney, P.L., Gibson, D.J.,
Hong, S., Yoshida, T., Langer, R., Cima, M.J.: Long-term dopamine neurochemical monitor-
ing in primates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114(50), 13260–13265 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1713756114
46. Schwerdt, H.N., Kim, M., Karasan, E., Amemori, S., Homma, D., Shimazu, H., Yoshida, T.,
Langer, R., Graybiel, A.M., Cima, M.J.: Subcellular electrode arrays for multisite recording of
dopamine in vivo. In: 2017 IEEE 30th international conference on micro electro mechanical
systems (MEMS), pp 549–552 (2017)
47. Patel, P.R., Na, K., Zhang, H., Kozai, T.D., Kotov, N.A., Yoon, E., Chestek, C.A.: Insertion of
linear 8.4 μm diameter 16 channel carbon ﬁber electrode arrays for single unit recordings. J.
Neural Eng. 12(4), 046009 (2015)
48. Constantin, C.P., Aﬂori, M., Damian, R.F., Rusu, R.D.: Biocompatibility of polyimides: a
mini-review. Materials. 12(19), 3166 (2019)
49. Rossini, P.M., Micera, S., Benvenuto, A., Carpaneto, J., Cavallo, G., Citi, L., Cipriani, C.,
Denaro, L., Denaro, V., Di Pino, G.: Double nerve intraneural interface implant on a human
amputee for robotic hand control. Clin. Neurophysiol. 121(5), 777–783 (2010)
50. Noh, K.N., Park, S.I., Qazi, R., Zou, Z., Mickle, A.D., Grajales-Reyes, J.G., Jang, K.I., Gereau
IV, R.W., Xiao, J., Rogers, J.A.: Miniaturized, battery-free optoﬂuidic systems with potential
for wireless pharmacology and optogenetics. Small. 14(4), 1702479 (2018)
51. Ecker, M., Joshi-Imre, A., Modi, R., Frewin, C.L., Garcia-Sandoval, A., Maeng, J., Gutierrez-
Heredia, G., Pancrazio, J.J., Voit, W.E.: From softening polymers to multimaterial based
bioelectronic devices. Multifunct. Mater. 2(1), 012001 (2018)
52. Arreaga-Salas, D.E., Avendaño-Bolívar, A., Simon, D., Reit, R., Garcia-Sandoval, A., Ren-
naker, R.L., Voit, W.: Integration of high-charge-injection-capacity electrodes onto polymer
softening neural interfaces. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 7(48), 26614–26623 (2015)
53. Shanmuganathan, K., Capadona, J.R., Rowan, S.J., Weder, C.: Stimuli-responsive mechani-
cally adaptive polymer nanocomposites. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 2(1), 165–174 (2010)
54. Campbell, P.K., Jones, K.E., Huber, R.J., Horch, K.W., Normann, R.A.: A silicon-based,
three-dimensional neural interface: manufacturing processes for an intracortical electrode
array. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 38(8), 758–768 (1991)
55. Wise, K.D., Angell, J.B., Starr, A.: An integrated-circuit approach to extracellular microelec-
trodes. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 3, 238–247 (1970)
56. Yoo, J.-M., Song, J.-I., Tathireddy, P., Solzbacher, F., Rieth, L.W.: Hybrid laser and reactive
ion etching of Parylene-C for deinsulation of a Utah electrode array. J. Micromech. Microeng.
22(10), 105036 (2012)
57. Musallam, S., Bak, M.J., Troyk, P.R., Andersen, R.A.: A ﬂoating metal microelectrode array
for chronic implantation. J Neurosci Methods. 160, 122–127 (2007)
58. Nicolelis, M.A., Lebedev, M.A.: Principles of neural ensemble physiology underlying the
operation of brain–machine interfaces. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10(7), 530–540 (2009)
59. De Vittorio, M., Martiradonna, L., Assad, J.: Nanotechnology and neuroscience: nano-
electronic, photonic and mechanical neuronal interfacing, vol. 8. Springer, New York,
Heidelberg, Dordrecht, London (2014)
60. Kim, D.-H., Viventi, J., Amsden, J.J., Xiao, J., Vigeland, L., Kim, Y.-S., Blanco, J.A.,
Panilaitis, B., Frechette, E.S., Contreras, D.: Dissolvable ﬁlms of silk ﬁbroin for ultrathin
conformal bio-integrated electronics. Nat. Mater. 9(6), 511–517 (2010)

128
E. Castagnola et al.
61. Minev, I.R., Musienko, P., Hirsch, A., Barraud, Q., Wenger, N., Moraud, E.M., Gandar, J.,
Capogrosso, M., Milekovic, T., Asboth, L.: Electronic dura mater for long-term multimodal
neural interfaces. Science. 347(6218), 159–163 (2015)
62. Patil, A.C., Bandla, A., Liu, Y.-H., Luo, B., Thakor, N.V.: Nontransient silk sandwich
for soft, conformal bionic links. Mater. Today. 32, 68–83 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.mattod.2019.08.007
63. Kim, Y., Zhu, J., Yeom, B., Di Prima, M., Su, X., Kim, J.-G., Yoo, S.J., Uher, C., Kotov,
N.A.: Stretchable nanoparticle conductors with self-organized conductive pathways. Nature.
500(7460), 59 (2013)
64. Kim, B.J., Meng, E.: Review of polymer MEMS micromachining. J. Micromech. Microeng.
26(1), 013001 (2015)
65. Rubehn, B., Stieglitz, T.: In vitro evaluation of the long-term stability of polyimide as a
material for neural implants. Biomaterials. 31(13), 3449–3458 (2010)
66. Wurth, S., Capogrosso, M., Raspopovic, S., Gandar, J., Federici, G., Kinany, N., Cutrone, A.,
Piersigilli, A., Pavlova, N., Guiet, R.: Long-term usability and bio-integration of polyimide-
based intra-neural stimulating electrodes. Biomaterials. 122, 114–129 (2017)
67. Jiang, X., Sui, X., Lu, Y., Yan, Y., Zhou, C., Li, L., Ren, Q., Chai, X.: In vitro and in vivo
evaluation of a photosensitive polyimide thin-ﬁlm microelectrode array suitable for epiretinal
stimulation. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 10(1), 48 (2013)
68. Rembado, I., Castagnola, E., Turella, L., Ius, T., Budai, R., Ansaldo, A., Angotzi, G.N.,
Debertoldi, F., Ricci, D., Skrap, M.: Independent component decomposition of human
somatosensory evoked potentials recorded by micro-electrocorticography. Int. J. Neural Syst.
27(4), 1650052 (2017)
69. Petrini, F.M., Valle, G., Bumbasirevic, M., Barberi, F., Bortolotti, D., Cvancara, P., Hiair-
rassary, A., Mijovic, P., Sverrisson, A.Ö., Pedrocchi, A.: Enhancing functional abilities
and cognitive integration of the lower limb prosthesis. Sci Transl Med. 11(512), eaav8939
(2019)
70. Petrini, F.M., Bumbasirevic, M., Valle, G., Ilic, V., Mijovi´c, P., ˇCvanˇcara, P., Barberi,
F., Katic, N., Bortolotti, D., Andreu, D.: Sensory feedback restoration in leg amputees
improves walking speed, metabolic cost and phantom pain. Nat. Med. 25(9), 1356–1363
(2019)
71. Tan, C.P., Craighead, H.G.: Surface engineering and patterning using parylene for biological
applications. Materials. 3(3), 1803–1832 (2010)
72. Davis, E.M., Benetatos, N.M., Regnault, W.F., Winey, K.I., Elabd, Y.A.: The inﬂuence of
thermal history on structure and water transport in Parylene C coatings. Polymer. 52(23),
5378–5386 (2011)
73. Meng, J.K.E.: Micromachining of Parylene C for bioMEMS Brian. Polym. Adv. Technol. 27,
564–576 (2016)
74. TECH P Parylene Properties. http://www.parylene.com/
75. Brancato, L., Decrop, D., Lammertyn, J., Puers, R.: Surface nanostructuring of Parylene-C
coatings for blood contacting implants. Materials. 11(7), 1109 (2018)
76. Gołda, M., Brzychczy-Włoch, M., Faryna, M., Engvall, K., Kotarba, A.: Oxygen plasma
functionalization of parylene C coating for implants surface: nanotopography and active sites
for drug anchoring. Mater. Sci. Eng. C. 33(7), 4221–4227 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.msec.2013.06.014
77. Omnexus Comprehensive guide on Polyimide (PI). https://omnexus.specialchem.com/
78. Lee, C., Seo, J., Shul, Y., Han, H.: Optical properties of polyimide thin ﬁlms. Effect of
chemical structure and morphology. Polym. J. 35(7), 578–585 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1295/
polymj.35.578
79. Xu, F.J., Zhao, J.P., Kang, E.T., Neoh, K.G.: Surface functionalization of polyimide ﬁlms
via chloromethylation and surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization. Ind. Eng.
Chem. Res. 46(14), 4866–4873 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1021/ie0701367
80. Feng, B., Xu, K., Huang, A.: Synthesis of graphene oxide/polyimide mixed matrix mem-
branes for desalination. RSC Adv. 7(4), 2211–2217 (2017)

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
129
81. McKeen, L.: 3 – introduction to the physical, mechanical, and thermal properties of plastics
and elastomers. In: McKeen, L. (ed.) The effect of sterilization on plastics and elastomers, 3rd
edn, pp. 57–84. William Andrew Publishing, Boston (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-
4557-2598-4.00003-4
82. Xu, T., Yoo, J.H., Babu, S., Roy, S., Lee, J.-B., Lu, H.: Characterization of the mechanical
behavior of SU-8 at microscale by viscoelastic analysis. J. Micromech. Microeng. 26(10),
105001 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/26/10/105001
83. Ayad Ghannam, C.V., Bourrier, D.: Thierry Parra dielectric microwave characterization of the
SU-8 thick resin used in an above-IC process. In: European microwave conference, Rome,
Sept 2009 (2016)
84. Blagoi, G., Keller, S., Johansson, A., Boisen, A., Dufva, M.: Functionalization of SU-8
photoresist surfaces with IgG proteins. Appl. Surf. Sci. 255(5 Part 2), 2896–2902 (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2008.08.089
85. Gao, Z., Henthorn, D.B., Kim, C.-S.: Enhanced wettability of an SU-8 photoresist through
a photografting procedure for bioanalytical device applications. J. Micromech. Microeng.
18(4), 045013 (2008)
86. Roch, I., Bidaud, P., Collard, D., Buchaillot, L.: Fabrication and characterization of an SU-8
gripper actuated by a shape memory alloy thin ﬁlm. J. Micromech. Microeng. 13(2), 330–336
(2003). https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/13/2/323
87. Lai, J.-L., Liao, C.-J., G-DJ, S.: Using an SU-8 photoresist structure and cytochrome C thin
ﬁlm sensing material for a microbolometer. Sensors (Basel). 12(12), 16390–16403 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.3390/s121216390
88. Armani, D., Liu, C., Aluru, N.: Re-conﬁgurable ﬂuid circuits by PDMS elastomer micro-
machining. In: Technical digest. IEEE international MEMS 99 conference. Twelfth IEEE
international conference on micro electro mechanical systems (Cat. No. 99CH36291), 21 Jan,
pp. 222–227 (1999). https://doi.org/10.1109/MEMSYS.1999.746817.
89. Mark, J.E.: Polymer data handbook. Oxford University Press, New York (2009)
90. Zhang, J., Chen, Y., Brook, M.A.: Facile functionalization of PDMS elastomer surfaces using
Thiol–Ene click chemistry. Langmuir. 29(40), 12432–12442 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1021/
la403425d
91. Frewin, C.L., Ecker, M., Joshi-Imre, A., Kamgue, J., Waddell, J., Danda, V.R., Stiller, A.M.,
Voit, W.E., Pancrazio, J.J.: Electrical properties of Thiol-ene-based shape memory polymers
intended for ﬂexible electronics. Polymers (Basel). 11(5), 902 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/
polym11050902
92. Park, J.K., Kim, S.: Droplet manipulation on a structured shape memory polymer surface.
Lab Chip. 17(10), 1793–1801 (2017)
93. Muller, R.S., Kim, J., Cho, D.-iD.: Why is (111) Silicon a better mechanical material for
MEMS? Paper presented at the Transducers ‘01 Eurosensors XV. Berlin/Heidelberg (2001)
94. Tsuchiya, T.: Tensile testing of silicon thin ﬁlms. Fatigue Fract. Eng. Mater. Struct. 28(8),
665–674 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2695.2005.00910.x
95. AZoM: Silicon (Si) semiconductors. https://www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=8346
(2013)
96. Golabchi, A., Woeppel, K.M., Li, X., Lagenaur, C.F., Cui, X.T.: Neuroadhesive protein
coating improves the chronic performance of neuroelectronics in mouse brain. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 155, 112096 (2020)
97. Golabchi, A., Wu, B., Cao, B., Bettinger, C.J., Cui, X.T.: Zwitterionic polymer/polydopamine
coating reduce acute inﬂammatory tissue responses to neural implants. Biomaterials. 225,
119519 (2019)
98. Zheng, X.S., Snyder, N.R., Woeppel, K., Barengo, J.H., Li, X., Eles, J., Kolarcik, C.L., Cui,
X.T.: A superoxide scavenging coating for improving tissue response to neural implants. Acta
Biomater. 99, 72–83 (2019)
99. de la Oliva, N., Mueller, M., Stieglitz, T., Navarro, X., del Valle, J.: On the use of Parylene
C polymer as substrate for peripheral nerve electrodes. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 5965 (2018). https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-24502-z

130
E. Castagnola et al.
100. Castagnola, V., Descamps, E., Lecestre, A., Dahan, L., Remaud, J., Nowak, L.G., Bergaud,
C.: Parylene-based ﬂexible neural probes with PEDOT coated surface for brain stimulation
and recording. Biosens. Bioelectron. 67, 450–457 (2015)
101. Lecomte, A., Degache, A., Descamps, E., Dahan, L., Bergaud, C.: Biostability assessment of
ﬂexible parylene c-based implantable sensor in wireless chronic neural recording. Procedia
Eng. 168, 189–192 (2016)
102. Nemani, K.V., Moodie, K.L., Brennick, J.B., Su, A., Gimi, B.: In vitro and in vivo evaluation
of SU-8 biocompatibility. Mater. Sci. Eng. C. 33(7), 4453–4459 (2013)
103. Feng, R., Farris, R.J.: Inﬂuence of processing conditions on the thermal and mechanical
properties of SU8 negative photoresist coatings. J. Micromech. Microeng. 13(1), 80 (2002)
104. Yang, X., Zhou, T., Zwang, T.J., Hong, G., Zhao, Y., Viveros, R.D., Fu, T.-M., Gao, T., Lieber,
C.M.: Bioinspired neuron-like electronics. Nat. Mater. 18(5), 510–517 (2019)
105. Hong, G., Yang, X., Zhou, T., Lieber, C.M.: Mesh electronics: a new paradigm for tissue-like
brain probes. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 50, 33–41 (2018)
106. Xie, C., Liu, J., Fu, T.-M., Dai, X., Zhou, W., Lieber, C.M.: Three-dimensional macroporous
nanoelectronic networks as minimally invasive brain probes. Nat. Mater. 14(12), 1286–1292
(2015)
107. Mata, A., Fleischman, A.J., Roy, S.: Characterization of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
properties for biomedical micro/nanosystems. Biomed. Microdevices. 7(4), 281–293 (2005)
108. Jothimuthu, P., Carroll, A., Bhagat, A.A.S., Lin, G., Mark, J.E., Papautsky, I.: Photodeﬁnable
PDMS thin ﬁlms for microfabrication applications. J. Micromech. Microeng. 19(4), 045024
(2009)
109. Tybrandt, K., Khodagholy, D., Dielacher, B., Stauffer, F., Renz, A.F., Buzsáki, G., Vörös,
J.: High-density stretchable electrode grids for chronic neural recording. Adv. Mater. 30(15),
1706520 (2018)
110. Mazurek, P., Vudayagiri, S., Skov, A.L.: How to tailor ﬂexible silicone elastomers with
mechanical integrity: a tutorial review. Chem. Soc. Rev. 48(6), 1448–1464 (2019)
111. Poole-Warren, L., Martens, P., Green, R.: Biosynthetic polymers for medical applications.
Woodhead Publishing (2015)
112. Samineni, V.K., Yoon, J., Crawford, K.E., Jeong, Y.R., McKenzie, K.C., Shin, G., Xie, Z.,
Sundaram, S.S., Li, Y., Yang, M.Y.: Fully implantable, battery-free wireless optoelectronic
devices for spinal optogenetics. Pain. 158(11), 2108 (2017)
113. Mickle, A.D., Won, S.M., Noh, K.N., Yoon, J., Meacham, K.W., Xue, Y., McIlvried, L.A.,
Copits, B.A., Samineni, V.K., Crawford, K.E.: A wireless closed-loop system for optogenetic
peripheral neuromodulation. Nature. 565(7739), 361 (2019)
114. Do, D.-H., Ecker, M., Voit, W.E.: Characterization of a thiol-ene/acrylate-based polymer for
neuroprosthetic implants. ACS Omega. 2(8), 4604–4611 (2017)
115. González-González, M.A., Kanneganti, A., Joshi-Imre, A., Hernandez-Reynoso, A.G., Ben-
dale, G., Modi, R., Ecker, M., Khurram, A., Cogan, S.F., Voit, W.E.: Thin ﬁlm multi-electrode
softening cuffs for selective neuromodulation. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 16390 (2018)
116. Garcia-Sandoval, A., Pal, A., Mishra, A.M., Sherman, S., Parikh, A.R., Joshi-Imre, A.,
Arreaga-Salas, D., Gutierrez-Heredia, G., Duran-Martinez, A.C., Nathan, J.: Chronic soft-
ening spinal cord stimulation arrays. J. Neural Eng. 15(4), 045002 (2018)
117. Hosseini, S.M., Rihani, R., Batchelor, B., Stiller, A.M., Pancrazio, J.J., Voit, W.E., Ecker,
M.: Softening shape memory polymer substrates for bioelectronic devices with improved
hydrolytic stability. Front. Mater. 5, 66 (2018)
118. Shanmuganathan, K., Capadona, J.R., Rowan, S.J., Weder, C.: Stimuli-responsive mechani-
cally adaptive polymer nanocomposites. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 2(1), 165–174 (2009)
119. Liu, Y., Li, Y., Yang, G., Zheng, X., Zhou, S.: Multi-stimulus-responsive shape-memory
polymer nanocomposite network cross-linked by cellulose nanocrystals. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces. 7(7), 4118–4126 (2015)
120. Rockwood, D.N., Preda, R.C., Yücel, T., Wang, X., Lovett, M.L., Kaplan, D.L.: Materials
fabrication from Bombyx mori silk ﬁbroin. Nat. Protoc. 6(10), 1612 (2011)

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
131
121. Tao, H., Kaplan, D.L., Omenetto, F.G.: Silk materials – a road to sustainable high technology.
Adv. Mater. 24(21), 2824–2837 (2012)
122. Lu, Q., Hu, X., Wang, X., Kluge, J.A., Lu, S., Cebe, P., Kaplan, D.L.: Water-insoluble silk
ﬁlms with silk I structure. Acta Biomater. 6(4), 1380–1387 (2010)
123. Alba, N., Du, Z., Catt, K., Kozai, T., Cui, X.: In vivo electrochemical analysis of a
PEDOT/MWCNT neural electrode coating. Biosensors. 5(4), 618–646 (2015)
124. Kozai, T.D., Alba, N.A., Zhang, H., Kotov, N.A., Gaunt, R.A., Cui, X.T.: Nanostructured
coatings for improved charge delivery to neurons. In: Nanotechnology and neuroscience:
nano-electronic, photonic and mechanical neuronal interfacing, pp. 71–134. Springer
Science+Business Media, New York (2014)
125. Kolarcik, C.L., Luebben, S.D., Sapp, S.A., Hanner, J., Snyder, N., Kozai, T.D.Y., Chang, E.,
Nabity, J.A., Nabity, S.T., Lagenaur, C.F.: Elastomeric and soft conducting microwires for
implantable neural interfaces. Soft Matter. 11(24), 4847–4861 (2015)
126. Castagnola, E., Ansaldo, A., Maggiolini, E., Angotzi, G.N., Skrap, M., Ricci, D., Fadiga, L.:
Biologically compatible neural interface to safely couple nanocoated electrodes to the surface
of the brain. ACS Nano. 7(5), 3887–3895 (2013)
127. Abidian, M.R., Martin, D.C.: Experimental and theoretical characterization of implantable
neural microelectrodes modiﬁed with conducting polymer nanotubes. Biomaterials. 29(9),
1273–1283 (2008)
128. Ansaldo, A., Castagnola, E., Maggiolini, E., Fadiga, L., Ricci, D.: Superior electrochemical
performance of carbon nanotubes directly grown on sharp microelectrodes. ACS Nano. 5(3),
2206–2214 (2011)
129. Fan, J.A., Yeo, W.-H., Su, Y., Hattori, Y., Lee, W., Jung, S.-Y., Zhang, Y., Liu, Z., Cheng, H.,
Falgout, L.: Fractal design concepts for stretchable electronics. Nat. Commun. 5, 3266 (2014)
130. Qi, D., Liu, Z., Liu, Y., Jiang, Y., Leow, W.R., Pal, M., Pan, S., Yang, H., Wang, Y.,
Zhang, X.: Highly stretchable, compliant, polymeric microelectrode arrays for in vivo
electrophysiological interfacing. Adv. Mater. 29(40), 1702800 (2017)
131. Nimbalkar, S., Castagnola, E., Balasubramani, A., Scarpellini, A., Samejima, S., Kho-
rasani, A., Boissenin, A., Thongpang, S., Moritz, C., Kassegne, S.: Ultra-capacitive carbon
neural probe allows simultaneous long-term electrical stimulations and high-resolution
neurotransmitter detection. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 1–14 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
41018-25198-x
132. Abidian, M.R., Martin, D.C.: Multifunctional nanobiomaterials for neural interfaces. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 19(4), 573–585 (2009)
133. Yuk, H., Lu, B., Zhao, X.: Hydrogel bioelectronics. Chem. Soc. Rev. 48(6), 1642–1667 (2019)
134. Fallegger, F., Schiavone, G., Lacour, S.P.: Conformable hybrid systems for implantable
bioelectronic interfaces. Adv. Mater. 32, 1903904 (2019)
135. Kozai, T.D., Gugel, Z., Li, X., Gilgunn, P.J., Khilwani, R., Ozdoganlar, O.B., Fedder, G.K.,
Weber, D.J., Cui, X.T.: Chronic tissue response to carboxymethyl cellulose based dissolvable
insertion needle for ultra-small neural probes. Biomaterials. 35(34), 9255–9268 (2014)
136. Lacour, S.P., Chan, D., Wagner, S., Li, T., Suo, Z.: Mechanisms of reversible stretchability of
thin metal ﬁlms on elastomeric substrates. Appl. Phys. Lett. 88(20), 204103 (2006)
137. Zhu, B., Gong, S., Cheng, W.: Softening gold for elastronics. Chem. Soc. Rev. 48(6), 1668–
1711 (2019)
138. Gray, D.S., Tien, J., Chen, C.S.: High-conductivity elastomeric electronics. Adv. Mater. 16(5),
393–397 (2004)
139. AZoM:
Gold
–
properties
and
applications
of
gold.
https://www.azom.com/
article.aspx?ArticleID=598 (2001)
140. Johnson, P.B., Christy, R.W.: Optical constants of the noble metals. Phys. Rev. B. 6(12), 4370–
4379 (1972). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.6.4370
141. Knake, H., Merker, J., Lupton, D., Topfer, M.: High temperature mechanical properties of the
platinum group metalselastic properties of platinum, rhodium and iridium and their alloys at
high temperatures. Platinum Metals Rev. 45(2), 50–100 (2001)

132
E. Castagnola et al.
142. AZoM:
Platinum
(Pt)
–
properties,
applications.
https://www.azom.com/
article.aspx?ArticleID=9235 (2013)
143. Ambrosch-Draxl, C., Werner, W., Glantschnig, K.: Optical constants and inelastic electron-
scattering data for 17 elemental metals. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data. 38, 1013–1092 (2009)
144. AZoM:
Iridium
–
properties
and
applications.
https://www.azom.com/
article.aspx?ArticleID=1700 (2002)
145. Windt, D.L., Cash Jr., W.C., Scott, M., Arendt, P., Newnam, B., Fisher, R.F., Swartzlander,
A.B.: Optical constants for thin ﬁlms of Ti, Zr, Nb, Mo, Ru, Rh, Pd, Ag, Hf, Ta, W, Re, Ir, Os,
Pt, and Au from 24 A to 1216 A. Appl. Opt. 27(2), 246–278 (1988). https://doi.org/10.1364/
ao.27.000246
146. AZoM: Tungsten. https://www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=614 (2001)
147. Ordal, M.A., Bell, R.J., Alexander Jr., R.W., Newquist, L.A., Querry, M.R.: Optical properties
of Al, Fe, Ti, Ta, W, and Mo at submillimeter wavelengths. Appl. Opt. 27(6), 1203–1209
(1988). https://doi.org/10.1364/ao.27.001203
148. Gong, S., Zhao, Y., Shi, Q., Wang, Y., Yap, L.W., Cheng, W.: Self-assembled ultrathin gold
nanowires as highly transparent, conductive and stretchable supercapacitor. Electroanalysis.
28(6), 1298–1304 (2016)
149. Gong, S., Schwalb, W., Wang, Y., Chen, Y., Tang, Y., Si, J., Shirinzadeh, B., Cheng, W.: A
wearable and highly sensitive pressure sensor with ultrathin gold nanowires. Nat. Commun.
5, 3132 (2014)
150. Guo, C.F., Sun, T., Liu, Q., Suo, Z., Ren, Z.: Highly stretchable and transparent nanomesh
electrodes made by grain boundary lithography. Nat. Commun. 5, 3121 (2014)
151. Kozai, T.D., Catt, K., Du, Z., Na, K., Srivannavit, O., Razi-ul, M.H., Seymour, J., Wise, K.D.,
Yoon, E., Cui, X.T.: ChronicIn vivoevaluation of PEDOT/CNT for stable neural recordings.
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 63(1), 111–119 (2015)
152. Luo, X., Weaver, C.L., Zhou, D.D., Greenberg, R., Cui, X.T.: Highly stable carbon nanotube
doped poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene) for chronic neural stimulation. Biomaterials.
32(24), 5551–5557 (2011)
153. Castagnola, E., Maiolo, L., Maggiolini, E., Minotti, A., Marrani, M., Maita, F., Pecora,
A., Angotzi, G.N., Ansaldo, A., Fadiga, L.: Ultra-ﬂexible and brain-conformable micro-
electrocorticography device with low impedance PEDOT-carbon nanotube coated microelec-
trodes. In: 2013 6th international IEEE/EMBS conference on neural engineering (NER), pp
927–930. IEEE (2013).
154. Cui, X.T., Zhou, D.D.: Poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene) for chronic neural stimulation.
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 15(4), 502–508 (2007)
155. Cui, X., Martin, D.C.: Electrochemical deposition and characterization of poly (3, 4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) on neural microelectrode arrays. Sensors Actuators B Chem. 89(1–
2), 92–102 (2003)
156. Musk, E., Neuralink: An integrated brain-machine interface platform with thousands of
channels. BioRXiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/703801 (2019)
157. Ouyang, L., Wei, B., Kuo, C.-c., Pathak, S., Farrell, B., Martin, D.C.: Enhanced PEDOT
adhesion on solid substrates with electrografted P (EDOT-NH2). Sci. Adv. 3(3), e1600448
(2017)
158. Wei, B., Liu, J., Ouyang, L., Martin, D.C.: POSS-ProDOT crosslinking of PEDOT. J. Mater.
Chem. B. 5(25), 5019–5026 (2017)
159. Wei, B., Liu, J., Ouyang, L., Kuo, C.-C., Martin, D.C.: Signiﬁcant enhancement of PEDOT
thin ﬁlm adhesion to inorganic solid substrates with EDOT-acid. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces.
7(28), 15388–15394 (2015)
160. Charkhkar, H., Knaack, G.L., McHail, D.G., Mandal, H.S., Peixoto, N., Rubinson, J.F.,
Dumas, T.C., Pancrazio, J.J.: Chronic intracortical neural recordings using microelectrode
arrays coated with PEDOT–TFB. Acta Biomater. 32, 57–67 (2016)
161. Carli, S., Lambertini, L., Zucchini, E., Ciarpella, F., Scarpellini, A., Prato, M., Castagnola,
E., Fadiga, L., Ricci, D.: Single walled carbon nanohorns composite for neural sensing and
stimulation. Sensors Actuators B Chem. 271, 280–288 (2018)

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
133
162. Mitchell Taylor, I., Patel, N.A., Freedman, N.C., Castagnola, E., Cui, X.T.: Direct in vivo
electrochemical detection of resting dopamine using PEDOT/CNT functionalized microelec-
trodes. Anal. Chem. 91, 12917–12927 (2019)
163. Cui, X., Hetke, J.F., Wiler, J.A., Anderson, D.J., Martin, D.C.: Electrochemical deposition
and characterization of conducting polymer polypyrrole/PSS on multichannel neural probes.
Sensors Actuators A Phys. 93(1), 8–18 (2001)
164. Cui, X., Wiler, J., Dzaman, M., Altschuler, R.A., Martin, D.C.: In vivo studies of polypyr-
role/peptide coated neural probes. Biomaterials. 24(5), 777–787 (2003)
165. Guitchounts, G., Cox, D.: 64-channel carbon ﬁber electrode arrays for chronic electrophysi-
ology. Sci. Rep. 10(1), 1–9 (2020)
166. Xin Liu, Y.L.D.K.: High-density porous graphene arrays enable detection and analysis of
propagating cortical waves and spirals. Sci. Rep. 8, 17089 (2018)
167. Lu, Y., Lyu, H., Richardson, A.G., Lucas, T.H., Kuzum, D.: Flexible neural electrode array
based-on porous graphene for cortical microstimulation and sensing. Sci. Rep. 6, 33526
(2016)
168. Goshi, N., Castagnola, E., Vomero, M., Gueli, C., Cea, C., Zucchini, E., Bjanes, D.,
Maggiolini, E., Moritz, C., Kassegne, S.: Glassy carbon MEMS for novel origami-styled 3D
integrated intracortical and epicortical neural probes. J. Micromech. Microeng. 28(6), 065009
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6439/aab061
169. Vomero, M., Castagnola, E., Ciarpella, F., Maggiolini, E., Goshi, N., Zucchini, E., Carli, S.,
Fadiga, L., Kassegne, S., Ricci, D.: Highly stable glassy carbon interfaces for long-term neural
stimulation and low-noise recording of brain activity. Sci. Rep. 7, 40332 (2017)
170. Zestos, A.G.: Carbon nanoelectrodes for the electrochemical detection of neurotransmitters.
Int. J. Electrochem. 2018, 1–19 (2018)
171. Puthongkham, P., Venton, B.J.: Recent advances in fast-scan cyclic voltammetry. Analyst.
145, 1087–1102 (2020)
172. Yang, C., Denno, M.E., Pyakurel, P., Venton, B.J.: Recent trends in carbon nanomaterial-
based electrochemical sensors for biomolecules: a review. Anal. Chim. Acta. 887, 17–37
(2015)
173. Vomero, M., Castagnola, E., Ciarpella, F., Maggiolini, E., Goshi, N., Zucchini, E., Carli, S.,
Fadiga, L., Kassegne, S., Ricci, D.: Highly stable glassy carbon interfaces for long-term neural
stimulation and low-noise recording of brain activity. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 1–14 (2017)
174. Castagnola, E., Ansaldo, A., Fadiga, L., Ricci, D.: Chemical vapour deposited carbon
nanotube coated microelectrodes for intracortical neural recording. Phys. Status Solidi B.
247(11–12), 2703–2707 (2010)
175. Wang, K., Fishman, H.A., Dai, H., Harris, J.S.: Neural stimulation with a carbon nanotube
microelectrode array. Nano Lett. 6(9), 2043–2048 (2006)
176. Thunemann, M., Lu, Y., Liu, X., Kılıç, K., Desjardins, M., Vandenberghe, M., Sadegh, S.,
Saisan, P.A., Cheng, Q., Weldy, K.L.: Deep 2-photon imaging and artifact-free optogenetics
through transparent graphene microelectrode arrays. Nat. Commun. 9(1), 2035 (2018)
177. Castagnola, E., Vahidi, N.W., Nimbalkar, S., Rudraraju, S., Thielk, M., Zucchini, E., Cea,
C., Carli, S., Gentner, T.Q., Ricci, D.: In vivo dopamine detection and single unit record-
ings using intracortical glassy carbon microelectrode arrays. MRS Adv. 3(29), 1629–1634
(2018)
178. Lang, U., Naujoks, N., Dual, J.: Mechanical characterization of PEDOT: PSS thin ﬁlms.
Synth. Met. 159(5–6), 473–479 (2009)
179. Okuzaki, H., Ishihara, M.: Spinning and characterization of conducting microﬁbers. Macro-
mol. Rapid Commun. 24(3), 261–264 (2003)
180. Zhang, J., Seyedin, S., Qin, S., Lynch, P.A., Wang, Z., Yang, W., Wang, X., Razal
Joselito, M.: Fast and scalable wet-spinning of highly conductive PEDOT:PSS ﬁbers enables
versatile applications. J. Mater. Chem. A. 7(11), 6401–6410 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1039/
C9TA00022D
181. Yu, Z., Xia, Y., Du, D., Ouyang, J.: PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms with metallic conductivity through
a treatment with common organic solutions of organic salts and their application as a

134
E. Castagnola et al.
transparent electrode of polymer solar cells. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 8(18), 11629–
11638 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b00317
182. Yang, Z., Fang, Z., Sheng, J., Ling, Z., Liu, Z., Zhu, J., Gao, P., Ye, J.: Optoelectronic
evaluation and loss analysis of PEDOT:PSS/Si hybrid heterojunction solar cells. Nanoscale
Res. Lett. 12(1), 26–26 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-016-1790-1
183. Li, C., Xian, G.: Experimental and modeling study of the evolution of mechanical properties
of PAN-based carbon ﬁbers at elevated temperatures. Materials (Basel). 12(5), 724 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.3390/ma12050724
184. Wentzel, D., Sevostianov, I.: Electrical conductivity of unidirectional carbon ﬁber composites
with epoxy-graphene matrix. Int. J. Eng. Sci. 130, 129–135 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijengsci.2018.05.012
185. Papageorgiou, D.G., Kinloch, I.A., Young, R.J.: Mechanical properties of graphene and
graphene-based nanocomposites. Prog. Mater. Sci. 90, 75–127 (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pmatsci.2017.07.004
186. Marinho, B., Ghislandi, M., Tkalya, E., Koning, C.E., de With, G.: Electrical conductivity
of compacts of graphene, multi-wall carbon nanotubes, carbon black, and graphite powder.
Powder Technol. 221, 351–358 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2012.01.024
187. Xu, J.: Linear optical characterization of graphene structure. UWSpace (2018).
188. Goding, J., Gilmour, A., Martens, P., Poole-Warren, L., Green, R.: Interpenetrating conduct-
ing hydrogel materials for neural interfacing electrodes. Adv. Healtcare Mater. 6(9), 1601177
(2017)
189. Goding, J., Gilmour, A., Martens, P., Poole-Warren, L., Green, R.: Interpenetrating conduct-
ing hydrogel materials for neural interfacing electrodes. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 6(9), 1601177
(2017)
190. Castagnola, E., Maggiolini, E., Ceseracciu, L., Ciarpella, F., Zucchini, E., De Faveri, S.,
Fadiga, L., Ricci, D.: pHEMA encapsulated PEDOT-PSS-CNT microsphere microelectrodes
for recording single unit activity in the brain. Front. Neurosci. 10, 151 (2016)
191. Aregueta-Robles, U.A., Woolley, A.J., Poole-Warren, L.A., Lovell, N.H., Green, R.A.:
Organic electrode coatings for next-generation neural interfaces. Front. Neuroeng. 7, 15
(2014)
192. Liu, Y., Liu, J., Chen, S., Lei, T., Kim, Y., Niu, S., Wang, H., Wang, X., Foudeh, A.M., Tok,
J.B.-H., Bao, Z.: Soft and elastic hydrogel-based microelectronics for localized low-voltage
neuromodulation. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 58–68 (2019)
193. Heo, D.N., Song, S.-J., Kim, H.-J., Lee, Y.J., Ko, W.-K., Lee, S.J., Lee, D., Park, S.J., Zhang,
L.G., Kang, J.Y.: Multifunctional hydrogel coatings on the surface of neural cuff electrode for
improving electrode-nerve tissue interfaces. Acta Biomater. 39, 25–33 (2016)
194. Spencer, K.C., Sy, J.C., Ramadi, K.B., Graybiel, A.M., Langer, R., Cima, M.J.: Characteri-
zation of mechanically matched hydrogel coatings to improve the biocompatibility of neural
implants. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 1952 (2017)
195. Lu, Y., Wang, D., Li, T., Zhao, X., Cao, Y., Yang, H., Duan, Y.Y.: Poly(vinyl alco-
hol)/poly(acrylic acid) hydrogel coatings for improving electrode–neural tissue interface.
Biomaterials. 30(25), 4143–4151 (2009)
196. Azemi, E., Lagenaur, C.F., Cui, X.T.: The surface immobilization of the neural adhesion
molecule L1 on neural probes and its effect on neuronal density and gliosis at the probe/tissue
interface. Biomaterials. 32(3), 681–692 (2011)
197. Winter, J.O., Cogan, S.F., Rizzo, I.I.I.J.F.: Neurotrophin-eluting hydrogel coatings for neural
stimulating electrodes. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part B: Appl. Biomater. 81(2), 551–563
(2007)
198. Zhong, Y., Bellamkonda, R.V.: Dexamethasone-coated neural probes elicit attenuated inﬂam-
matory response and neuronal loss compared to uncoated neural probes. Brain Res. 1148,
15–27 (2007)
199. Fattahi, P., Yang, G., Kim, G., Abidian, M.R.: Biomaterials: a review of organic and inorganic
biomaterials for neural interfaces (Adv. Mater. 12/2014). Adv. Mater. 26(12), 1793–1793
(2014)

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
135
200. Kim, D.-H., Wiler, J.A., Anderson, D.J., Kipke, D.R., Martin, D.C.: Conducting polymers on
hydrogel-coated neural electrode provide sensitive neural recordings in auditory cortex. Acta
Biomater. 6(1), 57–62 (2010)
201. Vitale, F., Vercosa, D.G., Rodriguez, A.V., Pamulapati, S.S., Seibt, F., Lewis, E., Yan, J.S.,
Badhiwala, K., Adnan, M., Royer-Carfagni, G.: Fluidic microactuation of ﬂexible electrodes
for neural recording. Nano Lett. 18(1), 326–335 (2017)
202. Huang, X.: Materials and applications of bioresorbable electronics. J. Semicond. 39(1),
011003209 (2018)
203. Li, C., Guo, C., Fitzpatrick, V., Ibrahim, A., Zwierstra, M.J., Hanna, P., Lechtig, A., Nazarian,
A., Lin, S.J., Kaplan, D.L.: Design of biodegradable, implantable devices towards clinical
translation. Nat. Rev. Mater. 5, 1–21 (2019)
204. Yu, K.J., Kuzum, D., Hwang, S.-W., Kim, B.H., Juul, H., Kim, N.H., Won, S.M., Chiang, K.,
Trumpis, M., Richardson, A.G.: Bioresorbable silicon electronics for transient spatiotemporal
mapping of electrical activity from the cerebral cortex. Nat. Mater. 15(7), 782 (2016)
205. Hava, M.A.S.: Single-crystal silicon: electrical and optical properties. In: Springer handbook
of electronic and photonic materials. Springer, Cham (2017)
206. Filmetrics: Refractive index of Mg – smooth. https://www.ﬁlmetrics.com/refractive-index-
database/Mg+-+Smooth (2019)
207. Palik, E.D.: Handbook of optical constants of solids, vol. 3. Elsevier, Academic Press, San
Diego (1997)
208. Wall DA: Zinc and its uses. https://www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=749 (1998)
209. AZoM:
Molybdenum
(Mo)
–
properties,
applications.
https://www.azom.com/
article.aspx?ArticleID=616 (2001)
210. Koh, L.-D., Cheng, Y., Teng, C.-P., Khin, Y.-W., Loh, X.-J., Tee, S.-Y., Low, M., Ye, E.,
Yu, H.-D., Zhang, Y.-W., Han, M.-Y.: Structures, mechanical properties and applications
of silk ﬁbroin materials. Prog. Polym. Sci. 46, 86–110 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.progpolymsci.2015.02.001
211. Lee, J.H., Kwak, H.W., Park, M.H., Hwang, J., Kim, J.W., Jang, H.W., Jin, H.-J., Lee,
W.H.: Understanding hydroscopic properties of silk ﬁbroin and its use as a gate-dielectric
in organic ﬁeld-effect transistors. Org. Electron. 59, 213–219 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.orgel.2018.05.012
212. Perotto, G., Zhang, Y., Naskar, D., Patel, N., Kaplan, D.L., Kundu, S.C., Omenetto, F.G.:
The optical properties of regenerated silk ﬁbroin ﬁlms obtained from different sources. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 111(10), 103702 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4998950
213. Qi, Y., Wang, H., Wei, K., Yang, Y., Zheng, R.Y., Kim, I.S., Zhang, K.Q.: A review of structure
construction of silk ﬁbroin biomaterials from single structures to multi-level structures. Int. J.
Mol. Sci. 18(3), 237 (2017). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18030237
214. Warwicker, J.: The crystal structure of silk ﬁbroin. Acta Crystallogr. 7(8–9), 565–573 (1954).
https://doi.org/10.1107/S0365110X54001867
215. Rivnay, J., Wang, H., Fenno, L., Deisseroth, K., Malliaras, G.G.: Next-generation probes,
particles, and proteins for neural interfacing. Sci. Adv. 3(6), e1601649 (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1126/sciadv.1601649
216. Oh, Y., Park, C., Kim, D.H., Shin, H., Kang, Y.M., DeWaele, M., Lee, J., Min, H.-K.,
Blaha, C.D., Bennet, K.E.: Monitoring in vivo changes in tonic extracellular dopamine level
by charge-balancing multiple waveform fast-scan cyclic voltammetry. Anal. Chem. 88(22),
10962–10970 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.6b02605
217. Di Flumeri, G., Aricò, P., Borghini, G., Sciaraffa, N., Di Florio, A., Babiloni, F.: The dry
revolution: evaluation of three different EEG dry electrode types in terms of signal spectral
features, mental states classiﬁcation and usability. Sensors. 19(6), 1365 (2019)
218. Norton, J.J., Lee, D.S., Lee, J.W., Lee, W., Kwon, O., Won, P., Jung, S.-Y., Cheng, H., Jeong,
J.-W., Akce, A.: Soft, curved electrode systems capable of integration on the auricle as a
persistent brain–computer interface. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112(13), 3920–3925 (2015)
219. Grozea, C., Voinescu, C.D., Fazli, S.: Bristle-sensors – low-cost ﬂexible passive dry EEG
electrodes for neurofeedback and BCI applications. J. Neural Eng. 8(2), 025008 (2011)

136
E. Castagnola et al.
220. Gargiulo, G., Calvo, R.A., Bifulco, P., Cesarelli, M., Jin, C., Mohamed, A., van Schaik, A.: A
new EEG recording system for passive dry electrodes. Clin. Neurophysiol. 121(5), 686–693
(2010)
221. Myers, A.C., Huang, H., Zhu, Y.: Wearable silver nanowire dry electrodes for electrophysio-
logical sensing. RSC Adv. 5(15), 11627–11632 (2015)
222. Ferrari, L.M., Sudha, S., Tarantino, S., Esposti, R., Bolzoni, F., Cavallari, P., Cipriani, C.,
Mattoli, V., Greco, F.: Ultraconformable temporary tattoo electrodes for electrophysiology.
Adv. Sci. 5(3), 1700771 (2018)
223. Leuthardt, E.C., Schalk, G., Moran, D., Ojemann, J.G.: The emerging world of motor
neuroprosthetics: a neurosurgical perspective. Neurosurgery. 59(1), 1 (2006)
224. Leuthardt, E.C., Freudenberg, Z., Bundy, D., Roland, J.: Microscale recording from human
motor cortex: implications for minimally invasive electrocorticographic brain-computer
interfaces. Neurosurg. Focus. 27(1), E10 (2009)
225. Schwartz, A.B.: Cortical neural prosthetics. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 487–507 (2004)
226. Degenhart, A.D., Eles, J., Dum, R., Mischel, J.L., Smalianchuk, I., Endler, B., Ashmore, R.C.,
Tyler-Kabara, E.C., Hatsopoulos, N.G., Wang, W.: Histological evaluation of a chronically-
implanted electrocorticographic electrode grid in a non-human primate. J. Neural Eng. 13(4),
046019 (2016)
227. Collinger, J.L., Wodlinger, B., Downey, J.E., Wang, W., Tyler-Kabara, E.C., Weber, D.J.,
McMorland, A.J., Velliste, M., Boninger, M.L., Schwartz, A.B.: High-performance neuro-
prosthetic control by an individual with tetraplegia. Lancet. 381(9866), 557–564 (2013)
228. Maiolo, L., Polese, D., Convertino, A.: The rise of ﬂexible electronics in neuroscience,
from materials selection to in vitro and in vivo applications. Adv. Phys.: X. 4(1), 1664319
(2019)
229. Pazzini, L., Polese, D., Weinert, J.F., Maiolo, L., Maita, F., Marrani, M., Pecora, A., Sanchez-
Vives, M.V., Fortunato, G.: An ultra-compact integrated system for brain activity recording
and stimulation validated over cortical slow oscillations in vivo and in vitro. Sci. Rep. 8(1),
16717 (2018)
230. Yi Qiang, P.A., Seo, K.J., Culaclii, S., Hogan, V., Zhao, X., Zhong, Y., Han, X., Wang, P.-
M., Lo, Y.-K., Li, Y., Patel, H.A., Huang, Y., Sambangi, A., Chu, J.S.V., Liu, W., Fagiolini,
M., Fang, H.: Transparent arrays of bilayer-nanomesh microelectrodes for simultaneous
electrophysiology and two-photon imaging in the brain. Sci. Adv. 4(9), eaat0626 (2018)
231. Wonryung Lee, D.K., Matsuhisa, N., Nagase, M., Sekino, M., Malliaras, G.G., Yokota, T.,
Someya, T.: Transparent, conformable, active multielectrode array using organic electrochem-
ical transistors. PNAS. 114(40), 10554–10559 (2017)
232. Kuzum, D., Takano, H., Shim, E., Reed, J.C., Juul, H., Richardson, A.G., De Vries, J., Bink,
H., Dichter, M.A., Lucas, T.H.: Transparent and ﬂexible low noise graphene electrodes for
simultaneous electrophysiology and neuroimaging. Nat. Commun. 5, 5259 (2014)
233. Park, D.-W., Ness, J.P., Brodnick, S.K., Esquibel, C., Novello, J., Atry, F., Baek, D.-H., Kim,
H., Bong, J., Swanson, K.I.: Electrical neural stimulation and simultaneous in vivo monitoring
with transparent graphene electrode arrays implanted in GCaMP6f mice. ACS Nano. 12(1),
148–157 (2018)
234. Ledochowitsch, P., Yazdan-Shahmorad, A., Bouchard, K., Diaz-Botia, C., Hanson, T., He,
J.-W., Seybold, B., Olivero, E., Phillips, E., Blanche, T.: Strategies for optical control and
simultaneous electrical readout of extended cortical circuits. J. Neurosci. Methods. 256, 220–
231 (2015)
235. Lu, Y., Liu, X., Hattori, R., Ren, C., Zhang, X., Komiyama, T., Kuzum, D.: Ultralow
impedance graphene microelectrodes with high optical transparency for simultaneous deep
two-photon imaging in transgenic mice. Adv. Funct. Mater. 28(31), 1800002 (2018)
236. Park, D.-W., Ness, J.P., Brodnick, S.K., Esquibel, C., Novello, J., Atry, F., Baek, D.-H., Kim,
H., Bong, J., Swanson, K.I., Suminski, A.J., Otto, K.J., Pashaie, R., Williams, J.C., Ma, Z.:
Electrical neural stimulation and simultaneous in vivo monitoring with transparent graphene
electrode arrays implanted in GCaMP6f mice. ACS Nano. 12, 148–−157 (2018)

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
137
237. Lee, W., Kim, D., Matsuhisa, N., Nagase, M., Sekino, M., Malliaras, G.G., Yokota, T.,
Someya, T.: Transparent, conformable, active multielectrode array using organic electrochem-
ical transistors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114(40), 10554–10559 (2017)
238. Lee, H., Bellamkonda, R.V., Sun, W., Levenston, M.E.: Biomechanical analysis of silicon
microelectrode-induced strain in the brain. J. Neural Eng. 2(4), 81 (2005)
239. Rousche, P.J., Pellinen, D.S., Pivin, D.P., Williams, J.C., Vetter, R.J., Kipke, D.R.: Flexible
polyimide-based intracortical electrode arrays with bioactive capability. IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 48(3), 361–371 (2001)
240. Chi Lu, S.P., Richner, T.J., Derry, A., Brown, I., Hou, C., Rao, S., Kang, J., Moritz, C.T., Fink,
Y., Anikeeva, P.: Flexible and stretchable nanowire-coated ﬁbers for optoelectronic probing
of spinal cord circuits. Sci. Adv. 3(3), e1600955 (2017)
241. DeWaele, M., Oh, Y., Park, C., Kang, Y.M., Shin, H., Blaha, C.D., Bennet, K.E., Kim, I.Y.,
Lee, K.H., Jang, D.P.: A baseline drift detrending technique for fast scan cyclic voltammetry.
Analyst. 142(22), 4317–4321 (2017)
242. Park, S., Guo, Y., Jia, X., Choe, H.K., Grena, B., Kang, J., Park, J., Lu, C., Canales, A., Chen,
R.: One-step optogenetics with multifunctional ﬂexible polymer ﬁbers. Nat. Neurosci. 20(4),
612–619 (2017)
243. Liu, J., Fu, T.-M., Cheng, Z., Hong, G., Zhou, T., Jin, L., Duvvuri, M., Jiang, Z., Kruskal, P.,
Xie, C., Suo, Z., Fang, Y., Lieber, C.M.: Syringe-injectable electronics. Nat. Nanotechnol. 10,
629–636 (2015)
244. Liu, J.: Syringe injectable electronics. In: Biomimetics Through Nanoelectronics, pp. 65–93.
Springer (2018)
245. Du, Z.J., Kolarcik, C.L., Kozai, T.D.Y., Luebben, S.D., Sapp, S.A., Zheng, X.S., Nabity,
J.A., Cui, X.T.: Ultrasoft microwire neural electrodes improve chronic tissue integration. Acta
Biomater. 53, 46–58 (2017)
246. Zhang, Y., Mickle, A.D., Gutruf, P., McIlvried, L.A., Guo, H., Wu, Y., Golden, J.P., Xue, Y.,
Grajales-Reyes, J.G., Wang, X., Krishnan, S., Xie, Y., Peng, D., Su, C.-J., Zhang, F., Reeder,
J.T., Vogt, S.K., Huang, Y., Rogers, J.A., Gereau, R.W.: Battery-free, fully implantable
optoﬂuidic cuff system for wireless optogenetic and pharmacological neuromodulation
of peripheral nerves. Science Advances. 5(7), eaaw5296 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.aaw5296
247. Canales, A., Jia, X., Froriep, U.P., Koppes, R.A., Tringides, C.M., Selvidge, J., Lu, C., Hou,
C., Wei, L., Fink, Y.: Multifunctional ﬁbers for simultaneous optical, electrical and chemical
interrogation of neural circuits in vivo. Nat. Biotechnol. 33(3), 277 (2015)
248. Lo, M.-c., Wang, S., Singh, S., Damodaran, V.B., Kaplan, H.M., Kohn, J., Shreiber, D.I.,
Zahn, J.D.: Coating ﬂexible probes with an ultra fast degrading polymer to aid in tissue
insertion. Biomed. Microdevices. 17(2), 34 (2015)
249. Felix, S.H., Shah, K.G., Tolosa, V.M., Sheth, H.J., Tooker, A.C., Delima, T.L., Jadhav, S.P.,
Frank, L.M., Pannu, S.S.: Insertion of ﬂexible neural probes using rigid stiffeners attached
with biodissolvable adhesive. J. Vis. Exp. 79, e50609 (2013)
250. Joo, H.R., Fan, J.L., Chen, S., Pebbles, J.A., Liang, H., Chung, J.E., Yorita, A.M., Tooker,
A.C., Tolosa, V.M., Geaghan-Breiner, C.: A microfabricated, 3D-sharpened silicon shuttle
for insertion of ﬂexible electrode arrays through dura mater into brain. J. Neural Eng. 16(6),
066021 (2019)
251. Lee, J.M., Hong, G., Lin, D., Schuhmann Jr., T.G., Sullivan, A.T., Viveros, R.D., Park, H.-G.,
Lieber, C.M.: Nanoenabled direct contact interfacing of syringe-injectable mesh electronics.
Nano Lett. 19(8), 5818–5826 (2019)
252. Szikszay, T., Hall, T., von Piekartz, H.: In vivo effects of limb movement on nerve stretch,
strain, and tension: a systematic review. J. Back Musculoskelet. Rehabil. 30(6), 1171–1186
(2017). https://doi.org/10.3233/BMR-169720
253. Romero-Ortega, M.: Peripheral nerves, anatomy and physiology of. In: Jaeger, D., Jung, R.
(eds.) Encyclopedia of computational neuroscience, pp. 1–5. Springer, New York (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-7320-6_214-1

138
E. Castagnola et al.
254. Johnson Chad, R.P.D., Barr Roger, C.P.D., Klein Stephen, M.M.D.: A computer model of
electrical stimulation of peripheral nerves in regional anesthesia. Anesthesiol.: J. Am. Soc.
Anesthesiol. 106(2), 323–330 (2007)
255. Tyler, D.J., Durand, D.M.: Functionally selective peripheral nerve stimulation with a ﬂat
interface nerve electrode. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 10(4), 294–303 (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1109/tnsre.2002.806840
256. González-González, M.A., Kanneganti, A., Joshi-Imre, A., Hernandez-Reynoso, A.G., Ben-
dale, G., Modi, R., Ecker, M., Khurram, A., Cogan, S.F., Voit, W.E., Romero-Ortega, M.I.:
Thin ﬁlm multi-electrode softening cuffs for selective neuromodulation. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 16390
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-34566-6
257. Navarro, X., Lago, N., Vivo, M., Yoshida, K., Koch, K.P., Poppendieck, W., Micera, S.:
Neurobiological evaluation of thin-ﬁlm longitudinal intrafascicular electrodes as a peripheral
nerve interface. In: 2007 IEEE 10th international conference on rehabilitation robotics, 13–15
June 2007. pp. 643–649 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICORR.2007.4428492
258. Wang, J., Thow, X.Y., Wang, H., Lee, S., Voges, K., Thakor, N.V., Yen, S.-C., Lee, C.: A
highly selective 3D Spiked Ultraﬂexible Neural (SUN) interface for decoding peripheral nerve
sensory information. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 7(5), 1700987 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/
adhm.201700987
259. Zheng, X., Woeppel, K.M., Grifﬁth, A.Y., Chang, E., Looker, M.J., Fisher, L.E., Clapsaddle,
B.J., Cui, X.T.: Soft conducting elastomer for peripheral nerve interface. Adv. Healthc. Mater.
8(9), 1801311 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201801311
260. Musick, K.M., Rigosa, J., Narasimhan, S., Wurth, S., Capogrosso, M., Chew, D.J., Fawcett,
J.W., Micera, S., Lacour, S.P.: Chronic multichannel neural recordings from soft regenerative
microchannel electrodes during gait. Sci. Rep. 5, 14363 (2015)
261. Clark, G.A., Ledbetter, N.M., Warren, D.J., Harrison, R.R.: Recording sensory and motor
information from peripheral nerves with Utah slanted electrode arrays. In: 2011 Annual
international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine and biology society, pp. 4641–
4644. IEEE (2011)
262. Wark, H.A.C., Mathews, K.S., Normann, R.A., Fernandez, E.: Behavioral and cellular
consequences of high-electrode count Utah arrays chronically implanted in rat sciatic nerve.
J. Neural Eng. 11(4), 046027 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/11/4/046027
263. Christensen, M., Pearce, S., Ledbetter, N., Warren, D., Clark, G., Tresco, P.: The foreign body
response to the Utah slant electrode array in the cat sciatic nerve. Acta Biomater. 10(11),
4650–4660 (2014)
264. Campbell, A., Wu, C.: Chronically implanted intracranial electrodes: tissue reaction and elec-
trical changes. Micromachines (Basel). 9(9), 430 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3390/mi9090430
265. Ordonez, J.S., Pikov, V., Wiggins, H., Patten, C., Stieglitz, T., Rickert, J., Schuettler, M.: Cuff
electrodes for very small diameter nerves – prototyping and ﬁrst recordings in vivo. In: 2014
36th annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine and biology society,
26–30 Aug. 2014, pp. 6846–6849 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2014.6945201
266. Yu, H., Xiong, W., Zhang, H., Wang, W., Li, Z.: A Parylene self-locking cuff electrode for
peripheral nerve stimulation and recording. J. Microelectromech. Syst. 23(5), 1025–1035
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/JMEMS.2014.2333733
267. Meyer, J.U., Stieglitz, T., Beutel, H.È., Schuettler, M.: Micromachined, polyimide-based
devices for ﬂexible neural interfaces. Biomed. Microdevices. 2(4), 283–294 (2000). https:/
/doi.org/10.1023/A:1009955222114
268. Zhang, Y., Zheng, N., Cao, Y., Wang, F., Wang, P., Ma, Y., Lu, B., Hou, G., Fang, Z., Liang,
Z., Yue, M., Li, Y., Chen, Y., Fu, J., Wu, J., Xie, T., Feng, X.: Climbing-inspired twining
electrodes using shape memory for peripheral nerve stimulation and recording. Sci. Adv. 5(4),
eaaw1066 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaw1066
269. Mizisin, A.W.A.P.: The blood-nerve barrier: structure and functional signiﬁcance. In: The
blood-brain and other neural barriers (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-60761-938-3_6

Flexible and Soft Materials and Devices for Neural Interface
139
270. de la Oliva, N., Navarro, X., del Valle, J.: Time course study of long-term biocompatibility
and foreign body reaction to intraneural polyimide-based implants. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A.
106(3), 746–757 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.36274
271. Myllymaa, S., Myllymaa, K., Korhonen, H., Lammi, M.J., Tiitu, V., Lappalainen, R.: Surface
characterization and in vitro biocompatibility assessment of photosensitive polyimide ﬁlms.
Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces. 76(2), 505–511 (2010)
272. Goda, T., Konno, T., Takai, M., Ishihara, K.: Photoinduced phospholipid polymer grafting
on Parylene ﬁlm: Advanced lubrication and antibiofouling properties. Colloids Surf. B:
Biointerfaces. 54(1), 67–73 (2007)
273. Jones, J.A., Chang, D.T., Meyerson, H., Colton, E., Kwon, I.K., Matsuda, T., Anderson, J.M.:
Proteomic analysis and quantiﬁcation of cytokines and chemokines from biomaterial surface-
adherent macrophages and foreign body giant cells. J. Biomed. Mater.Res. Part A. 83(3),
585–596 (2007)
274. Ghosh, I., Konar, J., Bhowmick, A.K.: Surface properties of chemically modiﬁed polyimide
ﬁlms. J. Adhes. Sci. Technol. 11(6), 877–893 (1997)
275. Chang, T.Y., Yadav, V.G., De Leo, S., Mohedas, A., Rajalingam, B., Chen, C.-L., Selvarasah,
S., Dokmeci, M.R., Khademhosseini, A.: Cell and protein compatibility of parylene-C
surfaces. Langmuir. 23(23), 11718–11725 (2007)
276. Stieglitz, T., Beutel, H., Meyer, J.U.: A ﬂexible, light-weight multichannel sieve electrode
with integrated cables for interfacing regenerating peripheral nerves. Sensors Actuators A
Phys. 60(1), 240–243 (1997). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0924-4247(97)01494-5
277. MacEwan, M.R., Zellmer, E.R., Wheeler, J.J., Burton, H., Moran, D.W.: Regenerated
sciatic nerve axons stimulated through a chronically implanted macro-sieve electrode. Front.
Neurosci. 10, 557–557 (2016). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2016.00557
278. Srinivasan, A., Tahilramani, M., Bentley, J.T., Gore, R.K., Millard, D.C., Mukhatyar, V.J.,
Joseph, A., Haque, A.S., Stanley, G.B., English, A.W., Bellamkonda, R.V.: Microchannel-
based regenerative scaffold for chronic peripheral nerve interfacing in amputees. Biomateri-
als. 41, 151–165 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.11.035
279. Fernandez-Leon, J.A., Parajuli, A., Franklin, R., Sorenson, M., Felleman, D.J., Hansen, B.J.,
Hu, M., Dragoi, V.: A wireless transmission neural interface system for unconstrained non-
human primates. J. Neural Eng. 12(5), 056005 (2015)
280. Shepherd, R.K., Villalobos, J., Burns, O., Nayagam, D.A.X.: The development of neural
stimulators: a review of preclinical safety and efﬁcacy studies. J. Neural Eng. 15(4), 041004
(2018)

