854
Wigner’s Friend
Primary Literature
1. E. Wigner: On the quantum correction for thermodynamic equilibrium. Phys. Rev. 40, 749–759
(1932)
2. H. Groenewold: On the principles of elementary quantum mechanics. Physica 12, 405–460
(1946)
3. J. Moyal: Quantum mechanics as a statistical theory. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 45, 99–124 (1949)
4. H. Weyl: Quantenmechanik und Gruppentheorie. Z. Phys. 46, 1–46 (1927)
Secondary Literature
5. C. K. Zachos, D. B. Fairlie, T. L. Curtright: Quantum Mechanics in Phase Space (World Sci-
entiﬁc, 2005)
6. L. E. Ballentine: Quantum Mechanics: a Modern Development, Chap. 15 (World Scientiﬁc,
2005)
7. M. Hillery, R. O’Connell, M. Scully, E. Wigner: Distribution functions in physics fundamen-
tals. Phys. Rep. 106, 121–167 (1984)
8. R. F. O’Connell: Quantum distribution functions in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, in
Frontiers of Nonequilibrium Statistical Physics (Plenum Publishing Corporation, 1986), pp.
83–95
9. L. Cohen: Generalized phase-space distribution functions. J. Math.Phys. 7, 781–786 (1966)
10. J. H. Irving, R. W. Zwanzig: The statistical mechanical theory of transport processess. V. Quan-
tum Hydrodynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 19, 1173–1180 (1951)
11. W. E. Brittin, W. R. Chappell: The Wigner distribution function and second quantization in
phase space. Rev. Mod. Phys. 34, 620–627 (1962)
12. S. Choi, J. Ross: Quantum corrections for transport coefﬁcients. J. Chem. Phys. 33, 1324
(1960)
13. R. Carruthers, F. Zachariasen: Quantum collision theory with phase-space distributions. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 55, 245–285 (1983)
14. L. Cohen: Time–Frequency Analysis (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1995)
15. M. O. Scully, M. S. Zubairy: Quantum Optics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
England, 1997)
16. W. P. Schleich: Quantum Optics in Phase Space (Wiley, England, 2001)
17. G. W. Ford, R. F. O’Connell: Exact solution of the Hu–Paz–Zhang master equation. Phys. Rev.
D 64, 105020, 1–13 (2001)
18. G. W. Ford, R. F. O’Connell: Wigner distribution analysis of a Schr¨odinger cat superposition
of displaced equilibrium coherent states. Acta Phys. Hungarica Quant. Electron. B 20, 91–94
(2004)
Wigner’s Friend
Henry Stapp
Eugene Wigner published, in 1961, a widely reprinted article [1] entitled “Re-
marks on the Mind–Body Problem” in which he stresses the basic role played by

Wigner’s Friend
855
W
consciousness in quantum theory. But if consciousness is basic then the question
immediately arises: Whose consciousness? To explore this issue Wigner considers
a situation in which his “friend”, rather than he himself, is observing the effects of
an atomic process, the radiation of a visible photon.
In order to formulate the problem Wigner ﬁrst explains the entry of consciousness
into physical theory:
When the province of physical theory was extended to encompass microscopic
phenomena, through the creation of quantum mechanics, the concept of conscious-
ness came to the fore again: it was not possible to formulate the laws of quantum
mechanics without reference to the consciousness. [2] All that quantum mechanics
purports to describe are probability connections between subsequent impressions
(also called ‘apperceptions’) of consciousness, and even though the dividing line
between the observer, whose consciousness is being affected, and the observed
physical object can be shifted towards one or the other to a considerable degree [3],
it cannot be eliminated.
His reference [2] is to von Neumann’s work ( orthodox interpretation) on
the shifting of the boundary between those aspects of nature that are described
in the mathematical language of quantum theory, and those that are described in
the psychological language by means of which we describe our actual and possible
conscious experiences. The job of quantum theory is to make predictions about con-
nections between such experiences. His reference [3] was to Heisenberg’s famous
pronouncement:
The conception of objective reality . . . evaporated into the . . . mathematics that represents
no longer the behavior of elementary particles but rather our knowledge of this behavior.
The concept of “our knowledge” is reasonably clear insofar as “we are able to communicate
to others what we have done and what we have learnt” [4].
But in practice different people often know different things.
The thought experiment considered by Wigner involves, essentially, an atomic
state that emits a visible photon into an optical system that directs the rays emitted
from the atom in certain directions into the retina of the eye of Wigner’s friend, and
directs the rays emitted in other direction to some other place. The  wave function
of the atom plus the photon will be a  superposition of components corresponding
to different directions of the photon emission. If the interaction of the photon with
the retina, and of the retina with the brain of the friend – who is presumed to be
attending to what she is seeing – is now included in the physical description, then
the state of his friend’s brain generated by the purely physical laws of motion would
include a part that corresponds to her observing the ﬂash and another part corre-
sponding to her not observing the ﬂash. When Wigner asks his friend whether she
saw the ﬂash, then, upon his registering of her response, the wave function (quantum
state) that represents his knowledge of her brain and body will suddenly jumps to
one state or the other. Yet before he learned about her reaction his representation of
her state was in a combination of the “I observed a ﬂash” and “I observed no ﬂash”
alternatives.

856
Wigner’s Friend
Wigner is willing to admit that, if the purely physically described laws entail it,
then an unobserved inanimate measuring device could exist in a state that represents
a combination of two macroscopically different states. However, although solipsism
may be a logical possibility, “everyone believes that the phenomena of sensation
are widely shared by organisms that we consider to be living”. And, accordingly,
his friend will surely report that she did [or did not] experience the ﬂash [as the
case may be] before she reported that fact to him. Wigner concludes from these
considerations that his friend was “not in a state of suspended animation” before he
learned about her state: he concludes that her quantum state became one or the other
of these two alternatives when she became conscious of the ﬂash, not when he came
to know what she reported.
Wigner asserts that “The preceding argument for the difference in the roles of
inanimate tools of observation and observers with consciousness – hence for a vio-
lation of physical laws where consciousness plays a role – is entirely cogent so long
as one accepts the tenets of orthodox quantum theory and all their consequences.”
Wigner proposes, then, that “the being with a consciousness must have a different
role in quantum mechanics than the inanimate measuring device.” He proposes, in
essence, that the occurrence of a conscious experience is an objective reality that
is correlated to a change in an objective wave function. “Our knowledge” can then
be interpreted to be the aggregate of the conscious knowledge of all systems that
possess consciousness (Fig. 1). This allows quantum theory to be regarded as an
objective theory that describes the interaction between an objective physical aspect
that is described in terms of the mathematical language of quantum theory, and an
objective mental aspect that is described in terms of the concepts of thoughts, ideas,
and feelings – i.e., in terms of the concepts of psychology. This move allows what
had originally been a fundamentally anthropocentric,pragmatic, subjective theory to
be elevated into a nonanthropocentric objective theory of an objective reality having
physically described aspects and psychologically described aspects related in the
speciﬁc way speciﬁed by the  orthodox interpretation quantum theory spelled out
by John von Neumann [2].
Primary Literature
1. E. Wigner: Remarks on the Mind-Body Problem, in I. J. Good, ed.: The Scientist Speculates
(Heinemann, London 1961, 284–302); Basic Books, New York (1962). Reprinted in E. Wigner:
Symmetries and Reﬂections (Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Indiana 196, 171–184) and
in J.A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek eds.: Quantum Theory and Measurement (Princeton University
Press 1983, 168–81)
2. J. Von Neumann: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer, Berlin 1932,
Ch. VI) (Translated as Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University
Press, 1955)
3. Heisenberg: The representation of nature in contemporary physics. Daedalus, 95–108 (Summer
1958)
4. N. Bohr: Essays 1958/1962 on Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge (New York, Wiley
1962, 3)

Wigner’s Friend
857
W
Fig. 1 (a) An illustration of Wigner’s argument that the role of ‘a conscious being’ is different
from that of an inanimate measuring device. The ﬁrst step is to assume that the state of the atom
plus the photon is the superposition: α1 + β2. (b) The second step is to treat Wigner’s friend as
an unobserved inanimate measuring device that has two states: either it registers the photon, χ1or
it does not χ2. According to the orthodox interpretation of quantum mechanics the state of the
combined system after interaction is a linear superposition of states: α(3 × χ1) + β(4 + χ2);
or if the interaction with the environment is taken into account, the mixture of (3
×
χ1),
with probability |α|2 plus (4 × χ2), with probability |β|2. [3 is the atomic part of 1 and 4is
the atomic part of 2.] Thus the device prior to any observation of it has part corresponding to
the photon’s being registered, and a part corresponding to the photon’s not being registered. (c)
But now suppose that the initially unobserved (by Wigner) observational device is a conscious
human being, e.g., Wigner’s friend. Wigner asks the question, and his friend answers that she saw
the ﬂash [or did not see the ﬂash] before she let Wigner know whether or not she saw it. Wigner
concludes his friend was not in a state of suspended animation prior to when he learned which state
she was in. He concludes that the state of the combined system of atom plus his conscious friend,
after she had experienced the outcome, was either deﬁnitely or (3 × χ1) or deﬁnitely (4 × χ2),
not a combination of the two. Wigner’s proposal is a move away from the Copenhagen idea that
the quantum state represents knowledge available to a community of communicating observers,
who have a common knowledge that is useful for making predictions about their combined future
experiences. Wigner suggests that each conscious being is able to collapse one single objective
quantum state, regardless of whether the information is actually physically shared. It is a move
away from an essentially subjective pragmatic interpretation toward a more objective absolute one

858
Wigner’s Friend
Secondary Literature
5. D. Z. Albert: Quantum Mechanics and Experience (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
London, England 1992, 76–79)
6. L. Sklar: Philosophy of Physics (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1992, 185–187)

