746
Stern–Gerlach Experiment
( Wigner distribution), which is a representation of the state operator that is in-
termediate between the position and momentum representations, and bears a partial
similarity to a classical phase space distribution.
Literature
1. H. Weyl: Quantenmechanik und Gruppentheorie. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 46, 1–46 (1927)
2. L. E. Ballentine: Quantum Mechanics – A Modern Development (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
1998, Sect. 2.3)
3. L. P. Hughston, R. Jozsa, W. K. Wooters: A Complete Classiﬁcation of Quantum Ensembles
having a given Density Matrix. Phys. Lett. A 183, 14 (1993)
4. Ref. [2], Sect. 2.4.
State Operator
The most general representation of a quantum state. See the articles States, Pure
and Mixed, and their Representations and States in Quantum Mechanics. The terms
 statistical operator and  density matrix are also used.
Statistical Operator
An alternative term for the  state operator, used mainly in quantum statistical
mechanics.
Stern–Gerlach Experiment
Friedel Weinert
The Stern–Gerlach experiments (SG experiments) were prepared and carried out by
Otto Stern (1888–1969) and his junior collaborator Walther Gerlach (1889–1979)
between 1921 and 1925. [1–6] According to modern textbook interpretations the
experiments established experimentally the so-called  quantization of angular mo-
mentum and therefore the discreteness of the magnetic moment of atomic particles
 Spin; Vector model. This phenomenon is known as ‘space quantization’ (Rich-
tungsquantelung) of angular momentum. As indicated below, the actual historical

Stern–Gerlach Experiment
747
S
context, in which the experiments were carried out, is more complex. Quantization
of angular momentum means that particles like  electrons orbit the nucleus only in
certain permitted planes. The experiments demonstrated, for the ﬁrst time, the idea,
proposed by Arnold Sommerfeld (1868–1951) in 1916, of the quantization of the
orbital planes of the electron in the atom. The orbital planes of electrons do not only
possess discrete sizes and shapes. These orbital planes must also be inclined in cer-
tain ways. They must have discrete spatial orientations in relation to a co-ordinate
system like an external magnetic ﬁeld. The size, shape and orientation of the orbital
planes are indicated by  quantum numbers (n, l, ml). In addition it became clear in
1925 that a quantum number for intrinsic angular momentum, s, was needed. These
quantum numbers specify the state of the atoms in an atom beam. When a beam of
atoms is sent through a non-uniform magnetic ﬁeld, this discrete spatial orientation
will be revealed on a screen mounted behind the magnet. Stern and Gerlach there-
fore ran these experiments on beams of silver atoms in inhomogeneous magnetic
ﬁelds. The purpose of the SG experiments is to maximize the effect of magnetic
ﬁeld gradients, ∂Bz/∂z, on the silver atoms. It is necessary for the magnetic ﬁeld
to be inhomogeneous so that the magnetic moments of the particles feel a net force
acting on them. In fact, in a non-uniform magnetic ﬁeld, with gradient ∂Bz/∂z, the
magnetic dipole moments, μ, experience both a torque, which makes them align
with the magnetic ﬁeld, Bz, but also a net force, which leads to their displacement.
In a typical Stern–Gerlach experiment, the magnetic ﬁeld will split the beam into
two parts and send the silver atoms either into the upper or the lower beam. Two
scenarios can be distinguished:
1. The beam of silver atoms – silver atoms have 47 electrons – is sent through the
magnet but the magnet is switched off. A screen mounted behind the magnet will
record the impact of the atoms. When the magnet is switched off, one central
trace will be recorded after the passage of the atom beam (l = 0, ml = 0)
because no deﬂection is experienced by the atoms in this state (Fig. 1).
2. The magnet is now switched on when the beam of atoms is sent through. De-
pending on the precise state of the atom beam, speciﬁed by its quantum numbers,
ml=0
−½
+½
+½
ms
−½
Fig. 1 The Stern–Gerlach experiments 1921–25

748
Stern–Gerlach Experiment
and assuming the simplest case, two traces will appear on the screen. The effect
of the magnet will be an intensity shift. When the magnet was switched off the
intensity maximum was in the centre of the screen. But with the magnet switched
on, this central intensity maximum will become a minimum. The central trace
will disappear and two clearly separated traces will appear, deﬂected upwards
and downwards respectively (Fig. 1). With the magnet switched on, the magnet
will cause the atom beam to split exactly into two halves (under appropriate con-
ditions). This shift will happen only if the magnetic gradient is large enough to
cause the displacement of the magnetic moments.
On the modern theory, an electron has orbital angular momentum, L, and spin
angular momentum, S. The total angular momentum, J, is the sum of L and S:
J = L + S.
(1)
Generally, the magnetic moment, μ, is related to J through the expression
μ = −e
2mJ.
(2)
The SG experiment detected two traces, in violation of equation (2). The silver
atoms were in their ground state (orbital angular momentum l = 0, ml = 0 and
hence no deﬂection is expected; spectroscopic notion 2S1/2) but the splitting was
due to the magnetic moment of the spin angular momentum of the electron (ms =
±1/2ℏ) in the z-direction (direction of the magnetic ﬁeld). When l = 0, it follows
from expression (1) that we are left with the value for S = 1/2ℏfor intrinsic spin, so
that the beam splits into two and leaves two traces.
The historical situation was more complicated than this textbook account. [13]
Strictly speaking, Stern and Gerlach believed that they had found Sommerfeld’s
quantization of angular momentum, L. They did not realize that the observed space
quantization was due to the magnetic moment of the spinning electron (hence S).
The two experimenters believed that their experiments had decidedly disproved
the classical Lamor theory, which was based on continuous values for magnetic
moments. They thought their experiments conﬁrmed Sommerfeld’s old quantum
theory (1916), which postulated, in addition to the usual quantum numbers for the
size and shape of orbits, a spatial orientation of the ‘Keplerian’ orbits of the elec-
trons around the nucleus. The discovery of spin angular momentum of the electron
came in 1925, when George Eugene Uhlenbeck (1900–1988) and Samuel Abra-
ham Goudsmit (1902–1978) proposed the concept of  spin. Contrary to frequently
made claims in modern physics textbooks, Stern and Gerlach were not surprised by
their results (splitting of beam into two traces) because this is just what Sommer-
feld’s theory told them to expect. Today many features of the Stern–Gerlach and the
 double-slit experiments reappear in so-called  which-way experiments.
The Stern–Gerlach experiments are also interesting from a philosophical point of
view. First, they demonstrate the relative robustness of experimental results and their
relative independence from the theoretical conceptions, on which they are based.
Secondly, they tell us that the often-quoted acausality of quantum mechanical pro-

Stern–Gerlach Experiment
749
S
cesses is not supported by the SG experiments. It is not difﬁcult to apply Mill’s
‘method of difference’, a form of eliminative induction, to this situation to establish
its causal nature. The only difference between otherwise two identical situations,
including the preparation of the atoms in identical atomic states, speciﬁed by the
quantum numbers, lies in the behaviour of the magnet. If it is not switched on
and there is no magnetic ﬁeld, one central trace appears; if it is switched on and
a magnetic ﬁeld is applied to the passing atoms, two traces appear in the simplest
case (l = 0). The set of causal conditions is closed. There are no other interfering
factors to be considered. We are therefore justiﬁed in concluding that the creation
of the non-uniform magnetic ﬁeld is the cause, given the initial state of the atoms,
of the splitting of the atomic beam into two parts. As is customary in quantum me-
chanics, no claim is made about the behaviour of the individual atoms making up
the beam. Since the initial orientation of their magnetic moment is random it is not
possible to predict, which way they will turn under the inﬂuence of the magnet.
But statistical predictions can be made about the behaviour of the whole beam. The
rules of quantum mechanics specify how atom beams in different states behave. For
instance, if l ̸= 0 an odd number of traces will appear on the screen. The SG ex-
periments show that causal relations obtain in the quantum domain but they are not
deterministic. Hence causality and the pair  indeterminism-determinism must be
distinguished.
Primary Literature
1. O. Stern: Ein Weg zur experimentellen Pr¨ufung der Richtungsquantelung im Magnetfeld.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 7, 249–53 (1921)
2. W. Gerlach, O. Stern: Der experimentelle Nachweis des magnetischen Moments des Silber-
atoms. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 8, 110–1 (1921)
3. W. Gerlach, O. Stern: Der experimentelle Nachweis der Richtungsquantelung im Magnetfeld.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 9, 349–52 (1922)
4. W. Gerlach, O. Stern: Das magnetische Moment des Silberatoms. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 9,
353–5 (1922)
5. W. Gerlach, O. Stern: ¨Uber die Richtungsquantelung im Magnetfeld. Annalen der Physik 74
(1924)
6. W. Gerlach, O. Stern: ¨Uber die Richtungsquantelung im Magnetfeld II. Annalen der Physik 76
(1925)
7. A. Einstein, P. Ehrenfest: Quantentheoretische Bemerkungen zum Experiment von Stern und
Gerlach. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 11, 31–4 (1922); reprinted in P. Ehrenfest: Collected Scientiﬁc
Papers. Ed. M. Klein (North Holland, Amsterdam 1959, 452–55)
Secondary Literature
8. R. G. Grifﬁths: Consistent Quantum Theory (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 2003,
Chaps. 17–17)
9. R. Harr´e: Great Scientiﬁc Experiments (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1983, Part III, B)
10. R. I. G. Hughes: The Structure and Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. (Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA 1989, 1–8)

750
Superconductivity
11. M. Jammer: The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics (McGraw Hill, New York
1966)
12. M. Morrison: Spin: All is not what it seems. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics 38, 529–57 (2007)
13. F. Weinert: Wrong Theory – Right Experiment: The Signiﬁcance of the Stern–Gerlach Exper-
iments. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 26, 75–86 (1995)
14. W. Walter: Otto Stern: Leistung und Schicksal. Gesellschaft Deutscher Chemiker, Fachgruppe
Geschichte der Chemie: Mitteilungen 3, 69–82 (1989)
15. R. Heinrich, H.-R. Bachmann: Walther Gerlach (Deutsches Museum, Munich1989, esp.
48–54)
Superconductivity
Kostas Gavroglu
Electrical Resistance in the Very Cold
The ﬁrst systematic studies of the dependence of electrical resistance on temper-
ature had been undertaken by L.P. Cailletet (1832–1913), E. Bouty (1846–1922)
and Z.F. Wroblewski (1845–1888) in 1885. Their researches led them to the as-
sertion that it would not be unreasonable to expect a zero value for the resistance
for a temperature higher than −273◦C. The next set of exhaustive measurements of
the electrical resistance of various metals were performed by James Dewar (1842–
1923) and John Ambrose Fleming (1849–1945). In 1896 they completed a study of
the resistance of mercury at liquid air temperature, and their results indicated that
the resistance of mercury could vanish at zero degrees Kelvin.
After having liqueﬁed helium in 1908, Heike Kamerlingh Onnes (1853–1926),in
1911, at Leiden, measured the resistance of platinum and that of pure mercury at he-
lium temperatures. He found that at 3K the value of the resistance of pure mercury
became 0.0001 times the value of the resistance of solid mercury at 0◦C, extrap-
olated from the melting point. Later that year the phenomenon was reafﬁrmed at
4.19K. By 1913 it was realized that impurities did not play any role in hindering the
disappearance of the ordinary resistance, and the phenomenon was for the ﬁrst time
called the “superconductivity” of mercury [22]. In 1914 Kamerlingh Onnes discov-
ered that an external magnetic ﬁeld could disturb superconductivity by “generating
resistance” in lead and tin. It was, also, found that superconductivity was destroyed
when current above a certain threshold value passed through the superconductor.
Eduard Riecke (1845–1915) and Paul Drude (1863–1906) [12] treated the elec-
tric current in a metal as a drift of an electron gas under the inﬂuence of an electric
ﬁeld. H.A. Lorentz’s (1853–1928) theory of electrical conduction had as a start-
ing point the statistical theory of Maxwell and Boltzmann, and he investigated the
dynamics of the collision processes. Nevertheless, his theory could not account for
the rapid fall of resistance at extremely low temperatures.

