374
Measurement Theory
Measurement Theory
Paul Busch and Pekka Lahti
The term measurement theory refers to that part of a physical theory in which the
empirical and operational content of the concepts of the theory is determined. Mea-
surements are analyzed both as operational procedures deﬁning the  observables
of the theory and as physical processes which are themselves subject to the laws of
physics.
In classical physics, measurements are performed in order to determine the values
of one or several observables of the physical system under consideration. Classical
physics allowed the idealized notion that every physical quantity has a deﬁnite value
at any time, and that this value can be determined with certainty by measurement
without inﬂuencing the object system in a signiﬁcant way. By contrast, in quantum
mechanics both features fail to hold without strong qualiﬁcations. Accordingly, in
their seminal paper of 1935 [1], Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen used elements of this
description as a sufﬁcient criterion of physical reality, applicable both in classical
and quantum mechanics:
“If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty (i.e., with proba-
bility equal to unity) the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element of physical
reality corresponding to that physical quantity.”
As far as observable elements of reality represented by quantum mechanics are
concerned, this condition must also be regarded as necessary. Hence, an observable
is understood to have a deﬁnite value if the probability that a measurement indi-
cates a particular value of the observable is equal to one. In quantum mechanics,
this can only be satisﬁed if the system is in an eigenstate of the observable associ-
ated with the value in question. Moreover, it turns out that in quantum mechanics
the interaction between a measuring apparatus and the measured system is gener-
ally not negligible. This leads to the necessity of reconsidering what it means that
a measurement determines the value of an observable. Here this question is dis-
cussed for the case of an observable represented by a selfadjoint operator A (acting
on a complex separable  Hilbert space H) with nondegenerate discrete spec-
trum {a1, a2, . . . }, associated  orthonormal basis of eigenvectors {ϕ1, ϕ2, . . . },
and spectral decomposition A = 
i aiPi, where Pi = |ϕi⟩⟨ϕi| denotes the pro-
jection onto the one-dimensional subspace spanned by ϕi. (Spectral decomposition,
see  Density operator; Ignorance interpretation; Objectiﬁcation; Operator; Prob-
abilistic Interpretation; Propensities in Quantum Mechanics; Self-adjoint operator;
Wave mechanics).
A minimal requirement for a physical interaction process between an object sys-
tem and an apparatus to qualify as a measurement of A is the so-called calibration
condition: whenever the system is in an eigenstate, the apparatus should indicate
the corresponding eigenvalue unambiguously after the interaction has ceased. In

Measurement Theory
375
M
quantum mechanics, a measurement is modeled by representing the apparatus by a
Hilbert space HA, the pointer observable as a selfadjoint operator Z acting on HA
and the coupling between object and apparatus as a unitary operator U acting on
the tensor product Hilbert space H ⊗HA of the total system. Together with the ini-
tial apparatus state TA, these elements, collected into a quadruple ⟨HA, TA, U, Z⟩,
constitute a measurement scheme.
Assuming, for simplicity, that the apparatus initially is in a pure state, described
by a unit vector φ, the calibration condition can be formalized as follows: the mea-
surement scheme has to be such that for any eigenstate ϕi of A there is an associated
(normalized) eigenstate φi of the pointer Z so that U effects the following transition:
ϕi ⊗φ →U(ϕi ⊗φ) = ψi ⊗φi.
(1)
Here ψi is some normalized vector state in H, and the φi are mutually orthogonal.
Thus, if the observable A initially has a deﬁnite value ai, the pointer observable of
the apparatus will indicate this value with probability equal to one, in accordance
with the  Born probability rule. If condition (1) is satisﬁed for all ϕi, the given
measurement scheme is called a premeasurement of A.
If the system is initially in a vector state ϕ which is not an eigenstate of A, then
ϕ is a  superposition of eigenstates of A, that is, ϕ = 
i ciϕi with more than
one of the ci nonzero. Together with the linearity of U, the rule (1) still determines
unambiguously the ﬁnal state of the total system:
ϕ ⊗φ =

i
ciϕi ⊗φ →Uϕ ⊗φ =

i
ciψi ⊗φi.
(2)
The ﬁnal state is a superposition of mutually orthogonal states, and the probability
for the pointer to indicate a value ai is equal to |ci|2 = |⟨ϕ|Piϕ⟩|2, thus justifying
the Born probability interpretation of the latter expression.
This simpliﬁed description also highlights the fundamental dilemma of quantum
measurement theory known as the quantum measurement problem, the problem of
objectiﬁcation, or the collapse problem: if an observable A does not have a deﬁnite
value, then according to quantum mechanics, a premeasurement of A will leave the
object-plus-apparatus system in an entangled state in which the pointer observable
does not have a deﬁnite value – in stark contrast to the fact that every real mea-
surement ends with a deﬁnite pointer position. This leaves one with the following
alternative: on the one hand, if one requires that quantum mechanics should include
an account of its measuring processes – that is, this theory should be semantically
complete – then it turns out that the occurrence of deﬁnite measurement outcomes
contradicts the quantum mechanical account of the measurement dynamics – that
is, this theory is semantically inconsistent; on the other hand, if one requires seman-
tical consistency, then quantum mechanics cannot be semantically complete [8]. In
the ﬁrst case, a modiﬁcation of the axioms of quantum mechanics is required. In the
second case, there is no consistent quantum measurement theory, unless an appro-
priate reinterpretation of what it means for an observable to have a deﬁnite value
can be found.

376
Measurement Theory
There is an enormous amount of literature dealing with the quantum mea-
surement problem, and as yet there is no generally accepted resolution. Rigorous
technical presentations of the problem and the spectrum of interpretational options
are found, for example, in [9] and [10], whereas philosophical aspects are discussed
in [11]. A valuable cross-section of the older literature until 1980 is reprinted in the
volume [12]. Interestingly, the founders of quantum mechanics (e.g., [2, 3]) identi-
ﬁed the reality of the collapse of the wave function ( wave function collapse) or
state vector but did not regard it as a conceptual problem. It was von Neumann in
1932 [4] who pointed out the tension between the collapse process as a random event
and the deterministic (unitary, linear) Schr¨odinger dynamics of a closed system.
Somewhat later, Schr¨odinger [5] conceived his infamous  Schr¨odinger cat paradox
to highlight the apparent absurdity of the possibility, suggested by quantum mechan-
ics, of observing macroscopic systems in superpositions of states corresponding to
such discernible situations as a cat being dead or alive.
Adopting the collapse postulate has since been taken by many as a pragmatic
way of suspending the measurement problem. Following this route, there remains
the task for quantum measurement theory to show that quantum mechanics entails
the possibility in principle of measuring any of its observables. For an observable
represented as a POVM ( observable), the above calibration condition is generally
not applicable. However, whenever that condition does apply, it implies the repro-
duction of probabilities for the object observable in terms of the pointer statistics.
This latter condition, called probability reproducibility condition [9], can always
be taken as the deﬁning criterion for a measurement scheme to constitute a mea-
surement of a given observable. This characterization of the measurements of an
observable implements the Born interpretation ( Born rule) of the quantum me-
chanical probabilities and the idea that any observable is identiﬁed by the totality of
its statistics. The formal implementation of these ideas, which constitute the math-
ematical framework of quantum measurement theory, are brieﬂy summarized in the
text box below.
Tools of Quantum Measurement Theory
Every measurement scheme ⟨HA, TA, U, Z⟩deﬁnes a unique observable of the
object system. If the pointer observable Z is represented as a POVM on the (Borel)
sets of R (say), then for each state T of the object system, the following deﬁnes a
probability measure on the real line (X denotes any Borel subset of R and I is the
identity operator):
X →tr[UT ⊗TAU∗I ⊗Z(X)] ≡tr[T E(X)].
(3)
This equation, valid for all states T , entails the existence of a positive operator
E(X) associated with each set X; moreover, the fact that X →tr[T E(X)] is a
probability measure for each T ensures that E : X →E(X) is a POVM on the
(Borel) subsets of R.

Measurement Theory
377
M
It is a fundamental theorem of the quantum theory of measurement that for
every observable there are measurement schemes (in fact, inﬁnitely many) such
that (3) is fulﬁlled for all object states T [6].
With the existence of premeasurements for any observable thus secured,
another task of quantum measurement theory is the description of the effect of
a measurement on the object system. Given a measurement scheme for an ob-
servable E, one can ask for the probabilities of the outcomes of any subsequent
measurement. If F is another POVM on the (Borel) subsets of R, to be measured
immediately after the E measurement, the sequential joint probability for obtain-
ing a value of E in a set X and a value of F in a set Y is
tr[UT ⊗TAU∗F(Y) ⊗Z(X)] ≡tr[IX(T )F(Y)].
(4)
This relation, valid for all states T , all observables F and all X, Y, determines
a unique non-normalized object state IX(T ); substituting for F(Y) the identity
operator, it is seen that tr[IX(T )] = tr[T E(X)]. Dividing the joint probability in
(4) by the latter probability gives the conditional probability for the occurrence of
an outcome in Y given that the ﬁrst measurement led to an outcome in X. Thus
IX(T ) can be taken to play the role of the ﬁnal object state in accordance with
the collapse postulate. The map T →IX(T ) is known as a (quantum) operation,
and X →IX is an operation-valued measure called the instrument induced by the
given measurement scheme [7].
Any instrument arising from a measurement scheme has the property of
complete positivity: that is, for any operation IX, if extended to a linear map
In ⊗IX acting on the trace class operators of the Hilbert spaces Cn ⊗H, the
extended map is positive for each n. It is another fundamental theorem of quan-
tum measurement theory that every completely positive instrument can be realized
by some (in fact, inﬁnitely many) measurement schemes [6].
With the conceptual tools of measurement theory outlined in the above box, it has
become possible to eliminate some long-standing myths and corroborate a number
of equally long-standing folk truths. For example, it has long been held without
questioning that any measurement collapses the object system into an eigenstate of
the measured observable. Measurements with that property are called repeatable. In
the example leading to (1), repeatability is achieved by putting ψi = ϕi; but it is by
no means necessary to assume that every measurement has this property. Moreover,
according to a theorem due to Ozawa [6], in order for an observable to admit a
repeatable measurement, this observable must be discrete, that is, have a countable
set of values.
The realization that measurements necessarily disturb the object system was
made early on in the history of quantum mechanics. However, the nature of that
“disturbance” and its quantiﬁcation have remained the subject of much debate until
recently, when it was realized that the notion of instrument allows a rigorous and
effective description of the state changes due to measurements. Yet another funda-
mental theorem of quantum measurement theory is given by the statement that there

378
Measurement Theory
is no measurement which does not change at least some of the states of the system
under investigation: a measurement scheme that leaves unchanged all states of the
object deﬁnes a trivial observable, that is one whose probability measures do not
depend on the state. Thus, there is no information gain in quantum measurements
without some disturbance.
The trade-off between information gain and disturbance in quantum measure-
ments has been recognized as a resource for novel applications of quantum mea-
surements, particularly in quantum cryptography,  quantum communication a
sub-ﬁeld of the new area of quantum information science. This is one example for
the importance of quantum measurement theory as an applied discipline besides its
foundational role.
Applications of quantum measurement theory ranging from nondemolition mea-
surements and analyses of basic experiments to open quantum systems and quantum
tomography are covered, for instance, by the monographs [13–17].
Primary Literature
1. Einstein, A., B. Podolsky, N. Rosen: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality
be considered complete? Physical Review 47, 777–780 (1935).
2. Heisenberg, W.: ¨Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und
Mechanik. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 43, 172–198 (1927).
3. Bohr, N.: The quantum postulate and the recent development of atomic theory. Nature 121,
580–590 (1928).
4. Neumann, J. von: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer, Berlin 1932,
2nd ed. 1996); English translation (by R. Beyer): Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Me-
chanics (Princeton University Press, Princeton 1955).
5. Schr¨odinger, E.: Die gegenw¨artige Situation in der Quantenmechanik. Die Naturwis-
senschaften 23, 807–812; 824–828; 844–849 (1935). English translation in [12].
6. Ozawa, M.: Quantum measuring processes of continuous observables, Journal of Mathematicsl
Physics 25, 79–87 (1984).
7. Davies, E.B., J.T. Lewis: An operational approach to quantum Probability, Communications in
Mathematical Physics 17, 239–260 (1970).
Secondary Literature
8. Mittelstaedt, P.: Philosophical Problems of Modern Physics (D. Reidel, Dordrecht 1976).
9. Busch, P., P. Lahti, P. Mittelstaedt: The Quantum Theory of Measurement (Springer, Berlin
1991, 2nd revised edn. 1996).
10. Bub, J.: Interpreting the Quantum World (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1997).
11. Mittelstaedt, P.: The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics and the Measurement Process
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1997).
12. Wheeler, J.A., W.H. Zurek.: Quantum Theory and Measurement (Princeton University Press,
Princeton 1983).
13. Braginsky, V.B., F.Ya. Khalili: Quantum Measurement, edited by K.S. Thorne, (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 1992).
14. Busch, P., M. Grabowski, P. Lahti: Operational Quantum Physics (Springer, Berlin 1995, 2nd
corrected printing 1997).

Mesoscopic Quantum Phenomena
379
M
15. Muynck, W.M. de: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics : An Empiricist Approach (Kluwer,
Dordrecht, 2002).
16. Breuer, H.-B., F. Petruccione: The Theory of Open Quantum Systems, (Oxford University Press,
Oxford 2002).
17. Paris, M.G.A., J. ˇReh´aˇcek (Eds.): Quantum State Estimation, (Springer, Berlin, 2004).
Mesoscopic Quantum Phenomena
Markus Arndt
Quantum physics was ﬁrst developed to understand the properties of small individ-
ual objects such as photons ( light quantum), atoms and molecules. And many
features of quantum physics, such as the discreteness of energy levels, the  super-
position of mutually exclusive states, quantum interference or  entanglement are
usually not directly accessible to our human senses. Colloquially we therefore often
separate between microscopic and macroscopic in the sense of ‘being observable or
unobservable by the unaided eye’ rather than in the more physical sense where mi-
croscopic would refer to objects in the micrometer size range. In physics, the notion
of mesoscopic quantum phenomena is generally used for systems with dimensions
somewhere in the middle (in Greek: meso = middle) between the microscopic and
the macroscopic world. In practice, mesoscopic systems mostly range between a
few and a few hundred nanometers. They are large enough to contain many particles
and can therefore be described by average properties, such as density or conductiv-
ity. On the other hand they are small enough for their lateral extensions to match
characteristic lengths, such as the coherence length or the mean free path. Meso-
scopic quantum systems therefore often exhibit unique physical properties such as
size-dependent electronic properties, transport phenomena and more. The following
examples select some of the most quoted mesoscopic quantum phenomena [6,9–11].
Mesoscopic Quantum Conﬁnement
Quantum dots are zero-dimensional nanostructures in the sense that they conﬁne
the quantum wave function in all three directions [1]. This has to be contrasted
with for instance one-dimensional quantum wires, two-dimensional electron gases
atomic ensembles ( ensembles in quantum mechanics) or three-dimensional bulk
solids. Quantum dots are often referred to as artiﬁcial, ultra-cold trapped atoms,
since they exhibit a size-dependent discrete energy spectrum. Optical transition lines
in small dots are blue-shifted with respect to those in larger dots. Q-dots realize
the textbook example of a particle in the box: strong conﬁnement leads to strong

