H
Happiness
ANTHONY CELANO
Department of Philosophy
Stonehill College
Easton, MA
USA
Abstract
The medieval concept of happiness has its origins in the
writings of Aristotle and Augustine. Both Aristotle and
Augustine posit a single end for all human moral activity:
for Aristotle that end is eudaimonia, the perfection of the
potentialities within the human soul; for Augustine that
end is beatitude, the eternal perfection of the soul granted
by God. For centuries, Augustine’s ideal dominated medi-
eval moral thought, but in the thirteenth century medieval
authors had to confront philosophical challenges to the
Christian understanding of human perfection. The earliest
commentators on the Ethics of Aristotle understood
Aristotle’s notion of happiness as a perfect activity of the
soul as support for their own belief in the possibility of the
perfection of the beatiﬁed soul. The writings of Robert
Kilwardby, Albert the Great, and Thomas Aquinas
redirected the attention of medieval authors to questions
of the relation between earthly happiness and perfect
beatitude, the cause of happiness, and the function of
moral and intellectual virtues as the foundation of
human goodness. Aristotle’s notion of happiness never
supplanted the Augustinian view of human purpose, as
is evident in the criticisms of the philosophical doctrine of
happiness by Henry of Ghent, John Duns Scotus, and
William of Ockham.
The intellectual antecedents to the medieval understand-
ing of the ideal of happiness lie in the writings of Aristotle
and Augustine. Augustine’s inﬂuence on the doctrine of
happiness remained generally unchallenged until the
beginning of the thirteenth century when Aristotle’s
Nicomachean Ethics became an integral part of the curric-
ulum of the arts faculties of the universities of western
Europe. Aristotle considers the goal of ethical deliberation
to be the determination of the nature of happiness
(eudaimonia). Despite the verbal agreement concerning
the deﬁnition of happiness as living and acting well, opin-
ions differ concerning its true nature. Aristotle seeks to
reﬁne the notion of happiness by describing the essential
characteristics of that end which all human beings seek.
Happiness must also be that which is desired for its own
sake, and never as a means to attain a superior goal
(Nicomachean
Ethics
=
NE,
1097a28–29).
Aristotle
restricts his investigation to a search for a practical good,
since were a separate supreme good to exist, it would
contribute little to an understanding of human moral
purpose (NE, 1096a30–35).
The general characteristic of happiness as a ﬁnal, self-
sufﬁcient end to which all actions are directed tells little
about its speciﬁc nature, as Aristotle freely admits. In
order to determine speciﬁcally human goodness, one
must examine the proper function of human beings (NE,
1097b29–35). Aristotle considers the most proper human
actions to originate in the soul, and the most ﬁtting
human existence to be the active life of the rational faculty
(NE, 1098a3–4). Aristotle’s preliminary discussions on the
nature of human goodness conclude with his summary of
the prerequisites for happiness: the human function is
a certain kind of life, which is an activity of the soul in
accordance with reason; and the performance of this activ-
ity must harmonize with what a good person does
according to his own particular excellence or virtue (NE,
1098a13–16). The acceptance of these conditions leads
Aristotle to formulate his own deﬁnition of happiness as
‘‘the activity of soul in accordance with virtue, and if there
are more than one virtue, in accordance with the best and
most complete’’ (NE, 1098a17–18). The inclusion of the
phrase, ‘‘if there are more than one virtue,’’ has provoked
much discussion concerning the exact meaning of Aristo-
telian happiness, both in the medieval and modern eras.
Aristotle at times seems to indicate that happiness consists
in the supreme human activity of intellectual contempla-
tion to which all other actions must be directed. At other
times he seems to claim that only a life of both intellectual
and moral virtue can make a person truly happy (Cooper
1975; Nussbaum 1986). Aristotle also implies a distinction
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

between the essential nature of happiness (eudaimonia)
and the life of virtue blessed with all the beneﬁts of good
fortune (to makarion). These topics were examined most
carefully in the medieval commentaries of the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries. Whatever the ultimate determi-
nation of these questions may be, Aristotle clearly viewed
happiness as a human activity that could be attained by
human efforts within a lifetime.
Augustine, like Aristotle, considers human goodness
to be a self-sufﬁcient end toward which all human activ-
ities are directed. Despite modern translations that often
render the words, ‘‘beatitudo’’ and ‘‘beatus,’’ as ‘‘happi-
ness’’ and ‘‘happy,’’ Augustine generally distinguishes
between the concepts of happiness and beatitude. His
preferred notion of human goodness is beatitude, which
consists in the eternal life granted by God. Augustine
interprets Paul’s exhortation to the Thessalonians to desire
without cessation (5, 17) as a reference to the blessed life
which is nothing other than eternal existence given by God
alone (Epistula 130, 4, 9). Earlier in the same letter,
Augustine compares earthly happiness (felicitas) unfavor-
ably with eternal beatitude. He admonishes Christians not
to consider themselves to be great because they enjoy those
pleasures that ﬂow only from a fountain of earthly
happiness (terrenae felicitatis). Augustine advises them to
condemn and scorn these things. (Epistula 130, 3, 7). In
another
letter
Augustine
again
dismisses
temporal
happiness (felicitas) in favor of the beatitude whereby
the soul becomes blessed (beata) when its mutable
nature is turned to the immutable good (Epistula, 140 2,
3 and 23, 56).
Augustine’s understanding of the nature of true beat-
itude remains remarkably consistent throughout his long
and proliﬁc literary career. In an early work devoted spe-
ciﬁcally to the topic of goodness and beatitude, the De
beata vita, Augustine argues that the possession of what
one desires brings beatitude. He adds another condition
that one must desire, and pursue, only good things.
Augustine then excludes transitory goods from those
objects that could possibly bring beatitude, since he
notes that all of these objects of desire may be lost. Even
when they are in our possession we fear that we may some
day lose them. Augustine makes the same arguments in the
tenth book of the Confessions (X, 25) and letter 130. What
completes the soul and fulﬁlls human desire is wisdom,
and true wisdom for Augustine is the recognition of divine
truth. Augustine claims that the full satisfaction of the soul
is the blessed life, which is gained through the pious and
complete recognition of God through whom one is led to
the truth enjoyed in the highest manner (De beata vita
4, 35; Confessions 10, 22). In book II of De libero arbitrio
Augustine argues that no one can become blessed except
by means of the supreme good, which is discovered in the
truth called wisdom (De libero arbitrio II, 9, 26; Confes-
sions 10, 24). Despite the doubts of his student, Evodius,
Augustine argues that a common, immutable and objec-
tive truth, which is separate from, and superior to, the
human mind, is the supreme good that reveals all true
goodness. Only one who enjoys this truth is indeed blessed
(beatus) (De libero arbitrio, II, 13, 36). Early in his career
Augustine relies on both philosophical and scriptural
arguments to determine the nature of wisdom and beati-
tude. He praises the conclusions of the Platonists that he
views as harmonious with the sacred truths of Christianity
(Contra academicos, III, 20, 43), but later in his
Rectractiones Augustine regrets his praise of human rea-
son, since it could bring great errors to Christian belief
(Rectractiones I, 14). In the Rectractiones Augustine doubts
seriously the ability of human reason to bring one to
beatitude. He admits that as far as human nature is
concerned nothing is better in mankind than mind and
reason. One who seeks beatitude, however, should not live
according to that mind, for then one would live according
to man, whereas to attain beatitude one must live
according to God. In order to achieve beatitude the
mind should not be content with itself, but should subject
itself to God (Retractiones I, 12).
While the moral doctrines of Boethius, Anselm, and
Abelard are interesting, and at times innovative, they do
not signiﬁcantly alter the Augustinian ideal of human
goodness. The primary challenge to Augustine’s notion
of beatitude occurs in the thirteenth century when the
Nicomachean Ethics was translated into Latin (Wieland
1981). The earliest commentators on the Ethica vetus
(books II and III of the NE) and the Ethica nova (book I)
failed to notice any great difference between Aristotle’s and
Augustine’s concepts of human goodness. The early
attempts to understand Aristotle’s ideal of happiness
were based upon its designation as a perfect activity of
the soul. To these Christian authors no act could be more
perfect than the soul’s union with God. They, therefore,
understood Boethius’ deﬁnition of beatitude as a ‘‘perfect
state with an accumulation of all goods’’ to be a ﬁtting
deﬁnition of the supreme human activity (Celano 2006).
An anonymous commentator on the Ethica nova considers
the Aristotelian and Boethian notions of human goodness
to be similar when he claims happiness to be nothing other
than ultimate perfection. This perfection is the delight in
the union of potency with its own act. This commentator,
while explaining the text of Aristotle, signals his preference
for the teachings of Augustine and Boethius when he uses
terms such and ‘‘perfection’’ and ‘‘delight’’ to describe the
450 H
Happiness

union of the soul with the Supreme Being. Like other
authors of this period he shifts the emphasis from the
soul’s activity to the divine object of contemplative action.
Happiness, therefore, actualizes every potential within the
soul by apprehending and contemplating the ﬁrst cause
(Tracey 2006).
Another anonymous commentator of this era under-
stands happiness to be the unqualiﬁed perfection of the
soul. All human endeavors become merely means whereby
the soul is joined to the Supreme Being, and this being is
happiness in the proper sense. Human beings cannot
attain happiness through their virtuous activities; they
can only be joined to happiness as the Supreme Being
itself (Gauthier 1975). This understanding of the meaning
of happiness appears in the works of the commentator
erroneously identiﬁed as John Pecham, Arnoul of Pro-
vence and the compiler of the examination guide for
students in the Arts Faculty at Paris (Celano 2006). During
this early period of assimilating Aristotle’s ethics, Robert
Kilwardby distinguishes clearly between the philosophical
ideal of happiness and the Christian belief in perfect beat-
itude. He limits Boethius’deﬁnition of beatitude to what is
‘‘perfect’’ in the genus of human operations. He no longer
views happiness as a separate object to which one is
united, but rather restricts it to the perfection of the
potential within the human soul. Happiness, as deter-
mined by Aristotle, is an act (opus) that is proper to
a human being qua human, and cannot be the absolute
perfection of the separate soul. Kilwardby argues that his
contemporaries misunderstood Aristotle’s deﬁnition of
happiness as the perfect activity of the soul. For Kilwardby,
a concept of limited perfection within a genus is necessary
to understand the meaning of Aristotle’s central idea of
moral goodness properly. Kilwardby, like Albert and
Thomas, allows for the possibility that Aristotle thought
the absolute perfection of the separate soul to be possible,
but he dismisses such a discussion as irrelevant to philo-
sophical speculation (Celano 1999).
Albert the Great’s early work on goodness, the De
natura boni, contains a notion of happiness heavily
inﬂuenced by the insights of Augustine and Boethius.
Albert considers the ultimate perfection of the soul to be
unattainable through human efforts, since no one can
comprehend God without error. Through its own powers
the soul may perform virtuous acts that merely prepare it
for the reception of the supreme perfection of beatitude.
Albert’s De bono, however, represents a transitional phase
in his understanding of happiness and beatitude, since he
considers the question both in Aristotelian and Augustin-
ian terms. Albert provides in the ﬁrst Latin commentary
on the entire text of the Nicomachean Ethics, the Super
ethica, his most profound and complex determination of
the questions concerning human happiness. Albert here
concentrates upon the problem of human happiness on
earth, and relegates the problem of the absolute perfection
of the soul to theological considerations (Mu¨ller 2001).
The unifying element within moral theory is contempla-
tive happiness, the intellectual activity of wisdom that
elicits and completes all other human acts. The practical
realm is governed by prudence, which is the primary
operation of civic happiness, and to which all moral vir-
tues are directed. Albert so closely identiﬁes the habit of
civic happiness with that of prudence itself that he says
civic happiness is the activity of prudence, which regulates
and determines all other moral virtues. Albert’s under-
standing of the directive force of the virtues of wisdom and
prudence leads him to conclude that there are two distinct
human ends: (1) civic happiness, which is ordered to
(2) contemplative happiness. The former happiness
disposes a human being to the latter by calming passions
and permitting uninterrupted intellectual activity. By
identifying the goal of contemplation, and therefore all
human endeavors, to be knowledge of the ﬁrst being,
Albert believes his interpretation to be consistent with
the intention of Aristotle. Albert seeks to deﬁne human
goodness only insofar as it falls within the category of
operata bona. Although the division of happiness into
two distinct types, each complete within its own order,
is a misreading of Aristotle’s own doctrine, Albert’s
explanation of happiness had enormous inﬂuence on
subsequent commentaries on the Nicomachean Ethics.
Only Thomas Aquinas and Boethius of Dacia rejected
Albert’s interpretation in favor of a uniﬁed concept of
happiness, in which both contemplation and moral
practice contribute to the single human goal of happiness
(Celano 1987).
In his commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics
Thomas Aquinas limits his discussion to a consideration
of the supreme end among all human actions (summum
omnium operatorum). Thomas’ distinction between the
philosopher’s felicitas and the theologian’s beatitudo per-
mits him in his philosophical works to concentrate upon
the way in which a person attains human happiness during
a lifetime. Aristotle’s praise of the contemplative life con-
vinces Thomas that happiness results from the exercise of
the soul’s intellectual abilities. While both Albert and
Thomas understand contemplation to be the supreme
achievement of a human being, Thomas does not divide
the intellectual and moral virtues into two distinct types of
happiness (due felicitates). He regards these virtues as
complementary elements of human perfection, which
together constitute human happiness.
Happiness H
451
H

Since contemplative activity is essential to the attain-
ment of happiness, Thomas must identify that object
which best perfects the intellect. He concludes that happi-
ness is achieved through an intellectual union of man with
God. This knowledge of God is, however, imperfect and
interrupted while the soul remains joined to the body. The
natural desire of humans to know leads them to speculate
metaphysically upon the nature, and primary cause, of all
being. Even Aristotle argued that the object of metaphysics
is divine, and that no one can be happy without some
knowledge of the ﬁrst being. In this way the pursuit of
philosophical knowledge and the desire for religious illu-
mination are similar. In order to explain the concept of
a single universal end for individual human beings, and to
account for individual accomplishment of such an end,
Thomas in the Summa theologiae divides the goal of
human actions into the ﬁnis cuius (the end of which)
and the ﬁnis quo (the end by which). The former term
refers to the ﬁrst being, which is the exact same object of
contemplation for all; the latter term designates the activ-
ities of individual human whereby happiness is achieved,
and which may differ according to the levels of virtue
attained.
Thomas follows Albert in distinguishing happiness
further into that which is according to the best which
can be (secundum optimum quod esse potest) and that
which exists essentially (secundum esse). This distinction
does not indicate the difference between Augustinian beat-
itude and Aristotelian eudaimonia, but rather a division
within human goodness on earth. This classiﬁcation
allowed Thomas and other commentators to resolve sat-
isfactorily the dilemma of Solon, who warned against
judging a man happy before death places him beyond
the reach of misfortune. Happiness in its essential nature
is the exercise of virtuous activity, which remains largely
unmoved by grave misfortune. Happiness according to its
best state can only occur when a virtuous person is blessed
with a multitude of the beneﬁts of good fortune. The
latter concept is equivalent to Thomas’ notion of imper-
fect beatitude because it designates the best possible
human life (beatitudo), which can always be subject to
change and loss (imperfecta). Thomas argues that misfor-
tune may tarnish beatitude (coinquinat beatitudinem), but
it alone cannot destroy happiness. Only the cessation of
virtuous activity can deprive one of happiness (Bradley
1997).
The Arts Masters, who commented upon the ethics of
Aristotle, generally avoided the difﬁcult question of the
relation between the philosophical ideal of happiness and
the Christian concept of perfect beatitude. Unlike Augus-
tine, they did not urge others to scorn and condemn
earthly happiness, but they cannot come to a resolution
concerning the way in which the virtuous life contributes
to the expectation of the perfect vision of God. Thomas,
like many others in this era, argues that Aristotle was not
concerned with the fate of the soul after death, but did not
expressly deny the possibility of eternal perfection.
Although Thomas concludes from philosophical princi-
ples that the knowledge of God that constitutes perfect
beatitude must be considered superior to imperfect beat-
itude or happiness, he is very careful in his formulation of
the relation between the two ideals of human perfection.
He says in his commentary on the Sentences and in the
Summa theologiae that human happiness participates
somehow in perfect beatitude according to the condition
of human nature. Thomas does not make explicit the
nature of this participation, since he is aware of the danger
in claiming that human actions somehow merit eternal
beatitude. The participation of which he speaks is most
likely the similarity between the intellectual processes of
beatitude and happiness. On earth one may attain
a ﬂeeting and partial understanding of the ﬁrst cause
through contemplation; after death this understanding is
made complete and eternal.
Thomas’ modest claim about the participation of hap-
piness in beatitude provoked a swift and hostile reaction
from theologians, who preferred Augustine’s notion of
human perfection to Aristotle’s ideal (Celano 1990).
Henry of Ghent criticizes those whom he believed to
have overemphasized human actions at the expense of
the divine object of universal desire. For Henry, beatitude
is the vision of the essence of God, which is hidden from
human science and results only from the will’s reception of
divine grace. Such a reception may occur imperfectly on
earth and perfectly after death. John Duns Scotus, like
Bonaventure before him, prefers to ignore the question
of the connection between earthly happiness and eternal
beatitude. Scotus identiﬁes true beatitude with the
supreme perfection of a beatiﬁcable nature in complete
union with its highest object. Because reason knows noth-
ing concerning the true nature of happiness (felicitas), the
opinions of Aristotle and other philosophers have no
authority whatsoever. William of Ockham prefers the ter-
minology of Augustine (frui and diligere Deum) to that of
Aristotle (felicitas and cognitio Dei) when discussing
human goodness. Ockham dismisses any natural progres-
sion from knowledge of created causes to an understand-
ing of the ﬁrst cause. He also denies the existence of any
natural inclination to human perfection, and views moral
goodness and human fulﬁllment as the result of the will’s
desire to love God above all things. While Albert and
Thomas attempted to discover a connection between
452 H
Happiness

imperfect earthly knowledge of God and the perfect vision
of the divine being, Ockham insists that the topic of
beatitude is best treated as a matter of faith. No natural
means can determine with any certainty that the beatiﬁc
vision is a universal goal for all human beings. Ockham
doubts that human reason can identify God as the cause of
beatitude, but he does admit that complete divine causal-
ity is a more likely explanation than any that involves
human cooperation.
Despite the importance of the Nicomachean Ethics
within the curriculum of the medieval universities,
Aristotle’s ideal of human happiness never replaced the
doctrines of Augustine and Boethius, who identify true
human beatitude with the absolute perfection of the sep-
arate soul. Some thinkers, such as Meister Eckhart and
Johannes Tauler, reject the Aristotelian virtues completely
in
favor
of
the
Christian
practices
of
acceptance
(Gelassenheit) and detachment (Abgeschiedenheit) (Enders
1996). Even in works of authors sympathetic to philo-
sophical moral speculation the tension between rational
and religious ideals is never resolved. Thomas Aquinas in
a sermon delivered relatively late in his life indicates his
acceptance of the Christian path toward human perfection
when he states that an old woman after the coming of
Christ knows more about living well and has a greater
knowledge of God than any philosopher with all his argu-
ments (Ayo 1988). Since living well and cognition of God
are synonymous with Aristotle’s notion of happiness,
Thomas, like many of his contemporaries, recognizes the
superiority of the Christian understanding of human per-
fection over the accomplishments of philosophical reason
in the ﬁnal determination of the nature of human happi-
ness and beatitude.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Augustine ▶Boethius
▶Boethius
of
Dacia
▶Ethics
▶Henry
of
Ghent
▶John Duns Scotus ▶John Pecham ▶Nicomachean
Ethics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Robert Kilwardby
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Thomism ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aristotle (1890) Ethica Nicomachea, ed. Bywater I. Oxford University
Press, Oxford
Aristotle (1972) Ethica Nicomachea. Ethica nova, ed. Gauthier RA.
Aristoteles Latinus, XXVI, 1–3, 2. Brill/Descle´e de Brower, Leiden/
Brussels
Augustine (1902) Rectractionum libri duo, ed. Kno¨ll P. Corpus
scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum, 36. Vienna
Augustine (1970) Contra Academicos, De beata vita, De libero arbitrio,
ed. Green W. Corpus Chistianorum series latina, 29. Brepols,
Turnholt
Augustine (1981) Confessionum libri XIII, ed. Verheijen L. Corpus
Chistianorum series latina, 27. Brepols, Turnholt
Augustine (1895–1923) Epistulae, Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum
latinorum, 34, 44, 57, 58. Vienna, Leipzig, Patrologia latina, 33,
61–1162
Boethius (2000) De consolatione philosophiae, Opuscula theologica, ed.
Moreschini C. Bibliotecheca scriptorum Graecorum et Romanorum
Teubneriana. Saur, Munich
Duns Scotus John (1894) In IV Sententiarum, Joannis Duns Scoti Opera
omnia, 21. Vive`s, Paris
Henry of Ghent (1520) Summa quaestionum ordinarium, ed. Buytaerts E.
Paris (repr. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure, 1951)
Magnus Albertus (1951) De bono. Alberti magni Opera omnia, 28, ed,
Ku¨hle H et al. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Magnus Albertus (1968–1972) Super Ethica commentum et quaestiones.
Alberti Magni Opera omnia, 14, 1–2, ed. Ku¨bel W. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster
Magnus Albertus (1974) De natura boni. Albert Magni Opera omnia, 25,
1, ed. Filthaut E. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Thomas Aquinas (1950) Summa theologiae, Ottawa.
Thomas Aquinas (1969) Sententia libri Ethicorum, Sancti Thomae de
Aquino Opera omnia, vol 47, 1&2, ed. Gauthier R-A. Commissio
Leonina, Rome
William of Ockham (1967) Scriptum in librum primum Sententiarum
ordination. In: Gal G, Brown S (eds) Guillelmi de Ockham Opera
theologica, 1. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
William of Ockham (1984) Quaestiones in librum quartum sententiarum
(reportatio), In: Wood R et al. (eds) Guillemi de Ockham Opera
theologica, 7. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Ayo N (ed and trans) (1988) The sermon-conferences of St. Thomas
Aquinas on the apostles’ creed.
Notre Dame University Press,
Notre Dame
Bradley D (1997) Aquinas on the twofold human good: reason and
human happiness in the moral science. The Catholic University of
America Press, Washington
Celano A (1987) The concept of worldly beatitude in the writings of
Thomas Aquinas. J Hist Philos 25(2):215–226 (repr. in Great Political
Thinkers, Dunn J, Harris I (eds) (1994), vol VII. Elgar, Cheltenham)
Celano A (1990) Act of the intellect or act of the will: the critical reception
of Aristotle’s ideal of human perfection in the 13th and early 14th
centuries. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du moyen aˆge
57:93–119
Celano A (1999) Robert Kilwardby on the relation of virtue to happiness.
Mediev Philos Theol 8:149–162
Celano A (2006) The understanding of beatitude, the perfection of the
soul, in the early Latin commentaries on Aristotle’s nicomachean
ethics. Documenti e Studi sulla Tradizione Filosoﬁca Medievale
17:1–22
Cooper J (1975) Reason and human good in Aristotle. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
Enders M (1996) Abgeschiedenheit des Geistes: hochste ‘Tugend’ des
Menschen und fundamentale Seinsweise Gottes. Theol Philos
71:63–87
Gauthier R-A (1975) Le Cours sur l’Ethica nova d’un maitre e`s Arts de
Paris (1235-1240). Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du
moyen aˆge 42:71–141
Mu¨ller J (2001) Natu¨rliche Moral und philosophische Ethik bei Albertus
Magnus. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des
Mittelalters: Texte und Untersuchungen, Neue Folge, 59. Mu¨nster
Happiness H
453
H

Nussbaum M (1986) The fragility of goodness: luck and ethics in Greek
tragedy and philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Tracey M (2006) An early 13th-century commentary on Aristotle’s
Nicomachean Ethics, I, 4–10: The Lectio cum Questionibus of an
Arts-Master at Paris in MS Napoli, Biblioteca Nazionale, VIII G*, ff.
4r-9v. Documenti e Studi sulla Tradizione Filosoﬁca Medievale
17:23–71
Wieland G (1981) Ethica – scientia practica, Die Anfa¨nge der
philosophischen Ethik im 13. Jahrhundert. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte
der Philosophie des Mittelalters, Neue Folge, 21. Mu¨nster
Hasdai Crescas
TAMAR RUDAVSKY
Department of Philosophy
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH
USA
Abstract
Hasdai ben Judah Crescas (c. 1340–1410/1411) is the last
outstanding original Jewish philosopher in the late medi-
eval period. Although Crescas had no interest in science
per se, he was embroiled in precisely the same set of
scientiﬁc issues that occupied scholastic philosophers
after the condemnation of 1277. His major work Sefer Or
Adonai (The Book of the Light of the Lord, 1405–1410),
ﬁnished several months before his death, is a polemic
against his two Aristotelian predecessors Maimonides
and Gersonides. In this work, Crescas sought to under-
mine the Aristotelian cosmology and physics that per-
vaded the works of his predecessors. Crescas’ critique of
Aristotelianism was momentous in that while arguing for
the liberation of Scripture, he was arguing as well for the
liberation of science. Thus, many of his anti-Aristotelian
arguments contain what turn out to be scientiﬁc
innovations.
Biographical Information
Hasdai ben Judah Crescas (c. 1340–1410/1411) is the last
outstanding original Jewish philosopher in the late medi-
eval period. Although Crescas had no interest in science
per se, he was embroiled in precisely the same set of
scientiﬁc issues that occupied scholastic philosophers
after the condemnation of 1277. Crescas was born in
Barcelona and studied with the famed philosopher Nissim
ben Reuben Girondi. In 1389, he assumed the post of rabbi
of Saragossa. In 1391, responding to riots against the Jews,
Crescas wrote a polemic Sefer bittul Iqqarei ha-Nozrim
(The Book of the Refutation of the Principles of the Chris-
tians, 1397–1398) in which he argued that major Christian
principles such as Original Sin, the Trinity, and Transub-
stantiation are all self-contradictory and philosophically
absurd. His major work Sefer Or Adonai (The Book of the
Light of the Lord, 1405–1410), ﬁnished several months
before his death, was written as a polemic against his two
Aristotelian predecessors Maimonides and Gersonides. In
this work, Crescas sought to undermine the Aristotelian
cosmology and physics that pervaded the works of his
predecessors. A ﬁnal extant work is his philosophical and
halakhic Sermon on the Passover (Derashat ha-Pesah),
which contains discussions of miracles, faith, and free
choice.
Philosophical System
Crescas’ major philosophical work Or Adonai was directed
against
those
Aristotelians
(e.g.,
Maimonides
and
Gersonides) who in his mind, used Aristotle’s arguments
to undermine Judaism. In an attempt to weaken Aristotle’s
hold upon Jewish philosophy, and to uphold the basic
dogmas of Judaism, Crescas subjects Aristotle’s physics
and metaphysics to a trenchant critique. The work is
divided into four books that analyze (1) the roots or ﬁrst
principles (shorashim) of Scripture, (2) the fundamental
beliefs or cornerstones (pinnot) of Scripture, (3) the true
doctrines of Scripture (de’ot amitiot), and (4) some non-
obligatory speculations in Scripture (de’ot usevarot).
This distinction is based on Crescas’ belief that the prin-
cipal beliefs of Judaism are those without which there
could be no revealed religion in general, or Judaism in
particular. All of his anti-Aristotelian diatribes thus occur
against the backdrop of Scriptural concerns. As Harvey
has pointed out (Harvey 2007), Crescas’ critique of
Aristotelianism was momentous in that while arguing for
the liberation of Scripture, he was arguing as well for the
liberation of science. Thus, many of his anti-Aristotelian
arguments contain what turn out to be scientiﬁc
innovations.
Book One of Or Adonai addresses the roots of Jewish
belief, central of which is belief in God. Maimonides had
provided Aristotelian arguments for the existence, unity,
and incorporeality of God, maintaining that correct
beliefs about God must be based in sound Aristotelian
principles; these arguments were based on 26 proposi-
tions drawn from the corpus of Aristotle’s physics.
Crescas, however, objected to Maimonides’ approach,
arguing that God’s existence, unity, and incorporeality
cannot be based on philosophical proofs, for these
‘‘proofs’’ are themselves based on faulty propositions.
Crescas thus proceeds to show the weaknesses inherent
454 H
Hasdai Crescas

in each of the 26 propositions adduced by Maimonides.
For example, Crescas rejects Aristotle’s theory of place
and argues that place is prior to bodies: in contradistinc-
tion to Aristotle’s conception of place, space for Crescas
is not a mere relationship of bodies but is the ‘‘interval
between the limits of that which it surrounds’’ (Wolfson
1929:195). Space is seen by Crescas as an inﬁnite contin-
uum ready to receive matter. Because this place or exten-
sion of bodies is identiﬁed with space, there is no
contradiction in postulating the existence of space not-
ﬁlled with body, i.e., the vacuum (see Wolfson 1929:38–
69). Crescas, in fact, assumes that place is identical with
the void, on the grounds that ‘‘place must be equal to the
whole of its occupant as well as to [the sum of] its parts’’
(Wolfson 1929:199).
Further, Crescas rejects Aristotle’s theory of time,
arguing that the correct deﬁnition of time is that it is
the measure of the continuity of motion or of rest
between two instants. By hitdabequt, Crescas means to
emphasize that time is not to be identiﬁed with physical
motion or bodies, but with the duration of the life of the
thinking soul. Time is ‘‘indeed measured by both motion
and rest, because it is our conception (tziyurenu) of the
measure of their continuity that is time’’ (Wolfson
1929:289).
On
this
basis,
Crescas
concludes
that
‘‘the existence of time is only in the soul’’ (ibid). It is
because humans have a mental conception of this mea-
sure that time even exists. The continuity of time
depends only upon a thinking mind, and is indeﬁnite,
becoming deﬁnite only by being measured by motion.
Were we not to conceive of it, there would be no time. It
is in this context that Crescas comes closest to reﬂecting
his near scholastic contemporaries Peter Auriol and
William
of
Ockham,
both
of
whom
develop
a subjective theory of time.
In book two of Or Adonai, Crescas lists the six beliefs
that are intrinsic to a notion of divine revelation: God’s
knowledge of particulars, Providence, God’s power,
prophecy, human choice, and the purposefulness of the
Torah. Each of these beliefs is then analyzed in light of the
tension between religion and reason. In each case, Crescas
reintroduces his rejection of an Aristotelian intellectualis-
tic conception of the relation between God and humanity.
Versions of this intellectual Aristotelianism can be found
in Crescas’ predecessors Maimonides and Gersonides, and
includes the following sorts of positions: God does not
know particulars; God cannot exercise providence over
particulars; God’s power is limited by the laws of nature;
prophecy is a natural phenomenon that requires intellec-
tual preparation on the part of the prophet; free will is
possible, since God has no knowledge of future events; and
the purpose of Torah is to provide intellectual, as opposed
to moral, perfection. Crescas rejects their views, arguing
that God acts toward the world with goodness, love, and
grace. Against Gersonides, for example, Crescas afﬁrms
God’s knowledge of future contingents, even those deter-
mined by human choice. He then argues that human
freedom is only apparent and not genuine: humans think
they are free because they are ignorant of the causes of
their choices. Human responsibility for action lies not in
the actual performance of the action, but rather in the
agent’s acceptance of an action as its own. The feeling of
joy an agent feels at acquiescing to certain actions, e.g.,
fulﬁlling the commandments, is the reward for that action.
So too, God experiences joy in giving of himself to the
world (Crescas 1990:123–205).
Of the non-fundamental obligatory beliefs, Crescas
in book three distinguishes those beliefs that are indepen-
dent of speciﬁc commandments (e.g., creation, survival of
the soul, reward and punishment, resurrection) from
those dependent on speciﬁc commandments (e.g., the
efﬁcacy of prayer, the spiritual value of the festivals). The
denial of even the non-fundamental beliefs, according to
Crescas, leads to heresy. In this context, his discussion
of the doctrine of creation is noteworthy. In contra-
distinction to Maimonides who in Guide 2:25 argued
that the doctrine of creation is necessary to uphold the
validity of Judaism, Crescas argues that one could believe
in revelation even if the world were eternal. In fact, he
goes on to argue that the doctrine of creation is best
understood as eternal emanation of the world: the world
is both created and eternal (see Crescas 1990:273–318;
Feldman 1980).
Many scholars have tried to trace the formative inﬂu-
ences upon Crescas’ thought. In his recent study of
Crescas’ Sermon on the Passover, Ravitzky has argued that
Crescas’ discussion of will appears to reﬂect a connection
to Latin scholasticism in its acceptance of Scotist ideas
regarding the moral and religious primacy of the will
(Ravitzky 1988:viii). After noting important similarities
and differences between Aquinas’ and Crescas’ concep-
tions of belief, Ravitzky turns to a comparison of Scotus
and Crescas, arguing that both philosophers reject their
predecessors’ insistence upon an intellectualist conception
belief that leads to ultimate felicity, and replace it with
a conception of belief based on the primacy of will
(Ravitzky 1988:54–60).
In a similar vein, Harvey suggests that Crescas’ work
was ‘‘perhaps connected in some way with the pioneering
work in natural science being conducted at the University
of Paris’’ (Harvey 1998:23). More speciﬁcally, Harvey has
compared the works of the two contemporaries Nicholas
Hasdai Crescas H
455
H

Oresme and Crescas, arguing that they are the two most
important philosophers representing the new physics.
Working in Pamplona in the 1330s, both argue for the
existence of many worlds, both claim that many worlds
do not imply existence of more than one God, and both
argue that generation and corruption in the sublunary
world is evidence for successive worlds. Crescas himself
describes his analysis and critique of Aristotelian science
as having ‘‘no small beneﬁt for this science’’ (Wolfson
1929:180). In fact, it can be argued that Crescas’ critique of
Aristotle helped lay the groundwork for the abandonment
of Aristotelian science in subsequent centuries.
See also: ▶Gersonides ▶Moses Maimonides ▶Time
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Crescas Hasdai (1990) The light of the lord (Sefer Or Adonai or Or Ha-
Shem), ed. Fisher S. Sifrei Ramot, Jerusalem; Editio princeps, Ferrara
(1555)
Crescas Hasdai (1992) The refutation of the Christian principles, trans.
and intro. Lasker DJ. SUNY, Albany
Secondary Sources
Feldman S (1980) The theory of eternal creation in Hasdai Crescas and
some of his predecessors. Viator 11:289–320
Harvey WZ (1980) The term hitdabbekut in Crescas’ deﬁnition of time.
Jew Quart Rev 71:44–47
Harvey WZ (1998) Physics and metaphysics in Hasdai Crescas. Gieben,
Amsterdam
Harvey WZ (2007) Crescas. In: Berenbaum M, Skolnik F (eds) Encyclo-
pedia Judaica, 2nd edn. Macmillan Reference USA, Detroit
Lasker D (1977) Jewish philosophical polemics against Christianity in the
Middle Ages. Ktav Publishing House, New York
Lasker D (1997) Crescas. In: Frank DH, Leaman O (eds) History of Jewish
philosophy. Routledge, London/New York, pp 399–414
Pines S (1967) Scholasticism after Thomas Aquinas and the teachings of
Hasdai Crescas and his predecessors. Proc Isr Acad Sci Humanit
1(10):1–101
Ravitzky A (1998) Sermon on the passover (Derashat ha-Pesach le-Rab
Hasdai
Crescas
u-Mehqarim
be-Mishnato
ha-Philosoﬁt).
ha-
Ak˙ademyah ha-le’umit ha-Yis´re’elit le-mada’im, Jerusalem
Robinson JT (2007) Hasdai Crescas and anti-Aristotelianism. In:
Frank DH, Leaman O (eds) The Cambridge companion to medieval
Jewish philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp
391–413
Wolfson HA (1929) Crescas’ critique of Aristotle. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
Helias, Peter
▶Peter Helias
Heloise
CONSTANT J. MEWS
Centre for Studies in Religion and Theology
School of Historical Studies
Monash University
Clayton, VIC
Australia
Abstract
Heloise (c. 1095–1164) was the lover and intellectual part-
ner of the controversial philosopher and theologian, Peter
Abelard (1079–1142), and abbess of a religious commu-
nity that he entrusted to her, the abbey of the Paraclete
from 1129 until her death. She is most well-known for the
letters that she exchanged with Peter Abelard c. 1132/1133,
after reacting to his Historia calamitatum, in which he
argued that providence had enabled him to survive
a turbulent career in which she herself was profoundly
implicated. Whereas Abelard had presented their affair
simply in terms of lust, Heloise emphasizes that she had
always been driven by ideals of selﬂess love. In a third
letter, she extends her interest in the ethics of intention,
asks him for an account of religious women in history, and
a rule better adapted to the needs of women. Widely
revered for her learning, she prompted Abelard to provide
many writings for the Paraclete, including responses to
a series of forty-two Problemata about questions presented
by inconsistencies within the Bible. Mews (1999, 2009)
argues that she is the young woman whose voice is pre-
served in an exchange of over one hundred Latin love
letters
(the
Epistolae
duorum
amantium)
between
a controversial teacher and his brilliant pupil, preserved
in a ﬁfteenth-century manuscript of Clairvaux.
Biographical Information
From Abelard’s Historia calamitatum, we learn that
Heloise was the niece of Fulbert, a canon of the cathedral
of Notre-Dame, Paris. She had been raised and educated at
the royal abbey of Argenteuil, but had moved to Paris to
live in her uncle’s house in the cathedral cloister, in order
to pursue further her studies. Nothing is known of her
father, but her mother could have been Hersende of
Champagne, a noble widow of Anjou, who befriended
the controversial preacher Robert of Arbrissel, c. 1095,
and enabled Fontevraud to be established c. 1100 as an
abbey of which she became the prioress (Robl 2003; Mews
2006). Heloise inherited a similar revulsion for hypocrisy
in religious life as inspired Robert of Arbrissel and the
456 H
Helias, Peter

early community at Fontevraud, but combined this with
a profound interest in classical literature and ethics, echo-
ing the interests of Baudri of Bourgueil and his literary
circle, which included women connected to religious
houses like Argenteuil.
Her relationship with Abelard developed through an
intense exchange of letters c. 1115–1117, climaxing in her
becoming pregnant and giving birth to Astralabe. She
initially resisted Abelard’s insistence that they should
marry with arguments recalled by Abelard in the Historia
calamitatum. After reluctantly yielding to Abelard’s desire
for a secret marriage, Heloise moved back to Argenteuil,
but only became a nun; thereafter, Abelard had been
castrated, and had chosen to become a monk at St.
Denis. Heloise rose to become prioress of the community
at Argenteuil until 1129, when the nuns were expelled by
Suger, abbot of St. Denis, who successfully took over the
abbey in that year, replacing the nuns with his own monks.
This prompted Heloise to obtain from Abelard control
over the oratory, dedicated to the Paraclete that Abelard
had initially established in 1122, after escaping from St.
Denis. Abelard recalls these early years of the Paraclete in
the Historia calamitatum, ostensibly written to provide
encouragement for a ‘‘friend’’ then experiencing distress,
but quite likely intended to offer guidance and support for
the nuns of the Paraclete. Heloise proved much more
successful than Abelard in building up this community,
obtaining papal protection for it in 1131. By resuming
contact with Abelard, through both letters and visits,
Heloise elicited from him a signiﬁcant series of letters
and writings, by putting issues and questions to him that
had a signiﬁcant effect on his own intellectual develop-
ment. The authenticity of her letters, once questioned by
scholars, is now widely accepted (Newman 1992). She
became widely respected by contemporaries for her
wisdom, learning, and literary activity, otherwise only
known through her exchanges with Abelard.
Thought
Perhaps the most celebrated statement of Heloise is her
rejection of the notion of marriage and external wealth,
articulated in her initial response to Abelard’s Historia
calamitatum. In a phrase that would be picked up by Jean
de Meun in The Romance of the Rose, she says that she
would rather have not married, and be called his prostitute
(meretrix) than to obtain the wealth of the whole world as
the empress (imperatrix) of Augustus (Letter 2, ed. Hicks,
49). Although this has often been read in a romantic sense
as a declaration of her selﬂess love, Heloise’s argument here
is part of a broader ethical reﬂection that true love is like
true friendship in not being based on any external reward,
but is pursued solely for the sake of the other person.
Heloise takes the Ciceronian ideal that friendship should
not be pursued for personal gain, but here transposes it to
her own situation, that of her friendship with Abelard
(Mews 2007). She does not accept Abelard’s presentation
of their love (amor) in the past, as having been essentially
lustful in character. After Abelard had responded with
a letter urging her to turn her attention to Christ, away
from the past, Heloise develops further arguments in her
impassioned second letter about her failure to feel truly
repentant about her past behavior, because she is certain
about the fundamental rightness of her love for Abelard –
even if she had committed sins in the eyes of the Church.
These arguments challenge Abelard’s contrast between self-
ish lust and the love he thinks she should develop for Christ.
A similar emphasis on selﬂess love is evident in the
young woman’s letters in the Epistolae duorum amantium,
attributed to Heloise by Mews (1999) and Piron (2005),
a view contested by Von Moos (2003) and Ziolkowski
(2004). In letter 25, she responds to his attempt in letter
24 to answer her question about the nature of love, by
adopting quite a different approach from her teacher.
Whereas he had paraphrased Cicero’s notion that love
creates a common mind to emphasize that love already
existed between them, she argues that true love is more of
an ideal that they strive to reach, but which must be
distinguished from general precepts about loving one’s
neighbor, and must involve the correct inner disposition.
In letter 49, she engages on an extended reﬂection, linking
amor to dilectio and amicitia as not concerned with exter-
nal gain. This prompts her teacher to reﬂect in letter 50,
that she was not so much inspired by Cicero, as giving him
instruction – an accurate observation given that Cicero
had only theorized friendship within an all-male context
and had not related amicitia to the notion of dilectio.
During their early relationship, Abelard may have admired
such ideas in Heloise, but he was then more preoccupied
intellectually by questions of logic than of ethics.
Heloise seems to have had more inﬂuence in shaping
Abelard’s ethical ideas after resuming correspondence
with him in the 1130s. Her emphasis, however, is always
that outward behavior should reﬂect inner intention
(Georgianna 1987). This underpins her critique of con-
temporary religious life. The 42 questions or Problemata
that she puts to Abelard similarly show that she was also
acutely aware of contradictions within the scriptural
record, and shared Abelard’s concern to identify its under-
lying signiﬁcance, beyond the variation evident in speciﬁc
accounts within the Bible.
See also: ▶Bernard of Clairvaux ▶Peter Abelard
Heloise H
457
H

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Heloise (1991) Letters 2, 4, 6. In: Hicks E (ed) La Vie et les epistres Pierres
Abaelart et Heloys sa fame. Honore´ Champion, Paris
Ko¨nsgen E (ed) (1974) Epistolae duorum amantium: Briefe Abaelards
und Heloises? Mittellateinische Studien und Texte 8. Brill, Leiden
MonfrinJacques(ed)(1978) Abelard Peter,Historiacalamitatum.Vrin, Paris
Muckle JT (ed) (1953) The personal letters between Abelard and He´loı¨se.
Mediaev Stud 15:47–94
Muckle JT (1955) The letter of He´loı¨se on the religious life and Abelard’s
ﬁrst reply. Mediaev Stud 17:240–281
Piron Sylvain (trans) (2005) Lettres des deux amants. Gallimard, Paris
Problemata Heloissae, ed. Migne J-P PL 178:677–730
Radice Betty (trans) (2003) The letters of Abelard and Heloise. Penguin,
London
Secondary Sources
Georgianna L (1987) Any corner of heaven: Heloise’s critique of monastic
life. Mediaev Stud 49:221–53 (repr. in revised form in Wheeler B (ed)
Listening to Heloise, pp 187–216)
Gilson E (1960) Heloise and Abelard, trans. Shook L. University of
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor
Grifﬁths F (2004) ‘Men’s duty to provide for women’s needs’: Abelard,
Heloise, and their negotiation of the Cura Monialium. J Mediev Hist
30:1–24
Lobrichon G (2005) He´loı¨se. L’amour et le savoir. Gallimard, Paris
Marenbon J (2008) Lost love letters? A controversy in retrospect. Int
J Class Tradit 4:267–280
McLeod E (1971) He´loı¨se. A biography, 2nd edn. Chatto & Windus,
London (ﬁrst published 1938)
McNamer EM (1991) The education of Heloise: methods, content, and
purpose of learning in the twelfth century. E. Mellen Press, Lewiston
Mews CJ (1999) The lost love letters of Heloise and Abelard. St Martin’s
Press, New York (2nd edn, 2008)
Mews CJ (2005) Abelard and Heloise. Oxford University Press, New York
Mews CJ (2006) Negotiating the boundaries of gender in religious life:
Robert of Arbrissel and Hersende, Abelard and Heloise. Viator
37:113–148
Mews CJ (2007) Cicero and the boundaries of friendship in the twelfth
century. Viator 38(2):369–384
Mews CJ (2009) Discussing love: the epistolae duorum amantium and
Abelard’s Sic et Non. J Mediev Latin 19:130–147
Newman B (1992) Authority, authenticity, and the repression of Heloise.
J Mediev Renaiss Stud 22:121–57 (repr. From virile woman to
womanChrist: studies in medieval religion and literature, University
of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, 1995, pp 19–45)
Nye A (1992) A woman’s thought or a man’s discipline? The letters of
Abelard and Heloise. Hypatia: J Feminist Philos 7:1–22
Robl W (2003) Hersindis Mater. Neues zur Familiengeschichte Heloisas
mit Ausblicken auf die Familie Peter Abaelards. In: Ursula Niggli (ed)
Peter Abaelard. Leben, Werk, Wirkung. Herder, Freiburg im
Breisgau, pp 25–89
Von Moos P (2003) Die Epistolae duorum amantium und die sa¨kulare
Religion der Liebe. Methodenkritische Voru¨berlegungen zu einem
einmaligen Werk mittellateinischer Brieﬂiteratur. Studi Medievali 3a
ser. 44:1–115
Wheeler B (ed) (2000) Listening to Heloise. The voice of a twelfth-century
woman. St Martin’s Press, New York
Ziolkowski J (2004) Lost and not yet found: Heloise, Abelard, and the
Epistolae duorum amantium. J Mediev Latin 14:171–202
Henry Harclay
JOHN T. SLOTEMAKER
Department of Theology
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
The works of Henry Harclay include his unedited com-
mentary on the Sentences and 29 Quaestiones ordinariae.
The early Parisian commentary of Harclay demonstrates
a Scotistic and realist inﬂuence, while his latter questions
at Oxford break with John Duns Scotus in numerous ways
that anticipate the writings of William of Ockham.
Harclay’s positions on universals and relations are central
to understanding his break with Scotus as he develops an
antirealist position on both universals and real relations.
Henry Harclay (b. c. 1270– d. 1317) was an Englishman
and a theologian who served as the Chancellor of Oxford
University from 1312–1317. He was ordained to the secu-
lar clergy (1297) and lectured on Peter Lombard’s
Sentences at Paris around 1300; he became a master of
theology at Oxford sometime before 1312. These dates
and locations place Harclay in an interesting historical
position between John Duns Scotus and William of Ock-
ham; lecturing on the Sentences while Duns was in Paris
and serving as chancellor until the same year Ockham
began his lectures on the Sentences at Oxford (1317–
1319). During his chancelorship, Harclay often sided
with the University against the Dominican Order,
a policy that is often evident philosophically and theo-
logically in his critiques of Thomas Aquinas (Maurer
1954:5–7). Harclay is particularly strong in his opposition
to Aquinas on the immortality of the soul, arguing that
Thomas betrayed the Christian faith in his attempt to
reconcile it with Aristotle (Maurer 1957:II 40–44).
The writings of Harclay can be divided into a Parisian
period (Commentary on Book I of the Sentences) and an
Oxford period (Quaestiones ordinariae). The commentary
on the ﬁrst book of the Sentences is unedited and exists in
two codices (MS Vat. lat., 13,687 and Casale Monteferrato,
Biblioteca del Seminario Vescovile, MS b 2); the 29
Quaestiones ordinariae have recently been edited and
translated by M. Henninger and are published in the series
Auctores Britannici Medii Aevi (2008). The earlier work
originating from Paris demonstrates a close adherence to
the writings of Scotus, often adhering to the Subtle
458 H
Henry Harclay

Doctor’s
argumentation
or
citing
him
explicitly
(Henninger 1981). Harclay is a careful and subtle thinker,
developing complex arguments and citing both patristic
and medieval authorities with remarkable precision.
The Ontology of Universals and Relations
Harclay’s position on universals in his unedited commen-
tary on the Sentences remains obscure, but it is clear that by
the time he wrote Quaestio de universali at Oxford he is
increasingly critical of Scotus’ strong realist theory of
universals. Harclay states that in extramental reality the
only things that exist are singular (quod in re extra animam
nulla est res nisi singularis); commonness, it must be
stressed, is not an extramental reality (Ga´l 1971:211).
Harclay’s position is that there is no extramental common
nature; two singular things (individual) are related by rela-
tions of similarity.
Harclay’s position is that an individual can be con-
ceived either distinctly or indistinctly, and the example
Harclay uses is that of Socrates and Plato. When Socrates
is conceived distinctly, he is known through a particular
concept, when he is conceived indistinctly, he is known
through a universal concept. But, as Harclay argues, indis-
tinct knowledge of Socrates is confused knowledge; that is,
if one has indistinct knowledge of both Plato and Socrates
standing a half mile away, one conceives of Plato and
Socrates as human beings through a universal concept
(human being) that does not distinguish Plato from Soc-
rates. This knowledge is confused in that it cannot distin-
guish the universal concepts representing Plato and
Socrates. Harclay insists that all knowledge, whether con-
ceived distinctly or indistinctly, is of individuals. The
distinct knowledge of Socrates is clearly of an individual,
but so is the indistinct knowledge of Socrates in that the
confused concept exists as a singular thing in the soul in
that it is not predicable to another extramental thing. In
the example above of indistinct knowledge, this is evident
in the fact that there would be two indistinct concepts of
human being in the soul of the observer.
The position deﬁned above was criticized by Ockham
because surprisingly Harclay argues that both the confused
concept of Socrates and the singular extramental thing are
both universal; the confused concept is universal because it
represents many indistinct things in the species (different
human beings), and the singular extramental thing is uni-
versal when it is conceived indistinctly. The obvious objec-
tion of Ockham being that the same thing cannot be both
universal and particular (the singular extramental thing
above would be both universal and particular for Harclay).
Harclay’s theory of real relations developed in conver-
sation with and in reaction to Scotus’ theory of relations,
as Henninger has demonstrated (Henninger 1989). The
ﬁrst position held by Harclay in his Commentary on the
Sentences was similar to that of Scotus, but he would
eventually come to reject Scotus’ ontology of real relations
in his Quaestiones ordinariae.
Scotus held that a real relation was an extramental
relative thing, a res, which is distinct from but inheres in
its foundation. This formulation is rejected by Harclay
who agrees with Scotus that in order for there to be
a real relation it is necessary for there to be two
extramental realities that exist, but argues that the relation
is not a mind-independent thing (res) that inheres in a
foundation. The point is that the relation is not a tertium
quid, but a non-inhering condition in one of the
extramental realities (things) to the other. For example,
if Socrates is being seen by an Ox – to use Harclay’s
example – there is not a real relative thing that inheres
in Socrates. Rather, the Ox is ‘‘to the other,’’ or toward
Socrates, in a new way, what Harclay calls aditas.
Henninger has ﬂeshed out Harclay’s account of real
relations in great detail, demonstrating this ‘‘non-
inhering condition of a toward b’’ (aditas) as the distinc-
tive aspect of Harclay’s theory of relations (Henninger
1987:118).
Conclusion
The writings of Henry Harclay are theological in nature,
and his position on almost every philosophical topic is
intertwined with a theological vision. While this dichot-
omy is admittedly anachronistic, it must be insisted that
for Harclay the questions above involved signiﬁcant theo-
logical implications. For example, the discussion of real
relations has signiﬁcant implications for both Trinitarian
theology (Trinitarian relations) and God’s relationship to
creation.
The philosophical and theological views of Henry
Harclay are signiﬁcant as a witness to the intellectual
development between Scotus and Ockham, but also pos-
sess an intrinsic philosophical quality that warrants much
greater appreciation. It has been surmised since Armand
Maurer’s work on the univocity of being that Harclay is an
important antecedent to Ockham; a position that has been
supported since by G. Ga´l and M. Henninger (Ga´l
1971:183; Henninger 1989). The publication and transla-
tion of Henry’s Quaestiones ordinariae will certainly assist
in establishing Henry’s place in medieval philosophy and
theology and his complex relationship to both Scotus and
Ockham.
See also: ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Uni-
versals ▶William of Ockham
Henry Harclay H
459
H

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Manuscripts
Commentary on the ﬁrst book of the Sentences: Vatican Library Lat.
13,687, f. 13v–97v; Casale Monferrato, Biblioteca del Seminario
Vescovile MS b 2, f. 1r–84r
Edited Works
Ga´l Gedeon (1971) Henricus de Harclay: Quaestio de signiﬁcato concep-
tus universalis. Franciscan Stud 31:178–234
Henninger Mark (1980) Henry of Harclay’s questions on divine pre-
science and predestination. Franciscan Stud 40:167–243
Henninger Mark (1981) Henry of Harclay on the formal distinction in the
Trinity. Franciscan Stud 41:250–335
Henninger Mark (1987) Henry of Harclay’s question on relations. Medi-
aeval Stud 49:76–123
Henry Harclay (2008) Quaestiones ordinariae. In: Henninger M (ed)
Auctores Britannici Medii Aevi. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Maurer Armand (1957) Henry of Harclay’s questions on immortality.
Mediaeval Stud 19:79–107
Maurer Armand (1974) Henry of Harclay’s disputed question on the
plurality of forms. In: O’Donnell JR (ed) Essays in honor of Anton
Pegis. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto, pp 125–159
Secondary Sources
Dales RC (1984) Henry of Harclay on the inﬁnite. J Hist Ideas 45:295–301
Henninger M (1989) Relations: medieval theories 1250–1325. Clarendon,
Oxford
Henninger M (1994) Henry Harclay. In: Gracia J (ed) Individuation in
scholasticism: the later Middle Ages and the counter-reformation
1150–1650. State University of New York, Albany, pp 333–346
Maurer A (1954) Henry of Harclay’s question on the univocity of being.
Mediaeval Stud 16:1–18
Murdoch J (1981) Henry of Harclay and the inﬁnite. In: Maieru` A,
Paravicini Bagliani A (eds) Studi sul XIV secolo in memoria di
Anneliese Maier. Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, Rome, pp 219–261
Pelster F (1924) Heinrich von Harclay, Kanzler von Oxford und seine
Qua¨stionen. Misc Fran Ehrle I (Studi e Testi 37), pp 307–356
Henry of Ghent
PASQUALE PORRO
Dipartimento di Scienze Filosoﬁche
Universita` di Bari
Bari
Italy
Abstract
One of the most prominent ﬁgures at the Faculty of
Theology in Paris during the last quarter of the thirteenth
century, Henry of Ghent has been traditionally considered
a conservative, ‘‘Neo-Augustinian’’ theologian, ﬁghting
against
the
spread
of
Aristotelianism
and
Arabic
philosophy – an impression that seemed to be conﬁrmed
by Henry’s participation in the commission set up by
Bishop Tempier in view of the famous condemnation of
March 1277, and by his heated controversies with those
theologians closer to the doctrinal legacy of Thomas
Aquinas, such as Giles of Rome and Godfrey of Fontaines.
However, the progress of the new critical edition of Opera
Omnia Henry’s – begun in Leuven by Raymond Macken in
1979 and now continued by an international team – has
already demonstrated that this image needs to be substan-
tially revised. Indeed, Henry sought to reconcile tradi-
tional Augustinian theories with some of the basic
principles of Aristotelian epistemology and Avicennian
ontology, thereby giving rise to a complex and original
synthesis, certainly different from that of Thomas
Aquinas, but also from that of the Franciscan masters of
his day.
Biographical Information
Henry’s date of birth is unknown, but should presumably
be placed before 1240. Information about his career is also
scarce. He was in Paris in 1265; from 1267, he begins to
appear in the documents as magister, though nothing is
known about his presumed teaching activity at the Fac-
ulty of Arts. From 1276, the year in which he disputed his
ﬁrst Quodlibet, until his death, Henry was Regent Master
at the Faculty of Theology. He was canon of Tournai,
archdeacon of Bruges (probably from 1277), and archdea-
con of Tournai (from 1279). His name was recorded in the
death register of Tournai cathedral on June 23, 1293.
During his university career in Paris, Henry was per-
sonally involved in almost all of the important events in
university and ecclesiastical life. In 1277, he was a member
of the commission of theologians set up by Bishop
Tempier in order to censure propositions considered erro-
neous that were being taught at the Faculty of Arts and
that would be condemned on March 7 of the same year.
Nevertheless, not only did Henry afﬁrm on different occa-
sions that he neither understood nor approved of the
condemnation of certain articles, but he himself was
pressured by Tempier and the papal legate Simon of
Brion to distance himself from the theory of the unicity
of substantial form in man.
From 1281, the year of the publication of the papal bull
Ad fructus uberes issued by Pope Martin IV, Henry
represented the main theological reference point for the
faction of prelates (secular clergy) in their conﬂict with the
Mendicant Orders concerning the privileges granted by
the Pope to the latter in matters of confession.
Henry is the author of a monumental, though incom-
plete, Summa (the second part De creaturis is missing,
460 H
Henry of Ghent

even though it was surely envisaged in the general plan of
the work), 15 Quodlibeta, disputed and published while
writing the Summa (Go´mez Caffarena 1957), a short com-
mentary on the Book of Genesis (Lectura ordinaria super
sacram Scripturam), a lengthy treatise on the issue of
confession
(Tractatus
super
factum
praelatorum
et
fratrum), as well as a few sermons. The authenticity of
the Quaestiones variae recently published in the series
of the Opera omnia is doubtful. Other still unedited
works are of uncertain attribution: a treatise on the
Syncategoremata (probably authentic), a commentary on
the Physics, and an incomplete commentary on the
Metaphysics.
Thought
Knowledge, Intellect, and Will
Henry’s Summa does not open with a direct treatment of
God, but with a detailed analysis of the problem of human
knowledge, beginning with the classical skeptic’s question:
can man know anything at all? Taking knowledge in its
most generic meaning, for Henry it is undeniable that man
is able to know something through the senses and without
divine intervention. Moving on to knowledge in the strict
sense, things get more complicated. Following Augustine’s
Soliloquia, it is important to distinguish between what is
true and truth itself: sensation only grasps id quod verum
est (‘‘what is true’’), while knowledge of the truth implies
the knowledge of the nature or essence of a thing, which
can only be gained by comparing the thing itself to its
exemplar.
There are, however, two exemplars: (a) the universal
species of the object that the mind obtains by abstraction,
on the basis of sensible data (in this case, the truth of the
res is the conformity between the really existing thing and
its mental representation); (b) the ideal form present in
the divine mind that acts as the formal cause of creatural
essences, and from this perspective the truth of a thing is
its ontological conformity to its eternal model. This dou-
ble relation thereby produces two different levels of truth:
on the one hand, the truth of Aristotelian science, deriving
from the purely natural faculties, through an abstracting
process; on the other, the ‘‘sincere truth’’ (sincera veritas),
obtained only through divine illumination. The ﬁrst truth
does not have the same infallibility, purity, and absolute
certainty as the second; nevertheless, it is necessary for the
fulﬁllment of the second: the action of the divine exemplar
can only work on a concept already obtained by the intel-
lect through abstraction. For Henry, divine illumination
does not directly provide the mind with any content, but
rather certiﬁes deﬁnitively the representation of a thing
present in the human intellect as coinciding with the
representation existing ab aeterno in the divine intellect.
The action of divine illumination is therefore neither
a direct donation of intelligible contents, independent of
the conditions of sensible knowledge, nor is it a simple
puriﬁcation, preparation or reﬁnement of the mind in
order to predispose it to intellectual knowledge; rather, it
is the certiﬁcation of our created exemplar by the uncre-
ated one (Macken 1972).
Over the years, however, Henry seems gradually to
abandon this theory of the double exemplar in order to
make room, on the one hand, for a reworking of the
deﬁning process of essences through their progressive
determination, as described by Aristotle in the Posterior
Analytics (Marrone 1985, 2001), and on the other, for
a reinterpretation of illumination as the constant presence
in act, albeit in a recess of the mind (abditum mentis), of
the image of God (Quodl. IX, q. 15; cf. Emery 2001).
In this evolution, the partial rejection of the function
of intelligible species (Quodl. III, q. 1; Quodl. IV, q. 7) is
particularly important, and anticipates the similar solu-
tion adopted by ‘‘nominalists’’ a couple of decades later.
For Henry, the particular phantasm is made immaterial
and universal by the abstraction of the agent intellect and
imprints itself on the potential intellect without the medi-
ation of an intelligible species that is numerically different.
The phantasm is therefore the efﬁcient cause of intellec-
tual knowledge, or better, of the ﬁrst operation of the
intellect (that of simple understanding). Henry does not
eliminate sensible species, however, nor does he eliminate
all types of representation in the sphere of intellectual
activity. Indeed, after the phantasms are impressed on
the possible, or potential, intellect, making simple under-
standing possible, the intellect then forms complex judg-
ments and produces its own species, or verbum (mental
word), as a result of this activity.
Concerning the relation between will and intellect (an
issue to which he dedicates no less than 20 quodlibetal
questions), Henry can be considered a voluntarist (Mu¨ller
2007), even though with regard to the more ‘‘radical’’
voluntarists, such as Walter of Bruges, he does not conﬁne
himself to interpreting the role of reason as that of a mere
‘‘advisor,’’ but instead as that of a cause (albeit a causa sine
qua non): without the prior knowledge of the intellect, the
will cannot desire anything (Macken 1975, 1977). In other
words, for Henry the intellect and the good that it pro-
poses are not the sole or necessary origin of the motion of
the will; however, by presenting the objects that this fac-
ulty can freely choose, reason is the conditio sine qua non of
the action of the will itself, which otherwise would be prey
to sensible appetites and the determinism of the passions.
Henry of Ghent H
461
H

Moral action is therefore performed both by the intellect,
which presents the kinds of good to choose, and by the
will, which freely chooses one of these, yet without being
forced to opt for that which is judged best by reason.
Metaphysics
Following Avicenna, Henry afﬁrms that every res possesses
its own ‘‘certitude’’ (certitudo) that makes it what it is, that
is, that expresses the objective content (the essence or
quidditas) by which every thing is identical to itself and
is distinguished from other things. This content can be
considered in itself, as independent from its physical (and
particular) or mental (and universal) existence: in itself,
essence is just essence (‘‘essentia est essentia tantum’’).
Nevertheless, every res only exists in physical reality or in
the mind. Possessing an absolute concept does not mean
possessing an absolute, separate existence. More simply,
through such a concept, a thing can be considered inde-
pendently of all that does not form part of its essential
content and that therefore constitutes an additional deter-
mination. For instance, physical or mental existence, par-
ticularity or universality, do not form part of ‘‘horseness’’
as such. Yet for this very reason ‘‘horseness’’ as such does
not exist; instead what exists are horses as individuals
(individual supposita) and the universal concept of
‘‘horse’’ which the mind obtains by abstraction from
them (Porro 1990, 1996). Actual existence is therefore an
‘‘intention’’ (intentio) that occurs to essence without
adding anything real, and so it differs from essence only
in an ‘‘intentional’’ way.
The term intentio designates here a ‘‘note’’ (a feature or
trait) of the essential content of a res, which does not differ
from it in any real sense, nor from its other identiﬁable
‘‘notes,’’ yet can nevertheless be expressed through an
independent concept (Quodl. V, q. 6). Intentio is thus the
fruit of an operation of the intellect, which delves inside
(for Henry intentio comes from intus tentio) the thing to
which the intention itself belongs, by considering its con-
stitutive ‘‘notes,’’ and gives rise to different concepts. It can
also be said that intentions really exist in a res, but only
potentially, whereas their distinction is an operation of the
intellect alone.
While two distinct things differ in a real sense, all that
gives rise to different concepts, albeit founded in the same
simple thing, differs intentionally (Quodl. V, q. 12). In an
intentional distinction, in other words, the very same
thing is expressed by different concepts in different ways.
From this perspective, an intentional distinction seems
akin to a purely logical distinction, to the point that the
two are often confused. Nevertheless, in the ﬁrst case, one
of the concepts excludes the other (one can be thought of
separately, in the absence of the other), whereas in the case
of a distinction based on reason the various concepts are
perfectly compatible. As Henry explicitly states, this means
that everything that differs in intention differs in reason
too, but not vice versa. Unlike a purely logical distinction,
an intentional distinction always implies a form of com-
position, even though this is minor with regard to that
implied by a real difference. Actually, for Henry there are
two levels of intentional distinction: a major and a minor.
In the major, none of the intentions includes the other or
others, even though they are all part of the same thing;
moreover, it has two modes: the distinction between the
differences in man (rational, sensible, vegetative, and so
on) and the distinction between genus and speciﬁc differ-
ence (animal and rational). In the minor, the concept of
one intention includes the other but not vice versa. And
here Henry lists four modes: the distinction between spe-
cies and genus; the distinction between living and being in
creatures; the distinction between a suppositum and its
nature or essence; and the distinction between a respectus
(relation) and the essence on which it is founded. The
distinction between essence and existence belongs to the
last mode.
Yet independently of actual existence, and preceding it,
essence is already constituted as such in a speciﬁc being,
which Henry calls esse essentiae. This must not be taken as
a real separate being, but indicates only the fact that a res
thus constituted has an objective content and so it is
objectively possible; that is, it can be placed in act by
God. Indeed, not every res conceivable by the human
intellect corresponds to a nature that can be actualized.
The being of essence thus coincides with the possibility, or
the ability, to receive actual existence that a purely imag-
ined res does not have. Henry appeals here to the distinc-
tion between res a reor reris and res a ratitudine (cf.
Summa, art. 21, q. 4; art. 24, q. 3). In the ﬁrst case,
a thing is considered in its purely nominal conception,
to which a reality, outside a purely mental one, need not
correspond (reor is here synonymous with opinor – ‘‘to
imagine’’ or ‘‘to suppose’’). In the second case, a thing is
‘‘certiﬁed’’ (rata) by the fact that it possesses at least the
being of an essence. If the nothing that stands in opposi-
tion to a res a reor reris cannot even be conceived, the
nothing that stands in opposition to a res a ratitudine is
not the lack of actual existence, hence nonexistence in the
physical world, but rather the lack of formal constitution:
the fact that a thing can be conceived (e.g., a chimera or
a mountain of gold) without being ‘‘certiﬁed’’ as
a determined essence. For Henry even the distinction
between esse essentiae and the content (realitas) of an
essence is of an intentional type, even though Henry was
462 H
Henry of Ghent

initially tempted to make a distinction based on reason
alone between essence and its essential being (Quodl. I, q.
9; a spectacular example of this change of position is the
recasting of q. 4, art. 21 in the Summa).
Every essence is what it is in reason of its nature
(Quodl.
X,
q.
8),
albeit
through
participation
(participative), since the very fact of being an essence,
content aside, is dependent on God. Essence is therefore
not strictly an ‘‘effect’’ or ‘‘product’’ of God, and yet it is
constituted only through a relation of participation in, or
imitation of, the divine essence. More precisely, esse
essentiae belongs to essence because of its eternal relation
to God as formal cause. It is only in virtue of this rela-
tion that essences can also come into actual existence,
which signals a new relation between a creature and
God, the latter now as efﬁcient cause. In the ﬁrst case,
essences depend on the divine intellect, in the second, on
the divine will. Being therefore always indicates a relation
in creatures, which is simple for essences in themselves
(esse essentiae), and twofold for actualized essences (esse
essentiae plus esse existentiae). Nevertheless, the two types
of relation are not perfectly symmetrical. In the ﬁrst place,
while essence can be conceived independently of its exis-
tence in the physical world, it cannot be conceived inde-
pendently of its being-essence, otherwise it would be
a mere ﬁgment. Consequently, the relation that forges
esse existentiae is in some way accidental, whereas that
which forges esse essentiae is essential. In the second
place, since God chooses, from all the essences eternally
constituted as such by His intellect, those that He will
actualize over time, on the basis of His free will, one
relation is such from eternity, while the other takes place
in time.
Essences thus correspond to divine ideas, which rep-
resent their eternal exemplars. More precisely, according
to Henry, an idea is in God for the fact that divine essence
is in some ways imitable by creatural essences. God’s
knowledge of what is different from Himself coincides
with the knowledge of the different ways in which He
considers Himself imitable, since divine knowledge is not
determined by the presence of external objects, but rather
is itself the formal (exemplary) cause of its own contents.
Here, however, the classic question of the relation between
divine simplicity and creatural multiplicity again arises.
Were God to know immediately the plurality of creatable
objects (essences), His simplicity and unity (divine knowl-
edge is not really distinct from divine essence) would be
irremediably compromised. On the other hand, if God did
not have access to the multiplicity of all that is distinct
from His essence, He would not know anything. So,
according to Henry, divine knowledge has a primary
object, which is divine essence itself, absolutely simple
and indivisible, and a secondary object, which is in some
way ‘‘other’’ than divine knowledge. To avoid any exces-
sively brusque passage, the knowledge of this secondary
object is then subdivided into two distinct moments: in
the ﬁrst, every creatural essence coincides with divine
essence itself; in the second, every such essence is taken
as distinct, endowed with a speciﬁc modus of being – esse
essentiae – which nevertheless always derives from
a relation of formal participation in the divine essence.
In Henry’s vocabulary, these two moments indicate
respectively the exemplar, which is the divine idea, and
the exemplatum (also called ideatum), which is an essence
fully constituted in its quidditative content and so able to
be placed in act, depending upon divine free will.
One might ask whether God possesses this same free-
dom in bestowing esse essentiae on possible essences, that
is, on (doubly) secondary objects of His knowledge.
Unlike what happens for the being of existence, the reply
would seem to be negative in this case. As mentioned
above, there is an asymmetry between the relation of
efﬁcient causality and the relation of formal dependence
that conjoin creatures and Creator: while the former is in
time, the latter is eternal. This means that the distinction
between what is possible and what is not possible is nec-
essarily such from eternity. Moreover, since essences can
never cease to be in their essential being (i.e., in their being
eternally thought by God), they are absolutely necessary.
As such, not only can they not be destroyed, but they
cannot even be modiﬁed. With respect to actual existence,
all essences are equally indifferent with regard to the
Creator’s power, so that God can place in act one res before
another as He chooses, without any mediation, whereas in
their own being essences are arranged in a hierarchical
order that God himself, on whom that order depends,
cannot modify. This fact has at least two consequences.
In the ﬁrst place, according to Henry, God cannot now
introduce ex novo a new essence in any part of the series
without irremediably destroying the whole order. In the
second place, since there is a perfect correspondence
between creatural essences and divine ideas, the latter are
numerically ﬁnite, like the former (Porro 1993). This
theory, which is highly unusual to say the least, is explicitly
put forward by Henry on at least two occasions in his
Quodlibeta (Quodl. V, q. 3 and Quodl. VIII, q. 8), before
being partially retracted, albeit reluctantly, in virtue of an
unspeciﬁed article condemned in Paris (Quodl. XI, q. 11).
Analogy of Being and Knowledge of God
In describing the role of divine illumination in the cogni-
tive process of the human intellect, Henry is always careful
Henry of Ghent H
463
H

to specify that God functions only as ratio cognoscendi and
not as obiectum cognitum. From another perspective, how-
ever, God is also the ﬁrst known object of the human
intellect, according to one of Henry’s most famous and
characteristic doctrines (Summa, art. 24, q. 7; Laarmann
1999; Goris 2007). More precisely, God is not the ﬁrst but
the last concept in the order of rational knowledge, after
the knowledge of creatures, but He is the ﬁrst object of
natural knowledge, which concerns the ﬁrst and most
general intentions. In this kind of knowledge, our intellect
always proceeds from what is most indeterminate. God, as
subsisting and absolute being, is contained within the
indeterminate concept of being, and it is for this reason
that every time an ens is conceived, the ens primum, God,
is also conceived, at least on more general levels of
knowledge.
Between creatural being and divine being there is, of
course, no real identity, but only a form of community
originating precisely in the indeterminacy of the most
general concept of being. Divine being is indeterminate
and indeterminable; in itself, it eludes all possibility of
determination. Being in general initially seems just as
indeterminate, though not because it is indeterminable:
the process of human knowledge aims at an ever more
complete determination of being as a given thing.
Nevertheless, at the level of our ﬁrst, confused knowl-
edge, our intellect is not able to distinguish between
the negative indeterminacy of God (indeterminatio per
abnegationem) and the privative indeterminacy of crea-
tures (indeterminatio per privationem), and so it forms
a single concept.
The equivocal term ‘‘being’’ is thus interpreted by our
intellect as a univocal term, and this gives rise to a peculiar
form of analogy. As a matter of fact, the ﬁrst concept of
being is both equivocal and univocal at the same time: it is
equivocal in itself, since it signiﬁes two completely hetero-
geneous realities (ﬁnite and inﬁnite, being in potency and
being absolutely and purely in act); it is univocal for the
human intellect, since at this initial level the distinction
remains hidden to our comprehension.
Yet it is this peculiar form of analogy, or community,
that
offers
the
only
positive
starting
point
for
a metaphysical demonstration of the existence of God,
a demonstration that, in appealing to Avicenna and to
Augustine’s De trinitate, proceeds by investigating this
falsely univocal concept of entity in order to isolate the
notion of God as pure, necessarily existing Being (Summa,
art. 22, q. 5; art. 24, q. 6). To this demonstration Henry
also adds some a posteriori proofs – in the order of
efﬁcient, formal, and ﬁnal causes – that nevertheless refer
exclusively to the existence of God de complexo, in other
words, to the truth of the statement ‘‘God exists’’ (Summa,
art. 22, q. 4).
Other Characteristic Doctrines
We can only brieﬂy mention here other characteristic
elements of Henry’s metaphysical and theological system:
●
The theory of human dimorphism: man alone has two
substantial forms, one of which is the rational soul
(Quodl. II, q. 2, after the hesitations of Quodl. I, q. 4
and the subsequent threats by Tempier and Simon of
Brion).
●
The essential identity between grace and glory (Quodl.
IX, q. 13; cf. Arezzo 2005).
●
The defense of the role of human merit in the doctrine
of divine grace, at least in terms of congruity (Quodl.
VIII, q. 5).
●
The superiority of the active over the contemplative
life, under given conditions, in the present life (Quodl.
XII, q. 28).
●
The relative superiority of personal over common
good in the hierarchy of spiritual goods (Quodl. IX,
q. 19).
●
The formulation of a basic vocabulary of human rights
(see especially Quodl. IX, q. 26 – ‘‘whether someone
condemned to death can legitimately escape’’ – in
which the idea of a natural right to survival seems to
emerge for the ﬁrst time in western thought).
●
The elaboration of an authoritative doctrine of time,
based on a reworking of Averroes’ theory, according to
which time coincides, in its material aspect, with the
continuity of motion, and in its formal aspect, with the
division (discretio) applied to this motion by the num-
bering activity of the soul (Quodl. III, q. 11, in clear
opposition to Augustine’s doctrine of time).
●
The admission of a distinction between potentia
ordinata and potentia absoluta in the case of the
pope, and the refutation of this distinction in the
case of God. For Henry potentia absoluta always indi-
cates the possibility of acting in a disorderly way,
which the pope, who is capable of sinning, possesses,
but God does not (Tractatus super facto praelatorum et
fratrum; cf. Porro 2003).
●
The severe criticism of Aquinas’ and Giles of Rome’s
doctrine of the subalternation of theological science to
the science of God and the Blessed (Summa, art. 7, qq.
4–5).
●
The doctrine of lumen supernaturale (‘‘supernatural
light’’), which is the prerogative of theologians only,
and which makes their scientiﬁc habit superior to that
of the ‘‘philosophers’’ (Quodl. XII, q. 2; Porro 2009).
464 H
Henry of Ghent

Indeed, one of the central concerns throughout Henry’s
career was the vindication of the absolutely scientiﬁc
nature of theology. Moreover, it is the Master of
Theology’s duty to give, on request, his authoritative
opinion on any topic; hence the numerous questions of
a pastoral, social, political, and even economic kind that
make Henry’s Quodlibeta one of the richest and liveliest
theological works of the entire Scholastic production
(Porro 2006). Henry’s inﬂuence has been considerable,
especially in the ﬁrst decades of the fourteenth century:
for instance, even though both John Duns Scotus and
William of Ockham criticize many of Henry’s doctrines,
they consider him to be the most authoritative master of
thirteenth century Scholasticism.
See also: ▶Augustine ▶Being ▶Causality ▶Essence and
Existence ▶Godfrey of Fontaines ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of
▶Intention, Primary and Secondary ▶John Duns Scotus
▶Knowledge ▶Mental Representation ▶Mental Word/
Concepts ▶Metaphysics ▶Natural Rights ▶Parisian
Condemnation of 1277 ▶Posterior Analytics, Commen-
taries on Aristotle’s ▶Proofs of the Existence of God
▶Sense Perception, Theories of ▶Skepticism ▶Species,
Sensible and Intelligible ▶Syncategoremata ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶Time ▶Truth, Theories of ▶Voluntarism
and Intellectualism ▶Will ▶Will, Weakness of
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ancient Editions
(1518) Quodlibeta. Parisiis: Vaenundantur ab Iodoco Badio Ascensio
(repr. 1961). Bibliothe`que S. J., Louvain
(1520) Summae quaestionum ordinariarum. Parisiis: Vaenundatur in
aedibus Iodoci Badii Ascensii (repr. 1953). The Franciscan Insti-
tute/E.
Nauwelaerts/F.
Scho¨ningh,
St.
Bonaventure/Louvain/
Paderborn
New Critical Editions
(1979 sqq.) Henrici de Gandavo Opera omnia. Leuven University Press,
Leuven (initially together with Brill, Leiden).
Volumes published up to 2009:
Macken Raymond (1979) Bibliotheca manuscripta Henrici de Gandavo. I.
Catalogue A–P; II. Catalogue Q–Z. Re´pertoire
Henry of Ghent:
(1979) Lectura ordinaria super S. Scripturam (attr.), ed. Macken R.
(1979) Quodlibet I, ed. Macken R.
(1981) Quodlibet X, ed. Macken R.
(1983) Quodlibet II, ed. Wielockx R.
(1983) Quodlibet IX, ed. Macken R.
(1985) Quodlibet XIII, ed. Decorte J.
(1987) Quodlibet VI, ed. Wilson GA.
(1987) Quodlibet XII, q. 1–30, ed. Decorte J.
(1989) Quodlibet XII, q. 31. Tractatus super facto praelatorum et fratrum.
eds. Ho¨dl L, Haverals M (with introduction by L. Ho¨dl)
(1991) Quodlibet VII, ed. Wilson GA.
(1991) Summa (Quaestiones Ordinariae) artt. XXXI–XXXIV, ed. Macken
R. (with introduction by L. Ho¨dl)
(1994) Summa (Quaestiones Ordinariae) artt. XXXV–XL, ed. Wilson GA.
(1998) Summa (Quaestiones Ordinariae) artt. XLI–XLVI, ed. Ho¨dl L.
(2001) Summa (Quaestiones Ordinariae) artt. I–V, ed. Wilson GA.
(2007) Summa (Quaestiones Ordinariae) artt. XLVII–LII, ed. Fu¨hrer M.
(2007) Quodlibet XV, eds. Etzkorn G, Wilson GA.
(2008) Quaestiones variae, ed. Etzkorn G.
Secondary Sources
Literature Prior to 1995
Porro P (1996) Bibliography. In: Vanhamel W (ed) Henry of Ghent.
Proceedings of the international colloquium on the occasion of the
700th anniversary of his death. Leuven University Press, Leuven,
pp 405–434
Porro P (2003) Bibliography on Henry of Ghent, 1994–2002. In:
Guldentops G, Steel C (eds) Henry of Ghent and the transformation
of scholastic thought. Studies in memory of Jos Decorte. Leuven
University Press, Leuven, pp 409–426
Recent Studies and Titles Quoted
Arezzo A (2005) La felicita` del teologo. Gloria, grazia e scienza in Enrico di
Gand. In: Bettetini M, Paparella FD (eds) Le felicita` nel Medioevo.
FIDEM, Louvain-la-Neuve, pp 411–424
Emery K Jr. (2001) The image of god deep in the mind: the continuity of
cognition according to Henry of Ghent. In: Aertsen JA, Emery K Jr.,
Speer A (eds) Nach der Verurteilung von 1277. Philosophie und
Theologie an der Universita¨t von Paris im letzten Viertel des 13.
Jahrhunderts. Studien und Texte/After the condemnation of 1277.
Philosophy and theology at the University of Paris in the last quarter
of the thirteenth century. Studies and texts. Gruyter, Berlin/New
York, pp 59–124
Go´mez Caffarena J (1957) Cronologı´a de la Suma de Enrique de Gante
por relacio´n a sus Quodlibetos. Gregorianum 38:116–133
Goris W (2007) Absolute beginners. Der mittelalterliche Beitrag zu einem
Ausgang vom Unbedingten. Brill, Leiden/Boston
Laarmann M (1999) Deus, primum cognitum. Die Lehre von Gott als
dem Ersterkannten des menschlichen Intellekte die Heinrich von
Ghent ({1293). Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Leone M (2005) Metaphysics, theology and the natural desire to know
separate substances in Henry of Ghent. Quaestio 5:513–526
Macken R (1972) La the´orie de l’illumination divine dans la philosophie
d’Henri de Gand. Recherches de The´ologie ancienne et me´die´vale
39:82–112
Macken R (1975) La volonte´ humaine, faculte´ plus e´leve´e que l’intelli-
gence selon Henri de Gand. Recherches de The´ologie ancienne et
me´die´vale 42:5–51
Macken R (1977) Heinrich von Gent im Gespra¨ch mit seinen Zeitgenossen
u¨ber die menschliche Freiheit. Franziskanische Studien 59:125–182
Marrone SP (1985) Truth and scientiﬁc knowledge in the thought of
Henry of Ghent. The Medieval Academy of America, Cambridge
Marrone SP (2001) The light of thy countenance. Science and knowledge
of god in the thirteenth century. Brill II, Leiden/Boston/Ko¨ln (esp.
259–388 and 391–564)
Mu¨ller J (2007) Willensschwa¨che im Voluntarismus? Das Beispiel
Heinrichs von Gent. Archiv fu¨r Geschichte der Philosophie 89:1–29
Pickave´ M (2007) Heinrich von Gent u¨ber Metaphysik als erste Wissen-
schaft. Studien zu einem Metaphysikentwurf aus dem letzten Viertel
des 13. Jahrhunderts. Brill, Leiden/Boston
Porro P (1990) Enrico di Gand. La via delle proposizioni universali.
Levante, Bari
Henry of Ghent H
465
H

Porro P (1993) Ponere statum. Idee divine, perfezioni creaturali e ordine
del mondo in Enrico di Gand. Mediaevalia 3:109–159
Porro P (1996) Possibilita` ed esse essentiae in Enrico di Gand. In:
Vanhamel W (ed) Henry of Ghent. Proceedings of the international
colloquium on the occasion of the 700th anniversary of his death.
Leuven University Press, Leuven, pp 211–253
Porro P (2003) Henry of Ghent on ordained and absolute power. In:
Guldentops G, Steel C (eds) Henry of Ghent and the transformation
of scholastic thought. Studies in memory of Jos Decorte. Leuven
University Press, Leuven, pp 387–408
Porro P (2006) Doing theology (and philosophy) in the ﬁrst person:
Henry of Ghent’s Quodlibeta. In: Schabel C (ed) Theological
Quodlibeta in the Middle Ages. The thirteenth century. Brill, Leiden,
pp 171–231
Porro P (2009) La teologia a Parigi dopo Tommaso. Enrico di Gand,
Egidio Romano, Goffredo di Fontaines. In: BifﬁI, Boulnois O,
Estelrich JG, Imbach R, Laras G, de Libera A, Porro P, Putallaz FX
(eds) Rinnovamento della ‘via antique.’ La creativita` tra il XIII e il
XIV secolo. Jaca Book-Citta` Nuova, Milano/Roma, pp 165–262
Heresy
RUPERT JOHN KILCULLEN
Department of Politics and International Relations
Macquarie University
North Ryde, NSW
Australia
Abstract
Medieval theologians took their concept of heresy mainly
from the texts of Jerome and Augustine quoted in
Gratian’s Decretum. Thomas Aquinas argued that anyone
who pertinaciously denies even a minor item of church or
Bible teaching falls into heresy. Ockham developed criteria
for pertinacity and argued that a Christian, even if his or
her opinions are actually in error, cannot be regarded as
pertinacious simply for refusing to defer to the teaching of
a pope.
Medieval theologians at ﬁrst do not seem to have reﬂected
much on the concept of heresy. Peter Lombard in the
Sentences, for example, asks the question what is heresy,
but gives a very uninformative answer (PL vol. 192, col.
868). The concept of heresy was more seriously explored
in the textbooks of canon law. Gratian’s Decretum (written
some time around 1150) includes a signiﬁcant collection
of patristic texts relating to heresy, and the collection of
decretals issued in 1234 by Gregory IX (the Liber extra)
includes titles concerning Jews, Apostates, Schismatics,
and Heretics (Friedberg, vol. 2, col. 749ff). Gratian’s
Causa 23 (Friedberg, vol. 1, col. 889ff) concerns warfare,
compulsion, and physical punishment directed against the
wicked, including heretics. In C.24 q.3 cc.26–31 Gratian
offers materials toward a deﬁnition of heresy drawn
mainly from Jerome and Augustine. The texts quoted
suggest that a person who has been a member of the
church becomes a heretic by pertinaciously maintaining
a false doctrine despite correction.
Thomas Aquinas
The ﬁrst major theological treatment of heresy was by
Thomas Aquinas. He refers explicitly to Gratian as the
source of some of his quotations from the fathers, and
Gratian could have been his source for others also.
Thomas holds that revelation comes to individuals
mainly in two ways, through the Bible and through
the teaching of the church. ‘‘The formal object of faith is
the First Truth, as manifested in the sacred scriptures and
the teaching of the church. Anyone who does not adhere,
as to an infallible and divine rule, to the teaching of the
church, which proceeds from the First Truth manifested in
the sacred scriptures, does not have the habit of faith but
holds things that belong to the faith in some other way
than by faith. . . A heretic who pertinaciously disbelieves
one article is not ready to follow church teaching in all
things – but if not pertinaciously, then he is not a heretic
but only one who errs’’ (ST 2–2 q.5 a 3). He refers here to
the articles of faith, but the argument could be applied to
the secondary objects of faith, such as the proposition that
Abraham had two sons. Thomas makes this application
later (ST 2–2 q.11 a.2). This thesis, that anyone who
pertinaciously disbelieves or doubts even such minor
point as that Abraham had two sons has no faith at all,
illustrates de Guibert’s statement, ‘‘Tandis qu’Augustin
refuse de mettre dans cette cate´gorie d’he´re´tiques ceux qui
erreraient sur un de´tail de la ve´rite´ re´ve´le´e, nous mettons
aujourd’hui [1920] sur le meˆme rang toute ne´gation de
ve´rite´ re´ve´le´e, quelqu’en soit l’importance et le lien avec
l’ensemble de l’e´conomie chre´tienne’’ (de Guibert:381):
this development seems to be due to Thomas Aquinas.
Thomas quotes Jerome’s remark that ‘‘heresy’’ comes
from the Greek word for choice, and says that heresy is the
species of unbelief found in those who profess the Chris-
tian faith but corrupt its teachings by choosing to assent
not to what Christ really taught but to their own ideas.
False opinions in geometry are not heresies, since heresies
are in matters belonging to the faith – namely the articles
of faith, which belong to faith directly and principally, and
the secondary objects of faith, denial of which leads to
disbelief in some article of faith. For the secondary objects,
implicit faith is enough, and it is possible to err about such
matters without being a heretic. Thomas quotes Augustine
466 H
Heresy

(from the Decretum, C.24, q.3, c. 29): ‘‘We should by no
means class as heretics those who defend a false and
perverse opinion in no pertinacious spirit, but seek the
truth with careful solicitude, ready to correct their opinion
when they have found the truth,’’ because they do not
choose against the doctrine of the church. Jerome and
Augustine differed on some questions, but neither was
a heretic because the questions either did not concern
faith or had not yet been determined by the church.
Pertinacious defense of an error in a matter determined
by the church would be heresy. The authority to decide
matters of faith belongs to the pope (for this Thomas
quotes Decretum, C.24 q.1 c. 12, Friedberg, vol. 1, col.
970; cf. ST 2–2 q.1 a10, where he refers to Decretum, d.17
c. 5, col. 51); Jerome, Augustine, and other orthodox
doctors never defended any error against the authority of
the pope (ST 2–2 q.11 a.2 ad 3).
William of Ockham
The next major treatment of heresy and heretics was by
William of Ockham in Part 1 of his Dialogus. In this work,
Ockham does not speak in his own person, but it is
generally possible to recognize which positions he recom-
mends, and for brevity, I will summarize the argument as
if it were directly presented. The interpretation can be
conﬁrmed from other works not in dialogue form, notably
Contra Ioannem and Contra Benedictum, in which Ock-
ham speaks directly in his own person. The whole of Part 1
of the Dialogus is concerned with heresy and heretics, but
in this article we will restrict our attention to the ﬁrst four
books.
In 1 Dial. 1 Ockham argues that the topics of heresy
and heretics belong primarily to theologians. In the pro-
logue to his Summa aurea the canonist Hostiensis claims
that the science of canon law is the ‘‘science of sciences,’’
comprehending both all law and theology. ‘‘All ought to be
led by it and not by their own understanding.’’ (On this
claim, and on the rivalry between canonists and theolo-
gians, see Scott.) Ockham rejects such claims. Canon law is
a collection of Bible texts, texts of the fathers, imperial
laws, and statutes and determinations of councils and
popes, touching on theological and moral matters (c. 8).
The canonical science is subalternated to theology and
moral philosophy (c. 10). Canonists may have better
memory of the canon law texts, but the theologians can
understand them more deeply. It is for theologians, not
canonists, to decide what is heresy and how to determine
whether an individual is a heretic. Canonists are experts
on the legal processes, but ‘‘it pertains to theologians to
judge by universal rules whether the ecclesiastical laws
about punishing heretics in certain ways and about the
way of proceeding against them are contrary to the divine
scriptures, because if such laws were opposed to sacred
scripture they should not in any way be tolerated’’ (c. 15).
In 1 Dial. 2 the question is, What counts as catholic
truth and what as heresy? In early times opponents of
heresy referred to ‘‘the rule of faith’’ as the measure against
which orthodoxy is to be tested. Sometimes the rule of
faith seems to be a summary of leading doctrines that
candidates for baptism were expected to know, sometimes
the general purport of the Christian tradition (Kelly:39,
40, 43). Canonists sometimes seemed to think that heresy
was any disagreement with or disobedience to the pope,
yet at other times they acknowledged that a pope might
become a heretic. For some (Marsilius, and later the Prot-
estants) the rule of faith is the Bible. For Ockham, the rule
of faith is what it was also for Thomas Aquinas, namely
‘‘sacred scripture and the teaching of the whole church,
which cannot err’’ (CI, 72.34–5). This rule is twofold: it
may be difﬁcult to ascertain what is the teaching of the
whole church, but someone who has access to the Bible
will, in some cases, be able to ﬁnd a sure answer in its text.
‘‘Concerning many questions of faith those learned in
sacred letters can be certain of catholic truth, notwith-
standing the question or doubt of anyone else whomso-
ever’’ (CB, 250.4–6).
Ockham tries to clarify the notion of catholic truth by
listing ﬁve classes of truths that catholics (members of the
universal church) are obliged to believe (1 Dial. 2.2, 5),
namely: (1) anything contained in the Bible, either explic-
itly or by necessary implication; (2) anything handed
down, outside the canonical scriptures, from the Apostles;
(3) factual information in chronicles, histories, etc., that
are worthy of trust; (4) anything necessarily implied by the
Bible and tradition together, or by either in conjunction
with chronicles etc.; (5) new undoubted revelations made
by God to the church. Corresponding to the ﬁve kinds of
truths that catholics are obliged to believe are ﬁve kinds of
‘‘deadly errors’’ (1 Dial. 2.17). However, these truths and
errors are not equivalent to catholic truths and heresies
respectively. What makes something catholic truth is rev-
elation by God to the church in one or other of the modes
corresponding to (1), (2), and (5).
To identify apostolic tradition or post-Apostolic reve-
lation (categories (2) and (5)) would require historical
research, but there is a short cut. Ockham interprets Mat-
thew 28:20, ‘‘I am with you all days, even unto the end of
the world,’’ as a promise that error will never prevail in the
church (1 Dial. 2.3, etc.). If at some period (e.g., in the
recent past) catholics all held that some proposition is
a truth of faith, then it is indeed a truth of faith: even if
we cannot ﬁnd any basis for it in the Bible, even if we
Heresy H
467
H

cannot trace the process by which this belief was handed
down from the Apostles, even if we have no evidence of
a post-Apostolic revelation, we can be sure that it is a truth
of faith that came to the Church in one or other of these
three ways.
In 1 Dial. 3 the question is, What makes a person
a catholic, and what makes a person a heretic? A person
is a catholic if he or she has been baptized and holds the
whole of the catholic faith; a heretic is anyone who has
been baptized (or presents himself as such) who pertina-
ciously rejects or doubts any catholic truth whatsoever
(1 Dial. 3.3). To explain how it is possible to hold the
whole of the catholic faith, Ockham draws on Thomas
Aquinas’ distinction between explicit faith and implicit
faith. To believe a truth implicitly means (a) to believe
explicitly some other truth in which it is implied and
(b) not to believe pertinaciously anything inconsistent
with it (1 Dial. 3.1). (Thomas Aquinas perhaps supposed
the second point but did not make it explicitly.) Catholics
must have explicit belief in some catholic truths (CI,
45.35–40; cf. 2.1 Dial. 11.13–23), but it is enough to
believe the others implicitly – that is, to have explicit belief
in a something that implies the rest, namely that whatever
is contained in the Bible and the teaching of the church is
true (CI, 46.20–22). Thus, someone who believes that
everything in the Bible is true implicitly believes that
Bilhah was the mother of Dan even though he has never
read Genesis 30:5–6, unless for some reason he believes
pertinaciously that Bilhah was not the mother of Dan.
People who regard themselves as orthodox catholics may
be heretics without knowing it, if they hold pertinaciously
some belief (even on some minor matter) that is really
inconsistent with something they have never realized was
a catholic truth (1 Dial. 4.2, 4; 2.1 Dial. 11.106ff).
According to Thomas Aquinas, it belongs especially to
the pope to draw up formulations of the articles of faith.
Ockham agrees: it is especially the function of the pope,
aided when that is appropriate by a council, to settle
doubts about the faith (1 Dial. 2.14). However, according
to Ockham a pope may become a heretic (as the canonists
and even papalist theologians also generally acknowledged
(see Tierney 1955:57–67; McGrade 1994:148ff.). Neither
pope nor council nor any part of the church is infallible.
Christ’s promise to be with his church all days does not
guarantee that any part of the church will never err. ‘‘What
is promised to the whole and not to any part ought not to
be attributed to any part, even to a more principal part’’
(1 Dial. 5.22). What Christ’s promise does guarantee is
that there will be somewhere in the church at least one
person who speaks out against a false doctrine being
presented as catholic truth (1 Dial. 5.28). If a pope or
council asserts that some doctrine is catholic truth and
some catholics, even a few illiterate lay people, contradict
that assertion, the deniers may be right – they may be
witnesses to the truth, speaking out against false doctrine
being asserted as catholic truth.
In 1 Dial. 4 the question is, what is pertinacity and how
can it be established? In 1 Dial. 4.5–34 Ockham discusses
20 possible ways of recognizing that a person is pertina-
cious and a heretic. According to the fourth way, for
example, if a person denies any catholic truth that is
widely disseminated as catholic among all catholics,
including those with whom he has been living, he is
immediately, without further examination, to be judged
a heretic – though he can be excused if he can prove (e.g.,
merely by oath, if he is an uneducated person) that he did
not know that this truth was catholic (1 Dial. 4.11).
Another way is the seventh, the way of ‘‘legitimate correc-
tion,’’ according to which a person can be adjudged perti-
nacious if he does not change his mind when shown from
the Bible or otherwise that his opinion is not catholic truth
(cf. CI, 52.2–6; see McGrade 1974:48ff). Even an illiterate
is not obliged to change his mind just at the behest of some
prelate; such a person may defend a heresy a thousand
times before the pope without being pertinacious or
a heretic. Before he can be judged pertinacious, it must
be shown to him, in a way suited to his education and
understanding, that his opinion is heresy (1 Dial.
4.15–24). On the other hand, according to the eighth
way, anyone, including a pope, who tries to impose
a heresy as catholic truth on others by commands, threats,
punishments, promises, oaths, etc., is to be judged perti-
nacious without examination to see whether he is ready to
be corrected – the attempt to impose his erroneous opin-
ion on others is sufﬁcient proof of pertinacity (1 Dial.
4.25). Like a simple person, a pope or other prelate can
put forward and defend a heretical opinion without being
a heretic as long as he does not attempt to impose it on
others: as soon as he tries to impose it by authority he can
be adjudged pertinacious. Ockham’s discussion of the
ways of proving pertinacity amounts to a defense of free-
dom of discussion within the church. Concerning the
Inquisition, he remarks: ‘‘Some people say that inquisitors
and some prelates often proceed unfairly and unjustly. For
they say that many are unlearned and simple men blinded
by greed and avarice who try to condemn those accused of
heresy in order to acquire their goods. And therefore no
assertion should be based on their practice’’ (1 Dial. 4.21).
Ockham had the same conception of the rule of faith
as Thomas Aquinas had and a very similar view of implicit
faith and of pertinacity. Ockham perhaps puts less empha-
sis on the distinction between articles of faith and the
468 H
Heresy

secondary objects of faith, though Thomas also held that
there can be heresy in the pertinacious rejection of any
detail of the Bible. Ockham’s discussion of how pertinacity
is recognized was an original contribution. According to
Thomas, the fact that Augustine and Jerome never
defended their opinions against the authority of the
pope showed that they were not heretics, whereas
according to Ockham even an illiterate might defend
a heresy before the pope ‘‘a thousand times’’ without
being a heretic.
Dialogus was copied and studied, for example by
Peter of Ailly who made an abbreviatio of the work, and
in the ﬁfteenth century it was printed twice. Ockham’s
ideas on the fallibility of pope and councils and on the
role of individual dissenters in witnessing to catholic
truth were not adopted by later theologians or canonists.
His 20 ways of proving pertinacity were taken over by
Turrecremata in his Summa de ecclesia, lib. IV pt. 2 c. 16
(according to a communication from Thomas Izbicki to
A.S. McGrade).
After the Middle Ages
Medieval Christian thinking on unbelief was based on the
proposition that ‘‘without faith it is impossible to please
God’’ (Hebrews 11:6), interpreted as meaning that God
requires of every human being adherence (at least by
implicit faith) to the particular body of doctrine found
in the Bible and the teaching of the church. Some post-
medieval writers put forward another view of what God
requires. According to Pierre Bayle, we are required, not to
believe the Bible and the church, but to search for truth
and believe and act on whatever seems true – if there is any
sin in relation to belief, it is not failing to believe the
orthodox doctrine, but negligence and self-deception in
the search for truth, of which the orthodox may also be
guilty. A human being is not in a position to judge whether
another person is guilty of such sin, and in any case human
authority is not called on to punish it. Under the inﬂuence
of such ideas, the punishment of heretics came to seem
simply unjust.
See also: ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Toleration ▶William of
Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Bayle Pierre (2005) Philosophical commentary on the words of the Gos-
pel, ‘Compel them to come in’, ed. Kilcullen J, Kukathas C. Liberty
Fund, Indianapolis
Bonaventure (1934) Opera theologica selecta. S. Bonaventura, Quarrachi
CB: William of Ockham. Contra Benedictum. In: OP, vol 3
Chillingworth William (1704) The religion of protestants. In: Works.
London
CI: William of Ockham. Contra Ioannem. In: OP, vol 3
Decretum: Decretum Gratiani (Concordia discordantium canonum). In:
Friedberg, vol 1. Online at http://mdz.bib-bvb.de/digbib/gratian
Dial.: See William of Ockham
Diogenes
Laertius
(1958–1959)
Lives
of
eminent
philosophers.
W. Heinemann, London
Friedberg A (ed) (1959) Corpus iuris canonici. Akademische Druck-
u. Verlagsanstalt, Graz (repr. Leipzig, 1879)
Hooker Richard (1977) Of the laws of ecclesiastical polity, vol 1, ed.
Edelen G. The Folger library edition of the works of Richard Hooker.
The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Liber Extra: Liber decretalium Gregorii IX. In: Friedberg, vol 2. Online at
http://www.lex.unict.it/liber/accedi.asp
Locke John (1824) A second letter concerning toleration. In: Works, vol. 5.
London
OP: Ofﬂer HS (ed) (1940/1956/1963/1974/1997) Guillelmi de Ockham.
Opera politica, vols 1–3. Manchester University Press, Manchester
(1940, 1956, 1963, 1974), vol 4; Oxford University Press for the
British Academy, Oxford (1997)
PL: Migne JP (ed) (1844–) Patrologiae cursus completus. . . series Latina.
Paris. Online at http://www.documentacatholicaomnia.eu/1815-
1875,_Migne,_Patrologia_Latina_02._Rerum_Conspectus_Singo-
lorum_Tomorum,_MLT.html
ST: Thomas Aquinas (1882–) Summa theologiae. In: Thomae Aquinatis
S Opera omnia, iussu Leonis XIII edita, vols 4–12. Rome. Online at
http://www.corpusthomisticum.org/. English translation online at
http://www.newadvent.org/summa/
William of Ockham. In: Kilcullen J, Knysh G, Leppin V, Scott J, Ballweg J
(eds) Dialogus: Latin text and English translation. British Academy,
London. http://www.britac.ac.uk/pubs/dialogus/ockdial.html
Secondary Sources
Brown P (1964) St. Augustine’s attitude to religious coercion. J Roman
Stud 54:107–116
de Guibert J (1920) La notion d’he´re´sie chez saint Augustin. Bulletin de
Litte´rature Eccle´siastique. 21:368–382
DTC (1903–1950) Dictionnaire de the´ologie catholique. Letouzey et Ane,
Paris
Hageneder O (1976) Der Ha¨resiebegriff bei den Juristen des 12. und 13.
Jahrhunderts. In: Lourdaux W, Verhelst D (eds) The concept of heresy
in the Middle Ages (11th–13th C): Proceedings of the international
conference, Louvain, 13–16 May 1973. University Press, Leuven
Kelly JND (1977) Early christian doctrines, 5th edn. Adam and Charles
Black, London
Kilcullen J (1991) Ockham and infallibility. J Religious Hist 16:387–409.
Online at http://www.britac.ac.uk/pubs/dialogus/winfal.html
Kilcullen J (2006) William of Ockham and early christianity. Online at
http://www.humanities.mq.edu.au/Ockham/SSEC.html
Lawlor FX (1967–1979) Heresy. In: New catholic encyclopedia. Mcgraw-
Hill, New York
Le Boulluec A (1985) La notion d’he´re´sie dans la litte´rature grecque,
IIe-IIIe sie`cles. E´tudes Augustiniennes, Paris
McGrade AS (1974) The political thought of William of Ockham: per-
sonal and institutional principles. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
McGrade AS (1994) William of Ockham and Augustinus de Ancona on
the righteousness of dissent. In: Andrews R (ed) Franciscan theology
and philosophy: essays in honor of father Gedeon Ga´l OFM on his
eightieth birthday. Francisc Stud 54:143–65
Heresy H
469
H

McGrade AS (1999) The medieval idea of heresy: what are we to make of
it? In: Biller P, Dobson B (eds) The medieval church: universities,
heresy and the religious life. Essays in honour of Gordon Leff. Boydell
Press, for the Ecclesiastical History Society, Woodbridge, pp 111–139
Michel A (1903–1950) He´re´sie. He´re´tique. In: Dictionnaire de the´ologie
catholique, vol 6. Letouzey et Ane, Paris col. 2208–2257
Peters E (1980) Heresy and authority in medieval Europe: documents in
translation. University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia
Schindler A (1977) Ha¨resie: Kirchengeschichtlich. In: Mu¨ller G et al (eds)
Theologische Realenzyklopa¨die. De Gruyter, Berlin
Scott John R. Theologians vs Canonists on Heresy. http://www.britac.ac.
uk/pubs/dialogus/frmIntro1d1.html
Tierney B (1955) Foundation of the conciliar theory: the contribution of
the medieval canonists from Gratian to the great schism. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge (rev. edn. Brill, Leiden, 1998)
Hermes Trismegistus
CHARLES BURNETT
The Warburg Institute
London
UK
Abstract
Hermes is best known in the Renaissance as the supposed
author of the Corpus Hermeticum, a collection of 17 Greek
texts on spiritual education of which 14 were translated
into Latin by Marsilio Ficino in 1463. One text of the
ancient Corpus Hermeticum was translated into Latin in
late Antiquity under the title ‘‘Asclepius’’ (the Greek text is
lost), and was the main conduit through which the doc-
trine of Hermes Trismegistus was known in the Latin
West.
The
theoretical
Hermeticism
in
the
Corpus
Hermeticum was accompanied by numerous texts of tech-
nical Hermeticism (in alchemy and talismanic-making),
most of which were transmitted via Arabic.
In the older Classical tradition we ﬁnd two Hermes. In the
Asclepius (fourth century CE) Hermes Trismegistus states
that his grandfather (or ancestor) was the god Hermes.
Saint Augustine (De civitate Dei, VIII, 8) identiﬁes the
older Hermes as the son of Maia, daughter of Atlas, and
Mercurius Trismegistus as his grandson. In the Arabic
tradition, however, we ﬁnd three. Abu¯ Ma‘shar (787–
886), in his Kita¯b al-ulu¯f (Book of the Thousands), had
stated that the ﬁrst Hermes lived in Egypt before the
ﬂood, the second in Babylon, and revived the sciences
after the ﬂood, and the third, once again in Egypt, taught
alchemy and passed on his wisdom to Asclepius. This
appears to be a survival of a legend in ancient Egyptian
history, as told in the Book of Sothis that one Hermes
inscribed Egyptian knowledge on stone before the Flood,
and another recovered it after the Flood. This became
known to Arabic scholars through a chronicle written by
Annianus (after the ﬁfth century), who is cited by Abu¯
Ma‘shar, al-Biru¯nı¯, and Bar Hebraeus. But Abu¯ Ma‘shar
makes the second Hermes a Babylonian, perhaps because
of his Iranocentricity. The story of the three Hermes then
became embedded in the alchemical tradition, and in this
way reached the Latin West.
In their catalogue of medieval Latin Hermetic texts,
Paolo Lucentini and Vittoria Perrone Compagni list 41
different works, extant in some 400 manuscripts. Most of
these give instructions on the various materials to be used
to make talismans and to summon spirits, so providing
the practical aspect to the theory of the Asclepius. How-
ever, it cannot be immediately assumed that all these
works were thought to be by an Egyptian Hermes or to
convey Egyptian wisdom. When Hermes is quoted by Abu¯
Ma‘shar, he is a Persian, and this is reﬂected in Hermann
of Carinthia’s De essentiis (1143), in which quotations of
‘‘Hermes’’ (or ‘‘Hermes Persa’’) refer to citations from Abu¯
Ma‘shar’s Great Introduction to Astrology, whereas quota-
tions of ‘‘Trimegistus’’ refer to the Asclepius.
A signiﬁcant number of texts in Arabic purport to
convey the occult teaching of Hermes as transmitted by
Aristotle to his royal pupil Alexander (the pseudo-
Aristotelian Hermetica), and excerpts from these books
survive
in
Latin
translation
(Antimaquis,
De
luna
secundum Aristotelem, Liber de quattuor confectionibus).
No overlap has been observed between the Arabic texts
attributed to Hermes and the Greek Hermetic corpus, but
it is undoubted that the Greek Corpus Hermeticum origi-
nated in Egypt. Of Egyptian origin, also, is the art of
alchemy, with which Hermes’ name is closely associated,
and the magical art, which used spirits (daemons) in its
operations. A leitmotif in Hermetic works is the discovery
in an underground chamber or crypt of a stele made of
marble, ebony, or emerald with mysterious writing or sym-
bols on it. The best-known of these steles was the emerald
tablet of Hermes, on which is written a hymn that encap-
sulates the mystery of alchemy. This ﬁrst appears in Latin in
a mid-twelfth-century translation of the Secret of Creation
of Pseudo-Apollonius, made by Hugo of Santalla (see the
entry on Apollonius of Tyana in this volume).
The Asclepius remained the best-known conveyor of
Hermetic doctrine in the Latin West. It was known to
Lactantius in the second century CE and Augustine in
the fourth, and was copied and quoted frequently in the
Middle Ages and the Renaissance. It takes the form of
a dialogue between Hermes Trismegistus and Asclepius.
470 H
Hermes Trismegistus

The Egyptian context of the conversation is presumed
from the beginning, but the ﬁrst explicit mention is in
Section 24, when the conversation turns to statues
‘‘ensouled and conscious, ﬁlled with spirit and doing
great deeds, foreknowing the future, and predicting by
prophecy, dreams and other means.’’ During the course
of this conversation, Trismegistus refers to Egypt as an
‘‘image of heaven’’ and states that ‘‘our land is the temple
of the whole world.’’ The editor and commentator on the
Corpus Hermeticum, A.-J. Festugie`re, had claimed that the
Egyptian element of the Corpus is only a veneer, and that
the texts represented rather the academic culture of Hel-
lenistic Alexandria. But discoveries in Armenian and in
the Coptic papyri of Nag Hammadi prompted a
reappraisal of the Egyptian roots of the doctrines.
These are some of the doctrines, as expressed in
the Asclepius. The administration of all things is by
the heavens, as ‘‘a perceptible god’’ (Section 3), but through
the agency of the sun and moon, and the aid of daemons
(5). Man is a ‘‘great wonder’’ with the capacity for becoming
a god; everything is permitted to him, and he can know all
things (6). The sensible universe is a ‘‘second god’’ created
by the master and shaper of all things, and manwas brought
into being to admire this creation (8); hence there are three
gods: the master of eternity, the universe, and mankind
(10). Man’s aim should be to disdain earthly possessions
and seek out the divine (11). Music brings all knowledge
into its correct sequence (13). In the beginning, there was
hyle¯ (the Greek word used for matter), infused with spirit,
which had the capacity for coming into being and procre-
ating (14). God ﬁlls all things with spirit (16); matter
nourishes bodies, spirit nourishes souls (18). All mortal
and immortal things and all sensible and insensible things
are connected in that they all depend on one thing (19).
God cannot be named, is of both sexes, and ever pregnant
with his own will (20). Man is superior to the gods in that
he is both mortal and immortal, whereas gods are only
immortal (21). Man can call down souls into appropriate
matter in order to make living statues, which have the
power of looking after things and foretelling the future
(24); this is the art of making gods (37). Hymns, praises,
and sweet sounds in tune with heaven’s harmony keep the
statue-god happy in the presence of mankind. It is these
lesser gods who help humankind through loving kinship,
looking after individual things and giving advice for the
future (38). The world is eternal, governed by the action of
the sun and the movement of the stars (30), and regulated
by heimarmene¯ (fate), necessity, and order (39). God
requires no gifts other than worship and prayer (41).
The emphasis on ensouling matter, making ‘‘gods’’
who can help man, binds the theoretical Hermetic texts
of the Corpus Hermeticum with the technical ones, such as
the Antimaquis, and the various texts on making talis-
mans. For a talisman is analogous with a statue, in that it
is made of natural substances, but endowed with soul or
spirit through the performance of various ritual acts, and
spirits of the upper world are summoned to do the bid-
ding of the practitioner. The Corpus Hermeticum enjoyed
a new vogue after Ficino’s translation of 1463, under the
title Pimander (printed in 1472), and encouraged the idea
of a ‘‘perennial philosophy’’ or ‘‘ancient theology’’
founded by sages of hoary antiquity. Only with the
debunking of an age-old Hermes by Isaac Casaubon in
1614 did the Hermetic doctrines start to lose their interest.
See also: ▶Apollonius of Tyana
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1994–/in progress) Hermes Latinus, ed. Lucentini P. Vittoria Perrone
Compagni. Brepols, Turnhout
Copenhaver Brian P (1992) Hermetica: the Greek Corpus Hermeticum
and the Latin Asclepius in a new English translation with notes and
introduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Festugie`re Andre´-Jean (1950–1954) La re´ve´lation d’Herme`s Trisme´giste, 4
vols. J. Gabalda, Paris
Secondary Sources
Burnett C (2001) The establishment of medieval Hermeticism. The medi-
eval world, ed. Linehan P, Nelson JL. Routledge, London/New York,
pp 111–130
Fowden G (1986) The Egyptian Hermes: a historical approach to the late
pagan mind. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Lucentini P, Parri I, Perrone Compagni V (eds) (2003) Hermetism from
late antiquity to humanism = La tradizione ermetica dal mondo
tardo-antico all’umanesimo: atti del convegno internazionale di
studi, Napoli, 20–24 novembre 2001. Brepols, Turnhout
Lucentini P, Perrone Compagni V (2001) I testi e i codici di Ermete nel
Medioevo. Edizioni Polistampa, Florence
Porreca D (2001) The inﬂuence of Hermetic texts on western European
philosophers and theologians (1160–1300). PhD, University of
London
Ruska J (1926) Tabula Smaragdina. Carl Winter, Heidelberg
Ruska J (1928) Zwei Bu¨cher De compositione alchemiae und ihre
Vorreden. Archiv fu¨r Geschichte der Mathematik, der Naturwis-
senschaft und der Technik (Sudhoffs Archiv) 11:28–37
Van Bladel K (2009) The Arabic Hermes: from pagan sage to prophet of
science. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Van den Broek R (2005) Hermetism. Dictionary of gnosis and
western esoterism, 2 vols, ed. Hanegraaff WJ. Brill, Leiden/Boston,
pp 558–570
Van den Broek R, Lucentini P, Faivre A (2005) Hermes Trismegistus.
Dictionary of gnosis and western esoterism, 2 vols, ed. Hanegraaff
WJ. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 474–486
Van den Broek R, Lucentini P, Lory P, Faivre A (2005) Hermetic literature.
Dictionary of gnosis and western esoterism, 2 vols, ed. Hanegraaff
WJ. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 487–544
Hermes Trismegistus H
471
H

Hermetic Literature, or Tradition
▶Hermes Trismegistus
Hervaeus Natalis
JOHN P. DOYLE
Department of Philosophy (Professor Emeritus)
St. Louis University
St. Louis, MO
USA
Abstract
Hervaeus Natalis was a fourteenth century Dominican phi-
losopher and theologian. Both before and after he became
Master General of his Order, he took part in different
political as well as theological controversies, in the course
of which he defended the doctrine of Thomas Aquinas.
Historians, however, have questioned his Thomistic ortho-
doxy, inasmuch as he departed from Aquinas on important
doctrines such as the distinction of essence and existence in
creatures, individuation, truth, and relation. He was the ﬁrst
medieval philosopher to introduce and discuss the notion
of intentionality, which had important ramiﬁcations both
within his own century and in centuries to come.
Biography
Hervaeus Natalis (Variants of his surname include: de
Nedellec, Ne´de´lec, Ne´de´lek, Noe¨l; and of his forename:
Arveus, Erveus, Herve´, or Harvey) was born in Brittany
probably between 1250 and 1260, and he entered the
Dominicans in April of 1276. From 1302 to 1307, he was
in Paris studying theology at the convent of Saint-Jacques.
On June 26, 1303, while a Bachelor sententiarus, he was one
of numerous Dominicans at Saint-Jacques who signed the
petition of Philip the Fair, seeking to convoke a council,
which would judge Boniface VIII on the subject of royal
versus papal jurisdiction. Also during this period,
Hervaeus composed his Commentary on the Sentences of
Peter the Lombard and received his licentiate in 1308.
Besides his Sentences commentary, he authored other
works and engaged in numerous controversies, which
resulted in various polemical writings. Among these was
a Defense of the Doctrine of St. Thomas, plus works directed
against Duns Scotus (1266–1308), Peter Auriol (d. 1322),
Henry of Ghent (1217–1293), James of Metz (ﬂ. 1295–
1309), Jean de Pouilly (d. c. 1321), and especially Durand
of Saint Pourc¸ain (c. 1275–1334). In 1309, Hervaeus
became Provincial Superior of the Dominicans in France.
In 1318, he was elected Master General of his Order, in
which ofﬁce he remained until his death at Narbonne on
August 7, 1323. Worthy of note here is that Thomas
Aquinas (1225–1274) was solemnly canonized at Avignon
on July 18, 1323, but Hervaeus, who as Master General had
vigorously promoted his cause, was too ill to attend.
Thought
Whatever his purpose, Hervaeus was at best an eclectic
Thomist. Thus, he denied the central Thomistic doctrine
of a real distinction between essence and existence in crea-
tures. In his most explicit work on proving God’s existence,
Hervaeus, to some degree inﬂuenced by Duns Scotus
(1266–1308), from among the famous ﬁve ways of Aquinas,
embraced only the second from efﬁcient causality and the
fourth from degrees of being. He downgraded the ﬁrst way
from motion, although in his Treatise on Second Intentions,
without mentioning Thomas by name, he seems to accept,
and even to highlight, this ﬁrst way. Other points of depar-
ture from Thomism included an embrace of a real unity of
species and a doctrine, which in contrast both to Thomas’
quantiﬁed matter and Scotus’ haeccitas, attributed individ-
uation to a combination of an extrinsic cause and the
intrinsic essence of a thing. Again, he taught a doctrine of
relation, which centered on connotation and came close to
that later adopted by William of Ockham (c. 1284–1349).
At the same time, he allowed for real as well as conceptual
relations and, for example in his Quodlibet I, question 9, he
afﬁrmed the reality of the last six Aristotelian categories.
The distinction between real and conceptual relations was
important for Hervaeus’ understanding of intentionality.
While intentions had been discussed by many others from
Avicenna (980–1037) on, Hervaeus apparently ﬁrst coined
the term ‘‘intentionality’’ (intentionalitas), which he used
235 times in his Treatise on Second Intentions. Here two
things to note are: (1) for him intentionality was basically
a relation from the known, or the knowable, to the knower,
and (2) the point of departure for his discussionwas not the
De anima but rather the Metaphysics of Aristotle. In this
last, the key was Aristotle’s distinction between real being
in the categories and being as true. More speciﬁcally, the
relation involved for Hervaeus in the constitution of the
whole order of intentionality was not a real categorical
relation from knower to known but a conceptual relation
in the opposite direction. Connected with his teaching on
intentionality was his doctrine of truth, which he
described as a relation of conformity between a thing in
its objective being and the same thing in its real being.
Again connected is his non-Thomistic position that
472 H
Hermetic Literature, or Tradition

creatures from all eternity have in the mind of God not
actual but rather objective being. This position was later
rejected not only by most Thomistic commentators, such
as Cajetan [aka Thomas de Vio (1469–1534)], Ferrara
[Franciscanus de Silvestris Ferrarensis (1474–1528)],
Domingo Ban˜ez (1528–1604), and John of St. Thomas
(1589–1644), but also by Luis de Molina (1535–1600). It
was, however, accepted by Molina’s fellow Jesuit, Francisco
Sua´rez (1548–1617), who in his famous Disputationes
metaphysicae (Salamanca 1597) cited Hervaeus 77 times.
Other things to mention now are Hervaeus’ views on
temporal and spiritual jurisdiction, and also on dominion,
rights, and ownership. All these views, which have links yet
to be explored with his intentionality theory, had impor-
tance for changing understandings of state and church, for
government and subordination of power within the
church, as well as for objective and subjective rights, in
the early fourteenth century and after.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Essence and Existence
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Intention, Primary and
Secondary
▶John
Duns
Scotus
▶Natural
Rights
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Thomas of Vio (Cajetan) ▶Tho-
mism ▶Truth, Theories of ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Natalis
Hervaeus
(1489)
Tractatus
magistri
Hervei
Doctoris
perspicacissimi de secundis intentionibus. Georgius Mitelhuss,
Paris (of this last, a Latin transcription and English translation by
J. P. Doyle was published by Marquette University Press in 2008)
Natalis Hervaeus (1647) In quatuor Libros sententiarum Commentaria,
quibus adiectus est eiusdem auctoris Tractatus de potestate Papae.
Apud viduam Dyonisii Moreau et Dyonisium Moreau ﬁlium, Parisiis
Natalis Hervaeus (1959) De iurisdictione, Ho¨dl L (ed). Hueber Verlag,
Mu¨nchen
Natalis Hervaeus (1966) Quolibeta Hervei: subtilissima Hervei Natalis
Britonis theologi acutissimi quolibeta undecim cum octo ipsius
profundissimis tractatibus. . . videlicet: De beatitudine. De verbo.
De eternitate mundi. De materia celi. De relationibus. De pluralitate
formarum. De virtutibus. De motu angeli, Venetiis: Georgium
Arrivabenum, 1513. (repr., Gregg Press, Ridgewood)
Natalis Hervaeus (1999) The poverty of Christ and the apostles, trans.
Jones JD. of the Liber de paupertate Christi et apostolorum. Pontif-
ical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Secondary Sources
Allen E (1960) Hervaeus Natalis: an early ‘Thomist’ on the notion of
being. Mediaeval Stud 22:1–14
Bielmeier A (1925) Die Stellungnahme des Hervaeus Natalis O.Pr. ({
1323) in der Frage nach dem Wissenschaftscharakter der Theologie.
Divus Thomas (Freiburg). 3:399–414
Doyle JP (2006) Hervaeus Natalis OP (d. 1323) on intentionality: its
direction, context, and some aftermath. Mod Schoolman 83:85–123
de Guimaraˆes Ag (1938) Herve´ Noel. E´tude biographique. Archivum
Fratrum Praedictorum 8:5–81
Ho¨dl L (1955) Die Quodlibeta Minora des Herveus Natalis ({ 1323).
Mu¨nchener Theologische Zeitschrift 6:215–29
Iribarren I (2002) The Scotist background in Hervaeus Natalis’s interpre-
tation of thomism. Thomist 66:607–627
Kelley F (1978) Some observations on the ‘‘Fictum’’ theory in Ockham
and its relation to Hervaeus Natalis. Franciscan Stud 38:260–282
Koridze G (2002) Wissenschaft und das intentional Gedachte bei
Hervaeus Natalis. In: Dietl C, Helschinger D (eds) Ars und scientia
im Mittelalter und in der fru¨hen Neuzeit. Festschrift fu¨r G. Wieland
zum 65. Geburtstag. A. Franke, Tu¨bingen 97–107
Krebs E (1912) Theologie und Wissenschaft nach der Lehre der
Hochscholastik and der Hand der bisher ungedruckten Defensa
Doctrinae D. Thomae des Hervaeus Natalis. In: Beitra¨ge zur
Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, XI. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster, pp 3–4
Lowe E (2003) The contested theological authority of thomas aquinas: the
controversies between Hervaeus Natalis and Durandus of St.
Pourc¸ain. Routledge, New York
Mannath JT (1969) Harvey of Nedellec’s proofs for the existence of god:
De Cognitione Primi Principii, Qq. III-IV. Salesianum 31:46–112
Perler D (1994) Peter Aureol vs. Hervaeus Natalis on intentionality. Arch
Hist Doctrin Litt M-Aˆ ge 61:227–262
Perler D (1998) Hervaeus Natalis (d. 1323). Routledge encyclopedia
Philos 4:403–404
Perler D (2002) Theorien der Intentionalita¨t im Mittelalter. Klostermann,
Frankfurt am Main.
Pinborg J (1974) Zum Begriff der intentio secunda. Radulphus Brito,
Hervaeus Natalis und Petrus Aureoli in Diskussion. Cahiers de
l’Institut du Moyen Aˆ ge Grec et Latin 13:49–59
Rode C (2001) Sein oder Nichtsein, Hervaeus Natalis und Wilhelm von
Ockham u¨ber das Ens Rationis. In: Umbru¨che. Historische
Wendepunkte der Philosophie von der Antike bis zur Neuzeit. Fest-
schrift fu¨r Kurt Flasch zu seinen 70. Geburtstag. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam/
Philadelphia, pp 77–97
Sen´ko W (1961) Les opinions d’Herve´ Ne´dellec au sujet de l’essence et
l’existence. Mediaevalia Philosophica Polonorum 10:59–74
Tavuzzi PM (1992) Hervaeus Natalis and the philosophical logic of the
thomism of the renaissance. Doctor Communis 45:132–152
Wengert RG (1983) Three senses of intuitive cognition: a Quodlibetal
question of Harvey of Nedellec. Franciscan Stud 43:408–431
Heymeric of Camp
K. MEREDITH ZIEBART
Department of Philosophy
Universite´ du Que´bec a` Montre´al
Montre´al, QC
Canada
Abstract
Heymeric of Camp (van de Velde) was a theologian and
leading representative of the Albertist school at Cologne in
Heymeric of Camp H
473
H

the ﬁfteenth century, and the author of approximately 30
philosophical as well as theological works, of which only
a fraction have been printed or edited. He served as rector
of the University of Cologne and its representative at the
Council of Basle, and is remembered as a friend and
conﬁdant of Nicholas of Cusa, who brieﬂy studied theol-
ogy under him at Cologne. Heymeric’s thought is gener-
ally considered to belong to the scholastic Neoplatonic
tradition, and is strongly impressed by the inﬂuence of
Albert the Great as well as by the Ars generalis of Ramon
Llull.
Life and Work
Heymeric was born approximately in 1395 in Zon (Bra-
bant), in the vicinity of Eindhoven in what is now the
Netherlands, and died on August 11, 1460 in Leuven,
Belgium. Between 1410 and 1420 he studied in Paris,
where he came under the tutelage of John de Nova
Domo. From 1420 to 1422 he taught philosophy in Diest
(vicinity of Leuven), where he composed his ﬁrst major
work, the Compendium divinorum, a handbook on the
subject of metaphysics. In 1422, he entered the Theology
faculty at Cologne. Works belonging to Heymeric’s theo-
logical studies include a Sentences commentary, the
Quadripartitus quaestionum supra libros sententiarum,
and commentaries on Aristotle, including the Quaestiones
supra libros philosophiae rationalis, realis et moralis
Aristotelis, Compendium logicae, Compendium naturalis
philosophiae, and Compendium ethicorum. He became
Master of theology at Cologne in 1428 and was appointed
professor of theology shortly thereafter. In 1432, Heymeric
was made rector of the university, and between 1432 and
1435 he represented the university at the Council of Basle.
During this time, he composed a lengthy conciliar tract,
the Disputatio de potestate ecclesiastica, a defense of the
revelations of St. Birgitta of Sweden (Dyalogus super
reuelacionibus Beate Birgitte), as well as a number of
important philosophical works. From 1435 to 1453,
Heymeric served as professor of theology at the University
of Leuven.
His early
philosophical work, the
Compendium
divinorum, which presents an emanation model of reality
whereby creation is a hierarchical unfolding into plurality
of the divine ﬁrst principle, already manifests the strongly
Neoplatonic orientation of Heymeric’s thought. He main-
tains in this work that, by virtue of its emanation, the
inner structure of everything in the universe bears
a Trinitarian structure which is an image, or assimilation,
of its divine principle. Accordingly, each substance is
a unity, but with an inner Trinitarian structure  the
most fundamental of which is determined as esse, posse,
and operari  that corresponds to the divine persons. This
Trinitarian model of reality is further developed in a later
work, entitled the Theoremata totius universi, where the
divine Trinity is mirrored in creation through triadic
structures such as unitas, veritas, and bonitas. Although
Heymeric does not explicitly identify his approach as
Albertist in these works, his trinitarian theory is heavily
marked by the inﬂuence of Albert the Great, especially the
latter’s commentary on the Divine Names of Pseudo-
Dionysius.
In his Tractatus de sigillo aeternitatis (1432–1435), the
central ﬁgure is that of an encircled, equilateral triangle
with lines extending inward from each corner to the center
of the circle. The circle symbolizes the unity of God, the
triangle symbolizes the Trinity, and the radiating lines
stand for the external working of the divine power in
creation. Heymeric maintains that this divine symbol is
the best means for making the trinitarian structure of
reality apparent, due to its ability to communicate traces
in the lower echelons of the human understanding (ratio)
to its upper echelons (intellectus). In this way, the symbol
is not only the key to all scientiﬁc knowledge, but will lead
one to the ﬁrst principles of that knowledge, that is, to
their divine archetypes.
The Colliget principiorum iuris naturalis, divini et
humani philosophice doctrinalium, written during his
Basle years, is Heymeric’s largest work next to the
Disputatio, and comprises a wide-ranging survey of phil-
osophical principles. The Ars demonstrativa, written
around the same time, develops a method of demonstra-
tion through a peculiar application of the Aristotelian
principle of non-contradiction, whereby a series of philo-
sophical as well as theological truths are shown to be true
via a process of demonstrating the absurdity resulting
from the assertion of their opposite.
De signis notionalibus (1435–1460), a treatise written
most probably during Heymeric’s professorship at Leu-
ven, revisits the question of how observation of aspects of
creation can in a stepwise manner lead to knowledge of the
divine Trinity, and belongs to the tradition of vestigia
trinitatis treatises of the likes of Bonaventure’s Itinerarium
mentis in Deum. In this work, he brings forth many exam-
ples of such vestigia found in nature, including the
Trinitarian structure of the four elements, whereby each
is seen to be comprised of a triad of characteristics inter-
related in a manner that mirrors the divine Trinity. So, for
example, ﬁre is alleged to consist of the characteristics of
warmth, dryness, and lightness, such that warmth is the
primary characteristic, out of which is generated dryness,
and out of these both proceeds lightness. Another of
Heymeric’s late works is the Centheologicum (c. 1454),
474 H
Heymeric of Camp

a compendium of 100 different philosophies, including
sections on Nicholas of Cusa and Ramon Llull.
All of Heymeric’s speculative works are concerned
with ﬁnding a universal form of knowledge that will
encompass both philosophy and theology. Trinitarian
concepts play an important role in this universal knowl-
edge. Because it is an image of the divine Trinity, the
human soul is a thesaurus omnium scibilium, which can
be unlocked through self-knowledge, and which therefore
has the potential to grasp through natural means not only
all human knowledge, but divine truths as well. In so
afﬁrming the ability of human reason to discover divine
wisdom, Heymeric comes down ﬁrmly on the side of the
via antiqua, as one who rejects the nominalist division of
philosophy and theology.
Heymeric and Nicholas of Cusa
Nicholas and Heymeric were lifelong friends and exerted
a mutual inﬂuence in terms of philosophical ideas. As
mentioned, Cusa studied theology under Heymeric at
Cologne in 1425–1426, and they were colleagues at
the Basle council. Heymeric makes reference to Cusa’s
works De docta ignorantia and De pace ﬁdei in his
Centheologicon, and refers to Cusa as ‘‘Praeceptor meus’’
in a letter. On the other hand, it was probably Heymeric
who introduced Cusa to the philosophy of Ramon Llull,
and Heymeric’s writings on the subject of Christianity and
Islam in his Disputatio had a marked effect on Nicholas’
De pace ﬁdei and Cribatio Alkorani. There are three codices
containing manuscripts of works by Heymeric in the
Cusanus Library in Bernkastel-Kues (Cod. Cus. 24,
containing Heymeric’s commentary on the Apocalypse;
and Cod. Cus. 105 and 106, containing the Compendium
divinorum,
Quadripartitus
quaestionum
supra
libros
sententiarum,
Quaestiones
supra
libros
philosophiae
rationalis, realis et moralis Aristotelis, Theoremata totius
universi fundamentaliter doctrinalia, Ars demonstrativa,
Tractatus de sigillo aeternitatis, Disputatio de potestate
ecclesiastica, and Colliget principiorum).
Heymeric and Albertism
It was as a student of John de Nova Domo, the founder of
the
Albertist
school,
that
Heymeric
came
to
be
a representative of Albertism, a ﬁfteenth-century move-
ment which defended Albert the Great’s reading of Aris-
totle against the interpretations of its major competitors,
namely the Thomists, Scotists, and Nominalists. Albertism
is distinguished from the other schools of thought by its
strongly
Neoplatonic
orientation.
One
of
its
key
distinguishing features is the teaching that it is possible
for the intellect to attain knowledge of separate substances
in this life and without the mediation of sensible experi-
ence. In defending this as an interpretation of Aristotle, the
Albertists relied heavily on the concept of the ‘‘intellectus
adeptus,’’ taken from the Islamic Aristotelians. In 1423,
Heymeric penned the Tractatus problematicus (Problemata
inter Albertum Magnum et Sanctum Thomam, printed in
Cologne in 1496), an Albertist tractate in which he ﬁrst
identiﬁes and rejects the position of the Nominalists,
before examining the points of difference as well as agree-
ment between the Thomists and Albertists. This treatise
incited a violent response from Thomist Gerard de Monte,
who rejected the notion that there might be any points of
agreement between Albertists and Thomists. Heymeric’s
inﬂuence on academic theology in the ﬁfteenth century 
especially through the Tractatus problematicus  was con-
siderable, and his activities as a representative of Albertism
were largely responsible for the institutional solidiﬁcation
of the Albertist school at Cologne and beyond.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Albertism ▶Aristotelian-
ism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Tra-
ditions ▶Bonaventure ▶Nicholas of Cusa ▶Ramon Llull
▶Thomism ▶Trinity
Bibliography
Works
Adman A (ed) (2003) Heymericus de Campo: Dyalogus super
reuelacionibus Beate Birgitte: a critical edition with an introduction.
University Press, Uppsala
Cavigioli J (1981) Les e´crits d’Heymericus de Campo (1395–1460) sur les
oeuvres d’Aristote. Freibg Z Philos Theol 28:289–371 (contains edi-
tion of excerpts of Heymeric’s commentaries on Aristotle)
Colomer E (ed) (1963) Heimeric van den Velde entre Ramo´n Llull
y Nicolas de Cusa. In: Vincke J (ed) Gesammelte Aufsa¨tze zur
Kulturgeschichte Spaniens 21. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster, pp 216–232
(edition of treatise Theoremata totius universi)
Hoenen M (ed) (1994) Denys the Carthusian and Heymeric de Campo on
the pilgrimages of children to Mont-Saint-Michel (1458). Arch Hist
Doctrin Litt M-Aˆ ge 61:387–418 (edition of treatise Determinatio
super peregrinatione multorum iuvenum)
Hoenen M (ed) (1998) Trinita¨t und Sein. Der Traktat De signis
notionalibus trinitatis et unitatis supernae und seine Bedeutung fu¨r
das trinitarische Weltbild des Heymericus de Campo. Freibg Z Philos
Theol 45:206–263 (edition of De signis notionalibus)
Hoenen M (ed) (2002) Academic theology in the ﬁfteenth century. The
Sentences commentary of Heymericus de Campo. In: Bakker P (ed)
Chemins de la Pense´e Me´die´vale. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 513–559
(edition of Quadripartitus quaestionum supra libros sententiarum)
Imbach R, Ladner P (eds) (2001) Heymericus de Campo. Opera selecta.
(Spicilegium Friburgense 39). University Press, Freiburg (editions of
Epistola ad Papam Martinum V (Hussite Dialogue), De sigillo
eternitatis, Ars demonstrativa, Tractatus de naturali veritatis
catholice analesy, Alphabetum doctrinale)
Korolec J (ed) (1967/1968) Compendium divinorum Heimeryka de
Campo
W
RKP.
BJ
695.
Studia
nad
dziejami
Albertyzmy
Kolonskiego. Studia Mediewistyczne 8:19–75, 1967; 9:3–90, 1968
Heymeric of Camp H
475
H

Ladner P (ed) (1977) Der Ablass-Traktat des Heymericus de Campo. Ein
Beitrag
zur
Geschichte
des
Basler
Konzils.
Zeitschrift
fu¨r
Schweizerische Kirchengeschichte 71:93–140 (edition of treatise
Vincit veritas)
Literature
Burie L (1977) Proeve tot inventarisatie van de in handschrift of in druk
bewaarde werken van de Leuvense theologieprofessoren uit de xve
eeuw. In: van Eijl E (ed) Facultas S. Theologiae Lovaniensis 1432–
1797. Bijdragen tot haar geschiedenis (Bibliotheca Ephemeridum
Theologicarum Lovaniensium 45). University Press, Leuven, pp
215–272
Hamann F (2005) Koran und Konziliarismus. Anmerkungen zum
Verha¨ltnis von Heymericus de Campo und Nikolaus von Kues.
Vivarium 43(2):275–291
Hamann F (2006) Das Siegel der Ewigkeit. Universalwissenschaft und
Konziliarismus bei Heymericus de Campo. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Hoenen M (1990) Heymeric van de velde. Eenheid in de tegendelen
(Geschiedenis van de Wijsbegeerte in Nederland 4). Ambo, Baarn
Hoenen M (1994) Academics and intellectual life in the low countries: the
university career of Heymeric de Campo ({1460). Recherches de
the´ologie ancienne et me´die´vale 61:173–209
Hoenen M (1995) Heymeric van de Velde ({1460) und die Geschichte des
Albertismus. Auf der Suche nach den Quellen der albertistischen
Intellektlehre des Tractatus problematicus. In: Hoenen M, de Libera
A
(eds)
Albertus
Magnus
und
der
Albertismus.
Deutsche
philosophische Kultur des Mittelalters (Studien und Texte zur
Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 48). Brill, Leiden, pp 303–331
Hoenen M (2008) Comment lire les grands maıˆtres?: Ge´rard de Monte,
Heymeric de Campo et la question de l’accord entre Albert le Grand
et Thomas d’Aquin (1456). Rev Thomiste 108:105–130
Imbach R, Calma D. Les notes marginales de Nicolas de Cuse au traite´
Colliget principiorum d’Heymeric de Campo. In: Reinhardt K (ed)
Heymericus
de
Campo.
Philosophie
und
Theologie
im
15.
Jahrhundert. Roderer, Regensburg, pp 15–51
Imbach R, Calma D. Primum principium. Anmerkungen zum Wandel in
der Auslegung der Bedeutung und Funktion des Satzes vom zu
vermeidenden Widerspruch bei Thomas von Aquin, Nikolaus von
Autre´court, Heymericus de Campo und Nikolaus von Kues. In:
Pickave´ M (ed) Die Logik des Transzendentalen. Festschrift fu¨r Jan
A. Aertsen zum 65. Geburtstag (Miscellanea Mediaevalia, 30). de
Gruyter, Berlin, pp 602–618
Imbach R, Calma D (1983) Das Centheologicon des Heymericus de
Campo
und
die
darin
enthaltenen
Cusanus-Reminiszenzen:
Hinweise und Materialen. Traditio 39:466–477
Imbach R, Calma D (1995) Quelques remarques sur le traite´ De sigillo
eternitatis de Heymeric de Campo. In: Hoenen M, de Libera A (eds)
Albertus Magnus und der Albertismus. Deutsche philosophische
Kultur des Mittelalters (Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte
des Mittelalters 48). Brill, Leiden, pp 297–302
Kaluza Z (1992) La voix cre´atrice de Dieu. Remarques sur l’Alphabetum
de Heimeric de Campo. In: Westra H (ed) From Athens to Chartres.
Neoplatonism and medieval thought. Studies in honour of E.
Jeauneau (Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters
35). Brill, Leiden, pp 439–468
Ladner P (1985) Revolutionare Kirchenkritik am Basler Konzil? Zum
Konziliarismus des Heymericus de Campo. Helbing & Lichtenhahn,
Basel/Frankfurt am Main
Meersseman G (1935) Geschichte des Albertismus, 2: Die ersten Ko¨lner
Kontroversen. Dissertationes historicae 5. Rome
Meuthen E (1988) Ko¨lner Universita¨tsgeschichte I. Die alte Universita¨t.
Bo¨hlau, Ko¨ln
Reinhardt K (ed) (2009) Heymericus de Campo. Philosophie und
Theologie im 15. Jahrhundert. Roderer, Regensburg
Tewes G (1993) Die Bursen der Ko¨lner Artisten-Fakulta¨t bis zur Mitte des
16. Jahrhunderts (Studien zur Geschichte der Universita¨t zu Ko¨ln
13). Bo¨hlau, Ko¨ln, pp 48–49 (for biographical information on
Heymeric’s time at Cologne)
Heytesbury, William
▶William Heytesbury
Hildegard of Bingen
CONSTANT J. MEWS
Centre for Studies in Religion and Theology
School of Historical Studies
Monash University
Clayton, VIC
Australia
Abstract
Hildegard of Bingen (1098–1179) was brought up from
the age of seven at the monastery of Disibodenberg, near
Mainz, Germany. Little is known of her early life until
a mystical experience in her forty-third year prompted
her to start recording her visionary insights in Scivias
(Know the Ways), a work that gained the approval of both
St. Bernard and Pope Eugenius III at the Council of Trier
in late 1147 or early 1148. Soon after 1150, she succeeded
in
moving
with
her
female
community
from
Disibodenberg to Rupertsberg near Bingen. There she
became famous as a proliﬁc author and as a spiritual
guide and counselor for both her nuns and the wider
community. Although not trained in philosophy, her
visionary treatises, Scivias, the Liber vitae meritorum
(Book of Life’s Rewards), and the Liber divinorum operum
(Book of Divine Works) reveal her desire to interpret
religious doctrine in the light of nature. She was pro-
foundly interested in the therapeutic properties of plants,
stones, and living organisms in the natural world, as well
as in the capacity of music to restore the human soul.
Although she never traveled outside of Germany, she was
widely recognized by contemporaries across Europe as
being one of the most extraordinarily gifted women of
her day.
476 H
Heytesbury, William

Biographical Information
Hildegard reveals relatively little about her early life, other
than that ever since the age of ﬁve, she had been gifted with
‘‘secret and wonderful visions,’’ which she had once spo-
ken to a woman under whose care she had been placed
(Jutta, daughter of the Count of Sponheim), but that by
the age of ﬁfteen she had learned not to speak about them,
out of fear of what others might say (Vita Hildegardis II.2).
Having been offered to Disibodenberg as a child, she was
formally enclosed as a recluse there in 1112, along with
Jutta – who was six years older. According to the Life of
Jutta, written soon after her death in 1136, Hildegard’s
mentor was widely known as offering advice and healing,
but who was committed to extremes of self-mortiﬁcation
(Silvas, 1999, 65–84). Only gradually did Hildegard move
out of her shadow. She recalls that her life changed in 1141
with a mystical experience of ‘‘the living light’’ by which
she claimed to understand the true meaning of the scrip-
tures, of the Fathers (and also of some philosophers, she
would later add) (Scivias, Prol.; Vita Hildegardis II.2). She
was encouraged to record her insights by close friends, in
particular by a monk called Volmar, and Richardis von
Stade. She spent the next ten years working on Scivias, or
‘‘Know the Ways’’ (of the Lord). Yet, only after prolonged
bouts of illness and after getting support from St. Bernard
and Pope Eugenius III at the Council of Trier (1147/48),
was she able to move with eighteen nuns to a new monas-
tic site, at Rupertsberg, where she was ofﬁcially the
magistra with Volmar as provost, but operated as its abbess
(Vita Hildegardis II.7). She quickly became widely recog-
nized as a healer and visionary, consulted by bishops,
monks, and simple layfolk. She engaged in extensive cor-
respondence with contemporaries at the same time as
composing many songs for the liturgy at Rupertsberg. At
this abbey, she devoted herself to writing not just about the
Church and Scripture, but about the healing properties of
natural elements and creatures, psychological develop-
ment, and the relationship of the natural world to the
process of redemption.
Hildegard went on several preaching tours in Germany,
and was particularly concerned by the growth of heretical
groups that rejected the worldliness of the established
Church. In the ﬁnal year of her life, Hildegard and her
nuns were excommunicated by the archbishop of Mainz,
ostensibly for burying an excommunicated nobleman in
their grounds. This prompted an impassioned defense of
their right to sing the liturgy, and thus recreate the original
voice of Adam in Paradise (Epist. 23). While this excom-
munication was lifted shortly before her death on Septem-
ber 17, 1179, Hildegard’s devoted admirers never succeeded
in getting her recognized by the papacy as a saint.
Thought
Hildegard’s ﬁrst major work, Scivias, is concerned with the
evolution of Ecclesia. She describes and comments on
thirteen visions (subsequently illustrated in the manu-
script produced under her direction). While she professed
ignorance of the technical skills of exegesis, she uses visual
images to highlight her reading of the great themes of
creation, the fall of humanity and the redemption, and
the return of Ecclesia to a godly path. Identifying herself
with John the Divine, she quotes extensively from Scrip-
ture to explain that although the natural universe was
created by God, humanity had been led astray (Scivias I).
Her frequent theme is that natural viriditas, or greening-
power, has fallen away, and that it is only through God’s
love that viriditas can be restored (Mews 1998b).
Hildegard gives detailed advice to different orders within
the Church about how they ought to lead their life. Rather
than single out Eve as the temptress of Adam, she sees the
devil as having ensnared Eve, mother of creation, but
Ecclesia as the reawakened Bride, mother of the faithful,
destined for mystical union with Christ (Newman 1987).
Much of the third part of Scivias is taken up by an account
of the elevation of Ecclesia through the Virtues, to which
Christians can appeal for support in their effort. It con-
cludes with a series of mystical songs that serve to remind
a sluggish soul of her true calling, expanded in her Ordo
virtutum (Order of Virtues), a morality play about the soul’s
journey. Hildegard also included songs in her Symphonia of
celestial harmonies, songs that she may have started to
compose long before she moved to Rupertsberg in 1150.
In the Liber subtilitatum rerum creaturarum (Book of
the Subtleties of Created Things) – preserved as two sepa-
rate texts, the Physica and the Causae et curae (Causes and
Cures), Hildegard considers how not only did God create
all things, but how creation, rightly used, can help restore
human health to physical and spiritual balance (Moulinier
1995). Her teaching recapitulates some familiar themes of
traditional medical wisdom, but placed within a spiritual
framework, in which physical illness is seen not simply as
a means for testing spiritual stamina, but as a sign of
spiritual imbalance within the human being. Hildegard
constantly refers to physical illnesses by which she was
afﬂicted throughout her life. Whereas Jutta seems to
have treated the body by ascetic exercises, Hildegard
understood the spiritual life as involving a restoration of
physical as well as spiritual harmony. She developed the
psychological aspect of her teaching in the Liber vitae
meritorum, composed after 1158, on a visual image to
highlight her teaching about conduct that ultimately leads
away from God. Using apocalyptic imagery to warn against
vices of inﬁdelity, slothfulness, and worldly love, and the
Hildegard of Bingen H
477
H

consequences of such behavior on those who follow such
vices, she sees herself as a legitimate philosopher, though
wiser than those who simply trusted in head knowledge
(Liber vitae meritorum III.9).
In 1163, Hildegard started her greatest composition,
the Liber divinorum operum (LDO) a vast synthesis of
visionary teaching, expounded through her technique of
describing and commenting on a series of ten visions. The
task took her another ten years to complete. While
Hildegard was never trained in the schools, she would
have been exposed to theological works like the De
sacramentis of Hugh of St. Victor, with its theme of
God’s plan for restoring humanity to God. She takes
a very different tack, however, from scholastic theologians.
The ﬁrst section of LDO is devoted to a symbolic account
of the natural world, and the relationship of the human
person to the wider universe. She has an apocalyptic ﬁgure
proclaim her distinctly dynamic vision of the life force,
divine in origin, that sustains creation:
"
I am the supreme and fiery life, which sets aflame all living
sparks, and breathed forth nothing dead, and I judge all
things as they are. [. . .] For the air lives in viridity and
flowers, the waters flow as if they live, the sun also lives
in its light (Liber divinorum operum I.1.2).
With this rich poetic writing, Hildegard distances her-
self from traditional philosophical categories about divine
being, and instead emphasizes the divine force that sus-
tains the created world. Her consistent theme is that body
and soul need each other to survive, and that imbalance in
this relationship disturbs the entire order of creation.
See also: ▶Bernard of Clairvaux ▶Hugh of St. Victor
▶Medicine and Philosophy ▶Virtue and Vice
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1978) Sciuias, ed. Fu¨hrko¨tter A, Carlevaris A. CCCM 43, 43A. Brepols,
Turnhout
(1991–2001) Epistolarium, ed. Van Acker L. CCCM 91, 91A; ed. Klaes M.
CCCM 91B. Brepols, Turnhout
(1993) Vita Sanctae Hildegardis, ed. Klaes M. CCCM 126. Brepols,
Turnhout
(1995) Liber vite meritorum, ed. Carlevaris A. CCCM 90. Brepols,
Turnhout
(1996) Liber diuinorum operum, ed. Derolez A, Dronke P. CCCM 92.
Brepols, Turnhout
(1999) Jutta and Hildegard. The biographical sources, trans. Silvas A.
Brepols, Turnhout (contains autobiographical extracts by Hildegard)
(2003) Cause et cure, ed. Moulinier L, Berndt R. Rarissima mediaevalia
Opera latina, 1. Akademie, Berlin
(2007) Opera minora, ed. Dronke P, Evans CP, Feiss H, Kienzle BM,
Muessig CA, Newman B. CCCM 226. Brepols, Turnhout
Secondary Sources
Berndt R (ed) (2001) Im Angesicht Gottes suche der Mensch sich selbst.
Hildegard von Bingen (1098–1179). Akademie, Berlin
Burnett C, Dronke P (eds) (1998) Hildegard of Bingen. The context of her
thought and art. Warburg Institute, London
Flanagan S (1989) Hildegard of Bingen, 1098–1179. A visionary life.
Routledge, London
Haverkamp A (ed) (2000) Hildegard von Bingen in ihrem historischen
Umfeld. von Zabern, Mainz
McInerny MB (ed) (1998) Hildegard of Bingen: a book of essays. Garland,
New York
Mews CJ (1998a) Hildegard and the schools. In: Burnett C, Dronke P
(eds) Hildegard of Bingen and the context of her thought and art.
Warburg Institute, London, pp 89–110
Mews CJ (1998b) A frail human being on ﬁery life. In: Newman B (ed)
Voice of the living light. University of California Press, Berkeley, pp
52–69
Moulinier L (1995) Le manuscrit perdu a` Strasbourg. Publications de la
Sorbonne, Paris
Newman B (1987) Sister of wisdom. St Hildegard’s theology of the
feminine. University of California Press, Berkeley
Newman B (ed) (1998) Voice of the living light. Hildegard of Bingen and
her world. University of California Press, Berkeley
Holcot, Robert
▶Robert Holcot
Holy War
▶War (Just War, Holy War)
Hugh of St. Victor
JOHN T. SLOTEMAKER
Department of Theology
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
The writings of Hugh of St. Victor encompass pedagogical,
exegetical, theological, and spiritual works. These four
areas of Hugh’s thought are brought together by various
themes, the central one being the creation of the world by
the Triune God and redemption of the world through the
478 H
Holcot, Robert

grace of the incarnation and the sacraments of the Chris-
tian
Church.
This unifying
theme
is
worked out
exegetically,
spiritually,
and
systematically
through
a conception of world history that takes into account the
historical and eschatological realities revealed in the Chris-
tian Scriptures. The present article brieﬂy traces these
themes as they are woven through Hugh’s central works.
Hugh of St. Victor (b. 1097/1101–d. 1141) was a member of
the Augustinian canons regular at the Abbey of St. Victor,
located ontheleft bank of the Seine just outside the city walls
of twelfth-century Paris. Perhaps a student of William of
Champeaux, Hugh was profoundly inﬂuential in the intel-
lectual ﬂowering that took place in western Europe from the
early twelfth to the mid-thirteenth century. Hugh, called by
his contemporaries the secundus Augustinus, was signiﬁ-
cantly inﬂuenced by Augustine of Hippo; Hugh’s inﬂuence
can be traced in the writings of Richard of St. Victor, Adam
of St. Victor, Thomas Gallus, and Bonaventure.
Like many of the victorines, Hugh is more of
a theologian and biblical exegete than a philosopher in
any modern sense of the term, and his works can be
divided into pedagogical, exegetical, theological, and spir-
itual works (Poirel 1998:37–47). The writings of Hugh
(including numerous misattributions) are collected in
the Patrologia Latina 175–177 and are currently being
edited in modern critical editions.
Hugh’s Pedagogical Division of Philosophy
In his Didascalicon, Hugh divided philosophy (the sci-
ences), following Augustine’s De doctrina christiana, into
four basic categories: (1) theoretical, (2) practical,
(3) mechanical, and (4) logical. The theoretical sciences
consist of theology, mathematics (arithmetic, music,
geometry, and astronomy), and physics. The practical
sciences are made up of individual concerns (ethics),
domestic concerns (economic), and public concerns
(political). The mechanical sciences consist of fabric mak-
ing, armament, navigation, agriculture, hunting, medi-
cine, and theatre. Finally, the logical sciences are divided
into grammar and the art of reasoning (demonstration,
dialectic, and rhetoric). The divisions explicated above
inform Hugh’s other pedagogical works such as De
institutione nouitiorum, De grammatica, and De tribus
maximis
circumstantiis
gestorum
(Chronicon).
These
works emphasize the importance of historical learning
and memory as well as proper exegetical method.
Biblical Exegesis
The Abbey of St.Victor was characterized by a focus on
biblical exegesis (Smalley). From Hugh and Andrew of St.
Vicor’s reevaluation of the historical sense (Zinn) to Her-
bert of Bosham’s interest in the hebraica veritas and
Hebrew exegesis (Goodwin), the school had a signiﬁcant
impact not only on twelfth-century exegesis but also on
the subsequent medieval tradition. The Hugonian corpus
includes theoretical works of exegesis (De scripturis et
scriptoribus sacris, PL 175, col. 9–28; Didascalicon) and
several important individual exegetical works (Expositio
super Psalmos, PL 177, col. 589–634; Homiliae in
Ecclesiasten, PL 175, col. 113–256).
Again, following Augustine (De doctrina christiana),
Hugh divided Scripture into three distinct scriptural
types: (1) literal (historical), (2) allegorical, and (3) tropo-
logical (moral). The literal sense, as Hugh understands the
category, is closely related to a historical understanding.
Hugh places a strong priority on the historical sense, and it
functions as a guide by which he evaluates the other senses,
in
particular
arguing
against
an
uncontrolled
or
undisciplined use of the spiritual sense (Didascalicon 6,
3; De scripturis et scriptoribus sacris 3–5). A particular
passage of Scripture can be understood to have a literal,
allegorical, and tropological sense, implying that these are
not ‘‘competing’’ categories in Hugh’s exegesis.
Theological Speculation
Hugh’s pedagogical and exegetical works form the foun-
dation of his De sacramentis christianae ﬁdei, a work that is
often considered the ﬁrst theological Summa of the high
medieval period. This systematic work is not Hugh’s
only theological treatise, although judging by the extant
manuscripts De sacramentis (224 mss.), and the shorter
De tribus diebus (114 mss.) are Hugh’s most signiﬁcant
theological tracts for the later Middle Ages (Poirel 1998:
41–43).
Hugh argues in the prologue to De sacramentis that
readers are often distracted by various unorganized and
disparate volumes, therefore he proposes a systematic
order that is contained in a single Summa. He argues
that the subject matter of the Scriptures is the restoration
of humanity, and this restoration is found in two works:
(1) the work of creation (opus conditionis) and (2) the
work of restoration (opus restaurationis). This basic divi-
sion of the treatise is between the time before the incarna-
tion and the time after the incarnation. The ﬁrst work
includes all things that came into being in the time before
the incarnation including angels, humanity, the fall,
human restoration, the sacraments (sacraments of the
Hebrew Bible), faith, and the law. The second work is an
explication of the restoration of creation through the
incarnation and the sacramental nature of all of reality.
In Hugh’s language, ‘‘the work of restoration is the
Hugh of St. Victor H
479
H

incarnation of the word with all his Sacraments’’ (opus
restaurationis est incarnatio Verbi cum omnibus sacramentis
suis; PL 176, col. 183). Hugh explicates the narrative of
creation, fall, and redemption in the ﬁrst book of De
sacramentis, leaving to the entire second book an elaborate
discussion of the incarnation of the Word and the divine
grace given through the sacraments.
The narrative of creation and redemption found in De
sacramentis is also the signiﬁcant theme of the Ark
trilogy and numerous other writings, locating the
heart of Hugh’s thought in the plan of redemption as
worked out in the grace of the incarnation and the
sacraments of the Christian Church. The exegetical,
mystical, aesthetic, and theological threads of Hugh’s
oeuvre are intricately woven together in his short work
De tribus diebus.
Spirituality
The culmination of Hugh’s theological enterprise – and
clearly the most copied, and presumably read, works – are
his spiritual writings. Some of these works, such as the
Soliloquium de arrha animae (327 mss.), De virtute orandi
(226 mss.), and De archa Noe morali (152 mss.) exist in
hundreds of manuscripts, demonstrating that they were
incredibly popular spiritual writings (Poirel 1998:44–47).
The works that have received the most scholarly attention
recently are Hugh’s triad of works on the theme of Noah’s
Ark: De archa Noe morali (or De archa Noe), De archa Noe
mystica (or Libellus de formatione arche), and De vanitate
mundi.
The Ark trilogy is an elaborate schema in which the
human heart or soul is related to God. God, throughout
the trilogy, is found to dwell in the human being through
knowledge and love; knowledge constructs the structure of
faith, the Ark, and love is that which gives the Ark its
beauty and embellishment. God dwells in the human
heart as if in a temple or an Ark. But, the relationship
between God and the human heart is worked out through
a complex structure of scriptural and historical imagery.
This work is begun in De archa Noe morali and continued
in De archa Noe mystica. The latter work encapsulates all of
Biblical and Church History, emphasizing the place of the
Church (CCCM 176:127; PL 176, col. 685) and its human
inhabitants from Adam through the pontiﬁcate of the
present Pope Honorius (CCCM 176:128–132; PL 176,
col. 686–7). The ﬁnal work in the triad, De vanitate
mundi, is in the form of a dialogue between Reason and
the Soul. The work continues the same theme, in which
the Ark saves humanity from the ﬂood and brings it to
God – who both resides above, but is also the helmsman,
or captain, of the Ark.
See also: ▶Augustine ▶Bonaventure ▶Pseudo-Dionysius
the Areopagite ▶Richard of St. Victor
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Hugh of St. Victor (1854) Patrologia Latina cursus completus, ed. Migne
JP. Opera omnia. vols 175–177. Vive`s, Paris
Hugh of St. Victor (1951) On the sacraments of the Christian faith [De
sacramentis christianae ﬁdei], trans. Deferrari R. The Medieval Acad-
emy of America, Cambridge
Hugh of St. Victor (1961) The Didascalicon, trans. Taylor J. Columbia
University Press, New York
Hugh of St. Victor (1962) Selected spiritual writings, trans. a Religious of
Congregatio Sanctae Mariae Virginis. Harper & Row, New York
Hugh of St. Victor (2001) De archa Noe and Libellus de formatione arche,
ed. Sicard P. Hugonis de Sancto Victore opera, v. I (CCCM 176).
Brepols, Turnhout
Hugh of St. Victor (2002) De tribus diebus, ed. Poirel D. Hugonis de
Sancto Victore opera, v. II (CCCM 177). Brepols, Turnhout
Hugh of St. Victor (2008) De sacramentis Christiane ﬁdei, ed. Berndt R.
Corpus Victorinum. Aschendorff, Monasterii Westfalorum
Secondary Sources
Coolman BT (2003) Pulchrum Esse: the beauty of scripture, the beauty of
the soul, and the art of exegesis in the theology of Hugh of St. Victor.
Traditio 58:175–200
Goodwin D (2006) Take hold of the robe of a Jew: Herbert of Bosham’s
Christian Hebraism. Brill, Leiden
Hofmeier J (1964) Die Trinita¨tslehre des Hugo von St. Viktor. Max
Hueber, Munich
Illich I (1993) In the vineyard of the text: a commentary to Hugh’s
Didascalicon. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Poirel D (1998) Hughes de Saint-Victor. Le E´ditions du Cerf, Paris
Poppenberg PE (1937) Die Christologie des Hugo von St. Victor. Herz
Jesu-missionshaus Hiltrup, Mu¨nster
Sicard P (1991) Hugues de Saint-Victor et son e´cole. Brepols, Turnhout
Schu¨tz C (1967) Deus absconditus, Deus manifestus: Die Lehre Hugos
von St. Viktor u¨ber di Offenbarung Gottes. Herder, Rome
Smalley B (1978) The study of the Bible in the Middle Ages. University of
Notre Dame, Notre Dame
Van Den Eynde D (1960) Essai sur la succession et la date des e´crits de
Hugues de Saint-Victor, Rome (Spicilegiium Pontiﬁcii Athenaei
Antoniani, 13).
Zinn G (1969) History and contemplation: the dimensions of the resto-
ration of man in two treatises on the Ark of Noah by Hugh of St.
Victor. Ph.D. dissertation, Duke University, Durham
Hylomorphism, Universal
▶Form and Matter
480 H
Hylomorphism, Universal

