Transactional Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
795
T
Transactional Interpretation of Quantum
Mechanics
John G. Cramer
Interpretations of quantum mechanics provide an account of the meaning of the
quantum formalism and guidance on how to use the formalism to connect with
nature and to make predictions on the outcome of experiments. The ﬁrst interpre-
tation was the Copenhagen interpretation, developed by Heisenberg and Bohr the
late 1920s. It has become the orthodox view of the meaning of the quantum formal-
ism, but it has lead to an uncomfortably large number of interpretational paradoxes
( Errors and paradoxes in quantum mechanics) associated with relativity conﬂicts,
 wave-particle duality, wave function collapse, and quantum  nonlocality.
The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics [1, 2] is a leading al-
ternative to the Copenhagen interpretation. The transactional interpretation (TI) is
explicitly nonlocal and is able to explain all of the interpretational paradoxes. It
is relativistically invariant, so that it can be used with the relativistic wave equa-
tions as well as the  Schr¨odinger equation. It uses the retarded () and advanced
(*) wave function solutions of these equations in a “handshake” that provides
a rationale for understanding the formal structure of quantum  wave mechanics
and for treating quantum  wave functions as physically present in space. In fact,
the advanced-retarded transactions are “visible” in the quantum wave-mechanics
formalism.
The logical development of the transactional interpretation starts with the time-
symmetric classical electromagnetism of Dirac [3], and Wheeler and Feynman [4,5],
which describes electromagnetic processes as exchanges between retarded (normal)
and advanced (time-reversed) electromagnetic waves. The transactional interpreta-
tion applies the time-symmetric Wheeler–Feynman view to the quantum mechanical
wave function solutions of the electromagnetic wave equation. The lessons learned
about electromagnetic quantum waves are then extended to wave functions describ-
ing the behavior of massive particles (e.g.,  electrons, protons, etc.) by applying
the same interpretation to their relativistic wave equations. Finally, the Schr¨odinger
equation is included as a nonrelativistic reduction of the relativistic wave equations
in the limit of small velocities.
The transactional interpretation views each quantum event as a “handshake” or
“transaction” process extending across space–time that involves the exchange of ad-
vanced and retarded waves to enforce the conservation of certain quantities (energy,
momentum, angular momentum, ...). It asserts that each quantum transition forms
in four stages: (1) emission, (2) response, (3) stochastic choice, and (4) repetition to
completion.
The ﬁrst stage of a quantum event, illustrated in Fig. 1, is the emission of an “offer
wave” by the “source,” which is the object supplying the quantities transferred. The
offer wave is the time-dependent retarded quantum wave function , as used in

796
Transactional Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
Fig. 1 Schematic view of
emission stage
Fig. 2 Schematic view of
response stage
standard quantum mechanics. It spreads through space–time until it encounters the
“absorber,” the object receiving the conserved quantities.
The second stage of a quantum event is the response to the offer wave by any
potential absorber (there may be many in a given event). Such an absorber produces
an advanced “conﬁrmation wave” *, the complex conjugate of the quantum offer
wave function . The conﬁrmation wave travels in the reverse time direction and
arrives back to the source at precisely the instant of emission with an amplitude of
*. In transactions involving “entangled” waves, i.e., emission of two or more
waves linked by a conservation law (e.g., conservation of momentum or angular
momentum), the corresponding conﬁrmation waves must match so that the conser-
vation law is implemented (Fig. 2).
The third stage of a quantum event is the stochastic choice exercised by the
source in selecting one from among the possible transactions. It does this in a lin-
ear probabilistic way based on the strengths *of the advanced-wave “echoes”
it receives from the potential absorbers. However, in order to avoid transactional
inconsistencies pointed out by Maudlin [6], the probabilistic decision must be

Transactional Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
797
T
hierachical, with the decision to select or not select transactions from small space–
time intervals occurring “before” any transactions from larger space–time intervals
are allowed to form.
The ﬁnal stage of a quantum event is the repetition to completion of this process
by the source and absorber, reinforcing the selected transaction repeatedly until the
conserved quantities are transferred and the potential quantum event becomes a real
event.
The application of the transactional interpretation in resolving interpretational
quantum paradoxes is discussed in detail in references [1] and [7]. Brieﬂy, conﬂicts
with relativity are eliminated because the TI is relativistically invariant. Paradoxes
associated with wave-particle duality and the  Heisenberg uncertainty relations
are resolved and clariﬁed because the offer wave is wavelike and can be quite gen-
eral, but the completed transaction is particle-like and must localize and project out
speciﬁc components of the offer wave function. Collapse paradoxes are resolved
because formation of the transaction provides an account of the process called
“wave function collapse” in the Copenhagen interpretation (Fig. 3). And perhaps
most important, the TI accounts of the quantum nonlocality of entangled states
as resulting from dual transactions for the entangled states that are required to
be consistent at the emission location, enforcing conservation laws and explaining
the nonclassical “EPR” link between widely separated measurements on entangled
particles.
Because all of the consistent interpretations of quantum mechanics describe the
same quantum formalism, and that formalism makes all of the testable predictions,
there is no way of using experimental tests to choose between interpretations. It is
possible that an interpretation can be falsiﬁed by ﬁnding it to be inconsistent with the
quantum formalism [8]. In the absence of such falsiﬁcation, however, the choice be-
tween interpretations must be made on the basis of other criteria: parsimony, absence
of paradoxes, ease of use, and facility for using the interpretation to speculate and
extrapolate.
Fig. 3 Schematic view of
completed transaction

798
Transactional Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
If rated on the basis of these criteria, the transactional interpretation gets a very
high score. It does well with parsimony because “extra” assumptions of the Copen-
hagen interpretation, in particular, the  Born rule and wave function collapse, are
implicit in the transactional interpretation and do not require extra assumptions [1].
As mentioned above, the transactional interpretation resolves essentially all of the
interpretational paradoxes raised by the Copenhagen interpretation. It is easy to use
because waves and transactions, assumed to be physically present in space, can be
diagrammed (see [1] and [7] for examples). Its use for speculation and extrapolation
is more subjective, but many practicing physicists have reported ﬁnding it useful in
areas like quantum optics and  quantum computation.
Therefore, the transactional interpretation should be seriously considered as
a useful and powerful alternative to the orthodox Copenhagen interpretation.
See  Born rule; Consistent Histories; Metaphysics in Quantum Mechanics;
Nonlocality; Orthodox Interpretation; Schr¨odinger’s Cat.
Primary Literature
1. J. G. Cramer: The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. Reviews of Modern
Physics 58, 647–688 (1986)
2. J. G. Cramer: An overview of the transactional interpretation. International Journal of Theo-
retical Physics 27, 227 (1988)
3. P. A. M. Dirac: Classical theories of radiating atoms. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London A167, 148–169 (1938)
4. J. A. Wheeler, R. P. Feynman: Interaction with the absorber as the mechanism of radiation.
Reviews of Modern Physics 17, 157–181 (1945)
5. J. A. Wheeler, R. P. Feynman: Classical electrodynamics in terms of direct interparticle action.
Reviews of Modern Physics 21, 425–433 (1949)
6. T. Maudlin: Quantum Non-Locality and Relativity (Blackwell Publishers, Oxford 2002)
7. J. G. Cramer: A transactional analysis of interaction free measurements. Foundations of
Physics Letters 19, 63–73 (2006), e-Print Archive: quant-ph/0508102
8. J. G. Cramer: A farewell to Copenhagen?. Analog Magazine (December 2004). Online at
http://www.analogsf.com/0412/altview.shtml.
Secondary Literature
9. J. G. Cramer: The Plane of the Present and the New Transactional Paradigm of Time, in: Time
and the Instant, edited by Robin Drurie (Clinamen Press, UK, 2001, Chapter 9)
10. J. Gribbin: Schr¨odinger’s Kittens and the Search for Reality (Back Bay Books, USA, 1996)

