Evolutionary Biology
New Perspectives on Its Development 5
Anne Dambricourt Malassé   Editor
Self-Organization 
as a New Paradigm 
in Evolutionary 
Biology
From Theory to Applied Cases in the Tree 
of Life

Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives
on Its Development
Volume 5
Series Editor
Richard G. Delisle, Department of Philosophy and School of Liberal Education,
University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, AB, Canada
Editorial Board Members
Richard Bellon, Lyman Briggs Coll, Rm E35, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI, USA
Daniel R. Brooks, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Joe Cain, Department of Science and Tech Studies, University College London,
London, UK
David Ceccarelli, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Department of History, Cultural
Heritage, Education and Society, ROMA, Roma, Italy
Thomas E. Dickins, Middlesex University, Dep of Psychology, Faculty of Science
and Technology, London, UK
Rui Diogo, Howard University, Washington, DC, USA
Maurizio Esposito, University of Lisbon, Interuniversity Center for the History of
Science and Technology, LISBOA, Portugal
Ulrich Kutschera, Institute of Biology, University of Kassel, Kassel, Hessen,
Germany
Georgy S. Levit, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Biology Education Research
Group (Bienenhaus), Jena, Thüringen, Germany
Laurent Loison, Institute for the History and Philosophy of Science and Technology
(IHPST), Paris, France
Jeffrey H. Schwartz, Department of Anthropology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Ian Tattersall, Division of Anthropology, American Museum of Natural History,
New York, NY, USA
Derek D. Turner, Department of Philosophy, Connecticut College, New London,
CT, USA
Jitse M. van den Meer, Department of Biology, Redeemer University College,
Ancaster, Canada

Evolutionary biology has been a remarkably dynamic area since its foundation. Its
true complexity, however, has been concealed in the last 50 years under an assumed
opposition between the "Extended Evolutionary Synthesis" and an "Alternative to
the Evolutionary Synthesis". This multidisciplinary book series aims to move
beyond the notion that the development of evolutionary biology is structured around
a lasting tension between a Darwinian tradition and a non-Darwinian tradition, once
dominated by categories like Darwinian Revolution, Eclipse of Darwinism, Evolu-
tionary Synthesis, and Post-Synthetic Developments.
The monographs and edited volumes of the series propose an alternative to this
traditional outlook with the explicit aim of fostering new thinking habits about
evolutionary biology, a multifaceted area composed of changing and interacting
research entities and explanatory levels. Contributions by biologists and historians/
philosophers are welcomed. Topics covered in the series span from (among many
other possibilities):
•
An Overview of Neutralist Theories in Evolutionary Biology
•
Developmental Biology: From Reductionism to Holism and Back
•
Selection Theories Beyond Hard and Soft Inheritance
•
Divergent, Parallel, and Reticulate Evolution: Competing or Complementary
Research Programs?
•
The Rise of Molecular Biology: Between Darwinian and Non-Darwinian
•
Biologizing Paleontology: A Tradition with Deep Historical Roots
•
The Darwinian Revolution and the Eclipse of Darwinism: Blurring the Historio-
graphical Lines
•
Darwinism, Lamarckism, Orthogenesis: Can We Really Deﬁne Them by Their
Hard Explanatory Cores?
•
The Evolutionary Synthesis: A Fabricated Concept?
•
The Opposition to the Evolutionary Synthesis: Criticizing a Phantom?
•
A Reversed Perspective: Approaching Charles Darwin from the Pre-1859 Period
•
The Long Development of the Multilevel Paradigm in Evolutionary Biology
•
Self-Organization: A Research Tradition from Morphology to Cosmology
•
Human Evolution: Sociobiological or Sociocultural?
All chapters are systematically reviewed by the series editor and respective volume
editor(s).
* * *

Anne Dambricourt Malassé
Editor
Self-Organization as a New
Paradigm in Evolutionary
Biology
From Theory to Applied Cases in the
Tree of Life

Editor
Anne Dambricourt Malassé
UMR 7194 CNRS “Histoire naturelle de
l’Homme préhistorique”, Département
Homme et environnement, Muséum
national d’Histoire naturelle
Institut de Paléontologie Humaine
Paris, France
ISSN 2524-7751
ISSN 2524-776X
(electronic)
Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its Development
ISBN 978-3-031-04782-4
ISBN 978-3-031-04783-1
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1
# The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG 2022
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by
similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Contents
1
Introduction: Understanding the Origins and Evolution
of Living Organisms—The Necessity of Convergence Between
Old and New Paradigms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Anne Dambricourt Malassé
Part I
The Modernity of Old Paradigms
2
Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst Haeckel
and Abiogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Georgy S. Levit and Uwe A. Hossfeld
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical”
Approach to the Investigation of Morphogenesis and Its
Pertinence to Cognitive-Behavioral and/or Learning-Based
Explanations of Evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
Adam C. Scarfe
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A
Thermodynamic Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
Dilip Kondepudi, James Dixon, and Benjamin De Bari
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity
in Comparative Genomic–Phenomic Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
Valeria V. Isaeva
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
161
Stephen E. Robbins
Part II
Modernity of Self-Organization and Emerging Paradigms
7
Biological Evolution of Microorganisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
187
Werner Arber
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth
and Reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
195
Stuart A. Newman
v

9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary
Mechanisms of Metastable Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
223
Andrei I. Granovitch
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,
Interactive Ecosystems, and Self-Organized Evolutionary
Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
253
Marc-Williams Debono
11
Quantum Fractal Thermodynamics to Describe the
Log-Periodicity Law in Species Evolution and Human
Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
291
Diogo Queiros-Condé, Jean Chaline, and Ivan Brissaud
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous
System—The Last Threshold of Self-Organized and
Self-Memorizing Increasing Complexity from Gametes
to Embryo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
307
Anne Dambricourt Malassé
13
Evolutionary Creativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
359
Edgar Morin
vi
Contents

Introduction: Understanding the Origins
and Evolution of Living Organisms—The
Necessity of Convergence Between Old
and New Paradigms
1
Anne Dambricourt Malassé
For several decades now, the ﬁeld of evolutionary biology has
been envisioned as organized around a profound and
fundamental divide: theories relying on strong selective
factors and those appealing to weak ones only [...]. This
Introduction calls for a new and more consistent paradigm
that would make sense of the overall development of
evolutionary biology, one based on a realignment of the
alliance between all partners pursuing research in this area.
—Richard Delisle (2021).
Abstract
Global warming, the Anthropocene concept (Hamilton C, Nat News 536(7616):
251, 2016), the sixth mass extinction (Ceballos et al., PNAS 114(30):E6089–
E6096, 2017), and the rapid progress in astrobiology looking for primitive life
forms are raising the awareness of the actors of society toward evolution as the
prime reality without which neither the biodiversity nor our species would exist,
and our civilizations survive. This discernment leads us to a better understanding
of the processes at the origin of the organization of dynamic structures and their
reproductive properties, from the smallest cellular unit to the most complex
interactions within the organism and then between organisms for the same unit
A. Dambricourt Malassé (*)
Département Homme et environnement, Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, Institut de
Paléontologie Humaine, UMR 7194 CNRS “Histoire naturelle de l’Homme préhistorique”, Paris,
France
e-mail: anne.malasse@mnhn.fr
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_1
1

of time and space. This awareness also encourages us to discern, over very long
geological and cosmic time scales, principles of self-organization of complex
systems and generic laws of adaptation and complexiﬁcation.
Keywords
Life · Evolution · Self-organization · Complexity · Emergence · Memory ·
Transdisciplinarity · Paradigms · Modeling · Epistemology · Basic and applied
research
1.1
Introduction
The transformism formulated by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck in 1801 at the National
Museum of Natural History, Paris, and the “natural selection” formulated by Charles
Darwin in 1859 were the premises of a general systems theory (Bertalanffy 1968),
necessary to understand the self-organized processes with the transmission of
acquired characters, but they did not master the physical explanations for abiogene-
sis or the emergence of the cellular cycle, the beginning of life. Since then, the
development of technics and methods of knowledge acquisition, as well as critical
thinking, have made it possible to develop numerous models for the distinct levels of
organization, thanks to physical, chemical, thermodynamics, and mathematics
formulations, each one questioning the analytical processes creating order and
stability, but also instabilities with innovative emergences, up to the level of
reﬂexive consciousness and its creative abilities.
The sciences concerned with time (instant, duration, memory), energy (conserva-
tion, dissipation), form (mathematics, physical laws), and signals (information) had
their precursors with Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919), Henri Bergson (1859–1941),
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson (1860–1948), Alexandre Oparin (1894–1980),
John
Haldane
(1892–1964),
Claude
Shannon
(1916–2001),
René
Thom
(1923–2002), and Ilya Prigogine (1917–2003), among other remarkable theorists
of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Their research has contributed to the
development of new theories and paradigms, such as the deterministic Chaos theory
with nonlinear dynamic systems, near or far from equilibrium in living phenomena:
dissipative structures and geometric and dynamic fractals. Cybernetics in systems
theory developed during the twentieth century and applied to robotics or nonliving
natural phenomena help to distinguish the living properties from the artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) created by the human mind. AI is cut off from the irreversible
processes of biological evolution, which have been going on for 4 billion years.
Human biology and cognitive abilities emerge from this, with the trace of this
evolution in each cell, that a robot even hybridized with a human cell will never
have. A robot is the artiﬁcial product of mathematical knowledge and not an
innovation of biological evolution. For this reason, a fundamental reﬂection is
necessary to discuss self-organization not only in biological ontogeny, well-
accepted, but also in evolutionary gametogenesis, which is much rarer and that
2
A. Dambricourt Malassé

raises difﬁculties at a conceptual level upstream of biological processes. Such
difﬁculties are the processes of emergence, which become explicit with the origins
of life.
Those scientiﬁc developments have been slowly integrated into the life sciences,
to model the morphogenesis, the regulation of homeotic genes in the control of
embryogenesis, the phylogenetic stability of ontogenetic geometric trajectories, the
emergence processes, etc. The transdisciplinarity developed by Edgar Morin
(Rigolot 2020) for half a century is a forthcoming method of the twenty-ﬁrst century,
allowing for the juxtaposition of such different ﬁelds of knowledge, in the accep-
tance of their differences and without mutual exclusion. The origins of life created
the evolutionary properties of gametogenesis, and ontogeny and phylogeny are thus
associated in recursive loops since phylogeny of gametes has created a great variety
of ontogeny.
The volume divided into two parts does not claim to be exhaustive as the diversity
of models varies according to the scales studied. Rather, it is meant to be representa-
tive of the immense scope of theoretical knowledge in need of attention, requiring a
combination of open-mindedness, rigor, reﬂection, and the search for complemen-
tarity between explanatory models. These advances concern all scales of time and
space in living systems, from complex molecular interactions and productions
(memorized by transmission or innovative) to instinct, intuition, and memory until
the self-reﬂexive consciousness.
The ﬁrst part brings together chapters devoted to the modern relevance of
nineteenth- and twentieth-century theories. The origins of life are analyzed since
the abiotic phase with Georgy Levit and Uwe Hossfeld revisiting Ernst Haeckel
(1834–1919) (Chap. 2). The authors recall that Charles Darwin never proposed a
theory to understand the transition between an abiotic molecular environment and
the formation of unicellulars necessary for the credibility of transformism. Ernst
Haeckel postulated the spontaneous generations of monera, the precursor of
Haldane-Oparin hypothesis, “we reconstruct Haeckel’s theory of abiogenesis as a
self-organization theory and demonstrate its importance as an early attempt to
discuss the origin of life in the post-Darwinian era.” In Chap. 3, Adam Scarfe
develops the current inﬂuence of D’Arcy Thompson (1860–1948) calling in mind
his Aristotelian and Kantian thinking patterns and his “physico-mathematical”
approach of morphogenesis. The author refers to the Cambrian explosion under
the angle of self-organized complex systems, referring to autopoiesis, teleology, and
the hypothetical scenario of paleontologist Simon Conway Morris (1988) that
“serves as a concrete example of how physico-geometrical factors entrain and/or
present constraints that may canalize the behavioral selections of organisms.”
Ilya Prigogine (1917–2003) has demonstrated the compatibility between the
production of entropy and the spontaneous organization of a dynamical system.
These are the dissipative structures far from thermodynamic equilibrium. Since then,
the Brussels school of thermodynamics has multiplied the examples of physico-
chemical mechanisms whose behaviors resemble those of a living being engaged in
an irreversible growth, the time arrow of life ﬁghting against disorganization and
death. Nonliving dissipative structures show that physicochemical components can
1
Introduction: Understanding the Origins and Evolution of. . .
3

generate complex dynamic organizations ordered in their own space and according
to their environment. In Chap. 4, Dilip Kondepudi, James Dixon, and Benjamin De
Bari describe the remarkable formation of a worm-like structure capable of displace-
ment. “We will see how some fundamental traits such as end-directed behavior, self-
healing, and mutations, can be described in thermodynamic terms, as phenomena in
self-organized non-equilibrium systems, called dissipative structures.”
The step of life requires properties missing in crystals that of self-memorization.
A self-organization could not reproduce itself without its own memorization and the
level of energy allowing the emergence of both its complexity and stability. The
conditions are at least that of concentration thresholds of “islets” of complexities and
energetical and informative interactions in permanent search of equilibrium. Those
“islets” were composed of molecules whose properties allowed them to be
recognized by other molecules to reproduce their information content, such as
RNA and DNA, able to form membranes, produce energy, and synthesize proteins.
Abiogenesis is a growing interest thanks to the search for exoplanets and studies of
ancient Martian lake deposits with analysis of algal-like biota. “Our morphological
and morphometrical investigations (. . .) suggest the presence of remnants of com-
plex algal-like biota, similar to terrestrial procaryotes and/or eukaryotes; possible
microorganisms that, based on absolute dating criteria used by other scholars, lived
on Mars about 2.12  0.3 Ga ago” (Rizzo et al. 2021).
Understanding the dynamics of self-memorizations still has a long way to go,
with the models of dissipative structures and basins of attraction and their attractors.
The diversity of unicellulars and their chemical–energetic environments have
favored the Cambrian explosion with the emergence of multicellular organisms.
Chapter 5 addresses this new threshold in the evolution of life with Valeria Isaeva.
The author follows the arrow of negentropic time by comparing the current
cyanobacteria (colonial and ﬁlamentous prokaryotes) and the metazoans such as
sea urchins and analyzes the physical properties (forces) that constrain the morpho-
genesis of an embryonic body plan (or archetype). The aim is a discussion to identify
the correlations between genome and phenotype that determine the body plan, from
the molecular scale to the organs, thanks to a multidisciplinary approach introducing
forms, energy, and topology according to René Thom (1923–2002). Indeed “the
central problem of topology is that of reconstructing the global from the local”
(Papadopoulos 2020), Thom’s mathematics allows a more precise explanation of
self-constrained dynamical systems and the emergence of new body planes coherent
on the different spatial and temporal scales of ontogeny.
The ﬁrst part ends with Chap. 6 on questions raised by Henri Bergson
(1859–1941) still relevant: Stephen Robbins comes back to Creative Evolution
(1907–1911) and “a pivotal discussion, the extreme complexity of instinctual
behavior” such as Hymenoptera, which “‘knows’ precisely the three locations of
motor–neuron complexes at which to sting a cricket such that it is paralyzed.” These
observations require mechanisms of analysis and recognition of signals, therefore
previous memories before ﬁnding innovative solutions: “Any theory of evolution, be
it selection, self-assembly, or self-organization, is equally bound to address not only
the origin problem of an organism’s structure but the correlated functional problem
4
A. Dambricourt Malassé

of instinct.” The problem extends to intuition and memory and requires a consensus
on the nature of consciousness, understood as a network of exchanges of signals,
correctly identiﬁed, and therefore previously learned, memorized, and transmitted.
Such complex processes have recently been described in the unicellular Physarum
polycephalum (Broussard et al. 2019).
The second part of the volume presents contemporary models dealing with self-
organization. Werner Arber describes harmless intestinal bacteria showing that
“biological evolution occurs in microorganisms by consecutive steps of genetic
variation [which] can be attributed to a process of self-organization that contributes
to the permanent creation of appropriate biological capacities” (Chap. 7). Under-
standing the evolution of organogenesis under conditions of instability requires the
distinction between cybernetics and living organisms affected by unpredictable
ﬂuctuations of global equilibrium and the ability of self-reorganization since fertili-
zation. In Chap. 8, Stuart Newman discusses the concept of self-organization since
the teleological formulation by Immanuel Kant in “Critic of Judgement” (1790)
making the distinction between self-organization of non-living systems, living
beings (embryogenesis), and the evolutionary processes that changed embryonic
development. The concept has progressively replaced the metaphor of genetic
program encoded in the DNA inspired by cybernetics in the 1950s. The emergence
of new embryogenesis is not the one of a genetic program that assumes knowledge
of the end (the ﬁnal stage).
Life and the evolution of living organisms are not programmed robots, and
ﬂuctuations are innovative parameters that cannot predict bifurcations, but the
complexity of gametes still misunderstood allows the reorganization of the ontoge-
netic memory and its hereditary transmission. Andrei Granovitch is engaged in a
critical analysis of the synthetic theory (Neo-Darwinian doctrine) in which the
notion of a highly integrated metastable system is missing, underlying that concept
varies according to the scale of observation and regarding different evolutionary
problems, adaptation, or transformation. In this Chap. 9, the author proposes to
remove the doubt by unifying the distinct levels in a dynamical and dissipative
system or morphoprocess and “a change of the evolutionary paradigm” to an
“extended evolutionary synthesis.”
Chapter 10 addresses self-organization in the plant kingdom with the concept of
biosemiotics, or exchanges of signals between animals and their environment,
elaborated in the 1930s by the ethologist Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944) and his
concept of Umwelt (Uexküll 1982). Marc-Williams Debono confronts the paradigm
with his work based on pioneering phytoelectrography experiments. The results
demonstrate the essential role of the electrome within the dynamic coupling between
the plant and its singular milieu. These new interfaces open a new ﬁeld of investiga-
tion by revisiting the concepts of plant cognition and more generally of bio- or
eco-semiotics.
The quantum world is in permanent agitation, but the long durations of
cosmogenesis and biogenesis show universal principles of order or of structural
stability (Bois 2002), which allow distinguishing a chronology, a continuity between
two different instants and not a stochastic dispersion without reference or
1
Introduction: Understanding the Origins and Evolution of. . .
5

information stabilized and reproducible. This information refers to nuclear forces
and implies exchanges with the electronic orbital as developed in the nuclear–
electronic orbital (NEO) approach (Hammer-Schiffer 2021).
Diogo Queiros-Condé, Jean Chaline, and Ivan Brissaud analyze in Chap. 11 a
log-periodic law by showing its meaning and its relationship with fractality
described by quantifying its length, time, and mass. Relying further on the work of
Louis de Broglie’s “hidden thermodynamics of the particle,” they introduced
kinetic–thermal chaining of lineage evolution that allows a fractal and quantum
thermodynamic description of log-periodicity, which leads to what could be called a
“quantum thermo-fractality” of the evolution of systems, especially species, astro-
nomical, economic, historical, artistic, and social.
Chapter 12 presents the embryonic and phylogenetic origins of the vertical
organization of our species, of which permanent bipedal locomotion is one of the
many postnatal consequences (Anne Dambricourt Malassé). This discovery is
replaced in its historical context that of the classiﬁcation of species with Georges
Buffon and Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck with the theory of evolution, two characters
who have profoundly marked the naturalist tradition of the National Museum of
Natural History (Paris). The discovery highlighted a dynamic architectural and
morphogenetic unity between dental occlusion and the orientation of the axial
endoskeleton that supports and protects the central nervous system from the brain
stem. The process was demonstrated as early as 1987. The phylogeny matches with
the curve of the increasing complexity of the brain, but the strengthening occurred
according to a succession of long stable periods followed by increasing angulation
thresholds. The ﬁrst stage of the verticality was the Hominidae (vs semi-erect
Panidae and Pongidae), the last one being ours (sapiens). The stability of the
evolutionary trajectory does not conform to divergent representations of chaotic
bifurcations and allowed us to infer memorization properties speciﬁc to gametes.
The emergence of the operating chains at the threshold of verticality called here the
cerebro-cerebellar Rubicon, and the symbolic thought would result in the integra-
tion of the cerebellum in the loops of cognitive reﬂection of the brain, necessary for
the control of its balance, the stability of the organism, and to anticipate the fall.
Chapter 13 closes the volume with Edgar Morin who has devoted his life looking
into human nature and its singularity in the evolution of life, namely the highest
evolutionary degree of the reﬂexive consciousness of the world and oneself. His
method is the most extensive transdisciplinary approach that can be conceived, from
quantum mechanics to cybernetics, and human societies to ecosystems and reﬂexive
consciousness. His approach is uniﬁed by a deﬁnition of the complexity that
recognizes through the antagonisms, the manifestations of a single reality that
assimilates these conﬂicts by self-organizing recursive loops, and from which new
properties emerge. Fundamental research attempts to grasp these properties at the
basis of emergence, and the mind, then, notes the ever-widening extent of the
unknown of which it is itself a stakeholder, emerging from universal evolutionary
creativity.
Reﬂexive
self-consciousness
cannot
objectively
abstract
from
it. Confronted with all scales of its complexity, the awareness of the limits of the
6
A. Dambricourt Malassé

consciousness is a recognition of its mystery that returns this last to its links with the
evolution of the living complexity and those processes of emergence.
These 13 chapters illustrate the diversity of evolutionary processes according to
the space-time scales considered, as well as the relevance of the avant-garde schools
of thought during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in explaining the processes
of self-organization. Open to the physics of chemistry, to the thermodynamics,
mathematics,
then
cybernetics,
and
quantum
mechanics,
their
common
denominators are the interactions between particles, atoms, and molecules, ordered
into their form according to energy levels, capable of association, source of bio-
chemical innovations with the natural creation of autonomous systems, and conse-
quently a complexiﬁcation of their environment and interactions. The concept of
natural selection has paved the way to their discovery for an even ﬁner approach to
the threshold of the emergence of life and the modalities of the self-reproduction of
unicellular that imply preexisting self-memorization properties. Those modalities
have allowed adaptation to their environmental diversiﬁcations, ﬂuctuations, and
complexiﬁed interactions, and then emergences of complexiﬁed organizations into
multicellular organisms. The concept of natural selection nevertheless is devoid of
these looping processes of integration and self-ampliﬁcation and does not match the
natural logic of the creative complexity with memorization properties. Such living
properties may react to the risks of Anthropocene extinction, thanks to innovative
creativities, but also to the memory of processes proper to the different lineages,
which were useful for their survival in the past.
References
Bertalanffy von L (1968) General system theory: foundations, development. George Braziller,
New York
Bois E (2002) L’univers sans repos ou l’essence première du mouvement. Philosophia Naturalis et
Geometricalis. Peter Lang, Berne
Broussard A, Delescluse J, Pérez-Escudero A, Dussutour A (2019) Memory inception and preser-
vation in slime moulds: the quest for a common mechanism. Philos Trans R Soc B 374:
20180368
Delisle R (2021) Introduction: in search of a new paradigm for the development of evolutionary
biology, chapter 1. In: Delisle R (ed) Natural selection, evolutionary biology - new perspectives
on its development. Springer Nature, Cham
Hammer-Schiffer S (2021) Nuclear-electronic orbital methods: foundations and prospects featured.
J Chem Phys 155:030901. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0053576
Papadopoulos A (2020) Topology and biology: from Aristotle to Thom. In: Dani SG, Papadopoulos
A (eds) Geometry in history. Springer, New York
Rigolot C (2020) Transdisciplinarity as a discipline and a way of being: complementarities and
creative tensions. Humanit Soc Sci Commun 7(1):100. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-
00598-5
Rizzo V, Armstrong R, Hua H, Cantasano N, Nicolò T, Bianciardi G (2021) Life on Mars: clues,
evidence or proof? In: Solar system planets and exoplanets. Intech Open, London, pp 1–39.
https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.95531
Uexküll von J (1982) The theory of meaning. Semiotica 42:1
1
Introduction: Understanding the Origins and Evolution of. . .
7

Part I
The Modernity of Old Paradigms

Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst
Haeckel and Abiogenesis
2
Georgy S. Levit and Uwe A. Hossfeld
Abstract
Although Darwin proposed a logically coherent theory of evolution, which
presupposed the natural occurrence of initial life forms, he never offered a theory
of the origin of life. This task was instead taken up by his German pupil Ernst
Haeckel. In contrast to Darwin, Haeckel paid lots of attention to abiogenesis.
Already in his ﬁrst major Darwinian book, Generelle Morphologie (General
Morphology), he postulated the origin of life on Earth by way of archigonia,
i.e., spontaneous generations of monera (the most primitive structureless
microorganisms) directly from inert matter. For Haeckel, all living organisms
on earth evolved from monera, and until his very last publication, he admitted the
initial occurrence of monera was a repetitive event; i.e., the very initial evolution
was polyphyletic. This created a tension between his monistic and pro-Darwinian
tendency toward strictly monophyletic explanations on the one hand and his
theory of abiogenesis on the other hand. Essentially, Haeckel’s concept was a
self-organization hypothesis built into the framework of Darwinian theory, and it
ﬁts into the more comprehensive doctrine of Haeckelian philosophical monism as
well. Although it appears archaic from the modern viewpoint, Haeckel’s theory of
abiogenesis contributed to the growth of experimental studies of abiogenesis in
the early 1920s—for example, in the development of the Oparin–Haldane
hypothesis. In his book, The Origin of Life, Aleksandr Oparin explicitly mentions
Haeckel and discusses Haeckel’s concept of abiogenesis in some detail. In this
chapter, we reconstruct Haeckel’s theory of abiogenesis as a self-organization
theory and demonstrate its importance as an early attempt to discuss the origin of
life in the post-Darwinian era.
G. S. Levit (*) · U. A. Hossfeld
Biology Education Research Group, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena, Germany
e-mail: georg.levit@uni-jena.de
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_2
11

Keywords
Abiogenesis · Ernst Haeckel · Self-organization · Evolution
2.1
Introduction
Ernst Haeckel is known, ﬁrst of all, as a crucial ﬁgure in the growth of Darwinian
biology in the nineteenth century—as the “German Darwin” (Fig. 2.1). He was
undoubtedly the major ﬁgure of the ﬁrst Darwinian revolution in German lands and,
arguably, on the continent as a whole. In his time, more people worldwide learned
evolutionary theory from his publications than from any other sources, including
Darwin’s own writings (Richards 2018). Haeckel’s popular scientiﬁc Natural His-
tory of Creation went through 12 editions, and The Riddles of the Universe sold
more than 650,000 copies, “making it the most successful work of popular science in
German history” (Finkelstein 2019). He defended and developed the Darwinian
theory with unmatched passion and energy and created a conceptual framework
within which the majority of Darwinians worldwide worked over subsequent
decades. Contemporary biology and related sciences are unthinkable without terms
Fig. 2.1 Ernst Haeckel in his
laboratory in the Buitenzorg
Botanical Gardens on the
Island of Java, 1901
(Courtesy: archive U. H.)
12
G. S. Levit and U. A. Hossfeld

and concepts introduced by Haeckel, such as “phylogeny,” “monophyletic,” “poly-
phyletic,” “ontogeny,” “biogenetic law,” or “ecology.” Moreover, his novel theories
were encouraged and admired by Darwin himself (Levit and Hossfeld 2019). It was
Haeckel who crucially contributed to the visualization of the Darwinian theory by
designing multiple “phylogenetic trees” reﬂecting evolutionary pathways of various
organismic groups, including humans.
In addition to being Darwin’s most inﬂuential and faithful disciple on the
continent, Haeckel also signiﬁcantly broadened Darwin’s scientiﬁc agenda. While
Darwin largely constrained himself to the establishment of the theory of biological
evolution, Haeckel aimed at the creation of a universal evolutionary theory
explaining the evolution of the entire universe—a theory mobilizing all natural
sciences and philosophy. Given these grand ambitions, Haeckel was compelled to
offer a theory of life’s origins, whereas Darwin bracketed the issue in favor of his
immediate theoretical interests: “Charles Darwin’s self-imposed task was the under-
standing of the evolutionary processes that underlie biological diversity, a task that
epistemologically can be undertaken even if it provides no explanation of the origin
of life itself” (Peretó et al. 2009). Although Darwin never came up with a proper
theory of abiogenesis, his correspondence proves that he was speculating about it.1
In the published works, Darwin was very cautious though; for example, he did not
even mention microorganisms in the Origin of Species (Darwin 1859; Davies 2009),
and it was Haeckel who ﬁrst brought the Darwinian agenda to bear on the ﬁelds of
microbiology and the origin of life (Kutschera 2016). Never afraid of brave specula-
tion, Haeckel developed an idiosyncratic theory of the origin and early evolution of
life which he regarded as a further extension of the Darwinian paradigm.
Haeckel’s theory of abiogenesis is not simply a matter of historical curiosity.
There is a causal chain connecting Haeckel’s work with modern theories of life’s
origins. Until very recently, it has seldom been recognized that Haeckel played a
signiﬁcant or even key role in shaping Alexander I. Oparin’s (1894–1980) theory of
the origin of life from lifeless matter (Lazcano 2016). As argued by Kolchinsky and
Levit (2019), Haeckel’s hypothesis contributed to the growth of experimental studies
of abiogenesis in the early 1920s, the best known of which became the works of
Oparin. In his path-breaking book, The Origin of Life (the earliest version was
published in 1924 in Russian: Oparin 1924), Oparin acknowledges Haeckel’s view
that spontaneous generation is a “logical postulate of philosophical natural science”
(i.e., this concept follows logically from everything we know from natural science),
although it is not yet proven by immediate experience, and discusses his concept of
abiogenesis in some detail (Oparin 1941, pp. 48–49). At the same time, Oparin
criticized Haeckel for making no principal difference between the occurrence of
crystals and “anucleate monera.” He classiﬁed Haeckel’s views therefore as naïve
and “mechanistic” and took issue speciﬁcally with the immediate emergence of
living matter from inorganic substances: “This was Haeckel’s essential error” (Ibid.,
p. 49).
1E.g., Letter no. DCP-LETT-7471, Darwin to J. D. Hooker (01.01.1871).
2
Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst Haeckel and Abiogenesis
13

In the present chapter, we outline Haeckel’s views on the origin of life and early
evolution and explain his motivation for developing these ideas. We come to the
conclusion that in developing his theory of abiogenesis Haeckel followed his
monistic creed and established several speculative hypotheses in the absence of
sufﬁcient experimental and observational data.
2.2
The Philosophical Background to Haeckel’s Theory
of Abiogenesis
Haeckel played a central role in the history of monism, which in his interpretation
was simultaneously an ethical worldview and a research program in the natural
sciences, ontology, and epistemology (Stewart et al. 2019). In contrast to Darwin
himself, Haeckel tried to turn Darwinism into a universal worldview, a “philoso-
phy.” His universalism did not merely connect academic philosophy with science; it
made philosophy and natural science into an inseparable whole. For Haeckel, “all
true natural science is philosophy, and all true philosophy is natural science. All true
science (Wissenschaft), however, is natural philosophy” (Haeckel 1866, Bd. II,
p. 447; Hossfeld and Levit 2020).
At the core of Haeckel’s doctrine was the concept of evolution as a universal
phenomenon affecting everything from inert matter to man. He believed in the unity
of body and soul and of spirit and matter:
We adhere ﬁrmly to the pure, unequivocal monism of Spinoza: Matter, or inﬁnitely-
extended substance, and Spirit (or Energy), or sensitive and thinking substance, are the
two fundamental attributes, or principal properties, of the all-embracing divine essence of the
world, the universal substance (Haeckel 1900, p. 21).
Monism guided Haeckel’s work from his ﬁrst major Darwinian book, the
Generelle Morphologie (1866), to his last book, the Kristallseelen (Crystal Souls
1917). The adoption of substance monism as a scientiﬁc meta-methodology and
basis for a new worldview (Weltanschauung) was Haeckel’s major philosophical
acquisition. Substance monism, such as materialist, idealist, or neutral monism,
supposes that all concrete objects fall under one highest type (namely, matter,
ideas, or neutral substance, respectively). Haeckel combined matter, energy, and
psychoma (the world’s soul) into the trinity of substance, thus embracing all basic
physical and psychological phenomena within one doctrine. All three elements of
the trinity had corresponding conservation laws: the conservation of matter, of
energy, and of psychoma (or Empﬁndung: perception). In his last philosophical
manifesto, Gott-Natur (Theophysis) (God-Nature [Theophysis] 1914: Haeckel
2008), Haeckel claimed that his universal concept of substance served to reconcile
old and still continuing controversies between materialism, energetics, and
panpsychism. From the epistemological viewpoint, Haeckel saw cognition as a
“natural physiological process whose anatomic organ is our human brain” (Haeckel
2008, p. 48). For Haeckel, the only secure foundation for science was empirical
14
G. S. Levit and U. A. Hossfeld

knowledge [Erfahrung, Empirie], and the ultimate objective of modern science was
to cognize the “unconscious laws” governing the universe, as “everything happens
with absolute necessity in accord with mechanical ‘causal’ laws” (Haeckel 2008,
pp. 74–75).
Although Haeckel considered himself a part of the Spinozian movement, his own
teachings centered ﬁrst and foremost around the doctrine of the omnipresence of
evolution (Hossfeld and Levit 2020). He proposed an all-embracing but
organism-centered evolutionism, which took energetic, life-possessing matter to be
its substantial, causal foundation. This proposal led him to adopt a kind of anthro-
pocentrism rooted in pan-psychism, which expressed itself in a vectored, apparently
teleological evolutionary development. Haeckel explicitly denied genuine teleology
in biological evolution (and even introduced the term “dysteleology” as a doctrine of
“goallessness” in evolution) (Haeckel 1866, Vol. II, p. 266ff), but the whole logic of
his doctrine suggests inevitable progress toward “more perfect” organic creatures
[Vervollkommnung]: “The notion of progress is the key of Haeckel’s evolutionary
theory” (Dayrat 2003). Haeckel’s progressivism is not about the intrinsic tendency
toward perfection, but follows from natural laws governing cosmic and organic
evolution and the ontological structure of the universe. For Haeckel, “there was no
teleological providence in the universe, only a naturalistic law of progress”
(Di Gregorio 2005, p. 189), but the progress toward perfection followed from
these laws such that gradual perfecting in biological evolution (teleosis, in Haeckel’s
terms) is the inevitable result of natural selection (Haeckel 1900, p. 272). The
transition from inert to living matter is a necessary logical link in this worldview.
Monism and evolutionary theory were, for Haeckel, parts of the same research
program, labeled the “monistischen Entwickelungslehre” (the monistic doctrine of
evolution). At the core of the monistic worldview was the idea of the fundamental
unity and cognizability of the world. The strong connection between the concepts of
evolution and monism can be seen in Haeckel’s work, The Monism and the Link
between Religion and Science. The Creed of a Natural Scientist (1892). In a printed
lecture known as the “Altenburg speech,” Haeckel asserted that the monistic idea of
God is compatible with the natural sciences, and he recognized the spirit of God in
all things. God cannot be seen as a personalized being anymore, namely an individ-
ual with a constrained spatial and temporal extension; instead, “God is nature itself”
(Haeckel 1914 in: Haeckel 2008, p. 71). Furthermore, he claimed that the Truth, the
Good, and the Beautiful are the three noble divinities before which we kneel. There
will be new altars built in the twentieth century, Haeckel argued, to celebrate the
“trinity of monism” (Levit and Hossfeld 2017).
Haeckel distinguished theoretical and practical monism. Theoretical monism was
a worldview grounded in experience, “pure reason,” and science, with the latter
based on evolutionism and proceeding from the unity of the universe. The theory of
abiogenesis was part of theoretical monism (Krause 1984). Practical monism, on the
other hand, was a set of ethical rules for a “reasonable lifestyle” in accord with
theoretical monism.
Haeckel’s monistic creed, which brought him into open conﬂict with traditional
religions, determined the internal dynamics of his theoretical system including issues
2
Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst Haeckel and Abiogenesis
15

concerning the origin of life. In his popular treatise, The Riddle of the Universe,
Haeckel introduced abiogenesis in the chapter on “The Unity of Nature,”
summarizing its logical steps in the chapter’s abstract: “The monism of the cosmos.
Essential unity of organic and inorganic nature. Carbon-theory. The hypothesis of
abiogenesis” (Haeckel 1900, p. 260). He called the ﬁrst spontaneously generated
living bodies on earth, “monera,” and he claimed: “But as these remarkable Monera
are from one point of view of the greatest interest, so from another they deserve
general attention from the inestimable importance which they possess of affording a
mechanical explanation of vital phenomena, and especially for a Monistic explana-
tion of entire organic nature [our italics]” (Haeckel 1869, p. 223). There were three
elements of this monistic creed that were crucial for Haeckel in this respect: (1) the
universe is a united whole evolving in a certain direction; (2) the direction of the
world’s evolution is of dysteleological (as opposed to teleological) nature and is
determined exclusively by natural laws; (3) natural laws embrace not only “mechan-
ical” (material) processes, but also psychoma that makes Haeckel’s understanding of
“natural laws” much broader than in contemporary science. Proving abiogenesis was
therefore absolutely essential for Haeckel. If there is no abiogenesis, the world is not
a united whole and the monist creed fails. If there is no abiogenesis, life is a product
of supranatural forces and evolution is a teleological process.
2.3
Spontaneous Generation and Early Evolution in Haeckel’s
Writings
Haeckel began speculating about the origin of life and looking for the most primitive
organismic forms before he published his magnum opus, Generelle Morphologie der
Organismen (Haeckel 1866). In a letter to Darwin from November 11, 1865,2
Haeckel described Protogenes primordialis3 as one of the most primitive types of
Rhizopoda [eines der allereinfachsten Geschöpfe], the “organism without organs.”
Haeckel emphasized that generatio aequivoca (spontaneous generation)4 of such a
“protein clump” [Eiweiss-Klumpen] is clearly intelligible, and if true, this would
contribute to solving the difﬁcult problem of the beginnings of the evolutionary
theory.
In the Generelle Morphologie, Haeckel already presented a coherent theory
linking planetary and organismic evolution. The metaphysical foundation for his
theory was the notion of the unity of organic and inorganic nature, which, Haeckel
believed, was “empirically proven” (Haeckel 1866, Vol. II, p. 447). Combined with
2“Letter no. 4934,” accessed on June 10, 2021, https://www.darwinproject.ac.uk/letter/DCP-
LETT-4934.xml
3Protogenes primordialis is a moneron Haeckel believed to have observed in 1864 in the Mediter-
ranean by Nice (Nizza) (Haeckel 1865).
4Haeckel deployed the terms “generatio aequivoca” and “generatio spontanea” interchangeably;
see, e.g., Haeckel (1866, Bd. II, p. 34).
16
G. S. Levit and U. A. Hossfeld

Haeckel’s belief in the “almighty” causal law governing all of nature “without
exceptions,” the idea of the “absolute unity of nature” rendered abiogenesis a logical
necessity. As he believed in building his theory on the ground of empirical
observations, Haeckel was forced to establish a theory compatible with available
biological data.
Haeckel published his theory in the mid of the controversy between Louis Pasteur
and Felix Pouchet generated by Pasteur’s experiments on spontaneous generation
(Farley and Geison 1974). Haeckel was critical of both sides in the controversy and
claimed that plasmogonia (spontaneous generation) was not yet proven, although it
was theoretically impossible that Pasteur would ever be able to prove its nonexis-
tence (Haeckel 1866, Vol. II, p. 34). In clear support of Pouchet, Haeckel proposed
the existence of a group of very primitive microorganisms, which he called monera
(plural): “A Moneron was deﬁned as a primitive form of life consisting of undiffer-
entiated protoplasm and lacking a nucleus” (Rupke 1976). Nothing is as important as
the discovery of monera for explaining the origin of life, Haeckel argued (Haeckel
1870, p. 178). Being a “missing link” between macroorganisms and lifeless matter,
monera became the crucial element of Haeckel’s concept of abiogenesis. Monera,
Haeckel claimed, were absolutely homogeneous, structureless organisms, which
served as the stem forms (i.e., parent forms) [Stammform] from which all other
organisms evolved by way of differentiation (Haeckel 1866, Vol. I, p. 179). Monera
spawned directly from inorganic liquid in the same way that crystals appear in their
mother liquor [Mutterlauge]. In 1866, Haeckel was uncertain whether spontaneous
generation of monera and their subsequent evolution into higher organismic forms
was an ongoing process or whether it happened only in the remote past (Haeckel
1866, Vol. II, p. 33, Vol. XXIII, p. 367).
In the Generelle Morphologie, Haeckel introduced several terms he would
continue to employ when discussing the origin of life. The term autogonia was
used as a synonym for spontaneous generation [Urzeugung] (Haeckel 1866, Vol. I,
p. 179). Speciﬁcally, the autogonia hypothesis suggested that structureless monera
spawned immediately from the interaction of inorganic substances in a primordial
liquid. Another important notion Haeckel introduced was plasmogonia (Haeckel
1866, Vol. II, p. 34), which is another kind of parentless procreation of organisms.
The difference between autogonia and plasmogonia is that, in the latter case, monera
spawn not directly from inorganic matter, but from an organic liquid [organische
Bildungsﬂüssigkeit]. An umbrella notion embracing both kinds of spontaneous
generation was archigonia (Haeckel 1866, Vol. II, p. 33), which explains why
Haeckel called the ﬁrst monera, “archigonian parent forms.” This sophisticated
terminological hierarchy was important for Haeckel, because he did not exclude
that monera would be spontaneously generated from lifeless matter even today. If
this is the case, they would occur in liquids saturated by organic substances, via
plasmogonia. In the late publications, Haeckel tended to see the occurrence of
monera as a double-step process (ﬁrst appear organic substances and then monera
out of this organic substances) even in the ancient times.
Haeckel presented a mature classiﬁcation of various monera and a description of
their morphology in a lengthy journal paper entitled, The Monograph of Monera
2
Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst Haeckel and Abiogenesis
17

[Monographie der Moneren], published 2 years after Generelle Morphologie
(Haeckel 1868). In 1869, an English version of the Monograph appeared in the
Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science (Haeckel 1869) (Figs. 2.2 and 2.3). In
the Monograph, Haeckel emphasized that monera were the most simple and primi-
tive [unvollkommenere] of all imaginable life forms (Haeckel 1868, p. 64); even
purely theoretically, there could be no organisms simpler than monera. He even
hesitated to label monera as organisms as they are not constituted by smaller parts. A
most primitive moneron is not a cell (as it is not yet separated into the nucleus and
the plasma), but a homogenous protein body in a solid–liquid aggregate state having
no rigid geometric characteristics, but becoming spherical when resting and
experiencing no external inﬂuences. Monera, as structureless plasma globules, are,
for Haeckel, proof that an ultimate separation between the two kingdoms of plants
and animals is impossible, as they (monera) are so indeﬁnite that they can equally
serve as the origin of both plants and animals. Accordingly, Haeckel placed them
into the kingdom of Protista along with Rhizopoda, amoeba, diatoms, etc. (Ibid.,
p. 65).
It is important to emphasize that monera, for Haeckel, were not a matter of mere
theoretical speculation. The ﬁrst moneron was discovered by Haeckel in 1864, “and
the number has gone on steadily increasing ever since,” as one of Haeckel’s
contemporaries, the French protozoologist Aimé Schneider noticed (Schneider
1873). The immediate impulse to write the Monograph came from “new
observations” Haeckel made in the winter of 1866/1867 on the coasts of the Canary
Island Lanzarote, already after completing Generelle Morphologie. From a contem-
porary scientiﬁc perspective, Haeckel’s monera were relatively macroscopic
organisms; for example, Protogenes primordialis (one of the ﬁrst monera he
described) was between 0.1 and 1.0 millimeters in diameter. As Schneider
commented: “This little creature, hardly visible to the naked eye, and, at most, as
big as a small pin-head, is of a ﬁne orange-red color, consists of a perfectly
homogeneous and transparent mass of jelly, and offers the paradox of an organism
without organs” (Schneider 1873). As monera live in water, they are able to move by
means of protoplasm contractions and building of pseudopodia. They propagate by
ﬁssion, in an asexual mode (Ibid., p. 130).
Already in the Monograph of Monera, Haeckel claimed the extraordinary impor-
tance of his monera theory for the hypothesis of spontaneous generation: “If the
natural history of the Monera is already, on these grounds, of the highest interest as
well for morphology as for physiology, this interest will be still more increased by
the extraordinary importance which these very simple organisms possess for the
important doctrine of spontaneous generation, or archigony” (Haeckel 1869, p. 30).
In the follow-up to the Monograph published 2 years later and entitled Nachträge
zur Monographie der Moneren (Supplement to the Monograph of Monera), Haeckel
added a special chapter, “Die Moneren und die Urzeugung” (Monera and the
Spontaneous Generation), where he summarized his theory of abiogenesis and
early evolution (Haeckel 1870, pp. 177–182). Haeckel begins by establishing a
theoretical connection between his hypothesis and Darwin’s theory of descent and
emphasizes that “every thinking reader” of Darwin’s book should have been asking
18
G. S. Levit and U. A. Hossfeld

Fig. 2.2 Plate IX from Haeckel’s “Monograph of Monera”: (Quarterly Journal of Microscopical
Science, Vol. IX, 1869). The plate depicts one of the new monera Haeckel found on the coastline of
the Canary Island Lanzarote. The orange-colored “Rhizopod-like” organism was found on empty
shells of Spirula peronii
2
Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst Haeckel and Abiogenesis
19

himself “where the ﬁrst simplest proto-form [Urform]” is coming from (Ibid.,
p. 177). It is this proto-form, Haeckel argued, that gave rise “to all other organic
forms” by means of Darwin’s natural selection. Haeckel emphasized that the theory
of the origin of life is a “necessary and integral constituting part of the universal
evolutionary theory” (Ibid., p. 177). It is a “natural bridge” between the Kantian–
Laplacian theory, which provides causal explanations of cosmic evolution, and
evolutionary biology, which provides causal explanations of the origin of plant
and animal species. The essence of the hypothesis is that a moneron consists of
structureless protein binding, which appears directly from the lifeless substances of
the primordial liquid by adapting to its immediate environment (Ibid., 178). We have
observed the occurrence of various carbon compounds in our laboratories so many
times, Haeckel argued that it is easy to imagine protein compounds occurring under
natural conditions as nature is more powerful than any laboratory. He even hoped
that 1-day monera could be produced synthetically (Krause 1984, p. 62).
Haeckel summarized the speciﬁc character of carbon compounds in a so-called
carbon theory, which, he emphasized, was monistic:
Fig. 2.3 Detailed description of the Plate IX from Haeckel’s “Monograph of Monera” illustrating
the development of spores by Protomyxa aurantiaca. Haeckel characterized the generic character of
Protomyxa as follows: “A simple shapeless protoplasm-body (with the formation of vacuoles),
which protrude ramifying and anastomosing pseudopods. Reproduction by zoospores, which
combine together into plasmodia” (Haeckel 1869, p. 340)
20
G. S. Levit and U. A. Hossfeld

The peculiar, chemico-physical properties of carbon—especially the ﬂuidity and the facility
of decomposition of the most elaborate albuminoid compounds of carbon—are the sole and
the mechanical causes of the speciﬁc phenomena of movement, which distinguish organic
from inorganic substances, and which are called life, in the usual sense of the word. (Haeckel
1900, pp. 262–263).
Abiogenesis for him was the occurrence of the living protoplasm out of inorganic
carbonates in the form of monera. Monera are held together by purely mechanical
forces. Furthermore, the concept of ontogeny is not applicable to the simplest
monera (such as protamoeba and protogenes),5 as they do not develop, but simply
grow larger, analogous to inorganic crystals. When a moneron achieves a certain
body size, it splits into two parts simply due to the weakening of the molecular
cohesion forces; i.e., it is a purely mechanical process far less sophisticated than cell
division.
Haeckel developed a detailed systematics of monera. In 1870, he counted 16 dif-
ferent species of monera arranged into eight genera (Haeckel 1870) of which the
most important from the viewpoint of the origin of life became the genus Bathybius,
consisting of one species, B. haeckelii. In 1870, Haeckel believed that this marine
benthic amoeboid organism, discovered by Thomas Huxley in the Atlantic Ocean
and deﬁned as a new moner,6 was the nearest living relative of the ancestral monera
(Haeckel 1870, p. 181; McGraw 1974; Rupke 1976). As Bathybius was not just a
single organism swimming in the ocean, but a thick biomat-like layer covering the
“deepest parts of the sea bottom,” Haeckel regarded Bathybius as very strong
evidence in favor of continuous spontaneous generation, a Lamarckian view that
the spontaneous generation of life from lifeless matter is a repetitive event. Other-
wise, Haeckel argued, it would be very difﬁcult to explain the origin of this
“protoplasma blanket” (Haeckel 1870, p. 181). Yet, to the end of the 1870s, Haeckel
abandoned this belief. His rejection of the Bathybius hypothesis in his 1880s
publications may be seen as one of the factors, which biased him toward the view
that the occurrence of life is not an ongoing process. His late masterpiece
Systematische Phylogenie (1894–1896) does not mention Bathybius anymore
(Di Gregorio 2005, p. 437). As Haeckel never explicitly explained his decision to
eliminate any mentionings of this ﬁctitious discovery from the late publications,
Rupke labeled the end of the Bathybius story a “silent exit” (Rupke 1976).
5Protamoeba and Protogenes are two genera belonging to the most primitive kind of monera. The
genus Protamoeba consisted of ﬁve species, three of which were found in the freshwaters near Jena.
The genus Protogenes consisted of only one species discovered in the Mediterranean, which
Haeckel labeled P. primordialis.
6“I propose to confer upon this new ‘Moner’ the generic name of Bathybius and to call it after the
eminent Professor of Zoology in the University of Jena, B. haeckelii” (Huxley 1868).
2
Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst Haeckel and Abiogenesis
21

2.4
Trees and Bushes: Polyphyletic vs. Monophyletic Evolution
Haeckel’s hypothesis, clearly expressed in early writings, that monera are continuing
to spontaneously generate and evolve to higher forms even today (Haeckel 1866,
1868, 1869, 1870), was at odds with the Darwinian notion of strictly monophyletic
evolution. Besides, strict monophyletism was better compatible with Haeckel’s very
own monism as the perfect unity of the world required perfect unity of life and of its
origin. From the other side, if monera are simple homogenous aggregates of organic
matter held together by purely mechanical forces—if they are, in fact, something
between proper organisms and inert matter—it is difﬁcult to explain why they should
not arise repetitively in both the past and present. This contradiction created a tension
which Haeckel never fully overcame, although his bias toward perfectly monophy-
letic evolution is well known (e.g., Haeckel 1887, p. 46; see also Levit et al. 2022).
As Olivier Rieppel emphasizes, Haeckel “never rejected the polyphyletic origin of
life through multiple spontaneous generation events” (Rieppel 2011). Benoît Dayrat
even claims that Haeckel coined the very terms “monophyletic” and “polyphyletic”
to discuss this question of whether the whole organic world owes its origin to a
single instance of spontaneous generation or to several (Dayrat 2003).
In Generelle Morphologie, Haeckel formulated three hypotheses describing
possible relations between the spontaneous generation of monera and living
organisms (Fig. 2.4). His ﬁrst hypothesis suggested that one single species of monera
arose through autogonia. All other organisms, without exception, are descendants of
this one monera species and compose a single phylum [Phylon] (1866, Vol. I,
p. 199). His second hypothesis supposed that autogonia resulted in the creation of
two different monera species, one of which was vegetative [vegetabilische] and the
other of which was animal [animalische]. According to this hypothesis, all plants are
descendants of the vegetative monera, and all animals have their origin in the animal
monera (1866 Vol. I, p. 200). The third hypothesis suggested that there were “more
than two different monera-species,” which gave rise to “more than two independent
stems [Stämme] of organisms” (1866 Vol. I, p. 200). Haeckel considered this “the
most probable of all three hypotheses” [bei weitem wahrscheinlichste von allen drei]
and never completely abandoned it. Although in 1866, Haeckel “did not yet intro-
duce the technical term polyphyly,” the third hypothesis clearly expressed the
concept of polyphyly, which is the idea that “a variable number of independent
phyla” originated from separate events of spontaneous generation (Rieppel 2011). In
this case, each of the three kingdoms would be deﬁned as “one single natural stem
(phylum)” [ein einziger natürlicher Stamm (Phylum)] originating from an “indepen-
dent spontaneously generated stem-form” [selbstständige autogone Stammform]
(1866, Vol. II, XXXI). Haeckel was even open to the thought that there may be
more than three monera and that a certain monera species could be, for example, a
common stem form (common ancestor) [gemeinsame Stammform] of all vertebrates
or of all coelenterates: “In our view it is most probable that each of the major stems
[Hauptstämme] or phyla of animal and plant kingdoms evolved [entwickelte sich]
from a separate monera stem-form” (Haeckel 1866, Vol. I, p. 185). According to this
view, all major stems are descendants of “autogone” (independently generated)
22
G. S. Levit and U. A. Hossfeld

Fig. 2.4 Monophyletic stem tree from General Morphology [Generelle Morphologie] (Haeckel
1866, Vol. II, Table I). Color lines are added by us. Although entitled by Haeckel “Monophyletic
Stem-Tree of Organisms,” this stem tree, in fact, includes three different diagrams illustrating three
hypothetical “universal genealogies.” I. Rectangle “pmnq” represents 19-stem model (red line).
II. Rectangle “pxyq” represents 3-stem model (green line). III. Rectangle “pstq” represents 1-stem
2
Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst Haeckel and Abiogenesis
23

monera, which evolved by means of divergence of characters and natural selection
(Vol. II, 419). Elsewhere in the Generelle Morphologie, Haeckel writes: “The proto-
forms themselves, which form roots of the single stems, arose completely indepen-
dently of each other via spontaneous generations [. . .]” (1866, Vol. II, p. 394).7
Neither Haeckel nor Darwin considered the polyphyletic origin of life as a danger
for evolutionary theory. The British master himself did not exclude the possibility
that animals and plants could have descended from distinct progenitors (Richards
2008, p. 137). Haeckel followed in Darwin’s footsteps: “Whether we ﬁnally assume
a single common parent-form (the monophyletic hypothesis), or several (the poly-
phyletic hypothesis), is wholly immaterial to the essence of the theory of descent”),
and it is equally immaterial to its fundamental idea what mechanical causes are
assumed for the transformation of the varieties” (Haeckel 1879b, p. 3). Even
Haeckel’s successor in Jena, Ludwig Plate (1862–1937), the leading Darwinist of
his time (Levit and Hossfeld 2006), wrote in 1925 in a paragraph devoted to the
origin of life that “polyphyly [Vielstämmigkeit] does not arise any serious objections
against evolutionary theory” (Plate 1925, p. 144).
In
the
ﬁrst
and
several
subsequent
editions
of
the
Natürliche
Schöpfungsgeschichte (The Natural History of Creation), Haeckel argued along
the same lines (e.g., Haeckel 1868, 1879a, 1880). In the ﬁrst German edition of
the text, Haeckel repeated the idea that monera, which we observe today, could have
existed since the “primordial time,” or alternatively, that spontaneous generation
could be a repetitive process, and if so, it would be hard to deny that they could well
be generated even today (Haeckel 1868, pp. 345–346). He illustrated the hypothesis
of repeated spontaneous generation with a polyphyletic stem tree diagram (Fig. 2.5).
In the English edition of the book, titled The Evolution of Man (Haeckel 1879c),
Haeckel emphasized again that the issue of the origin of life corresponded to the
issue of the spontaneous generation of monera: “In the deﬁnite, limited sense in
which I maintain spontaneous generation (generatio spontanea) and assume it as a
necessary hypothesis in explanation of the ﬁrst beginning of life upon the earth, it
merely implies the origin of Monera from inorganic carbon compounds” (Haeckel
1879c, Vol. II, pp. 30–31). As in the Generelle Morphologie and Monograph der
Moneren, he again admits that it is “very possible” that Monera will be “produced
daily by spontaneous generation” (Haeckel 1879c, p. 32). In the seventh German
edition of the History of Creation, Haeckel still employed the terms phytomonera
[Phytomoneren], neutral monera [neutrale Moneren], and zoomonera [Zoomoneren]
while admitting that distinct kinds of monera could be responsible for the origin of
plants and animals. Haeckel also presented a modiﬁed diagram illustrating the
Fig. 2.4 (continued) model (blue line), i.e., all living organisms origin from a single-kind moneron
(single common parent form). In 1866, Haeckel considered the model I (multi-monera model) as the
most probable (Krause 1984, p. 64)
7German original: “Urformen selbst aber, welche die Wurzel der einzelnen Stämme bilden, sind
gänzlich unabhängig von einander durch Geueratio spontanea entstanden, wie wir bereits im
sechsten und siebeuten Capitel erläutert naben.”
24
G. S. Levit and U. A. Hossfeld

Fig. 2.5 Polyphyletic stem tree from the ﬁrst German edition of the History of Creation; it
illustrates the idea of multiple independent spontaneous generation of monera and their evolution
2
Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst Haeckel and Abiogenesis
25

polyphyletic origin of life (Haeckel 1879a, p. 401; Reynolds and Hülsmann 2008)
(Fig. 2.6). At the same time, he introduced the concept of “archigone monera,”
which could have been giving rise to all other kinds of monera (Haeckel 1879a,
p. 400) and presented a diagram illustrating the hypothesis of the monophyletic
origin of life (Fig. 2.7). In a comment on these diagrams, Haeckel explained that a
“well-founded decision between monophyletic and polyphyletic hypotheses is
completely impossible [ganz unmöglich] considering our present imperfect phylo-
genetic knowledge” (Ibid. 1879a, p. 399). The same idea was repeated in the English
edition of the History of Creation published in 1887, where he stated that a safe
means of deciding between the monophyletic and polyphyletic hypotheses is “as yet
quite impossible” (Haeckel 1887, p. 73). At the same time, Haeckel, again, clearly
expressed his bias toward the concept of spontaneous generation as a repetitive
process and toward the independent origin of the three kingdoms:
But the more deeply we penetrate into the genealogical secrets of this obscure domain of
inquiry, the more probable appears the idea that the vegetable kingdom and the animal
kingdom are each of independent origin, and that midway between these two great pedigrees
a number of other independent small groups of organisms have arisen, by repeated acts of
spontaneous generation, which on account of their indifferent neutral character, and in
consequence of their mixture of animal and vegetable properties, may lay claim to the
designation of independent Protista” [our italics—auth.] (Haeckel 1887, p. 73).
Of these two issues—repetitive spontaneous generations and the polyphyly
controversy—Haeckel considered the latter as a minor issue as the whole body of
a moneron consists anyway only of a formless mass “made up of a single albumin-
ous combination of carbon,” and therefore, primary monera were quite uniform,
morphologically identical, differing only by their “chemical nature” (Haeckel 1887,
p. 45). In other words, in Haeckel’s typological approach to phylogeny, even major
organismic groups originating from different acts of spontaneous generation
(kingdoms) could be depicted as elements of the same monophyletic stem tree.
In the ﬁrst volume of his very last technical (i.e., strictly scientiﬁc, as opposed to
popular) work, the three-volume Systematische Phylogenie (Systematic Phylogeny),
Haeckel devoted several paragraphs to the discussion of polyphyly vs. monophyly
(Haeckel 1894, pp. 31–32; pp. 88–89) and formulated a general principle determin-
ing the relations between these two concepts. In §69 of the chapter “The Unity of the
Organic World” (vol. I), Haeckel, again, explained that monism, “the doctrine of the
perfect unity of the organic world,” is the true foundation of his understanding of
evolution. This unity can be observed everywhere; for example, he observes that
“the same protein-like substance, called plasma, is the common material foundation
of the organic life” (Haeckel 1894, p. 88). He posed the question of how the “perfect
morphological and physiological unity of the world” relates to the concept of
phylogeny: “May we conclude from this that all different organic forms originally
Fig. 2.5 (continued) to higher organisms by means of natural selection (Haeckel 1868, Nat.
Schöpfungsgeschichte, 1. Auﬂage, S. 347)
26
G. S. Levit and U. A. Hossfeld

Fig. 2.6 Polyphyletic stem tree published in the 7th German edition of the History of Creation
(Haeckel 1879a, Nat. Schöpfungsgeschichte, 7. Auﬂage, S. 401). {{ symbolizes extinct indepen-
dent stems
2
Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst Haeckel and Abiogenesis
27

Fig. 2.7 Monophyletic stem tree from the 7th German edition of the History of Creation and
published next to the polyphyletic tree (Haeckel 1879a, S. 400). The single lines at the very bottom
of the tree symbolize multiple monera produced by spontaneous generation
28
G. S. Levit and U. A. Hossfeld

evolved [historisch entwickelt] from one and the same common proto-form
[Urform]?” (Ibid., p. 89). The answer to this question, Haeckel comments, is
simultaneously “yes” and “no.” One can apply the polyphyletic hypothesis to the
origin of “organic stems” (phyla) as in the initial period of “biogenesis” (Haeckel
meant abiogenesis, in modern terms), whereby monera spawned from lifeless matter
by means of archigonia multiple times. However, this process can also be described
as monophyletic, whereby archigonia took place everywhere in the same manner.
Haeckel illustrated this typological vision of early phylogeny with a monophyletic-
looking diagram (Fig. 2.8).
Elsewhere in the same volume, Haeckel argued that the application of the
polyphyletic or monophyletic hypotheses to a certain evolutionary episode must
be decided individually for each case (Haeckel 1894, Vol. I, pp. 31–32), although in
general monophyly becomes more plausible the higher one climbs in a given
phylogenic tree. For example, it is indubitable that all vertebrates evolved in a
strictly monophyletic mode, but the polyphyletic hypothesis may be applicable to
the low protists.
Haeckel tended to narrow the scope of the polyphyletic hypothesis to early
evolution in the latest writings. Yet, he still maintained that abiogenesis was not a
unique event, but took place multiple times giving rise to various organismic
kingdoms—and in that sense, early evolution was polyphyletic. At the same time,
he believed that various kingdoms could have their ultimate roots in monera of the
same kind—and in that sense, early evolution was monophyletic.
2.5
Conclusions
Haeckel’s theory of abiogenesis, consisting of the hypothesis of spontaneous gener-
ation “and the allied carbon theory,” was central to his monistic worldview as it
allowed him to overcome both ontological dualism and teleology in favor of a purely
causal (mechanistic, in his terms) interpretation of natural phenomena (Haeckel
1900, p. 264). For Haeckel, abiogenesis was a necessary logical consequence of
his monistic “substance theory,” which asserted the fundamental unity of organic
and inorganic matter. Being a universal evolutionist, he also saw abiogenesis as a
concept linking the Kant–Laplace nebular hypothesis with Darwin’s theory of
evolution.
All
events
leading
from
inorganic
to
organic
evolution
are
law-governed, proceed without external or supranatural inﬂuences, and can therefore
be thought of as self-organizing (although Haeckel himself did not employ this term,
his concept of autogonia [linguistically consisting of two parts, auto ¼ self and
gonia (gonos) ¼ creation] suggests he was thinking along these lines). The immedi-
ate product of autogonia was the simplest living creatures, monera, which gave rise
to all other forms of life on earth. In his very late works, Haeckel tended to describe
the occurrence of monera as a two-step process: ﬁrst, the rise of the simplest organic
substances, and second, the appearance of monera out of these substances (Haeckel
1900, p. 263).
2
Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst Haeckel and Abiogenesis
29

Fig. 2.8 Monophyletic stem tree of the entire organic world published in the Phylogenetic
Systematics (Haeckel 1894, S. 91). Note that the three lines at the very bottom of the scheme,
symbolizing the early evolution of monera, remain separated and do not unite to a single line as on
the monophyletic stem tree from the History of Creation (1879)
30
G. S. Levit and U. A. Hossfeld

He distinguished three organismic kingdoms (Animalia, Plantae, and Protista)
and speculated about their polyphyletic origin—about the possibility that different
kinds of monera brought about each kingdom. He even admitted that there could be
many (more than three) primitive parent forms, as was reﬂected in his diagrams of
extremely polyphyletic early evolution (Figs. 2.5 and 2.6). Although his monism and
the Darwinian paradigm he championed urged him to accept strict monophyly,
Haeckel remained biased toward the polyphyletic model of life’s origins throughout
his life. In his latest works, he narrowed down his application of polyphyly to the
early evolution and abandoned the hypothesis of extreme polyphyly he admitted for
a long period of time. He elaborated a general principle unifying both concepts
(polyphyly and monophyly), which declared that the higher one climbs the phylo-
genetic trees the more strictly monophyletic they appear. On a purely empirical level,
Haeckel’s theory was lacking experimental data or direct observations proving the
hypothesis of continuing spontaneous generations in fresh or ocean waters. At the
same time, Haeckel’s monera hypothesis was hardly compatible with strict mono-
phyly, because it favored the idea that multiple and continuing spontaneous
generations of various kinds of monera occur repetitively throughout the early
history or even throughout the whole history of earth. In accord with the “carbon
theory,” monera were so easy to generate that it would be difﬁcult to explain why
they should not spawn multiple times after the early earth cooled down. In other
words, the theory of the origin of life was the terrain, where Haeckel’s monistic
epistemology came into conﬂict with his monistic ontology as the former required
secure empirical foundation for the abiogenesis theory—which was absent—while
the latter required abiogenesis as a necessary logical link in his theoretical system.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Cameron Yetman (Canada) for valuable
suggestions.
References
Darwin C (1859) On the origin of species. John Murray, London
Davies J (2009) Darwin and microbiomes. EMBO 10(8):805
Dayrat B (2003) The roots of phylogeny: how did Haeckel build his trees? Syst Biol 52:515–527
Di Gregorio M (2005) From here to eternity: Ernst Haeckel and scientiﬁc faith. Vandenhoeck and
Ruprecht, Göttingen
Farley J, Geison GL (1974) Science, politics and spontaneous generation in nineteenth-century
France: the Pasteur-Pouchet debate. Bull Hist Med 48(2):161–198
Finkelstein G (2019) Haeckel and du bois-Reymond: rival German Darwinists. Theory Biosci 138:
105–112
Haeckel E (1865) Über den Sarcodekörper der Rhizopoden. Zeitschrift für wissenschaftliche
Zoologie. Bd XV, p 360
Haeckel E (1866) Generelle Morphologie der Organismen. Bde I und II. Georg Reimer, Berlin
Haeckel
E
(1868)
Monographie
der
Moneren.
Jenaische
Zeitschrift
für
Medicin
und
Naturwissenschaft 4:64–137
Haeckel E (1869) Monograph of Monera. Q J Microsc Sci IX:27ff
Haeckel E (1870) Biologische Studien. Erstes Heft: Studien über Moneren und andere Protisten.
Wilhelm Engelmann, Leipzig
2
Self-Organization Meets Evolution: Ernst Haeckel and Abiogenesis
31

Haeckel E (1879a) Natürliche Schöpfungsgeschichte, 7. Auﬂ. Georg Reimer, Berlin
Haeckel E (1879b) Freedom in science and teaching. D. Appleton & Co, New York
Haeckel E (1879c) The evolution of man. D. Appleton & Co, New York
Haeckel E (1880) The history of creation. D. Appleton & Co, New York
Haeckel E (1887) The history of creation, vol II. D. Appleton & Co, New York
Haeckel E (1894) Systematische Phylogenie. Entwurf eines natürlichen Systems der Organismen
auf Grund ihrer Stammesgeschichte, 1. Theil. edn. Verlag Georg Reimer, Berlin
Haeckel E (1900) The riddle of the universe at the close of the nineteenth century. Transl. by
J. McCabe. Watts and Co, London
Haeckel E [1914] (2008) Gott-Natur (Theophysis). Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart
Hossfeld U, Levit GS (2020) Ernst Haeckel. In: Bloomsbury encyclopedia of philosophers.
Bloomsbury, London. https://doi.org/10.5040/9781350994997.0006
Huxley TH (1868) On some organisms living at great depths in the North Atlantic Ocean. Quart J
Microscop Sci 8:203–212
Kolchinsky EI, Levit GS (2019) The reception of Haeckel in pre-revolutionary Russia. Theory
Biosci 138(1):73–88
Krause E (1984) Ernst Haeckel. Teubner Verlag, Leipzig
Kutschera U (2016) Haeckel’s 1866 tree of life and the origin of eukaryotes. Nat Microbiol 1:
16114. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmicrobiol.2016.114
Lazcano A (2016) Alexandr I. Oparin and the origin of life: a historical reassessment of the
heterotrophic theory. J Mol Evol 83:214–222
Levit GS, Hossfeld U (2006) The forgotten “old Darwinian” synthesis: the evolutionary theory of
Ludwig H. Plate (1862-1937) sciences. NTM Int J Hist Ethics Nat Sci Technol Med 14:9–25
Levit GS, Hossfeld U (2017) Major research traditions in twentieth-century evolutionary biology:
the relations of Germany’s Darwinism with them. In: Delisle R (ed) The Darwinian tradition in
context. Springer Nature, Cham, pp 169–193
Levit GS, Hossfeld U (2019) Ernst Haeckel in the history of biology. Curr Biol 29(24):R1272–
R1280
Levit GS, Hossfeld U, Naumann B, Lukas P, Olsson L (2022) The biogenetic law and the Gastraea
theory: from Ernst Haeckel’s discoveries to contemporary views. J Exp Zool (Mol Dev Evol)
338:13–27. https://doi.org/10.1002/jez.b.23039
McGraw DJ (1974) Bey-Bey Bathybius: the rise and fall of the marine myth. Bios 45(4):164–171
Oparin AI (1924) The origin of life [Происхождение жизни]. Moskovskij Rabochij, Moscow. [in
Russian]
Oparin AI (1941) The origin of life on earth. The Academy of Sciences, Moscow. [in Russian]
Peretó J, Bada JL, Lazcano A (2009) Charles Darwin and the origin of life. Orig Life Evol Biosph
39:395–406
Plate L (1925) Die Abstammungslehre. Verlag von Gustav Fischer, Jena
Reynolds A, Hülsmann N (2008) Ernst Haeckel’s discovery of Magosphaera planula: a vestige of
metazoan origins? Hist Philos Life Sci 30:339–386
Richards R (2008) The tragic sense of life: Ernst Haeckel and the struggle over evolutionary
thought. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Richards R (2018) Ernst Haeckel: a dream transformed. In: Harman O, Dietrich M (eds) Dreamers,
visionaries, and revolutionaries in the life sciences. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
pp 35–50
Rieppel O (2011) Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919) and the monophyly of life. J Zool Syst Evol Res
49(1):1–5
Rupke NA (1976) Bathybius Haeckelii and the psychology of scientiﬁc discovery: theory instead of
observed data controlled the late 19th century ‘discovery’ of a primitive form of life. Stud Hist
Philos Sci 7:53–62
Schneider A (1873) Haeckel’s Moners. Pop Sci (Monthly) 4:181–183
Stewart IG, Hossfeld U, Levit GS (2019) Evolutionary ethics and Haeckelian monism: the case of
Heinrich Schmidt’s Harmonie (1931). Theory Biosci 138(1):189–202
32
G. S. Levit and U. A. Hossfeld

D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s
“Physico-Mathematical” Approach
to the Investigation of Morphogenesis
and Its Pertinence to Cognitive-Behavioral
and/or Learning-Based Explanations
of Evolution
3
Adam C. Scarfe
Abstract
This chapter highlights the inﬂuence of the Aristotelian and Kantian thought
patterns on D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s (1860–1948) elucidation, in On
Growth and Form (1917, 1942) and elsewhere, of his “physico-mathematical”
approach to the investigation of morphogenesis. Writing and working prior to the
modern synthesis, for Thompson, the explanations of organismic form that had
been provided by selectionists, geneticists, and vitalists seemed to him to be
implicitly teleological in nature. As a response, Thompson held that proper
scientiﬁc focus on the physical forces that underlie, entrain, and constrain organ-
ismic growth patterns was being neglected. Following Kant, for Thompson, it
was the duty of the natural sciences to orient themselves via a “physico-mathe-
matical” approach and to carry such an approach as far as possible in research.
That said, although emphasizing a mechanistic perspective as regard formal
scientiﬁc inquiry, in a manner consistent with Aristotle and Kant, Thompson
also did justice to teleology as a heuristic for inquiry. The latter sections of this
chapter express the pertinence of Thompson’s “physico-mathematical” orienta-
tion, as exempliﬁed by his notion of “mechanical efﬁciency,” to explanations of
how the behavioral selections made by organisms can be a trigger of physiologi-
cal evolution, potentially channeling its direction (as in the Baldwin effect/the
theory of organic selection). Speciﬁcally, Thompson’s theses are brought to bear
on Simona Ginsburg and Eva Jablonka’s notion of “(unlimited) associative
learning” in their exploration, in The Evolution of the Sensitive Soul (2019) and
elsewhere, of the cognitive-behavioral and/or learning-based causes of the
A. C. Scarfe (*)
University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
e-mail: a.scarfe@uwinnipeg.ca
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_3
33

Cambrian explosion, namely, the “morphological big bang” out of which most of
the generalized organismic forms that are found in our present evolutionary epoch
are alleged to have emerged. Conway Morris’ (The crucible of creation: the
burgess shale and the rise of animals. Oxford University Press, New York,
1998) hypothetical scenario involving the Cambrian, priapulid worm, Ottoia
proliﬁca’s (alleged) habitualized mode of seizing certain prey (i.e., the hyolith,
Haplophrentis) given the latter’s obstructive “helens,” serves as a concrete
example of how physico-geometrical factors entrain and/or present constraints
that may canalize the behavioral selections of organisms.
Keywords
Morphology · Morphogenesis · Epigenesis · Autopoiesis · Teleology ·
Mechanism · Mechanical efﬁciency · The Baldwin effect (i.e., the theory of
organic selection) · (Unlimited) associative learning · The Cambrian explosion ·
Ottoia proliﬁca · Haplophrentis carinatus
3.1
Introduction: D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson
and the Aristotelian Foundations of Morphology
Morphology (Gr. morphe: “form” and logos: “study”) designates scientiﬁc investi-
gation into the causes of the physiological shape, form, pattern, “ground-,” or “body
plans” (Ger. Baupläne or Bauplan) (Woodger 1945)1 of organisms qua phenotypes.
As a diverse discipline of inquiry that is interrelated with most others in biology,
among other things, morphology involves (1) the tracing of sequences of transfor-
mation and deformation as regards the physiological structures of individual
organisms, and of groups of organisms over time, with reference to the fossil record;
(2) the comparison of the physiological forms of organisms and of groups for the
sake of identifying genealogical kinship, homological, and/or phylogenetic relations
(e.g., species), the sorting or classiﬁcation of organisms with explicit reference to
commonalities and differences as regards physiological form, and/or for understand-
ing the relationships between stem and crown lineages of groups or varieties; (3) the
investigation of the connections between the structures of organisms and their
functioning relative to the environment over time; (4) inquiry into the conformation
and de-conformation of the physiologies of organisms to stereotypical, isomorphic,
1Joseph Henry Woodger, “On Biological Transformations,” in Essays on Growth and Form
Presented to D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson, eds. W. E. Le Gros Clark and P. B. Medawar
(Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 1945, p. 104). Speaking to the importance of the
term Bauplan in biology, Woodger states that “by a taxonomic group . . . we shall mean any set of
lives which is determined by a Bauplan)” (104–105). For Katherine E. Willmore, in “The Body
Plan Concept and Its Centrality in Evo-Devo,” Evolution: Education and Outreach 5 (2012), “a
body plan is a suite of characters shared by a group of phylogenetically related animals at some
point during their development. The concept of bauplane, or body plans, has played and continues
to play a central role in the study of evolutionary developmental biology (evo-devo)” (219).
34
A. C. Scarfe

or generalized body plans; and (5) the explanation of morphogenesis, namely, the
processes, mechanisms, inﬂuences, constraints, and/or causal factors (e.g., physical,
geological, environmental, genetic, epigenetic, biochemical, molecular, hormonal,
homeostatic, chronobiological, autopoietic, intellectual, behavioral, and symbolical,
etc.. . ., and/or interrelations thereof), through which organismic structures issue
forth (i.e., in the course of growth, differentiation, and development), are maintained
(e.g., with reference to the relations between organismic wholes and their members),
and/or are deformed. As the German zoologist Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919) deﬁned it
in his General Morphology of Organisms (1866):
morphology, or the theory of form in organisms, is the comprehensive science of the internal
and external relations of form among [and within] living natural bodies, animals, and
plants,” its task being “to identify and explain these relations of form, i.e., to trace their
occurrence back to precise natural laws (Haeckel 1866).2
The modern scientiﬁc discipline of morphology is generally held to have
originated with Johann Wolfgang von Goethe’s (1749–1832) The Metamorphosis
of Plants3 in 1790 and his investigation of variations in form among vertebrates. Yet,
the concept of “form” is a metaphysical one that has foundations within Ancient
Greek Philosopher Aristotle’s (384–322 BCE) substance-ontological philosophy of
nature,4 something that was recognized explicitly by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson
2Ernst Haeckel, Generelle Morphologie der Organismen. Allgemeine Gründzüge der organischen
Formen-Wissenschaft, mechanisch begründet durch die von Charles Darwin reformierte
Descendenz-Theorie, Volume 1 of 2 (Berlin, Germany: Reimer, 1866), 3, as translated and cited
in Nolan Hele, “Ernst Haeckel and the Morphology of Ethics,” Journal of the Canadian Historical
Association 15.1 (2004), 8, emphasis in original, my addition.
3See a translation of Goethe’s The Metamorphosis of Plants and Adolph Portmann’s interpretation
of it, in Essays in Philosophical Zoology by Adolf Portmann: The Living Form and the Seeing Eye,
trans. Richard Carter (Lewiston, ME: Edwin Mellen Press, 1990, pp. 161–276.
4Pointing to the importance of the Aristotelian substance-metaphysical notion of physiological
“form” to modern biology, the whole meaning of evolution in general is typically construed to
involve the charting of the sequence-in-ﬂux of the physiological forms of organisms over time. Of
course, among laypersons, the standard yet naïve and anthropocentric and anthropomorphic “march
of progress” and “tree of life” views of evolution (see Stephen Jay Gould’s characterization of these
typical habits of thought in relation to biological evolution in the ﬁrst chapter, “The Iconography of
an Expectation,” in Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History [New York:
W. W. Norton & Company, 1989], 23–52) tend to measure it nearly exclusively in terms of a linear
“teleological progression” of physiological forms toward the human and/or the superhuman. Also,
while the fossil record does provide an empirical and reliable record of organismic form, this form
requires interpretation, not only in terms of the appearance of the physiological structures of the
organisms in question but the manners of functionality of those structures, as well as their modes of
life, their behaviors, and their mentalities, for example. Furthermore, an overemphasis on physio-
logical form in terms of the meaning of evolution can often overlook other dimensions, such as
mental, behavioral, and chronobiological patterns. A case can be made, for example, that modiﬁca-
tion of the thought patterns and the behavioral habits of organisms over time, considered not only as
causal factors as regards physiological transformations (as emphasized in the standard formulation
of the Baldwin effect), but taken of themselves, should also be taken seriously as constituting a part
of the meaning of evolution. So, there are very good reasons to question modern biology’s ﬁxation
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
35

(1860–1948), the renowned Scottish classicist and naturalist who was knighted in
1937. In his celebrated volume On Growth and Form (1917, 1942) and elsewhere,
Thompson emphasized the focusing of inquiry on the physical forces involved in
morphogenesis and he embraced mathematical methods as a key to explaining it. It is
the purpose of the ﬁrst portion of this chapter to unpack Thompson’s “physico-
mathematical” approach to the study of morphology with reference to the Aristote-
lian and Kantian thought patterns that inﬂuenced it.
Thompson had a wide knowledge of Aristotle’s corpus, having translated
Aristotle’s The History of Animals.5 On the subject of Aristotle’s biological
inquiries, his philosophy of nature and metaphysics, as well as the inﬂuence of his
thinking on biology and its importance to contemporary morphology and our
understanding of morphogenesis, Thompson wrote and delivered papers such as
“Magnalia Naturae (the Wonderful Nature) or the Greater Problems of Biology”
(Thompson 1911) and “On Aristotle as Biologist (with a Prooemion on Herbert
Spencer)” (Thompson 1913), wherein he accoladed the Ancient Greek Philosopher
as a “morphologist and embryologist” who had “the keenest insight into physiologi-
cal problems,”6 and whose thought is “of the highest possible interest to us.”7
Furthermore, Thompson credited Aristotle’s comprehensive philosophical under-
standing of the world and the practical wisdom that he kindled largely to the latter’s
original biological researches and experiments (Thompson 1913, p. 15). After all, for
example, Aristotle had looked upon the political state as an organism (Thompson
1913, p. 25). And in his ethics, Aristotle employed the concepts of excess, deﬁ-
ciency, and moderation (of which Thompson made very good use in exploring the
geometry of organismic forms8), which undoubtedly stem from a keen understand-
ing of organismic processes akin to what is today understood as homeostasis, which
serves to maintain their physiological functioning. Thompson noted that more than
on physiological transformation as the core meaning of evolution, to the neglect of other factors.
Nevertheless, physiological form remains crucial. Relating explicitly to evolutionary developmen-
tal biology, embryogenesis is, in some sense, early-stage morphogenesis pertaining to organisms
that reproduce sexually. It reveals morphogenetic processes that are concealed in later stages of
organismic development. It should be highlighted that when referring to organismic form it is really
dynamic form-in-process, of course, with some degree of stability.
5See Aristotle’s “The History of Animals,” translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson, compris-
ing Volume IV of Smith JA and Ross WD (eds.), The Works of Aristotle (Oxford, UK: Clarendon
Press, 1910). Thompson’s translation remains a deﬁnitive English version of this Aristotelian work
even today.
6D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson, “Magnalia Naturae (the Wonderful Nature), or the Greater
Problems of Biology,” Science (Proceedings of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science) 34.875, October sixth, 1911, 417.
7D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson, On Aristotle as a Biologist with a Prooemion on Herbert Spencer
(Clarendon Press: Oxford, UK, 1913, reprinted BiblioLife, LLC, 2019), 17.
8For example, see D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson, “Morphology and Mathematics,” Transactions
of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (Volume 50, Part IV, Number 27, London, UK: Williams and
Norgate, 1915), 861, and see D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson, “Excess and Defect: Or the Little
More and the Little Less,” Mind 38.149 (January 1929), pp. 43–55.
36
A. C. Scarfe

just whispers of the “greater problems of [modern] biology” were present in
Aristotle’s work, the philosopher being knowledgeable of most topics studied
therein (Thompson 1911, p. 418).
While Aristotle’s philosophy of nature is seemingly archaic to modern
neo-Darwinian sensibilities, some understanding of Aristotle’s conceptual frame-
work, as Thompson emphasized, remains essential to the examination of some of the
presuppositions underlying modern evolutionary theory, to the understanding of the
metaphysical foundations and the basic problems of the science of morphology
(which he aimed to renew), as well as to the effort of deciphering the causes of
morphogenesis. Hence, in order to gain a proper understanding of Thompson’s
approach to the study of morphogenesis, it will be ﬁrst necessary to examine some
aspects of Aristotle’s philosophy of nature and his overall metaphysical framework.
3.2
Aristotle’s Philosophy of Nature and Metaphysics
As contrasted with the modern understanding of nature as an environmental back-
drop and external to human civilization, as expressed in his Physics, Metaphysics,
and elsewhere,9 for Aristotle, the word nature (physis) meant several interconnected
things. Nature (physis) designated a teleological process involving the “coming-to-
be,” emergence, genesis, growth, formation, production, and/or bringing forth
(poiesis) of substances, for example, whether they involve crystallization in the
case of inorganic molecules, the blooming forth of leaves and ﬂowers in the cases
of various plants, the growth of fur and horns in the cases of some animals, or the
development of a human embryo. A key notion within Aristotle’s metaphysics is that
of substance (ousia), representing the core ontological unit out of which the world is
composed, and correlatively, the basic unit of predication in rational and scientiﬁc
discourse. A substance, for Aristotle, is hylomorphic, namely, it is deﬁned as a unity
of matter and form. Whether they are animate or inanimate, substances are said to
have their essences immanent within themselves, so as to be able to persist and/or to
remain one and the same through alterations to their accidental properties. Contrary
to modern postulations of the notion of a substance as merely static and self-
contained, as in Descartes’ deﬁnition of them as “a thing which exists in such a
way as to depend on no other thing for its existence” (Descartes 1988, pp. 197–198),
Aristotle’s concept of a substance emphasized their dynamism. While considered
separate, self-subsistent, and individual, at the same time, Aristotle’s substances are
marked by their movement as well as their causal capacity and/or their ability to act
on another entity from without, as in external relations. Pointing to their self-
organizing character, for Aristotle, the production of substances is partly due to
their own autonomous power (dunamis) and/or their teleological movement from
potentiality to actuality according to their intrinsic capacities. As contrasted with the
9See The Complete Works of Aristotle (Vols. 1–2), ed. Jonathan Barnes (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1984).
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
37

process of emergence explicitly inherent in nature (physis), the process of production
involved in techne, whereby human artisans and engineers participate in the process
of bringing forth (poiesis), directing it so as to craft objects according to their own
designs supposedly “perfected” that of nature. Although the two modes of bringing
forth are to be viewed as interconnected rather than separate, the notion that
(technological) production somehow “perfects” nature puts on display Aristotle’s
tendency toward anthropocentrism (although there are many other elements of his
philosophy of nature that may be considered “biocentric” in character).
From an Aristotelian standpoint, the developmental process an organism
undergoes is purposive, given that its mature form is greatly predictable on the
basis of inductive reasoning from its immature form. For instance, providing that
they have what they require in terms of nutriment, water acidity, oxygen, sunlight,
etc.. . . in their marine environment, and are not thwarted in this regard, tadpoles
mature into frogs through their speciﬁc process of growth, differentiation, and
development. While each individual organism varies slightly, the fact that their
mature form is that of a frog only, rather than say, a water buffalo, is evidence of
such causal, goal-directed, or teleological unfolding. According to Aristotle, the
physiological structures (e.g., a ﬁsh’s scales, gills, and ﬁns) or organisms are suited
to an environment (e.g., a ﬁsh’s “proper” environment is in a river or a lake) and a
particular mode of life, carrying out inherent functions (e.g., swimming, foraging for
food), and it is a bad state of affairs for them when they cannot do so (e.g., a ﬁsh that
is out of water suffocates).
Based on these notions, for Aristotle, the concept of nature (physis) ﬁrst names
the teleological process by which matter enters into shape or form (morphe or eidos),
relating to the processes by which substances, be they animate or inanimate, emerge.
Second, the term nature (physis) points to the aforementioned essence of the thing in
question (i.e., what it is in itself) through which it determines itself and maintains an
identity, even though its attributes may be changed. Third, for Aristotle, nature
(physis) designates the primal material ground out of which the process of emer-
gence takes place, regardless of whether or not the substance in question is animate
or inanimate. On this note, however, the etymological meaning of the later Latin
term for nature (i.e., natura) was “the uterine oriﬁce of a female quadruped”
(Schadewaldt 2014, pp. 25 and 31),10 relating speciﬁcally to a physiological part
of an organism that is responsible for the generation of offspring rather than to an
inanimate entity or member thereof.
Aristotle’s threefold conception of nature (physis) and his notion of substance
(ousia), deﬁned as a dynamic unity of matter and form, relates directly to his doctrine
of fourfold causality (aition). From an Aristotelian orientation, the process of
emergence/the teleological movement is explicitly a causal one. When inquirers
seek to understand what is responsible for any given emergence, be they animate,
teleological centers of life or inanimate objects, they may point to four interrelated
10As regards this Latin meaning of the term, nature (natura), Schadewaldt indicates that “for this
important fact I am indebted to the erudition of my friend Ernst Zinn.”
38
A. C. Scarfe

causes. First, the material cause (i.e., “what is it made out of?”) is said to comprise
the material component(s) that underlie and/or make up the substance in question,
these entering into form in the process of production. Second, the formal cause (i.e.,
“what is it?”) entails both the shape or form that the matter enters into and its nature,
as in its essential identity. The biological discipline of morphology can be said to
have straddled both of the elements involved in formal causality in that the shape or
form of an organism is a core criterion for how it is to be classiﬁed. Parallel with the
move, on the part of the neo-Darwinism of the twentieth century, to consider the unit
of selection the genotype in contrast to the phenotype, genes or genomes have been
assumed to represent the organism’s “essential biological identity,” although more
recently, with the advance of epigenetics, the genome has been decentered somewhat
in this regard.
Aristotle’s metaphysical notion of the “unmoved mover,” representing his specu-
lation as to what is responsible for subtly moving or “luring” the organism toward
the actualization of its teleological potentiality but which is not of itself subject to
this process or reciprocally moved or affected, resonates with the Weismannian
conception of the relation between the germplasm and the somatoplasm that was, by
and large, accepted by modern biology through the modern synthesis.11 The “hard
inheritance” view adopted therein supplanted Lamarckism and “soft inheritance.”
Under it, the germplasm was deemed to be the hard basis of heredity and the linear
cause of the somatoplasm, the former providing the “program” for the growth,
differentiation, and development of the phenotype (i.e., coding for proteins) and
acting on it, without any reciprocal response or causal action by the latter on the
former. This gene-centered orientation, which considered the relation between
genotype and phenotype as one of external relations only rather than also of internal
relations, has been eclipsed somewhat in the twenty-ﬁrst century with the rise of
epigenetics, which points to alterations in gene expression, prompted by environ-
mental, somatic, and behavioral factors, which may produce inheritable effects.
Today, genes (e.g., homeotic genes) are still considered to be highly important
causal factors in an organism’s unfolding and in the formation of its physiological
structures, but they are but one highly important factor among many and are
considered more along the lines of a “mover” that is, to some extent, “moved,” for
somatic factors, such as morphogens, also contribute in this regard.
Third, the efﬁcient cause (i.e., “how is it produced?”) is the activity through
which an emergence comes to be. For neo-Darwinian biology, natural selection
operating on genes or genomes is the chief efﬁcient cause of evolution. Curiously,
11While in Evolution: The Modern Synthesis (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010), Julian Huxley
admitted that “the distinction between soma and germplasm is not always so sharp as Weismann
supposed,” he commended him for this differentiation, since it had contributed “a great
clariﬁcation” (17–18) in preparing the way for the modern synthesis, speciﬁcally, its emphasis on
“hard inheritance” over “soft inheritance.” The assumption of a “hard” separation between germ-
plasm and somatoplasm in modern biology, the former directing the development of the latter
without any reciprocal response, is evidenced by Francis Crick’s recognition of “The Central
Dogma of Molecular Biology,” Nature 227 (1970), pp. 561–563.
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
39

modern scientiﬁc inquiry into the causes of morphogenesis largely comprises a
search for the efﬁcient causes of organismic form, in a curious intermingling of
formal causality with efﬁcient causality. Fourth, the ﬁnal cause (i.e., “why?” or “for
what purpose?”) is the function, goal, or telos that the substance fulﬁlls or is meant to
accomplish. Traditionally, organisms have been viewed chieﬂy as unfolding teleo-
logically from potentiality to actuality. However, given, for example, (1) the Dar-
winian notion that in the course of evolution, organismic structures can be adapted to
the performance of new functions, such that there is really no ultimate “purpose” to
attribute to them; (2) that organisms evolve in terms of their form (in both of the
senses outlined above), such that there is no immutable essence or a priori identity;
and (3) that Darwinian natural selection has been characterized as mechanical and
algorithmic, rather than as purposive or intentional,12 modern neo-Darwinian biol-
ogy has typically eschewed ﬁnal causality and has concentrated instead on efﬁcient
causality, namely, on explaining phenomena by way of discovering “the
mechanisms” underlying them. The mechanistic lens through which modern
neo-Darwinian biology typically investigates organisms, which emphasizes efﬁcient
causality largely to the exclusion of teleology and/or ﬁnal causality, has recently
come into question. “Mechanism” is an a priori metaphysical concept just as much as
“teleology” is, yet it underpins much scientiﬁc research, while the natural sciences
are supposed to have an empirical foundation. While the concept of mechanism, or,
alternatively, the machine metaphor, stemming originally from Descartes’ emphasis
of its indispensability in the study of nature, has generally been “selected for” in the
life sciences, some philosophers of biology have aimed to show that organisms are
not machines, given that they are autonomously self-organizing entities which are
bearers of intrinsic purposiveness, whereas machines are not.13 Whereas, on the one
hand, organisms implicitly maintain the integrity of their interior milieu in the face of
entropy, for example, by way of homeostatic, chronobiological, homeorhetic, and
autopoietic processes, it is held that machines, on the other hand, are only extrinsi-
cally purposive, in that they are bearers only of the programming issuing from the
intrinsically purposive agents operating outside of them. However, this distinction
has led to further questioning about the bifurcation of animate entities and inanimate
ones (this bifurcation being something that D’Arcy Thompson actively seeks to
prevent). An interesting remark pertaining to the tension within the history of the life
sciences regarding Aristotelian efﬁcient and ﬁnal causality stems from mathemati-
cian and process-relational philosopher, Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947), who
was D’Arcy Thompson’s undergraduate colleague at Cambridge and who
corresponded with him intermittently from 1906 to 1945. Whitehead wrote that:
12For example, see Daniel Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995), pp. 48–60.
13For example, see Hans Jonas, “Cybernetics and Purpose: A Critique,” in The Phenomenon
of Life: Toward a Philosophical Biology (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press), 1966,
reprinted 2001, 108–134; and Daniel Nicholson, “Organisms 6¼ Machines,” Studies in the History
and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 44 (2013), pp. 669–678.
40
A. C. Scarfe

Aristotle’s . . . philosophy led to a wild overstressing of the notion of “ﬁnal causes” during
the Christian middle ages; and thence, by a reaction, to the correlative overstressing of the
notion of “efﬁcient causes” during the scientiﬁc period. One task of a sound metaphysics is
to exhibit ﬁnal and efﬁcient causes in their proper relation to each other. (Whitehead 1978).14
Another important aspect of Aristotle’s philosophy of nature was his classiﬁca-
tion of life forms into groups, in a manner that is somewhat akin to modern
taxonomy. He divided up organisms that had blood from those that did not, as
well as those that reproduced sexually and those that did not. But perhaps his most
notable philosophical division was his classiﬁcation of organisms on the basis of the
kind of “soul” (Gr. psyche, as in “psychology”) that they appeared to have. By the
term “soul” Aristotle can be said to have meant not only the underlying principle of
life (as Thompson says, “the ruling force of the body” (1913, p. 23), but also
representing the organism’s particular kind of “mental” and/or “behavioral” disposi-
tion, which related to the particular manner of their teleological unfolding. In short,
the soul played a key role in “enforming” the emergent body. Aristotle proposed that
there were three types of organism in nature: (1) those with “vegetative” souls (i.e.,
plants which move and grow); (2) those with “sentient” or “sensitive” souls (i.e.,
animals [with subjective feelings, and that can experience pain and pleasure and can
learn]); and (3) those with “rational” souls (i.e., human beings), whose teleological
process is not only physiological, as in the previous two categories, but intellectual
as well.
The relevance of this division of “souls” for investigations of the causes of
morphogenesis has been articulated recently by Ginsburg and Jablonka in their
landmark volume, The Evolution of the Sensitive Soul: Learning and the Origin of
Consciousness (2019). As they state, they employ the term (“soul”) as a tribute to
Aristotle, whom they consider to be the greatest philosopher of life and the very
founder of the life sciences. For Ginsburg and Jabonka, in De Anima (On the Soul),
Aristotle carved the living world at its teleological joints. He considered the soul as the
principle of life, the cause and source of the living body: “It [the soul] is the source of
movement, it is the end, it is the essence of the whole living body.” The Aristotelian soul is
14Alfred North Whitehead, Process and Reality: Corrected Edition, eds. David Ray Grifﬁn and
Donald W. Sherburne (New York: The Free Press, 1978), 84. As for the relationship between
Thompson and Whitehead, see Thompson’s 1918 letter to Whitehead on the importance of forces of
gravity for organismic existence and the question of whether there are “three dimensions of space.”
The letter is published online by Suzan Mazur under the title “‘Three Dimensions of Space’?—
D’Arcy Thompson Letter to Whitehead,” Hufﬁngton Post, November 10th, 2017 (accessed June
23rd, 2021) at: https://www.huffpost.com/entry/three-dimensions-of-space-darcy-thompson-letter_
b_59f040a0e4b00a4ce5a222cd. See also the references to letters to Whitehead in A. G. Mackenzie
(Librarian), Index to the Correspondence and Papers of Sir D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson
(St. Andrews, UK: St. Andrews University Library, 1987), 194. Furthermore, in “‘Problematic
Idiosyncrasies’: Rediscovering the Historical Context of D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s Science
of Form,” Science in Context 27.1 (2014), Maurizio Esposito suggests that Whitehead belonged to a
close group of Thompson’s friends (100), with whom he was in correspondence and that Thompson
was (later) “attracted by the [holistic] organicist metaphysics of Whitehead” (99).
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
41

the dynamic embodied form (organization) that makes an entity teleological in the intrinsic
sense—having internal goals that are not externally designed for it but that are dynamically
constructed by it. (Ginsburg and Jablonka 2019, pp. 8–9)
Ginsburg and Jablonka employ Aristotle’s threefold division of organisms based
on their type of soul as a heuristic that frames their investigation of the evolutionary
emergence of consciousness (i.e., of organismic “subjective feeling”), and of the
causal factors contributing to the Cambrian Explosion, which they characterize as
“the morphological big bang” (ib, p. 410) on this planet. Later in this chapter, after
taking up some of the main contours of Thompson’s approach to the study of
morphogenesis, I shall unpack and extend Ginsburg and Jablonka’s theses, along
Thompsonian lines. However, in the next section of this chapter, I will brieﬂy take
up the Kantian construal of the metaphysical notions of “form” and “substance,” as
well as the analogy to the theories of embryonic development of his day (i.e.,
preformation and epigenesis) that he supplies in relation to the question of the origin
of the a priori concepts of the understanding. In so doing, I shall display Kant as a
major forbearer of contemporary theories of autopoietic self-organization, his think-
ing having informed Thompson’s physico-mathematical approach to the scientiﬁc
study of morphogenesis and the latter’s stance in relation to the dichotomy of
teleology and mechanism.
3.3
Kant on Substance, Teleology, and Mechanism
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) construed the metaphysical notions of “form,” “mat-
ter,” and “substance” in a different way than Aristotle had done. “Substance,” for
Kant, was considered an a priori concept of the understanding, alongside other
metaphysical notions such as time, space, causality, necessity, self, mechanism,
teleology, the principle of sufﬁcient reason, etc.. . . . While Aristotle assumed that
“form,” with its dual sense, was inextricably linked to “matter” and that both
belonged intrinsically to emergent substances themselves, Kant emphasized the
notion that rational beings give “form” to perceived “matter” in constituting objects
of experience. It is not simply that “form” and “matter” were sub-components of the
a priori concept of substance, and to be considered a priori categories unto them-
selves, but as Kant deﬁnes in Critique of Pure Reason (1781, 1787), matter and form
were inseparable in terms of providing the ground for the possibility of the experi-
ence of rational beings in general. For him, matter “signiﬁes the determinable in
general,” whereas form provides matter with its “determination.” (Kant 1984,
pp. 369–370). While impressions of sensation may lend themselves to particular
modes of determination, ultimately, rational beings order and give form to objects of
experience, their experience being mediated by their a priori conceptual framework.
To be sure, Kant writes:
the impressions of the senses provide the ﬁrst occasion for opening the entire power of
cognition to them and for bringing about experience, which contains two very heterogenous
42
A. C. Scarfe

elements, namely, a matter for cognition from the senses and a certain form for ordering it
from the inner source of the pure intuiting and thinking. . . (Kant 1984, pp. 220–221)
Pointing to the inﬂuence of metaphysical categories in science, morphologists not
only study and categorize the empirically apparent forms belonging to diverse
organisms, but, at the same time, as Kant suggests, in the process of cognition,
they give form to the objects of their inquiries. From a Kantian orientation, like any
rational being, morphologists necessarily view the unstructured manifold that is
present to their senses through the mediating lens of an a priori conceptual frame-
work (e.g., be it implicitly mechanistic or teleological). In the same manner, and
hinting at a basis of contemporary thinking relating to self-organization, such as
autopoietic and enactivist theories, from a Kantian outlook, cognition even gives
form to itself and to the body that houses it in the process of self-constitution.
As for the epistemological question as to the “origin” of this a priori conceptual
framework, which includes the notions of substance, causality, necessity, etc.. . . and
which is inherent to rational beings, Kant sought to carve out a position that went
beyond Descartes’ rationalism, on the one hand, which held that such prized ideas
were innate (i.e., implanted into the minds of rational beings by God at birth), and
Hume’s empirical realism, on the other hand, which maintained that all meaningful
ideas are a posteriori, or derived from impressions of sensation/experience. In
deﬁning his own transcendental idealist position, Kant described the a priori
categories as “self-thought” (ib p. 265) and as “arising from the understanding,”
(Kant 1997, p. 10) the understanding being “their birthplace” (Kant 1984, p. 202). Of
course, much later, in the twentieth century, renowned ethologist Konrad Lorenz
(1903–1989) postulated the “evolutionary neo-Kantian” thesis that something like
the framework of a priori categories of reason, which Kant had posited, existed, but
that it owed its origin to the same forces of Darwinian natural selection that
preserved individuals with adaptive phenotypic traits that gave them an advantage
in the struggle for existence and weeded out individuals with maladaptive traits.15
For Lorenz, human beings are in possession of such categories [e.g., substance
(including the associated concepts of matter and form), causality, necessity, mecha-
nism, teleology, the principle of sufﬁcient reason] as part of their rational natures
because they provide a great survival advantage in the struggle for existence. Lorenz
paints the picture that, over eons of evolutionary time, such core ideas have consis-
tently demonstrated their indispensability, not only to the particular mode by which
human beings constitute the world in the context of their experience, but also in
guiding their actions, such that they have been profusely assimilated into the human
15Konrad Lorenz, “Kant’s Doctrine of the A Priori in Light of Contemporary Biology” in Philoso-
phy After Darwin: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Michael Ruse (New Jersey: Princeton
University Press, 2009), pp. 231–247. Lorenz’ outlook positively connects Kant to modern biology,
but his position is perhaps incomplete, for it does not provide insight into the questions of whether
there are objective foundations as regards such categories (as in a putative evolutionary
neo-Hegelianism) and whether such prized, “naturally selected,” categories can be reﬁned or
altered.
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
43

genome. Lorenz theorizes that experiential releasing events in the course of the
organism’s development may be requisite in order for them to be made fully
manifest.
Returning to Kant, other than locating the origin of this metaphysical framework
in the intellectual faculties of rational beings (i.e., it being “grounded in the nature of
human reason” (Kant 1984, p. 400), in the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant suggested
an analogy to the theories of embryonic development of his day, most notably,
preformationism, spontaneous generation (generatio aequivoca), and epigenesis.16
First, Kant implied an association of Descartes’ rationalist belief in “innate” ideas
with preformationism. Preformationism is the traditional view (asserted, for exam-
ple, by William Harvey [1578–1657] and Charles Bonnet [1720–1793]) that, fol-
lowing conception, which stimulated the egg to grow, an embryo already has the
form of the mature organism that it will become within it (e.g., miniature organs are
already present at conception); for humanoids, the embryo is a homunculus that
simply grows into its mature form without differentiation. Here, form is already
present and emerges purely by way of growth, namely, without development and/or
differentiation. While the maternal environment may provide nourishment for the
embryo, which enables growth, it otherwise does not alter the vital, intrinsic essence
(in some instantiations of the theory instilled directly by God at the creation of the
world, members of the same species sharing somewhat in the same form) that
provides the embryo’s growth or unfolding with its purposive potentiality. Second,
Kant associated unmitigated Humean empiricism with the theory of spontaneous
generation, wherein especially the so-called lowliest of organisms issue forth from
material nature, for example, ﬂies and maggots from the presence of a carcass or of
rotting meat, and worms and slugs from the presence of moist soil. While this theory
was present in Aristotle’s works, Kant meant to compare Hume’s skeptical tracing of
all of our ideas, including the concepts of the understanding, back to prior
impressions of sensation, having all content in them, insinuating that their lowly
status is ultimately conditioned by sensation and/or that they result from “the mere
conﬂuence of aggregated concepts” (Kant 1984, p. 692), something he would never
accept.
Third, Kant associated mitigated (in terms of the level of skepticism) Humean
empiricism, which left room for certain prized metaphysical concepts (lest the
human species should perish), with the theory of epigenesis. Epigenesis is the
traditional view that, following fertilization, the embryo starts off as cells that divide:
the embryo’s development toward its mature form involving successive differentia-
tion in stages. The embryo is said to contain certain elements that, during develop-
ment, react together to bring forth others that were not originally present in it (Van
Speybroeck 2002, p. 67). Here, organs and limbs are not present in the embryo.
16Of course, as Hein van den Berg reminds us in Kant on Proper Science: Biology in the Critical
Philosophy and the Opus Posthumum (New York: Springer, 2014), these theories are also
“frameworks for understanding what we might call various types of organic generation, including
regeneration, and growth” (193).
44
A. C. Scarfe

Rather they develop as a by-product of (cellular) differentiation. In the theory of
epigenesis, the maternal environment is said to play a greater role in the development
of the embryo, not only providing what is needed for its growth (i.e., nourishment)
but also helping to trigger appropriate processes of (cellular) differentiation. It
should be noted that the traditional notion of epigenesis is a root of today’s key
term, epigenetics,17 being the study of the layer of biological connections that “sits
atop the genome” regulating gene expression, but that can be affected by behavior
and environment in ways that can be inherited.18 But the meanings of these terms are
not merely synonymous.
Based on Kant’s characterizations of competing epistemological standpoints by
way of his analogies to the theories of embryonic development of his time, Kant
sought to characterize his own transcendental idealist position—which involved the
notions that rational beings “cannot think any object except through categories”
(e.g., substance, mechanism, and teleology) and that they “cannot cognize any object
that is thought except through intuitions that correspond to [the a priori] concepts”
(Kant 1984, p. 265)—apart from Descartes’ rationalism (which was implicitly
compared with preformationism) and the unmitigated and mitigated versions of
Hume’s empirical realism (as implicitly associated with the theories of spontaneous
generation and epigenesis, respectively). While the yardsticks and contours of his
formulation of his position seem to “move” somewhat in his presentation of the
analogy, and for a great deal of his prior career, Kant had emphasized
“preformationism,” in the revised 1787 version of the Critique of Pure Reason,
Kant moved closer to associate his own epistemological position with that of a
considerably tempered “epigenesis” as compared to the one he had implicitly
associated with the Humean empirical realism of the mitigated variety.19 While the
17As Jonathan B. L. Bard, in “Waddington’s Legacy to Developmental Theoretical Biology,”
Biological Theory 3.3 (2008), suggests “epigenetics is actually a portmanteau term and a conﬂation
of epigenesis—the belief that development is the gradual process of taking a simple egg and
allowing complexity to develop (contrasting with preformationism, the idea that development is
just the expansion of structures already present in the fertilized egg)—and genetics, the study of the
laws of heredity” (p. 191).
18Conrad Hal Waddington’s coining of the term “epigenetics” takes aspects of both
“preformationism” and “epigenesis” into account, synthesizing them together. To be sure, in
Principles and Problems of Development and Differentiation (New York, Collier Macmillan
Ltd., 1966), Waddington wrote, “we know that a fertilized egg contains some preformed elements,
namely, the genes and a certain number of different regions of cytoplasm, and we know that during
development these interact in epigenetic processes to produce ﬁnal adult characters and features that
are not individually represented in the egg. We see, therefore, that both preformation and epigenesis
are involved in embryological development” (p. 15).
19While for most of his career, Kant had been a preformationist, following from the work of Caspar
Friedrich Wolff’s (1733–1794) Theoria Generationis (1759) and Johan Friedrich Blumenbach’s
(1752–1840) Institutiones Physiologicae (1787), Kant only gradually came to assert that the theory
of epigenesis was superior to that of preformation. In the Critique of the Power of Judgment, Kant
attempts to provide evidence that supports the former, but it must be noted that Kant’s defense of
epigenesis was of a considerably weak form, when compared with Herder’s, and later Schelling’s
versions of the theory. Kant was uncomfortable with the idea of epigenesis up until 1787, which
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
45

proper word connecting his synthetic position to a designated theory of embryonic
development remained unnamed in the ﬁrst Critique, what is clear is that Kant aimed
to present the contrast between the possibilities of “a system of the epigenesis of pure
reason” and a “preformation system of pure reason” (Kant 1984, pp. 264–265).
It was not until the Critique of the Power of Judgment (1790) that things become
somewhat clearer. There, Kant more fully recognized the interrelationship between
preformationism and epigenesis, by asserting that:
the system of epigenesis . . . can also be called the system of generic preformationism, since
the productive capacity of the progenitor is still preformed in accordance with the internally
purposive predispositions that were imparted to its stock, and thus the speciﬁc form was
preformed virtualiter. (Kant 2000, p. 291)
In other words, Kant displayed a mitigated “adherence to epigenesis, with the
relevant qualiﬁcation being that the causality responsible for the epigenetic
capacities of organic bodies be conceived in preformationist terms” (Fisher 2014,
pp. 25–26). Writing well prior to the onset of modern genetics, with its concrete
understanding of “genetic instructions” directing embryonic development, Kant
recognized that an element of preformationism lay regnant in the context of epigen-
esis. Nevertheless, had the contemporary keyword “autopoiesis” (Gr. self-creation,
self-production, self-maintenance) been coined at that time, Kant might very well
have employed it (i.e., as in an “autopoiesis of reason”) in representing his more
synthetic epistemological position beyond the competing notions that “form
precedes development” and “development precedes form.” For elsewhere in the
Critique of the Power of Judgment, Kant displays himself explicitly as a chief
forbearer of contemporary autopoiesis theory.
For Kant, the nature of an organism revolves around being a “natural end” (i.e., a
bearer of intrinsic purposiveness), a whole in which its members constitute a
reciprocally active, mutually productive, causal network that supports the persis-
tence of that whole. He writes that:
for a thing to be a natural end it is requisite, ﬁrst, that its parts (as far as their existence and
their form are concerned) are possible only through their relation to the whole . . . [but]
second, that its parts/members be combined into a whole by being reciprocally the cause and
effect of their form. For in this way alone is it possible in turn for the idea of the whole
conversely (reciprocally) to determine the form and combination of all of the parts . . . For a
body, therefore, which is to be judged as a natural end in itself and in accordance with its
internal possibility, it is required that its parts reciprocally produce each other, as far as both
their form and their combination is concerned, and thus produce a whole out of their own
causality. . . . consequently, the connection of efﬁcient causes could at the same time be
judged as an effect through ﬁnal causes.
makes his analogies here confusing for interpreters. To make things even more puzzling, Kant had
sought
initially
to
make
the
connection
between
his
transcendental
philosophy
and
preformationism, rather than with epigenesis, in order to make the case that the a priori categories
were pre-given in the understanding, but revised this analogy in the 1787 version of the ﬁrst
Critique.
46
A. C. Scarfe

In such a product of nature each part is conceived as if it exists only through all the
others, thus as if existing for the sake of the others and on account of the whole, i.e., as an
instrument (organ), . . . [but also] it must be thought of as an organ that produces the other
parts (consequently each produces the others reciprocally) . . . only then and on that account
can such a product, as an organized and self-organizing being, be called a natural end
[my addition]. (Kant 2000, p. 245, my additions in square brackets).
So, from a Kantian perspective, judgments of entities as bearers of intrinsic
purposiveness entail that the members internal to them are reciprocally means and
ends for themselves. In other words, the members internal to the entity in question
are reciprocally causes of, and effects for, one another, operating conjointly for the
sake of the cumulative production of, and the maintenance of the integrity of, the
supervenient whole. In such a manner, living systems are intrinsically purposive,
autonomously self-organizing, self-creating, self-producing, self-forming, self-
maintaining, self-repairing entities, their members working in a causally reciprocal
manner for the sake of maintaining the whole, and the integrity of the whole also
being a condition for the possibility for the particular functioning of the parts. Kant
goes on to assert that:
an organized being is thus not a mere machine, for that has only a motive power, while the
organized being possesses in itself . . . a self-propagating formative power, which cannot be
explained through the capacity for movement alone (that is, mechanism). . . . As natural ends
. . . organized beings . . . provide natural science with the basis for a teleology. (Kant 2000,
pp. 246–247).
As Weber and Varela assert in “Life After Kant: Natural Purposes and the
Autopoietic Foundations of Biological Individuality” (2002), in these passages,
Kant gave “a visionary account of self-organization that anticipates the deﬁnition
of autopoiesis almost literally, but within the bounds of a transcendental analysis.”20
However, Kant did not simply give “free rein” to teleology. Rather, he painstakingly
examined the contours of the antinomy between the logically contradictory claims
that “all generation of material things is possible in accordance with merely mechan-
ical laws,” and that “some generation of things is not possible in accordance with
merely mechanical laws.”21 On the whole, Kant attempted to cultivate a synthetic
position between teleology and mechanism, giving both sides their due, although
treating the former as a “regulative” and the latter as “constitutive.” He sought to
20Andreas Weber and Francisco J. Varela, “Life After Kant: Natural Purposes and the Autopoietic
Foundations of Biological Individuality,” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 1 (2002),
120. For Weber and Varela, some of the new developments and research programs in the life
sciences of the late twentieth and early twentieth century necessitated revisiting and reframing of
Kant’s ideas. They question the use of Kant’s stance on teleology to support the relegation of it in
contemporary neo-Darwinian biology to the status of an “appearance only,” as in the notion of
“teleonomy” (in which the specter of goal directness is present, but held ultimately reducible to
mechanical explanation). That said, Maturana and Varela’s original formulation of autopoiesis in
the 1970s was explicitly mechanistic in nature.
21Kant, Critique of the Power of Judgment, 259.
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
47

avoid a chaotic situation in which the teleological and mechanical notion were
simply “jumbled together” (Kant 2000, p. 249) haphazardly in the context of
scientiﬁc inquiry. For Kant, both were necessary for understanding organized
beings, and the study of organized forms must operate in the space of (dialectical)
tension between them, even though he strongly believed that it was the duty of the
natural sciences, as far as possible, to strive to carry out a mechanistic explanation of
natural phenomena.
In the third Critique, the rationale Kant provides for his position is basically as
follows. On the one hand, there is the claim quoted above, that, given their teleolog-
ical, circular structure of the process of self-organization, the natures of living
creatures cannot be fully grasped in purely mechanistic terms, even though mecha-
nistic analysis could serve to illuminate many of the important causal underpinnings
belonging to this teleological process. Also, for Kant, mechanistic principles were
limited in that they could not serve to explain the underpinnings of the universe or
the system of nature which included organismic teleology within it. In these regards,
Kant thought that it was a “necessary maxim of reason not to bypass the principle of
ends in the products of nature” (ib, p. 280). On the other hand, he held that to
emphasize the teleological to the neglect of the efforts of mechanistic explanation
came too close to an attempt to penetrate into entities as they are in themselves (e.g.,
reason somehow being able to know the exact conceptual content that was
communicated in the ﬁring of a neuron comes to mind), which is precisely what
Kant had sought to criticize. It was simply beyond the capacities of reason, in
general, to arrive at a determinate cognition of nature’s noumenal substratum.
Furthermore, Kant saw the wisdom of not bifurcating nature (as Descartes had
done) into entirely separate categories (i.e., inanimate versus animate entities),
which would suggest that a separate set of non-mechanistic laws, beyond Newton’s
laws of nature, would have to be derived for the latter in order to account for their
unfolding. This would thereby place organisms into the category of non-natural
entities and would inevitably lead to the justiﬁcation of theological speculation into
what could not be known by human reason, doing so in the context of scientiﬁc
discourse. So, for Kant, while mechanistic principles could be used to help explain
teleological phenomena with certainty, teleological principles were hard-pressed to
be able to unpack material nature without resorting to a different level of metaphysi-
cal abstraction, involving discourses about the intentions of nature, the supersensi-
ble, theological speculation, which would require the assertion of truth claims based
on that which is inaccessible to human reason.
It was Kant’s stance that teleology was indeed a positive heuristic for guiding
scientiﬁc inquiry (such that, for example, offhand functionalist language could
productively be employed by inquirers as long as was treated as an “as if”), but he
stood ﬁrm in asserting that it ought not be constitutive in terms of the methods of the
natural sciences or their concrete explanations. For Kant, the over-extension of the
teleological principle into that which goes beyond what reason can know would
ultimately end up in tautological assertions, and rational beings would not be able to
achieve a “proper cognition of nature” (ib, p. 259). As he states, “it is of inﬁnite
importance to reason that it not allow the mechanism of nature in its productions to
48
A. C. Scarfe

drop out of sight and be bypassed in its explanations; for without this no insight into
the nature of things can be attained” (ib, p. 279). From a Kantian point of view, the
over-extension of the teleological principle into the methodology of the natural
sciences would end up “snufﬁng out” the need to inquire that the “principle of
sufﬁcient reason” promoted. Teleology could thereby “stand in” for explanation
where explanation was not forthcoming, but it could not ultimately of itself provide
proper explanation. It is for these reasons that Kant (2000, pp. 292–293) commended
the work of Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (1752–1840), who, in “On the Formative
Drive” (1781, 1789), had elucidated an epigenetic theory of embryonic develop-
ment, showing how it was consistent with preformationism. At the same time,
whereas Blumenbach had posited the existence of a “vital force” that directs
organismic formation and regeneration, Kant did not go so far as to embrace it
(van den Berg 2014, pp. 190–198 and pp. 204–220). For it committed Blumenbach
to the bifurcation of nature, and as a case in point regarding teleology, other than
acknowledging its existence, this “vital force” introduced a concept that was without
an objective correlate into the material world, and was said to have causal capacities
that stood against the established laws of nature. Taken “as is” this “vital force”
could not be pointed to empirically, its origins could not be illuminated, it could not
be explained, and from a scientiﬁc point of view, the question of how, in fact, it
caused organismic form could not be inquired into, without at least deploying some
measure of mechanistic analysis. But also, its own purpose (as in ﬁnal causality)
could not be unpacked. Really, other than being able to refer to it conceptually,
nothing further could be said objectively about this “vital force,” at least not easily.
Kant also criticized Johann Gottfried von Herder’s (1744–1803) concepts of
“genetic force” and “organic force,” deemed to represent the cause of epigenesis
period, in that, without sufﬁcient elucidation of their mechanistic underpinnings and
their own origins (i.e., how it is that they came to exist), these and other concepts
pointing to the supersensible, for Kant, did “not belong to natural science but merely
to speculative philosophy” (ib pp. 206–208). In short, Kant thought that it was
necessary to employ the concept of teleology in the context of describing the nature
of organisms, but he objected to teleological principles being invoked as causal
explanations for organismic phenomena in a manner that portrayed them as “black
boxes” containing “occult” qualities, or that simply came with a “period” of ﬁnality
after them, namely, in a dogmatic way that neglected precise mechanistic analysis
and/or that went beyond nature and its laws.
On the whole, Kant certainly gave the teleological perspective its due in the
context of outlining the contours of what greatly approximates today’s conception of
autopoietic self-organization. Nevertheless, for Kant, it was the “meritorious” duty
of natural scientists “to pursue the mechanism of nature, for the sake of an explana-
tion of the products of nature, as far as can plausibly be done, and indeed not to give
up this effort” (Kant 2000, p. 286). While Kant admitted that it was “impossible in
itself to ﬁnd the purposiveness of nature by [way of] this route,” (ib) this was not a
defect of mechanistic explanation, but part of the wider limitations to the capacities
of reason that he had emphasized throughout his philosophical system. Kant
staunchly maintained that a proper natural science should be systematic, have an
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
49

objective grounding, and be apodictically certain. And of course, in light of these
conditions, it should be mathematical, as in his famous dictum that:
in any special doctrine of nature there can be only as much proper science as there is
mathematics therein . . . a pure doctrine of nature concerning determinate natural things . . . is
only possible by means of mathematics. . . . a doctrine of nature will contain only as much
proper science as there is mathematics capable of application (Kant 2004, p. 6).22
For Kant, the science that modeled these principles the best, of course, was
physics, whose chief tool was mathematics. Accordingly, while it was welcome
for scientiﬁc inquiries into the unfolding of organisms to direct themselves with the
help of the regulative principles of teleology, ultimately, they ought to restrict
themselves to the pursuit of mathematically precise, mechanistic explanation.
While evidently, Aristotle and Kant, as grand ﬁgures of the history of Western
philosophy, have been interpreted in innumerable, different ways, it is in the light of
the above understanding of Aristotle’s and Kant’s thought that I turn now to the
thinking of D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson surrounding morphogenesis. Thompson
was a scholar-naturalist whose contributions were original in their own right. He was
undoubtedly inspired in his work by a vast number of past ﬁgures (e.g., Galileo,
Newton, Descartes), and he had a wide international network of colleagues whom he
interacted with in the context of his own research program.23 Clearly, Thompson
was not simply an Aristotelian or a Kantian, or both. But the inﬂuence of Aristotle’s
and Kant’s respective doctrines (e.g., as outlined above) concerning substance,
matter, and form, as well as teleology and mechanism in science, on Thompson’s
overall “physico-mathematical” approach to the study of morphogenesis, including
his stance as regards the proper scientiﬁc outlook, the methods for investigating it,
and his respective criticisms of vitalism, Darwinian natural selection, and genetics,
cannot be overlooked. After all, Thompson wrote in his introduction to On Growth
and Form that:
physical science and philosophy stand side by side, and one upholds the other. Without
something of the strength of physics, philosophy would be weak; and without something of
philosophy’s wealth physical science would be poor. (Thompson 1942, p. 14).
Thompson was not alone in his “Kantian,” or alternatively, “neo-Kantian”
interests. As for the explicit historical connection of Thompson to Kantian
biophilosophy, Thompson can be said to have belonged to a diverse, multi-
generational group of scholars and naturalists on the British intellectual scene that
“all had bequeathed, through diverse routes and ways, Kant’s bio-philosophical
tradition” (Esposito 2013, p. 49) although each may have expressed it differently
(e.g., neo-Kantian, post-Kantian). This group included ﬁgures such as Adam
22Also see van den Berg, Kant on Proper Science, 15–51.
23For an elucidation of the scope of Thompson’s network of intellectual contacts and research
colleagues, see Maurizio Esposito, “Problematic ‘Idiosyncrasies,’” 79–107.
50
A. C. Scarfe

Sedgwick (1854–1913), John Scott Haldane (1860–1936), Joseph Henry Woodger
(1894–1981), and many others. The closest to Thompson was his personal friend and
colleague, Haldane, who had pursued training in philosophy and biology in
Germany, and had attended some of Ernst Haeckel’s and August Weismann’s
lectures (afterward being critical of the latter). Haldane had a deep interest in both
Kant’s and Hegel’s respective philosophies, Hegel having attempted to point to the
objective aspect of the category of teleology as found in organisms.24 Early on in his
career, Haldane had co-written material relating to Kantian biophilosophy, pointing
to the Kantian notion that organisms are “self-conserving systems,” and that Dar-
winian natural selection and adaptation say nothing about such a notion.25
Thompson had numerous scholarly and scientiﬁc interchanges with Haldane
(Esposito 2013, p. 54), as for instance, their 1918 Symposium on the question:
“Are Physical, Biological and Psychological Categories Irreducible?” and their
mutual participation in a 1929 conference on “The Nature of Life.”26 Haldane had
24Although disagreeing with Kant’s self-imposed limitation of reason, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich
Hegel (1771–1830) followed the latter’s theses concerning the nature of life, suggesting that “one of
Kant’s great services to philosophy consist in the distinction he has made between relative or
external, and internal purposiveness; in the latter he has opened up the notion of life” (Science of
Logic, trans. A. V. Miller [New Jersey, NJ: Humanities Press, 1969], 737). Another of Kant’s “great
services to philosophy,” according to Hegel, is his exhibition of the general dialectical “opposition
between teleology and mechanism” (Science of Logic, 737). Consistent with Kant, elsewhere,
Hegel states that “all of the body’s members are reciprocally both means and ends for each other
from moment to moment” (Encyclopaedia Logic, trans. T. Geraets, H.S. Harris, and W. A.
Suchting, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company, 1991], §216, 291) and the organism
“maintains itself by self-production. . . . This activity of the members is just the One [activity] of the
subject into which its productions return—so that in all this only the subject is produced; i.e., it
simply reproduces itself” (Hegel, Encyclopaedia Logic, §218, 292). In the Logic, Hegel goes on to
discuss the categories of Chemism, Mechanism, and Organism, and their dialectical relationships,
the latter category involving the notion of intrinsic purposiveness which has actuality. As regards
the Kantian notion of “appearance” (as in the notion that reason is limited to appearances only and
cannot penetrate to the noumenal), in the Encyclopedia Logic, Hegel argues that when something
“appears” (scheinen) to be such and such (e.g., living organisms appear to be teleological), there is
an objective element that can be inquired into (see “The Doctrine of Essence,” sections 112–141). In
relation to Hegel and dialectics, in “Organism: A Meshwork of Selﬂess Selves,” in Organism and
the Origins of Self (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 129), ed. Alfred I. Tauber
(Dordrecht, Germany: Springer, 1991, my additions), Francisco Varela suggests that “the concept
of an organism connotes a knotty dialectic: a living system makes itself into an entity distinct from
its environment through a process that brings forth,” autopoiesis entailing a “dialectic between the
local component levels [i.e., the organism’s members: organelles, cells, tissues, organs, systems,
etc.] and the global whole [i.e., the organism as a whole], linked together [in interpenetrating and]
reciprocal [causal] relation” (84).
25For example, see chapter three of Maurizio Esposito’s Romantic Biology, 1890–1945 (New York:
Routledge, 2013), pp. 53–82, and his “Between Holism and Reductionism: Organismic Inheritance
and the Neo-Kantian Biological Tradition in Britain and the USA, 1890–1940” (PhD Thesis)
(University of Leeds, UK, October 2011), 61–64, also see 87–89 and 103–106.
26See J. S. Haldane, D’Arcy W. Thompson, P. Chalmers Mitchell, and L. T. Hobhouse, “Sympo-
sium: Are Physical, Biological and Psychological Categories Irreducible?,” Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes, Volume 1: Life and Finite Individuality
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
51

taken to the more holistic, organicist, teleological line of Kantian–Hegelian
biophilosophy, whereas Thompson (non-reductively) took to Kant’s more material-
istic and mechanistic side in the context of scientiﬁc inquiry while still doing justice
to teleology. Arguably, of the two, Thompson’s approach was more accurate to the
overall stance taken by Kant himself.
3.4
Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach
to the Study of Morphogenesis and His Criticisms
of Vitalism, Natural Selection, and Genetics
Thompson deﬁned “morphology” (the science he wished to reinstate) broadly as
“the study of Organic Form,” this study being “but a portion of that wider Science of
Form which deals with the forms [and patterns] assumed by matter under all aspects
and conditions, and in a still wider sense, with Forms which are theoretically
imaginable” (Thompson 1915, p. 856). In On Growth and Form, Thompson
characterizes that:
we are dealing with Form in a very concrete way. To Aristotle it was a metaphysical concept;
to us it is a quasi-mechanical effect on Matter of the operation of chemico-physical forces.
To Aristotle its Form was the essence, the archetype, the very “nature” of a thing, and Matter
and Form were an inseparable duality. Even now, when we divide our science into Physiol-
ogy and Morphology, we are harking back to the old Aristotelian antithesis. (Thompson
1942, p. 82).
For Thompson, inquiry into the causes of the physiological forms of organisms
was to be viewed largely as an extension of the study the causes of physical form of
entities in general, thereby counteracting the bifurcation of entities into the domains
of the living and the non-living. To be sure, there was “no essential difference
between phenomena of organic form and those which are manifested [more gener-
ally] in portions of inanimate matter” (Thompson 1915, p. 858),27 recognizing that
the interiority of the body and its vast, interconnected tapestry of organs and cellular
ﬁelds are by no means places of deviance from the laws of physics and chemistry, the
organism not only being a part of energetic nature, but helping to compose it. For
Thompson, living substances embodied emergent manifestations of those same laws,
differing only in terms of the levels of order and complexity involved in their
conﬂuence. While he played up the importance of the “old” laws of Newtonian
physics in this regard, he was open to having inquiry also be guided by the principles
(Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1918), pp. 11–74. The second conference that Haldane and
Thompson participated in was the British Association for the Advancement of Science Meeting in
Cape Town, South Africa, July 22–August 3, 1929.
27Thompson reiterates this statement in On Growth and Form 1942, 1029.
52
A. C. Scarfe

of the “newer” physics (e.g., relativity physics, and we might add in quantum
mechanics).28
From a scientiﬁc standpoint, for Thompson, organisms should not be treated as
though they were simply (supernaturalistic) exceptions to the established laws of
physics and chemistry, as, for example, he felt vitalism had been apt to promote. He
emphasized that morphology ought to focus its investigations of every manner of
physical force acting on and “sculpting” the physiologies of organisms (e.g., “grav-
ity, pressure, cohesion, friction, viscosity, elasticity, diffusion, . . . [and] surface
tension” (Thompson 1911, p. 424) over time. One might also include factors such
as temperature, humidity, stress, stretching, twisting, fracturing, adhesiveness,
chemical interactions, velocity, density, electromagnetism, nuclear force, entropy,
geological rhythms, (approximate) fractal symmetry and symmetry breaking, illu-
mination, and color. For Thompson, “stress and strain are concerned in the fabric and
in the physiology, of the organism” and it was his intent to investigate “how physical
and mechanical relations . . . and incident forces of gravity, growth, and pressure
control or determine the shape of the leaf and bone and single cell” (Thompson 1913,
p. 6).
One might consider the physical pressures that cause the elongated, conical shape
of a newborn baby’s skull after it has passed through the birth canal.29 One of
Thompson’s own examples involved the tying of a rag tightly around a “little round
gourd,” which applies a pressure that instead of producing one round or oval form
grows into one resembling a weightlifter’s barbell, with two spherical masses joined
together (Thompson 1942, p. 1049). Still another pointed to the effect on the human
body of gravity over time, leading to the sagging and droopiness of various parts in
old age after having been initially adroit in youth (ib, p. 1050). Although such an
observation may seem at ﬁrst to entail scientiﬁc platitudes, upon further reﬂection,
today, we are certainly learning about the drastic effects on the body stemming from
protracted periods of relative weightlessness in space (e.g., deterioration of bone and
muscle, loss of ﬂuid volume, intracranial pressure). If humanity is to pursue space
exploration, more research will have to be carried out in order to deal with the
question of how to minimize the dire physiological effects that will stem from
prolonged periods spent on other planetary environments (e.g., Mars’ gravitational
acceleration [3.72 m/s2] is only 38% that of the Earth’s [9.81 m/s2]). While the
evolution of the life forms of which we have knowledge has been terrestrial,
extrapolations might be made about evolution within other planetary environments.
28See D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson 1942, pp. 15–21.
29With this example, there is a risk of interpreting Thompson as being onside with Lamarckian
reasoning in that a giraffe’s stretching of its neck causes the evolution of neck length. Of course,
Baldwinian reasoning, following Darwin, is that the giraffes with longer necks which assisted them
to carry out the “good trick” of reaching food on high branches, a behavior that had become
important for survival, were cumulatively selected for. Yet, a Thompsonian could respond by
saying that physical causes still play the key role and not just the novel behavior, as it is the
mechanical efﬁciency that is afforded by the shape or form of the necks that bestows onto giraffes
the ability to exploit the new niche in the environment.
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
53

In terms borrowed from chronobiology, from a Thompsonian perspective, organis-
mic form is, at once, (1) generated by the endogenous physical forces, energies,
oscillations, and rhythms underpinning organismic growth and (2) entrained exoge-
nously to a great extent by way of physiological immersion over time in the
conﬂuence of physical forces, energies, and rhythms belonging (in speciﬁc
magnitudes) to its particular geological environment and more widely the general
regularities holding (as far as we expect) throughout the cosmos; the endogenous and
the exogenous physical forces in play ultimately are manifestations of the self-same
cosmic constants.
Thompson felt that morphology ought not just compare organismic forms
and patterns with other organismic forms and patterns, but also organismic forms
and patterns with those belonging to inanimate entities. The more or less similar and
repeated forms and patterns that belong to the general six-sidedness of crystals of
snow, soap suds, the hexagonal structure of honeycomb, and even “the waves of the
sea, the little ripples on the shore, the sweeping curve of the sandy bay between the
headlands, the outline of the hills, the shape of the clouds” (ib, p. 10)30 had
demonstrably been chiseled out by the interplay of various physical forces over
time. Although each snowﬂake, bubble of ocean foam, or living cell may be
different, each has a general, characteristic shape, emerging and stemming from
the conﬂuence of physical forces acting within, and on, them according to the laws of
nature (which determined what was possible for them in terms of physical form).
From a Thompsonian position, ﬁelds of living cells in organisms in terms of their
replication and adhesion would have commonalities with, say, crystalline sheets, in
terms of their development, as they would be subject to similar physical forces acting
on, and inherent in, them. Or, studying the physical dynamics of mixing oil and
water could be edifying in terms of similar physical dynamics within living
organisms. However, for Thompson, not only did inanimate entities present clues
as to the nature and causes of organismic form (e.g., spherical, radially symmetrical,
bilaterally symmetrical), but similar patterns could be seen in the very constitutions
of those organismic forms. For instance, from a biophysical point of view, rounded
bodily structures preserve warmth the best, of any shape, a sphere having the least
surface-area-to-volume ratio, meaning the least area for warmth to escape. Or, for
aquatic organisms to live “successfully” in an underwater environment their bodies
must be neutrally buoyant (i.e., they must offset the gravitational force, which, of
course, is constant, but also not ﬂoat on the surface). This requires a morphology
(e.g., having a swim bladder) that is suited to its environment in that it counteracts
the forces underlying both negative buoyancy and positive buoyancy. Among other
factors, the average density of their bodies cannot either be denser or signiﬁcantly
less dense than the water (warmer saltwater being less dense than colder freshwater)
in which they are immersed.
30Thompson also made comparisons between organisms and structures built by humans such as
houses and bridges.
54
A. C. Scarfe

For Thompson, the growth of organisms was not only constrained by physical
forces but was a conﬂuent manifestation of physical and chemical forces and
transferences of energy. Organisms were emergent, dynamic products, arising out
of this complex conﬂuence of forces. And ecosystems could themselves be
interpreted as transferences of mass and energy. As such, Thompson characterized
the living organism as representing or occupying “a ﬁeld of force . . . of immense
complexity” (ib, p. 1030) and their forms as “diagrams of forces” (ib, p. 16). They
and their members (including the germplasm) constituted dynamic “seat[s] of energy
and center[s] of force,” (ib, p. 20) internally speaking, manifesting themselves in the
context of a tension with the offsetting constraints posed on them by other physical
forces acting on them. Thompson endeavored to show how alterations of geometric
form, or transformations, could occur greatly as a result of the interpenetrating
and reciprocal causal interaction occurring between the forces underpinning organ-
ismic growth and the external physical forces over time, aspects of which in many
cases could be measured in precise mathematical terms.
In charting the geometrical changes pertaining to the physiological forms of
organisms over time, Thompson drew on Aristotle’s notion of the “golden ratio”
and/or the virtuous “golden mean” (ib, p. 923 and p. 932, as well as Thompson 1929,
pp. 43–55) between excess and deﬁciency (or “defect” as Thompson writes), as
outlined in Nicomachean Ethics. Thompson relates that his own physico-
mathematical inquiries into the forms of organisms were based on the principles
that Aristotle had established. Precisely, Aristotle had demonstrated that generally,
“the essential differences between one ‘species’ and another are merely differences
of proportion, of relative magnitude, or of ‘excess and defect,’” and it was this
insight upon which Thompson based his signature “co-ordinate method” (Thompson
1942, pp. 1034–1035). By placing diagrams of various organisms and organismic
structures on a “Cartesian grid,” Thompson aimed to disclose the systematic defor-
mation of an initial physiological structure as a result of physical forces. Formation
could in many respects equally be construed as deformation. As he writes,
in a very large part of morphology, our essential task lies in the comparison of related forms
. . . and the deformation of a complicated ﬁgure may be a phenomenon easy of comprehen-
sion . . . This process of comparison, of recognising in one form a deﬁnite permutation or
deformation of another . . . lies within the immediate province of mathematics, and ﬁnds its
solution in the elementary use of a certain method of the mathematician. This method is the
Method of Co-ordinates, on which is based the Theory of Transformations (Thompson 1942,
p. 1032).
As a crude representation of his coordinate method, at holiday events, Thompson
“used to entertain children by drawing pictures of dogs on rubber sheets and
stretching them from poodles to daschunds” (Wolfram 2021; Ruth D’Arcy
Thompson 1958, p. 230). This is nearly the exact metaphor that Richard Dawkins
employed in elucidating the nature of his own “biomorph algorithm” (of course,
Dawkins adds that it is genes that “mathematically control the stretching” of the
evolving rubber) (Dawkins 2015, pp. 191–195). Illuminating the Thompsonian point
here, Newman et al. (2006) insist that non-living viscoelastic materials such as clay,
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
55

rubber, lava, and jelly, for example, are subject to being molded, formed, and
deformed by the external physical environment. Recognizing that such materials
have been called “soft matter” by the physicist de Gennes (1992), they state:
Most living tissue are soft matter and all of them are also what physicists term “excitable
media” . . . materials that respond in active and predictable ways to their physical environ-
ment. It is clear that some, if not much of organismal plasticity results from such material
properties. (Newman et al. 2006, p. 90).
Ultimately, according to Thompson, living organisms are made of malleable
materials (e.g., the human body is made up of about sixty percent water, and some
organs are of a higher percentage), not only impressed upon, and molded, by
external physical forces, but their internal milieu is composed and maintained by
way of physicochemical forces. Its integrity also depends on those from outside.
Physicochemical forces also pervade the interior-exterior divide. Further, organisms
are also active in mustering up the physical forces necessary to impress upon, and
mold, what is outside of them (including objects and other organisms in the natural
environment). Thompson also refers brieﬂy to the father of homeostasis research
Claude Bernard’s stance that, without remainder, “mechanical, physical, and chemi-
cal forces [adequately] summed up all with which the physiologist has to deal”
(Thompson 1911, p. 421), regardless of the implicit goal directedness that seems to
be involved with homeostatic processes. Some key issues here involve the questions
of how exactly the physical elements and forces that pervade the body are organized
ongoingly in a self-productive fashion and whether there is some potentially
teleological element transcending them that was responsible for the phenomenon
of self-organization. Following from Kant, Thompson did not deny the apparently
teleological aspect(s) of the organism, but he was content to focus on what could be
demonstrably known and measured mathematically. Taking the “road of observation
and of experiment,” (ib, p. 422) he was largely critical of overt claims and
conjectures as regards the former (e.g., as in the vitalisms of his day).
In
chapter
seventeen
of On
Growth
and
Form,
“On
the
Theory
of
Transformations or the Comparison of Related Forms,” Thompson most promi-
nently exhibits his “co-ordinate method” of placing his two-dimensional drawings
of the forms of various organisms onto rectilinear grids, the outlines of their bodies
being at ﬁxed coordinates. He then carried out a geometrically uniform “angular
stretching” of the underlying axes on grid, mimicking various physiological forces
and patterns of organismic growth in their tension with the exigencies of the physical
forces acting on it in its particular environment, thereby displaying potentially
interspeciﬁc “transformations.” By the sheer manipulation of the grid, namely, by
way of simple mathematical equation, the shape or body plan of one arthropod, ﬁsh,
or crab species could be “stretched” excessively, pressed into deﬁciency, or
deformed into that which was held to belong to another species. In comparing the
initial form with the resultant one, while the species in question were deemed in the
context of the norms of Linnaean taxonomy to be entirely separate species (largely
on the basis of their “form”), in actuality, their forms were different only due to
56
A. C. Scarfe

Thompson’s manipulation of the underlying grid (representing the impact of physi-
cal forces on organismic growth). He concluded that the resulting forms could be
construed as variants of the former forms (i.e., topologically related to them in
morphospace) and that a change in quantity pertaining to a physical force operating
on organisms could cause a change in quality as regards their forms.
Thompson cites Aristotle to the effect that while some organisms have parts that
do not resemble those of others, “as a general rule, most parts and those that go to
make up the bulk of the body are either identical with one another, or differ from one
another in the way of contrast and of excess and defect. For ‘the more’ and ‘the less’
may be represented as ‘excess’ or ‘defect’” (ib, p. 1035). For instance, for
Thompson, the morphologies of a puffer ﬁsh and a sunﬁsh were basically the
same, the differences being mostly representable mathematically through the Aris-
totelian notions of excess and deﬁciency. A sunﬁsh’s morphology was generally
representable as an excess of that of a puffer ﬁsh, and, in turn, that of a puffer ﬁsh
was representable as a deﬁciency of the sunﬁsh’s. The Aristotelian notions of excess,
deﬁciency, and the golden mean may be said additionally to be aligned with the
notion of homeostasis through which the far-from-equilibrium mean, set point, or
stable state (which serves to maintain the internal milieu of the organism in the face
of external perturbations and/or the forces of entropy) is “attained” in a dynamic,
vibratory, oscillatory, and processive fashion by way of positive and negative
feedback, rather than statically. Connecting the theme of homeostasis with the
Thompsonian perspective on morphogenesis, it may be said that physical forces
provide feedback and negative feedback which entrain and canalize the relatively
stable, far-from-equilibrium, morphological states, which are characteristic of the
limited number of forms belonging to the “tree,” or “cone,” of life on this planet.
Thompson’s emphasis on the mathematical aspect of Aristotle’s notions of excess,
deﬁciency, and the golden mean also reverberate with the wondrously uncanny
Fibonacci sequences that are found throughout physical and organismic nature
(e.g., in the adaptive patterning of the petals of various ﬂowers [as in phyllotaxis],
or in the complex logarithmic spiral belonging to snail shells). Later, inspired by
Thompson, in the light of producing his reaction-diffusion theory of morphogenesis,
Turing attempted to decipher the meaning of the apparently widespread phenome-
non of Fibonacci sequences implicit in the forms of plants (ib, pp. 923–924; Okabe
et al. 2019, pp. 1–7; Swinton 2004, pp. 477–495).
One key aspect of the rationale Thompson gave for his overall “physico-mathe-
matical” (Thompson 1958, p. 233) approach to the study of morphogenesis (i.e.,
grounded in the hypothesis that “the forms of living things, and . . . the parts of living
things, can be explained by physical considerations, and . . . that in general no
organic forms exist save such as are in conformity with physical and mathematical
laws” (Thompson 1942, p. 15)) leaned toward Kantian thought patterns concerning
natural science. Thompson cites the Kantian maxim that scientiﬁc inquiry should, as
far as possible, attempt to explain organismic phenomena in mechanistic terms,
indicating that his evidence speciﬁcally supports the possibility of basing the
interpretation of “the observed facts of organic form on mathematical principles,
[so] as to bring morphology within or very near to Kant’s demand that a true natural
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
57

science should be justiﬁed by its relation to mathematics” (Thompson 1911, p. 426).
This point also frames the beginning of the introduction to On Growth and Form.
In the context of arguing that the investigation of organismic form should take
place using the same descriptive, mechanistic, and mathematical language as that
belonging to physics in studying inorganic forms, Thompson writes that it is an
elementary scientiﬁc duty to take explanation by way of the properties of matter and
energy as far as possible. He asserts that:
It is of the essence of physiological science to investigate the manifestations of energy in the
body, and to refer them, for instance, to the domains of heat, electricity, or chemical activity.
By this means a vast number of phenomena, of chemical and other actions of the body, have
been relegated to the domain of physical science and withdrawn from the mystery that still
attends on life. (ib, p. 422).
And he suggests that physics should be seen as morphology’s proper “guide and
teacher in many matters regarding organic form” (ib, p. 423). For Thompson,
morphology should not be deterred from “attempting to explain organic forms by
mathematical or physical law,” namely, by reference to forces and to “simple laws of
spatial arrangement where molecule ﬁts into molecule” (ib, p. 422). Even though
absolute geometrical perfection is not present in either organismic or inanimate
forms, he felt that this “unduly neglected” (ib, p. 427) approach, which “related to
mechanical considerations, to mathematical laws, or to physical and chemical
processes” (ib, p. 426), would prove to be the most productive, fertile soil for the
scientiﬁc explanation of organismic form. This was largely because “the form of an
object is deﬁned when we know its magnitude, actual or relative, in various
directions; and Growth involves the same concepts of magnitude and direction,
related to . . . the ‘dimension’ of Time” (Thompson 1942, p. 22).
Organismic form was a (non-perfect) geometrical determination of “spatial mag-
nitude” pertaining to the extension of the volume and surface area of the body. At the
end of the introduction to On Growth and Form, while Thompson admitted that
physical science also changes in terms of orientation, causality, which he cites as
being one of the key Kantian a priori concept of the understanding, would always
still be an important guide for inquiry (ib, pp. 20–21). Thompson believed that, even
though it had some limitations, the physico-mathematical approach, which would be
based on the well-trodden and established principles of physics, would see to the
type of rigorous investigation that was best suited to ﬁnding out the causes of
organismic form.
Thompson’s Kantian leanings (e.g., his emphasis on mechanistic principles,
rather than teleological ones, in formal scientiﬁc inquiry as a means to explain
phenomena) are not only evidenced in his emphasis on a physico-mathematical
approach in the study of organismic form, but they also pervade his criticisms of
natural selection, genetics, and mutationism, as well as the vitalism of his day. Here,
we must remember the historical context behind in his criticisms. Thompson was
writing prior to the neo-Darwinian Modern Synthesis that took shape from the
1930s–1940s, a time in which biology had not settled upon its foundations and a
58
A. C. Scarfe

plethora of differing perspectives were being articulated. Darwinian natural selection
and Mendelian Genetics (together with mutationism) had not yet been deemed to be
commensurate and there was a tension between selectionists and geneticists. The
modern synthesis eventually heralded them as the core pillars of modern biology
going forward, but Thompson expressed profound criticisms of both (although he
was not simply dismissive of them). On Growth and Form (originally published in
1917) deviated from them in terms of orientation, and its publication in its full,
revised form in 1942, namely, in the same year as Huxley’s Evolution: The Modern
Synthesis, was perhaps uncomfortably discordant with the consensus that had
emerged.
On the one hand, Thompson considered that natural selection, being an elimina-
tive principle, did not provide insight into the positive origination of organismic
form (at least not in the way that it was being construed by the selectionists of his
day).31 Anticipating Stephen Jay Gould’s and Richard Lewontin’s “spandrels”
(Gould and Lewontin 1979) from a Thompsonian perspective, natural selection
did not account for the existence of so-called ornamental features and structures of
organisms that did not exhibit themselves as having an identiﬁable “adaptive value”
in the struggle for existence. For Thompson, the selectionist emphasis on the
teleological notion of “adaptive functions” did not present an adequate focus on
the mechanical efﬁciencies of the physiological structures that were deemed to be
“advantageous” in terms of the performance of various functions. He thought that the
selectionist focus on the attainment by organisms on advantageous adaptations (i.e.,
adaptation being the efﬁcient cause) in the struggle for existence (i.e., survival being
the ﬁnal cause) was implicitly teleological, and “adaptation” tended to rely on the
concoction of non-empirical “just-so” stories from the evolutionary past in order to
explain organismic form. Thompson further felt that selectionists tended to empha-
size a progressive, teleological, or “upward” direction to evolution. And, in contrast
to them, he was open to the notion that saltational changes, stemming from physical
forces, could occur as regard organismic form. Also, one might add that from a
Thompsonian perspective, natural selection might be seen largely to be contextual-
ized as an extension of kinetic selection (Pross 2012, pp. 138–139), and/or
constitutes a special aspect of the law of entropy. With this possibility in mind,
given that living organisms are part of the natural world and help to compose it,
entropic and other forces not only act on them, but belong intrinsically to them.
Furthermore, beyond the typical selectionist focus on natural selection acting on
phenotypes, genomes, or genes, from outside of them, one can point to the
(Baldwinian) notion that organisms are not only objects upon which natural selec-
tion acts, but can be valuative-selective-appropriative agents of selection (their own
behavioral selections playing a role in the eliminations of other organisms and
organismic capacities).
31For a synopsis of some of Thompson’s criticisms of natural selection, see the editor’s introduction
in the abridged version of Thompson’s On Growth and Form: Abridged Edition, ed. John Tyler
Bonner (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1961, reprinted 1992), pp. xiv–xxii.
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
59

On the other hand, genetics seemed to Thompson to point to unexplained,
non-physical, mysterious, preformed origins of heredity that presumably could
produce organismic form in a teleological manner without limits. After all, the
physicochemical nature of genes was not clear at that time, and it was not evident
how genes themselves had come into existence and evolved, much less how they
transmitted “instructions” or “information” that would produce organismic form.
“Gene action” seemed too much to smack of an unexplainable quality. Thompson
felt that Mendelian genetics (together with Morgan’s and De Vries’ mutationism)
and conceptions of heredity (e.g., Weismann’s separation of germplasm from
somatoplasm and consideration of their external relations, the former acting on the
latter in a one-way fashion) were being used as vehicles for the introduction of
teleological principles that breached the continuity of nature and its regularities, in
order to explain the unfolding of the living organism and evolution. To be sure, for a
natural science to explain that some substances, in this case, genes, are deemed not to
be affected by the causal action of the forces emerging from the material swaddling
them certainly sounds like pointing to the supernatural. While Thompson’s own
emphasis on organismic growth and on physical forces constraining it could be
interpreted to ally itself with preformationism, at the very least, for Thompson, the
germplasm should have to be considered a site of a conﬂuence of energies and
forces, some from without, which is a point that he thought warranted his emphasis
on physical forces. In contrast to genetic determinism, it may be interpreted in a
contemporary light that Thompson was pointing to the contribution of developmen-
tal processes to gene expression, including to the notion that epigenetic forces act
reciprocally on genes, constituting a causal factor in the emergence of organismic
form. He was also skeptical of what may be crudely termed the “beanbag” nature of
the genetics of his time, wherein each gene is seen as the cause of each phenotypic
trait. Thompson opposed the artiﬁcial separation of genes and traits, respectively,
when, in truth, the organism comprises “one integral and indivisible whole”
(Thompson 1942, pp. 1036–1037) gene working interactively, often in a cascading
fashion. For Thompson, there was no “strict dividing line” between the organism’s
seemingly disparate characters and members which operated correlatively for the
sake of that whole. The process of growth was a phenomenon to be analyzed at the
level of the whole organism, not just its parts, and the genetics of his time seemed to
be based too much on an abstract, intellectual carving up of the characters and
members of the organs and their placement into separate compartments, rather than
looking at the whole.
As for his criticism of the vitalisms that were still regnant in his day (e.g., of
Roux’s theory of “auto-determination,” Driesch’s “entelechy,” and Bergson’s “élan
vital”), Thompson relegated them to the status of merely being re-discoveries of
Aristotelian teleology or Aristotelian teleology “dressed in new garments”
(Thompson 1913, p. 29). Relating back to Kant’s critique of Blumenbach’s positing
of the existence of a “vital essence,” the dubious admittance of “invisible” vital
principles “alien to the province of the physicist” (Thompson 1911, p. 419) for
Thompson, there was no clear rule or guidance as to what was “vital” and what was
not. For him,
60
A. C. Scarfe

the whole assemblage of so-called vital phenomena . . . cannot be clearly classiﬁed into those
that are physical in origin and those that are sui generis and peculiar to living things. All we
can do meanwhile is to analyze, bit by bit, those parts of the whole to which the ordinary
laws of the physical forces more or less obviously and clearly and indubitably apply
(Thompson 1942, p. 19).
While Thompson admitted that there may be processes going on in cells that do
not readily admit to any known physical force, for him, it is incumbent on the
scientist to diligently inquire in order to ﬁnd out whether they yield to physico-
mathematical investigation. From a Thompsonian standpoint, the fact that living
organisms persist in the face of entropy, for instance, by way of homeostatic,
chronobiological, homeorhetic, and autopoietic processes of self-organization,
does not mean that a separate “vitalistic” law either antithetical to or beyond the
second law of thermodynamics, somehow belonging speciﬁcally to their unfolding,
needed to be created. Rather, much like the persistence displayed in oscillating
chemical reactions, the living organism is a site where its own concrescent forces,
in their interaction, offset the forces of entropy but in a progressively decremental
manner over time toward a more stable state.32
All of that said, Thompson did pay homage to “the teleological side” of Aristotle,
which was focused on ﬁnal causation and/or intrinsic purposiveness. Thompson
wrote that living things “have also, doubtless, their immanent teleological signiﬁ-
cance” even if it is on “another plane of thought from the physicists” (Thomson
1961, p. 7) that such determinations are made. He also stated that:
like warp and woof, mechanism and teleology are interwoven together, and we must not
cleave to the one nor despise the other; for their union is rooted in the very nature of totality.
We may grow shy or weary of looking to a ﬁnal cause for an explanation of our phenomena;
but after we have accounted for these on the plainest principles of mechanical causation it
may be useful and appropriate to see how the ﬁnal cause would tally with the other, and lead
towards the same conclusion (Thompson 1942, p. 7).
Elsewhere, Thompson eloquently put the matter as follows:
and if wonderment springs, as again Aristotle tells us, from ignorance of the causes of things,
it does not cease when we have traced and discovered the proximate causes, the physical
32In “Magnalia Naturae,” Thompson criticizes “others, like Felix Auerbach, still holding to a
physical or quasi-physical theory of life, believe that in the living body the dissipation of energy is
controlled by a guiding principle, as though through Clerk Maxwell’s demons; that for the living the
law of entropy is thereby reversed; and that life itself is that which has been evolved to counteract
and battle with the dissipation of energy” (427–428). On the subject of the constraints posed to self-
organizing systems in relation to the law of entropy, and anticipating the theses of Erwin
Schrödinger in “What is Life: The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell” (1944), in On Growth and
Form (1942), Thompson also writes that “organic evolution has its physical analogue in the
universal law that the world tends, in all its parts and particles, to pass from certain less probable
to certain more probable conﬁgurations or states. This is the second law of thermodynamics. It has
been called the law of evolution of the world; and we call it, after Clausius, the Principle of Entropy,
which is a literal translation of Evolution into Greek” (11).
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
61

causes, the efﬁcient causes of our phenomena. For beyond and remote from the physical
causation lies the end, the ﬁnal cause of the philosopher, the reason why, in which are hidden
the problems of organic harmony and autonomy and the mysteries of apparent purpose,
adaptation, ﬁtness and design. Here, in the region of teleology, the plain rationalism that
guided us through the physical facts and causes begins to disappoint us, and intuition, which
is of close kin to faith, begins to make itself heard. (Thompson 1911, p. 428).
Arguably, Thompson may be here construed to be suggesting that the mechanistic
approach should not merely proceed to explain what was apparently teleological on
its own terms (as in the notion of “teleonomy”), such as to suggest that there was
nothing concrete or objective in the teleological interpretation at all. Rather, the
mechanistic approach should treat teleology as if it was only an appearance, namely,
to carry out its reductive analysis amidst the backdrop of a persistent intuition that
the living is intrinsically purposive. Given the mechanistic neo-Darwinian interpre-
tation that most anyone referencing intrinsic purposiveness in the same breath as
nature or the living is suggesting a theological discourse,33 on the note of Thompson
and the subjects of faith and religion, Dobell (1949) qualiﬁes in his Thompson’s
obituary that “D’Arcy Thompson was deeply religious, but he had no ‘religion’, in a
sectarian sense; indeed, from the depths of his Hellenism he sometimes even called
himself a ‘Pagan’: yet he had the noblest ideals, and ever strove to attain them with
all of his heart and soul” (Dobell 1949, p. 614). Nevertheless, Michael Ruse has
asserted that while Thompson “may not have been an explicit vitalist, . . . there is
certainly the odor of spirit forces about what he claims.”34
In contrast to Ruse’s perspective, however, in understanding Thompson’s pay-
ment of tribute to Aristotelian teleology while overall emphasizing physical forces
and mathematics in the study of organismic form, one might consider the vast
diversity of Aristotle’s inquiries, which also encompassed physics and mathematics,
and that Paley’s Teleological Argument for the existence of God is based in a
mechanistic conception of nature to which neo-Darwinians (e.g., like Dawkins)
tend to subscribe. Also, regardless of the justice he did to teleology in several
sections of his work, Thompson argued staunchly that it was only by proceeding
through a comprehensive examination of the physical causes of morphogenesis,
namely, by carrying a physico-mathematical approach as far as possible (following
Kantian sensibilities) and by being dutifully “unprejudiced by vitalistic hypothesis,
33Here, we may recall Stephen Jay Gould’s statement in “D’Arcy Thompson and the Science of
Form,” New Literary History 2.2 (Winter 1971), that “it is still unfashionable, in biological circles,
to use such words as ‘design’, ‘purpose’, or ‘teleology’. Since ﬁnal cause is so indispensable a
concept in the elucidation of adaptation, and since natural selection can produce a well-designed
structure without any conscious intervention of God’s super-human wisdom or the sub-human
intelligence of the animal in question, one would think that these terms would again be admitted into
orthodoxy. Evidently, however, in our choice of words, we are still ﬁghting the battle with
theologians that we won in deeds almost a century ago” (258, note 59).
34Michael Ruse, “From Organicism to Mechanism—and Halfway Back?” in Beyond Mechanism:
Putting Life Back Into Biology, eds. Brian G. Henning and Adam C. Scarfe (Lanham, MD:
Lexington Books/Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 2013), 416.
62
A. C. Scarfe

along the road of observation and experiment” (Thompson 1911, p. 422), that
something ultimately might be gathered about a putative teleological aspect
pertaining to self-organization. That said, there is no indication in Thompson’s
writings that he was ever implying that the arrival at the teleological was to be
directly the instrumental purpose of his own diligent, physico-mathematical
investigations. On the contrary, the direction of one’s inquiries with, and focusing
solely on, the teleological aspect ﬁrst and foremost, as he thought the vitalists of his
time were doing, could only result in the contribution of an empty dogmatism to the
understanding of life. To prejudge, prior to mechanistic scientiﬁc investigation, the
results of such an investigation (i.e., that teleological conceptions could never play a
role in terms of the ﬁndings of such an analysis) could also not be said to represent
proper scientiﬁc objectivity. After all, by way of logical elimination, a thorough
physico-mathematical approach to the study of morphogenesis could disclose what,
if anything (teleological or otherwise) was left, to be explained (e.g., the speciﬁc
informational “content” that is expressed in neural, electrochemical, cellular, mor-
phogenetic, and/or genetic signaling), and the understanding garnered from concrete
physico-mathematical explanation of living organisms might one day point to self-
organization as an emergent product, with supervenient teleological properties,
based on the conﬂuence of physical or mechanistic conditions for its possibility.
In the light of his adherence to the (aforementioned) Kantian maxims concerning
the constitution of proper scientiﬁc inquiry, and making his case against the
selectionists, the geneticists, and the vitalists in terms not unlike Dennett’s (1995)
distinction between “explanatory cranes” and “skyhooks” (Dennett 1995, pp. 74–76)
for Thompson, it was a matter of the duty of life scientists, as far as possible, to carry
out precise examinations of the life processes of organisms as compositional
manifestations of physical laws, keeping to the so-called mundane, rather than to
jump hastily and impatiently into the “lazy arguments” (Thompson 1942, p. 960)
and grandiose “teleologistic” generalizations. However, for Thompson, wonder
book-ended such precise scientiﬁc inquiry. Wonder was to be found both at the
outset of scientiﬁc inquiry, motivating it, and at the end of such inquiry, enabling
reﬂective generalization, as Plato and Aristotle had postulated. But it would take care
of itself. While wonder is representable in scientiﬁc discourse (e.g., see Waddington
1961, pp. 15–17) and, for Thompson, the Aristotelian notion of teleology had
heuristic value (as it had for Kant), it was not to be the primary focus of bioscientiﬁc
inquiry in terms of its precise methods or goals.
It is interesting to note the diversity, and, on occasion, the clash of scholarly
interpretations of Thompson. On the one hand, Ruse has smelled an “odor of spirit
forces” in Thompson’s work, and on the other hand, in a short correspondence piece,
entitled, “Follow Thompson’s Map to Turn Biology From a ‘science’ Into a ‘Sci-
ence,’” Enquist and Stark (2007) have characterized Thompson as a staunch mecha-
nist in order to argue against Evelyn Fox Keller’s article “A Clash of Two Cultures”
(2007) (which questions whether biologists should focus so heavily on the search for
all-encompassing laws governing animate entities, given the complexity of what is
being studied [i.e., life]). Previously, Keller (2002) has presented a sober look at
Thompson’s contributions, suggesting that the accolades that have been bestowed
3
D”Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s ’Physico-Mathematical“ Approach to. . .
63

onto some prominent ﬁgures in the history of biology (including Thompson) have
been somewhat arbitrary, when compared to how other researchers doing similar
things have been treated (e.g., Stéphane Leduc).35 In any case, according to Enquist
and Stark, Thompson provided a staunch mechanistic and mathematical “roadmap”
for biology going forward, one that stood parallel to the one that chemistry has
embraced. And, for them, arguing against Keller, Thompson’s mechanistic and
mathematical “roadmap” needs to be embraced today, given the urgency of “the
need to understand and predict the response of the biosphere to climate change, the
spread of emerging diseases, the collapse of biological diversity and the need to
improve the human condition through medicine and agriculture,” all of which
“demand the development of a quantitative, mechanistic and predictive biology”
(Enquist and Stark ib., p. 611).
While the embracing of a thorough mechanistic and mathematical reduction may
enable the study of such issues precisely, one problem with Enquist and Stark’s
argument is that, alone, such reductionism does not enable humanity to act on such
problems in order to resolve them. For if, from a materialist, mechanistic perspec-
tive, living organisms are considered a priori as “bits of matter . . . hurrying about”
(Whitehead 1978, p. 50) then there is no reason to truly care for their plight.
However, a more holistic approach that focuses on the intrinsic purposiveness of
self-organizing agents (i.e., as autopoietic loci of valuative-selective-appropriative
activity) thereby providing a basis for their having intrinsic worth (e.g., as “teleolog-
ical centers of life” (Taylor 1981, pp. 210–211, pp. 217–218) or as “subjects of a
life” (Regan 1983, pp. 235–236), and which emphasizes the cultivation of what
Waddington called “biological wisdom,” is able to generate profound reasons for
why humanity must deal with the ecological crisis. The point is to make sure that the
teleological conceptions of the living that are expressed in the domain of
evolutionary-environmental ethics are demonstrably consistent with the ﬁndings of
the biological sciences.
Thompson cannot be considered a mechanistic reductionist. While placing
emphasis on physical and chemical laws in understanding physiological form, trying
to carry these principles as far as possible in understanding the phenomenon of
morphogenesis (along Kantian lines) Thompson certainly recognized the limits of
that approach by suggesting that “though we push such [physicalist and mathemati-
cal] explanation to the uttermost, and learn much in the so doing,” for example,
about “what is implied in the organization of the living organism,” we shall “be left
wondering still” (Thompson 1911, p. 427). In so doing, Thompson did recognize the
(Aristotelian) teleological, self-organizing character of the organism’s processes of
growth, development, and differentiation, which took place in the context of, and
within the constraints posed by, those laws. The phenomena behind the appearance
35For Keller’s synopsis and discussion of Thompson’s work, see her Making Sense of Life:
Explaining Biological Development With Models, Metaphors, and Machines (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2002), especially 15–82. Also see Keller’s “Physics in Biology—Has
D’Arcy Thompson Been Vindicated?” in D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s Generative Inﬂuences in
Art, Design, and Architecture: From Forces to Forms, 35–46.
64
A. C. Scarfe

of teleological, autonomous self-organization in living organisms are indeed a
wonder, but they are not, for Thompson, to be considered a priori as transcendent
of nature’s physical regularities. Rather, they are, most likely, subject to them, and
more strongly, emergent compositional manifestations of them. As in the more
recent depiction of the notion of autopoiesis as involving the notion that organisms
are distinct from inanimate entities in that they “organize the production of their own
components” (Luisi 2006, p. 158) so as to maintain their interior milieu in the face of
the forces of entropy, whereas the latter do not, for Thompson, the special organiza-
tion of the organismic whole itself is also not a deviance from the laws of nature.
As regards Thompson’s critiques of natural selection, genetics, and vitalism, for
some contemporary scholars and scientists who are aligned with calls for a novel
extended synthesis in biology (i.e., one that does more justice to a multiplicity of
areas of study [e.g., systems biology, emergence theory, homeostasis, chronobiol-
ogy, autopoiesis, the Baldwin effect, niche construction, evolutionary developmen-
tal biology, epigenetics, biosemiotics, morphic ﬁelds, etc.] that in many ways go
against the grain of the neo-Darwinian modern synthesis), Thompson’s central
contribution is that his approach constitutes a “holistic” stance that explores effects
other than, or complementing, natural selection and genetic inheritance (or seeing
these in the light of physics and chemistry). Speciﬁcally, Thompson’s work
represents a “demonstration of how the mechanics of physical force are central to
generating living forms present[s] an alternative to purely selectionist, Neo-Darwini
[an] formulations of evolution that resonate today” (Levy and Terranova 2021, p. 1).
Some may see Thompson as articulating an epigenetic orientation that is not
explicitly concerned with processes such as DNA methylation or histone acetylation.
Such proponents tend to value Thompson’s emphasis on the notion that “evolution-
ary diversiﬁcation [is] not due to stochastic gene mutation and selection but to
speciﬁc changes of growth and form happening during individual development”
(Esposito 2013, p. 51). It is not the case that Thompson simply dispensed with
natural selection and genetics, for as can be seen in On Growth and Form, he is still
talking about adaptation and heredity. Rather, he saw them as merely two of many
important factors in biological explanation—just not the only ones—and questioned
the particular “tunnel vision” of some selectionists and geneticists of his day who
were emphasizing adaptation and heredity in ways that simply bypassed physical
considerations. It is this partially non-selectionist and non-gene-centric take on
morphogenesis that some proponents of an extended evolutionary synthesis ﬁnd so
appealing today (Levy and Terranova 2021, pp. xxiii, 1). For Thompson, what was
problematic was the narrow way that they were being portrayed in the face of the
sheer complexity of the living being, a manner that excluded consideration of
physical forces. In his view, selection and genetics simply could not provide the
whole story on their own.
Overall, in investigating the phenomenon of morphogenesis, Thompson placed
his emphasis on physical forces as a fundamental part of the overall crucible within
which organismic form emerges. To a signiﬁcant degree, one can place Thompson’s
criticisms of Darwinian natural selection, genetics, and vitalism and his own empha-
sis on the physical and the mathematical in scientiﬁc inquiry in the context of the
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
65

connection of Aristotle’s philosophy of nature and Kant’s biophilosophy, both of
which had contributed signiﬁcantly to the shaping of his own mindset. In this light,
Thompson should not be seen as “eclectic,” “intellectually lonely,” “out of step with
his time,” “idiosyncratic,” “anachronistic,” “unorthodox,” which are terms that
various interpreters have used to characterize his overall position (Esposito 2013,
pp. 79–81) and which serve to label Thompson as someone who was doing some-
thing that was completely disconnected from long-established thinking patterns,
from modern biology, and/or from its concrete interests. We must recall that
Thompson was working prior to the modern synthesis when there was not yet a
consensus concerning biology’s foundations going forward and there was great
divergence among biologists at that time as to the proper path forward. Furthermore,
Thompson was a critical thinker who did not follow the developing mainstream
consensus that would amount to the modern synthesis, which Huxley had outlined so
eloquently in Evolution: The Modern Synthesis (1942). In hindsight, the modern
synthesis has been deemed by many scholars and biologists today as “incomplete,”
something which has only increased interest in the work of Thompson and other
non-mainstream ﬁgures like Waddington.
With his eleven-hundred-page treatise, Thompson aimed to show that an empha-
sis on the physical and the mathematical had been “unduly neglected” with the
widespread move on the part of biologists to focus their researches on adaptation,
natural selection, genetics, and mutation, and he had some very good reasons for his
position. Furthermore, from a Thompsonian perspective, as regards “origin of life”
research, given that organisms, including their genes, emerged out of chemical
matter and evolved, and many truths of chemistry are found in physics, the nature
of the living should certainly be explored with a focus on the physical forces
underlying such processes. The term Phusitic evolution has been employed to
point to the earliest phase of evolution in which primarily “physical forces that
directed the formation of organic compounds” which enabled the transition to the
Zoetic phase involving the “chemical coding of instructions” (Silverstein 2021, p. 3)
and the efﬁcient causal action of natural selection on the emergent entities in
question. Even so, some research into the origination of multicellular organisms
has focused on physical causes (e.g., Newman et al. 2006), given that other factors
(Darwinian, genetic, epigenetic, behavioral, mental) are deemed not as signiﬁcant or
applicable to early life in comparison with the complex forms we see today.
More strongly, Newman and Linde-Medina (2013) state that “rather than being
encoded in genes, form emerges when cells and certain of their molecules mobilize
physical forces, effects, and processes in a multicellular context” (Newman and
Linde-Medina 2013, p. 274). Even though, admittedly, Thompson’s work has been
on the “scientiﬁc margins throughout the twentieth century” (Newman and Linde-
Medina ib., p. 275) Newman (2018) identiﬁes Thompson’s “physicalist concepts of
growth and form” as one important source for the contemporary notion of
“inherency” (Newman 2018, p. 129). “Inherency” suggests that “aspects of the
phenotype are latent in the organism’s material identity and that these features will
spontaneously emerge if the conditions are right” (Newman ib., p. 121). For
Newman, “inherency” breaks with the main tenets of both the modern synthesis
66
A. C. Scarfe

and the proposed extended evolutionary synthesis by assuming that “generation of
form [is] ontologically prior to its uses” and that “the major factor in the establish-
ment of new lineages is not competitive struggle in pre-existing niches but ingenuity
of organisms in using the means at their disposal” (Newman ib., p. 122). At any rate,
Thompson’s stance effectively represents the constraints of what is physically
possible in terms of organismic form, and suggests that beyond what is biologically,
logically, and historically possible (Dennett 1995, pp. 104–107) there needs ﬁrst to
be a consideration of the category of what is physically possible. Consequently,
while Thompson’s “back-to-basics,” physico-mathematical approach cannot be seen
as all comprehensive in terms of investigating the causes of morphogenesis, it will
perhaps always have a complementary “card in the game” of biological explanation
in the context of a multi-level, multi-perspectival, and multi-dimensional orientation.
3.5
Thompson’s Notion of “Mechanical Efficiency”
and the Baldwin Effect
Exemplifying the importance of Thompson’s physico-mathematical approach to the
study of morphogenesis, in the present section I demonstrate that his notion of
“mechanical efﬁciency” ought not to be overlooked when it comes to scientiﬁc
explanations which cite the Baldwin effect (i.e., the theory of organic selection) as a
cause of evolutionary phenomena.36 In the latter sections of this chapter, I point
speciﬁcally to the pertinence of Thompson’s emphasis on physical forces, especially
through his notion of “mechanical efﬁciency,” in the context of Ginsburg’s and
Jablonka’s cognitive-behavioral account of the causes of the Cambrian explosion, as
articulated in The Evolution of the Sensitive Soul (2019).
In the chapter of On Growth and Form entitled “On Form and Mechanical
Efﬁciency,” Thompson begins by stating outright that in elucidating the importance
of the notion of “mechanical efﬁciency” his focus is speciﬁcally on physiological
adaptations, namely, those that are “in the clearly demonstrable form of mechanical
ﬁtness for the exercise of some particular function or action which has become
inseparable from the life and well-being of the organism” (Thompson 1942, p. 958).
This is to the exclusion of types of adaptations that he feels have been nebulously
ascribed to organisms without sufﬁcient justiﬁcation by Darwinians under a teleo-
logical rubric. In emphasizing the notion of “mechanical efﬁciency,” Thompson is
suggesting that it is the material structure and/or the physiological form of the
organism that provides the mechanical conditions for the possibility of gainful
adaptations. Here, function is not set in stone, as there is no one singular purpose
for any physiological structure. Physical structures can be coopted or “exapted” to
36John Bonner, in his abridged version of On Growth and Form (1961/1992), has in his short
introduction to the chapter on “Form and Mechanical Efﬁciency” (221–222) brieﬂy mentioned the
possibility of bringing together this Thompson’s notion with themes pertaining to the Baldwin
effect and to Waddingtonian genetic assimilation.
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
67

new modes of getting on in the natural world. While instinct and innateness exist,
their function is not something a priori or absolute. But, for Thompson, the degree to
which such physical structures can serve to support the organism’s performance of
gainful actions by manifesting forces is something that can be inquired into and
largely quantiﬁable. The physical capacities and limits of the mechanical structures
in producing the minimal forces requisite to the successful performance of the
function are also largely measurable. As such, Thompson says that “the biological
interest” that is connected with the principle of mechanical efﬁciency “lies chieﬂy in
the mechanical construction” (ib, p. 972), speciﬁcally in “the mechanical properties
of the material of which [the physiological structures of the organism] are built,” for
instance “in relation to the strength [they] ha[ve] to manifest or the forces [they] has
to resist” (ib, p. 967).
Organismic structures that are of adaptive signiﬁcance to the organism are, for
Thompson, feats of tremendous complexity as regards their “engineering” via
(rhythmic) processes of growth and development. And in his view, rather than
focusing on select parts, inquirers should take into account the whole interconnected
fabric of physiological structures that permit gainful actions, including adjoining
tissues, given that bone and muscle “are inseparably associated and connected; they
are moulded one with another; they come into being together and act and react
together” (ib, p. 135). As he says:
ligament and membrane, muscle and tendon, run between bone and bone . . . the beauty and
strength of the mechanical construction lie not in one part or in another, but in the harmoni-
ous concatenation which all the parts, soft and hard, rigid and ﬂexible, tension-bearing and
pressure-bearing, make up together.” (ib, p. 969)
But further, for Thompson, along the lines of his criticisms of selectionism and
genetics, elucidated above, in identifying the adaptive features of an organism and in
thinking about mechanical efﬁciency, the organism as a whole must not simply be
reduced to its parts. According to him, “as we analyse a thing into its parts or into its
properties, we tend to magnify these, to exaggerate their apparent independence, and
to hide ourselves (at least for a time) the essential integrity and individuality of the
composite whole” (ib, p. 1018). It is the whole organism that ﬂies or swims, not just
its parts or members, and mechanical efﬁciency is ultimately efﬁciency of the whole.
As he says, an organism “is not a bundle of parts but an organization of parts, of parts
in their mutual arrangement, ﬁtting one with another, in what Aristotle calls ‘a single
and indivisible principle of unity’” (ib, p. 1019).
From these Thompsonian considerations, the notion of mechanical efﬁciency can
be said to involve the degree to which an organism’s whole integral set of physio-
logical structures, in all of their complex unity representing a “ﬁeld of force” (ib,
p. 1025), can effectively and sustainably produce physical forces requisite to the
successful performance of actions that have survival value for the organism and that
may become habitualized. Such efﬁciency may come in degrees, and the organism’s
physiological structures may not be sufﬁcient to produce physical forces necessary
to carry out various movements, pointing to a Thompsonian interpretation of
68
A. C. Scarfe

adaptation in the face of natural selection. Thompson concludes that his reﬂections
on the topic of mechanical efﬁciency “are of no small importance to the morpholo-
gist” (ib, p. 1002), given his view that, on the one hand, “similarities of form endure
in the absence of conﬂicting forces,” but on the other hand, “new system(s) of forces,
introduced by altered environment and habits, impinging on those parts of the fabric
which lie within this particular ﬁeld of force, will assuredly not be long of
manifesting itself in notable and inevitable modiﬁcations of form” (ib, p. 1025).
This last quotation, in emphasizing that changes of environment and habit, which
introduce “new systems” of physical force which may operate on, over against, or in
conjunction with those manifested by the organism, are major efﬁcient causes
responsible for morphological change, asserts what basically amounts to the
Baldwin effect. The key Thompsonian addition here is his placement of it upon a
foundation of emphasis on physical forces. To reiterate, Thompson’s emphasis is on
the notion that changes of physiological form arise largely due to changes to the
regime of conﬂuent physical forces that are at play in the organism’s development
(including those forces which issue from the organism and those forces that issue
from the environment): on the one hand, the mechanical efﬁciency of the organism’s
(growing) physiological structures as regards its carrying out of novel movements
that are requisite for survival, and, on the other hand, the physical forces in its given
environment acting on it.
The Baldwin effect, or the theory of organic selection, was co-developed by
evolutionary psychologist James Mark Baldwin (1861–1934) in “A New Factor in
Evolution” (1896), although his most mature expression of it is to be found in
Development and Evolution (1902). It is a theory that has undergone a resurgence
in terms of interest over the last thirty years. Although a multiplicity of
interpretations or versions of the theory of organic selection have been presented
by various sources, in a nutshell, what the theory involves is the notion that
organisms have a degree of developmental plasticity and that novel behavior can
effect morphological change, this being explained from within a Darwinian frame-
work and without resorting to Lamarckian principles. In short, the Baldwin effect
shows how behavioral change can be an efﬁcient cause of morphological change.
The theory of organic selection entails the postulation that, especially in times where
organisms ﬁnd themselves in a new or changing environment, where the resources
they previously exploited are scarce or no longer available in sufﬁcient quantities to
keep them alive, they may take it upon themselves to adapt by developing new ways
to survive, modifying their established behavioral habits. The organism’s develop-
ment or discovery of behavioral novelties may take place in a multitude of various
ways, for example: (1) by targeting new resources that may be proﬁtably exploited;
(2) by randomly discovering new “behavioral novelties” or “good tricks,” as Dennett
(1995) calls them, in the process of performing habitualized actions when procuring
resources; (3) by way of imitating, appropriating, or learning from other organisms
that have themselves discovered new good tricks; (4) by engaging in exploratory
learning activities; or (5) by way of activities such as animal play by which new
movements are attempted and tested through bite, roll, and tumble. The learning of
effective movements that positively procure needed resources is selected for future
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
69

use and potentially reﬁned or imitated by other organisms, while the ineffective ones
are, in general, left inoperative. If a species or group faces selection pressures, and
the selected behavioral good trick becomes requisite for survival, unless they are
able to perform it, they will be eliminated in the struggle for existence via natural
selection. Everything else being considered equal, in subsequent generations of the
variety, natural selection will generally ensure that the phenotypic or morphological
characteristics of such organisms will evolve in a manner that is channeled by the
behavioral good trick. In other words, natural selection will favor phenotypic or
physiological traits that serve to amplify the ability for the organism to perform the
requisite good trick and/or that assist in honing their ability to perform it. In this
way, according to Baldwin, behavior and mentality have an important role to play in
evolution, and along these lines they may provide “a directive determination” in
terms of the course of physiological evolution (Baldwin 1902, p. 142).
When the Baldwin effect is cited as an explanation of some emergent phenome-
non the attention tends to be centrally on the novel behaviors in question as a cause
of physiological evolution. But D’Arcy Thompson’s emphasis on “mechanical
efﬁciency” can be said to help us place proper attention on the physico-mechanical
aspects of the theory, speciﬁcally, on the interplay of physical forces which are
introduced by the organism entering into new environment, by the environment
changing, or by the new behavioral habit. Thompson’s orientation can refocus some
of the attention on the physiological structures and physical forces that serve to
amplify the organism’s ability to perform and/or to perfect the novel good trick.
After all, the good trick is only of survival value to the organism to begin with if it
has the physical capacity to be able to perform it with minimal efﬁciency, based on
their physiological features. The physiological form of the organism must ﬁt the
particular environmental niche that contains the resources it needs to “unlock” in
order to survive.
As a hypothetical example, the land-based predecessor of the marine iguana
(Amblyrhynchus cristatus) the only sea-going iguana species in the world),
originating presumably from the jungles of South America, did not just embrace
the novel behavioral habit of diving into the ocean for short periods of time to
procure food resources when it ﬁrst appeared as a castaway on the barren islands of
the Galapagos (Dawkins 2005). Rather, along with other physical features, its tail
needed to have a shape, size, strength, curvature, and a muscularity that made it
mechanically efﬁcient enough in terms of being able to provide the organism with
some of the means to produce the physical forces necessary to perform the behav-
ioral good trick of propelling itself through the (resistance of the) water, with some
velocity, for short periods of time and to avoid drowning. The novel behavior of
swimming in rough oceans enabled the predecessor of the marine iguana to survive,
as the organism became successful in procuring macrophytic algae on the ocean
ﬂoor when few other resources were available. Further, in association with the
organism’s physiological features, the novel behavior allowed it to reproduce and
to pass on the advantageous traits that it had (i.e., those enabling it to perform the
good trick), which were “captured” by the Baldwin effect, thereby channeling out
the course of physiological evolution of the species (e.g., toward longer, ﬂatter, more
70
A. C. Scarfe

muscular tails in comparison with other iguana varieties). But of course, there are
also constraints on tail and body size that relate to foraging efﬁciency in deep, rough,
cold oceans (including thermoregulation and energy requirements) where there are
strong currents. In drawing attention to the physical aspect of Baldwinian
adaptations, Thompson would not allow us merely to focus on one or a few
advantageous traits (e.g., the long, ﬂattened, eel-like tail of the marine iguana)
enhancing the abilities of organisms to perform requisite good tricks. Rather, he
would draw attention to the whole network of organic ﬁbers, rigid, gristly, and
spongy tissues, ligaments, bones, cartilage, membranes, muscles, tendons, and other
joining parts and anatomical structures that support its capacity for such hydrody-
namic movement (e.g., those that bear load, tension, and pressure; that ﬂex, thrust,
bend, and stretch elastically; that buoy and balance the organism in water, etc.. . .)
through which the iguana’s anguilliform swimming is made possible. After all, it is
the whole organism (its physical bulk appearing near its elongate front) that swims,
not just the tail exerting a physical force on the water. The marine iguana’s
swimming involves “strong lateral undulations of the entire body and tail,” they
“sometimes use the[ir] front legs for balance,” and, for example, “in deeper water,
. . . their buoyancy becomes neutral as a result of compression of the air in their
lungs” (Bartholomew et al. 1976, p. 712, my emphasis; p. 716), reﬂecting the
non-reductionist, Thompsonian point that the organism is not just to be viewed as
a “bundle of parts” (Thompson 1942, p. 1019). Pointing to the whole organism, the
marine iguana species has evolved a host of other traits that “suit” its whole
physiology toward the performance, ampliﬁcation, and reﬁnement of the behavior
of swimming in an ocean environment. In comparison with other iguana varieties,
marine iguanas have evolved a blunter snout with which to effectively scrape algae
off of rocks and they have larger hooked claws which enable them to cling to rocks
when exiting the water. They mediate the timing of their ocean foraging ventures by
way of chronobiological synchronization with the tides. The good trick of swimming
in the rough ocean is strenuous for marine iguanas in terms of the physical forces
required, given the build-up of blood lactate levels, their muscles eventually seizing
up. Marine iguanas may forage several times a day, but after engaging in burst
swimming it may take hours of rest in order to moderate their blood lactate levels in
order to be able to return to the water.
The Thompsonian point here as regards this hypothetical example of the Baldwin
effect is that the typical focus on the behavioral change that allowed the marine
iguana to survive is only a fraction of the whole story. Thompson’s notion of
“mechanical efﬁciency” may point to the notion that physical forces constrain
what good tricks (e.g., swimming underwater and locating algae) are operative and
which are not, as well as provides positive or negative feedback on the behaviors
being entertained and performed by the organism. It is the novel behavior, together
with the degree of mechanical efﬁciency belonging to the physiological structures of
the organism in terms of mustering up the physical forces necessary to performing it,
that is, as a whole, tested by natural selection and potentially ampliﬁed by
subsequent morphological changes over subsequent generations, as in the Baldwin
effect.
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
71

3.6
Ginsburg and Jablonka’s Cognitive-Behavioral and/or
Learning-Based Account of the Causal Fuses Leading
to the Cambrian Explosion
In Chap. 9, “The Cambrian Explosion and Its Soulful Ramiﬁcations” (pp. 405–450)
of their landmark volume, The Evolution of the Sensitive Soul (2019), Ginsburg and
Jablonka argue that the evolutionary emergence of consciousness during the Cam-
brian period, together with all of the “Baldwinian” ramiﬁcations of this development
(e.g., in terms of learning and behavior), was one of the main drivers of the Cambrian
explosion—the “morphological big bang” (Ginsburg and Jablonka 2019, p. 410) on
this planet that allegedly took place some 542–485 million years ago, out of which a
majority of the generalized organismic forms (e.g., arthropods, mollusks, and
chordates) that are found in our present evolutionary epoch emerged. The wondrous
creatures immortalized in the Burgess Shale (near Field, British Columbia, Canada)
and other fossil discoveries (e.g., the Qingjiang biota in Hubei, China) around the
world have given us a glimpse into this key period in the evolutionary past, in which
metazoan bodies, “characterized by axial symmetries and asymmetries, multiple
tissue layers, interior cavities, segmentation, and various combinations of these
properties” (Newman et al. 2006, p. 293), emerged. Although their focus is on the
evolutionary emergence of consciousness (or mentality) in life forms as one efﬁcient
cause of the Cambrian explosion, Ginsburg and Jablonka take a multi-dimensional
view, citing the plethora of major theses that have been advanced in attempting to
explain this seminal evolutionary event (Ginsburg and Jablonka ib., pp. 411–417).
While Thompsonian physical forces or mechanical efﬁciency are not directly named
among them, Ginsburg and Jablonka do brieﬂy cite the research of Stuart Newman
and his colleagues (2006, 2009, 2010) pointing to “the constraints imposed by the
physical nature of multicellular animals”37 in inquiring into the morphological
diversiﬁcation of the Cambrian explosion. Nevertheless, Ginsburg and Jablonka
might be more attentive to the aspect of the physical forces that constrain what
good tricks are entertainable, operative, and performable by the organism.
It must be qualiﬁed that paleontologists and evolutionary biologists generally
hold that deep in the evolutionary past “there was a [morphological] explosion of
some sort,” as Levinton (2008, p. 863) suggests, but there is still substantive
disagreement about some of the details, including its time frame (based on the
study and interpretation of fossil data), molecular clock estimates, and genetic
evidence, with some suggesting that “bilaterian animal groups seem to appear in
the fossil record at or just before the beginning of the Cambrian” (ib, p. 858)
geological era. For Levinton, the Cambrian explosion hypothesis holds that a
37See Ginsburg and Jablonka, The Evolution of the Sensitive Soul, 421, citing Newman, Forgacs,
and Müller (2006); Stuart A. Newman and Ramray Bhat, “Dynamical Patterning Modules: A
‘Pattern Language’ For Development and Evolution of Multicellular Form,” International Journal
of Developmental Biology 53 (2009), pp. 693–705; and Stuart A. Newman and Gerd B. Müller,
“Morphological
Evolution:
Epigenetic
Mechanisms,”
in
Encyclopedia
of
Life
Sciences
(Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons, Ltd., 2010), pp. 1–9.
72
A. C. Scarfe

menagerie of life forms diverged from a common ancestor, establishing a spectacular
diversity of body plans in the relatively short time frame, evolutionarily speaking, of
about 20 million years. An alternative version of this hypothesis allows for a
divergence a few million years before the Cambrian, with an explosion of larger-
bodied organisms in the Early Cambrian (ib, p. 855). Levinton questions the
estimates that are typically assumed in the hypothesis as to the pace of body plan
evolution, suggesting that the fossil record tells us that evolution is dominated by
radiations of form and genetic structure that are discontinuous in time.
On a similar note, Briggs and Fortey (2005) have taken issue with several
assumptions that are present in Stephen Jay Gould’s account of the Cambrian
explosion in Wonderful Life (1989). They suggest that “new sources of data have
arisen” and some of the claims in this work “have not stood the test of time,”
although they note that the challenges it posed “have served to move the science
forward” (Briggs and Fortey 2005, p. 109). Gould had claimed that the Cambrian
explosion produced more morphological diversity than is found on the Earth pres-
ently, meaning that, whereas the Burgess Shale fossils point to the predecessors of
mollusks, arthropods, and vertebrates existing today, because of the mass extinction
of groups like trilobites there are fewer body plans today. Briggs and Fortey take
issue with Gould’s “all-too-narrow focus” on phyla or body plans in interpreting the
morphological differentiations of the Cambrian radiation, given that the science had
since moved toward recognizing morphological relations using molecular data. They
suggest that Gould’s “claims about a maximum of morphological disparity in the
Cambrian [have not] stood up to analysis,” suggesting that “at most, disparity of
design was equal to that at the Recent” (ib, p. 209). After all, Gould had claimed that
instead of views of the course of evolution of life on the planet being represented as a
linear cone of increasing diversity, it was more like an upside-down tree with
maximum diversity occurring during the Cambrian explosion, followed by a period
mass extinction (e.g., eliminating the trilobites) and a lessening of diversity occur-
ring during the Cambrian decimations, leaving basically three main branches of
phyla (i.e., arthropods, mollusks, and chordates). Briggs and Fortey state that
cladistic analyses have shown “morphological disparity . . . to be similar in Cam-
brian times as now” (ib, p. 94) and they suggest that the history of life might better be
represented as “a ‘tube’ with a diameter that remained roughly constant following its
establishment in the early Cambrian.”38 Briggs and Fortey further remark that the
more that new Cambrian arthropods are discovered, “the more (morphologic)
evolution seems to have happened already by the Cambrian.” They also cite Budd
and Jensen (2000) to the effect that “a great amount of body-plan reorganization
must have taken place post-Cambrian.”39 For them, there is not enough evidence for
38Briggs and Fortey, “Wonderful Strife,” 97, citing Matthew A. Wills and Richard A. Fortey, “The
Shape of Life: How Much Is Written In Stone?,” BioEssays 22 (2000), pp. 1142–1152.
39Briggs and Fortey, “Wonderful Strife,” 100, citing Graham E. Budd and Sören Jensen, “A Critical
Reappraisal of the Fossil Record of the Bilaterian Phyla,” Biological Reviews 75.2 (May
2000), 259.
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
73

Gould’s thesis that there was greater morphological disparity in the Cambrian.
Nevertheless, they say, “the rapid evolution of form still remains to be explained”
(Briggs and Fortey 2005, p. 98).
Ginsburg and Jablonka explicitly recognize the discordant scientiﬁc perspectives
surrounding the Cambrian explosion hypothesis and its details. However, they
maintain that molecular evolution and morphological evolution “are often
decoupled” in terms of their pace, that “an increased rate of molecular evolution is
correlated with periods of speciation,” that with many new fossil discoveries and
analysis “the fossil evidence still stubbornly suggests that in a geologically very
short period, most extant metazoan phyla made their ﬁrst appearance in the fossil
record and diversiﬁed,” and that there is still a scientiﬁc consensus that “a remark-
able ecological and morphological diversiﬁcation occurred during the Cambrian”
(Ginsburg and Jablonka 2019, p. 410). As such, they proceed in providing their
rationale for why a conﬂuence of cognitive and behavioral factors is to be viewed as
an important efﬁcient cause, among many, that fused this “morphological big bang,”
establishing in a brief, geologically speaking, burst the thirty-ﬁve or so categories of
generalized body plans (with some exceptions, e.g., complex plants) that we see in
the world today.
Indeed, in The Crucible of Creation (1998), Simon Conway Morris asserted that
“on balance the evidence suggests that the Cambrian explosion is indeed genuine,”
subject of course “to some important qualiﬁcations” (Conway Morris 1998, p. 141)
pertaining to the level of diversiﬁcation. For him, “the diversity of trace fossils
emerging in the Cambrian,” as evidenced, for example, by the Burgess Shale, “is a
clear indication of a dramatic increase in behavioral repertoires and, by implication,
of neurological sophistication” (ib, my emphasis) as compared, for example, with
what fossils tell us about prior Ediacaran fauna (about 600 million years ago,
generally involving “simpler sheetlike, or budded, segmented tube-like multicellular
biota” (Newman and Bhat 2009, p. 693)), a point which coincides directly with
Ginsburg and Jablonka’s arguments. Conway Morris concludes that “the Cambrian
explosion does . . . appear to be a genuine evolutionary event, and thus one that
demands an explanation” (Conway Morris 1998, p. 141).
As mentioned earlier, Ginsburg and Jablonka employ Aristotle’s notion of “sen-
sitive-souled” organisms as a symbol, metaphor, and heuristic for what they seek to
explain: the emergence of the ﬁrst minimally “conscious” and/or “sentient”
organisms, and how the emergence of consciousness, in turn, propelled the Cam-
brian explosion. They associate Aristotle’s “sensitive-souled” organisms with two
phases of mental development that Dennett identiﬁes in his multiple drafts theory of
consciousness: those he calls “Skinnerian creatures” and those he calls “Popperian
creatures,” in contrast to the more limited capacities of “Darwinian creatures”
(Ginsburg and Jablonka 2019, p. 406). As a “Baldwin booster,”40 Dennett’s “multi-
ple drafts theory” (Dennett ib., pp. 370–383) is a hypothetical sketch characterizing,
40See, for example, Evolution and Learning: The Baldwin Effect Reconsidered, eds. Bruce
H. Weber and David J. Depew (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003), x, 53, 69–80.
74
A. C. Scarfe

ﬁrst, how natural selection may favor organisms that have some degree of behavioral
plasticity over those that do not. For Dennett, there are gradations in terms of the
ability of organisms to select, habitualize, or dehabitualize their behaviors. Second,
Dennett’s theory highlights how greater degrees of mentality can emerge by way of
adaptation and natural selection. Dennett tracks the evolution of mentality in incre-
mental stages from what he calls “Darwinian creatures” (i.e., organisms without
central nervous systems, with little going on in the way of mentality, learning, or
“neural buzz” (Ginsburg and Jablonka ib., p. 406), as in Aristotle’s “vegetative-
souled” creatures, e.g., single-celled microorganisms, plants, fungi, sponges) to
“Skinnerian creatures” (i.e., organisms with central nervous systems beholden to
entrenched behavioral habit, but also of conditioned behavior, being capable of
learning by way of trial and error, pain and pleasure, e.g., worms, crabs, insects,
ﬁsh, frog) to “Popperian creatures” (i.e., organisms that have, to some degree, have a
capacity to pre-select behaviors from among recalled alternatives, potentially
eliminating at the outset those that will cause the creature harm/death, e.g.,
mammals, birds, but also some cephalopods) to “Gregorian creatures” (i.e.,
organisms with “mental tools” [i.e., the Lorenzian, evolutionary neo-Kantian a priori
concepts of the understanding; symbolic language; e.g., human beings], and a
mature degree of “look ahead” (i.e., the ability to “see beyond the present” and to
anticipate future events on the basis of the uniformity of the past). While “Gregorian
creatures” are “sensitive-souled” from an Aristotelian point of view, they are not
merely that, as they may proceed toward and/or constitute “rational-souled
creatures.” It is to be noted that Dennett’s divisions between the different types of
creatures are not to be viewed rigidly. Rather, in applying them to the vast diversity
of biota on the planet over the course of evolutionary history, there will be gradations
and overlappings of the categories.
Drawing from a plethora of understandings of consciousness,41 including
Dennett’s, what Ginsburg and Jablonka understand by consciousness is “subjective
experiencing” (Ginsburg and Jablonka 2019, pp. ix–12), namely, having an aware-
ness of self, body, and environment and a capacity for what they call “unlimited
associative learning” (ib, pp. 347–403). For them, the notion of “open-ended” or
“unlimited associative learning” represents a minimal, evolutionary, transition
marker for designating the emergence in organisms of “consciousness.” The notion
of “unlimited associative learning” is said to adequately represent what capacity is
logically sufﬁcient and necessary for accepting the presence of the overlapping
hallmarks that most theorists would associate with basic “conscious experience” in
feeling animals (e.g., subjective awareness, discriminative awareness of objects,
41Given that there is a vast plethora of different conceptions of consciousness that have been
advanced and at least on ﬁrst consideration it would seem preposterous to attribute “consciousness”
to the creatures of the Burgess Shale (e.g., Opabinia, Anomalocaris, Wiwaxia, Pikaia gracilens), it
might better be qualiﬁed that there are various gradations of mentality, ranging from physical
feelings to consciousness, of which consciousness involves a “high level” of mentality (given the
intensity of operations of selectivity, division, and negation, with reference to “mind tools,” which
characterizes the cognitive awareness of human beings).
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
75

mental differentiation of body from other objects, integration of information given
by perception, selective attention, awareness of the “internal-external situation,”
agency).42 For Ginsburg and Jablonka, consciousness qua “unlimited associative
learning” is “open-ended learning that enables an organism to ascribe motivational
value to a compound stimulus or action and use it as a basis for future learning”
(Ginsburg and Jablonka 2019, p. 35; p. 191). It is a capacity which allows for the
possibility of “open-ended behavioral adjustments” (ib, p. 225). Through it, they
maintain that both the range and “the number of associations among stimuli and the
number of possible reinforced actions that can be generated are practically limitless”
(ib, p. 347). A crucial point for them is that “inherent in the notion of associative
learning is the assumption that the reinforcement of new behavior depends on
internal evaluation” (Ginsburg and Jablonka 2007, p. 232), whether this involves
“Skinnerian”
habit
formation
through
conditioning
or
more
sophisticated
“Popperian” pre-selection of behavior from among alternatives.
Ginsburg and Jablonka suggest that unlimited associative learning is present
today “in most vertebrates, some cephalopod molluscs (. . . octopods, squids, and
cuttleﬁsh) and some arthropods (including honey bees and fruit ﬂies),” although they
recognize that with more research it may be found that “the distribution of unlimited
associative learning may be broader than currently assumed” (Birch et al. 2020,
p. 11). However, they point to the evolutionary transition from “Darwinian
creatures” with limited experience to those with “limited” and “unlimited associative
learning” (e.g., of “Skinnerian” and “Popperian creatures,” respectively), the latter
especially in arthropods and vertebrates, as a key driver of the Cambrian explosion.
One assumption here is that if “unlimited associative learning” is present in these
animal groups today, and this is partly responsible for their forms, then it should
have been present (at least more rudimentarily) at the time of the emergence of their
stem groups and earliest ancestors (i.e., in the Cambrian period), for example, with
the creatures of the Burgess Shale which included ancestors of today’s mollusks,
arthropods, and vertebrates. For Ginsburg and Jablonka, “associative learning, both
limited and unlimited did not just originate in the Cambrian explosion, but was one
of the major driving forces behind that explosion” (ib, p. 12), their theses further
suggesting that the Cambrian explosion was not just one of organismic form but, at
the same time, an explosion in terms of the cognitive and behavioral capacities of
organisms.
Ginsburg and Jablonka hypothesize that the evolution of the Cambrian bilaterians
may initially have been spurred on by an open range of ecological niches that was
made possible by the co-existence of sessile Ediacaran organisms living on the ocean
ﬂoor. These organisms are purported to have provided “organic carbon resource
heterogeneity that rendered increased motility and burrowing beneﬁcial” (Ginsburg
and Jablonka 2019, p. 415), leading to an increase in body sizes, larger muscle ﬁelds,
and larger sensory organs. The (mostly) benthic existence of pre-Cambrian
42Simona Ginsburg and Eva Jablonka, “The Transition to Experiencing: II. The Evolution of
Associative Learning Based on Feelings,” Biological Theory 2.3 (2007), 242, their qualiﬁcation.
76
A. C. Scarfe

organisms gave way to a “world of burrowing and swimming creatures,” (ib) in
which numerous ecological opportunities opened up. This transition required the
evolution of “a throughput gut, muscles, an internal or external skeleton, and a
central nervous system that could coordinate internal movements and locomotion”
(ib), as well as regulating development, maintaining the constancy of the internal
milieu, connecting neural circuitry, providing a condition for the possibility of
experiential feeling (of pain and pleasure), and directing adaptive behavior. But,
for them, it was the emergence of various heightening gradations of learning from
prior ones (i.e., from non-associative learning, to limited associative learning, to
unlimited associative learning) that chieﬂy promoted the Cambrian morphological
explosion. As they describe, in the Cambrian world, “a whole orchestra of neural
circuits started the great symphony of intensely active, highly interactive, and
competitive animal life” (ib, p. 407), and led to a transition in the living between
merely “reproductive teleological system(s)” to “new teleological systems” that had
“consciousness,” “subjectively felt experiences,” and which could develop novel
behavioral strategies with which to fulﬁll their biological “needs” (Ginsburg and
Jablonka 2015, p. 59), including the agential ability to select among potentialities for
action.
Citing the Baldwin effect as well as West-Eberhard’s (2003) notions of “morpho-
logical, physiological, and behavioral plasticity” and “genetic accommodation”
(Ginsburg and Jablonka 2019, pp. 417–421), in the context of describing the
competition that must have transpired between predators and predators, predators
and prey, and prey and prey, Ginsburg and Jablonka suggest that organisms that
animals with capacities for associative learning had a selective advantage over those
that did not: being able to adapt to a host of environments and to use new resources,
and being more successful in predation and/or in escape. They state:
organisms that could learn ﬂexibly by association had an enormous selective advantage.
They could associate many new stimuli with old ones and many new acts with outcomes.
They therefore had an increased capacity to discriminate and could anticipate the effects of
environmental change and their own actions. Their ability to adapt ontogenetically to a
variety of environments and to use new resources increased dramatically. These onto-genetic
adaptations determined where animals looked for food and protection, how they sought
mates and handled food, how they reacted to predation, and so on. They were fundamental to
the construction of the niches that animals and their off-spring inhabited . . . . For example,
an animal that learned that food sources are available in a particular area tended to stay and
reproduce there; an animal that learned that a hole in a rock affords protection against
predators tended to hide in holes, and was likely to reproduce in or near them. Such
behaviors introduce the offspring to the same learning environment and learning
opportunities, and may lead to the genetic accommodation of any physiological, neurologi-
cal, or morphological feature that enables more effective adaptation to this learning environ-
ment (including more sophisticated or more efﬁcient learning ability). The explosion of new
behaviors was therefore accompanied by an explosion of new congruent morphologies,
which were probably based on regulatory modiﬁcations of genes in the existing develop-
mental networks. (Ginsburg and Eva Jablonka 2007, p. 240).
The results were organisms with “new body plans” as well as “various types of
rigid skeletons, protective shells, armored plates and spines, claws, and striking and
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
77

efﬁcient mouthparts” (Ginsburg and Jablonka 2019, p. 407), including in such
wondrous organismic forms like those appearing to belong to Burgess Shale
creatures such as Anomalocaris, Opabinia, Sanctacaris, and Sidneyia, among
predators, whereas other creatures like the small ﬁlter-feeder, ﬁsh-like vertebrates,
Haikouichthys and Metaspriggina, “swam hurriedly in the Cambrian seas to escape
the arthropod predators, and the members of other phyla evolved ways of camouﬂag-
ing and protecting themselves” (ib, p. 408). Ginsburg and Jablonka claim that the
sensory apparatuses of organisms (e.g., eyes, mouths, touch sensitivity) were also
enhanced by way of the novel modes of interaction among organisms (e.g., predators
and prey) that were promoted by associative learning. The morphological arms race
was also a competition in terms of cognitive ability, learning, and behavioral
plasticity. They state:
in addition to directing the morphological and behavioral evolution of the lineage in which it
evolved, learning had effects on other species’ evolution, because learning in one animal can
exert strong selection pressure on the organisms with which it interacts. For example, as the
learning ability of a predator species improves, there is strong selection for morphological
and physiological adaptations (such as protective hard parts and escape reactions) in its prey
species, and also for the prey’s ability to learn. Consequently, not only did associative
learning lead to the radiation of the group in which it emerged, it also probably led to
learning-guided morphological co-evolution and a learning arms race in interacting species
(Ginsburg and Jablonka 2007, p. 240).
In this sense, the ability to learn is also an adaptive trait, which, of course, requires
memory stemming from sophisticated neural functioning and/or brain structures, and
some interpretations of the Baldwin effect focus almost exclusively on the ampliﬁ-
cation of the organism’s capacity to learn. Ginsburg and Jablonka go on to argue that
the competitive race of learning leads to overlearning and stress which necessitated
the adaptation of a homeostatic stress response.43
Overall, for Ginburg and Jablonka, the presence of associative learning, by which
organisms may exploit new resources in the environment, settle into new ecological
niches, and become more effective predators, more evasive prey, and/or more
selective mates, is a mark of behavioral and developmental plasticity which can
potentially generate adaptive and phenotypic novelty. In their view, the emergence
of associative learning and especially of unlimited associated learning in some
organisms promoted an intensiﬁcation of selection pressures on other organisms.
The competition that was spurred on by the emergence of associative learning and its
reﬁnement is, for them, what primarily drove the dramatic diversiﬁcation of
organisms during the Cambrian period (Birch et al. 2020, p. 12).
43This claim has been criticized by John Mallatt in “Unlimited Associative Learning and Con-
sciousness: Further Support and Some Caveats About a Link to Stress,” Biology and Philosophy
36.22 (2021), 3–4.
78
A. C. Scarfe

3.7
Embodying the Baldwin Effect: Complementing Ginsburg
and Jablonka’s Cognitive-Behavioral and/or
Learning-Based Account of the Cambrian Explosion
with the Thompsonian Approach—A Hypothetical
Scenario Involving Ottoia prolifica and the Hyolith,
Haplophrentis)
In this section, I shall show how Thompson’s emphasis on physical forces and
mechanical efﬁciency can help to complement Ginsburg and Jablonka’s account of
the production of novel physiological structures and morphologies in the Cambrian
explosion by way of the emergence of consciousness, including learning new
behaviors. From a Thompsonian perspective, there is a need to “embody the
Baldwin effect,” so to speak, by placing more emphasis on the physical side of
things within cognitive and behavioral accounts of morphogenesis. After all,
“Skinnerian,” “Popperian,” and “Gregorian” creatures are also physical creatures,
the so-called more sophisticated ones still retaining basic properties of the former
categories (e.g., “Darwinian creatures”), and in a parallel fashion, for example, to
some extent, the creatures of the Burgess Shale would have shared with their earlier
Ediacaran counterparts the element of being molded by physical factors (where
highly integrated genetic programming and developmental processes as well as
selectionist explanation do not apply to the same degree) (see Newman et al.
2006). Learned behaviors and strategies like scavenging, seizing prey without
being reciprocally harmed by their defenses, detecting and ﬂeeing from predators,
burrowing in marine sediment, hiding in holes, and swimming (as “consequences of
the evolution of associative learning” (Ginsburg and Jablonka 2007, p. 240) require
morphologies that “ﬁt,” at least minimally, with the environment, and that produce
the physical forces that are requisite to perform them in the particular context. For
instance, in order to burrow into muddy sediment so as to avoid epibenthic predators
in a minimal fashion, an organism’s appendages must have sufﬁcient and coordi-
nated digging or thrust power to carry this out and its bodily form as a whole must
not present undue physical obstruction. Otherwise, the possibility of even minimal
burrowing activity is closed or inoperative. Furthermore, there are limits as to the
range of ecological niches that may be efﬁciently exploited as well as limits to the
physiological energies of organisms as they attempt to take advantage of them.
As in the Baldwin effect, over evolutionary time, morphologies that provide the
conditions for the possibility of the organism performing a requisite novel good trick
will be selected for, and the evolution of the species will be canalized toward those
which amplify the ability of the organism to perform them. Habitualized good tricks
may only go so far in dealing with the exigencies of changing environments. And it
is the overall phenotypic plasticity of the organism, its physicality included, that will
help to determine its ﬁtness. At the same time, evolutionary trade-offs must be made:
an aquatic organism that has developed a morphology like a “Swiss army knife” may
be limited in terms of its hydrodynamism, or one that must constantly exapt its
existing appendages to new required functions will impede spontaneity in its perfor-
mance of requisite behaviors. On the one hand, as is aptly shown by the Baldwin
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
79

effect generally as well as by Ginsburg and Jablonka, the organism’s degree of
mentality qua associative learning and the generation of novel behavioral selections
both promote and constrain what physiological and/or morphological novelties will
emerge. However, on the other (Thompsonian) hand, behavioral innovation by way
of associative learning is both enabled and constrained by the intrinsic and extrinsic
physical forces in play in the performance of the behavior as well as by the
organism’s overall morphology, its physiological structures, and their mechanical
“ﬁtting” with the environment, including the objects and other organisms interacted
with therein. In other terms, although behavioral innovation can canalize morpho-
logical change in evolution, behavioral innovation is enabled, largely determined,
limited, and canalized by what is physically possible, in the interaction of the
organism with a speciﬁc morphology and the given environment. As such, from a
Thompsonian orientation, Ginsburg and Jablonka’s use of the term “unlimited
associative learning” as a marker for consciousness can be said to be nebulous in
this regard, and the “open-endedness” of what is meant requires further qualiﬁcation.
Indeed, other commentators44 have for more clariﬁcation about the meaning of
this term (although not explicitly on these Thompsonian lines). While Ginsburg and
Jablonka do admit that while the behavioral possibilities in relation to exploratory
activities involving “unlimited associative learning” are “sufﬁciently open-ended
that there is no serious prospect of all the possible associative links” being exhausted
by an organism over the course of its realistic lifespan, unlimited associative learning
is “not . . . entirely free of constraint” (Birch et al. 2020, p. 8).45 That said, they do
not specify what factors present constraints on the organism’s generation and
performance of good tricks as well as on the range of behavioral novelties that
may be entertained. Surely, what they call “unlimited” associative learning is, to
some extent, limited to what is physically possible for the organism, which canalizes
behavioral innovation. Again, Thompson’s notion of “mechanical efﬁciency” can be
said to point to the notion that physical forces constrain what good tricks are
operative and which are not, providing positive or negative feedback on the
behaviors (burrowing, attacking prey, swimming) being entertained and/or
performed by the organism. So, from a Thompsonian perspective, what Ginsburg
and Jablonka putatively call “unlimited associative learning” is not truly “unlim-
ited.” Rather, the actionable content of so-called unlimited associative learning and
behavioral selection is enabled, entrained, and constrained by way of physical forces
and the requirements of mechanical efﬁciency as regards the organism’s physiologi-
cal structures. Hence, synthesizing the Baldwin effect and Ginsburg and Jablonka’s
emphasis on behavioral innovation together with Thompson’s physico-mathematical
44For example, see Mallatt, “Unlimited Associative Learning and Consciousness,” 21–22.
45Also see Ginsburg and Jablonka, “The Teleological Transitions in Evolution,” where they state
“there are, of course, many constraints on unlimited associative learning in any learning animal
(including humans), but nevertheless, the number of possible learned associations is vast, and
learning-based plasticity is never fully exhausted” (59).
80
A. C. Scarfe

orientation, it can be said that both physical forces and behavioral innovation are to
be viewed as cooperating efﬁcient causes of morphogenesis.
While providing a wealth of insight and detail, Ginsburg and Jablonka do not
provide many concrete examples of detailed, plausible scenarios of behavioral
innovation in Cambrian times generated by (unlimited) associated learning leading
to morphogenesis. However hypothetical such scenarios would be (given that the
actual behavior of the Cambrian organisms in question can only be interpreted and
reconstructed on the basis of physical fossil evidence with reference to the behavior
of similar modern organisms), such examples would go a long way to demonstrate
the soundness of their theories. In carrying out such “speculative ethological”
interpretations of cognitive- and/or behaviorally induced evolution in Cambrian
fauna, special care would be required not to interpret such examples as ﬁxed,
representative “stand-ins,” eliminating all difference, for the behaviors of the
organisms in question. And it would be best that such examples be based on the
analytical and interpretive study of Cambrian fossils by paleontologists.
Consistent with the theses advanced by Ginsburg and Jablonka concerning the
causes of the Cambrian explosion, Vannier and Chen (2005) have provided evidence
for the notion that “the burst of anatomical innovations (new body plans) . . . was
accompanied by the rapid development of new feeding strategies and by an unprec-
edented expansion of ecological interactions (prey–predator relationships) (Vannier
and Chen 2005, p. 3). Speciﬁcally, they chart out a range of predator–prey
interactions among diverse Cambrian fauna at various levels of the water column,
ranging from endobenthic predators (e.g., Ottoia proliﬁca), through meiobenthic
prey (e.g., Ercaia) and epibenthic predators (e.g., Naraoia) and prey (e.g., hyoliths,
trilobites), to midwater predators (e.g., Anomalocaris) and prey.
One (at least partly) endobenthic middle-to-upper Cambrian Burgess Shale crea-
ture
was
the
tube-shaped,
bilateral,
radially
symmetrical,
non-segmented,
“cycloneuralian” worm, Ottoia proliﬁca. Ottoia proliﬁca represents one of the
more widespread of Cambrian fossils, and it resembles some priapulids of today
(e.g., Priapulus caudatus). Ottoia was on average eight centimeters in length, with
an eversible and retractable proboscis at one end, and a trunk “marked by cuticular
annulations” (Banta and Rice 1976, p. 84) encasing a long digestive tract of around
two-to-ﬁve millimeters in diameter. Ottoia’s particular morphology appears “suit-
able for a large metazoan moving through a uniform environment like mud than
crawling over the substrate” (ib, p. 84). Ottoia had about twenty-ﬁve rows of hooks
on its proboscis, a battery of teeth around its mouth (at the end of the proboscis). And
lining its “pharynx”46 (which could be “outside” or “inside” depending on whether
the proboscis was everted or introverted) there was another forty or so more rings of
teeth, each ring containing as many as twenty teeth. These presumably assisted in
scraping soft material in the process of feeding. Ottoia had bands of teeth of various
46Banta and Rice suggest that “there is no agreement as to the proper term for this organ; we shall
refer to it as a “pharynx” (“A Restudy of the Middle Cambrian Burgess Shale Fossil Worm, Ottoia
Proliﬁca,” 88).
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
81

distinct types, progressively decreasing in size. These ranged from “conical spines
fringed with accessory denticles,” to “quincunxially” patterned, widely-based, broad
spines, to “edentate cones” (Smith et al. 2015, pp. 14–16). A number of Ottoia’s
teeth “project[ed] inwards and downwards” (assuming an introverted proboscis)
such that “if the prey were to struggle free when it was swallowed, it [would] impale
itself against these teeth” (Conway Morris 1998, p. 69).47
Ottoia had up to half a dozen sickle-shaped spines on its tail, which may have
provided an anchor for its body in its burrow and a means of defense for its anterior.
For part of its time, Ottoia burrowed powerfully into the muddy sea-ﬂoor by way of
its proboscis and the “peristaltic” movement of the muscles of its body wall. Ottoia’s
burrowing would have involved the eversion of its proboscis, pushing its trunk
backward, and requiring it to have to wedge itself into the sediment (with the use of
its proboscis hooks), followed by retracting the proboscis. Feeding would also have
involved the partial eversion of its proboscis. Ottoia was “basically a large sac, ﬁlled
with bodily ﬂuid [that was] . . . effectively incompressible,” its proboscis everting
“by way of hydrostatic pressure” (Conway Morris ib., p. 69). Anchored in a curved
U-like position in a similarly shaped burrow, its proboscis at one end of the burrow
would be “ready to shoot out and capture” (Foster 2014, p. 272) epibenthic prey. Its
anus at the other end would presumably enable the ejection of fecal elements safely
outside of the burrow while awaiting prey. Ottoia had a 0.3-millimeter-wide longi-
tudinal nerve cord running ventrally down the inside of its bellied trunk, with regular
ganglia (Conway Morris 1977, p. 27). However, Ottoia lacked complex sensory
organs and awareness of prey was probably based on chemoreceptors that are found
in modern priapulids (Vannier 2012, p. 12). Ottoia was probably “a generalist,”
namely, a scavenger-predator ﬂexible in its behavioral strategies, which displays “a
high level of trophic complexity” that has no precedent in prior geological eras, and
“foreshadows modern-style ecosystems” (ib, p. 16).
Of the specimens of Ottoia proliﬁca collected, approximately twenty percent of
these fossils were found to have preserved gut contents, and of these, almost half of
the identiﬁable contents were found to be one or several hyoliths, such as
Haplophrentis carinatus, (ib pp. 6–7) a small, semi-sessile, epibenthic organism.
Haplophrentis’ body was encased in a ten-millimeter-long (on average), bilaterally
symmetrical, conelike, aragonite shell (or conch), which owed its production to the
biomineral secretion of calcium carbonate (in a similar fashion to a clam or a snail).
The shell was pointed at its tip, ﬂat on the bottom, with a small aperture lid or
operculum at its front. Similar to the shape of a crossbow, two curved, “oarlike”
(Briggs et al. 1994, p. 113), “stiltlike,” or “strutlike,” appendages, named “helens”
(by Charles Walcott after his daughter), protruded laterally from the aperture on the
hyolith’s shell. Other hyoliths did not have these appendages (Liu et al. 2020,
p. 453). As for Haplophrentis, these rigid, bent, skeletal, biomineralized
appendages, perhaps three-to-four millimeters in length, could be rotated ventrally
47Banta and Rice report that “the teeth are directed posteriorly” (88). They appear to be assuming a
retracted proboscis. See their Figure 30 on page 88.
82
A. C. Scarfe

about one-hundred-and-eighty degrees. It is thought that these helped the organism
to move itself (“inefﬁciently” (Briggs et al. 1994, p. 113)) along the top of soft,
muddy, ocean ﬂoor as it searched for small organic matter. Haplophrentis also had a
small tentaculate band protruding out of the bottom of its operculum and a protrusi-
ble “pharyngeal” organ (Moysiuk et al. 2007, p. 394). Hyoliths were a major food
resource for Ottoia, but only one of many (e.g., other brachiopods, small trilobites,
and decaying wiwaxiids and sidneyians being some of the others), it being able to
adapt its diet to circumstance. However, neither Ottoia’s “pharyngeal” teeth could
macerate the conch shells of the hyoliths, nor could Ottoia digest them chemically
along with the soft matter. Along with sediment, the conches passed through Ottoia.
And presumably, the helens could be disarticulated, but also not digested by Ottoia.
Of the hundreds of Ottoia fossil specimens found with one or more hyolith
impressed in their guts, almost eighty percent of them were oriented such that the
apertures of their shells were pointed toward the posterior end of the Ottoia’s gut, in
a “head down” fashion (Vannier 2012, p. 7). This orientation allegedly pervaded the
entire digestion process. The nearly “unidirectional orientation” of the hyoliths in
Ottoia’s gut indicates that they were “caught preferentially by one side,”48 namely,
“grasped and drawn into the gut by their anterior side, where they probably offered a
stronger grip point to the pharyngeal teeth of Ottoia” (Vannier 2012, p. 7, my
emphasis). It was only on rare occasion that the helens of the digested hyoliths
were found intact, such that most “became partly disarticulated as they entered the
digestive tract of the worm (e.g., by the muscular contractions of the pharynx)” (ib).
With these descriptions of Ottoia and Haplophrentis in mind, Conway Morris
(1998) has provided a dramatic, hypothetical re-enactment of the predator–prey
interaction between Ottoia and Haplophrentis, which asserts an explanation for
the nearly uniform orientation of the hyoliths in the Ottoia’s narrow, muscular gut,
as follows:
the hyoliths browse peacefully on the surface of the sediment, seeking out organic detritus.
But now close to a group of these hyoliths the sediment has begun to move slightly. What
happens next is very fast. Suddenly the snout of an Ottoia rears out of the sediment, a hyolith
is seized and quickly swallowed. . . . Three times the group is attacked before Ottoia sinks
back into the mud. Each time a hyolith is swallowed in the same fashion, the priapulid
grabbing the front end ﬁrst. Why does Ottoia choose to attack this way round? Consider the
curved struts (or “helens”) sticking out of the hyolith. . . . These struts point backwards, and
if the Ottoia swallowed the hyolith from the other direction there would be a danger of the
prey becoming jammed in the gut of the priapulid. (Conway Morris, 1998, p. 72, my italics
for emphasis, my addition for clarity in brackets)49
48Vannier and Chen, “Early Cambrian Food Chain,” p. 22, my emphasis. Also see Conway Morris,
who states (in “Fossil Priapulid Worms”) that the hyoliths “were eaten alive for food rather than
ingested by chance; whilst the preferred orientation indicates that O. proliﬁca chose the method of
ingestion, i.e., the hyolithids were hunted” (26, my emphases).
49Vannier (2012) indicates incomplete agreement with some elements of Morris’ claims, and the
manner of “swallowing” the hyoliths may just be a function of their own direction of movement,
while Conway Morris asserts that “Ottoia is a voracious predator. Sometimes it will emerge out of
the sediment to seize shellﬁsh known as brachiopods. But Ottoia also hunts for food as it burrows
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
83

It should be noted that Conway Morris’ (1998) hypothetical scenario predates
some important revelations that were made about Ottoia [e.g., see Smith, Harvey,
and Butterﬁeld (2015) in relation to its teeth] and Haplophrentis (e.g., about the
nature of the possibilities as regards the orientation of its “helens” and of its
tentaculate band), and it should deﬁnitely be taken with a “grain of salt.” That
said, taken “as is,” in it, Ottoia is alleged to have some degree of valuative-selective
agency in that it is said to have “preferences,” “choices” (as per the language
employed by researchers), and/or to make behavioral selections that it applies in a
“downward causal” fashion (coinciding with Ginsburg and Jablonka’s theses
concerning associative learning). However, Morris’ scenario points explicitly to
the importance of the physical context, as in Thompson’s physico-mathematical
approach to the study of morphogenesis. For the putative behavioral strategy of
Ottoia to tend to seize hyoliths from the front was, from Morris’ account, predicated
on the physico-geometrical form of the hyolith’s conch and “oarlike helens,” in
relation to Ottoia’s morphology (i.e., with its tubular, digestive tract, and also the
inward and downward facing teeth [when the proboscis is introverted]). Ottoia’s
pre-selection of this behavior was, in all likelihood, based on (associative) learning
from “problematic” episodes in its past experience of feeding speciﬁcally on
Haplophrentis (i.e., the hyolith getting caught in the Ottoia’s narrow gut or on its
teeth [in a fashion much like putting a crossbow on the hooked prongs of a wall
storage rack] due to its obstructive helens). Presumably, it would not matter which
way prey—other than Haplophrentis (and/or those which did not have such obstruc-
tive “helens” as part of their anatomy)—were to be seized by Ottoia. Admittedly,
Conway Morris’ scenario depends on an unconﬁrmed hypothesis that the
Haplophrentis’ helens could pose a physical obstruction to the digestive apparatus
of the Ottoia, and there could be other explanations for why the hyoliths were seized,
swallowed, and digested in “head-ﬁrst” fashion. Nevertheless, pointing to the
importance of the Thompsonian outlook in cognitive, behavioral, and/or learning-
based accounts of morphogenesis and evolution, based on it, Ottoia’s behavioral
innovation and/or selection was entrained and/or canalized by the physico-
geometrical constraints posed by the Haplophrentis’ obstructive helens and conch
in relation to the morphology of its digestive tract and the pointing direction of its
“pharyngeal” teeth.
Finally, following the logic of the Baldwin effect, one might speculate that had
diverse food sources not been available to the Ottoia population, such that, for
example, its diet was substantially narrowed down to Haplophrentis (with its
obstructive helens) then in light of Ottoia’s habitualization of the good trick of
through the mud. It readily consumes soft-bodied prey, and will even attack weaker individuals of
its own species. Ottoia the predator is also a cannibal.” Vannier (2012) has not veriﬁed that Ottoia
was a cannibal, suggesting that this conclusion can only be drawn from a single poorly preserved
specimen (“Gut Contents as Direct Indicators,” 10). Briggs et al. (1994) had suggested that one
specimen involved the proboscis of another Ottoia in its gut (The Fossils of the Burgess Shale, 122),
but Vannier asserts that it is not known whether Ottoia was more of a scavenger than a predator
(“Gut Contents as Direct Indicators,” 14).
84
A. C. Scarfe

seizing its prey from the front, natural selection would have favored a morphology,
including any physiological features, that would assist in this task. For example,
adaptive features (e.g., proboscis, mouth, and/or gut shapes) that were more mechan-
ically efﬁcient, namely, more able to muster up the physical forces required to seize
and to swallow such prey in such a manner, or muscles, tooth shapes, and teeth
pointing in directions that could help Ottoia to reorient the hyolith in the “pharynx”
after being swallowed, if necessary, would be selected for, thereby channeling the
physiological transformation of Ottoia in the direction of the good trick over
evolutionary time.50
3.8
Conclusion: The Importance of D’Arcy Thompson’s
Physico-Mathematical Approach to the Study
of Morphogenesis—Teleology and Mechanism
The preceding analysis has unpacked some of the Aristotelian and Kantian
undercurrents of D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “physico-mathematical” approach
to morphogenesis and evolution as well as his critiques of the vitalism, selectionism,
and geneticism of his time, which may serve to place into question various promi-
nent characterizations of his biological thought as “eclectic,” “unorthodox,” etc.. . . .
And it has attempted to show the continuing importance of Thompson’s approach
today, as representing a key conceptual “lens” for researchers to look through in the
context of a holistic, multi-level, multi-perspectival, and multi-dimensional orienta-
tion as regard the study of life. Pointing to its application in the context of
supplementing cognitive-behavioral and/or learning-based explanations of morpho-
genesis and evolution (with all of their “apparently” teleological implications), such
as that represented by the Baldwinian theory of organic selection and/or that of
Ginsburg and Jablonka (2019), the Thompsonian approach positively assists us to
“keep one eye on” the physical dimension within the physical-behavioral nexus that
is involved in organismic agency. Furthermore, by way of its emphasis on the
entrainment and/or the canalizing constraints posed by physical forces in relation
to the cognitive-behavioral selections of organisms (“the teloi of which” according
to Ginsburg and Jablonka “are the fulﬁllments of feelings, needs, and desires”
(Ginsburg and Jablonka 2015, p. 59)), Thompson’s “physico-mathematical”
approach may be seen, in turn, to assist in resolving the tension between “the
teleological” and “the mechanistic” as regards what concepts are most proper to
the study of self-organization and of life, as we move (ongoingly) toward an
extended evolutionary synthesis and beyond.
50Additional clues as to the evolution of Ottoia may come from comparisons of Ottoia proliﬁca and
Ottoia tricuspida (such as in Smith et al. 2015) who compare the teeth of specimens and suggest that
these varieties may be reliably distinguished on this basis) as well as Ottoia with the morphologies
of various Cambrian priapulids (e.g., Fieldia, Louisella, Ancalagon, and Selkirkia). Further insights
may issue from further comparisons of the morphologies of Ottoia, fossils of earlier priapulids, or
the anatomies of modern priapulids.
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
85

References
Aristotle (1910) The history of animals translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson. In: Smith JA,
Ross WD (eds) The works of Aristotle, vol IV. Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK
Baldwin JM (1896) A new factor in evolution. Am Nat 30(441–457):536–554
Baldwin JM (1902) Development and evolution: including psychophysical evolution, evolution by
Orthoplasy, and the theory of genetic modes (reprinted by Elibron Classics, 2005). The
Macmillan Company, New York
Banta WC, Rice ME (1976) A restudy of the middle Cambrian burgess shale fossil worm, Ottoia
Proliﬁca. Proceedings of the First International Symposium on the Biology of the Sipincula, and
Echiura 2:79–90
Bard JBL (2008) Waddington’s legacy to developmental theoretical biology. Biol Theory 3(3):
188–197
Barnes J (ed) (1984) The complete works of Aristotle, vol 1–2. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ
Bartholomew GA, Bennett AF, Dawson WR (1976) Swimming, diving and lactate production of
the marine Iguana, Amblyrhynchus cristatus. Copeia 4:709–720
Birch J, Ginsburg S, Jablonka E (2020) Unlimited associative learning and the origins of conscious-
ness: a primer and some predictions. Biol Philos 35:1–23
Briggs DEG, Fortey RA (2005) Wonderful strife: systematics, stem groups, and the phylogenetic
signal of the Cambrian radiation. Paleobiology 31(2):94–112
Briggs DEG, Erwin DH, Collier FJ (1994) The fossils of the burgess shale. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, DC
Budd GE, Jensen S (2000) A critical reappraisal of the fossil record of the Bilaterian phyla. Biol Rev
75(2):253–295
Conway Morris S (1977) Fossil Priapulid Worms. Spec Papers Palaeontol 20:1–160
Conway Morris S (1998) The crucible of creation: the burgess shale and the rise of animals. Oxford
University Press, New York
Crick F (1970) The central dogma of molecular biology. Nature 227:561–563
Dawkins R (2005) The Turtle’s tale. The Guardian (February 26th). https://www.theguardian.com/
books/2005/feb/26/scienceandnature.evolution
Dawkins R (2015) Brief candle in the dark: my life in science. Harper Collins, New York
de Gennes P-G (1992) Soft matter. Science 256:495–497
Dennett D (1995) Darwin’s dangerous idea: evolution and the meanings of life. Simon & Schuster,
New York
Descartes R (1988) Principles of philosophy. In: Selected philosophical writings, translated by John
Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch, part II, §20–21. Cambridge University
Press, New York, pp 160–222
Dobell C (1949) D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson (obituary). Biogr Mem Fellows R Soc 6(18):
599–617
Enquist BJ, Stark SC (2007) Follow Thompson’s map to turn biology from a ‘science’ into a
‘science. Nature 446(5):611
Esposito M (2011) Between holism and reductionism: organismic inheritance and the neo-Kantian
biological tradition in Britain and the USA, 1890–1940 (Ph.D. Thesis). University of Leeds, UK
Esposito M (2013) Romantic biology, 1890–1945. Routledge, New York
Esposito M (2014) Problematic idiosyncrasies’: rediscovering the historical context of D’Arcy
Wentworth Thompson’s science of form. Sci Context 27(1):79–107
Fisher M (2014) Kant’s theory of biology and research on nature in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. In: Goy I, Watkins E (eds) Kant’s theory of biology. De Gruyter, Boston, MA, pp
25–42
Foster J (2014) Cambrian Ocean world: ancient sea life of North America. Indiana University Press,
Bloomington
86
A. C. Scarfe

Ginsburg S, Jablonka E (2007) The transition to experiencing: II. The evolution of associative
learning based on feelings. Biol Theory 2, 3:231–243
Ginsburg S, Jablonka E (2015) The teleological transitions in evolution: a Gántian view. J Theor
Biol 381:55–60
Ginsburg S, Jablonka E (2019) The evolution of the sensitive soul: learning and the origins of
consciousness. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Gould SJ (1971) D’Arcy Thompson and the Science of Form. New Lit Hist 2(2):229–258
Gould SJ (1989) Wonderful life: the burgess shale and the nature of history. W. W. Norton &
Company, New York
Gould SJ, Lewontin R (1979) The spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian paradigm: a critique.
Proc R Soc Lond Biol Sci 205(1161):581–598
Haeckel E (1866) Generelle Morphologie der Organismen: Allgemeine Gründzüge der organischen
Formen-Wissenschaft, mechanisch begründet durch die von Charles Darwin reformierte
Descendenz-Theorie, vol 1. Reimer, Berlin, Germany
Haldane JS, Thompson D’Arcy W, Chalmers PM, Hobhouse LT (1918) Symposium: are physical,
biological and psychological categories irreducible? Proceedings of the Aristotelian society,
supplementary volumes, volume 1: life and ﬁnite individuality. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK
Hegel GWF (1969) Science of logic, translated by A. V. Miller. Humanities Press, London
Hegel GWF (1991) Encyclopaedia logic, translated by T. Geraets, H.S. Harris, and W. A. Suchting.
Hackett Publishing Company, Indianapolis
Hele N (2004) Ernst Haeckel and the morphology of ethics. J Can Hist Assoc 15(1):1–27
Huxley J (1942) Evolution: the modern synthesis (reprinted 2010). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Jonas H (1966, Reprinted 2001) Cybernetics and purpose: a critique. In: The phenomenon of life:
toward a philosophical biology. Northwestern University Press, Evanston, IL, pp 108–134
Kant I (1984) Critique of pure reason, translated and edited by Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood.
New York, Cambridge University Press
Kant I (1997) Prolegomena to any future metaphysics, translated and edited by Gary Hatﬁeld.
Cambridge University Press, New York
Kant I (2000) Critique of the power of judgment, translated by Paul Guyer and Eric Mathews; edited
by Paul Guyer. Cambridge University Press, New York
Kant I (2004) Metaphysical foundations of natural science, translated and edited by Michael
Friedman. Cambridge University Press, New York
Keller EF (2002) Making sense of life: explaining biological development with models, metaphors,
and machines. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Keller EF (2007) A clash of two cultures. Nature 445:603
Levinton JS (2008) The Cambrian explosion: how do we use the evidence? BioScience 58(9):
855–864
Levy EK, Terranova CN (eds) (2021) D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s generative inﬂuences in art,
design, and architecture: from forces to forms. Bloomsbury, London
Liu F et al (2020) Are hyoliths palaeozoic lophophorates? Natl Sci Rev 7:453–469
Lorenz K (2009) Kant’s doctrine of the a priori in light of contemporary biology (1941/1962). In:
Ruse M (ed) Philosophy after Darwin: classic and contemporary readings. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ
Luisi PL (2006) The emergence of life: from chemical origins to synthetic biology. Cambridge
University Press, New York
Mackenzie AG (Librarian) (1987) Index to the correspondence and papers of sir D’Arcy Wentworth
Thompson. St. Andrews University Library, St. Andrews, UK
Mallatt J (2021) Unlimited associative learning and consciousness: further support and some
caveats about a link to stress. Biol Philos 36(22):1–6
Mazur S (2017) “Three dimensions of space’?—D’Arcy Thompson letter to Whitehead. Hufﬁngton
Post. https://www.huffpost.com/entry/three-dimensions-of-space-darcy-thompson-letter_b_
59f040a0e4b00a4ce5a222cd
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
87

Moysiuk J, Smith MR, Caron JB (2007) Hyoliths are Palaeozoic Lophophorates. Nature 541:394–
397
Newman SA (2018) Inherency. In: Nuño de la Rosa L, Muller GB (eds) Evolutionary developmen-
tal biology. Springer, Cham
Newman SA, Bhat R (2009) Dynamical patterning modules: a ‘pattern language’ for development
and evolution of multicellular form. Int J Dev Biol 53:693–705
Newman SA, Linde-Medina M (2013) Physical determinants in the emergence and inheritance of
multicellular form. Biol Theory 8:274–285
Newman SA, Müller GB (2010) Morphological evolution: epigenetic mechanisms. In: Encyclope-
dia of life sciences. Wiley, Chichester, UK
Newman SA, Forgacs G, Müller GB (2006) Before programs: the physical origination of multicel-
lular forms. Int J Dev Biol 50:289–299
Nicholson D (2013) Organisms 6¼ machines. Stud Hist Philos Biol Biomed Sci 44:669–678
Okabe T, Ishida A, Yoshimura J (2019) The uniﬁed rule of phyllotaxis explaining both spiral and
non-spiral arrangements. J R Soc Interface 16:1–7
Portmann A (1990) Essays in philosophical zoology by Adolf Portmann: the living form and the
seeing eye, translated and interpreted by B. Richard Carter. Lewiston, ME, Edwin Mellen Press
Pross A (2012) What is life?: how chemistry becomes biology. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK
Regan T (1983) The case for animal rights. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA
Ruse M (2013) From organisms to mechanism- and halfway back? In: Henning BG, Scarfe AC
(eds) Beyond mechanism: putting life Back into biology. Lexington Books/Rowman and
Littleﬁeld, Lanham, MD
Schadewaldt W (2014) “The Greek concepts of ‘nature’ and technique,” translated by William
Carroll. In: Scharff RC, Dusek V (eds) Philosophy of technology: the technological condition—
an anthology. Wiley, Malden, MA
Schrödinger E (1944, Reprinted 2018) What is life?: the physical aspect of the living cell.
Cambridge University Press, New York
Silverstein J (2021) Panevolutionary theory: why we are wrong about Darwinian theory. Acad Lett
288:1–4
Smith MR, Harvey THP, Butterﬁeld NJ (2015) The macro- and microfossil record of the Cambrian
Priapulid Ottoia. Palaeontology 58:705–721
Swinton J (2004) Watching the daisies grow: Turing and Fibonacci phyllotaxis. In: Teuscher C
(ed) Alan Turing: life and legacy of a great thinker. Springer, Berlin, Germany, pp 477–495
Taylor P (1981) The ethics of respect for nature. Environ Ethics 3:197–218
Thompson D’Arcy W (1911) Magnalia Naturae (the wonderful nature); or, the greater problems of
biology. Science 34(875):417–428
Thompson D’Arcy W (1913) On Aristotle as a biologist with a Prooemion on Herbert Spencer.
Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK. reprinted BiblioLife, LLC, 2019
Thompson D’Arcy W (1915) Morphology and mathematics. Transactions of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh. Williams and Norgate, London
Thompson D’Arcy W (1929) Excess and defect: or the little more and the little less. Mind 38(149):
43–55
Thompson D’Arcy W (1942) On growth and form: the complete revised edition. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK, reprinted Dover Publications, Inc, 1992
Thompson D’Arcy R (1958) D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson: the scholar-naturalist. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, London
Thompson D’Arcy W (1961) On growth and form: abridged edition, edited by John Tyler Bonner.
Cambridge University Press, New York, reprinted 1992
van den Berg H (2014) Kant on proper science: biology in the critical philosophy and the opus
posthumum. Springer, New York
van Speybroeck L (2002) From Epigenesis to epigenetics: the case of C. H. Waddington. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 981:61
88
A. C. Scarfe

Vannier J (2012) Gut contents as direct indicators for trophic relationships in the Cambrian marine
ecosystem. PLoS One 7(12):1–20
Vannier J, Chen J (2005) Early Cambrian food chain: new evidence from fossil aggregates in the
Maotianshan Shale biota, Southwest China. PALAIOS 20(1):3–26
Waddington CH (1961) The nature of life. Athenaeum, New York
Weber BH, Depew DJ (eds) (2003) Evolution and learning: the Baldwin effect reconsidered. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA
Weber A, Varela FJ (2002) Phenomenol Cogn Sci 1(2):97–125. https://doi.org/10.1023/
A:1020368120174
Whitehead AN (1978) Process and reality: corrected edition, edited by David ray grifﬁn and Donald
W. Sherburne. The Free Press, New York
Willmore KE (2012) The body plan concept and its centrality in evo-devo. Evol Educ Outreach 5:
219–230
Wills MA, Richard AF (2000) The shape of life: how much is written in stone? BioEssays 22:1142–
1152
Wolfram S (2021) Are all ﬁsh the same shape if you stretch them? The Victorian tale of on growth
and form. In: Levy EK, Terranova CN (eds) D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s generative
inﬂuences in art, design, and architecture: from forces to forms. Bloomsbury, London, pp 17–34
Woodger JH (1945) On biological transformations. In: Le Gros Clark E, Medawar PB (eds) Essays
on growth and form presented to D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp 95–120
3
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s “Physico-Mathematical” Approach to. . .
89

From Dissipative Structures to Biological
Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
4
Dilip Kondepudi, James Dixon, and Benjamin De Bari
Abstract
In the second half of the twentieth century, it was recognized that systems far
from thermodynamic equilibrium can spontaneously self-organize into structures
that exhibit chemical oscillations, propagating and stationary chemical patterns.
These nonequilibrium structures are called dissipative structures. Rapid develop-
ment of research in this ﬁeld came from the seminal work by the Brussels School
of Thermodynamics under the leadership of Ilya Prigogine. Developments in the
last decade have given us a new perspective on the emergence of organism-like
behavior in non-living systems. It was found that highly complex, organism-like
behavior can spontaneously emerge in dissipative structures. An example is the
formation of a worm-like structure which moves to locations that provide more of
the energy needed to sustain it. General characterization of such complex behav-
ior in terms of rates of entropy production has been formulated. In this chapter,
these recent advances will be reviewed and the relationship between dissipative
structures and biological evolution is discussed.
D. Kondepudi (*)
Department of Chemistry, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC, USA
Center for the Ecological Study of Perception & Action and Department of Psychological Sciences,
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
e-mail: dilip@wfu.edu
J. Dixon
Center for the Ecological Study of Perception & Action and Department of Psychological Sciences,
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
e-mail: james.dixon@uconn.edu
B. De Bari
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, Storrs, CT, USA
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_4
91

We shall come closest to understanding the principles of life if we can discover the principles
according to which life could begin. This is a challenge addressed to the physicist, even if he
calls himself a biophysicist, a biochemist or a molecular biologist. How did life begin,
however, can probably only be understood by appeal to historical evidence (Eigen and
Winkler-Oswatitsch 1992).
Keywords
Self-organization · Dissipative structures · End-directed evolution · Entropy
production · Self-healing · Symmetry-breaking transitions · Biological chiral
asymmetry · Bio-analog systems · Maximum entropy production
4.1
Self-Organization in Non-equilibrium Systems
In physics and chemistry, self-organization is a phenomenon that occurs in systems
that are far from thermodynamic equilibrium. In the 1960s and 1970s, it was realized
that irreversible processes that increase entropy, and thus destroy order, when a
system is at or near thermodynamic equilibrium, can do just the opposite and
spontaneously create order when a system is far from thermodynamic equilibrium.
These ﬁndings generated a ﬂurry of research on self-organizing nonequilibrium
systems (Nicolis and Prigogine 1977; Haken 1977; Vidal and Pacault 1981; Field
and Burger 1985; Epstein and Pojman 1998). This research laid a new path to
address a challenging question in physics: as material process, how could life
originate?
In this chapter, we describe how our current understanding of self-organization in
nonequilibrium systems provides a foundation on which we can begin to extend
physics to address the challenging question: how could life originate and evolve? We
will build a bridge between the language of biology and language of thermodynam-
ics. We will see how some fundamental traits, such as end-directed behavior, self-
healing, and mutations, can be described in thermodynamic terms, as phenomena in
self-organized nonequilibrium systems, called dissipative structures.
4.1.1
Classical and Modern Thermodynamics
Though the reader may be familiar with the basic concepts of thermodynamics and
self-organization, for the sake of completeness, we will begin with a brief review of
modern thermodynamics, which was formulated in the twentieth century.
In its inception, thermodynamics was formulated as a theory of equilibrium
states, with the introduction of the two fundamental laws of thermodynamics, one
governing energy and the other entropy. Transformations in the state of a system
were described and the limitations nature imposed on the possible changes were
clariﬁed: every change in the system can only happen in such a way that the energy is
conserved, a change in the energy of a system compensated exactly by an opposite
92
D. Kondepudi et al.

change in the world exterior to it. And every change can only increase the total
entropy of the system and its exterior. Every process in nature only increased the
entropy of the universe. Energy and Entropy are state functions; they are dependent
only on the current state of the systems, and not on the path that brought it to the
current state. However, in this nineteenth-century classical formulation, changes in
entropy are calculable only for “inﬁnitely slow” reversible processes (also called
quasi-static processes), a concept introduced in the foundational work of Sadi Carnot
(Carnot 1824; Mendoza 1977). For this idealized process, changes in entropy, dS,
are calculable using the equality dS ¼ dQ/T, in which dQ is the heat exchanged with
the system and T its absolute temperature. In reality, transformations in the state of a
system occurred in ﬁnite time due to irreversible processes, for which the classical
formulation could only provide the inequality dS > dQ/T. There was no direct
relationship between irreversible processes and entropy in the classical thermody-
namics. Still, changes in entropy between equilibrium states could be calculated
using the concept of the reversible process: when a system underwent a change from
a state A to state B, in a ﬁnite time due to irreversible processes, the same change
could be realized using a reversible process1 and the change in entropy calculated
using dS ¼ dQ/T (Fig. 4.1). Classical theory did not have a way to make a connection
between irreversible processes and the entropy they generated (Kondepudi and
Prigogine 2015).
Twentieth-century formulation of thermodynamics that originated in the work of
Onsager, De Donder, Prigogine, and others (Onsager 1931; De Donder and Van
Rysselberghe 1936; Prigogine 1947, 1967) relates entropy directly to irreversible
processes that produce entropy. In this formulation, changes in entropy of a system
are expressed as:
Irreversible
A
B
Reversible
Fig. 4.1 In classical
thermodynamics, change in
entropy between equilibrium
states A and B is calculated
using an imaginary, reversible
path along which dS ¼ dQ/T.
The actual change takes place
along an irreversible path
1It was tacitly assumed this was always possible.
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
93

dS ¼ diS þ deS:
ð4:1Þ
In this expression, diS is the entropy produced by irreversible processes within the
system, which according to the second law is always positive, and deS is the
exchange of entropy with the system’s exterior (Fig. 4.2).
diS is directly related to the thermodynamic processes occurring within the system
which are describable in terms of thermodynamic forces and ﬂows. Thermodynamic
forces are gradients of intensive variables X (e.g., temperature and chemical afﬁnity)
divided by temperature, and ﬂows are time derivatives of the corresponding exten-
sive variable J (heat ﬂow and reaction rate, respectively). The entropy production per
unit volume is calculated as the sum of the product of all thermodynamic forces and
ﬂows in the system (Prigogine 1967; De Groot and Mazur 1969; Kondepudi and
Prigogine 2015):
dis
dt ¼ σ ¼
X
i
XiJi:
ð4:2Þ
Here, s is the entropy density, S/V. Flows are driven by forces. Flow of heat
driven by a temperature gradient is an example. Flows are not functions of the forces
alone; ﬂows may depend on other variables. For a given thermodynamic force, ﬂows
can vary due to system properties; the presence or absence of a catalyst in chemical
reactions is an example. Critically, Eq. (4.2) establishes that the entropy is a direct
function of the processes driving changes in a thermodynamic system. The rate at
which entropy is generated can be calculated if the thermodynamic forces and ﬂows
are known.
The second law of thermodynamics is distinctly different from Newtonian
mechanics in two aspects. First, it states that that nature is fundamentally irreversible
diS > 0 
deS 
Fig. 4.2 Changes in entropy
of a system consist of entropy
produced in the system by
irreversible processes, diS,
and entropy exchanges with
the system’s exterior, deS
94
D. Kondepudi et al.

with an arrow of time, in stark contrast to Newtonian mechanics which is time
reversible.2 Second, it predicts the ﬁnal state of a system (the equilibrium state), not
the path the system will take to reach this state; in this way, it portrays nature as “end
directed.” Depending on the nature of the constraints, the second law predicts that
the system will eventually reach a state of maximum entropy, or minimum
Helmholtz or Gibbs energy, but its path to this state or how long it will take to
reach the ultimate state of equilibrium is not speciﬁed. This is in contrast to
Newtonian mechanics which, given the initial conditions and the forces, predicts
the entire path in the future and the past. The second aspect will become signiﬁcant
when we discuss end-directed behavior in non-living dissipative structures that is
analogous to the behavior we see in living organisms.
4.1.2
Self-Organization in Systems Far from Thermodynamic
Equilibrium
When a system is near equilibrium, ﬂows are linear functions of the forces that drive
them. These conditions are termed “the linear regime.” When a system is driven
farther away from equilibrium by ﬂows of matter and/or energy, the relationship
between thermodynamic ﬂows and forces is no longer linear and the system is said
to be in the nonlinear regime. It is in the nonlinear regime that the phenomenon
of self-organization appears. When a system is moved away from equilibrium
through a ﬂow, for instance, beyond a critical value of the ﬂow or a concentration,
the system can make a transition to a self-organized state with an identiﬁable
structure, either spatial, temporal, or spatio-temporal. (For an extensive discussion
of such systems, see Nicolis and Prigogine 1977; Haken 1977; Epstein and Pojman
1998). Chemical oscillations and spiral waves in the well-studied Belousov–
Zhabotinsky (BZ) reaction are examples. Such periodic dissipative structures appear
in living organisms as biochemical oscillation and rhythms (Goldbeter 1996, 2017).
In addition, as predicted by Alan Turing, spatial patterns of varying concentrations
can form (De Kepper et al. 1994) – Turing suggested it as a model for morphogene-
sis. Such structures are generated and maintained by entropy generating irreversible
processes that dissipate free energy. For this reason, they are called dissipative
structures. From the time dissipative structures were discovered it became clear
that living organisms, whose creation and survival depends on ﬂow of matter and
energy, are dissipative structures (Prigogine et al. 1972). As described below,
dissipative structures have general characteristics and properties that can be
recognized as traits that we see in living organisms. In our recent studies, we
discovered that dissipative structures also exhibit end-directed behavior, such as
seeking energy that sustains the structure, thus giving us a ﬁrm foundation for the
notion that living organisms are a class of dissipative structures.
2This distinction is important when we consider the fundamental difference between machines and
organisms (Kondepudi et al. 2017).
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
95

4.1.3
Dissipative Structures
In general terms, evolution is a result of mutation, adaptation, and survival of the
ﬁttest. If organisms are a class of dissipative structures, we need to understand living
organisms on an individual level, as well as their evolution on the species level, in
terms of general features of dissipative structures. Let us note a few general
characteristics of dissipative structures that are signiﬁcant for a discussion of self-
organization as a paradigm for biological evolution.
4.1.3.1 Instability, Amplification of Fluctuations, and Establishment of a
New Structure
According to the second law, entropy generating irreversible processes drive the
system to the state of maximum entropy, the equilibrium state. In the equilibrium
state, all thermodynamic forces and ﬂows vanish and there is no entropy production.
The equilibrium state is stable to random ﬂuctuations. All thermodynamic systems
have intrinsic thermal ﬂuctuations in its state variables, such as temperature, pres-
sure, and concentrations of chemical components. Since the equilibrium state has the
maximum entropy, thermal ﬂuctuations can only decrease the system’s entropy;
irreversible processes that increase entropy then come into effect and restore the state
of equilibrium.3 Thus, the equilibrium state is stable in the face of random thermal
ﬂuctuations.
In contrast, nonequilibrium states may become unstable to speciﬁc types of
ﬂuctuations (Nicolis and Prigogine 1977; Haken 1977; Kondepudi and Prigogine
2015). As a system is forced away from equilibrium through a ﬂow of energy and/or
matter, initially, the states that are close to the equilibrium state remain stable, but
this stability is not guaranteed. Under far-from-equilibrium conditions, a state can
become unstable to a particular type of ﬂuctuations depending on the boundary
conditions. This ﬂuctuation is then ampliﬁed by irreversible processes and the
system undergoes a transition to an organized state, a dissipative structure. The
new organized state is stable, but its stability is not assured by any general maximum
or minimum principle, such as the second law. A principle in terms of the rate of
entropy production, the so-called maximum entropy production principle (MEP),
has been suggested. In Sect. 4.3, we shall discuss this principle and its validity in one
of the systems we have studied extensively.
If the boundary conditions (environmental factors) are changed, a dissipative
structure may become unstable to another type of ﬂuctuation and be driven to a
different dissipative structure. This phenomenon is similar to random changes in the
genetic code (which are analogous to ﬂuctuation in dissipative structure) and the
consequent response of an organism. We shall discuss the analogy further in a later
section.
3The probability of a ﬂuctuation in the equilibrium state is given by Einstein’s formula: Exp(ΔS/
k), in which ΔS is the change in entropy due to the ﬂuctuation, and k is the Boltzmann constant.
96
D. Kondepudi et al.

Nonequilibrium instability and transition to a dissipative structure occurs at a
particular critical value of a parameter, such as a ﬂow rate or a concentration or
voltage. Mathematically, this appears as bifurcation of new solutions to nonlinear
differential equations at the critical value of a parameter. Each of the new solutions
corresponds
to
a
possible
organized
state/dissipative
structure;
driven
by
ﬂuctuations, as described above, the system makes transition to one of the available
stable states. Often, there are multiple new solutions that are related to the
symmetries of the system. To which one of the possible states the transition takes
place may depend on environmental factors.
4.1.3.2 Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking, States Selection,
and Sensitivity
More often than not, dissipative structures arise out of a symmetry-breaking transi-
tion (Prigogine and Nicolis 1967). In such a transition, the state to which the system
evolves does not have the symmetry of the processes that generate it. In mathemati-
cal terms, it means the solution to a differential equation does have the symmetry of
the differential equations; hence it is called spontaneous symmetry breaking. For
example, even if there is no intrinsic bias in a system to one direction or its opposite,
still, the solutions to the equations that describe the system may have a polarity,
pointing to one or the other direction; however, there will be two new solutions with
opposing polarities (Fig. 4.3).
The symmetry is reﬂected in the multiplicity of solutions. It means, beyond the
critical value, there are two possible dissipative structures, with opposing polarity, to
which the system can transition. Such a transition occurs in the Rayleigh–Bénard
convection. Above a critical temperature gradient, convection rolls emerge. An
individual roll could emerge with clockwise or Counter clockwise rotation (from a
given perspective). These new states are equiprobable, emerging due to the ampliﬁ-
cation of microscopic random ﬂuctuations during the critical transition. A similar
situation arises in the formation of chemical spatial structures in which a concentra-
tion gradient forms in one direction or its opposite. This ampliﬁcation of ﬂuctuations
a
l
Unstable
lC
Fig. 4.3 Bifurcation of
symmetry-breaking states to
possible states with opposing
polarity. α is a measure of the
polarity and λ is a parameter
that quantiﬁes the system’s
nonequilibrium state
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
97

into self-organized states is what Prigogine and Stengers (1984) called “order
through ﬂuctuations.” In such situations, which of the two possible structures the
system will transition to depends very sensitively on environmental or external
inﬂuence, such as a gravitational ﬁeld or a temperature gradient, which biases the
system toward one of the two possible polarities. Though the ﬁeld only exerts a very
weak inﬂuence on the system, the self-organizing processes intrinsic to the system
will amplify the ﬂuctuations induced by the embedding ﬁeld. This induced symme-
try breaking or nonequilibrium sensitivity is one of the ways a nonequilibrium
system becomes highly sensitive to their environment (Kondepudi and Prigogine
1981; Kondepudi 1982). This is in contrast to equilibrium systems whose stable state
is only perturbed a little due to an environmental factor such as gravity.
The selection of states through environmental factors makes the system very
sensitive to its environment. Through such a mechanism, internal structure and
dynamics of a dissipative structure become correlated with external factors. It was
noted that through such a mechanism, internal states of small living cells can become
aligned with the direction of gravitational ﬁeld, thus providing a gravity detection
mechanism for living cells (Kondepudi 1991; Bizzarri et al. 2014). It could be said
that in symmetry-breaking transitions, the environment imprints on the structure.
Higher order symmetries result in a larger number of states to which the system
can make a transition. In the case of a breaking of a spherical symmetry along an
axis, the multiplicity of solutions is inﬁnite, each corresponding to an axis of the
sphere. Development of a sea urchin is an example. In the early stages of the
development, the sea urchin’s embryo is spherically symmetric in the sense that
the animal–vegetal axis can be induced along any axis of the spherical embryo.
Which axis will actually become the animal–vegetal axis depends generally on an
external factor such as the point at which the embryo is in contact with another
object. Once the animal–vegetal axis is ﬁxed, spherical symmetry is completely lost
due to complex morphogenetic processes.
In systems that have multiple self-organized states, a large enough perturbation
may drive it from one stabe state to another. If a system has a very large number of
states, the system’s interactions with the environment may cause it to make
transitions between these states. It is a mechanism through which a system’s internal
states become correlated with the world around it in complex ways making the
system “aware” of various factors in its environment. In the Sect. 4.3, we will present
an example of such environmental sensitivity in an electrically driven dissipative
structure with a large number of internal states.
4.1.3.3 Self-Healing
Dissipative structures are stable to perturbations. If a spatial or a temporal structure is
perturbed, in due course the structure is reestablished (Nicolis and Prigogine 1977;
Kondepudi et al. 2017). This occurs due to the intrinsic dynamical stability of these
structures. As discussed above, the emergence of structured states corresponds with
the emergence of new solutions to the dynamical equations. When a dynamical
system exhibits a stable state (e.g., a ﬁxed point or limit cycle), the system
demonstrates a resilience to perturbations, relaxing back to the stable state after
98
D. Kondepudi et al.

being pushed out of it. This implies “self-healing,” a characteristic property of living
organisms. When there is damage to the structure, the structure is restored due to
stability of the structure. Since the irreversible processes that created a dissipative
structure are within the structure, the system has the ability to restore the structure
and “heal” damages. This aspect is an important characteristic of biological
organisms, and, as we discuss below, is clearly visible in some non-living dissipative
structures. It is in contrast to machines and computers whose structure originates
from a process outside the system (Kondepudi et al. 2017).
In living organisms, self-healing is not strictly structural or morphological. It also
has a functional component. A damaged organ or limb might heal but not to the exact
structure that it was before the damage; the healing also needs to maintain the function
of the organ. This feature is also exhibited in dissipative structures in which a function
could be clearly identiﬁed. An example of this feature can be seen in an electrically
driven dissipative structure which is discussed in Sect. 4.3. Thus, we see that
selfhealing is a consequence of the stability of dissipative structures.
We conclude this section with the following observation. In physics, there is no
clear deﬁnition of a complex system, but for a dissipative structure there is. And,
complexity is an integral part of a dissipative structure; we do not need to deﬁne our
system as a “complex system,” which has no clear deﬁnition. We only need to
clearly deﬁne a dissipative structure and observe or describe its behavior in various
conditions; its behavior can become quite complex. By identifying living organisms
as dissipative structures, we are able to clearly identify the class of systems they
belong to. If they are deﬁned as complex systems, though it is an apt descriptive
term, it is not a well-deﬁned classiﬁcation.
4.2
Universal Chiral Asymmetry in Biological Realm
In the words of Francis Crick, “The ﬁrst great unifying principle of biochemistry is
that the key molecules have the same hand in all organisms” (Crick 1981).
Life, as we know it, is a dissipative structure with a broken chiral symmetry.
When an object is not identical to its mirror image, it is said to be chiral. The key
biomolecules, amino acids, the building blocks of proteins, and nucleotides, the
building blocks of DNA, are chiral molecules: they have two possible forms, like the
left and right hand, called the L- and the D-form. Two mirror image forms of a chiral
molecule are called enantiomers. When synthesized in a lab from smaller non-chiral
molecules, both enantiomers are produced in equal amounts. In fact, since basic laws
of chemistry have no preference for one hand or the other, this is the expected result.
So it is with every chiral molecule synthesized from smaller non-chiral molecules. In
view of this, it is quite remarkable that we ﬁnd only L-amino acids in proteins and
D-nucleotides (due to the D-sugar component of these molecules) in all of life, from
the smallest to the largest living organism. Life is a clear example of a dissipative
structure with a broken symmetry.
From the viewpoint of dissipative structures, biochemical asymmetry is a case of
spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry. The chemical reactions that synthesize
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
99

chiral molecules from non-chiral molecules have no preference for any of the two
enantiomers. Consequently, the chemical rate equations for these reactions are
symmetric, or invariant, under the interchange of the two enantiomers. Nevertheless,
when a certain reaction mechanism is present, the system can break the chiral
symmetry of the underlying reactions and generate unequal amounts of the two
enantiomers. In mathematical terms, the solutions to the chemical rate equations do
not have the symmetry of the rate equations. How this can happen can be
demonstrated using the following set of chemical reactions:
S þ T $ XL or XD:
ð4:3Þ
XL þ S þ T $ 2XL:
ð4:4Þ
XD þ S þ T $ 2XD:
ð4:5Þ
XL þ XD $ P:
ð4:6Þ
Here, S and T are non-chiral molecules that react to form a chiral molecule X in
the two enantiomeric forms, XL and XD as shown in reaction (4.3). Each of these
enantiomers can catalyze their production, as indicated in reactions (4.4) and (4.5).
Finally, the two enantiomers can combine to form an inactive product P. This model
chemical reaction is a modiﬁcation of a model proposed by Frank (1953).
The chiral symmetry of the reaction is clear: the two enantiomers have identical
reactions. Yet, under appropriate nonequilibrium conditions, this system can make a
transition to a state in which the concentrations of the enantiomers are unequal. This
can happen when the reaction system is subject to an inﬂow of reactants S and T,
such that the concentrations of S and T are maintained at a constant value, and an
outﬂow of the product P (Fig. 4.4). By deﬁning a parameter λ ¼ [S][T], as the
product of the concentrations of S and T, the transition to an asymmetric state with
unequal concentration can be described as a bifurcation of asymmetric states from a
symmetric state (Fig. 4.4). Many models, such as the one above one, have been
proposed (see Plasson et al. 2007 for a review). Such models show how biochemical
asymmetry could arise as a dissipative structure. There have been many suggestions
for the origin of chiral asymmetry in amino acid and DNA in particular, but there is
no consensus on a plausible answer. It is a historical question, as Eigen noted.
Handedness in biology extends to morphology and behavior as well. The place-
ment of liver or heart and dominance of righthandedness in humans are examples.
Naturally, the question arises as to the possible connection between molecular
asymmetry and morphological asymmetry; in more general terms, the effect of chiral
asymmetry at one level on chiral asymmetry on a higher level. In fact, the theory of
spontaneous symmetry breaking provides a general framework to understand how
asymmetries at various levels may be linked. For the breaking of a twofold symme-
try such as chirality, one can derive an equation whose general form is based on the
symmetry, and not on the details of a particular system. In the vicinity of the
transition point, all systems that break chiral symmetry are described by the follow-
ing equation:
100
D. Kondepudi et al.

dα=dt ¼ Aα3 þ B λ  λC
ð
Þα þ ε tð Þ:
ð4:7Þ
In this equation, α is a measure of the asymmetry such that it is zero when there is
no asymmetry, and positive or negative when there is an asymmetry. For example, in
the above model chemical system α ¼ [XL]  [XD]. Coefﬁcients A and B depend on
the detailed symmetry-breaking mechanism, but the general form depends only on
the symmetry that is broken. ε(t) represents random ﬂuctuations that drive the system
to one of the two asymmetric states. Steady-state solutions of this equation give the
bifurcation diagram shown in Fig. 4.4b.
S
T
P
X L
X D
P
S
T
a
Unstable
P+ = 50%
(a)
(b)
lC
l
P– = 50%
Fig. 4.4 Spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking in a model chemical system, summarized as a
bifurcation of asymmetric states from an unstable symmetric state. (a) Non-chiral S and T ﬂow into
the reactor where they from chiral X in the two enantiomeric forms, XL and XD. The product P is
removed from the system. (b) λ ¼ [S][T] and a ¼ [XL]  [XD]. When l > lC, the symmetric state,
a ¼ 0, becomes unstable and two new asymmetric states, a > 0, and a < 0, bifurcate. Random
ﬂuctuations drive the systems to one of the two branches. P+ and P are probabilities of reaching the
two branches. In the absence of any chiral bias, both branches are equally probable
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
101

Using this general approach, we can also formulate a theory of how a small bias,
g, which favors one branch over the other, can inﬂuence the transition. This theory
enables us to study the sensitivity of the systems to a small bias (Kondepudi and
Nelson, 1984). With the bias, Eq. (4.7) has an additional factor g:
dα=dt ¼ Aα3 þ B λ  λC
ð
Þα þ g þ ε tð Þ:
ð4:8Þ
The corresponding bifurcation diagram is shown in Fig. 4.5. There is a small
separation of the two branches at the critical value λC. The probabilities of transition
to the two branches, P+ and P, are no longer equal. The sensitivity of the system is
relative to the strength of ﬂuctuation ε(t). At ﬁrst, it might appear that the bias g will
not have a noticeable effect on the probabilities, P+, P, if its magnitude is smaller
than the root-mean-square value of ε(t). However, closer analysis revealed that the
system’s sensitivity depends not only on the relative values of g and ε(t), but also on
P+
P–
Unstable
N
(a)
(b)
g
lC
l
a
P+
Fig. 4.5 Bifurcation of asymmetric states in the presence of a small bias that favors one of the
asymmetric state. P+ and P are the probabilities of transition to the shown branches as the
parameter λ sweeps through the critical value, λC, at rate γ. P+ can be graphically represented as
an integral of a Gaussian in which N is given by Eq. (4.9)
102
D. Kondepudi et al.

the rate at which the parameter λ crosses the critical point, λC, sweeping from a value,
λ0, below the critical point λC (Kondepudi and Nelson 1985). Let us assume that λ ¼
λ0 + γt so that λ moves through the critical value at a rate γ. Detailed analysis shows
that, when g is positive, the probability P+ is given by the following Gaussian
integral (Fig. 4.5):
Pþ ¼
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2π
p
Z N
1
Exp  x2
2


dx N ¼ g
ε
π=B
γ

1=4
:
ð4:9Þ
This result shows that the probability depends not only on the relative values of
g and ε but also inversely γ1/4, making the system more sensitive when it moves
slowly through the critical point. This general theory shows how asymmetry at one
level can inﬂuence asymmetry at another level. It is remarkable that chiral asymme-
try is at all levels, from elementary particles to morphology of mammals (Hegstrom
and Kondepudi 1990), and there are indications that it might extend to the universe
(Longo 2011). So, in addition to the questions relating the possible connection
between biomolecular asymmetry and morphological asymmetry, one might wonder
if biomolecular asymmetry is itself a consequence of a more fundamental asymmetry
at the level of elementary particles and fundamental forces of nature. The electro-
weak interaction between the electron and the atomic nucleus creates a small energy
difference between enantiomers of a chiral molecule (Hegstrom et al. 1980; Mason
and Tranter 1984; Quack 2002). These energy differences, called parity-violating
energy differences (PVED), are extremely small when compared with thermal
energy ﬂuctuation of a molecule. Using the theoretical calculations of these energy
differences, one can estimate that the rates of reaction of enantiomers may differ in
one part in 1017 making it impossible to detect under laboratory conditions. PVED
could be several orders of magnitude larger, depending on the molecules. However,
in prebiotic times, in large volumes of water of the order of several cubic kilometers,
and slow increase of concentrations of compounds on a time scale of 104 years,
PVED could indeed inﬂuence the outcome of molecular chirality in model reaction
systems such as the one discussed above (Kondepudi and Nelson 1985).
Calculations by Mason and Tranter (1984) have shown that the biologically domi-
nant L-amino acids have a lower energy and hence are favored. Later calculations
have conﬁrmed this result. Thus, we see that the asymmetry at the level of funda-
mental electro-weak forces could inﬂuence biochemical evolution to favor the
observed L-amino acid dominance. Whether this indeed happened is a historical
question that cannot be answered at this time.
The theory of sensitivity of chiral symmetry-breaking systems to small inﬂuences
also points to a possible mechanism through which molecular chiral asymmetry,
progressing hierarchically through macro-molecular assembly and ﬁbers, could
propagate upward to a level of morphological chirality. Helical plants wind consis-
tently as left or right helices, and this trait is inherited. The helical winding is due to
the helicity of growth ﬁbers which can be traced down to a molecular level. At each
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
103

level, if a system can break chiral symmetry, it would be inﬂuenced by asymmetry at
lower level. In some cases, as in the case of the right-handed double helix of DNA,
the inﬂuence of D-sugars is strong as it is probably the case with many molecular
assemblies in biomolecules. But there might be a situation in which the relationship
is not so clear; in such situations, the above theory provides a framework for
investigation. Nonequilibrium self-organization and theory of dissipative structures
thus provides a basis for the asymmetries of life at all levels in an evolutionary
context.
4.3
Bio-Analog Dissipative Structures
We have offered that, rather than investigate the particular historical circumstances
that precipitated Terran life, the physics of self-organization and dissipative
structures provides a framework for understanding the generic emergence of life-
like systems. In other words, our work prioritizes understanding processes and
functions that support biology rather than the particular structures that compose
living organisms. In line with this, we have developed and studied two non-living
dissipative structures—called bio-analogs—that demonstrate compellingly life-like
phenomena. Though their instantiation (described below) is in stark contrast to the
unique architecture of Terran life, the thermodynamic processes and self-organizing
capabilities share some fundamental characteristics of biology. The evidence
summarized below serves to support the plausibility of dissipative structure theory
as a suitable basis for explaining the emergence and evolution of life-like systems.
One such system is an electrically driven dissipative structure that self-organizes
into a tree-like morphology and demonstrates foraging and even complex coordi-
nated dynamics (Davis et al. 2016; De Bari et al. 2020; Dixon et al. 2016; Kondepudi
et al. 2015). The system consists of metal beads in a dish with a shallow bath of oil.
The dish also includes a circular metal ring along the interior edge of the dish that is
attached to a grounding electrode. A source electrode is positioned above the dish,
separated by an air gap (typically 5 cm), and a voltage in the range of 20–30 kV is
applied. Charges are sprayed out over the dish, collecting on the beads and the
surface of the oil. The charged beads become dipoles, are attracted to each other and
the grounding electrode, and ultimately aggregate into branching strings of beads
(Fig. 4.6). These tree structures serve as pathways for the conduction of charges to
ground, and this ﬂow of charges through the trees maintains their stability. This
system demonstrates a rich host of bio-analog behaviors, including an intrinsic
end-directedness,
self-healing,
foraging
dynamics,
and
even
coordinative
capabilities. Due to the primacy of the foraging behavior (detailed below), the
system is referred to as the Electrical Self-Organized Foraging Implementation
(E-SOFI).
A key feature of the E-SOFI is that it appears to abide by a variational principle to
maximize the rate of entropy production (REP). Several empirical (De Bari et al.
2019, 2021; Davis et al. 2016; Kondepudi et al. 2015) and simulation-based results
(De Bari et al. 2019, 2020) have supported this assertion by demonstrating that the
104
D. Kondepudi et al.

system tends to exhibit changes that facilitate increasing the REP. That is, when the
system has access to several states (morphological or dynamical) it will tend to
occupy the state with higher REP. The adherence to a variational principle means
that the system’s future state constrains the present dynamics, in concert with
circumstantial boundary conditions. This intrinsic state-selection principle is effec-
tively an intrinsic end-directedness, like that fundamental to biological behavior. It
manifests in several types of bio-analog behavior. The REP per unit volume σ is a
function of the applied voltage V, the current through the system I, and the
temperature T. The current is a complex function of the bead structures’ morphology
and dynamics (i.e., position x and time t).
σ ¼ VI x, t
ð
Þ
T
ð4:10Þ
The total entropy production, Σ ¼ VI/T, is the integral of σ over the system
volume. The formation of structures demonstrates an immediate and dramatic
increase in the REP (Kondepudi et al. 2015; Fig. 4.7). The REP is proportional to
the length and number of trees, consistent with the hypothesis that trees form to
facilitate entropy production. When a tree’s structure is perturbed by breaking up the
beads, due to the stability of this structure is spontaneously and quickly restored.
This phenomenon is analogous to the self-healing and self-repair exhibited by
organisms when subject to injuries. For small perturbations the original morphology
may return, while larger perturbations can result in novel architectures. When the
tree is broken, its entropy production decreases. Critically, when structure is
restored, the REP is restored to nearly the exact level as before the perturbation,
Fig. 4.6 The E-SOFI.
Electrically charged beads
aggregate into a branching
“tree” that serves as a pathway
for conducting charges to
ground
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
105

independent of a change in morphology (Kondepudi et al. 2015). This kind of
process equiﬁnality supports the hypothesis that the structures’ dynamics and mor-
phology emerge to maximize the REP. Moreover, much like in biological self-repair,
the changes favor functional organization over structural/morphological organiza-
tion. A remarkable example in biology is in nervous tissue, such as when the
localization of functional brain regions changes due to developmental events
(Johnson et al. 2015) or after traumatic injury (Levin 2003). The function of the
nervous tissue persists, while the speciﬁc morphological organization may not.
Various tree morphologies are displayed in Fig. 4.8. The current conducted by
these differently shaped trees is nevertheless remarkably similar.
Fig. 4.7 The rate of entropy production by the E-SOFI increases dramatically with the emergence
of structured trees
106
D. Kondepudi et al.

The E-SOFI’s morphology also exhibits some context sensitivity during devel-
opment. Organisms can exhibit developmental differences due to many small envi-
ronmental deviations; for example, a species of alligator, Alligator mississippiensis,
exhibits differential sexual development due to small differences in ambient temper-
ature during egg incubation (Ferguson and Joanen 1982). The E-SOFI can similarly
exhibit morphological differences in the presence or absence of a weak magnetic
ﬁeld (Kondepudi et al. 2020). The system is prepared with a mix of both magnetic
chrome beads and nonmagnetic aluminum beads, all initially concentrated in the
center of the dish under the source electrode. Two experimental conditions were
investigated, (i) with a magnet below the dish and (ii) no magnet below the dish. In
condition (i) the magnet was set to a distance from the bottom of the dish that was
just below the threshold at which lateral motion of the magnet would move chrome
beads (when the beads were in the oil bath, but without any applied voltage).
Experiments were conducted simply by turning the electrical ﬂow on and waiting
for tree structures to form. A statistical analysis of the distribution of beads within the
trees revealed morphological differences between trees in conditions (i) and (ii).
Thus, the self-organizing developmental processes of the E-SOFI are sensitive to
very small changes in environmental condition.
In addition to structural evidence, the dynamics and behavior of tree structures
also demonstrate a tendency for the system to maximize the REP which manifests as
energy-foraging behavior. Consider the following experimental setup: Initially, a
Fig. 4.8 (Left) Several different tree conﬁgurations in the E-SOFI. (Right) the various
morphologies conduct very similar levels of current. Tree structure appears to favor functional
organization in the conductivity over structural organization
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
107

tree is formed maximizing REP with the source electrode at the center. Then plastic
constraints around its base bead that prevents translation along the grounding ring
are imposed, limiting its motion to oscillatory swaying. Then the source electrode is
moved to the right side of the dish, off-center (Fig. 4.9). With the source electrode off
center, the tree is no longer drawing the maximum current it could. This asymmetry
makes it such that charges build up in greater concentration in regions of oil nearer
the electrode than those further (i.e., in the steady state there are more charges on the
right side of the dish than the left) creating a gradient of charge concentration that
increases from left to right. The tree is positioned in the left side of the dish,
maximally displaced from the source electrode. When a plastic constraint is
removed, the tree continues to sway, but additionally begins to traverse the ground-
ing ring, moving into the region of greater charge density.
Over time, the tree settles into the region under the source electrode, where it will
remain. During the relaxation process to this new steady state the REP increases,
until it saturates when the tree reaches the region of minimum displacement from the
source electrode. Thus, the tree appears to forage for electrical charges and for
circumstances that maximize the current and in turn its own stability. Other results
have indicated that the oscillatory swaying (De Bari et al. 2019) and even inter-tree
interactions (Davis et al. 2016; De Bari et al. 2020, 2021) facilitate maximizing the
Fig. 4.9 Experimental setup to demonstrate foraging. After removing the plastic constraints, the
tree will move along the edge of the ring over to the right region of the dish. It will remain in this
charge-rich region once it arrives there
108
D. Kondepudi et al.

REP. The intrinsic end-directedness thus endows the system with a host of
bio-analog properties. We have studied a sister system of the E-SOFI, a chemical
bio-analog known as the C-SOFI. This system is composed of solid pellets of
benzoquinone (BQ) ﬂoating on the surface of water that exhibit self-motion due to
surface-tension gradients caused by the dissolution processes. Solid BQ dissolves
into the liquid phase, generating local concentration and surface-tension gradients.
Individual pellets are propelled along increasing gradients of surface tension. When
several particles (e.g., 10–16) are present in the same dish, they will tend to
aggregate into a dynamic collective of particles that moves through the dish as a
largely cohesive unit (Fig. 4.10). This emergent collective is referred to as a ﬂock and
constitutes the structure that is maintained by the dissipative ﬂow of BQ into the
aqueous phase.
These ﬂocks have interesting properties and capabilities. One such property is the
emergent sensitivity to weak magnetic ﬁelds. This occurs when one of the 15 pellets
is prepared with a small amount of ferrous material embedded in it, making it
magnetic, while all other members of the ﬂock are nonmagnetic. To establish the
experimental setup, the single ferrous pellet is placed in the dish. This sensor
pellet—as it will be called—exhibits self-motion qualitatively indistinct from its
nonmagnetic counterparts. A magnet is positioned above the dish, raised to a height
that has minimal interaction with the sensor pellet—the sensor continues to swim
through the entire dish and is not conﬁned to a small region by the magnetic ﬁeld.
After setting the magnet height, the remaining non-magnetic particles are added to
the dish. Over time, the pellets create a ﬂock that includes the sensor particle.
Fig. 4.10 Benzoquinone pellets ﬂoat at the air–water interface, aggregating into a dynamic ﬂock.
Sub-ﬁgures show time samples of the ﬂock at (a) 0 s elapsed, (b) 30 s elapsed, (c) 60 s elapsed, (d)
90 s elapsed, (e) 120 s elapsed, (f) 150 s elapsed, (g) 180 s elapsed, and (h) a close-up of the ﬂock.
Reprinted with permission from Satterwhite-Warden J. E., Kondepudi D. K., Dixon J. A., Rusling
J. F., (2019) Thermal- and magnetic-sensitive particle ﬂocking motion at the air-water interface. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 123, 3832–3840. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
109

Critically, the entire ﬂock is observed to move under the magnet and remain close to
the magnet (Fig. 4.11).
This is despite the fact that the force is too weak to capture the single sensor
particle. Nevertheless, the nonlinear interactions between particles appear to amplify
the sensitivity of the ﬂock to the magnetic ﬁeld; in other words, the ﬂock with the
magnetic pellet is more sensitive to the magnetic ﬁeld than the single magnetic
pellet. This phenomenon is analogous to the perceptual sensitivity exhibited by
organisms, wherein sensitivity is maintained by virtue of a self-organized state.
Further, the perceptual ﬁelds (e.g., light arrays, chemical gradients) that organisms
are sensitive to only exhibit very weak (Newtonian) interactions with organisms
(Kugler and Turvey 1987), like the very weak magnetic forces in the case of the
C-SOFI. Much like the E-SOFI, C-SOFI ﬂocks have shown evidence of foraging, in
this case foraging for regions of the dish with higher surface tension and which
facilitate dissolution (Chen et al. 2019). Interestingly, this foraging even results in
the ﬂocks’ capability to cross through barriers, as was observed in the following
experiment. A dish is prepared with a hydrophobic sheet in the middle that effec-
tively divides the water into two compartments, joined by a small opening in the
middle of the sheet (Fig. 4.12).
After pellets are placed on the surface of the water, they will take some time to
aggregate into a ﬂock, ultimately aggregating on one side of the dish. After some
time, the ﬂock will make a transition to the other side of the dish, moving through the
gap as a whole unit. This transition process is correlated with a switch in the relative
surface tension on either side, such that the ﬂock moves after the second side
develops higher surface tension. The ﬂock is apparently foraging for higher surface
tension, and even navigates rudimentary obstacles as a collective unit to do so.
Fig. 4.11 Benzoquinone pellets form a ﬂock, incorporating a single ferrous pellet. After a weak
magnet is introduced above the system, the ﬂock tends to swim in the region below the magnet.
Reprinted with permission from Satterwhite-Warden J. E., Kondepudi D. K., Dixon J. A., Rusling
J. F., (2019) Thermal- and magnetic-sensitive particle ﬂocking motion at the air-water interface. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 123, 3832–3840. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society
110
D. Kondepudi et al.

Many other remarkable and interesting dissipative structures have been devel-
oped, especially in the ﬁeld of autonomous chemical swimmers. These include oil
droplets with embedded hydrolysis reactions that exhibit self-motion and chemo-
taxis (Hanczyc et al. 2007). Aqueous droplets of Belousov–Zhabotinsky reactants
have been shown to swim through oil baths, demonstrating nonlinear dynamics by
virtue of the embedded oscillatory reaction (Suematsu et al. 2016). Systems such as
these demonstrate a host of interesting life-like behaviors and further support the
notion that dissipative structures are a foundational feature of living systems.
It is possible that proto-life systems, which we assert were very likely dissipative
structures, capitalized on this intrinsic self-stabilizing behavior present in these
bio-analogs. The processes of evolution could play out on such proto-organisms,
selecting for increasing self-stabilizing processes and morphologies, ultimately
leading to increasing complexiﬁcation. As we discuss in the following section, key
Fig. 4.12 The surface tension on either side of the dish was measured at discrete time points (top).
The ﬂock tended to make a transition to the high-surface tension side of the gate (bottom). Reprinted
with permission from Chen T. Kondepudi D. K., Dixon J. A., Rusling J. F. (2019) Particle ﬂock
motion at air-water interface driven by interfacial free energy foraging. Langmuir, 35 (34),
11066–11070. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
111

aspects of nonequilibrium thermodynamics have direct analogs to processes in
biology and evolution.
4.4
Thermodynamics, Self-Organization, Dissipative
Structures, and Evolution
A thermodynamic theory of biological evolution must bridge the gap between the
concepts in thermodynamics and biology. In the thermodynamic theory of dissipa-
tive structures, we have concepts such as energy, ﬂuctuations, instability, self-
organization, entropy production, and end-directed evolution. In biology, at the
level of an individual organism, we have basic properties such as self-replication,
ability to respond to environment, ability to heal and retain function, and goal-
oriented behavior; at the species level, we have mutations, evolution, and survival of
the ﬁttest. Bridging the gap between the two subjects involves description of the
biological processes in thermodynamic terms. This needs to be done at both the
biochemical and the organism levels. In this section, we discuss to what extent the
key properties and concepts of dissipative structures provide a thermodynamic
language for biological processes.
4.4.1
Self-Replication and End-Directed Behavior
Self-replication occurs in nature at all levels. The simplest of particles, the photon,
can self-replicate by stimulating an atom in an excited state to emit a photon identical
to itself. On a molecular level, autocatalysis in general and chiral autocatalysis in
particular are known (Asakura et al. 1995; Soai et al. 1995). Self-replication at the
level of crystals is known to result in interesting competition between enantiomeric
crystals with one type dominating over the other (Kondepudi et al. 1990). Self-
replication was also observed in the formation and growth of vesicles (Albertsen
et al. 2017, Lin et al. 2021). These systems are not dissipative structures that are
maintained through continuous entropy production.
Self-replication in dissipative structures has also been studied both theoretically
(Pearson 1993; Reynolds et al. 1997, Lesmes et al. 2003) and experimentally (Lee
et al. 1994). In these systems, chemical patterns of dots form and these dots self-
replicate. Such self-replicating dots form complex patterns resembling organism
development (Munteanu and Sole 2006). Thus, we can say self-replication of
organisms is within the domain of dissipative structures, though in organism the
process is much more complex.
End-directed behavior we see in organisms has analogs in non-living dissipative
structures as we have noted in the previous section while discussing E-SOFI. In this
system, the tree structure moves toward its energy source. This and other observed
behavior could be explained as the system’s movement toward states of higher
entropy production. For organisms, we do not yet have a thermodynamic explana-
tion but perhaps some of the behavior of an organism could be explained as process
112
D. Kondepudi et al.

that optimizes a thermodynamic quantity. Here, again we see that a characteristic
property of organisms is in the realm of dissipative structures.
4.4.2
Nonequilibrium Sensitivity
Organisms rely on a variety of physical media to guide behavior, including chemical,
mechanical, and electromagnetic ﬁelds. An organism has only weak interactions
with these ﬁelds, and yet those ﬁelds constrain the dynamics of the organism, as in an
ambient light distribution guiding locomotion. This is directly analogous to the
nonequilibrium sensitivity in dissipative structures: a weak embedding ﬁeld biases
endogenous self-organizing processes (here, bio-mechanical motor processes
broadly) to constrain more macroscopic dynamics.
Dissipative structures can demonstrate emergent sensitivity to weak energy ﬁelds
by virtue of endogenous self-organizing processes. How this can come about in
chemical systems embedded in gravitational or electrical ﬁelds was noted
(Kondepudi and Prigogine 1981; Kondepudi 1982; Kondepudi 1989). Such sensi-
tivity could be a suitable mechanism to explain gravity detection in microorganisms
(Bizzarri et al. 2014; Kondepudi 1991). The sensitivity of E-SOFI and thermotaxis
and sensitivity of C-SOFI when embedded in weak magnetic ﬁeld was described in
the previous section.
Such mechanisms point to the many ways in which dissipative structures can
become sensitive to their environment. In these processes, internal structures and
their behavior are correlated with the environment, providing a physical basis for
understanding the sensitivity of life to its environment. When there are a large
Fig. 4.13 Transitions between internal states due to interaction with environmental factors. λ1, λ2,
λ3 . . . are system parameters that indicate the nonequilibrium conditions. In dissipative structures
that have a large number of internal states, interaction with the environment may cause transitions
between these states. Through such mechanism, perceptual sensitivity of organisms can emerge
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
113

number of internal states between which a dissipative structure can undergo
transitions due to its interaction with its environment, complex behavior can emerge
(Fig. 4.13). We propose that it is also a good explanation for the perceptual
sensitivity of organisms in general (De Bari et al. 2020). It should be noted that
maintenance of an organized state and transitions between organized states is at the
expense of entropy production. Where appropriate and possible, it is worthwhile
looking at the behavior of the rate of entropy production in organisms.
4.4.3
Self-Healing
Self-healing is an intrinsic feature of biology, and one of the most remarkable
capabilities of organisms. We identiﬁed self-healing capabilities in our bio-analog
system the E-SOFI. When the bead structures are mechanically perturbed or broken,
they will tend to reform into functionally identical systems, though morphology may
vary. The same can be said of biological self-healing. Moreover, this intrinsic self-
stabilization is foundational to a theory of evolution, which must account for
survivability as a fundamental feature; natural selection must select for something,
namely adaptation to the environment. Some interpretations of natural selection treat
survivability as a matter of happenstance; insofar as an organism happens to survive
and reproduce, it is demonstrating adaptation and survivability. Thus, if traits are
passed on by natural selection, then they are adaptive traits, but they are supposed to
be selected for on the basis of their adaptability. Rather than this kind of circularity,
the self-healing and self-stabilizing properties of dissipative structures (living and
non-living) provide a ﬁrmer foundation for natural selection to operate on. Stability,
survivability, or normativity (e.g., that stability is “better than” or “preferred” to
instability) is intrinsic to dissipative structures (Bickhard 2009).
4.4.4
Mutations and Appearance of New Traits
This process can be understood in terms of self-organizing ampliﬁcation or “order
through ﬂuctuations” (Prigogine and Stengers 1984) which was described earlier in
detail. It is the observation that all physicochemical systems have thermal and other
form of ﬂuctuations of the state variables such as concentrations of chemical species,
temperature, and pressure. In a system at or close to thermodynamic equilibrium,
these ﬂuctuations are damped by irreversible processes and equilibrium values of
these state variables are restored. But if a system is far from thermodynamic
equilibrium, instability leads to the growth of certain type of ﬂuctuations and a
transition to a new organized state occurs. Which ﬂuctuations will grow and
establish a new structure depends on the “boundary conditions” or “the system’s
environment.”
Genetic mutations are essentially this same process, but taking place in the
complex dissipative structure that is a living organism. Each mutation is a ﬂuctua-
tion; some mutations can be “ampliﬁed” or ﬁnd expression through the intrinsic self-
114
D. Kondepudi et al.

organizing processes and alter some aspects of the complex organism’s structures
and produce new traits. Mutations in the genetic code can occur due to thermal as
well as non-thermal processes such as radiation. The genetic code is imbedded in a
system that can amplify certain changes, depending on various factors. This non-
equilibrium process of ampliﬁcation of ﬂuctuations generates an astounding diver-
sity of organisms. There is not yet a non-living dissipative structure that reﬂects,
even in a primitive way, the production of diverse forms of organisms. Nevertheless,
the processes of ampliﬁcation of mutations (ﬂuctuation) and evolution of new forms
are a general feature of dissipative structures.
4.4.5
Competition and Survival of the Fittest
Dissipative structures rely on ﬂows of energy and matter to maintain organization
and stability, and organisms are no exception to this. While some microorganisms
and the vast majority of plants rely primarily on the energy delivered through solar
radiation, the rest of the biosphere is a complex web of predator–prey relations, with
organisms serving as a source of energetic material for other organisms. From the
thermodynamic point of view, this aspect of life is transformation of energy and
matter, or the transformations from one structure to another. When an osprey catches
a ﬁsh, in some sense we are witnessing a ﬁsh transforming into an osprey, as its
biomass is incorporated into that of the osprey and used to power subsequent ﬁshing
expeditions. The entire struggle for survival is the transformation of one organism
(complex dissipative structure) into another, or complex transformations of energy
and matter. We do not yet have a laboratory example of non-living dissipative
structures that predate and convert from one from to another, but we can conceive
of such systems.
4.4.6
Complexity and Complexification Through Evolution
As we have noted above, in physics there is no clear deﬁnition of a complex system,
but there is a clear deﬁnition for a dissipative structure. And, in dissipative structures,
complexity is an integral part.
This complexity in dissipative structures appears in terms of the composing
network of thermodynamic forces and ﬂows (Kondepudi 2012). Emergent force–
ﬂow couplings can provide novel organizational states for a dissipative structure. If
these novel processes and conﬁgurations affect the stability of the system, they can
be selected for. A schematic of natural selection can thus be inferred as a process of
ﬂuctuation-induced emergence of dynamics (i.e., mutation) leading to differential
self-maintenance dynamics (i.e., phenotypic differentiation) that are selected for by
the embedding circumstances (i.e., adaptability). The complexiﬁcation of organic
life by evolution need not appeal to statistical or morphological measures of com-
plexity, but rather can be indexed by the network of thermodynamic force–ﬂow
couplings and the related multiplicity of organizational states.
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
115

In discussing complexity, we would like to note the non-algorithmic nature of
organisms. Being a product of human planning and design, a machine is algorithmic;
in other words a machine can be simulated by a computer code and its behavior
reproduced as the output of this computer code. An algorithm simulating a machine
is a logical structure representing each component of the machine and their
interrelationships. It is a map between the machine’s design and a computer lan-
guage. Organisms are complex dissipative structures, and living organisms, in
particular, are fundamentally different from a machine (Kondepudi et al. 2017).
Their structure and function do not originate from a logical design. Though
organisms have components with functions, they operate with a self-reference: the
parts make the whole and the whole supports the parts. For these reasons, we do not
think organisms can be described by an algorithm. Algorithms can capture some
aspects but not the entire behavior of an organism.
References
Albertsen AN, Szymański JK, Pérez-Mercader J (2017) Emergent properties of Giant vesicles
formed by a polymerization-induced self-assembly (PISA) reaction. Sci Rep 7(2). https://doi.
org/10.1038/srep41534
Asakura K et al (1995) Generation of an optically active octahedral cobalt complex by a chiral
autocatalysis. Phys D 84:72–78
Bickhard M (2009) The interactivist model. Synthese 166:547–591. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11229-008-9375-x
Bizzarri M, Cucina A, Palombo A, Masiello MG (2014) Gravity sensing by cells: mechanisms and
theoretical grounds. Rendiconti Lincei 2:29–38. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12210-013-0281-x
Carnot S (1824) Réﬂexions sur la puissance motrice du feu et sur les machines propres à développer
cette puissance. Chez Bachelier, Paris, France
Chen T, Kondepudi DK, Dixon JA, Rusling JF (2019) Particle ﬂock motion at air-water interface
driven by interfacial free energy foraging. Langmuir 35:11066–11070
Crick F (1981) Life itself: its origins and nature. Simon and Schuster, New York
Davis TJ, Kay BA, Kondepudi D, Dixon JA (2016) Spontaneous interentity coordination in a
dissipative structure. Ecol Psychol 28(1):23–36
De Bari B, Dixon JA, Kay BA, Kondepudi D (2019) Oscillatory dynamics of an electrically driven
dissipative structure. PLoS One 14(5)
De Bari B, Kondepudi D, Kay BA, Dixon JA (2020) Collective dissipative structures, force ﬂow
reciprocity, and the foundations of perception-action mutuality. Ecol Psychol 32(4). https://doi.
org/10.1080/10407413.2020.1820337
De Bari B, Paxton A, Kondepudi D, Kay BA, Dixon JA (2021) Functional interdependence in
coupled dissipative structures: physical foundations of intra- and inter-personal biological
coordination. Entropy 23:614. https://doi.org/10.3390/e23050614
De Donder T, Van Rysselberghe P (1936) Afﬁnity. Stanford University Press, Menlo Park, CA
De Groot SR, Mazur P (1969) Non-equilibrium thermodynamics. North Holland Press, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
De Kepper P et al (1994) Experimental study of stationary Turing patterns and their interaction with
traveling waves in a chemical system. Int J Bifurcation Chaos 4:1215–1231
Dixon JA, Kay BA, Davis TJ, Kondepudi D (2016) End-directedness and context in nonliving
dissipative systems. In: Ehtibar D (ed) Contextuality from quantum physics to psychology.
World Scientiﬁc Publishing, New York
116
D. Kondepudi et al.

Eigen M, Winkler-Oswatitsch R (1992) Steps towards life: a perspective on evolution. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Epstein I, Pojman J (1998) An introduction to nonlinear chemical dynamics: oscillations, waves,
patterns, and chaos. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Ferguson MJW, Joanen T (1982) Temperature of egg incubation determines sex in Alligator
mississippiensis. Nature 296:29
Field RJ, Burger M (eds) (1985) Oscillations and traveling waves in chemical systems. Wiley,
New York
Frank FC (1953) Spontaneous asymmetric synthesis. Biochem Biophys Acta 11:459–463
Goldbeter A (1996) Biochemical oscillations and cellular rhythms. The molecular bases of periodic
and chaotic behaviour. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Goldbetter A (2017) Dissipative structures and biological rhythms. Chaos 27:104612. https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.4990783
Haken H (1977) Synergetics: an introduction. Springer, Berlin
Hanczyc M, Toyota T, Ikegami T, Packard N, Sugawara T (2007) Fatty acid chemistry at the
oil-water interface: self-propelled oil droplets. J Am Chem Soc 129:9386–9391. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ja0706955
Hegstrom RA, Kondepudi DK (1990) The handedness of the universe. Sci Am 262:108–115
Hegstrom RA, Rein DW, Sanders PGH (1980) Calculation of the parity non-conserving energy
difference between mirror-image molecules. J Chem Phys 73:2329–2341
Johnson MH, Jones EJH, Gliga T (2015) Brain adaptation and alternative developmental
trajectories. Dev Psychopathol 27:425–442. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579415000073
Kondepudi DK (1982) Sensitivity of chemical dissipative structures to external ﬁelds: formation of
propagating bands. Phys A 115:552–566
Kondepudi DK (1989) State selection dynamics in symmetry breaking transitions. In: Moss F,
McClintock PV (eds) Noise in nonlinear dynamical systems, vol 2. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 251–270
Kondepudi DK (1991) Detection of gravity through non-equilibrium mechanisms. Am Soc Gravit
Space Biol Bull 4:119–124
Kondepudi DK (2012) Self-organization, entropy production and physical intelligence: preliminary
remarks. Ecol Psychol 24(2012):33–45
Kondepudi DK, Nelson G (1984) Chiral symmetry breaking states and their sensitivity in nonequi-
librium systems. Phys A 125:465–496
Kondepudi DK, Nelson GW (1985) Weak neutral currents and the origin of biomolecular chirality.
Nature 314:438–441
Kondepudi DK, Prigogine I (1981) Sensitivity of nonequilibrium systems. Phys A 107:1–24
Kondepudi DK, Prigogine I (2015) Modern thermodynamics: from heat engines to dissipative
structures, 2nd edn. Wiley, New York
Kondepudi DK, Kaufmann R, Singh N (1990) Chiral symmetry breaking in sodium chlorate
crystallization. Science 250:975–976
Kondepudi D, Kay B, Dixon J (2015) End-directed evolution and the emergence of energy-seeking
behavior in a complex system. Phys Rev E 9:050902
Kondepudi D, Kay B, Dixon J (2017) Dissipative structures, machines, and organisms: a perspec-
tive. Chaos 27. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5001195
Kondepudi DK, De Bari B, Dixon JA (2020) Dissipative structures, organisms, and evolution.
Entropy 22(11). https://doi.org/10.3390/e22111305
Kugler PN, Turvey MT (1987) Information, natural law, and the self-assembly of rhythmic
movement. Erlbaum Associates, London
Lee KJ, McCormick WD, Swinney HL, Pearson JE (1994) Experimental observation of self-
replicating spots in a reaction-diffusion system. Nature 369:215–222
Lesmes F, Hochberg D, Mora F, Perez-Mercader J (2003) Noise-controlled self-replicating
patterns. Phys Rev Lett 91:238301
4
From Dissipative Structures to Biological Evolution: A Thermodynamic Perspective
117

Levin HS (2003) Neuroplasticity following non-penetrating traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj 17(8):
665–674
Lin C, Katla SK, Juan Pérez-Mercader J (2021) Photochemically induced cyclic morphological
dynamics via degradation of autonomously produced, self-assembled polymer vesicles.
Commun Chem 4:25. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42004-021-00464-8
Longo MJ (2011) Detection of a dipole in the handedness of spiral galaxies with redshifts z 0.04.
Phys Lett B 699:224–229
Mason SF, Tranter GE (1984) The parity-violating energy difference between enantiomeric
molecules. Mol Phys 53(5):1091–1111
Mendoza E (ed) (1977) Reﬂections on the motive force of ﬁre by Sadi Carnot and other papers on
the second law of thermodynamics by E
 Clapeyron and R Clausius. Peter Smith,
Gloucester, MA
Munteanu A, Sole RV (2006) Pattern formation in Noisy self-replicating spots. Int J Bifurc Chaos
16:3679–3685. https://doi.org/10.1142/S0218127406017063
Nicolis G, Prigogine I (1977) Self-organization in non-equilibrium systems. Wiley, New York
Onsager L (1931) Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. Phys Rev 37:405–426
Pearson JA (1993) Complex patterns in a simple system. Science 261:189–192
Plasson R et al (2007) Review article: emergence of homochirality in far-for-equilibrium systems:
mechanisms and role in prebiotic chemistry. Chirality 19:589–600
Prigogine I (1947) Etude Thermodynamique des Phénomènes Irréversibles. Editions Desoer, Liège,
Belgium
Prigogine I (1967) Introduction to thermodynamics of irreversible processes. Wiley, London
Prigogine I, Nicolis G (1967) On symmetry-breaking instabilities in dissipative systems. J Chem
Phys 46:3542–3552
Prigogine I, Stengers I (1984) Order out of chaos: man’s new dialogue with nature. Bantam,
New York
Prigogine I, Nicolis G, Babloyantz A (1972) Thermodynamics of evolution. Phys Today 25:23
Quack M (2002) How important is parity violation for molecular and biomolecular chirality?
Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 41:4618–4630
Reynolds WN, Ponce-Dawson S, Pearson JE (1997) Self-replicating spots in reaction-diffusion
systems. Phys Rev E 56:185–198
Soai K, Shibata T, Morioka H, Choji K (1995) Asymmetric autocatalysis and ampliﬁcation of
enantiomeric excess of a chiral molecule. Nature 378:767–768
Suematsu NJ, Mori Y, Amemiya T, Nakata S (2016) Oscillation of speed of a self-propelled
Belousov-Zhabotinsky droplet. J Phys Chem Lett 7:3424–3428. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpclett.6b01539
Vidal C, Pacault A (eds) (1981) Non-linear phenomenon in chemical dynamics. Springer, Berlin
118
D. Kondepudi et al.

Self-Organization at Different Levels
of Metazoan Complexity in Comparative
Genomic–Phenomic Context
5
Valeria V. Isaeva
Abstract
The chapter presents an analytic description of evolutionary and developmental
morphogenetic events in Metazoa using concepts of self-organization, morpho-
logical and molecular–genetic data, and the topological approach to the analysis.
Biological objects are complex systems capable of dynamic self-organization at
all levels of biological complexity. Some examples of self-organization in
cyanobacteria, metazoan cells in vitro (chick embryo myogenic cells, molluscan
hemocytes, sea urchin embryo cells), and animal communities of some
vertebrates are shown. Following René Thom, a topological interpretation of
some evolutionary and developmental transformations is presented using well-
known mathematical concepts. Toroidal forms are considered as examples of
functionally optimized biological design and attractors in metazoan morphogen-
esis. Molecular–genetic evidence of genomic–phenomic correlations determining
the body plan and evolutionary trajectories in Metazoa is discussed. Gene regu-
latory networks and whole metazoan genomes are interpreted as self-organizing
network systems dynamically transforming in development and evolution. Sym-
metry breaking, topological discontinuities and catastrophes, and body plan
transformations are fundamental phenomena in metazoan development and
evolution.
V. V. Isaeva (*)
A.N. Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
A.V. Zhirmunsky National Scientiﬁc Center of Marine Biology, Far Eastern Branch, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Vladivostok, Russia
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_5
119

Keywords
Cyanobacteria · Metazoa · Cell interactions · Social behavior · Topological
transformations · Gene regulatory networks · Genome–phenome correlations
5.1
Introduction
The concept of self-organization originated within cybernetics (Ashby 1947;
Gershenson 2012). Alan Turing (1952) and N. Rashevsky (1958) theoretically
predicted spontaneous pattern formation as the emergence of inhomogeneities in
some chemical reactions. Later, Ilya Prigogine proved the possibility of dissipative
structure formation as spatial inhomogeneities in open nonequilibrium systems by
the ﬂux of energy and matter (Nicolis and Prigogine 1977, 1989; Prigogine and
Stengers 1984; McCusker 2020). The conception of self-organization resulting in the
emergence of spatial and/or temporal order (Haken 1977) was propagated into an
extended interdisciplinary ﬁeld of scientiﬁc research from physics to biology and
engineering, in nonliving, living, and artiﬁcial systems (Camazine et al. 2001;
Gershenson 2012; Johnson and Lam 2010; Feistel and Ebeling 2011; Lane 2015;
Wedlich-Söldner and Betz 2018; McCusker 2020; Gershenson et al. 2020).
Living systems are open, far-from-equilibrium complex network systems,
maintained by continuous ﬂows of matter, energy, and information. Almost any
network system can be described as self-organizing one (Ashby 1956; Gershenson
2012; Gershenson et al. 2020), so self-organization is inevitable in complex
biological network systems with nonlinear dynamics, characterized by feedback,
robustness, ﬂexibility, hierarchy. If a complex network system has a set of attractors
as organized “preferred” states, the system will self-organize toward these attractors
(Gershenson 2012). The great French mathematician René Thom (1923–2002) had
shown that biological objects and events might be described in terms of vector ﬁelds,
attractors, and catastrophes (Thom 1969, 1996, 1997). Since topology operates with
the most general properties of spaces, an adequate description of biological mor-
phology can be obtained by using topological concepts and terminology. The
topological approach to the description and interpretation of some morphogenetic
events in onto- and phylogenesis is presented here.
Biological systems provide countless examples of self-organization at all levels,
from molecular one to ecosystems (Kauffman 1993; Babloyantz 1986; Misteli 2001;
Kirschner and Gerhart 2005; Karsenti 2008; Gershenson 2012; Gloag et al. 2015;
Balaban et al. 2018; Saha and Galic 2018; Wedlich-Söldner and Betz 2018; Dong
and Fisher 2019; McCusker 2020; de Astacio et al. 2020). For example, at the
cellular level, cells in vitro reveal remarkable capabilities for self-organization
without controlling the inﬂuences of a whole body; in different animal communities
(ﬂocks, schools, and herds), vertebrates coordinate their collective behavior and
reach “collective decisions.” In this chapter, examples of self-organization of the
cyanobacterial cells and different metazoan cells in vitro (chick embryo myoblasts,
molluscan hemocytes, sea urchin embryo cells) as the transition from chaos into
120
V. V. Isaeva

order are presented, as well as self-organization phenomena in communities of
vertebrates.
For contemporary theorists, biological self-organization in the living world is
directed and ﬁxed genetically by natural selection (Kauffman 1993; Parrish and
Edelstein-Keshet, 1999; Camazine et al. 2001; Blazis 2002; Parrish et al. 2002;
Gershenson 2012; Kirschner and Gerhart 2005; Johnson and Lam 2010; Goldenfeld
and Woese 2011; Glancy et al. 2016). The selection of self-organizing systems leads
to an increase in robustness, ﬂexibility, plasticity, adaptability, and evolvability.
During self-organization, the global pattern of a system emerges as epiphenomenon
generated by numerous local interactions between the elements of the lower levels
(Kauffman 1993; Parrish and Edelstein-Keshet 1999; Camazine et al. 2001; Parrish
et al. 2002; Gershenson 2012; Wedlich-Söldner and Betz 2018). In an effort to
understand some genomic-phenomic correlations as a genotype-phenotype mapping
(Minelli 2015; Ogura and Busch 2016; Isaeva and Rozhnov 2021), the Molecular
genetic background of metazoan axial body plan is considered in this chapter.
5.2
Self-Organization in Cyanobacteria Cell Communities
Three major domains of the living world, Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya
(Eukaryota), are distinguished, and the ﬁrst two domains often are named Prokaryota
(Woese 2002; Muller et al. 2010; Wassenaar 2012). It is known that life arose around
half a billion years after the earth’s formation, but Bacteria and Archaea have
remained simple in their morphology up till now (throughout about 4 billion
years). Bacteria had invented most forms of metabolism, including multiple forms
of respiration and photosynthesis (Lane 2010). It is widely accepted that
photosynthesizing cyanobacteria played a crucial role in the evolution of the bio-
sphere and were responsible for the accumulation of atmospheric oxygen during the
Great Oxidation Event starting 2.45 billion years ago, hence dramatically changing
life on the planet (Lane 2010; Little et al. 2012; Wassenaar 2012; Schirrmeister et al.
2013). Cyanobacteria are morphologically diverse prokaryotic organisms, with
morphotypes ranging from unicellular to multicellular ﬁlamentous forms; phyloge-
netic evidence indicates that multicellularity evolved very early in the history of
cyanobacteria and coincided with the onset of the Great Oxidation Event
(Schirrmeister et al. 2013). In the evolution of both Prokaryota and Eukaryota,
multicellularity has apparently evolved many times (Rainey and Kerr 2012;
Strassmann and Queller 2012; Olsen et al. 2012). Among other recent cyanobacteria,
Oscillatoria
terebriformis
and
Microcoleus
chthonoplastes
used
in
our
investigations of self-organization (Isaeva et al. 2013) are multicellular ﬁlamentous
species. Oscillatoriales have long multicellular, usually straight ﬁlamentous
trichomes consisting of uniform cylindrical cells. The trichomes are ﬂexible, motile,
and capable of the formation of bundles, multiradial aggregates, bioﬁlms, and three-
dimensional mats in laboratory cultures (Castenholz 1968; Richardson and
Castenholtz 1987, 1989; Petroff et al. 2008; Shepard and Sumner 2010; Sumina
and Sumin 2013; Isaeva et al. 2013).
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
121

It is usually assumed that stromatolites, the petriﬁed reefs of prokaryotic
communities having regularly layered macroscopic inner structure, are early fossils
formed by cyanobacterial communities (see Lane 2010; Sumina and Sumin 2013;
Seilacher and Gishlick 2015). Seilacher and Gishlick (2015) supposed that the
regular layered morphology of stromatolites was controlled by self-organizational
principles and environmental conditions. Nick Lane in his book “Life ascending”
gave a photograph of the “living stromatolites”—natural cyanobacterial colonies,
about 1 m in high, in Western Australia (Hamlin Pool, Shark Bay) (Lane 2010,
Fig. 3.3, p. 75); outer layers of these formations were ﬁlled with living cyanobacteria
(Lane 2010). Earlier A.W.D. Larkum (1999) described the “stromatolites” at Hamlin
Pool, Shark Bay (Fig. 5.3, p. 151), as a cyanobacterial symbiosis with coral reefs.
Needless to say, cyanobacteria predate coral reefs by billions of years as stromatolite
formers and their role in the modern reef formation is a different one (Larkum 1999).
Petroff et al. (2008) considered living cyanobacterial aggregates (without any corals)
as analogs of ancient stromatolites.
Similar “living stromatolites” (up to 10 cm in high) were spontaneously self-
organized by communities of two cyanobacterial species, O. terebriformis and
M. chthonoplastes, cultured by Eugenia Sumina in the laboratory of Moscow State
University. The coordinated behavior of bacterial communities led to the perception
of bacterial mats as “cities” of microorganisms (Li and Tian 2012), so the underwater
landscape created by O. terebriformis and M. chthonoplastes I venture to name
“Cyanopolis” (Fig. 5.1).
Evidently, the multicellular ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria O. terebriformis and
M. chthonoplastes are capable of forming various macroscopic structures of large-
scale order by self-organization.
In this culture, O. terebriformis was the main, prevalent component of the
bacterial community (Sumina and Sumin 2013). At the microscopic level, three-
dimensional polygonal networks with hexagonal tessellation formed by ﬁlamentous
cyanobacteria, in particular O. terebriformis, were found (Petroff et al. 2008;
Shepard and Sumner 2010; Sumina and Sumin 2013; Isaeva et al. 2013). Explor-
atory activity and complex movements of trichomes including contact inhibition and
Fig. 5.3 Microscopic patterns in myogenic cell in vitro (from left to right): radial migration pattern
from single-cell aggregate; triangular connection between tree neighboring aggregates; hexagonal
pattern forming myoblasts migrating from several cell aggregates (from Isaeva 1994)
122
V. V. Isaeva

contact guidance (see Sect. 5.3) and the sequential transformation of multi-array
radial aggregates into three-dimensional networks were revealed in O. terebriformis
(Sumina and Sumin 2013; Isaeva 2014a). The formation of these network patterns is
due to the mobility of multicellular ﬁlaments (trichomes); dynamic collective behav-
ior of trichome bundles led to the formation of three-dimensional polygonal
networks (Sumina and Sumin 2013; Isaeva et al. 2013) (Fig. 5.2).
Thus, coordinated social behavior and self-organization of complex cell
assemblies including polygonal networks of large-scale order were demonstrated
Fig. 5.1 “Cyanopolis” formed by cyanobacteria (cultured by E. Sumina; photo by V.V. Isaeva)
Fig. 5.2 Microscopic view of three-dimensional polygonal networks formed by the cyanobacteria
O. terebriformis; right—higher magniﬁcation; modiﬁed from Isaeva et al. (2013)
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
123

in cyanobacterial communities, which are phenomenologically comparable with
behavior of metazoan cells in vitro (Isaeva et al. 2013; see Sect. 5.3). The dynamic
and reversible rearrangement of random trichome patterns into highly ordered
polygonal networks is analogous to physical phase transition depending on external
conditions. Since cyanobacteria are photosynthetic organisms, the most important
and prominent morphogenetic reactions of their communities are the reactions to
changes in illumination (Sumina and Sumin 2013; Isaeva 2014a). Structures formed
by cyanobacteria O. terebriformis, in particular the multi-arrayed aggregates, have
also mechanosensitivity (Sumina and Sumin 2013).
Coordinated cell movements resulting in ordered spatial patterns of bacterial
colonies were observed repeatedly (Ingham 2012; Mastropaolo et al. 2012; Olsen
et al. 2012). For example, Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and Staphylococcus aureus form radial, spiral, and fractal patterns of
colonies (Ben-Jacob et al. 2004, 2012; López et al. 2010). In Paenibacillus vortex
and some members of the genera Pseudomonas and Proteus, “swarming” as coordi-
nated movement provided by the ﬂagellar activity is found (Ingham 2012;
Mastropaolo et al. 2012).
Microbiologists have discovered an unexpectedly high degree of coordinated
social behavior in cell communities of Bacteria and also Archaea (Crespi 2001;
Ben-Jacob et al. 2004, 2012; Brodsky 2009; Foster 2011; Chandler and Greenberg
2012; Olsen et al. 2012; Isaeva 2014a; Balaban et al. 2018). Among Archaea, for
example, two species of the genus Giganthauma may form long ﬁlaments, in which
G. karukerense are associated with bacterial cells (Muller et al. 2010; Olsen et al.
2012). A new ﬁeld of research, sociomicrobiology, emerged, considering bacteria as
social beings, capable of complex activity including social interactions, “quorum
sensing,” dynamic adaptation to environmental changes, and even “altruism” (Chan-
dler and Greenberg 2012; Olsen et al. 2012; Strassmann and Queller 2012). For
example, evidence for altruism in E. coli responding to the attack of lytic phage by
committing suicide to prevent parasite transmission to nearby relatives was
demonstrated (Refardt et al. 2013). Many microorganisms and cells within eukary-
otic multicellular organisms secrete small signaling molecules and sense their
concentration in the environment; different types of bacterial cell-to-cell signaling
systems are considered quorum-sensing systems. The term “quorum sensing” was
introduced to speciﬁcally refer to the cell density-linked coordinated gene expression
in populations that experience threshold signal concentrations to induce a
synchronized population response (Fuqua et al. 1994; De Monte et al. 2007;
Atkinson and Williams 2009; Li and Tian 2012; Olsen et al. 2012; Balaban et al.
2018). So, bacterial communications include cell–cell chemical signaling that
provides a bacterial “quorum” involving coordinated transcription (Waters and
Bassler 2005; Atkinson and Williams 2009; Chandler and Greenberg 2012; Olsen
et al. 2012). Quorum sensing confuses the distinction between prokaryotes and
eukaryotes because it enables bacteria to act as multicellular organisms (Bodman
von et al. 2008; Brodsky 2009). Quorum-sensing signaling is not restricted to
bacterial cell-to-cell communication, but also includes interkingdom signaling as
communication between microorganisms and their hosts, i.e., prokaryote–eukaryote
124
V. V. Isaeva

cross-communication (Bodman von et al. 2008; Anetzberger and Jung 2010; Hughes
and Sperandio 2012).
Adaptive interactions of “smart” cooperating bacterial cells permit to treat their
behavior as a “bacterial wisdom,” “social intelligence,” and “collective intelligence”
(Ben-Jacob et al. 2004, 2012; Balaban et al. 2018) of a bacterial community able to
take collective decisions (Ben-Jacob et al. 2004, 2012; Balázsi et al. 2011; Ingham
2012). The collective cell behavior such as information generation, collective mem-
ory, and efﬁcient cell-to-cell communication is an emergent property of the group
and not of the individual cells (Balaban et al. 2018). Collective behavior refers to
complex macroscopic dynamics of microbial communities exhibiting emergence
and self-organization properties without a global controller (Balaban et al. 2018).
The self-organization of collective behaviors often manifests as dramatic patterns of
emergent large-scale order (Gloag et al. 2015). Bacterial stigmergy is a self-
organization principle that explained how random and independent movements of
individual cell (or trichomes) could result, by the transfer of local information
(chemical, for example), coordinated behavior at a global level (Gloag et al.
2015). Many other researchers of bacterial aggregations and collective rearrange-
ment of the cells in colonies and metabolic dynamics also considered the coordinated
social behavior in bacterial communities as self-organization (Caratozzolo et al.
2008; Brodsky 2009; Hengge and Sourjik 2013; Ebrahimi et al. 2019; de Astacio
et al. 2020; You et al. 2021).
Thus, the studied community of cyanobacteria, as well as other bacteria and
archaea, is capable of complex social interactions and transition to large-scale orders
with dynamic and reversible adaptation to environmental changes.
5.3
Cell Social Behavior and Self-Organization in Metazoan
Cell Assemblies In Vitro
It is assumed that Bacteria and Archaea gave rise to Eukaryota: The mitochondria
and chloroplasts were derived by endosymbiosis of proteobacteria and archaea
(Margulis 1981; Woese 2002; Wassenaar 2012; Strassmann and Queller, 2012;
Lane 2015). In addition, horizontal gene transfer has increased the complexity of
the recipient cell design (Woese 2002; Lane 2015). Complex life arose through a
singular endosymbiosis between an archaeon and a bacterium; there are no surviving
evolutionary intermediates between the bacterial morphological simplicity and the
complexity of eukaryotic cell (Lane 2015). Nick Lane (2015) believes that energy is
central to evolution, and the endosymbiosis broke those constraints, enabling the
evolution of vastly more complex cells; the clue to the eukaryotic cell complexity
lies in the energy generation by mitochondria. Mitochondria and complex internal
membrane structures ensure an essential intensiﬁcation of the ﬂux of energy and
matter in comparison with prokaryotic cells (Lane 2015).
Besides nucleus and mitochondria (in plant cells also plastids), eukaryotic cells
contain complex membrane system and cytoskeleton capable of self-organization.
At the subcellular level, self-organization can be deﬁned as the ability of cell
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
125

organelles or macromolecular complexes to determine their own structure based on
the functional relations of the components (Misteli 2001). Macromolecular complex
formation during the construction of cytoskeletal structures (including actin, tubulin,
motor proteins, and other molecular components) is traditionally considered as self-
organization (Kirschner and Gerhart 2005; Karsenti 2008; Johnson and Lam 2010;
Sasai 2013; Tee et al. 2015; Dasbiswas et al. 2018; Wedlich-Söldner and Betz 2018;
Kadzik et al. 2020; McCusker 2020). The polymerization of actin and tubulin forms
cytoskeletal actin ﬁlaments and microtubules that deﬁne the shape of a cell, its
migration and polarity, intracellular transport, and mitotic division. The data on the
assembly of actomyosin favor the interpretation that intracellular waves of actin
polymerization and contractility are indeed self-organized by biomechanical feed-
back mechanisms (Wedlich-Söldner and Betz 2018; Kadzik et al. 2020). Self-
organization was repeatedly demonstrated for the cytoskeleton microtubule system
with the formation of various structural patterns. For example, dynamic and complex
patterns of microtubule self-organization were observed in the very simple system
that included solely tubulin and GTP (Tabony 2006). Microtubules and their
associated motor proteins can be self-organized into various large-scale patterns:
asters, vortices, and a network of aster poles connected by aligned microtubules. It
was also shown the formation of structurally diverse microtubule patterns depending
on the concentration of tubulin and the motor proteins (Misteli 2001).
A polarized cellular architecture is fundamental to the establishment of the
anterior–posterior polarity of animal egg and zygote. Both the actin and microtubule
cytoskeletal elements work together to convert an initial asymmetry into a global cell
polarity. The cytoskeletal system transmits and integrates information across cellular
dimensions; a polarized cellular architecture is fundamental to the formation of
embryonic axes (Li and Bowerman 2010; Isaeva 2012, 2014b). Egg cytoskeleton
functions as a global morphogenetic determinant, which directs and maintains the
anisotropy of molecular information distributed in the ooplasm so determining axis
polarity of a future adult organism (Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012).
The investigation of the interlink between membrane tension and signaling events
that are triggered by rapid tension variations has led to the conclusion on biomechan-
ical, feedback-driven self-organization (Wedlich-Söldner and Betz 2018). It was
shown that mechanical tension inﬂuenced cell proliferation, differentiation, and
morphogenesis (Stamenovic and Ingber 2009; Beloussov 2012, 2015; Isaeva et al.
2012; Eroshkin and Zaraisky 2017). The cytoskeleton is the generator of morpho-
genesis at the cellular and supracellular levels, and cytoskeletal reorganization is the
basis of metazoan morphogenesis (Vasiliev 2007; Stamenovic and Ingber 2009;
Wedlich-Söldner and Betz 2018). Cell cytoskeleton is responsible for the control of
the shape and mechanical properties of cells, orients most of the cell’s metabolic
machinery, and mediates mechanotransduction, i.e., the process by which cells sense
and respond to mechanical cues by altering intracellular biochemistry and gene
expression (Stamenovic and Ingber 2009; Eroshkin and Zaraisky 2017). Cells
control their shape and mechanics through the use of an architectural mechanism
known as “tensegrity” (tension + integrity) to structurally integrate thousands of
different molecular components; tensegrity may facilitate mechanochemical
126
V. V. Isaeva

transduction and convert mechanical forces into changes in molecular biochemistry
(Stamenovic and Ingber 2009). In multicellular Metazoa, cytoskeletal tensional
forces are transferred to the extracellular matrix via integrin receptor-containing
focal adhesions and to cytoskeletons of neighboring cells through cadherin-
containing cell–cell adhesion complexes, so external mechanical signals can propa-
gate a long distance (Stamenovic and Ingber 2009). The mechanical tension is able
to activate gene expression; the molecular mechanisms translating mechanical forces
into the expression of some genes including mechanotransduction across cell and
cytoskeleton were shown (Farge 2003; Desprat et al. 2008; Brunet et al. 2013;
Beloussov 2015; Eroshkin and Zaraisky 2017; Wedlich-Söldner and Betz 2018).
It is evident that collective behavior and social networking such as quorum
sensing are not limited to the bacterial kingdom (Atkinson and Williams 2009;
Brodsky 2009). Eukaryotic cells inherited from Prokaryota some features of unicel-
lular organisms and enhanced their abilities for explorative and adaptive “intelli-
gent” social behavior and self-organization (Brodsky 2009; Isaeva 2014a). In 1985,
Albrecht-Buehler in his remarkable article entitled “Is cytoplasm intelligent too?”
wrote on an ability of metazoan cells to perceive information from other cells,
process it, and realize an adaptive answer. It is well known also that the aggregation
of the Dictyostelium amoebae (directed by the chemotactic mechanism in response
to the concentration of the chemoattractant cAMP) forming concentric or spiral
waves of cells movement is recognized as a classic example of self-organization.
Metazoan cells are involved in the organization of multicellular organisms at all
levels. A metazoan organism, a “state of cells,” strictly controls the self-renewal,
differentiation, apoptosis (morphogenetic cell death), and behavior of own cells,
promoting their “altruism” and suppressing cell individuality; a “tyranny of the
organism” (Gould 2002) is inevitable. Nevertheless, a cell in a multicellular eukary-
otic organism retains some features of an individual being capable of exploration,
collective behavior, and collective self-organization, as evidenced by experiments
with dissociated cells cultured outside the organism, in vitro (Kirschner and Gerhart
2005; Vasiliev and Gelfand 2006; Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012, 2013). Experiments with
dissociated metazoan cells in vitro clearly reveal their remarkable possibilities of
self-organization in the absence of controlling inﬂuences of the whole organism,
organs, and tissues. Dissociated cells in vitro are able to explore and coordinate
social behavior and the spontaneous generation of some ordered morphological
patterns (Kirschner and Gerhart 2005; Deisboeck and Couzin 2009; Isaeva 2012,
2014a). The coordinated social behavior of metazoan cells in the monolayer cultures
in vitro involves the contact guidance resulting in parallel cell orientation and the
contact inhibition of cell movement and cell reproduction resulting in the self-
organization of ordered spatial patterns (Weiss and Garber 1952; Weiss 1961,
1968; Abercrombie 1980; Turner et al. 1983; Trinkaus 1984; Lackie 1986; Isaeva
et al. 2008, 2012, 2013).
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
127

5.3.1
Myogenic Cells In Vitro
Dissociated chick embryo skeletal myoblasts (myogenic cells from the femoral
muscle of 11-day-old chick embryo) in monolayer cell culture are supplied with
nutritive medium and able to proliferate, move, and differentiate into multinuclear
myotubes. The myoblasts usually maintain their typical elongated, spindle-like
shape. Spatial patterns in a monolayer myogenic culture are determined by intercel-
lular interactions: the contact inhibition of cell movement and contact cell-to-cell
orientation. The contact inhibition of cell movement preventing cell crossing over
in vitro (Abercrombie 1980; Heaysman 1980) results in radial patterns of cell
migration from aggregates, which are common in monolayer cultures of different
cell types (Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012, 2013). Chick embryo myoblasts migrating from
aggregates in vitro are also radially arranged around each aggregate due to the
contact inhibition of cell movement (Fig. 5.3).
These migrating myoblasts form cell bridges between the aggregates (Fig. 5.3);
the following myoblast migration along these cell bridges is due to cell–cell contact
guidance (one cell along the other). Thus, cell bridges connecting the aggregates
direct subsequent cell movements along these bridges reinforcingthe emerging
reticular pattern of polygonal tesselation. Some myoblasts in cell bridges
differentiated with the formation of multinuclear myotubes; the cell bridges evi-
dently are stretched and disposed above the artiﬁcial solid substrate (Fig. 5.3).
This reticular pattern that emerged in myogenic culture is similar to the integrated
polygonal networks of the cyanobacteria O. terebriformis (Fig. 5.2) and in cell
cultures derived from different tissues and species of metazoan animals (Isaeva
et al. 2008, 2012). For example, P. Weiss (1961) described how neurons and
nerve ﬁbers formed the bridges between two chick embryo spinal ganglia in vitro;
later, Weiss (1968) found also a triangular pattern connecting three explants and
directing cell trafﬁc.
These reticular patterns and structural patterns of topological singularities (see
Sect. 5.4) emerged by self-organization of myogenic cells only in vitro; such
myogenic patterns are absent in vivo, during normal myogenesis in the whole
embryo. The skeletal myogenesis in vivo is tension-dependent, and in vivo, it is
also necessary for the mechanical tension for myotube differentiation. Myoblast
attachment to an artiﬁcial solid substrate in vitro ensured the possibility for mechan-
ical stress as a prerequisite for the completion of skeletal myogenesis (Isaeva et al.
2008, 2012). It was shown that myogenesis is essentially modiﬁed in the rotating
suspension culture: myoblasts in three-dimensional aggregates fused with the for-
mation of atypical massive myosymplasts with dozens of randomly clustered nuclei
(Isaeva 1980, 1994). After replating in monolayer culture and attachment to a solid
substrate, these myosymplasts undergo gradual elongation and differentiation into
typical cross-striated myotubes (Isaeva et al. 2012). The morphogenetic role of
mechanical stress in myogenesis was demonstrated experimentally (Vandenburgh
1982), as well as in tension-dependent developmental cytomechanics (see above).
The inﬂuence of physical relief of the substrate in vitro on the orientation of
myoblasts and myotubes in the myogenic monolayer culture was also demonstrated
128
V. V. Isaeva

as the contact guidance of myoblasts and myotubes along grooves of artiﬁcial
substrate (Isaeva 1980, 1994; Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012). The ordered arrangement
of cells determined by physical properties of the substrate is maintained and trans-
mitted by intercellular contact cell orientation side by side. The parallel orientation
of myotubes on the substrate with ordered microrelief imitates the parallel arrange-
ment of muscle ﬁbers in the skeletal muscle in vivo; topological singularities are
absent (Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012). So, in monolayer culture, bipolar myogenic cells,
becoming free from controlling inﬂuences of tissue and organism, spontaneously, by
self-organization formed two-dimensional cell direction ﬁelds, with or without
topological singularities depending on physical microrelief of artiﬁcial solid
substrate.
Thus, the spatial patterns in myogenic and ﬁbroblast cultures are the result of cell
interaction games: contact guidance and contact inhibition of cell movement. The
cell–cell and cell–substrate interactions (short-range order) generate cell direction
ﬁelds (long-range order). Cell contact guidance is the cellular basis of myogenic
morphogenesis both in vivo and in vitro as a transition of the local order of cell
interactions into the global order of cell ﬁelds. While at the cellular level the
biological mechanisms of self-organization in monolayer culture are contact inhibi-
tion and contact guidance of cell movement, at the molecular level it is the ﬁbrillar
actin function necessary for actin–myosin interaction (Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012). The
treatment with cytochalasin B or D (a speciﬁc inhibitor of the ﬁbrillar actin system)
prevented cell migrations, cell differentiation, and all cell–cell and cell–substrate
interactions so completely inhibiting the formation of structural patterns and mor-
phogenesis in vitro (Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012). Therefore, myoblast migration and
pattern formation are due to the F-actin-dependent mechanism including the acto-
myosin interaction.
5.3.2
Hemocyte Aggregation In Vitro
Early stages of cell aggregation in suspension at high cell density are similar in
diverse cell systems: Cells of different organisms and different tissue origins form
cell clusters of varying size and shape. The early aggregation phase proceeds in the
same fashion as it was described initially for sponge cells (Wilson 1907) and later for
sea urchin embryo cells (Spiegel and Spiegel 1975, 1986). The same aggregation
pattern is observed in cell suspensions of other cell types from different animals at
high cell density. Free circulating cells, for example, molluscan hemocytes and
echinoderm
coelomocytes,
are
the
emergency
systems
of
rapid
response
characterized by chaotic dynamics and rapid transition from one state to another.
These systems consisting initially of isolated cells are suitable to study phenomena
of self-organization. The contact of the hemolymph, coelomic ﬂuid, or blood with
the external environment causes immediate cell aggregation.
The earliest cell aggregations having the fractal dimension with values of 1.6 to
1.7 are similar to fractal “monsters” (Mandelbrot 1983) and to chaotic fractal clusters
arising during diffusion-limited aggregation (DLA) (Witten and Sander 1981). After
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
129

completion of the chaotic aggregation phase (within a few minutes), the hemocyte
aggregates became spherical ones and for several hours transform into ordered
spherical bodies, formed by several layers of elongated ﬂattened cells and similar
to encapsulation bodies (Isaeva 2012). Thus, a cell aggregate is an integrated whole
showing emerging properties due to coordinated “social” cell behavior.
When the hemolymph of the scallop Mizuhopecten yessoensis was transferred
into a Petri dish, we observed very rapid aggregation of hemocytes followed by
contraction of the hemocyte aggregates (Isaeva et al. 2008) (Fig. 5.4).
Thus, contact of the M. yessoensis hemolymph with an external medium causes
an immediate aggregation of hemocytes as a modiﬁed in vitro protective clotting
reaction. During the phase of compactization and contraction, the fusion of neigh-
boring aggregates originally connected with a narrow bridge of few cells is observed
(Fig. 5.4). Freshly isolated molluscan hemolymph or echinoderm coelomic ﬂuid
contains numerous aggregates of various shapes and sizes. During aggregate con-
traction, the linear size of the aggregates was essentially reduced (Fig. 5.4). Cyto-
chalasin B or D (2–5 μg/ml) completely inhibits both the contraction and the fusion
of aggregates—so revealing the dependence of these processes on an intact system
of actin ﬁlaments. Therefore, aggregate compaction is a ﬁbrillar actin-dependent
process, comparable to muscle contraction.
Molluscan hemocytes and echinoderm coelomocytes fulﬁll in vivo such cell-
protective functions as clotting, encapsulation, phagocytosis, and primary wound
reparation. In vitro, reactions of phagocytosis and encapsulation are expressed as the
attachment to an artiﬁcial substrate, while clotting reaction appears as cell aggrega-
tion (Isaeva 1994, Isaeva et al. 2008; Kotolupov and Isaeva 2013) (Fig. 5.5).
Thus, coordinated, social behavior metazoan cells lead to the formation of
ordered morphological patterns of cell assemblies (Abercrombie and Heaysman
1954; Vasiliev and Gelfand 2006; Deisboeck and Couzin 2009; Isaeva 2012,
2014a; Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012, 2013). It was revealed a change in cell behavior
in vitro as a sudden spontaneous transition from chaos (irregular movement of
individual cells) to order (collective cell behavior resulting in the self-organization
of 3D cellular aggregates or 2D ordered patterns) similar to a phase transition in
physical systems (Bird 2003; Deisboeck and Couzin 2009; Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012,
Fig. 5.4 Contraction dynamics of cell aggregate formed by hemocytes of the scallop M.
yessoensis; the sequence of aggregate fusion is shown within circles; modiﬁed from Isaeva et al.
(2008)
130
V. V. Isaeva

2013). By the contact guidance cell–cell and cell–substrate, translation of the local
order of cell interactions into the global order of cell ﬁelds is realized in vitro.
5.3.3
Metazoan Embryonic Cells
Experiments with dissociation embryonic cells of some animals provided evidence
of tremendous self-organization and regulatory properties of these cells capable of
spontaneous reaggregation and development into the whole organism. Recent data
demonstrated striking regulatory capacities of dissociated and reaggregated embry-
onic cells of the cnidarian Nematostella vectensis (Kirilliva et al. 2018). The
reaggregated cells of dissociated gastrulae showed enormous plasticity including
the capacity of the ectodermal cells to convert into endodermal ones and using
various pathways of the gastrulation process as alternative developmental
trajectories. The data suggest that the spectrum of developmental trajectories acces-
sible for a species might be far broader than can be concluded from the observation
of normal development, which might involve only a subset of available morphoge-
netic capacities (Kirilliva et al. 2018).
It has been shown earlier that the reaggregates of dissociated sea urchin embry-
onic cells formed swimming “embryoids,” or “embryoid bodies,” which were
capable to develop into more or less normal larvae, to undergo metamorphosis,
and ﬁnally become fertile sea urchins (Giudice 1962; Hinegardner 1975; Spiegel and
Spiegel 1986). During the development of the echinoderm embryoids from
dissociated blastomeres, blastulation, gastrulation, and mesoderm formation
occurred in another way in comparison with normal embryogenesis, however, can
lead to the development of normal organisms (Tamura et al. 1998; Isaeva et al. 2008;
Presnov et al. 2010). For example, in the period corresponding to the stage of
blastula epithelialization (mid-blastula transition), dissociated blastomeres of
Fig. 5.5 Hemocyte protective reactions: left—an aggregate of hemocytes from M. yessoensis on
microporous substrate in vitro; cell–cell and cell–substrate adhesion is evident (scanning electron
microscopy);
right—a
scheme
of
defensive–morphogenetic
reactions
of
hemocytes
and
coelomocytes (clotting, wound reparation, encapsulation, phagocytosis); modiﬁed from Isaeva
and Korenbaum (1989), Demenok et al. (1997)
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
131

echinoderm embryos, lying on the bottom of a Petri dish as a loose layer of cells,
formed the local plates of tightly joined epithelial cells. Later, edges of each local
monolayer plate became bent, risen above the substrate and ﬁnally closed with the
formation of a three-dimensional embryoid; such unusual embryogenesis in vitro
was called “blastulation” (Dan-Sohkawa and Fujisawa 1980; Dan-Sohkawa et al.
1986; Kadokawa et al. 1986). We observed the similar blastulation process in
experiments with dissociated blastomeres from embryos of the sea urchin
Strongylocentrotus nudus) (Isaeva 1994; Isaeva et al. 2008; Presnov et al. 2010;
Kotolupov and Isaeva 2013). In starﬁsh embryoids developing from reaggregates of
dissociated embryonic cells, mesoderm formation occurred by the normal
enterocoely (evaginations of the gut wall) or by schizocoelic-like pathway (cell
immigration
following
aggregation
and
cavitation),
which
is
unusual
for
echinoderms and all Deuterostomes (Tamura et al. 1998). In embryoids separated
from large chimeric aggregates, which were formed after the dissociation of many
urchin embryos, we observed similar alternative developmental trajectories, includ-
ing also gastrulation by the cavitation process instead of the normal invagination
(Isaeva 1994).
Recently, it was shown also that small aggregates of mouse embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) in vitro, with appropriate stimulation, can undergo gastrulation-like self-
organizing resulting in “gastruloids” containing neural, mesodermal, and endoder-
mal derivatives that mimic embryonic spatial–temporal Hox gene expression
(Beccari et al. 2018). Cloning intestinal stem cells is also self-organized forming
mini-guts (Sato and Clevers 2013).
Thus, many experimental data indicate that the experimentally revealing spec-
trum of potencies of embryonic cells is broader than the possibilities realized in
normal development (Kirilliva et al. 2018). These regulatory events in vitro consid-
ered as self-organization (Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012; Beccari et al. 2018; Kirilliva et al.
2018; Sato and Clevers 2013) represent the scenario of transition from chaos into
order by means of cell social interactions. Self-organizing systems of embryonic
cells are able to achieve a normal ﬁnite state using various developmental trajectories
and demonstrating the equiﬁnality of development morphogenetic equiﬁnality pre-
sumedly due to the streaming of the trajectories to a ﬁnal attractor.
5.4
Topological Approach: Transformations in Metazoan
Development and Evolution
The spatial organization of living systems has a dynamical character; these are forms
sustained in a metabolic ﬂow. V.N. Beklemishev (1890–1962), an outstanding
Russian zoologist and comparative morphologist, considered an organism as a
morphoprocess (Beklemishev 1964). Since topology operates with the most general
properties of spaces as mathematical subjects, an adequate description of biological
morphogenesis can be obtained through the use of the topological approach. Topol-
ogy enables us to analyze a transition from local parameters to global ones, so the
topological models would be adequate models of real biological objects. However,
132
V. V. Isaeva

the traditional description of biological forms does not contain topological concepts
and terminology. Living organisms inhabit and develop in the real physical space
and are organized according to the global topology of this space (Presnov et al. 2010,
2014). General principles in physics, geometry, and topology are applicable to many
situations in biology (Bouligand 1996). Nicolas Rashevsky (1958) initiated a topo-
logical approach to biological research, which he named “biological topology” or
“biotopology”; later, G. Edelman (1988) proposed a similar name, “topobiology.”
René Thom, a brilliant mathematician, who devised catastrophe theory, was the
ﬁrst to show that biological concepts can be formulated in terms of vector ﬁelds,
attractors, and bifurcations (catastrophes) (Thom 1969, 1996, 1997). For example,
René Thom (1969, 1996) considered gastrulation as a topological catastrophe and
cell movements during gastrulation as a topological spatial mapping. R. Thom put
forward the topological description and modeling of embryogenesis in his paper
“Topological models in biology” (Thom 1969). Thom argued that quality is not
reduced to quantity, and the discrete character of biological morphogenesis involves
qualitative discontinuities such as topological bifurcations (catastrophes) and quali-
tative evolutionary innovations (Thom 1969, 1996, 1997). R. Thom considered a
continuous spatial–temporal conﬁguration that relates the parent individually with
the offspring as the major object of biological investigation; according to Thom, the
hen and the egg are only the temporal sections of the global conﬁguration of
trajectories (Thom 1997). The topological approach to the description of biological
morphogenesis and using the elementary topological language for the formalization
of biological forms and processes and for modeling of form dynamics in ontogeny
and evolution have become a more common practice (Maresin and Presnov 1985;
Presnov et al. 1988, 2010, 2014; Jockusch and Dress 2003; Isaeva et al. 2006, 2008,
2012; Cherdantsev 2006; Honda 2012).
Following R. Thom, we introduced the topological language in descriptions and
analysis of biological morphogenesis using some well-known theorems to reveal a
topological inevitability of some events in early embryogenesis (Presnov et al. 1988,
2010, 2014; Isaeva et al. 2006, 2008, 2012, 2014). Forms of a developing organism
such as cell sets and closed surfaces are topological objects; maps as mathematical
functions are additional topological constructions in these objects including polari-
zation, singularities, and curvature. We applied elementary topological concepts to
describe and interpret structural dynamics of biological forms and morphogenetic
processes in ontogeny and evolution since developmental and evolutionary
modiﬁcations of topological patterns are discrete events. For example, the spatial
organization of the biological ﬁelds is analyzable in topological terms; topological
singularities inevitably emerge in biological morphogenesis and are retained and
transformed during pattern formation. T. Elsdale pioneered in applying a topological
theorem (the theorem on the sum of the indices of the singularities in a vector ﬁeld)
to experimental biology and revealing singularities in ﬁbroblast conﬂuent layer
in vitro (Elsdale 1972, 1973; Elsdale and Wasoff 1976). In a monolayer myogenic
culture, self-organization of planar directional ﬁelds with a certain set of topological
singularities was observed (Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012; Presnov et al. 2010). The
limited number of topological singularities of directional planar ﬁelds (Penrose
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
133

1979) determines the corresponding topological constraints of planar morphogenesis
in monolayer cell cultures (Elsdale 1973; Isaeva et al. 2008).
In conﬂuent monolayer cultures, human epidermal cells form patterns resembling
dermatoglyphics (Green and Thomas 1978); human ﬁbroblasts pack side by side due
to contact guidance (Weiss 1961) and contact inhibition (Abercrombie 1980)
aligning parallel to one another and forming a “patchwork” of many local cell
ﬂows, with discontinuities between cell arrays (Elsdale 1972, 1973; Elsdale and
Wasoff 1976). These cell ﬁelds and dermatoglyphic patterns are considered in
topology as planar, nonoriented vector ﬁelds, or direction ﬁelds (Elsdale 1973;
Elsdale and Wasoff 1976; Penrose 1979). The direction ﬁelds include points
where the ﬁeld directions are not deﬁned becoming zero, and each point was referred
to as a discontinuity or a topological singularity of the ﬁeld; it is possible only a
limited set of topological singularities (discontinuities) of planar direction ﬁelds
(Elsdale and Wasoff 1976; Penrose 1979). In the monolayer culture of completely
dissociated chick embryo myogenic cells, the moving myoblasts were self-organized
into parallel arrays by the contact guidance; later, myotubes were also aligned one
along another forming cell ﬂows, resulting in the emergence of topological
singularities in this planar cell ﬁeld (Isaeva 1994; Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012, 2013).
For example, two singularities, which are usual in myogenic monolayers, the
triradius and the loop, are shown here, as well as a schematical image of all possible
planar singularities (Fig. 5.6).
Thus, in the myogenic monolayer culture, we observed spontaneous patterning as
self-assembly in direction cell ﬁelds with the emergence of topological singularities
(discontinuities of the direction ﬁeld). In the monolayer myogenic culture, all the
possible singularities of the planar direction ﬁeld were observed (Isaeva et al. 2008,
2012). A radial pattern of cell migration from aggregates in monolayer culture
(Fig. 5.3) is the common typical phenomenon of self-organization in monolayer
cell cultures. The limited set of topological singularities of planar directional ﬁelds
Fig. 5.6 Topological singularities in planar ﬁelds: left—two singularities (the triradius and the
loop) in monolayer myogenic culture; right—schematic representation of possible singularities in
planar direction ﬁelds: (a) the radial pattern; (b) the loop; (c) the saddle; and (d) the triradius; the
central circle is the point zero (from Isaeva 1994)
134
V. V. Isaeva

determines the topological basis and topological constraints of the biological
two-dimensional pattern formation (Penrose 1979; Elsdale 1973; Elsdale and
Wasoff 1976; Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012).
We used well-known mathematical axiomatics for an extended topological
description of biological development. For example, a topological interpretation of
some events of early morphogenesis was given based on the known concepts of
mathematics, for example, Poincaré–Hopf and Gauss–Bonnet theorems (see Isaeva
et al. 2008, 2012, 2014a, b; Presnov et al. 2010, 2014). We proposed that the
inevitability of oocyte/egg polarization follows from Poincaré–Hopf theorem.
According to this theorem, a vector ﬁeld on a sphere has inevitably at least one
singularity (the point where the value of the ﬁeld becomes zero). This singular point
may be either vegetal or animal pole. The singular point on the cortical sphere of an
egg coincides with actin concentration and/or localization of the microtubule aster,
and the cytoskeleton polarization determines the axial polarization of an egg, zygote,
and developing embryo. In chordates, a new singularity besides preexisting animal/
vegetal egg pole emerges following sperm penetration. After fertilization, zygote
cleavage creates a pattern of cell contacts on the embryo surface, a discrete morpho-
genetic ﬁeld with inevitable topological singularities. The positional information of a
discrete morphogenetic ﬁeld is described by the Gauss–Bonnet theorems as the
relationship between the local and integral orders. At least in some animals, the
localization of invagination (or immigration, ingression) during gastrulation
coincides with the location of the singularities of negative curvature, i.e., with the
highest value of the cell ﬁeld on the vegetal surface of embryos (Presnov et al. 2010,
2014).
In metazoan evolution, the appearance of the epithelial tissue was one of the most
signiﬁcant innovations. Epithelial cells form cohesive cell sheets; the structural and
functional connectivity of an epithelial layer during epithelial morphogenesis is
ensured by the system of specialized intercellular contacts that integrate cells into
a united morphological and functional entity, integrating cytoskeletons in
“histoskeleton” and creating “an envelope” of an organism (Presnov et al. 2010,
2014; Isaeva et al. 2006, 2008, 2012, 2014; Honda 2012). Epithelial cell layers are
characterized by connectivity, the closeness of an intact surface, and apical–basal
polarity. To translate traditional morphological descriptions of a metazoan morpho-
genesis into topological language, the external shape of an organism is modeled as a
set of smooth, closed, orientable surfaces formed by epithelial layers, which thick-
ness is neglected. According to the theorem of elementary topology, any closed
surface in three-dimensional space is homeomorphic (topologically equivalent) to
the sphere with a certain number ( p) of handles. If there are no topological surgeries
(cutting and gluing of epithelial sheets as “cut and paste” operations), the genus of
the surface ( p) is a topological invariant, and any geometrical deformations such as
surface curvature and linear and angle values are not essential. The closed surfaces of
the genus p ¼ 0 (sphere), p ¼ 1 (torus), p ¼ 2 (double torus, or “pretzel”), and p ¼ 3
(triple torus) are discrete forms, separated by discrete topological transformations
producing reorganization of whole-body plan. The topological approach makes it
possible to consider the succession of spherical surgeries changing the topological
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
135

genus of a metazoan body surface. In some animal taxa, topologically complicated
fractal-like systems increase the genus of the surface, so that the body surface
becomes homeomorphic to a high-order torus. The topological differences between
these surfaces are qualitative and fundamental. Topological handles in biological
objects are usually realized as channels (canals), for example, the digestive tube, and
we consider only epithelized through hollow channels as topological handles. There
are various evolutionary modiﬁcations of the archetypical body plan in many phyla
due to additional topological surgeries; for example, in Spongia, some Cnidaria and
Ctenophora, an increase in genus p up to very high values and the shaping of
topologically complicated fractal systems are evident. We considered only basic
archetypical body plans for each metazoan taxon, i.e., a plesiomorphic topological
design neglecting variations and modiﬁcations inside the taxon.
The
ﬁrst
important
topological
surgery
in
the
evolution
of
Bilateria
(Triploblastica) is the appearance of a hollow, through the intestinal tube instead
of a blind gut. Among Bilateria, animals of many phyla have the stable topological
pattern, with the through the digestive tube only, without any other through
channels, and their external surface is topologically homeomorphic to the torus,
p ¼ 1. Topologically, the digestive tube is outer surface of an organism and the
ectodermal surface of the organism; both ecto- and entodermal epithelia form united
continuous surface, the outer surface of an organism. An analysis of topological
organization of the closed epithelial layer that covers the outer body surface as a
continuous envelope is applicable also to the topological organization of the body
surface in metazoan development (Maresin and Presnov 1985; Presnov et al. 1988,
2010, 2014; Isaeva et al. 2006, 2008, 2012, 2014).
Gastrulation is a topological catastrophe, transition from the sphere with an
inevitable singularity (singularities) of its vector ﬁeld to the topologically stable
torus (a toroid embryo or a larva) with a homogeneous ﬁeld (Fig. 5.7).
The evolutionary invention of a through gut probably involved duplication of an
ancestral homeobox gene cluster (ProtoHox) to yield two paralogous gene clusters,
Hox and ParaHox; it was proposed that Para-Hox genes were components of an
ancient system for patterning the bilaterian gut (Holland 2015; Ferrier 2019; Zhong
et al. 2020). ParaHox genes are notable for their roles in patterning the development
of the gut and the central nervous system in Bilateria. The origin of a through gut,
with the mouth, digestive regions, and anus, may have facilitated the evolution of
predation and active burrowing as key drivers of animal diversiﬁcation in the
Cambrian (Holland 2015; Ferrier 2019; Zhong et al. 2020). The emergence of a
through gut is a topological innovation of a high evolutionary value, which provided
vectorized functioning and regional differentiation of the gut tube (Isaeva 2014b).
The epithelial body surface is the boundary layer, the interface between the internal
medium of a metazoan organism and its environment. Therefore, adaptive topologi-
cal transformations of the body surface during metazoan evolution result in an
enlargement of this interface ensuring the better distribution of external medium
ﬂows within an organism, better utilization of necessary nutrients with directed,
more complete excretion. This functional advancement (P. Holland 2015) is named
“ecological engineering.” A transition of blind archenteron to through intestine tube
136
V. V. Isaeva

is realized during gastrulation by the formation of another opening besides the
blastopore (a primary mouth), which becomes the deﬁnitive oral opening in
Protostomia or anal opening in Deuterostomia.
Subsequent evolution has led to the formation through channels of the coelomic
and respiratory systems; the emergence of additional through epithelial channels
transformed the body surface of animals in different taxa into a double, triple, and
sometimes multiple tori (Isaeva et al. 2006, 2008, 2012). For example, mollusks and
echinoderms exhibit, besides the digestive tube, the second through a channel
formed by the coelomic system ( p ¼ 2). The next evolutionary level of topological
organization in animals is attained through the development of the respiratory
system: the system of paired tracheal tubules (of ectodermal origin) with lateral
connections in higher terrestrial arthropods or paired gill slits (of endodermal origin)
in a chordate archetype. This evolutionary transition from the torus to the surface of
the genus p ¼ 1 + 2n occurred by adding an even number of channels (gill slits) of
the respiratory system in Chordata; among chordates, the ascidian body surface is a
high-order torus due to the presence of numerous pharyngeal openings (gill slits)
(Fig. 5.8).
Thus, in evolution and embryonic development, the body surface of an organism
(its epithelial “envelope”) in most Metazoa undergoes spherical surgery(ies), which
changes the topological genus of the surface, the value of which is determined by the
number of through hollow channels. In embryogenesis, the topological surgeries
occur locally and involve such complex cell events as epithelial sheet disintegration
followed by cell adhesion and cytoskeletal and intercellular rearrangements giving
rise to a newly formed cell layer. Therefore, local topological surgeries inevitably
lead to global topological transformation (topological catastrophe) of an organism.
Topological rearrangement by cutting and pasting can be found at all levels of
biological organization. “Evolutionary cut and paste” (Shubin 1998), as well as
Fig. 5.7 Topological transformation during gastrulation: left—the singularity of the vector ﬁeld of
a fertilized egg; right—a postgastrulation embryo topologically homeomorphic to a torus with the
homogeneous vector ﬁeld; modiﬁed from Isaeva et al. (2014)
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
137

rearrangements of gene regulatory networks, are the topological operations;
Hox/ParaHox collinearity phenomenon is the topological mapping (see Sect. 5.5).
5.5
Metazoan Body Plan in Molecular–Genetic
and Macroevolutionary Context
5.5.1
Gene Regulatory Networks: The Inevitability
of Self-Organization
Metazoan genome is not a “bag of beans,” but a complex hierarchical network
system, including many intragenomic connections and many feedbacks, capable of
self-organization and dynamic transformations in developmental processes (Koonin
2012; Ryan 2015; Srivastava 2015; Simakov and Kawashima 2017). Gene regu-
latory networks are modeled by the abstract topological random Boolean network
(RBN) (Kauffman 1993; Gershenson 2012; Erwin 2020; Gershenson et al. 2020).
RBNs can be described as self-organizing systems simply because they have
attractors, a set of “preferred” states because any such system is able to self-organize
toward the attractors (Gershenson 2012). It was studied how changes in the nodes
and connections affect the global network dynamics and critical regimes of RBNs;
the phase transition is characterized by its criticality as the “edge of chaos”
(Kauffman 1993; Gershenson 2012). The critical regime is advantageous for adapt-
ability, evolvability, and robustness; probably, natural selection can guide the self-
organization of genetic regulatory networks toward the critical regime (Gershenson
Fig. 5.8 Topological organization in some metazoans (left to right): digestive tube only (most
worms); digestive tube with several pairs of gill slits (Hemichordata and chordate archetype);
digestive tract with numerous pharyngeal openings (Ascidia); modiﬁed from Isaeva et al. (2012)
138
V. V. Isaeva

2012). Investigations concerning the molecular mechanisms of development reveal
the modular hierarchical architecture of developing systems and networks of their
gene regulation (Davidson 2006; Peter and Davidson 2011), and the modular
architecture of gene regulatory networks has emerging properties (Davidson
2010). The modularity, a ubiquitous topological feature of most biological networks,
is crucial for the self-organization of the global network dynamics (Siebert et al.
2020). Thus, self-organization is inevitable in complex biological networks.
Gene regulatory networks include a large number of genes that code for tran-
scription factors, ligands and receptors of intercellular signaling, and the sequences
that control the expression of each of these genes. These elements of coding and
noncoding sequences of DNA altogether comprise the regulatory genome;
interacting regulatory genes form the regulatory network, i.e., the gene program of
development (Erwin and Davidson 2009; Peter and Davidson 2011). The program of
development is encoded in the form of a huge network of functionally interrelated
cis-regulatory DNA modules; various subcircuits are active in various embryo
domains and in various periods (Davidson 2006; Erwin and Davidson 2009; Peter
and Davidson 2011; Erwin 2020). Evolutionary change in animal morphology
results from alteration of the functional organization of the gene regulatory networks
(Peter and Davidson 2011). Only about two percent of the human genome is protein
coding; it is leading to a reevaluation of the potential complexity in the regulatory
circuits embedded in the DNA, at least for vertebrates (Tschopp and Duboule 2011).
The “dark matter” of the animal genome, DNA that does not encode proteins, which
has recently been considered as “junk,” is now being studied. A signiﬁcant part of
such DNA encodes various RNA, including long and short noncoding RNA,
transposons, and microRNA; the very important regulatory functions of some of
these RNAs have been identiﬁed (Koonin 2012; Carey 2015; Ryan 2015; Srivastava
2015; Shapiro 2016; Simakov and Kawashima 2017). Changes in “noncoding”
sequences can result in important phenotypic alterations (Shapiro 2016). Possibly,
cells possess “read–write genomes” and can rearrange DNA molecules (Shapiro
2016). It is well known that the relation between the genotype and phenotype can
include polyphenism when the same genotype can ensure alternative developmental
trajectories resulting in various phenotypes (see Kirschner and Gerhart 2005; Gilbert
2010). Thus, the simple unambiguous interconnection between genotype and phe-
notype is absent; the genotype–phenotype mapping turns out to be very complex.
Thus, a bilaterian genome is a “hypertext,” a dynamic hypercode.
5.5.2
Genome–Phenome Mapping/Correlations
In an effort to integrate body plan and genomic levels, let us try to consider a
genome–phenome mapping, at least some genome–phenome correlations. Evolu-
tionary genomics made it possible to link the diversity of genomes to the phenotypic
diversity of Metazoa and other Eukaryota, in particular, revealing genomic correlates
of morphological complexity and diversity in animal body plans (Erwin 2009; Dunn
and Ryan 2015; Srivastava 2015). A signiﬁcant, clearly pronounced correlation
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
139

between the regulatory complexity of a genome (determined by the total number of
transcription factors and other transcription regulators) and morphological complex-
ity (measured by the number of cell types) in Metazoa was identiﬁed as a causal
evolutionary
relationship
between
genomic
regulatory
complexity
and
morphophysiological complexity of a metazoan body (Lang and Rensing 2015;
Srivastava 2015). Expansion of transcription factors as a result of genomic duplica-
tion and the subsequent neofunctionalization of paralogs are assumed to be the
source of evolutionary innovation with the acquisition of new cell types and an
increase in morphological complexity (Lang and Rensing 2015; Srivastava 2015).
Generally, the relationship between genotype and phenotype, genome, and
phenome of a metazoan organism is a complex network of interactions at all levels
of biological complexity. Understanding the relationship between the genotype and
the dynamic phenotype or, according to topological terminology, mapping genotype
! phenotype is a central challenge of current biological research. In evolutionary
developmental biology, the correlation between genes and phenotype, or a
genotype–phenotype mapping is considered as a complex nonlinear web of the
signaling systems and transcription regulators; the following events involve pleiot-
ropy, extensive feedback loops, self-organization processes, physical forces, and
environmental cues, all contributing to the ﬁnal morphology of the organism
(Wilkins 2002; Davidson 2006; Gilbert 2010; Minelli 2015, Dunn and Ryan 2015;
Ogura and Busch 2016; see also Isaeva 2018; Isaeva and Rozhnov 2021). In short,
genome-to-phenotype mapping is an extremely complex network, the many-to-
many mapping (Koonin 2012).
However, it is a unique unambiguous example of the topological mapping as the
transfer of the linear vector of the spatial gene arrangement through the spatial and
temporal sequence of the gene expression along the axis of an embryo into the axial
morphological pattern of a future organism—the Hox/ParaHox gene collinearity in
their clusters in Bilateria. It is known that genetic mechanisms, which determine the
anteroposterior patterning of a bilaterian body, are related to the order of the Hox
genes in the cluster: Genes located closer to the 30 end of the cluster (and the
chromosome) are expressed closer to the anterior end of an embryo and earlier
than their 50-associated neighbors, so showing spatial and temporal collinearity (see
Duboule 1994, 2007; Holland 2015; Darbelay and Duboule 2016; Ferrier 2019;
Deschamps and Duboule 2017). Thus, clustered Hox genes perform the fundamental
function of coding positional information along the bilaterian anteroposterior axis so
determining the global phenotypic architecture of organisms. The ability of Hox
cluster to the coordinate functioning of the entire complex of Hox genes with the
performance of the integral function of coding the axial body pattern allows consid-
ering the Hox cluster as a metagene (Duboule 1994; Darbelay and Duboule 2016).
Therefore, collinearity of Hox genes is the example of topological mapping, projec-
tion of the gene spatial order into the spatial–temporal order of their expression, and
global axial pattern of developing organisms (Minelli 2003, 2015; Isaeva et al. 2008,
2012; Isaeva 2018). Besides Hox genes, three ParaHox genes (Gsx, Xlox/Pdx, and
Cdx), the evolutionary sisters to the Hox genes, also exhibit collinearity: The order of
the genes along the chromosome corresponds to their order of expression (Duboule
140
V. V. Isaeva

2007; Deschamps and Duboule 2017; Ferrier 2019; Zhong et al. 2020). The genes of
the Hox/ParaHox clusters, which play a central role in the determination of the
anteroposterior axis and the entire complex of the main features of the bilaterian
body plan, are present only in Metazoa. Thus, Bilateria “invented” additional coding
of global axial body plan by clusters of coordinately operating Hox/ParaHox genes
and new mechanisms of metagenic, supragenic regulation of higher level.
Hox genes are known as genes–architects determining the body plan in Bilateria
(see Gilbert 2010). The Hox genes encoding transcription factors, like the related
genes of the ParaHox and NK groups, belong to the homeobox-containing genes of
the ANTP class. The emergence and evolutionary expansion of Hox genes and their
cluster (in vertebrate—clusters), accompanied by the loss of some genes, served as
the genetic basis for the evolutionary transformation of the bilaterian body plan and
its diversiﬁcation (Holland 2015; Srivastava 2015; Halanych 2016; Ferrier 2019).
There is a correlation between the increase in the number of Hox genes (as well as
the total number of genes of the ANTP class) with the increasing complexity of the
body plan (Garcia-Fernández 2005; Holland 2015; Halanych 2016; Ferrier 2019). In
the evolution of Metazoa, the number of Hox genes increased from a small set to a
diversiﬁed toolkit, presumably as a result of duplications of the ancestral cluster, the
entire genome, and individual Hox cluster genes. Although the occurrence of Hox
genes preceded the Bilateria radiation, the Hox system as a coordinated assemblage
of Hox genes is speciﬁc to the bilaterian animals. Probably, the Cambrian explosion
with the advent of most bilaterian types was ensured by “Hox gene explosion”
(Davidson 2006; Erwin and Valentine 2013; Holland 2015; Peterson and Eernisse
2016). The topological rearrangement of the gene order in the Hox cluster, as well as
the loss of one or several Hox gene(s), can cause large-scale macroevolutionary
transformation in body morphology associated with various developmental and
evolutionary strategies (Duboule 2007; Tschopp and Duboule 2011; Srivastava
2015; Isaeva 2018; Isaeva and Rozhnov 2021). Hox cluster is an important node
in the vertebrate patterning network (Peter and Davidson 2011). Studies of Hox gene
reveal several dozens of direct target genes including other regulatory genes and a
plethora of downstream genes encoding proteins active in apoptosis, cell-cycle
control, cell adhesion, cell polarity, signaling, and cytoskeletal functions (Carroll
2008; Peter and Davidson 2011). It is known that cluster Hox genes determine the
development and axial patterning of mammalian limbs (Peter and Davidson 2011;
Deschamps and Duboule 2017), considered as evolutionary duplicates of the main
body axis (Minelli 2000, 2003, 2015). At the early stages of mammalian limb bud
development, Hoxd genes are transcribed in the same spatiotemporal order as during
trunk extension, and the underlying mechanism is likely identical to that at work
during body axis extension (Deschamps and Duboule 2017).
Thus, the Hox gene system is a very important regulatory node of the genome–
phenome relationships that determine a wide range of developmental processes and
global body architecture. Paraphrasing the well-known statement of George Orwell,
one can say that “All genes are equal but some genes are more equal than others”
(Isaeva 2018).
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
141

5.5.3
Developmental Molecular–Genetic Machinery in Vertebrates
Recent data obtained on mammals demonstrate remarkable molecular–genetic
machinery of highly coordinated patterning of the primary body axis in the early
development of both axial and limb patterns: the embryonic timing, directional Hox
clock, dynamics of the chromatin structure, and the axial progenitor generation, all
functioning as “a time machine” (Deschamps and Duboule 2017). In other words,
mammals achieve the appropriate Hox-mediated spatial patterning through the initial
timed-sequenced activation of their Hox clusters in response to early embryonic
signals (Neijts et al. 2016). Hox genes are initially switched as a response to Wnt
signaling, which usually predates zygotic Hox activity; thus, the trigger for Hox
activation is a canonical Wnt signal activating Hox in a temporally collinear way
(Neijts et al. 2016, 2017; Deschamps and Duboule 2017). Both Hox and Cdx
(ParaHox) genes encoding transcription factors are pivotal regulators of axial pat-
terning and tissue generation along the vertebrate body axis (Neijts et al. 2016, 2017;
Deschamps and Duboule 2017). Cdx genes are crucial for the timing mechanism
driving collinear Hox activation and key regulators of Hox genes, as their inactiva-
tion affects central Hox gene expression (Neijts et al. 2016, 2017; Zhong et al. 2020).
Cdx genes are implicated in a range of taxa in the posterior growth of the body (axial
elongation); mutations in Cdx genes lead to arrest of axial extension as a result of the
exhaustion of axial progenitor cells in the posterior growth zone (Neijts et al. 2016,
2017; Zhong et al. 2020). Thus, central Hox genes and their Cdx activators ensure
posterior growth by maintaining axial progenitor cells active in the growth zone and
deﬁning a trunk segment in the Hox cluster topology (Zhong et al. 2020), so
translating a temporal genetic system into spatial coordinates via the fate of these
progenitors (Deschamps and Duboule 2017). During axial elongation, the early
timing mechanism synchronizes Hox gene expression with the progressive genera-
tion of the trunk and tail from the posterior embryonic growth zone (Neijts et al.
2016, 2017). The stepwise activation of the clustered Hox genes appears as at least
one of the molecular–genetic fundaments of the temporal collinearity of Hox gene
expression; chromatin opening around trunk Hox genes is Cdx-dependent (Neijts
et al. 2017; Zhong et al. 2020). Finally, the Hoxa13 gene and the Hoxa13 protein
constitute the most posterior module ending central Hox gene temporally collinear
activation, possibly by direct competition with the trunk effector Cdx: Hox13
proteins antagonize Cdx by binding to the same targets, and so doing arrests axial
elongation (Neijts et al. 2017).
During the development of vertebrate animals, Hox genes provide positional
information to the emerging embryonic axial tissues, thereby instructing them on
how to undergo appropriate morphogenesis; i.e., axial progenitors translate the Hox
clock into spatial coordinates (Deschamps and Duboule 2017). The pluripotency
factor Oct4 is a crucial player in determining progenitor activity. The translation of
sequential Hox gene activation into spatial cues in axial tissue anlagen occurs in all
vertebrates examined, including amphibians (Deschamps and Duboule 2017).
142
V. V. Isaeva

5.5.4
Molecular–Genetic Background of Metazoan Axial Body Plan
The body plan (Bauplan) as a characteristic of the morphological organization of
Metazoa is one of the basic concepts of comparative and evolutionary biology
(Beklemishev 1964; Gould 2002; Isaeva and Rozhnov 2021). Body axes form the
basis of animal body plans. Because a metazoan body is formed from a spherically
symmetrical egg, symmetry breakdown is one of the fundamental processes of
development (Hirokawa et al. 2009). Symmetry breaking inevitably arising during
early development plays a key role in biological morphogenesis. Topological
bifurcations are tightly coupled with symmetry breaking, as developmental and
evolutionary transformations of symmetry are discrete steps in biological morpho-
genesis inevitably disrupting a preexisting pattern of symmetry. Data on genetic
mechanisms of axial pattern establishment, creating a coordinate system of the
metazoan body plan, bilaterian segmentation, and left–right symmetry/asymmetry
are necessary to an understanding of the evolutionary diversiﬁcation and phenotypic
expression of various body plans. Besides the crucial role of the axial Hox/ParaHox
code as the mapping of the Hox/ParaHox cluster metagenes into the anteroposterior
axis (see above), the broad variety in metazoan forms appears to be founded on a few
signaling pathways—Wnt, BMP, Notch, and Hedgehog cascades, which determine
metazoan body axes (De Robertis 2008; Manuel 2009; Petersen and Reddien 2009;
Niehrs 2010; Neijts et al. 2014, 2016; Dunn et al. 2017; Simakov and Kawashima
2017; Erwin 2020; Fields and Levin 2020; Isaeva and Kasyanov 2021). Molecular
components of the signaling systems are diffusible morphogens, which carry posi-
tional information, determining axial coordinates in morphogenetic ﬁelds of a
developing embryo by means of instructive clues for genes to be expressed differ-
ently in cells located in different spatial areas (see Isaeva and Kasyanov 2021).
Developmental gene transcriptional regulatory cascades and the signaling pathway
responsible for the patterning of the metazoan body plan are remarkably similar
throughout Metazoa. So, molecular positional information determines metazoan
body plan.
The Wnt signaling pathway is the ancestral and most important program for
animal development in the crosstalk with other gene regulatory cascades—not only
patterning the primary axis, but also regulating morphogenetic cell movements and
axial differences in cell fate, including the speciﬁcation of cell lineages, cell prolif-
eration, and posterior growth elongation (Petersen and Reddien 2009; Holstein
2012; Hogvall et al. 2019; Erwin 2020; Fields and Levin 2020; Isaeva and Kasyanov
2021). The growth of the metazoan body by the terminal addition of progenitor cells
localized at the posterior growth zone was a cardinal evolutionary innovation. The
formation of a localized Wnt signaling center at the site of gastrulation determines
the orientation of the primary body axis in both bilaterians and non-bilaterians, in
deuterostomes and protostomes, indicating that the conserved Wnt signaling path-
way is at the base of polarized development in all metazoans. Data revealed by
comparative genomics have shown that members of the Wnt signaling pathway are
speciﬁc for metazoans as important regulators of embryogenesis and cell differenti-
ation (Dunn et al. 2017; Hogvall et al. 2019; Erwin 2020).
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
143

In the canonical Wnt pathway, binding of Wnt(s) to their receptors induces
intracellular gene cascades that lead to the release of β-catenin, which then regulates
the transcription of Wnt target genes; β-catenin is the key intracellular effector of the
canonical Wnt signaling pathway and plays an important role in the early polariza-
tion of the animal–vegetal axis of the embryo (Petersen and Reddien 2009; Holstein
2012; Hogvall et al. 2019; Erwin 2020). In planarians with their extraordinary
morphological plasticity, the Wnt/β-catenin pathway provides positional informa-
tion pivotal for proper head regeneration (Iglesias et al. 2008). Iglesias et al. (2008)
studied the role of the β-catenin homologues from the asexual freshwater planarian
Schmidtea mediterranea, mainly the gene Smed b-catenin-1. In S. mediterranea,
experimental amputation of both head and tail produces trunk fragments usually
regenerating both anterior and posterior structures, but if β-catenin is depleted by
RNA interference, a head is generated instead of a tail, resulting in two-headed or
multi-headed planarians (Iglesias et al. 2008; Petersen and Reddien 2009; Fields and
Levin 2020). Thus, silencing of the gene Smed β-catenin-1 in regenerating and intact
planarians induces a gradual anteriorization of the animals that ﬁnally leads to a
radial-like hypercephalized phenotype, demonstrating the requirement for Smed
β-catenin-1 in anterior–posterior axis reestablishment and maintenance (Iglesias
et al. 2008; Fields and Levin 2020). Thus, the anterior–posterior axis can be
symmetrized and duplicated to such an extent that it effectively disappears and is
annihilated, leaving a radially symmetric, fully anteriorized form (Fields and Levin
2020). Unique examples of striking body symmetry transformation were observed in
the most extreme cases, when planarians not only lose their tail, but ectopic heads
with eyespots begin sprouting around the periphery of the body, eventually forming
almost a radially transformed organism whose perimeter essentially consists of
multiple heads (Fields and Levin 2020; Petersen and Reddien 2009; Fields and
Levin 2020) (Fig. 5.9).
In normal planarians, the central nervous system is composed of two anterior
cephalic ganglia located at the anterior end of two ventral nerve cords, while in
radial-like hypercephalized planarians, the cephalic ganglia and ventral nerve cords
are transformed into a thick ring from which cephalic branches ectopically differen-
tiate all around the body, and all photoreceptor cells appeared to be connected
through their visual axonal projections to the circular brain (Fields and Levin
2020). Thus, in the asexual freshwater planaria, speciﬁc experimental manipulations
can symmetrize the anterior–posterior axis producing a radially symmetric,
anteriorized form around the remaining dorsal–ventral axis (Fields and Levin 2020).
It was suggested that radial and bilateral body plans could have been generated
with the same or similar genetic toolkit but with different regulatory networks (see
Isaeva and Kasyanov 2021). Possibly, the silencing and knockdown of the gene
Smed β-catenin-1 expression cause a dramatic rearrangement, a topological catas-
trophe of the gene regulatory network (a contour including Smed β-catenin-1),
which results in the radical symmetry transformation—bilaterality into radiality.
It is well known that embryonic morphogenetic ﬁelds, in which molecular
positional information determines metazoan body plan, have the remarkable ability
of self-organization, self-regulation, and self-regenerating after experimental
144
V. V. Isaeva

manipulations (De Robertis 2008; Niehrs 2010; Seilacher and Gishlick 2015; Loh
et al. 2016). The “self-organizing” morphogenetic mechanisms were important in
evolutionary processes; of course, they are genetically controlled, but not in a simple
one-to-one relationship; the relationship between the self-organizing processors and
their genetic control has been referred to as “genomic assimilation” (Seilacher and
Gishlick 2015).
5.6
Social Behavior in Vertebrate Communities
Social behavior is found at every level of biological complexity, ranging from
quorum sensing in bacteria to human altruism (Parrish et al. 2002; De Monte et al.
2007; Ballerini et al. 2008; Balázsi et al. 2011; Leu et al. 2013; Attanasi et al. 2014;
Gloag et al. 2015). Sociobiology is an attractive interdisciplinary ﬁeld. The
synchronized collective behavior of animals with the appearance of various ordered
spatial patterns, which has been investigated for eusocial insect colonies, ﬁsh shoals,
and bird ﬂocks, is considered as the usual example of self-organization (Camazine
et al. 2001; Parrish et al. 2002; Ballerini et al. 2008; Gershenson 2012; Attanasi et al.
2014; Gloag et al. 2015; Wedlich-Söldner and Betz 2018). The most commonly
recognized social factors and beneﬁts of being in a group include dilution of
predation risk, increased vigilance and early predator detection, thermoregulation,
and enhanced feeding through the use of social information (see Leu et al. 2013).
Fig. 5.9 A scheme of body
symmetry transformation in
planarians (left to right): an
intact planaria; two-headed
bipolar form;
“hypercephalized,” radialized
form (β-catenin knockdown
with RNAi); modiﬁed from
Isaeva and Kasyanov (2021)
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
145

Nevertheless, there are also costs to group formation, which are often proportional to
group size and include increased competition within the group, travel distances, and
susceptibility to parasites and pathogens (Leu et al. 2013). The collective behavior of
animal associations is not always adaptive; however, during evolution, the features
of organism assemblies or cell associations inevitably become an object of natural
selection (Camazine et al. 2001; Parrish et al. 2002; Kirschner and Gerhart 2005;
Johnson and Lam 2010; Glancy et al. 2016).
The growing ﬁeld of sociogenomics is revealing how complex social behavior
can be dissected at the molecular level (Foster 2011). Multilevel selection theory
(including kin selection) provides a theoretical foundation for sociobiology
(Hamilton 1964; Gould 2002; Wilson and Wilson 2007). Evolutionary theory
interprets social behavior in terms of ﬁtness: cooperation among relatives can thus
extend to altruism, in which an individual sacriﬁces its chance of reproducing to
advance those of a relative (Olsen et al. 2012).
The self-organization of collective behaviors often manifests as dramatic patterns
of emergent large-scale order; this is true from relatively “simple” entities such as
microbial communities and robot “swarms,” to more complex self-organized
systems such as those displayed by social insects, migrating herds, and many
human activities (Gloag et al. 2015).
Here are two examples of self-organization among vertebrate animals: tadpoles of
the toad Bufo gargarizans and well-known ﬂocks of the starlings, Sturnus vulgaris.
In anurans, tadpole aggregations have been reported in many species (Leu et al.
2013), but among anurans of the south Russian Far East, only tadpoles of the toad
Bufo gargarizans reveal collective self-organized behavior forming aggregates with
coordinated movement (Far Eastern Bufo gargarizans http://www.ecosystema.ru/)
(Fig. 5.10).
The factors driving this behavior remain unclear, as well as the aggregation of
tadpoles of the frog Litoria aurea (Leu et al. 2013). Leu et al. (2013) suggested that
small tadpoles are more vulnerable to predation and therefore more likely to form
aggregations as an antipredator behavior; the observed inverse relationship between
tadpole size and aggregation preference supports the notion of adaptive antipredator
behavior (Leu et al. 2013). Another social route to tadpole schooling is the beneﬁt of
social foraging and the transfer of social information to obtain food (Leu et al. 2013).
Tadpole schooling has evolved multiple times in distantly related anuran taxa and
occurs in at least ten families (Leu et al. 2013).
Bird ﬂocking is a striking example of collective animal behavior, and a vivid
illustration of this phenomenon is provided by the aerial display of vast ﬂocks of
starlings as a paradigmatic case of collective behavior in animal aggregations with
extraordinary spatial coherence (Ballerini et al. 2008). Starling ﬂocks show strong
spatial coherence and capability of fast, highly synchronized maneuvers, either
spontaneously, or as a response to predator attacks (Ballerini et al. 2008). Individual
birds kept a minimum distance from each other (comparable to their wingspan);
during a turn, orientation changed with respect to the direction of movement
(Ballerini et al. 2008). A. Attanasi et al. (2014) studied the orientational order in
146
V. V. Isaeva

starling ﬂocks performing collective turns; fast and robust transfer of information
between birds, with the inclusion of behavioral inertia, was found.
Here is an example of the social collective behavior illustrated by the turning
ﬂock of the starlings Sturnus vulgaris, trying to escape a hawk attack, over Moscow
(Fig. 5.11).
Fish schools, mammal herds, and insect swarms represent other examples of
collective animal behavior that have fascinated biologists for many years; in all these
examples, collective behavior emerges as the result of the local interactions between
Fig. 5.10 Self-organization of coordinated movement and aggregation by tadpoles of the toad
Bufo gargarizans in a natural forest pond near Vladivostok (wright—higher magniﬁcation). (Photo
by V.V. Isaeva)
Fig. 5.11 A ﬂock of the starlings, Sturnus vulgaris performing collective turn at 90 (Photo by
V.V. Isaeva)
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
147

the individual units, without the need for centralized coordination (Ballerini et al.
2008).
5.7
Conclusions
Self-organization and social behavior are observed at all the levels of biological
complexity ranging from quorum sensing in bacteria to human altruism (De Monte
et al. 2007; Balázsi et al. 2011; Balaban et al. 2018), from cyanobacteria to Metazoa.
The communities of both cyanobacterial (Prokaryota) and metazoan (Eukaryota)
cells, with their essential differences in biological mechanisms of cell motility and
cell–cell interactions, are capable of exploratory and coordinated social cell activity
resulting in the formation of ordered patterns. Metazoan cells retain some features of
individual beings as evidenced by experiments in vitro with dissociated cells, which
display a coordinated social behavior and self-organization into ordered patterns
without a global control of whole body (Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012, 2013; Isaeva 2012,
2014a, b). Eukaryotic cells have evolved from prokaryotic cells, inheriting and
enhancing their exploratory ability, intercellular communication, collective behav-
ior, “social intelligence,” and adaptability.
Earlier, many developmental biologists proposed holistic solutions of the prob-
lem of integrating factors in metazoan morphogenesis: the concepts of morphoge-
netic ﬁelds (Gurwitsch 1922; Weiss 1968), organizers (Spemann and Mangold
1924), gradients (Child 1941), and positional information (Wolpert 1969, 1989;
Stern et al. 2006). Diffusion of the interacting morphogens (activators and inhibitors
of cell differentiation) and self-organizing morphogenetic ﬁelds was the traditional
assumption in modeling (Turing 1952; Wolpert 1969, 1989; Meinhardt 2006;
Newman 2012). Wolpert (1969, 1989) introduced the term “positional information,”
provided by gradients of diffusible morphogens and determining cell fate in relation
to the position in a developing system. Now, this abstract language is translated into
the molecular–genetic one: the coordinate system of the metazoan body plan,
bilaterian segmentation, and left–right symmetry/asymmetry is created by the sig-
naling pathways Wnt, BMP, Nodal, and Hedgehog as the major morphogenesis and
by the mapping of the Hox/ParaHox metagenes into the anteroposterior axis
(Duboule 1994, 2007; see Isaeva and Kasyanov 2021). Modern phylogenomics
reveal genomic–morphogenetic correlations determining the body plan complexity
and evolutionary trajectories in Metazoa. A correlation between genomic regulatory
complexity and morphological complexity of a metazoan body was found (Dunn
and Ryan 2015; Lang and Rensing 2015; Srivastava 2015). The Hox gene system is
an important regulatory node of the genomic–phenotypic relationships, which
determines a wide range of developmental processes, global body architecture, and
alternative evolutionary trajectories of different bilaterian taxa (Duboule 1994, 2007;
Tschopp and Duboule 2011; Srivastava 2015; Isaeva 2018; Isaeva and Rozhnov
2021). The genome-to-phenotype mapping is an extremely complex network
(Koonin 2012). The relationship between genes and phenotypes is seen as a nonlin-
ear web of events, involving pleiotropy, self-organization processes, physical forces,
148
V. V. Isaeva

and environmental cues, all contributing to the ﬁnal morphology of the organism
(Wilkins 2002). Developmental and evolutionary transformations can involve phase
transitions in gene networks (Soleґ et al. 2002). Gene regulatory networks and a
whole metazoan genome are a uniﬁed, hierarchical network system, including many
feedbacks, capable of self-organization and dynamic transformations in develop-
ment and evolution.
The complexity of the living world is constrained by the simplicity of the basic
laws of physics (Mandelbrot 1983; Goldenfeld and Kadanoff 1999); general
principles in physics, geometry, and topology are applicable to many situations in
biology (Bouligand 1996; Isaeva et al. 2008, 2012). Like all aspects of biology, self-
organizing morphogenetic processes are subjected to natural selection and evolution.
Evidently, biological self-organized systems are both the products of and subject to
natural selection (Blazis 2002). Natural selection directed and ﬁxed genetically
biological systems capable of self-organization (Camazine et al. 2001; Kirschner
and Gerhart 2005; Johnson and Lam 2010; Isaeva 2012; Isaeva et al. 2012). The
living organisms inhabit and develop in the real physical space, and biological
morphogenesis cannot be independent of the physical and topological properties
of our space. Self-organization is a fundamental force that shapes our world and
should be placed alongside natural selection as a complementary mechanism of
evolution (Nicolis and Prigogine 1977; Kauffman 1993; Camazine et al. 2001;
Karsenti 2008; Glancy et al. 2016). Moreover, self-organization can guide natural
selection (Glancy et al. 2016). Evolution is a collective phenomenon (Goldenfeld
and Woese 2011). The selection of self-organizing systems and self-constructing
modules of development can increase ﬂexibility, adaptability, and evolvability.
Evolution itself is a self-developing, self-organizing process. The course and out-
come of biological evolution are strongly inﬂuenced by constraints. The inevitable
topological dependence and constraints of the symmetry transformations are
integrated and ﬁtted into genetically determined processes of biological morphogen-
esis; the physical and topological imperative restricts and directs the biological
morphogenesis (Isaeva et al. 2012, 2014).
Biological morphogenesis is under strict genetic control, but shape evolution
itself is a physical process; genes do not produce forms and shapes, and physical
mechanisms do it (Neagu et al. 2005). Embryonic tissues are chemically “excitable
media,” the physical properties of which can explain some enigmatic developmental
phenomena; physico-genetic determinants are essential in the evolution of develop-
ment (Newman 2012). For developmental and evolutionary biology, the important
physical constraint is mechanodependence (Ingber 2005; Nelson 2009; Stamenovic
and Ingber 2009; Gilbert 2010; Beloussov 2012, 2015; Ambrosi et al. 2013). It is
necessary to incorporate and integrate the physics into system biology (Stamenovic
and Ingber 2009; Johnson and Lam 2010; Beloussov 2012, 2015). It was shown that
mechanical tension is essential for the organization of the cytoskeleton and
inﬂuences cell viability, proliferation, differentiation, and morphogenesis in cell
systems
(Vasiliev
2007;
Isaeva
et
al.
2008;
Beloussov
2012,
2015).
Mechanodependent modulation of gene expression was experimentally shown, for
example, for the twist gene expression under mechanical deformation during
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
149

gastrulation in Drosophila (Farge 2003; Desprat et al. 2008). The mechanical tension
that is able to activate gene expression is inherent to the morphogenetic ﬁelds of an
embryo. It was found that a key link between exogenous mechanical forces and gene
expression stimulation is the same in the ﬂy and vertebrate embryos: This is
phosphorylation of β-catenin and its interaction with E- cadherins of cell–cell
junctions (Brunet et al. 2013). It has been demonstrated that an important regulator
of
the
embryonic
differentiation
mesoderm,
the
gene
Brachyury,
is
mechanosensitive (Brunet et al. 2013; Eroshkin and Zaraisky 2017). Thus, the
mechanosensitivity of gene expression, the mechanotransduction across the cell,
the cytoskeleton, and regulatory pathways involved in the expression of some genes,
i.e., the molecular mechanisms that translate mechanical forces into gene expression,
were demonstrated (Eroshkin and Zaraisky 2017). It was also shown that mechanical
force alters morphogenetic movements and the patterns of segmental gene engrailed
expression during Drosophila embryogenesis; the chromatin conformation change
due to mechanical strain and mechanodependence of the gene expression during
development was observed (Kumar and Shivashankar 2012). The authors concluded
that the developing embryos are highly sensitive mechanical systems and suggest a
link between physical modulation of cell morphogenetic movements, actomyosin
reorganization, and pattern of the gene engrailed expression (Kumar and
Shivashankar, 2012). It was shown that intracellular waves of actin polymerization
and actomyosin contractility are self-organized by biomechanical feedback
mechanisms (Dasbiswas et al. 2018; Wedlich-Söldner and Betz 2018). Cell migra-
tion and morphogenesis emerge from the interaction between biochemical signaling
and physical forces orchestrating self-organized cortical actomyosin rearrangements,
and membrane tension is an important player in the actin polymerization and
actomyosin contractility (Saha and Galic 2018). Taken together, the data give
evidence on mechanodependent regulation of biological morphogenesis and suggest
that developing embryos comprise a collective dynamic mechanical network linking
physical modulation of cellular morphogenetic movements, actomyosin reorganiza-
tion, and gene expression (Kumar and Shivashankar 2012; Saha and Galic 2018;
Wedlich-Söldner and Betz 2018). Thus, the morphogenetic and developmental role
of mechanical stresses is recognized; tissue geometry and mechanical stress as
inductive cues are entangled within the causal web of structural and functional
relationships that drive developmental processes (Nelson 2009).
Topological methodology reveals a topological imperative as a certain set of
topological rules, which constrains and directs biological morphogenesis (Isaeva
et al. 2006, 2008, 2012, 2014; Presnov et al. 2010, 2014). The topological structure
of phenotypic space gives the topological clariﬁcation of evolutionary transitions as
“the topology of the possible” (Stadler et al. 2001). The inevitable topological
dependence and constraints are integrated into biological morphogenesis depending
on the topological organization of our space. It was supposed that some biological
forms, such as branching structures, are the most functional biological design; these
forms are topological attractors that evolution cannot avoid (Thomas and Reif 1993).
Toroid forms also can be considered functionally optimized biological designs and
attractors in metazoan morphogenesis. For example, topological methodology
150
V. V. Isaeva

interpreted spherical surgeries of the metazoan body surface in development and
evolution as adaptable transformations (Presnov et al. 2010, 2014). In evolution and
embryonic development, the body surface of an organism (its epithelial “envelope”)
in most Metazoa undergoes spherical surgery(ies), which changes the topological
genus of the surface, the value of which is determined by the number of through
hollow channels. In the evolution of Metazoa, there was a transition from organisms
lacking any through epithelial channels, in which body surface is topologically
homeomorphic to a sphere, to organisms with a through the intestinal tube and the
body surface homeomorphic to a torus. The epithelial body surface is the boundary
layer, an interface between the internal medium of a metazoan organism and its
environment. Topological and fractal transformations increase this interface
resulting in better distribution of ﬂows to and from the external medium used as
the source of nutrients, oxygen, and the sink of excreta, so increasing intensity and
efﬁciency of metabolic processes and ensuring better adaptation of the organism to
the environment.
All living organisms are sustained by far-from-equilibrium conditions in their
environment in the ﬂux of energy and matter, in a “stream of order” (Schrödinger
1944; Lane 2015). Energy is central to evolution promoting the self-organization of
matter, and some sort of physical channeling would also seem to be necessary to
extract order from the environment (Lane 2015). The channeling similar to water
mills maximized energy input (Lane 2015). It is the channeling provided through
canals in metazoan organisms that ensured evolutionary energetic gains. Evolution-
ary topological transformations of the metazoan body surface led to the enlargement
of the interface between an organism and its environment; beneﬁts include better
utilization of energy and matter from the external medium ﬂowing through the
animal organism and radical metabolic intensiﬁcation.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Russian Scientiﬁc Foundation, the grant
19-14-00346.
References
Abercrombie M (1980) The crawling movement of metazoan cells. Proc R Soc Lond 207:129–147
Abercrombie M, Heaysman JE (1954) Observations on the social behaviour of cells in tissue
culture. II. Monolayering of ﬁbroblasts. Exp Cell Res 6:293–306
Albrecht-Buehler G (1985) Is cytoplasm intelligent too? In: Shay JW (ed) Cell and muscle motility,
vol 6. Plenum Press, New York
Ambrosi D, Beloussov LV, Ciarletta P (2013) Mechanobiology and morphogenesis in living
matter: a survey. Meccanica 8(8). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11012-017-0627-z
Anetzberger C, Jung K (2010) Introduction. In: Krämer R, Jung K (eds) Bacterial signaling. Wiley-
VCH Verlag, Weinheim
Ashby WR (1947) Principles of the self-organizing dynamic system. J Gen Psychol 37:125–128
Ashby WR (1956) An introduction to cybernetics. Chapman & Hall, London
Atkinson S, Williams P (2009) Quorum sensing and social networking in the microbial world. J R
Soc Interface 6:959–978
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
151

Attanasi A, Cavagna A, Del Castello L, Giardina I, Grigera TS, Jelić A, Melillo S, Parisi L, Pohl O,
Shen E, Viale M (2014) Information transfer and behavioural inertia in starling ﬂocks. Nat Phys
10:691–696
Babloyantz A (1986) Molecules, dynamics, and life: an introduction to self-organization of matter.
Wiley, New York
Balaban V, Lim S, Gupta G, Boedicker J, Bogdan P (2018) Quantifying emergence and self-
organisation of Enterobacter cloacae microbial communities. Sci Rep 8:12416. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-018-30654-9
Balázsi G, van Oudenaarden A, Collins JJ (2011) Cellular decision making and biological noise:
from microbes to mammals. Cell 144:910–925
Ballerini M, Cabibbo N, Candelier R, Cavagna A, Cisbani E, Giardina I, Orlandi A, Parisi G,
Procaccini A, Viale M, Zdravkovic V (2008) Empirical investigation of starling ﬂocks: a
benchmark study in collective animal behaviour. Anim Behav 76:201e215. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.anbehav.2008.02.004
Beccari L, Moris N, Girgin M, Turner DA, Baillie-Johnson P, Cossy A-C, Lutolf MP, Duboule D,
Martinez Arias A (2018) Multi-axial self-organization properties of mouse embryonic stem cells
into gastruloids. Nature 562:272–276
Beklemishev VN (1964) Principles of comparative anatomy of invertebrates. Nauka Publisher,
Moscow. [in Russian]
Beloussov LV (2012) Self-organization, symmetry and morphomechanics in development of
organisms. In: Pereira LAV (ed) Embryology – updates and highlights on classic topics. InTech,
Rijeka
Beloussov LV (2015) Morphomechanics of development. Springer, Heidelberg
Ben-Jacob E, Aharonov Y, Shapira Y (2004) Bacteria harnessing complexity. Bioﬁlms 1:239–263
Ben-Jacob E, Coffey DS, Levine H (2012) Bacterial survival strategies suggest rethinking cancer
cooperativity. Trends Microbiol 20:403–410
Bird RJ (2003) Chaos and life. Complexity and order in evolution and thought. Columbia Univer-
sity, New York
Blazis DEJ (2002) Introduction. The limits to self-organization in biological systems. Biol Bull 202:
245–246
Bodman von SB, Willey JM, Diggle SP (2008) Cell-cell communication in bacteria: united we
stand. J Bacteriol 190:4377–4391
Bouligand Y (1996) Morphological singularities and macroevolution. Memor Soc Ital Sci Natur
Museo Civico Storia Natur Milano 2:89–94
Brodsky VY (2009) Direct cell-cell communications and social behavior of cells in mammals,
protists, and bacteria. Possible causes of multicellularity. Russ J Dev Biol 40:69–82
Brunet T, Bouclet A, Ahmadi P, Mitrossilis D, Driquez B, Brunet AC, Henry L, Serman F,
Beґalle G, Meґnager C, Dumas-Bouchiat F, Givord D, Yanicostas C, Le-Roy D, Dempsey
NM, Plessis A, Farge E (2013) Evolutionary conservation of early mesoderm speciﬁcation by
mechanotransduction in Bilateria. Nat Commun 4:2821. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms3821
Camazine S, Deneubourg JL, Franks N, Sneyd J, Theraulaz G, Bonabeau E (2001) Self-
organization in biological systems. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ
Caratozzolo M, Carnazza S, Fortuna L, Frasca M, Guglielmino S, Gurrieri G, Marletta G (2008)
Self-organizing models of bacterial aggregation states. Math Biosci Eng 5:75–83
Carey N (2015) Junk DNA: a journey through the dark matter of the genome. Columbia University
Press, New York
Carroll SB (2008) Evo-devo and an expanding evolutionary synthesis: a genetic theory of morpho-
logical evolution. Cell 134:25–36
Castenholz RW (1968) The behavior of Oscilaltoria terebriformis in hot springs. J Phycol 4:132–
139
Chandler
JR,
Greenberg
EP
(2012)
Sociomicrobiology
and
quorum
sensing–mediated
communication. In: Olsen LA, Choffnes ER, Mack A (eds) The social biology of microbial
communities. The National Academies Press, Washington
152
V. V. Isaeva

Cherdantsev V (2006) The dynamic geometry of mass cell movements in animal morphogenesis.
Int J Dev Biol 50:169–182
Child CM (1941) Patterns and problems of development. Chicago University Press, Chicago
Crespi BJ (2001) The evolution of social behavior in microorganisms. Trends Ecol Evol 16:178–
183
Dan-Sohkawa M, Fujisawa H (1980) Cell dynamics of the blastulation process in the starﬁsh,
Asterina pectinifera. Dev Biol 77:328–339
Dan-Sohkawa M, Yamanaka H, Watanabe KJ (1986) Reconstruction of bipinnaria larvae from
dissociated embryonic cells of the starﬁsh, Asterina pectinifera. J Embr Exp Morph 94:47–60
Darbelay F, Duboule D (2016) Chapter sixteen—topological domains, metagenes, and the emer-
gence of pleiotropic regulations at Hox loci. Curr Top Dev Biol 116:299–314
Dasbiswas K, Hu S, Schnorrer F, Safran SA, Bershadsky AD (2018) Ordering of myosin II
ﬁlaments driven by mechanical forces: experiments and theory. Philos Trans R Soc B 373:
20170114. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2017.0114
Davidson EH (2006) The regulatory genome: gene regulatory networks in development and
evolution. Academic Press, San Diego
Davidson EH (2010) Emerging properties of animal gene regulatory networks. Nature 468:911–920
de Astacio LM, Prabhakara KH, Li Z, Mickalide H, Kuehn S (2020) Closed microbial communities
self-organize to persistently cycle carbon. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.28.121848
De Monte S, d’Olivio F, Danø S, Sørensen PG (2007) Dynamical quorum sensing: population
density encoded in cellular dynamics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:18377–18381
De Robertis EM (2008) Evo-devo: variations on ancestral themes. Cell 132:185–195
Deisboeck TS, Couzin ID (2009) Collective behavior in cancer cell populations. BioEssays 31:190–
197
Demenok LG, Karetin YA, Isaeva VV (1997) Aggregation of the Mizuhopecten yessoensis
hemocytes in vitro. Russ J Mar Biol 23:327–329. [in Russian]
Deschamps J, Duboule D (2017) Embryonic timing, axial stem cells, chromatin dynamics, and the
Hox clock. Genes Dev 31:1406–1416
Desprat N, Supatto W, Pouille PA, Beaurepaire E, Farge E (2008) Tissue deformation modulates
twist expression to determine anterior midgut differentiation in drosophila embryos. Dev Cell
15:470–477
Dong X, Fisher SG (2019) Ecosystem spatial self-organization: free order for nothing? Ecol
Complex 38:24–30
Duboule D (1994) Temporal colinearity and the phylotypic progression: a basis for the stability of a
vertebrate Bauplan and the evolution of morphologies through heterochrony. Development
1994:135–142
Duboule D (2007) The rise and fall of Hox gene clusters. Development 134:2549–2560
Dunn CW, Ryan J (2015) The evolution of animal genomes. Curr Opin Genet Dev 35:25–32
Dunn FS, Liu AG, Donoghue PCJ (2017) Ediacaran developmental biology. Biol Rev 1. https://doi.
org/10.1111/brv.12379
Ebrahimi A, Schwartzman J, Cordero OX (2019) Cooperation and spatial self-organization deter-
mine rate and efﬁciency of particulate organic matter degradation in marine bacteria. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 116:23309–23316
Edelman GM (1988) Topobiology: an introduction to molecular embryology. Basic Books,
New York
Elsdale T (1972) Pattern formation in ﬁbroblast cultures, an inherently precise morphogenetic
process. In: Waddington GH (ed) Towards a theoretical biology, vol 4. Edinburgh University
Press, Edinburgh
Elsdale T (1973) The generation and maintenance of parallel arrays in cultures of diploid
ﬁbroblasts. In: Kulonen E, Pikkarainen J (eds) Biology of ﬁbroblasts. Academic Press,
New York
Elsdale T, Wasoff F (1976) Fibroblast cultures and dermatoglyphics: the topology of two planar
patterns. Roux’ Arch Dev Biol 180:121–147
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
153

Eroshkin FM, Zaraisky AG (2017) Mechano-sensitive regulation of gene expression during the
embryonic development. Genesis 2017:e23026
Erwin DH (2009) Early origin of the bilaterian developmental toolkit. Philos Trans R Soc 364:
2253–2261
Erwin DH (2020) The origin of animal body plans: a view from fossil evidence and the regulatory
genome. Development 147:dev182899. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.182899
Erwin DH, Davidson EH (2009) The evolution of hierarchical gene regulatory network. Nat Rev
Genet 10:141–148
Erwin DH, Valentine JW (2013) The Cambrian explosion: the construction of animal biodiversity.
Roberts & Co, Greenwood
Farge E (2003) Mechanical induction of twist in the Drosophila foregut stomodeal primordium.
Curr Biol 13:1365–1377
Feistel R, Ebeling W (2011) Physics of self-organization and evolution. Wiley Verlag, Weinheim
Ferrier DEK (2019) Space and time in Hox/ParaHox gene cluster evolution. In: Fusco G
(ed) Perspectives on evolutionary and developmental biology. Padova University Press, Padova
Fields C, Levin M (2020) Does regeneration recapitulate phylogeny? Planaria as a model of body-
axis speciﬁcation in ancestral eumetazoa. Comm Integr Biol 13:27–38
Foster KR (2011) The sociobiology of molecular systems. Nat Rev Genet 12:193–203
Fuqua WC, Winans SC, Greenberg EP (1994) Quorum sensing in bacteria: the LuxR-LuxI family
of cell density-response transcriptional regulators. J Bacteriol 176:269–275
Garcia-Fernández J (2005) Hox, ParaHox, ProtoHox: facts and guesses. Heredity 94:145–152
Gershenson C (2012) Guiding the self-organization of random Boolean networks. Theory Biosci
131:181–191
Gershenson C, Trianni V, Werfel J, Sayama H (2020) Self-organization and artiﬁcial life. Artif Life
26:391–408
Gilbert SF (2010) Developmental biology. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland
Giudice G (1962) Restitution of whole larvae from disaggregated cells of sea urchin embryo. Dev
Biol 5:402–411
Glancy J, Stone JV, Wilson SP (2016) How self-organization can guide evolution. R Soc Open Sci
3:160553. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.160553
Gloag ES, Turnbull L, Whitchurch CB (2015) Bacterial stigmergy. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/
387342
Goldenfeld N, Kadanoff LP (1999) Simple lessons from complexity. Science 284:87–89
Goldenfeld N, Woese C (2011) Life is physics: evolution as a collective phenomenon far from
equilibrium. Annu Rev Condens Matter Phys 2011:375–399
Gould SJ (2002) The structure of evolutionary theory. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA
Green H, Thomas J (1978) Pattern formation by cultured human epidermal cells: development of
curved ridges resembling dermatoglyphs. Science 200:1385–1388
Gurwitsch AG (1922) Über den Begriff des embryonalen Feldes. Wilhelm Roux’ Arch
Entwicklungsmech Org 52:383–415
Haken H (1977) Synergetics: an introduction. Springer, Berlin
Halanych KM (2016) How our view of animal phylogeny was reshaped by molecular approaches:
lessons learned. Org Divers Evol 16:319–328
Hamilton WD (1964) Genetical evolution of social behaviour, I and II. J Theor Biol 7:1–52
Heaysman J (1980) Processes in cell culture. Experientia 36:503–504
Hengge R, Sourjik V (2013) Bacterial regulatory networks—from self-organizing molecules to cell
shape and patterns in bacterial communities. EMBO Rep 14:667–669
Hinegardner RT (1975) Morphology and genetics of sea urchin development. Am Zool 15:679–689
Hirokawa N, Tanaka Y, Okada Y (2009) Left-right determination: involvement of molecular motor
KIF3, cilia, and nodal ﬂow. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 1:a000802
Hogvall M, Vellutini BC, Martín-Durán JM, Hejnol A, Budd GE, Janssen R (2019) Embryonic
expression of priapulid Wnt genes. Dev Genes Evol 229:125–135
154
V. V. Isaeva

Holland PWH (2015) Did homeobox gene duplications contribute to the Cambrian explosion? Zool
Lett 1:1. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40851-014-0004-x
Holstein TW (2012) The evolution of the Wnt pathway. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 4:a007922.
https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a007922
Honda H (2012) Essence of shape formation of animals. Forma 27:S1–S8
Hughes DT, Sperandio V (2012) Inter-kingdom signaling: communication between bacteria and
their hosts. In: Olsen LA, Choffnes ER, Mack A (eds) The social biology of microbial
communities. The National Academies Press, Washington
Iglesias M, Gomez-Skarmeta JL, Saló E, Teresa A (2008) Silencing of Smed-β-catenin1 generates
radial-like hypercephalized planarians. Development 135:1215–1221
Ingber DE (2005) Mechanical control of tissue growth: function follows form. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 102:11571–11572
Ingham CJ (2012) Dispersal of cargo microorganisms by swarming bacteria. In: Olsen LA,
Choffnes ER, Mack A (eds) The social biology of microbial communities. The National
Academies Press, Washington
Isaeva VV (1980) Contact orientation of myoblasts and myotubes in the differentiating culture of
myogenic cells. Sov J Dev Biol 11:181–187
Isaeva VV (1994) Cells in morphogenesis. Nauka Publisher, Moscow. [in Russian]
Isaeva VV (2012) Self-organization in biological systems. Biol Bull 39:110–118
Isaeva VV (2014a) Topological and fractal approaches to systematics and biodiversity. In:
Riosmena-Rodrigez R (ed) Invertebrates: classiﬁcation, evolution and biodiversity. Nova Sci-
ence Publishers, New York
Isaeva VV (2014b) Symmetry transformations in ontogeny and evolution. Paleontol J 48:1–10
Isaeva VV (2018) Genomic-morphogenetic correlations and evolutionary trajectories of Bilateria.
Paleont J 52:1655–1662
Isaeva VV, Kasyanov NV (2021) Symmetry transformations in metazoan evolution and develop-
ment. Symmetry 13:160. https://doi.org/10.3390/sym13020160
Isaeva VV, Korenbaum ES (1989) Defensive functions of coelomocytes and immunity in
echinoderms. Russ J Mar Biol 15:3–14. [in Russian]
Isaeva VV, Rozhnov SV (2021) Evolutionary transformations of the metazoan body plan: genomic-
morphogenetic correlations. Paleontol J 55:97–110
Isaeva VV, Presnov EV, Chernyshev AV (2006) Topological patterns in metazoan evolution and
development. Bull Math Biol 68:2053–2067
Isaeva VV, Kasyanov NV, Presnov EV (2008) Analysis situs of spatial-temporal architecture in
biological morphogenesis. In: Kelly JT (ed) Progress in mathematical biology research. Nova
Science Publishers, New York
Isaeva VV, Kasyanov NV, Presnov EV (2012) Topological singularities and symmetry breaking in
development. Biosystems 109:280–298
Isaeva VV, Sumina EL, Sumin DL (2013) Symmetry transformations during the morphogenesis in
communities of ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria (Prokaryota) and in vitro cells of some Metazoa
(Eukaryota). In: Morphogenesis in individual and historical development: symmetry and asym-
metry. PIN RAS, Moscow [in Russian, summary in English]
Isaeva VV, Kasyanov NV, Presnov EV (2014) Topology in biology: singularities and surgery
transformations in metazoan development and evolution. Appl Math 5:2664–2774
Jockusch H, Dress A (2003) From sphere to torus: a topological view of the metazoan body plan.
Bull Math Biol 65:57–65
Johnson BR, Lam SK (2010) Self-organization, natural selection, and evolution: cellular hardware
and genetic software. Bioscience 60:879–885
Kadokawa Y, Dan-Sohkawa M, Eguchi G (1986) Studies on mechanism of blastula formation in
starﬁsh embryos denuded of fertilization membrane. Cell Differ 19:79–88
Kadzik RS, Homa KE, Kovar DR (2020) F-actin cytoskeleton network self-organization through
competition and cooperation. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 36:35–60
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
155

Karsenti E (2008) Self-organization in cell biology: a brief history. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9:255–
262
Kauffman SA (1993) The origins of order. Self-organization and selection in evolution. Oxford
University, New York
Kirilliva A, Genikhovich G, Pukhlyakova E, Demilly A, Kraus Y, Technau U (2018) Germ-layer
commitment and axis formation in sea anemone embryonic cell aggregates. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 115:1813–1818
Kirschner MW, Gerhart JC (2005) The plausibility of life. Yale University, New Haven, London
Koonin EV (2012) The logic of chance: the nature and origin of biological evolution. Pearson
Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
Kotolupov VA, Isaeva VV (2013) Cells in the system of multicellular organism from positions of
non-linear dynamics. J Evol Biochem Physiol 49:262–273
Kumar A, Shivashankar GV (2012) Mechanical force alters morphogenetic movements and
segmental gene expression patterns during drosophila embryogenesis. PLoS One 7(3):e33089
Lackie JM (1986) Cell movement and cell behavior. Allen & Unwin, London
Lane N (2010) Life ascending: the ten great inventions of evolution. Proﬁle Books, London
Lane N (2015) The vital question: why is life the way it is. Proﬁle Books, London
Lang D, Rensing SA (2015) The evolution of transcriptional regulation in the viridiplantae and its
correlation with morphological complexity. In: Ruiz-Trillo I, Nedelcu AM (eds) Evolutionary
transitions to multicellular life. Principles and mechanisms. Springer, Dordrecht
Larkum AWD (1999) The cyanobacteria of coral reefs. In: Charpy L, Larkum AWM (eds) Marine
cyanobacteria. Musée Océanographique, Monaco
Leu ST, Whiting MJ, Mahony MJ (2013) Making friends: social attraction in larval green and
golden bell frogs, Litoria aurea. PLoS One 8(2):e56460. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0056460
Li R, Bowerman B (2010) Symmetry breaking in biology. Cold Spring Harbor Perspect Bio l2 3:1–
5
Li Y-H, Tian X (2012) Quorum sensing and bacterial social interactions in bioﬁlms. Sensors 12:
2519–2538
Little AEF, Robinson CJ, Peterson SB, Raffa KF, Handelsman J (2012) Rules of engagement:
interspecies interactions that regulate microbial communities. In: Olsen LA, Choffnes ER, Mack
A (eds) The social biology of microbial communities. The National Academies Press,
Washington
Loh KM, Amerongen van R, Nusse R (2016) Generating cellular diversity and spatial form: Wnt
signaling and the evolution of multicellular animals. Dev Cell 38:643–655
López D, Vlamakis H, Kolter R (2010) Bioﬁlms. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2(7):a000398
Mandelbrot BB (1983) The fractal geometry of nature. Freeman, New York
Manuel M (2009) Early evolution of symmetry and polarity in metazoan body plans. C R Biol 332:
184–209
Maresin VM, Presnov EV (1985) Topological approach to embryogenesis. J Theor Biol 114:387–
398
Margulis L (1981) Symbiosis in cell evolution. Freeman, New York
Mastropaolo MD, Silby MW, Nicoll JS, Levy SB (2012) Novel genes involved in Pseudomonas
ﬂuorescens Pf0-1 motility and bioﬁlm formation. Appl Environ Microbiol 78:4318–4329
McCusker D (2020) Cellular self-organization: generating order from the abyss. Mol Biol Cell 31:
143–148
Meinhardt H (2006) The primary body axes of vertebrates: the generation of a near-Cartesian
coordinate system and the role of Spemann-type organizer. Dev Dyn\ 235:2907–2919
Minelli A (2000) Limbs and tail as evolutionarily diverging duplicates of the main body axis. Evol
Dev 2:157–165
Minelli A (2003) The development of animal form. Ontogeny, morphology, and evolution.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
156
V. V. Isaeva

Minelli A (2015) EvoDevo and its signiﬁcance for animal evolution and phylogeny. In: Wanninger
A (ed) Evolutionary developmental biology of invertebrates, vol 1. Springer, Wien
Misteli T (2001) The concept of self-organization in cellular architecture. J Cell Biol 155:181–185
Muller F, Brissac T, Le Bris N, Felbeck H, Gros O (2010) First description of giant Archaea
(Thaumarchaeota) associated with putative bacterial ectosymbionts in a sulﬁdic marine habitat.
Environ Microbiol 12:2371–2383
Neagu A, Jakab K, Jamison R, Forgacs G (2005) Role of physical mechanisms in biological self-
organization. Phys Rev Lett 95:178104
Neijts R, Simmini S, Giuliani F, van Rooijen C, Deschamps J (2014) Region-speciﬁc regulation of
posterior axial elongation during vertebrate embryogenesis. Dev Dyn 243:88–98
Neijts R, Amin S, van Rooijen C, Tan S, Creyghton MP, Laat de W, Deschamps J (2016) Polarized
regulatory landscape and Wnt responsiveness underlie Hox activation in embryos. Genes Dev
30:1937–1942
Neijts R, Amin S, van Rooijen C, Deschamps J (2017) Cdx is crucial for the timing mechanism
driving colinear Hox activation and deﬁnes a trunk segment in the Hox cluster topology. Dev
Biol 422:146–154
Nelson CM (2009) Geometric control of tissue morphogenesis. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell
Res 1793:903–910
Newman SA (2012) Physico-genetic determinants in the evolution of development. Science 338:
217. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1222003
Nicolis G, Prigogine I (1977) Self-organization in non-equilibrium systems: from dissipative
structures to order through ﬂuctuations. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ
Nicolis G, Prigogine I (1989) Exploring complexity: an introduction. Freeman, New York
Niehrs C (2010) On growth and form: a Cartesian coordinate system of Wnt and BMP signaling
speciﬁes bilaterian body axes. Development 137:845–857
Ogura T, Busch W (2016) Genotypes, networks, phenotypes: moving toward plant systems
genetics. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 32:103–126
Olsen LA, Choffnes ER, Mack A (eds) (2012) The social biology of microbial communities:
workshop summary. The National Academies Press, Washington, DC
Parrish JK, Edelstein-Keshet L (1999) Complexity, pattern, and evolutionary trade-off in animal
aggregation. Science 284:99–101
Parrish JK, Viscido SV, Grünbaum D (2002) Self-organized ﬁsh schools: an examination of
emergent properties. Biol Bull 202:296–305
Penrose R (1979) The topology of ridge systems. Ann Hum Genet Lond 42:435–444
Peter IS, Davidson EH (2011) Evolution of gene regulatory networks controlling body plan
development. Cell 144:970–985
Petersen CP, Reddien PW (2009) Wnt signaling and the polarity of the primary body axis. Cell 139:
1056–1068
Peterson KJ, Eernisse DJ (2016) The phylogeny, evolutionary developmental biology, and paleo-
biology of the Deuterostomia: 25 years of new techniques, new discoveries, and new ideas. Org
Divers Evol 16:401–418
Petroff A, Sim MS, Liang B, Rothman D, Bosak T (2008) Aggregation phenomena in
cyanobacterial analogues of ancient stromatolites. In: Reitner J, Quéric N-V, Reich M (eds)
Geobiology of stromatolites. Universitätsverlag Göttingen, Göttingen
Presnov EV, Malyghin SN, Isaeva VV (1988) Topological and thermodynamic structure of
morphogenesis. In: Lamprecht I, Zotin AI (eds) Thermodynamics and pattern formation in
biology. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin
Presnov E, Isaeva V, Kasyanov N (2010) Topological determination of early morphogenesis in
Metazoa. Theor Biosci 129:259–270
Presnov E, Isaeva V, Kasyanov N (2014) Topological invariance of biological development.
Axiomathes 24:117–135
Prigogine I, Stengers I (1984) Order out of chaos: man’s new dialogue with nature. Bantam Books,
New York
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
157

Rainey PB, Kerr B (2012) Cheats as ﬁrst propagules: a new hypothesis for the evolution of
individuality during the transition from single cells to multicellularity. In: Olsen LA, Choffnes
ER, Mack A (eds) The social biology of microbial communities. The National Academies Press,
Washington
Rashevsky N (1958) A note on biotopology of reproduction. Bull Math Biophys 20:275–280
Refardt D, Bergmiller T, Kümmerli R (2013) Altruism can evolve when relatedness is low:
evidence from bacteria committing suicide upon phage infection. Proc R Soc B 280:30–35
Richardson LL, Castenholtz RW (1987) Dial vertical movements of the cyanobacterium
Oscillatoria terebriformis in a sulﬁde-rich hot spring microbial mat. Appl Environ Microbiol
53:2142–2150
Richardson LL, Castenholtz RW (1989) Chemokinetic motility responses of the cyanobacterium
Oscillatoria terebriformis. Appl Environ Microbiol 55:261–263
Ryan F (2015) The mysterious world of the human genome. Harper Collins, New York
Saha T, Galic M (2018) Self-organization across scales: from molecules to organisms. Phil Trans R
Soc B 373(1747):20170113. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2017.0113
Sasai Y (2013) Cytosystems dynamics in self-organization of tissue architecture. Nature 493:318–
326
Sato T, Clevers H (2013) Growing self-organizing mini-guts from a single intestinal stem cell:
mechanism and applications. Science 340:1190–1194
Schirrmeister BE, de Vos JM, Antonelli A, Bagheri HC (2013) Evolution of multicellularity
coincided with increased diversiﬁcation of cyanobacteria and the great oxidation event. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:1791–1796
Schrödinger E (1944) What is life? The physical aspect of the living cell and mind and matter.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Seilacher A, Gishlick ADS (2015) Morphodynamics. CRC Press, Boca Raton, NJ
Shapiro JA (2016) Nothing in evolution makes sense except in the light of genomics: read–write
genome evolution as an active biological process. Biology 5:27. https://doi.org/10.3390/
biology5020027
Shepard RN, Sumner DY (2010) Undirected motility of ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria produces
reticulate mats. Geobiology 8:179–190
Shubin NH (1998) Evolutionary cut and paste. Nature 394:12–13
Siebert BA, Hall CL, Gleeson JP, Asllani M (2020) Role of modularity in self-organization
dynamics in biological networks. Phys Rev E 102:052306. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.
102.052306
Simakov O, Kawashima (2017) Independent evolution of genomic characters during major meta-
zoan transitions. Trans Dev Biol 427:179–192
Soleґ RV, Salazar-Ciudad I, Garcia-Fernaґndez J (2002) Common pattern formation, modularity
and phase transitions in a gene network model of morphogenesis. Phys A 305:640–654
Spemann H, Mangold H (1924) Induction of embryonic primordia by implantation of organizers
from a different species. Roux’s Arch Entwicklungsmech Org 100:599–638
Spiegel M, Spiegel E (1975) The reaggregation of dissociated embryonic sea urchin cells. Am Zool
15:583–606
Spiegel E, Spiegel M (1986) Cell-cell interactions during sea urchin morphogenesis. In: Develop-
mental biology: a comprehensive synthesis, vol 2. Plenum Press, New York, London
Srivastava MA (2015) Comparative genomics perspective on the origin of multicellularity and early
animal evolution. In: Ruiz-Trillo I, Nedelcu AM (eds) Evolutionary transitions to multicellular
life. Principles and mechanisms. Springer Science, Dordrecht
Stadler BMR, Stadler PF, Wagner GP, Fontana W (2001) The topology of possible: formal spaces
underlying patterns of evolutionary change. J Theor Biol 213:241–274
Stamenovic D, Ingber DE (2009) Tensegrity-guided self assembly: from molecules to living cells.
Soft Matter 5:1137–1145
158
V. V. Isaeva

Stern CD, Charité J, Deschamps J, Duboule D, Durston AJ, Kmita M, Nicolas J, Palmeirim I, Smith
JC, Wolpert L (2006) Head-tail patterning of the vertebrate embryo: one, two or many
unresolved problems? Int J Dev Biol 50:3–15
Strassmann JE, Queller DC (2012) Evolution of cooperation and control of cheating in a social
microbe. In: Olsen LA, Choffnes ER, Mack A (eds) The social biology of microbial
communities. The National Academies Press, Washington
Sumina EL, Sumin DL (2013) Morphogenesis in a community of ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria. Russ J
Dev Biol 44:158–172
Tabony J (2006) Historical and conceptual background of self-organization by reactive processes.
Biol Cell 98:589–602
Tamura M, Dan-Sohkawa M, Kaneko H (1998) Coelomic pouch formation in reconstructing
embryos of the starﬁsh Asterina pectinifera. Dev Growth Differ 40:567–575
Tee YH, Shemesh T, Thiagarajan V, Hariadi RF, Anderson KL, Page C, Volkmann N, Hanein D,
Sivaramakrishnan S, Kozlov MM, Bershadsky AD (2015) Cellular chirality arising from the
self-organization of the actin cytoskeleton. Nat Cell Biol 17:445–457
Thom R (1969) Topological models in biology. Topology 8:313–335
Thom R (1996) Qualitative and quantitative in evolutionary theory with some thoughts on Aristo-
telian biology. Memor Soc Ital Sci Nat Museo Civico Storia Natur Milano 27:115–117
Thom R (1997) Structural stability and morphogenesis: an outline of a general theory of models.
Addison-Wesley, New York
Thomas RDK, Reif WE (1993) The skeleton space: a ﬁnite set of organic design. Evolution 47:341–
359
Trinkaus JP (1984) Cells into organs. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs
Tschopp P, Duboule D (2011) A genetic approach to the transcriptional regulation of Hox gene
clusters. Annu Rev Genet 45:145–166
Turing AM (1952) On the chemical basis of morphogenesis. Philos Trans Roy Soc Lond Ser B 237:
37–72
Turner DC, Lawton J, Dollenmeier P, Ehrisman R, Chiquet M (1983) Guidance of myogenic cell
migration by oriented deposits of ﬁbronectin. Dev Biol 95:497–504
Vandenburgh HH (1982) Dynamic mechanical orientation of skeletal myoﬁbers in vitro. Dev Biol
93:438–443
Vasiliev JM (2007) Reorganization of cytoskeleton as a basis of morphogenesis. Russ J Dev Biol
38:90–94
Vasiliev JM, Gelfand IM (2006) Cellular search migrations in normal development and carcino-
genesis. Biochem Mosc 71:821–826
Wassenaar TM (2012) Bacteria: the benign, the bad, and the beautiful. Wiley-Blackwell,
Hoboken, NJ
Waters CM, Bassler BL (2005) Quorum sensing: cell-to-cell communication in bacteria. Annu Rev
Cell Dev Biol 21:319–346
Wedlich-Söldner R, Betz T (2018) Self-organization: the fundament of cell biology. Philos Trans R
Soc B 373:20170103. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2017.0103
Weiss P (1961) Guidance principles in cell locomotion and cell aggregation. Exp Cell Res 8
(Suppl):260
Weiss P (1968) Dynamic of development: experiments and inferences. Academic Press, New York,
London
Weiss P, Garber B (1952) Shape and movement of mesenchyme cells as functions of the physical
structure of the medium. Contribution to a quantitative morphology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
38:264–280
Wilkins AS (2002) The evolution of developmental pathways. Sinauer, Sunderland
Wilson HW (1907) On some phenomena of coalescence and regeneration in sponges. J Exp Zool 5:
250–252
Wilson DS, Wilson EO (2007) Rethinking the theoretical foundation of sociobiology. Q Rev Biol
82:327–348
5
Self-Organization at Different Levels of Metazoan Complexity. . .
159

Witten TA, Sander LM (1981) Diffusion-limited aggregation, a kinetic critical phenomenon. Physi
Rev Lett 47:1400–1403
Woese CR (2002) On the evolution of cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:8742–8747
Wolpert L (1969) Positional information and the spatial pattern of cellular differentiation. J Theor
Biol 25:1–17
Wolpert L (1989) Positional information revisited. Development 107:3–12
You Z, Pearce DJG, Giomi L (2021) Conﬁnement-induced self-organization in growing bacterial
colonies. Sci Adv 7. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abc8685
Zhong Y, Herrera-Úbeda C, Garcia-Fernàndez J, Li G, Holland PWH (2020) Mutation of amphi-
oxus Pdx and Cdx demonstrates conserved roles for ParaHox genes in gut, anus and tail
patterning. BMC Biol 18:68. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12915-020-00796-2
160
V. V. Isaeva

Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
6
Stephen E. Robbins
Abstract
In Creative Evolution (1907/1911), a pivotal discussion is the extreme complex-
ity of instinctual behavior. As one of many examples, a member of the
Hymenoptera “knows” precisely the three locations of motor-neuron complexes
at which to sting a cricket such that it is paralyzed, yet remains fully alive for the
wasp’s larvae. Two points: (a) This behavior is as much an “irreducible” complex
of acts as the structural organization of the wasp’s body, and just as inexplicably
formed by natural selection, and (b) the instinctual behavior is actually at the
same level as the vital processes of the organism. This is to say that any theory of
evolution, be it selection, self-assembly, or self-organization, is equally bound to
address not only the origin problem of an organism’s structure, but the correlated
functional problem of instinct.
Instinct, however, was Bergson’s prime source for holding, ﬁrstly, that we
must see Consciousness as the impetus behind evolution and secondly that it is
only by utilizing the essence of instinct, conjoined with intellect—his “intui-
tion”—that mind and science can penetrate these mysterious evolutionary pro-
cesses. This double thesis of the role of Consciousness and the role of intuition
likely helped to cause Bergson’s neglect in the biological world, but subsequently
there has emerged the current sharp awareness of the “Hard Problem” of Con-
sciousness (Chalmers, J Conscious Stud 2:200–219, 1995). The ongoing failure
on a solution to this problem—its very, very unresolved status—should give us
pause. In fact, integral to the argument of Creative Evolution, though always only
obliquely referenced, was Matter and Memory (1896/1912), and in this work was
a remarkable solution to the Hard Problem—when understood, an amazing feat of
“intuition.” This, we will see, casts Bergson’s view of the role of Consciousness
S. E. Robbins (*)
Center for Advanced Product Engineering, W126 N7449 Flint Drive, Menomonee Falls, WI, USA
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_6
161

in evolution, and the nature of instinct as one of evolution’s lines of development,
in a new light.
Keywords
Bergson · Instinct · Intuition · Time · Consciousness · Gibson · Affordances
6.1
Introduction
Intuition. Bergson is perhaps most famous for his emphasis on this. Intuition—this is
something everyone has a feel for, understands somewhat, experiences, but as usual
with Bergson it is highly doubtful this concept is understood with its radical
implications for our Science. Bergson’s vision of it was developed in the context
of evolution, i.e., how is evolution explained, what is the “mechanism” behind it, and
thus in analysis of Darwin and Neo-Darwinism. It is the salient feature of Creative
Evolution (1907/1911; henceforth, CE). In Bergson, intuition merges with the
problem of instinct, with instinct itself being seen as an inescapable problem for
any theory of evolution. One cannot separate a theory of the evolution of forms—
birds, bees, butterﬂies—from a theory of the instinct these forms display. These are
inseparable problems.
We are going to go immediately to a pivotal point in CE. Bergson begins here on
the problem of the Hymenoptera—the wasps (and sawﬂies, bees, ants). Per Wiki,
females “typically insert their eggs in hosts.” Fine, one would think this is not a
problem for evolution theory. Here’s Bergson:
We know that the different species of Hymenoptera that have this paralyzing instinct lay
their eggs in spiders, beetles or caterpillars, which, having ﬁrst been subjected by the wasp to
a skillful surgical operation, will go on living motionless a certain number of days, and thus
provide the larvae with fresh meat. (Bergson 1907/1911, p. 172)
Yes, a bit gruesome, and:
In the sting which they give to the nerve-centres of their victims, in order to destroy its power
of moving without killing it, these different species of Hymenoptera take into account, so to
speak, the different species of prey they respectively attack. (ib)
Continuing:
The Scolia, which attacks the larvae of a rose-beetle, stings it in one point only, but in this
point the motor ganglia are concentrated, and those ganglia alone—the stinging of other
ganglia might cause death and putrefaction, which it must avoid. (ib)
And:
The yellow-winged Sphex, which has chosen the cricket for its victim, knows that the cricket
has three different nerve-centres which serve its three pairs of legs—or at least acts as if it
162
S. E. Robbins

knew this. It stings the insect ﬁrst under the neck, then behind the prothorax, and then where
the thorax joins the abdomen. (ib)
Finally:
The Ammophila Hirsuta gives nine successive strokes of its sting upon the nine nerve-
centres of its caterpillar, and then seizes the head and squeezes it in its mandibles, enough to
cause paralysis without death. (ib)
How
can
we
account
for
this
knowledge
by
evolutionary
“steps”?
Neo-Darwinism gives us:
•
Random mutations
•
Carried by DNA. . .
•
. . .IF the mutation has survival value.
We ask: an Ammophila once learned all the necessary nine strokes plus the head
squeeze—all at once? And transmitted this in its DNA? Less than this, say, trans-
mitting just one of the nine strokes—this is a NO, by deﬁnition—no survival value!
How were these wasps providing for their offspring before this, how were the larvae
staying alive—before this knowledge? And how is such a complex knowledge/
action “encoded” in DNA?
There is, of course, the new synthesis position. This adds self-organization to
Darwinism,
where
self-organization
implies
the
self-creation
of
structures
employing constant energy input (i.e., dissipative structures). But how does a
system—an organism—“self-organize” into this knowledge:
•
The exact three points to sting a cricket???
•
The exact nine points to sting a caterpillar (plus head squeeze)???
•
The precise location of the critical knot of motor neurons?
And note, this knowledge implies the structures (stinger, ovipositor, muscular
support. . .) with their functionality required to support the actions implementing this
knowledge.
So, the problem is inverted—function (the concept of the action) precedes
structure. We are not simply “self-organizing” (or mutating) new structures which
beings (like wasps) then discover are useful, say, for stinging caterpillars at precise
points! We already have to account for the concept of the function, or as Bergson
will term it, the impetus driving the birth of this function. This is to say that we need
consider whether we are dealing with a problem of Consciousness, i.e., a Conscious-
ness behind evolution. For Bergson, Consciousness is the impetus of evolution. It is
for this reason that our intellect, by itself, cannot penetrate the wasp, the origin of its
instinct, the origin of its structure. Why? This is what we’re about to see. A bit
paradoxically, we will be mixing an analysis of the problem of instinct and form with
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
163

a methodological prescription to its solution based in the very nature of instinct. But
ﬁrstly a couple of correlated things.
6.2
The Problem of Commonsense Knowledge
The nine stings necessary for paralyzing the caterpillar, the three stings at precise
points for the cricket: Of what does this remind us? “Irreducible complexity” and
Behe’s (1996, 2000, 2007) mousetrap—the mousetrap being only a metaphor for the
complexity of the organization of parts in an organism. The force of Behe’s
argument was not that one cannot imagine simpler mousetraps than say, our standard
mousetrap. McDonald (2000, 2002), in fact took on the mental exercise of
constructing a series of such, starting from an extremely simple trap, yet functional,
to increasingly more complex versions. The force of Behe’s argument was that, to
evolve to a new and different form of trap, one cannot evolve (or mutate) just one
part of an already functional mousetrap for the resultant new trap, given just this one
change, is useless—non-functional—the one change then itself having no survival
value. Or if transitioning from trap A to trap B, make one change to trap A which
leaves it non-functional (until we get to B)—we need the entirety of the function
changes or transformations at once. We need an interrelated set of parts/changes that
create a functional whole. Consider (Fig. 6.1) the transformations required to move
from one of McDonald’s “fully functional” mousetraps to a next, more advanced,
functional stage:
Transformation steps (partial list), from Trap 5 to 6:
•
Expand platform
•
Reposition spring
•
Rotate hammer down
•
Create slot for hold down bar
•
Position hold down bar
•
Create fancy release for hold down bar
Fig. 6.1 McDonald’s Traps #5 and #6
164
S. E. Robbins

Elsewhere (Robbins 2002, 2012), I argued that evolutionists, in treating this
problem, have simply bumbled, with apparently no awareness, into the massively
unsolved problem of AI—commonsense knowledge. AI oscillates from ignoring the
problem to renewed enthusiasm as new developments come along. For example,
LeCun (2016) expresses explicitly a new determination to solve the problem (per
him, “a very old, classic problem in AI”) via deep learning networks with their many
variants. In truth, the commonsense problem is simply a restatement of the “frame
problem” (McCarthy and Hayes 1969) already deeply recognized in the 1960s. One
can state the frame problem as such: How does a robot, watching coffee being stirred
(a very commonsense piece of our knowledge of things), recognize an anomaly?
Anomaly examples might be: The coffee surface erupts in geysers, or the spoon
collapses and melts, or the coffee liquid periodically rises one inch above the cup and
falls back. The problem is that the robot is (constantly) checking his very, very long
list of “frame axioms”—things that do not change while this event (a “frame”)
occurs—the cup stays in a stable position, the cup does not collapse, the table holds
steady under the cup, the president stays the same, the sun stays up, etc. How to
perform this axiom-check against this very, very long list in real time against the
ongoing event? As Wheeler (2008) notes, this problem was attacked enthusiastically
for 30 years, then simply “faded,” i.e., despite occasional claims that the problem
was solved (which LeCun is obviously disregarding), never actually solved.
The exercise considered in the 2012 paper was creating a mousetrap out of a pile
of components, say, for a partial list: a small box, rubber bands, paper clips, tooth
picks, string, staples, a razor blade, a pencil, a piece of cheese. This was actually a
little creativity test for engineers, and the paper was sourced originally in
contemplating an AI paper by Freeman and Newell (1971) we will discuss further
in a later section. The paper purported, by implication, to do this kind of thing, i.e., to
design a device. So, back to the component list: One could construct a type of
“crossbow trap” with pencil as arrow, rubber bands pulling the arrow back, paperclip
locking the pencil in position, string attached to the cheese and clip. Or (Fig. 6.2) one
could construct a form of “beheader,” with the razorblade and pencil forming an
“axe,” rubber band providing the downward force, pencil propped up by a toothpick,
string/cheese attached to toothpick, the pencil’s (non-axe) sharp end lodged in the
box corner, etc.
Fig. 6.2 Crossbow trap, axe for a beheading trap
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
165

These are dynamic transformations of (visual, kinesthetic) imagery in thought.
They must occur in an indivisible ﬂow of time. This cannot be within the discrete
state “time” of the computer model of mind, where, as each state arrives, the
previous disappears. In this framework, there is only one (abstract) state at a time.
There is no transformation per se, i.e., there is no basis for continuity in this abstract
framework, but continuity is intrinsic to “transformations.” (I’ll expand these
statements in a later section on the classic metaphysic of space and time this
framework reﬂects.)
This point is precisely that of Penrose (1994) in his examples of “non-computa-
tional thought,” a process he argued required consciousness, though unfortunately
neither Penrose nor his many angry critics were aware of this implication of his
argument. One example he gives (Fig. 6.3) is a visual proof of “a computation that
does not stop” (i.e., the halting problem). In this, he takes a hexagonal number, folds
it into a three-sided cube, then stacks this three-sided structure over the previous
cube, the result being again a cube (thus a cubical number, with each successive
stacking also being a cubical number). It is obvious that this process and its cubical
result will never end, and it is obvious that this is a continuous visual event-
transformation—folding, stacking—each transformation preserving certain invari-
ance—cubicalness, three-sided structure, rigidity, stability, spatial ﬁt.
The problem of consciousness and the nature of time are inseparable. Conscious-
ness itself, as we shall explore, is an indivisible, continuous ﬂow. This underlies the
perception, shall we term it, of the globality of the transformation, with the various
invariants being preserved. This is not possible via a discrete state machine. This is
not grasped nor understood as a need by AI, consciousness being yet an epiphenom-
enon in its “cognitive” framework; consciousness exists, yes, but its function is
mysterious, apparently unneeded. In fact, this is why consciousness is required for
true cognition (Robbins 2009), not only for transformations upon forms in proofs,
but even for the transformations of pencils while creating lowly mousetraps.
Fig. 6.3 Penrose’s visual
proof of a computation that
does not stop: Adding two
successive hexagonal
numbers always results in a
cubical number. A hexagonal
number (like 7, 19, 37) is
folded into a three-sided cube,
then stacked over the previous
cube, the resultant always
being a cubical number
166
S. E. Robbins

“Continuous transformations” is a bit insufﬁcient to cover what is intended here.
We are talking continuous transformations in a perceptual (or cognitive-perceptual)
modality—the visual, the auditory, the kinesthetic. The great theorist of child
cognitive development, Jean Piaget, studied these extensively. In one example
(1946), the children, ranging from ages 3–7, are shown a tunnel into which three
beads, ABC, on a wire are moved (Fig. 6.4). The tunnel is semi-rotated (180) and
the children asked in which order the beads will come out (inverted: CBA). The
questions are ultimately generalized: What is the order after 3 semi-rotations, after
7 semi-rotations, after 8? The abstract generalization—the invariance—is the “odd-
even” rule: The order remains the same after an even number of rotations and the
order changes (inverts) with an odd number (yes, again, a computation that does not
stop). But the children struggle until roughly the age of seven to reach this generali-
zation—to perceive the invariance. In the meanwhile, over the years of their
developmental trajectory (i.e., over the changes of their neural organization), they
are working on improving the visualizing of the semi-rotations. They will come to a
point for example where they can predict the result of 3 or 4 semi-turns, but are yet
lost when asked to jump to, say, 7 or 8—they cannot visualize this many half-turns.
For Piaget, the eventual achievement of the odd-even rule or invariance (his “con-
crete operations” stage) is the result of schematizing these visual transformations,
until they become like a little schematic experiment that does not actually have to be
fully performed.
This is what is required: a “device” that supports, in multiple modalities, contin-
uous transformations over which invariance is preserved. This is a “device” far
beyond a standard computer, its intrinsic discrete time framework and its homoge-
neous substrate for memory (e.g., magnetic cores). Indeed, if the universe is capable
of creating such contraptions as beetles (variant after variant), butterﬂies, or
brontosaurs, it must be a far different “device” from a Turing form of “cosmic
computer” employing AI-like processes for design. Yet it is not difﬁcult to show that
the evolutionists and AI are allies, with evolutionists implicitly, covertly appealing
to AI-like processes, for the concept is apparently that these transformations of parts
into new functionality, i.e., commonsense knowledge, is easily solved, in fact
algorithmic. Noting Miller’s (2003, 2004) concept of pools of available biological
parts, Dawkins (2006) held that evolution is simply “commandeering” from these
pools of biological parts and modifying them into new “devices” or forms. The
concept is already there in Darwin’s “exaptation”:
Fig. 6.4 Piaget’s Tunnel-Bead Experiment. The beads (on a wire) are pushed into the tunnel, the
tunnel given N half-turns, and the child is asked in which order will the beads emerge
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
167

On the same principle, if a man were to make a machine for some special purpose, but were
to use old wheels, springs, and pulleys, only slightly altered, the whole machine, with all its
parts, might be said to be specially contrived for that purpose. Thus throughout nature almost
every part of each living being has probably served, in a slightly modiﬁed condition, for
diverse purposes, and has acted in the living machinery of many ancient and distinct speciﬁc
forms. (Darwin, quoted by Shermer 2006, p. 68).
Though Darwin is clearly going to be no better off than Miller in coaching AI on
creating programs for the design of mousetraps, in lieu of “commandeer,” Shermer
conﬁdently employs the term “co-opt,” as in evolution “co-opts” features to use for
another purpose. For “commandeer,” Scott (2004) uses “borrowing and swapping.”
For “commandeer,” Dennett (1996) substitutes the term “generate and test,” holding,
with no explication, that evolution simply “generates” new devices such as ﬂagellar
motors (or mousetrap #6) to test them out. Finally, Kevin Miller (2004) himself
simply uses “mix and matching” saying, “. . .it’s to be expected that the opportunism
of evolutionary processes would mix and match proteins to produce new and novel
functions” (2004, p. 88). It is difﬁcult to resist stating that if Dennett, Shermer or the
evolutionary biologists know secretly how to program these things, if they have
solved the problem of commonsense knowledge, they should be transmitting this to
the folks in AI.
6.2.1
DNA and Coding “Commonsense”
There is the problem then of the transformations of forms, say, from beetle variant
1 to beetle variant 2—the implicit force of Behe’s argument. But this is equivalent to
employing these forms, using these in behavior—a human making the mousetrap out
of handy materials, or, if one is a spider, constructing webs. This is the “common-
sense” of spiders. One could spend much time, for an example, on the incredible
complexity of spider web construction. Gunther (2012) takes us through a thought
exercise, scaling up the web problem to human size. We would face stringing a web
between two 90-foot-high trees separated by 300 feet. We end up employing nearly
one mile of rope, casting the ﬁrst line across from one tree to the other, somehow,
and then creating the radial spokes, constantly adjusting the spokes for tension, and
always tailoring the web, contextually, to the conditions of wind, to the precise
conﬁguration of branches from which it will be hung. Each web is thus slightly to
even largely different. As a spider, we can do this from Day 1, and since the spider
can do this on Day 1, all this knowledge, this ability to make contextually dependent,
complex engineering feats called webs—this instinct—is supposedly encoded, yes,
like an AI program, in DNA.
Just like the wasp, the question becomes: How can DNA possibly “code” such
knowledge? One could explore the possibility of morphic ﬁelds (Sheldrake 2012),
but even were these ﬁelds to explain the memory (passed from spider generation to
generation), they could not explain the initial creation of the ability. There was
Spider #1, and Wasp #1. We are forced to the beginning—to Consciousness.
168
S. E. Robbins

6.3
Consciousness, the Hard Problem, and Evolution
If there is a deepest theme in CE, it is: Consciousness is the impetus behind the
explosion of forms in evolution. My suspicion is that the role of Consciousness in
CE is considered “interesting” at best. It does not carry close to the weight it
should. Why? Because Matter & Memory (1896) is the foundation of CE, and the
difﬁculty is that M&M and its signiﬁcance was little understood. Even by its
admirers, its concept of perception was considered “obscure.” This is because it
was a holographic theory, ﬁfty plus years before Gabor’s 1947 discovery. It was
elegant, yet abstruse, well beyond Pribram’s (1971) attempt to use the holographic
concept, and anticipating but well beyond Bohm’s approach (1980). It was, as well, a
solution to the Hard Problem—before the Hard Problem was (somewhat) understood
or “announced” (e.g., Chalmers 1995). In CE, it is amazing how minimal is
Bergson’s explication of his M&M model of consciousness and perception, barely
a, “I said things on this in another work. . .”.
The Hard Problem is still not understood. But this problem is key, the salient
problem of our times, hovering over physics with QM’s measurement problem and
over the whole endeavor of AI! It is interesting to ask: Suppose this problem and
Bergson’s solution were really grasped and accepted? Would CE then be weighed
far more seriously? This is the problem: If consciousness is merely an epiphenome-
non, a mere “phosphorescence from the brain” (as Bergson described this materialist
position), all is just matter, and Consciousness cannot be the impetus of evolution,
rather, it is just a result. But if not an epiphenomenon, then, particularly in Bergson’s
framework, we have something else entirely.
The Hard Problem, as stated by Chalmers (1995), is generally this: Given some
neural or computer architecture, i.e., given chemical-neural ﬂows or changing bit
patterns, how does this architecture account for the qualia of the perceived world?
Here “qualia” is generally construed as “the redness of a sunset,” the taste of
cauliﬂower, the feel of sandpaper, the brown and cream color of a coffee surface.
These are somewhat “static” qualities, but this is typical: Time is not considered a
problem in this literature. Though the term qualia was not used by Chalmers in 1995,
this was the import. The emphasis since Chalmers has been on explaining qualia or
qualities, or “why things ‘feel like’ something.”
This has been a misdirection: The problem is more generally stated as that of
explaining the origin of the image of the external world. There is nothing in our
image of the world that is not qualia, to include its dynamically changing forms—
rotating cubes, buzzing ﬂies, swirling coffee liquid and stirring spoon. Witness
Hardcastle’s description of qualia: “. . .the conductor waving her hands, the
musicians concentrating, patrons shifting in their seats, and the curtains gently and
ever-so-slightly waving. . .” (Hardcastle 1995, p. 1). Here, we see form as qualia too,
in fact, dynamically changing form, for all qualia exist only over time; all qualia is
dynamic. The experiential image of the orchestra Hardcastle is describing is entirely
qualia, to include, and especially include, its dynamically changing, qualitatively
changing forms—as equally non-computable as the colors and sounds. It is the
image of the external world that must be explained—that coffee cup, “out there,”
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
169

on the table, liquid surface swirling. This has been the dilemma: Neuroscience
certainly has found nothing like the image of the coffee cup with its swirling surface
and circling spoon in the brain, nor does such a thing exist in a computer with its
changing bit patterns (save by pure conceptual attribution, e.g., “this bit pattern must
be, or correspond to, a coffee cup”).
Bergson addressed this exact question, in 1896, in Matter and Memory. Surely,
he noted, there is no “photograph” of the external world in the brain. The neurosci-
ence of the day was already sufﬁcient to know this—no image of the coffee cup was
anywhere to be found in neural structures. But he noted, if one examines the
implications of Leibniz and his monads, or better, Faraday and his atoms, each
atom being the nexus, the intersection of lines of force in every direction from all
other atoms in the universe, one must be led to this conclusion, “. . .the photograph, if
photograph there be, is already developed in the very heart of things and at every
point of space.” (Bergson 1896/1912, p. 31) This was his declaration, years before
Bohm (1980), that the universal ﬁeld is a holographic ﬁeld. When one draws out the
implications of M&M’s subsequent theoretical development, upgrading it into
current terms/concepts that have been birthed subsequent to holography’s discovery,
this describes his vision of the role of the brain: In essence, the brain is a modulated
reconstructive wave, passing through this holographic ﬁeld, specifying or “speciﬁc”
to a source within the ﬁeld (Fig. 6.5)—the coffee cup and stirring spoon (Robbins
2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2013, 2017, 2020). There is no image being developed or
being represented in the brain; the coffee cup is being speciﬁed right where “it says it
is,” external to the body, on the table top, within the holographic ﬁeld.1
Reconstructing wave set
Virtual
Image
Virtual
Image
Hologram
Plate
Hologram
Plate
Undeviated
waves
Downward
deviated waves
(forming real
image)
f1
Reconstructing wave set
f2
Viewer
Viewer
Fig. 6.5 Modulating the reconstructive wave. Modulating the reconstructive wave to frequency 1:
The original wave front (object wave) from the pyramid-ball is speciﬁed. Frequency 2: The object
wave from the cup (the original source) is speciﬁed. The holographic plate becomes the universal
ﬁeld; the brain is the wave passing through this “plate.”
1The brain’s modulation pattern is driven by the external event, speciﬁcally by the dynamic
structure of invariants deﬁning the event. For stirring coffee, a partial list of such: (1) a radial
velocity ﬂow ﬁeld over the swirling liquid surface, (2) an adiabatic invariant—the ratio of energy of
oscillation to frequency of oscillation for the spoon, (3) an inertial tensor deﬁning the momenta of
170
S. E. Robbins

A ﬂy “buzzing by” the coffee cup, his wings beating at 200 cycles/s, is perceived
with its wings as a blur—this being an index of our “normal” scale of time. This scale
of time is determined by the brain’s dynamics, its underlying chemical velocities,
themselves underlying the brain as a very concrete, resonant wave form. Other scales
can be speciﬁed: increase the chemical velocities: the ﬂy becomes heron-like, barely
ﬂapping his wings. Note too: This speciﬁcation is to the past, to past portions of
ﬁeld’s transformation, for any light reﬂected from the ﬂy, striking the retina and
transduced through the perceptual system is now “long ago,” long in the past when
taken relative to the presently speciﬁed ﬂy. How is this possible?
This is where Bergson’s conception of time must be factored into the picture.
Brieﬂy, for we must return to this, he argued that motion, say, an object’s motion
from point A to B, cannot be treated as a series of static, discrete states, as though we
are simply carving up a space—a line or trajectory we visualize from A to B—into
points, each point corresponding to an “instant” of time. This is an inﬁnite regress.
Between each pair of static points on this line, to account for the motion, we must
re-introduce yet another line of points—ad inﬁnitum. In other words, we are
applying a principle of inﬁnite divisibility. This is the source of Zeno’s paradoxes.
Rather, motion must be seen as indivisible. Thus, the transformation (motion) of the
ever-changing holographic ﬁeld is indivisible. There are no discrete instants, where
each “past” instant is falling into the past (non-existence). Rather the ﬁeld is
inherently 4-D.
And this is the kicker, where we meet that larger, that Cosmic scale Conscious-
ness. For, taken at the “null scale” of time (the most minute scale imaginable), the
transforming holographic ﬁeld inherently carries elementary attributes of conscious-
ness. Firstly, there an elementary awareness deﬁned throughout the ﬁeld via its
holographic property, for the state of each “point” in the ﬁeld reﬂects that of every
other point; thus, there is an elementary awareness at each point of the Whole of the
ﬁeld. Secondly, there is an elementary memory via the ﬁeld’s indivisible transfor-
mation, for state of each moment or “instant” is reﬂecting the entire history of the
Whole.
Thus, the speciﬁcation (by the brain as a reconstructive wave) is to a time-scaled
form of the elementary awareness deﬁned over the ﬁeld. As Bergson stated,
“. . .questions of subject and object, in their distinction and the union, must be
treated in terms of time, not space” (Bergson ib., p. 77). At the null scale of
time—the smallest scale, the “tiniest instant” imaginable—one can see that our
body has no sharp differentiation, spatially, from the ﬁeld or, for that matter, from
a ﬂy within the ﬁeld. But specify increasingly larger scales: The ﬂy changes from,
say, a cloud of electrons to a motionless vibrating, crystalline being, then to a heron-
like ﬂy barely ﬂapping his wings, to the “buzzing” being of normal scale. Subject is
differentiating from object, in terms of time. The homunculus (or the observer’s eye,
the viewer, in Fig. 6.5) is removed.
the spoon, (4) a ratio of cup height to position on the surface texture gradient, etc. This is where
Bergson merges with J. J. Gibson (1966).
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
171

So, yes, this is a panpsychic theory, but a theory that has no “aggregation
problem,” i.e., no need for answering this: How do tiny “proto-conscious” particles
aggregate or combine to become an experienced coffee cup and spoon, and (though
no one notes this piece of the problem) at some particular scale of time? As well, it is
a theory, as opposed to standard panpsychism, that actually has the wherewithal—a
dynamical mechanism—to explain the origin of the image of the external world.
Standard panpsychism has nothing such.
Our individual consciousness, then, is a ﬂowing aspect of/within that larger,
ﬂowing Consciousness, the Consciousness deﬁned over the ever-transforming
ﬁeld. The individual aspect is specifying from a unique spatial perspective and
specifying a scale of time placed upon this larger whole. So, this is a signiﬁcance
of which to take note: already in M&M, in the context of the one solution to the Hard
Problem that exists when the problem is actually understood, we see the Conscious-
ness—Cosmic scale—that Bergson sees as the impetus behind evolution and which
is the force behind both the knowledge (instinct) of the wasp, and the formation of
the wasp as an organic structure.
For Bergson, our intellect is incapable, in and of itself, of understanding this
process, this knowledge (instinct), the organic formation of structure. What is the
nature and origin of intellect? Why must it be augmented, augmented in fact nearly
paradoxically, by something equivalent to, if not itself sharing in instinct? It already
starts in the nature of perception.
6.4
The Intellect, the Classic Metaphysic
The holographic ﬁeld is a vast ﬁeld of information. Bergson visualized this ﬁeld as a
vast sea of motions or “real actions,” all forming a vast (holographic) interference
pattern. Any given object acts upon all other objects in the ﬁeld and is in turn acted
upon by all other objects. It is in fact obliged:
. . . .to transmit the whole of what it receives, to oppose every action with an equal and
contrary reaction, to be, in short, merely the road by which pass, in every direction the
modiﬁcations, or what can be termed real actions propagated throughout the immensity of
the entire universe. (Bergson 1896/1912, p. 38).
What is the principle for the selection of a subset of this and its speciﬁcation as an
image, say, as a coffee cup? From this information or real actions, our body selects
only that (the subset of real actions) related to its action capabilities. Highly
correlated to J. J. Gibson’s (1966, 1979) “affordances,” what is speciﬁed and
selected from the real actions is now “virtual action”—how the body can act, and
at a speciﬁc scale of time. A ﬂy speciﬁed as barely ﬂapping his wings is indicative of
different action possibilities relative to the normal “buzzing ﬂy.” Speaking of
organisms as centers of action in this ﬁeld, Bergson would state, “. . .the real action
passes through, the virtual action remains.” Thus, per Bergson, perception is virtual
action.
172
S. E. Robbins

From this undifferentiated, ever-transforming ﬁeld, our body’s ﬁrst order of
business is to carve out “objects” on which it can act—to hold a baby bottle, to
shake a rattle. Thus begins the partition of the ﬁeld into “objects” and their
“motions.”
This partition gets ever more rariﬁed. Beneath and through the surrounding ﬁeld
we place a (mental) mesh as it were (M&M). The meshes are made ever smaller; we
end with the continuum of points or positions. As noted, the “motion” of an object
from point A to point B is now treated as a series of points comprising a line or
trajectory though this static continuum. And as noted already, this is an inﬁnite
regress. Between each pair of static points on the line, to account for the actual
motion, we must re-introduce a new line with its points, ad inﬁnitum. Each point,
further, corresponds to an “instant” of time. “Time” is simply the fourth dimension
of this abstract space, the series of static instants.
If we take one these instants/positions of the moving object, we can take it as a
point in the “all of Space” at an instant, where this “all of Space” can be visualized as
a huge Cube (Fig. 6.6). As the limit of the division operation is a mathematical point,
each Cube of Space, corresponding to a point on the object’s trajectory, has the time-
extent of a mathematical point. Each Cube is thus utterly stripped of quality—
homogeneous. This aspect of this overall conceptual framework on space and time
is the start the “whence qualia?” problem (Robbins 2013). In fact, we could note, as
did Lynds (2003), each Cube is frozen, never to change again—unless some extra
Fig. 6.6 Successive positions of the moving cup across the continuum of points/positions. Each
point/position of the cup corresponds to instant of the all of Space
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
173

agent or “force” is envisioned to create the next Cube and then the next, etc.
(To Descartes, seeing this implication, this had to be where God was needed.)
This is the classic metaphysic. This is the playground of our intellect. All our
science, our mathematics, our calculus—based upon it.
But this conception is further rariﬁed. The motions are relative. One can move the
object across the continuum of points/positions, or one can move the continuum
(or coordinate system) beneath the object. Motion becomes rest, merely upon
perspective. Thus, all real, concrete motion is lost. But there must be real motion.
Stars explode, trees grow, roses bloom. Thus, Bergson would argue, we must see the
Whole is changing, like a kaleidoscope. In this, the “motions” of “objects” become,
rather, changes or transferences of state, like waves in the ocean, within this global
transformation.
In such a global transformation, there is clearly simultaneity. Biologists should
take note: It is in organic motion that the classic metaphysic, with its intrinsic
relativity, most clearly fails and falls. The blooming expansion of a rose cannot be
relativized. The branching growth of a tree cannot be relativized. If for a “stationary”
observer, two opposite petals of the blooming rose strike equidistant points simulta-
neously, the fact that a physicist, in motion, passing the rose, taking an instantaneous
cross section of this motion (an abstract “instant”), says “not simultaneous”—this is
totally irrelevant, an artiﬁce of the abstraction; it cannot possibly be so without
destroying the simultaneous ﬂows of the organic growth, the integral blooming
process of the rose. Einstein’s famous lightning bolts, simultaneous to a stationary
observer, supposedly non-simultaneous to a moving observer, when both bolts are
generated simultaneously from a massive, organic storm system with all its complex
forces—the “non-simultaneity” (supposed per one observer) is equally an abstract
artiﬁce, without reality (Robbins 2010, 2014a, b). In this, we see an example of
Bergson’s (in CE) critique of Kant and Kant’s vision of a uniﬁed structure of science,
where the classic metaphysic, in essence, is applied to physics, to biology and to
psychology—uniformly, across all subjects. But the essence of CE (we shall visit the
why of this in closing) is that the classic metaphysic, as it describes and is applied to
the extended world of matter, is only an ideal limit—never actually reached. This
metaphysic works for physics—practically, to a large extent, though not entirely.
Applying it to the biological and psychological takes it increasingly beyond its
applicability.
With the classic metaphysic, it all started with solids—with our perception
parsing those “objects” upon which we can act.
Let us start then from action, and lay down that intellect aims, ﬁrst of all, at constructing.
This fabrication is exercised exclusively on inert matter. . .And of inert matter itself, fabrica-
tion deals only with the solid. The rest escapes by its very ﬂuidity. (Bergson 1907/1911,
p. 153).
He adds:
If therefore the tendency of the intellect is to fabricate, we may expect to ﬁnd that whatever is
ﬂuid in the real will escape it in part, and whatever is life in the living will escape it
174
S. E. Robbins

altogether. Our intelligence, as it leaves the hands of nature, has for its chief object the
unorganized solid. (Bergson 1907/1911, p. 153).
To the intellect, we are surrounded by a material ﬁeld—extended—objects
(absolutely distinct) external to other objects, parts external to parts. Each part
inﬁnitely divisible—all treated as units. The “objects” (solids) are certainly mobile.
But from the motion itself the intellect turns away.
But the intellect is meant for something altogether different. Unless it does violence to itself,
it takes the opposite course. It always starts with immobility, as if this were the ultimate
reality. When it tries to form an idea of movement, it does so by constructing movement out
of immobilities put together. . .Of immobility alone does the intellect form a clear idea.
(Bergson 1907/1911, pp. 154–155).
Of course, he notes, “Motion as a series of immobilities is an absurdity.”
This homogeneous, empty medium, inﬁnitely divisible, lends itself to any mode
of decomposition:
This space is therefore, preeminently, the plan of our possible action upon things. . . the
intellect is characterized by the unlimited power of decomposing according to any law and it
does so by constructing movement out of immobilities put together. (Bergson 1907/1911,
p. 155).
The “symbols” we use in language, logic, are themselves derived from solids.
As these symbols are derived from the consideration of solids, as the rules for combining
these symbols hardly do more than express the most general relations among solids, our
logic triumphs in that science which takes the solidity of bodies for its object [geometry].
(Bergson 1907/1911, p. 160).
Intellect behaves as if fascinated by inert matter. “Hence its bewilderment when it
turns to the living and is confronted with organization.” (Bergson 1907/1911, p. 161)
And just as it ﬁxes in things in space, it ﬁxes in time. It cannot deal with pure
mobility. Again, the series of static “instants”—the actual motion is lost.
This framework rejects creativity. All is the re-composition of static elements—of
the already old. “The intellect is characterized by a natural inability to comprehend
life.” (Bergson 1907/1911, p. 163) The intellect is only an aspect, a cutout, of the
larger, ﬂowing Whole; therefore, it cannot be that which comprehends this Whole.
6.4.1
Instinct
So, he states: “Instinct, on the contrary, is molded on the very form of life. While
intelligence treats everything mechanically, instinct proceeds, so to speak, organi-
cally.” (Bergson 1907/1911, p. 165). He adds:
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
175

For [the consciousness driving it] only carries out further the work by which life organizes
matter—so that we cannot say. . .where organization ends and instinct begins. (Bergson
1907/1911, p. 165, emphasis added)
Again, I repeat the starting question: How is the organic structure of the wasp
separate from the “concept” of the action [instinct] it will be performing? So he says,
“The most essential of the primary instincts are really, therefore, vital processes.”
(Bergson 1907/1911, p. 166).
The cells of our body, all working for a common end, yet each living for itself,
preserving itself, reproducing itself, like so many instincts, each cell instinctual. The
bees and their hive—each bee a “cell” united by an invisible bond. A bee separated,
even given food/water, dies. The “instinct” that animates the bee is indistinguishable
from the force that animates a cell. Here, instinct coincides with “organization”—
organizing matter.
Thus the instinctive knowledge that one species possesses of another on a particular point
has it root in the very unity of life. . .a ‘whole sympathetic unto itself’.(Bergson 1907/1911,
p. 167).
Instinct and intellect are two divergent lines of evolution:
•
Intelligence ¼ > ﬂuid composition/decomposition of inert matter.
•
Instinct ¼ > Within itself, totally embedded in the concrete.
Perception is an example: The intellect asks, “How is it we see the coffee cup ‘out
there’, on the kitchen table?” We understand touching the cup. The light hitting the
retina—like a touch! But seeing the cup “out there,” at a distance, is literally action
at a distance. Yes, it is the same problem Newton had with his own theory of
gravitation: It relies upon an abhorrent (to him) unexplained effect of one object
upon another a distance away—action a distance—through no medium of transmis-
sion. So, starting with the light touching the retina, our intellect begins constructing
mechanisms, logic, computer programs, neural nets—to effect all this inside the
brain (or computer). Witness AI and self-(seeing)/driving cars, Elon Musk, etc., etc.
But the “image” of the coffee cup is now “inside” the computer (i.e., the bits being
attributed to be such), while the coffee cup is seen as “out there,” on the table. Action
at a distance still reigns—and unsolved.
Bergson simply says here, in CE, “But we have shown elsewhere that. . .the
philosophical explanation of perception. . .must be of another kind.” (Bergson
1907/1911, p. 168). But we have seen what he is so vaguely referring to, namely,
the holographic/reconstructive wave model of M&M, where the coffee cup is
speciﬁed right where it says it is—“out there,” within the external holographic
ﬁeld. So we know what this massively “of another kind” means.
Thus the instinctive knowledge that one species possesses of another on a particular point
has it root in the very unity of life. . .a ‘whole sympathetic unto itself’. (Bergson 1907/1911,
p. 167)
176
S. E. Robbins

So how does the wasp solve the “construction” of this instinctive behavior? It
does so by sympathy. It is a sympathy between the wasp and its victim, a sympathy
which teaches the wasp from within the caterpillar’s vulnerability.
This feeling of vulnerability might owe nothing to outward perception, but result from the
mere presence together of the Ammophila and the caterpillar, considered no longer as two
organisms, but as two activities. (Bergson 1907/1911, p. 173, emphasis added)
“Objects” in “motions” (the wasp, the caterpillar) are changes or transferences of
state within the global motion of the Whole. Each—the wasp, the caterpillar—are
two ﬂows, or two activities, in the larger, global ﬂow. This is the basis for the
operation of instinct. This instinct is not resolvable in terms of intelligent elements,
or even in terms necessarily intelligible. But it is not beyond the limits of mind.
6.4.2
Intuition
Instinct is sympathy. It is oneness with life, union with other beings, w/all Being.
Intelligence dwells on the surface of life with its “objects,” with the inﬁnity and
composability of their relations.
But it is to the very inwardness of life that intuition leads us—by intuition I mean instinct
that becomes disinterested, self-conscious, capable of reﬂecting on its object and enlarging it
indeﬁnitely (Bergson 1907/1911, pp. 175–176, emphasis added).
This simple sympathy is possible to mind, for there are no true spatial separations
in the ever-transforming holographic ﬁeld. The wasp is one with the caterpillar—as
two activities, two ﬂows within this single Flow. This is the basis; it extends to all
beings, even to scientiﬁc theorists. What Bergson is saying: To take our Science to
another stage, to penetrate the instinct (the mysterious intelligence) of the wasp, to
penetrate evolution’s formation of the organic structure of the wasp, humanity itself
must move to a new evolutionary stage. Pure intellect alone is a dead-end stage of
one evolutionary line. Humanity and Science must move to intellect guided by
intuition. How science solves the origin of instinct and form (and their inescapable
and intrinsic correlation)—this in essence will merge with the very form of sympathy
(intuition) by which instinct itself solves problems.
Intuition, let us simply note here, is not all that mystical or mysterious when put
into practice. Yes, it can be exempliﬁed in meditation practices, where, as an
example, for many a session, one intently contemplates a tree as the object of
meditation, to the point where—as meditators have reported—one experiences
oneself as the tree, sap literally ﬂowing through one’s being, branches growing,
leaves budding. But Bergson describes the process more mundanely: It can be
absolute immersion in a subject—for years—reading, absorbing everything within
it, contemplating a problem within the subject constantly. In other words, merging
with the subject.
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
177

If there is an example, it certainly would be Bergson’s own model of perception.
Once one understands it, one can only stand back in complete awe. In his brief
descriptions of how Life might form a being, or an eye, one says, “Wow, to go
further, deeper, more detailed. . .this will take one heck of an intuitive absorption.”
To give a very brief idea of what I mean. . .
6.4.3
The Eye
The eye is massively complex—“an inﬁnity of mechanisms.” Mechanism attempts
to explain the putting of all these “parts” together, gradually, by chance, with no
ability to explain their correlation. Finalism sees all the parts brought together by a
pre-conceived plan. Like a workman constructing a watch. (Finalism would corre-
spond to the Intelligent Design position.) Beyond both: “Life does not proceed by
the association and addition of elements, but by dissociation and division.” (Bergson
1907/1911, p. 89) Note the extreme contrast—the simplicity of vision, the complex-
ity of the eye. “. . .[this complexity] may be only the simple act of vision, divided for
us into a mosaic of cells, whose order seems marvelous to us because we have
conceived the whole as an assemblage” [of those so-loved “parts”]. (Bergson 1907/
1911, p. 90)
Nature has had no more trouble in making an eye than I have lifting my hand. Nature’s
simple act has divided itself automatically into an inﬁnity of elements which are then found
to be coordinated to one idea. . .just as the [in fact, indivisible] movement of my hand [from
point A to point B across the continuum of points/positions] has dropped an inﬁnity of points
which are then found to satisfy one equation. (Bergson 1907/1911, p. 91).
This is what our intuition must penetrate.
6.4.4
To Return: Creating Mousetraps and Wasps
In the literature of the new (or extended) synthesis, Stuart Kauffman appears in some
ways very Bergsonian. Kaufmann (2013) states: “No law entails the evolution of the
biosphere.”
One key to this, he argues:
We cannot name all the causal consequences or uses of any object, say a screwdriver, alone
or with other objects. The set of uses appears to be both unbounded or “indeﬁnite”, and
on-orderable. But this means we cannot know that we have ever “listed” all the uses of a
screw driver alone or with other objects or process. (Kaufmann 2013, p. 519)
So, this looks very much like the commonsense knowledge problem I described
that afﬂicts AI, to include the creation of mousetraps from components. My own
thought on this began years ago in contemplating the implications of a program for
“design” by Freeman and Newell (1971). Here, a database, so to speak, was
178
S. E. Robbins

contemplated listing objects and their functions, speciﬁcally, for each object, the
object’s functional requirements and functional provisions. To design a KNIFE, the
program discovered (in its database) that a BLADE provided “cutting” (a functional
provision) and it has a functional requirement, namely, “being held.” Matching to
the functional requirement, a database search found HANDLE (which has a func-
tional provision of “holding”); a “match” was made, a KNIFE was “designed.”
The difﬁculty (of many), again, is that these functional provisions/requirements
emerge only over transformations. The “provision” of the box corner for “holding”
(or “lodging”) the pencil when it is employed as an “axe-handle” would hardly have
been prelisted as a functional provision in a database, assuming a “box corner” was
even a database entry, nor that the box-side has a functional provision for anchoring
the rubber bands for the pencil-arrow. Again, trying to generalize this, from
functions to “features” brings the same problem. A sock may be “ﬂoppy,” but
under a forceful swatting transformation, displays the needed “rigidity” to squash
a ﬂy. “Features” emerge over transformations. Needless to say, one cannot imagine a
database with all possible transformations on objects. These cannot be pre-set,
pre-deﬁned.
But worse, these transformations must occur in that time that is an indivisible
ﬂow, and this again brings us back to Bergson’s model of individual conscious
perception—the brain, as a modulated reconstructive wave, intrinsically embedded
within the indivisible transformation of the holographic ﬁeld, specifying a past
transformation of the ﬁeld—coffee being stirred. This individual model is telling
us the basis on which we must scale to the universal problem of evolution, and the
creation, not of mousetraps, but of biological devices—birds, butterﬂies, bees.
Kaufmann adds:
Now consider an evolving cell in which one or more objects or processes, each with myriad
causal consequences, ﬁnds a novel use that we cannot prestate, but which enhances the
ﬁtness of the cell, and so is grafted by natural selection into the evolving biosphere. This
“ﬁnding of a novel use that we cannot prestate” occurs all the time. The famous ﬂagellar
motor of some bacteria made use, via Darwinian preadaptations or exaptations. . .of
fragments of its ﬂagellar proteins that were serving entirely different functions in other
bacteria. (Kaufmann 2013, p. 519, emphasis added).
“Exaptation.” This (and other names) was precisely what we saw the evolutionists
(Kevin Miller, Dennett, Shermer, Dawkins. . .) all use to implicitly appeal to a form
of (cosmic) AI program, as though they’ve solved the problem of commonsense
knowledge. Kauffman would have to be saying that exaptation is nothing like AI,
and requires an entirely different form of cosmic “device.” But, unfortunately, he
says all this is effected by natural selection. Not possible. We are back to the problem
of irreducible complexity: The mouse trap must have all the parts to be functional, to
be selected. And—the wasp must know all the places to sting the cricket.2
2Since this writing, Kauffman and Roli (2021) have argued in terms of affordances not being
computable, or “UTMs [Universal Turing Machines], at least those not embodied, cannot ﬁnd new
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
179

When we created the “crossbow mousetrap,” it was done so on the basis of a
knowledge about a desired function (to kill, disable, or trap a mouse) and on
knowledge of the mouse—how it can be killed (cut off head, pierce it) or be trapped
given its action capabilities (we must make a “prison cell” trap). This knowledge
about both mice and the intended function was integral in creating some form of trap.
Equally so, even were Dr. Kauffman to create a wasp from components, there is still
that knowledge (manifesting as “instinct”) that was guiding the design, e.g., the
vulnerability of the caterpillar (for the stinger), nest creation, nectar slurping, what
the young need. This still must be addressed and accounted for; it is still part of the
problem of creating mousetraps, wasps or beetles.
So, Kauffman holds:
(a) Natural selection still works, is operative.
(b) Irreducible complexity is not a problem.
Why b? Intelligent Design proponents argue via the massive improbability of
natural selection selecting all the changes simultaneously. But Kaufmann argues,
given there is “no law of evolution” and the unforeseen uses of parts, probabilities
can no longer be computed; we don’t know the “space.” This is an easy escape route.
Too easy. Examples abound where things are just mathematically ﬁxed. In the case
of proteins, we know the space. There are 20 amino acids, they can only be joined in,
say, 2035 ways that will get a string that is 35 amino acids long—a peptide. There is
not any question as to what the space is.
The difﬁculty is the same for the pencil. There is an enormous number of possible
functions:
•
Pungi stake
•
Spear
•
Axe handle
•
Pillar/support
•
Fuel/ﬁre
•
Fork
•
Stirrer
•
Prison cell bar
affordances,” though elsewhere they state, “. . .we are not merely embodied UTMS.” “Affordances”
have tended to carry a precise meaning in ecological psychology discussion as a relation (mathe-
matical) between bodily action capabilities and the environment, e.g., “climability” as the ratio of
stair riser height to knee height. Extending this usage to a pencil poking a mouse or a box corner
securely lodging the pencil seemed a bit too much of an extension, and in 2002/2012, I stayed in the
standard framework of functional provisions, properties, etc. Further, the affordance term tends to
obscure the structure of invariance laws at their core. Kauffman and Roli, I might note, in their
analysis, still think ﬁnding affordances is possible by natural selection, and more critically, are
unaware of the classic metaphysic of space and time at the core of these problems.
180
S. E. Robbins

•
Baton
•
Etc.
You cannot state all the uses of a part, but you can make a huge ﬁnite list for each,
and assign probabilities of use. Then you quickly get the massive joint improbability
of selecting the correct uses for the combination of all the different parts required for
the total transformation. But we have seen already that this is only the beginning of
the problem: One cannot pre-deﬁne all the possible transformations under which
functions or features emerge.
Kauffman is trying to save natural selection [per (a)] as the mechanism—a virtual
algorithm—for evolution. A lost cause. The unforeseen uses of “parts” by evolu-
tion—yes, exactly, but the universe must be a far different form of creative device—
nothing
like
a
Turing
computer.
The
transformations
on
these
parts—
transformations that must occur over an indivisible time are a fatal enough problem
for any mechanistic [abstract space-based] conception of this, but notice, the “parts”
themselves are no longer simply the “same part.” The pencil is no longer truly a
pencil, the box corner is far from a simple “corner.” Thus part of this difﬁculty is the
very focus of science on “parts”—on reusing parts, on rearranging parts—to create
new devices. This is to say, in this framework, there is no room for true creation.
Bergson would note:
. . .if after the fact we could know these causes in detail, we could explain them by the form
that has been produced; foreseeing the form is out of the question. (Bergson 1907/1911,
p. 27, emphasis added)
But “causality” is a creature of the classic metaphysic:
Such is the case with astronomical, physical and chemical facts, with facts which form part
of a system in which elements supposed to be unchanging and merely put together, in which
the only changes are changes of position, in which there is no theoretical absurdity in
imagining that things are restored to their place, in which, consequently the same elementary
phenomena can be repeated. (Bergson 1907/1911, p. 27).
The billiard ball model is the standard paradigm here: We apply the “same”
forces, the “same” vectors, to the “same” billiard ball: We get the same path for the
ball, over and over, and this is deemed a “law.” But NONE of these things are
actually the same from instant to instant. The billiard ball is not the same, the cue is
not the same, the force is not the same—only practically the same. It is a practicality
that largely works for physics, astronomy, chemistry, but increasingly less so as we
move toward the biological. Nothing is actually the “same” in a universal ﬁeld that is
constantly changing, no matter how small the interval of time examined. Thus:
But against this idea of the absolute originality and unforeseeability of forms our whole
intellect rises in revolt (Bergson 1907/1911, p. 27). . .[for to our science]. . . “What you call
an unforeseeable form is only a new arrangement of old elements” (ib, p. 30)
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
181

For Science, the epitome of intellect. . . .
. . .in dealing with things, science is only concerned with the aspect of repetition. Though the
whole be original, science will always manage to analyze it into elements or aspects that are
absolutely a reproduction of the past. (ib, p. 27).
But this is only possible in the abstract space and the abstract time (again, a
dimension of the abstract space) of the classic metaphysic—an absolutely homoge-
neous, perfectly repeatable continuum. And this metaphysic is the child of the
intellect. And this intellect is only a cut out, an aspect within the ever-transforming
Whole of the universal ﬁeld. This is why intellect must be augmented by intuition.
But this should be placed in the context of Bergson’s larger vision of this evolving
Whole.
6.4.5
Bergson’s Larger Vision of the Transforming Field
This transforming Whole is both physical and psychical. In Bergson’s framework, it
has two aspects: the extended (matter) and the in-extensive (the psychical). The
in-extensive pushes forth, so to speak, continually, both as the emerging forms of
evolution and more mundanely, as the everyday (and at every instant) extended
world of matter. This is to say this impetus, this creation, is continuous. As noted, the
reﬁned, logical extension of the extended world—the abstract space expressed in the
classic metaphysic—is but the ideal limit of this thrust; it is never truly reached, but
extended matter comes close enough for the geometric method of physics to, by and
large, work very well, but ever less so as we move back upwards so to speak, away
from this ideal limit, toward the original impetus or source, ﬁrst into the biological
and further upwards, to the psychological.
Bergson noted that this “impetus” driving evolution is but a metaphor/image. It is
the essence of the psychical to enfold a confused plurality of interpenetrating terms.
The psychical elements within a dream are not truly separable—these do not exist in
an abstract space. The complex psychical state of a Beethoven while he imagined the
ﬁfth symphony is not something describable using independent “elements.” It
appears to be so only afterward, as this intermingled complex of interpenetrating
“elements” is expressed with a quill pen in the extended world of matter as separate
“notes” on a manuscript. Only in [abstract] space is distinct multiplicity possible.
“But what is psychical cannot entirely correspond with space, nor enter perfectly into
categories of understanding.” (Bergson 1907/1911, p. 257).
Certainly, this is not the framework of materialism. Biology can wait, fruitlessly I
would predict (Robbins 2014a, b), for the quintessential expression of the materialist
framework and its spatial metaphysic—AI, neural networks, deep learning
networks—to solve the commonsense knowledge problem and effect true creativity,
or one can accept that we are dealing with, indeed, creative evolution, and that to
deal with this reality we need a new framework, a new metaphysic, namely, the
temporal metaphysic of Bergson, yes, even a model of consciousness incorporating a
182
S. E. Robbins

solution to the hard problem. When this larger framework on the universe is grasped,
one can see that for comprehending and penetrating evolutionary development, it
becomes a fundamental necessity to meet this requirement: the achievement of a
higher union of the two evolutionary lines—of instinct, of intellect. This takes the
form of intuition—to which intellect becomes the scribe and expositor.
References
Behe M (1996) Darwin’s black box: the biochemical challenge to evolution. The Free Press,
New York
Behe M (2000) A mousetrap defended: response to critics. http://www.arn.org/docs/behe.mb_
mousetrapdefended.htm
Behe M (2007) The edge of evolution: the search for the limits of Darwinism. Free Press, New York
Bergson H (1896/1912) Matter and memory. Macmillan, New York
Bergson H (1907/1911) Creative evolution. Holt, New York
Bohm D (1980) Wholeness and the implicate order. Routledge & Kegan-Paul, London
Chalmers D (1995) Facing up to the problem of consciousness. J Conscious Stud 2:200–219
Dawkins R (2006) The god delusion. Houghton-Mifﬂin, Boston, MA
Dennett D (1996) Darwin’s dangerous idea: evolution and the meanings of life. Simon & Schuster,
New York
Freeman P, Newell A (1971, September) A model for functional reasoning in design. In: Second
international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence. London
Gibson JJ (1966) The senses considered as visual systems. Houghton-Mifﬂin, Boston, MA
Gibson JJ (1979) The ecological approach to visual perception. Houghton-Mifﬂin, Boston, MA
Gunther C (2012) Mind, memory, time. Amazon Digital Services
Hardcastle VG (1995) Locating consciousness. John Benjamins, Philadelphia
Kauffman S, Roli A (2021) What is consciousness? Artiﬁcial intelligence, real intelligence,
quantum mind, and qualia. arXiv:2106.15515v3
Kaufmann S (2013) Evolution beyond entailing law. In: Marks RJ, Behe MJ, Dembski WA,
Gordon BL, Sanford JC (eds) Biological information, new perspectives. World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore
LeCun Y (2016) Predictive learning. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v¼Ount2Y4qxQo
Lynds P (2003) Time and classical and quantum mechanics: indeterminacy versus discontinuity.
Found Phys Lett 16:343–355
McCarthy J, Hayes P (1969) Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of artiﬁcial
intelligence. In: Meltzer B, Michie D (eds) Machine Intelligence. Edinburgh University Press,
Edinburgh, p 4
McDonald J (2000) A reducibly complex mousetrap. http://udel.edu/~mcdonald.oldmousetrap.html
McDonald J (2002) A reducibly complex mousetrap. http://udel.edu/~mcdonald.mousetrap.html
Miller K (2003) Answering the biochemical argument from design. In: Manson N (ed) God and
design: the teleological argument and modern science. Routledge, London
Miller K (2004) The ﬂagellum unspun: the collapse of irreducible complexity. In: Ruse M, Dembski
W (eds) Debating design: from Darwin to DNA. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Penrose R (1994) Shadows of the mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Piaget J (1946) The Child’s conception of movement and speed. Ballentine, New York
Pribram K (1971) Languages of the brain. Prentice-Hall, Hoboken, NJ
Robbins SE (2000) Bergson, perception and Gibson. J Conscious Stud 7:23–45
Robbins SE (2002) Semantics, experience and time. Cogn Syst Res 3:301–337
Robbins SE (2004) On time, memory and dynamic form. Conscious Cogn 13:762–788
Robbins SE (2006) Bergson and the holographic theory. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 5:365–394
Robbins SE (2009) The COST of explicit memory. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 8:33–66
6
Instinct as Form: The Challenge of Bergson
183

Robbins SE (2010) Special relativity and perception: the singular time of psychology and physics. J
Conscious Exploration Res 1:500–531
Robbins SE (2012) Meditation on a mousetrap: on consciousness, cognition, evolution and time. J
Mind Behav 33:69–107
Robbins SE (2013) Time, form and qualia: the hard problem reformed. Mind Matter 11:53–181
Robbins SE (2014a) Collapsing the singularity: Bergson, Gibson and the mythologies of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. CreateSpace, Atlanta
Robbins SE (2014b) The mists of special relativity: time, consciousness and a deep illusion in
physics. Amazon Digital Services
Robbins SE (2017) Analogical reminding and the storage of experience: the Hofstadter-Sander
paradox. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 16:355–385
Robbins SE (2020) Is experience stored in the brain? A current model of memory and the temporal
metaphysic of Bergson. Axiomathes 31(1):15–43
Scott E (2004) Evolution vs creationism. University of California Press, Berkeley
Sheldrake R (2012) Science set free. Random House, New York
Shermer M (2006) Why Darwin matters: the case against intelligent design. Times Books,
New York
Wheeler M (2008) Cognition in context: phenomenology, situated robotics and the frame problem.
Int J Philos Stud 16:323–349
184
S. E. Robbins

Part II
Modernity of Self-Organization and Emerging
Paradigms

Biological Evolution of Microorganisms
7
Werner Arber
Abstract
Life on our planet earth must have started with quite simple unicellular
organisms. Nowadays we have a large number of their evolutionary descendants
in the world of microorganisms. We report here on scientiﬁc investigations with
harmless intestinal bacteria which serve the scientists to explore molecular
genetic processes of biological evolution. This research leads to the conclusion
that biological evolution occurs in microorganisms by consecutive steps of
genetic variation. This historical advance can be attributed to a process of self-
organization that contributes to the permanent creation of appropriate biological
capacities.
Keywords
Bacteria · Molecular genetic processes · Biological evolution · Self-organization
7.1
Introduction
Astrophysical evidence leads to the notion that our solar system with its planets must
have an age of approximately 4000 million years. Traces of living organisms
indicate the presence of single-cellular microorganisms already about 3500 million
years ago. So far, we do not know how the existence of such primitive organisms
came to be on our planet earth.
Bacteria are a large group of single-cellular microorganisms. We generally
assume that in the course of 3500 million years consecutive steps of biological
W. Arber (*)
Biozentrum University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland
e-mail: werner.arber@unibas.ch
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_7
187

evolution led on the one hand to the rich variety of bacteria with different biological
functions and, on the other hand, to all kinds of other living organisms including
plants and animals. Many different kinds of bacteria exist on our planet mainly at and
near its surface and in the depth of the oceans. Of importance for the human health
conditions are, on the one hand, cohabiting bacteria carrying out in microbiomes
(Blaser et al. 2013) essential functions for our life processes and on the other hand,
pathogenous microorganisms (some bacteria and viruses). Experimental and theo-
retical studies carried out in the twentieth century with microorganisms provided to
us essential insights into the chemical nature of the genetic information (DNA) and
its molecular functions and evolution processes. Some details on the thereby
acquired knowledge will be presented in the following sections.
7.2
Molecular Genetics of Escherichia coli Bacteria and Their
Phages
Intensive research has been carried out with a few related strains of nonpathogenic
intestinal E. coli bacteria and their viruses (bacteriophages or shortly phages).
Almost all genes of E. coli bacteria are carried on a single circular DNA molecule,
i.e., on the bacterial genome. Some strains may, in addition and for some time, also
carry one or a few plasmids. These are in general also circular DNA molecules and
they carry just relatively few genes. An example is the genome of phage P1 in
P1-lysogenic bacteria (Sengstag and Arber 1983). Some other phage genomes (e.g.,
phage lambda) can, upon infection, become incorporated into the host genome
which renders the host cell also lysogenic (Arber 1960). Lysogenic bacteria can
spontaneously, or by experimental induction with UV irradiation, produce progeny
phage particles with the genome of their carried prophage. A prophage is the phage
genome carried in lysogenic bacteria.
For many kinds of experimental investigations, E. coli bacteria can become
efﬁciently propagated in different kinds of liquid media at about 37 C. Under
good growth conditions, the bacteria replicate their genome and undergo cell
division where each cell receives a newly replicated genome. These conditions,
with rapid growth facilitate experimental investigations on occasional genetic
variations in single cells of the growing population.
7.3
Mechanisms of Genetic Variation in Bacterial Genomes
Series of experimental investigations revealed a number of speciﬁc molecular
processes to produce a novel genetic variant. Genetic variation is the driving force
of biological evolution by occasionally enabling a bacterial strain to adapt to an
alternative growth medium which is not accessible to the parental strain of bacteria.
In this context, the direction of biological evolution taken by a novel genetic variant
is dependent on the kind of new growing condition used by the variant cell. This
situation is called “natural selection”, a term introduced by Charles Darwin.
188
W. Arber

A multitude of so far known mechanisms of genetic variation can be attributed to
three natural strategies of genetic variation (Arber 2007):
(a) Occasionally occurring alterations of one or a few adjacent nucleotides of the
genome can be brought about upon the DNA replication at sites of a short-living
tautomeric form of a nucleotide that has another pairing speciﬁcity than its stable
form (Watson and Crick 1953). Tautomeric adenine pairs with cytosine and
tautomeric guanine pairs with thymine. A point mutation results if this replica-
tion error escapes a repair process shortly after its production.
(b) The second strategy of genetic variation is the occasional transposition of a
mobile genetic element within the genome (Arber 2007). Depending on its new
insertion site, transposition can contribute to the formation of a new functional
fusion product. Different kinds of mobile genetic elements are widespread in
bacterial strains and they can also exist in other living organisms. Their trans-
position is under the control of the enzyme transposase, which is their own gene
product. In favor of a high genetic stability, the expression of the gene for
transposase may become under serious control. This became obvious in experi-
mental investigations with the mobile genetic element IS30 (Arini et al. 1997).
In front of its reading frame for the transposase we found, to our surprise, a
normally active transcription promoter segment and it starts actively the pro-
duction of messenger RNA. But with a probability of 50%, a terminator segment
stops the messenger synthesis early. The other half of synthesis complexes stop
regularly at the end of the expressed gene. But a majority of the full length
messenger RNA becomes quickly inactivated by the production of antisense
RNA that can block the functional expression of the transposase. Therefore,
when IS30 is present, it has a relatively high genetic stability and IS30 transpo-
sition is a rare event.
(c) The third natural strategy of genetic variation is the horizontal gene transfer.
This process is widespread in bacterial populations and it also occurs in other
living organisms. Horizontal gene transfer between bacteria can be brought
about by several different processes. In transformation (Avery et al. 1944),
free DNA molecules liberated from a donor cell can become taken up into a
genetically different receptor cell, which sometimes integrates the transferred
genetic information into its own genome. Horizontal gene transfer occurs also
by bacterial conjugation (Lederberg 1947), when a donor cell associates by cell
contact with a receptor cell and actively transfers a copy of its genome to its
partner cell. In this process, the receptor cell can often proﬁt from the use of a
hitherto lacking genetic capacity having been developed and functionally used
in another organism. Still another process of horizontal gene transfer occurs by
transduction (Morse et al. 1956). Transducing bacteriophage particles carry
along DNA segments from a former host bacterium. After infection of a new
host bacterium, the latter can sometimes maintain and use the received genetic
information.
7
Biological Evolution of Microorganisms
189

Still other genetic variants can originate under the activities of environmental
mutagens such as some chemicals or by irradiation.
7.4
Bacterial Restriction and Modification Systems
In the context of horizontal gene transfer by bacteria, it is good to know that many
bacterial strains are genetically equipped with a strain-speciﬁc restriction-modiﬁca-
tion system. This phenomenon had originally been encountered when a phage grown
in a bacterial host was used to infect another bacterial host strain. In this case, only
very few progeny phages became produced and liberated upon cell lysis. These few
progeny phages now grew normally upon reinfection of their second host, but they
became strongly restricted in their previous host. This phenomenon was tentatively
attributed to properties of the phage, but it remained unexplained.
In the early 1960s we could show that upon infection of an alternative host strain,
the DNA of the infecting phage becomes relatively rapidly degraded (Arber and
Dussoix 1962; Dussoix and Arber 1962). This degradation is not limited to phage
DNA. The responsible restriction endonuclease cuts any invading foreign DNA into
fragments which then become acid solubilized by the host enzyme DNA exonucle-
ase. Restriction thus also acts upon conjugation (Arber and Morse 1965), transfor-
mation, and phage-mediated transduction (Arber 1965).
In the meantime, restriction endonucleases became isolated from many different
bacterial strains (Roberts et al. 2015) and their restriction activities revealed a few
principle mechanisms. In general, foreign DNA becomes recognized at short-
speciﬁc sequences of nucleotides. Many restriction enzymes cut the foreign DNA
at its recognition sites, whereas other restriction enzymes become activated at the
recognition sequences and cut the foreign DNA more randomly elsewhere.
Restriction enzymes make no harm to the DNA of their own bacterial host thanks
to methylating (Kühnlein and Arber 1972) all of its recognition sites. This explains
also the rare survival of infecting restricted phages and of occasionally acquired
DNA markers originating in another bacterial strain. We can interpret this natural
phenomenon as follows: In the wide population of bacterial strains, great care is
being taken not to mix up DNA from various different genomes. However, by a fast
methylation of some recognition sequences on invading foreign DNA, the restricting
bacterium can occasionally take up a short properly modiﬁed foreign DNA segment
in its own genome. Such an acquisition of a foreign gene that had already proved its
functional capacities in the donor strain can, in some cases, be welcome for the life
activities of the restricting host.
Bacteria can sometimes possess and express more than one restriction/modiﬁca-
tion system. Relevant genes for a speciﬁc restriction/modiﬁcation system have
become known to be located on the genome of the transducing phage P1. As we
have already discussed, in P1-lysogenic bacteria, the prophage is propagated as a
plasmid. Interestingly, in the P1-lysogenic situation, bacterial host strains express
besides their own restriction/modiﬁcation activities, also the restriction/modiﬁcation
activity expressed by the P1 prophage (Lark and Arber 1970). Similarly, it has
190
W. Arber

become known that occasionally another bacterial plasmid can carry and express
another speciﬁc restriction/modiﬁcation system.
7.5
Role of Restriction Enzymes in Structural and Functional
Genome Analysis and Genetic Engineering
As we have already discussed, upon infection of restricting bacteria with foreign
DNA, the latter becomes fast cut into fragments. Restriction endonucleases of type II
cut the invading foreign DNA at all of its short DNA sites recognized by the
restricting host. In in vitro experiments with puriﬁed restriction enzymes, the
resulting fragments of foreign DNA can be separated according to their size by gel
electrophoresis. This methodic approach has become a welcome help in structural
and functional studies of DNA molecules in order to reveal their functional
speciﬁcities. In genetic engineering, speciﬁc knowledge on transferred functions is
of importance for the safety of in vitro horizontal gene transfer (Berg et al. 1975).
7.6
Evolution Genes and the Duality of the Bacterial Genome
Referring to the bacterial capacities to occasionally produce a genetic variant,
speciﬁc gene products are involved either as variation generators or as modulators
of the frequency of genetic variation. Their activities ensure on the one hand that
various rare genetic variants become present in bacterial populations and, on the
other hand, that a relatively high genetic stability is characteristic for bacterial
populations. This situation ensures that a growing bacterial population has the
capacity, thanks to the occasional presence of appropriate genetic variants, to
adapt to alternative nutritional environments without losing its inherited essential
growth capacities.
When it became obvious that at least some of the genes acting as variation
generators or as modulators of the frequency of genetic variation could lose by
mutagenesis their evolutionary characteristics without affecting the normal propaga-
tion of the concerned host bacteria (Wood 1966), we decided to call the genes
contributing to the evolutionary development “evolution genes” (Arber 2005).
This situation indicates that the bacterial genome has a duality: A majority of the
genes are essential for the daily life activities of the bacterial cell, whereas a minority
of the genes serve for the biological evolution by paying attention not to seriously
affecting the genetical stability of the concerned bacterial population. It is obvious
that only a few gene activities can exert their biological functions both in favor of the
cellular life activities and for the bacterial evolution.
7
Biological Evolution of Microorganisms
191

7.7
Self-Organization of the Biological Evolution
of Microorganisms by Permanent Creation
As we have already discussed before, extensive molecular genetic studies carried out
with bacteria and phages have revealed their capacities to adapt their functional
activities stepwise to newly encountered environmental conditions. However, there
is no indication that these primitive organisms could identify a speciﬁc functional
need and actively fulﬁll it upon their contact with a novel alternative living condi-
tion. Rather, any growing population acquires in the course of time a number of
different genetic variants not causing any functional harm to the relevant cells. One
or a few of these mutants may by chance fulﬁll a novel functional requirement and
propagate under the novel growth conditions. We are aware that this procedure
corresponds to single steps of biological evolution of the concerned microorganism.
On the other hand, an occasionally produced genetic variant may sometimes by
chance improve an already existing biological function.
Different kinds of microorganisms that exist today must have a very long history
of many million years undergoing occasionally steps of their biological evolution to
reach their different speciﬁc functional capacities. This process can go on in future
times. As we have already discussed it, a number of speciﬁc processes can contribute
by genetically determined activities to such historical advances. This is a permanent
process of self-organization (Arber 2019) of the biological evolution of these haploid
and thus relatively simple living organisms. Their actual presence is not to explain
by a single step of creation. Rather, we can explain their present functions by a
natural process of permanent creation during many million years.
7.8
Conclusions
Research investigations with Escherichia coli bacteria revealed genetically exerted
capacities to occasionally adapt to alternative living conditions. The latter can either
be another kind of growth medium- or longer-term functional cooperations by
cohabitation with other types of living organisms in so-called microbiomes. Bacteria
are able by self-organization not only to occasionally adapt to novel functional
capacities, but also to insure maintenance of the inherited functions in a large
majority of the cells of the given bacterial strain. On the short-term, bacteria are
able to stepwise adapt and to exert new functions by maintaining a majority of the
parental genome in a stable condition. This generalized conclusion from the data
available today should merit additional systematic investigations involving many
bacterial strains and many living conditions including various growth media and
cohabitations with various other living organisms.
192
W. Arber

References
Arber W (1960) Polylysogeny for bacteriophage lambda. Virology 11:250–272
Arber W (1965) Host-controlled modiﬁcation of bacteriophage. Annu Rev Microbiol 19:365–378
Arber W (2005) Dual nature of the genome: genes for the individual life and genes for the
evolutionary progress of the population. IUBMB Life 57(4/5):263–266
Arber W (2007) Genetic variation and molecular evolution. In: Meyers RA (ed) Genomics and
genetics, vol 1. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany
Arber W (2019) Self-organization of the biological evolution. Genes 10(854):517–521. https://doi.
org/10.3390/genes10110854
Arber W, Dussoix D (1962) Host speciﬁcity of DNA produced by Escherichia coli. I. Host-
controlled modiﬁcation of bacteriophage λ. J Mol Biol 5:18–36
Arber W, Morse ML (1965) Host speciﬁcity of DNA produced by Escherichia coli. VI. Effects on
bacterial conjugation. Genetics 51:137–148
Arini A, Keller MP, Arber W (1997) An antisense RNA in IS30 regulates the translational
expression of the transposase. Biol Chem 378:1421–1431
Avery OT, MacLeod CM, McCarty M (1944) Studies on the chemical nature of the substance
inducing
transformation
of
pneumococcal
types.
Induction
of
transformation
by
a
desoxyribonucleic acid fraction isolated from pneumococcus type III. J Exp Med 79:137–158
Berg P, Baltimore D, Brenner S, Roblin RO, Singer MF (1975) Summary statement of the Asilomar
conference on recombinant DNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 72:1981–1984
Blaser M, Bork P, Fraser C, Knight R, Wang J (2013) The microbiome explored: recent insights and
future challenges. Nat Rev Microbiol 11:213–217
Dussoix D, Arber W (1962) Host speciﬁcity of DNA produced by Escherichia coli. II Control over
acceptance of DNA from infecting phage λ. J Mol Biol 5:37–49
Kühnlein U, Arber W (1972) Host speciﬁcity of DNA produced by Escherichia coli. XV. The role
of nucleotide methylation in in vitro B-speciﬁc modiﬁcation. J Mol Biol 63:9–19
Lark C, Arber W (1970) Host speciﬁcity of DNA produced by Escherichia coli. XIII. Breakdown of
cellular DNA upon growth in ethionine of strains with r15
+, rP1
+ or rN3
+ restriction phenotypes. J
Mol Biol 52:337–348
Lederberg J (1947) Gene recombination and linked segregation in Escherichia coli. Genetics 32:
505–525
Morse ML, Lederberg EM, Lederberg J (1956) Transduction in Escherichia coli K-12. Genetics 41:
142–156
Roberts RJ, Vincze T, Posfai J, Macelis D (2015) REBASE: a database for DNA restriction and
modiﬁcation enzymes, genes and genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 43:D298–D299
Sengstag C, Arber W (1983) IS2 insertion is a major cause of spontaneous mutagenesis of the
bacteriophage P1: non-random distribution of target sites. EMBO J 2:67–71
Watson JD, Crick FHC (1953) The structure of DNA. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 18:123–
131
Wood WB (1966) Host speciﬁcity of DNA produced by Escherichia coli. VII. Bacterial mutations
affecting the restriction and modiﬁcation of DNA. J Mol Biol 16:118–133
7
Biological Evolution of Microorganisms
193

Self-Organization in Embryonic
Development: Myth and Reality
8
Stuart A. Newman
Abstract
“Self-organization” has become a watchword in developmental biology,
characterizing observations in which embryonic or induced stem cells derived
from animals replicate morphological steps and outcomes seen in intact embryos.
While the term was introduced in the eighteenth century by the philosopher
Immanuel Kant to describe the goal-directed properties of living systems, it
came into modern use for non-living materials in which complex forms and
patterns emerge through dynamical, energy-expending physical processes.
What is the relationship among these uses of the term? While multicellular
forms arose dozens of times from single-celled organisms, only some of these
undergo development, and not all developmental processes are self-organizing.
The evolution of the animals (metazoans) from unicellular holozoans was
accompanied by the addition of novel gene products which mediated the consti-
tution of the resulting cell clusters as liquid-, liquid crystal-, and solid-like
materials with protean morphogenetic propensities. Such materials variously
exhibited multilayering, lumen formation and elongation, echoing the self-
organizing properties of nonliving matter, “generic” based on such parallels,
though with biologically based subunit properties and modes of interaction.
These effects provided evolutionary starting points of and templates for embry-
onic forms and morphological motifs of diverse metazoan lineages. Embryos and
organ primordia of present-day animal species continue to generate forms that
resemble the outcomes of these physical effects. Their development, however,
employs overdetermined, highly evolved mechanisms that are often disconnected
from
their
originating
processes.
Using
the
examples
of
gastrulation,
S. A. Newman (*)
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA
e-mail: newman@nymc.edu
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_8
195

somitogenesis, and limb skeletal development, this chapter provides instances of,
and a conceptual framework for understanding, the relationships between trans-
parently physical and evolved types of developmental self-organization.
Keywords
Gastrulation · Somitogenesis · Limb development · differential interfacial
tension · Clock-and-wavefront · Turing-type process · Evolution · Homomorphy
8.1
Introduction
A series of ﬁndings beginning in the 1980s, including ones arising from improved
cell culture methods, comparative phylogenomics, cellular and genetic manipulation
of embryos, and progress in understanding the dynamical and other physical
properties of multicellular materials, led to the mostly unacknowledged disappear-
ance of the notion of a “genetic program” from the theoretical discourse in develop-
mental biology. This idea, inspired by the rise of the digital computer in the 1950s
and the associated hardware–software distinction, attempted to locate the informa-
tion acquired during phylogeny in each organism’s nuclear DNA, where it was
deployed in a hierarchical fashion during ontogeny (Istrail et al. 2007; Peluffo 2015;
Sarkar 1998). What increasingly replaced the computer program model was the
concept of “self-organization,” whereby complexity of form and pattern (usually, but
also potentially of function) emerges from apparent simplicity due to interactions of
unorganized components. This term had already been in use in the physics of
materials of the meso-, or middle-scale, “soft matter” (de Gennes 1992) such as
viscoelastic ﬂuids, and “excitable media” such as complex chemical and mechano-
chemical systems (Elphick et al. 1990). In a sense, the conceptual change echoed the
centuries-old transition from preformationism to epigeneticism that had been played
out in the pre-genetic, pre-evolution era of biology (Van Speybroeck et al. 2002).
Some ﬁndings from the ﬁelds mentioned above which led to changes in how
development and its evolution were conceptualized included:
(i) The capacity to generate and maintain stably differentiated cell types, as well as
early embryo- and organ-like structures, in culture. These depended on identi-
ﬁcation of soluble growth factors such as Wnt, TGF-βs, and FGFs and extra-
cellular matrix (ECM) molecules such as collagens, ﬁbronectin, and laminin
(Gospodarowicz 1984; Gospodarowicz et al. 1986; Hay 1991; Massagué
1987). Later it was shown that members of the same set of factors could elicit
differentiated cell types and early embryonic structures (“gastruloids”) from
both embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells
(Beccari et al. 2018; Hanna et al. 2008; Hoffman and Carpenter 2005).
(ii) Advances in sequencing techniques and comparative phylogenomics, which
led to the recognition that these same growth and ECM molecules were among
a
few
dozen
conserved
members
of
a
phylogenetically
conserved
196
S. A. Newman

“developmental genetic toolkit.” The products of these genes were found to
induce changes in form and pattern in embryos across the full range of animal
phyla (Carroll et al. 2004).
(iii) Visualization of gene expression in whole embryos, which showed that given
toolkit gene products could be involved in the formation of morphological
characters that were both homologous (e.g., the legs of different vertebrates)
and analogous (e.g., the legs of mice and of ﬂies) across phyla. This “homol-
ogy-analogy paradox” (i.e., anatomical analogs are not homologs, but the
molecules that mediated both could be homologous) was difﬁcult to reconcile
with the widely accepted notion of the evolutionary continuity of purported
genetic programs (Newman 2006).
(iv) Mathematical and computational models of cell movement and differentiation
in response to toolkit gene products, which consistently found that physical
determinants such as differential adhesion, reaction–diffusion (“Turing-type”)
processes, and oscillations in gene expression provided the most coherent and
convincing explanations of the relationships between gene action and morpho-
logical phenotype (reviewed in Forgacs and Newman 2005).
(v) Genetic
manipulation,
including
full
and
conditional
knockouts
and
overexpression, which indicated that gene function could be decoupled from
morphological outcome in ways difﬁcult to reconcile with the program notion.
The discovery of “constructional unit autonomy” and “developmental system
drift” pointed to a similar phenomenon of gene-morphology decoupling over
evolution (Müller and Newman 1999; True and Haag 2001).
(vi) The formation of chimeras from mammalian species as evolutionary distant as
sheep and goats, which diverged 14–16 Mya by some estimates. Blastomeres of
these species could be mixed together to produce healthy full-term animals of
intermediate phenotype (Fehilly et al. 1984). This was exceedingly difﬁcult to
reconcile with a genetic program notion since chimeras are cellular mosaics of
the two originating species. The cells (unlike those of hybrid organisms) retain
their species-speciﬁc genomes along with whatever additional cytoplasmic
information is used for development and read each other’s signals in
constructing an evolutionarily unprecedented animal. No conventional deﬁni-
tion of computational programs would admit of this kind cooperation among
fortuitously associated entities.
Despite this evidence against the genetic program notion, the concept of “self-
organization” as applied to embryogenesis or organogenesis is nonetheless ambigu-
ous. It is not identical to the claim that physical processes underlie morphogenesis,
which is an uncontested assumption of modern biology. Something more is implied
by using the term “self-organization” instead of simply “development.” Machines
are physical entities contrived to produce speciﬁc outcomes. While organisms and
their constituent processes are not machine-like (Nicholson 2019), their structure–
function relationships are often difﬁcult to discern, not least because their protein
constituents are often intrinsically disordered and alter their roles based on
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
197

conditional interactions with other components (Uversky and Giuliani 2021; Niklas
et al. 2015). Machine analogies are often a recourse of convenience.
Complex materials can undergo morphological changes over time and arrive at a
reproducible endpoint that might not resemble anything else in nature. This is true of
certain minerals, as well as the developing tissues of plants and fungi. The morpho-
genetic mechanisms that produce ﬂowers, pinecones, and gilled mushrooms are
poorly understood, but there is no reason to doubt that are physical processes.
Under certain conditions they produce patterns of exquisite mathematical regularity
that have plausible physical interpretations (Douady and Couder 1992; Azpeitia
et al. 2021). It is possible that these systems are “self-organizing” in the sense of
being mesoscale, excitable materials with physically explicable, reliable outcomes.
But the enigmatic physical nature of plant and fungal tissues as growing, deformable
solids makes this difﬁcult to establish.
Physical organizing processes and effects, and corresponding morphological
outcomes, have been termed “generic” if they are common to both living and
nonliving materials (Newman and Comper 1990). While even non-generic physical
processes can be self-organizing, it is only for systems with generic properties that
self-organization can feasibly be conﬁrmed to be an important mode of develop-
ment. This is because generic processes are governed by known physical principles
with predictable outcomes. The possibility that generic processes were active during
the periods when a lineage’s morphology ﬁrst arose in evolution can also provide
insight into why they look the way they do.
In this chapter, I deﬁne “physical self-organization” (or “self-organization” for
short) in conformity with the classical usage in physics: the generation of geometric
structures
or
chemical
patterns
by
dynamical
interactions
of
unorganized
components. The outcomes of such processes, also referred to as “dissipative
structures” (Goldbeter 2018), only occur in thermodynamically open systems, in
which there are ﬂuxes of matter or energy across the boundaries. Physical self-
organization is distinguished from “self-assembly,” the ﬁtting together of a system’s
components (as in protein quaternary structures) that does not involve such system-
environment exchange (Halley and Winkler 2008). Since, as noted, generic pro-
cesses pertain to living as well as nonliving systems, in the former cases, where the
generic physical mechanism (e.g., the random motion of subunits in a liquid-like
material; see below) depends on a biological, rather than a nonbiological, function
(undirected cell motility vs. Brownian motion in this example), the term
“biogeneric” is used (Newman 2016a).
In contrast to multicellular plants and fungi, aggregative microorganisms such as
the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum and the bacterium Myxobacteria
xanthus present uncontroversial examples of physical self-organization, employing
generic processes (Fujimori et al. 2019; Fukujin et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2011). But
even in these seemingly simple systems, interpretation of morphogenetic processes
is confounded by the capacity of individual cells to act as autonomous agents, with
apparent goals of their own, a feature not seen in nonliving matter (Arias Del Angel
et al. 2020).
198
S. A. Newman

Regarding the animals, the subject of this chapter, the liquid-like nature of their
embryonic tissues imposes coherency and collective behaviors on their cells. This
affords possibilities of generic-type self-organization, as does the ability of such
tissues to serve as excitable chemical and electrical media. In the discussion here,
processes internal to individual cells, including those driving their random motion or
regulating the expression of genes, and the bases of ﬂuidity and excitability, will be
“bracketed” with no attempt to explain them. Development will only count as self-
organized in this framing if it is attributable to physical processes that act on the
multicellular, rather than the subcellular level.
Newer in vitro culture techniques which permit isolated embryos or aggregates of
embryonic or induced pluripotent stem cells to develop along normal pathways have
permitted detailed investigations of developmental capabilities and subsystem
interactions. Development of “embryoids” or “gastruloids” initiated from stem
cells under these conditions is often taken as evidence of self-organization (Bedzhov
and Zernicka-Goetz 2014; Beccari et al. 2018; Etoc et al. 2016). But simply because
an embryo can be removed from its normal gestational setting and in the presence of
appropriate nutrients execute the same set of steps it does in vivo, does not mean it is
exhibiting physical self-organization. It could be behaving as a more complicated
(because highly evolved) or causally obscure (see below) physical assemblage.
This is true even if the starting point of in vitro embryogenesis is a collection of
embryonic ES or iPS cells. After all, such cells are derived from organisms that
emerged as distinct mammalian species millions of years ago and retain their
respective species-speciﬁc genomes when reverted to the stem-state. It would be
surprising if they had not evolved the means to recover the morphogenetic routines
characteristic of their type. The kind of self-organization exhibited, however, is not
the physical variety, for which complexity is a truly emergent effect. It is rather the
restorative behavior of a highly evolved, complex “self.”
While the fact of evolution thus complicates the ascertainment of self-
organization, the possibility of such effects, particularly if they have generic
properties, can provide insights into the processes of evolutionary innovation. In
the older “genetic program” picture, an organism’s developmental mechanisms were
presumed to have evolved gradually by random mutation and selection, with no role
for the material properties of the forming tissues. Although organisms with
programmed development could potentially result from such a random search,
they might resemble the self-constructing contrivances theorized by the mathemati-
cian John von Neumann (Von Neumann and Burks 1966). Such machines would be
vanishingly likely to arise and could only operate to produce the requisite forms if all
their parts assumed their precisely evolved relationships. In contrast, if self-
organization of tissue masses plays a part in embryogenesis, or once did in a
lineage’s phylogenetic history, pathways of morphological evolution would have
had preferred directions and predictably achievable outcomes, contrary to the logic
of undirected Darwinian natural selection.
In the next section, I show how physical self-organization in fact helped to kick-
start the evolution of developmental systems. I describe how animals and their
tissues arose from ancestral holozoan cells that were recruited into multicellular
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
199

entities by the products of a speciﬁc, evolutionarily assembled genetic toolkit. These
masses of cells constituted parcels of novel ﬂuid-like living matter with unique
morphogenetic propensities. In the subsequent section, I discuss three examples
from
vertebrate
embryogenesis:
gastrulation,
somitogenesis,
and
limb
skeletogenesis, which have been proposed, with experimental evidence, to employ
various generic physical processes to realize their morphological outcomes: differ-
ential adhesion, a biochemical oscillation in conjunction with a molecular gradient,
and a Turing-type reaction–diffusion standing wave-generating system.
My goal is to show that whereas generic physical processes typically continue to
be involved in the developmental events, they are not always, or in all relevant
species, equally, the decisive factors in morphogenesis. In consequence, they are not
generally explanatory of the observed developmental phenomena. If this is correct,
descriptions of purported self-organization of stem cell embryoids and gastruloids,
which are increasingly prominent in the developmental biology literature, are
misleading regarding mechanistic understanding. In the concluding section, I sug-
gest that only with an analysis incorporating an evolutionary dimension, i.e., a
recognition of how development in an extant species reﬂects the originating pro-
cesses of its lineage followed by their reconﬁgurations and transformations, can we
hope to comprehend in causal terms how the morphological phenotype is realized.
8.2
Metazoan Matter: Physical Bases of Self-Organization
For the concept of “self-organization” to be nontrivially different from “develop-
ment,” the forming structures should emerge de novo from unstructured precursor
materials by known effects with generally predicable outcomes. The non-self-orga-
nizational alternative would be the playing out of the morphogenetic potential of a
complex, composite material that has evolved to unfold in certain ways. Animal
embryos generally ﬁt the second description. Do they partly conform to the ﬁrst?
The animals are members of Holozoa, a phyletic group which also includes
unicellular and transiently colonial organisms. Premetazoan holozoans are inferred
to have contained cadherin-like cell surface proteins (Nichols et al. 2012). In the
transition to the metazoan form of life some of these proteins acquired a cytoplasmic
domain that mediates attachment to the cytoskeleton. The resulting “classical”
cadherins are exclusive to the animals, and some of the cytoplasmic adaptor proteins
of the linkage are also animal-speciﬁc (Abedin and King 2008).
Materials composed of subunits (e.g., atoms, simple molecules, polymers, or
cells) that have strong afﬁnity for one another while readily changing their neighbors
are deﬁned as liquids (Widom 1967). The homophilic adhesive function of classical
cadherins, with their unique transmembrane–cytoskeletal connection that permits the
cells of metazoan embryos and organ primordia to move relative to one another
while remaining attached to their changing neighbors, causes the cell clusters to
behave like liquids (Foty et al. 1994; Steinberg 2007; Miller et al. 2013). Unlike
nonliving liquids, however, where nanoscale subunits change position by Brownian
motion (which is independent of their internal structure), for liquid tissues, the active
200
S. A. Newman

mechanochemical processes of the (macroscopic) cells’ interiors are essential to
drive their random movement.
In determining whether embryos and organs develop by self-organization rather
than by some alternative, complex, mechanistically obscure set of physical pro-
cesses, we can ask whether the morphological features that appear during ontogene-
sis are among the inherent modes of this liquid-tissue “ground state.” For example, in
nonbiological liquids, mixtures of subunits which are sufﬁciently different in com-
position (e.g., adhesivity) can undergo phase separation, forming immiscible layers
(e.g., oil and water) (Flory 1973). If the subunits have nonuniformly distributed
interactive properties (“binding polarity”) lumens or interior spaces can form.
Further, liquids whose subunits have asymmetric shapes can form liquid crystals,
droplets of which become oblate or elongated rather than (as in more typi-
cal liquids) spherical (Yang et al. 2005).
All these liquid phenomena—multilayering, cavity formation, reshaping of
masses, and some additional behaviors of this state of matter—spreading on
(or “wetting”) solid substrata, and “jamming,” a liquid-to-solid phase transformation
in which the subunits move closer to one another (Bi et al. 2011), halting their
relative movement—are features of embryonic development, though not all of them
in every phylum. As noted, the subunits of liquid-like tissues are motile cells, and the
gene products responsible for the strength of their mutual adhesion and their binding
and shape polarity are well known. These gene products did not appear all at once
during evolution, but sequentially, with the present-day descendants of earliest
emerging animals, marine sponges, placozoans, cnidarians, and ctenophores having
some, but not all of them. Organisms in these groups are correspondingly morpho-
logically simpler than ones such as arthropods, mollusks, and chordates (including
humans) that have fuller genetic toolkits (reviewed in Newman (2019b)).
With demonstrable liquid-like properties and structural motifs that resemble those
seen in liquids, it is reasonable to expect that animal embryos and organ primordia
would generate their forms by known physical means. However, as mentioned
above, this supposition is often incorrect. For example, development can deviate
from generic physics owing to the capacity of the cellular subunits to actively
participate in morphogenetic processes. Rather than simply moving in random
directions (the prerequisite for their aggregates behaving as liquid-like materials)
they act as signaling and reactive centers (Forgacs and Newman 2005) and differen-
tiate into specialized types (Newman 2020).
The capacity of cells to differentiate is a feature of animal development that
previously had been thought to be based on generic physical effects. Speciﬁcally, the
panoply of specialized cell types—a few in sponges and placozoans and more than
200 in mammals—was proposed to be the mathematically determined dynamical
modes of behavior of the respective genomes. Genes regulate other genes in all
forms of life and are thus organized into gene regulatory networks, or GRNs. These
systems can be modeled as Boolean switching networks (BSNs) in which genes turn
one another on or off at successive discrete time steps based on the states of their
input genes at the previous time step, or as ordinary differential equations (ODEs),
where both the time progression and concentration of gene products are continuous
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
201

variables. Formally, both kinds of networks exhibit multiple stationary modes of
activity or dynamical “attractors,” in which the concentrations of the system’s
components (e.g., gene products or on-off states) are unchanging over time, or
cycle among a small subset of the possible states of the system. Since transitions
are
possible
between
such
attractor
states,
these
generic
mathematical
representations were proposed to reﬂect the properties of genomic organization,
with the dynamical attractors providing the explanation of the existence of cell types
(Kauffman 1993).
More recent work, however, has led to the recognition that the physical basis of
cell differentiation in animals is not generic in the sense deﬁned here. Speciﬁcally,
the system of expression hubs in which functionally related genes are partitioned
into insulated nuclear regions (topologically associated domains: TADs) by a com-
bination of the mechanics of chromatin ﬁbers and phase transformations of
associated transcription factors and scaffolding proteins (Furlong and Levine
2018; Newman 2020) has no nonbiological counterparts. Some of the proteins
involved, and the distant gene regulatory sequences known as enhancers, which
congregate in TADs in up to the thousands in differentiated cells, are speciﬁc to
metazoans, not even being present in other holozoans. The lack of stoichiometric and
mass action relationships among cell-type-speciﬁc genes and their molecular
regulators, as well as the transience of the causal nexuses in which they are involved,
make BSN or ODE representations applicable to these GRNs at most on in a local
(lineage-adjacent) sense, but not on the level of the global “regulatory genome”
(Peter and Davidson 2015). Moreover, it is highly implausible that a system of
physiologically coordinated cell and tissue types could be produced as a purely
mathematical consequence of the balance of effects leading to dynamical attractors
(Newman 2020).
But even if generated by processes that by most deﬁnitions are not self-
organizing, differentiated cell types can be induced and spatially patterned by self-
organizing processes acting on a multicellular scale. The resulting arrangements, in
turn, can trigger additional self-organizing processes. Some of these effects resemble
ones seen in nonbiological systems. A simple case is the appearance in some
embryos or developing organs of a specialized group of cells that secrete a “mor-
phogen,” a molecule that causes other cells to change their states depending on
concentration or duration of exposure. The transport of the morphogen away from its
source can be by diffusion (Yu et al. 2009), a generic process, or by something more
complicated and cell dependent (Ben-Zvi et al. 2011). A more complex case
involves the coupling of molecular transport (however it may be mediated) across
spatial domains with the biochemical responsivity (excitability) of cells of those
domains. This can produce nonuniform patterns such as standing waves (i.e., spots
or stripes) of molecular concentration, followed by periodic distributions of an
induced cell type (Kondo and Miura 2010).
Processes of this sort (often referred to as “Turing-type” owing to a paper in
which the mathematician A.M. Turing proposed them as “the chemical basis of
morphogenesis”; Turing 1952), a paradigmatic example of self-organizing pattern
formation in nonliving systems (Castets et al. 1990; Boissonade et al. 1994; Ouyang
202
S. A. Newman

and Swinney 1991), have been proposed to underlie patterning of digits in the
vertebrate limb (Newman and Frisch 1979; Zhu et al. 2010), pigment stripes and
spots of animal skins (Kondo and Asai 1995), and hair follicles (Sick et al. 2006). As
we will see below, however, actual developmental patterning mechanisms, while
they may have originated in the form of these generic ones, are typically evolution-
ary transformations of these mechanisms into more elaborate, mostly non-
generic ones.
Other seemingly generic physical effects, e.g., phase separation of tissue layers
by differential adhesion, and segment formation by the interaction of synchronized
biochemical oscillations and tissue gradients (“clock-and-wavefront” mechanisms),
have also been transformed over evolution, and are differently realized in different
lineages, sometimes being supplanted by very different mechanisms (Newman
2019a; Haag and True 2018). A theoretical rationale for such divergences is that if
a layered or a segmented morphology becomes intrinsic to the organism’s identity,
conserving the forms will impose constraints on retained genetic changes, leaving
the structural motif (layers, segments, or endoskeletal elements such as digits) in
place as the developmental process evolves into something more complicated or
entirely different (Müller and Newman 1999; Newman et al. 2006).
Finally, as mentioned, the living cells of developing embryos and organs, though
participating in the reorganization of liquid-like materials, are not physically passive
like the subunits of nonliving liquids. The reactive and agent-like natures of these
entities will therefore complicate attribution of generic self-organization to morpho-
genesis (Arias Del Angel et al. 2020). This agential behavior has many intersecting
determinants and an obscure evolutionary history. As noted above, autonomous cell
behavior is important in the development of organisms, both non-metazoan
eukaryotes and prokaryotes, in which multicellularity is achieved by aggregation.
In more complex forms in which multicellularity is achieved zygotically, individual
cell agency is more restricted. In plants, although extensive cell–cell communication
is employed via plasmodesmata during development and growth, the presence of
encapsulating walls curtails cell autonomy and thus agency. In animal embryos,
directed cell movement and other autonomous behaviors are also less prominent than
in aggregative forms, but always remain a possibility, and are sometimes employed,
in the generation of animal form and pattern.
8.3
Evidence for and Against Developmental
Self-Organization
In this section, I discuss three embryonic processes in animals: gastrulation, seg-
mentation, and endoskeletal patterning, for which there is good evidence from
in vitro studies for self-organization of the generic type. I will also describe evidence
from in vivo, or other in vitro studies that challenge these attributions. Apart from
these contrasts, I make no attempt to provide a detailed account of these develop-
mental events. Each of these embryological phenomena occurs in invertebrate as
well as vertebrate organisms, but the examples I explore are all taken from the latter
group.
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
203

8.3.1
Gastrulation
Gastrulation is the formation and arrangement of distinct tissue layers during the
establishment of the body plan in early animal development. About half a dozen
distinct kinds of cell behavior are employed, depending on the species (see Fig. 8.1,
top panel, for the zebraﬁsh case), and each requires a differentiation step that
Fig. 8.1 The three embryonic systems discussed in this chapter. Top panel, drawings of successive
stages (left to right) of gastrulation in a zebraﬁsh embryo, beginning from the formation of the
interface between the germ layers at 4 h postfertilization to the envelopment of the yolk cell layer by
the blastoderm at 10 h postfertilization. (Reprinted from Bruce and Heisenberg (2020) Mechanisms
of zebraﬁsh epiboly: A current view. Curr Top Dev Biol 136: 319–341, used by permission of
Elsevier.) Middle panel, photographs of chicken embryos during the period of somitogenesis
(26–53 h; 8–22 somites). (Adapted from Hamburger and Hamilton (1951).) Bottom panel, drawing
of cross-sections of upper and lower embryonic mouse limbs between 9.5 and 13.5 days of
development. Gray shading represents precartilage mesenchymal condensations, and black shading
cartilage. (Adapted from Taher et al. (2011).)
204
S. A. Newman

designates a subpopulation of the original clump of cells derived from the zygote
(variously, blastula, morula, inner cell mass) as distinctive. Often the deﬁning
character is an adhesive differential that causes the subpopulation to be more, or
less, cohesive than the other cells of the mass (reviewed in Newman (2016b) and
Forgacs and Newman (2005)).
How the different cell populations are established during gastrulation may depend
on maternal determinants stored in the egg, or external cues during oogenesis or
gestation. Self-organization may also be involved in the early stages of cell alloca-
tion: some evidence points to one or more Turing-type reaction–diffusion
mechanisms (Muller et al. 2012).
Steinberg and his colleagues, referring to the physics of phase separation,
attributed the layering of germ layers in gastrulating frog embryos to measured
cohesivity differences of the tissues. The interfacial tensions between the layers,
which were the relevant determinants for this putative thermodynamically driven
effect, could not be directly measured, but were inferred indirectly by comparing the
surface tensions (measured by a compression tensiometer) of rounded-up parcels of
isolated tissues (Foty et al. 1994). The values conﬁrmed the predictions of the
Differential Adhesion Hypothesis (DAH), which, under the assumption that the
tissues were liquid-like (which is generally correct, see previous section), asserted
that surface and, by inference, interfacial tensions, were due exclusively to quantita-
tive or qualitative differences between the tissues’ cell types in adhesive proteins,
such as classical cadherins (Steinberg 2007).
Experiments on sorting-out of mixtures embryonic cells from later-stage embry-
onic primordia (liver, limb bud, retina, etc.) were also consistent with the DAH.
Here, the equilibrium conﬁguration of the tissues resulting from demixed cells from
given sources was always identical to the morphological results obtained by direct
confrontation of the intact tissue fragments. This was true with respect to which mass
was engulﬁng and which engulfed, or (where full engulfment did not occur) to the
direction of convexity of the interface (Duguay et al. 2003). These experiments
conﬁrmed the liquid nature of the tissues and their phase separation-like behavior
(a generic physical effect). They did not prove the attribution of the tissue
conﬁgurations to differential adhesion per se, however. This aspect of the hypothesis
appeared to be pinned down, however, when Steinberg and Takeichi genetically
engineered mouse L-cells, a cell type with no adhesive proteins of their own, to
express different amounts of P-cadherin (Steinberg and Takeichi 1994). Here,
sorting out occurred when the levels of expression were sufﬁciently different, and
the resulting artiﬁcially produced tissue-like masses exhibited engulfment behaviors
and interfacial contours exactly as predicted by the DAH.
Cells, however, are different from subunits of nonbiological liquids in that they
have mechanically complex, responsive interiors. Interfacial tension, the driving
force for cell sorting and tissue engulfment in liquid tissues was postulated by the
DAH to result simply from cell surface-based adhesive differentials between the
cells. But Brodland countered this by observing that the compression tests used by
the Steinberg group measured not only the surface tension between the aggregate
and the surrounding medium, but (indirectly) also the effective viscosity and
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
205

contractility of the cells’ cytoplasm, which affect the cohesivity of the aggregates.
This led him to propose an alternative differential interfacial tension hypothesis
(DITH) for cell sorting and tissue engulfment in vitro and in vivo (Brodland 2002).
While adhesive differentials alone can be the determining factor for cell sorting or
phase separation of tissue fragments if internal cell states are equivalent, as in the
genetically engineered L-cells in the Steinberg–Takeichi experiments, the more
general DITH was ultimately recognized (even by advocates of the DAH) as more
relevant to embryonic systems (Manning et al. 2010). In vitro experiments on tissues
of gastrulating embryos appeared to conﬁrm the idea that the boundaries of immis-
cibility between germ layers and the relative spatial arrangements of the layers were
the result of differential tissue surface tension (TST)-based self-organization. Thus,
progenitor cells from the ectodermal and mesendodermal germ layers of zebraﬁsh
embryos sort out from mixtures in vitro, and fragments of these layers adopt
conﬁgurations that correspond to TSTs predicted from direct measurement of cell
adhesivities and cortical tensions by atomic force microscopy (Krieg et al. 2008).
Moreover, the conﬁguration of the leading edge of the spreading epiblast during
epiboly (envelopment of the yolk cell mass) in zebraﬁsh was consistent with the
physics of surface wetting, i.e. TST-driven rearrangement (Wallmeyer et al. 2018).
But what holds in vitro does not necessarily reﬂect the in vivo process, as
Winklbauer and coworkers noted when they reported “[c]adherin-dependent differ-
ential cell adhesion in Xenopus causes cell sorting in vitro but not in the embryo”
(Ninomiya et al. 2012). Further, the group that had previously obtained in vitro
evidence for TST-driven rearrangement of germ layers (Krieg et al. 2008) used
optical methods to directly measure differences in germ layer TST when the germ
layers are ﬁrst established. They found, surprisingly, that the magnitude of this
difference was insufﬁcient to drive progenitor cell sorting and tissue rearrangement
under physiological conditions (Krens et al. 2017). The disparity between the in vitro
and in vivo results was attributed to differences between the ﬂuids bathing the cells
under the two conditions. The low osmolarity of the interstitial ﬂuid between the
intact embryo’s epiblast cells caused a reduction in the interfacial tension between
the tissue layers compared to that in the tissue cultures. These results suggest that the
self-organized germ layer phase separation seen in vitro was artifactual. If so, a
different explanation is required for this phenomenon.
The study’s authors provided evidence that the germ layer interface was formed
by directed cell movement, possibly under the guidance of a gradient of interstitial
ﬂuid (Krens et al. 2017). Though biologically plausible, this explanation, which
appeals to the agent-like properties of the embryo’s constituent cells, challenges the
postulate of physical self-organization. It implies, instead, that the cells have an
evolved capacity to assume their proper positions in the embryo based on something
akin to a predetermined program.
But even if directed cell migration is involved in germ layer formation in
zebraﬁsh, it is not necessarily the mechanism for this developmental process in
other species: there is extensive phylogenetic variability of gastrulation-related
molecules and cell behaviors even among the vertebrates (Schauer and Heisenberg
2021). Moreover, the liquid-like properties of animal tissues are deeply entrenched
206
S. A. Newman

in metazoan origins and the observed germ layer boundaries conform to the
predictions of the physics of wetting (Wallmeyer et al. 2018). One possibility is
that the inferred program of directed migration may have been templated by, and
over time supplanted, the formation of germ layers by the generic physical mecha-
nism of tissue phase separation in a vertebrate ancestor (Newman 2019a). What is
clear, though, is that for extant animals any genuine physical self-organizing pro-
cesses that may act during gastrulation are integrated into more complex
multidetermined developmental routines of these organisms, notwithstanding claims
to have observed “self-organization” of gastrulation in vitro (Beccari et al. 2018;
Etoc et al. 2016; Rosado-Olivieri and Brivanlou 2021).
8.3.2
Somitogenesis
In vertebrates, the mesoderm directly to either side of the notochord in the early
embryo becomes organized into parallel blocks of tissue called “somites.” The ﬁrst
somite forms as a tight aggregate or condensation of cells at the anterior region of the
trunk. Each new somite forms immediately posterior to the previous one, budding
off from the more anterior portion of the unsegmented presomitic mesoderm (PSM)
(see Fig. 8 1, middle panel, for the chicken case). The somites mature into the
vertebrae and the ribs, and the associated muscles. They also send muscle
progenitors into the limb buds (in species that have them) which extend from the
body wall (Chevallier et al. 1977). Eventually, 30 (zebraﬁsh), 65 (mouse), or as
many as 500 (certain snakes) somites will form (Maroto et al. 2012).
Cooke and Zeeman presented a mathematical model for somitogenesis in 1976,
before any of the involved molecular components had been identiﬁed (Cooke and
Zeeman 1976). It drew on two physical processes, intracellular biochemical
oscillations and a traveling morphogenesis-permissive signal sweeping across the
length of the embryo. In this “clock-and-wavefront” mechanism, the unsegmented
tissue at any position along the axis was postulated to be in a “phase-linked” (i.e.,
synchronized) state. When a cohort of cells that were at a certain phase of the cycle
experienced the wavefront signal, they would coalesce into a somite. A spatial
gradient of phase values, the slow unidirectional passage of the wave, or both,
could ensure that somite pairs formed in the observed anteroposterior order.
While both the oscillatory and spatially progressive aspects of the Cooke–
Zeeman model were speculative, periodic cell regulatory processes, most promi-
nently the cell cycle, were long known. Sustained oscillations in energy metabolites
had been observed a few years previously in yeast cells (Ghosh et al. 1971) and their
biochemical mechanism established in cell-free reactors (Pye and Chance 1966). The
connection between such intracellular oscillations and the hypothesized synchro-
nous oscillations that the somitogenesis model posited was obscure, but the authors
were drawing on new theoretical initiatives on the dynamics of periodic phenomena
in biological systems taking place during the same period (Winfree 1970; Goldbeter
and Lefever 1972).
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
207

In the late 1990s, Pourquié and coworkers appeared to establish the validity of the
clock-and-wavefront model by identifying molecular components that played the
predicted roles. In chicken embryos the product of the Hes1 gene is expressed in the
paraxial mesoderm in cyclic waves whose period corresponded to the formation time
of one somite (Palmeirim et al. 1997; Pourquié 2003). This protein and its homolog
Her7, another member of the Hes/Her family of transcriptional coregulators were
found to be similarly expressed in zebraﬁsh and mouse, and dynamical bases of the
intracellular oscillation were inferred (Lewis 2003; Monk 2003). As noted above,
however, self-organizing biochemical processes in individual cells do not constitute
developmental self-organization, unless they come to act on the multicellular level.
Lewis and Kageyama and their respective coworkers independently demonstrated
that the Hes/Her oscillations become entrained so that, as predicted by Cooke and
Zeeman and suggested by the experiments of Palmeirim et al., the PSM at each tissue
domain about to undergo somite formation is a synchronized multicellular oscillator
(Giudicelli et al. 2007; Özbudak and Lewis 2008; Masamizu et al. 2006). This
collective behavior is uncontroversially the result of self-organization, but the way
synchrony is brought about appears to differ in different species and remains in
dispute even in well-studied organisms.
There are two possibilities. The ﬁrst is that the cells are individually clock-like:
they can keep time (i.e., undergo cyclic changes in Hes/Her concentration) even if
isolated from one another, that is, autonomously, and can come into phase synchrony
by interacting with each other in weak, non-speciﬁc ways. This so-called Kuramoto
effect is a mathematically conﬁrmed consequence of the physics of oscillations, and
is observed, for example, in the behavior of ﬁreﬂies in the wild and initially
asynchronous arrays of metronomes that have been lined up on a ﬂexible board
(Strogatz 2003).
The second possibility is that the cells, though potentially oscillatory, are excit-
able entities that mainly enter this dynamical mode by interacting with each other. In
this case, the establishment of clock-like behavior at the individual cell-level
coincides with synchronization of the collective (Baibolatov et al. 2009). It is this
second phenomenon which is commonly referred to as dynamical self-organization,
because it mediates an emergent synchronized state. But the Kuramoto mechanism,
which brings coherence to a set of phase incoherent oscillations is also a form of
physical self-organization by the deﬁnition used in this chapter. Recent experiments
suggest that synchronization of PSM cells in some somite-forming species is due to
the non-Kuramoto emergent type of self-organization (Hubaud et al. 2017).
In intact embryos, somite boundaries form when cells which have left the
posterior growth zone move sufﬁciently far from a source of FGF8 (and in some
species additional, or different factors) in the posterior tip of the embryo (Dubrulle
et al. 2001; Mallo 2016). But when PSM is dissociated and placed in culture, somite-
like structures form whose size and shape are controlled solely by local cell–cell
interactions, involving neither a clock nor a wavefront (Dias et al. 2014). This
indicates that important aspects of somitogenesis result from inherent mechanical
instabilities of the PSM.
208
S. A. Newman

Electron microscopic studies by Meier from the late 1970s suggested that, at least
in chicken embryos, the relevant tissue is already arranged into somite-like cell
clusters (termed “somitomeres”) before the cells would have moved outside any
posterior zone of morphogenetic inhibition (i.e., the wavefront of the Cooke–Zeman
model) (Meier 1979, 1984). Furthermore, experimental application of mechanical
strain to living embryos was shown to induce supernumerary well-formed somites
between existing ones, by a mechanism involving somite splitting and reorganiza-
tion (Nelemans et al. 2020). This provided evidence that mechanical organizational
effects are operative in situ, even under normal stress conditions. Finally, newer
electron microscopic observations revealed a posteriorly progressing front of adhe-
sive changes in the presomitic mesoderm, accompanied by signs of tissue segmen-
tation, developmentally much earlier than overt intersomite boundary formation
(consistent with Meier’s ﬁndings). The investigators have advanced a model of
mechanical instability of the PSM incorporating this work, challenging the
fundamentality of the clock-and-wavefront mechanism (Adhyapok et al. 2021).
As with gastrulation, developmental processes in the embryo are much more
complex than in isolated tissues, and it seems plausible that the clock-and-wavefront
(with somewhat different molecular-genetic bases in different vertebrate species)
evolved to reinforce a more primitive segmentation scheme that evolved in an
ancestral form (Stern and Piatkowska 2015; Mallo 2016). (Strikingly, short
germband insects like beetles and grasshoppers, though not directly ancestral to
vertebrates, also employ clocks and wavefront-like activity gradients, using some of
the same genes as the latter in their segmentation processes (Clark et al. 2019).)
Nonetheless, the cell aggregate-forming process that occurs in vitro, and which is
essential to somite formation in the intact embryo, appears to be an authentic self-
organizing process (Dias et al. 2014).
Oscillator synchrony, by whichever means it is brought about (e.g., via the
Kuramoto or emergent modes) also appears to be a category of generic self-
organizing process. Its effect is to coordinate cell states across multicellular tissues
in a variety of developing systems (see below). The generation of such “morphoge-
netic ﬁelds” (Levin 2012; Gilbert et al. 1996) enables the reliable and coherent
operation across broad tissue domains of system-speciﬁc spatiotemporal signals.
8.3.3
Limb Skeletogenesis
The jawed vertebrates (gnathostomes) typically have two sets of paired appendages,
either ﬁns or limbs. These structures are characterized by species-speciﬁc
arrangements of bony or cartilaginous endoskeletal elements that arise from focal
condensations of “mesenchyme,” i.e., loose embryonic connective tissue, similar to
those observed in early somite formation. The mesenchymal cells are initially
dispersed in a dilute extracellular matrix (ECM), but this material is lost or greatly
reduced at the sites of condensation, and the cells come to directly adhere to one
another. Mesenchymal condensation is a transient effect. The skeletal primordia
progress to cartilage tissue in cartilaginous ﬁsh such as sharks where it forms the
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
209

deﬁnitive skeleton, as well as in lobe-ﬁnned ﬁsh, such as coelacanths, and tetrapods,
where it is mostly replaced by bone later in development. Replacement bone (e.g.,
that formed with the intermediary of cartilage) also occurs to a limited extent in
ray-ﬁnned ﬁsh, but the bony endoskeleton in these species mostly develops by direct
differentiation of mesenchymal condensations into bone in the so-called dermal rays
of the ﬁns (Clack 2012; Hinchliffe and Johnson 1980).
There were indications as early as the 1960s that self-organizing processes
contribute to vertebrae limb skeletogenesis. Zwilling performed a series of
experiments in which he disrupted the mesoblast from isolated chicken limb buds
and packed the fragments or reaggregated cells into a jacket of ectoderm (i.e.,
embryonic skin) from a different limb bud. When the composite was grown as a
graft, recognizable limb structures, consisting of nodules or small rods of cartilage,
developed (Zwilling 1964). These experiments were repeated by Fallon and
coworkers, with the addition that expression of Hox genes was monitored in the
“recombinant” limbs (Ros et al. 1994). According to the theory of “positional
information,” a developmental program-type model that was popular in limb
research at the time, the distribution of various Hox gene products in the normal
limb was what speciﬁed the locations of the skeletal elements (Tickle 1994). But the
investigators found that discrete, parallel rod-like elements reminiscent of digits
could appear without the reestablishment of normal Hox protein gradients. This
provided further evidence that the Zwilling result was indeed due to some form of
self-organization.
In tetrapod limbs and lobe-ﬁnned ﬁsh ﬁns, the skeleton is arranged so that there is
generally one element attached to the body, with increasingly distal rows containing
more of them (see Fig. 8.1, bottom panel, for the mouse case). In the human arm, for
example, the proximal humerus is followed by the radius and ulna, two tiers of wrist
bones, and then ﬁve digits. In birds and mammals these elements are generated
proximodistally during development, so that rows containing successively larger
numbers of elements (initially parallel rods of cartilage) emerge sequentially over
time (Hinchliffe and Johnson 1980).
There are generic physical mechanisms of self-organization that permit well-
spaced spots or stripes of chemical concentration or states of mechanical compres-
sion to form, with different numbers appearing as a result of ﬁne-tuning of system
parameters or changes in domain shape (Alber et al. 2005). The Turing mechanism is
one of these, and was proposed to underlie limb skeletal patterning beginning in the
1970s (Newman and Frisch 1979; Hentschel et al. 2004). We can ask if any of these
generic mechanisms underlie the patterning of the mesenchymal tissue of the limb
mesoblast. The proximodistal generation of the different tiers of the skeleton does
appear to draw on such physical processes. But since the spatiotemporal ordering
depends on regulated tissue elongation and the regulated decreasing suppression of
pattern formation in the distal regions of the limb bud by proteins (mainly ﬁbroblast
growth factors; FGFs) secreted by the apical ectoderm, there are aspects of the
process that while mechanistically comprehensible, are not themselves physically
self-organizing (Glimm et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2013).
210
S. A. Newman

Like somitogenesis, ﬁn and limb skeletogenesis depends on patterns of mesen-
chymal condensation in which cells form focal aggregates that come to be
distributed in a regular fashion across the developing tissue. There is, in fact,
evidence for one or more Turing-type reaction–diffusion processes occurring in ﬁn
and limb development and in avian and mammalian limb bud cells in vitro (Christley
et al. 2007; Kiskowski et al. 2004; Raspopovic et al. 2014; Sheth et al. 2012). But
simulations show that fairly regular spot and stripe patterns can also result from local
cell–cell and cell–ECM interactions in the absence of diffusible activators and
inhibitors (Zeng et al. 2003). Unlike Turing processes, which require such factors,
the simpler cell–cell and cell–ECM-based mechanism of Zeng and coworkers has no
intrinsic wavelength. Its capacity to generate regular patterns is conditional, depen-
dent on the density of the cells and the strength of their local interactions (Zeng et al.
2003). As in the case of somite formation, superimposed dynamical processes, some
with self-organizing properties, which may differ in divergent lineages (e.g., carti-
laginous ﬁshes, birds, mammals) could serve to regularize the patterns formed by the
simpler, likely more ancestral, mechanism.
In attempting to determine whether there is a self-organizing condensation-
generating process common to all ﬁn and limb development, it is helpful to compare
experimental studies that have traced the development of condensations in vivo and
in vitro. Although ﬁbronectin, an ECM molecule that is abundant in avian and
mammalian limb precartilage condensation is important in the consolidation of
these foci as they mature (Frenz et al. 1989; Downie and Newman 1994), and it is
part of an elaborate reaction–diffusion system involving various growth factors and
their receptors (Hentschel et al. 2004), it is not the developmentally earliest molecule
to mark these structures. A receptor for bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), a
diffusible morphogen produced by the mesenchymal cells is present earlier, when
cell
“compactions” or
“protocondensations”
appear
in
anticipation
of
the
condensations (Barna and Niswander 2007). There is also evidence for a Turing-
type network incorporating BMP in conjunction with another morphogen, Wnt, and
Sox9, a master transcription factor for the differentiation of cartilage in the formation
of digits in the developing mouse limb (Raspopovic et al. 2014). However, this
“BSW” network falls short as a candidate for the ancestral self-organizing system for
ﬁn and limb skeletogenesis.
In the ﬁrst place, protocondensations form in the absence of Sox9, i.e., when it is
knocked down genetically (Barna and Niswander 2007). This makes sense for the
dermal endoskeleton of ray-ﬁnned ﬁshes, where the bones form without a cartilage
intermediate. While recent evidence suggests the dermal rays are organized in part
by the same pattern-forming system as tetrapod limb endoskeletons (Gehrke et al.
2015), here the master transcription factor of bone, Runx2, is involved rather
than Sox9.
Second, there is no evidence that skeletal elements other than the digits are
patterned by the BSW mechanism. A primordial self-organizing process that has
been recruited across all ﬁns and limb would be expected to function not only in the
digital plate (which is a novelty of tetrapods) and its counterpart in the distal region
of the developing ﬁns of cartilaginous ﬁsh (Onimaru et al. 2016), but at all
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
211

proximodistal levels of the limb, particularly those with deeper evolutionary roots
than the digits (Stewart et al. 2017).
Third, none of the components of the BSW network are cell–cell adhesive or
ECM molecules. Factors that mediate changes in the arrangement of cells are
prerequisites for the kind of ancestral condensation self-organizing system
postulated above.
The one experimentally conﬁrmed molecular mechanism that promotes
condensations in limb mesenchyme consists of galectin-1 (Gal-1) and galectin-
8 (Gal-8), two members of the galectin family of sugar-binding proteins (Bhat
et al. 2011). Galectins are matricellular proteins (i.e., ECM components that are
rapidly turned over and play both adhesive and signaling roles; Gabius (2009)). In
the avian limb bud tissues where the role of galectins has been studied, Gal-1
localizes to prospective sites of condensation where it promotes aggregation of
limb mesenchymal cells, while Gal-8 blocks the ability of Gal-1 to perform this
function. Though antagonistic at the protein level, the two galectins mutually induce
each other’s expression at the gene regulatory level. This combination of antagonis-
tic and reinforcing interactions, along with the effects that each galectin has on the
production (or mobilization at the cell surface) of its speciﬁc and shared ligands,
constitutes a multiscale network capable of forming regular patterns (Glimm et al.
2014).
Although the galectin-based mechanism can be described as a Turing-type
system, it depends on local cell–adhesive cell–ECM interactions similarly to the
mechanism proposed by Zeng et al. (2003) rather than on a balance of diffusible
morphogens and their effects, as in classical Turing mechanisms. Because Gal-8
interferes with cell–cell adhesion mediated by Gal-1, it is superﬁcially analogous to
the inhibitory morphogen in a reaction–diffusion mechanism. But it acts entirely
locally. In a model based on its experimentally determined action, changing its
expression rate and binding afﬁnity to a postulated shared receptor with Gal-1
changes the pattern wavelength, but altering its diffusion rate does not (Bhat et al.
2016; Glimm et al. 2014). Further, the simulated galectin mechanism only forms
patterns if the cells it acts on move up gradients of Gal-1, another feature not part of
Turing mechanisms. This has led it to being termed a “reaction-diffusion-adhesion”
mechanism (Glimm et al. 2014).
Cell movement in response to an adhesive gradient is a generic effect since it does
not require the cells to be anything other than randomly motile. The galectin-based
protocondensation-forming mechanism can thus be considered an example of tissue
self-organization.
Although little is yet known about the role, if any, of the galectin network in
non-avian species, homologs of Gal-1 and Gal-8 are present in all tetrapods and
ray-ﬁnned and cartilaginous ﬁshes for which genomic data are available. The
sequence and conformation of Gal-8s in these groups provide a basis (insofar as
computational models permit) for understanding the different numbers of limb
skeletal elements in these species. Moreover, the acquisition of putative cis-acting
regulatory sequences by the Gal-8 genes of tetrapods provides an explanation
(by simulations) of the proximodistal increase in element number in this group
212
S. A. Newman

(Bhat et al. 2016). Thus, the two-galectin network, which may have recruited the
lineage-determining transcription factors of cartilage (Sox9) or bone (Runx2) during
the evolution of various ﬁshes and tetrapods, is the best current candidate for a
primordial self-organizing basis of skeletogenesis (Newman et al. 2018).
A second self-organizing process active during skeletogenesis resembles the
synchronization of cellular oscillations employed in somitogenesis. As in the
PSM, Hes1 oscillates in limb bud mesenchyme, and when these oscillations were
suppressed in vitro, condensation patterning was perturbed (Bhat et al. 2019).
Depending on the time in culture when this was done there was either an increase
in the number of protocondensations with less regular spacing between them, or a
decrease and fusion of neighboring condensations. Suppression of Hes1 oscillations
in the limb buds in intact embryos similarly led to pattern irregularities, including
fused and misshapen skeletal elements (Bhat et al. 2019).
A functional connection between Hes1 and the core two-galectin network
motivated computational studies of the effects of perturbing variables representing
the concentration of each protein on the dynamics of the others. When Hes1 was
made not to oscillate, the simulations showed that the galectin system formed
regularly spaced condensations with sharp boundaries, and when Hes1 oscillated
in a synchronous fashion the result was the same. However, if Hes1 was allowed to
oscillate asynchronously, or its concentration was assigned randomly across the ﬁeld
of cells, the precision of the pattern was degraded (Bhat et al. 2019).
The implication is that synchronization of oscillators, rather than being a pattern-
forming mechanism itself, is a dynamical means to place all the cells in a developing
ﬁeld on the “same page.” That is, if the levels of the multifunctional transcription
coregulator Hes1 are uniform across the tissue, patterning signals such as nonuni-
form concentrations of galectins (in limb skeletogenesis) or the release from poste-
rior suppression of aggregation (as in somitogenesis) can act in a spatiotemporally
coherent fashion over distances greater than the range of the diffusible signals that
typically coordinate development (Bhat et al. 2019).
8.4
Conclusions
Animal embryos and developing organs, being parcels of excitable soft matter, will
inevitably exhibit physical self-organizing effects. Does that mean that embryos,
or embryo- and organ-like structures derived from stem cells, are physically
self-organizing? The studies described here suggest that they are not, and the
most suitable description for what they do in cultures (as in their normal
gestational environments) is just “development.” As the examples have indicated,
physical processes of self-organization are clearly employed in the embryos and
organ primordia of extant animals: envelopment of the yolk by the blastoderm in
the zebraﬁsh embryo by tissue surface tension according to the differential
interfacial tension mechanism, PSM condensation, and limb/ﬁn mesenchymal
protocondensation compaction by mechanical instabilities. The multicellular syn-
chronization of oscillations of transcriptional regulators is another self-organizing
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
213

effect employed in embryogenesis and evidenced in vitro. But the constitution of the
interface between the reorganizing germ layers in the ﬁsh embryo, the organization
of PSM condensations into tandem somites and the limb/ﬁn condensations into
patterned endoskeletons, occur by agent-type and growth-dependent processes that
are “biological” in ways not readily explicable by physical mechanisms.
Like the reorganization of tissue layers during gastrulation, the recruitment of
simple nodule-generating self-organizing effects into patterned blocks of tissue
along the body axis, or cartilaginous and bony ﬁn or limb endoskeletons, evolved
away from their presumed ancestral states. Somitogenesis required integration of
tissue condensation into the elongating body in a way that suppressed it until it
moved beyond the inﬂuence of an inhibitor emanating from the embryo’s posterior
tip. In all vertebrate species, the condensation process is under the control of Hes/Her
family transcriptional regulators. These oscillate in concentration, so the resulting
blocks of tissue are tandemly repetitive. But the posterior inhibitory factor is taxon-
speciﬁc and varies in molecular mechanisms and timing, indicating phylogenetic
divergence (Stern and Piatkowska 2015).
In the case of ﬁns and limbs, the presumed ancestral protocondensation-initiating
molecule Gal-1 may have generated randomly distributed supportive nodules in the
appendages of ancient gnathostomes. But it then acquired embellishments that made
the nodules more regular (coregulation with Gal-8), more stable (linkage to a
reaction–diffusion network for ﬁbronectin production), more solid (linkage to
reaction–diffusion control of Sox9 or Runx2 for cartilage and bone, respectively).
Finally, with acquisition by Gal-8 of cis-acting gene regulatory modules, the
skeletogenic system acquired position-dependent differentiation capabilities. This
“evolving complex of self-organizing systems” generated, in a stepwise but diver-
gent progression, the ﬁns of cartilaginous and ray-ﬁnned ﬁshes and the limbs of
tetrapods (Newman et al. 2018).
The described scenario posits major roles for physical processes of self-
organization, not in the development of present-day embryos and organs, but in
the origination of the forms and patterns of these forms. Since we cannot experiment
on the ancestral forms to determine how they arose, the best evidence for this
hypothesis is the “generic” look of some morphological features of the modern
forms, that is, the appearance of having been formed by physical processes that are
well understood via nonliving counterparts (Newman and Comper 1990). The
conﬁguration of embryonic germ layers, the segments of the vertebrate embryo,
and the repeated endoskeletal elements of gnathostome appendages are examples of
this. But as we have seen, however they ﬁrst arose, evolution can also draw
established morphological traits away from their original genetic and even physical
foundations by the processes of “developmental system drift” (True and Haag 2001)
and “homomorphy” (Newman 2019a).
The eighteenth century philosopher Immanuel Kant coined the term “self-orga-
nization” to describe certain enigmatic properties of organisms. He described them
as “natural purposes,” entities that not only maintain coherent identities, but produce
the ingredients and embody the means to perpetuate themselves (Kant 1790; trans.
1966). Kant wrote in the context of Newtonian physics, unaware of the
214
S. A. Newman

thermodynamic and dynamical phenomena that later scientists would term self-
organizational. Since many of these self-organizing processes operate in living
systems, Kant’s usage was highly prescient.
But Kant was also only vaguely aware of organic evolution, and it is this, as we
have seen, that transforms organisms into something different from the self-
organizing systems of physics. Indeed, the complex, overdetermined entities that
have resulted from evolutionary processes occurring over the more than 650 million
years since the origin of the animals are, despite Kant’s lack of appreciation of this
dimension, aptly described by his term “natural purposes” (Moss and Newman
2015).
Finally, to return to the recent ﬂush of allusions to self-organization, mentioned at
the beginning of this chapter, in reference to formation of gastruloids and organoids
produced by stem cells in culture (Beccari et al. 2018; Etoc et al. 2016; Rosado-
Olivieri and Brivanlou 2021; Shahbazi et al. 2019), it is difﬁcult not to consider it
problematic, both scientiﬁcally and regarding social uses of the associated
technologies. One recent paper, for example, describes what occurs when stem
cells generate embryo-like structures in culture as akin to coalescence in a supersat-
urated vapor, phase separation of immiscible liquids, Turing processes, and so forth
(Shahbazi et al. 2019). Public lectures by principals of the ﬁeld contain conﬁdently
asserted, but similarly oversimpliﬁed or misleading treatments (Brivanlou 2016).
These analogies (understandable in the past, but less so now that the physics of some
developmental systems have been investigated in depth, with documented
complicating effects) give the false impression that there has been more progress
in understanding embryonic development than there truly has been. Based in part on
such “hand-waving” explanations, investigators are drawing inferences about human
development and its genetic and environmental vulnerabilities from in vitro models,
seeking to mobilize medically targeted funding to this end (Clark et al. 2021).
Notwithstanding the hazards of genetically modifying systems whose principles of
organization are poorly understood (Newman 2017), some are forthright in their
intention to eventually perform such alterations in human embryos based on data and
purported conceptual advances acquired from stem cell development in vitro
(Turocy et al. 2021).
As we have seen, however, development of the embryo in its in vivo setting does
not generally occur by the action of physically straightforward processes. Further,
development of reconstituted embryo cells in vitro does not always occur in the same
way it does in vivo. It would be unfortunate if we ﬁnd ourselves having emerged
from a period of misconceived genetic program metaphors only to land in a brave
new world captivated by equally misguided ones about self-organization.
References
Abedin M, King N (2008) The premetazoan ancestry of cadherins. Science 319(5865):946–948
Adhyapok P, Piatkowska AM, Norman MJ, Clendenon SG, Stern CD, Glazier JA, Belmonte JM
(2021) A mechanical model of early somite segmentation. iScience 24(4):102317. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102317
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
215

Alber M, Glimm T, Hentschel HGE, Kazmierczak B, Newman SA (2005) Stability of
n-dimensional patterns in a generalized Turing system: implications for biological pattern
formation. Nonlinearity 18:125–138
Arias Del Angel JA, Nanjundiah V, Benítez M, Newman SA (2020) Interplay of mesoscale physics
and agent-like behaviors in the parallel evolution of aggregative multicellularity. EvoDevo 11
(1):21. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13227-020-00165-8
Azpeitia E, Tichtinsky G, Le Masson M, Serrano-Mislata A, Lucas J, Gregis V, Gimenez C,
Prunet N, Farcot E, Kater MM, Bradley D, Madueno F, Godin C, Parcy F (2021) Cauliﬂower
fractal forms arise from perturbations of ﬂoral gene networks. Science 373(6551):192–197.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abg5999
Baibolatov Y, Rosenblum M, Zhanabaev ZZ, Kyzgarina M, Pikovsky A (2009) Periodically forced
ensemble of nonlinearly coupled oscillators: from partial to full synchrony. Phys Rev E Stat
Nonlinear Soft Matter Phys 80(4 Pt 2):046211. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.80.046211
Barna M, Niswander L (2007) Visualization of cartilage formation: insight into cellular properties
of skeletal progenitors and chondrodysplasia syndromes. Dev Cell 12(6):931–941. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.devcel.2007.04.016
Beccari L, Moris N, Girgin M, Turner DA, Baillie-Johnson P, Cossy AC, Lutolf MP, Duboule D,
Arias AM (2018) Multi-axial self-organization properties of mouse embryonic stem cells into
gastruloids. Nature 562(7726):272–276. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0578-0
Bedzhov I, Zernicka-Goetz M (2014) Self-organizing properties of mouse pluripotent cells initiate
morphogenesis upon implantation. Cell 156(5):1032–1044. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.
01.023
Ben-Zvi D, Pyrowolakis G, Barkai N, Shilo BZ (2011) Expansion-repression mechanism for
scaling the Dpp activation gradient in Drosophila wing imaginal discs. Curr Biol 21(16):
1391–1396. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.07.015
Bhat R, Lerea KM, Peng H, Kaltner H, Gabius HJ, Newman SA (2011) A regulatory network of
two galectins mediates the earliest steps of avian limb skeletal morphogenesis. BMC Dev Biol
11:6
Bhat R, Chakraborty M, Glimm T, Stewart TA, Newman SA (2016) Deep phylogenomics of a
tandem-repeat galectin regulating appendicular skeletal pattern formation. BMC Evol Biol
16(1):162
Bhat R, Glimm T, Linde-Medina M, Cui C, Newman SA (2019) Synchronization of Hes1
oscillations coordinates and reﬁnes condensation formation and patterning of the avian limb
skeleton. Mech Dev 156:41–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mod.2019.03.001
Bi D, Zhang J, Chakraborty B, Behringer RP (2011) Jamming by shear. Nature 480(7377):
355–358. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10667
Boissonade J, Dulos E, DeKepper P (1994) Turing patterns: from myth to reality. In: Kapral R,
Showalter K (eds) Chemical waves and patterns. Kluwer, Boston, pp 221–268
Brivanlou AH (2016) Self-understanding of self-organization TEDxYouth@LFNY. https://youtu.
be/JBlM2MafHoc
Brodland GW (2002) The differential interfacial tension hypothesis (DITH): a comprehensive
theory for the self-rearrangement of embryonic cells and tissues. J Biomech Eng 124(2):
188–197
Bruce AEE, Heisenberg CP (2020) Mechanisms of zebraﬁsh epiboly: a current view. Curr Top Dev
Biol 136:319–341. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.ctdb.2019.07.001
Carroll SB, Grenier JK, Weatherbee SD (2004) From DNA to diversity: molecular genetics and the
evolution of animal design, 2nd edn. Blackwell, Malden, MA
Castets V, Dulos E, Boissonade J, DeKepper P (1990) Experimental evidence of a sustained
standing Turing-type nonequilibrium chemical pattern. Phys Rev Lett 64:2953–2956
Chevallier A, Kieny M, Mauger A (1977) Limb-somite relationship: origin of the limb musculature.
J Embryol Exp Morphol 41:245–258
Christley S, Alber MS, Newman SA (2007) Patterns of mesenchymal condensation in a multiscale,
discrete stochastic model. PLoS Comput Biol 3(4):(e76):0743–0753
216
S. A. Newman

Clack JA (2012) Gaining ground: the origin and evolution of tetrapods. In: Life of the past, 2nd edn.
Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Clark E, Peel AD, Akam M (2019) Arthropod segmentation. Development 146(18). https://doi.org/
10.1242/dev.170480
Clark AT, Brivanlou A, Fu J, Kato K, Mathews D, Niakan KK, Rivron N, Saitou M, Surani A,
Tang F, Rossant J (2021) Human embryo research, stem cell-derived embryo models and
in vitro gametogenesis: considerations leading to the revised ISSCR guidelines. Stem Cell
Rep 16(6):1416–1424. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2021.05.008
Cooke J, Zeeman EC (1976) A clock and wavefront model for control of the number of repeated
structures during animal morphogenesis. J Theor Biol 58(2):455–476
de Gennes PG (1992) Soft matter. Science 256:495–497
Dias AS, de Almeida I, Belmonte JM, Glazier JA, Stern CD (2014) Somites without a clock.
Science 343(6172):791–795. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1247575
Douady S, Couder Y (1992) Phyllotaxis as a physical self-organized growth process. Phys Rev Lett
68(13):2098–2103
Downie SA, Newman SA (1994) Morphogenetic differences between fore and hind limb
precartilage mesenchyme: relation to mechanisms of skeletal pattern formation. Dev Biol
162(1):195–208
Dubrulle J, McGrew MJ, Pourquié O (2001) FGF signaling controls somite boundary position and
regulates segmentation clock control of spatiotemporal Hox gene activation. Cell 106(2):
219–232
Duguay D, Foty RA, Steinberg MS (2003) Cadherin-mediated cell adhesion and tissue segregation:
qualitative and quantitative determinants. Dev Biol 253(2):309–323
Elphick C, Meron E, Rinzel J, Spiegel EA (1990) Impulse patterning and relaxational propagation
in excitable media. J Theor Biol 146(2):249–268
Etoc F, Metzger J, Ruzo A, Kirst C, Yoney A, Ozair MZ, Brivanlou AH, Siggia ED (2016) A
balance between secreted inhibitors and edge sensing controls gastruloid self-organization. Dev
Cell 39(3):302–315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2016.09.016
Fehilly CB, Willadsen SM, Tucker EM (1984) Interspeciﬁc chimaerism between sheep and goat.
Nature 307(5952):634–636
Flory PJ (1973) Principles of polymer chemistry. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY
Forgacs G, Newman SA (2005) Biological physics of the developing embryo. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge
Foty RA, Forgacs G, Pﬂeger CM, Steinberg MS (1994) Liquid properties of embryonic tissues:
measurement of interfacial tensions. Phys Rev Lett 72:2298–2301
Frenz DA, Jaikaria NS, Newman SA (1989) The mechanism of precartilage mesenchymal conden-
sation: a major role for interaction of the cell surface with the amino-terminal heparin-binding
domain of ﬁbronectin. Dev Biol 136(1):97–103
Fujimori T, Nakajima A, Shimada N, Sawai S (2019) Tissue self-organization based on collective
cell migration by contact activation of locomotion and chemotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
116(10):4291–4296. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas1815063116
Fukujin F, Nakajima A, Shimada N, Sawai S (2016) Self-organization of chemoattractant waves in
Dictyostelium depends on F-actin and cell-substrate adhesion. J R Soc Interface 13(119). https://
doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2016.0233
Furlong EEM, Levine M (2018) Developmental enhancers and chromosome topology. Science
361(6409):1341–1345. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau0320
Gabius H-J (2009) Animal and human lectins. In: Gabius H-J (ed) The sugar code. Fundamentals of
glycosciences. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, pp 317–328
Gehrke AR, Schneider I, de la Calle-Mustienes E, Tena JJ, Gomez-Marin C, Chandran M,
Nakamura T, Braasch I, Postlethwait JH, Gomez-Skarmeta JL, Shubin NH (2015) Deep
conservation of wrist and digit enhancers in ﬁsh. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112(3):803–808.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1420208112
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
217

Ghosh AK, Chance B, Pye EK (1971) Metabolic coupling and synchronization of NADH
oscillations in yeast cell populations. Arch Biochem Biophys 145(1):319–331. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0003-9861(71)90042-7
Gilbert SF, Opitz JM, Raff RA (1996) Resynthesizing evolutionary and developmental biology.
Dev Biol 173(2):357–372. https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.1996.0032
Giudicelli F, Özbudak EM, Wright GJ, Lewis J (2007) Setting the tempo in development: an
investigation of the zebraﬁsh somite clock mechanism. PLoS Biol 5(6):e150
Glimm T, Bhat R, Newman SA (2014) Modeling the morphodynamic galectin patterning network
of the developing avian limb skeleton. J Theor Biol 346:86–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.
2013.12.004
Glimm T, Bhat R, Newman SA (2020) Multiscale modeling of vertebrate limb development. Wiley
Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 12(4):e1485. https://doi.org/10.1002/wsbm.1485
Goldbeter A (2018) Dissipative structures in biological systems: bistability, oscillations, spatial
patterns and waves. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci 376(2124). https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.
2017.0376
Goldbeter A, Lefever R (1972) Dissipative structures for an allosteric model. Application to
glycolytic oscillations. Biophys J 12(10):1302–1315. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3495(72)
86164-2
Gospodarowicz DJ (1984) Extracellular matrices and the control of cell proliferation and differen-
tiation in vitro. Prog Clin Biol Res 145:103–128
Gospodarowicz D, Neufeld G, Schweigerer L (1986) Molecular and biological characterization of
ﬁbroblast growth factor, an angiogenic factor which also controls the proliferation and differen-
tiation of mesoderm and neuroectoderm derived cells. Cell Differ 19(1):1–17. https://doi.org/10.
1016/0045-6039(86)90021-7
Haag ES, True JR (2018) Developmental system drift. In: de la Rosa LN, Müller G (eds)
Evolutionary developmental biology: a reference guide. Springer, Cham, pp 1–12
Halley JD, Winkler DA (2008) Consistent concepts of self-organization and self-assembly. Com-
plexity 14(2):10–17. https://doi.org/10.1002/cplx.20235
Hamburger V, Hamilton HL (1951) A series of normal stages in the development of the chick
embryo. J Morphol 88:49–92
Hanna J, Carey BW, Jaenisch R (2008) Reprogramming of somatic cell identity. Cold Spring Harb
Symp Quant Biol 73:147–155. https://doi.org/10.1101/sqb.2008.73.025
Hay ED (1991) Cell biology of extracellular matrix, 2nd edn. Plenum Press, New York
Hentschel HG, Glimm T, Glazier JA, Newman SA (2004) Dynamical mechanisms for skeletal
pattern formation in the vertebrate limb. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 271(1549):1713–1722
Hinchliffe JR, Johnson DR (1980) The development of the vertebrate limb. Oxford University
Press, Oxford
Hoffman LM, Carpenter MK (2005) Characterization and culture of human embryonic stem cells.
Nat Biotechnol 23(6):699–708. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt1102
Hubaud A, Regev I, Mahadevan L, Pourquié O (2017) Excitable dynamics and yap-dependent
mechanical cues drive the segmentation clock. Cell 171(3):668–682. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cell.2017.08.043
Istrail S, De-Leon SB, Davidson EH (2007) The regulatory genome and the computer. Dev Biol
310(2):187–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.08.009
Kant I (1790; trans 1966). Critique of judgement. Translated by J H Bernard, Hafner, New York
Kauffman SA (1993) The origins of order: self-organization and selection in evolution. Oxford
University Press, New York
Kiskowski MA, Alber MS, Thomas GL, Glazier JA, Bronstein NB, Pu J, Newman SA (2004)
Interplay between activator-inhibitor coupling and cell-matrix adhesion in a cellular automaton
model for chondrogenic patterning. Dev Biol 271(2):372–387
Kondo S, Asai R (1995) A reaction-diffusion wave on the skin of the marine angelﬁsh
Pomacanthus. Nature 376:765–768
218
S. A. Newman

Kondo S, Miura T (2010) Reaction-diffusion model as a framework for understanding biological
pattern formation. Science 329(5999):1616–1620. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1179047
Krens SFG, Veldhuis JH, Barone V, Capek D, Maitre JL, Brodland GW, Heisenberg CP (2017)
Interstitial ﬂuid osmolarity modulates the action of differential tissue surface tension in progeni-
tor cell segregation during gastrulation. Development 144(10):1798–1806. https://doi.org/10.
1242/dev.144964
Krieg M, Arboleda-Estudillo Y, Puech PH, Kafer J, Graner F, Muller DJ, Heisenberg CP (2008)
Tensile forces govern germ-layer organization in zebraﬁsh. Nat Cell Biol 10(4):429–436.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1705
Levin M (2012) Morphogenetic ﬁelds in embryogenesis, regeneration, and cancer: non-local
control of complex patterning. Biosystems 109(3):243–261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biosystems.2012.04.005
Lewis J (2003) Autoinhibition with transcriptional delay: a simple mechanism for the zebraﬁsh
somitogenesis oscillator. Curr Biol 13(16):1398–1408
Mallo M (2016) Revisiting the involvement of signaling gradients in somitogenesis. FEBS J 283(8):
1430–1437. https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.13622
Manning ML, Foty RA, Steinberg MS, Schoetz EM (2010) Coaction of intercellular adhesion and
cortical tension speciﬁes tissue surface tension. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107(28):
12517–12522. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1003743107
Maroto M, Bone RA, Dale JK (2012) Somitogenesis. Development 139(14):2453–2456. https://
doi.org/10.1242/dev.069310
Masamizu Y, Ohtsuka T, Takashima Y, Nagahara H, Takenaka Y, Yoshikawa K, Okamura H,
Kageyama R (2006) Real-time imaging of the somite segmentation clock: revelation of unstable
oscillators in the individual presomitic mesoderm cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(5):
1313–1318
Massagué J (1987) The TGF-β family of growth and differentiation factors. Cell 49:437–438
Meier S (1979) Development of the chick embryo mesoblast. Formation of the embryonic axis and
establishment of the metameric pattern. Dev Biol 73(1):24–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/0012-
1606(79)90135-0
Meier S (1984) Somite formation and its relationship to metameric patterning of the mesoderm. Cell
Differ 14(4):235–243
Miller PW, Clarke DN, Weis WI, Lowe CJ, Nelson WJ (2013) The evolutionary origin of epithelial
cell-cell adhesion mechanisms. Curr Top Membr 72:267–311. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
12-417027-8.00008-8
Monk NA (2003) Oscillatory expression of Hes1, p53, and NF-kappaB driven by transcriptional
time delays. Curr Biol 13(16):1409–1413
Moss L, Newman SA (2015) The grassblade beyond Newton: the pragmatizing of Kant for
evolutionary-developmental biology. Lebenswelt 7:94–111
Müller GB, Newman SA (1999) Generation, integration, autonomy: three steps in the evolution of
homology. In: Bock GK, Cardew G (eds) Homology (Novartis Foundation symposium 222).
Wiley, Chichester, pp 65–73
Muller P, Rogers KW, Jordan BM, Lee JS, Robson D, Ramanathan S, Schier AF (2012) Differential
diffusivity of nodal and lefty underlies a reaction-diffusion patterning system. Science
336(6082):721–724. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1221920
Nelemans BKA, Schmitz M, Tahir H, Merks RMH, Smit TH (2020) Somite division and new
boundary formation by mechanical strain. iScience 23(4):100976. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.
2020.100976
Newman SA (2006) The developmental-genetic toolkit and the molecular homology-analogy
paradox. Biol Theory 1(1):12–16
Newman SA (2016a) ‘Biogeneric’ developmental processes: drivers of major transitions in animal
evolution. Philos Trans R Soc Lond Ser B Biol Sci 371(1701). https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.
2015.0443
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
219

Newman SA (2016b) Origination, variation, and conservation of animal body plan development.
Rev Cell Biol Mol Med 2(3):130–162
Newman SA (2017) Sex, lies, and genetic engineering: why we must (but won’t) ban human
embryo modiﬁcation. In: Braverman I (ed) Gene editing, law, and the environment: life beyond
the human. Routledge, Abingdon, UK, pp 133–151
Newman SA (2019a) Inherency and homomorphy in the evolution of development. Curr Opin
Genet Dev 57:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2019.05.006
Newman SA (2019b) Inherency of form and function in animal development and evolution. Front
Physiol 10:702. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2019.00702
Newman SA (2020) Cell differentiation: what have we learned in 50 years? J Theor Biol 485:
110031. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2019.110031
Newman SA, Comper WD (1990) ‘Generic’ physical mechanisms of morphogenesis and pattern
formation. Development 110(1):1–18
Newman SA, Frisch HL (1979) Dynamics of skeletal pattern formation in developing chick limb.
Science 205(4407):662–668
Newman SA, Forgacs G, Müller GB (2006) Before programs: the physical origination of multicel-
lular forms. Int J Dev Biol 50(2–3):289–299
Newman SA, Glimm T, Bhat R (2018) The vertebrate limb: an evolving complex of self-organizing
systems. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 137:12–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2018.01.002
Nichols SA, Roberts BW, Richter DJ, Fairclough SR, King N (2012) Origin of metazoan cadherin
diversity and the antiquity of the classical cadherin/beta-catenin complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 109(32):13046–13051. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1120685109
Nicholson DJ (2019) Is the cell really a machine? J Theor Biol 477:108–126. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jtbi.2019.06.002
Niklas KJ, Bondos SE, Dunker AK, Newman SA (2015) Rethinking gene regulatory networks in
light of alternative splicing, intrinsically disordered protein domains, and post-translational
modiﬁcations. Front Cell Dev Biol 3:8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2015.00008
Ninomiya H, David R, Damm EW, Fagotto F, Niessen CM, Winklbauer R (2012) Cadherin-
dependent differential cell adhesion in Xenopus causes cell sorting in vitro but not in the
embryo. J Cell Sci 125(Pt 8):1877–1883. https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.095315
Onimaru K, Marcon L, Musy M, Tanaka M, Sharpe J (2016) The ﬁn-to-limb transition as the
re-organization of a Turing pattern. Nat Commun 7:11582. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms11582
Ouyang Q, Swinney H (1991) Transition from a uniform state to hexagonal and striped Turing
patterns. Nature 352:610–612
Özbudak EM, Lewis J (2008) Notch signalling synchronizes the zebraﬁsh segmentation clock but is
not needed to create somite boundaries. PLoS Genet 4(2):e15
Palmeirim I, Henrique D, Ish-Horowicz D, Pourquié O (1997) Avian hairy gene expression
identiﬁes a molecular clock linked to vertebrate segmentation and somitogenesis. Cell 91(5):
639–648
Peluffo AE (2015) The “genetic program”: behind the genesis of an inﬂuential metaphor. Genetics
200(3):685–696. https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.115.178418
Peter IS, Davidson EH (2015) Genomic control process: development and evolution. Academic
Press is an imprint of Elsevier, London
Pourquié O (2003) The segmentation clock: converting embryonic time into spatial pattern. Science
301:328–330
Pye K, Chance B (1966) Sustained sinusoidal oscillations of reduced pyridine nucleotide in a cell-
free extract of Saccharomyces carlsbergensis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 55(4):888–894. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.55.4.888
Raspopovic J, Marcon L, Russo L, Sharpe J (2014) Modeling digits. Digit patterning is controlled
by a Bmp-Sox9-Wnt Turing network modulated by morphogen gradients. Science 345(6196):
566–570. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1252960
220
S. A. Newman

Ros MA, Lyons GE, Mackem S, Fallon JF (1994) Recombinant limbs as a model to study
homeobox gene regulation during limb development. Dev Biol 166:59–72
Rosado-Olivieri EA, Brivanlou AH (2021) Synthetic by design: exploiting tissue self-organization
to explore early human embryology. Dev Biol 474:16–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2021.
01.004
Sarkar S (1998) Genetics and reductionism, Cambridge studies in philosophy and biology.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Schauer A, Heisenberg CP (2021) Reassembling gastrulation. Dev Biol 474:71–81. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ydbio.2020.12.014
Shahbazi MN, Siggia ED, Zernicka-Goetz M (2019) Self-organization of stem cells into embryos: a
window on early mammalian development. Science 364(6444):948–951. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.aax0164
Sheth R, Marcon L, Bastida MF, Junco M, Quintana L, Dahn R, Kmita M, Sharpe J, Ros MA
(2012) Hox genes regulate digit patterning by controlling the wavelength of a Turing-type
mechanism. Science 338(6113):1476–1480. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1226804
Sick S, Reinker S, Timmer J, Schlake T (2006) WNT and DKK determine hair follicle spacing
through a reaction-diffusion mechanism. Science 314(5804):1447–1450
Steinberg MS (2007) Differential adhesion in morphogenesis: a modern view. Curr Opin Genet Dev
17(4):281–286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2007.05.002
Steinberg MS, Takeichi M (1994) Experimental speciﬁcation of cell sorting, tissue spreading, and
speciﬁc spatial patterning by quantitative differences in cadherin expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 91(1):206–209
Stern CD, Piatkowska AM (2015) Multiple roles of timing in somite formation. Semin Cell Dev
Biol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2015.06.002
Stewart TA, Bhat R, Newman SA (2017) The evolutionary origin of digit patterning. EvoDevo 8:
21. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13227-017-0084-8
Strogatz SH (2003) Sync: the emerging science of spontaneous order, 1st edn. Theia, New York
Taher L, Collette NM, Murugesh D, Maxwell E, Ovcharenko I, Loots GG (2011) Global gene
expression analysis of murine limb development. PLoS One 6(12):e28358. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0028358
Tickle C (1994) Molecular basis of limb development. Biochem Soc Trans 22(3):565–569
True JR, Haag ES (2001) Developmental system drift and ﬂexibility in evolutionary trajectories.
Evol Dev 3(2):109–119
Turing AM (1952) The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 237:37–72
Turocy J, Adashi EY, Egli D (2021) Heritable human genome editing: research progress, ethical
considerations, and hurdles to clinical practice. Cell 184(6):1561–1574. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cell.2021.02.036
Uversky VN, Giuliani A (2021) Networks of networks: an essay on multi-level biological organi-
zation. Front Genet 12:706260. https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2021.706260
Van Speybroeck L, De Waele D, Van de Vijver G (2002) Theories in early embryology: close
connections between epigenesis, preformationism, and self-organization. Ann N Y Acad Sci
981:7–49
Von Neumann J, Burks AW (1966) Theory of self-reproducing automata. University of Illinois
Press, Urbana
Wallmeyer B, Trinschek S, Yigit S, Thiele U, Betz T (2018) Collective cell migration in embryo-
genesis follows the laws of wetting. Biophys J 114(1):213–222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.
2017.11.011
Widom B (1967) Intermolecular forces and the nature of the liquid state: liquids reﬂect in their bulk
properties the attractions and repulsions of their constituent molecules. Science 157(3787):
375–382. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.157.3787.375
Winfree AT (1970) Integrated view of resetting a circadian clock. J Theor Biol 28(3):327–374
8
Self-Organization in Embryonic Development: Myth and Reality
221

Wu Y, Jiang Y, Kaiser AD, Alber M (2011) Self-organization in bacterial swarming: lessons from
myxobacteria. Phys Biol 8(5):055003. https://doi.org/10.1088/1478-3975/8/5/055003
Yang Z, Huck WT, Clarke SM, Tajbakhsh AR, Terentjev EM (2005) Shape-memory nanoparticles
from inherently non-spherical polymer colloids. Nat Mater 4(6):486–490
Yu SR, Burkhardt M, Nowak M, Ries J, Petrasek Z, Scholpp S, Schwille P, Brand M (2009) Fgf8
morphogen gradient forms by a source-sink mechanism with freely diffusing molecules. Nature
461(7263):533–536. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08391
Zeng W, Thomas GL, Newman SA, Glazier JA (2003) A novel mechanism for mesenchymal
condensation during limb chondrogenesis in vitro. In: Capasso V (ed) Mathematical modelling
and computing in biology and medicine, 5th ESMTB conference 2002. Società Editrice
Esculapio, Bologna, Italy, pp 80–86
Zhang YT, Alber MS, Newman SA (2013) Mathematical modeling of vertebrate limb development.
Math Biosci 243(1):1–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mbs.2012.11.003
Zhu J, Zhang YT, Alber MS, Newman SA (2010) Bare bones pattern formation: a core regulatory
network in varying geometries reproduces major features of vertebrate limb development and
evolution. PLoS One 5(5):e10892. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0010892
Zwilling E (1964) Development of fragmented and of dissociated limb bud mesoderm. Dev Biol 89:
20–37
222
S. A. Newman

The Morphoprocess and the Diversity
of Evolutionary Mechanisms of Metastable
Structures
9
Andrei I. Granovitch
Abstract
This study is a long-overdue attempt to tackle the complexity of evolutionary
problems by mutually complementary conceptual approaches rather than from
the standpoint of a single dominating evolutionary hypothesis. As a ﬁrst step, I
identify the major problems preventing a clear understanding of evolutionary
mechanisms. They are associated with three “uncertainties” accompanying the
analysis of evolutionary phenomena: (1) Terminological ambiguity, bordering on
a logical inconsistency, in the construction of evolutionary concepts, (2) The
uncertainty of direct observation, associated with the difﬁculties of documenting
the evolutionary process and (3) The uncertainty of applicability, arising from the
complex multilevel nature of the living matter. Then I outline a fairly substantial
approach to the consideration of living systems. The analysis of the uncertainty of
applicability suggests that the most productive approach is to apply the notion of
an “evolving system” to systems of the organismic rank, understood as an object–
process or a morphoprocess. Such systems (highly integrated metastable
structures–processes) are dissipative structures with a cyclic character of imple-
mentation. Once we have identiﬁed the evolving system, we can determine three
different conceptual models of transformism of these structures. Importantly, the
delimitation is based on a unique set of their characters rather than an afﬁliation
with a particular historic scientiﬁc tradition. These models of microevolution are
indirect adaptogenesis, direct adaptogenesis and constructional transformism.
The logic of each of them has often been used in various evolutionary concepts
in the course of the last two centuries. Finally, I present a general outlook on the
diversity of mechanisms of transformism. They fall into two groups: combinatory
A. I. Granovitch (*)
Department of Invertebrate Zoology, St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russia
e-mail: a.granovich@spbu.ru
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_9
223

mechanisms
(transformation
through
combinations)
and
transformational
mechanisms as such (transformation without combination). It is the transforma-
tional mechanisms that are encompassed by the three conceptual models men-
tioned above. It is becoming evident that the evolutionary process is based on
mechanisms described by different models. A time has come for a careful
examination of various transformistic possibilities and the identiﬁcation
of prevailing and accessory mechanisms. Different groups of organisms/types
of morphoprocesses may be characterized by different leading mechanisms of
transformism, which may belong to both “combinational” and “transformational”
phenomena. We have to consider a broad kit of potential evolutionary tools and
try to comprehend evolutionary phenomena at a new level of conceptual
synthesis.
Keywords
Evolutionary concepts · Morphoprocess · Natural selection · Adaptogenesis ·
Self-organization · Models of microevolution
9.1
Introduction
Pluralism has been making a comeback to evolutionary discussions in the last
decades. The single-mindedness of the Modern Synthesis is giving way to the
contemplation of the diversity of potential mechanisms of the evolutionary process.
One of the reasons is the failure of the Modern Synthesis, with its supremacy of
population genetics, to explain many important features of evolution (Lewontin
1974; Gilbert et al. 1996). Another is the pressure of the enormous bulk of informa-
tion that has recently been obtained in ﬁve major directions. Our knowledge of
(1) the molecular framework of the living cell has increased dramatically. It is
becoming clear that the processes of self-regulation and regular self-assembly of
complex intracellular structures prevail over stochastic mechanisms of functioning
and morphogenesis. We have looked inside the cell and found not The Blind
Watchmaker (Dawkins 1996) “but [. . .] a genetic engineer [. . .], and she has an
impressive toolbox full of sophisticated molecular devices for reorganizing DNA
molecules” (Shapiro 1995). Self-organization in the cell is expressed not only in
reparation and replication of DNA. This principle pervades the entire cell, from
molecules and their complexes to organoids (Misteli 2001; Denton et al. 2003;
Kurakin 2005; Carazo-Salas and Nurse 2006; Cortès et al. 2006; Glick 2007; Misteli
2007; Karsenti 2008; Loose et al. 2008; Johnson and Lam 2010 and others).
Our understanding of (2) phenotypic plasticity of multicellular body and
transgeneration inheritance (West-Eberhard 2003; Pigliucci 2010; Jablonka and
Lamb 2010; Danchin et al. 2011; Kull 2014; Laland et al. 2014) has also expanded.
The new information calls for a revision of the relationships between the
mechanisms of phenotypic plasticity and those of genotypic adaptations and,
224
A. I. Granovitch

potentially, for a change of the evolutionary paradigm to an “extended evolutionary
synthesis”.
A new outlook emerges from the data on (3) a routine exchange of genetic
information between organisms from different taxonomic groups, the diversity of
non-canonical means of horizontal transfer of hereditary material in different
organisms and non-genetic vertical inheritance within a strain of organisms
(Ochman et al. 2000; Gladyshev et al. 2008; Gladyshev and Arkhipova 2010;
Boschetti et al. 2011; Haegeman et al. 2011; Koonin 2011; Husnik et al. 2013). At
the same time, we are beginning to realize the importance and depth of (4) symbiotic
relationships in the functioning of biological systems (Kooijman et al. 2003; Gilbert
et al. 2015). Finally, (5) paleontological description of the biota’s historical devel-
opment is now relying on much more complete data (Benton and Pearson 2001;
Smith and Ortega-Hernández 2014; Aria et al. 2015; Darroch et al. 2018; Kaufman
2018).
These advances pave the way for a rethink of the relative importance of evolu-
tionary mechanisms: which of them are master mechanisms and which play a
subordinate role. Approaches expanding the orthodox Modern Synthesis and laying
the ground for a new evolutionary synthesis have already been developed (Kirschner
and Gerhart 2010; Müller 2010; Newman 2010; Pigliucci 2010; Jablonka and Lamb
2010; Koonin 2011). Let us not forget that while the Modern Synthesis claimed to
possess the gospel-truth about evolution, several dozen comprehensive concepts
suggested in the last two hundred years have interpreted the evolutionary process
from other vantage points (see for review, Berg 1969; Bowler 1975; Lyubishchev
1982; Gould 2002; Vorontsov 2004; Nazarov 2005; Esposito 2017; Levit and
Hoßfeld 2017; Loison and Herring 2017; Kutschera 2017; Popov 2018). These
concepts, often branded as “dead ends” or considered as a marginal part of the
scientiﬁc knowledge, might well turn out, once the rethink has been achieved, to be
its solid ground, while their diversity may emphasize the plurality of mechanisms
ensuring the general process of evolution of the organic world.
In such a situation, an overview of various concepts and possibly their classiﬁca-
tion by the key features is long overdue. The need for such an overview is associated
not with a historical ordering of the existing knowledge but, crucially, with the
development of a heuristic approach to the analysis of the diversity of evolutionary
mechanisms. It was exactly such a prudent analysis of the diversity that was
advocated by A.A. Lyubishchev in his paper On the classiﬁcation of evolutionary
theories (Lyubishchev 1982).
In this work I will give an example of a possible approach to the classiﬁcation of
conceptual approaches to the explanation of evolutionary phenomena. Its substantial
part consists of three successive steps or sections. First I will consider the major
difﬁculties arising during interpretation of evolutionary phenomena (Sect. 9.2). Then
I will outline a fairly substantial approach to the consideration of living systems
(Sect. 9.3), which I will then apply in the third section (Sect. 9.4) dealing with key
concepts modelling the mechanisms of the evolutionary process (Three principal
models of the evolutionary process of highly integrated metastable structures). In
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
225

Conclusion, I will compare the available models of evolution by their key
characteristics.
9.2
Major Problems in Understanding Evolutionary
Mechanisms
Two centuries have elapsed since the ﬁrst holistic evolutionary concept was
suggested (Lamarck 1955) but the question about major mechanisms of the evolu-
tion of the organic world remains debatable. The reason is associated with three
“uncertainties” accompanying the analysis of evolutionary phenomena. To begin
with, (1) the subject matter of the notion “evolution” is not formalized strictly
enough. This entails a terminological ambiguity and even a logical inconsistency
in the construction of evolutionary concepts. Besides, the evolutionary process is
difﬁcult to document experimentally, which may be referred to as (2) an uncertainty
of direct observation. Finally, a complex multilevel nature of the living matter,
represented by a hierarchical series of mutually involved systems of various levels
of organization, complicates the choice of the key system, with which the
mechanisms of evolutionary process are associated. The latter uncertainty may be
referred to as (3) the uncertainty of applicability. It is easy to see that the ﬁrst
uncertainty refers predominantly to epistemological problems while the second and
the third uncertainties are mostly ontological.
I will deal with these three uncertainties one by one in the three subsequent
sections.
9.2.1
Epistemological Problem of the Ambiguity of the Notion
of Evolution and the Associated Problem of Uncertainty
of the Term “Evolution”
The ubiquity of the term “evolution” is in stark contrast with the singularity of
attempts at its clear deﬁnition. The most profound analysis of the contextual basis of
this term can be found in the works of P.J. Bowler and A.A. Lyubishchev (Bowler
1975; Lyubishchev 1982). The former study considered the changes of the meaning
of the term “evolution” in historical retrospective, from the denotation of embryo-
logical preformism to the denotation of changes of the living systems (transmutation
of species) (Ch. Lyell, Principles of geology 1832, cited in Bowler 1975) and even
nature in general (Spencer 1864). The latter study analysed various semantic
meanings of the term “evolution” (Lyubishchev 1982) using the principle of
contrapositions.
The most frequent meaning of the term “evolution” is the possibility of transfor-
mation of some species into others as opposed to the immutability of species. For a
terminological speciﬁcation of this semantic context—changes of species in time—
the term “transformism” was suggested (Berg 1969). Other meanings of the term
“evolution” (evolution as preformation; evolution as gradual development;
226
A. I. Granovitch

evolution as ascent, progress; evolution as irrevocable development (Lyubishchev
1982) as well as evolution as the emergence of the new as opposed to combinations)
are very important for the deﬁnition of the key features of any hypothesis
characterizing the evolution of the organic world. Their analysis calls for a special
study. Here let us take note that the semantic ambiguity of this term should
necessarily be taken into account in studies of evolutionary phenomena.
The choice of parameters is paramount for the comparison of various evolution-
ary hypotheses by their key characters. Any hypothesis describing the mechanism of
evolution answers, directly or by implication, several major questions. Following
A.A. Lyubishchev (1982), I will present these questions as contrapositions. Some of
them were suggested by Lyubishchev himself in his paper On the classiﬁcation of
evolutionary theories (Lyubishchev 1982). Each of the contrapositions presents an
evolutionary hypothesis in the continuum of the key semantic character.
A. An
assessment
of
the
degree
of
ﬁnality
of
evolution
in
general:
TELEOGENESIS (the development of the biota moves towards a certain result,
the movement is directed, conforming to laws) VS ATELEOGENESIS (evolu-
tion is not directed, there is no movement towards any goal).
B. An assessment of the formation of correspondence between organisms and their
environment: ADAPTOGENESIS (the process of adaptation to the environment
[evolutionary adaptation] is directly associated with the impact of evolutionary
mechanisms) VS ANADAPTOGENESIS (adaptation of an organism is a side
effect of evolution; it is secondary and is not directly associated with the impact
of evolutionary mechanisms).
C. An assessment of predominance of external or internal factors in evolution:
ECTOGENESIS (the main driving forces of evolution are entirely associated
with the effect of the environment, which forms corresponding evolutionary
changes; functionalism sensu Kellogg 1907; Gould 2002) VS AUTOGENESIS
(the entire morphogenetic potential is associated with the structural features of
organisms; the environment merely triggers internal evolutionary processes of
self-assembly and eliminates the organisms that fail to adapt; structuralism sensu
Kellogg 1907; Gould 2002).
D. The assessment of the degree to which evolutionary mechanisms and the pro-
cesses of formation of taxa are gradual: GRADUALISM (slow and gradual
modiﬁcations of species; a relative uniformity of the rate of evolution, including
the cases of origin of new large taxonomic groups) VS PUNCTUALISM
(an abrupt alternation of periods of evolutionary stasis and evolutionary changes;
the possibility of fast formation of organisms with new complexes of characters,
including those of a high taxonomic rank).
E. The assessment of the uniqueness and the directionality of evolutionary changes:
IRREVERSIBILITY (impossibility to reverse evolution following from Dollo’s
law (Louis 1893) as well as the uniqueness of the evolutionary emergence of
species and taxa of a higher rank) VS REVERSIBILITY and REPEATABILITY
(possibility of reversal to the ancestral state in the process of evolution; the
possibility of multiple formations of species and higher taxa).
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
227

F. The assessment of the integrity of evolutionary changes: MEROGENESIS
(a transforming organism is a set of useful and harmful characters; some
characters may change while others may remain intact) VS HOLOGENESIS
(the organism is a holistic system; no character can transform by itself; a
transformation is always a reconstruction of the entire system).
It goes without saying that this list is not exhaustive and may be extended by
additional criteria for comparison. However, even those given above make it possi-
ble to compare evolutionary concepts on the basis of their key features rather than
their afﬁliation with vaguely deﬁned directions such as Darwinism or Lamarckism.
On closer examination, it turns out that these directions combine several conceptual
and logical approaches and are united under one and the same name merely owing to
inertia and tradition (see, e.g., Delisle 2017).
9.2.2
The Problem of Uncertainty of Direct Observation
The prolonged nature of the evolutionary process means that it is difﬁcult to study
experimentally. Our knowledge about its course is mainly derived from the fossil
record. Paleontological data, being the only source of information about the direction
and features of the macroevolutionary process, are insufﬁcient for any reliable
conclusions about potential microevolutionary mechanisms. Attempting an interpre-
tation of the available temporal series of non-ontological data, one encounters a
problem of distinguishing evolutionary events as such in the series of dynamic
regulatory populational phenomena (Altukhov 2003).
Numerous post hoc conclusions about the mechanisms of microevolution, based
on the assessment of the frequencies of alleles/haplotypes in populational groups of
the same species or in the distribution of populations of closely related species,
actually allow different interpretations of the formation of these changes. Thus, they
are also ill-suited for making sound conclusions about the realization of this or that
microevolutionary mechanism.
Studies on “experimental evolution” of prokaryotes are probably the closest we
can get to direct experimental observation of evolutionary processes (see for review
Lenski (2017a, b)). These studies, based on whole-genome sequencing of the same-
strain microorganisms separated by thousands of generations, made it possible to
identify the key features of the mutation process and to establish the connection
between the changes in the genome and the adaptive abilities of the strain. However,
even for this remarkable evidence, the question about the prevailing mechanisms of
microevolution largely remains open to interpretation.
9.2.3
The Problem of Uncertainty of Applicability
The analysis of evolutionary phenomena, similar to any other study of biological
objects, requires a clear deﬁnition of the biological systems in question. The
228
A. I. Granovitch

structure of living matter is hierarchical. Studies of various levels of its organization
in the context of transformism broadly operate such notions as molecular evolution,
the evolution of genomes and other functional systems of organisms, cell evolution,
the evolution of tissues and organs of multicellular organisms, the evolution of
behaviour, the evolution of populations, communities, etc. All these viewpoints
(the angles from which evolution is considered) undoubtedly provide important
data characterizing various features of the evolutionary process. All of them are a
reﬂection of the general evolutionary change of the organic world at some level of
organization. However, if we are to understand the driving mechanisms of the
evolutionary process, we have to identify the level of the living matter organization
which makes the decisive contribution into the formation of the evolutionary
trajectory. On the other hand, we also have to identify the systems at the levels of
which changes are largely a reﬂection of the operation of the main evolutionary
mechanisms.
In the hierarchy of systems, the best integrated and the most individualized
(holistic) ones are unitary organisms, which exhibit a high physiological autonomy
and complex behaviour as well as a high degree of morphogenetic closedness
(Beklemishev 1970; McShea 2001; Levit and Scholz 2002; Granovitch et al. 2010).1
The organismic level of individuality may be expressed both at the poly- and at
the mono-cellular level. This is the reason why there are two “peaks” of the degree of
integration of living systems, characterized by a very different complexity of
organization. One of the peaks corresponds to cellular organisms (protists and
prokaryotes), while the other corresponds to the meta-cellular level of organization
and, correspondingly, to multicellular or, rather, meta-cellular organisms (Metazoa,
Metaphyta) (Beklemishev 1970; Granovitch et al. 2010).
Formation and existence of the systems that constitute the elements of a multicel-
lular organism (organelles and their systems, cells, organs, and their systems) are
mostly regulated by the organism itself (a highly integrated whole regulates its
parts). Systems of the supraorganismic level such as populations and communities
are, in their turn, distributive (Serzhantov 1972). Their elements (organisms) have a
much greater systemic integrity than the system on the whole. Both biocenoses and
populations are characterized by a low degree of physiological and morphogenetic
closedness (Beklemishev 1970).
This means that the most signiﬁcant evolutionary mechanisms should be looked
for at the level of systems of the organismic rank: cells-organisms and multicellular
organisms. However, even this understanding does not fully clarify the issue of the
key objects of the evolutionary process because one needs to account for other
essential features of the living matter such as its dynamic nature and temporal
changes of the system’s characteristics. For organisms, these features are represented
by ontogenetic aspects of their existence. In addition, the life of an organism is
1Not to be confused with a more abstract term “closure” (Mossio and Bich 2017; Kauffman 2019)
denoting mutual dependence of ﬂows of energy and matter (causal regime according to the authors)
ensuring the existence of biological structures far from thermodynamic equilibrium.
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
229

conﬁned to a narrow time frame, while the issues of transformism can only be solved
if we consider time frames comparable with a sequence of a series of generations
(see Sect. 9.2.1): the required systems should be deﬁned transgenerationally (see
Mossio and Bich 2017). All these features of the chosen systems should be taken into
account when constructing models of the evolutionary process.
In order to clarify the features of the systems with which evolutionary changes are
associated most directly, let us consider a certain outlook on the living systems of the
organismic rank. This outlook, which has a long and venerable history, is also
promising for the solution of the current problems.
9.3
Conceptualization of the Morphoprocess
The dynamic character of organization of living systems of the organismic rank was
understood at the earliest stages of the development of comparative anatomy.
Georges Cuvier made an exhaustive characterization of stability of form due to the
dynamic nature of its components when he wrote:
[...] the essence of life [...] consists in the ability that certain corporeal combinations have of
enduring for a time and in a deﬁnite form, incessantly attracting into their composition a part
of environmental substances and rendering to the elements portions of their own substance.
(Cuvier 1817, 12–13).
V. N. Beklemishev developed this view on the organism and formalized it in the
concept of an “object-process” or an “organic morphoprocess” (see Beklemishev
1994; Levit and Scholz 2002; Granovitch et al. 2010; Granovitch 2021). This
concept is rooted in the idea that an organism is simultaneously an object and a
process (a morphoprocess)—a form enduring in a metabolic ﬂow. The dynamics of
the system’s components ensures relatively stable maintenance of its speciﬁc
features (Beklemishev 1994). However, the form of an organism (as an epiphenom-
enon of the processes ensuring its existence) is not constant. It undergoes changes in
the process of ontogenesis. Thus, the morphoprocess implies an inherent change of
the form, which reﬂects dynamic changes in the functional characters of an object
(an individual) in the course of its ontogenesis.
In the late twentieth century, the ideas about organisms as objects–processes
found unexpected support in studies of physical and chemical properties of matter.
Open systems, which absorb and give up matter and energy into the environment,
may exist far from the point of energy equilibrium (that is, the maximum entropy
point) for a long time. Under these non-equilibrium conditions the so-called dissipa-
tive structures are formed. These are well-ordered complexes, whose dynamic
morphofunctional integrity and stability are ensured by their passage through the
system of energy ﬂow (Prigogine 1978; Cramer and Prigogine 1993). The concept of
dissipative structures describes perfectly the behaviour of certain chemical reactions
and physical processes and is also applicable to biological objects and probably even
to social phenomena (Artigiani 1987; Cramer and Prigogine 1993; Karsenti 2008).
230
A. I. Granovitch

In fact, it is a universal characteristic of behaviour of non-linear open systems under
non-equilibrium conditions. At the same time, the formation of order and a regular
dynamics of such systems–processes emphatically pose the question about the laws
and regularities of self-assembly and self-organization of the living systems (John-
son and Lam 2010; de Paoli et al. 2017; Simunovic and Brivanlou 2017; Werner
et al. 2017; Bizzarri et al. 2018; Sazer and Schiessel 2018).
The term “metastable pattern”, broadly applied to physical and chemical
systems–processes, denotes the phenomenon when a system, situated in a certain
area of the phase space, may undergo an abrupt transition into another area following
a change of the external conditions (Kivelson and Reiss 1999; Alexandrov and
Nizovtseva 2014). This pattern is also used to describe the properties of “biological”
molecules, e.g., the molecular dynamics of DNA oligomers (Horenko et al. 2008), as
well as the organization of chromosomes (Sazer and Schiessel 2018), the organiza-
tion of cellular systems into tissue constructions (Jakab et al. 2004) and molecular
dynamics of cellular processes (“metastable network” processing) (Kurakin 2005,
2007). In general, a more exact term for dissipative structures existing stably far from
the maximum entropy point is “metastable processes” (Johnson and Lam 2010). This
term emphasizes both their dynamic exchange (absorption/expulsion) of elements
with the environment (process) and their ability to maintain form under certain
conditions and to shift to an entirely different form of the process under other
conditions (metastable).
The application of the term “metastable process” to complex living systems
highlights the fact that such dissipative structures are not structures sensu stricto.
They are a process, that is, a form enduring in the ﬂow of matter and energy
exchange with the surrounding world (Johnson and Lam 2010). To note, the term
“metastable process” fully conforms to the deﬁnition of the morphoprocess given by
Beklemishev (1994) when applied to systems of the organismic rank. At the same
time, it has a broader scope and may be extended to living systems of any level of
organization such as enzymatic reactions, glycolytic cycle, formation of multicellu-
lar aggregates in Dictyostelium discoideum and self-organization in insect
populations (Prigogine and Stengers 1984) as well as to complex non-living systems
such as dynamic and stable atmospheric phenomena (Johnson and Lam 2010).
Bearing
in
mind
this
terminological
difference,
I
will
apply
the
term
“morphoprocess” only to organisms.
Developing the ideas about the morphoprocess in an earlier study, we have
pointed out the need to specify this term in accordance with the ontogenetic features
of organisms and the scheme of the life cycle (Granovitch et al. 2010; Granovitch
2021). As a result, we gave several deﬁnitions reﬂecting various aspects of the
morphoprocess (Fig. 9.1).
Instant morphoprocess (Fig. 9.1, IM) is an organism in a given time moment.
This notion emphasizes the mode of existence of a dynamic form; a living organism
exists only in the present; an epiphenomenon of its existence in a vanishing lapse of
time is an “instant form”. This notion illustrates the uniqueness of the form reﬂecting
the interaction of structural elements and the ﬂows of energy and information
(Granovitch et al. 2010; Granovitch 2021).
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
231

Partial morphoprocess (Fig. 9.1, PM), the “ﬁrst derivative” of the instant
morphoprocess, is the existence of an organism enduring from its origin (the
merging of gametes or cell division) to its death or the next division. A partial
morphoprocess is the entire sequence of morphofunctional changes of an organism
throughout its lifetime, ending with the disintegration of the system due to its death
or the division of the cell-organism. Morphofunctional characteristics of a partial
morphoprocess are not constant. They are dynamically stable at certain stages
(propagation of the form) and change in a regular manner at other stages (Granovitch
et al. 2010; Granovitch 2021).
Compound partial morphoprocess (Fig. 9.1, CPM) is a sequence of several
different partial morphoprocesses in case of a complex life cycle (Granovitch et al.
2010; Granovitch 2021) such as the sequence of medusoid and polypoid generations
in Cnidaria, the alternation of parthenogenetic and amphimictic forms in Aphididae,
Cynipoidea
and
Rotifera
Monogononta,
the
alternation
of
generations
in
Trematoda, etc.
General morphoprocess (Fig. 9.1, GM), the “second derivative” of the instant
morphoprocess, is a rhythmic repetition of partial morphoprocess/compound partial
morphoprocess at a sufﬁciently large time scale. General morphoprocess is
characterized by a dynamic stability of the form, as is partial morphoprocess, but,
IM
IM
IM
IM
IM
IM
PMD
PMD
PMM
PMM
CPMD
CPMD
GM
GM
GM
A
C
B
Fig. 9.1 A scheme of the structure of General Morphoprocesses (GM) with arbitrary assessments
of Instant Morphoprocesses (IM), Partial Morphoprocesses (PM) and Compound Partial
Morphoprocesses (CPM). Partial morphoprocesses: (a) Of organisms with direct development
(PMD); (b) Of organisms with metamorphosis in the development (PMM); (c) Of organisms with
direct development and a complex life cycle involving two different generations (CPMD)
232
A. I. Granovitch

in contrast to the partial and the compound partial morphoprocess, it is also
characterized by repeatability (reproducibility, cyclic nature) in a series of ancestor–
progeny generations. A cycle of general morphoprocess may consist of a partial
(simple) morphoprocess or a regular sequence of two or several partial
morphoprocesses (a compound partial morphoprocess) (Granovitch et al. 2010;
Granovitch 2021).
In the conceptual ﬁeld under consideration a partial morphoprocess is an integral
of instant morphoprocesses. It is characterized by considerable temporal changes of
its morphofunctional characteristics even in the case of the direct development of the
organism (Fig. 9.1, PMD). Using a multicellular organism as an example, we can
describe the succession of these types of changes of a partial morphoprocess. First
come changes associated with the dynamics of embryonic and postembryonic
development. They are followed by changes associated with the formation of
propagative elements (formation of reproductive structures). After that, “necrotic”
changes, associated with the organism’s senescence, set in. A partial morphoprocess
often consists of two or several “stable” morphofunctional states connected by fast
transitions (metastability of a partial morphoprocess). A clear illustration is formed
with successive stages of the larva and the imago. The most dramatic reconstructions
of a morphoprocess—those that involve fast and vast changes—are called metamor-
phosis (Fig. 9.1, PMM). Vivid examples of such phase transitions of the partial
morphoprocess may be found among annelids, molluscs, arthropods, cestodes,
acanthocephalans, etc.
General morphoprocess (Fig. 9.1, GM) is a rhythmic repetition of the partial
morphoprocess in a series of generations. This means that the characteristics of the
partial morphoprocess set the rhythmic basis of the general morphoprocess.
The typology of morphoprocesses is such that these systems can usually be
considered within similar groups called species (to be more precise, species
morphoprocesses). Organisms with amphimictic reproduction are characterized by
an incomplete morphogenetic closedness (Beklemishev 1970) (secludedness sensu
Levit and Scholz 2002) in relation to each other within these groups. In contrast,
species morphoprocesses of agamic species are fully characterized by a morphoge-
netic closedness. Such species exist as sets of parallel clonally reproducing ancestor–
progeny lines. At the same time, however, these morphoprocesses, similarly to those
of amphimictic species, are typologically separated from those of other species.
Intraspeciﬁc variability of the morphoprocesses is set by the plasticity of the
morphoprocess and by the multiple genetic variants of species morphoprocess
(genetic heterogeneity). Despite its intraspeciﬁc variability, a group of species partial
morphoprocesses is characterized by a stable manifestation of a complex of the
species characters. In this way, modality—the most stably reproducing complex of
characters of the partial morphoprocess of a species—manifests itself. Thus, general
morphoprocesses of species, as series of partial morphoprocesses constituting them,
rhythmically reproduce the modal characters of a given species.
The above conceptual scheme allows a more concrete discussion of evolutionary
phenomena because, overcoming the “uncertainty of applicability” (see above, Sect.
9.3), it points to the category of living systems promising for the evolutionary
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
233

analysis. It becomes clear that the object of evolution is a concrete general
morphoprocess, in other words, the ancestor–progeny line, considered as an object–
process. From this viewpoint, an evolutionary phenomenon is a stable modiﬁcation
of a general morphoprocess in the process of its cyclic realization.
Having identiﬁed a potential evolving system and having deﬁned an elementary
evolutionary phenomenon, we should turn to mechanisms ensuring the modiﬁcation
of the general morphoprocesses, in other words, the mechanisms of evolutionary
changes. It is clear that they should operate at the level of the partial/compound
partial morphoprocess. There are many diverse ideas on this topic, and the leading
role may be attributed to different mechanisms depending on the preferred scheme of
the evolutionary process. Nevertheless, all the schemes may be boiled down to three
conceptual models of microevolution. They will be discussed in the next section.
9.4
Three Conceptual Models of Microevolution of Highly
Integrated Metastable Structures–Processes
9.4.1
The Model of Indirect Adaptogenesis (Granovitch 2018, 2021)
Indirect adaptogenesis is currently the most popular model within the framework of
transformistic interpretations of evolution. It includes selection-based notions and
postulates natural selection as the main evolutionary force. Its correspondence to
empirical facts is frequently taken for granted, and other models are ignored. Indirect
adaptogenesis is based on the assumption that information about changes in the
environment is reﬂected in the general morphoprocess not through a speciﬁc direct
impact but through a generalized “signal” of the magnitude corresponding to the
degree of reproduction of the partial morphoprocess. At the same time, the external
signal causing the transformation does not result in adequate changes of the partial
morphoprocess transferred to the general morphoprocess but regulates the arrange-
ment of partial morphoprocesses in the population. This, rather than anything else,
consistently results in the change of the modality of morphofunctional characteristics
of the general morphoprocesses of a given population. Hence, the name of the
model—indirect adaptogenesis or indirect impact of the environment on the modal-
ity of the general morphoprocess. The model in general is logically based on
tychogenetic and selectogenetic ideas. It assumes that the mechanism of evolution-
ary change is selectogenesis (selectogenesis, term—Berg 1922, cit. ex (Berg 1969;
Lyubishchev 1982)), from the Latin selectio—choice, selection), that is, a differen-
tial contribution of partial morphoprocesses into the modality of the totality of
general ones. The material making the selection possible is, it would seem, a random
distribution of minute hereditary deviations of the species morphoprocess
(tychogenesis). Tychogenesis (term—Osborn (1929); from the Greek týche—
chance) assumes that small hereditary deviations are the basis of further evolutionary
changes. The key aspect of the tychogenetic approach is the assumption that initial
hereditary deviations are random, that is, (a) variation, accumulation of small
234
A. I. Granovitch

mutations is unlimited and non-directional and (b) the primary act of variation is
independent of the need for it and the character of the need for it.
The acknowledgement of tangible differences in the effectiveness of reproduction
of the carriers of such deviations introduces into play the action of the environment
(ectogenesis). Its effect on the morphoprocess, however, is not direct but mediated
by selection. On the one hand, it is postulated that organisms are different in respect
of their reproductive characters and that these differences are random, independent
of the environment (whose impact may only be reﬂected in a non-speciﬁc increase of
the frequency of deviations). On the other hand, it is postulated that the input of
individuals into the next generations is, correspondingly, different. These two
postulates are crucial for the choice of the major mechanism of transformation
within the model of indirect adaptogenesis—it is the selection of “the ﬁttest”, or
natural selection.
In general, indirect adaptogenesis is a change of the modality of the general
morphoprocess without a corresponding change of the partial morphoprocess. The
change of the modality is based on the choice of the totality of partial
morphoprocesses available in the variation set of a population. Transformism is
modelled as ectogenesis meaning that the environment is its initiating and directing
force. The model is a variant of adaptogenesis since its mechanism is associated with
the multiplication of the most successful partial morphoprocesses in the general
morphoprocess and the maintenance of a “correspondence” between the modality of
the general morphoprocess and the environment.
Consistently applying the model of indirect adaptogenesis, one has to assume that
evolution is gradual and divergent, that the evolutionary process is undirected and
that every act of speciation is unique, creating a new species, which is unique
genetically, ecologically and physiologically. The stochasticity of the model’s
mechanisms betrays its idiographic character: each transformation phenomenon is
the result of a unique combination of the impact of factors and the work of essentially
stochastic mechanisms of tychogenesis and selectogenesis. This means that the
evolutionary process, in general, is also thought of as undirected—a superimposing
succession of unique events. The only system in which the mechanisms of indirect
adaptogenesis may operate is the totality of partial morphoprocesses. Hence, the
assumption that the population is the smallest unit of evolutionary transformations
and the promotion of the so-called populational thinking.
9.4.2
The Model of Direct Adaptogenesis (Granovitch 2018, 2021)
The model of direct adaptogenesis presents other potential mechanisms of the
transformation of the morphoprocess than those described in Sect. 9.4.1. It is
based on the assumption that changes conforming to the external impact, which
occur during the implementation of a partial morphoprocess, can be imparted to the
general morphoprocess. Changes in the environment result in corresponding ﬁne-
tunings of the implementation of a partial morphoprocess, which are speciﬁcally
(that is, in conformance with the impact of the environment and in accordance with
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
235

the internal systemic organization of the object) reﬂected in the morphoprocess. It
was this directed speciﬁc impact (as distinguished from the indirect input of differing
individuals into the next generation or, in other words, of partial morphoprocesses
into general ones, see Sect. 9.3) that gave the model of direct adaptogenesis its name.
This logical scheme is characteristic of all the hypotheses implying the mechanism
of inheritance of characters acquired by the organism during its lifetime. Direct
adaptogenesis is the conceptual basis of various groups of “Lamarckian” evolution-
ary theories (see for review, Gould 2002; Vorontsov 2004; Nazarov 2005; Bowler
2017; Esposito 2017; Loison and Herring 2017).
In the light of this model, transformism is a constant modiﬁcation of the partial
morphoprocess, ongoing under the inﬂuence of the changing external conditions
and accumulated, in the series of its cyclic implementation, in the general
morphoprocess. Information about the changes in the environment is imparted to
the general morphoprocess in a direct manner rather than as a generalized signal of
the degree of reproduction. If so, it is the partial morphoprocess (not the population,
which is the combination thereof!) that is the key object of potential evolutionary
changes.
In the light of modern knowledge, the mechanisms of direct adaptogenesis seem
to be quite diverse. They are united by one feature: a possible “trans-generational”
transition of adaptive modiﬁcation responses of the organism/partial morphoprocess.
In other words, these responses can be reproduced in successive partial
morphoprocesses. These are mechanisms of adaptive long-term modiﬁcations with
subsequent genetic assimilation (Schmalhausen 1982; West-Eberhard 2003; Levis
and Pfennig 2016; Levis et al. 2017), paramutation phenomena associated with
epigenetic regulation of an allele under the inﬂuence of another allele (Chandler
2010; Suter and Martin 2010; Hollick 2017), various other instances of epigenetic
and structural inheritance (Jablonka and Lamb 2010; Goldberg et al. 2007; Danchin
et al. 2011; Rissman and Adli 2014; Tikhodeyev 2018), phenomena associated with
the canalization of development and the genetic basis of phenotypic plasticity
(Kirschner and Gerhart 2010; Newman 2010; Pigliucci 2010), mechanisms deter-
mining the resistance of bacteria to phages based on CRISPR-CAS system (Koonin
and Wolf 2009; Deveau et al. 2010; Horvath and Barrangou 2010; Chylinski et al.
2014). An important contribution to our understanding of the potential importance of
mechanisms of direct adaptogenesis is an immense bulk of data describing
mechanisms of cell reparation and mechanisms of induced mutagenesis including
site-speciﬁc mutagenesis under the impact of speciﬁc factors (Ponder et al. 2005;
Galhardo et al. 2007; Lynch 2010) and ideas about structural limitations and
dynamic nature of the genome, including those associated with environmental
factors (Capy et al. 2000; Shapiro 2009, 2016; Koonin and Wolf 2010; Laos et al.
2014).
An important aspect of the model of direct adaptogenesis is its ectogenetic nature.
It assumes the possibility of transformation under the impact of external factors, that
is, ectogenesis. If we speak about understanding the course of evolution in general,
the model is also idiographic: each act of transformation is considered unique, being
236
A. I. Granovitch

determined by the impact of a unique combination of environmental conditions. In
this regard, the model lacks the prerequisites for understanding evolution as a vector
process with a regular character.2
9.4.3
The Model of Constructional Transformism (Granovitch 2018,
2021), syn. Orthogenesis (Term—Haacke 1893, cit. ex. Popov
2018), from the Greek ὀruóς—Straight)
Within the framework of this model, the driving force of transformation are internal
regularities of morphofunctional organization of living systems. The logic of the
model may be characterized as self-assembly (not selection!) of increasingly more
complex systems. This means that it is the only model that consistently assumes
autogenesis, the change based on internal structural–functional laws of the
morphoprocess, rather than ectogenesis. Based on this feature, this model may be
deﬁned as “constructional transformism”. It was used in numerous evolutionary
concepts, from Galton’s polyhedron to the nomogenesis of L. Berg (1922), the
typostrophism of O. Schindewolf (1993) and the organicism of A. Vandel (1964)
(cit. ex. Popov 2018). Variation of organisms is recognized to be not random but
strictly directed. The model is nomothetic, being aimed at the search for strict
laws of evolutionary transformations and implying the possibility of predictive
interpretations. On the whole, the model recognizes the internal directivity of the
evolutionary process, i.e. orthogenesis. The main problem of orthogenetic evolu-
tionary interpretations is the seeming lack of a logical explanation of the formation
of adaptations of organisms in the course of evolution, that is, their conformity to the
environment (Lyubishchev 1982; Gould 2002).
The explanation of evolutionary changes with the help of constructional
transformism is based on an enormous body of evidence from three major subject
domains: (1) Evidence of a limited character of variation, its non-homogenous
character, (2) Evidence of a regular and correlated character of morphogenetic
processes in multicellular organisms and (3) Evidence of self-assembly of molecular
and cellular structures. It would be futile to try to analyse all this evidence within the
framework of this paper. So I will simply list the main information units providing
argumentation in these three domains.
2Signiﬁcantly, it is this feature (understood or intuited) of direct adaptogenesis that made scientists
look for additional macroevolutionary mechanisms when constructing holistic concepts based on
this logical scheme. These additional conditions were necessary to impart directivity to the
evolutionary process, to represent it as a progressive advance. Such were the “gradation principle”
of Lamarck (1955), the “principle of perfection” of morphological characters of C. Nägeli (1884,
cit. ex. Nazarov 2005) and the “batmism” of E. Cope (1904).
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
237

9.4.3.1 Evidence of a Limited and “Non-homogenous” Character
of Variation Has Been Analysed Before (Granovitch 2018, 2021),
the Main Points Being as Follows
•
Fossil record indicates that morphogenesis has a limited character and that there
are numerous parallelisms in the evolution of large taxonomic groups (Rozanov
1973, 2005; Tatarinov 1976; Ponomarenko 2005, 2008; Markov 2010).
•
“Non-homogenous” character of variation of extant and extinct species is con-
ﬁrmed by the methodology of construction of potentially possible (mathemati-
cally calculated) spaces of certain characters (D’Arcy Thompson 1961; Raup
1966, 1967; Raup and Stanley 1978; Thomas and Reif 1993; Ubukata 2005;
McGhee 2007; Meyen 2007; Brakeﬁeld 2010).
•
The manifestation of variability range and separate characters is rather conserva-
tive in species from the same genus and even family (Vavilov 1987).
•
Broad occurrence of agamic, autogamic and parthenogenetic species among
protists and multicellular organisms (Hausmann et al. 2003; Ruppert et al.
2004; Grebel’ny 2008).
•
The existence of numerous cryptic species (see for review, Hausmann et al. 2003;
Trontelj and Fišer 2009), that is, genetically distinct groups that have all the
prerequisites for a morphofunctional divergence based on genetic isolation
(Bickford et al. 2006) but remain within the same typological framework.
•
Canalized nature and regular character of variation of characters early in the
ontogenesis (Kovalenko 1996a, b; Kovalenko and Danilov 2006).
•
Ideas about systemic organization of genomes, coordinated functioning of
systems of reparation of matrix processes, regulation of the level of mutational
variation, directed transposition of mobile genetic elements in the genome of
different species (Radman 1974; Echols 1981; Khesin 1984; Gierl 1990; Fedoroff
et al. 1995; Golubovskii 2000; Ponder et al. 2005; Shapiro and von Sternberg
2005; Galhardo et al. 2007; Karpen and Hawley 2007; Asis et al. 2008; Koonin
and Wolf 2009; Koonin 2010).
•
An essentially non-stochastic functioning of epigenetic systems reﬂecting
interactions based on the feedback of the genome sensu stricto (a set of species-
speciﬁc sequences of DNA nucleotides) and other molecular components of the
cell associated with the regulation of functioning of protein-synthesizing appara-
tus, dynamic structure of chromatin, the laws of “protein” heredity, the function-
ing of the system of “small RNA” (see a series of reviews, Allis et al. 2007;
Tikhodeyev 2018).
9.4.3.2 Evidence of a Regular and Correlated Character
of the Morphogenetic Processes in Multicellular Organisms
Ideas about a regular and correlated character of morphogenetic processes in multi-
cellular organisms were ﬁrst developed by Waddington (1957) and Schmalhausen
(1982). These authors, aiming at a better understanding of the nature of an organism
(a morphoprocess), emphasize its representation as a system of dynamic
correlations. The ontogenetic development of a multicellular organism follows a
stable trajectory owing to the internal correlations and the regular character of the
238
A. I. Granovitch

major processes, a phenomenon referred to as the canalization of development
(Waddington 1957; Scharloo 1991). Evo-devo, currently a ﬂourishing research
direction, focuses on the following mechanisms of self-organization, autonomous
development and regulation of morphogenesis.
•
Self-organization of cellular aggregates into regular multicellular structures,
including canalized development of embryos at the early stages of embryogenesis
(van den Brink et al. 2014; Baillie-Johnson et al. 2015; Bedzhov et al. 2015;
Ozone et al. 2016; Turner et al. 2016; Simunovic and Brivanlou 2017; Bizzarri
et al. 2018).
•
Formation of speciﬁc architectonics of organs using interaction of differentiating
cells, including the formation of complex organ-like aggregates from pluripotent
iPS cells (Taguchi et al. 2014; Dye et al. 2015; Sakaguchi et al. 2015; Takasato
et al. 2015; Guye et al. 2016; Koehler et al. 2017; McCauley and Wells 2017).
•
Autonomous patterning of repeated structures based on the physical–chemical
reaction–diffusion model (Turing model, Turing 1952) (Cooke and Zeeman
1976; Sheth et al. 2012; Tsiairis and Aulehla 2016; Liao and Oates 2017).
•
Processes of self-organization, autonomous coordination of different cell types
during the formation of tissues and complex systems of organs of a multicellular
organism (Sheth et al. 2012; Raspopovic et al. 2014; Onimaru et al. 2016; Walton
et al. 2016).
•
Systems switching the development to new stable trajectories based on dynamic
modules (Newman 2010).
•
Potential mechanisms responsible for the emergence of evolutionary novelties
(West-Eberhard 2003; Müller 2010).
9.4.3.3 Evidence of Self-Assembly of Molecular and Cellular Structures
A plethora of data accumulated in the last decades indicates that self-assembly and
self-organization of molecular and cellular structures are often due only to their
constructional features and are not directly connected with the genetic apparatus of
the cell. Both self-assembly and self-organization processes are of interest to us. The
distinction between them is traditionally based on energy dependence (Gerhart and
Kirschner 1997; Halley and Winkler 2008; Werner et al. 2017). Processes consid-
ered as self-assembly are characterized by the minimization of energy in the system,
which has approached the state of thermodynamic equilibrium. Correspondingly,
these processes do not need an energy supply. On the contrary, self-organization
implies the formation of elaborate complexes in a system that is far from the zone of
thermodynamic equilibrium. Stable existence and increasing complexity of such
systems are possible only under conditions of constant energy ﬂows through them
(Prigogine and Stengers 1984). It is noteworthy that processes of both types also
contribute to the canalized development of a multicellular organism (see above Sect.
Sect. 9.4.3.2).
There is ample evidence of self-assembly and self-organization of molecular
complexes and organoids of the cell. Leaving aside self-organization and replication
of the genetic apparatus, which are quite well studied, I would like to note that almost
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
239

all major structures and functions of the cell operate based on these physical and
chemical principles. There are data about the self-assembly of membranes, locomo-
tor systems ensuring motility of cellular elements, the self-assembly of organoids,
the assembly of cell division apparatus, the formation of vacuoles and, ﬁnally, the
spatial organization of chromosome material (Palade 1983; Attardi and Schatz 1988;
Mitchison 1992; Warren and Wickner 1996; Nédélec et al. 2003; Denton et al. 2003;
Carazo-Salas and Nurse 2006; Cortès et al. 2006; Misteli 2007; Papanikou and Glick
2009; Svetina 2009; Inagaki and Katsuno 2017; Sazer and Schiessel 2018). Consid-
ering these data, we begin to intuit that the entire morphofunctional organization of
the cell is a totality of coordinated processes of self-organization (Misteli 2001;
Kurakin 2005; Kholodenko 2006; Karsenti 2008; Johnson and Lam 2010). Hence,
we may characterize the cell as a morphoprocess implemented regularly under given
physical conditions.
Concluding the third section, I would like to remind the reader that the three
models explaining the mechanisms of microevolutionary process (transformism) are
far from being new. The ﬁrst model had underlain the ideas about natural selection in
the classical Darwinism and Modern Synthesis (but see Delisle 2017, 2021 to
emphasize the differences of the concepts). It incorporated the ideas of Weismann
about the continuity of germplasm, assimilated views on heredity, was reborn as
Modern Evolutionary Synthesis and underwent numerous modiﬁcations under the
pressure of new data (Gould 2002; West-Eberhard 2003; Newman 2010; Müller
2010; Pigliucci 2010; Jablonka and Lamb 2010). The second model is rooted in the
ideas of Lamarck and Saint-Hilaire, which have been repeatedly reborn as
Neo-Lamarckism. The third model also has a venerable history in its numerous
guises of ortho-Lamarckian/orthogenetic evolutionary concepts. A comparative
characteristic of the three logical schemes presenting potential evolutionary
mechanisms transforming the morphoprocess is given in Table 9.1.
These three mechanisms, as well as a group of mechanisms based on a combina-
tion of different morphoprocesses (transformation through combinations), are
presented in Fig. 9.2, which is discussed in more detail in Conclusion.
9.5
Conclusion
In the three main sections of this work, we speciﬁed what exactly we wanted to know
about living systems by singling out transformism as the central meaning in the
polysemantic notion of “evolution”. Then we identiﬁed morphoprocesses as the
systems to which this notion can be applied most productively. Finally, we
concluded that most of the explanations of the mechanisms of transformism ever
suggested can be arranged into three logical models describing the transformation of
the modality of the general morphoprocess.
Let us now present the differences between the models (and, strangely enough,
their similarities too) as a “cladogram of similarities and dissimilarities”. In order not
to mislead the reader, who might be used to phylogenetic constructions, I speciﬁcally
state that this scheme bears no relation to the historical outlook on the development
240
A. I. Granovitch

of ideas. Its only purpose is to illustrate the differences in the logic of the models in
the order of their similarities and dissimilarities (Fig. 9.2).3
Thus, evolutionary changes in the sense of a stable transformation of the modality
of the general morphoprocess may occur in two essentially different ways. The ﬁrst
way is the possibility of a combination of characters of partial morphoprocesses of
different modalities owing to their incomplete physiological and morphogenetic
closedness of organization (see Beklemishev 1970). This category embraces
hybridogenesis, symbiogenesis and horizontal transfer of hereditary material—phe-
nomena whose importance for the evolutionary process, in general, have been
actively discussed in recent years. Sufﬁce it to say that the symbiogenetic hypothesis
is currently considered as the best suited for explaining the origin of various
structural types of the eukaryotic cells (Margulis and Fester 1991; Chapman and
Margulis 1998; Antonelli et al. 2003; Kozo-Polyanskii and Raven 2010). Horizontal
Table 9.1 A comparative characteristics of the three major logical models of transformism
Indirect
adaptogenesis
Direct adaptogenesis
Constructional
transformism
Degree of ﬁnalism of
evolution in general
Ateleogenesis
(micro- and
macroevolution)
Ateleogenesis
(microevolution)
Teleogenesis
(macroevolution)
Teleogenesis
(micro- and
macroevolution)
Relationship between the
formation of adaptations and
the mechanism of
microevolution
Adaptogenesis
Adaptogenesis
Anadaptogenesis
Prevalence of internal or
external evolutionary forces
Ectogenesis
Ectogenesis
Autogenesis
Degree of gradualness of
microevolution
Gradualism
Gradualism
Punctualism
Degree of irreversibility of
evolution
Irreversibility
Irreversibility
Reversibility and
repeatability
Degree of autonomy of
separate features of an
organism
Merogenesis
Hologenesis or
merogenesis
Hologenesis
Nomothetic or idiographic
character
Idiographic
Idiographic
(microevolution)
nomothetic
(macroevolution)
Nomothetic
The unit of microevolution
Population/set of
several general
morphoprocesses
Single general
morphoprocess
Single general
morphoprocess
3Let us note, nevertheless, that all “phylogenetic schemes”, seemingly reconstructing evolutionary
events and based on any character basis, are, strictly speaking, simply diagrams of “similarities and
differences”. On the contrary, the means of their evolutionary interpretation (evolutionary hypothe-
sis for a given group of organisms as such) would be radically different depending on the assumed
model of transformism.
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
241

transfer of genetic material is already assumed to be a leading evolutionary mecha-
nism in prokaryotes (Koonin 2011), while the body of evidence indicating its
importance for multicellular eukaryotic organisms is also growing (Gladyshev
et al. 2008; Boschetti et al. 2011; Fussmann 2011; Haegeman et al. 2011; Husnik
et al. 2013).
In this work, I focussed on other means of transformation, those that do not imply
the above combinatory phenomena. The basis of their diversity is the principle of
“transformation without combination”, that is, without the combination of partial
morphoprocesses belonging to different “species” (see Fig. 9.1). In this case, we deal
with a situation when the transformation of the general morphoprocess should be
ensured only by its own properties under the inﬂuence of environmental factors.
The most important dichotomy associated with this idea results in two different
interpretations of the leading mechanisms of the evolutionary process. The ﬁrst
interpretation assumes the leading role of two coupled phenomena, tychogenesis
and selectogenesis. It is based on the idea that the modality of the general
morphoprocess changes using a selection of partial ones (See Sect. 9.4.1; indirect
adaptogenesis). The recognition of such a model as the only correct one necessarily
leads to the recognition of the stochastic character of evolution in general and the
idiographic nature of our ideas about it. The directivity of the evolutionary process is
then a moot question.
Non-fulﬁlment of the conditions of tychogenesis entails the admission that the
mechanism of indirect adaptogenesis is secondary. In this case, the leading role
among the mechanisms of transformism should be given to non-selective phenom-
ena, shown in the scheme in the second branch as “transformation of partial
TRANSFORMISM
SYMBIOGENESIS
HYBRIDOGENESIS
HORIzONTAL TRANSFER
INDIRECT ADAPTOGENESIS
(SELECTOGENESIS)
DIRECT ADAPTOGENESIS
CONSTRUCTIONAL 
TRANSFORMISM
(ORTHOGENESIS)
transformaƟon through 
combinaƟons
transformaƟon without 
combinaƟons
selecƟon of 
morphoprocesses
transformaƟon of
morphoprocess
according to
external forces
according to laws of
internal organizaƟon
ect. adapt.
ect. adapt.
aut.
Fig. 9.2 A scheme showing relationships of different models of transformism in the form of a
hierarchical tree. Brief comments on the semantic dichotomies of different concepts are given in
brackets. Ect. ectogenesis; adapt. adaptogenesis; aut. authogenesis
242
A. I. Granovitch

morphoprocesses”. In this case, we assume a change of the modality of the general
morphoprocess using transformation of partial morphoprocesses successively
implemented within it. This interpretation, in turn, implies two different emphases
on the prevailing mechanisms of transformation.
The ﬁrst emphasis is on the recognition of the possibility and the leading role of
the changes of the partial morphoprocess commensurate with the environment,
which are imparted to the general morphoprocess (Sect. 9.4.2, direct adaptogenesis).
To note, in this case, too, the ideas about microevolution are idiographic, being
based on the direct ﬁxation of stochastic ﬂuctuations of the environmental impact in
the general morphoprocess. The second possible emphasis is on the primacy of
structural–functional features of the partial morphoprocess for its further modiﬁca-
tion and the recognition of the environmental impacts as a potential trigger of such
modiﬁcations (Sect. 9.3.3, constructional transformism). Only these ideas can be the
basis of an outlook representing evolution as a regular, directed process and promot-
ing a nomothetic understanding of evolutionary phenomena.
In two out of the three concepts of “transformation without combinations”
(indirect and direct adaptogenesis), the adaptation of the morphoprocess to the
conditions of the environment and the formation of adaptations are a direct conse-
quence of the operation of the mechanisms of transformism (selectogenesis in the
former case and direct, hereditarily ﬁxed reaction in the latter case; adapt. on the
scheme). In the case of constructional transformism, an adaptive character of
evolution is not evident and calls for additional explanations. I have suggested a
possible explanation of the formation of multilevel adaptations within the framework
of this model in earlier work (Granovitch 2018).
In the same two concepts (indirect and direct adaptogenesis) transformism
appears as an ectogenetic process (ect. in the scheme). In both cases, evolution is
triggered, directed and fully determined by the impact of the environment. In
contrast, constructional transformism is an autogenetic process (aut.). The emphasis
in the explanation of the transformation of the morphoprocess is shifted to internal
constructional features of the living matter, the environmental impact being at best a
trigger.
In one of the models (indirect adaptogenesis), the leading role in the transforma-
tion of the modality of the general morphoprocess is ascribed to natural selection
(the mechanism of selectogenesis). In direct adaptogenesis and constructional
transformism, the role of the selective principle and hence natural selection is
downplayed to an accessory mechanism altogether lacking morphogenetic
signiﬁcance.
In conclusion, I would like to note that, on the one hand, each of the three
conceptual models of transformism has its own internal logic. On the other hand,
however, these concepts cannot and should not be considered mutually exclusive.
The reign of a single concept—indirect adaptogenesis embodied by the Modern
Synthesis—is over. A time has come for a careful examination of various
transformistic possibilities and the identiﬁcation of prevailing and accessory
mechanisms. Different groups of organisms/types of morphoprocesses may be
characterized by different leading mechanisms of transformism, which may belong
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
243

to both “combinational” and “transformational” phenomena (Fig. 9.2). A vivid
example is the recognition of the horizontal transfer of genetic material as one of
the leading evolutionary mechanisms in prokaryotes (Koonin 2011). What we
currently need most is a balanced assessment of the contribution of different
mechanisms
characteristic
of
a
given
group
of
organisms/types
of
the
morphoprocesses and the identiﬁcation of the leading ones. In the age of
“postmodernism in the understanding of evolutionary phenomena” (Koonin 2011),
we have to consider a broad kit of potential evolutionary tools and try to comprehend
evolutionary phenomena at a new level of conceptual synthesis, “Transformism
2.0”, based on the input from all conceptual approaches.
Acknowledgments I am eternally grateful to Natalia Lentsman for her creative, thoughtful,
generally invaluable contribution to the English translation of the manuscript. This study was
supported by a grant from the Russian Science Foundation (RSF) no. 19-14-00321-П.
References
Alexandrov DV, Nizovtseva IG (2014) Nucleation and particle growth with ﬂuctuating rates at the
intermediate stage of phase transitions in metastable systems. Proc R Soc A 470(2162):
20130647
Allis CD, Jenuwein T, Reinberg D, Caparros M-L (2007) Epigenetics. Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, New York
Altukhov YP (2003) Genetic processes in populations. Akademkniga, Moscow
Antonelli PL, Bevilacqua L, Rutz SF (2003) Theories and models in symbiogenesis. Nonlinear
Anal Real World Appl 4(5):743–753
Aria C, Caron JB, Gaines R (2015) A large new leanchoiliid from the Burgess Shale and the
inﬂuence of inapplicable states on stem arthropod phylogeny. Palaeontology 58(4):629–660
Artigiani R (1987) Revolution and evolution: applying Prigogine’s dissipative structures model. J
Soc Biol Struct 10(3):249–264
Asis RA, Kondrashov EV, Koonin EV, Kondrashov FA (2008) Nested genes and increasing
organisational complexity of metazoan genomes. Trends Genet 24:475–478
Attardi G, Schatz G (1988) Biogenesis of mitochondria. Annu Rev Cell Biol 4(1):289–331
Baillie-Johnson P, Van den Brink SC, Balayo T, Turner DA, Arias AM (2015) Generation of
aggregates of mouse embryonic stem cells that show symmetry breaking, polarization and
emergent collective behaviour in vitro. J Vis Exp 105:e53252
Bedzhov I, Bialecka M, Zielinska A, Kosalka J, Antonica F, Thompson AJ, Franze K, Zernicka-
Goetz M (2015) Development of the anterior-posterior axis is a self-organizing process in the
absence of maternal cues in the mouse embryo. Cell Res 25(12):1368
Beklemishev VN (1970) On general principles of organization of life. In: Biocenological basics of
comparative parasitology. Nauka, Moscow, pp 7–25
Beklemishev VN (1994) Methodology of systematics. KMK Scientiﬁc Press, Moscow
Benton MJ, Pearson PN (2001) Speciation in the fossil record. Trends Ecol Evol 16(7):405–411
Berg LS (1969) Nomogenesis: or evolution, determined by law. In: Works on the theory of
evolution, Leningrad, Nauka, pp 95–311. (orig. 1922)
Bickford D, Lohman DL, Sodhi NS, Ng PKL, Meier R, Winker K, Ingram KK, Das I (2006)
Cryptic species as a window on diversity and conservation. Trends Ecol Evol 22(3):148–155
Bizzarri M, Masiello MG, Giuliani A, Cucina A (2018) Gravity constraints drive biological systems
toward speciﬁc organization patterns: commitment of cell speciﬁcation is constrained by
physical cues. BioEssays 40(1):1700138
244
A. I. Granovitch

Boschetti C, Pouchkina-Stantcheva N, Hoffmann P, Tunnacliffe A (2011) Foreign genes and novel
hydrophilic protein genes participate in the desiccation response of the bdelloid rotifer Adineta
ricciae. J Exp Biol 214(1):59–68
Bowler P (1975) The changing meaning of “evolution”. J Hist Ideas 1975:95–114
Bowler PJ (2017) Alternatives to Darwinism in the early twentieth century. In: Delisle RG (ed) The
Darwinian tradition in context. Springer, Cham, pp 195–217
Brakeﬁeld PM (2010) Radiations of Mycalesine butterﬂies and opening up their exploration of
Morphospace. Am Nat 176:77–87
Capy P, Gasperi G, Biémont C, Bazin C (2000) Stress and transposable elements: co-evolution or
useful parasites? Heredity 85(2):101
Carazo-Salas RE, Nurse P (2006) Self-organization of interphase microtubule arrays in ﬁssion
yeast. Nat Cell Biol 8(10):1102
Chandler VL (2010) Paramutation’s properties and puzzles. Science 330(6004):628–629
Chapman MJ, Margulis L (1998) Morphogenesis by symbiogenesis. Int Microbiol 1(4):319–326
Chylinski K, Makarova KS, Charpentier E, Koonin EV (2014) Classiﬁcation and evolution of type
II CRISPR-Cas systems. Nucleic Acids Res 42(10):6091–6105
Cooke J, Zeeman EC (1976) A clock and wavefront model for control of the number of repeated
structures during animal morphogenesis. J Theor Biol 58(2):455–476
Cope ED (1904) The primary factors of organic evolution. Open Court, Chicago
Cortès S, Glade N, Chartier I, Tabony J (2006) Microtubule self-organisation by reaction–diffusion
processes in miniature cell-sized containers and phospholipid vesicles. Biophys Chem 120(3):
168–177
Cramer F, Prigogine I (1993) Chaos and order: the complex structure of living systems. VCH,
Weinheim
Cuvier GJLNFD (1817) Le Règne animal distribué d'aprés son organisation pour servir de base a
l'histoire naturelle des animaux et d'introduction a l'anatomie compare. Tome 1. De l'imprimerie
de A. Belin, Paris
Danchin É, Charmantier A, Champagne FA, Mesoudi A, Pujol B, Blanchet S (2011) Beyond DNA:
integrating inclusive inheritance into an extended theory of evolution. Nat Rev Genet 12:475–
486
Darroch SAF, Smith EF, Laﬂamme M, Erwin DH (2018) Ediacaran extinction and Cambrian
explosion. Trends Ecol Evol 33:653–663
Dawkins R (1996) The blind watchmaker: why the evidence of evolution reveals a universe without
design. W. W. Norton & Company, New York
de Paoli H, van der Heide T, van den Berg A, Silliman BR, Herman PMJ, van de Koppel J (2017)
Behavioral self-organization underlies the resilience of a coastal ecosystem. Proc Natl Acad Sci
114:8035–8040
Delisle RG (2017) From Charles Darwin to the evolutionary synthesis: weak and diffused
connections only. In: Delisle RG (ed) The Darwinian tradition in context. Springer, Cham, pp
133–167
Delisle RG (2021) Natural selection as a mere auxiliary hypothesis in Charles Darwin’s origin of
species. In: Delisle RG (ed) Natural selection - revisiting its explanatory role in evolutionary
biology. Springer, Cham, pp 73–104
Denton MJ, Dearden PK, Sowerby SJ (2003) Physical law not natural selection as the major
determinant of biological complexity in the subcellular realm: new support for the
pre-Darwinian conception of evolution by natural law. Biosystems 71(3):297–303
Deveau H, Garneau JE, Moineau S (2010) CRISPR/Cas system and its role in phage-bacteria
interactions. Annu Rev Microbiol 64:475–493
Dye BR, Hill DR, Ferguson MAH et al (2015) Author response: in vitro generation of human
pluripotent stem cell derived lung organoids. Elife 4. https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.05098.029
Echols H (1981) SOS functions, cancer and inducible evolution. Cell 25(1):1–2
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
245

Esposito M (2017) The organismal synthesis: holistic science and developmental evolution in the
English-speaking world, 1915–1954. In: Delisle RG (ed) The Darwinian tradition in context.
Springer, Cham, pp 219–241
Fedoroff N, Schläppi M, Raina R (1995) Epigenetic regulation of the maize Spm transposon.
BioEssays 17:291–297
Fussmann GF (2011) Rotifers: excellent subjects for the study of macro- and microevolutionary
change. Hydrobiologia 662(1):11–18
Galhardo RS, Hastings PJ, Rosenberg SM (2007) Mutation as a stress response and the regulation
of evolvability. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 42:399–435
Gerhart J, Kirschner M (1997) Cells, embryos, and evolution: toward a cellular and developmental
understanding of phenotypic variation and evolutionary adaptability (No. 575.21). Blackwell
science, Malden, MA
Gierl A (1990) How maize transposable elements escape negative selection. Trends Genet 6:155–
158
Gilbert SF, Opitz JM, Raff RA (1996) Resynthesizing evolutionary and developmental biology.
Dev Biol 173(2):357–372
Gilbert SF, Bosch TCG, Ledón-Rettig C (2015) Eco-Evo-Devo: developmental symbiosis and
developmental plasticity as evolutionary agents. Nat Rev Genet 16:611–622
Gladyshev EA, Arkhipova IR (2010) Genome structure of Bdelloid rotifers: shaped by asexuality or
desiccation? J Hered 101:S85–S93
Gladyshev EA, Meselson M, Arkhipova IR (2008) Massive horizontal gene transfer in Bdelloid
Rotifers. Science 320:1210–1213
Glick BS (2007) Let there be order. Nat Cell Biol 9(2):130–132
Goldberg AD, Allis CD, Bernstein E (2007) Epigenetics: a landscape takes shape. Cell 128:635–
638
Golubovskii MD (2000) The age of genetics: evolution of ideas and concepts. Borei Art, Saint
Petersburg
Gould SJ (2002) The structure of evolutionary theory. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Granovitch AI (2018) Is natural selection still have to be regarded a foundation stone of evolution-
ary process? J Evol Sci 1:14–30
Granovitch AI (2021) Natural selection, morphoprocess and a logical ﬁeld of evolutionary
concepts. In: Delisle RG (ed) Natural selection - revisiting its explanatory role in evolutionary
biology. Springer, Cham, pp 391–418
Granovitch AI, Ostrovsky AN, Dobrovolsky AA (2010) Morphoprocess and life cycles of
organisms. Zh Obshch Biol 71(6):514–522
Grebel’ny SD (2008) Cloning in nature. Gelicon, Saint Petersburg
Guye P, Ebrahimkhani MR, Kipniss N, Velazquez JJ, Schoenfeld E, Kiani S, Grifﬁth LG, Weiss R
(2016) Genetically engineering self-organization of human pluripotent stem cells into a liver
bud-like tissue using Gata6. Nat Commun 7:10243. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10243
Haegeman A, Jones JT, Danchin EGJ (2011) Horizontal gene transfer in nematodes: a catalyst for
plant parasitism? Mol Plant Microbe Interact 24:879–887
Halley JD, Winkler DA (2008) Consistent concepts of self-organization and self-assembly. Com-
plexity 14:10–17
Hausmann
K,
Hülsmann
N,
Radek
R.
(2003)
Protistology.
E.
Schweizerbart’sche
Verlagsbuchhandlung (Nägele u. Obermiller), Stuttgart
Hollick JB (2017) Paramutation and related phenomena in diverse species. Nat Rev Genet 18:5–23
Horenko I, Dittmer E, Lankas F, Maddocks J, Metzner P, Schütte C (2008) Macroscopic dynamics
of complex metastable systems: theory, algorithms, and application to B-DNA. SIAM J Appl
Dyn Syst 7(2):532–560
Horvath P, Barrangou R (2010) CRISPR/Cas, the immune system of bacteria and archaea. Science
327:167–170
Husnik F, Nikoh N, Koga R et al (2013) Horizontal gene transfer from diverse bacteria to an insect
genome enables a tripartite nested mealybug symbiosis. Cell 153(7):1567–1578
246
A. I. Granovitch

Inagaki N, Katsuno H (2017) Actin waves: origin of cell polarization and migration? Trends Cell
Biol 27:515–526
Jablonka E, Lamb MJ (2010) Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance. In: Pigliucci M, Muller GB
(eds) Evolution. The extended synthesis. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp 137–174
Jakab K, Neagu A, Mironov V, Markwald RR, Forgacs G (2004) Engineering biological structures
of prescribed shape using self-assembling multicellular systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci 101(9):
2864–2869
Johnson BR, Lam SK (2010) Self-organization, natural selection, and evolution: cellular hardware
and genetic software. Bioscience 60(11):879–885
Karpen GH, Hawley RS (2007) Epigenetic regulation of chromosome inheritance. Epigenetics
2007:265–289
Karsenti E (2008) Self-organization in cell biology: a brief history. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9(3):255
Kauffman SA (2019) A world beyond physics: the emergence and evolution of life. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Kaufman AJ (2018) The Ediacaran-Cambrian transition. Chemostratigraphy across major chronol
boundaries, vol 240. Wiley, Boca Raton, FL, pp 115–142
Kellogg VL (1907) Darwinism today. G. Bell & Sons, London
Khesin RB (1984) The inconstancy of genome. Nauka, Moscow
Kholodenko BN (2006) Cell-signalling dynamics in time and space. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7:165–
176
Kirschner MW, Gerhart JC (2010) Facilitated variation. In: Pigliucci M, Muller GB (eds) Evolution.
The extended synthesis. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp 253–280
Kivelson D, Reiss H (1999) Metastable systems in thermodynamics: consequences, role of
constraints. J Phys Chem B 103:8337–8343
Koehler KR, Nie J, Longworth-Mills E, Liu X-P, Lee J, Holt JR, Hashino E (2017) Generation of
inner ear organoids containing functional hair cells from human pluripotent stem cells. Nat
Biotechnol 35:583–589
Kooijman SALM, Auger P, Poggiale JC, Kooi BW (2003) Quantitative steps in symbiogenesis and
the evolution of homeostasis. Biol Rev 78:435–463
Koonin EV (2010) Taming of the shrewd: novel eukaryotic genes from RNA viruses. BMC Biol.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7007-8-2
Koonin EV (2011) Logic of chance, the nature and origin of biological evolution. Pearson Educa-
tion, London
Koonin EV, Wolf YI (2009) Is evolution Darwinian or/and Lamarckian? Biol Direct 4(1):42
Koonin EV, Wolf YI (2010) Constraints and plasticity in genome and molecular-phenome evolu-
tion. Nat Rev Genet 11:487
Kovalenko EE (1996a) Analysis of the Anura sacrum variability. 1. The method of analysis of the
tailless amphibians sacrum variability. Zool Zh 75(1):52–66
Kovalenko EE (1996b) Analysis of the Anura sacrum variability. Sacrum variability in the genus
Rana. Zool Zh 75(2):222–236
Kovalenko EE, Danilov IG (2006) Variety of sacro-urostile skeleton in the family Bufonidae
(Amphibia, Anura). 2. Analysis of the diversity by the method of spectra. Zool Zh 85(6):
725–740
Kozo-Polyanskii BM, Raven PH (2010) Symbiogenesis: a new principle of evolution. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA
Kull K (2014) Adaptive evolution without natural selection. Biol J Linn Soc 112:287–294
Kurakin A (2005) Self-organization versus watchmaker: stochastic dynamics of cellular organiza-
tion. Biol Chem 386:247–254
Kurakin A (2007) Self-organization versus watchmaker: ambiguity of molecular recognition and
design charts of cellular circuitry. J Mol Recognit 20:205–214
Kutschera U (2017) Symbiogenesis and cell evolution: an anti-Darwinian research agenda? In:
Delisle RG (ed) The Darwinian tradition in context. Springer, Cham, pp 309–331
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
247

Laland K, Uller T, Feldman M et al (2014) Does evolutionary theory need a rethink? Nature 514:
161–164
Lamarck JB (1955) Philosophy of zoology (1809). In: Selected works, vol 1. Academy of Science
Print, Moscow
Laos R, Thomson JM, Benner SA (2014) DNA polymerases engineered by directed evolution to
incorporate non-standard nucleotides. Front Microbiol. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.
00565
Lenski RE (2017a) Experimental evolution and the dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
in microbial populations. ISME J 11:2181–2194
Lenski RE (2017b) What is adaptation by natural selection? Perspectives of an experimental
microbiologist. PLoS Genet 13(4):e1006668
Levis NA, Pfennig DW (2016) Evaluating ‘plasticity-ﬁrst’ evolution in nature: key criteria and
empirical approaches. Trends Ecol Evol 31:563–574
Levis NA, Serrato-Capuchina A, Pfennig DW (2017) Genetic accommodation in the wild: evolu-
tion of gene expression plasticity during character displacement. J Evol Biol 30:1712–1723
Levit GS, Hoßfeld U (2017) Major research traditions in twentieth-century evolutionary biology:
the relations of Germany’s Darwinism with them. In: Delisle RG (ed) The Darwinian tradition in
context. Springer, Cham, pp 169–193
Levit GS, Scholz J (2002) The biosphere as a morphoprocess and a new look at the concepts of
organism and individuality. Senckenb Lethaea 82:367–372
Lewontin RC (1974) The genetic basis of evolutionary change. Columbia University Press,
New York
Liao B-K, Oates AC (2017) Delta-notch signalling in segmentation. Arthropod Struct Dev 46:429–
447
Loison L, Herring E (2017) Lamarckian research programs in French biology (1900–1970). In:
Delisle RG (ed) The Darwinian tradition in context. Springer, Cham, pp 243–269
Loose M, Fischer-Friedrich E, Ries J, Kruse K, Schwille P (2008) Spatial regulators for bacterial
cell division self-organize into surface waves in vitro. Science 320(5877):789–792
Louis D (1893) Les Lois De L’évolution. Arno, New York
Lynch M (2010) Evolution of the mutation rate. Trends Genet 26(8):345–352
Lyubishchev AA (1982) Problems of form, systematics and evolution of organisms. Nauka,
Moscow
Margulis L, Fester R (eds) (1991) Symbiosis as a source of evolutionary innovation: speciation and
morphogenesis. Mit Press
Markov A (2010) The birth of complexity. Astrel, Moscow
McCauley HA, Wells JM (2017) Pluripotent stem cell-derived organoids: using principles of
developmental biology to grow human tissues in a dish. Development 144(6):958–962
McGhee
GR
(2007)
The
geometry
of
evolution.
Adaptive
landscapes
and
theoretical
morphospaces. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
McShea DW (2001) The hierarchical structure of organisms: a scale and documentation of a trend in
the maximum. Paleobiology 27:405–423
Meyen SV (2007) The morphology of plants in the nomothetic aspect. In: Ignatiev IA (ed) S.V.
Meyen: paleobotanist, evolutionist, thinker. Geos, Moscow, pp 162–222
Misteli T (2001) The concept of self-organization in cellular architecture. J Cell Biol 155(2):
181–186
Misteli T (2007) Beyond the sequence: cellular organization of genome function. Cell 128:787–800
Mitchison TJ (1992) Self-organization of polymer-motor systems in the cytoskeleton. Philos Trans
R Soc Lond B 336(1276):99–106
Mossio M, Bich L (2017) What makes biological organisation teleological? Synthese 194:1089–
1114
Müller GB (2010) Epigenetic innovation. In: Pigliucci M, Müller GB (eds) Evolution. The extended
synthesis. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp 307–332
248
A. I. Granovitch

Nägeli C (1884) Mechanistic-physiological theory of evolution (Mechanischphysiologische
Theorie der Abstammungslehre). Druck und Verlag von R. Oldenbourg, Munich and Leipzig
Nazarov VI (2005) Evolution is not according to Darwin: a change in the evolutionary model.
KomKniga, Moscow
Nédélec F, Surrey T, Karsenti E (2003) Self-organisation and forces in the microtubule cytoskele-
ton. Curr Opin Cell Biol 15(1):118–124
Newman SA (2010) Dynamical patterning modules. In: Pigliucci M, Müller GB (eds) Evolution.
The extended synthesis. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp 281–306
Ochman H, Lawrence JG, Groisman EA (2000) Lateral gene transfer and the nature of bacterial
innovation. Nature 405(6784):299–304
Onimaru K, Marcon L, Musy M, Tanaka M, Sharpe J (2016) The ﬁn-to-limb transition as the
re-organization of a Turing pattern. Nat Commun 7:11582. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms11582
Osborn HF (1929) The titanotheres of ancient Wyoming, Dakota, and Nebraska. United States
Government Publishing Ofﬁce, Washington. https://doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.36431
Ozone C, Suga H, Eiraku M, Kadoshima T, Yonemura S, Takata N, Oiso Y, Tsuji T, Sasai Y (2016)
Functional anterior pituitary generated in self-organizing culture of human embryonic stem
cells. Nat Commun 7:10351. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10351
Palade GE (1983) Membrane biogenesis: an overview. Methods Enzymol 96:xxix–lv
Papanikou E, Glick BS (2009) The yeast Golgi apparatus: insights and mysteries. FEBS Lett
583(23):3746–3751
Pigliucci M (2010) Phenotypic plasticity. In: Pigliucci M, Muller GB (eds) Evolution. The extended
synthesis. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp 281–306
Ponder RG, Fonville NC, Rosenberg SM (2005) A switch from high-Fidelity to error-prone DNA
double-strand break repair underlies stress-induced mutation. Mol Cell 19(6):791–804
Ponomarenko AG (2005) Paleontological data on the origin of arthropods. In: Vorobyova EI,
Striganov (Eds) Evolutionary factors of animal diversity formation. KMK Scientiﬁc Press,
Moscow, pp. 146–155
Ponomarenko AG (2008) Early stages of the arthropods’ evolution. In: Mamkaev YV
(ed) Evolutional morphology of animals. SPbSU Publishing, Saint Petersburg, pp 43–57
Popov I (2018) Orthogenesis versus Darwinism. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
95144-7
Prigogine I (1978) Time, structure, and ﬂuctuations. Science 201(4358):777–785
Prigogine I, Stengers I (1984) Order out of chaos: man’s new dialogue with nature. Bantam,
New York
Radman M (1974) Phenomenology of an inducible mutagenic DNA repair pathway in
Escherichia coli: SOS repair hypothesis. In: Prakash L, Miller FSM, Lawrence C, Tabor HW
(eds) Molecular and environmental aspects of mutagenesis. Charles C. Thomas, Springﬁeld, IL,
pp 128–142
Raspopovic J, Marcon L, Russo L, Sharpe J (2014) Digit patterning is controlled by a Bmp-Sox9-
Wnt Turing network modulated by morphogen gradients. Science 345(6196):566–570
Raup D (1966) Geometric analysis of shell coiling: general problems. J Paleontol 40:1178–1190
Raup D (1967) Geometric analysis of shell coiling: coiling in ammonoids. J Paleontol 41:43–65
Raup DM, Stanley SM (1978) Principles of paleontology. Macmillan, London
Rissman EF, Adli M (2014) Minireview: transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: focus on endo-
crine disrupting compounds. Endocrinology 155:2770–2780
Rozanov AY (1973) Morphological evolution of Archeocyathids and questions of the deﬁnition of
lower Cambrian stages. Nauka, Moscow
Rozhnov SV (2005) Morphological patterns of formation and evolution of higher taxa
echinoderms. In: Vorobieva E, Striganov M (eds) Evolutionary factors of wildlife diversity.
KMK Scientiﬁc Press, Мoscow, pp 156–170
Ruppert EE, Fox RS, Barnes RD (2004) Invertebrate zoology. A functional evolutionary approach,
7th edn. Thomson Brooks/Cole, Paciﬁc Grove, CA
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
249

Sakaguchi H, Kadoshima T, Soen M, Narii N, Ishida Y, Ohgushi M, Takahashi J, Eiraku M, Sasai
Y (2015) Generation of functional hippocampal neurons from self-organizing human embryonic
stem cell-derived dorsomedial telencephalic tissue. Nat Commun 6:8896. https://doi.org/10.
1038/ncomms9896
Sazer S, Schiessel H (2018) The biology and polymer physics underlying large-scale chromosome
organization. Trafﬁc 19:87–104
Scharloo W (1991) Canalization: genetic and developmental aspects. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 22(1):
65–93
Schindewolf OH (1993) Basic questions in paleontology: geologic time, organic evolution, and
biological systematics. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Schmalhausen II (1982) The organism as a whole in its individual and historical development.
Nauka, Moscow
Serzhantov VF (1972) Introduction to the methodology of modern biology. Nauka, Leningrad
Shapiro J (1995) Adaptive mutation: who’s really in the garden? Science 268(5209):373–374
Shapiro JA (2009) Revisiting the Central Dogma in the 21st century. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1178(1):
6–28
Shapiro JA (2016) The basic concept of the read–write genome: mini-review on cell-mediated DNA
modiﬁcation. Biosystems 140:35–37
Shapiro JA, von Sternberg R (2005) Why repetitive DNA is essential to genome function. Biol Rev
80:227–250
Sheth R, Marcon L, Bastida MF, Junco M, Quintana L, Dahn R, Kmita M, Sharpe J, Ros MA
(2012) Hox genes regulate digit patterning by controlling the wavelength of a Turing-type
mechanism. Science 338(6113):1476–1480
Simunovic M, Brivanlou AH (2017) Embryoids, organoids and gastruloids: new approaches to
understanding embryogenesis. Development 144(6):976–985
Smith MR, Ortega-Hernández J (2014) Hallucigenia’s onychophoran-like claws and the case for
Tactopoda. Nature 514(7522):363–366
Spencer H (1864) The principles of biology, vol 1. Williams & Norgate, London
Suter CM, Martin DIK (2010) Paramutation: the tip of an epigenetic iceberg? Trends Genet 26(1):
9–14
Svetina S (2009) Vesicle budding and the origin of cellular life. ChemPhysChem 10(16):
2769–2776
Taguchi A, Kaku Y, Ohmori T, Sharmin S, Ogawa M, Sasaki H, Nishinakamura R (2014)
Redeﬁning the in vivo origin of metanephric nephron progenitors enables generation of
complex kidney structures from pluripotent stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 14(1):53–67
Takasato M, Er PX, Chiu HS et al (2015) Kidney organoids from human iPS cells contain multiple
lineages and model human nephrogenesis. Nature 526(7574):564–568
Tatarinov LP (1976) Morphological evolution of Theriodonts and general questions of
phylogenetics. Nauka, Moscow
Thomas RDK, Reif WE (1993) The skeleton space: a ﬁnite set of organic designs. Evolution (N Y)
47:341–360
Thompson D (1961) On growth and form. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Tikhodeyev ON (2018) The mechanisms of epigenetic inheritance: how diverse are they? Biol Rev
93:1987–2005
Trontelj P, Fišer C (2009) Perspectives: cryptic species diversity should not be trivialised. Syst
Biodivers 7(1):1–3
Tsiairis CD, Aulehla A (2016) Self-organization of embryonic genetic oscillators into spatiotem-
poral wave patterns. Cell 164(4):656–667
Turing AM (1952) The chemical theory of morphogenesis. Philos Trans R Soc B 237(641):37–72
Turner DA, Baillie-Johnson P, Martinez Arias A (2016) Organoids and the genetically encoded
self-assembly of embryonic stem cells. BioEssays 38(2):181–191
Ubukata T (2005) Theoretical morphology of bivalve shell sculptures. Paleobiology 31:643–655
250
A. I. Granovitch

Van den Brink SC, Baillie-Johnson P, Balayo T, Hadjantonakis A-K, Nowotschin S, Turner DA,
Martinez Arias A (2014) Symmetry breaking, germ layer speciﬁcation and axial organisation in
aggregates of mouse embryonic stem cells. Development 141(22):4231–4242
Vandel A (1964) Biospeleology. In: The biology of cave animals (Biospéologie. La biologie des
Animaux Cavernicoles). Gauthier-Villars Éditeur, Paris. English edition: Vandel A (1965)
biospeleology. The biology of cavernicolous animals. Pergamon Press, Oxford
Vavilov NI (1987) Theoretical basis of selection. Nauka, Moscow
Vorontsov NN (2004) The development of evolution idea in biology. KMK Scientiﬁc Press,
Moscow
Waddington CH (1957) The strategy of the genes: a discussion of some aspects of theoretical
biology. Allen & Unwin, London
Walton KD, Freddo AM, Wang S, Gumucio DL (2016) Generation of intestinal surface: an
absorbing tale. Development 143(13):2261–2272
Warren G, Wickner W (1996) Organelle inheritance. Cell 84(3):395–400
Werner S, Vu HT-K, Rink JC (2017) Self-organization in development, regeneration and
organoids. Curr Opin Cell Biol 44:102–109
West-Eberhard MJ (2003) Developmental plasticity and evolution. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
9
The Morphoprocess and the Diversity of Evolutionary Mechanisms. . .
251

Mesological Plasticity as a New Model
to Study Plant Cognition, Interactive
Ecosystems, and Self-Organized
Evolutionary Processes
10
Marc-Williams Debono
Abstract
The plasticity of living systems acts at several levels of evolutionary biology
including self-organization, phenotypic, phylo-, onto-, and epigenetic processes,
while mesology is an approach situated in between ecology and phenomenology.
After a description of the speciﬁc objects of plasticity and mesology as
non-dualist studies of the dynamical coupling between beings and their singular
milieu, we will develop some arguments regarding the perception–action loop
and the sensory ﬂux of informations crossing the evolution of the living, before
focusing on recent discoveries about plant electrome. Using for the ﬁrst time
mesological plasticity as a frame to reanalyze the Uexcküll’s assertions about
Umwelt and meaning-making theories of plants, this chapter shows the leading
rule of electromic interfaces in the generation of spontaneous low-voltage
variations continuously emitted by plants via electrophytographic or EPG
recordings. Used as early markers, EPGs are considered in this framework as
natural systems of monitoring and discrimination of environmental stimuli that
allow the identiﬁcation of the electromic signature of a plant–stimulus pair in a
given milieu. More generally, we will develop the trajections associated with
complex
behaviors
of
plants:
a
bottom-up
transdisciplinary
view
of
co-evolutionary or ecosemiotic processes highlighting their speciﬁc sensitive
ﬁelds and cognitive accesses to experience (their otherness) as well as new
phenomenologies about interactive ecosystems and phytosemiotics.
M.-W. Debono (*)
PSA Research Group, Palaiseau, France
e-mail: psa-rg@plasticites-sciences-arts.org
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_10
253

Keywords
Plant electrome · Electrophytography · Plasticity concept · Interactive ecosystem ·
Mesological plasticity · Cognition · Phytosemiotics · Transdisciplinarity
10.1
Introduction
Plant “intelligent” behaviors (Trewavas 2003) upset today notions rooted in our
evolutionary schemata, largely anthropocentric, questioning self-organized knowl-
edge-accumulating and non-linear dynamic evolutionary systems including as main
marker bioelectrical correlates of their extensive communication strategies and
embodied or extended cognitive abilities compared to neuroplasticity and the rapid
sensorimotor coordination of animals. We will show that plants are plastic interfaces
that behave as self-organized entities with protoneural abilities leading to active
perception systems close to those of animals and non-linear dynamic processes
which have progressively conducted to the eclosion of complex brain networks
during evolution. The sensory and bioelectrical (or electromic) abilities of plants
constitute indeed a privileged ﬁeld of study of the interface between living
organisms and the environment (mesology) as well as their non-nervous ways of
processing information (Debono 2013a, b; Debono and Souza 2019).
After describing the conﬂuence between the two major approaches of plasticity as
a “science of forms” and mesology as a “science of environments,” we will detail the
electrical dimension of plant life (de Toledo et al. 2019) and the primordial role
that electromic pathways play in communication and rapid diffusion of information
in plants. Among these electromic activities, we will focus on the little known
and
underestimated
role
of
spontaneous
extracellular
variations
or
EPGs
(electrophytograms)1emitted at the level of plant tissues, looking in particular in
the mesological approach for the Uexcküllian ﬂaws that led to this positioning. This
will lead us to the modeling of a new approach to the relationship between the plant
and its milieu (mesological plasticity) and the discovery of speciﬁc signatures of the
electrome in relation to some stimuli or ﬁeld experiments that have important
implications and repercussions in experimental works in evolutionary biology or
plant electrophysiology, but also in botany, agro-ecology, biosemiotics, ecophysiol-
ogy, and cognitive sciences.
We will also explore throughout this chapter new worlds that intersect and
co-signify each other and more generally re-interrogate around this new botanical
front of science on the notions of form, intelligence, sensitivity, metamorphosis,
cognition, or identity. A journey that, we hope, will allow us to take a new look at the
otherness of plants and the primordial impact of epigenetic plasticity as well as the
inﬂuence of the milieu differentiated from the environment during evolution. “What
1See paragraph 10. Section 10.4.2 related to the epistemological context linked to the discovery of
EPGs in plants.
254
M.-W. Debono

a plant knows?” asked Chamovitz (2017) discussing about the sensory system of
plants. It is clearly the question. We will see that plants can show complex behaviors,
sensibility, and minimal cognition (Calvo and Keijzer 2011). At the level of evolu-
tionary biology, the real question regards their speciﬁc relationships with the milieu
and their interactive ecosystem, their otherness. In such an area, we will show that
plants are: (1) plastic interfaces having as main motor the form/matter cople, acting
mainly at the level of phenotypic (direct impact on their life cycle and ﬁtness),
morphogenetic, and epigenetic plasticity; (2) electromic interfaces using bioelectri-
cal networks and non-linear dynamic systems as facilitator and discriminative
processes to communicate and spread information; (3) mesological interfaces
using phytosemiotics and the plant/milieu entity to grow optimally and ﬁt in
(Debono and Souza 2019; Debono 2020b). Starting from there, we can break out
of the zoocentric or neurocentric mold done by many authors and afﬁrm that, if
plants use the same directory of cell signalization (ionic channels, bioelectric
currents, chemical neurotransmitters. . .) without brain and neurons (contrarily to
the enteric nervous system, for instance) and are eukaryotes as us, they do not have
the same sensorial and subjective experience at the end. This is because or dynamical
coupling with the milieu is singular, based on morphisms, meanings, topological
situations, and subjectivity (Berque 2015).
10.2
The Epistemic Concept of Plasticity: Ontology
and Complexion
Born from an observable—the brain plasticity—(which is of course not a metaphor),
linked to my activities as a researcher in neurobiology, the scope of this universal
property of matter that describes also a process, very early on imposed itself on me as
fundamental to be explored, both on theoretical and experimental levels. Indeed, the
progressive elaboration of the epistemological concept of plasticity was initiated by
the publication of “L’ère des plasticiens” (Debono 1996) describing a new evolu-
tionary logic (non-binary and transversal) taking plasticity out of its ruts (until then
focalized on visual arts or biological functionality) and opening it up to transversal
grids of lecture. At the experimental level, the implementation of transdisciplinary
(TD) research groups working around evolutionary processes using mathematical
modelization, biology, cognitive sciences, neuroplasticity, experimental medicine
and posturology, biophysics, genetics, paleoanthropology, neurosemantics or art and
science relationships, was effective during several years within the framework of the
GDP2 founded in 1994 in Paris. The success of this enterprise has allowed to
gradually mark out the different plastic interfaces and to create a research back-
ground on the concept of plasticity and its evolutions, notably through the opening of
a new research area on plastic processes and the regular publications of the
2Groupe des Plasticiens: see the minutes of the GDP Conferences on the PSA website referenced
in 4.
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
255

Transdisciplinary Review of Human Plasticity Plastir3 founded in 2005 which
gathers nearly 150 authors around TD themes having plasticity as a junction point,
which you can follow on the ofﬁcial website of the PSA (Plasticities Sciences Arts)
research group.4
As a matter of fact, the term of plasticity from the Greek plassein concerns form
and matter in the ﬁrst place. For a long time exclusively attached to esthetics, ﬁne
arts, and the humanities, now concerns all scientiﬁc ﬁelds (plasticity of materials, of
the brain, human plasticity. . .) as well as philosophical ones. It has been sometimes
misused due to its ubiquity (Aristotle), man’s power of self-transformation (Plato’s
myth of epimetheus), universality and historicity (from Harvey with his vis plastica
and Pic de la Mirandole with his “De dignitate hominis oratio”) (1486) to different
scientiﬁc traditions (biology, embryology, genetics, morphogenesis, anthropol-
ogy...) including the works of Wolffe (2000), Driesch (1892), Pigliucci (2001),
Haeckel (1904), Woltereck (1909), Johannsen (1911), Thom (1966, 1977),
D’Arcy Thomson (1917), the plastic nature of the neoplasticians Cudworth (1820)
and the philosophical approaches of Leibniz (Monads, 1646–1716),5 Goethe 1999,
2004 (Plastizität, 1749–1832), Heidegger (1961, 1982), Kant (1967, 1781) and
speciﬁcally Hegel linking subjectivity, temporality, and plasticity in “The phenome-
nology of mind” (1939–1941).
At the contemporary level, only two concepts are operational today to my
knowledge, presenting common points—about plastic dynamics—and diver-
gence—about objects and methodology—: our epistemic and transdisciplinary
approach to the concept of plasticity and the Malabou’s philosophical positioning
linking ontology, temporality, and the post-historical future of man. This approach
takes us out of passivity by describing an active and sometimes negative
(or explosive, plasticizing) plasticity following Deleuze and the deconstructivist
post-Hegelian philosophical current (Malabou 1996). We share this dynamic con-
ception of plasticity (plastids vs plasmas, ex. sculpture) taking into account the
intelligibility of forms and the temporality of the plastic process, provided that we
place it in the transdisciplinary context of the third included which allows us to
exceed the active–passive or negative–positive antagonist terms (Contradiction
logic, Lupasco 1970, 1986) and indicates that we are dealing with a ternary
Lupascian process and/or an imprint-matrix mode (Berque 2014a) more than with
an emerging property. This is true for developmental and functional plasticity and at
the junction between the humanities and the fundamental sciences embodied by a
plastic process in progress. The plasticity of the living includes indeed self-organized
and dynamic non-linear systems that co-determine or co-signify themselves recipro-
cally, participating in the genesis of the forms from which they originate and not only
undergoing it. The different interfaces and plastic complexes that we will describe
3Plastir: the Transdisciplinary Review of Human Plasticity is available online on the PSA website
(see summary and English abstracts): http://www.plasticites-sciences-arts.org/plastir/
4PSA Website: http://www.plasticites-sciences-arts.org
5Please also look at the more recent reference on Leibniz (2004) and More (1969, 1987).
256
M.-W. Debono

more speciﬁcally in the plasticogenetic process allow plasticity to seal this move-
ment and to inscribe it in a common ontology (Table 10.1).
The concept of plasticity is then not dualistic and seeks the principles of coher-
ence and defragmentation of knowledge, following a transdisciplinary approach
(Debono 2005, 2010, 2012). More generally, plasticity could be assimilated to the
science of forms. It is not either purely descriptive but has a raised predictive value of
the dynamic behavior of nonliving systems, being a founding property and not only a
systemic or an emergent one. In this direction, regarding advances in systemic
plasticity, biophysical science, cognitive neurosciences, or ecosystemics, it is neces-
sary to speak of metaplasticity as a way to explore the genesis of natural processes.
As explained in a recent paper summarizing the evolution of the epistemic concept of
plasticity—from the concept to the complex of plasticity—and then a description of
its mesological part (Debono 2021a, b), plasticity is a key notion in any evolutionary
process that looks at form and matter in the ﬁrst place. It concerns all inert or living
systems and contrary to elasticity, ﬂexibility, or malleability, leads to an
irreversibility of the dynamic link established between two interfaces that cannot
be reduced to each other (plastic interfaces) and then to the formation of plasticity
complexes6 of which plasticity is an included third.
As a matter of fact, the speciﬁcity of plasticity, apart from its primary function
within the matter–form interface, is its irreversibility and ability to active processes
of transformation in which the events evolve while co-signifying mutually, in other
Table 10.1 Plasticogenesis—from plastic interfaces to epistemic processes. The unformed–
formed step symbolizes the primitive link preﬁguring the formation of matter while the matter–
form interface is the operational one, which may involve energetic processes. Both interfaces can
generate plasma–plastid or structured–structuring relationships, fundamental in morphogenetics or
developmental plasticity (Debono 2005, 2021b). The three main steps of the plasticogenetic
process are: (1) the formation of plastic interfaces (PI), (2) of active bondings (AB), and (3) of
irreversible plasticity complexes (PC) like BEP-BMP leading to ternary paths conducting to
co-meaning metaplastic or epistemic processes (see Table 10.2). # MW Debono
PLASTIC
INTERFACES
(PLASTICITY OF THE PLASTICITY)
ARTICULATION
RECIPRO CITY
SEMIOTICS
ONTOLOGY
TIERCEITY
TETRALEMNA
T STATE
TERNARY 
PATHS &
COMPLEXES
COMPLEXION
MATTER-FORM
(MATTER-ENERGY)
(IRREVERSIBILITY)
PLASTICITY
COMPLEXES
CO-MEANING
PROCESSES
EPISTEMIC
PROCESSES
ACTIVE
BONDING
CO-IMPLICATION
CO-CONSTRUCTION
METAPLASTICITY
UNFORMED-FORMED
(PLASTID-PLASMA)
6From complexion or aggregation (not from complexity), look at the main plasticity complexes
described in Table 10.2.
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
257

words are structured as much as structuring, including a reciprocity between ascend-
ing and downward systems inside the same system or of interacting systems (e.g.,
brain/mind or experience/consciousness). This behavior implies a universal capacity
of articulating fundamental pairs such as form vs matter, form vs object or subject,
etc. This active binding includes non-linear dynamic systems (like EPGs and
electromic interfaces) and obeys a transverse logic by creating irreversible plastic
complexes where plasticity is a catalyst. The important point is that plasticity is the
third included of the complexes formed (see below) and acts directly at the anchor-
age point of dimensions or irreducible expressions by including the object or subject
in the plasticity of the world. Ontology and complexion are thus two fundamental
steps of the plastic process. The following tables summarize the four steps of
plasticogenesis, showing the main plasticity complexes from matter–form–plasticity
to brain–mind–world (Tables 10.1 and 10.2).
The plasticity of living systems is more speciﬁcally related to our ﬁeld of study
and to the subject we are addressing in this chapter. It is classically deﬁned as a self-
organizing and order-generating capacity of living systems and/or a durable
deformability of structures. Systemic studies of functional trajectories and variability
differentiate rigid systems like robots with functional invariance and ﬂexible or
homeostatic systems with structural invariance including systematic variability
from plasticity including vicariance and further modiﬁcations (Paillard 1976;
Debono 2017). Elasticity describes a systemic auto-adaptability to program changes
while plasticity assumes the ability of a stable or autostabilized system to be
deformed or to deform in a lasting and sensitive way its own structures or
sub-structures (synaptic plasticity) and to exceed its own limits (transformation or
ﬁne equilibration of thermodynamic couplings or environmental pressures). The
plasticity of the function is therefore described as an open system or a systemic
unit (Weiss 1941, Jacob’s integron) that is speciﬁed by its structure, functioning, and
function (SFF). Only plastic systems can modify this trivalent system.
To summarize: plasticity is opposed to ﬂexibility and systemic stability and an
irreversible deformability, capable of surviving its initial causes, distinguishes
Table 10.2 Some of the main plasticity complexes. At the level of vegetal plasticity, the primacy
of the form (implying phenotypic as well as epigenetic plasticity) is expressed mainly through plant
morphogenesis and the mesological plasticity of the dynamical coupling between plants and their
singular milieu (BEP). # MW Debono (2021a, b)
Main plasticity complexes
MFP (Matter–Form–Plasticity): Autopoietic Plasticity, Self-Organization, Materials Plasticity
(Physics), Structured–Structuring Relationships, Morphogenesis, Cosmogonies...
IAP (Innate–Acquired–Plasticity): Evolutionary Biology, Ontogenesis, Phenotypic, Philo- and
Epigenetic Plasticity
BMP (Brain–Mind–Plasticity): Neuroplasticity, Experience–Consciousness Relationships,
Affect. . .
SOP (Subject–Object–Plasticity): Plasticity of the living (PL), Interobjectivity/subjectivity,
Sociobiological Systems, Ontological Plasticity, Alterity, Identity, Human Plasticity. . .
BEP-BMP (Being–Environment–Plasticity, Body–Mind–Plasticity)
258
M.-W. Debono

plasticity from elasticity, ﬂexibility, or malleability. It concerns the form as well as
the function of living organisms, their sensitivity to the external environment, their
structured–structuring relationships of which the phenotypic (Pigliucci 2001; West-
Eberhard 2003) and epigenetic plasticity7 are strong anchors. In other words,
plasticity is a unique dynamic interface between two sensitive worlds, concerning
as much the simplest self-organized systems as cortical representations of the human
brain. It includes the capacity of the mature system to reshape its own structure
and/or to create new entries in the system: typically motor and somatotopic cards or
synaptic and cognitive plasticity leading to structural reshufﬂing of networks at the
cerebral scale (Greenwood and Parasuraman 2010).
The recent rise of the evo-devo approach in laboratories around the world has led
to a revaluation of the effective and dynamic role of plasticity in living organisms,
whether it is phenotypic, ontogenetic, or phylogenetic, highlighting the major
inﬂuence of interactions with the environment and the milieu during development.
Plasticity has indeed become a major evolutionary concept because it is ﬁnally
recognized for what it is, an efﬁcient means at the scale of individuals as well as
populations to develop innovative adaptive strategies (micro as well as macro-
evolutionary) responding to or thwarting the heterogeneous spatiotemporal distribu-
tion maps of the environment by optimizing survival as well as the singular
relationships between living beings and their environment. More generally, plastic-
ity revolutionizes a part of the history of science by becoming a central concept in
evolutionary and humanistic biology.8
10.3
The Concept of Mesology: Being, Environment,
and Trajection
Before focusing on the plant electrome as a privileged interface for the study of this
new concept of mesological plasticity, we will present the basis of the contemporary
mesological approach and its interest in the study of living systems during evolution.
We will adopt here the contemporary scientiﬁc approach of the orientalist geogra-
pher Berque as to the contemporary deﬁnition of mesology, which can be generically
described as the science of environments (singular milieu, habitat, or immediate
environments with which plants and animals directly interact) as opposed to classical
environmental sciences. Indeed, this classiﬁcation was based on the naturalistic
foundations of the founder of ethology Jacob von Uexküll about the Umvelt and
the quasi-contemporary discoveries of the Japanese philosopher Watsuji Tetsurô
(1934–1935) who, listening to Heideggerian philosophy (1992), introduced the
7Related to the historical works from Harvey (1651), Buffon (1749), Waddington (1942, 1957),
Lamarck (1815–1822). See reference list.
8The biology of the twentieth century in PhasPhen (2017), CNRS Savoie Thematic School, GDR
(University of Lyon 1 CNRS
- LBBE/Biometry and Vegetal Biology Laboratory UMR5558-
INRA).
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
259

concept of fûdosei 風土性meaning “the structural moment of human existence” or
the dynamic coupling of the being and its environment (Berque 2014b, 2016). This
is one of the founding principles of mesology about human or ecoumenical
environments (Berque 2000).
The Berquian school or ecologists like Tassin (2020) are more generally opposed
to a scientiﬁc ecology that considers the environment and biodiversity as socio-
economic variables to be adjusted and not the singular and sensible links established
directly between living organisms (animals, plants, or humans with the notion of
ecumene) and the milieu. This approach is not limited to niches or to Darwinian
adaptation but takes into account the topological, biosemiotic, and ontological
dimension of these speciﬁc links that are independent of the raw and universal
data of the environment (Umgebung). The milieu is thus regarded as being relative
to a subject and conversely, contrary to the dualist or mechanicist considerations of
the West. It is what exists concretely for the subject (or a given species: famous
example of the tick), whereas the environment is a universal object carried by the
glance of an abstract observer. Between the environment and the being concerned
expresses itself thus a “counterpoint” (Kontrapunkt) or a “counter-assemblage”
(Gegengefüge), which makes that the two terms are inseparable (Berque 2014a,b,
2016).
Mesology can thus be compared to ecophysiology (Souza et al. 2018), a scientiﬁc
discipline that integrates the behavioral and physiological responses of living
organisms in a given environmental context and seeks to understand how
populations of different species of living beings constantly face the constraints of
their environment during evolution. However, it has an ecophenomenological,
semiotic, and societal dimension that clearly distinguishes it from classical ecology,
a term with which it has historically co-evolved.9 Indeed, as already mentioned, the
new contributions developed by Berque from the works of Watsuji and Uexküll
introduce the concept of trajection resulting from the landscape trajection, then
resituated as a ternary passage compared to the Chôra of Plato—at the same time
imprint and matrix—and to the Indian tetralemma: Berque (2014a) and the state of
mediance (translation of the dynamic coupling between the being and its environ-
ment or fudôsei). According to the author: “It is the seizure of the Umgebung as
Umwelt”; in other words, it is the “as that” by which the Earth is seized (by the
senses, the action, the thought, the word), as a world.” This seizure is analogous to a
predicate, in which the mesological reality (which is the reality at all for the being
considered) can be represented by the formula: r ¼ S/P, where r is the reality, S the
logical subject (what it is about, i.e. the Earth or the nature), the oblique or diagonal,
the “as that” and P the predicate (what is seized from S, i.e., the world). In other
words, concrete reality is neither simply objective (S), nor simply subjective (P); it is
trajective (S/P). Several trajective chains like the semiological chains of Barthes or
Pierce can be involved (Berque 2019).
9Haeckel published the term ökologie in 1866 (Generelle Morphologie, Berlin, Reimer Vol.
2, p. 286). See also the recent publication of Levit GS and Hossfeld (2019) on the subject.
260
M.-W. Debono

10.4
Plant Electrome and Cognition
10.4.1 Behaviors and Signalization in Plants
The cellular communication of plants is as complex as that of animal cells with a
directory of similar ion channels although with speciﬁc differences such as their
intra- and extracellular compositions or the existence of proton pumps (H+ transport
against metabolic gradients and ATPases), several membranes (plasmatic, vacuolar,
pectocellulosic
wall)
of
which
the
plasmalemma
is
the
most
important
autoregenerated electrome, transporters, and membrane proteins forming several
dozens of sensory receptors. Among these, growth hormones like auxin, efﬁcient
photoreceptors, and the ability to distinguish certain wavelengths, chemoreceptors
capable of synthesizing some 3000 molecules or chemical compounds emitted and
processed by plants, including methyljasmonate, anti-stress substances, or BVOCs
(Biogenic Volatile Organic Compounds) allowing remote exchange or defense
against attacks from herbivores. In the same way, many sensitive sensors allow a
direct interaction with the ecosystem or the environment (insect pollinator, soil
moisture, gravitation, electromagnetism, exploration of the chemical composition
of
the
soil,
air
or
space—climbing
plants—,
mechanosensory
receptors,
phonotropism—effect on the direction of the roots—, emission and capture of clicks
for the purpose of intra and interspecies communication, etc.). Behaviors involving
mobility, memorization and certain forms of learning that are described in many
species (Mimosa pudica, Venus ﬂytrap, Dionaea muscipula, Nepenthes) and present
adapted behaviors and learning capacities according to the danger of predators
(insects, lizards, small mammals, worms) or the search for nitrogen in the soil
essential to produce proteins (Wildon et al. 1992; Volkov et al. 2010; Volkov
2014; Cheung et al. 2020 for a recent review).
Among the many recent discoveries of plant neurobiology research launched by
the school of Florence and Bohn and refocused today around the signaling and
behaviors of plants (Baluška and Mancuso 2009; Brenner et al. 2006), we can quote
the highlighting of the underground communication carried out by roots allied to
mycelia and hyphae forming one of the densest symbiotic networks: the mycorrhiza
or the “wood wide web” (Volkov et al. 2019). This signaling network considerably
increases the volume of soil and the active surface of the roots (factor 700) by
ensuring a dosed distribution of sugars and water to the plants and their neighbors
according to their needs and to the changes of situations (drought, stress, priorities,
obstacle circumvention, etc.). It can be thousands of years old in some trees and
measure several tens of km2. The question of individuality and quasi-immortality of
the plant kingdom is also raised at this level, given the plurality of possible genomes
of a single tree whose own individuality or its progressive colonization of close
organisms is not known. In addition, the efﬁciency of this high-speed network
allows trees to communicate with their congeners, or even with other species, that
can present behaviors interpreted as solidary or social (intertwining, defense and
prevention strategies; Simard et al. 2012).
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
261

These complex modes of plant communication relayed by the interconnected
meristems and efﬁcient aerial networks of plants through a body anchored to the
ground and required to react permanently to environmental stimuli are one of the
ﬁndings leading us to rethink the scale of plasticity of living systems. In particular, it
raises the question of the divergence of the kingdoms; many works underlining the
fact that it is not so clear-cut. This taxonomic re-evaluation of the evolution of plants
compared to animals (Selosse 2012),10 added to the classical observation of inter-
species co-evolutionary processes between plants and animal pollinators, deserves to
be developed. The crucial role of hormones and neurotransmitter analogs in growth,
sensory responses (light, orientation, gravity, oxygen, moisture, inorganic nutrients
for roots) or stress in plants, the emission of toxic substances or long-distance
volatile gases like ethylene,11,12 repair or vascularization of plants are also clear
signs of high sensibility (different from the nervous system of animals) and access to
immediate experience necessary to optimize their survival and growth.
New scientiﬁc approaches of plant behavior, signaling, and cognition clearly
show since two decades that perception–action loops, cognitive abilities (Calvo and
Keijzer 2011, 2016), or intelligent behaviors (Trewavas 2003, 2005; Mancuso and
Viola 2013) are widely developed in plants. These extensive studies including the
biomolecular, genetic, and epigenetic plan as well as the whole plant behavior show
the beneﬁt that plant evolution brings in terms of sensory coding, learning, directed
individual variation, and adaptability (Calvo 2016). Plant complex behaviors and
goal-directed changes are used to face adverse or competitive environments, giving
them the best response to adapt and improve their survival. Several mechanisms
including competition, regeneration, mutualism, cooperation, local memory, or
learning are involved using common electrochemical communication and functions
(perception, sensory inputs, hormonal system, growth, reproduction, development,
cognition maps described here for niche construction) than animals. They legiti-
mately raise questions about the nature of emerging behaviors in plants, including
terms like intelligence, sentience, or cognition.
Perhaps the problem has been posed backwards from the start and we should have
seen before the “radical otherness” advocated by Hallé (2014) concerning plants
rather than trying to compare animal and plant kingdoms at all costs? Still, without
entering into this semantic debate, which has ancient roots with the fundamental
pioneering work of Bose on bioelectricity and the nervous mechanism of plants
(1901, 1902, 1926)13 or even earlier by von Sachs noting the analogies between the
responses of plants and those of animal skeletal muscles (1874, 1862) or by Darwin
10Common evolutionary tree until before the divergence of the kingdoms and introduction to a new
classiﬁcation of eukaryotes (Chlorobiont vs Zoobiont).
11Plants dose their responses according to the danger involved: from leaves rendered inappetent to
some pests to poison like tannins for their predators.
12Wouter Van Hoven, Wildlife Management Centre, Pretoria, South Africa. Famous observation of
emission of toxic substances and volatile gas by kudu-killing acacia trees (over-interpreted? as an
ability to warn neighboring trees of danger).
13See Bose refs and Tandon (2019) for a recent review of Bose’s pioneering work.
262
M.-W. Debono

working on the movements of plants14 and the self-recognition of Orchids (1864,
1881), the observation is that, apart from some overly anthropo- or neurocentric
statements, it has given rise to a wealth of indisputable scientiﬁc results ranging from
botany to epigenetics and interdisciplinary discoveries updating the remarkable
capacities of the plant world in terms of communication or sensitivity (Baluška
et al. 2006). Many philosophers, engineers, anthropologists, or ecologists have also
taken up the issue with anthropocentric, metaphysical, or ethical overtones.15
10.4.2 Role of Low-Voltage Spontaneous Variations
or Electrophytograms (EPGs) Recorded at the Whole Plant
Level: Dynamics of the Plant Electrome
The electrome, term introduced by De Loof (2016) in analogy to the biome or the
genome represents the totality of the ionic and electric dynamics present at different
scales of organization of the plant or the electrical dimension of plant life (de Toledo
et al. 2019). Knowing that cell signaling and bioelectricity are two major ways of
processing information in plants, we have demonstrated by pioneering works
(Debono and Bouteau 1992) that spontaneous microvolted extracellular variations
or oscillations called electrophytograms contribute actively to the expression and
signature of plant’s electrome (Debono 2013a) considered as a self-organized
complex with “multicolored” noise summing up all of the ionic repertory and
bioelectrical activity of plant tissues (Souza et al. 2017). This non-random bioelec-
trical activity is analogous in terms of amplitude to EEGs conventionally recorded in
animals (mathematical derivative representing the algebraic sum of biomolecular
signals associated with polarization–depolarization of cell membranes), but present
neither the same temporality, nor the same degree of correlation and complexity.
As a matter of fact, the spontaneous oscillations that I described and named
electrophytograms or EPGs in a pioneering way (Debono and Bouteau 1992) due to
their EEG-like chaotic characteristics were for a long time confused with back-
ground noise due to their weak voltage and amplitude but also obscured by the
researchers themselves due to what has been called the “Backster effect.”16 Today
14Current research on the root apex conﬁrm Darwin’s predictions and are described as synapse-like
properties by Baluška and Mancuso (2013) Baluška et al. (2004, 2005).
15Philosophers such as Calvo and Keijzer (2011), Coccia (2016), Marder (2013a, b), Hall (2011),
Hiernaux (2019), Morizot (2020); anthropologists like Kohn (2013) or Descola (2005, 2019),
ecologists like Tassin (2020), ethicists like Pouteau (2014, 2018), forest engineers such as legal
approaches about plant law, political status, human–plant relationship, or the planthropocene
(Marder 2013a, b, Myers 2017, Haraway 2003, 2008, Tsing 2012) are widely published. See
reference list for details.
16This side-effect was related to the pseudo-scientiﬁc experiments of a former CIA agent who
interpreted the same kind of bioelectrical traces (weak oscillations recorded with a galvanometer) by
lending intentions and feelings to plants, which in the context of the New Age had the echoes that
one could expect (mediatized by the worldwide best seller of Tompkins and Bird “The secret life of
plants”), but above all had the serious consequence of obscuring electrophysiological researches in
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
263

this debate is totally outdated and our results validated by several independent teams
in the world. The aim is now to understand the exact role played by EPGs in the life
of plants with various approaches (modeling, quantiﬁcation, monitoring in natural
environment with multisensors or EPG kits, ﬁltering) searching for patterns or
speciﬁc signatures of the electromic ﬁeld related to certain stimuli (Parise et al.
2020, 2021; Debono and Souza 2019) We detail in this chapter several of these
approaches and our up-to-date working hypothesis concerning the precise role of
EPGs in the operability of the plant–environment relationship and its cognition
modes (Debono 2013a, b, 2021a, b). Contextually, much long-muted plant electro-
physiology work is now becoming audible and this new perception of two-way
information ﬂows and complex communication strategies in plants points to a
radically different perspective on our anthropocentric view of life or otherness
(Debono 2004, 2018) which goes hand in hand with the need to reconsider taxa as
well as the notion of boundaries between living beings. One of the fundamental ways
to measure these activities at the cellular and organic level is to proceed to a precise
bioelectrical survey of the perception–action loop or of the physiological state of
plants. Valuable information on the duration, amplitude, type of conduction, func-
tion, and localization of signals will provide us in the coming decades with essential
clues on the communication capacities of plants. Two anatomical sites are particu-
larly promising at this level: meristems, vascular tissues located at the ends of
underground (root) and aerial branches that interconnect with each other, and the
electrome representing the global electrical activity of the plant organism, which can
be collected, in addition to the cellular level, in the form of spontaneous low-voltage
(20–200 μV) variation potentials or EPGs permanently emitted at the level of sets of
tissues that can propagate themselves in network at the whole plant level (Debono
2013a, Fig. 10.1). This synchronization of EPG activities between different tissues
of the same plant has been validated by Masi et al. (2009) with a multi-electrode
array recording technique (60 channel MEA) able of quantifying them and following
their spatiotemporal course in high resolution in maize roots.
These spontaneous EPG variations were shown interspersed with isolated spikes
or sharp oscillations lasting several seconds or minutes after a natural or evoked
stimulation (Debono 2013a), evoking a marked reactivity to certain stimuli
(Fig. 10.1). EPG activities are indeed added to the panoply of classical bioelectrical
signals brought into play during the various scenarios physiologically soliciting the
plants (Fromm and Lautner 2007; Chen et al. 2016). It is about action potentials or
APs triggered by a depolarization of the membrane following ionic ﬂows, variation
potentials or VPs speciﬁc to plants produced in the xylem and mainly induced by
biotic or abiotic mechanical stimuli, injuries or herbivore attacks, systemic potentials
or SPs which are hyperpolarized signals (H+ pump) gradual in nature propagating at
long distance (5–10 cm/min) in the phloem and local potentials or LPs emitted
directly at the stimulated area under the inﬂuence of environmental factors (light,
this area, made outside of us by two or three other teams in the world like that of Pickard in the USA
(1971), for almost three decades!
264
M.-W. Debono

temperature, air humidity, water, hormone, pathogen infection...) plus long-distance
signals using glutamate like Ca2+ waves (spiking and oscillations) emitted for plant-
defense signaling (Toyota et al. 2018) following herbivore attacks or mechanical
wounding converting local signals to a systemic defense program in the whole plant
(Tian et al. 2020).
10.4.3 Signature of the Electrome and Plant Cognition: A New
Electromic Reading Grid
More generally, being preponderant in any process engaging perception, reaction, or
non-linear behavior of plants, the electrome dynamics generates a constant electrical
activity as a consequence of the movement of electrically charged particles and the
emission of electric ﬁelds partly due to the electrochemical gradients formed. To this
must be added the action of mobile and immobile charges involving polymers or
macromolecules, electrogenic pumps or electronic ﬂows in chloroplasts and
Fig. 10.1 Dynamic protoneural networks in plants: a new approach of spontaneous extracellular
potential variations (From M-W Debono, Plant Signaling and Behavior, Vol 8, N6, 2013a,
#
Landes
Biosciences).
Left
plots:
Spontaneous
low-voltage
oscillatory
activity
or
electrophytograms (EPGs) and isolated “spikes” recorded in Kalanchoe Daigremontiana. (a)
followed by a train of higher amplitude spikes evoked by a mechanical stimulus (b–g) and a
recovery of the baseline (h). Right plots: b1, c Chemical activation (Fusicoccin 3.7 μM) inducing
spike-wave discharge for 27 min interrupted by application of a metabolic inhibitor (FCCP 50 μM).
Diagram on the bottom right: experimental setup including both spontaneous and evoked EPGs
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
265

mitochondria. Propagation of signals at short distance is done via plasmodesmata
forming a symplasm and permitting cell to cell or intercellular communication.
Propagation of signals at long distance concerning vascular and hydraulic systems
like the transport of liquids or sugars (essential energy and photosynthesis) is made
bottom-up (Xylem) or top-down (Phloem) with rapid conductivities implying hydric
or hormonal signals (auxin), calcium oscillations, and chemical mediators (Hedrich
et al. 2016).
The EPG chaotic activity was recently attributed by Souza et al. (2017) to a self-
organized critical state (SOC) of the whole plant. According to a work to which I am
currently contributing, it could correspond to a non-linear dynamic behavior able to
manage the permanent inﬂux of stimuli of all kinds that assail the plant (wind, rain,
drought, mechanical shocks, predation, etc...) and have a central role in the relational
life or cognitive ecology (Real 1993) of plants. The same team recently
demonstrated that the EPGs show a distribution according to the power law which
is deﬁned by two constants: a (proportionality) and k (exponent) which characterize
large systems presenting invariant scales. Under some conditions, they can push
them toward a SOC conventionally observed in non-linear dynamic systems (Souza
et al. 2017). Power density spectrum (PSD) and autocorrelation studies carried out
by these authors, respectively show that SOCs and non-linear dynamic behaviors
present different patterns and colored noises, depending on the kind of stimulus
applied (Mannitol, cold, low light. . .), corresponding to the previous isolated spikes
or evoked potentials in the form of regular oscillations that we had recorded
outside spontaneous EPGs (Debono 2013a, b). As previously described, temporal
correlations on large scales show also a long-distance treatment of complex infor-
mation emerging from different temporospatial patterns propagating through all
plant tissues (Masi et al. 2009). Other teams like that of Gimenez et al. (2021)
have recorded different patterns of bioelectrical oscillatory signals in different
Miconia species, using learning machine techniques and in non-invasive in loco
recordings, several speciﬁc patterns and spectral densities were recorded depending
on the species inﬂuenced by environmental factors. We therefore assume that EPGs
are widely used for the detection and discrimination of the stimuli when dynamic
coupling occurs via SOCs, allowing plants to prioritize warning or defense signals
and optimize their survival and growth. A constant EPG monitoring of plants will
permit to measure this discrimination rate and the management of the environmental
stimuli done in real time by plants (water supply during drought, brutal climate
changes, interspecies relations, osmotic shock, stress...) in order to ensure their
optimal growth (Saraiva et al. 2017; Debono and Souza 2019; Debono 2021a, b).
Indeed, EPG like signals17 having been recently validated by several teams in the
world like those of Masi et al. (2009) or Cabral et al. (2011), I am now pursuing my
17Our EPG technique (Debono 2013a, initially published in 1992) must not to be confused with a
recent technique called electropenetrography or EPG measuring the electrical penetration graph to
study plant–insect interactions. This technique is also used to study plant virus transmission, host
plant selection by insects, and the feeding process of insects in plant tissues. Lucini and Panizzi
(2018) describe, for instance, experiments with aphids (phytophagous stink bugs or pentatomids)
266
M.-W. Debono

research since 2016 in collaboration with the laboratory of plant cognition and
electrophysiology (Department of Botany, Institute of Biology, Federal University
of Pelotas, Brazil directed by Pr. Souza). This research team has indeed validated and
quantiﬁed EPG activities in plant tissues analyzing the chaotic dynamic of their time
series (Pereira et al. 2018). The results obtained also highlighted spikes following a
power law only when plants were subjected to speciﬁc stimuli such as osmotic stress
(Saraiva et al. 2017; Souza et al. 2017). Next experiments will be done in natural
environment, assuming that laboratory experiments do not allow having an exhaus-
tive survey of the reactivity and interactivity of plants in their natural ecosystem.18
As a matter of fact, recordings with EPG kits or multiple sensors in constant
monitoring could allow to validate deﬁnitively our operational hypothesis and to
show synchronization among bioelectrical signals and formation of speciﬁc patterns
or signatures of the electrome following external stimuli. We hope especially that
these in loco experiments will conﬁrm our hypothesis about the watch (spontaneous
variations) and discriminative role of plant’s EPGs responding to environmental
stimuli and downstream: (1) the Uexkül’s functional circle as support of meaning-
making theory, Umwelt and more generally the value of bio- or phytosemiotics;
(2) the mesological plasticity and “subjectivity” of plants.
Indeed, our recent publications assimilate plants to plastic electromic interfaces
displaying cognitive abilities19 into interactive ecosystems (Debono and Souza
2019). Several speciﬁc signature of the plant electrome using synchronized bioelec-
tric networks of different types of vegetal tissues (phloem, xylem, symplasm)
distributed over the whole body of the plant which cells are not separated, were
detected
highlighting
plastic
ternary
complexes
[plant–environment–world]
(Table 10.2) and an effective mesological plasticity (Debono, 2020b). This plastic
process neither purely phenotypic nor epigenetic was for the ﬁrst time reported about
plants by Debono (2016, 2018) who adapted the concept of plasticity he developed
to the trajective and medial behavior of plant’s body anchored to the soil and
dynamically coupled to their singular milieu.
As we will develop later, this position allows to attribute to plants a cognitive
access to experience whose modes of action will have to be speciﬁed. It can be
expressed as the capacity to co-construct and perceive an intelligible world or a
sensitive reality activated by the sensory system of plants representing dynamic
ecosensitive interfaces showing communicative, intelligent, or resilient strategies.
The question of their intelligent behavior is here secondary, because related to all
living systems (from bacteria to man) having absolute needs to evolve adequately
and survive in their environment; the way to do it being very likely linked to
phytosemiotics and plant mesological interfaces (see next sections).
using a simple device for the extracellular recordings at the level of plant tissues (xylem and
phloem) that are connected by inserting an electrode into the soil next to the plant. Such recordings
are done as soon as the aphid starts plant penetration and allow the registration of EPG waveforms.
18Work in progress.
19According to the biological and post-cognitivist acception of this term.
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
267

Our experiments have indeed shown, far ahead of current discoveries, that if the
nature of bioelectrical events linked to their cellular ionic directory or to local
responses is well known, the permanent spontaneous oscillations collected at the
level of the whole plant with electrophytographic techniques actually play a prepon-
derant role in their sensitive relationship to the natural environment. As previously
mentioned, long assimilated to noise due to the low amplitude and chaotic nature of
their signals, EPGs constitute for us, with the whole electrome, a unique facilitating
system of monitoring, management, and discrimination of stimuli allowing plants to
make operational choices to survive and grow optimally, i.e. to have a form of
sensitive access to experience or cognitive ability without representation or need
for a brain. Collected chronically in their natural environment, it would allow us to
draw up the electrical proﬁle of a species, an organism, or an individual by reﬂecting
the efﬁciency and the inseparable character of the direct dynamic coupling taking
place between the plant and its milieu or Umwelt (mesological plasticity). Moreover,
EPGs could constitute valuable early markers of activity in biology or agronomy
(diagnostic or monitoring tools, multisensors, EPG kits). We are experimenting in
this way. Simmi et al. (2020) also recently showed that infection by pathogens
affected the dynamics of the electrome, even when it was located far from the
infected site and before these effects were visually detectable.
The electrome signature of a given species or plant thus indicates a cohesive
factor and/or unit of behavior observable in their singular environment despite the
sessile, modular, and non-individualized nature of the plant system. The electrome
signature or response patterns detected in our EPG experiments or in calcium
oscillations are also speciﬁc signs of reactivity potentially indicating stress-
responses, discriminative choices among stimuli, or complex behaviors of plants.
At the population level, it could concern resilient or “empathic” strategies. Conse-
quently, it is necessary to adopt a new ecoplastic (and electromic) reading grid of the
levels of sensitivity, reactivity, and capacities of adaptation to new situations of
plants in a constantly changing environment (Debono and Souza 2019; Debono
2021a, b).
10.5
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant
Evolutionary Biology
If we consider now the path that led to the development of the epistemological
concept of plasticity, it has totally different sources and objects at the beginning from
the mesological one, namely it does not have as object the eco-phenomenological
study of the world per se, but overlaps it on many points, mainly ontological,
epistemic, and transdisciplinary. The plasticity of living systems is however one of
its main ﬁeld of research (see Sect. 10.2). It is indeed instructive in this context and
for the rest of the discussion to describe how I came to make this connection with
mesology. The tree of causes has two parallel branches indeed: (1) my discovery of
this school of thought while attending the seminar of mesology at the School of
Higher Studies in Social Sciences (EHESS Paris) directed by Berque where I was
268
M.-W. Debono

invited to give a lecture in 2016, and then during a Cerisy colloquium dedicated to
the mesological paradigm at the time of the Anthropocene (Debono 2017, 2018);
(2) my work in plant electrophysiology questioning the sensitivity of plants and their
close link with the milieu while they are rooted in the soil and permanently subjected
to environmental stimuli. However, it was the ﬁrst time that these two concepts
(plasticity and mesology) met, and it quickly became apparent that in Uexcküll’s
precursory work, the place of the plant world had not been studied at all. Only a few
allusions to it are made in his great work. We will come back to this in the next
sections because we can interpret these elements differently today.
In any case, there are two excellent reasons to study this question further, which is
directly related to the subject of this book on the self-organization of living beings
during evolution. Indeed, the body–medium–world ternarity is impacted at several
scales during evolutionary processes whether they concern phylogenesis, ontogene-
sis, or epigenesis. This concerns as much the development of populations and/or
acquired characters as the scale of the individual. However, the mesological part is
situated between the micro and macro-evolutionary scale since it refers to a non-dual
process of imprinting-matrix and being–environment totally linked to interactive
ecosystems and biotopes common to species. It implies therefore, just like the
fundamental plasticity of the matter–form, co-constructive mechanisms, and bijec-
tive Nature–Culture Relations. If we integrate the subject as a predicate and the “as
that” as properly trajective, we end up with an operational conjunction: the
mesological plasticity.
10.5.1 Plasticity as the “as that” or the Third Included
of the Mesological Formulation
The principle raised by Berque in the form of a digression following my work
highlighting the potential complementarity of the two concepts and the rule of
perception–action loops in plants (Debono 2016) opened up perspectives at the
global level on the study of beings–subjects immersed in a given environment, but
also, and this is above all what I would like to explain for the ﬁrst time in the context
of this work, on the speciﬁc ﬁeld of plant behavior and cognition. The aim was to
describe a cognitive ethology that differs in form and function according to species,
and not to confuse intelligent behaviors or post-cognitivist deﬁnitions that can apply
to plants, particularly in the observation of mechanisms related to extended or
embodied cognition (Debono 2021a) with the notions of animal sentience and
cognitive representations or human introspective consciousness. At this level, the
preponderant emotional part must lead us to question at another level the qualiﬁers or
typologies proper to the universal intelligence of the living and the speciﬁcity of
human or animal feelings (Damasio 2021). In any cases, an interaction prevails at
this stage, whether it is represented or not in a brain, it is that of the immediate
presence of the subject included in its singular milieu, the mediance of the dynamic
pair formed at this level, and by that, of the operating forms of life which result
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
269

from it: a meso-logic of the place and of the interaction with a third included or
the ternarity common to all forms of life.
The concept of mesological plasticity (Debono 2016, 2018, 2020b, 2021a, b) is
then a recent evolution resulting from the combination of my work about the
epistemological concept of plasticity developed since the 1990st and that of Berque
(EHESS, Paris France) concerning mesology (Berque 2014a, b, 2016). It starts from
the observation that plasticity is indeed the meeting of two worlds: the world of
forms and the world of meanings, which co-signiﬁes the reality that we inhabit. By
making a comparative analysis of these two approaches, it becomes clear that the
plastic component of this new formulation combining the two concepts (mesology
and plasticity) is efﬁcient at the level of living systems, and in particular of the
organisms ﬁxed to the ground like plants. As previously evoked, Berque has largely
developed and theorized the mesological approach deepening the notion of
trajectivity and of the relationship between living beings and their singular milieu
(instead of environment). Concerning plasticity, he has precisely located it in the “as
that” (en-tant-que) or the slash of the major mesological formulation r ¼ S/P
previously described and where trajection ﬁnds its full meaning (Berque 2017, see
Fig. 10.2). Trajectivity is synonymous with crossing “beyond,” with a close link
between the milieu and the subject (S/P) through an existent (E) deﬁning the ternary
link SEP from the tetralemme of the Indian logicians “both A and not A” (contra-
dictory terms then described by Aristotle and Plato still prisoners of the excluded
third) and signifying for Berque “this movement by which there is “subjectivation of
the environment and environmentalisation of the subject.” This assertion from
Imanishi Kinji implies more precisely for all plastic and trajective processes, the
notion of subjecthood (or subjectivity) concerning any self-organized structures
during evolution (Berque 2015).
10.5.2 Mesological Relationships Between Plants and Their Milieu:
The Uexküll’s Gap
In the context of an opposition to Darwinist, Tainian, and especially monistic
theories of Haeckel, Uexcküll describes the correlate of the perceptive activity of
animal perception and the irreducibility of the milieu to a given species by focusing
on the perception–action loop and the relations between the environment and its
living being. Canguilhem will analyze this relationship on an epistemological level
later (1965), showing that the transition from the notion of milieu to that of Umvelt
described by Ratzel (1899) shortly before Uexcküll20 is not so clear-cut, at least on a
linguistic and terminological level (Feuerhahn 2009). Uexküll, focused on animal
ethology, will consider indeed very early on the living being as a subject in its own
right. In this regard, he interprets the environmental data adopting a new vision of
speciﬁc links between species and their milieu. Numerous examples of speciﬁc ﬂora
20Uexcküll replaces it with Merkwelt in certain writings: see following paragraphs and note 27.
270
M.-W. Debono

or fauna support these observations, which ensure the dynamic pair established
between a living being and his singular milieu, an optimal growth and mutualistic
links. The example of the tick is classic. More generally, what turns out to be a sign
associated with the typical behavior of an animal or plant species (the stem for a bird
or such a color associated with a speciﬁc wavelength for bees or the direct effects of a
given human culture) leads to a speciﬁc biosemiotic (Kull 2020) or a globalizing
semiosis if we refer to the anthropologist (Kohn 2013). This author reminds us
indeed, that as far as our human societies are concerned, they are inscribed in the
symbolic function of the language and the representation and that it is necessary to
go out of it by taking into account a globalizing semiosis exceeding the human.
According to this hypothesis, all forms of life or forest’s signs would admit
representations and symbolic functions that are expressed differently from us,
i.e. according to an eco-bio-semiotic paradigm (a living thought) for anthropologists
like Kohn taking into account a globalizing semiosis that goes beyond the human
Mesological Process
Mediance/ Umwelt & Structural Moment
Dynamic coupling {Being-Environment}
Trajection & Trajective Chains
Objectivity/Subjectivity/Trajectivity
(Subjectity)
Mesological Formulation
r = S/P
Mesological Plasticity
r = S{PC}P
Fig. 10.2 The Mesological
Process. Mesological Main
steps. For mesological
plasticity, the plasticity
complex PC replaces the “as
that” or the slash of the
mesological formulation
where r is the reality, S the
subject, P the predicate.
# Debono (2021a, b)
following discussions with
Berque (2016, 2017)
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
271

being. One can notice here that if the biosemiotic value of plant–environment
relationships has a strong value in animism and Amazonian cultural approaches, it
should be primarily interpreted here according to its subject status. We have seen that
it would rather be for plants and all living systems a subjectivity (shutaisei 主体性)
according to Imanishi, than a classical subjectivity that is limited to the individual
organism. This subjectivity is extended to the whole biotic society (different from
the biosphere) according to Imanishi or a speciety for Berque that translated him
(2015), indicating in our context the unique otherness of plants rooted in a speciﬁc
milieu compared to object–subject relationships of classical societies.
Indeed, the central object here is not the environment, but the dynamic coupling
of the being with its milieu, which is always interpreted singularly and differs from
the raw data of the environment interpreted similarly by all living species. This
posture of subject inscribed in an environment and in strong interaction with the
adjacent ecosystems is radically opposed to the dualistic or Cartesian positions
separating body and brain or subject and object. What is important in our biologic,
plastic, and mesological position is the relation and its signiﬁcance in a lived reality.
We will see that it has strong implications: (1) at the level of the individual and the
species for what concerns the autonomy of the living being and (2) at the level of a
possible access to experience (sensitive, sensible, cognitive, conscious or not).
Concerning plant plasticity, a point of importance is noted for the ﬁrst time in this
chapter: the almost total absence of reference to the mesological relationships
between plants and their environment by Uexküll, the father of ethology and
mesology. Indeed, he barely mentions them for the ﬁrst time in 1940, when he had
completed his pioneering work while Rowohlt published the original text of Uexküll
related to the plant world in 1956.21 We will quote here the extracts of the few pages
of his major work “Animal Worlds and Human World” followed by the “Theory of
Meaning” (Bedeutungslehre”) and in its French translation by Denoel/Pockett
(1934)22 evoking the place of plants and their relation with the environment. A
later translation was made in Semiotica in 1982 where Uexküll mentioned plants as
part of his attempt to deﬁne the meaning theory.23 “The question of meaning is,
therefore, the crucial one to all living beings,” he says, including plants considered as
able to use or be immersed in habitats or “houses” despite their lack of brain,
receptor–effector relations, mobility, and “meaning-carriers.” However, they are
considered as not autonomous, contrarily to animals, and totally dependent on the
environment.24
Uexküll admits however that plants have in common with animals “to make
selections among the environmental stimuli that constantly assail them” and unlike
inert systems use meaning to evolve and grow optimally in their immediate
21von Uexküll (1956, pp. 110–111).
22von Uexküll (1934, pp. 101–102).
23von Uexküll (1982, pp. 33–53).
24Like fungus-cells differentiating themselves from bacteria by interpreting their surroundings and
signs like food in terms of meaning-carriers and minimal perception–action loops.
272
M.-W. Debono

environment. If we consider these assertions in their historical context (early XIXe,
governed, biologically speaking, by mechanism at one end and vitalism at the other),
and before discussing Uexcküll’s arguments related to his positioning as a precursor
of ethology and biosemiotics, this simple observation or hypothesis regarding the
possible selective rule of plants vs environmental stimuli is fundamental regarding
our discoveries on the function of EPGs and the signature of the electrome in the
relational life of plants, whose discriminative role it would be precisely on the
functional level via electromic mechanisms and mesological plasticity (Debono
and Souza 2019; Debono 2021a, b). We hope that new in loco or in situ EPG
monitoring experiments will conﬁrm this hypothesis as soon as possible.
Uexküll uses indeed the term “Wohnhülle” (dwelling-integument) in place of
Umwelt for plants, considering them to be sensitive through their lipid cell bilayer
and use primary meaning-making where stimuli act as cofactors through the
wohnhülle. Another important consideration that can be linked to the current knowl-
edge of plant physiology in Uexcküll’s hypotheses is the fact that plants capture and
respond to environmental stimuli through their shape and all their organs (medial
body), even though he associated it in its historical context to a “building plan” or
bauplan. It means for the author that take often the example of the deformation of
trees under the inﬂuence of the wind or of the form of tree foliage directing rainfall
toward the root tips, a meaning-factor operating between the shape of plants and the
environmental conditions (rain, wind, drought) which corresponds today to
mechanosensitivity, proprioception, or thigmomorphogenesis commonly observed
in plants (Moulia and Fournier 2009; Hamant and Moulia 2016).
Many other authors have addressed this issue in different contexts. Among these,
Sharov’s deﬁnition (2015) issued in the context of primary meaning-making
modeling states that “an agent is a system with spontaneous activity that selects
actions to pursue goals.” Kull, who quotes the Sharov’s concept of agentivity in
2020, rightly makes the difference between selection and choice, the ﬁrst qualiﬁer
pertaining to purely sequential algorithmic operations, while the second concerns the
presentation of non-sequential options constantly arriving in the present (simulta-
neous interactions in place of stochastic or deterministic ones), which corresponds to
the case of plants rooted in the soil and subjected to permanent and changing stimuli.
This point of view caught my attention because, like Uexküll’s initial observation
previously noted about the meaning theory, it strongly supports our discovery of the
presence of a spontaneous bioelectrical activity permanently emitted at the level of
the whole plant (recorded by electrophytography). Indeed, as previously shown,
EPGs correspond to biological signals of low amplitude and voltage that are an
integral part of the plant electrome that we had detected very early (Debono and
Bouteau 1992),25 hypothesizing that they would have a functional role, and in
particular an essential function as a radar or discrimination window for all the
environmental stimuli in order to allow the plant to develop optimally in an environ-
ment that is often adverse, stressful, and that requires minimal cognition to survive.
25See Sect. 10.4.2.
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
273

Ongoing ﬁeld experiments following the validation of our results by several teams
are now projected with Souza’s team (Debono and Souza 2019; de Toledo et al.
2019; Parise et al. 2020, 2021) and would conﬁrm this hypothesis.
10.5.3 Semiosis, Uexküll’s Primary-Meaning Making and Functional
Circle: An Ecosensitive Complexion?
As shown in two synthesis done by Kull about Uexküll’s work in Semiotica (2001)
and more recently in Kull (2020) about the study of primary-meaning-making and
evolutionary biology, Uexküll’s great contribution related to classical genetic
considerations about mutations and natural selection concerns the introduction of
subjectivity and biosemiotics. Choice-making done by living beings is described as a
necessary interpretation of the environment by living beings (mainly animals and
humans) and not as a nervous or conscious prerogative. Meaning-making is then
considered here as a semiotic process using signs and the Umwelt to survive and
evolve. Uexküll has modelled it as a functional circle. This circle means that any cell
or multicellular organism having enough complexity is able to use functional circles
in which its subjectness or subjectivity can emerge as relation signs in “the phenom-
enal present” (the here and now singular milieu). This interpretation constituted by
the reciprocal link Umwelten- Umwelt established between living beings and their
singular milieu is essential to describe any semiosis, joining classical assertions
about logical or literary languages by Pierce (1979) or De Saussure (1995).
Quoting Deacon (1997, 2012), Eco (1979), Sebeok (1997), von Uexkull (1986),
or Hoffmeyer (1996), Kull (2020) recalls us that “semiosis is co-extensive with life.”
Thus, rather than focusing on the Eco’s semiotic thresholds, he suggests to pay
attention to perceptual and action signs that are included in meaning-making
operations deﬁning functional circles that could be related or differentiated to
functional cycles or closed sequences (Sebeok 1994), or also in another context to
the operational close described by Maturana and Varela for self-organization and
autopoiesis (Maturana and Varela 1980; Varela 1983). Gestalt, feedback, or
situationist approaches were also adopted by Dewey following Pierce primeity, by
Thure von Uexküll and Wesiak (1997) concerning elementary sensations linked to
receptor–effector relationships and emergent perceptual properties and also by von
Weizsäcker (1985) introducing the temporal factor or Plessner, the ontogenetic one.
The time factor is indeed essential to insure the operability of the functional circle for
agency and the dynamical pair formed by living beings as subjects incorporated into
a singular milieu and a present moment. This unique conjunction allows the simul-
taneous elaboration of a semiogenesis and an Umwelt in a given environment. Now,
a fundamental difference between animals and plants resides in this limited and
conditioned time factor for the former and almost unlimited and indeterminate for
the latter, which may constitute at ﬁrst sight an obstacle in the operability of the
functional circle. Another potential obstacle raised by Plessner (1940, see review
2019) at the ontological level: the “open form” of plants which are divisible, are
never ﬁnished and live in immediacy, directly incorporated into the external
274
M.-W. Debono

environment compared to the “closed form” (or completed form) of animals or
humans whose embryogenesis follows precise stages, whose organs are positioned
in the body, and who acquire an autonomy and an individuality of their own with
regard to their learning and their indirect experience (passing through representation)
of the external world. This experience of the lived world, if it is not internalized,
individuated, and even less conscious or existential in plants, is not absent for all that
at the sensitive level where it is on the contrary exacerbated (plants are hypersensi-
tive to the environment) and embodied cognitive (in the post-cognitivist sense of the
term). It corresponds to minimal cognition (Calvo and Keijzer 2011), extended or
distributed cognition according to the authors and the behaviors observed among the
thousands of plant species. With regard to extended cognition, Parise et al. (2020)
have, for instance, recently shown that the root system of plants would constitute, as
the whole body of the spider weaving its web, an extension of the environment
where external physical objects are part of the cognitive system.
The model of mesological plasticity describes more precisely three stages at the
level of the plant plastic interface, including: (1) an active binding directly resulting
from the dynamic coupling between the plant and its singular milieu; (2) a medial
organism by excellence (body rooted in the soil and in permanent interaction with
aerial elements) and (3) an ecosensitive complexion allowing a trajective access to
experience. This experience is not subjective as in the animal, capable of projecting
targeted actions in relation to the object of its instincts or life projects, or introspec-
tive and represented (image) as in the human being, but it constitutes a subjectity
following Imanishi as noted by Berque (2015). Moreover, our mesological and
plastic approach is a counter-argument to the Plessner’s considerations linked to
the open form of plants, where precisely their immediacy and direct incorporation
into the external environment are presented as a handicap to acquire an autonomic or
ontological status. Their subjectivity and open source behavior in close interaction
with the interactive ecosystems from which they cannot extract themselves consti-
tute, on the contrary, the signature of their speciﬁcity or otherness and are guarantors
of their unique mode of exchange with the environment.
Namely, many authors associate the complexity of certain plant behaviors to
minimal
agentive
capacities
without
mental
representation.
For
instance,
Barandiaran memorization or perceptual learning (2009), deriving in part from
Simondonian perception’s level assimilated to sensibility (2006) and Gibsonian
affordance or direct perception phenomena (1986) showing the direct contribution
of the action to the perceptual process, introduces the concept of perceptual systems
like the dynamic touch (Turvey 1996) or the visual system. It means that perception
may be active and not only driven by external stimuli giving rise to a cognitive
representation or a mental reconstruction. This direct access to the experience or
perception–action loop concerning here an animal doing a motor exploration of his
environment does not exclude learning and memory processes but describes another
mode of cognition close to the mesological relationship linking the subject and its
singular milieu.
A lot of works about mesology (Berque 2014a, b, 2016, 2019) or biosemiotics
(Kull 2020) show indeed that Uexküll, as an anti-behaviorist, had clearly anticipated
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
275

the anthropocentric tendency separating the notion of Umgebung (unique consider-
ation of the raw data of the environment) from that of Umvelt where living subjects
are in strong interaction with their singular environment (milieu or habitat for
animals) and the other species of its ecosystem. In this sense, they interpret the
environmental data and make them their own milieu, establishing speciﬁc links that
the other species do not have. Numerous examples of speciﬁc ﬂora or fauna support
these observations, which ensure the dynamic couple established between a living
being and his singular environment, an optimal growth, and cooperative links.
Indeed, mutualistic exchanges are observable at the level of many plant species
and by extrapolation could be the symbol of a symbiotic planet (Margulis 1998). So,
they are for us not only included in the Uexküll’s functional circle, but also have an
Umwelt. A recent study of Clements (2016) compared the circle and the maze with
an ecosemiotic grid of lecture showing that Uexküll’s functional circle corresponds
more to a solipsist view of ecological relations, while Peirce’s drawing maze is
more chaotic and not predictable, both concepts being linked to a subjective
factor—causality for Uexküll and self or man as signs for Peirce (1979).
Indeed, if we consider the historicity of the theory, the teleological view of
Uexküll (the bauplan), the idea that plants were inferior beings, lacking sophisticated
receptors, sensory organs, and mobility, incapable of exchanging or co-constructing
with the environment, we understand that Uexküll did not give them an Umvelt
status. We all know, however, that the scientiﬁc discoveries that followed have
shown, on the contrary, that the sensitiveness of plants was ﬂagrant and their
communication capacities, even learning, very extensive. This is why it is important
to reconsider these pioneering works in the light of current knowledge in biochem-
istry, electrophysiology, genetics, ecology, and epigenetics, where the extent of
phenotypic as well as developmental plasticity is widely demonstrated. In addition,
there are numerous semiotic, philosophical, and phenomenological approaches that
take plants as subjects of study today (from a metaphysical to a political point of
view, respectively, for Coccia 2016; Marder 2013a, b).
Among the major ﬁndings of these ﬁelds of research is the fact that all forms of
life, however elementary, need to exchange with the environment in order to grow,
reproduce, and survive. This evidence, on which everyone can agree, has gone
unnoticed, as is often the case with the obvious, although it alone justiﬁes the status
of subject anchored in a meaningful reality granted to plants by transdisciplinary
researchers. This status is linked to their active perception of the environment, which
is volitional or intentional in this primitive sense, that is to say capable of discerning
an inside from an outside, of distinguishing their own entity from the otherness of the
world. An informal identity, blurred, internalized, without nervous system, a form of
ipseity or radical otherness (Hallé 2014) differentiating itself clearly from the
subjectivity, the marked individuality and the implicit self-consciousness of the
animal or the man, but which leads the plant kingdom, in spite of its fundamental
differences with these species (timelessness, divisibility, sessility, autotrophy. . .), to
establish perception–action loops and to develop, not only “intelligent” behaviors
proper to all living beings (reactivity, problem solving, etc.), but efﬁcient and
signiﬁcant exchanges with the environment which are its own.
276
M.-W. Debono

For instance, plants mobilize their whole bodies in an environment spatially
constrained but which they do everything to optimize, widen, develop by all the
means: chemical communication via odorous or volatile substances, co-evolution
with insects, propagation of electrical signals at long distance via the electrome,
development of the mycorrhizae within gigantic root networks, proprioception
(perception of their own deformation by plants or trees), elementary cognition,
cellular or biological memory (habituation in sensitive plants like Mimosa P.,
motor response in the carnivorous plant Dionea M.), developmental and epigenetic
plasticity (often transgenerational), remediation, meaning-making, local memories,
and learning abilities approaching animal procedural memories (Gagliano et al.
2016; Thellier 2017). The concept of interface and plastic complex to the
mesological approach that we develop puts forward this inextricable link between
the living being and its environment, widely described at other levels of organization
of the living being (neuroplasticity) and of reality (biophysical, energetic).
The notions of plasticity of the living being that we develop, on the one hand, and
of morphosis and semiosis or semiophysics (Thom 1988), on the other hand, best
translate this consideration of plant phenomenology, which ensures in a simple and
efﬁcient way the optimal growth of the plant, without the need to have recourse to an
integrative and centralized nervous system. This is possible through the trajection of
living forms or a sensitive reality which, since the dawn of time, establishes an
unconditional and inextricable link with nature, which we tend to over-interpret or
anthropize, but which has no less value as a sign. Such a sign marks in an indelible
way the singularity of the living compared to artiﬁcial intelligences (Benasayag
2017) and translates a ternary reality plant–environment–world, which leads to an
anoetic highly sensitive reading of the reality of the world. This essential reading on
the scale of self-organized evolutionary processes allows relativizing the predomi-
nant and self-centered vision of humanity on the world. It is a matter of taking into
account the ecoplastic and ecosensitive nature of the world in all its dimensions
(Debono 2022)26 and this requires a transdisciplinary approach and methodology.
The sensitive experience means being for Nietzche (1878). And that concerns all the
living beings. There is apart from us, an intelligible and sensitive world that lives in
an autonomous way, has its own codes and cognitive borders, or of access to the
experience founded on its interactions with this world. The plant body represents a
major one, because contrary to the sectorized and indivisible animal body secured by
shelters or habitats, it lives constantly in an open environment and does not have
separate cells, but a diffuse body with zones of exchanges from near to near (some of
which are purely electrogenic) that can typically activate genes coding for receptors
emitting defense molecules which will induce a local response and can be
propagated at long distance via the electromic ﬁeld (de Toledo et al. 2019).
26Debono (2020a, b) Plant cognition: when science requestions the ecosensibility of the world. IIIrd
World Congress of Transdisciplinarity. Planned conference on the topic at Mexico City, Nov. 3–7,
2022. See Nicolescu 1996, 2011 for details regarding the chart and methodology of
transdisciplinary.
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
277

So, elementary life (from protists like amoeba to bacteria, fungi, plants, and
animals) not only can but need to feel. This notion of primary “feeling” differentiated
from emotions and the basic intelligence of any living being by Damasio (2021) that
could be linked to direct perception and meaning-making in plants is important to
take in consideration in evolutionary biology and studies considering homologies vs
semiosis or ontologies when comparing animal to vegetal behaviors. Indeed, some
arguments are oppose to the consideration of the sensitivity of plants and the reality
of the lived experience, conﬁning them to a simple reactivity to a given stimulus.
However, this ignores the medial and trajective effectiveness of plants (their
mesological plasticity), which are by deﬁnition extremely sensitive to their immedi-
ate milieu (they are anchored in it and totally dependent on it), capable of move-
ment, of developing advanced defense or communication strategies and high degrees
of cognition relatively to their biological constraints in a hostile environment.
10.5.4 Phyto- vs Ecosemiotics as an Experimental Field
of Mesological Plasticity: Evolutionary Biology
and the Umvelt of Plants
One potential issue to assess plant biosemiotics could be to consider the ﬁeld of
phytosemiotics. Kull (2000) made a nice synthesis on the subject, comparing the
concept of biological need as “the primary holistic process in living systems” to that
of semiosis, where signs, according to their categories (respectively, cellular, vege-
tative, animal, linguistic, and cultural) are considered as meronomic entities and
plants as semiotic systems. Excluding the presence of semiotic thresholds (Eco
1979), he shows, quoting a lot of biosemioticians like Deely (1986, 1990) that
semiosis is a general process in biological systems from unicellular cells to fungi,
protists, and multicellular organisms and asks “whether there may be anything
special in plant semiosis in order to justify its distinction from the other ﬁelds of
biosemiotics?”. Phytosemiotics is often mentioned, he said, quoting mainly
Krampen that lunch the term in Semiotica (1981) and also Nöth (1990, 1994,
1998), but not clearly deﬁned and differentiated. He banishes then the generic
semiotic attributes of living organisms to search the speciﬁcity of evolved plants
(like
bryophytes
and
vascular
plants)
excluding
algaes
and
differentiates
phytosemiotics from human–plant interaction studies (plant as signs to communi-
cate) belonging to the ecosensitive ﬁeld. The Krampen (1992, 1997) in-deep analysis
of von Uexküll’s statements about autonomy and semiosis in plants has several
phases, ﬁrst agreeing with him (neither Umwelt nor effector/receptor relationships,
feedback cycles but not functional circles and meaning factors only) and then
admitting their speciﬁcity (plants’ signs being considered as indexes, sensing,
meaning used by plants via their forms, chemosensitive responses) compared to
the iconicity of animals and humans as symbols, on condition of detaching from any
anthropomorphic or phytocentric enterprise (Krampen 1986).
This assertion is at minima in adequation with the Uexküll’s Wohnhülle of plants
describing their singular relationships to the habitat and corroborates a lot of plant
278
M.-W. Debono

behaviors using via bioelectrical or chemical networks, insects, fungi, other plants
and their own form as signs or meaning factors. However, Thure von Uexküll (1986)
assimilates plants to solipsistic systems using only iconic signs and not able to
discriminate objects (only self and nonself) because they are not subjects and use
only vegetative signs. For him, indeed “they are not signs for occurrences outside the
plants, as there is no “outside” for vegetative systems.” Kull (2020) rightly points out
in his synthesis about phytosemiotics clear contradictions between these positions
and the attribution by many of the same authors, Uexküll in ﬁrst place, of an Umwelt
to fungi (Hoffmeyer 2008a) but also protists and unicellular organisms like the
paramecium or other ﬂagellates provided with a plasma membrane, receptors, and
effectors inducting body movements characteristic of the animal kingdom. We can
thus better understand the historical genesis of these classiﬁcation battles including
few botanists, the outcome of which is clearly in favor of plants, which have no
reason, whether it is at the cellular or organic level, not to have their own Umwelt.
A lot of plant signalization and behavior studies attests to it (Baluška et al. 2006)
and as we discussed before, functional circles are most likely present in plants,
knowing their ability to move (even slowly), to show an important phenotypic,
developmental, and epigenetic plasticity, to recognize and answer speciﬁcally to a
lot of external signals. They treat them by means of differentiated and specialized
structures showing mechanosensitivity, gravi- or proprioception (Moulia and
Fournier 2009), direct intercellular junctions or root networks, and the electrome
between themselves or other species (pollination, reproduction, mutual exchanges,
symbiosis) They also have defense strategies based on hormonal or chemosensitive
receptors, present some degree of memory and learning (Thellier 2017; Gagliano
et al. 2016) and perhaps more speciﬁcally in relation to the Umvelt of plants,
and show, as previously evoked, a morphogenesis directly acting as phytosemiotic
agent. Kull (2020) says in this way that a “correspondence between the spatial
placement of leaves and roots will be achieved due to a functional relationship that
has originated from a speciﬁc biological need,” where the need is not a feedback
process but a semiotic and universal one using meronomy—objects as parts of a
whole—in place of taxonomy as typological vegetative sign recognition (compared
to the Sebeok’s zoosemiotic system 1994). To conclude, phytosemiotics is
reinforced by this analysis.
10.6
Assessments of in Loco Mesological Plasticity Using
Monitored EPG Kits: A Key Approach to Study Electrome
Patterns in Natural Conditions
Let us come back to our experimental results in this perspective. Previous bioelec-
trical experiments have quantiﬁed spontaneous electrophytographic activities and
shown the presence of speciﬁc patterns related to certain types of stimuli on long-
term EPG recordings (Pereira et al. 2018). They constitute speciﬁc signatures of the
electrome (Souza et al. 2017; Simmi et al. 2020) validating our key hypothesis about
the role of these micropotentials in plant communication (with their milieu as for
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
279

interspecies exchanges). The next step is to plan monitoring experiments using
miniaturized EPG kits or sensors in natural environments, which is challenging
and very important to understand the behavior of plants outside the constraints of
the laboratory. The aim is to ﬁnd speciﬁc patterns of electrome responses
highlighting the cognitive capacities of plants, especially in terms of operational
mode of communication at long distance (Debono and Souza 2019; Debono
2021a, b; Gimenez et al. 2021). These patterns could include synchronization
among electrical signals at the level of single plants (Debono 2013a, b; Masi et al.
2009) and discrimination of environmental stimuli or propagated defense signals
(Reissig et al. 2021)
This still ongoing methodological part related to the operability and nature of in
situ mesological plasticity of plants constitutes a key point of our experimental
approach. As a matter of fact, the electrome signatures, addressed in a new way in
this book, are related to the plant Umwelt (their eco- and phytosemiotics) and the
lessons that can be drawn from Uexküll’s succinct approaches to the plant kingdom
in the context of current research. We show here that our ﬁeld of research on the
plant electrome and the particular role of EPGs could corroborate or at least support
the reality of a plant Umwelt characterized by a cognitive access to its singular
environment. This environment taken into account at the plant mesological interface
is not a habitat as in animals, but can be seen as a somatotopic mapping of plant
spatiotemporal evolution. Its self-organization and dynamic coupling with the milieu
(or its mediation) open up trajective perspectives describing precisely the
mesological interface that they form intimately with it, especially since plants are
anchored there and must necessarily develop elaborate and interactive defense and
communication strategies with regard to both the elements (aerial, terrestrial,
aquatic, etc.) and the surrounding species (insects, fungi, etc.).
These perspectives characterize the Umwelt or the proper world of plants in
relation to their singular environment.27 Starting from the idea that matter, and
thus the living, are semiotized, biosemiotics, which can be criticized,28 imply a
stable imbalance or homeostasis on the scale of a territory where each species is the
sign of another. Finally, scientiﬁc ecology, which is necessary, but whose perverse
effects on agricultural policies, excessive urbanization, or the use of biodiversity as
an argument for the Capitalocene (Haraway 2003, 2008) tend to anthropomorphize
27Uexcküll, who, as we have seen, was little concerned with plants, distinguishes in an interesting
way in his work of 1934 on the animal and human worlds the Umwelt of the “higher” animals able
to internalize (to replicate, to represent) the external world (Gegenwelt), to perceive it (Merkwelt)
ﬁnely (landscape, intention, danger...) with the proper notion of animal affect or stimmung, notably
developed in comparison to the man by Buytendijk, one of his pupils and to act (Wirkwelt), drawing
up there clearly a classic loop perception-action of the Umwelt of the lower animals (molluscs,
insects, etc..) whose Merkwelt only perceives the stimuli of the environment, without relating them
to a sense or a function.
28As we have seen in the chapter speaking of the differences between cycle and functional circle:
for instance on its understanding of function and the biologization it sometimes grants itself in
excess can lead to contradictions such as Uexcküll attributing an Umwelt to unicellulars and not to
plants or Umwelt-Umwelten semiotic conﬁgurations that are ambiguous to say the least.
280
M.-W. Debono

the notion of the environment. Hence, the birth of an ecocritical watches wishing to
counteract the nature–culture opposition by using biosemiotics or Piercean and
Uexckülian ecosemiotics as a ﬁeld of investigation. Vignola (2017) thus reminds
us that “Jakob von Uexküll developed the concept of Umwelt, a key concept in
biosemiotics that refers to the fact that each species, that each individual within each
species, perceives its environment according to what is signiﬁcant to it for the
purposes of its survival and according to the senses conferred on it by its anatomy.”
This Umwelt is particularly marked in man where the inﬂuence of the environ-
ment—of the habitat, the ecumene in particular, of the geography, of the climate, of
the city—has a direct impact on his behaviors (whether they are individual or group)
and the culture they convey. Kull (1998) relied in particular on the Lotmanian
concept of the semiosphere to describe speciﬁcally the human Umvelt, characterized
by a place, a language, a psyche that can induce biases and an imaginary. It forms a
powerful network of exchange whose semiosphere corresponds to “the whole of all
the interconnected Umwelten.”
This large-scale network includes the ecosystem and all the Umwelten that it
contains, some of the species concerned. Plants are consequently in the sensing
or the sensitiveness, a form of sentience in opposition to the intellecting29 and
have obviously, like all living organisms a non-explicit intelligence (neither
representational, nor affective or conscious), anchored in a territory or an environ-
ment, a milieu whose dynamic coupling has given rise to a biodiversity and an
ecosensitivity like no other, the explosion of life on Earth and the rise in complexity
that we know with the advent of consciousness and mind.30 Several authors in this
way show that plant (speciﬁcally roots that use homeobox proteins able to control
the morphodynamics of the shoots) could use sensing to draw up spatial and even
cognitive maps of the soil and the environment. They use as well qualitative as
quantitative informations directing growth or other behaviors like ﬁtness, following
local conditions (light conditions, moisture, drought, mechanical stress, temperature,
attacks of pathogens and insects, pollution, gravity, symbionts, nutrients), competi-
tive or mutualistic strategles with other species, abiotic inputs or obstacles (Falik
et al. 2005; Trewavas 2005). Memory and learning processes or proprioception
(Gagliano et al. 2016; Hamant and Moulia 2016) are also widely described in the
literature in plants showing their ability to control the environment and growth
optimally. The electrome of plants including cellular action potentials, systemic
responses, calcium waves, and EPGs have a key role in long-distance signal
propagation as we stated before (Masi et al. 2009; Debono 2013a; Souza et al.
2017), but could also act at the level of defensive responses and biological rhythms
(Volkov 2012, 2014). More generally, sensitiveness, otherness, or ipseity of plants
could be considered as sufﬁcient to explain their cognitive abilities whose nature is
under study to interpret the world in a sensible and agentive mode without the need
29In another context, Deleuze and Guattari (2004) interestingly compare plant behaviors to the
intellective process.
30What I called protoneural dynamic networks in my paper referenced in 2013a.
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
281

for a nervous system. Parise et al. (2021) have in this way recently shown in Cuscuta
R. that electrical signaling of dodders could change according to host species
perceived in patterns recorded by machine learning, suggesting a recognition system
but also for the ﬁrst time a vector of “attention” in plants.
Deacon (1997, 2012) clearly shows that sentience is an emergent property of
teleodynamic systems, but distinct emergent forms of sentience found in animals and
humans (higher-order forms) from that found in plants and other multicellular
organisms (lower forms). He shows however about the sentience of individual
neurons compared to the brain that we cannot reduce the former to the latter because
teleodynamic processes are irreducible to the thermodynamic processes that they
depend on and that higher forms could not exist without lower levels of sentience
serving. This level-speciﬁcity can be attributed to any emerging teleodynamic
processes from the molecular level to auto-organized systems such as single-cell
organisms, multicelled plants and animals having brains. So, for Deacon, lower
sentient forms like those of all cellular-level adaptive responsiveness permit the
higher forms to emerge. The interesting report concerning our considerations at the
plant level is that the author assimilates this second-order operation related to brain–
neurons interactions to “the way that the teleodynamics of interacting organisms
with an ecosystem can contribute to a higher-order population dynamics, including
equilibrating (homeodynamic) and self-organising (morphodynamic) population
effects.” It includes morphodynamic processes as well as self-recognition by
teleogenic closure, but also the key notion of Bateson (1979)31 opposing the
neuronal matter–energy (ﬁring pattern) constitution to the informational one of the
mental worlds embodied by distributed dynamical attractors. Yet, network activity
patterns and attractor forms are present in many non-linear dynamical systems,
including in particular the electrome of plants which can relay the microstates
constituted by permanent spontaneous low-voltage EPG’s regularities to macrostates
involving “large-scale global
attractor
dynamic produced by an extended
interconnected population” of plant cells (neurons for Deacon). Indeed, for him there
is no need for a brain to accomplish this qualitative leap, as long as we examine the
whole homeodynamic process and that we “disregard the level of complexity
reached in mental operations due to the synchronization of hierarchical and highly
specialized structures.” The result obtained in plants would be different, being
limited to a minimal cognitive access to experience and to a speciﬁc interaction
with its environment, which is already far from being negligible!
10.7
The Plant Mesological Plasticity: A Unique Cognitive,
Electromic, and Ecosemiotic Interface
To sum up our discussion, we can say that the way in which plants exist is based on
sessility, unlike animals, which implies a dependence on environmental constants
and their variations. It is thus a question of playing on other factors than movement
31See also Hoffmeyer (2008a, b).
282
M.-W. Debono

and immediacy, of composing with the physical forces in presence and their
spatiotemporality. Although chemistry and taxonomy have long occupied botany,
the essential role of bioelectricity in all motor phenomena, communication and
exchange with the environment and other species has long been underestimated.
The ﬁrst objective of this chapter was therefore to introduce this prevalence by
describing in detail the plant electrome and the potential of mesological plasticity as
a new theoretical model of self-organizing evolutionary systems considering the
plant and its environment as inseparable. Indeed, this framework of analysis
combines two distinct concepts: the plasticity complexes and the dynamic coupling
between living beings and their environment (their mesological link). It has the
advantage of not being limited to a reductionist, dualistic or, conversely, too
permissive or deviant reading grid, but of giving the clearest possible vision of the
place, the role and the prerogatives that can be granted to new plant signaling and
behavior discoveries (Brenner et al. 2006) in the context of the Anthropocene.
Our second objective was to highlight the fundamental role of spontaneous
low-voltage variations or electrophytograms (EPGs) within the whole plant’s
electrome dynamics and more generally of systemic plant electrophysiology (Volkov
2012). These bioelectrical activities are indeed directly linked to their singular
continuum via symplasms and plasmodesmata as well as the progressive establish-
ment of efﬁcient non-linear dynamic systems that occur during evolution (Debono
2013a, b; Souza et al. 2017, 2018). The resulting operational and cognitive modes
allow establishing a precise mapping of ecosensitivity and complex processing of
information within a plant or between plants in their natural environment. These
behaviors and ways of communication are currently under studies focusing on new
patterns of electrome responses in natural conditions (Debono and Souza 2019;
Reissig et al. 2021; Parise et al. 2020, 2021). We show more precisely here that the
plant electromic reading grid integrates the key role of EPGs as early markers,
permanent scans, and discrimination tools for environmental stimuli or stresses,
allowing the whole plant reaching self-organized critical states or SOCs to have
vigilance systems and an active perception of their milieu.
As for the architectural relationships between these systems or interfaces, we
describe them through plasticity complexes set up during evolution. More precisely,
we have established plastic links between the matter and the form, the non-linear
dynamic systems linked to the plant electrome, and the activation of operational
ternary models during some of these evolutionary processes. The resulting plant
electrome signatures will allow us to identify how plants survive and grow optimally
in their interactive ecosystem as well as in their singular milieu. Similarly, it will
allow the description of a speciﬁc ﬂora, of the close interactions between an
environment or milieu and a particular species as well as its relations with other
animal or plant species.
Our third goal was to clarify for the ﬁrst time key points about the Uexckülian gap
or positioning on the Umwelt and the primary-meaning making of plants showing as
a new reading grid to study ecosensitive complex systems and to question plant
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
283

evolution and emergent cognitive or intelligent behaviors (Debono 2022).32 More
precisely, the selective role of EPGs at plant electromic interfaces and mesological
plasticity is proposed as the best bottom-up approaches of co-evolutionary and
ecosemiotic processes. Indeed, they cover two essential ﬁelds: the intrinsic cognitive
capacities of plants to internalize without representing it the external world by
quantifying and discriminating the stimuli of the environment (biotic or abiotic,
degree of humidity or dryness, rate of luminosity...) and their high sensitivity to the
milieu (singular mesological link) by means of morphogenesis and semiosis (Sebeok
1997; Kull 2000; von Uexküll 1986; Deacon 2012), in other words of the direct
relation between form and function or form and environment (epigenetic plasticity).
In this way, new experimental ﬁelds like phytosemiotics or mesological plasticity
will permit to support fundamental research areas questioning the sensitive and
cognitive nature of plants.
To conclude, evolutionary biology is particularly illustrated at the scale of the
action–perception loop and of the communication established within a species or
between the species. This is precisely what is operated at the plant’s electromic
interface that irreversibly binds form and matter, the living being and its environ-
ment, subject and object with a single purpose: to express the singular existence of
plants in their alterity (Hallé 2014) or simplexity (Berthoz 2009): a mesological and
cognitive relationship to the world which does not have an equivalent in the animal
and human world.
References
Baluška F, Mancuso S (2009) Plant neurobiology: from sensory biology, via plant communication,
to social plant behavior. Cogn Process 10(S1):3–7
Baluška F, Mancuso S (2013) Root apex transition zone. Front Plant Sci 4(354):1–15
Baluška F, Mancuso S, Volkmann D, Barlow PW (2004) Root apices as plant command centres: the
unique ‘brain-like’ status of the root apex transition zone. Biologia (Bratislava) 59:7–19
Baluška F, Volkmann D, Menzel D (2005) Plant synapses: actin-based domains for cell-to-cell
communication. Trends Plant Sci 10:106–111
Baluška F, Mancuso S, Volkmann D (2006) Communication in plants: neuronal aspects of plant
life. Springer, New York
Barandiaran XE, Di Paolo E, Rohde M, Deﬁning Agency (2009) Individuality normativity,
asymmetry, and spatio-temporality in action. Adapt Behav 17-5:367–386
Bateson G (1979) Mind and nature: a necessary unity. Bantam Books, New York
Benasayag M (2017) La singularité du vivant. Le Pommier, Paris
Berque A (2000) Ecoumène - Introduction à l’étude des milieux humains. Belin, Paris
Berque A (2014a) Formes empreintes, formes matrices. Asie orientale, Franciscopolis
Berque A (2014b) La mésologie, pourquoi et pour quoi faire? Presses University, Paris-Ouest
Berque A (2015) Imanishi Kinji. La liberté dans l’évolution. Le vivant comme sujet. (Shutaisei no
shinkaron, 1980), trad. by A. Berque, Wildproject
32Reference to the last book of the author questioning in a transdisciplinary way plant intelligence,
Hermann, Paris, 2020.
284
M.-W. Debono

Berque A (2016) Plasticité mésologique? In: Philo/ENP Blog (Aug 2016). https://www.
editionsdenullepart.info/index.php/ci3/210-augustin-berque/2529-plasticite-mesologique.
Accessed 16 November 2020
Berque A (2017) Trajection et réalité in Acts of the Colloque de Cerisy, La mésologie, un autre
paradigme pour l’anthropocène? http://www.ccic-cerisy.asso.fr/mesologie17.html
Berque A (2019, June 6–8) Does nature think evolution? In does nature think ? French-Japanese
interdisciplinary dialogues on the “intelligences of nature”, UNESCO and Japanese House of
Culture, Paris
Berthoz A (2009) La simplexité. Éditions Odile Jacob, Paris
Bose JC (1901) Comparative electrophysiology. Longmans, Green & Co, London
Bose JC (1902) Response in the living and non-living. In: The nervous mechanism of plants.
Longmans, Green & Co, London
Bose JC (1926) The nervous mechanism of plants. Longmans, Green & Co, London
Brenner ED, Stahlberg R, Mancuso S, Vivanco J, Baluška F, Van Volkenburgh E (2006) Plant
neurobiology: an integrated view of plant signaling. Trends Plant Sci 11:413–419
Buffon GL (1749) Variété dans l’espèce humaine in Buffon, Œuvres
Cabral EF, Pecora PC, Arce AIC, Tech ARB, Costa EJX (2011) The oscillatory bioelectrical signal
from plants explained by a simulated electrical model and tested using Lempel-Ziv complexity.
Comput Electron Agric 76:1–5
Calvo P (2016) The philosophy of plant neurobiology: a manifesto. Synthese 193(5):1323–1343
Calvo P, Keijzer FA (2011) Plants: adaptive behavior, root-brains, and minimal cognition. Adapt
Behav 19:155–171
Canguilhem G (1965) Le vivant et son milieu. La connaissance de la vie. Vrin, Paris
Chamovitz D (2017) What a plant knows? A ﬁeld guide to the senses. Scientiﬁc American, Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, LLC, New York
Chen Y, Zhao DJ, Wang Z, Wang ZYW, Tang G, Huang L (2016) Plant electrical signal classiﬁca-
tion based on waveform similarity. Algorithms 9(4):70
Cheung AY, Qu L-J, Russinova E, Zhao Y, Zipfel C (2020) Update on receptors and signaling.
Plant Physiol 182(4):1527–1530
Clements M (2016) The circle and the maze: two images of ecosemiotics. Sign Syst Stud 44(2):
69–93
Coccia E (2016) La vie des plantes. Payot & Rivages, Paris
Cudworth R (1820) The truth intellectual system of the universe. Printed for R. Priestley, London
D’Arcy WT (1917) On growth and form, 1st edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Damasio AR (2021) Feeling and knowing. Making minds conscious. New York, Pantheon Books
Darwin C (1864) The various contrivances by which orchids are fertilised by insects, 1st edn.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Darwin C (1881) The power of movements in plants. John Murray, London
De Loof A (2016) The cell’s self-generated “electrome”: the biophysical essence of the immaterial
dimension of life? Commun Integr Biol 9(5):e1197446
De Saussure F (1995) Cours de linguistique générale. Payot, Paris
de Toledo GRA, Parise AG, Simmi FZ, Costa AVL, Senko LGS, Debono MW, Souza GM (2019)
Plant electrome: the electrical dimension of plant life. Theor Exp Plant Physiol 31:21–46.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40626-019-00145-x
Deacon T (1997) The symbolic species: the co-evolution of language and the brain, 1st edn. Norton,
New York
Deacon T (2012) Incomplete nature. How mind emerged from matter. W.W. Norton, New York
Debono MW (1996) L’Ère des Plasticiens. Aubin, Coll Sciences, Epistemologie
Debono MW (2004) From perception to consciousness: an epistemic vision of evolutionary
processes. Leonardo J 37(3):243–248. https://doi.org/10.1162/0024094041139364
Debono MW (2005) Le concept de Plasticité, un nouveau paradigme épistémologique in DOGMA
Debono MW (2010) Le complexe de Plasticité:état des lieux et immersion in PLASTIR n18, 2010/
3. http://www.plasticites-sciences-arts.org/1216-2/
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
285

Debono MW (2012) États des lieux de la Plasticité. I- Les Interfaces plastiques and II - La Plasticité
de l’esprit. Implications Philosophiques, March and May issues
Debono MW (2013a) Dynamic protoneural networks in plants: a new approach of spontaneous
extracellular potential variations. Plant Sig Behav 8, 6, e24207:1–10. https://doi.org/10.4161/
psb.24207
Debono MW (2013b) Perceptive levels in plants: a transdisciplinary challenge in living organism’s
plasticity. Trans J Eng Sci 4. https://doi.org/10.22545/2013/00044
Debono MW (2015) Écriture et plasticité de pensée. Anima Viva Andorra
Debono MW (2016) Perception and active plasticity of the world in Mésologie de la perception.
Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales (EHESS), Paris
Debono MW (2017) Enjeux épistémiques du concept de plasticité: le monde du vivant. Forme et
fonction: morphogenèse, épigénétique, évolution. Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales
(EHESS), Paris
Debono MW (2018) Flux d’information sensoriels et stratégies de communication ‘intelligentes’
chez les plantes. In: Augendre M, Llored JP, Nussaume Y (eds) in La mésologie, un autre
paradigme pour l’anthropocène? Colloque de Cerisy, Paris
Debono MW (2020a) L’intelligence des plantes en question. Hermann, Paris
Debono MW (2020b) Plasticité mésologique: un rapport constant d’architectures.Tiers Inclus, June
Issue
Debono MW (2021a) Electrome and cognition modes in plants: a transdisciplinary approach to the
eco-sensitiveness of the world. Transdiscip J Eng Sci 11(2020). https://doi.org/10.22545/2020/
00143
Debono MW (2021b) Le concept épistémologique de plasticité: évolution et perspectives.
DOGMA, 15. https://dogma.lu/edition-15-printemps-2021/
Debono MW (2022) “Intelligence” of plants: when science requests the ecosensitivity of the world.
In: Third World Congress of Transdisciplinarity, Mexico City 31 Oct–7 Nov 2022
Debono MW, Bouteau F (1992) Spontaneous and evoked surface potentials in Kalanchoe tissues.
Life Sci Adv Plant Physiol 11:107–117
Debono MW, Souza GM (2019) Plants as electromic plastic interfaces: a mesological approach.
Prog Biophys Mol Biol 146:123–133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2019.02.007
Deely JN (1986) On the notion of phytosemiotics. In: Deely JN, Williams B, Kruse FE (eds)
Frontiers in semiotics. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Deely JN (1990) Basics of semiotics. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Deleuze G, Guattari F (2004) A thousand plateaus. Brian Massumi, London, New York
Descola P (2005) Par-delà nature et culture. Folio, Gallimard, Paris
Descola P (2019) Une écologie des relations. Collection: Les grandes voies de la recherche. CNRS
Editions, Paris
Driesch
H
(1892)
Entwicklungsmechanische
Studien
I.
Der
Werth
der
beiden
ersten
Furchungszellen in der Echinodermentwicklung. Experimentelle Erzeugen von Theil- und
Doppelbildung, Zeitschrift für wissenschaﬂiche Zoologie, 53:160–178. Translated in Willier
and Oppenheimer
Eco U (1979) A theory of semiotics. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Falik O, Reides P, Gersani M, Novoplansky A (2005) Root navigation by self-inhibition. Plant Cell
Environ 28:562–569
Feuerhahn (2009) Du milieu à l’Umlvelt: enjeux d’un changement terminologique. PUF 4–134:
419–438
Fromm J, Lautner S (2007) Electrical signals and their physiological signiﬁcance in plants. Plant
Cell Environ 30:249–257
Gagliano M, Vyazovskiy V, Borbély A, Grimonprez M, Depczynski M (2016) Learning by
association in plants. Sci Rep 6:38427. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep38427
Gibson JJ (1986) The ecological approach to visual perception, 1st edn. Psychology Press,
New York
286
M.-W. Debono

Gimenez VMM, Pauletti PM, Sousa Silva AC, Costa EJX (2021) Bioelectrical pattern discrimina-
tion of Miconia plants by spectral analysis and machine learning. Theor Exp Plant Physiol.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40626-021-00214-0
Goethe GW (1999) La métamorphose des plantes et autres écrits botaniques in Triades (1st German
Ed. 1790)
Goethe GW (2004) Discours de métaphysique, suivi de Monadologie et autres textes. Gallimard,
Paris
Greenwood PM and R Parasuraman (2010) Neuronal and cognitive plasticity: a neurocognitive
framework for ameliorating cognitive aging. Front Aging Neurosci 2:150. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fnagi.2010.00150
Haeckel E (1866) Generelle Morphologie der Organismen. Georg Reimer, Berlin
Haeckel E (1904) Kunstformen der Natur. Olaf Breidbach, Leipzig and Wien.
Hall M (2011) Plants as persons: a philosophical botany. SUNY, Albany
Hallé F (2014) Eloge de la plante. Pour une nouvelle biologie. Points, Paris
Hamant O, Moulia B (2016) How do plants read their own shapes? New Phytol 212:333–337
Haraway D (2003) The companion species manifesto: dogs, people, and signiﬁcant otherness.
Prickly Paradigm Press, Chicago
Haraway D (2008) When species meet. Minnesota University Press, Minneapolis
Harvey W (1651) Exercitationes de Generatione Animalium. W. Harvey, London
Hedrich R, Salvador-Recatala V, Dreyer I (2016) Electrical wiring and long-distance plant commu-
nication. Trends Plant Sci 21(5):376–387
Hegel (1939–1941) La Phénoménologie de l’esprit, French trans. From Jean Hyppolite, Paris,
Aubier
Heidegger M (1961) An introduction to metaphysics. Translated by R Manheim, New York,
Doubleday
Heidegger M (1982) The basic problems of phenomenology. Translated by A Hofstadter, Indiana
University Press, Bloomington
Heidegger M (1992) Die Grundbegriffe der Metaphysik, Francfort, Klostermann (Transl. D Panis),
Les Concepts fondamentaux de la métaphysique, Éditions Gallimard, Paris
Hiernaux Q (2019, July 2) History and epistemology of plant behavior: a pluralist view? Synt.
Special issue on the biology of behavior: explanatory pluralism across the life sciences, Online
publication
Hoffmeyer J (1996) Signs of meaning in the universe, vol 120. Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, pp 3–4
Hoffmeyer J (2008a) Biosemiotics: an examination into the signs of life and the life of signs.
University of Scranton Press, Scranton
Hoffmeyer J (2008b) A legacy for living systems: Gregory Bateson as a precursor to biosemiotics.
Springer, Berlin
Johannsen W (1911) The genotype conception of heredity. Am Nat, XLV, pp 129–159
Kant E (1781, 2d Ed. 1787) Critique de la raison pure. (Trans. Tremesaygues & Pacaud), PUF Ed.,
Coll. Bibliothèque de Philosophie contemporaine (1975) 8e Ed, Paris
Kant E (1967) Prolégomènes à toute métaphysique future. (Trans. J.Gibelin), Vrin, Paris
Kohn E (2013) How forests think: towards an anthropology going beyond the human. University of
California Press, Berkeley
Krampen M (1981) Phytosemiotics. Semiotica 36:187–209
Krampen M (1986) Phytosemiotics. In: Sebeok TA (ed) Encyclopedic dictionary of semiotics.
Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin
Krampen M (1992) Phytosemiotics revisited. In: Sebeok TA, Umiker-Sebeok J (eds) Biosemiotics:
the semiotic web 1991. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin
Krampen M (1997) Models of semiosis. In: Posner R, Robering K, Sebeok TA (eds) Semiotics: a
handbook on the sign-theoretic foundations of nature and culture, 1. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin
Kull K (1998) Semiotic ecology: different natures in the semiosphere. Sig Syst Stud 26:344–371
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
287

Kull K (2000) An introduction to phytosemiotics: semiotic botany and vegetative sign systems. Sig
Syst Stud 28:326–350
Kull K (2001) Jakob von Uexküll: a paradigm for biology and semiotics. Semiotica 134:1–4
Kull K (2020) Jakob von Uexküll and the study of primary meaning-making. In: Michelini F,
Köchy K (eds) Jakob von Uexküll and philosophy: life, environments, anthropology.
Routledge, London
Lamarck JB (1815–1822) Histoire naturelle des Animaux Sans vertèbres (Sept tomes)
Leibniz GW (1646–1716) Considérations sur les principes de vie et sur les natures plastiques, T.II,
Part I. Dutens, Paris
Leibniz GW (2004) Discours de métaphysique, suivi de Monadologie et Autres textes. Gallimard,
Mesnil-sur-l’Estrée
Levit GS, Hossfeld U (2019) Ernst Haeckel in the history of biology. Curr Biol 29(24):R1272–
R1280
Lucini T, Panizzi AR (2018) Electropenetrography (EPG): a breakthrough tool unveiling stink bug
(Pentatomidae) feeding on plants. Neotrop Entomol 47:6–18
Lupasco S (1970) Les trois Matières. R. Julliard, Paris
Lupasco S (1986) L’homme et ses trois éthiques. Eds du Rocher, Paris
Malabou C (1996) L’avenir de Hegel - plasticité, temporalité, dialectique. Vrin, Paris
Mancuso S, Viola A (2013) Brillant green: the surprising history and science of plant intelligence.
Island Press, Washington
Marder M (2013a) Plant intelligence and attention. Plant Signal Behav 8:e23902
Marder M (2013b) Plant-thinking: a philosophy of vegetal life. Columbia University Press,
New York
Margulis L (1998) Symbiotic planet: a new look at evolution. Basic Books, New York
Masi E, Ciszak M, Stefano G, Renna L, Azzarello E, PandolﬁC et al (2009) Spatiotemporal
dynamics of the electrical network activity in the root apex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 06:4048–
4053
Maturana HR, Varela FJ (1980) Autopoiesis and cognition. D. Reidel Publishing, Dordrecht
More H (1969) Philosophical writings of Henry More. AMS Press, New York
More H (1987) The immortality of the soul II, XIV § 8. M. Nijhoff, Dordrecht
Morizot B (2020) Manières d’être vivant. Actes Sud, Paris
Moulia B, Fournier M (2009) The power and control of gravitropic movements in plants: a
biomechanical and systems biology view. J Exp Bot 60(2):461–486
Myers N (2017) From the anthropocene to the planthroposcene: designing gardens for plant/people
involution. Hist Anthropol 28(30):297–301
Nicolescu B (1996) La Transdiciplinarité. Editions du Rocher, Paris
Nicolescu B (2011) Methodology of transdisciplinarity, levels of reality, logic of the included
middle and complexity. In: Ertas A (ed) Transdisciplinarity bridging natural science, social
science, humanities and engineering. Atlas Books
Nietzsche FW (1878) Human, All Too Human: a book for free spirits. (Trans. by M Faber and S
Lehmann, 1984), University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, NE
Nöth W (1990) Handbook of semiotics. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Nöth W (1994) Opposition at the roots of semiosis. In: Nöth W (ed) Origins of semiosis: sign
evolution in nature and culture. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin
Nöth W (1998) Ecosemiotics. Sig Syst Stud 26:332–343
Paillard J (1976) Réﬂexions sur l’usage du concept de plasticité en neurobiologie. J Psychol Norm
Pathol 1:33–47
Parise AG, Gagliano M, Souza GM (2020) Extended cognition in plants: is it possible? Plant Signal
Behav 15(2):1710661
Parise AG, Reissig GN, Basso LF, Senko Schultz LG, Oliveira C, Aguilera de Toledo GR, Ferreira
AS, Souza GM (2021) Detection of different hosts from a distance alters the behaviour and
bioelectrical activity of Cuscuta racemose. Front Plant Sci. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2021.
594195
288
M.-W. Debono

Pereira DR, Papa JP, Saraiva GFR, Souza GM (2018) Automatic classiﬁcation of plant electro-
physiological responses to environmental stimuli using machine learning and interval arithme-
tic. Comput Electron Agric 145:35–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2017.12.024
Pic de la Mirandole P (1486) Discours de la dignité de l'homme in Œuvres philosophiques
(Trans. O. Boulnois, G.Tognon), PUF Ed., Coll. “Épiméthée” (1993) & De la dignité de
l'homme, Oratio de hominis dignitate, (Trans. by Y. Hersant, 1993). L'Éclat, “Philosophie
imaginaire”, Paris
Pickard BG (1971) Spontaneous electrical activity in shoots of Ipomea, Pisum and xanthium. Planta
102:91–113
Pierce CS (1979) Théorie et pratique du signe. Payot, Paris
Pigliucci M (2001) Phenotypic plasticity: beyond nature and nurture in Baltimore. Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore
Plessner H (2019) Helmuth Plessner’s levels of organic life and the human: an introduction to
philosophical anthropology (trans Millay Hyatt, Int. By J.M. Bernstein). Fordham University
Press
Pouteau S (2014) Beyond « second animals »: making sense of plant ethics. J Agric Environ Ethics
27(1):1–25
Pouteau S (2018) Plants as open beings: from aesthetics to plant-human ethics. In: Kalhoff A, Di
Paola M, Schörgenhumer M (eds) Plant ethics: concepts and applications. Routledge, New York
Ratzel F (1899) Antrhropogeographie. Erster Teil: Grundzüge der anwendug der erdkunde auf die
geschichte. J. Engelhorn, Stuttgart
Real LA (1993) Toward a cognitive ecology. Trends Ecol Evol 8(11):413–417
Reissig GN, de Carvalho FON, de Padilha OR, Posso DA, Parise AG, Nava DE, Souza GM (2021)
Fruit herbivory alters plant electrome: evidence for fruit-shoot long-distance electrical signaling
in tomato plants. Front Sustain Food Syst 5:657401. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2021.657401
Sachs von J (1862) Histoire de la botanique du XVIe siècle à 1860. BNF, Paris
Sachs von J (1874) Traité de botanique. BNF, Paris
Saraiva GRF, Ferreira AS, Souza GM (2017) Osmotic stress decreases complexity underlying the
electrophysiological dynamic in soybean. Plant Biol (Stuttg) 19(5):702–708. https://doi.org/10.
1111/plb.12576
Sebeok TA (1994) Signs: an introduction to semiotics. University of Toronto Press, Toronto
Sebeok TA (1997) The evolution of semiosis. In: Posner R, Robering K, Sebeok TA (eds)
Semiotics: a handbook on the sign-theoretic foundations of nature and culture, 1. Walter de
Gruyter, Berlin
Selosse MA (2012) Les végétaux existent-ils encore? Pour la Science 77:8–13
Sharov AA, Vehkavaara T (2015) Protosemiosis: agency with reduced representation capacity.
Biosemiotics 8:103–123
Simard SW, Beiler KJ, Bingham MA, Deslippe JR, Philip LJ, Teste FP (2012) Mycorrhizal
networks: mechanisms, ecology and modeling. Fungal Biol Rev 26(1):39–60
Simmi FZ, Dallagnol LJ, Ferreira AS, Pereira DR, Souza GM (2020) Electrome alterations in a
plant-pathogen system: toward early diagnosis. Bioelectrochemistry 133:107403. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bioelechem.2020.107493
Simondon G (2006) Cours sur la perception: 1964–1965. Eds de la Transparence, Chatou
Souza GM, Ferreira AS, Saraiva GFR, Toledo GRA (2017) Plant “electrome” can be pushed toward
a self-organized critical state by external cues: evidences from a study with soybean seedlings
subject to different environmental conditions. Plant Signal Behav 12:e1290040. https://doi.org/
10.1080/15592324.2017.1290040
Souza GM, Toledo GRA, Saraiva GFR (2018) Towards a systemic view for plant learning: an
(eco)physiological perspective. In: Baluska F, Gagliano M, Witzany G (eds) Memory and
learning in plants. Springer, New York. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75596-0_9
Tandon PN (2019) Jagdish Chandra Bose and plant neurobiology. Indian J Med Res 149(5):
593–599
Tassin J (2020) Pour une écologie sensible. Odile Jacob, Paris
10
Mesological Plasticity as a New Model to Study Plant Cognition,. . .
289

Thellier M (2017) Plant memory vs. animal and human memory in plant responses to environmental
stimuli. Springer, Dordrecht
Thom R (1966) Une théorie dynamique de la morphogenèse. In: Waddington CH (ed) Toward a
theoretical biology. University of Edinburgh Press, Edinburgh
Thom R (1977) Stabilité structurelle et morphogenèse. InterEditions, Paris
Thom R (1988) Esquisse d'une sémiophysique. InterEditions, Paris
Tian W, Wang C, Gao Q et al (2020) Calcium spikes, waves and oscillations in plant development
and biotic interactions. Nat Plants 6:50–759
Toyota M, Spencer D, Sawai-Toyota S, Jiaqi W, Zhang T, Koo AJ et al (2018) Glutamate triggers
long-distance, calcium-based plant defense signaling. Science 361:1112–1115. https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.aat7744
Trewavas A (2003) Aspects of plant intelligence. Ann Bot 92:1–20
Trewavas A (2005) Green plants as intelligent organisms. Trends Plant Sci 10:413–419
Tsing A (2012) Unruly edges: mushrooms as companion species. Environ Human 1:141–154
Turvey MT (1996) Dynamic touch. Am Psychol 51(11):1134–1152
Varela FJ (1983) Autonomie et connaissance. Le Seuil, Paris
Vignola G (2017) Écocritique, écosémiotique et représentation du monde en literature. Cygne noir
N5,
http://www.revuecygnenoir.org/numero/article/vignola-ecocritique-ecosemiotique.
Accessed 23 Sep 2019
Volkov AG (2012) Plant electrophysiology. Signaling and responses. Springer, Berlin
Volkov AG (2014) Plant biosensor and method. US Patent 8:893
Volkov AG, Carell H, Baldwin A, Markin VS (2010) Electrical memory in Venus ﬂytrap. Plant Cell
Environ 33:163–173
Volkov AG, Toole S, WaMaina M (2019) Electrical signal transmission in the plant-wide web.
Bioelectrochemistry 129:70–78
von Uexcküll J (1934) Mondes animaux et monde humain followed by La théorie de la signiﬁca-
tion. French translations from German: Denoël (1965), Pocket, Coll. Agora (2004) and with the
title Milieu animal et milieu humain, Payot and Rivages (2010), Paris
von Uexcküll J (1956) Streifzüge durch die Umwelten von Tieren und Menschen, ein Bilderbuch
unsichtbarer Welten, Bedeutungslehre. Rowohlt Verlag, Hamburg
von Uexcküll J (1982) The theory of meaning in semiotica 42:1, The Hague: Mouton. See also the
English translation (2010): A theory of meaning in von Uexküll, a foray into the worlds of
animals and humans, with a theory of meaning, English translation JD O’Neil, University of
Minnesota Press
von Uexcküll T (1986) Medecine and semiotics. Semiotica 61(3/4):201–217
von Uexcküll T, Wesiak W (1997) Theorie der Humanmedizin. Grundlagen ärztlichen Denkens
und Handelns. Verlag, Wien
Waddington CH (1942) The epigenotype. Endeavour 1:18–20
Waddington CH (1957) The strategy of genes. Allen & Unwin, London
Weiss P (1941) Self-differentiation of the basic patterns of coordination. Comp Psychol
Monographs 17(4):1–96
Weizsäcker von CF (1985) Aufbau der Physik. Carl Hanser Verlag, München/Wien Vorwort, p 17
West-Eberhard MJ (2003) Developmental plasticity and evolution. Oxford University Press,
New York
Wildon DC, Thain JF, Minchin PEH, Gubb IR, Reilly AJ, Skipper HM, O’Donnell PJ, Bowles DJ
(1992) Electric signaling and systemic proteinase inhibitor induction in the wounded plant.
Nature 360:62–65
Wolffe A (2000) Chromatin: structure and function. Academic Press, London
Woltereck R (1909) Weitere experimentelle Untersuchungen über Artveränderung, speziell über
das Wesen quantitativer Artunterschiede bei Daphniden. Verhandlungen Dtsch Zool Ges 19:
110–172
290
M.-W. Debono

Quantum Fractal Thermodynamics
to Describe the Log-Periodicity Law
in Species Evolution and Human
Organizations
11
Diogo Queiros-Condé, Jean Chaline, and Ivan Brissaud
Abstract
We propose a physical representation of the log-periodicity law which has been
evidenced in the ﬁeld of seismic physics, species evolution, astronomical
systems, economy, history, and human organizations. Calling “fractal state” a
truncated fractal obtained for a ﬁnite number of iterations, i.e., deﬁned for a ﬁnite
scale range, we deﬁne a fractal length, a fractal time of interaction, and ﬁnally a
fractal mass for the fractal states of a fractal. The introduction of the mass of a
fractal allows showing the existence of a quantum structure due to the fractal
structure which leads to a Planck–Einstein-like law. Inspired by the work of Louis
de Broglie on the “hidden thermodynamics of the particle,” we introduce a
“kinetic chain temperature” which gives access to a thermodynamical description
of log-periodicity. We found that log-periodic systems are characterized by a
constant entropy production between two consecutive fractal states. The parame-
ter g of log-periodicity ﬁnds here a clear and simple physical interpretation. It
quantiﬁes the increase of fractal length or fractal time with the number of
iterations of the fractal state.
D. Queiros-Condé (*)
Université Paris-Nanterre, Nanterre, France
e-mail: dqueiros-conde@parisnanterre.fr
J. Chaline
Pr. Emérite CNRS, Biogéosciences (UMR CNRS 5561) et de Paléobiodiversité et Préhistoire de
l’EPHE, Centre des Sciences de la Terre, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France
I. Brissaud
IN2P3/CNRS, Université Paris-Sud/Orsay, Orsay, France
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_11
291

Keywords
Quantum fractal dynamics · Log-periodicity law · Species evolution · Human
evolution
11.1
Introduction
As a geologist working on the physics of earthquakes, Sornette evidenced a
log-periodic structure in a temporal seismic signal probably linked to an underlying
fractal structure (Sornette and Sammis 1995; Sornette 1998). Inspired by this
log-periodic structure, Chaline et al. (1999), convinced by the fractal nature of
evolution, showed that a log-periodic structure was existing in species evolution.
Making use of paleontological data giving the major dates Tn of the evolutive jumps
of a species, Chaline et al. (1999) discovered that these dates are linked by a
log-periodic law.
Tn ¼ T0  Tc
ð
Þgn þ Tc,
ð11:1Þ
where T0 is the ﬁrst date of the series giving the birth (emergence) of the species, Tc
is a critical date interpreted as the date at which the species loses all its evolutive
capacity, and g would be a parameter, a sort of “time-scale ratio” linked to a fractal
structure in time. The parameter g is interpreted in the framework of a “temporal
fractal tree” as being the ratio between lengths Lbn and diameter rn of two
consecutive branches of the tree: g ¼ Lb  n/Lb  n + 1 ¼ rb  n/rb  n + 1. In the
case of a fractal tree, we thus have g ¼ k1=Df , where k is the mean number of
branches at the level n + 1 coming from the level n and Df is the fractal dimension.
Assuming a fractal dimension equal to 2 and a trichotomic tree (k ¼ 3) the authors
calculated g ¼ 31/2 ¼ 1.73, which is close to the value found in a wide variety of data.
Since this work, a great number of studies in the ﬁeld of the economy (Johansen and
Sornette 1999; Nottale et al. 2009) and in human ontogenesis (Cash et al. 2002),
demography (Johansen and Sornette 2001; Nottale et al. 2000, 2009), history
(Brissaud et al. 2012), arts (Brissaud 2007; Brissaud and Chaline 2013), monastic
structures (Brissaud 2009), and information systems (Guillen 2001) have shown a
similar log-periodic structure. This points to a universal behavior that deserves to be
investigated and explained more deeply. These studies are mainly based on treat-
ment of data which are dates. Log-periodicity is thus a temporal phenomenon. The
fundamental problem is that it is difﬁcult to grasp what can be its fractal nature, what
can be the length and the diameter of a temporal tree. This is the major problem
raised by J. Dubois concerning the log-periodic law (Dubois 1995). After all, species
evolve in space so this log-periodic temporal dynamics should have a spatial
explanation (Queiros-Condé et al. 2015). Moreover, the studies on the economy
(Nottale et al. 2009) and empire expansion (Brissaud et al. 2012) clearly suggest an
important spatial component. In this chapter, our main objective is to propose a
geometric and spatial approach to this time log-periodic structure.
292
D. Queiros-Condé et al.

11.1.1 Length of a Fractal Interaction: Homogeneous Time
and Entropic Fractal Time
Let us consider a homogeneous ﬁeld of characteristic size L crossed by a phenome-
non or a mobile having a velocity V. The crossing time is simply tL ¼ L/V. Let us
now assume that this limited ﬁeld develops some local heterogeneous structures
which will slow the crossing phenomenon. This is the case if the ﬁeld displays some
defects, or obstacles, which deviate or perturbate any crossing trajectory. Let us
consider that the sum of these perturbations will increase the crossing time by a term
denoted tZ. The total crossing time is thus t ¼ tL + tZ. To illustrate this simple idea, let
us consider the general case of a ﬁeld as in Fig 11.1 which displays a homogeneous
part and a heterogeneous component which can be defects, obstacles, vortices, loops,
or anything that perturbates a regular and linear trajectory through the ﬁeld. The
heterogeneous set can have some multi-scale features and even a fractal structure.
But for the moment let us work with a simple system as in Fig. 11.1.
The phenomenon undergoes deviations and curvature of the trajectories which
increases the crossing length. The length of the interaction of order 0 denoted LF0 is
the total length of the loops of level zero. This interaction frontier can be interpreted
as a kind of “buffer layer” in which all the physical interaction between the system
and its environment takes place. But due to statistical repeating over time associated
with a sort of “memory effect,” the loops of order 0 can organize themselves to form
a larger loop of order 1 having a smaller length: this can be interpreted as an
evolution, an improvement, or optimization of the system. The interaction length
is now denoted LF1 and represents the sum of all the loops of order 1. These order
1 loops can again organize together and it gives a loop of order 2. Let us note LFn the
length of interaction for the order n. If we assume now that the local velocity
V remains unchanged, it is then possible to associate a time of interaction tFn for a
Fig. 11.1 (a) The ﬁeld displays some loops of order 0 which deviates the trajectories and increases
the length of interaction relatively to the size L. The arrows indicate the direction of an energetic
perturbation. (b) The ﬁeld displays now loops of order 1: the smaller loops of order 0 have been
integrated into a loop of order 1. The length of interaction is smaller; (c) The loops of order 1 are
integrated into a larger loop of order 2. The length of interaction is reduced again. The length of
interaction can decrease beyond this value if the loop or order 2 loses some of its spatial extension at
it can be seen in Fig. 11.2
11
Quantum Fractal Thermodynamics to Describe the Log-Periodicity Law. . .
293

given order n. We just write tFn = LFn/V. The loop of order 2 represents the largest
scale of the system, but the system can evolve beyond this state if the loop is
fragmented and loses its spatial extension as can be seen in Fig. 11.2.
11.1.2 The States of a Fractal: Application to the Generalized Surface
Cantor Fractal
We present our approach by taking, as an example and to make easier the presenta-
tion, the case of the generalized surface Cantor fractal. This set is very interesting
when we are studying multi-scale distributions in ecosystems and natural patterns
because it recalls some kinds of natural clustering of vegetation or animal distribu-
tion in space. Figure 11.3 explains how the set is built. We start from an initial square
which is fragmented in k smaller squares by a scale ratio r. By deﬁnition, the fractal
dimension of the set is thus Df ¼ ln(k)/ln(1/r). For r ¼ 1/3 and k ¼ 4 which is the
classical Cantor set, we obtain Df ¼ ln4/ln3 ¼ 1.26. But the scale ratio r can vary
from 0 to ½.
We are here interested in the length of the fractal set for a given number of
iterations: we will work with truncated fractals that we call “fractal states.” Let us
note the interaction length LFn as the length of the fractal at the level n. But for some
reasons of coherence in the notations, we will consider that the level n ¼ 0, i.e., LF0,
corresponds to the set having the largest number of iterations denoted n0. The fractal
length at level 0 is thus LF0 ¼ gF
n0LB, where avec gF ¼ kr. The case of the classic
surface Cantor is recovered for k ¼ 4 and r ¼ 1/3, i.e., gF ¼ 4/3. Since the fractal
dimension is D ¼ lnk/ln(1/r), we thus can write
gF ¼ kr ¼ r1D orgF ¼ kr ¼ k D1
ð
Þ=D:
ð11:2Þ
The quantity gF is the ratio of the lengths of two consecutive fractal sets, i.e.,
gF ¼ LFn/LF(n + 1). The speciﬁc case D ¼ 2 implies gF ¼ 1/r which means that this
parameter, only for D ¼ 2, is a scale ratio. At the level n ¼ 1, the fractal length is
LF1 ¼ gF
n01LB. At the level n ¼ 2, LF2 ¼ gF
n02LB; then we have LF3 ¼ gF
n03LB
Fig. 11.2 (a) The system of Fig. 11.1 has reached the largest integrative loop. The length of
interaction has its minimum value. (b, c) This loop is submitted to fragmentation and loses some of
its spatial extension: this reduces the entropic time, i.e., the internal deviation of trajectories. (d) The
largest loop is now completely erased. The crossing time tends to the homogeneous time tL ¼ L/V
294
D. Queiros-Condé et al.

and the level n ¼ 4 gives the basis length LB with LF4 ¼ LB. We thus can write for
n varying from n ¼ 0 to n0 the following relationship (Fig. 11.4):
Fig. 11.3 Sketch of the surface Cantor; (a) The zero iteration is a square of side L; its total length is
LB ¼ 4L. (b) Iteration n ¼ 1: the initial square is reduced by a scale factor r and k reduced squares
are placed in the corners of the initial square. The total length is now 4rLB. (c) Iteration n ¼ 2: the
same reduction procedure is made. The total length is now LB(4r)2. The classical surface Cantor
corresponds to r ¼ 1/3, but r can take values between 0 and ½
Fig. 11.4 (a) The Cantor surface fractal for r ¼ 1/3 and n0 ¼ 4 iterations (b) The previous fractal
set is smoothed, the smallest scale are eroded, and the fractal has now 3 iterations. (c) Again the
fractal is submitted to a smoothing procedure and loses its smallest scale. It becomes an order
2 fractal. (d) The fractal displays now one iteration after new smoothing. (e) Finally, we get a simple
square after new smoothing. Let us note that the fractal becomes thicker as it is simpliﬁed
suggesting a more massive object after each smoothing procedure
11
Quantum Fractal Thermodynamics to Describe the Log-Periodicity Law. . .
295

LFn ¼ LF0gF
n
with
LF0 ¼ gF
n0LB:
ð11:3Þ
What happens when the fractal set has been smoothed until to its largest scale?
The general relationship LFn ¼ LF0gF
n remains valid for n larger than n0. If n > n0,
the length LFn becomes smaller than the basic length LB corresponding to the largest
scale. If n!1, the length LFn tends toward zero. This means that the fractal
interaction is smoothed beyond this largest scale and that entropic time
becomes null.
Let us observe that the interaction lengths LFn are linked to each other by
LFn  LF nþ1
ð
Þ
LF n1
ð
Þ  LFn ¼ 1=gF
with
lim
n!1LFn ¼ 0:
ð11:4Þ
Moreover, between two fractal states n et n + 1, it can also be written
LFn
LF nþ1
ð
Þ ¼ gF:
ð11:5Þ
To make our presentation easier, we need to give some precisions of vocabulary.
This is now clear that we are not working here with inﬁnite mathematical fractals but
with truncated fractals at some level n having for smallest scale (internal cutoff). The
scale characterizes the smallest scale of the truncated fractal of order n: its scale
range is thus [lc(n); L]. That is why we call “fractal state of order n” the truncated
fractal at the level n.
11.2
Interaction Time of a Fractal State
Let us remind that we deﬁned the minimum crossing time tL as the time obtained for
a homogeneous ﬁeld without any heterogeneity, without any friction or entropy
production. If a phenomenon interacts with this ﬁeld, the time of interaction will be
larger than tL and frequency smaller than νL ¼ 1/tL. We assume now the existence in
the ﬁeld of a heterogeneous fractal set that creates blockage, deviations, and frictions
which can be called “entropy production.” If the fractal heterogeneous set generates
a time interaction tFn (called entropic time), then the total crossing time is the sum
tn ¼ tFn þ tL,
ð11:6Þ
where tL is the homogeneous time (without entropy production). Let us make some
remarks on the entropic time. It is clear that the more the fractal set displays
iterations, i.e., an increasing scale range, the more the entropic time is high with a
fractal set. The evolution of entropic time through scale-space is given by the
parameter gF ¼ kr since (Fig. 11.5).
It is easily shown that the crossing time can be written
296
D. Queiros-Condé et al.

tn ¼ t0  tL
ð
ÞgF
n þ tL:
ð11:7Þ
We thus derive the following relationships:
tn  tnþ1
tn1  tn ¼ 1=gF and tnþ1  tL
tn  tL ¼ 1=gF:
ð11:8Þ
One recognizes here a log-periodic equation linking crossing times. Crossing
time tends toward a minimum interaction time which is the homogeneous time, a
time obtained for a perfectly smoothed ﬁeld. The homogeneous time deﬁnes a ﬁeld
without entropy production. It can be associated with a critical time at which
evolutive capacities saturate. The system has thus reached a sort of rigid dynamical
state as if the mass of the system had increased becoming more difﬁcult to move
from its kinematical state.
11.3
Energy of a Fractal State
Let us now deﬁne the energy EFn of a fractal state. Its length being LFn and the
crossing time being tFn, the simplest way to deﬁne an energy is ﬁrst to deﬁne an
acceleration aFn ¼ LFn=t2
Fn and then to introduce a mass mFn that would lead to the
force. The work done by this force over the length of interaction is then
EFn ¼ mFnaFnLFn, i.e.,
Fig. 11.5 The fractal set of
heterogeneities deviates the
trajectories and increases the
crossing time relatively to the
homogeneous time tL ¼ L/V
11
Quantum Fractal Thermodynamics to Describe the Log-Periodicity Law. . .
297

EFn ¼ mFn LFn=tFn
ð
Þ2:
ð11:9Þ
If we deﬁne a velocity cF such as cF = LFn/tFn we thus have EFn ¼ mFnc2F. Such
an equation is of course reminiscent of the ﬁeld of relativity and quantum mechanics.
To go forward, i.e., to be able to link mechanics and geometry, we need to
understand what can be the mass of a fractal state.
11.4
The Mass of a Fractal State: The Variation of Mass
with the Order of the Fractal State
To deﬁne the mass of a fractal state, let us come back to the “scale smoothing”
between two fractal states. When the fractal set jumps from the fractal state of order
n to the fractal state of order n + 1, it loses some length in a precise ratio. It also loses
interaction time such as gF ¼ tFn/tF(n+1). Can we consider this smoothing effect
differently? If there is smoothing during a jump from n to n + 1, what happens to the
lost interaction length? If we say that there is a smoothing phenomenon, how can we
reduce the interaction length and at the same time how can we increase the quantity
of smoothed length? One solution is to deﬁne geometrically the smoothed length.
One way to do this is to deﬁne a sort of “thickness of the fractal” by wrapping along
with the fractal set of order n + 1 the smoothed length coming from the fractal set of
order n. Let us consider an example of the surface Cantor fractal. To make the
presentation clear let us start from the fractal in Fig. 11.6 displaying only two
iterations. Its fractal length is LF0 ¼ gF
n0LB with n0 ¼ 2 and the smoothing procedure
leads to the fractal or order one having a fractal length. The segments along the main
lines of the normal fractal set represent the segments lost in the smoothing procedure,
the total length leading to the length jump LF0  LF1. If we consider that this smooth
length along the main fractal contributes to making easier some ﬂux existing on the
Fig. 11.6 Sketch explaining the wrapping process of mass which increases the mass of a fractal.
(a) A surface Cantor fractal state of two iterations. It has no wrapped length. (b) The initial fractal
state is smoothed to one single iteration. The internal segments correspond to the wrapped length.
(c) A new smoothing leads to a ﬁnal square of size L: the internal segments represent all the length
that has been wrapped from the initial fractal state (a). This wrapped length makes the increase of
the mass of the fractal state. We consider that the sum of the fractal length and wrapped length is
conserved from (a–c). Fractal length is transformed into the wrapped length which gives an increase
of mass
298
D. Queiros-Condé et al.

set, then the main thickness should be proportional to the mass of the set. The
smoothed length appears to be wrapped in the main fractal structure. If we note LWn
the wrapped (smoothed) length at the level n, we have LWn + LFn ¼ LF0. This means
that we consider that the intrinsic length LF0 is conserved through the smoothing
procedure. The length of interaction decreases, but the wrapped (smoothed) length
increases in such a way that their sum is conserved.
The mass of a body can be deﬁned by the measure of the resistance of the body to
a change in its kinematical state. Let us now consider the different levels of a fractal
set by taking into account their wrapped lengths. If there is a phenomenon circulating
on the fractal, along with and around its frontier, we can easily see that more the
fractal is “thick” in terms of wrapping lengths more circulation on the fractal is
possible. We also understand that if more circulation occurs on the fractal it will be
more difﬁcult to change its kinematical state. This means that the wrapped length is
linked to the kinetic mass of the body. In other words, the increase of wrapped length
corresponds to the increase in mass. We will assume that there is a proportionality
between the increase of mass and wrapped length. If mF0 is the mass corresponding
to the fractal set of order 0 which has a fractal length LF0 and a wrapped length
LW0 ¼ 0, then the fractal set of order n with LFn and a wrapped length LWn will be
associated with a mass
mFn ¼ mF0 1 þ LWn=LFn
ð
Þ:
ð11:10Þ
This leads to a simple and remarkable relationship between the masses at different
orders.
To understand more clearly how the wrapped length can generate an increase of
the mass, let us consider Fig. 11.7 representing a simple surface Cantor for r ¼ 1/3.
The basic elements of the initial fractal of order 0 in (a) are made up of three lines:
this is the initial “thickness” of the fractal. The smoothing of the fractal obtained with
its wrapped length represented in (b) generates a system with four lines which is
represented in (c). The system in (c) being thicker in terms of internal smoothed lines
is more massive than the one in (a).
Fig. 11.7 Sketch illustrating how smoothing a fractal generates wrapped length which increases
the number of circulating lines and thus the mass of the fractal set
11
Quantum Fractal Thermodynamics to Describe the Log-Periodicity Law. . .
299

11.5
A Planck–Einstein-Like Law for the Fractal State Energy
Having now a geometrical deﬁnition of the mass of a truncated fractal, we can come
back to the energy of a fractal written through EFn ¼ mFnL2
Fn=t2
Fn . Since LFn ¼
LF0gn
F , tFn ¼ tF0gn
F andmFn ¼ mF0gn
F
it is easily shown that the quantity
mFnL2
Fn=tFn ¼ mF0L2
F0=tF0 does not depend on n and should be a constant when
n changes. This quantity has the dimension of action. Let us note hF ¼ mFnL2
Fn=tFn.
We thus have EFn ¼ hF/tFn which leads to a remarkable Planck–Einstein’s law-like
formula
EFn ¼ hFνFn:
ð11:11Þ
What is here very interesting in this approach is that a constant of action is
emerging naturally from a simple fractal system. The constant of action exists
because there is compensation between mass, length, and time which destroys
the dependence with n: the energy then becomes proportional to the frequency.
The action is a fundamental quantity in physics. There is no quantum physics
without the concept of action. Action is an energy multiplied by a time, but it is
interesting to observe that it is also a mass multiplied by a diffusivity. In our case,
diffusivity is equal to αF ¼ L2
Fn=tFn and deﬁnes the capacity of the system to diffuse
energy. We thus have hF ¼ mFnαFn. The action is constant because mass and
diffusivity display inverse evolutions with order n of the fractal state. When mass
increases which means also an increase of energy, the internal diffusivity decreases
which also means a decrease of spatial extension denoted here Δx which can be
associated with a decrease of temporal extension denoted by Δt; the system is thus
more localized in space and in time. The opposite case, i.e., a decrease of mass,
implies a decrease of energy; the internal diffusivity becomes higher, which implies
a higher spatial extension. It seems that we have here a geometrical way to visualize
the uncertainty principle of Heisenberg. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst derivation
of Planck–Einstein’s law using simple and direct fractal ideas. This model has
certainly a lot to say in the ﬁeld of quantum mechanics and the origin of Planck–
Einstein’s law. This will be developed in a future book entitled Creative Entropy
(Queiros-Condé et al. 2022).
11.6
Kinetic Chain Temperature, Exergy, and Dispergy of a
Fractal State
At this stage, inspired by the pioneering work of Louis de Broglie on the “hidden
thermodynamics of the particle” and the “temperature of the photon,” we introduce a
temperature t

Fn such as EFn ¼ hFνFn ¼ kBFt

Fn where kBF is a constant having the
dimension of an entropy which can be interpreted as the quantum of entropy and of
course linked to a sort of macroscopic constant of Boltzmann. Pay attention: kBF is
different from the fractal geometrical parameter k. How can we interpret the temper-
ature? This temperature deﬁnes the intensity of kinetic chaining. For n ¼ 0, the
300
D. Queiros-Condé et al.

temperature is at its smallest value: the chaining between quanta is relatively small
and displays high dispersive features. For increasing values of n, the chaining
between quanta is very intense leading to some internal rigidity and strong linkage
corresponding to a high kinetic mass. For all these reasons, we will call this
temperature the “kinetic chain temperature.” We observe that for low values of n,
i.e., for highly developed and spatially extended fractal states, the chain temperature
is low, while for high values of n (i.e., for highly localized fractal states) the chain
temperature is high.
We would like now to distinguish in the fractal state energy EFn two forms of
energy that appear through the second principle of thermodynamics: (i) the exergy
content of energy denoted XFn which is simply the maximum work that can be
realized by using the energy EFn and (ii) the complementary energy which represents
the rest of energy that is not available for mechanical work and has an entropic
nature. This energy ZFn displays dispersive features which cannot be transformed
into mechanical work. For these reasons, it is called “dispergy.” In some thermody-
namical books, this quantity is sometimes referred to as “anergy,” but this term is
ambiguous since it suggests a quantity without energy or positive feature. This is not
the case. Dispergy is of course linked to the entropic features of energy, but this does
not mean that dispergy is linked to “disorder” or does not have a useful function.
Dispergy must not be seen as disordered energy. It rather can be interpreted as the
energy necessary to make possible the transfer of exergy, a kind of “energy of
canalization” which is also correlated to the information necessary to this canaliza-
tion. Moreover, it certainly displays a damping (buffer) function which gives
stability to the system: this means that systems with low dispergy relative to exergy
can deliver a high quantity of work (this means a high efﬁciency) but are highly
unstable and vulnerable to internal or external perturbations because there is not
enough dispergy to maintain the stability and to display a buffer or a damping
function. We thus will keep the term dispergy (Queiros-Conde and Feidt 2018).
Let us take a temperature of reference t

0 . If an energy E is transmitted at the
temperature t

E with, the exergy content of E denoted XE is expressed through the
Carnot factor θE ¼ 1  t

E=t

0 . It gives XE ¼ E 1  t

E=t

0


. The dispergy is thus
ZE ¼ E t

E=t

0


.
Let us come back to the energy EFn of a fractal state. We would like to quantify its
exergy and dispergy contents, i.e., XFn and ZFn with EFn ¼ XFn + ZFn. It is easy to see
that the dispergy content is constant with n, since by deﬁnition we thus have
ZFn ¼ ZF0 ¼ kBFt

0 ¼ Cte:
ð11:12Þ
This implies that the energy jump EF(n + 1)  EFn is an exergy jump and that it can
be written δWn ¼ XF(n + 1)  XFn. This means that the fractal state changes with n due
to its exergy content XFn which increases. It can be shown that the exergy content is
11
Quantum Fractal Thermodynamics to Describe the Log-Periodicity Law. . .
301

XFn ¼ EFn
gn
F  1
gn
F


:
ð11:13Þ
A fractal state jumps from n to n + 1 by an equivalent of mechanical work δWn.
What is exactly this equivalent work? This quantiﬁes all the improvements,
the innovations, and the increase of information which makes the fractal length
and the fractal time shorter from n to n + 1. These changes have a smoothening effect
on the smallest scales which are orientated along the direction given by the larger
scales. The fractal length LFn becomes shorter, but the kinetic mass mFn increases as
it has been illustrated in Figs. 11.6 and 11.7. The scale smoothening is thus
associated with an internal mass roughening. The kinetic chain temperature also
increases because δWn = EF(n + 1)  EFn = kBF(tF(n + 1)  tFn). Since gF = tFn/tF(n + 1)
we have δWn/EFn = gF  1. The system seems thus evolving by a sort of compression
from n to n + 1 where δWn would be the compression work. As in a classical
compression, this work is transformed into heat (δWn ! δQn) which makes an
increase of kinetic chain temperature with δQn = kBF(tF(n + 1)  tFn): the constant kF
can thus be interpreted as linked to an elementary caloriﬁc capacity.
11.7
Entropy Production Between the Fractal States: The
Kinetic Chain Temperature
Let us calculate the production of entropy when the structure jumps from the state
n to the state n + 1. By deﬁnition
δSn ¼ δQn
t

n
 δQn
t

nþ1
:
ð11:14Þ
By using hF=tFn ¼ kBFt

Fn andhF=tF nþ1
ð
Þ ¼ kBFt

F nþ1
ð
Þ we can derive
δQn ¼ kBF t

F nþ1
ð
Þ  t

Fn


ð11:15Þ
and then
δSn ¼ kBF gF  1
ð
Þ2
gF
:
ð11:16Þ
The entropy production we calculated so far is for one single elementary event (“a
geometrical quantum”) on the fractal set. But the fractal set does not jump from state
n to state n + 1 with one single quantum. To change the state, it will need the action
of a great number of geometrical quanta: let us note this number of quanta Nn. If Tn is
the date at which starts the state n and Tn+1 is the date at which ends the state n and
begins the state n + 1, the difference of time Tn+1  Tn gives the time needed for the
transition. The question now is: how many quanta the system needs to go from n to
302
D. Queiros-Condé et al.

n + 1? Since tFn  tF(n+1) is the quantum time between two states, the number of
quanta can be expressed by
Nn ¼ Tnþ1  Tn
tFn  tF nþ1
ð
Þ :
ð11:17Þ
The total entropy production becomes now
Sn ¼ NnδSn ¼ kBFNn gF  1
ð
Þ2
gF
:
ð11:18Þ
The previous formula can be written
Sn
Nn ¼ kBF gF  1
ð
Þ2
gF
:
ð11:19Þ
Our last result means that the entropy per quantum is conserved when n changes.
We will see just hereafter that this is in agreement with the entropic-skins theory
(Queiros-Condé 2000) used to describe log-periodicity in species evolution and
based on a fractal approach of the phenomenon of intermittency in turbulence. If
we assume that the number of quanta does not depend on n (Nn ¼ NS) then it implies
that the entropy production is also a constant between two fractal sets, i.e.,
Sn ¼ NSkBF(gF  1)2/gF.
We observe that for this case, the entropy becomes null which means a reversible
evolution without entropy production. The other limit gF ! 1 gives Sn/
Nn ! kBFgF ¼ kBFrk. This means that in this limit the quantity kBFrk becomes a
new quantum of entropy k0
BF and that we have Sn ¼ Nnk0
BF. This is the simple well-
known equation giving the entropy of a number Nn of particles in a perfect gas.
By writing NS(tn  tn + 1) ¼ Tn + 1  Tn for n increasing from 0 to n and by
summing all the equations, we simply obtain for any value of n
NS t0  tn
ð
Þ ¼ Tn  T0:
ð11:20Þ
By taking the limit n!1, it gives NS(t0  tL) ¼ TL  T0 where TL is the critical
time of Tn when n!1. We thus recover the famous log-periodic equation
Tn ¼ T0  TL
ð
ÞgF
n þ TL:
ð11:21Þ
11.8
Irreversibility and the Structuration Efficiency of a
Log-Periodic Phenomenon
We thus found that the entropy production between two consecutive fractal sets is a
constant when n changes. The entropy production is null for the speciﬁc case gF ¼ 1
which is characteristic of a reversible evolution. The change in the fractal structure is
thus associated with the same amount of entropy. We recover here the result we
11
Quantum Fractal Thermodynamics to Describe the Log-Periodicity Law. . .
303

obtained in the context of “entropic-skins theory” in the paper entitled “Principle of
conservation of the ﬂux entropy in species evolution” (Queiros-Condé 2000). Let us
recall that the parameter g was interpreted as γ ¼ 1/g where the factor of reversibility
quantiﬁes the level of intermittency. Intermittency is a phenomenon (namely in
turbulence) that is characterized by the fact that energy dissipates through a clustered
structure: a non-intermittent system is deﬁned by a homogeneous and space-ﬁlling
dissipation without clustering. The case γ!1 (i.e., g!1) corresponds to a purely
reversible evolution without entropy production and thus without intermittency. The
system does not display internal differentiation. In other words, it has no internal
structure since it is characterized by homogeneity. The opposite extremal case
γ!0 (i.e., g!1) corresponds to an inﬁnite irreversible case where all the energy
is transformed in entropy very rapidly when n varies. All the energy is dissipated
(dispersed) in entropy within the system. We can deﬁne an efﬁciency of internal
structuration η ¼ 1  γ. We see that when γ!1 the structural efﬁciency tends to zero
and when γ!0 the structural efﬁciency is equal to one. Working with frequencies, it
takes the form ηF ¼ 1  vFn/vF(n + 1) which implies ηF ¼ δQn/EF(n + 1). Working with
temperatures, it takes the form
ηF ¼ 1 
t

Fn
t

F nþ1
ð
Þ
:
ð11:22Þ
The structuration efﬁciency between two fractal states n and n + 1 is a sort of
Carnot efﬁciency corresponding to a thermal machine working between the low
temperature t

Fn and the high temperature t

F nþ1
ð
Þ. The log-periodic law implies that
this efﬁciency is a constant when the order of the fractal state varies.
11.9
Conclusion
We developed a thermodynamical explanation of the log-periodic law based on a
simple quantum fractal model. The parameter g of the log-periodic law is interpreted
as linked to the increase of the length of the fractal with its number of iterations
which deﬁnes its scale range. By introducing a “kinetic chain temperature,” we show
that the log-periodic law corresponds to a log-periodic increase of temperature
converging toward a critical temperature. We deﬁned an efﬁciency of structuration
and found a production of entropy which are constant through the fractal states of the
phenomenon. The critical time TL represents thus a state having the maximum
kinetic chain temperature. The system is thus in its hottest state, which is deﬁned
by internal strong links, a minimum evolutive capacity, and thus a low potential of
adaptation. Around its critical time or equivalent critical temperature, due to its low
dispergy (or entropy) content which displays a damping function to internal and
external ﬂuctuations, the system becomes highly unstable and vulnerable. It can thus
collapse very rapidly since it has no damping (no “escaping”) possibility. The
revenge of dispergy (entropy) against exergy (mechanical power) lies precisely in
304
D. Queiros-Condé et al.

this simple idea: without enough dispergy (entropy) there is no stability in time, no
adaptation, and thus no survival.
References
Brissaud I (2007) La chronologie du jazz suit-elle une loi log-périodique ? Math Sci Hum 178(2):
41–50
Brissaud I (2009) Evolution log-périodique des ordres religieux et monastiques. Math Sci Hum
188(4):55–65
Brissaud I, Chaline J, Grou P, Nottale L (2012) Expansions log-périodiques. Les exemples de la
Russie et de la Rome antique. Math Sci Hum 50:29–48
Brissaud I, Chaline J (2013) La chronologie des courants artistiques suit-elle une loi log-périodique
? L’exemple de la peinture. In: Grou P (ed) L’obscurantisme de l’argent, ﬂéau du XXIe siècle.
Jalons pour un nouvel esprit des Lumières. L’Harmatan, Paris
Cash R, Chaline J, Nottale L, Grou P (2002) Développement humain et loi log-périodique. C R Biol
325:1–7
Chaline J, Nottale L, Grou P (1999) L’arbre de la vie a-t-il une structure fractale ? Le Point sur. C R
Acad Sci Paris 328:717–726
Dubois J (1995) La dynamique non linéaire en physique du globe. Masson, Paris
Guillen A (2001) L’évolution des idées et de leurs applications dans le temps a-t-elle une structure
fractale ? personal communication
Johansen A, Sornette D (1999) Financial « anti-bubbles » : log-periodicity in gold and Nikkei
collapses. Int J Mod Phys C 10(4):563–575
Johansen A, Sornette D (2001) Finite-time singularity in the dynamics of the world population,
economic and ﬁnancial indices. Phys A 294:465–502
Nottale L, Chaline J, Grou P (2000) Les arbres de l'évolution. Hachette Littérature, Paris
Nottale L, Chaline J, Grou P (2009) Des ﬂeurs pour Schrödinger. La relativité d’échelle et ses
applications. Ellipses, Paris
Queiros-Condé D (2000) Principle of conservation of the entropy ﬂux for species evolution. C R
Acad Sci Paris 330:445–449
Queiros-Condé D, Chaline J, Dubois J (2015) Le monde des fractales-la nature trans-échelles (The
world of fractals-the trans-scale nature). Ellipses, Paris
Queiros-Condé D, Feidt M (2018) Fractal and trans-scale nature of entropy-towards a geometriza-
tion of thermodynamics. Elsevier, Paris
Queiros-Condé D, Chaline J, Brissaud I (2022) The creative entropy: universe, life and human
societies. Ellipses, Paris
Sornette D, Sammis CG (1995) Complex critical exponents from renormalization group theory of
earthquakes: implications for earthquake predictions. J Phys I France 5:607–619
Sornette D (1998) Discrete scale invariance and complex dimensions. Phys Rep 297:239–270
11
Quantum Fractal Thermodynamics to Describe the Log-Periodicity Law. . .
305

Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal
Vertical Nervous System—The Last
Threshold of Self-Organized
and Self-Memorizing Increasing Complexity
from Gametes to Embryo
12
Anne Dambricourt Malassé
« Teilhard wrote, “we are not lost in the Universe, on the
contrary” (...). This phenomenon is of course observable only
in the long term, but it translates a logic of astonishing
stability, an irreversible time, writes Anne Dambricourt
Malassé, who memorizes! I am not far from her thought. The
sense (in all the senses of the term) of the history of the inert,
alive, thinking matter, in its race to the complexity, is an
observation (. . .). —Y. Coppens (1996)
Abstract
From Antiquity to the nineteenth century, the human being was seen as an
archetype from the metaphysical origin organized in the physical world around
the verticality, monkeys belonged to another archetype able of quadrupedalism
and bipedalism. In 1801 and 1802, Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck proceeded to a
rupture by seeking a natural and functional explanation of human verticality since
extinct monkeys in relation to climate changes. He opened the mind to self-
organized processes between living systems and their environments. In 1868,
Charles Darwin took up the Lamarckian theory with the gemmules hypothesis,
looking for an explanation for the transmission of the macroscopic changes and
their memorization at the microscopic scale of the sex cells. Memorization and
A. Dambricourt Malassé (*)
Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, UMR 7194 CNRS-Département Homme et environnement,
Paris, France
e-mail: anne.malasse@mnhn.fr
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_12
307

self-organization were the implicit processes of transformism, the natural selec-
tion
being
a
general
concept
waiting
for
better
knowledge
in
bio-physicochemistry, i.e., in thermodynamics. This double evolutionary
problematics, (1) the memorization of the transformation processes and (2) the
neural straightening from quadrupedal primates to bipedal Homo sapiens, is
conﬁrmed but as a consequence of the macroevolution of the embryonic body
plans and not as the result of postnatal biomechanical constraints. I have
demonstrated for more than 30 years that the straightening was a progressive
embryonic and phylogenetic process, saltationist and reiterated four times,
starting systematically from the horizontal direction of the notochord. This
process followed increasing complexity and duration of the neurulation with
morphological reorganization along the cephalocaudal axis. The stability of the
evolutionary trajectory over 40 million years up—despite successive emergent
angular discontinuities separated by million years—allowed us to infer a new
family of gametogenesis attractors which correspond to evolutionary properties
transmitted since the emergence of unicellulars: the self-memorization of self-
organized processes. In other words, self-organization which includes simulta-
neously its own memorization is the complex process that allowed the emergence
of life whose principles are self-reproduction. Prokaryote diversiﬁcation
generated
environmental
increasing
complexity.
Then,
eukaryotes
and
multicellulars became possible thanks to the increasing diversity and complexity
of the environment but also thanks to self-memorization properties able to create
and transmit the ﬁrst ontogeny. Later, macroevolution could develop with a
coherent reorganization of the body plan according to the rules of internal
increasing complexity. The phylogenetic straightening of the central nervous
system allows us to induce that gametes have inherited these macroevolutionary
properties acting during embryogeny along the craniocaudal axis. This
paradigmatic shift is coherent with the sciences of self-organization and opens
debate on the future of our species because the verticality is reaching a physical
limit for the vocal tract, the dental occlusion, and the cerebellum with psychomo-
tor and cognitive consequences, whereas the relationships between the environ-
mental complexity, the sex cells, the reproductive organs of the females, and the
exponential complexiﬁcation of the neurogenesis are still unknown.
Keywords
Verticality · Hominization · Central nervous system straightening · Embryonic
body plan · Gametogenesis · Increasing complexity · Self-memorization ·
Modeling · Attractors · Instability · Axial skeleton · Basicranio-facial contraction ·
Cerebro-cerebellar Rubicon · Psychomotor balance · Cognition
308
A. Dambricourt Malassé

12.1
The Premises
The theory of biological evolution was formulated in 1801 by Jean-Baptiste de
Lamarck and developed in 1802 with the concept of the inheritance of characters
modiﬁed by the function (Lamarck 1801, 1802). His mentor Georges Buffon
(1707–1788) had already described the major stages of the planetary transformations
which reached 10 million years (Buffon 1785) or even several hundred million years
(Giraud-Soulavie 1780–1784). The natural history of organisms, or the natural order
of their places in the environment, remained that of Aristotle. The history was
recognizable thanks to the fossil records, from the least to the most complex
organization illustrated by the human nervous system. The planet was irreversibly
committed to a state of stable internal equilibrium, with the cooling of the lava (the
magma) and its tectonic consequences (shrinking of the earth’s diameter), so the
fauna and ﬂora had necessarily been replaced by new species as geochemical and
climatic changes took place. The cooling tendency of the earth and the natural order
of the animals in their environment were thus linked, as conﬁrmed by the extinct
species. The variation of subspecies according to latitudes and continents was
accepted, but only within the limits of a metaphysical archetype, an “inner mold”
as proposed by Georges Buffon (1749). These archetypes were no longer embodied
in the matter as soon as the climatic and/or geophysical conditions did not allow the
molecular inputs necessary for their development, from fertilization to adult form.
The environment was, therefore, inﬂuential insofar as the same mold had adaptive
plasticity to different environments (Buffon’s “organic molecules” of the mold). But
global environmental changes were the cause of their massive extinction according
to the planetary extent of geophysical changes, as Georges Cuvier maintained later
with the catastrophism paradigm. Aristotle’s gradation of the animals had thus
followed the history of the Earth, according to the internal diversiﬁcation and
complexiﬁcation of their organizations until the modern human encephalon. It
should be noted that man appears not only as the most complex organism in the
history of the animal kingdom but also the only animal whose nervous system is
vertical from the brain stem. The Greek philosophers already reasoned on this
cognitive capacity, but without the long durations, since the cosmos and the earth
had neither beginning nor end.
The varieties of a species were seen as adaptations of the same archetype, but the
environment was not conceived as the master-builder capable of creating an arche-
type with molecules or atoms. The origin of an animated organization from the
embryonic germ with the transmissible memory of its construction was out of the
ﬁeld of natural history and the observation tools. Thenceforth how to understand that
atoms or molecules could have organized themselves to generate the ancestors of
sexual cells, or male and female animalcules (spermatozoids and oocytes)? In other
words, how could free molecules and atoms have generated an autonomous organi-
zation which will simultaneously be its self-memorization, since the consequence is
to reproduce in itself, from itself? For the origin of the animalcules, the naturalists
thus relied on the metaphysics of the Greek philosophers, nature was the physical
dimension (space-time-energy) of a being (ontos) and accessible to the human
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
309

reason by the senses of observation and the measurements. The organization was
thus the visible part, physically observable and measurable, of the beings. Their
beginning and end were their physical dimensions in the duration. The study of
fossils, or paleoontology, was the science of extinct beings whose animate, or
physical, organization would have been a kind of terrestrial incarnation of abstract
entities (mathematical forms at the base of archetypal structures). Such was the
intellectual context in Europe, only 220 years ago, when Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck
began teaching in 1793 at the new chair of invertebrate zoology of the National
Museum of Natural History in Paris (Dambricourt Malassé 2021a).
12.2
Lamarck and Darwin, Pioneers of the Self-Organized
Evolution
Lamarck had developed the ﬁrst reﬂection on metabolism or the internal equilibrium
of organisms and their death, in terms of physical processes (Lamarck 1794). The
zoologist was thinking on the origins of life, the very beginning of the ﬁrst unicellu-
lar cycles, but without pushing the reasoning until its logical consequences that
implied self-memorized processes. The emergence of life, or a unicellular cycle, is
more than the replication of a cell. The cycle is the reproduction of the process
organization, it has self-memorized. Nevertheless, the zoologist reasoned on the
adult term of ontogeny and added a conceptual difﬁculty for the transmission of the
modiﬁcations to the sexual cells. Abandoning the chronology of the development, he
reversed the direction of the reasoning from the macroscopic toward the microscopic
scale, whereas he should have logically followed that of the physical and chemical
laws at the terrestrial surface. But the spontaneous formation of replicative cells from
physicochemical processes was inconceivable. Thirty years later, in 1830, his
audacity reached the European community thanks to the debate at the Academy of
Sciences between his fervent defender Etienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and his
contradictor Georges Cuvier. The ﬁrst argued that there was only one “unity of
organic composition plan” in the animal kingdom, which was therefore capable of
becoming more complicated, while the second distinguished four, without any
possible transition. The environment as a factor of variability within the limits of
the species had already been disseminated by Buffon, but seeing the environment as
the motor of the evolution of the “chain of beings” including Homo sapiens, was the
audacity of Lamarck. Charles Darwin recognized the historical reality:
The conclusion that man is the co-descendant with other species of some ancient, lower, and
extinct form, is not in any degree new. Lamarck long ago came to this conclusion (. . .) as the
progenitors of man became more and more erect (. . .) owing to a change in its manner of
procuring subsistence or in the conditions of its native country, to live somewhat less in trees
and more on the ground, its manner of progression would have been modiﬁed: and in this
case, it would have had to become either more strictly quadrupedal or bipedal (Darwin
1871).
310
A. Dambricourt Malassé

Darwin was a Lamarckian and he extrapolated the reasoning until its limits,
postulating the existence of gemmules (Darwin 1868), a kind of molecule capable
of recording modiﬁcations on the macroscopic scale of the adult animal and trans-
mitting them to the microscopic scale of the internal organization of sex cells. Then
looking for an explanation for the successful transmission from generation to
generation, he applied his concept of natural and sexual selection: the transmission
could only be explained by the crossing of females and males which shared the same
functional modiﬁcations and the same gemmules able to transmit them to the sex
cells. Individuals unﬁt for change, because the gemmules were deﬁcient, should end
up not having any descendants, in accordance with the model of extinction defended
by Georges Cuvier.
The gemmules hypothesis was already obsolete because of Gregor Mendel’s laws
of inheritance. On other hand, Darwin’s nephew Francis Galton tried to explain to
him that the gemmules—the molecules able to record or memorize changes—could
be conceivable only for the reproductive cells.1 But Darwin’s merit, rarely men-
tioned, was to set an implicit condition for the environment to be able to modify
organisms: they had to be endowed beforehand with physical and chemical
properties on the scale of adult organization and transmissible to the sex cells.
This conception was already one of the self-organized systems with their internal
logics, the organism possessing the necessary properties to reorganize itself and
transmit them to the sex cells. The individuals endowed with these self-organized
internal properties and interbreeding with each other transmitted them. But without
such self-organized organic properties, natural selection alone would have made no
sense. Darwin did not solve the chicken-and-egg dilemma, since the gemmules had
to come from the sex cells ﬁrst and match with the cellular specialization of an
organism completed in its development while not yet existing in the zygote stage.
Neither Lamarck nor Darwin discovered the biological processes of the
transformist evolution, but they raised the real question: the transmission of its
complex mechanisms.
In France, therefore, natural selection was not welcomed by naturalists as Charles
Darwin expected, because the concept could not be compared to a discovery of
physicochemical processes that generate embryogenesis more complicated than that
from which it was supposed to emerge. The physician Armand de Quatrefages,
inventor of the Cro-Magnon race and an astrogeophysicist (PhD on lunar gravita-
tion), had a solid grounding in physics and mathematics and was in the position to
note the absence of scientiﬁc content in the formulation of transformism, aware that
the skeletal structures subject to gravitation, form a whole whose vital parts are in
reciprocal coherence. The morphological plan of organization was necessarily in
conformity with the physical and chemical laws since the sex cells.
The transformation of an internal structure could not be conceived by gradual and
isolated changes within the organism and even less in the direction of the most
1Correspondence between Charles Darwin and Francis Galton. http://galton.org/letters/darwin/
correspondence.htm
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
311

complex organization toward the least complex sex cell necessary for their heredi-
tary transmission. The naturalists could not conceive a morphogenetic body plan
otherwise than as the completion of a process toward the achieved archetype at the
adult stage, a metaphysical being without duration.
Armand de Quatrefages was a metaphysicist, so natural selection was not a
scientiﬁc discovery able to invalidate the use of the metaphysical concept of the
archetype, defended in paleontology by Richard Owen (1848). And many naturalists
agreed with Quatrefages, even Paul Broca, the French founder of biometric anthro-
pology and the free-tinkers society because this doctrine did not consider the
structural and functional unity of the organism. French naturalists were looking for
a vaster multidisciplinary theory taking into account the laws of physics and the
forces of attraction at the inframolecular scale (Dambricourt Malassé 2021a).
The successive appearance of prosimians,2 monkeys, great apes, and man in the
geologic strata raised this problem. Anthropologists familiar with the primate’s
comparative anatomy did not conceive the vertical anatomy of man as the result of
the slow transformation of the semierect organization of apes. Paul Broca has studied
orangutan skeleton and concluded:
But then it is not by slow and gradual evolution, by a selection with a secular march, that the
species of the orang was produced? The change took place suddenly, without transition; it is
not a progressive transformation, it is a complete transﬁguration, carried out at once,
contrary to all the Darwinian laws or others (...). The Darwinian doctrine is therefore
inseparable from the idea that the evolution of species has been gradual and excessively
slow. This is, one can say, its fundamental axiom. And yet, when we apply the rules of
natural selection to the example of the orang, we come to recognize that the type of this
animal could not have been produced gradually, that it must have appeared suddenly,
without any transition. I ﬁnd, on the contrary, that if the species have evolved, which is
probable, they are arranged as if natural selection had not been the agent of their transfor-
mation. (Broca 1870).
Thus, Georges Cuvier’s heirs rejected the transformism and consequently Charles
Darwin’s theory, because the hypothesis granting to sex cells properties of
remodeling organogenesis more complex than those of the ancestor had no physico-
chemical modeling. Moreover, these properties of increasing complexity would have
been transmitted from the ﬁrst unicellular organisms, the origins of which were
misunderstood. The acceptance of Lamarck’s ideas in his own institution dates from
the accession of Albert Gaudry to the chair of paleontology in 1872 where one
century later Yves Coppens will pursue his research with the discovery of
Australopithecus afarensis, a hominin in permanent verticality but, to the general
surprise, still arboreal.
The fundamental mechanism that Charles Darwin was confronted with, was the
origins of life, in other words, the self-memorization of self-organization processes
and this very abstract problem is still relevant today:
2We keep this classical terminology coherent with the embryonic data.
312
A. Dambricourt Malassé

We will also hypothesize that living organisms are not palimpsests that have erased all
memory of their past, but that they still contain today archives from the past. Also, we will
restrict our quest to the atom of life, the cell, leaving aside multicellular organisms. The
physicist Freeman Dyson (1999) demonstrates that in a realistic scenario of the origins of
life, the reproduction of primordial processes must predate the emergence of a replicative
process and then associate them into a coherent whole. In a chemical world such as the
Earth’s surface, this implies both the reproduction of chemical ﬂows and the emergence,
from this metabolism, of entities that can replicate themselves. In short, it takes at least two
chemically distinct origins to explain the origin of life (. . .). This functional scenario of the
origins of life is very abstract. (Danchin 2022)
The memory of the cellular construction is the memory of the evolutionary
process that created the cell cycle as such; otherwise, it would not transmit itself.
So, the process has therefore put itself in memory. This paradox is one of the
complexity solved by the emergence of an unedited organization not reducible to
its parts, but without having understood emergence as such (Morin 2022). The self-
organized process which created the very ﬁrst living system—a unicellular—
included itself in the logic for its own transmission. This fundamental problem is
found again with the process formerly called “orthogenesis”, i.e., reproducible over
very long geological times with morphogenetic trajectories forming phylogenetic
lineages. The stability of the trajectory implies the reproduction of the evolutionary
process, e.g., its memorization. By inference, these properties of memorization are
necessarily constitutive of gametogenesis properties since the origins of life.
12.3
Orthogenesis, Macroevolution, and the Synthetic Theory
(Princeton, 1947)
Such evolutionary mechanisms were beyond comprehension and they remained so
in the middle twentieth century when the neo-Darwinian doctrine developed thanks
to the discovery of genes and statistical calculations. The new Synthetic Theory was
formulated in January 1947 during the Princeton conference taking into consider-
ation the chromosomes but with a new postulate according to with only mistakes of
electronic bonds—or covalency—during their replication could change the species.
In April 1947, the French National Center for Scientiﬁc Research (CNRS), the
Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle and the Sorbonne University organized a
symposium with the Rockefeller Foundation hosted at the Institut de Paléontologie
Humaine to debate on the insufﬁciency of the new synthesis (Piveteau 1950). Many
researchers did not agree because of the incapacity of such molecular randomness to
explain orthogenetic processes of the macroevolution but also those of microevolu-
tion described with mole rats of China.
For the paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson, orthogenesis was an “optical
effect”, the trend was only the combination of statistics and the natural selection of
favorable random mutations, i.e., chemical processes occurring during the
chromosomic replication:
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
313

The reconstruction of orientations, geologically long, in a single direction, is subjective (...).
The postulates inherent in one form or another of the orthogenetic theory (...) by unknown
factors are neither required nor probable according to the present data (...). The driving role
of natural selection, in this synthetic view, is not merely channeling, without a restrictive
sense, but is also creative, bringing about a progression in a deﬁnite direction, orthogenesis,
as it occurs, is ortho-selection. (Simpson 1950).
His colleague Pierre Teilhard de Chardin opposed him to three lineages of mole
rats emerging from the same ancestral population over 20 million years he had
studied in China. These species were distinguished by their skulls, but they have
evolved with the same dental trend statistically improbable by the mere accumula-
tion of electronic bond mistakes during the chromosomic replications.
Elongation of the crowns, loss of the roots, which betrays a continuous process affecting the
phylum itself, in its totality, and each of its components (...). The Siphnae confronts us with a
certain case of directed morphological transformation that is to say of orthogenesis. The
phenomenon can no longer be denied. But it remains to ﬁnd a good explanation of the
phenomenon. (Teilhard de Chardin 1950).
The statistics would not explain such improbability; the new paradigm did not
take into consideration possible mutagenic effects with ampliﬁcation or autocatalysis
which will be developed later (e.g., Moore and Pearson 1981).
12.4
Posing the Evolutionary Problem: The Embryonic
Trajectories of the Nervous System Versus Locomotion
12.4.1 Locomotion
The mammal skeleton is divided into axial and appendicular territories. The axial
skeleton is composed of the skull, the laryngeal structures, the vertebral column, and
the thoracic cage, whereas the appendicular skeleton is formed by bones attached to
the vertebral column with the shoulder and pelvic girdles and the limbs.
The neurocranium is formed by the vault and the base with three internal fossae,
the anterior under the frontal lobes, the medial containing the temporal lobes, and the
posterior with the brainstem and the cerebellum (Fig. 12.1).
The nervous system is surrounded by the meninges formed by three membranes,
the outermost of which, the dura mater, is attached to the endocranial surface from
the vault to the base, before extending to the end of the spinal cord forming the dural
sac. The dura mater separates the two cerebral hemispheres as well as the occipital
lobes from the cerebellum, by forming respectively the cerebral falx and the cerebel-
lar tentorium. The membrane in contact with the nervous system is the pia mater,
separated from the dura mater by the arachnoid membrane. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid
circulates in the cavities of the nervous system and spreads outward under the
arachnoid, suspending the encephalon above the bony skull base and cushioning
shocks.
314
A. Dambricourt Malassé

Since the nervous system has no contact with bone or cartilage tissues, their
reciprocal relationships during morphogenesis imply necessarily these membranes.
The cranial skeleton is a discontinuous bony system with sutures and a continuity
solution with the ﬁrst vertebra (atlas), but the membranes form a uniﬁed support
system from the vault to the dural sac which is inserted at the level of the sacral
vertebrae (S2–S3). A coccygeal ligament of the dura mater attaches it to the last
vertebra of the coccyx. This membrane thus forms a guy wire unifying the
endocranium to the sacrum.
Lamarck had not studied the comparative anatomy of skulls and did not know the
complex internal organization of the skull base. His reasoning, therefore, assumed
that the constraints were applied on the exocranium by the muscular insertions
between the nape and the neck. But Lamarck did not verify whether his hypothesis
was realistic given the organization of the vascular-nervous oriﬁces of the base
coming from the nervous system and the orientation of sutures showing that strains
are internal and coming from the mesenchymal tissue. Due to a lack of knowledge in
comparative anatomy, he missed the true problem of the straightening which
becomes obvious when the axial skeleton is sectioned in the median sagittal plane
(Fig. 12.1). No muscular strain can force the posterior fossa (the clivus and the
pyramids, S-Ba and R in Fig. 12.2) to straighten. Later anthropologists will be
looking for pressures coming from the cerebral hemispheres.
1
2
3
Fig. 12.1 Median sagittal section of adult skulls of extant species showing the staging of the three
cerebral fossae (1, 2, 3) according to the classiﬁcation of primates: top from left to right: prosimian
(Indri), platyrrhine simian (Cebus), catarrhine simian (Hylobates), bottom from left to right, great
ape (Pan) and Homo sapiens. The arrow indicates the orientation of the occipital foramen (different
scales, # Dambricourt Malassé)
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
315

Until the 1950s, the internal comparisons of the cranial base were rare because
they need the destruction of the skull. The stomatologist Robert Gudin (1952) had
demonstrated the utility of the proﬁle radiography applied to different primate
species including Homo sapiens, for a PhD thesis of the Sorbonne University in
Comparative Anatomy with Jean Piveteau. He enlightened dynamical basicranio-
facial links modeled with a pantograph (Fig. 12.3).
The geometrical analysis of Gudin was necessary for the nonchirurgical orthope-
dic treatments and announced a revolution in anthropology with the highlighting of
dynamic balances between the occlusion, the spine and the posture, putting in light a
self-organized system with its inner logics, able to maintain its global equilibrium.
But the dynamic trace was still unknown in paleontology and anthropology when
30 years later, in 1983, I committed myself to PhD thesis of the Muséum national
d’Histoire naturelle, on the mandible and skull base of extant and fossil catarrhine
primates (Dambricourt Malassé 1987). The emergent question was: when and how
the verticalized craniocaudal equilibrium took place during ontogeny and
phylogeny.
12.4.2 More Precise Vocabulary to Clarify the Problem: The
Endoskeleton of the Axial Skeleton
Comparative anatomy distinguishes the exoskeleton of arthropods and the endoskel-
eton of vertebrates. In the former, the skeleton is outside and protects the body, in the
latter the skeleton is inside the organism. The vertebrate skull is an endoskeleton but
Fig. 12.2 Internal view on
the adult Homo sapiens skull
base. Ba: basion, Cx:
semicircular canals of the
vestibular system, Ex:
exo-occipital, Occ: occipital
squama, R: petrous
pyramids, S: body of the
sphenoid bone
(# Dambricourt Malassé)
316
A. Dambricourt Malassé

anatomists distinguish the exocranium and the endocranium surrounding the brain.
On the other hand, anthropologists divide the endoskeleton into two territories: the
cranium and the postcranium. This dichotomy has no embryonic reality, but its
impact is considerable in human paleontology which divides the body into two
evolutionary approaches which fail to unify; the ﬁrst studies the cranial cavity and
the imprints of the cerebral hemispheres, and the second studies external constraints
due to the locomotion. This creates a clash between the internal approach of cerebral
growth and the external study of adult and locomotion. Both disregard the embry-
onic organization of the craniocaudal axis and especially the skull base and the
distinction in zoology between the axial and the appendicular skeletons and not the
division in cranial and postcranial skeletons.
Clivus
Occiput 
Basion
Fig. 12.3 Geometrical trace of Gudin, or “pantograph”, drawn in the 1950s thanks to the X-rays,
linking for the ﬁrst time, the inclination of the clivus, the posterior part of the mandible (ascending
branch), and the prognathism of the middle face (angle α1), and modeling dynamical basicranio-
facial relationships in opposite direction, with a rotation axis in the middle of the skull base (after
Godard and Ducasse 1973; Gudin and Godard 1989)
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
317

As soon as the term endocranium is used, such a distinction can be generalized to
the whole axial skeleton, which is why I distinguish the axial exoskeleton and the
axial endoskeleton lined by the dura mater from the vault to the dural sac. This inner
craniocaudal uniﬁcation by the dura mater allows a better understanding of the
ontogenetic and phylogenetic processes that generated the straightening of the
nervous system, before the locomotor functions of the vertebral column, the pelvis
and the appendicular skeleton, especially those of the lower limbs. As we will see,
the endoskeleton is submitted to constraints from neural embryogenesis, whose
primordial environment is the amniotic ﬂuid and the body of the mother.
In the past, males and females lived in environments beneﬁcial for reproduction,
starting with the survival of the mother-new born couple. We have always insisted
on two conditions: (1) the environment was known to mothers and clans for the
protection of parturient and (2) rich in water necessary for the production of the
amniotic ﬂuid and breast milk. At the threshold of the verticalized neuroaxial system,
i.e., hominin emergence, the way of life was adapted to mixed environments of forest
and savannah. Recent studies conﬁrm that the arid East African environment of
prehominins (Ardipithecus, 5.5 Ma) and oldest known hominins (Australopithecus,
ca 4 Ma) offered a wide variety of microhabitats with wetlands maintained densely
forested by groundwater, such as palm forests (Barboni et al. 2019).
12.4.3 The Straightened Axial Endoskeleton: The Result of an
Internal Evolutionary Process
The straightening involves the axial skeleton since the center of the cranial base, i.e.,
the sphenoid, a composite bone with a central body with extensions that form
laterally the temples, the back of the orbits, and, underlying, the back of the nasal
cavities. Its central body is formed by an anterior segment, the presphenoid and a
posterior segment, the basisphenoid. The basisphenoid is the part that straightened
during evolution step by step, given the geometrical direction which matches the
classiﬁcation starting from most primitive primates before reaching Homo sapiens.
The basisphenoid is prolonged by the basioccipital which ends on the large occipital
foramen. Both are separated by a cartilaginous suture or synchondrosis and together
form the clivus, bordered on each side by a massive bone called the “petrous
pyramid”. The pyramid has two parts, the ﬁrst belongs to the medial fossa supporting
the temporal lobe and the second belongs to the cerebellar fossa. The cerebellar part
of the pyramid and the clivus form the anterior wall of this lower fossa, a complex
puzzle assembled by sutures (Fig. 12.2).
As soon as the skull base shows an angulation at birth, the three fossae are stepped
from front to back. The clivus and the cerebellar surface of the pyramids form the
straightened territory, the angulation of which is measured by their inclinations
regarding the presphenoid planum (Dambricourt Malassé and Lallouet 2021). This
fossa is the territory dedicated to the control of locomotor movements and balance
with the brainstem for the nervous connections between the cerebellum and the brain
informed by neurosensory receptors. The pyramids contain the vestibular system, a
318
A. Dambricourt Malassé

sensory organ in the inner ear related to the cerebellum for the control of head
movements (Fig. 12.2, Cx). This proximity is all the more understandable as the
cerebellum is immediately concerned.
A new paradigm was established in the 1920s, with the fetalization theory
developed by Louis Bolk (1926). The Dutch anatomist started from the principle
that the plication between the presphenoidal planum (see Fig. 12.1, line 1 of Homo
sapiens) and the clivus-coccyx axis was the ancestral embryonic conformation, so
the straightening would never have been an evolutionary reality. However, the
cranial base of the most primitive primates, or prosimians, is horizontal at birth;
the clivus is a little straightened in monkeys, a little more in great apes and
verticalized in humans. Bolk assumed that the ontogenetic tendency of the cerebellar
fossa was to join the horizontal according to the spine. The increasing volume of the
fetal brain over millions of years and especially its development according to a
superoinferior winding would have progressively prevented the skull base to tend
toward the horizontal. For Bolk, hominization was not the acquisition of verticality
but its embryonic conservation and the main process was the development of the
cerebral hemispheres, called telencephalon. Homo sapiens would have preserved the
hypothetical vertical embryonic ancestral conﬁguration because of the pressure of
the cerebral hemispheres applied on the cerebellar tentorium inserted on the pyramid
and the periphery of the occipital squama. This pressure would have kept the clivus
and petrous pyramids upright in humans. The search for internal physical constraints
of neural and fetal origin was already more coherent than the external adult
constraints transmitted by the appendicular skeleton to the vertebral column.
12.4.4 Human Paleontology and the Neural Straightening: One
Century of Dilemma Between Locomotion and Encephalon
The fetalization hypothesis coincides with two major paleontological discoveries of
the fossils which seemed intermediate between extinct apes and Homo sapiens. The
ﬁrst was the skull and endocranial cast of a child found in South Africa in 1924, in
the Taung karst, named Australopithecus africanus dated 2.3 Ma. The second is a
sub-adult skull collected in 1929 in the Zhoukoudian karst in Northern China, named
Sinanthropus, then later Homo erectus pekinensis, and dated to 800,000 years. The
physician Franz Weidenreich (1943) studied a dozen skulls of Sinanthropus
extracted from the karst and described the curvature of the vault around a transverse
axis passing through the center of the skull base (Fig. 12.4b), this curvature was
more advanced than the living great ape but less than Homo sapiens. The paleoan-
thropologist disagreed with Bolk and concluded that the clivus straightened around
this transverse axis under the effect of the encephalization. But nothing is evocated
concerning the primordial conformation of the embryonic skull base if this one was
ﬂat or ﬂexed.
Furthermore, a considerable paradox was already visible: the skulls of Eurasian
Neandertals contemporary with Proto-Cromagnoids from the Near East (Skhul
115,000 years and Qafzeh 92,000 years in Israel) had a larger endocranium and
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
319

more developed neocortical imprints than Sinanthropus, while the occipital lobes
were not farther down. Instead, their growth was directed backward forming the
occipital bun. In other words, the growth activity of the basicranial synchondroses
was not inﬂuenced by the growth of the cerebral hemispheres; the vectors were
oriented in the direction of least resistance. The contradictions will accumulate with
the
Australopithecines.
In
1948,
the
most
complete
adult
skeleton
of
Australopithecus africanus showed a verticalized clivus, the cerebellar fossa was
tilted forward and downward above a short and wide pelvis supporting the viscera of
a verticalized axial skeleton. The animal was in permanent bipedal locomotion on
the ground, but the brain, with a volume of 485 ml, was no larger than a chimpanzee
with a semierect base. In opposite, with a brain volume of 915 ml, the cerebellar
fossa of Sinanthropus was no more verticalized than Australopithecus. The brain
(cerebrum) volume had nothing to do with the verticalization of the clivus and
Fig. 12.4 (a) Comparative sagittal midsection diagrams of Sinanthropus III and Homo sapiens
centered on the porion showing homologous point displacements. (b) Exocranial proﬁles of adult
skulls from top to bottom: Gorilla, Sinanthropus III, Homo sapiens, aligned on a vertical and
centered on a transversal axis of rotation passing just before the external auditory meatus, showing
the curvatures of the vault and the temporal squama forming almost a circle in Homo sapiens
(according to Weidenreich 1943)
320
A. Dambricourt Malassé

petrous pyramids. A closed-angle between the anterior cerebral fossa and the
neuraxis imposes the erect posture of the axial endoskeleton and its locomotion in
an exclusive bipedal mode. But how this orientation has been acquired since the
prosimians if the increasing volume of the cerebral hemispheres was not the
mechanical cause?
In 1974, nothing goes further: a new species of Australopithecus was discovered
in Ethiopia (East Africa), showing adaptation to an arboreal way of life. Thus, not
only the encephalization was not the mechanical cause of the verticalization of the
clivus and the petrous pyramids, but arboricolism was still practiced while the axial
skeleton was in permanent bipedalism on the ground. The bipedal walking of
Australopithecus did not substitute arboricolism. If brain growth and locomotion
were not the explanation of this closed angle in the young and the adult stages, what
could be the cause? The fetalization was invalidated by fossils. It was necessary to
ensure that the embryonic axis was formed verticalized with respect to the
presphenoidal territory.
12.5
The Straightening, an Embryonic Dynamical Reality
12.5.1 A Bibliographic Rediscovery
The skull base is the only cranium formed during embryogenesis, named chondro-
cranium because of its cartilaginous nature. It is located under the nervous system in
a rudimentary state of organization, that of a neural tube, the vault does not exist
since the cerebral hemispheres (telencephalon) are not yet formed. The doctoral
thesis I had supported at the Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle tested the
fetalization hypothesis. When the research began in 1983, no publication on the
chondrocranium of nonprimate mammals and prosimians described a ﬂexed confor-
mation. The chondrocranium was always ﬂat, hence its name planum basale. But
what about Homo sapiens? Embryological studies on human embryogenesis cited a
work published in 1900 in a German journal (Levi 1900). By chance, the article was
available at the Central Library of the Museum. The reproductions of the cartilagi-
nous structures were of remarkable quality. The Italian physician and surgeon
Guiseppe Levi (1872–1965) had pursued embryological research in 1899 at the
University of Berlin with Oscar Hertwig (1849–1922), a former student of Ernest
Haeckel. Levi described four stages, the ﬁrst two are the earliest ever observed, at
13- and 14-mm crown-rump. And the conformation of the human chondrocranium is
ﬂat like all mammalian embryos.
Louis Bolk and Franz Weidenreich never referred to this article and therefore
probably never knew about it. Levi returned to the University of Turin and devoted
his work to neurogenesis, giving a boost to molecular and cellular biology awarded
by three Nobel prizes, Salvatore Luria in 1969, Renato Dulbecco in 1975, and Rita
Levi Montalcini in 1986. This article described the verticalization of the clivus in
two steps, but the chondrocranium was isolated from its context and the anatomist
did not give a dynamic explanation.
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
321

12.5.2 The Mandible, the Double Pantograph, and the Craniofacial
Contraction
The PhD thesis was dedicated to the ontogeny and phylogeny of the mandible in its
cranial context in extant and fossil catarrhine primates. The morphogenesis has been
studied in the three planes replaced in the basicranial context. As shown by the
Gudin’s pantograph, the mandible has two spatial determinisms: the ﬁrst is cranio-
rachidial; it depends on the vertical position of the cerebellar fossa with which it
articulates on each side of the petrous pyramids and the second is facial, with the
maxilla and their articulation via the alveolar and dental arches (see Homo sapiens
Fig. 12.1). Moreover, the mandible has the incomparable advantage of being the
most frequent fossil in the paleontological record, whereas the base is rarely pre-
served. Thus, its position relative to the posterior part of the base changes during
embryogenesis because it depends on the straightening of the clivus and the
pyramids. The maxilla, on the other hand, is integrated into the anterior part of the
cranium and is not mobile. Thus, the adequacy between the two mandibular and
maxillary arches implies particularly complex coordination between the “mobile”
posterior base and the ﬁxed anterior base of the cerebral skull as soon as the
straightening begins. This coordination is a research topic in infantile dento-maxillo-
facial orthopedics since the 1950s. The highlighting of the dynamic relations
between the cranial base and misplacements of the dental arches is teaching in the
French school of Nantes (Delaire 1978, 2003; Deshayes 1986; Deshayes and
Deshayes 2013) and allowed collaborations in infant dento-maxillo-facial orthope-
dics (Dambricourt Malassé and Deshayes 1990, 1992; Deshayes et al. 1990;
Deshayes and Dambricourt Malassé 1991). These principles are applied by different
orthodontic schools (e.g., Bhattacharya et al. 2014; Monirifard et al. 2020).
The morphological growth of the mandible of extant and fossil species was
measured with angles in the sagittal and transverse planes and placed in its
basicranial context. The objective was the 3D modeling with a double pantograph
(Figs. 12.5 and 12.6). We have called this morphogenetic process “craniofacial
contraction” (Dambricourt Malassé 1987, 1988).
12.5.3 The Embryonic Origin of the Neural Straightening
In the nineteenth century, the leader of “human embryogenesis” was Alfred Velpeau
(1795–1867), an obstetrician and physician who held the chair of surgery at the
Faculty of Medicine in Paris, where he established the ﬁrst large collection of human
embryos. It took him 8 years to constitute this collection by eliminating the
malformations, which totaled 200 specimens until the end of the third month. He
published this collection in 1833 with lithographs of very high quality made by the
painter-engraver Antoine Chazal (1793–1854), professor of drawing at the Muséum
national d’Histoire naturelle. The earliest embryonic stage had been described by
Gilbert Breschet (1784–1845), Velpeau reproduced the illustration which shows the
axis of the embryo entirely horizontal. Thirty years later, the Russian embryologist
322
A. Dambricourt Malassé

Fig. 12.5 Basicranio-facial double pantograph applied to a human newborn. In the box: compari-
son of the mandibular shape between 3 and months, same scale (drawing # Dambricourt Malassé
1987)
Fig. 12.6 Gorilla and Homo sapiens newborns. Left: Mid-sagittal section of the skull and superior
view of the mandible. Right: Geometric traces in sagittal and transversal plans containing the
alveolar arch, a part of a double pantograph which prolongs with the skull base (collection Muséum
national d’Histoire naturelle, photos and drawings are not at the same scale, # Dambricourt
Malassé 1987)
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
323

Alexander Kowalevsky discovered an axial embryonic structure, the notochord,
located
under
the
neural
tube.
The
notochord
is
common
to
Tunicates
(Urochordates), Cephalochordates (Amphioxus), and Chordates which include
Agnatha and Vertebrates.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, a collection was built up by the
Carnegie Institution of Washington, which allowed describing the chronology of
neurulation and organogenesis during the 8 weeks following ovulation. George
Streeter (1873–1948) described the collection at the beginning of the 1940s by
deﬁning “horizons”, then Fabiola Müller and Ronan O’Rahilly took it up again in
the 1980s by deﬁning the 23 stages of the Carnegie (CS) since fertilization.
At the end of the twentieth century, the rapid progress of medical imaging made it
possible to create a scan library. Researchers from Hopkins University (Baltimore,
north of Washington) applied Microscopic Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MIR) to
the embryos of the Carnegie collection and realized an animation in the framework
of the Virtual Human Embryo program (Paidas et al. 1999; Smith 1999).
In the twenty-ﬁrst century, the new imaging technologies are the Episcopic
Fluorescence Image Capturing (EFIC) and the High-Resolution Episcopic Micros-
copy (HREM) which generate digital volume data and three-dimensional
(3D) images. They were applied by the Congenital Anomaly Research Center of
Kyoto University to 101 human embryos from stage 13 to stage 23 without malfor-
mation (Shiraishi et al. 2015). All these technical advances have made it possible to
progressively verify what we have been describing since 1987 and whose major
observations we recall here.
The linear shape of the neural tube is acquired at the end of the neural gutter
closure at stage 13 (4–6 mm, 28 days postovulatory). This shape progressively
curves around the voluminous heart to form a circle where the caudal and cephalic
ends tend to join. Neurulation and organogenesis take place in this context of folding
common to all mammals. When it is completed, the coiled axis which has grown
from a few millimeters to several centimeters straightens out with its human confor-
mation. We will therefore follow the spatial formation of the human cephalic neural
tube in this coiled conﬁguration and place the four stages of Levi in the succession of
these stages. Figures 12.7 and 12.8 illustrate the geometric landmark that we have
deﬁned and the stages described by Levi (Dambricourt Malassé et al. 2006).
The cephalic part of the neural tube is initially formed by three vesicles from front
to back: the prosencephalon, the mesencephalon, and the rhombencephalon. The
neural area on which the observation focuses is the rhombencephalon, located above
the notochord. Its upper part is formed by a thin membrane of cells (neuroblasts) and
its thicker ﬂoor; it is separated by the cerebrospinal ﬂuid. This space is the fourth
ventricle. The horizontal axis x is given by the notochord, the origin 0 is its apex, and
the vertical axis y is the perpendicular passing through the origin. This geometrical
frame is sufﬁcient to place the different stages in the sagittal median section, to
follow the vectors of the neural tube and then to replace the four stages of Levi.
At stages 16–17 (37–41 days postovulatory), the chondrocranium is formed by
the presphenoid, postsphenoid, and basioccipital aligned. The notochord is embed-
ded in the basioccipital and postsphenoid where it ends.
324
A. Dambricourt Malassé

At the following stages 17–18 (41–44 days postovulatory), the morphogenesis
develops in the transverse direction, and the petrous pyramids (see R in Fig. 12.2)
begin to form, as well as the cartilaginous occipital squama. The cartilaginous
skeleton of the mandible is formed by two stalks (Meckel’s cartilages), one per
half jaw. Each posterior end is in connection with the otic capsule and will be
integrated into the petrous pyramids which belong to the dynamical part (Fig. 12.9).
At stages 18–19 (44–47 days postovulatory), the ethmoid is visible in front of the
presphenoid, the postsphenoid is verticalized, it has tilted around its axis from top to
bottom, the basioccipital is thus lowered but a segment remains horizontal. The otic
X 
Y 
P
Mes
Rho
Ch
Fig. 12.7 Cephalic end of
the human embryo in median
sagittal section. X horizontal
axis aligned with the cephalic
termination of the notochord,
Y vertical axis passing
through the notochord
apex. Ch: notochord, Mes:
mesencephalon, P:
prosencephalon, Rho:
rhombencephalon, after
Susanna P. Gage (1905)
modiﬁed (# Dambricourt
Malassé et al. 1999)
Fig. 12.8 After Levi (1900) modiﬁed: the human chondrocranium in superior view at four stages
of embryogenesis, from the ﬂat conformation (stadium 16–17 and 17–18) to the ﬁnal verticalization
(stadium 23). The straightening happens at the stadium 18–19 and concerns only the postsphenoid
(# Dambricourt Malassé et al. 1999)
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
325

capsules attached to the postsphenoid are thus dragged into its downward and
forward movement. The two ends of the mandibular cartilage are therefore also
displaced downward and forward. The vertical dimension has just become part of the
axial skeleton. The face will develop in the verticalized conﬁguration. The
verticalization thus ﬁnds its axis of rotation in the body of the postsphenoid.
Stages 20 to 22 are not described. The fourth is stage 23 (56 days) which marks
the end of embryogenesis. The postsphenoid and the basioccipital have aligned, they
form the erect clivus. The sella turcica is visible and the wings of the sphenoid begin
to develop. The cartilaginous cerebellar fossa is well-formed. The sphenoid angle is
acquired. The two mandibular cartilages have joined in their ventral end forming an
Fig. 12.9 Three stages of the human chondrocranium with the mandibular cartilage in connection
with the otic capsule. Top: stage 17–18 before the verticalization (after Levi 1900). Bottom: (a)
stage 18–19, the ﬁrst straightening of the basisphenoid and the forward and downward projections
of Meckel’s cartilage (after Levi 1900). (b) stage 23, the second straightening with both
basisphenoid and basioccipital and the verticalization in opposite sense of the Meckel’s hook
(after Macklin 1914). # Dambricourt Malassé
326
A. Dambricourt Malassé

arch, named “Meckel’s hook” or hamulus Meckeli. Under the arch is a space visible
in the human fetus and called the symphyseal void. It will give its triangular shape to
the chin.
These four morphologies correspond to different stages of neural tube develop-
ment. For the early stages, our description observes the prechordal territory
(Fig. 12.10). The last synthesis has been enriched and became more precise
(Fig. 12.11). The sequence is as follows:
1. The anterior segment of the rhombencephalon elongates in front of the notochord
apex forming the metencephalon (the futures cerebellum and annular protuber-
ance) while its ﬂoor begins an upward rotation that brings it above this apex,
clearing a space in front of the notochord. The two small vesicles of the telen-
cephalon, which were in contact with the heart, are dragged into the upward
rotational movement. The space freed in front of the sphenoid allows it to
continue its morphogenesis in a rostral direction (forward). The ethmoid is
differentiated in the median sagittal plane and the ﬂoor of the future frontal
lobes begins to form. This conformation is acquired when the ﬂoor of the
metencephalon has rotated by 90 and is merged with the y-axis (stage
16, Fig. 12.10). Up to this stage, the chondrocranium is plane, the origin 0 is in
the center of the chondrocranium. The segment of the neural tube that remains
above the notochord becomes the myelencephalon, it will form the elongated
medulla and the segment in front of the notochord becomes the metencephalon:
the ﬂoor will form the protuberance and the ceiling will develop in the
cerebellum.
2. From stage 17 onwards, the chondrocranium enlarges between the two otic
capsules due to transverse myelencephalon enlargement which can be seen very
well on medical imaging (see Fig. 12.1 in Shiraishi et al. 20153).
3. From stage 18 (Fig. 12.11), the ﬂoor of the myelencephalon begins to rotate
toward the vertical apex of the notochord in the opposite direction to the meten-
cephalon so that the two ﬂoors meet above the notochord termination at stage 20.
The space ﬁlled with cerebrospinal ﬂuid is compressed, the ﬂuid is pushed
upwards, and the ceiling of the fourth ventricle swells. The rhombencephalon
thus forms two ﬂoors, one remained above the notochord, the other developed in
front of the notochordal termination. They join at its apex, closing the fourth
ventricle with the rotation axis located at the termination.
However, it is at stages 18–19 that Levi described the verticalized postsphenoid.
This last one is separated from the other cartilaginous territories, anteriorly by the
intrasphenoidal
synchondrosis
and
posteriorly
by
the
spheno-occipital
synchondrosis. The cartilaginous blastema that forms the postsphenoid has rotated
on its axis between these two synchondroses. Microscopic Imaging shows the
3Morphology and morphometry of the human embryonic brain: A three-dimensional analysis—
ScienceDirect.
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
327

Fig. 12.10 Trajectories of the neural tube in the geometric frame aligned on the notochord and centered on the notochord apex. The last stage illustrates the
straightening of the clivus. The drawings are scientiﬁc illustrations of different articles (# Dambricourt Malassé 1993)
328
A. Dambricourt Malassé

17  Planum basale
20
23
Basi-sphenoidal rotaƟon
Basi-occipital  alignement
BS    Ba
PR
PR
BS 
Ba
BS 
PR
Ch
Levi 1900
The MulƟ-Dimensional Human Embryo
Ba
Fig. 12.11 Left: Sagittal midline section of the Carnegie embryonic stages scanned in magnetic resonance microscopic imaging (MRI) for the Multidimen-
sional Human Embryo project (source: http://embryo.soad.umich.edu/). The neural dynamics are visible online. We have added arrows to visualize the
directions of movements. Right: Three stages of Levi in correspondence with the neural dynamics on the left. The lines illustrate the proﬁle in the median sagittal
section of the chondrocranium, this comparison shows the correlations between the closure of the IV ventricle and the rotation of the basisphenoid. Ba:
basioccipital, BS: basisphenoid, Ch: notochord, PR: presphenoid (Dambricourt Malassé 2022)
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
329

closure of the fourth ventricle at stage 20. Then, the movement of the
myelencephalon’s ﬂoor returns backward and does not stop until the optimal
straightening. The basioccipital then aligns with the tilted postsphenoid and together
they form the clivus.
Figure 12.11 highlights with more detail, the phenomenon of neural dynamics
that generate the rotation of the basisphenoid, the stage 20, with the complete closure
of the IV ventricle, when the pressure of the cerebrospinal ﬂuid and tensions due to
the neural crest cell migration toward the ﬂoor, are maximal. This double movement
can be understood in 3D by resuming the chronology (Fig. 12.12): we observe an
enlargement of the rhombencephalon on both sides of the sagittal plane of symme-
try. This is due to the migration of the membrane that covers the fourth ventricle and
stretches laterally with a maximum tension at the aplomb of the notochord
termination.
The dynamic trajectories of the rhombencephalon ﬂoor associated with the
rotation of the postsphenoid are visible between stages 19 and 20, then 20 and
21 (Fig. 12.11).
After stage 23, the fetal period begins, the head straightens with the cerebral trunk
in a vertical orientation (see the morphing referenced Fig. 12.11).
The postsphenoid supports the pons (bridge) while the basioccipital supports the
medulla oblongata (elongated spinal cord).
Fig. 12.12 Dynamics of the rhombencephalon in the three planes showing the relationship
between the migration of neural crests at the cephalic end of the notochord and the closure of the
IV ventricle by the get closer together of the metencephalon and myelencephalon. Vectors and
orthonormal planes have been added (Langman 1984 modiﬁed, in Dambricourt Malassé et al. 1999)
330
A. Dambricourt Malassé

The observation of the embryonic straightening in two steps is still unknown,
although it enlightens the understanding of the Hominins’ emergence according to
parallel evolutions and not to the linear model “great ape-Australopithecus-Homo”
as we will see (12.6). So we have concluded that the macroscopical event which
reveals the microscopical evolutionary processes that occurred during gametogene-
sis and which changed the body plan, is the closure of the IV ventricle.
12.5.4 Nonhuman Primate Embryogenesis
Nonhuman primate embryos are rare, some are kept at the Hubrech Laboratorium
(Utrecht, the Netherlands) but to age for a comparison with the stages 17 and
20, nevertheless, the youngest Tarsius (22.9 mm) described by Jeffery et al. (2007,
see Fig. 12.3) matches with the human neural stage 23 and its postsphenoid is not
straightened, that can be observed with X-ray at an oldest fetal stage (Dambricourt
Malassé 2022). We can therefore conclude that the neural tensions of the
tarsiiformes and their omomyiformes ancestors, never exceeded the amplitude of
the older mammals in the same way as the extant lemuriformes and lorisiformes. For
this reason, the creation of the taxonomic group Haplorhinian based on adult
characteristics to classify them with the simiiformes is a counter-sense (Dambricourt
Malassé 2011a). This was conﬁrmed by genomic analysis:
Despite numerous morphological and molecular studies, there has been weak support for
grouping tarsiers with either strepsirrhine primates in a prosimian clade or with anthropoids
in a haplorrhine clade. (Jameson et al. 2011).
The best nonhuman primate species illustrated by embryos is the monkey
Macaca (Cercopithecidea), but they have never been scanned in Magnetic Reso-
nance Microscopic Imaging. The comparison between a fetus of Semnopithecus
(Cercopithecidea) and the embryonic human stage 23 shows clearly the differences
in the amplitude of the cerebellar fossa’s tilt and the cranial termination of the
Meckel’s cartilage higher than in Homo sapiens and without a ventral (facial)
hook. The human craniofacial contraction and the lowering of the cerebellum
fossa are obvious (Fig. 12.13).
Great ape’s embryos are unknown but the fetus allows the comparison of the
postembryonic dynamics and to verify that the lowering of the cerebellar fossa is
greatest than in monkeys and lesser than in Homo sapiens (Fig. 12.14).
For the clarity of purpose, I keep the name prosimian to qualify primate
organizations older than simians.
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
331

12.5.5 Embryogenesis, Homeotic Genes, and Viscoelastic Dynamics
12.5.5.1 Hominins Verticality and Homeotic Genes
We have seen that craniofacial contraction is an embryonic process related to the
amplitude of the tensions that close the IV ventricle. These tensions lead to a
pivoting of the postsphenoid around the axis located at the apex of the notochord
and laterally, to the bascule forward and downward of the otic capsules which
contain the three semicircular canals of the inner ear. Spoor et al. (1994), Spoor
and Zonneveld (1997) observed these canals for the ﬁrst time in Homo erectus and
South African Australopithecines thanks to the CT scanning and the results were
Fig. 12.13 Fetal chondrocranium with the mandible of a Cercopithecidae (Semnopithecus
maurus) (TS of 53 mm, according to Fischer 1902) (left) and Homo sapiens (TS 40 mm, according
to Macklin 1914) (right). The horizontal line is the tangent at the septum nasi; the red asterisk
locates the contact of the cranial termination of the mandibular cartilage, with the otic capsule. Both
highlight the lowering of the human cerebellar fossa. The drawings are not at the same scale
(Dambricourt Malassé 1987, 2006) # Dambricourt Malassé
Fig. 12.14 Comparison of a very young chimpanzee fetus (TS 71 mm according to Starck 1960)
(left) and a human embryo (TS 40 mm according to Macklin 1914). Same legend than Fig. 12.13
(Dambricourt Malassé 1987)
332
A. Dambricourt Malassé

surprising. Paleoanthropologists were waiting for a human-like morphology in
Australopithecus because of their bipedal locomotion (Dambricourt et al. 2000). It
was the opposite, the canals are similar to extant African great apes. More recently
two specimens of South African Australopithecus have been scanned (StW 573 “Lit-
tle foot” and StW 578) and authors reach the same conclusion (Beaudet et al. 2019).
I have studied a rare case of anencephaly with spina biﬁda (absence of neural tube
closure) from the Musée de l’Homme,4 a human fetus 5-month-old which does not
show the rotation of the postsphenoid (Fig. 12.15) and compared it to a Gorilla and a
normal human fetus of the same age. Despite the lack of rotation, the semicircular
canals are human (Dambricourt Malassé and Lallouet 2009).
This observation had huge consequences for the validation of the embryonic and
phylogenic origins of hominins. Since 1987, I suspected that what had changed in
the great ape embryonic body plan was the regulation of the embryonic craniocaudal
gradient (Dambricourt Malassé 1987, 1988, 2011b, 2022). As soon as the homeotic
genes were recognized in the genetic control of early embryonic development
(Duboule 1994), it seemed obvious that they have played a major role in the
hominization process and that the dynamic of the neural straightening was an
epiphenomenon without relation with the necessity to walk on the two posterior
limbs. For the semicircular canals, the role of homeotic genes has been conﬁrmed in
the control of apoptosis acting with cartilage tissue (Merlo et al. 2002) and this was
our conclusion (Dambricourt Malassé and Lallouet ib.). It, therefore, appears that
neither the function nor the shape and the volume of the cerebrum or the cerebellum,
are the causes of these morphogenetic changes.
Fig. 12.15 CT scanning of 5-month-old human fetus. Left: anencephaly without rotation of the
basisphenoid, the petrous pyramids (3) and the basioccipital (4). Right: normal fetus. The skulls are
not at the same scale. Collection of Musée de l’Homme—Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle
(Dambricourt Malassé and Lallouet 2009, # Dambricourt Malassé)
4The Musée de l’Homme is a site of the Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle.
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
333

12.5.5.2 Embryonic Straightening and Viscoelastic Dynamics
Finally, the histological observation of the synchondrosis that separates the
basisphenoid and the presphenoid conﬁrmed the organization of the interstitial
matrix by a dynamic of rotation, training by the mesenchymal tissue formed before
the chondriﬁcation and which will become the ectomeninge (dura mater). Indeed, the
collagen ﬁbers are organized in “convection cell” from bottom to top (Dambricourt
Malassé 1989) (Fig. 12.16).
It was necessary to integrate forces and thus the microphysics of microﬁbrils or
molecular
structures
which
confer
the
forms
and
spatial
organization
to
synchondroses, sutures, and cellular tissues. Experiments performed on newts in
the 1970s (Jacobson and Gordon 1976; Jacobson 1978) showed that, since the
embryo is 95% water, the summation of neuroblast cell behaviors obeys viscous
and elastic properties. The neuroblasts are made up of collagen ﬁbrils that link them
together, contract to the maximum under the induction of notochord. In 2008,
modeling went further: “One of the fundamental challenges of current embryo
modeling is the profound lack of relevant mechanical property data” (Chen and
Brodland 2008):
How that embryonic tissues are fundamentally viscous or plastic, unlike mature tissue,
which is basically elastic or viscoelastic. This fundamental difference arises because
O
md 
mx 
cv
PS
BS
Fig. 12.16 Parasagittal histological sections of a 4-month-old human fetus. cv: cerebellum, mb:
basement membrane, md: mandible, mx: maxilla, o: eye, ss: intrasphenoid synchondrosis, tcv:
cerebellar tentorium. The histological sections on the right show the spatial organization of collagen
ﬁbers between the presphenoid (PS) and the basisphenoid (BS), the double arrow marks the
physical limit between the two dynamic territories (photos and # Dambricourt Malassé 1989)
334
A. Dambricourt Malassé

embryonic cells are relatively free to ﬂow past one another and rearrange. Strictly speaking,
embryonic tissues do exhibit viscoelastic characteristics when the constant interfacial ten-
sion between their cells interacts with the viscous cytoplasm, but the resulting viscoelasticity
is best described by a ﬂuid-like Maxwell model, not the solid-like Kelvin–Voigt model more
commonly used for mature tissues (Chen and Brodland 2008).
The works of Fleury et al. (2016) also shed light on the physical constraints of
embryogenesis since fertilization:
The oocyte is spherical at the base, before ﬂattening into a disc of concentric rings of cells as
it matures into the blastula stage. Researchers have shown, through micromechanical studies
on chicken embryos, how to change from this shape to that of cylinders. The alignment and
difference in plasticity between the specialized cells in each ring create tensions within the
embryo, forces that cause it to bend exactly at the boundaries between these rings until it
forms nested cylinders. But the team went even further by demonstrating that the fold of the
amniotic sac is triggered by the previous fold, which forms the body of the animal, itself
caused by the folds that precede it. Thus, there is a cascading fold phenomenon entirely due
to deterministic physical phenomena, and not controlled solely by genetic information. If
morphogenesis could be perceived as a phenomenon with a strong element of arbitrariness or
randomness, these works place it in a true dynamic explanation, linked to clearly identify
physical phenomena.5
Works on embryonic morphogenesis conﬁrm that tissue is viscoelastic material in
accordance with biorheology:
Tissue morphogenesis in multicellular organisms is brought about by spatiotemporal coor-
dination of mechanical and chemical signals. Extensive work on how mechanical forces
together with the well-established morphogen signaling pathways can actively shape living
tissues has revealed evolutionary conserved mechanochemical features of embryonic devel-
opment. More recently, attention has been drawn to the description of tissue material
properties and how they can inﬂuence certain morphogenetic processes. Interestingly,
besides the role of tissue material properties in determining how much tissues deform in
response to force application, there is increasing theoretical and experimental evidence,
suggesting that tissue material properties can abruptly and drastically change in
development. These changes resemble phase transitions, pointing at the intriguing possibil-
ity that important morphogenetic processes in development, such as symmetry breaking, and
self-organization, might be mediated by tissue phase transitions (. . .). We posit that abrupt
changes of tissue rheological properties may have important implications in maintaining the
balance between robustness and adaptability during embryonic development. (Petridou and
Heisenberg 2019).
DNA does not code for the synthesis of water molecules, while water is indis-
pensable for the kinetics of organogenesis. Intracellular circulation of organelles
would be impossible without the viscous properties of the matrix that limit friction,
or resistance. So, it is clear that factors involved in the morphogenesis of the
chondrocranium and the splanchnocranium, both uniﬁed by the dynamics of rota-
tion, are combinations between microbiophysics including water, organic molecules,
5Le rôle de la physique dans le développement des embryons enﬁn dévoilé | INSIS (cnrs.fr).
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
335

and homeotic genes. The question is now the natural factors that have changed the
hereditary memory of the embryonic body plan of extinct species.
12.6
Embryogenesis and Paleontology: Consequences
for the Recognition of Extinct Taxa in the Fossil Records
12.6.1 Craniocaudal Discontinuities in Phylogenetic Continuities
Fossil mandibles are arranged into four groups, prosimians (lemuriforme,
lorisiforme, tarsiiforme), monkeys, great apes, and Homo sapiens, except fossil
specimens which ﬁll a geochronological gap between the two last. These mandibles
match with verticalized skull bases and transverse growth of the middle fossa
superior to the great apes. These primates are Australopithecus (the oldest fossils
are known ca 4 Ma), Paranthropus (known for 1.8 Ma), Homo (nothing comparable
with Sapiens more verticalized) and of which the present approach predicts fossils as
old as the ﬁrst Australopithecus. The geometrical modeling of the postsphenoidal
rotation conﬁrms greater amplitude in Australopithecus, or contraction of the IV
ventricle during embryogenesis (Fig. 12.17b, d) (Dambricourt Malassé 2022).
The postsphenoidal straightening is very close to the oldest known Homo skull
base (Homo habilis ER 1813, 1.9 Ma) but the basioccipital is not aligned with it, the
pyramids are less verticalized and the foramen magnum is still oriented dorsally and
not ventrally (Fig. 12.18), the ontogenetic divergences increase in Homo with the
gracilization of the masticatory apparatus and the facial growth, the whole engaged
in a verticalization that transforms the vocal tract.
The oldest cranial fossil allocated without a doubt to Homo is a mandible of
2.4 Ma (Malawi). The skull base of the oldest Homo species is less straightened than
in Sapiens, the cerebellum as well as the vocal tract, are higher (Fig. 12.19).
Paranthropus, known in East and South Africa (OH 5, KNM ER 406, SK 48)
shows a postsphenoid straightening greater than in Australopithecus and Homo
sapiens but as in Australopithecus, the basioccipital did not align with it
(Dambricourt Malassé 2005, 2022, Fig. 6.23). Aiello and Dean (1990) observe the
same greater verticalization for the cerebellar surface of the pyramids. I have
concluded that the complexiﬁcation of Australopithecus gametogenesis has evolved
in an unprecedented acceleration which ampliﬁed the IV ventricle closure, the pons
having reached the physical limit of verticality but not the medulla oblongata and
without increasing telencephalization.
Australopithecus and Homo were permanent bipedal because their endoaxial
skeleton was verticalized at the end of the embryonic period, which can be explained
only by a recrudescence of gametogenesis increasing complexity which had
generated the great apes 15 million years ago. As illustrated by Paranthropus, the
increasing embryonic complexity of Australopithecus did not change the spheno-
basi-occipital trajectories, whereas that was not the case with Homo. This fact added
to
the
great
proximity
between
Australopithecus
and
Homo
embryonic
straightenings, allows us to infer contemporaneous polycentric foci in tropical, or
336
A. Dambricourt Malassé

sub-tropical
forests,
with
independent
emergences
starting
from
different
sub-species of the same great ape genus (see Sect.12.6.2).
The taxonomical determination is largely inﬂuenced by two doctrines, the oldest
which postulates since the 1950s a gradual transition from Australopithecus to Homo
and then, the Rift Valley seen as the cradle of Homo emergence with a geologic
glass-ceiling not oldest than 3 Ma. The ﬁrst doctrine was not supported by Pierre
Teilhard de Chardin who has been appointed as the expert of the Wenner-Gren
Foundation in the 1950s to evaluate the funding for new excavations in South Africa.
Moreover, the necessity of australopithecine ontogeny to generate Homo has never
been demonstrated. Paleoprimatologist Brigitte Senut (2020) is also in favor of the
independence of the australopithecine and human lineages that supposes a diver-
gence of the two phyla at least 4 Ma ago. This view is supported by the appendicular
and vertebral skeleton of Kadanuumuu (Ethiopia, Afar, 3.58 Ma) close to modern
human with long legs. Unfortunately, the skull with semicircular canals is missing.
Paradoxically, the fossil is allocated to Australopithecus afarensis (Haile-Selassie
et al. 2015) while the anatomy has no common features with the genus; Zeresenay
A
B
C
D
Fig. 12.17 Comparison between adult chimpanzee (a, c) and Australopithecus africanus (b, d)
from Sterkfontein (Sts 5), showing the straightening of the postsphenoid in hominin. ba: basion, ds:
dorsum sellae, i: internal section of the spheno-occipital synchondrosis, s: external section of the
spheno-occipital synchondrosis, sse: spheno-ethmoidal synchondrosis. The skulls are aligned on
the planum sphenoidal. (c, d) Caro 2004 (photos A. Dambricourt Malassé, CT scanning of Sts
5 courtesy from P.V. Tobias in 2003)
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
337

A
B 
NF
PS
FM
CF
CP
FM
CP
CF
OL
OL
Fig. 12.18 Comparison between Australopithecus africanus from Sterkfontein (Sts 5) (a) and
Homo habilis KNM ER 1813 (b) showing the less straightening of the basioccipital (arrow) and
foramen magnum (FM, dotted line) and the less verticalized vocal tract in Australopithecus
(inclinations of the arrow and nasal ﬂoor NF, dotted line). CF: cerebellar fossa, CP: the cerebellar
face of the pyramid, FM: foramen magnum (dotted line), OL: occipital lobe. The skulls are aligned
on
the
planum
sphenoidale
PS.
CT
scanning
of
the
UMR
7194
CNRS
database.
Figure # Dambricourt Malassé
NF
A
B
FM
OL
CF
PS
FM
CF
CP
CP
OL
Fig. 12.19 Comparison between Homo habilis KNM ER 1813 (a) and present-day Sapiens (b)
showing the less straightening of the basioccipital and foramen magnum (dotted line) and the less
verticalized cerebellar surface of the pyramids in Homo (habilis). CF: cerebellar fossa, CP: the
cerebellar face of pyramid, FM: foramen magnum, OL: occipital lobe, PS: tangent to the planum
sphenoidal. The skulls are aligned on the planum sphenoidal. CT scanning: the database of the
UMR 7194 CNRS and skull of the IPH collection. Figure and photo # Dambricourt Malassé
338
A. Dambricourt Malassé

Alemseged who have collected the skeleton of a child, disagrees,6 the conclusion is
the existence of another hominin in Afar very close to Homo and oldest than
Australopithecus afarensis (3.2 Ma).
These African phyla become extinct while Homo has known an important
diversiﬁcation and reached Asia long before the Quaternary (Pleistocene, 2.58 Ma)
as evidenced in sub-Himalayan ﬂoodplain (Dambricourt Malassé et al. 2016;
Dambricourt Malassé 2021b; Chapon Sao et al. 2016; Cauche et al. 2021;
Dambricourt Malassé and Cauche 2022). The genus gathers mandibles and skull
bases of African and Eurasian species: habilis, ergaster, rudolfensis, erectus,
heidelbergensis, and neanderthalensis. In 30 years, the number of species illustrated
by their mandibles have increased with georgicus in Caucasia (1.8 Ma), antecessor
in Spain (1.22 Ma), denisovensis in Eastern High Asia (Tibetan plateau, 160 ka),
ﬂoresiensis in Indonesia (80 ka), naledi in South Africa (335–236 ka), and a
controversial taxon in Northwestern Africa (300 ka, Jebel Irhoud). They have in
common a receding mandibular symphysis or the absence of a chin. The skull bases
associated with the mandible are rare (e.g., the four skulls of Homo georgicus), their
correspondence is allowed either because the fossils are extracted from the same
karstic deposits (South Africa), or the same geologic layers (lake or river terraces,
East Africa) and thanks to their morphological coherences. These mandibles corre-
spond to cerebellar fossa in a higher position than Sapiens, corroborated by the
inclination of the clivus and pyramids less verticalized, whatever their geologic age
and their cranial capacity as well as their complexity of brain convolutions (imprints
on the endocranium) (Fig. 12.20). These different lineages share the same embryonic
straightening and became extinct, but after gametogenic lineages have generated the
last embryonic verticalization, Sapiens, or the last threshold of increasing complex-
ity whose axial and appendicular skeletons differ from Homo regardless of species.
Jebel Irhoud allows putting the question of the axial straightening well diffused
since 1996 (Coppens 1996).7 If the vault from the frontal squama to the occiput gives
the impression of a progressive evolution within the Homo genus that is not the case
for the chondrocranium which has evolved according to modalities of emergence
with punctuated equilibria after million years of stability. Contrary to recent claims,
Jebel Irhoud cannot be seen as the oldest member of Sapiens:
This evidence makes Jebel Irhoud the oldest and richest African Middle Stone Age hominin
site that documents the early stages of the H. sapiens clade in which key features of modern
morphology were established. (Hublin et al. 2017).
Unfortunately, this “evidence” has no ontogenetic support. The skull base is
sufﬁciently preserved with the pyramids to see that not only the chondrocranium
has not exceeded the embryonic straightening of Homo habilis, but also that its
6“Lucy” Kin Pushes Back Evolution of Upright Walking? (nationalgeographic.com).
7Invitation at his professorial chair of the Collège de France for the magisterial conference « Les
fondements modernes de la pensée de Pierre Teilhard de Chardin face au chaos déterministe »,
March 1996.
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
339

dynamic was in extension as did later Homo neanderthalensis (Fig. 12.20). The
occipital lobe was higher than in Homo sapiens and extended dorsally.
Moreover, the mandibular symphysis has no more chin than the Neandertal La
Quina H9 (Dambricourt Malassé 2022). Then a “discrete” character that supports the
separation of Jebel Irhoud lineage from the one common to Sapiens and Homo
neanderthalensis is the occlusal pattern of the ﬁrst upper molar. In Sapiens and
Neandertal, the pattern is rhomboidal (in a shape of a rhombus), the posterior relief
on the lingual side (hypocone) is particularly prominent and is not older than 1 Ma,
whereas on the oldest known maxillae of Africa and Western Asia, of at least 1.8 Ma,
it is poorly developed and the shape is square. Jebel Irhoud developed the square
shape (Dambricourt Malassé et al. 2018). These Northwestern African populations,
therefore, belong to a lineage separated since 1 Ma at least of the lineage common to
Neandertal and Sapiens.
The emergence of the new embryogenesis is the overcoming of the angular
threshold of Homo, regardless of species. A neurocranium with an occiput as high
as a Homo habilis cannot be called sapiens, even when approaching the geologic age
of emergence with a complexiﬁed brain. Sapiens is organized around a more
verticalized endoskeleton with a complexiﬁed cerebral vascularization (Saban
Fig. 12.20 CT scanning of mid-sagittal cranial section. (a) Jebel Irhoud, (b) Homo
neanderthalensis La Chapelle-aux-saints, and (c) fossil Homo sapiens (Cro-Magnon 1). The
horizontal line is parallel to the sphenoidal planum, starting from the foramen caecum; the inclined
line is the tangent to the cerebellar surface of the petrous bone, Ol: imprint of the occipital lobe. (a)
cast from the collection of the Institut de Paléontologie Humaine, CT scanning American Hospital
of Paris with Dr Fabienne Lallouet; (b, c) original skulls, CT scanning collection of Musée de
l’Homme (photos and # A. Dambricourt Malassé)
340
A. Dambricourt Malassé

1984) and neocorticalizations (e.g., Holloway 1996; Grimaud Hervé 1997), regu-
larly conﬁrmed by paleontological discoveries. The taxonomic criteria are thus read
1 in the chronological order since embryogenesis and 2 from the base to the vault
and not from the face, the vault and the base after birth only. So, reasoning about the
adult vault before considering the developmental chronology from embryogenesis
and overriding the sphenoid and the petrous pyramids can generate phylogenetic
counter-sense like for Jebel Irhoud (Neubauer et al. 2018) and misunderstanding of
the evolutionary process because Sapiens is not a variability within the limits the
genus Homo, the changes are at the level of the genus.
Neither the brain, nor the cerebellum and the endoskeleton Homo sapiens
Linnaeus, 1758, match with any previous taxon. Sapiens is the last emergent
ontogenetic unit complexiﬁed and reorganized during embryogenesis, with
anatomical and neural changes all along the craniocaudal ontogeny and reorganiza-
tion of the cerebro-cerebellar loop. So, giving the name sapiens to Jebel Irhoud is the
application of gradualism allowing interpreting of more recent fossilized bones, such
as the mandible with a chin, as a simple variation or gracilization within the limits of
a morphotype (Bergman et al. 2021). Human paleontology has fallen far behind the
sciences of self-organization by ignoring the dynamics of systems, such as embryo-
genesis and dentofacial orthopedics (Gudin, Delaire, Deshayes. . .), which explains
why concepts such as body plan, emergence, thresholds, and sciences of nonlinear
dynamic systems are still missing. This great lacuna has consequences for the
understanding of the current occluso-postural disorders as well as for maxillary
dental agenesis (Héloret 2015) which cannot be replaced in a correct interpretation
of the evolutionary processes doing no distinction between microevolutions and
macroevolutionary changes.
The oldest Sapiens’ skulls have been collected in Ethiopia. Interesting cases are
coming from the Member 1 of the Omo Kibish Formation (Ethiopia), with the
fragmentary skeleton Omo I and the neurocranium Omo II. The ﬁrst is Sapiens
while the cerebellar fossa of Omo II is as high as in Homo erectus. Fragments of
mandible and neurocranium of Omo I are associated, which implies a fast burial of
the corpse after death. The mandible developed a projecting chin as Skhul V
excavated from the oldest intentional burial (115 ka, Israël) but the supraorbital
arch is signiﬁcantly less developed by comparing with Herto (160–155 ka, Ethiopia).
The bones have been collected on the outcrop of a lithostratigraphic disconformity
within a sedimentary series of deltaic deposits and in which “mottles follow root
structures of reed and seed vegetations” and match with a temporarily emerged
period (Butzer 1969). Overlaying tuff has been recently dated to 230 ka (Vidal et al.
2022), Omo I is then claimed as the oldest “modern” Homo sapiens. But the corpse
was neither covered by river silts nor disarticulated by carnivores, which remains
intriguing and raises the question of an ancient intentional burial after the erosion of
the Kibish Formation, recalling the case of the skeleton of Asselar (Mali) (Vialet
et al. 2013).
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
341

12.6.2 A Key Distinction: Different Appendicular Adaptations
for a Same Embryonic Axial Straightening
This lack of consideration of embryogenesis does not allow distinguishing between
two evolutionary problematics, generating confusion between the verticality of the
axial endoskeleton, which is part of the macroevolution of the organization plan and
the large diversity of adaptations of the appendicular skeleton, of a same notochord
organization plan. The classical reasoning consists in comparing the adaptations of
the adult posterior appendicular skeleton to detect traces of bipedalism which would
be the “ancestor” of hominin’s bipedalism, whereas this bipedalism has no locomo-
tor origin. Hominin bipedalism is the displacement of the verticalized endoaxial
skeleton due to the straightening of the embryonic notochordal axis. Therefore, there
can be no human or hominin “type” of bipedalism in semierect primates, but
occasional bipedalism is possible within the limits of the semierect embryonic
plan. Brigitte Senut rightly recalls that the appendicular skeletons of the extant
great apes, Gorilla, Pan, and Pongo, are not identical to the fossil species in their
specialization (Senut ib). However, the morphogenesis of their notochordal cephalic
extremity is the same and is found again with the mandibles in Europe, Asia, and
Africa until 20 Ma ago. In other words, these species have adapted their appendicular
skeleton to different ecosystems within the limits of the same embryonic axial
dynamics, or, of the same notochordal straightening.
The axial inclination is distinguishable with the canines and premolars. The
occlusal balance of a semierect axial skeleton is blocked by the four canine crowns
higher than premolars, as well as deciduous than permanent teeth. This is the case in
Africa with the Miocene fossils Sahelanthropus (7.2–7 Ma, Chad), Orrorin
(6.1–5.7 Ma, Kenya), and Ardipithecus ramidus (5.6–5.2 Ma, Ethiopia) while the
lock has disappeared in Pliocene Hominins. Miocene fossils show that occasional
bipedalism was more developed than in the living Gorilla, Pan, and Pongo, with
Orrorin and Ardipithecus, but also in South China 6 Ma ago, in Yunnan with
Lufengpithecus lufengensis.
Then, it became clear that the genus Orrorin lived in the tropical Miombo
woodland8 with areas particularly wet (Senut ib). In other words, the use of bipedal-
ism for a semierect axial skeleton appears as a frequent locomotor mode, whereas
lineages such as those of Pongo became specialized in arboricolism and dependent
on forest ecosystems. In the end, it is important to note that the occasional use of
bipedalism was viable in wet woodland so that “mutants” newborns in these
populations with a verticalized axial skeleton were not unsuitable. Occasional
bipedal walking and tree climbing were the maternal behavior. So, the ﬁrst environ-
ment of the “hominin mutant” was the mother’s body, her behavior and that of the
clan toward parturients and their nutritional needs. I have concluded that the
verticalization of the supranotochordal neural tube, both in Australopithecus and
8Miombo woodlands can be classiﬁed as dry or wet based on the per annum amount and distribu-
tion of rainfall.
342
A. Dambricourt Malassé

Homo, was two neural dynamic effects due to increasing complexity occurring
during gametogenesis of great ape species. The two lineages would have emerged
because of different changes in the homeotic regulation along the cephalocaudal
axis. The postnatal anatomical differences developed in an educational context
transmitted by the mothers, with the disappearance of quadrupedal balance and
canine lock, hormonal delay, and longer psychomotor development (Dambricourt
Malassé 2010, 2022). The child could learn arboreal locomotion with an endoaxial
skeleton in permanent verticality.
12.6.3 Wet Woodland and the Role of Females in Hominization
Processes
Since the endoaxial verticality is not a consequence of bipedalism and because the
embryonic angular straightening of Australopithecus and Homo is very close, I argue
for many years that their emergences occurred at the same geologic period, in
different great ape populations and environments controlled by the females
(Dambricourt Malassé 2022). If the species were arboreal, then the births occurred
in the forest environment chosen by the females to feed themselves during gestation,
lactation, and psychomotor development, these were the priorities that conditioned
their behavior for their protection as well. Thus, to the ﬁrst environment which was
the placenta and not the trees, then the second which was the body of the mother who
carried her child, was added the maternal and social behavior of the clan. It was
normal that females have sought the best conditions, by instinct, by experience, and
by reﬂexive consciousness to preserve their own equilibrium. The embryonic and
biodynamical approach allows us to support that Australopithecines and Homo
emerged from different great ape’s lineages in wet woodland long before the
population density allowed the conservation of a sufﬁcient number of fossils and
in conditions more favorable than the acidic forest soils (Dambricourt Malassé
2011b, 2022).
There remains a conceptual difﬁculty in paleoprimatology with the prevalence of
the XIXth century Lamarcko-Darwinian model that limits the reasoning at the
gradualist vision and the posture at biomechanics inﬂuenced by a ratio between
arboreal and open environments. These studies are necessary but insufﬁcient.
Paleontologists feel compelled to postulate intermediate stages as the very ancient
and saltationist emergence of anatomy considered as human (but different from
Sapiens), is contrary to the collective imagination for two centuries. But the distance
of walking between trees will not explain the emergence of the verticalized
endoaxial skeletons with cerebro-cerebellar loops more complex (Leiner et al.
1987). Only mechanisms transmitted by the gametogenesis could reorganize and
complexiﬁed the embryogenesis in a coherent and coordinated manner along the
craniocaudal axis and sustainably to the stage of reproduction. Thus it is not by
reasoning in terms of environmental pressure on locomotor behavior that the
anatomical origin of hominins will be better understood, but by considering embryo-
genesis, its dynamics, and their consequences for the geometry in space of the central
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
343

nervous system. They are the ontogenetic roots of behavioral changes concerning
mother-newborn relationships, psychomotor development with more complex
cerebro-cerebellar loops, and social interactions between the females.
12.6.4 Cerebro-Cerebellar Rubicon, Psychomotricity, Mother-Infant
Interactions, and Cognitive Implications
Mothers and their newborns constituted the ﬁrst level of reﬂexive consciousness
with the transmission of knowledge, experiences, care, and the search for the best
living conditions. As a result, this is not the environment that selected the little
hominins more vulnerable with a less “biting” jaw, delayed psychomotor develop-
ment, and the permanent struggle against the fall, but the mothers who welcomed
them in their hands, on their chest, and certainly already with emotion and affection
and empathy between the adults. I then distinguish between intrauterine biological
hominization and development to the adult stage and this phase of “humanization” of
behavior for these more vulnerable children, the construction of the self-reﬂexive
consciousness. All this is a matter of several levels of self-organization in interactive
loops.
Of course, adaptations will differentiate species, with different dental adaptations,
depending on the diet; the development of the nervous system and cognitive
functions will also depend on nutrients, but it is essential to distinguish between
adaptive microevolution, on one hand, and macroevolution, on the other, which
generated the two embryonic straightenings, Australopithecus and Homo. The
cradles of hominization were the territories known for by females well before the
extension into unknown territories without behavioral references in the collective
memory. Socialization and innovative cognitive abilities were, from our point of
view, the previous conditions of the extension in new biotopes and to extend
territories.
In this cadre, I have developed the concept of cerebro-cerebellar Rubicon, or the
sudden instability of the cerebellum due to the verticality of the endoaxial skeleton
(see more in Dambricourt Malassé 2022). The cerebellum that controls the equilib-
rium is forced to be simultaneously informed on its own balance, i.e., the position of
the cerebellar fossa, while it cannot inform itself and control itself the head posture.
The nervous system composed of networks of interconnected neurons was
constrained to self-reorganize and self-complexify in order to allow the cerebellum
to receive information about the stability from the cerebellar fossa and for sending
back information to maintain the muscular tone of the neck. The cerebro-cerebellar
loop necessarily experienced a leap in the complexity of its interconnections. This
was not the consequence of bipedalism, widespread in primates, but of the threshold
of verticality reached by the mesencephalon, the myelencephalon, and the spinal
cord at the end of the embryonic period. This threshold of complexity, or the
cerebro-cerebellar Rubicon, would explain the emergence of operating chains such
as the Lomekwan dated 3.3 Ma produced by nonhuman hominins (Harmand et al.
344
A. Dambricourt Malassé

2015) and in the sub-Himalayan ﬂoodplains before Pleistocene (Masol, ca 2.8 Ma)
by unknown hominins (Dambricourt Malassé and Cauche 2022).
No geo-paleontological data allow excluding the hypothesis of a tropical cradle of
Homo emergence ca 4 Ma in Central Africa and then slowing dispersions in
borderlands exposed to the global climate cooling with biological and behavioral
adaptations. To the climate model forcing biomechanical changes allowing walking
in open spaces, it seems interesting to consider environmental contexts much more
complex since the issue concerns the complexity of the central nervous system and
the control of its embryonic development memorized in the gametes.
12.7
An Emerging Evolutionary Problematic
Basicranio-facial morphogenesis and mandibular growth of the extant primates
match with the classiﬁcation in prosimian, monkeys, great apes, and Homo sapiens,
and the phylogenesis (Fig. 12.21). The succession of adult skulls in internal view,
illustrated by the pantograph, is the same as in external view published in The
Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human Evolution (2009).
The Evo-Devo approach allowed cooperation with Jean Chaline and his team at
the University of Burgundy, familiar with heterochrony and the formalization of
Fig. 12.21 Phylogenetic succession of the neural tube straightening illustrated by the adult
basicranio-facial pantograph and regularly tested by paleontological discoveries of skull bases
and mandibles (Dambricourt Malassé 1993, 1996, 2011b, 2022; Dambricourt Malassé et al.
1999; Chaline et al. 2000). # Dambricourt Malassé
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
345

evolutionary processes modifying skeletal or dental morphologies over long geo-
logic periods (Chaline et al. 1996, 1998, 2000; Dambricourt Malassé et al. 1999;
Chaline and Marchand 2010). We asked the question if the climate was the engine
that could explain such iteration on 40 million years regarding the organization level
concerned, the embryonic body plan and its evolution in increasing complexity
(Chaline et al. 2000). Finally, the evolutionary problematics of changes in shapes
and positions measurable by angles can be modeled and formalized thanks to the
spatio-temporal trajectories characteristic of self-organized and emergent pro-
cesses. In the present case, mathematics is that of nonlinear dynamical systems far
from equilibrium such as the dissipative structures developed by the Brussels School
of thermodynamics and Ilya Prigogine. For this reason, the research has turned in
1995 for a collaborative project with the astrophysicist Eric Bois (2010) to substan-
tiate the use of mathematical languages such as attractors, basin of attraction, and
bifurcations, or singularities, acting during gametogenesis (Dambricourt Malassé
1992, 1995, 1996, 2011b).
12.7.1 Environments and Self-Memorizing Evolutionary Processes
12.7.1.1 Dissipative Structures and Unpredictability
Chance in evolutionary biology is seen as random ﬂows of information, coming
either from outside the gametes (mesological inﬂuence) or generated during game-
togenesis (Brownian motion, Grandcolas 2021). The dominant trend in the natural
system is the search for equilibrium; a biological system tends to maintain itself
“alive”, or its stability, through its energetical exchanges and informative signals
with the environment. Studies of the early embryonic stages of the Drosophila show
that the developing dynamic system has properties allowing it to maintain its internal
coherence:
Extensive variation in early gap gene9 expression in the Drosophila blastoderm is reduced
over time because of gap gene cross regulation. This phenomenon is a manifestation of
canalization, the ability of an organism to produce a consistent phenotype despite
variations in genotype or environment. The canalization of gap gene expression can be
understood as arising from the actions of attractors in the gap gene dynamical system.
(Gursky et al. 2011).
Ilya Prigogine developed the model of dissipative structures in biochemistry
(Prigogine and Stengers 1979), according to which the system opens on its environ-
ment and which dissipates energy, can increase its organization if it is far from its
initial state of equilibrium. At the threshold of instability, its state bifurcates toward a
9“Drosophila “gap” genes provide the ﬁrst response to maternal gradients in the early ﬂy embryo.
Gap genes are expressed in a series of broad bands across the embryo during ﬁrst hours of
development. The gene network controlling the gap gene expression patterns, includes inputs
from maternal gradients and mutual repression between the gap genes themselves” (Papatsenko
and Levine 2011).
346
A. Dambricourt Malassé

new equilibrium, but its innovative reorganization is unpredictable. The mathemati-
cal modeling explains that at the bifurcation point, a singularity or a critical point, the
system is under the control of internal attractors called “chaotic”. Nonlinearity is
seen in the contrast between the scale of the instability threshold, a local constraint,
and its exponential effects on the global scale of the system. The chaos theory differs
from the neo-Darwinian paradigm, in which all are stochastic, because of physical
determinism which refers to an underlying order proper of the dynamical system:
The two main components of chaos theory are the ideas that systems—no matter how
complex—rely on an underlying order, and that very simple or small system and events
can give rise to very complex behaviors or events. While chaos is often thought of as a
reference to randomness and lack of order, it is more accurate to think of it as an apparent
random state that results from complex systems and interactions between systems.
(Techtarget 2021).10
But despite the underlayer order due to complex interactions, the sensibility to
initial conditions, or Brownian agitation, remains the physical cause of the search for
a new equilibrium, with unpredictable modiﬁcations. This paradigm can integrate
the critics of the “all genetics” dogma by Henri Atlan (1999) who put forward
epigenetics, or the cellular self-regulation that has shifted the determinism of DNA
to its nucleic, cellular, or extracellular environment. Thus, the chaos theory shares
with the neo-Darwinian doctrine the pre-eminence of random ﬂuctuations even
internal determinism cannot allow any reorganization, the causality which allows
innovation with a new state of equilibrium is not the reproducibility of the principles
which constructed the system.
In such cases, the self-organized dissipative structures are not replaced in their
phylogenetic context, or the gametogenic ﬁliation over the very long geologic
durations. This is the reason why internal properties of self-regulation controlled
by references in memory are not evocated, whereas, with such hindsight, they would
be highlighted as in the case of three lineages of Siphnae described by Teilhard de
Chardin. The theory of deterministic chaos thus reverses the roles between deter-
minism and random, because of the lack of the historical understanding of the
gametogenesis, or (1) the encoding processes of the principles of construction and
(2) the memorization of these encoding processes. The chaos theory does not
correspond to the stability of the evolutionary straightening over 40 million years.
The circumstances in which the gametes have been forced to maintain their equilib-
rium during duplication were unpredictable, but their responses to these unforeseen
conditions were already memorized, preserved, and transmitted.
10Que signiﬁe théorie du chaos ?—Déﬁnition IT de Whatis.fr (techtarget.com) in French: Les deux
principaux constituants de la théorie du chaos sont l’idée que les systèmes—quelle que soit leur
complexité—s’appuient sur un ordre sous-jacent, et que des systèmes et événements très simples ou
de faible envergure peuvent engendrer des comportements ou événements très complexes. Si le
chaos est souvent considéré comme une référence à un caractère aléatoire et à l’absence d’ordre, il
est plus précis de le considérer comme un état aléatoire apparent qui résulte de systèmes complexes
et d’interactions entre systèmes.
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
347

Yet, fossil and extant primate species attest to reproducibility and nonlinear
ampliﬁcation of the effects: increasing complexity of the nervous system and axial
straightening show retrospectively an iteration, not of the form as in a fractal such as
the Koch snowﬂake, but of the dynamics and self-reorganization processes.
12.7.1.2 Self-Memorization, Conservative Dynamics with Innovative
Organization
Life is understood as an organization of molecules, atoms, and ions integrated in
autonomous dynamic systems, capable of maintaining their equilibrium with the
environment as described in thermodynamics, and capable of reproducing. But, as
recalled previously, this cycle is not only the replication of a cell; it is ﬁrst the self-
transmission of the memory that builts itself as an autonomous dynamical system
open on its environment. During abiogenesis, such processes had to be capable of
being self-memorized; otherwise, they would not be able to transmit themselves. So
it is possible to conclude that the best chance for replicative processes to stay stable
on long geological durations are those keeping the self-memorization properties. The
emergence of such properties poses the problem of their abstract representation as
recalled previously (Danchin 2022). Appearing 3770 billion and possibly 4280
billion years ago (Dodd et al. 2017), these unicellular properties remained in
equilibrium with their aqueous environment before the Cambrian explosion or the
“explosive” emergence of multicellular organisms—or the metazoans—around
2.3–2.1 billion years ago in relation to a threshold oxygen concentration (El Albani
et al. 2014). These evolutionary phenomena allow inferring primitive memories’
necessaries for the transmission of self-complexiﬁed systems and unexpected
attractors regarding the chaotic attractors better known in the living systems
(Uthamacumaran 2021). These primitive attractors match with conservative
properties, or self-memorization, and seem hidden by the past of current gameto-
genesis. So, the difference between orthogenetic macroevolutions visible only on
very long geological periods, and bushy microevolutions observed in shorter
periods, allow inferring different levels of organization in gametogenesis. The oldest
would be composed by metamemory necessary to explain the stability of phyloge-
netic lineage despite the more and more complex changes acquired at each new
emergence. This principle of self-reproduction of the complexiﬁcation process is
found again at the origin of our verticality inseparable from the complexiﬁcation of
the central nervous system, essential to ensure the psychomotor control of its
balance.
12.7.2 Self-Organization, Self-Memorization, and Predictability
Our embryogenesis emerges from fertilization in continuity with internal orthogene-
sis characterized by the neural straightening and craniofacial contraction, but in a
nonlinear way: for 20 million years, monkeys reproduce monkeys; 20 million years
later, great ape embryogenesis emerges and again gametogenesis stabilized with
species reproducing great ape embryogenesis till today. Then 4 million years ago
348
A. Dambricourt Malassé

that was the threshold of the verticality and since then, the process follows an
unprecedented acceleration, with the last threshold emerging around 200,000 years
ago. The stability of the trajectory despite its acceleration does not correspond to the
predictions of the chaos theory. If chaotic attractors were the regulators of the
gametogenesis evolution, great apes and a fortiori hominins would never have
appeared. With the chaos theory, it would be impossible to predict retrospectively
a bifurcation 20 million years after the ﬁrst simian, yet this bifurcation was a ﬁrst
iteration of the embryonic complexiﬁcation with an ampliﬁcation of the straighten-
ing. It would be not possible to predict again, 20 million years later, a second
iteration with the hominins and the two very close states of equilibrium,
Australopithecus and Homo. These to last iterations ampliﬁed the previous straight-
ening and reached the unstable threshold of verticality that generated the loss of
quadrupedalism. The third iteration is Sapiens, our stage of verticality which tends
toward a physical limit and develops occluso-postural disorders.
The meiotic attractors that enabled bifurcation at a threshold of complexity are
not chaotic. Other attractors have the property of preserving the logic of a process
that reaches a threshold of disequilibrium and causes it to shift into a new state of
organization. Such attractors are different from the chaotic attractors because they
preserve the internal logic at the threshold of the bifurcation, whereas the latter
would have reacted to ﬂuctuations that modify it without reference to the identity of
the phylogenetic process in memory. They go back to the origin of the ﬁrst cellular
cycles. I have called them “harmonic” attractors because of the conservation of
internal evolutionary properties which have not been deviated by random
ﬂuctuations (Dambricourt Malassé 1992, 1995, 1996, 2011b).11
Innovations have emerged within the limits allowed by the memory of the
reconstruction process of ontogeny when the metabolic equilibrium of gametes has
reached limit conditions of complexity. This amounts to conclude that gametes
produce their complexity and keep in memory the mechanisms of regulation of a
state of equilibrium became too unstable. These processes are auto-catalytic, self-
organized, self-controlled, and complexity-producing. Thus it is possible to predict
the morphological effects on the axial skeleton due to the iterations of the straight-
ening ampliﬁcation and heterochronic effects at the cephalic pole. For instance,
the mesenchymal cells of the dental buds are formed with neural crests derived from
the mesencephalon and from the rhombomeres 1 and 2 of the rhombencephalon. The
mandibular molars form ﬁve cusps in the great ape except the deciduous teeth which
form only two, whereas they form ﬁve in all hominins (Australopithecus,
Paranthropus, Homo). In other words, the deciduous germs had time to form the
ﬁve cusps and thus to complexify the occlusal surface. In contrast, the morphological
11The allusion to the chaos theory instead of the stochastic theory shows the change of paradigm in
Mrs. Dambricourt. Harmonic attractors play a stabilizing role like chemical clocks that oscillate
between two colors, Jacques Vauthier (2011), mathematician, Emeritus Professor of Sorbonne
University, former director of the unit of research “Pure mathematics” at Pierre et Marie Curie
University (Paris VI). Report for the Accreditation to Direct Research.
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
349

changes of the appendicular skeleton due to the cascade effect of the homeotic genes,
for instance, the shape of the pelvis, are not understood.
Similarities have been observed with the mathematics of forms, the topology,
developed by René Thom (1977) with the “general theory of the models” known as
the catastrophe theory (TC).
Thom discovered with astonishment that, unlike stable applications, some unstable
applications cannot be described in simple terms, because of the presence of a hidden
dynamism. The text around which this talk will be organized is a 1962 paper in which
Thom described the ﬁrst example of such hidden dynamism. It marks an important milestone
in the development of his reﬂections on the general problem of the birth and destruction of
forms—morphogenesis—employing the qualitative study of the applications of one variety
on another. This is the germ of the catastrophe theory, which he developed from the middle
of the 1960s, which was much publicized in the 1970s, and which continues to inspire many
researchers in the theory of singularities. (Popescu-Pampu 2021).
His work gives a mathematical description of spatial phenomenology in which
discontinuities are singularities of a continuous medium. They have highlighted the
primacy of internal logic in the control of threshold effects or hidden dynamics.
These mathematics are consistent with the stability of the morphogenetic trajectory
over 40 million years, whereas chaos theory would never have supported the
appearance of Sapiens 40 million years away from the ﬁrst monkeys. In conclusion,
chaotic attractors are not consistent with the properties of gametogenesis that
controlled the reorganization of the embryonic body plan. Other attractors dating
from the origins of life are highlighted over the very long geological periods and
without which the phylogeny of primates, from the prosimian to Sapiens (Homo
sapiens), would never have been possible, thus joining the transdisciplinary curve of
increasing complexity synthesized by Pierre Teilhard de Chardin in the 1950s.
12.7.3 Examples of Memory in Nonlinear Systems
Memory phenomena are observed in physics. Gleick (1987) in “Chaos: Making a
New Science” recalls the discovery and theory of the soliton or collective solitary
waves:
Bifurcation points are the milestones of system evolution; they crystallize the history of the
system. Hidden in all the forms and processes that make us unique—in the chemical
reactions of our cells and the shape of our nerve networks—are thousands upon thousands
of bifurcation points constituting a living chronology of the choices by which we have
evolved as a system, from the primordial single cell to our present form. Systems are
highly sensitive near these areas, which constitute the crystallized “memory” of past
bifurcations. (Gleick 1987).
Self-memorizing processes called gray models have been modeled by Guo et al.
(2014) and have allowed researchers to conclude, which is basically logical, that the
best of them have a memory in reference. During the same years and closer to cells
350
A. Dambricourt Malassé

and interstitial tissues, mathematical equations have been published dedicated to
viscoelastic medium and behaviors, attractors, and memory, for instance, Conti et al.
(2014, 2016), Boldyrev and Zvyagin (2019), Zvyagin and Orlov (2021). In physics
as well as in mathematics, the nonlinear behaviors of dynamical systems can thus be
associated with memory. In biology, recent studies on the unicellular Physarum
polycephalum have deduced such properties with the transmission of memory
(Vogel and Dussutour 2016).
12.7.4 Macroevolutionary Straightening and Self-Memorization
Versus Random Ecological Epiphenomenon
The succession of angular thresholds generated its theoretical formalization which
does not match with the neo-Darwinian doctrine of accidental mutations; this is the
ﬁrst statement (Dambricourt Malassé 1993, Chaline et al. 1996, 1998, 2000, Chaline
and Marchand 2002). The emergence of new embryogenesis does not reﬂect a
random dissipation of covalent bonds between DNA atoms. If this had been the
case, this would have resulted in disorganization and not in an ampliﬁcation of the
effects keeping the correlations, which are the neural straightening, the craniofacial
contraction, and the complexiﬁcation of the cerebro-cerebellar neuronal networks.
The innovations are reorganizations according to (1) the internal coherences of the
cellular dynamics and (2) the conditions of equilibrium of the cellular divisions with
the immediate environment formed by the ovaries, then the uterine tubes after the
ovulation until the implantation in the intrauterine mucosa.
The stability of the phylogenetic trajectory and its exponential curve since the ﬁrst
hominins have allowed us to induce harmonic attractors which match with a
metalevel of memory, that of the reconstruction rules of the embryonic body
plane. These attractors control the morphological innovations and their coherence
(1) with the previous body plan and (2) with the rules of the previous craniocaudal
reorganization. This deduction is contrary to the paradigm according to which
hominin ontogeny is a mere environmental epiphenomenon that does not take into
account the necessary hereditary rules for the craniocaudal reorganization. For many
years I make a distinction between, on one hand, the microevolution of the body plan
with its different adaptations, and on the other, the macroevolution with the increas-
ing complexity of the embryo. The mutant populations were adapted to their
ecosystems, but as Teilhard de Chardin (1921) developed after he discovered
primitive primates collected in the Quercy phosphorites (Eocene, France,
37–34 Ma), it should be necessary to make a distinction between specialized and
generalized species. He considered that the phylum from the oldest primates to
Homo sapiens was the trunk formed by generalized species, while extant species
are divergent branches from the trunk. So, I sustain for more than 30 years in the
scientiﬁc lineage of Pierre Teilhard de Chardin and his intellectual successors,
professors holding chairs at the Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle, Yves
Coppens, and Henry de Lumley, that hominization is in continuity with terrestrial
phenomena of increasing complexity since the ﬁrst unicellular cycles and that
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
351

without these very old and primitive attractors associated to the production of
complexity, never hominins could have emerged. Environmental conditions are
necessary but they are not the complex processes that increase the complexity of
embryogeny and control it without disorganizing the internal coherence of the
ancestral embryogeny. A unicellular is a living organism that is no more the case
for the gamete in continuity with the ﬁrst cells. Nevertheless, maybe, this could be
the case when attractors inherited from these unicellular ancestors have been
activated because of thresholds of complexity. The question remains why gameto-
genesis increased irreversibly the complexity of embryonic memory.
12.8
Conclusion: The Emergence of Life Helps to Understand
the Phylogenetic Neuraxis Straightening
Natural selection was a fecund concept as long as the properties of physics such as
thermodynamics escaped the knowledge. But this concept could not explain the
processes of memorization necessary for the reproduction of the ﬁrst cellular cycle
that stays the problem of the emergence of life. As recalled in this chapter, the
cellular cycle would have been impossible if the rules of the construction of the
dynamic system did not integrate themselves for their transmissible sustainability.
Attractors of such properties have been called “harmonic”. These properties of self-
memorization prove as the initial conditions for the emergence of the ﬁrst level of
complexity,
without
which,
the
increasing
complexity
of
organisms,
the
metazoans—or the “Cambrian” explosion—could not have been transmitted until
the ﬁrst primates and their central nervous systems, the most complex among
vertebrates. Physical, geophysical, and geochemical conditions constitute the matrix
of biodiversity and local indetermination has contributed to adaptive innovations.
But harmonic attractors are necessary for the understanding of the neural straighten-
ing and the stability of the irreversible trajectory up to our verticality,
psychomotricity, social behaviors, and complex cognition emerging through the
cerebro-cerebellar reﬂexive loops, waiting for a better understanding of the
mesological conditions to complete the synthetic theory of the self-organized
hominization.
Acknowledgments I thank Prof. Valeria Isaeva and Dr Sandra Joffroy for accepting the invitation
to review the chapter.
References
Aiello L, Dean C (1990) An introduction to human evolutionary anatomy. Academic Press, San
Diego
Atlan H (1999) La ﬁn du tout génétique ? Vers de nouveaux paradigmes en biologie. Editions
INRA-Quae, Paris
352
A. Dambricourt Malassé

Barboni D, Ashley GM, Bourel B, Arráiz H, Mazur JC (2019) Springs, palm groves, and the record
of early hominins in Africa. In: Carrión JS, Scott L, de Menocal P (eds) Paleoﬂoras,
paleovegetation and human evolution, review of palaeobotany and palynology, vol 266.
Wiley, New York, pp 23–41
Beaudet A, Clarke RJ, Bruxelles L, Carlson KJ, Crompton R, de Beer F, Dhaene J, Heaton JL,
Jakata K, Tea Jashashvili T, Kuman K, McClymont J, Pickering TR, Stratford D (2019) The
bony labyrinth of StW 573 (“little foot”): implications for early hominin evolution and paleobi-
ology. J Hum Evol 127:67–80
Bergman I, Hublin JJ, Gunz JJ, Freidline SE (2021) How did modern morphology evolve in the
human mandible? The relationship between static adult allometry and mandibular variability in
Homo sapiens. J Hum Evol 157:103026
Bhattacharya A, Bhatia A, Patel D, Mehta N, Parekh H, Trivedi R (2014) Evaluation of relationship
between cranial base angle and maxillofacial morphology in Indian population: a cephalometric
study. J Orthod Sci 3(3):74–80
Bois
E
(2010)
La
dynamique
posturale
non-Linéaire.
Partie
I:
bases
et
fondements.
L’Anthropologie 114(3):370–387
Boldyrev AS, Zvyagin VG (2019) Attractors for model of viscoelastic media with memory motion
in non-autonomous case. Lobachevskii J Math 4:918–937
Bolk L (1926) Das Problem der Menschwerdung. Gustav Fischer, Jena
Broca P (1870) Sur le transformisme. Bull Mém Soc Anthropol Paris 5:168–242
Buffon G (1749) Histoire naturelle de l’Homme. Imprimerie royale, Paris
Buffon G (1785) Histoire naturelle, générale et particulière, Tome 6. Imprimerie royale, Paris
Butzer KW (1969) Geological interpretation of two Pleistocene hominid sites in the lower Omo
Basin. Nature 222:1133–1135
Caro P (2004) Entretien avec Anne Dambricourt Malassé: Développement embryonnaire et évolu-
tion. La lettre de l'Académie des sciences 13:14–15
Cauche D, Dambricourt Malassé A, Singh M, Tudryn A, Gargani J, Abdessadok S, Chapon Sao C,
Moigne A-M, Karir B, Pal S (2021) Pre-quaternary hominin settlements in Asia: archaeology,
bio-lithostratigraphy and magnetostratigraphy evidences at Masol, Siwaliks, Northwestern
India. L’Anthropologie 125:1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anthro.2021.102846
Chaline J, Marchand D (2010) Le singe, l’embryon et l’homme. Ellipses, Paris
Chaline J, Dambricourt Malassé A, David B, Magniez-Jannin F, Marchand D, Courant F, Millet JJ
(1996) Quantiﬁcation de l'évolution morphologique du crâne des hominidés et hétérochronies.
C R Acad Sci Terre Planètes 326:291–298
Chaline J, Durand A, Marchand D, Dambricourt Malassé A, Deshayes MJ (1998) Chromosomes
and the origins of apes and australopithecines. Hum Evol 11:43–60
Chaline J, Durand A, Dambricourt Malassé A, David B, Magniez-Jannin F, Marchand D (2000)
Were climatic changes a driving force in hominid evolution? In: Hart MB (ed) Climates: past
and present, vol 18. Geological Society, London, pp 185–198
Chaline J, Marchand D (2002) Les merveilles de l’évolution. Editions Universitaires de Dijon
Chapon Sao C, Abdessadok S, Dambricourt Malassé A, Singh M, Karir B, Bhardwaj V, Pal S,
Gaillard C, Moigne AM, Gargani J, Tudryn A (2016) Magnetic polarity of Masol 1 locality
deposits, Siwalik frontal range, northwestern India. In: Dambricourt Malassé A (ed) Human
origins in the Indian sub-continent. Comptes Rendus Palevol 15(3–4):407–416
Chen X, Brodland GW (2008) Multi-scale ﬁnite element modeling allows the mechanics of
amphibian neurulation to be elucidated. Phys Biol 5:015003
Conti M, Marchini EM, Pata V (2014) A well posedness result for nonlinear viscoelastic equations
with memory. In: Nonlinear analysis: theory, methods and applications. Elsevier, New York, pp
206–216
Conti M, Marchini EM, Pata V (2016) Global attractors for nonlinear viscoelastic equations with
memory. Commun Pure Appl Anal 15(5):1893–1913
Coppens Y (1996) Annuaire du Collège de France 1995–1996, résumé des cours et des travaux,
96ème année, Paris
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
353

Dambricourt Malassé A (1993) Continuity and discontinuity during modalities of hominization. In:
Chaline J, Werdelin L (eds) Modes and tempos in evolution in the quaternary, vol 19.
Quaternary International, London, pp 85–100
Dambricourt Malassé A (1987) Ontogenèses, paléontogenèses et phylogenèse du corps
mandibulaire catarhinien. Nouvelle interprétation de la mécanique humanisante (théorie de la
fœtalisation, Louis Bolk, 1926). PhD Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle, Paris
Dambricourt Malassé A (1988) Hominisation et fœtalisation. C R Acad Sci 307(2):199–204
Dambricourt Malassé A (1989) Report for the Fyssen Foundation research Grant, Paris
Dambricourt Malassé A (1992) L'hominisation et la théorie des systèmes dynamiques non linéaires
(Chaos). Revue de Biologie Mathématique, Société française de Biologie mathématique
117(118):119
Dambricourt Malassé A (1995) Les attracteurs inédits de l'hominisation. Ontogenèse fondamentale,
attracteurs chaotiques et attracteurs harmoniques. Acta Biotheoretica 43:113–125
Dambricourt Malassé A (1996) Exemple du chaos appliqué en paléontologie humaine. Chapitre
III. In: Rozelot JP (ed) Chaos et fractales dans l'activité solaire, École thématique du Centre
national de la Recherche scientiﬁque (CNRS)
Dambricourt Malassé A (2005) Un nouvel angle de la base pour une meilleure compréhension de la
morphogenèse basi-crânienne des Hominidés et des modalités évolutives. In: Biométrie et
anthropologie de la tête, de la face et du cou. Biométrie Humaine et Anthropologie, 23(1–2):
53–62
Dambricourt Malassé A (2006) Évolution du chondrocrâne et de la face des grands anthropoïdes
miocènes jusqu'à Homo sapiens, continuités et discontinuités. In: de Lumley H (ed) Climats,
cultures et Sociétés aux temps préhistoriques. De l'apparition des Hominidés jusqu’au
Néolithique. Palevol (Comptes Rendus Académie des Sciences), 5:109–117
Dambricourt Malassé A (2010) The relationships between occlusion and posture in the hominid
lineage, implications for the transition between Mesolithic and Neolithic populations. Int J Mod
Anthropol 3:14–63
Dambricourt Malassé A (2011a) The human lineage, a macro-evolutionary process acting during
embryogeny with emergent macro-evolutionary implications. In: Auletta G, Leclerc M,
Martinez RA (eds) Biological evolution: facts and theories, Analecta Gregoriana, p 312
Dambricourt Malassé A (2011b) Les équilibres bipèdes permanents, origine embryonnaire,
morphogenèse, équilibre occluso-postural, conséquences pour l’évolution psychomotrice et
comportementale des Hominidés. Université de Technologie de Compiègne, Habilitation à
Diriger des Recherches
Dambricourt Malassé A (2021a) Embryogeny and phylogeny of the human posture. A new glance
at the future of our species, vol 1. ISTE-Wiley, Hoboken NJ
Dambricourt Malassé A (2021b) Activités hominiennes dans la plaine inondable sous-himalayenne
à la ﬁn du Pliocène. In: Coppens Y, Vialet A (eds) Who was who, and who did what, where and
when. Académie pontiﬁcale des sciences et CNRS Editions, Paris
Dambricourt Malassé A (2022) Embryogeny and phylogeny of the human posture. A new glance at
the future of our species, vol 2. ISTE-Wiley, Hoboken NJ
Dambricourt Malassé A, Cauche D (2022) Des traces de boucherie aux outils lithiques de Masol
(Pliocène supérieur, Inde du Nord). Une approche psychomotrice de l’origine et de l’identité des
hominiens. L'Anthropologie, 4
Dambricourt Malassé A, Deshayes MJ (1990) Relationships between neuro-cephalic development
and cranio-facial morphogenesis in living and fossil primates. Fysisch-Anthropologische
Mededelingen. Newletter 2:3–6
Dambricourt Malassé A, Deshayes MJ (1992) Modeling of the cranio-facial architecture during
ontogenesis and phylogenesis. In: Berthoz A, Vidal PP, Graf W (eds) The head-neck sensory
motor system. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Dambricourt Malassé A, Lallouet F (2009) Étude au scanner des canaux semi-circulaires d'un crâne
sec d'anencéphale dépourvu de ﬂexion sphéno-occipitale; implications pour l'interprétation
354
A. Dambricourt Malassé

paléo-embryologique des Hominidés fossiles. Avancées en biométrie humaine, Biométrie
Humaine et Anthropologie 27(1–2):79–86
Dambricourt Malassé A, Lallouet F (2021) Apport de la scanographie à l’interprétation
embryologique de la base du crâne et de son évolution posturale chez les hominiens. XIXth
World Congress of the International Union of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Meknès,
Maroc, XIX Congrès mondial UISSP – Meknès. https://uispp2020.sciencesconf.org/323625
Dambricourt Malassé A, Deshayes MJ, Magnies-Jannin F, Chaline J, Marchand D (1999) A
solution to human paradox: fundamental ontogenies and heterochronies. Hum Evol 14(4):
277–300
Dambricourt Malassé A, Martin JP, Kerviler de E (2000) Approche biodynamique des angulations
de la base du crâne de l'embryogenèse à la morphogenèse postnatale. In: Andrieux P,
Hadjouis D, Dambricourt Malassé A (eds) L'identité humaine en question. Nouvelles
problématiques et nouvelles technologies en paléontologie humaine et en paléoanthropologie
biologique. Artcom, Paris
Dambricourt Malassé A, Moigne AM, Singh M, Calligaro T, Karir B, Gaillard C, Kaur A,
Bhardwaj V, Pal S, Abdessadok S, Chapon Sao C, Gargani J, Tudryn A, Garcia Sanz M
(2016) Intentional cutmarks on bovid from the Quranwala Zone, 2.6 Ma, Siwalik frontal
range, NW India. In: Dambricourt Malassé A (ed) Human origins in the Indian sub-continent,
Comptes Rendus Académie des sciences, Palevol, 15(3–4):317–339
Dambricourt Malassé A, Zhang P, Wils P (2018) A new molar in the Middle Pleistocene hominid
assemblage of Yanhuidong, Tongzi, South China. Acta Anthropologica 37(1):1–17
Danchin A (2022) Origine des premières cellules: le point de vue de l’ingénieur, Encyclopédie de
l’Environnement, [online ISSN 2555-0950]. https://www.encyclopedie-environnement.org/
vivant/origine-premieres-cellules-point-de-vue-de-lingenieur/
Darwin C (1868) The variation of animals and plants under domestication. John Murray, London
Darwin C (1871) The descent of man. Selection in relation to sex. John Murray, London
Delaire J (1978) L’analyse architecturale et structurale du crâne (de proﬁl). Revue Stomatol 79(1):
1–33
Delaire J (2003) Le développement adaptatif de la base du crâne. Justiﬁcation du traitement précoce
des dysmorphoses de classes III. Rev Orthop Dento Faciale 37:243–265
Deshayes MJ (1986) Croissance cranio-faciale et orthodontie. Masson, Paris
Deshayes MJ, Dambricourt Malassé A (1991) Analyse des différents types architecturaux cranio-
faciaux par l'approche ontogénique de l'hominisation. Rev Stomatol Chir Maxillofac 4:249–258
Deshayes MJ, Deshayes J (2013) Étude des relations entre la morphologie crâniofaciale et
l'occlusion en denture temporaire: remodelages occipitaux et singularités basicrâniennes
déterminantes pour l'occlusion. Orthod Fr 84(1):97–111
Deshayes MJ, Dambricourt Malassé A, Deshayes P (1990) Utilisation de la téléradiographie dans la
compréhension de la mécanique humanisante. In: L’image et la Science. Actes du 115ème
Congrès national des Sociétés Savantes, pp 149–157
Dodd M, Papineau D, Grenne T et al (2017) Evidence for early life in Earth’s oldest hydrothermal
vent precipitates. Nature 543:60–64
Duboule D (ed) (1994) A guidebook to homeobox genes. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Dyson F (1999) Origins of life. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
El Albani A et al (2014) The 2.1 Ga old Francevillian biota: biogenicity, taphonomy and biodiver-
sity. PLoS One 9(6):e99438
Fischer E (1902) Zur Kenntnis des Primordialcraniums der Affen. Anat Anz 20:410–417
Fleury V, Vaishnavi Murukutla A, Chevalier NR, Gallois B, Capellazzi-Resta M, Picquet P,
Peaucelle A (2016) Physics of Amniote formation. Phys Rev E 94:022426
Gage SP (1905) A three weeks’ human embryo, with especial reference to the brain and the nephric
system. Am J Anat 4:409–443
Giraud-Soulavie JL (1780–1784) Histoire naturelle de la France méridionale. Belin, Paris
Gleick J (1987) Chaos: making a new science. Viking Penguin Inc, New York
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
355

Godard B, Ducasse D (1973) L’examen radiologique en O.D.F. L’analyse de Gudin. Rev Orthop
Dento Faciale 7, 3:373–392
Grandcolas P (2021) Les trajectoires évolutives des organismes ne sont pas stochastiques. In:
Gaudin T, Maurel MC, Pomerol JC (eds) Le calcul, le hasard et la vie. ISTE Editions, London
Grimaud Hervé D (1997) L’évolution de l’encéphale chez l’Homo erectus et l’Homo sapiens:
exemples de l’Asie et de l’Europe. Cahiers de Paléoanthropologie, CNRS, Paris
Gudin R (1952) Étude du crâne de proﬁl. Morphologie et radiographie. Bulletins et Mémoires de la
Société d'Anthropologie de Paris 3(10):59–87
Gudin RG, Godard B (1989) Les troubles dyspnéiques des sphères oro-faciale et pharyngée. Leur
inﬂuence sur la morphogenèse cranio-faciale et leur rapport avec la posture mandibulaire en
période de croissance. Rev Orthop Dento Faciale 23(4):407–425
Guo X, Liu S, Wu L, Tang L (2014) A grey NGM (1,1 k) self-memory coupling prediction model
for energy consumption prediction. Sci World J 2014:ID 301032
Gursky VV, Panok L, Myasnikova EM, Manu M, Samsonova G, Reinitz J, Samsonov AM (2011)
Mechanisms of gap gene expression canalization in the Drosophila blastoderm. BMC Syst Biol
5:118. https://doi.org/10.1186/1752-0509-5-118
Haile-Selassie Y, Gibert L, Melillo SM, Ryan TM, Alene M, Deino A, Levin NE, Scott G, Saylor
BZ (2015) New species from Ethiopia further expands middle Pliocene hominin diversity.
Nature 521(7553):483–488
Harmand S, Lewis J, Feibel C et al (2015) 3.3-million-year-old stone tools from Lomekwi 3, West
Turkana, Kenya. Nature 521:310–315
Héloret C (2015) Agénésies dentaires: De la phylogénèse à l’épigénétique. Dissertation in Dental
Surgeon. Toulouse University
Holloway RL (1996) In: Lock A, Peters CR (eds) Evolution of the human brain. Clarendon Press,
Oxford, UK
Hublin JJ, Ben-Ncer A, Bailey SE, Freidline SE, Neubauer S, Skinner MM, Bergmann I, Le
Cabec A, Benazzi S, Harvati K, Gunz P (2017) New fossils from Jebel Irhoud, Morocco and
the pan-African origin of Homo sapiens. Nature 546(7657):289–292
Jacobson AG (1978) Some forces that shape the nervous system. Zoon 6:13–21
Jacobson AG, Gordon R (1976) Changes in the shape of the developing vertebrate nervous system
analyzed experimentally, mathematically and by computer simulation. J Exp Zool 197(2):
191–246
Jameson NM, Hou ZC, Sterner KN, Weckle A, Goodman M, Steiper ME, Wildman DE (2011)
Genomic data reject the hypothesis of a prosimian primate clade. J Hum Evol 3:295–305
Jeffery N, Davies K, Köckenberger W, Williams S (2007) Craniofacial growth in fetal Tarsius
bancanus: brains, eyes and nasal septa. J Anat 210(6):703–722
Lamarck JB (1794) Recherches sur les causes des principaux faits physiques (. . .) enﬁn de
l’entretien de la vie des êtres organiques, de leur accroissement, de leur vigueur, de leur
dépérissement et de leur mort. Maradan, Paris
Lamarck JB (1801) Système des animaux sans vertèbres, ou, Tableau général des classes, des
ordres, et des genres de ces animaux. Chez l’Auteur au Muséum d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris
Lamarck JB (1802) Recherches sur l’organisation des corps vivants et particulièrement sur son
origine, sur la cause de ses developpemens et des progrès de sa composition. Chez l’Auteur au
Muséum d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris
Langman J (1984) Abrégé d’embryologie médicale. Masson, Paris
Leiner HC, Leiner AL, Dow RS (1987) Cerebro-cerebellar learning loops in apes and humans. Ital J
Neurol Sci 8:423–436
Levi G (1900) Beitrag zum studium der entwickelung des knorpeligen primordialcraniums des
menschen. Arch Mikr Anat 55:341–414
Macklin CC (1914) The skull of a human fetus of 40 mm. Am J Anat 16(3):317–385
Merlo GR, Paleari L, Mantero S, Zerega B, Adamska M, Rinkwitz S, Bober E, Levi G (2002) The
Dlx5 homeobox gene is essential for vestibular morphogenesis in the mouse embryo through a
BMP4-mediated pathway. Dev Biol 248(1):57–69
356
A. Dambricourt Malassé

Monirifard M, Sadeghian S, Afshari Z, Raﬁei E, Sichani AV (2020) Relationship between cepha-
lometric cranial base and anterior-posterior features in an Iranian population. Dent Res J 17:60–
65
Moore JW, Pearson RG (1981) Kinetics and mechanism. Wiley, New York
Morin E (2022) Evolutionary creativity, Chapter 14. In: Dambricourt Malassé A (ed) Self-
organization as a new paradigm in evolutionary biology. From theory to applied cases in the
tree of life. Springer-Nature, Cham, Switzerland
Neubauer S, Hublin JJ, Gunz P (2018) The evolution of modern human brain shape. Sci Adv 4(1):
1–8
Owen R (1848) Archetype and homologies of the vertebrate skeleton. John van Voorst, London
Paidas CN, Moreale RF, Holoski KM, Lund RE, Hutchins GM (1999) Septation and differentiation
of the embryonic human cloaca. J Pediatr Surg 34:877–884
Papatsenko D, Levine M (2011) The drosophila gap gene network is composed of two parallel
toggle switches. PLoS One 6(7):e21145
Petridou N, Heisenberg CP (2019) Tissue rheology in embryonic organization. EMBO J 38:
e102497. https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.2019102497
Piveteau J (1950) Paléontologie, génétique et transformisme. In: Arambourg C, Cuénot L, Grassé
PP (eds) Paléontologie et transformisme. Albin Michel, Paris
Popescu-Pampu P (2021) René Thom et le dynamisme des formes instables. Société mathématique
de France. https://smf.emath.fr/smf-dossiers-et-ressources/rene-thom-et-le-dynamisme-des-
formes-instables-patrick-popescu-pampu
Prigogine I, Stengers I (1979) La Nouvelle Alliance. Métamorphose de la science. Gallimard, Paris
Saban R (1984) Anatomie et évolution des veines méningées chez les hommes fossiles Comité des
Travaux Historiques et Scientiﬁques, Paris
Senut B (2020) Orrorin tugenensis et les origines de l’homme: une synthèse. Bull Acad Nat Med
204(3):258–267
Shiraishi N, Katayama A, Nakashima T, Yamada S, Uwabe C, Kose K, Takakuwa T (2015) Three-
dimensional morphology of the human embryonic brain. Data Brief 4:116–118
Simpson GG (1950) L’orthogenèse et la théorie synthétique de l’évolution. In: Arambourg C,
Cuénot L, Grassé PP (dir) Paléontologie et transformisme. Albin Michel, Paris, 123-167
Smith BR (1999) Visualizing Human Embryos. Sci Am 280(3):76–81
Spoor F, Zonneveld F (1997) The bony labyrinth of Sts5 (“Mrs Ples”). South Afr J 93:180
Spoor F, Wood B, Zonneveld F (1994) Implications of early hominid labyrinthine morphology for
evolution of human bipedal locomotion. Nature 369:645–648
Starck D (1960) Das Cranium eines Schimpansenfetus (Pan troglodytes Blumenbach 1799) von
71 mm Sch.-Stlg., nebst Bemerkungen über die Körperform von Schimpansenfeten. (Beitrag
zur Kenntnis des Primatencraniums II). Morph Jb 100:559–647
TechTarget (2021) Que signiﬁe théorie du chaos? – Deﬁnition IT de Whatis.fr, https://whatis.
techtarget.com/fr/deﬁnition/theorie-du-chaos
Teilhard de Chardin P (1921) La présence d'un Tarsier dans les Phosphorites du Quercy et sur
l’origine tarsienne de l'Homme. Anthropologie 31:329–330
Teilhard de Chardin P (1950) Sur un cas remarquable d’un cas d’orthogenèse de groupe: l’évolution
des Siphnéidés de Chine. In: Arambourg C, Cuénot L, Grassé PP (eds) Paléontologie et
transformisme. Albin Michel, Paris
Thom R (1977) Stabilité structurelle et morphogenèse. Essai d’une théorie générale des modèles.
InterEditions, Paris
Uthamacumaran A (2021) A review of dynamical systems approaches for the detection of chaotic
attractors in cancer networks. Patterns 2:4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2021.100226
Vauthier J (2011) Report for the National center for scientiﬁc research (CNRS), Paris
Vialet A, André L, Aoudi L (2013) L’Homme fossile d’Asselar (actuel Mali). Étude critique, mise
en perspective historique et nouvelles interprétations. L'Anthropologie 117(3):345–361
12
Sapiens and Cognition: The Optimal Vertical Nervous System—The. . .
357

Vidal CM, Lane CS, Asrat A, Barfod DN, Mark DF, Tomlinson EL, Tadesse AZ, Yirgu G,
Deino A, Hutchison W, Mounier A, Oppenheimer C (2022) Age of the oldest known Homo
sapiens from eastern Africa. Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04275-8
Vogel D, Dussutour A (2016) Direct transfer of learned behaviour via cell fusion in non-neural
organisms. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 283:20162382. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2016.238
Weidenreich F (1943) The skull of Sinanthropus pekinensis. A comparative study on a primitive
hominid skull. Paleontol Sin D 10:126
Zvyagin VG, Orlov VP (2021) Strong solutions of one model of dynamics of thermoviscoelasticity
of a continuous medium with memory. Russ Math 65:84–89
358
A. Dambricourt Malassé

Evolutionary Creativity
13
Edgar Morin
The fabulous bushy developments of the plant and animal
kingdoms show us what Bergson called “creative evolution”
and which we could also call “evolutionary creativity”.
—Morin (2017)
Abstract
Fifty years of reﬂection on the modes of thought of scientists and transdisciplin-
ary synthesis allow the philosopher of science and the sociologist to understand
how much life cannot be reduced to biochemistry. Its creative capacities open the
consciousness of Homo sapiens to the recognition of emergence, considered here
as the mystery of life unceasingly renewed by the progress of knowledge.
Keywords
Life · Evolution · Self-organization · Creativity · Recursiveness · Autonomy ·
Genos · Phenon · Autos · Individuality
E. Morin (*)
Montpellier Advanced Knowledge Institute on Transitions, Institute of Advanced Knowledge,
University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France
# The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
A. Dambricourt Malassé (ed.), Self-Organization as a New Paradigm
in Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology – New Perspectives on Its
Development 5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1_13
359

13.1
Introduction
This chapter looks back on a life committed to the exploration of the ways of
knowledge of Man by Man, and on the need for a method to apprehend the
complexity emerging from the evolutionary creativity at the origin of life and its
unfolding. The method of complexity makes it possible to integrate antagonisms by
conferring on them a creative unity that has allowed the prodigious inventions of
plant and animal life. Since the 1960s, complexity has never ceased to animate my
curiosity
as
an
anthropologist,
in
sociology,
philosophy
of
science,
and
cogniscience. It led me to discover the theories of self-organization, notably “On
self-organizing systems and their environment” by Heinz Von Foerster (1960) and
“The Laws of Form” by George Spencer-Brown (1969) which emphasizes the use of
self-referential paradoxes.
There is a double creativity in the “history of life”, the ﬁrst and that of any
organization which associates diverse elements, produces qualities unknown to the
isolated elements, qualities named emergences. Thus, the birth of the living organi-
zation has produced remarkable emergences which are autonomy, self-reference,
self-reproduction, cognition, mobility. Self-reference constitutes a recursive loop
whose products are necessary for its own production, a typical phenomenon of living
complexity (which Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) lacks), it is this primum movens that
unites life, knowledge, and creativity.
The second creativity is that of invention, or rather of the innumerable inventions
of life, such as sexuality in the two kingdoms, the chlorophyll function, the germ, the
ﬂower in the plant world, the legs, wings, organs, and brains in the animal world. As
Anne Dambricourt Malassé (1992) has shown us, this creativity is carried out at the
time of reproduction after self-reorganized gametogenesis and whereas human
creativity is carried out in the cerebral process and thought.
13.2
The Complexity of Autos
Let us recall at the beginning this principle: The object of study metamorphoses
according to the type of vision that beholds it. Either one considers that there is
nothing under, above, or outside the phenomena, that what is mere potential is purely
and simply unreal, and therefore, everything that is alive is phenomenal, including
the genos,1 which is inscribed in the phenon2 (productive activity) in the form of the
genome. Or one considers as worthy of attention only the organizing principles that
generate visible things, and then, phenomenal life is only the expression of the
deeper reality of the genos. Here, I have consistently rejected this type of alternative.
I will try to link the two points of view which deny each other, that is to say to
1Genos: everything that is genetic and therefore generic and generative referred to in general as
genotype.
2Phenon: the concrete phenomenal existence designated by phenotype.
360
E. Morin

relativize them into a meta-point of view that respects the complexity of auto3s. We
will thus see that everything that is generative is, in one sense, phenomenal, and that
everything that is phenomenal participates, in another sense, in what is generative.
Everything that is generative is phenomenal: DNA is molecular in nature, like
protein; although more stable than protein, it is not immune to degradation and
disintegration. The genetic memory, inscribed in this physico-chemical entity, can
be corrupted, and in fact, it is protected and repaired by ad hoc enzymes. Conversely,
everything that is phenomenal is also generative, since exchanges and activities
bring energy, materials, work, and synthesis necessary for the reorganization/regen-
eration of the organism.
It is not enough to notice that, under a certain angle, the genos is phenomenal and
that the phenon is generating. It is also necessary to see that each one contains the
other in speciﬁc ways. The phenomenal being contains within itself its matri-
patrimonial heritage, and the genos,4 for its part, contains within itself the potential-
ity of all new phenomenal beings. The genos is in the phenon which is in the genos.
More still: The organization of the one comprises the organization of the other. It is
not only the phenomenal organization that requires the generative organization; it is
also the generative organization that requires the phenomenal organization. DNA
always needs a phenomenal envelope to reproduce itself. When, in the cell, the two
chains of the DNA double helix separate from each other, it is the cytoplasm that
provides the complementary nucleotide opposite each nucleotide that has become
accessible. The virus, an autonomous RNA or DNA capsule, becomes active, i.e.,
reproductive, only in the cell it parasitizes.
Thus, genes only operate as genes in living cells. In order for their conﬁguration
to become “information” and for their “information” to become “program”, they
need the living cell, not only as a nourishing environment, but above all as an
organizing being of which they themselves are a part. Specialized enzymes have
even been discovered, arranged along the strands of DNA, which detect breaks,
excise the fractured parts, and repair accidents. These enzymatic repair mechanisms
seem universal. They indicate to us not only that phenomenal organization plays a
co-organizing role in genetic organization, but also that in a way it regenerates the
regenerator.
All reproduction is always carried out in and by geno-phenomenal activity. It is
the cell, not the gene, that self-reproduces (Dumitrescu 1976, p. 25). The egg
resulting from the fusion of two gametes is not the food reservoir of a genome, but
a cellular organism from which a complex ontogeny will be organized. Moreover,
any embryogenesis needs phenomenal conditions of protection and development,
which can be organismic (the intra-uterine gestation of mammals), peri-organismic
(the brooding of eggs by birds), sociological (where the eggs of an ant or a bee are
3Autos: the (dependent) autonomy of the species/individual complex speciﬁc to the living.
4It does not replicate itself in a test tube; enzymes and substrates must be added under speciﬁc
conditions; and when it replicates chemically, there is no duplication of the entire DNA–enzyme–
substrate system (the enzymes degrade, the substrates run out).
13
Evolutionary Creativity
361

entrusted to the social organization), or ecological (where, for example, the eggs of
ﬁsh are fertilized in a shelter). We see therefore that at each level of existence—
cellular or muticellular—and at each stage of existence—birth, ontogenesis, adult
state—genos and phenon ineluctably call on each other. Every phenomenon of life
constitutes in a way a geno-phenomenon, a pheno-genomenon.
Self-organization is thus both double and one—unidual—that is to say, self-
(geno-pheno-)-organization. Geno-phenomenal uniduality means ﬁrst of all that
every geno-organization and every pheno-organization needs the dynamism of the
other, and that both need the dynamism of the self-organizing whole that they
co-constitute.
The progress of biology, starting with the discovery of the evolution of the living
world, reveals to us the mystery of plant and animal creativity, but the fear of
creationism has produced an explanatory ﬂattening with the notions of (random)
mutation and adaptation. Nevertheless, I need this term, creativity, without which
biological evolution and human history are seen trivially as due to mere determinism
and/or chance.
13.3
Our Reality Is Not Primary, It Is Emergent
How could the reality of our universe emerge from that which is devoid of all criteria
that deﬁne reality? Here, the notion of emergence provides a decisive clariﬁcation,
even if the notion itself is inexplicable. Emergence is a surprising systemic notion
that the sciences are beginning to integrate. Emergence is a type of new reality,
endowed with its own qualities and properties, and which is formed, constituted, and
concretized from the organizing assembly of elements not endowed with the
qualities and properties of this reality. Thus, living organization was constituted
and is constituted unceasingly starting from physico-chemical molecules which in
themselves do not have any property of life. Nevertheless, the organizing complexity
of living beings gives them qualities unknown to the molecules in isolation: self-
repair, self-reproduction, cognitive aptitudes. The reality of life is the result of the
complexity of its self-organization, which is in fact self-eco-organization; it needs its
environment from which to draw the necessary energies for its uninterrupted work
(which this work degrades unceasingly).
Our reality as individual beings with bodies and minds in a world of material
objects—plants, animals, houses, machines, cars, supermarkets—is emergent in its
very reality. This emergence is permanently ongoing from microphysical
constituents devoid of locality and where our time and our space are non-existent.
So the notion of emergence can help us to understand our doubly antagonistic feeling
of an absolute reality and the relative or weak reality of our reality. The reality of our
world emerged 15 billion years ago from a self-organizing process. The material
universe emerges unceasingly from microphysical elements, devoid of materiality,
362
E. Morin

but whose combination makes our materiality emerge.5 Matter is not a primary
reality, but an emergent reality. What we call decoherence is the phenomenon by
which the association of a large number of microphysical elements, past a certain
threshold, makes our spatio-temporal universe emerge.
Our spatio-temporal, physical, and biological reality is therefore obviously an
emergence from a strange reality that we apprehend with our words, our instruments
of detection, our observation and experimentation, but which escapes our logic. This
microphysical reality has very little reality compared to ours, but the latter depends
on this reality without reality. Microphysics gives us only indirect or metaphorical
approaches to something inconceivable and unnamable.
Time and space are emergences that appeared in and through the formation of the
universe. They are real, while having a reality depending on an unknown which is
neither time nor space (a “void”?) and which remains beneath our reality. At the
same time, our reality is absolute, in our pain as in our love (in our affectivity, as
Stéphane Lupasco has said), because the emergence of our world is a reality,
although very dependent on an “infra-world” endowed with another reality where
our time and our space have not yet emerged. This emergent reality constitutes a
literal reiﬁcation (at least to our senses and to our minds): “real”, from the Latin res
for “thing”. The notion of reality is reiﬁed in itself; our universe is a gigantic thing
made up of things separated from each other by time and space. Our reality is a
process of thingiﬁcation.
However, and here I take up an idea of Niels Bohr, which I have developed
elsewhere, where key paradoxes from microphysics are found as well in our
physical, biological, and human reality. Thus, the inseparability of what is separate
is found in a particular way in our world and at our scale; it is not only the separate
particle of microphysics that is inseparable from the “inseparable” wave; it is the
individual separated from the species and society that is at the same time inseparable
from the species and society. We are humans separated from our biological
ancestors, but we are also inseparable from them; we are separated from the animal
world, but we are inseparable from the process that stretches all the way from the
unicellular organisms to us, just as we are inseparable from the physical history of
the cosmos from which life originates. The most astonishing thing is that the
astrophysical conception of our cosmos not only supposes an underlying chaos,
but that this cosmos is supposed to have issued from what seems to have the least
reality: the quantum vacuum. Now this vacuum is said to be constituted by virtual
and inﬁnite energies, which, when actualized (following some strange event or
accident) produced the thermal deﬂagration metaphorically called the Big Bang.
Thus, what seems the least real, the vacuum, would be the source of our reality.
Thus, there is no reality in itself. There is, however, a self-organization of the
universe which produces its reality.
5Let us recall that for philosophy and materialist science, as well as for common sense, matter
seemed the ﬁrst fundamental reality.
13
Evolutionary Creativity
363

As Basarab Nicolescu6 afﬁrms, there are levels of reality, totally heterogeneous
among themselves, but also inseparable and interdependent. Moreover, there would
seem to be a permanent and invisible level of pre-reality, an infra- or super-reality
that is co-present with our universe, which for Buddhism, under the name of
emptiness or nirvana, is the supreme reality and which for us is that which escapes
reality but grounds realities. A Taoist-Buddhist thinker, such as Fang Yi Zhi,
speculated that samsara (our world) and nirvana were not two separate worlds,
but two polarities of the same reality. Nagarjuna went so far as to say, “As long as
you make a difference between samsara and nirvana you are in samsara”, as if to
indicate that nirvana is within samsara, just as samsara is within nirvana. If all
realities form reality, then reality is multidimensional (Pierre-André Terzian7). I
would say otherwise: We must hypercomplexify the idea of reality.
Hypercomplex Reality
The continuous and the discontinuous, the separate and the inseparable are them-
selves inseparable. Illogically, the real and the unreal are each contained in the other.
The fabric of our reality comprises layers, holes, and emergences which are
sub-logical, supra-logical, a-logical, extra-logical, one really does not know what
else...
Emergence is logically non-deducible: We can only observe it. It is not an
explanation, but a mystery proper to physical reality. Chaos is not only anterior to
cosmos; it is interior to the cosmos. Our cosmos is not only order: It is a permanent,
retroactive, and recursive dialogue between order, disorder, and organization.
Chance, this unknown, is omnipresent. Even in our perception of the human
universe, reality only obeys classical logic if we cut it into separate pieces.
The important question remains: Are we bound to, exiled or separated from,
indescribable realities? Do we participate in them without knowing it? In ﬂashes?
What relation could our minds have with an unknowable and ineffable reality?
Veriﬁed thought transmissions, premonitions, and veriﬁed predictive clairvoyances
are like holes in time (premonitions, clairvoyances) or in space (telepathy) which
suggest that our brains have the ability to participate tangentially or in ﬂashes in this
non-separated reality without time or space.
We exist between two inﬁnities, said Pascal. Human knowledge is carried out in a
middle band between these inﬁnities, a zone of shadows and ﬂickering light. It is by
holding to this band that we sense in our depths how the real exceeds the thinkable,
which fragments and dissolves into it. Outside this middle band, we cannot establish
our distinctions, our logic, our separations, and this extra-reality takes on the face of
chaos before sinking into emptiness, which itself enfolds a plenitude of
potentialities.
6Basarab Nicolescu is the founder of the International Center for Transdisciplinary Research and
Studies (CIRET).
7Pierre-André Terzian is a poet and playwright.
364
E. Morin

Reality is indeed hypercomplex: It comprises plurality, even heterogeneity,
reiﬁcation, the imaginary, uncertainties, the unknown, and ﬁnally, mystery.
The mystery is in the real, perhaps in the two senses of the word mystery:
1 something unknowable, 2 a secular/sacred ceremony where our lives play out
and are played out. In any case, within a reality woven of unreality, a reality both
absolute and illusory, suffering, enjoying, being born, living and dying, these
realities, so ﬂeeting and ephemeral, are our true human reality.
13.4
Autos Revealed and Hidden
It is by wanting to reduce living processes to physical–chemical processes that
molecular biology makes us discover the astonishing organizational autonomy of
cellular life and gives us access to the idea of an organization that organizes itself—
that is, self-organization. It is the approach that seeks to annihilate any idea of
autonomy of living matter that allows us to discover the autonomy of the living
machine. It is the search for elementary simplicity that leads us to a fundamental
complexity.
At the same time, however, we see that this biology neglects the self-organization
that it has revealed. Danchin’s book is telling in this respect. No other work better
demonstrates how molecular biology has been able to reconstitute a good portion of
the myriad cogs of the prodigious cellular machine and will undoubtedly reconstitute
its entire economy (Danchin 1978, pp. 107–263). Everything is there, almost: The
fact of self-organization is present, but what is missing is the idea of self-
organization.8
Thus, biology, and molecular biology in particular, brings to light the central
problem of the organization of living autonomy and of the autonomy of this living
organization, only immediately to fall back to the level of chemical interactions. It
brings to light processes of self-assembly, but remains at the level of molecular
8Let us recall (Morin 1977, Method 1, pp. 95–96) that the reductive conception proper to classical
physics atomizes beings and existence into their elementary units and makes of them “objects”
devoid of autonomy: It does not grasp the phenomenon of self-organization proper to natural
machine-beings, and which grounds the autonomy of physical beings like stars, atoms, and
whirlpools. Biological theory exceeds this understanding when it calls upon the organizational
framework of cybernetics (Morin 1973, p. 257). But the model used is that of the artiﬁcial machine
which is produced, constructed, and programmed from the outside (by humans). However, as we
have seen (Morin 1977, Method 1, pp. 165–166), “life includes the idea of machine in its strongest
and richest sense: a form of organization which both produces and reproduces itself. We can
conceive of living beings, from unicellular organisms to animals and humans, at once as heat
engines and chemical machines which produce all the materials, all the complexes, organs, and
features, all the behaviors, all the emergences of this multiple quality called life.... Life is a
polyvalent machine-like process that produces machine-beings, a process which is maintained by
self-reproduction.... The living being fulﬁlls and brings to fruition the idea of machine, while
overﬂowing it existentially and exceeding it biologically.”
13
Evolutionary Creativity
365

conﬁgurations. It brings to light a self-organization which, while presupposing them,
exceeds in richness and complexity any systems or cybernetic notions, but at the
same time it cannot provide an autonomous foundation for autonomy: it cannot
theoretically link together autonomy and dependence, and it emphasizes in extremis
the non-autonomous factors of autonomy. It recognizes and emphasizes the problem
of organization, but it lacks the organizational paradigm that would allow it to give
consistency to the ideas of feedback, emergence, and therefore of autonomy. It
retains only half of this fundamental two-sided truth: (1) All elementary phenomena
of life are strictly physico-chemical, and all global phenomena are organizational
emergences; (2) the organization produced by the elementary interactions retroacts
on them, controls them, governs them and produces an overall reality endowed with
its own qualities.
This organization, which depends on physico-chemical processes, is not pro-
duced by any external super-organization, which would be its deus pro machina: It is
a self-organization. It is indeed this self-organization that molecular, cellular, and
genetic biology shows us. But biological thinking does not manage to comprehend
the meaning of the preﬁx “self-”. And as long as we cannot conceive what “self”
means, the organizing autonomy of the living being is condemned, either to ﬂoat in
the vacuum like a ghost, or to let itself be dissolved by heteronomous
determinations.
13.4.1 The Emergence of Autos
An obviousness and a mystery lie hidden in the preﬁx “self-”. What is the autonomy
of organization and action that is both productive and produces the autonomy of an
individual being and of a living existence, while constituting a trans-individual
process of self-reproduction? Here is a problem deprived of a name, which has
only a preﬁx, and this preﬁx is most often asleep or forgotten. We lack a key concept
for the most obvious, most banal character of all life, from bacteria to Homo sapiens.
This concept exists in germinal form in the preﬁx “self-”. We must therefore ﬁrst
transform this preﬁx into a concept: autos. From then on, autos becomes the
sphinxlike word which poses us the great enigma of life.
The notion of autos must awaken and regenerate the preﬁx “self-”(auto- in
French), restoring to it its two vitally inseparable meanings: its direct meaning,
“the same” (idem), and its reﬂexive meaning, “oneself” (ipse). It thus designates
both the return of the same through the cycles of reproduction (idem) and the
emergence of individual beings (ipse), the identical (idem) which deﬁnes a species,
and the identity (ipse) which deﬁnes an individual. It gives a living meaning to the
terms of organization, production, reproduction: self-organization, self-production,
self-reproduction.
366
E. Morin

autos
the same (idem)
oneself (ipse)
the identic
identity
auto-reproduction
auto-organization
species
individual
Even before recognizing the concept, the problem of autos arises in the 1950s, not
in the heart of biology, but in a no man’s land patrolled by the advanced reﬂection of
cybernetics, the theory of systems, and the theory of automata.
1. The notion of self-organization appears as a key problem in three symposia on the
theme of Self-Organizing Systems (Yovits and Cameron 1960; Yovits et al. 1962;
von Foerster 1962).
2. von Neumann’s reﬂection on natural (living) automata had already led in the
1950s to the idea of self-reorganization. Going beyond the problem of self-
reproduction [cf. the posthumous publication of von Neumann (1966)], von
Neumann had discovered that what opposes natural automata to artiﬁcial
automata is the complexity of an organization which, tolerating, reabsorbing,
and correcting disorder, repairs and regenerates itself.9 Atlan was to draw the
fundamental consequence of the Neumannian discovery (Atlan 1972): Permanent
disorganization/reorganization
is
a
constitutive
character
of
living
self-
organization. Thus, a two-sided process emerges:
self-organization                self-reorganization
3. The idea of self-production emerges from the work of Maturana, Varela, and
Uribe (Varela et al 1974). These authors consider that auto-poiesis,10 i.e., the
capacity to self-reproduce in a permanent way, constitutes the central property of
living systems (Maturana and Varela 1972).
4. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the logic of living organization has raised
various questions since the 1960s (Gunther 1962; von Foerster 1974) and has
given rise to the problem of self-reference [cf. the formalization of Varela (1975)
based on the arithmetic of Spencer-Brown (1969)].
9Let us recall: von Neumann wondered why an artiﬁcial machine, whose constituents are extremely
reliable, is less reliable than the living machine whose constituent proteins are extremely degrad-
able. He discovered that this was due to the always degenerative character of the former
(a disturbance or an error is the cause of stoppage or irreversible degradation) and to the provision-
ally non-degenerative character of the latter, which is capable of tolerating, ﬁghting, and rectifying
the error by carrying out repairs and reorganizations.
10I have deﬁned production in the strong sense of “bringing to being and existence” (Morin 1977,
La Méthode 1, p. 157) and I use poiesis whenever I give a creative connotation to the term
production (ibid. p. 158).
13
Evolutionary Creativity
367

The notions of self-organization, self-reorganization, self-production, and self-
reference emerge separately, without much communication between them. Although
they concern a fundamental problem, they remain marginal and peripheral to the
theory of life. The idea of self-organization remains at the crossroads between
thermodynamics and biophysics, without having made a strategic breakthrough in
biological thought. After its emergence at the end of the 1950s, it has only attracted
the interest of a small number of adventurous minds and remains ignored in the great
theoretical and epistemological debates.
How can we explain the neglect and persisting marginality of such a fundamental
notion? It is because, unlike cybernetics, which can be effectively applied to
computing machines, theoretical models of self-organization cannot produce any
living machine, nor can they fertilize research in molecular biology which aims at
identifying chemical units and their interactions. The nascent idea of self-
organization is still too abstract for empirical research, too premature for practical
application. Moreover, it is not yet itself conceptually self-organizing. Nevertheless,
however late its birth, however old it may seem, self-organization remains a new
idea, hardly recognized and explored. The idea of auto-poiesis is still too localized in
one school of thought. It has isolated itself by insisting on the idea of closure, at a
time when, on the contrary, the idea of the openness of living systems was spread-
ing.11 The idea of self-reference, in its necessarily formalizing elaboration, still
hovers over life without knowing how to embody it.
13.4.2 The Constellation of Autos
All these notions—self-organization, self-reorganization, self-reproduction, self-ref-
erentiality—have not yet attained to a real existence. They are still separate, with
little or no communication. In fact, however, they call for and imply one another, and
ask to be associated in a macro-conceptual constellation. This constellation is indeed
constitutive of the macro-concept of autos, which gives principle and consistency to
what is at the same time:
self-organization                   self-reorganization
self-reference
self-production                     self-reproduction
We will explore and elaborate on the notion of autos, taking care:
11I have already indicated (Morin 1977, La Méthode 1, p. 210) and I will show again later that
openness and closure are two inseparable notions and cannot be posed as alternatives.
368
E. Morin

– not to conﬁne autos to one of these terms,
– to conceive in autos both the dimension of reproduction (idem) and that of the
individual being (ipse), but without reducing autos to the Linnean cut of species/
individual,
– not to forget the relation of independence/dependence between autos and oikos,
that is to say the self-eco relation.
From Self to Autos
We have now to make the conceptual leap from the physical to the bio-logical where
at the same time:
– Self becomes Autos;
– existence becomes life;
– being becomes an individual;
– the living generates itself from the living.
13.5
The Unity of geno
phenomenal Duality
13.5.1 The geno
phenomenal Organizing Loop
Weiss emphasizes the idea of global dynamism when he notes that the correspon-
dence between differences in the arrangement of DNA sequences and differences in
the morphological characteristics of an organism does not explain the morpho-
genetic dynamism by which conﬁgurations such as eyes, hair, etc., are constituted:
“How can discrete units such as genes (...) lead to an organization if they are not
nested in a reference system (itself already) organized, of which they are the
constitutive elements, but the global dynamism of which they must undergo in
return?” (Weiss 1974, p. 117).
We must grasp the inseparability of genos and phenon, not only in terms of
interaction and interdependence, but also in the dynamic totality of a recursive
organization. Let us recall (Morin 1977, p. 187): Any process is recursive whose
ﬁnal states or effects produce the initial states or causes. A recursive organization is
an organization that produces the elements and effects necessary for its own (re)-
generation and existence. It is thus organizer-of-itself. Living organization is a
machine-like organization; it is recursive in the sense that its organized products
are necessary to the reconstitution and operations of this very organization, and are
therefore organizing. From this point forward, the idea that the product co-produces
its producer takes on a non-absurd meaning. In this double organization, the
organized is not only organizer, but necessarily contributes to the organization of
its organizer. Generative organization is in a sense the organization of the phenome-
nal organization, which co-organizes the organization that organizes it.
13
Evolutionary Creativity
369

The whole consists precisely in an auto-(geno-pheno)-organization, where the
generated is necessary to the (re)generation of the generating.
We must therefore not think in linear terms:
genos 
phenon
but in a loop:
genos 
phenon
and enlarge this loop further by including oikos:
genos
phenon
oikos
which constitutes the
geno
pheno
eco-organizing
relation, where each of the terms participates in the regeneration of the others.
This does not mean that there is symmetry or equivalence of the action of genos on
phenon and that of phenon on genos. Thus, there is no informational marking of the
protein on the DNA (contrary to the "Lyssenkian" idea), but there is co-organizing
feedback of the proteins on the DNA, in particular in the case of DNA repair and
excision proteins. More broadly, it is not only the protein envelope, but the whole
phenomenal organization of the living being that is indispensable to the action,
duplication, repair, and regeneration of genes. So we see the recursive process
whereby the action of the genes is regulated by cellular organization, which is
regulated by the action of the genes.
Everything that is self-organizing is grounded in a recursive geno-phenomenal
dynamism. Thus, living machinery includes the regulation of the regulated on the
370
E. Morin

regulator (homeostasis being necessary for the regeneration of the loop that
generates it) as it includes the productive action of the product on the producer.
If we now consider not only the living being, but also the cycle of reproductions,
we see that this cycle produces individuals which, while constituting themselves by
means of relatively autonomous geno-phenomenal loops, are indispensable
moments for the continuation of this cycle. There is thus a double loop: The
generative loop is inscribed in the phenomenal loop that it produces, but the same
phenomenal loop, while producing the continuation of the generative cycle, is
inscribed in the generative loop that precedes and succeeds it. Thus, the generative
(cycle of reproductions) produces the phenomenal individuals which produce this
generative cycle.
Finally, generative autonomy depends on the existential autonomy of the phenon,
which depends on generative autonomy. The autonomy of living self-organization is
the product of this double organizational dependence of the generative on the
phenomenal and of the phenomenal on the generative, a mutual dependence
which builds the autonomy of the whole, and thereby of both. Each one, in this
sense, constitutes a capital moment of the other, while accomplishing its own loop.
Thus, genos and phenon are not only inseparable, but co-organizers of each other in
a process of self-organizing recursion.
13.5.2 Computing Apparatus and Geno-Phenomenal
Transformations
The “biological revolution” has revealed to us that living organization is informa-
tional/communicational; DNA contains hereditary “information”; this information
“programs” the activities of the cell via a DNA RNA protein communication device.
But the notions of information, memory, knowledge, and program only make sense
within an apparatus that resurrects memory, organizes knowledge, transforms infor-
mation into a program, and decides on action, and this computing apparatus cannot
be dissociated from the organizing activity of the entire living being. Thus, the genes
are part of the computing apparatus, which is an integral part of the cellular being. It
is the whole of every cell that constitutes a being, a “machine”, and a computing
apparatus.
The computing apparatus of the cellular being becomes generative by
transforming information (potential negentropy) into programs and strategies (orga-
nizational negentropy) that govern the phenomenal actions and performances,
which, themselves essential to the existence of the generative apparatus, participate
in the regeneration of the generator. Thus, starting from the computing apparatus, an
unceasing cycle of conversion of generative praxis into phenomenal praxis and vice
versa takes place, is generated and regenerated.
The unity of duality: Let me recapitulate what makes their unity: genos and
phenon belong to a unity, the autos, of which they are, by their association in a
loop, the two necessary constituents; the recursive unity that is born from their
conjugation makes them indissociable. Moreover, each in its own way is constitutive
13
Evolutionary Creativity
371

of the other, participates in the nature of the other, and each, via permanent
computation, is transformable into the other. Living self-organization constitutes
indeed a geno-phenomenon, a pheno-phenomenon.
13.6
The Duality of the Unity
The deep unity of autos should not hide from us the deep duality between genos and
phenon. Let us recall what has already been said. On the side of genos, the terms:
species, germen, phylum, genotype, DNA, reiteration, reproduction, invariance,
stability, closure; on the side of phenon: individual, soma, phenotype, protein,
existence, death.
The duality does not appear only between nucleic acids and proteins (the one as
long polymers with an always identical helical structure, the other as molecules with
very varied three-dimensional structures; the one stable, the other unstable; the one
able to duplicate itself, the other to combine itself); it is not only in the structural/
functional difference between karyoplasm and cytoplasm. It is not, in short, only
substantial and organizational. It is also an apparently ontological duality between
two dimensions of reality.
The realm of genos is a realm of the virtual, of potential, of the past, of the future;
it is below and beyond life itself; it is below and above phenomena; it is, in
Castoriadis’s words, “much more than real without being real” (Castoriadis 1978,
pp. 47–48). The realm of the phenon is in the present, the actual, the immediacy of
existence; in it emerge individuality, subjectivity; however, precarious and
condemned to death from birth, it emerges for a moment between two nothingnesses
and seems therefore to be only epiphenomenon.
The time of genos is at the same time the slow time of indeﬁnite becoming and the
time of the return to the inﬁnite. The time of the phenon is that of instants which
follow one another irreversibly and it is inscribed in ﬁnitude... With phenomena,
there is enjoyment and suffering, but where there is only gene, there is no delight...
It seems therefore that there are in genos and in phenon two ontologies, two
heterogeneous logics. And yet these two ontologies, these two logics communicate
in and through the uninterrupted translation between two languages, the language of
the “code” of the four purine and pyrimidine nucleotides of DNA and the language
of the twenty amino radicals. It is in this ongoing communication between
genosphere and phenosphere that the geno-phenomenal uniduality, that is to say
the self-organization itself, is woven.
13.6.1 Symbiotic Uniduality
The ﬁrst cellular beings came from a very long pre-biotic history associating
nucleotides and amino acids in an increasingly stable and functional way (Eigen
1971; Danchin 1978, pp. 301–316): the former, duplicating, becoming capable of
regenerating and reproducing the association; the latter, transformable, ensuring its
372
E. Morin

exchanges and nutrition; and the whole, having become one, found itself endowed
with a bundle of emerging qualities unknown to each of the associates: life. We can
thus see that the idea of symbiosis (complementary interdependence of two partners
of different nature) corresponds to a certain extent to the type of complementarity
that is instituted between genos and phenon, the difference with symbiosis itself
being that it is not a question of two living “beings” associating, but of two
heterogeneous entities whose symbiosis precisely constitutes one living being.
This reservation being made, autos can be considered as a quasi-symbiotic
complementarity between these two entities, each of which has become indispens-
able to the being, existence, and organization of the other. As we have seen, the
phenon is necessary for the generativity of the genos, just as the genos is necessary
for the phenomenality of the phenon. The one brings its invariant capital, the other its
thermodynamic machinery. The one brings the principle of duplication; the other
brings the aptitude to metamorphoses. One brings closure on the generic identity; the
other brings opening to the environment. It is what opposes the genos to the phenon
which unites them, the closure of the ﬁrst on its hereditary capital, the opening of the
second on the external universe. The one brings its resistance to random agitation,
the other brings its sensitivity to events. The generative is paralytic, the phenomenal,
blind. The generative preserves, the phenomenal consumes; the generative
conceives, the phenomenal consumes and is consumed. This leads to an extreme
fragility of existence and an extreme constancy of regeneration and reproduction.
Hence, the autos is at the same time open and closed, invariant and variable, at once
uniting and dissociating the ephemeral and the durable through the conjunction/
disjunction of two temporalities, hence the rebirth of the ancestral past in the
individual present, which is at the same time the production by the present of a
future reﬂecting the past.
In this symbiosis, the virtual genos, escaping from “reality”, enjoys a kind of
infra-supra-mortality, neither immortality nor amortality, but transmortality; the
phenon, on the other hand, is all “reality” but also all mortality and their union is
thus a ﬁghting union against and through death.
13.6.2 Internal Competition and Antagonism
Genos and phenon are united in an almost symbiotic way and, in unicellular
organisms, the two processes—one dedicated to reproduction, the other dedicated
to individual autonomy, one “altruistic”, the other “egoistic”—seem to be indistinct,
and differentiate only when sexual reproduction takes place. They will differentiate
themselves more and more clearly when reproduction will be carried out by
specialized organs and when individual autonomy will have a neuro-cerebral appa-
ratus. From then on, they become competitors, not only in the sense that they will
“run together” without merging, but also in the sense that they can enter into
competition.
However, already at the cellular level, it is conceivable that the symbiotic genos/
phenon relationship originally and structurally includes features of mutual
13
Evolutionary Creativity
373

subjugation and parasitism.12 One can even think that in the double enslavement that
has become symbiotic, the nucleic entity is in a way “master”; it monopolizes the
genetic memory, the organizing knowledge, and its trans-mortal character is based
on the mortality of proteins that degrade and renew themselves unceasingly. The
protein complex thus seems dedicated to work, obedience, and death. Is this already
the model of the domination of knowledge/power over work and execution—the
immemorial source of our social hierarchies? Or is it rather our anthroposocial
hierarchical model that I am projecting onto cellular organization? We must note
here that, at the cellular level, the symbiosis is so strong that the unity of the being
transcends the subjugation of the proteinic by the nuclear. And, in any case, the
antagonistic potentiality included in the association between the two entities is
necessary to the constitution of this unity itself. Thus, from the “opposition” between
rigid order, of which DNA is the citadel, and the turbulent agitation of the Kutos is
born and reborn unceasingly the recursive organization of the cellular being: In the
same way, the opposition between the closure of the genos and the opening of the
phenon generates the necessarily open/closed character of living organization.
13.6.3 The Struggle to the Death
The genos/phenon antagonism can even take, in animal life, the face of a struggle to
the death. Whereas unicellular organisms, and even many multicellular organisms,
could live indeﬁnitely and only die from the accumulation of “noise” and disorder
within their organization, it seems that for insects, ﬁsh, birds, and mammals, death is
genetically
determined,
either
by
a
“programming”
for
aging,
or
by
a
“deprogramming” of the processes of resistance to aging. Everything seems to
indicate that beyond a certain time (two years for the mouse, ﬁfteen years for the
dog), the genos abandons the phenon to its disintegration and even triggers the
process of physical liquidation.
Conversely, mammals show anti-reproductive states or behaviors in conditions of
food shortage or demographic excess: famine amenorrhea, the almost automatic
interruption of procreation, the devouring of the eggs by the genitors. The devouring
of their own litter by female dogs or cats are perhaps “aberrations” resulting from the
denaturing conditions of domestication, but these aberrations can also be revealing
of the deep virtual conﬂict between genos and phenon. Besides, in apparently normal
conditions for the observer, lynxes, lions, or male baboons have been seen devouring
their newborns.
12Thus, it is conceivable that RNA, a kind of self-replicating proto-virus, could have enslaved an
enzymatic ensemble, allowing it to reproduce and making this proto-cytoplasm (cyto—kutos ¼ cav-
ity) its ecological niche; it is reciprocally conceivable that this proto-cytoplasm would have been
able to use the organizing potential of P RNA for the maintenance in memory of the processes of
exchanges and transformations that are necessary for it.
374
E. Morin

In any case, we see that, in mammals, primates, and ﬁnally in humans, there can
be an oscillation between the tendency to sacriﬁce oneself, even to death, for one’s
offspring, and the tendency to sacriﬁce one’s offspring to oneself, even to death.
13.6.4 Dialogical Unity
It is not enough to recognize the unity or the complementarity of genos and phenon.
It is also necessary to realize that self-organization, like any organized unit or system
(Morin 1977, pp. 118–123), comprises in itself antagonism, virtual or active, among
its components and between its components and the whole. Here, we must conceive
at the same time the extraordinary ontological unity (because constitutive of a living
being) and the antagonism, which can become radical, between the logic of phenon
and the logic of genos. We must conceive at the same time that the antagonism
between these two logics is not only disintegrating of their unity, but constitutes a
necessary ingredient of it.
Let me repeat: The term of autos takes its unity, its stability, its distinctive
features only if we give it the recursive movement that assembles these different,
heterogeneous, symbiotic, competing, parasitic, complementary, and enemy terms
into its own loop-unity. The problem is not so much to recognize the inseparable
character of genos and phenon, which is not disputed by anyone. It is to be able to
consider without prejudice the biological mystery of their unity and duality which,
like the sacred mystery of homoiesis, always risks being betrayed by simpliﬁcation,
either when the two are reduced to one, or when the one is split into two. It is
therefore necessary not to cease conceiving one in two, two in one: This is why I
speak of uniduality and introduced the idea of a dialogic, a logic of one in two, a
double logic in one, whose two terms are at the same time irreducible to one another
and inseparable one from the other.
13.6.5 The Republic of the Complex: Between the Empire
of the Genes and the Empire of the Environment
Geneticism and environmentalism, while ﬁghting each other, have in common the
annihilation of the phenomenal autonomy of the individual. The more they ﬁght over
causal authority, the less they leave to the living being itself, which, laminated
between genos and oikos, is no more than a thin ﬁlm that separates them. Incapable
of recognizing self-determination and self-causality, their simplifying logic crushes
autos, either under the determinism and external chance of the empire of the
Environment, or under the determinism and superior chance of the empire of the
Genes. Living beings thus appear as toys and puppets whose spring and strings
always come from elsewhere than themselves. It is certainly true that genetic
determinism comes from the past and that ecological determinism comes from the
external universe. But this means rather that self-causality is produced, not ex nihilo,
but by and through external determinism and determinism from the past, both of
13
Evolutionary Creativity
375

which, in the very game of self-organization, transform each other into self-
determination without the one ceasing to remain anterior and the other external.
Thus the problem is not only to recognize the phenomenal autonomy of living beings.
The problem is especially to think this autonomy in the paradox of its dependence
relative to the Empire of the Genes and the Empire of the Environment, both of
which not only crush self-causality with their own dominating causality, but allow it
and co-produce it.
It is not a question of reducing or underestimating the capital importance of oikos
and genos. I have indicated that eco-causality is not just an anonymous external
causality and that it plays a co-programming and co-organizing role in self-causality.
I indicated that geno-causality is interior to self-causality while being prior to the
individuals who succeed each other in the chain of generations. Moreover, I have
begun to indicate that living individuals constitute emergences that retroact on the
conditions of their formation, that they are endowed with the quality of being, that
some of them, having a neuro-cerebral apparatus, develop their autonomy by
becoming capable of acquiring, capitalizing, and exploiting experience as well as
elaborating strategies of knowledge and behavior. But I have also already indicated
that this autonomy is based on a geno-dependence, since the neuro-cerebral appara-
tus produced in an innate way functions in and through genetically conditioned
cellular interactions, as well as on the basis of an eco-dependence, since learning can
only be formed in an environment.
Living autonomy, whether considered from the point of view of the individual or
of the autos as a whole, requires a double dependence. It is the closure of the genos
which, by locking out individual experience from the matri/patrimonial inheritance,
prevents the invasion of determinism and external chance and ensures the autonomy
of the being with regard to the environment. Conversely, it is the opening of the
phenon to the environment which allows individuals, especially if they have a neuro-
cerebral apparatus, to build up their own experience. It is this closed/open neuro-
cerebral apparatus which uses external determinism and chance for its strategies.
Thus, geno-dependence and eco-dependence feed the production and the develop-
ment of the autonomy of the individual being, without the latter ceasing to depend
on it.
13.7
Generativity and Genesis
There is in genos, in living generativity, something both repetitive and genesis-like,
which corresponds to the two aspects under which we conceive of genetic capital:
memory and program.
13.7.1 Generativity and Genesis
Genesis is what gives birth to organization from non-organization; it transforms
agitation into motricity, the dispersive into the concentric, contrary movements into
376
E. Morin

loops, and turbulence into being (Morin 1977, p. 225 ff.). Living generativity, for its
part, constantly overcomes disorganizing processes, uses them and transforms them
into reorganizing processes and, in this sense, it can be considered as an indeﬁnitely
renewed, organized, and regulated genesis. But it is obviously in reproduction that
the genesis-like character of living generativity is vividly manifested. Asexual
cellular self-reproduction creates two beings from one. Sexual reproduction creates
a being that is not only new, but new in relation to its ancestors. Although it unites
two genetic heritages, the recombination of this dual heritage is original. Thus, the
developments of genos, via the developments of sexuality, are at the same time the
development of the powers of genesis.
13.7.2 The Resurrection of the Past
While involving production, generation, and genesis, genos is at the same time
repetition of the same, a restarting of the old, a resurrection of the bygone. The
new and original being of which I have just spoken is certainly singular in its genetic
combination, but there is no element of this combination which (except for acciden-
tal mutations) does not come from its ancestors. All reproduction, asexual or sexual,
cellular or organismic, is the result of a memory; it takes on the character of
remembrance, that is to say of reproduction/resurrection of the past, and reproduces
this memory.
The ontogeny of a multicellular being even constitutes a kind of remembrance,
from the cellular state, of the history of the phylum. Of course, ontogeny does not
“reproduce” phylogeny, but one cannot say that its process has no analogy with that
of phylogeny. Everything happens as if the still extremely obscure process of
ontogeny (where the ideas of “program” and “chreodes”13 are still only indicative
arrows) included a dimension of recollection which, like any recollection, includes
failures, errors, shortcuts, and abbreviations. We can use this term of recollection
since we can consider genetic inscription as a kind of memory. But it is a completely
different recollection from that of our cerebral recollections, which are imaginary
representations. Genetic recollections are not images, but practical actions, which are
carried out in the image of past actions. Thus, ontogenetic “recollection” produces,
not the unreal image-memory of a dead past, but a real living being where this past is
resurrected.
Everything happens, therefore, as if ontogenesis produces, in the case of parthe-
nogenesis, the resurrection of the progenitor in another being, and in the case of
sexual reproduction, the resurrection by snippets and fragments, associated with
chance, of traits proper to each ascending lineage whose assembly determines a new
and original being.
13Waddington so names the moving morphogenetic paths that embryonic development seems to
follow (Waddington 1977, pp. 106–112).
13
Evolutionary Creativity
377

Recollection
Genesis
Past
Present
Future
Any living act, in its genetic character, produces a present referring to the past and
propelled toward the future. Every living act involves both recollection and genesis,
including genetic mutation, which does not abolish all memory, but modiﬁes it. Each
birth is the re-presentation—the presentiﬁcation—of a past, its reinscription in
becoming, and in a way produces the regeneration of time in and through the genesis
of a being.
13.8
Biological Oscillation, a Principle of Uncertainty
Instead of retreating from the challenge, we must ceaselessly confront the problem of
the individual, which is at the same time focal point and ﬁeld, particle and system,
nothing and everything. We must conceive of the individual which, totally depen-
dent on genos and oikos, is at the same time the most autonomous, the most
individualized of beings.
As Simondon put it, “the individual cannot give an account of itself from itself”
(Simondon 1964, p. 71). But one neither reduce the individual to the non-individual,
because, as Simondon also says, “the individual is at the same time result and
medium of individuation” (Simondon 1964, p. 272). Here, we have a dazzling
paradox of complexity, where the individual demands simultaneously to be
conceived intrinsically (as an individual) and extrinsically (in relation to the
non-individual).
The insufﬁciencies and weaknesses of our understanding, i.e., our tendency either
to confuse or to simplify, lead us to make of the individual either everything or
nothing. But the key notion of the individual must remain something rather
ﬂickering.
13.8.1 Biological Individuality and the Living Individual
Everything that tends to neglect the discrete in favor of the continuous, the random in
favor of the determined, emergence in favor of initial conditions, autonomy in favor
of dependencies, self-organization in favor of external determinism, being and
existence in favor of pattern and schema, tends to neglect the individual.
Every approach that tries to escape from uncertainty and ambiguity (that is to say,
from complexity) tends to bypass and forget the problem of the individual. From that
point on, the individual always tends to be reduced to the external general or to the
superior generic.
Until the middle of the twentieth century, individuality was anesthetized where it
was most immediately evident: in behavior and the animal organism. The individual
seemed to have to be reduced—or dissolved—into its components and determinants.
378
E. Morin

However, while ethology rediscovered the individual in the observation of higher
animals within their natural environment, molecular biology discovered individual-
ity at levels of unsuspected radicality: the cell, the molecule; it made it appear where
it was not sought: in the gene; and it ﬁnally resurrected the individual where it was no
longer seen: in the organism.
We know today that in any living population, including unicellular organisms, no
two individuals are exactly alike, even when they have an identical genotype. Each
individual therefore has, as a constitutive trait of individuality, at least one tiny but
irrefragable difference that makes it original among its fellow creatures. Individual
difference increases with the evolution of multicellular beings. The environment
(which plays an ever greater role in individual development), sexuality (which
renews and varies the gene combinations) are both machines for making difference
and singularity. Singularity increases and differences unfold in the higher animals.
Each being is singular in its genetic capital and can be unique forever within its
species.14 Each being is singular in its morphology, in its anatomy, physiology,
temperament, behavior, and intelligence. With Homo sapiens, differences of all
kinds, from individual to individual, are extremely strong, even in extremely closed
isolates, much stronger than the statistically established differences between ethnic
groups or races (Neel 1970).
Individual singularity does not only concern the morphology, anatomy, and
physiology of the organism, but its molecular constitution as well. Each protein
has its singularity in relation to other proteins in the same cell, in relation to the same
protein in other species, and ﬁnally in relation to the same protein in individuals of
the same species.
We thus see this character of individualization and individuality, which is singu-
larity, emerging and imposing itself at all levels of organization and constitution of
the living being, whether molecular, genetic, organismic, or behavioral. We even see
that this singularity produces, not only biological individuality, but chemical (molec-
ular) individuality.
This singularity is inseparable from a constellation of features of individuality. To
say singularity is at the same time to say originality, even unicity. It is also to say
difference—the difference of one individual from another, the difference/gap com-
pared to an average or ideal type. As I have just said, these remarkable features
of individuality—singularity, difference, originality, uniqueness—concern all levels
of self-(geno-pheno)—organization. However, given the theoretical inconsistency of
the notion of the individual, simplifying principles tend to pump them out of the
individual as a whole and to attribute them either to the genos, to the environment, or
to randomness.
14“By considering only a very small segment of our genome (1/300), we can already afﬁrm that
each man is unique on earth. (...) If we consider the sixty other genetic systems that also have
variants, we see that there have probably never been two similar men” (Dausset 1978, p. 7).
13
Evolutionary Creativity
379

Certainly, we have here not only recognized, but afﬁrmed genetic, random, and
environmental determination in the very constitution of the individual. But is it
necessary for all that to withdraw individuality from the individual?
13.8.2 Individuality and Individual
The general drives out the individual. The generic, by monopolizing individuality,
hides the individual. The problem here is not to remove the singularity/originality
from the genos to restore it to the phenon. The original/singular determination of the
gene must be fully recognized in the originality/singularity of the individual. The old
conception of the species made it a general term whose principles and rules apply to
all the individuals belonging to it. The new conception, resulting from the progress
of genetics and molecular biology, links the general and the singular by emphasizing
generic singularity. The generic is singular because it is the perpetrator and perpetu-
ator of singularity. Genes constitute a capital and a source of singularities, and this is
why the genos carries within it a principle of individuation.
However, it is necessary to recall again that this genetic individuation is not only
the producer, but also the product of the individual, who is therefore not only the
product, but also the co-producer of the individuation. That is to say that we cannot
return individuality exclusively to the camp of genos. It is necessary to conceive in
recursive terms the articulation between the two different levels (genos and phenon)
of singularity/originality: The individual accomplishes and actualizes the singularity
of a genetic heritage, which in turn preserves, transmits, and multiplies the singular-
ity of individuals. The individual is not the singular specimen of a general type; it is
the concrete accomplishment of a process of individuation. The individual is speciﬁc
in the same movement that the species is individualizing. It is not only the individual
that has the characters of the species, it is the species that has the characters of the
individual.
On the other hand, and especially, one should not confuse singularity and
individuality. Singularity, originality, and difference constitute only one dimension
of living individuality and this dimension, though certainly necessary, is completely
insufﬁcient to give an account of the living individual. The individual is not only the
singularity of a singularity. It is also a living being existing in the phenomenal world.
The individual is not deﬁned only, even mainly, by differences and originality. It is
also deﬁned by qualities of being and existence, themselves inseparable from
qualities of organizing autonomy. In other words, one cannot reduce the individual
to singular individuality.
Thus, the individual possesses within itself a capital of singularities and a
principle of individuation which precede and exceed it, but its quality of individual
rests also on its autonomy of being and existence.
380
E. Morin

13.8.3 Individual Autonomy
The biological notion of the individual is thus inseparable from the self-organizing
and existential autonomy of the living machine-being. This autonomy is quite
original in the physical universe, and (although and because it is much more
eco-dependent) it is much more autonomous than that of other physical machine-
beings, both natural and artiﬁcial. Now, when physiology focused on the animal
body to recognize its organization, it effected an initial dissociation between the idea
of organism and the idea of individual. Claude Bernard admirably expressed, in the
same sentence, both the unity and the dissociation between the two terms: “The
living being forms an organism and an individuality”. It would be enough to push the
unifying virtue of this “and” to conceive the living being as an organismic individu-
ality, an individual organism. In fact, this “and” constituted a frontier for a whole
century. In these conditions, the isolated idea of organism remained marked by a
profound insufﬁciency: the organism as corporality deprived of individuality, even if
it has, according to Cannon’s expression, a “wisdom of body”. The individual
dissolves all the more when one considers the organism as a sample of a generic
type, obeying a program that precedes and transcends it. The organism becomes
from then on the concretized species. The individual disappears in favor of an
anonymous machinery and an abstract dependence. However, the fundamental
progress of physiology allowed us not only to know the organization of the organ-
ism, but also, from Claude Bernard to Cannon, to recognize the autonomy of this
organization.
On the other hand, the individual autonomy of behavior was for a long time
repressed by behaviorism, even for higher animals.15 But this autonomy came back
in force under the joint effect of the development of genetics and ethology. The self-
causality of animal behavior was ﬁnally emphasized when ethology broke with
behavioral experiments in artiﬁcial environments (zoo, laboratory) to observe natu-
ral behavior. At ﬁrst, it was only the genos (the “instinct”, the “genetic program”)
that was credited, and the genericity paradigm took over from the external causality
paradigm to make the individual the puppet of a genetic program. Then, in the
sixties, a more complex ethological vision ﬁnally put the accent on the individual
qualities of intelligence, sensitivity, and affectivity.
While the individual comes back from above (superior animals endowed with an
evolved neuro-cerebral apparatus), it emerges at the lowest level of living existence.
But this level is at the same time the fundamental level. Indeed, we discover in the
unicellular organism not only traits of singularity which differentiate it from its
fellow creatures, but also an individual being computing and deciding by itself and
for itself.
15Behaviorism emphasized external determinism and not internal elaboration: In the stimulus/
response pair, the response is seen more as the product of the stimulus than as the fruit of individual
computation. Of course, the existence of an inner causality is not denied and is sometimes even
highlighted in the processes of behavioral reinforcement, but it remains secondary to exocausality,
which has led contemporary ethologists to denounce behaviorism as the doctrine of the empty
organism (cf. in particular Lorenz 1977).
13
Evolutionary Creativity
381

13.8.4 The Individual Being
Self? This word both points to and brings about the reuniﬁcation between the idea of
autonomous living organization and the idea of individual being.
Who says “Self”? It is immunology which ﬁnally brings to light (Grabar 1947)
and develops (Jerne 1969) this notion of Self, a notion which, though absent from
biological theory until then, is fundamental for any conception of the living individ-
ual. The Self is not only an idiosyncrasy (a particular disposition which makes each
individual react in a personal way to the action of external agents) in the response to
microbial aggressions; it is not only an individual originality in the production of
individualized antigens; it is not only the singular unity of individual molecules in an
individual being. The immunological idea of the Self manifests itself as a self-
afﬁrmation of identity, not only molecular, but global, of a character not only
defensive, but possibly offensive and fundamentally organizing, of a being that
recognizes itself as itself, and organizes itself from itself and acts for itself (Dausset
1978, p. 7).
From this point on, the idea of autonomy (of organization, of computation, of
decision, of action, of behavior) must no longer be juxtaposed to the idea of the
individual. These two ideas henceforth call each other forth, combine, and identify
with one another. By revealing the Self, immunology reunites the organism and the
individual. In this way, the individual being rightfully forces its way into the
biological sciences. But it is still only in the immunological compartment, and
communications are rareﬁed from compartment to compartment.
13.8.5 The Non-Elementary Individual
We have seen the emergence of non-elementary—that is to say complex—aspects of
living individuality at all the levels of self-(geno-pheno)-organization. They are
inscribed in the heart of genos, which is conservative of singularities and generator
of individuation. But they also concern the individuality of the individual.
The individuality of the individual is not merely a matter of discontinuity, sponta-
neity, randomness, and actuality; it is not only singularity, originality, and difference
with regard to other individuals, including members of the same or similar species; it is
not only the individuality of the organism and its behavior. The individuality of the
individual is also in the being and existence of oneself. This “oneself” cannot be
identiﬁed with autos, although the latter includes it. What is this “oneself”?
13.9
Reason and Unreason in Life
13.9.1 The First Level of Rationality
At the ﬁrst level, life appears to us as a marvel of rationality: As compared with all
our industrial and administrative enterprises, the living being presents itself as an
automated combination superior in economy, efﬁciency, functionality, and
382
E. Morin

reliability. The environment is the permanent spur of this rationality in the form of
“natural selection”: The latter eliminates not only the “bad” genes, but also the
second-choice genes, and privileges high proﬁtability along with the extra-quality
genes: savings in the time budget, excess birth-rate compared to mortality, minimi-
zation of effort and risk...
13.9.2 The Second Level of Irrationality
However, at second glance, we realize that the living economy contains and
produces not only competitions, antagonisms, egoisms, and disorders which seem
very irrational, but also wasteful, useless, luxurious, parasitic, and harmful... Does
mating really need colors and ornaments, cock’s crests, peacock’s feathers, or
incredible and endless courtship rituals? Is it necessary for sexual reproduction to
indulge in a senseless waste of germinal cells, seed, and sperm, and for each
ejaculation to disperse one hundred and eighty million spermatozoa? Couldn’t all
these insects, agitated by Brownian motion, proceed in straight lines, or at least take
a few precautionary zigzags? Isn’t the marvelous process of chlorophyll assimila-
tion, which is so far ahead of our technologies, nevertheless underproductive, ﬁxing
as it does only one percent of solar radiation as chemical energy?
13.9.3 The Third Level: Complex Rationality
However, it would be just as superﬁcial to substitute the vision of a generalized
functionality with that of a generalized waste.
We have seen that the integration of antagonisms, competitions, disorders,
freedoms, and egoisms produced an organization richer and superior to that of the
most rationalized artiﬁcial automatons. One can guess or verify that the waste caused
by egoistic competition can be paradoxically less than that of a programmed/
planned/uniﬁed organization, but where the latter stiﬂes individual initiative and
reacts very slowly to randomness. This means that it is more rational to tolerate/use
disorders/waste as by-products or components of complexity than to want to elimi-
nate them totally, which amounts to hyperwaste.
The bio-economy does not necessarily need high proﬁtability. The low energy
yield of chlorophyll assimilation is in fact a more rational “laziness” than a maxi-
malist activism would have been: Where there is full abundance of resources and
absence of competition, there is no need to improve systems largely sufﬁcient to the
needs.
Moreover, it appears that many characteristics which, from the point of view of a
narrow rationality, are useless, luxurious, and expensive can, in a broader vision,
prove to be necessary and vital. Thus, unused devices, or even activities that are
parasitic in normal circumstances in bacteria, can prove to be salutary in dangerous
situations or become a source of progress (Ninio 1979). Diversity, as we have seen,
has a greater selective value, because of the qualities it brings to a population, than a
13
Evolutionary Creativity
383

selection that would homogenize this population according to what is most efﬁcient
(cf. p. 40 f.). Let us remember that diversity, which abhors all homogenizing
rationalizations, is a source of evolution, development, and complexity.
More amply still, when one is situated at a complex level of vision, many
apparently irrational features are transformed into constituents of the only rationally
conceivable behaviors within a world that includes irrationality.
It is by dealing with randomness, not by ignoring it, that strategy becomes
rational. It is by living with disorder that living organization surpasses in rationality
an organization without disorder, but that is incapable of living.
It is therefore quite “reasonable” to squander as much seed as possible, to
minimize regulation... An apparent irrationality becomes the open rationality of a
system that must constantly confront the forces of destruction and death.
Finally, it is necessary to notice that life is not economy, on the one hand, and
waste on the other, but is played out at the same time on the double ground of
economy and waste. Thus, any living organization knows at the same time how to
save (accumulation of energy reserves) and to spend (useless movements and
actions). In the same way, the mad squandering of seed is at the same time an
economic operation. It accumulates informational redundancy by multiplying gen-
erative memory. This multiplication is not a hoarding of the most precious capital,
the genetic capital, in a closed box, but an all-out investment via dissemination.
13.9.4 The Fourth Level: The Reverse Side of Rationality:
Infra? Meta? Rationality
At the same time, complex rationality has a ﬂip side. It cannot totally absorb all of
the expense, waste, competition, conﬂict, antagonism, and disorder, although the
expense/waste is complementary to the economy, and the competition, antagonism,
and disorders are co-organizers. The complex economy of life integrates what
disintegrates it, without what disintegrates it ceasing to be disintegrating.
More deeply, life contains within itself the irrationality of the random situations
that it ﬁnds itself in and of the universe of which it is part. The hecatombs paid by the
survivors are not totally rationalizable. The fabulous expenditure of life is not totally
functional. It was discovered that “natural selection” retained not only useful traits,
but also useless traits, even handicaps, but which were drowned among other traits.
What’s more: There is something irrationalizable in the idea of being, of exis-
tence, and of living:
– being and existence are irrationalizable, not in their determinations, processes,
structures, and organizations, but intrinsically, as being and existence: There is no
reason why there should be something rather than nothing;
– individual egocentrism has something absurd, necessary though it is to the “will
to live”;
– the absence of any external and superior purpose to living concentrates irrational-
ity in the heart of life itself: Why live? Why struggle? To be defeated? Why
384
E. Morin

develop for death? So much effort, so much expenditure of energy, of work, of
strategies, of intelligence for a few moments of life, a few ﬂea jumps for the ﬂeas,
a few wing beats for the swallows...
Life is a strange and unstable mixture of rationality, a-rationality, irrationality,
and the unrationalizable, where each of these terms inter-communicate and inter-
contaminate. Life deﬁes the old rationalism that enclosed it in a merely functional
and economic vision or that rejected it as unworthy irrationality. But we must
understand that the elimination of the irrational is ultimately non-rational: To remove
the unreason of living is to remove the reasons for living.
13.9.5 Inoptimization
All this brings us back to a capital idea: the impossibility of deﬁning in an obvious
and clear way, as well as of governing in a “rational” way, what could be considered
a “real life”, a good life, the best of lives. Optimization is a technological concept
coming from the artifact and adapted to the artiﬁcial machine: It allows one to
determine a rational program according to clear and precise ends and an economy
functionality of the means. But as we have seen, it is impossible to optimize
complexity, and especially living complexity:
1. As complexity intrinsically involves chance and uncertainties, it is necessary to
link program and strategy: However, everything that involves chance and
innovation cannot be pre-optimized; the strategy can only randomly self-optimize
in the course of its development.
2. As the ends are uncertain, diverse, competing, and antagonistic, optimization
loses its foundations: How can these ends be satisﬁed together? Why favor one
over another? And when the ends change, wither away, are born, optimization
becomes pessimization, favoring obsolete ends and thwarting new ends that want
to be born.
An optimum can only be based on a clear and unequivocal distinction between
the good (optime) and the bad (pessime). Now, if the “evil” of life is disorder,
disintegration, and death, this “evil” is also an ingredient of life, and therefore also a
“good”, and it is impossible absolutely, totally, and always to oppose evil and good,
which maintain complex relations. Thus, Boltzmann’s demon works diabolically for
disunity (diabolo: that which disunites), but it works at the same time, without
wanting to, for Maxwell’s demon, which restores order from disorder, which in
return works for Boltzmann’s demon, since it spends energy... In the same way
Mephisto accomplishes, without wanting to, or rather by wanting the opposite, the
designs of the Lord, who on his side works as much for Mephisto as this one works
for him. Thus, just as it is very poor theory absolutely to oppose order and disorder, it
is very poor rationality absolutely to oppose the benign to the malignant. Finally, one
cannot optimize according to the present alone (to enjoy, to consume) or the future
13
Evolutionary Creativity
385

alone (to survive, to give life). The present/future relation is uncertain, and their
compromise is inoptimizable. It is thus impossible in the unequivocal and simple
sense of the term that concerns the complexity of the living.
13.9.6 Toward an Open Rationality
Here, I merely want to raise the problem of rationality. Let us note some questions
that emerge at this point:
1. Neither the physical universe nor life can be totally translated into a coherent
system of ideas. This impossibility of enclosing reality in the ideal must be
conceived as irrationalizability.
2. Can we know if this irrationalizability involves irrationality, infra-rationality,
meta-rationality, or supra-rationality?
3. Rationalization is what obscures and covers the problem of irrationalizability; it
identiﬁes the real and the rational, that is, the real and the ideal: It is the height of
idealism. The real escapes rationalization on all sides.
4. Life, like physis, but in its own way, unites in it the rationalizable and the
irrationalizable.
5. A low rationality rejects the irrationalizable. High rationality must recognize it: It
must work with/against the a-rational, the irrational, and perhaps contribute to the
supra-rational. The new rationality must be open, that is, open to the non-rational.
6. The new rationality must dissociate itself from and oppose rationalization which,
although it comes from the same source, is its real enemy: Rationalization is
closed ideation, closed coherence, closed logic; it wants to ﬁnd a “reason for
being” for all existence, all reality. It is more insane than irrationalism, since the
latter knows that it is irrational and that the madness of rationalization is to
believe that it is rationality.
13.9.7 Open Life
Complexity is not only the fundamental character of the organizational logic of life.
It is the only one that allows us to conceive of the living. Life cannot be reduced to
utility,16 economy, homeostasis, or adaptation, although it includes all these
dimensions. Living bursts through, not rationality, but any closed conception of
rationality.
16Von Bertalanffy said: “We must conceive that a large part of biological conduct (...) is beyond the
principle of utility, of homeostasis, of stimulus-response” (Bertalanffy in Buckley 1968, p. 26).
386
E. Morin

13.10 Living Creativity
The creativity of the physical universe is systemic: Its systems, resulting from the
organizing association of diverse constituents, create emergences and new qualities
unknown to the isolated elements. Life is born from such systemic creativity, from
the organizing association of innumerable and diverse molecular constituents and its
own qualities, including self-organization itself, are born from systemic creativity.
But once born, living self-organization has a new creativity, one able to create organs
and to transform organisms: living creativity.
13.10.1 Life Is a Creator of Creativity
There is a dialogic speciﬁc to living self-organization: One logic ensures the
invariance of the species as well as of the individual; the other allows creative
genetic reorganizations at the heart of the reproductive system, from which have
emerged the innumerable innovations of evolution: eukaryotic cells, multicellular
organisms, chlorophyll assimilation in plants that allows them to capture solar
energy, the ﬂoral explosion and, in animals, ﬁns, legs, wings, brain, nervous system,
liver, kidneys, etc.
Apparently, starting from reproduction, which perpetuates the identical and
opposes any modiﬁcation, the law of life should exclude any creative invention.
However, let us note that if, in relation to identical reproduction, which is a normal
phenomenon, innovative creation is a deviant, marginal, and rare phenomenon, it has
become the decisive motor of a bushy and luxuriant biological evolution, that is to
say of the very history of life.
Creativity manifests itself in the course of reproduction, that is to say in the
re-creation of a new living being; it can be stimulated by chance, by the integration
of a virus in the DNA that brings innovative information; it can above all be
stimulated by challenges from the environment. As soon as a new quality or a new
organ is created, these will spread by reproduction which, “normally” prohibiting the
new, puts itself at the service of the new, multiplying it, hence the myriad of plant
and animal species.
There are in nature, not only with animals but also with plants, prodigious forms
of knowledge linked to a form of creativity, such as the invention of ﬂowers which
“know” how to attract foraging insects, but this is also true for insects, as for birds
and many other species. The remarkable cases of plant cognition/creativity without a
brain or nervous system reveal to us that the cognition/creation link (where cognition
enables a creation that brings a new cognition) is inherent to living self-eco-organi-
zation, although it is only activated in extreme situations, almost always, it seems, in
response to a deadly challenge or a deep aspiration.
Creativity is carried out by associations and combinations. The intimate union of
two unicellular organisms, or rather the absorption of one by the other, will create the
eukaryotic cell with a double heredity, the second one in the mitochondrion, a
vestige of the absorbed cell. Single cells will unite durably in multicellular
13
Evolutionary Creativity
387

organisms, which will then diversify their cells. Chance, or the constraints of an
environment, must have played a role in the formation of multicellular organisms, a
collective grouping better armed against chance. Creativity is manifest in the
invention of an organ or an innovative reorganization with its own emergence.
The fabulous bushy developments of the plant and animal kingdoms show us what
Bergson called “creative evolution” and that we could also name “evolutionary
creativity”.
Since the ﬁrst cells, life has generated a proliferation of millions of species, of
which perhaps 8.7 million living species remain, including 2.2 million in the aquatic
environment. It has invented the most incredible shapes, of turtles, snails, octopuses,
scorpions; the most shimmering colors, the most extreme sizes, from bacteria
through aphids to elephants, from blades of grass to giant sequoias; the most
ingenious devices, such as the spider’s web; the most imaginative weapons, such
as the venom of the snake or hornet or the horn of the rhino. Through births,
including those of cells within a living organism, life is a permanent renewal), a
restart of the same (the return is the movement of life: the Dao), a reproduction of the
identical, which, at certain decisive moments of external or/and interior origin, is
modiﬁed or transformed. The dialogical union of a principle of invariance and a
principle of transformation is an essential character of life.
13.10.2 The Challenge
Living creativity has often been a response to a mortal challenge. And it has
manifested itself by an ability to solve a vital problem. The ﬁrst great invention of
living beings was made without a brain or nervous system. It is the invention of
photosynthesis by chlorophyll, already present in certain unicellular organisms
(diatoms, microalgae), which was generalized to the immense plant kingdom. This
marvelous invention allows the plant to draw its energy from sunlight. Moreover, the
roots were created to absorb mineral juices.
Creativity has manifested itself in the art of metamorphosis: from seed to plant,
from egg to adult animal, from mammalian embryo in its placenta to adult, and
ﬁnally, from crawling caterpillar to butterﬂy and dragonﬂy. This creativity has
reached a complexity and ingenuity that human genius has not (yet?) reached: The
latter, which has invented so much, has not yet succeeded in making a bacterium, nor
the slightest plant, nor the slightest animal. As the animal kingdom has not been able
to capture solar energy, it has had to invent the means of locomotion to seek its food
and escape its predators: ﬁns, legs, wings. It had to invent a jaw or a beak to catch
food, to lengthen the beak of the stork or the toucan, to lengthen the neck of the
giraffe or the trunk of the elephant; it invented an extraordinary digestive system to
assimilate food and to reject the waste. It invented sense organs, sight, hearing,
olfaction, nervous system, brain. It invented shapes, colors, and smells to make itself
beautiful, to frighten its enemies, to attract members of the opposite sex.
The diffusion of oxygen from plants into the atmosphere was a poison
transformed in the animal world into a cellular detoxiﬁer through respiration and
388
E. Morin

blood circulation. The lowering of sea levels gave rise to amphibia in ﬁsh that
transformed their gills into lungs. Cataclysms and catastrophes have stimulated
living creativity. Thus, the Permian–Triassic extinction event, which destroyed
90% of the species, gave rise to the creation of new species. Creativity is not only
a response to a challenge or a problem. It can also be the satisfaction of an aspiration.
Could it be that what has so often given rise to wings in earthbound beings comes
from an aspiration to experience the lightness and exhilaration of ﬂight? Certainly,
one can think that ﬂight allows the predator to better ﬁnd its terrestrial prey and the
prey to better ﬂee its terrestrial predator, but it seems to me that unlike legs and ﬁns,
wings do not respond to a primary locomotor necessity for living or surviving. It
seems rather that the desire to ﬂy has produced the wings of innumerable insects, has
given wings to a branch of reptiles that have become birds, and has even given wings
to mammals in the form of bats. We might forever contemplate the astonishing
metamorphosis that transforms a crawling caterpillar into an aerial dragonﬂy or a
shimmering butterﬂy.
Would not an obscure, unconscious, but deep desire coming from the whole
being be at the source of so many creations?
The luxury of so many ornaments and colors, from the small beetle to the
peacock, cannot be reduced to the sexual seduction of congeners, and in any case,
such seduction comprises an aesthetic component. Adolf Portmann proposes the
concept of Selbstdarstellung,17 “self-presentation”, the inherent tendency of the
living to present itself, not only as congener or enemy, but for itself, which
corresponds to the desire for beautiﬁcation among humans.
In fact, we humans extend animal aesthetics with our tattoos and colorful
ornaments by endowing ourselves, through our clothes, with a variety of removable
skins.
It is not very plausible to reduce so many creative inventions to simple genetic
mutations due to chance, although chance can intervene.
Researchers in molecular biology, geneticists, and Darwinians attribute all the
inventions of life to mutations due solely to chance and limit themselves to seeing
only adaptation in what was more than adaptation: invention. Invention can create
adaptation to an environment; it can also create adaptation of an environment to itself
(as in the formation of birds’ nests or in the architecture of beavers, building lodges
and dams). Many scientists are afraid that living creativity refers only to creationism,
i.e., to the design of a creator God, whereas creativity is, as Spinoza thought, at the
171. Adolf Portmann, La Forme animale (1948), reed. La Bibliothèque, 2013.
Self-presentation (Selbstdarstellung) expresses the idea that living being feel the need to present
itself, to present itself to its fellow creatures and to the world that welcomes it and with which it
interacts. The animal form expresses a vital need to exhibit itself, to show itself: “Self-presentation
is thus a kind of requirement which falls to any life: to appear, to show only what one is. The pure
and simple being (simple positive existence) is not enough: it is necessary moreover ‘to appear’, that
is to say to give form, in the ﬁeld of the visible (but it can be also about acoustic or olfactory
manifestations), to the singularity of what one is—not, in this case, of its individual existence, but of
its singularity as a species, of its speciﬁc particularity.”
13
Evolutionary Creativity
389

very heart of living nature. There is, I believe, a dormant creative potentiality within
living beings that awakens to a challenge, a desire, an aspiration. Inventive creativity
operates in the embryonic phase of development, where the work of the species
becomes the formation of the individual.18
I cannot end this passage on creativity by forgetting my own body, that is to say
the body of all Homo sapiens/demens. This organism is the fruit of a creative
evolution from the vertebrates, then the mammals, and ﬁnally from the primates to
our species. It is an incredible machine which, as I have said, possesses me more than
I possess it. And what ingenuity, what complexity, to consider only digestion where,
without wanting to, I secrete saliva around the food that my teeth grind, then through
the digestive tract, soaked in gastric juices, where it goes on a prodigious journey
that ends up in the large intestine. Such complexity in the production of hormones by
the brain! What a hypercomplex machine this brain is and, while it produces feelings
and thoughts, we only know its electrochemical manifestations! The most sophisti-
cated machines that we can manufacture are still crude and rudimentary next to this
machine that has manufactured us and that remakes us moment by moment.
13.10.3 Generalized Life
Molecular biology eliminates the notion of life, whereas, in my opinion, it should be
generalized beyond strictly biological beings (single cells, plants, animals). Planet
Earth is a geo-bio-physical entity with a life of its own. It is perhaps endowed with
intelligence... Might the true “ﬂying saucers” not be travelers from outer space, but
emanations of Earth? Ecosystems are living self-organizations arising from the
conjugation between the living beings of a given environment and the geoclimatic
determinants of this environment. Human societies are living beings endowed with
self-eco-organization (Morin 1985, p. 236 ff.). They are at the same time physical
machines, living machines, and social machines. Language exists as the ﬁrst neces-
sity of communication in any human society; at the same time, it has certain
characteristics of life: evolution, metamorphoses; words die, are born, and drift;
turns of phrase change. Language tends to spread out into two branches, the prosaic
branch with a utilitarian function and the poetic, creative branch, which provides
aesthetic emotion. Slang is a poetic sub-branch very alive in its inventiveness. The
prosaic branch tends to lose all vitality, becoming empty and formulaic, especially in
the case of administrative, technocratic, and economic discourse.
The way in which languages have been formed, organized, and have evolved is
proof of a formidable creative power, a power nourished by innumerable speaking
minds. Finally, the human minds of a given society produce and nourish entities—
gods and ideas—endowed with a life that exercises power over the minds that
created them. Gods are anthropomorphic or biomorphic, their power such that they
18Since there is obviously creativity in life, we cannot exclude other creativities elsewhere, but at
this point no one can be certain.
390
E. Morin

demand from humans adoration, obedience, and sacriﬁce, including the sacriﬁce of
their lives and the murder of the impious or unfaithful. Ideas can also be sovereign
and despotic: Thus, communism was an imperious religion of earthly salvation
(Morin 1991). It is our minds and activities that produce and nourish all these
lives that feed us and that sometimes, like gods and ideas, enslave us.
13.11 Conclusion
The most fertile ﬁelds for discoveries concerning the nature of living organization,
molecular biology and genetics, have obscured the very idea of life, which has
become invisible to those who only see molecules, genes, programs, random
mutations, and natural selection, all of which allow creativity to be concealed for
fear of the creationist illusion.
Life has been trivialized and made banal.
However, since the 1960s, ethology has allowed us to recognize the complexity
of the behaviors and interrelationships between mammals, birds, and ﬁsh, not to
mention the work on bees, ants, and termites. A new botany has revealed that the
complexity of plant evolution is no less than that of the animal world, and on this
occasion, I salute the memory of Jean-Marie Pelt.19 This new botany has begun to
discover the intelligence and sensitivity of plants that I mentioned previously.
We must detrivialize life and be astonished by it. Life surprises by its complexity,
its autonomy, and its creativity that appeared so suddenly and marginally in the
physical universe. In this universe without apparent aim or goal, obeying only the
dialogic of order/disorder/organization, life has introduced its dual purpose in a loop:
to reproduce itself to make living individuals, to make living individuals to repro-
duce itself.
If we cannot conceive of a great goal proper to such a diverse and bushy
evolution, we must notice myriads of goals that are simultaneously divergent and
convergent (in ecosystems and the biosphere), both complementary and antagonis-
tic. Once again, we ﬁnd the Heraclitean insight into the union of concord and
discord.
We are coming to know more about life, but it remains more and more
mysterious.
Life is emergence, that is to say, a set of qualities.
Life is made of nucleoprotein molecules but its emergence due to their organiza-
tion cannot be reduced to its constituent elements.
As a sociologist and philosopher of science, I can only note how much creativity
is a mystery for the sciences. It might be stimulated or triggered by as yet unknown
interactions between our level of physical reality and the level of the quantum, and
these interactions are likely to give rise to creativity in biological evolution as well as
in the human creativity of the mind/brain. Above all, I believe that the creative force
19Jean-Marie Pelt (1933–2015) is the founder of the European Institute of Ecology.
13
Evolutionary Creativity
391

eludes all naming and remains, in the ﬁnal analysis, an “unspeakable mystery”
(Klee) encouraging scientists to never forget the models and equations that allow
us to build machines and robots are not life.
Acknowledgments My special thanks go to Anne Dambricourt Malassé without whom the article
would never have seen the light of day, and to Sean Kelly who translated it with his benevolent
friendship.
References
Atlan H (1972) L’Organisation biologique et la Théorie de l’information. Hermann, Paris
Buckley W (ed) (1968) Modern systems research for the behavioral scientist: a sourcebook. Aldine
Publishing Company, Chicago
Castoriadis C (1978) Epilégomènes à une théorie de l’âme que l’on a pu présenter comme science,
l’Inconscient, II, 8
Dambricourt Malassé A (1992) L’hominisation et la théorie des systèmes dynamiques non linéaires
(Chaos). Revue de Biologie Mathématique, Société française de Biologie Mathématique, n117,
n118, n 119
Danchin A (1978) Ordre et dynamique du vivant. Le Seuil, Paris
Dausset J (1978) HLA: pour une déﬁnition biologique du moi. Prospective et santé, 5
Dumitrescu DO (1976) Recherches morphologiques sur l’appareil digestif (intestin moyen) des
Gonyleptomorphi (Arachnida, Opilionida). Travaux du Muséum d'Histoire naturelle, Grigore
Antipa, Bucarest 17:17–30
Eigen M (1971) Self-organization of matter and the evolution of biological macromolecules.
Naturwissenschaften 58:465–523
Grabar P (1947) Les Globulines du sérum sanguin. Masson et Cie, Paris
Gunther G (1962) Cybernetic ontology and transjunctional operations. University of Illinois,
Engineering Experiment Station. Technical report, 4. Electrical Engineering Research Labora-
tory, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL
Jerne NK (1969) The complete solution of immunology. Australas Ann Med 18(4):345–348
Lorenz K (1977) Sciences, idéologie et l’appréhension de notre société en elle-même. Prospective et
Santé, 3
Maturana HR, Varela F (1972) Autopoietic systems, Faculté de Ciencias, Santiago University, Chili
Morin E (1973) Le paradigme perdu : la nature humaine. Le Seuil, Paris
Morin E (1977) La Nature de la nature. La Méthode, tome 1. Le Seuil, Paris
Morin E (1985) La Vie de la vie. La Méthode, tome 2. Collection Points, 275. Le Seuil, Paris
Morin E (1991) Les idées. Leur habitat, leur vie, leurs mœurs, leur organisation. La Méthode, tome
4. Le Seuil, Paris
Morin E (2017) La connaissance, l’ignorance, le mystère. Fayard, Paris
Neel JW (1970) Lessons from a “primitive” people. Science 170:815–822
Ninio J (1979) Approches moléculaires de l’évolution. Masson, Paris
Simondon G (1964) L’individu et sa genèse physico-biologique: l’individuation à la lumière des
notions de forme et d’information. Essais Philosophiques. Epimethee, Presse Universitaire de
France, Paris
Spencer-Brown G (1969) The laws of form. Allen & Unwin, London
Varela F (1975) A calculus for self-reference. Int J Gen Syst 2:5–24
Varela FG, Maturana HR, Uribe R (1974) Autopoiesis: the organization of living systems, its
characterization and a model. Biosystems 5(4):187–196
von Foerster H (1960) On self-organizing systems and their environment. In: Yovits SC (ed) . Self-
organizing systems, M.C. Pergamon Press, London
392
E. Morin

von Foerster H (1962) Biologic. In: Biological prototypes and synthetic systems, vol 1. Plenum
Press, New York
von Foerster H (ed) (1974) Cybernetics of cybernetics, recueil de textes. Biological Computer
Laboratory, Urbana, IL
von Neumann J (1966) Theory of self-reproducing automata. University of Illinois Press, Urbana
Waddington CH (1977) Tools for thought. Paladin, St Albans
Weiss PA (1974) L’archipel scientiﬁque. Etude sur les fondements et les perspectives de la science.
Maloine, Paris
Yovits M C, Cameron S (1960) Self-organizing systems and they environments. Proceedings of an
Interdisciplinary Conference, 5 and 6 May, 1959. Pergamon Press, London
Yovits MC, Jacobi T, Goldstern GD (1962) From self-organizing systems. Spartan Books,
Washington, DC
13
Evolutionary Creativity
393

