Gleason’s Theorem
263
G
2. N. Bohr: Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?
Phys. Rev. 48, 696–702 (1935)
Bell’s Theorem was ﬁrst stated in
3. J. S. Bell: On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox. Physics 1, 195–200 (1964)
These and many other papers relevant to the discussion, up to 1982, are contained in the book
4. J. A. Wheeler, W. H. Zurek (eds.): Quantum Theory and Measurement (Princeton University
Press, Princeton 1983)
All John Bell’s papers relevant to the discussion are contained in the book
5. J. S. Bell: Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge 1987). They are also included in the book M. Bell, K. Gottfried, M. Veltman (eds.):
John S. Bell on the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 2001).
GHZ states were ﬁrst introduced in a very short paper by
6. D. M. Greenberger, M. A. Horne, A. Zeilinger in M. Kafatos (ed.): Bell’s Theorem, Quantum
Theory, and Conceptions of the Universe (Kluwer, Dordrecht 1989, 73–76). An expanded, and
much more complete version is given in D. M. Greenberger, M. A. Horne, A. Zeilinger, A.
Shimony: Bell’s Theorem without Inequalities. Am. J. Phys. 58, 1131–43 (1990)
The Mermin experiment we discuss was ﬁrst described by
7. D. Mermin, Physics Today 43/6, 9 (June 1990); Quantum Mysteries Revisited. Am. J. Phys.
58, 731–34 (1990). See also Asher Peres: Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods (Kluwer,
Dordrecht, the Netherlands 1995)
The Mermin experiment has been essentially performed with a multi-photon system by
8. J.-W. Pan, D. Bouwmeester, M. Daniell, H. Weinfurter, A. Zeilinger: Experimental Test of
quantum nonlocality in three-photon Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger entanglement. Nature 403,
515–9 (2000). See also the review by J.-W. Pan and A. Zeilinger, in R. A. Bertlmann, A.
Zeilinger (eds.): Quantum (Un)speakables – From Bell to Quantum Information (Springer,
Berlin 2002, 225–240).
Gleason’s Theorem
Carsten Held
On a  Hilbert space H, the quantum-mechanical trace formula provides a proba-
bility measure. Let {P} be the set of projection operators ( projection) on H and
let, for a given statistical operator W, μ be a function from {P} into [0, 1] deﬁned
by μ(P) = Tr (P · W). Let {Pi} ⊂{P} be a countable set of mutually orthogo-
nal projection operators. Then, μ(
i P|qi⟩) = 
i μ(P|qi⟩) (countable additivity),
μ(I) = 1, if 
i P|qi⟩= I, where I is the identity operator (probability of the cer-
tain event), and μ(P0) = 0, where P0 is the operator projecting on the zero space
(probability of the impossible event). Hence for every particular set {Pi}, μ fulﬁls
the familiar probability axioms, i.e. is a probability measure. Obviously, μ is not a
probability measure deﬁned on the whole set {P}, since countable additivity is ful-
ﬁlled, not for arbitrary, but only for mutually orthogonal elements of {P}. We have,
in effect, deﬁned a generalised probability function, a function on the lattice of pro-
jection operators such that every restriction to a Boolean sublattice is a probability
measure.

264
Gleason’s Theorem
Are there generalised probability functions besides the quantum-mechanical
ones? Given that dim (H)>2, the answer is no. In other words, on a Hilbert space
of dimension greater than two the quantum-mechanical probability measures are
the only ones forming generalised probability functions. This remarkable claim is
the content of Gleason’s Theorem [1]. The theorem is important for the question
whether quantum mechanics is complete in the following sense. Assume that, if
a quantum-mechanical system S is in a pure state |a1⟩such that μ(P|a1⟩) = 1
(i.e. the probability that S is found, upon an A-measurement, to have a1 equals
1), then it has the physical property represented by a1 (the eigenvalue of A per-
taining to |a1⟩). Completeness can be characterized as the idea that the properties
ascribed to S in this way are the only ones (i.e. the “if” in the previous sen-
tence should be replaced by “if and only if”) and incompleteness as the idea that
there are more. Explicitly, let A, B, . . . be pairwise non-commuting operators
(complementary observables) on S which are non-degenerate and have eigenval-
ues (possible S-properties) a1, a2, . . . , b1, b2, . . . (Non-degeneracy of A means
that if dim (H) = n, then A has n distinct values.) Quantum mechanics prescribes
that S can be in only one of the states |a1⟩, |a2⟩, . . . , |b1⟩, |b2⟩, . . . E.g., if S is
in |a1⟩, then completeness means that it does not have any value of B and in-
completeness that it does. The latter idea now can be expressed as follows. Every
one of the observables A, B, . . . has one of its values or, equivalently: one of
the |a1⟩, |a2⟩, . . . gets assigned the number 1, the others the number 0, one of the
|b1⟩, |b2⟩, . . . gets assigned the number 1, the others the number 0, and so on. Since
each of the sets {|a1⟩, |a2⟩, . . . }, {|b1⟩, |b2⟩, . . . }, . . . is an  orthonormal basis of
H, incompleteness becomes the task of assigning 1 to one vector in such a basis and
0 to all others and doing this for all bases of H. Is such an assignment possible or
not? It is easy to see that if it is impossible for a space H with dim (H) = n, then it is
impossible for all spaces H with dim (H) = m ⩾n, all deﬁned over the same ﬁeld.
And it is comparatively easy to see that if such an assignment is impossible for a
space Rn, an n-dimensional space over the real numbers, then it is impossible over
Cn, a space of identical dimension over the complex numbers (see [6], p. 124, [2],
pp. 323–25). So, an impossibility proof of the incompleteness assumption reduces
to showing that in R3 it is impossible to assign the number 1 to exactly one vector –
in any orthonormal basis – (the number 0 to the two others) and do so consistently
for all bases under the conditions that (a) vectors of different bases but lying in the
same ray get assigned the same number and (b) any vector gets assigned a unique
number, although it can belong to many bases.
The assignment described is indeed impossible, but there are two different ways
to prove this. First, one can show the impossibility directly (i.e. constructively) by
writing out a set of bases that make the assignment impossible. This is the route
taken by the Kochen–Specker Theorem ( Kochen–Specker Theorem). Or one can
exploit Gleason’s Theorem for an indirect proof. It follows immediately from the
theorem that all probability measures on H, with dim (H)>2, are continuous. Es-
pecially, every μ on C3 is continuous and induces a map μ′ on R3 that is also
continuous. Every such μ′ can be visualized as an assignment of values from [0,
1] to all points on the surface of the unit sphere in R3 such that the values vary

Gleason’s Theorem
265
G
continuously. On the other hand, the map required for realizing the above incom-
pleteness assumption must be discontinuous. Intuitively, when all points on the
surface of the unit sphere in R3 are assigned numbers 1 and 0 only and both val-
ues occur, the map must be discontinuous. So the incompleteness assumption is
refuted.
What should we think about conditions (a) and (b)? Condition (a) is unproblem-
atic and plays no substantial role in the argument. It just reminds us that the space
R3, though intuitively accessible, is not a direct representation of physical space. In
the full quantum-mechanical Hilbert space C3, vectors |a⟩and – |a⟩represent the
same state and the map μ′ on R3 is deﬁned to respect this constraint. A possible
assignment of 0 and 1 values to basis vectors in R3 will likewise have to respect
(a) because R3 is a stand-in for quantum-mechanical C3 where it is respected auto-
matically. Condition (b) seems to explicate a trivial premise of the assignment task.
The task of assigning 1 and 0 to all R3 basis vectors would be trivially possible if
we did not look for an assignment to all vectors, at once. However, this implies that
any vector gets assigned a unique number, although it can belong to many bases
and this condition can be interpreted in terms of the corresponding physics. It is
called the assumption of non-contextuality. Assume that we wish to assign values
to observables beyond the quantum-mechanical allowances. These values might not
be ontologically independent from each other, but it seems reasonable to require
that they are epistemologically independent in the following sense: The value of an
 observables does not depend on which other observables are measured in conjunc-
tion with it. In particular, consider a non-degenerate observable A = 
i ai P|ai⟩on
H = Cn. Ascribing some value to A implies ascribing values to all the P|ai⟩. (As-
cribing, e.g., ak will ascribe 1 to P|ak⟩and 0 to each P|ai⟩with i ̸= k.) But, given
n > 2, there is for an arbitrary eigenvector |am⟩of A a non-degenerate A′ sharing
this eigenvector, but no others, with A. Does the value of P|am⟩depend on whether
it is measured as a function of A or of A′? Answering no means to endorse non-
contextuality, answering yes to reject it. (If n = 3 the eigenvectors of A and A′
can be directly represented as two orthogonal triples in R3 sharing just |am⟩.) So,
denying condition (b) (i.e. assuming hidden S properties to be contextual) opens
a loophole in the no-hidden-variables argument from Gleason’s Theorem. An ex-
actly parallel reply can of course be made in connection with the Kochen–Specker
Theorem ( Kochen–Specker Theorem for more discussion).
Gleason’s original proof of his theorem is mathematically involved. An elemen-
tary proof was given by Cooke et al. in 1985 [2]. It is reproduced and extensively
commented by Hughes [4].
Primary Literature
1. A.M. Gleason: Measures on the Closed Subspaces of a Hilbert Space, J. Math. Mech. 6, 885–93
(1957); reprinted in [3], 123–34

266
GRW Theory (Ghirardi, Rimini, Weber Model of Quantum Mechanics)
Secondary Literature
2. R.M. Cooke, M, Keane, and W. Moran: An Elementary Proof of Gleason’s Theorem, Math.
Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 98, 117–28 (1985); reprinted in [4], 321–46
3. C. Hooker (ed.): The Logico-Algebraic Approach to Quantum Mechanics (Reidel, Dordrecht,
1975)
4. R.I.G. Hughes: The Structure and Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA 1989)
5. S. Kochen and E. Specker: The Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Mechanics, J. Math.
Mech. 17, 59–87 (1967); reprinted in [3], 293–328
6. M. Redhead: Incompleteness, Nonlocality, and Realism: A Prolegomenon to the Philosophy of
Quantum Mechanics. (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1987)
Grover’s Algorithm
See  quantum computation.
GRW Theory (Ghirardi, Rimini, Weber Model
of Quantum Mechanics)
Roman Frigg
Consider a toy system consisting of a marble and box. The marble has two states,
|in⟩and |out⟩, corresponding to the marble being inside or outside the box. These
states are eigenvectors of the operator ˆB, measuring whether the marble is inside
or outside the box. The formalism of quantum mechanics (QM) has it that not only
|in⟩and |out⟩themselves, but any  superposition |m⟩= a |in⟩+ b |out⟩
where a and b are complex numbers such that |a|2 + |b|2 = 1, can be the state
of the marble. What are the properties of the marble in such a state? This ques-
tion is commonly answered by appeal to the so-called Eigenstate-Eigenvalue Rule
(EER): An observable ˆO has a well-deﬁned value for a quantum a system S in state
|⟩if, and only if, |⟩is an eigenstate of ˆO. Since |in⟩and |out⟩are eigen-
states of ˆB, EER yields that the marble is either inside (or outside) the box if its
state is |in⟩(or |out⟩). However, states like |m⟩defy interpretation on the ba-
sis of EER and we have to conclude that if the marble is in such a state then it
is neither inside nor outside the box. This is unacceptable because we know from
experience that marbles are always either inside or outside boxes. Reconciling this
fact of everyday experience with the quantum formalism is the infamous measure-
ment problem. See also  Bohmian mechanics; Measurement theory; Metaphysics
in Quantum Mechanics; Modal Interpretation; Objectiﬁcation; Projection Postulate.

