830
Wave-Particle Duality: Some History
out to double its initial size. His result was T ∼= Δ√m/ℏ. Because of the smallness
of  Planck’s constant (ℏ= 1.05 × 10−34 Js) this means that the doubling time is
nearly inﬁnite for a macroscopic particle. For a particle of linear size Δ = 0.001 cm
and mass m = 1 g, the doubling time is about 10,000 times the age of the universe.
Another important work, relating to Schr¨odinger’s and Ehrenfest’s, was due
to Peter Debye, who showed that  wave packet, simulating mass and charge
points, can be constructed also without using the special expansion coefﬁcient that
Schr¨odinger had used in his treatment of the harmonic oscillator. Debye discussed
in 1927 the behaviour of wave packets of one degree of freedom for any kind of
force, and found that their maxima move in accordance with the classical laws. His
work was one of many that aimed at showing the correspondence-like connection
between quantum mechanics and classical physics.
Primary Literature
1. E. Schr¨odinger: Der stetige ¨Ubergang von der Mikro- zur Makromechanik. Die Naturwis-
senschaften 14, 664–666 (1926)
2. W. Heisenberg: ¨Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und
Mechanik. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 43, 172–198 (1927)
3. K. Przibram ed.: Briefe zur Wellenmechanik (Springer, Vienna 1963)
Secondary Literature
4. M. Jammer: The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics (Wiley, New York 1974)
5. F. Steiner: Schr¨odinger’s Discovery of Coherent States. Physica B 151, 323–326 (1988)
6. H. Kragh, B. Carazza: Classical Behavior of Macroscopic Bodies from Quantum Principles:
Early Discussions. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 55, 43–56 (2000)
Wave-Particle Duality: Some History
Bruce R. Wheaton
Our modern understanding of light is the result of dispute since the scientiﬁc revo-
lution of the seventeenth century. The roots of that contention, however, precede the
contributions of Aristotle, and I daresay the ﬁnal story has yet to be written.
Following Plato and his student Aristotle, what we see in our lives are “sec-
ondary” qualities that originate from an unseen world of “primary” events. In their
view whatever the primary causes of sound should seem similar to the water, and
of matter to the rocks we encounter in life. The earlier philosophers tended to ﬁnd

Wave-Particle Duality: Some History
831
W
guidance from a single entity: Thales from water with its waves lapping the shores;
Anaximines sowed the seeds of all within all, a proto-atomic hypothesis later devel-
oped by Demokratus and Leucretius. For Aristotle, light was special. It can coexist
in the celestial and earthly world, thus it could not be compounded of Empedokles’
four elements. He refers to light as a process, an “actualization” of a latent property.
Light thus occurs instantaneously, since it is not propagated. That light delineates
straight lines underlay surveying and observational astronomy, and made both ac-
cessible to geometry, like mechanics, in the ancient world.
Aristotle’s worldview dominated natural speculation throughout the middle ages.
But the distinction between the discrete and the continuous is an important philo-
sophical issue that has driven epistemological discussion in the west since the
pre-Socratics. Its modern locus in quantum physics is only the most recent man-
ifestation. It informed discussion of the contrast amongst Empedokles’ elements;
ﬁgures in Aristotle’s Platonic distinction between what we observe and the un-
derlying primary qualities of things; of theological issues in the middle ages; of
renaissance mathematics upon the introduction of numerical al-jebra in conﬂict
with Greek continuity; of nascent optics; of electron/ﬁeld physics after Maxwell;
and its modern quantum guise will be diverted and changed in the future. These
conﬂicting views, a Hegelian dichotomy, had competed for hegemony in western
natural philosophy since before Aristotle.
Even with the remarkable advances in medieval study of optical properties of
lenses for eyeglasses, the telescope, the microscope; discovery of Snell’s law of re-
fraction (1621); even later successful attempts to measure the speed of light (Roemer
1676); one ﬁnds little inquiry into the nature, rather than the properties, of light even
in writings of masters like Averroes, Witelo, and Kepler. Descartes, for example,
pictured the cosmos a plenum in which light is the pressure exerted by motion of
its parts at a distance from the eye. Before reﬁned devices existed to measure the
quantitative properties of light, the issue remained one of smoke and mirrors.
But with the revolution in science of the seventeenth century, all changed. Ma-
terialism rose ascendant, so observed secondary properties, even of light, tended
to be ascribed to unperceived atoms. Thus natural philosophers of the eighteenth
century set themselves the goal of verifying what many took to be Isaac Newton’s
corpuscular theory of light (henceforth CT) in its ﬁnest manifestations.
Newton’s Opticks (1704 and later editions) capped his efforts beginning in 1672
to extend mathematical analysis to include refraction, diffraction, and color. Newton
ascribed the observed periodicity (“Newton’s rings”) to “ﬁts of transmission” by
what otherwise must be something like particles of light, particles that differ in their
three spatial dimensions; and he assigned different particle-like characteristics to
each color of light as its “connate property.” By this he explained the peculiarity of
the beam splitting in two on transmission through calcite, long-known as a useful
navigating tool called “Iceland spar.”
Leonhard Euler’s Nova theoria lucis et colorum (1746) represents the crest of
the opposing undulatory theory (UT) in the eighteenth century. He proposed a truly
periodic wave where light frequencies parallel the harmonies of sound. But in this
period when wave interference was barely recognized, the ability of any wave to

832
Wave-Particle Duality: Some History
yield observed rectilinear propagation raised grave difﬁculties, and Euler’s ideas
were not widely embraced even on the continent. The battleground would be the
ﬁne points of light in its interaction with matter. Rectilinear propagation and re-
ﬂection favored the CT, in accord with senses of taste and touch. Refraction and
diffraction constituted as seemingly fatal a difﬁculty for any CT as rectilinear prop-
agation posed for the UT, based on senses of sight and hearing.
Christaan Huygens (1629–95), struck by the incompatibility of geometric con-
tinuity with algebraic discreteness, had offered an elegant explanation of both
properties in 1678 that light is best portrayed as an irregular sequence of dis-
continuous impulses propagating in a medium (not UT.) Newton’s authority had
bullied most philosophers of the eighteenth century to overlook Huygens’ penetrat-
ing objections. The devil clearly lay in the details and the battle soon focused on
polarization which seemed explainable on both accounts to the kinetic ontology of
the time, now to be described.
The “Laplacian school” in early nineteenth century France accorded conceptually
coherent explanation of reﬂection, refraction, diffraction, and polarization in terms
of gravity-like forces acting within atomic ‘atmospheres’ of subtle caloric ﬂuid. Us-
ing crystals as analyzers, Etienne Malus found that sunlight can be polarized just
by reﬂecting off materials like glass and water. This eliminated the atomic atmo-
sphere necessary to Pierre-Simon Laplace’s position and dulled Ockham’s razor to
an extent that began to offend, even in France.
Educated in Scotland, English dissenter Thomas Young studied medicine in
G¨ottingen and took interest in hearing and the acoustical waves of sound as dis-
cussed by, among others, Euler. His detailed studies of the physiology of the eye
soon turned up so many parallels between observable properties of sound and light
that he was led to Newtonian heresy before 1800. Young proposed an UT he sought
to authenticate as the “true” Newtonian view, an ambiguity, like the sense of smell,
somewhere between particles and waves.
Young developed many practical demonstrations for public lectures in London
of his belief that, like sound, light is a longitudinal wave. He demonstrated that,
like acoustic sound, hydrodynamic water waves passed through a double aperture
show marked interference effects, producing no disturbance where the crests of one
align with the troughs of the other, as in Fig. 1  double-slit experiment. And he
extended this analogy to light with little idea of the medium in which it propagated,
but thereby calculating the approximate wavelength of light by 1803.
Throughout these public claims, Young apologized that the water waves, being
transverse, were only an approximation to the longitudinal waves of light and sound.
His qualitative results made their way despite the Napoleonic wars to the director
of the Bureau des Longitudes, Franc¸ois Arago (1786–1853) who passed the issue
to his cadet. Augustin Fresnel (1788–1827), son of a mason in Normandy, given
the most rigorous scientiﬁc education available anywhere in the world at the Ecole
Polyt´echnique, found the CT untenable in principle. Mathematically adept, Fresnel
saw through the mathematical haze to the physical failure of the Laplacian program.
Because Fresnel had come to his revelation in ignorance of Young’s but armed with
differential equations, a crucial difference emerged. From the ﬁrst Fresnel admitted

Wave-Particle Duality: Some History
833
W
A
C
D
E
F
B
Fig. 1 Young’s ripple tank results of interference of equal frequencies from A & B: low at C & E,
high at D & F. From Young, Course XX, 267 (1807)
a transverse component in polarization-induced color changes in thin crystals, he
came by 1821 to realize that the transverse tail must be wagging the longitudinal
dog. Polarization is most realistically treated mathematically as interference of two
waves moving along the same line but separated by a 90◦(λ/4) phase shift; their
interference in an analyzing crystal produces the observed result.
This implied that wave direction could as readily be thought to lie orthogonal
to the physical motion of the aetherial medium. Indeed, were the transverse com-
ponent to rotate rapidly enough about that direction of wave motion, the polarizing
asymmetry would vanish and appear as unpolarized light. Lacking the acoustic base
from whence Euler and Young proceeded, Fresnel’s mathematical analysis of in-
terference could now stand on purely transverse waves. Figure 2 is his version of
Young’s experiment, except here the two sources A and B are the diffracted waves
at the edges of obstacle AB. In Young’s hydrodynamic image the water goes up
and down while the wave proceeds along the surface; he had been apologizing for a
decade about the inaccuracy of his ripple tank, so Fresnel’s transverse waves came
as a lightning bolt.
Fresnel’s 1816 “M´emoire sur la diffraction de la lumi`ere” is the foundation of the
classical UT of light; it led to remarkable tools like  spectroscopy to analyze the
chemical nature of the stars. That paragon combination of theory and experiment,
Heinrich Hertz declaimed in 1889 that “for all practical purposes, the wave theory
of light is a certainty.” Despite the immense advances that acceptance of the UT’s
enlightened legacy brought, it too would shift out of favor in the twentieth century.
Cracks in the UT began to appear, almost unnoticed, in the 1880s with the fa-
mous aether-drift experiments of Americans Albert Michelson and Edward Morley
that seemed to ﬁnd no aether in which light could propagate. But the most chal-
lenging troubles followed concurrent improvements in vacuum technology that led
to cathode discharge tubes and to discovery of  X-rays in 1895. The most rele-
vant explanation of this “new form of radiation” was a resuscitation of Huygens’

834
Wave-Particle Duality: Some History
Fig. 1
A
f 4
f 4
f 3
f 3
f 2
f 2
f z
f z
C
S
D
B
F3
F2
F1
F2
Fig. 2 Fresnel’s mathematical reconstruction of Young’s double-slit experiment, where the
sources A & B are the waves from a single source diffracted at the edges of obstacle C. Fresnel
was able to show that the lines of equal interference (like F1 & F2 are hyperbolic). From Verdet,
ed. Oeuvres d’Augustin Fresnel, vol. 1, p. 95, Paris: Imp. imp., 1866
disconnected impulse model of light, now from the pen of George Stokes. Today we
have an acoustic analogy to this early view of X-rays (and Huygens’ of light): the
sonic boom. Constructed by superposition of wake vibrations in the continuum of
the atmosphere, it has nonetheless a localized effect on the ground. You hear it as if
it were a pistol shot. It combines the UT and the CT in a trice and its possibilities,
other than the pregnant Cherenkov radiation ( Bremsstrahlung), have been largely
ignored by physicists and left to SST designers.

Wave-Particle Duality: A Modern View
835
W
Primary Literature
1. Aristotle: De anima, 418–419
2. I. Newton: Opticks. A brief preliminary version (Moxon, London 1670) caused so much ran-
corous contention with Robert Hooke that Newton withheld publication to (Smith and Walford,
London 1704) after Hooke’s death. With important later additions, the prime source is the 4th
edn. of 1730 readily available (Dover, New York 1979)
3. Th. Young: Bakerian lecture: Experiments and calculations relative to physical optics. Royal
Society of London Philosophical Transactions 94, 1–16 (1804)
4. Th. Young: Course of lectures on natural philosophy (Johnson, London 1807, Vol. 1, on hydro-
dynamics p. 290; on sound pp. 389–96; on light pp. 464ff; the double-slit is plate XX, ﬁgure
267). The remarkable Baconian encyclopaedic approach of the man can be divined merely by
reading his short introduction and analytical table of contents
5. A. Fresnel: Oeuvres completes (ed. Verdet Paris: Imp. imp., 1866 vol. 1, 9–33; 89–122*; 129–
170). *This appeared in Annales de chemie et physique 1, 239–81 (1816); all were published
in the Comptes rendus of the Academie, but not until after Fresnel was elected a member in
1823, four years before his death from tuberculosis
Secondary Literature
6. S. Bofﬁ, M. D’Anna: Le radici del dualismo onda-corpuscolo (Bibliopolis, Napoli 1999)
7. R. McCormmach: J. J. Thomson and the structure of light. British Journal of the History of
Science 3, 362–387 (1967)
8. J. C. Poggendorff: ¨Uber den relativen Werth der beiden Lichttheorien. Ann Pk, 28, 381–383
(1833). Footnote to article by Brewster
9. P. Rowland: Waves versus corpuscles – The revolution that never was (PD, Liverpool 1992)
10. B. R. Wheaton: The tiger and the shark – Empirical roots of wave-particle dualism (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 1983) An extensive literature exists on history of optics and light
by inter alia: Buchwald, Cantor, Lindberg, Ronchi, Sabra, Shapiro
Wave-Particle Duality: A Modern View
Bruce R. Wheaton
Our understanding of light is the result of dispute since the scientiﬁc revolution of
the 17th century. Students of physics today are taught “wave-particle duality”: belief
based on otherwise conﬂicting experiments that electromagnetic radiation is a peri-
odic wave that, at high frequencies, exhibits increasingly localized concentration of
energy. It is a wave with particle characteristics: something akin to energy that under
some circumstances exhibits interference like periodic waves, and under others acts
like a stream of bullets.

