Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning 26
Lorenzo Magnani
Discoverability
The Urgent Need of an Ecology 
of Human Creativity

Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning
Interdisciplinary Perspectives from the Humanities
and Social Sciences
Volume 26
Series Editor
Shahid Rahman, University of Lille, CNRS-UMR 8163: STL, France
Editorial Board Members
Frans H. van Eemeren, Amsterdam, Noord-Holland, The Netherlands
Zoe McConaughey, Lille, UMR 8163, Lille, France
Tony Street, Faculty of Divinity, Cambridge, UK
John Woods, Dept of Philosophy, Buchanan Bldg, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada
Gabriel Galvez-Behar, Lille, UMR 8529, Lille, France
Leone Gazziero, Lille, France
André Laks, Princeton/Panamericana, Paris, France
Ruth Webb, University of Lille, CNRS-UMR 8163: STL, France
Jacques Dubucs, Paris Cedex 05, France
Karine Chemla, CNRS, Lab Sphere UMR 7219, Case 7093, Université Paris Diderot, Paris Cedex 13,
France
Sven Ove Hansson, Division of Philosophy, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Stock-
holms Län, Sweden
Yann Coello, Lille, France
Eric Gregoire, Lille, France
Henry Prakken, Dept of Information & Computing Sci, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands
Franç¸ois Recanati, Institut Jean-Nicord, Ecole Normale Superieur, Paris, France
Gerhard Heinzmann, Laboratoire de Philosophie et d’Histoire, Universite de Lorraine, Nancy Cedex,
France
Sonja Smets, ILLC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
G¨öran Sundholm, ’S-Gravenhage, Zuid-Holland, The Netherlands
Michel Crubellier, University of Lille, CNRS-UMR 8163: STL, France
Dov Gabbay, Dept. of Informatics, King’s College London, London, UK
Tero Tulenheimo, Turku, Finland
Jean-Gabriel Contamin, Lille, France
Franck Fischer, Newark, USA
Josh Ober, Dept of Pol Sci, West Encina Hall 100, Stanford University Stanford, CA, USA
Marc Pichard, Lille, France
Managing Editor
Juan Redmond, Instituto de Filosoﬁa, University of Valparaíso, Valparaíso, Chile

Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning (LAR) explores links between the Humanities
and Social Sciences, with theories (including decision and action theory) drawn
from the cognitive sciences, economics, sociology, law, logic, and the philosophy of
science.
Its main ambitions are to develop a theoretical framework that will encourage and
enable interaction between disciplines, and to integrate the Humanities and Social
Sciences around their main contributions to public life, using informed debate, lucid
decision-making, and action based on reﬂection.
•
Argumentation models and studies
•
Communication, language and techniques of argumentation
•
Reception of arguments, persuasion and the impact of power
•
Diachronic transformations of argumentative practices
LAR is developed in partnership with the Maison Européenne des Sciences de
l’Homme et de la Société (MESHS) at Nord - Pas de Calais and the UMR-STL:
8163 (CNRS).
This book series is indexed in SCOPUS.
Proposals should include :
•
A short synopsis of the work, or the introduction chapter
•
The proposed Table of Contents
•
The CV of the lead author(s)
•
If available: one sample chapter
We aim to make a ﬁrst decision within 1 month of submission. In case of a
positive ﬁrst decision, the work will be provisionally contracted ˚Uthe ﬁnal decision
about publication will depend upon the result of an anonymous peer review of the
complete manuscript.
The complete work is usually peer-reviewed within 3 months of submission.
LAR discourages the submission of manuscripts containing reprints of previ-
ously published material, and/or manuscripts that are less than 150 pages / 85,000
words.
For inquiries and proposal submissions, authors may contact the editor-in-
chief, Shahid Rahman at: shahid.rahman@univ-lille.fr,or the managing editor, Juan
Redmond, at: juan.redmond@uv.cl

Lorenzo Magnani
Discoverability
The Urgent Need of an Ecology of Human
Creativity

Lorenzo Magnani
Dipartimento di Studi Umanistici
University of Pavia
Pavia, Italy
ISSN 2214-9120
ISSN 2214-9139
(electronic)
Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning
ISBN 978-3-030-93328-9
ISBN 978-3-030-93329-6
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93329-6
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG 2022
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Our faculty of guessing corresponds to a
bird’s musical and aeronautic powers; that
is, it is to us, as those are to them, the loftiest
of our merely instinctive powers. I suppose
that if one were sure of being able to
discriminate between the intimations of this
instinct and the self-ﬂatteries of personal
desire, one would always trust to the former.
For I should not rate high either the wisdom
or the courage of a ﬂedgling bird, if, when
the proper time had come, the little agnostic
should hesitate long to take his leap from the
nest on account of doubts about the theory of
aerodynamics.
Charles Sanders Peirce, Collected Papers,
7.48, 1907

To my daughter Lorenza and to my grandson
Valentino

Preface
We academics all know that philosophers of science are not involved—neither
directly nor indirectly—in decisions regarding public policy: it seems that policy
decisions must be based on social goals and other factors that have nothing to do
with epistemology. At this point, it seems that various aspects of current decision
making in commercialized scientiﬁc research, for example, in biomedical area, are
jeopardizing discoverability in science and therefore scientiﬁc creativity and human
creative abduction in general. Furthermore, what we can call the “perfect epistemic
storm”—which is not directly addressed in this book and has been generated
by the many failures and confusions happened during this corona virus era—is
visible to everyone. As an epistemologist, I am just indicating the problem of
protecting discoverability, which I also think is at the base of the epistemic disasters
of the present time of the pandemic: too many aspects of the socio-economical
organization of science—increasingly business oriented—put in danger the genuine
tradition of objective science and some of the best aspects of the human abductive
scientiﬁc cognition. I do not have “practical” suggestions and solutions, but surely
the smart people who are involved in economic and political decisions and at the
same time are interested in favoring the further growth of science and civilization in
the Western world will ﬁnd ones.
The book addresses the problem of discoverability and consequently of the
sustainability of human creativity in an “eco-cognitive” perspective, with special
attention to science, and concentrates on the question of hypothesis generation
and choice, that is, on creative abduction and on the conditions of its possibility,
traditionally disregarded by philosophy, logic, epistemology, and cognitive sci-
ence. I think the intellectual, didactic, but also “social” virtues of providing an
analysis of discoverability are extremely important: having a better knowledge of
discoverability—for example, in science—enables a better promotion of human
creativity, which is the condition of possibility of increasing other kinds of
knowledge, always needed in our technological era. Reaching higher degrees of
discoverability should also shed new light on the current negative challenges to
human creativity and consequently on the obstacles to the cognitive and social
ﬂourishing of human beings.
ix

x
Preface
To further illustrate the importance of sustaining human creativity through the
enhancement of discoverability, the example of the recent Encyclical Letter of
the Holy Father Francis, head of the Catholic Church, is very useful. In the
recent Encyclical Letter, Laudato Si’ of the Holy Father Francis on Care for Our
Common Home the Pope quotes several times the importance of human creativity
in solving the many problems of humanity that are illustrated. Creativity is seen
as a fundamental tool necessary to ﬁx the failures of our societies and of our
lives. Just to make some examples, we ﬁnd the following sentences: “In order to
continue providing employment, it is imperative to promote an economy which
favours productive diversity and business creativity” (129), “creativity should be
shown in integrating rundown neighbourhoods into a welcoming city” (152), “[...]
political and institutional frameworks do not exist simply to avoid bad practice,
but also to promote best practice, to stimulate creativity in seeking new solutions
and to encourage individual or group initiatives” (177). Moreover, the awareness
concerns the fact that in current societies, creativity is jeopardized, and this is
exhibited: speaking of the effect of technology, we ﬁnd, for example, the following
sentences “Our capacity to make decisions, a more genuine freedom and the space
for each one’s alternative creativity are diminished” (108) “Human creativity cannot
be suppressed” (131).
Chapter four of the Encyclical Letter introduces the need for an integral ecology,
also necessary in education, and many subtypes of ecology are illustrated: ﬁrst of all,
environmental, economical, and social ecology, but also cultural ecology, ecology of
daily life, human ecology, and ecology of man (“man too has a nature that he must
respect and that he cannot manipulate at will”—155). In all these endeavors, related
to the emancipation of human lives, human creativity is so fundamental that I would
strongly suggest to integrate the Encyclical deontological commitments with what
I call ecology of human creativity.
My proposal of an integration of the Encyclical deontological commitments
actually resorts to the need of accepting that an ecology of human creativity has
priority over the others illustrated in the Encyclical Letter: consequently, a ﬁrst
ecological duty is the one that protects and sustains human creativity because it
is exactly human creativity that can grant the implementation of the other kinds
of ecology I have just quoted from the Encyclical letter. I consider the ecology of
human creativity a conditio sine qua non in the following sense: I am convinced
that without creativity and skillful human capacities, all the other envisaged and
invoked ecologies and sustainability, in general, tend to sadly fail. Sustaining the
eco-cognitive conditions of discoverability is fundamental because only creativity
can grant the implementation of the other kinds of ecology, which are urgently at
play in our era, so that the ecological improvement can in turn positively affect
human creativity.
In the present book, I will, for example, illustrate the importance of sustaining
the so-called epistemic niches, that is, those eco-settings that have the potential
for scientiﬁc creativity. I will center my attention on scientiﬁc creativity because
of its importance in our current societies and collectives, not only because of
its intrinsic—so to speak—value but also because in our technological era, full

Preface
xi
of science-based artifacts of various type, knowledge in general, and scientiﬁc
knowledge in particular are fundamental. In my book Morality in a Technological
World. Knowledge as Duty
(Magnani, 2007), I treated this issue extensively,
arguing that the maintenance and ﬂourishing of technological societies require a
great deal of new scientiﬁc and ethical knowledge as well as modern approaches to
moral deliberation, and to achieve these goals I provided compelling analyses, also
offering a variety of strategies we might use to solve them. I believe that producing
and applying recalibrated appropriate general, scientiﬁc, and moral knowledge has
become a duty. It is in this vein that I analyzed troubling issues such as cyberprivacy,
globalization, bad faith, cloning, biotechnologies, and ecological imbalances: the
right creative knowledge, I think, can manage these challenges and counter many
of technology’s ill effects by preserving ownership of our own destinies, encour-
aging responsibility, and enhancing freedom. However, creative knowledge can
completely ﬂourish only when discoverability is sustained, protected, and enhanced.
A consequence of the above considerations is the following: if creativity is
jeopardized, and in particular scientiﬁc creativity, it is practically impossible to
acceptably and successfully deal with our technological societies, also from an
ethical perspective: this means that the need of an ecology of human creativity I
am endorsing here is rooted in the observations I have just sketched, quoting my
book of 2007.
The present book, which aims at improving knowledge of discoverability, will
take into account:
•
the distributed and embodied nature of scientiﬁc cognition, ultimately related
to the idea of the importance of the external cognitive tools and mediators in
cognition;
•
the central role of the dynamics of the production and of the rational handling
of hypotheses, by referring to the various multimodal aspects of abduction,
visual/diagrammatic, verbal-propositional, emotional, and manipulative;
•
the fact that science is characterized by a maximization of abducibility, performed
thanks to speciﬁc constraints.
These topics are analyzed in terms of what I consider the main tenets of an eco-
cognitive approach to the epistemology of discoverability:1
1. Chapter one
Fruitfully approaching the problems of discoverability involves an important
intermediate step, which concerns the role of abductive cognition, that is, rea-
soning to hypotheses, and the logical models of it. To this aim, when engaged in
formalizing abductive reasoning, it is extremely useful to see inferences adopting
the more general concepts of input and output instead of those of premisses and
conclusions. Indeed, from this perspective, abductive inferences can be ﬁrst of
1 A considerable part of the recent academic literature—for example in social epistemology—
refers the word epistemology to the whole area of cognitive reasoned activities. In this book, I
basically adopt its classical intended meaning, which refers only to scientiﬁc cognition.

xii
Preface
all seen as related to logical processes in which input and output fail to hold
each other in an expected relation, with the solution involving the modiﬁcation
of inputs, not that of outputs. Unfortunately, if input and output fail to hold
each other in a “good” relation, it becomes very difﬁcult to solve the related
abductive problem: discoverability is jeopardized. In this perspective—and given
the fact science produces and “maximizes” cognition through a process in which
afﬁrming truths implies negating truths—the analysis of abductive processes
leads us to the emphasis on the importance of the following main aspects:
“optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness,” “maximization of changeability” of
both input and output, and high “information-sensitiveness.” I will also illustrate
that irrelevance and implausibility are not always offensive to reason, and so
they can favor both discoverability and discovery. For example, we cannot be
sure, more broadly, that our guessed hypotheses are plausible (even if we know
that looking—in advance—for plausibility is a human good and wise heuristic),
indeed an implausible hypothesis can, later on, result plausible.
2. Chapter two
Recent research in the area of the so-called EEEE cognition (extended, embod-
ied, embedded, enacted) has shown that human cognition and its evolutionary
dimension can be better understood in terms of their environmental situatedness.
This means humans do not retain in their memory rich representations of the
environment and its variables, but they actively manipulate it by picking up
information and resources upon occasion, already available, or extracted/created
and made available: information and resources are not only given, but they
are actively sought and even manufactured. In this sense, we can consider
human cognition as a chance-seeker system. Consequently, in my terminology,
chances are not simply information, but they are also “affordances”, namely
environmental anchors that allow us to better exploit external resources. Dis-
coverability is of course related to the availability of the appropriate affordances.
Abduction is still important: it describes all those human and animal hypothetical
inferences that are operated through actions made up of smart manipulations
of the environment to both detect new affordances and to create manufactured
external objects that offer new affordances/cues. A ﬁnal section deals with the
defense of the inferential view of abduction, affordances, and cognitive niche
construction (based on epistemology and cognitive science) and their importance
for the analysis of discoverability, against the reductionist attitudes due to some
interpretations provided by the predictive processing theory, based on the idea of
a Bayesian brain.
3. Chapter three
In this chapter, with the help of the concepts of locked and unlocked strategies,
abduction, and optimization of eco-cognitive openness, I will describe some
central aspects of the cognitive character of reasoning strategies and related
heuristics, with the aim of shedding new light on the cognitive aspects of deep
learning machines and their impact on discoverability, and so creativity. Taking
advantage of my studies on abduction, I will contend that what I call eco-

Preface
xiii
cognitive openness is undermined in the case of famous computational programs
such as AlphaGo/AlphaZero, because they are based on locked abductive strate-
gies. Unlocked abductive strategies, which are in tune with what eco-cognitive
openness requires, qualify those high-level kinds of abductive creative reasoning
that are typical of human-based cognition, and locked abductive reasoning
strategies are instead much simpler than the unlocked ones to be rendered at the
computational level. The second part of the chapter emphasizes, taking advantage
of the logical and cognitive studies introduced in the previous chapters, the
importance of knowledge in motion—in multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, and
transdisciplinary scientiﬁc research—and its role in favoring high-level kinds of
discoverability, and so of abductive results and of the so-called “optimization
of eco-cognitive openness and situadedness.” The concept of “knowledge in
motion” is also the necessary conceptual premise of the analysis of various kinds
of “epistemic irresponsibility,” which are illustrated in chapter four.
4. Chapter four
In this chapter I will analyze some important aspects of the organization of
research and development (R&D) in the case of biopharmaceutical companies,
which represent a prototypical situation of what I call impoverished epistemic
niches. At least in this case we clearly see a challenge to the epistemic
integrity of modern science. Taking advantage of the logical and cognitive
studies illustrated in the previous chapters, which emphasize the crucial role
played in abductive cognition by the so-called “optimization of eco-cognitive
openness and situadedness,” this chapter will describe the hot problem of the
current emergence of disparate kinds of “epistemic irresponsibility” that strongly
jeopardize discoverability.2 Interesting cases related to the commodiﬁcation
and commercialization of science, marketing of technoscientiﬁc products, and
impoverishment of the so-called epistemic niches are illustrated, which show
that human fruitful abductive cognition in science is increasingly assaulted and
jeopardized, and at the same time human creativity is seriously endangered.
5. Chapter ﬁve
Taking advantage of the logical and cognitive studies illustrated in the previ-
ous chapters, which emphasize the crucial role played in abductive cognition
by the so-called “optimization of eco-cognitive openness and situadedness,”
“knowledge in motion,” and the concept of “epistemic irresponsibility,” the
present chapter will introduce the concept of overcomputationalism, to help
interpret the related concepts of pancognitivism, paninformationalism, and
2 In this chapter I prefer to adopt the expression epistemic irresponsibility (instead of epistemologi-
cal irresponsibility), because I attribute to the adjective epistemic a restricted meaning. “Epistemic”
pertains to scientiﬁc knowledge or the conditions for acquiring it, which involve eco-cognitive
situations in which not only scientists but also other economical, political, and institutional agents
directly or indirectly intertwined with scientiﬁc research are involved. Instead, “epistemological”
also expressly refers to the philosophical community of epistemologists, who in general are not
affected by epistemic irresponsibility, but by other problems such as, for example, philosophical
irrelevance or scholasticism.

xiv
Preface
pancomputationalism and their impact on discoverability. In the second part of
the chapter, I will submit to the attention of the reader a question that in my
opinion synthesizes many of the problems described in this book: will the future
of eco-cognitive settings be computationally tailored or humanly tailored? The
challenges against human creative abduction and epistemic rigor on the part
of what I call computational invasive “subcultures” and unwelcomed effects
of selective ignorance are illustrated. Finally, I will describe two fundamental
roles played by human knowledge and the need of their continuous enhancement
to the aim of sustaining discoverability: to maximize the ownership of their
own destinies, thanks to everyday, philosophical, and scientiﬁc knowledge about
natural and artiﬁcial phenomena human beings have improved their capacities to
track the external world; in turn thanks to ethical knowledge humans have learnt
to track the behavior of other human beings to the aim of favoring cooperation.
I am grateful to many colleagues and friends for their helpful suggestions and
much more. For valuable comments and discussions, I am indebted and grateful
to John Woods, Paul Thagard, Ping Li, Atocha Aliseda, Woosuk Park, Nancy
J. Nersessian, Giuseppe Longo, Yukio Oshawa, Akinori Abe, Michael Leyton,
Dov Gabbay, John Josephson, Walter Carnielli, Gerhard Schurz, Balakrishnan
Chandrasekaran, Jon Williamson, Douglas Walton, Cameron Shelley, Sami Paavola,
Luís Moniz Pereira, Thomas Addis, Giovanna Magnani, Lorenza Magnani, Diderik
Batens, Joke Meheus, Simon Colton, Athanassios Raftopoulos, Michael Hoffmann,
Ilkka Niniluoto, Theo A. F. Kuipers, Chris Sinha, Ryan D. Tweney, Ferdinand D.
Rivera, Peter Flach, Antony Kakas, Oliver Ray, Luis A. Pineda, Atsushi Shimojima,
Pat Langley, Demetris P. Portides, and to my collaborators Tommaso Bertolotti,
Selene Arﬁni, and Alger Sans Pinillos. Also of great help was correspondence
or conversation with a number of people whose inﬂuence on various of the
book’s particularities is more or less palpable. I especially wish to acknowledge
Hanne Andersen, Otávio Bueno, Marco Buzzoni, Sanjay Chandrasekharan, Marcelo
Dascal, Gordana Dodig Crnkovic, Mauro Dorato, Michel Ghins, Marcello Guarini,
Ricardo Gudwin, Albrecht Heeffer, Mireille Hildebrandt, Shahid Rahman, Kenneth
Einar Himma, Fabio Minazzi, Gerhard Minnameier, Margaret Morrison, Alfredo
Pereira, Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen, Dagmar Provijn, João Queiroz, Chiaki Sakama,
Colin Schmidt, Nora Schwartz, Frederik Stjernfelt, Mauricio Suárez, Jeroen van den
Hoven, Peter-Paul Verbeek, Riccardo Viale, and Marion Vorms. The preparation of
the volume would not have been possible without the contribution of resources and
facilities by the Computational Philosophy Laboratory (Department of Humanities,
Philosophy Section, University of Pavia, Italy). This project was conceived as a
whole, but as it developed, various parts have become articles, which have now
been excerpted, revised, and integrated into the current text.
Parts of this book are excerpted from L. Magnani (2015), The eco-cognitive
model of abduction. Aπαγω´η now: Naturalizing the logic of abduction. Journal
of Applied Logic, 13, 285–315. L. Magnani (2016), The eco-cognitive model
of abduction II. Irrelevance and implausibility exculpated, Journal of Applied
Logic 15, 94–129; (chapter one); L. Magnani (2019), AlphaGo, locked strategies,

Preface
xv
eco-cognitive openness, in H. Zenil and S. Bringsjord, eds., “Philosophy and
Epistemology of Deep Learning” a special issue of Philosophies 2019, 4(1), 8,
https://doi.org/10.3390/philosophies4010008 (chapter three); L. Magnani, (2009),
Abductive Cognition. The Epistemological and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of Hy-
pothetical Reasoning, Springer (chapter two); L. Magnani, (2017), The Abductive
Structure of Scientiﬁc Creativity. An Essay on the Ecology of Cognition, Springer
(chapter four), L. Magnani (2021), Computational domestication of ignorant en-
tities. Unconventional cognitive embodiments, Synthese 198, 7503–7532, Special
Issue edited by L. Magnani and S. Arﬁni “Knowing the Unknown: Philosophical
Perspectives on Ignorance,” (chapter ﬁve). I am grateful to Elsevier and Springer for
permission to include portions of previously published articles.
Pavia, Italy
Lorenzo Magnani
July 2021
Reference
Magnani, L. (2007). Morality in a technological world. Knowledge as duty.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Contents
1
Discoverability Explained ...................................................
1
1.1
Sustaining Discoverability: Towards an Ecology of Human
Creative Cognition ......................................................
2
1.2
The Eco-Cognitive Model of Abduction (EC-model) .................
3
1.3
Abduction and the Optimization of Eco-Cognitive Situatedness .....
5
1.4
Irrelevance and Implausibility Defended ..............................
7
1.5
Identifying the Optimization of Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
in a Logical Perspective.................................................
14
1.5.1
The Importance of “Optimally Positioning” Input
and Output ......................................................
17
References .....................................................................
23
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness ........................................
27
2.1
Various Types of Abduction Depend on the Character
of Eco-Cognitive Situatedness..........................................
28
2.1.1
“Ecological Validity”: Data as Appropriate
Affordances that Trigger Abductive Cognition................
28
2.1.2
Affordances, Diagnosticability, and Creative
Abduction: The Plasticity of Environmental Situatedness ....
32
2.2
Discoverability and Diagnosticability through Affordance
Creation..................................................................
35
2.2.1
Latent Constraints ..............................................
35
2.2.2
Creating Chances through Manipulating Artifacts
and External Representations ..................................
38
2.3
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness to Favor Abductive
Cognition ................................................................
43
2.4
Protecting the Inferential View of Abduction, Affordances,
and Cognitive Niches ...................................................
46
References .....................................................................
49
xvii

xviii
Contents
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure ....................
53
3.1
Locked and Unlocked Strategies in Natural and Artiﬁcial
Cognition ................................................................
53
3.1.1
Reading Ahead..................................................
55
3.2
Locked Abductive Strategies Defeat the Eco-Cognitive Openness ...
57
3.3
Locking Strategies Restricts Creativity ................................
58
3.4
Governing Diagnosticability and Discoverability:
Conﬁnement, Filter Bubbles, and Ignorance...........................
64
3.4.1
Disﬁgured Affordances, Adversarial Abduction, and
Fake Diagnosticability (and Discoverability)..................
65
3.5
Maximizing Discoverability in Scientiﬁc Discovery:
The Centrality of Eco-Cognitive Openness ............................
66
3.5.1
“Knowledge in Motion” Defended: Favoring
Scientiﬁc Abduction through the Maximization of
Eco-Cognitive Openness .......................................
67
3.5.2
Marketing Technoscientiﬁc Results............................
72
References .....................................................................
76
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability................................................
79
4.1
Jeopardizing Human Creative Abduction Through
Impoverished Epistemic Niches ........................................
80
4.1.1
Epistemic Irresponsibility I: Expensive Drugs
Now and the Undisciplined Commodiﬁcation of
Abduction in Science ...........................................
80
4.1.2
Epistemic Irresponsibility II: How to Avoid the
Eco-Cognitive Shutdown of Creative Abduction..............
85
4.1.3
Epistemic Irresponsibility III: Neoliberalism
Assaults to Epistemic Integrity of Biopharmaceutical
Research ........................................................
88
4.2
Optimizing the Eco-Cognitive Situatedness: Human
Creative Abduction between Academia and Corporations ...........
94
4.2.1
“The Symbiotic Model of Innovation”
and the Precompetitive Collaborations ........................
96
References ..................................................................... 100
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings ..................................... 105
5.1
Protecting Ignorance: Beyond Overcomputationalization ............ 105
5.1.1
Pancognitivism, Paninformationalism,
Pancomputationalism ........................................... 105
5.1.2
Protecting Ignorant Entities .................................... 110
5.2
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings.................................. 111
5.2.1
Computational Invasive “Subcultures” Undermine
Human Creative Abduction in Science ....................... 112
5.2.2
Science Impoverished: Encouraging Epistemic
Irresponsibility through Ignorance ............................. 114
5.3
Enhancing Discoverability.............................................. 117

Contents
xix
5.3.1
Tracking the External World I: Enhancing Predictive
Knowledge ...................................................... 118
5.3.2
Tracking the External World II: The Role of
Scientiﬁc Knowledge ........................................... 120
5.3.3
Tracking Human Behavior: Rendering Human
Behavior Predictable Through Ethics.......................... 121
References ..................................................................... 124
Conclusion ........................................................................ 127
Lexicon of Discoverability....................................................... 131
References ..................................................................... 147
Index ............................................................................... 149

Chapter 1
Discoverability Explained
Optimizing the Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
Fruitfully approaching the problems of discoverability involves an important inter-
mediate step, which concerns the role of abductive cognition, that is reasoning to
hypotheses and the logical models of it. To this aim, when engaged in formalizing
abductive reasoning, it is extremely useful to see inferences adopting the more
general concepts of input and output instead of those of premisses and conclusions,
which are standardly used to characterize abduction in the syllogistic scheme of the
fallacy of “afﬁrming the consequent”. As I will better explain below, we can say
that of course the relation from premisses to conclusions still represents a particular
case of input-output relation, but seeing abductive inferences in the input/output
framework helps to abandon the habit—typical of the image of abductive inference
as composed by premisses and a conclusion—of privileging the reaching of an
output as the abductive conclusion. On the contrary, adopting the view of inference
in terms of input and output can highlight the process of modifying part of the
inputs, or both inputs and outputs, in order to obtain the desired relation between
inputs and outputs. Indeed, from this perspective abductive inferences can be ﬁrst
of all seen as related to logical processes in which input and output fail to hold
each other in an expected relation, with the solution involving the modiﬁcation
of inputs, not that of outputs. Unfortunately, if input and output fail to hold
each other in a “good” relation, very difﬁcult is to solve the related abductive
problem: discoverability is jeopardized. In this perspective—and given the fact
science produces and “maximizes” cognition through a process in which afﬁrming
truths implies negating truths—the analysis of abductive processes leads us to
the emphasis on the importance of the following main aspects: “optimization of
eco-cognitive situatedness”, “maximization of changeability” of both input and
output, and high “information-sensitiveness”. I will also illustrate that irrelevance
and implausibility are not always offensive to reason and so they can favor both
discoverability and discovery. For example, we cannot be sure, more broadly, that
our guessed hypotheses are plausible (even if we know that looking—in advance—
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
L. Magnani, Discoverability, Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning 26,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93329-6_1
1

2
1
Discoverability Explained
for plausibility is a human good and wise heuristic), indeed an implausible
hypothesis can, later on, result plausible.
1.1
Sustaining Discoverability: Towards an Ecology
of Human Creative Cognition
To further illustrate the importance of sustaining human creativity through the
enhancement of discoverability the example of the recent Encyclical Letter of
the Holy Father Francis, head of the Catholic Church, is very useful. In the
recent Encyclical Letter Laudato Si’ of the Holy Father Francis on Care for Our
Common Home the Pope various times quotes the importance of human creativity
in solving the several problems of humanity that are illustrated. Creativity is
seen as a fundamental tool necessary to ﬁx the failures of our societies and our
lives. Just to make some examples, we ﬁnd the following sentences: “In order to
continue providing employment, it is imperative to promote an economy which
favours productive diversity and business creativity” (129), “creativity should be
shown in integrating rundown neighbourhoods into a welcoming city” (152), “[...]
political and institutional frameworks do not exist simply to avoid bad practice,
but also to promote best practice, to stimulate creativity in seeking new solutions
and to encourage individual or group initiatives” (177). Moreover, the awareness
concerning the fact that in current societies creativity is jeopardized is exhibited:
speaking of the effect of technology we ﬁnd for example the following sentences
“Our capacity to make decisions, more genuine freedom and the space for each
one’s alternative creativity are diminished” (108) “Human creativity cannot be
suppressed” (131).
Chapter four of the Encyclical Letter introduces the need of an integral ecology,
also necessary in education, many subtypes of ecology are illustrated: ﬁrst of all
environmental, economical, and social ecology, but also cultural ecology, ecology
of daily life, human ecology, ecology of man (“man too has a nature that he must
respect and that he cannot manipulate at will”—155). In all these endeavors, related
to the emancipation of human lives, human creativity is so fundamental that I would
strongly suggest to integrate the Encyclical deontological commitments with what
I call ecology of human creativity.
My proposal of integration of the Encyclical deontological commitments resorts
to the need of accepting that this kind of ecology of human creativity has priority
over the others illustrated in the Encyclical Letter: consequently, a ﬁrst ecological
duty is the one of protecting and sustain human creativity because it is exactly
human creativity that can grant the implementation of the other kinds of ecology
I have just quoted from the Encyclical letter. I consider the ecology of human
creativity a conditio sine qua non in the following sense: I am convinced that
without creativity and skillful human capacities all the other envisaged and invoked
ecologies and sustainability, in general, tend to sadly fail.
In the present book, I will for example illustrate the importance of sustaining
the so-called epistemic niches, that is of those eco-settings that are the condition of

1.2
The Eco-Cognitive Model of Abduction (EC-model)
3
possibility of scientiﬁc creativity. I will center my attention on scientiﬁc creativity
because of the importance of it in our current societies and collectives, not only
because of its intrinsic—so to speak—value, but also because, in our technological
era, full of science-based artifacts of various types, knowledge in general and
scientiﬁc knowledge in particular are fundamental. In my book Morality in a
Technological World. Knowledge as Duty (Magnani, 2007) I extendedly treated
this issue, arguing that the maintenance and ﬂourishing of technological societies
requires a great deal of new scientiﬁc and ethical knowledge as well as modern
approaches to moral deliberation, and to achieve these goals I provided compelling
analyses also offering a variety of strategies we might use to solve them. I
believe that producing and applying recalibrated appropriate general, scientiﬁc, and
moral knowledge has become a duty. It is in this vein that I analyzed troubling
issues such as cyberprivacy, globalization, bad faith, cloning, biotechnologies, and
ecological imbalances: the right creative knowledge, I think, can manage these
challenges and counter many of technology’s ill effects by preserving ownership
of our own destinies, encouraging responsibility, and enhancing freedom. However,
creative knowledge can completely ﬂourish only when discoverability is sustained,
protected, and enhanced.
A consequence of the above considerations is the following: if creativity is
jeopardized and in particular scientiﬁc creativity, it is practically impossible to
acceptably and successfully deal with our technological societies, also from an
ethical perspective: this means that the need of an ecology of human creativity I
am endorsing here is rooted in the observations I have just sketched, quoting my
book of 2007.
1.2
The Eco-Cognitive Model of Abduction (EC-model)
At the center of my perspective on cognition and consequently of abduction is
the emphasis on the “practical agent”, on the individual agent operating “on the
ground”, that is, in the circumstances of real life. In all its contexts, from the
most abstractly logical and mathematical to the most roughly empirical, I always
emphasize the cognitive nature of abduction. Reasoning is something performed by
cognitive systems. At a certain level of abstraction and as a ﬁrst approximation, a
cognitive system is a triple (A, T, R), in which A is an agent, T is a cognitive target
of the agent, and R relates to the cognitive resources on which the agent can count in
the course of trying to meet the target-information,time and computational capacity,
to name the three most important. My agents are also embodied distributed cognitive
systems: cognition is embodied and the interactions between brains, bodies, and
external environment are its central aspects. Cognition is occurring taking advantage
of a constant exchange of information in a complex distributed system that crosses
the boundary between humans, artifacts, and the surrounding environment, where
also instinctual and unconscious abilities play an important role. This interplay is

4
1
Discoverability Explained
especially manifest and clear in various aspects of abductive cognition, that is in
reasoning to hypotheses.
My perspective adopts the wide Peircean philosophical framework, which
approaches “inference” semiotically (and not simply “logically”): Peirce distinctly
says that all inference is a form of sign activity, where the word sign includes
“feeling, image, conception, and other representation” (Peirce, 1866–1913, 5.283).
It is clear that this semiotic view is considerably compatible with my description
of cognitive systems as embodied and distributed systems. It is in this perspective
that we can fully appreciate the role of abductive cognition, which not only refers
to propositional aspects but it is also performed in a framework of distributed
cognition, in which also models, artifacts, internal and external representations, and
manipulations play an important role. Already in a passage concerning abduction
(that is
 —“leading away”) of chapter B25 of the Aristotelian Prior
Analytics, we can see some of the current well-known distinctive characters of
abductive cognition, which are in tune with my eco-cognitive model of abduction
(EC-Model), I will soon describe. Aristotle is already pointing to the fundamental
inferential role in reasoning of those externalities that substantiate the process
of “leading away” ( ) . We can gain a new positive perspective about
the “constitutive” eco-cognitive character of abduction, just thanks to Aristotle
himself.1
The backbone of this approach can be found in the manifesto of my Eco-
Cognitive Model (EC-Model) of abduction in (Magnani, 2009).2 It might seem
awkward to speak of “abduction of a hypothesis in literature,” but one of the
fascinating aspects of abduction is that not only it can warrant for scientiﬁc
discovery, but for other kinds of creativity as well. We must not necessarily see
abduction as a problem-solving device that sets off in response to a cognitive
irritation/doubt: conversely, it could be supposed that esthetic abductions (referring
to creativity in art, literature, music, games, etc.) arise in response to some kind of
esthetic irritation that the author (sometimes a genius) perceives in herself or in the
public. Furthermore, not only esthetic abductions are free from empirical constraints
in order to become the “best” choice: many forms of abductive hypotheses in
traditionally-perceived-as-rational domains (such as the setting of initial conditions,
or axioms, in physics or mathematics) are relatively free from the need of an
empirical assessment. The same could be said of moral judgments: they are eco-
cognitive abductions, inferred upon a range of internal and external cues and, as
soon as the judgment hypothesis has been abduced, it immediately “can” become
prescriptive and “true,” informing the agent’s behavior as such.
The kinds of abduction that do not need empirical conﬁrmation can be called
“knowledge enhancing”: Peirce implicitly provides various justiﬁcations of the
1 I have illustrated in detail the various aspects, philosophical, logical, and cognitive of the
Aristotelian ideas concerning abduction in (Magnani, 2015b, 2016, 2017) and in the recent
(Magnani, 2021).
2 Further details concerning the EC-model of abduction can be found in (Magnani, 2015b, 2016).

1.3
Abduction and the Optimization of Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
5
knowledge enhancing role of abduction, that is when abduction is not considered
an inference to the best explanation (IBE) in the classical sense of the expression,
that is an inference necessarily characterized by an empirical evaluation phase, or
inductive phase. In chapter three of (Magnani, 2017) I have provided the example
of conventions: abducing conventions favors and increases knowledge even if these
hypotheses remain evidentially inert—at least in the sense that it is not possible to
empirically falsify them. Consequently, abduced conventions are evidentially inert
but knowledge enhancing at the rational level of science.
A rich analysis of the various criteria (or—more simply—of the various inter-
mediate criteria for provisionally “judging” abductive results, such as plausibility,
relevance, consistency, simplicity, minimality, likeliness, loveliness, probability,
uberty, fruitfulness, etc.) that characterize a “best explanation”, as they are il-
lustrated by the rich literature on the issue produced in last decades, is offered
by (Cabrera, 2017, 2020). Cabrera proposes a less misleading name for IBE:
“inference to the hypothesis with the optimal combination of explanatory virtues”.
This qualiﬁcation emphasizes the contextual character and the fact that a privileged
model of explanation is irrelevant and unnecessary. It is also usefully observed: “Of
course, explanationists must tackle other obstacles, such as offering more detailed
accounts of the virtues, of why those virtues are epistemically relevant, and of how
the virtues are to be agglomerated and compared. Still though, appealing to the
explanatory virtues [...], provides, in my view, an elegant solution to what would
otherwise be a devastating objection to IBE” (Cabrera, 2020, p. 21).
Assessing that there is a common ground in all these works of what could be
broadly deﬁned as “creativity” does not imply that all of these forms of selective or
creative abduction3 with their related cognitive strategies are the same, contrarily it
should spark the need for ﬁrm and sensible categorization: otherwise it would be
like saying that to construct a doll, a machine-gun and a nuclear reactor are all the
same thing because we use our hands in order to do so!
1.3
Abduction and the Optimization of Eco-Cognitive
Situatedness
When I say that abduction can be knowledge-enhancing I am referring to various
types of newly produced knowledge of various novelty levels, in absence of an
empirical evaluation phase, or inductive phase, as Peirce called it. Some cases of
new knowledge produced in science (for example, conventions and intermediate
3 For example, selective abduction is active in diagnostic reasoning, where it is merely seen as an
activity of “selecting” from an encyclopedia of pre-stored hypotheses; creative abduction instead
refers to the building of new hypotheses. I have proposed the dichotomic distinction between
selective and creative abduction in (Magnani, 2001). A recent and clear analysis of this dichotomy
and of other classiﬁcations emphasizing different aspects of abduction I have described is given in
(Park, 2015).

6
1
Discoverability Explained
models used in research settings), are cases of knowledge enhancing abduction.
However, also knowledge produced in an artiﬁcial game thanks to a smart appli-
cation of strategies or the invention of new strategies and/or heuristics has to be
seen as the fruit of knowledge-enhancing abduction. This means that abduction
is not necessarily ignorance-preserving (reached hypotheses would always be
“presumptive” and to be accepted they always need empirical conﬁrmation), as
contended by Gabbay and Woods (2005), with their Gabbay-Woods schema of
abduction (GW-schema). Abduction can creatively build new knowledge by itself
(that is as an inference not necessarily characterized by an empirical evaluation
phase, or inductive phase), as various examples coming from the area of history
of science and other ﬁelds of human cognition clearly show.4
I contend that to reach selective or creative good abductive results efﬁcient
strategies have to be exploited, but it is also necessary to count on an environment
characterized by various degrees of what I have called eco-cognitive situatedness,
in which that eco-cognitive openness already envisaged by Aristotle thanks to
the emphasis on “leading away”5 is fundamental (Magnani, 2016). To favor good
creative and selective abduction reasoning strategies must not be “locked” in an
external restricted eco-cognitive environment such as in a scenario characterized
by ﬁxed deﬁnitory rules and ﬁnite material aspects (an artiﬁcial game, Go or
Chess, for example), which would function as cognitive mediators able to constrain
agents’ reasoning.6 In brief, the optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness concerns
the substantial problem of discoverability and diagnosticability, almost totally
disregarded in the literature on abduction (and just sketched by Peirce himself).
I have to anticipate that the solution of this problem has to take into account
the fact that we deal with something fundamentally characterized by contextual
conﬁgurations.
Research on abduction has frequently emphasized the fruitful role of cognitive
openness. (Hendricks & Faye, 1999) consider trans-paradigmatic abduction a form
of discovery in which a guessed hypothesis transcends the prompt empirical
agreement between two paradigms. The paradigms are presumed to belong to the
same ﬁeld (for example physics) where one of the ﬁelds is well established and the
other is emerging (for example classical and quantum physics):
New theoretical concepts can be introduced transcending the current body of background
knowledge while yet others remain within the given understanding of things. A case in
point would be the formulation of the hypothesis of electron spin. Bohr considered the spin
conjecture as a welcome supplement to the current magnetic core theory. Pauli remained
rather skeptical pertaining to the spin hypothesis due to the fact that it actually required
the theory of quantum mechanics for its proper justiﬁcation, which was not part of the
4 I better supported my claim about the knowledge enhancing character of abduction in the recent
(Magnani, 2015b, 2016). Woods has recently enriched, modiﬁed, and moderated his views of
ignorance-preservation, see (Woods, 2017).
5 Cf. the previous section of this chapter.
6 More details concerning the role of locked and unlocked strategies are illustrated in the recent
(Magnani, 2019) and in chapter three of this book.

1.4
Irrelevance and Implausibility Defended
7
background knowledge at the time of the conjecture. In such cases, two paradigms are
competing and the abduction is then dependent upon whether the conjecture is made
within the paradigm or outside it. Hence we distinguish between paradigmatic and trans-
paradigmatic abduction (cit., p. 287).
Furthermore, people draw on different domains of knowledge to arrive to an
abductive conclusion thanks to what (Gibson & Bruza, 2021) call “transepistemic
abduction” (TeA), which illustrates how two agents, in order to successfully
explain a phenomenon, reason across two very distant cognitive ﬁelds (for example
computational and psychosocial domains) despite each agent being ignorant of the
other domain knowledge. The authors themselves acknowledge that TeA represents
a case that is partially concerned with my eco-cognitive perspective: “TeA may not
necessarily accommodate wider understandings of abduction like the eco-cognitive
model proposed by Magnani. For example, TeA may not necessarily encompass
perceptions, aesthetic decisions or moral judgements in the way that a eco-cognitive
view of abduction might” (p. 475).
Another interesting procedure that can refer to higher abductive processes in need
of cognitive openness is the chunk-and-permeatemethod (Brown & Priest, 2004), in
which consideration is given to conditions under which mutually incompatible well-
grounded theories can interact to bring forth solutions to problems which neither
theory can solve on its own. This method introduces a paraconsistent reasoning
strategy, in which information is broken up into chunks, and a limited amount
of information is allowed to ﬂow between chunks, and it is applied to model the
reasoning employed in the original inﬁnitesimal calculus.
1.4
Irrelevance and Implausibility Defended
From the perspective of the EC-Model the available logical views concerning abduc-
tion have to be reconsidered. By now this fact is acknowledged by some logicians.
Estrada-González (2013, p. 182), for example, by referring to the properties called
consistency, minimality, etc. stated in the AKM-schema7 usefully notes:
We think that overemphasizing the characteristics of abduction as it occurs in scientiﬁc
practices and daily life scenarios has led to overlook some features that abduction in those
circumstances shares with other phenomena in which some given outputs fail to stand in a
certain relation with some given inputs and thus a modiﬁcation on those inputs is in order.
Indeed, abduction in an eco-cognitive perspective is not circumscribed by
indicating particular requirements of each particular ﬁeld of application, such as
scientiﬁc discovery, diagnosis, machine discovery in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), and
7 Gabbay and Woods (2005) call AKM-schema: for A they refer to Aliseda (1997, 2006), for K to
Kowalski (1979), Kuipers (1999), and Kakas et al. (1993), for M to Magnani (2001) and Meheus
et al. (2002), which is contrasted to their own (GW-schema), which I have explained in chapter
two of my book (Magnani, 2009) and below in this chapter.

8
1
Discoverability Explained
computational creativity. The available logical models of abduction (orchestrated
around the properties of classical deduction), the so-called nonmonotonic, adaptive,
etc. logics, which restrict their structure to some of the above requirements,
are extremely important and provide images of abduction that, even if logically
powerful, are partial, limited, and not appropriate to represent general perspectives.
Of course, we acknowledge that the rich research on abduction already available
in the ﬁelds of logic, cognitive science, philosophy, and artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI), has already rehabilitated the “cognitive” importance of the fallacy “afﬁrming
the consequent” (abductive reasoning corresponds to this fallacy in the light of
classical logic), traditionally taken as the mistake of having a conditional and its
consequent, and from this deriving the antecedent. When reframed in the spirit of
the naturalization of logic8 this fallacy becomes a form of abduction endowed with
a positive cognitive value, in most of the real-life reasoning contexts in which it
occurs, included diagnosis and creative processes. It can exhibit what some writers
have called “material validity”,9 in this case to refer to the fact that an invalid form
provides a cognitive good semantic outcome. We need a new logical framework
for abduction: an important step of the naturalization of this fallacy is certainly
the already widespread acknowledgment of the agent-based nature of abduction but
also—as I will stress below, taking advantage of my EC-Model—of its eco-cognitive
situatedness.
The already available taxonomy of the various kinds of abduction, which myself
and many authors have proposed and analyzed, is extremely useful because it
shows that we are dealing with cognitive activities extremely variegated but also
tremendously fruitful, resorting to the common aim of guessing hypotheses that can
provide various kinds of reliable knowledge, common, scientiﬁc, moral, aesthetical,
etc. These abductively established kinds of cognition do not necessarily aim at
providing truths in the sense of the word established by the tradition of the
epistemology of natural sciences: for example, abduction certainly works when
performed to establish a new “truth” in physics, but also when exploited to make
a “good” hypothesis (for example about a person) in gossip. In this last case
the reaching of a truth based on evidence, that is a truth that would be such
because, for example, in tune with the spirit of scientiﬁc rationality—is usually
a secondary concern. For example, in the case of cognitive moral interplays of
gossip, it is the produced hypothesis (about a person or an event) that establishes—
constitutes, we could say—a special kind of “truth” by itself, that truth that is
8 In (Magnani, 2015a) I have illustrated and commented on Woods’ program of naturalization of
logic advanced in his recent book Errors of Reasoning: Naturalizing the Logic of Inference (Woods,
2013). This program aims at bringing logic into a creative rapprochement with cognitive science.
This can be achieved by trying to do for logic what over forty years ago Quine and others attempted
for epistemology: similarly, it is necessary to propose a “naturalization” of the logic which leads
logic closer to actual human inference through a process of de-idealization.
9 The standard concept of material validity is illustrated in (Brandom, 2000), as a case of
semantically valid inference, which instantiates an invalid syntactic form. I adopt the same term
slightly modifying its meaning.

1.4
Irrelevance and Implausibility Defended
9
such because locally/situationally accepted and efﬁciently adopted by the involved
human group: this is just what it takes, to promote the narratives or the actions—
sometimes violent—which the relationships between the individuals of the group
aim at performing.10
First of all, we have to say that an abductive inference is not different from other
inferences: it presents outputs derived from inputs: the AKM and GW schemas I
have quoted above treat abduction in this way. A special perspective can be assumed,
which shapes the inferential status of abduction in a smart way. I can anticipate that,
in this perspective, abduction appears orthogonal to deduction, but not incompatible
with it, such as it is occurring when abduction is seen as a fallacy, in the light
of the classical Peircean syllogistic framework: the important difference is indeed
that in the perspective I will soon illustrate (see the following section) no direct
reference to the fallacious character of abduction is postulated. Hence, to the aim of
“naturalizing” abduction in logic, and to follow the main tenets of my EC-Model, it
is provisionally appropriate to adopt a broad logical view of the so-called inferential
problems, in which the semantic problem of the fallacious character of abduction
and the problem of its presumptive character (stressed by the GW schema) are not
primarily taken into account.11
Let us adopt, following Estrada-González (2013) the more general concepts of
input and output instead of premisses and conclusions: as I have already explained
at the beginning of this chapter, this view consists in seeing inference not only in
terms of the reaching of an output or the modiﬁcation of it, like in the standard view
of deductive proofs,12 but also as the process of modifying part of the inputs, or
both inputs and outputs, in order to obtain the desired relation between inputs and
outputs. In this framework, abductive cognition is easily depicted in terms of the
situation in which some given outputs fail to stand in a certain relation with some
given inputs and thus a modiﬁcation on those inputs is needed. It is a received and
common way of modeling abduction in logic (cf. for example Aliseda, 2006).
Still following Estrada-González, let us consider a simple example such as the
consequence relation of a logic L, ⊩L, and let α, β be formulas of the language of
L, © is a certain binary connective. An abductive problem can be illustrated by the
following incomplete argument, in the sense that the conclusion does not L-follow
10 More details about hypothetical cognition in gossip are illustrated in Magnani (2011) and
Bertolotti & Magnani (2014).
11 Anyway, we have to remember that the presumptive character of abduction manifestly stresses
that necessity—taken in the received Aristotelian sense—is just only one criterion which can
characterize the solution of an inferential problem, if we consider it from a wide point of
view. Also plausibility, probability, possibility, sufﬁciency, defeasibility are completely legitimate
(Woods, 2013, chapter eight). A general inferential problem is not inevitably characterized by the
“necessity” of classical deduction, in the Aristotelian sense, other aspects have to be taken into
account and considered legitimate.
12 From this point of view, deductive and inductive inferences are situated at the same level because
they concern the ﬁnding of suitable modiﬁcations in the outputs (Estrada-González, 2013, pp. 189–
191).

10
1
Discoverability Explained
from the premisses
α©β ̸⊩L β
(1.1)
The making of an abduction I have just described represents the logical counter-
part of the cognitive (and epistemological) ﬁll-up problem13 I have already quoted
above, that is the ﬁnding of a suitable improvement of the context (the premisses),
here the variable ?, such that from the original context and its enrichment the
conclusion L-follows
α©β, ? ⊩L β
(1.2)
Obviously, there are many ways to complete the argument above. A list of various
presumptive very elementary solutions can be easily provided (for example α, or
β), showing that to the aim of choosing among them we need some preferential
measure: this resorts to the cutdown problem.14
13 “There is the problem of ﬁnding criteria for hypothesis selection. But there is the prior problem
of specifying the conditions for thinking up possible candidates for selection. The ﬁrst is a
‘cutdown’ problem. The second is a ‘ﬁll-up problem’; and with the latter comes the received view
that it is not a problem for logic” (Woods, 2011, p. 243 emphasis added). In chapter six of my recent
book on abduction (Magnani, 2017) I have contended that in a wide eco-cognitive perspective the
cutdown and ﬁll-up problems in abductive cognition appear to be spectacularly contextual.
14 In the scheme (1.2), according to Estrada, we might need to add rules and the conclusions
may even be rules. What is needed is an input. However, the scheme represents a kind of
oversimpliﬁcation: abducing new rules cannot simply consist in adding an input instead of ?. It
rather requires some kind of dynamic of the relation expressed by ⊩L. As I will better explain
below, in the case in which new rules are abduced, what is changed is the relation between inputs
and outputs, not only the inputs (even if the new rule is some kind of input as well). This is for
example highlighted by considering a dynamic reading of ⊩L, and that should be accounted for
by the scheme (1.3) at p. 16, in which X in ⊩X
L expresses different potential relations between
input and output and ⊩
√
L expresses the fact that—dynamically—the expected relation is reached.
I repeat, in the simple scheme (1.2), what is needed is clearly an input. However, abducing new
rules cannot simply consist in adding an input instead of ?. This is a point also addressed by
(Barés-Gómez & Fontaine, 2021) and (Fontaine & Barés-Gómez, 2019) in their adaptive dialogical
approach to abduction: in dialogues, there are two kinds of rules. The particular rules provide
the local semantics of the connectives. The structural rules deﬁne the context of argumentation
(the underlying logic), thereby the global semantics of the connectives. A change of structural
rules involves a change of logic. By articulating different sets of structural rules in a speciﬁc
kind of game, a dynamic consequence relation may be obtained. This is precisely how Fontaine
and Barés conceive abduction of rules in dialogues: while the argumentative partners may be
interacting in the context of a dialogue for paraconsistent logic (with constraints on the use of
negation), the hypothesis that negation behaves consistently at some point in the dialogue may be
conjectured (together with a certain commitment to defend further conditions). This might appear
less general, but generality is here to be understood in terms of the structure of the dialogues
which can be similarly adapted to other dynamic processes. Hence, this perspective approaches
abduction without disregarding its pragmatic/dialectical dimension, thanks to the adoption of a
dialogical logic. This current logical illustration of the dialectic involved in abduction is able to
model argumentative interactions leading to conjectures, through a kind of “dialectiﬁcation”.

1.4
Irrelevance and Implausibility Defended
11
It is clear that in principle there might be inﬁnitely many ways to complete
the above argument. Estrada-González (2013, p. 183) notes that abduction “[...]
is usually thought as the construction of a (scientiﬁc) hypothesis for adding it
to a theory and other previous knowledge (the premises) in order to explain a
problematic phenomenon (the conclusion)”. If we adopt this received schema of
abduction in our simple example various solutions should be discarded because they
are not good options: for example, according to some chosen criteria, we can say that
solutions do not have to be trivial, redundant: for example, if one has a connective
K such that β is L-implied by both (α©β)Kβ and α©β, the solution can obviously
be to add the formula (α©β)Kβ. Also, they do not have to lack explanatory power
(such as for example the solution β). Furthermore, a solution that is not simple, and
so excessively explanatory, certainly less simple than another available, has to be
discarded, such as in the following cases, in which complicated solutions are added:
α©β, ϑ, β, α, (α©β)Kβ ⊩L β or α©β, (α©β)Kβ, ⊩L β. Indeed, there is another
solution available that is the preferred one—the solution α.
In sum, by adopting the received logical view of abduction (AKM-schema), we
restrict our general idea of abduction being conditioned by special cases (such as the
dominant ones of medical diagnosis): unfortunately, by restricting our perspective
in this way, some good solutions that would be remarkable and productive in
other cases (for example different with respect to scientiﬁc discovery and medical
diagnosis) can be ruled out. To avoid this result the GW-schema and the EC-Model
of abduction can be of some help. The GW-schema does not refer to consistency
and minimality as necessary requirements.
However, it has to be said that many standard perspectives on abduction still
demand two properties, which are presented as possessed by “every” kind of
solution for an abductive problem:
1. Relevance: the solution, the guessed hypothesis H, should be relevant to the
problem: for example, if an agent’s knowledge does not sufﬁce to know why
the bartender in Kuala Lumpur has been killed, releasing the true Newtonian
hypothesis that the planets move according to the law of gravitation has nothing
to do with the given problem: it is not relevant.
2. Plausibility: The abduced hypothesis H should be characterized by some
designated degree of plausibility. If an agent’s knowledge does not sufﬁce to
know who killed the bartender in Kuala Lumpur, releasing the hypothesis that
the killer is the President of United States has to do with the problem (because,
after all, the President is a human being and we know human beings are potential
killers) but is sufﬁciently implausible as to count as a solution.
Since for many abductive problems there are—usually—many guessed hypothe-
ses, the abducer needs to reduce this space to one. This means that the abducer has to
produce the best choice among the members of the available group: It is extremely
difﬁcult to see how this is done, both formally and empirically. There is the
problem of ﬁnding criteria for hypothesis selection. But there is the prior problem
of specifying the conditions for thinking up possible candidates for selection, I have
already explained above. In particular, formal models aim at producing fragments of

12
1
Discoverability Explained
classical logic in which instances of abductive or backward reasoning are allowed.
It is also interesting to note that recent studies, even if not directly related to the
naturalization of the logic of abduction, are strongly concerned with the role of
context in reasoning: Zardini emphasizes, in a recent rich formal treatment, the role
of simple temporal “intercontextual” logics, which aim at adequately modeling the
validity of certain arguments in which the context changes (Zardini, 2014).
Indeed in the eco-cognitive perspective the relevance of a guessed hypothesis
would seem a trivial requirement because it is “hard to see how it might fail to
be relevant”, as Estrada-González says (2013, p. 185). He further adds: “Someone
might press the point that what is required is the relevance not of solutions,
but of candidates to be solutions. However, I think it might go against all those
pleas connecting abduction with creativity, hypothesis generation, guessing, etc.”
I basically agree with him. This is exactly the point to be stressed and further
explained. First of all, we have to note that relevance is context- and time-dependent.
When Feyerabend (1975) emphasizes the role of what he calls “counterinduction”,
he is just presenting to us the complete unreasonable and unwarranted character
of scientiﬁc discovery: the guessed hypothesis could be devoid of relevance to the
problem in the framework of the upholders of the rival theory but also, even if not
necessarily, in the perspective of the agent herself that—paradoxically—guessed
the new “strange” hypothesis. Of course, the relevance requirement is related to
the current state of knowledge of both agonists. However, the new hypothesis can
result “relevant” later on, for example when recognized as a new discovery. To
summarize, candidates to be solutions which seem weird—irrelevant—soon can
become relevant if they are recognized as solutions.
Something similar can be said in the case of plausibility. First of all, in general,
we cannot be sure that our guessed hypotheses are plausible (even if we know that
looking for plausibility is a human good and wise heuristic), indeed an implausible
hypothesis can, later on, result plausible. Moreover, when a hypothesis solves the
problem at hand, this is enough to count as a solution of the abductive problem (even
if, not necessarily a good solution or the best solution). If we want to preserve the
property of plausibility, at most, we can say that in some cases it is just potential,
given the time-dependency I have illustrated.
To make an example, the strange Cartesian hypothesis of a plenum vortices made
of particles, destroyed by the Newtonian concept of action at distance, later on,
appeared more rational and fully compatible with the Einsteinian framework:
Thus Descartes was not so far from the truth when he believed he must exclude the existence
of empty space. The notion indeed appears absurd, as long as physical reality is seen
exclusively in ponderable bodies. It requires the idea of the ﬁeld as the representative of
reality, in combination with the general principle of relativity, to show the true kernel of
Descartes’ idea; there exists no space “empty of ﬁeld” (Einstein, 2014, pp. 375–376).

1.4
Irrelevance and Implausibility Defended
13
In sum, irrelevance and implausibility not always are offensive to reason:15
to delineate the ﬁll-up problem neither relevance, nor plausibility are necessary,
they are just two “typical” smart and fruitful principles human beings subjectively
adopt to look for hypotheses. Unfortunately, they are no longer “typical”, for
example, in the case of high-level kinds of cognitive creativity. Also the GW-schema
acknowledges the fact that relevance or plausibility cannot be taken to be general
conditions of hypothesis selection.
It is now useful to provide a short introduction to the concept of eco-cognitive
openness from a logical point of view. The new perspective inaugurated by the so-
called naturalization of logic16 contends that the normative authority claimed by
formal models of ideal reasoners to regulate human practice on the ground is, to
date, unfounded. It is necessary to propose a “naturalization” of the logic of human
inference. Woods holds a naturalized logic to an adequacy condition of “empirical
sensitivity” (Woods, 2013). A naturalized logic is open to study many ways of
reasoning that are typical of actual human knowers, such as fallacies, which, even
if not truth preserving inferences nonetheless can provide truths and productive
results. Of course one of the best examples is the logic of abduction, where the
naturalization of the well-known fallacy “afﬁrming the consequent” is at play.
(Gabbay & Woods, 2005, p. 81) clearly maintain that Peirce’s abduction, depicted
as both a) a surrender to an idea, and b) a method for testing its consequences
perfectly resembles central aspects of practical reasoning but also of creative
scientiﬁc reasoning.
It is useful to refer to my recent research on abduction (Magnani, 2016), which
stresses the importance in good abductive cognition of various kinds of the already
quoted optimization of situatedness: abductive cognition in a situation of “strong”
eco-cognitiveopenness is for example very important in scientiﬁc reasoning because
it refers to that activity of creative hypothesis generation which characterizes one of
the more valued aspects of rational knowledge. I think that in scientiﬁc creative
reasoning discoverability is only granted by a maximization/optimization of eco-
cognitive openness. The study above teaches us that situatedness is related to the
so-called eco-cognitive aspects, referred to various contexts in which knowledge is
“traveling”:17 to favor the solution of an inferential problem—especially in science
but also in the case of other abductive problems, such as diagnosis—the richness of
the ﬂux of information has to be maximized.
In my opinion, it is exactly the presence of a “maximization/optimization of
eco-cognitive openness” that can favor the discoverability of abductive hypotheses
characterized by what Peirce called “uberty”, as a potentiality to arrive at undis-
15 Scientists would agree that the really surprising and fruitful thought arising from abduction has
to challenge prevailing conceptions by suggesting ideas that are prima facie neither relevant nor
plausible, nor that even appear to contradict pre-established notions (see e.g. the book by Livio,
2013).
16 I have illustrated this new project in (Magnani, 2015a). See also above the last part of Sect. 1.2.
17 Cf. chapter three, this book.

14
1
Discoverability Explained
covered truths: “I think logicians should have two principal aims: 1st, to bring out
the amount and kind of security (approach to certainty) of each kind of reasoning,
and 2nd, to bring out the possible and desirable uberty, or value in productiveness,
of each kind” (Peirce, 1866–1913, 8.384). As I have illustrated above hypotheses
of this kind—uberous hypotheses are a typical possible fruit of abduction—are
often irrelevant and implausible in the perspective of the contemporary context but
have a high potential to favor undiscovered truths. This means that plausibility
and relevance are often deceptive guidance that can generate a bad result: the
overlooking of potentially fecund hypotheses. The price of uberty is lost security.18
1.5
Identifying the Optimization of Eco-Cognitive
Situatedness in a Logical Perspective
A good abductive
logical system is classically characterized by the following
general distinct levels, which resort to the ﬁll-up and cutdown aspects I have already
explained above:
– a base logic L1 with proof procedures Π;
– an abductive algorithm which deploys Π to look for missing premisses and
other formulas to be abduced;
– a logic L2 for deciding which abduced formulas to choose, which criteria of
selection apply, etc. This logic is related to the speciﬁcation of suitable con-
straints regarding plausibility, relevance (topical, full-use, redundancy-oriented,
probabilistic), etc., and economy, making the ideal agent able to discount and
select information that does not resolve the task at hand (Gabbay & Woods,
2005).
As I have illustrated above it is thanks to the so-called GW-schema that Gabbay
and Woods
criticize what they call the classic AKM-schema of abduction. A
primary gift provided by this new GW-schema was the opening of the discussion
about ignorance preservation but also about non-explanatory and instrumental
abduction, considered as not intrinsically consequentialist.19
In the previous parts of this chapter, I have underlined that relevance and
plausibility are context- and time-dependent, and so they are not necessary aspects
of all potential successful abductions: this means that also in this perspective eco-
cognitive environmental situatedness of abductive cognition matters more than
expected. From the perspective of logic, the ﬁrst consequence is that the ﬁll-up
problem should consist of a logic eco-cognitively disciplined and multimodally built.
I have indicated above—also taking advantage of the analysis of the Aristotelian
18 On Peirce and uberty cf. (McJohn, 1993; Campos, 2011; Mcauliffe, 2015; Pietarinen, 2020).
19 I have illustrated non-explanatory and instrumental abduction in (Magnani, 2009, chapter two),
also providing some case studies.

1.5
Identifying the Optimization of Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
15
concept of “leading away” (  )—that looking for a naturalization of the logic
of abduction, it is fruitful to follow the main tenets of my EC-Model. Consequently
it is appropriate to adopt, when dealing with the so-called “inferential problem”
of abduction, the more general concepts of input and output instead of those of
premisses and conclusions, in the perspective I have already illustrated above. In
such a way there is one more advantage: it is more natural to accept the multimodal
character of the inferences involved. In this perspective we expect to have a logic
in which the artiﬁcial language presents an extendable expressive capacity and that
can also be itself composed of icons and not only of symbols, like it is occurring
in the case of heterogeneous logics. Some logicians seem to acknowledge this need
when dealing with a broad view of the inference problems: “An inference can be
seen as an argument completion process, where premises are reduced either to a
single formula or to multiple formulas, depending on whether single—or multiple—
conclusion logics are used. But although the conclusion might consist of a single
formula, we might need to add rules, theories, etc. to complete an argument, and
not just adding formulas in the context. Nonetheless, the conclusions could be also
rules (if for example, in a logic we want a rule to be a derived one, we may need
to make some input to the original logic), theories, valid arguments, diagrams, etc.”
[...] (Estrada-González, 2013, p. 186).
To the aim of explaining and describing how discoverability and diagnosticability
are so important in abductive cognition the reader has to be patient and to examine
the following characterization of abduction, which will highlight and illustrate the
problem of optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness, taking advantage of simple
logical considerations. Let Θ = {Γ1, . . . , Γm} be a background theory, P
=
{Δ1, . . . , Δn} a set of true sentences corresponding—for example—to phenomena
to be explained and ⊩a consequence relation, usually—but not necessarily—
the classical one. According to the received AKM schema I have quoted above,
abduction refers to the inference of P from Θ and H
=
{A1, . . . , Ak}, a
collection of hypotheses, given some further constraints, which can basically relate
to consistency, minimality, and preference, as we have repeatedly stated. In this
perspective an abductive problem concerns the ﬁnding of a suitable improvement
of A1, . . . , Ak such that Γ1, . . . Γm, A1, . . . , Ak ⊩L Δ1, . . . , Δn is L-valid. It is
obvious that an improvement of the input Γ1, . . . Γm can be reached by additions
of a “new” background theory but also by modiﬁcation and enrichment of the
input already available in the given inferential problem: this process refers to the
importance of the “optimal position” of both input and output, as I will better
describe in the following section.
In the perspective above in terms of inferential problems an inference is not only
seen in terms of the process that leads to the generation of and output or to the proof
of it, like in the traditional and standard view of deductive proofs, when we have to
obtain the output from the input. In this broader logical view an inferential problem
is also the process of increasing or modifying part of the input, or both input and
output, in order to obtain a desired relation between input and output. Of course,
the reached extension or modiﬁcation is the solution of the inferential problem. It is
clear that in the case of abductive cognition input and output fail to stand each other

16
1
Discoverability Explained
in an expected relation and the solution requires enrichment of part of input, not of
output: these enrichment represents the solution of the abductive problem.
I have already said that this process of modiﬁcation of input is basically
multimodal and various context-depending conditions have to be fulﬁlled in order
to reach the (best) solution. From this perspective the general form of an inferential
abductive problem can be symbolically rendered as follows (Estrada-González,
2013, p. 189):
Λ1, . . . , Λi, ?I ⊩X
L Υ1, . . . , .Υj
(1.3)
in which ⊩X
L indicates that input and output do not stand each other in an expected
relation and that the generation of the input ?I can provide the solution. ⊩
√
L will
denote that the expected relation is obtained.
In general, in this characterization, the direction is not from evidence/premisses
to abductive result but the forward fashion is adopted, where the inferential parame-
ter ⊩sets some appropriate logical relationship between an input which consists in
both the abductive guess to be found and a background theory, and an output—
premisses, for example, an evidence, a novel phenomenon to be abductively
“explained” through facts, rules, or even new theories. The inferential parameter
does not have to be considered neither the semantic entailment above nor the
classical derivability. Aliseda observes that it ranges—at least in the case of the main
received non-standard logical accounts—over diverse values such as for example
probable inference, logic programming, or dynamic inference: “abduction is not
one speciﬁc non-standard logical inference mechanism, but rather a way of using
any one of these” (Aliseda, 2006, p. 47); also, she stresses that it is logically useful
to depict “explanatory” consistent abduction by extracting those sets of “top-down”
(van Benthem, 2007, p. 272) basic properties that are called structural rules of
inference, such as conditional reﬂexivity, simultaneous cut, conclusion consistency,
modiﬁed monotonicity, modiﬁed cut, rejection of permutation in dynamic inference,
etc., which “ﬁt a logical format” (Aliseda, 2006, p. 150).
The structural rules reverberate—Aliseda (cit., p. 95) says they “state how
abductive explanatory logic behaves”—the fact that abduction can be expressed by
deviant (but still logical) systems, endowed with extra-systematic speciﬁc notions
of validity, even if, unfortunately, they do not provide methods for generating
abductive explanations, such as it is occurring computing abduction thanks to logic
programming and semantic tableaux.
Finally, it has to be remembered that, if we consider the generation of the input
?I that provides the solution as subjunctively attained, such as in the case of the
ignorance-preserving abductions illustrated by the GW-schema, then these comput-
ing devices do not appear to be “genuine” abductions. In this perspective Woods
observes that in the case of semantic tableaux abduction resembles enthymeme
resolution and so does not reﬂect its presumptive character: the task resorts to the
rehabilitation of an ailing deduction. In semantic tableaux abduction, “the task is
to ﬁnd a φ that closes a model-connection between a theory and some (usually)

1.5
Identifying the Optimization of Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
17
empirical data, which also is the repair of a decrepit deduction” (Woods, 2007,
p. 310). In the light of the presumptive character of the GW schema, and only in
this light, there is nothing that is abductive about such closures. Indeed |-closures
are possible without there being any ignorance-problem to which the closure is a
response.
1.5.1
The Importance of “Optimally Positioning” Input
and Output
I contend that to get good abductions, such as for example the creative ones that are
typical of scientiﬁc innovation, the input (background theory) and output (evidence,
premisses) of the formula Λ1, . . . , Λi, ?I ⊩X
L Υ1, . . . , .Υj (in which ⊩X
L indicates
that input and output do not stand each other in an expected relation and that the
generation of the input ?I can provide the solution) have to be thought as optimally
positioned. Not only, this optimality, in various types of abduction even if not
in all, is made possible—at least in scientiﬁc discovery—by a maximization of
changeability of both input and output; again, not only input has to be enriched
with the possible solution but, to do that, other aspects of input have usually to be
changed and/or modiﬁed.20
Indeed, in our eco-cognitive perspective, an “inferential problem”, given some
starting evidence/premisses, can be enriched by the appearance of a new output
(that is more evidence/premisses) to be accounted for and the inferential process
has to restart. This is exactly the case of abduction and the cycle of reasoning
reﬂects the well-known nonmonotonic character of abductive reasoning. Abductive
consequence is ruptured by new and newly disclosed information, and so defeasible.
In this perspective abductive inference is not only the result of the generation of
the input ?I (that is the reaching of the abductive hypothesis), but, in general,
actually involves the intertwined modiﬁcation of both input (also the background
theory to be adopted) and output (the evidence/premisses). Consequently, abductive
inferential processes are highly information-sensitive, that is the ﬂux of information
which interferes with them is continuous and systematically human(or machine)-
promoted and enhanced when needed. This is not true of traditional inferential
settings, for example proofs in classical logic, in which the modiﬁcations of the
input are minimized, proofs are usually taken with “given” input and the burden of
proofs is dominant and charged on rules of inferences, and on the smart choice of
them together with the choice of their appropriate sequentiality. This changeability
ﬁrst of all refers to a wide psychological/epistemologicalopenness in which (at least
in science) knowledge transfer has to be maximized.
In sum, considering an abductive “inferential problem” as symbolized in the
above formula, a suitably “anthropomorphized” logic of abduction has to take into
20 More details are illustrated in (Magnani, 2016, section three).

18
1
Discoverability Explained
account a continuous ﬂux of information from the eco-cognitive environment and
so the constant modiﬁcation of both input and output on the basis of both
1. the new information available,
2. the new information inferentially generated, for example new inferentially
generated input aiming at solving the inferential problem.
To conclude, optimization of situatedness is the main general property of
logical abductive inference, which—from a general perspective—defeats the other
properties such as minimality, consistency, relevance, plausibility, etc. These are
special subcases of optimization, related to the quality of the guessed hypotheses,
and are intertwined with the kind of a given situatedness, at the level of the
appropriate abductive inference to the new input indicated with a question mark
of the above formula.
Another count is indeed the problem of choosing, selecting, and ﬁnding the
appropriate input (background theory) and output (evidence/premisses), that is an
optimal positioning of the eco-cognitive situatedness, to the aim of “favoring” the
required kind of abductive process.
We have seen that an abductive solution is still related to that Aristotelian
“leading away” ( )—quoted above in Sect. 1.2—that is on the starting of the
application of a supplementary logic implementing an appropriate formal inference
engine which can provide a solution. This supplementary logic implements a new
inference engine from the output of the formula (1.3). If we want to naturalize the
logic of the abductive processes and its special consequence relation, which has
to be strongly “eco-cognitive-sensitive”, ⊩EC, we must at this point note that a
naturalized abductive logic would have to ﬁrst of all refer to the
•
optimization of situatedness. Situatedness is related to eco-cognitive aspects: to
favor the solution of the abductive problem input and output of the formula above
have to be thought as optimally positioned.
Other accessorial aspects which favor the success of abductive cognition have to be
immediately illustrated:
1. in scientiﬁc discovery (but also in other ﬁelds of abductive cognition, such as
for example medical diagnosis) the above-illustrated optimality has to be further
characterized as a maximization of changeability of both input and output. Not
only inputs have to be enriched with the possible solution to favor the potential
increase of knowledge, even if not satisfactory, so favoring the restarting of a new
inferential process, but, to do that, other inputs (background theory) have usually
to be built, changed, and/or modiﬁed;
2. consequently, abductive inferential processes are highly information-sensitive,
that is the ﬂux of information which interferes with them is continuous and
systematically human(or machine)-promoted and enhanced when needed. This is
not true of traditional inferential settings, for example, proofs in classical logic,
in which the modiﬁcations of the input are minimized, proofs are usually taken
with “given” input, and the burden of proofs is dominant and charged on rules

Appendix: Abduction as the Eco-Cognitive Production of a Deduction
19
of inferences, and on the smart choice of them together with the choice of their
appropriate sequentiality;
3. indeed, in our eco-cognitive perspective, an “inferential problem” can be en-
riched by the appearance of a new output to be accounted for and the inferential
process has to restart. This is exactly the case of abduction and the cycle of
reasoning reﬂects the well-known nonmonotonic character of abductive reason-
ing. Abductive consequence is ruptured by new and newly disclosed information,
and so defeasible. In this perspective abductive inference is not only the result of
the modiﬁcation of the input, but, in general, actually involves the intertwined
modiﬁcation of both input and output;
4. contrarily to the case of classical demonstrative systems, which are characterized
by what I call maximization of memorylessness, naturalizing a logic of abduction
is related to the need of keeping record of the past life of abductive inferential
praxes;
5. traditional logical systems are abstract in the sense that they are based on a
maximal independence regarding sensory modality, and so they strongly stabilize
experience and common categorization, on the contrary, this requirement is no
longer crucial, but “abstractness” is circumstance-based and so eco-cognitively
conditioned. Moreover, I repeat, multimodality of formalization is really impor-
tant: a naturalized logic of abduction is open to a modiﬁcation of both language
and rules;
6. as Peirce says, abduction is “akin to the truth”:21 research on abduction in the
last decades certainly has described it as an exceptional example of a signiﬁcant
and fruitful truth-generating non-deductive reasoning.
Further, let us remember that in an abductive “inferential problem” as symbolized
in (3) (cf. above, Sect. 1.5), it is extremely important to grant multimodality. The
logical inferential process that is involved in the whole modiﬁcation of input and
output has to be strongly intended as multimodal not only from the point of view of
the cognitive devices “represented” (not merely propositions, but also diagrams, for
example) but also from the point of view of the applied rules: model-based, but also
computational aspects, have to be taken into account.
Appendix: Abduction as the Eco-Cognitive Production
of a Deduction
In Sect. 1.4 above we have remembered that the making of an abduction represents
the logical counterpart of the cognitive (and epistemological) ﬁll-up problem, that
is the problem of ﬁnding a suitable improvement of the context (the premisses)—
21 “It is a primary hypothesis underlying all abduction that the human mind is akin to the truth
in the sense that in a ﬁnite number of guesses it will light upon the correct hypothesis” (Peirce,
1866–1913, 7.220).

20
1
Discoverability Explained
taking advantage of what I have called eco-cognitive openness—and ﬁnally the
variable ? below, such that from the original context and its enrichment the
conclusion L-follows
α©β, ? ⊩L β
(1.4)
This abductive need of improving the context (the premisses) echoes what is
described in chapters A27–A30 of the ﬁrst book of Prior Analytics,22 that is the
group of procedures—we could now call heuristic—for ﬁnding premises to decently
solve certain problems, Aristotle says “ τò πoιε˜ιν σuλλoγισμòν ” (Aristotle, 1989,
A28, 43a, 19–24, p. 42), that is to the aim of producing a syllogism in a satisfactory
way. Indeed, at the beginning of Chapter A27 Aristotle contends that “Now it is
time to explain how we may ourselves always be supplied with deductions about
what is set up, and the route by which we may obtain the principles concerning
any particular subject. For surely one ought not only to study the origin (γ´ενεσιν)
of deductions, but also have the power to produce (πoιε˜ιν) them” (Aristotle, 1989,
A28, 44b, 26, p. 46). In this perspective syllogisms are concerned with problems,
when seen as regarding situations in which the conclusion is already given, and the
problem is how to ﬁnd/discover premisses in order to set up a syllogism.23
The procedure above, in particular, reduces to a procedure for ﬁnding the middle
term: during the Middle Age it was called inventio medii, that is the discovery of
the middle term because it is essentially a procedure for ﬁnding the appropriate
middle term of a syllogism, given the conclusion. The Pons Asinorum, or “bridge of
asses”, is a diagram embodying Aristotle’s rules of argument-ﬁnding of the Prior
Analytics I have just quoted. Hamblin (1976, p. 131) contends that “these rules
were elaborated by Alexander of Aphrodisias, who speaks of a ‘diagram’ and may
reasonably be credited with having invented it”.
Hamblin also reports that the diagram itself seems given by John Philoponus, it
is discussed by Averroes, Albert the Great, by the major logicians in the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries, and Bochenski ﬁnds it in Thomas Bricot’s commentary on
the work of George of Brussels. In the ﬁfteenth century it appears in John Dorp’s
commentary on Buridan, and in Peter Tartaret, who is the ﬁrst to use the name
pons asinorum and gives an elaborately drawn diagram with an allegory about
an ass (which may be indicates a logical beginner) crossing one of a number of
bridges between a major and a minor term. Because of Rabelais the name has
become proverbial and it has to be said that it is also sometimes applied to the
ﬁfth proposition of the ﬁrst book of Euclid, concerning the equality of the angles
at the base of an isosceles triangle, which is the ﬁrst difﬁcult theorem in that work
22 It has to be noted that this abductive need of improving the context seems to reverberate, from
an epistemological perspective and perhaps as its main component, the scientist’s search for new
degrees of discoverability as sources of information in this respect cf. also Hintikka’s interrogative
model (Hintikka, 2007).
23 A detailed description of this part of Aristotelian logic is given in cf. (Cellucci, 2013, chapter
seven).

Appendix: Abduction as the Eco-Cognitive Production of a Deduction
21
and has a ﬁgure slightly reminiscent of the logical diagram. Bayle speculates that
the name pons asinorum, French pont aux ânes, arises from a pun between âne and
an, “whether”, and refers to the choice between alternative middle terms; he also
proposes a link with the fable of Buridan’s ass, which could not choose between
equally distant heaps of hay. Other authors have connected the doctrine of the pons
with Buridan, because of the section De arte inveniendi medium of his Compendium
(Hamblin, 1976, pp. 131–132).
This same procedure for ﬁnding the middle term can be seen in the light of
the cognitive (and epistemological) ﬁll-up problem of abduction, I have quoted
above. It is worth to be noted that in dealing with this problem a special role
is played by model-based procedures (especially diagrammatic). Indeed, I have
ﬁrst of all to emphasize the role of the method of analysis and of the intro-
duction of new/additional middle terms in Plato’s dialectic argumentation,24 in
their relationships with Aristotle’s concept of
 . In the case of the Meno
dialogue Plato needs to determine whether a certain rectilinear ﬁgure could be
constructed along the diameter of a circle; to this aim, Socrates establishes a new
diagrammatic hypothesis, that incarnates the “leading away” (  ), which,
following Aristotle, opens up the reasoning to an eco-cognitive dimension, which
in our case corresponds to an abduction, endowed with its degrees of uncertainty.
In a previous article (Magnani, 2016) I also suggested that the function played by
diagrams in reasoning was also typical of diorismic/porismic processes and of their
creative counterparts, eventually endowed with an objection-refuting role. Levy
eloquently says that in Peirce’s theorematic reasoning, typical of productive geo-
metrical diagrammatic constructions, “a foreign idea” is introduced, that leads away
from previous deﬁnitions or known results suggesting new cognitive chances and
so an optimization of what I have called in this chapter eco-cognitive situatedness
(Levy, 1997, p. 97).25
An echo of this reference to the importance of diagrams in analyzing abductive
reasoning is indeed still vivid in Peirce, also thanks to the emphasis on the role of
icons: “I said, Abduction, or the suggestion of an explanatory theory, is inference
through an Icon” (Peirce, 1997, p. 276). It is well known that, for Peirce, signs
are icons, indexes, and depending on the nature of the relationship of them to the
24 An interesting recent revival of these dialectical roots of abduction is represented by the formal
treatment and justiﬁcation of abduction as IBE (inference to the best explanation) in terms of
meta-arguments, called by Betz practical meta-syllogisms (Betz, 2013). The so-called “dialectical
structures” are introduced, which involve the maximization of robustness of one’s point of view in
an interplay of negotiations.
25 See also (Campos, 2010, p. 131) and (Marietti, 2010, pp. 153–154). On theorematic and
corollarial reasoning in mathematics and on “geometrical constructions interpreted as manipulative
abductions” cf. (Magnani, 2009, chapter three, section 3.6.3). It is here very interesting to note that
the ﬁfth proposition of the ﬁrst book of Euclid’s Elements —I have quoted above when dealing
with the procedures for ﬁnding the middle term and the Pons Asinorum—is also one of Peirce’s
favorite examples in order to illustrate theorematic diagrammatic reasoning in geometry (Campos,
2010, p. 132).

22
1
Discoverability Explained
objects signiﬁed. An icon26 is the middle term of abduction (Trajkovski, 2014),
because Peirce aims at stressing the role of resemblance, such as in the following
case, a syllogism of the second ﬁgure [Aristotle insists that all syllogisms are valid
(by deﬁnition) (Woods, 2014, p. 150), there is no such thing as an invalid syllogism.
We know the syllogistic tradition began to relax this requirement quite early on. I
am using the term syllogism in this extended sense]:
This woman is pale,
Being with child is accompanied with paleness; therefore
This woman is with child.
where “to be pale” represents the middle term.27 It functions as an icon: a pale
women resembles a woman who gave birth, she has some features in common with
her, and she looks like her. In general, abduction and icon share the common feature
of creativity, in so far as an icon can present—through resemblance—unexpected
outcomes.
On the contrary, index is related to deduction, such as in the case of the middle
term “to have milk”, which is taken as an index, a natural sign of giving birth to a
child, see the following related syllogism of the ﬁrst ﬁgure:
This woman has milk,
Having milk means to be with child; therefore
This woman is with child.
In the following example (syllogism of the third ﬁgure):
Pittacus is wise,
Pittacus is good; therefore
Wise men are good
“to be Pittacus” is the middle term. Pittacus is, so to speak, a paradigmatic case
of wise men, taken by convention, and so represents the foundation for an inductive
generalization, not an index, not an icon, but precisely taken as a symbol.
Summary
In this chapter I explained the fundamental aspects of discoverability taking
advantage of the Eco-Cognitive model of abduction, fruit of my studies of the last
two decades. To this aim I have also taken advantage of a logical formalization
26 An index instead refers to deduction and a symbol refers to induction, see below.
27 This and the following examples—reworked in a Peircean perspective—are directly derived
from the part of Prior Analytics Aristotle devoted to the enthymemes as syllogisms “from
likelihoods or signs” (Aristotle, 1989, B29, 70a, 10, p. 136). I think this part represents a kind
of “proto-semiotic” treatment of various aspects of reasoning.

References
23
which adopts the general concepts of input and output instead of the classical ones
of premisses and conclusions. In this light an abductive inference can be seen as a
logical process in which input and output fail to hold each other in an appropriate
relation, with the solution involving the modiﬁcation of inputs, not that of outputs.
It is thanks to this model that we can see discoverability jeopardized when input
and output fail to hold each other in a “good” relation: consequently, the abductive
problem at hand cannot be solved. In the case of scientiﬁc creative reasoning, which
I have described as characterized by a systematic “maximization” of cognition,
the relative creative abductive processes—discoverability—is more likely when an
“optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness”, is reached, certainly busted by the
“maximization of changeability” of both input and output, that is a kind of high
“information-sensitiveness”. I have ﬁnally vindicated the role of irrelevance and
implausibility in promoting both discoverability and discovery. Plausibility and
relevance even if virtuous cognitive heuristics, are not the only criteria that can
guide the creation of abductive hypotheses.
References
Aliseda, A. (1997). Seeking explanations: Abduction in logic, philosophy of science and artiﬁcial
intelligence (Doctoral dissertation, Amsterdam: Institute for Logic, Language and Computa-
tion).
Aliseda, A. (2006). Abductive reasoning. Logical investigations into discovery and explanation.
Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Aristotle. (1989). Prior analytics. Translated by R. Smith. Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett
Publishing Company.
Barés-Gómez, C., & Fontaine, M. (2021). Between sentential and model-based abductions. A
dialogical approach. Logic Journal of the IGPL, 29(4), 425–446. Special Issue on “Formal
Representations in Model-Based Reasoning and Abduction”, ed. by A. Nepomuceno, L.
Magnani, F. Salguero, C. Barés-Gómez, M. Fontaine.
Bertolotti, T., & Magnani, L. (2014). An epistemological analysis of gossip and gossip-based
knowledge. Synthese, 191, 4037–4067.
Betz, G. (2013). Justifying inference to the best explanation as a practical meta-syllogisms on
dialectical structures. Synthese, 190, 3553–3578.
Brandom, R. (2000). Articulating reason: An introduction to inferentialism. Cambridge, MA,
Edinburgh: Harvard University Press.
Brown, B., & Priest, G. (2004). Chunk and permeate, a paraconsistent inference strategy. Part I:
The inﬁnitesimal calculus. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 33(4), 379–388.
Cabrera, F. (2017). Can there be a Bayesian explanationism? On the prospects of a productive
partnership. Synthese, 194(4), 1245–1272.
Cabrera, F. (2020). Does IBE require a “model” of explanation? British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science, 71(2), 727–750.
Campos, D. G. (2010). The imagination and hypothesis-making in mathematics: A Peircean
account. In M. Moore (Ed.), New essays on Peirce’s mathematical philosophy (pp. 123–145).
Chicago: Open Court.
Campos, D. G. (2011). On the distinction between Peirce’s abduction and Lipton’s inference to the
best explanation. Synthese, 180(3), 419–442.
Cellucci, C. (2013). Rethinking logic: Logic in relation to mathematics, evolution, and method.
Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.

24
1
Discoverability Explained
Einstein, A. (2014). Relativity and the problem of space [1952]. In Ideas and opinions (pp. 360–
377). Translated by S. Bergmann. New York: Crown Publisher.
Estrada-González, L. (2013). Remarks on some general features of abduction. Journal of Logic
and Computation, 232(1), 181–197.
Feyerabend, P. (1975). Against method. London-New York: Verso.
Fontaine, M., & Barés-Gómez, C. (2019). Conjecturing hypotheses in a dialogical logic for
abduction. In D. Gabbay, L. Magnani, W. Park, & P. A (Eds.), Natural arguments, a tribute
to John Woods (pp. 379–414). London: College Publications.
Gabbay, D. M., & Woods, J. (2005). The reach of abduction. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Gibson, A., & Bruza, P. (2021). Transepistemic abduction: Reasoning across epistemic domains.
Logic Journal of the IGPL 29(4), 469–482. Special Issue on “Formal Representations in Model-
Based Reasoning and Abduction”, ed. by A. Nepomuceno, L. Magnani, F. Salguero, Barés-
Gómez, M. Fontaine.
Hamblin, C. L. (1976). An improved Pons Asinorum. Journal of the History of Philosophy, 14(2),
131–136.
Hendricks, F. V., & Faye, J. (1999). Abducting explanation. In L. Magnani, N. J. Nersessian, &
P. Thagard (Eds.), Model-based reasoning in scientiﬁc discovery (pp. 271–294). New York:
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Hintikka, J. (2007). Socratic epistemology. Explorations of knowledge-seeking by questioning.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kakas, A., Kowalski, R. A., & Toni, F. (1993). Abductive logic programming. Journal of Logic
and Computation, 2(6), 719–770.
Kowalski, R. A. (1979). Logic for problem solving. New York: Elsevier.
Kuipers, T. A. F. (1999). Abduction aiming at empirical progress of even truth approximation
leading to a challenge for computational modelling. Foundations of Science, 4, 307–323.
Levy, S. H. (1997). Peirce’s theoremic/corollarial distinction and the interconnections between
mathematics and logic. In N. Houser, D. D. Roberts, & J. Van Evra (Eds.), Studies in the logic
of Charles Sanders Peirce (pp. 85–110). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Livio, M. (2013). Brilliant blunders: From Darwin to Einstein. Colossal mistakes by great
scientists that changed our understanding of life and the universe. New York, NY: Simon &
Schuster.
Magnani, L. (2001). Abduction, reason, and science. processes of discovery and explanation.
New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Magnani, L. (2007). Morality in a technological world. Knowledge as duty. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive cognition. The epistemological and eco-cognitive dimensions of
hypothetical reasoning. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2011). Understanding violence. The intertwining of morality, religion, and violence:
A philosophical stance. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2015a). Naturalizing logic. Errors of reasoning vindicated: Logic reapproaches
cognitive science. Journal of Applied Logic, 13, 13–36.
Magnani, L. (2015b). The eco-cognitive model of abduction. ’Aπαγω´η now: Naturalizing the logic
of abduction. Journal of Applied Logic, 13, 285–315.
Magnani, L. (2016). The eco-cognitive model of abduction. Irrelevance and implausibility
exculpated. Journal of Applied Logic, 15, 94–129.
Magnani, L. (2017). The abductive structure of scientiﬁc creativity. An essay on the ecology of
cognition. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2019). AlphaGo, locked strategies, and eco-cognitive openness. Philosophies, 4(1), 8.
Magnani, L. (2021). Abduction as “leading away”. Aristotle, Peirce, and the importance of eco-
cognitive openness and situatedness. In J. Shook & S. Paavola (Eds.), Abduction in cognition
and action: Logical reasoning, scientiﬁc inquiry, and social practice (pp. 77–105). Cham:
Springer.
Marietti, S. (2010). Observing signs. In M. Moore (Ed.), New Essays on Peirce’s mathematical
philosophy (pp. 147–167). Chicago: Open Court.

References
25
Mcauliffe, W. H. B. (2015). How did abduction get confused with inference to the best explanation?
Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society, 51(3), 300–319.
McJohn, S. M. (1993). On uberty: Legal reasoning by analogy and Peirce’s theory of abduction.
Willamette Law Review, 29, 191–235.
Meheus, J., Verhoeven, L., Van Dyck, M., & Provijn, D. (2002). Ampliative adaptive logics and the
foundation of logic-based approaches to abduction. In L. Magnani, N. J. Nersessian, & C. Pizzi
(Eds.), Logical and computational aspects of model-based reasoning (pp. 39–71). Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Park, W. (2015). On classifying abduction. Journal of Applied Logic, 13, 215–238.
Peirce, C. S. (1997). Pragmatism as a principle and method of right thinking. The 1903 Harvard
lectures on pragmatism. Ed. by P. A. Turrisi. (Peirce, C. S., “Lectures on Pragmatism”,
Cambridge, MA, March 26–May 17, 1903, reprinted in Peirce, 1992–1998, II, pp. 133–241).
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1866–1913). Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. Vols. 1–6, C. Hartshorne
& P. Weiss (Eds.), vols. 7–8, A. W. Burks (Ed.) (1931–1958). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1992–1998). The Essential Peirce. Selected Philosophical Writings. Vol. 1 (1867–
1893), ed. by N. Houser & C. Kloesel; vol. 2 (1893–1913) ed. by the Peirce Edition Project.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Pietarinen, A. (2020). Abduction and diagrams. Logic Journal of the IGPL. Special Issue on
“For mal Representations in Model-Based Reasoning and Abduction”, ed. by A. Nepomuceno,
L. Magnani, F. Salguero, C. Barés-Gómez, M. Fontaine. Online ﬁrst: https://doi.org/10.1093/
jigpal/jzz034
Trajkovski, M. (2014). The origin of semiotic validity—Peirce and Aristotle on reasoning by
signs. Presented at the Charles S. Peirce Centennial Congress 2014. Lowell, MA. Unpublished
manuscript.
van Benthem, J. (2007). Abduction at the interface of logic and philosophy of science. Theoria,
60(22/3), 271–273.
Woods, J. (2007). Ignorance and semantic tableaux: Aliseda on abduction. Theoria, 60(22/3), 305–
318.
Woods, J. (2011). Recent developments in abductive logic. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science, 42(1), 240–244. Essay Review of L. Magnani, Abductive Cognition. The Epistemolog-
ical and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of Hypothetical Reasoning, Springer, Heidelberg/Berlin,
2009.
Woods, J. (2013). Errors of reasoning. Naturalizing the logic of inference. London: College
Publications.
Woods, J. (2014). Aristotle’s earlier logic. Second revised edition. Originally published by Hermes
Science Publications, Oxford, 2001. London: College Publications.
Woods, J. (2017). Reorienting the logic of abduction. In L. Magnani & T. Bertolotti (Eds.),
Springer handbook of model-based science (pp. 137–150). Cham: Springer.
Zardini, E. (2014). Context and consequence. An intercontextual substructural logic. Synthese,
191, 3473–3500.

Chapter 2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
Diagnosticability, Affordances, Abduction
Recent research in the area of the so-called EEEE cognition (extended, embodied,
embedded, enacted) has shown that human cognition and its evolutionary dimension
can be better understood in terms of their environmental situatedness. This means
humans do not retain in their memory rich representations of the environment
and its variables, but they actively manipulate it by picking up information and
resources upon occasion, already available, or extracted/created and made available:
information and resources are not only given but they are actively sought and even
manufactured. In this sense, we can consider human cognition as a chance-seeker
system. Consequently, in my terminology, chances are not simply information, but
they are also “affordances”, namely, environmental anchors that allow us to better
exploit external resources. Discoverability is of course related to the availability
of the appropriate affordances. Abduction is still important: it describes all those
human and animal hypothetical inferences1 that are operated through actions made
up of smart manipulations of the environment to both detect new affordances and
to create manufactured external objects that offer new affordances/cues. A ﬁnal
section deals with a defense of the inferential view of abduction, affordances, and
1 Usually the concept of inference is interpreted in logical or psychological terms. On the contrary,
as I will clearly explain below in this chapter, I consider the term inference (and so the hypothetical
abductive inference) in a Peircean perspective and, consequently, not necessarily concerning
rationality. From Peirce’s philosophical/semiotic point of view, all thinking is in signs, and signs
can be icons, indices or symbols: moreover, all inference is a form of sign activity, where
the word sign includes “feeling, image, conception, and other representation” (Peirce, 1866–
1913, 5.283), and in Kantian words, all synthetic forms of cognition. In this sense, the term
“inference” does not only refer to conscious processes and also deals with cognitive activities
involved in model-based and manipulative cognition. This wide meaning attributed to the concept
of inference is also related to my eco-cognitive model of abduction, in which, in summary, “eco-
cognitive” means that knowing is to be understood in relation to an embodied subject who interacts
with his surrounding—that is, who receives and perceives information, but also manipulates his
environment whether directly or employing the construction of artifacts and epistemic mediators
(Magnani, 2009).
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
L. Magnani, Discoverability, Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning 26,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93329-6_2
27

28
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
cognitive niche construction (based on epistemology and cognitive science), and of
its importance for the analysis of discoverability, against the reductionist attitudes
due to some interpretations provided by the predictive processing theory, based on
the idea of a Bayesian brain.
2.1
Various Types of Abduction Depend on the Character
of Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
2.1.1
“Ecological Validity”: Data as Appropriate Affordances
that Trigger Abductive Cognition
Gibson deﬁnes “affordance” as what the environment offers,
provides, or fur-
nishes. For instance, a chair affords an opportunity for sitting, air breathing, water
swimming, stairs climbing, and so on. By cutting across the subjective/objective
frontier, affordances refer to the idea of agent-environment mutuality. Gibson did
not only provide clear examples, but also a list of deﬁnitions (Wells, 2002) that may
contribute to generating possible misunderstanding:
1. affordances are opportunities for action;
2. affordances are the values and meanings of things which can be directly
perceived;
3. affordances are ecological facts;
4. affordances imply the mutuality of perceiver and environment.
Our problem in this subsection is related to the relationship between abduction
and affordances: indeed human and non-human animals can “modify” or “create”
affordances by manipulating their cognitive niches2 so favoring or impeding certain
abductive results. Moreover, it is obvious to note that human, biological bodies
themselves evolve: and so we can guess that even the more basic and hardwired
perceptive affordances available to our ancestors were very different from the
2 Representational delegations to the external environment that are conﬁgured as parts—some of
them can play the role of pregnances (see Lexicon of Discoverability, this book)—of cognitive
niches are those cognitive human actions that transform the natural environment into a cognitive
one. Humans have built huge cognitive niches, characterized by informational, cognitive, and,
ﬁnally, computational processes, as described by the studies in the ﬁeld of biosciences of evolution
by Odling-Smee, Laland, and Feldman (Odling-Smee et al., 2003; Laland & Sterelny, 2006; Laland
& Brown, 2006).

2.1
Various Types of Abduction Depend on the Character of Eco-Cognitive. . .
29
present ones.3 Of course different affordances can also be detected in children, and
in the whole realm of animals.
In his research Gibson basically referred to “direct” perception, which does not
require the internal inferential mediation or processing by the agent. In this sense
affordances express the complementary nature of an organism and its environment
through the direct, effortless way in which an organism picks them up (Wells, 2002).
It is signiﬁcant to note that Donald Norman modiﬁes the original Gibsonian notion
of affordance also involving mental/internal processing: “I believe that affordances
result from the mental interpretation of things, based on our past knowledge and
experience applied to our perception of the things about us” (Norman, 1988, p.
14). The same event or place can have different affordances to different organisms
but also multiple affordances to the same organism. Following Donald Norman’s
perspective, affordances suggest a range of chances: given the fact that artifacts
are complex things and their affordances normally require high-level supporting
information, it is more fruitful to study them following this view. To give an
example, perceiving the full range of the affordances of a door requires complex
information about for example direction of opening or about its particular pull
(Scarantino, 2003, pp. 953–954). Among the various chances offered by affordances
there are of course the chances which are more or less inclined to offer a signiﬁcant
basis for human discovery, for example in science.
As I have said before, becoming attuned to invariants and disturbances often
goes beyond the mere Gibsonian direct perception, and higher representational and
mental processes of thinking/learning have to be involved. This means that for
example in designing an artifact to the aim of properly and usefully exhibiting
its full range of affordances we have to clearly distinguish among two levels: (1)
the construction of the utility of the object and (2) the delineation of the possible
(and correct) perceptual information/cues that deﬁne the available affordances of the
artifact. They can be more or less easily be undertaken by
the user/agent (Gaver,
1991; Warren, 1995; McGrenere & Ho, 2000): “In general, when the apparent
affordances of an artifact match its intended use, the artifact is easy to operate.
When apparent affordances suggest different actions than those for which the object
is designed, errors are common and signs are necessary” (Gaver, 1991, p. 80). In this
last case affordances are apparent because they are simply “not seen”. In this sense
information arbitrates the perceivability of affordances, and we know that available
information often goes beyond what it can be provided by direct perception but
instead involves higher cognitive endowments.
3 The term “wired” can be easily misunderstood. Generally speaking, I accept the distinction
between cognitive aspects that are “hardwired” and those which are simply “pre-wired”. By the
former term, I refer to those aspects of cognition which are ﬁxed in advance and not modiﬁable.
Conversely, the latter term refers to those abilities that are built-in prior the experience, but that
are modiﬁable in later individual development and through the process of attunement to relevant
environmental cues: the importance of development, and its relation with plasticity is captured
thanks to the above distinction. Not all aspects of cognition are pre-determined by genes and
hardwired components. Cf. also (Barrett & Kurzban, 2006).

30
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
A true situation of distributed cognition is occurring in the case of online
thinking, like in the case of manipulative abduction4 and in other less expert and
less creative cases, where the resources are not merely inner (neurally-speciﬁed)
and embodied but hybridly intertwined with the environment: in this case we face
with an abductive/adaptive process produced in the dynamical inner/outer coupling
where internal elements are “directly causally locked onto the contributing external
elements” (Wheeler, 2004, p. 705).
Following Brunswik’s theory an organism is not able to perceive distal stimuli
directly but instead must infer what is going on in its ecological niche from the
cues available (cues provided by proximal stimuli). The success (Brunswik says
the ecological validity) of this “vicarious” inference5 is of course jeopardized by
the constitutive incompleteness (and unreliability, ambiguity, and equivocality) of
the cues available and by their highly variable diagnostic character: Brunswik,
implicitly professing an abductive attitude worthy of Peirce, says: “[...] ordinarily
organisms must behave as if in a semierratic ecology” (Brunswik, 1955, p. 209),
given the intrinsic “ambiguity in the causal texture of the environment” (Brunswik,
1943, p. 255). In this sense he adds that the cues and the mediating inference are
both “probabilistic”, like in the case of abduction where it is always the case that:
“Both the object-cue and the means-end relationship are relations between probable
partial causes and probable causal effects” (Brunswik, 1943, p. 255).
In this light the Brunswikian concept of ecological validity can be seen in terms
of abductive plausibility of the inference at play, given the available data/cues: in
other words, ecological validity coincides with discoverablity/diagnosticability.The
quality of the inferential abductive performance measures the degree of adaptation
between an organism’s behavior and the structure of the environment, i.e. the
ﬁtness of the behavior based on the particular adopted inference. When the cues
are object of simple and immediate perceptual appraisal the situation reﬂects
what I have illustrated in the case of the so-called “visual abduction” (Magnani,
2009, chapter two).6 On the contrary, in the other cases, organisms more or less
appropriately inferentially abduce a “hypothesis/judgment” about distal structure of
the environment. It is worthy to quote again Gibson’s intuition, which can better be
grasped in this perspective: “Perceiving is the simplest and best kind of knowing.
4 The concept of manipulative abduction—which also takes into account the external dimension
of abductive reasoning in an eco-cognitive perspective—captures, to make a clear example, a large
part of scientiﬁc thinking where the role of action and of external models (for example diagrams
and artefacts) and devices is central, and where the features of this action are implicit and hard to
be elicited. Action can provide otherwise unavailable information that enables the agent to solve
problems by starting and by performing a suitable abductive process of generation and/or selection
of hypotheses. Manipulative abduction happens when we are “thinking through doing” and not
only, in a pragmatic sense, about doing (Magnani, 2009, chapter one).
5 Again, here the word inference has to be intended in the expanded semiotic Peircean sense, i.e.
the term must not collapse in the restricted logical meaning.
6 In this last case we could say there is a one-to-one mapping between proximal and distal structure
(Vicente, 2003, p. 261).

2.1
Various Types of Abduction Depend on the Character of Eco-Cognitive. . .
31
But there are other kinds, of which three were suggested. Knowing by means of
instruments extends perceiving into the realm of the very distant and the very small;
[...] Knowing by means of language makes knowing explicit instead of tacit”
(Gibson, 1979, p. 263). An example can be a forecast—usually probabilistic—about
the behavior of wind-based on the current wind speed measured at a ground station
as illustrated in a computer screen—the “cue”. It is important to say that in this last
case the proximal perception affords the day-after action of wearing clothes suitable
to the weather.
I have said above that in the mediating inferential processes also cognitive dele-
gations to the environment (for example to automated artifacts) can also play a role,
for example in facilitating reliable action/decisions.7 In both human and non-human
animals artifacts can reduce the uncertainty of the relationship between organism
and environment. Even in these cases, for example—in the case of humans—
when technology is directly designed to respond with greater precision than people
can do, a person’s abductive judgment can still fail to correspond with the distal
environment. Research based on Brunswikian tradition has emphasized the essential
ecological character of the cognitive engineering enterprise in the framework of
systems composed of the interaction among humans, mediating technologies, and
tasks environments. Many results have shown in various interesting ways how many
technological devices help humans to fulﬁll their adaptation to the environment
by enhancing hypothesis generation/judgment and, consequently, decision-making.
Often the technology itself fails to provide the correct judgment about a given
situation, in other cases the gap in the proximal/distal relationship is embedded in
the interaction with the user (Kirlik, 2006b).
For example (Byrne et al., 2006) study the airline pilot’s performance in landing
and taxiing to the gate in foggy conditions by showing, thanks to an ecological
analysis, how the cockpit artifacts (and their interfaces which provide proximal
cues/chances for action) affect the overall cognitive performance. Often the problem
is related to the fact that technologies exhibit a discrete ecology that does not
sufﬁciently involve the approximation and convergence performed by continuous
ecologies of natural environmental structures. This fact for example explains why
it has been shown that the current design of cockpit automation leaves pilots less
supported in special uncertain (and more challenging)—unsafe—situations: control
systems proximal to pilots are discrete, whereas the behavior of the distal controlled
system—the aircraft—is continuous (Degani et al., 2006). Finally, in the mediating
abductive inferences occurring through artifacts, time (and the so-called “time-
stress” and “time-pressure” effects and their relationship to knowledge deﬁcits
and task simpliﬁcation) is still a key element that strongly affects information
incompleteness and the degree of success of various heuristic schemes.
Interpreting perception and other forms of cognition as ways of seeking salient
information that involves extra-neural enactive processes related to bodies and
social environment rejoins what I have illustrated in the previous chapter about
7 The case of computer interfaces and time pressure is treated in (Adelman et al., 2006).

32
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
cognitive action and its “situatedness”. I have said it is a way of getting more
sensory data, compensating for their equivocality, and obtaining cognitive feedback,
and/or a way of manipulating them, and also of exploiting cognitive delegations
to the environment and to artifacts. In this sense, brains do not need to form rich
internal models of the environment and so they do not store “[...] all knowledge
about the world in explicit form and do not hold comprehensive explicit models
or representations of the environment. Rather, it has been argued [...] our brains
contain recipes for seeking out information—often rather trivially by deciding
where in the environment to look” in the interplay between internal and external
(delegated) representation (Adolphs, 2006, p. 32).
2.1.2
Affordances, Diagnosticability, and Creative Abduction:
The Plasticity of Environmental Situatedness
I have quoted above Gibson’s conviction that “The hypothesis that things have
affordances, and that we perceive or learn to perceive them, is very promising,
radical, but not yet elaborated” (Gibson, 1979, p. 403). Let us deepen this issue:
we can say that the fact that a chair affords sitting means we can perceive some
clues (robustness, rigidity, ﬂatness) from which a person can easily say “I can sit
down”. Now, suppose the same person has another object O. In this case, the person
can only perceive its ﬂatness. He/she does not know if it is rigid and robust, for
instance. Anyway, he/she decides to sit down on it and he/she does that successfully.
Again, we are faced with the problem of direct and indirect visual perception. It is
thanks to the effect of action that we can detect and stabilize the new affordances.
Now, my point is that we should distinguish between the two cases: in the ﬁrst
one, the cues we come up with (ﬂatness, robustness, rigidity) are highly diagnostic to
know whether or not we can sit down on it, whereas in the second case we eventually
decide to sit down, but we do not have any precise clue about it. How many things
are there that are ﬂat, but one cannot sit down on? A nail head is ﬂat, but it is
not useful for sitting. This example further clariﬁes two important elements: ﬁrstly,
ﬁnding/constructing affordances certainly deals with a (semiotic) inferential activity
(cf. Windsor, 2004); secondly, it stresses the relationship between an affordance
and the information that speciﬁes it that only arises in the eco-cognitive interaction
between environment and organisms. In this last case, the information is reached
through a simple action, in other cases through action and complex manipulations.
The term “highly diagnostic” explicitly refers to the abductive framework. In
chapter one of my book on abduction (Magnani, 2009), I have said that abduction
is a process of inferring certain facts and/or laws and hypotheses that render some
sentences plausible, that explain or discover some (eventually new) phenomenon
or observation. The distinction between theoretical and manipulative abduction
extends the application of that concept beyond the internal dimension. I repeatedly
said that from Peirce’s philosophical point of view, all thinking is in signs, and

2.1
Various Types of Abduction Depend on the Character of Eco-Cognitive. . .
33
signs can be icons, indices, or symbols: moreover, all inference is a form of
sign activity, where the word sign includes “feeling, image, conception, and other
representation” (Peirce, 1866–1913, 5.283), and, in Kantian words, all synthetic
forms of cognition. That is, a considerable part of the thinking activity is “model-
based” and consequently non-sentential. Of course model-based reasoning acquires
its peculiar creative relevance when embedded in abductive processes, so that we
can individuate a model-based abduction. In the case of diagnostic reasoning in
medicine, a physician detects various symptoms (that are signs or clues) in a
multimodal way, for instance, cough, chest pain, and fever, then he/she may infer
that it is a case of pneumonia.
The original Gibsonian notion of affordance especially deals with those situa-
tions in which the “perceptual” signs and clues we can detect prompt or suggest
a certain action rather than others.8 They are already available and belong to the
normality of the adaptation of an organism to a given ecological niche. Nevertheless,
if we acknowledge that environments and organisms’ instinctual and cognitive
plastic endowments change, we may argue that affordances can be related to the
variable (degree of) abducibility of a conﬁguration of signs: a chair affords sitting in
the sense that the action of sitting is a result of a sign activity in which we perceive
some physical properties (ﬂatness, rigidity, etc.), and therefore we can ordinarily
“infer” (in Peircean sense) that a possible way to cope with a chair is sitting on it.
So to say, in most cases, it is a spontaneous abduction to ﬁnd affordances because
this chance is already present in the perceptual and cognitive endowments of human
and non-human animals.
I maintain that describing affordances that way may clarify some puzzling
themes proposed by Gibson, especially the claim concerning the fact that we directly
perceive affordances and that the value and meaning of a thing is clear at ﬁrst
glance: organisms have at their disposal a standard endowment of affordances (for
instance through their hardwired sensory system), but at the same time they can
extend and modify the scope of what can afford them through the suitable cognitive
abductive skills. I also stressed the important fact that environments change but also
perceptive capacities enriched through new or higher-level cognitive skills change,
those capacities that go beyond the ones granted by the merely instinctual levels: if
affordances are usually stabilized this does not mean they cannot be modiﬁed and
changed and that new ones can be formed.9
8 As I have already indicated, in the original Gibsonian view the notion of affordance is mainly
referred to proximal and immediate perceptual chances, which are merely “picked up” by a
stationary or moving perceiver. I maintain that perceiving affordances also involves evolutionary
changes and the role of sophisticated and plastic cognitive capacities (further details below in this
subsection).
9 Thom nicely says that “Nature (φύσις) is present in the behavior of inanimate beings. But the
animate being is able to exploit natural regularities in order to stabilize connections that would
be accidental, not generic, in the inanimate world” (Thom, 1988, p. 217). On Thom’s catastrophe
theory and its consequences for the concept of abduction cf. (Magnani, 2009, chapter eight).

34
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
First of all, affordances appear durable in human and animal behavior, like kinds
of habits, as Peirce would say (Peirce, 1866–1913, 2.170). For instance, that a chair
affords sitting is a fair example of what I am talking about. This deals with what
we may call stabilized affordances. That is affordances that we have experienced
as highly successful. Once evolutionarily formed, or created/discovered through
cognition, they are stored in embodied or explicit cognitive libraries and retrieved
upon occasion. Not only, they can be a suitable source of new chances, through
analogy. We may have very different objects that equally afford sitting. For instance,
a chair has four legs, a back, and it also stands on its own. The affordances exhibited
by a traditional chair may be an analogical source and transferred to a different new
artifact that presents the affordance of a chair for sitting down (and that to some
extent can still be described as a chair). Consider, for instance, the variety of objects
that afford sitting without having four legs or even a back. Let us consider a stool:
it does not have even a back or, in some cases, it has only one leg or just a pedestal,
but it affords sitting as well as a chair.
Second, affordances are also subjected to changes and modiﬁcations. Some of
them can disappear because new conﬁgurations of the cognitive environmental
niche (for example new artifacts) are invented with more powerful offered affor-
dances. Consider, for instance, the case of blackboards. Progressively, teachers and
instructors have partly replaced them with new artifacts which exhibit affordances
brought about by various tools, for example, slide presentations. In some cases, the
affordances of blackboards have been totally re-directed or re-used for more speciﬁc
purposes and actions. For instance, one may say that a logical theorem is still easier
to be explained and understood by using a blackboard, because of its affordances
that give a temporal, sequential, and at the same time global perceptual depiction to
the matter.
Of course—in the case of humans—objects can afford different persons in
different ways. This is also the case of experts: they take advantage of their advanced
knowledge within a speciﬁc domain to detect signs and clues that ordinary people
cannot detect. For instance, a patient affected by pneumonia affords a physician
in a completely different way compared with that of any other uncultured person.
Being abductive, the process of perceiving affordances mostly relies on a continuous
activity of hypothesizing which is cognition-related. That A affords B to C can be
also considered from a semiotic perspective as follows: A signiﬁes B to C. A is
a sign, B the object signiﬁed, and C the interpretant. Having cognitive skills (for
example knowledge contents and inferential capacities but also suitable pre-wired
sensory endowments) about a certain domain enables the interpretant to perform
certain abductive inferences from signs (namely, perceiving affordances) that are
not available to those who do not possess those apparatuses. To ordinarily people
a cough or chest pain are not diagnostic, because they do not know what the
symptoms of pneumonia or other diseases related to cough and chest pain are. Thus,
they cannot make any abductive inference of this kind and so perform subsequent
appropriate medical actions.

2.2
Discoverability and Diagnosticability through Affordance Creation
35
2.2
Discoverability and Diagnosticability through
Affordance Creation
Consider, for instance, a huge stone and a chair. Indeed, both these objects afford
sitting. The difference is that in the case of a stone affordances are simply already,
so to say, given: we ﬁnd a stone and we ordinarily “infer” (in Peircean sense) that
it can be useful for sitting. In contrast, those of a chair are somehow manufactured
from scratch. In the case of a chair, we have entirely created an object that displays
a set of affordances. This process of building affordances can be made clearer by
taking advantage of the abductive framework we have introduced above.
That an object affords a certain action means that it embeds those signs
from which we “infer”—through various cognitive endowments, both instinctual
and learned—that we can interact with it in a certain way. As already said, in
the case of a stone, humans exploit a pre-existing conﬁguration or structure of
meaningful sign data that are in some sense already established in the interaction
organism/environment shaped by past evolution of the human body (and in part
“material cultural” evolution, for example when hominids exploited a stone/chair to
sit down in front of a rudimentary altar). In the case of a chair, this conﬁguration
is invented. If this perspective is correct, we may argue that building “artiﬁcial”
affordances means conﬁguring signs in an external environment expressly to
trigger new proper inferences of affordability. In doing this, we perform smart
manipulations and actions that—I conjecture—can produce new (and sometimes
“unexpected”) affordances. Accordingly, creating affordances is at the same time
making new ways of inferring them feasible: a process that is strictly related to the
enhancement of diagnosticability and discoverability.10
2.2.1
Latent Constraints
The organism’s “end-stage” of being afforded, in the Brunswikian interplay prox-
imal/distal, not only involves perception, but also a more complicated inferential
processing which in turn occurs through either
1. a mere internal cognitive processing (expressed by model-based abduction and,
in the case of human beings, also by sentential abduction, cf. (Magnani, 2009,
chapter one)
or
2. a (cognitive) composite action with the aim of getting more sensory data, com-
pensating for their equivocality, and obtaining cognitive feedback (conﬁrmatory
and disconﬁrmatory), and/or with the aim of manipulating them (manipulative
10 On this note, see (Magnani & Bardone, 2005) about the role of abduction in designing computer
interfaces.

36
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
abduction), also exploiting cognitive delegations to the environment and to
artifacts.
[Indeed these high-level inferential processes affect perception in various ways,
like it is shown by the evidence coming from the studies illustrated above].
I have consequently said that affordances emerge through perceptions that
in humans are basically semi-encapsulated (that is also involving a top-down
“interpretation” of data), and also affected by the two processes above and that grant
the subsequent (pragmatic) action.
Consequently, two kinds of “actions”, cognitive and pragmatic (performatory)
are at play. Kirlik (2006a), also resorting to a distinction between pragmatic
and epistemic action offered by Kirsh and Maglio (1994),11 offers an analysis
of the problem that is extremely interesting to further clarify the dichotomy. In
Kirlik’s words, the ﬁrst type of action I have just indicated plays an “epistemic”
or “knowledge-granting” role and the second a “performatory role in the execution
of interactive tasks” (Kirlik, 2006a, p. 214). It is well-known that traditionally,
cognitive scientists have seen action systems in a purely performatory/pragmatic
light, thus lacking any immediate “cognitive” features other than the ability to
execute commands.
Recent research, taking an explicit ecological approach to the analysis and design
of human-machine systems (Kirlik, 1998), has shown how expert performers use
action in everyday life to create an external model of task dynamics that can be
used in lieu of an internal model: a child shaking a birthday present to guess
its contents is dithering, a common human response to perceptually impoverished
conditions. Not only a way for moving the world to desirable states, action performs
an epistemic and not merely performatory role: people structure their worlds to
simplify cognitive tasks but also in the presence of incomplete information or faced
with a diminished capacity to act upon the world when they have fewer opportunities
to gain knowledge. Epistemic action can also be described as resulting from the
exploitation of latent constraint in the human-environment system. This additional
constraint grants additional information and so enhances diagnosticability: in the
example of the child shaking a birthday present she is taking action that will cause
variables relating to the contents of the package to covary with perceptible acoustic
and kinesthetic variables. Epistemic actions result from exploiting latent constraints
in the human-environment system as chances for further inferences. “Prior to
shaking, there is no active constraint between these hidden and overt variables
causing them to carry information about each other”. Similarly, “[...] one must put
a rental car ‘through its paces’ because the constraints active during normal, more
reserved driving do not produce the perceptual information necessary to specify the
dynamics of the automobile when driven under more forceful conditions” (Kirlik,
1998, p. 24) . In this light (Powers, 1973) studied behavior considering it as a control
11 Kirsh describes everyday situations (e. g. grocery bagging, salad preparation), where people
adopt actions to simplify choice, perception, and reduce the amount of internal computation
through the use of suitable cognitive delegations to the environment and to artifacts Kirsh, 1995.

2.2
Discoverability and Diagnosticability through Affordance Creation
37
of perception and not only as controlled by perception. (Flach & Warren, 1995) used
the term “active psychophysics” to illustrate that “[...] the link between perception
and action [...] must be viewed as a dynamic coupling in which stimulation will
be determined as a result of subject actions. It is not simply a two-way street, but a
circle” (p. 202).
Moreover, a very interesting experiment is reported concerning short-order
cooking at a restaurant grill in Atlanta: the example shows how cooks with various
levels of expertise use external models in the dynamic structure of the grill surface
to get new information otherwise inaccessible.
In Brunswikian terms, some variable values are proximal because they can
be perceived and others cannot because they are distal. This distinction, Kirlik
observes, is relative:
A particular variable (e.g. the velocity of an automobile) could be described as proximal
if the purpose of a study was to understand how a driver might use velocity to infer less
readily available information relating to a vehicular control task (e.g. whether he or she can
take a given turn safely). In other cases, velocity could be considered a distal variable if the
goal of the effort was to understand how velocity itself was estimated on the basis of even
more immediate perceptual information (e.g. optical ﬂow patterns, speedometer readings,
etc.) (Kirlik, 2006a, p. 216).
Of course from the perspective of action, the values of proximal variables can
directly be manipulated. On the contrary distal variables can be changed (and so
inferred) only by manipulating proximal variables. On this basis Kirlik illustrates
a generalized framework that provides an ontology for describing an environment
of a performer who is undertaking an interactive activity. Variables exhibited to an
agent in a world of surfaces, objects, events, and artifacts present various values:
1. Type I [PP.PA]: variables are proximal from the perspective of both perception
and action. “The location of the book you are now reading can most likely be
represented by variables of this type: most of us can directly manipulate the
values of these variables by hand and arm movements, and we can also perceive
the location of the book directly. One can think of these variables as representing
Gibson’s directly perceptible affordances” (Kirlik, 2006a, p. 216).
2. Type II [PP.DA]: variables proximal for perception but distal for action. Variables
are directly available to perception but we can change their values by manip-
ulating proximal variables that cause changes in the values of the distal action
variable. You feel it is cold in the room but you need to manipulate the thermostat
to change the temperature and consequently your feeling, but you cannot directly
change the temperature.
3. Type III [DP.PA]: variables distal for perception and proximal for action. It is
the case that many of my actions through for instance an artifact can change the
values of the environment, which I cannot directly perceive. A common outcome
of the manipulation of many artifacts is that they for example have moral
consequences, perhaps even unexpected ones, for human beings and objects
very distant and remote from us, which might last forever. “When posing for
a photograph I change the location of my image in the viewﬁnder of a camera

38
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
without being able to perceive how it has been changed” (Kirlik, 2006a, pp. 217–
218).12
4. Type IV [PP.PA]: variables that are distal from both perception and action, very
common in the case of technology. “We infer the values of these variables from
interface displays, and we change the value of these variables by using interface
controls” (Kirlik, 2006a, p. 218).
In the framework above, which stresses the importance of inner-outer inter-
action in proximal-distal dynamics, it is very easy to interpret artifacts built by
humans as ways of adaptation that, through the construction of suitable cogni-
tive feasible niches, mediate and augment our interaction with the distal world.
They aim at enhancing intellectual functioning by offering suitable differentiated
affordances/proximal-cues, which are easier to perceptually detect and present new
opportunities for action. This strategy, which modiﬁes previous available human
“cognitive ecology”, can ofﬂoad some cognitive demands to the world through a
better exploitation of artifacts.13
2.2.2
Creating Chances through Manipulating Artifacts
and External Representations
It is now clear that the history of culture, artifacts, and various tools can be viewed
as a continuous process of building and crafting new affordances upon pre-existing
ones or even from scratch. From cave art to modern computers, there has been a
coevolution between humans and the environment they have built and they live in.
Indeed, what a computer can afford embraces an amazing variety of opportunities
and chances comparing with the ones exhibited by other tools and devices. More
12 In (Magnani, 2007) I have illustrated a related issue: many artifacts play the role of “moral medi-
ators”. This happens when macroscopic and growing phenomenon of global moral consequences
and collective responsibilities result from the “invisible hand” of manipulations of artifacts and
interactions among agents at a local level, like for example in the case of the effect of the Internet on
privacy or of the derivatives in the international economical crisis: for example my manipulations
on the net can affect the privacy of people with effects that I cannot perceive.
13 Kirlik (2007) describes various interesting examples of the use of artifacts to enhance cognitive
skills in technological disciplines like architecture and aeronautics, but also in expert everyday
performances like cooking. A negative example of proximal-distal dynamics has to be noted in
many contemporary artifact devices (for example in cars) which offer signs that mainly appeal to
the visual sense. This involves learning to answer to visual rather than to auditory, olfactory—for
example motor smell is extinct in new cars—and tactile proximal cues so loosing out on a lot
of important body-mind sensorimotor resources (Bauters, 2007). We can say, in Peircean terms,
that in these cases the semiotic ground active in perception and in which the actions can emerge
seems poor, allowing bad and unsatisfactory habits to be afforded, promoted, and stabilized (Vandi,
2007): indeed Peirce maintains that habits are “[. . . ] a general law of action, such that on a certain
general kind of occasion a man will be more or less apt to act in a certain general way” (Peirce,
1866–1913, 2.148).

2.2
Discoverability and Diagnosticability through Affordance Creation
39
precisely, a computer as a Practical Universal Turing Machine (cf. Turing, 1992
and Magnani, 2021b) can mimetically reproduce a considerable part of the most
complex operations that the human brain-mind systems carry out (Magnani, 2006).
For instance, computers even result in many respects more powerful than humans in
memory capacity and in some aspects of mathematical reasoning. From a semiotic
perspective, computers bring into existence new artifacts that present “signs” (in
Peircean sense) for exploring, expanding, and manipulating our own brain cognitive
processing (and so they contribute to “extend the mind beyond the brain”), that is,
offering and creating new affordances. As just argued above, building affordances
deals with a semiotic activity, mainly abductive, in which signs are appropriately
scattered all around in order to prompt (or suggest) a certain interaction rather than
others.
To clarify this point, consider the simple diagrammatic demonstration (we all
have learned at the middle school) that the sum of the internal angles of any
triangle is 180◦(I have illustrated this case in (Magnani, 2009, chapter three) as a
prototypical case of manipulative abduction. This is also an example of construction
of affordances taken from the ﬁeld of elementary geometry that (1) in case of
current children, help arrive at the conclusion of the proof, and (2) in the case of
the ancient pre-Euclidean geometers, provided the suitable discoverability able to
grant new geometrical results. In this case, a simple manipulation of a suitably
externally depicted triangle gives rise—through constructions—to other external
conﬁgurations that uncover new visual affordances. The process occurs through
construction and modiﬁcation of the initial external diagram, so as we can easily
arrive at the generalized result that the sum of the internal angles of any triangle
is 180◦. The process happens in a distributed interplay between a continuous
externalization through cognitive acts, its manipulation, and re-internalization that
acknowledges what has been discovered outside, picking up the result and re-
internalizing it. In the action new affordances arise and lead to the result whereby,
the sum of the internal angle is found.
From the epistemological point of view this example is a typical example of that
manipulative abduction I have quoted above. Reframed in terms of affordances this
is a cognitive manipulation (entirely abductive, the aim is to ﬁnd a incontrovertible
geometrical hypothesis) in which an agent, when faced with merely “internal”
representational geometrical “thoughts”, from which it is hard or impossible to
extract new meaningful features of a concept, organizes epistemic action that
structures the environment in such a way that unearths new affordances as chances
which favor new outcomes. As already mentioned, the detection of affordances is
hypothesis-driven: it is not said that just anybody can detect it. In the example of the
triangle, only a person that has been taught about geometry can infer the affordances
within the manipulated construction built upon the original triangle. In this sense,
“artiﬁcial” affordances are intimately connected to culture and knowledge available
in speciﬁc human cognitive niches but also to their availability to the suitable
individuals involved in the epistemic process.
We can say that in a given geometrical diagram various affordances still
exist regardless of correct interpretation or even perception by the agent: indeed

40
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
the diagram embeds geometrical knowledge that potentially means something to
someone. To correctly grasp the affordances
1. the agent has to appreciably “know” geometry,
2. the particularly expert agent—through suitable cognitive manipulations in the
internal/external representations interplay—can also extract/ﬁnd/discover “new”
affordances like chances offered to possibly increase knowledge.
The diagram offers nested affordances:14
1. it is a simple picture, which almost everybody (and many animals) can see
and understand as a perceptual picture that affords potential colors and shapes,
depending on the perceptive hardwired endowments of the organism in front of
it—for example expert and uncultured persons but also cats—(strict Gibsonian
case);
2. it is a picture which can be seen and understood as a geometrical diagram with
all its technical properties and features (in this case higher cognitive endowments
are needed in the organism at stake: a human being, of course, other animals do
not understand geometry),
3. it is an artifact which can offer—through even higher creative cognitive
manipulations—new affordances to be picked up and possibly inserted in the
available encyclopedia of geometrical knowledge. Imagine a child who must
“demonstrate” a theorem of the elementary geometry (the sum of the internal
angles of a triangle). The child does not have to demonstrate this theorem for
the ﬁrst time, in the sense that it has already been discovered (demonstrated)
historically and reported in every manual of Euclidean geometry. However,
excluding the case when he passively repeats by rote, he can achieve this
demonstration by using the series of elementary extracted affordances illustrated
above, based on the appropriate use of basic geometric concepts which are
already available to him. We can also say that the child used a heuristic, that is an
advanced procedure of discovery. And this heuristic, naturally, considered from
the viewpoint of an already available manual of geometry (as an abstract and
static system of knowledge) is a true “demonstration”, and obviously does not
lead to a discovery. Rather, it is a kind of re-discovery. Also from the viewpoint
of the child-subject, it is a re-discovery, because he re-discovers a property that
is already given at the beginning). Instead, the inferences that were employed
at the moment of the ﬁrst historical discovery (maybe Greek) of that property
14 Turner (2005) clearly acknowledges the character of affordances as nested. They are seen
as “complex” affordances expressed by “signiﬁcances” delegated to the natural and artiﬁcial
environment—in the perspective of an interesting semiotic and Heideggerian approach to dis-
tributed cognition. On the role of the “extra-bodily world”—an artifact, for example—that becomes
poised itself to the user not just as a problem-space but also as a problem-solving resource via
“inhabited interaction”, which grants ﬂuent acts on ways that simplify or transform the problems,
cf. (Clark, 2008, p. 10). Clark usefully stresses that in case of the inhabited interaction the body has
become “transparent equipment” and tools lead to the alterations of the local sense of embodiment:
a true incorporation rather than mere use is at play, like Heidegger already contended.

2.2
Discoverability and Diagnosticability through Affordance Creation
41
of the triangles (and the assessment of the respective theorem) established a
kind of creative achievement (as I have said, a creative manipulative abduction).
Moreover, both types of reasoning are also mainly model-based, considering
the fact they are performed with “hybrid” forms of representation, including
considerable non-verbal devices (like the geometrical diagrams).15
The case indicated in item (1) also explains why an affordance can be grasped at
the same time by animals, infants, and adult human beings, despite their cognitive
differences: all of them can perceive “the brink of a cliff as fall-off-able according
to a common perceptual process” (Scarantino, 2003, p. 960), even if they have
different perceptual endowments. “This is much the same as we would describe
a piano as having an affordance of music playability. Nested within this affordance,
the piano keys have the affordance of depressability” (McGrenere & Ho, 2000,
p. 340). We can add that the piano also offers the chance—discoverability—in
the cognitive interplay artifact/agent, of providing new affordances of new good
melodies, not previously invented in a merely internal way, in the agent’s mind, but
found over-there, in the hybrid interplay with the artifact. Of course both artifacts,
the diagram and the piano, offer in themselves various constrained conditions for
affordances, depending on their properties, quality, materiality, and design, and
of course various degrees of affordances. From Kirlik’s perspective in terms of
variables and proximal/distal distinctions the example above can be illustrated in
this way: the agent builds a diagram in which he/she can work on the surface by
taking advantage of the constraints that guarantee that latent variables intrinsic to the
materiality of the artifact at hand “to take care of themselves, so to speak” (Kirlik,
2006a, p. 221).
The need of having a rich internal model of the depicted triangle is weakened
because various aspects are discharged from the agent and delegated to the external
representation, which offers a proximal perceptual and a manipulative environment
containing all the resources needed to effectively perform the creative task of ﬁnding
new properties of a triangle. The result is immediately perceived and consequently
can be picked up and internally re-represented. The diagram itself is a model in the
dynamics of the geometrical reasoning and its manipulation expresses an example
of situated cognitive action completely intertwined with perception.
From a semiotic perspective, at ﬁrst glance, we do not have sufﬁcient cognitive
capacities to internally infer what the sum of internal angles is. Manipulating the
externalized conﬁguration (the external diagram of a triangle) we come up with a
new conﬁguration of perceptual signs that adds properties not contained neither in
the initial internal representation of a triangle nor in the initial external depiction.
15 Of course the agent can modify and change in a more or less creative way the features of the
artifacts just to make the available affordances visible or more exploitable, or to build new ones
that are offered as options. This is for example the case of a user who customizes a computational
interface making an alias for a long command string. He/she can gain easier use of the tool by
simply invoking a single key or by the simultaneous pressing of multiple keys instead of writing a
long string of characters (McGrenere & Ho, 2000).

42
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
This new conﬁguration of signs gives birth to a new set of affordances that allow
us to ﬁnd the solution. In a Euclidean sense it is a way of “demonstrating” a new
theorem. This example furnishes an epistemological example of the nature of the
cognitive interplay between internal neuronal semiotic conﬁgurations that permit the
representational thought about a triangle (together with the help of various embodied
“cognitive” kinesthetic abilities) and external representations: also for Peirce, more
than a century before the new ideas derived from the ﬁeld of distributed reasoning,
the two aspects are pragmatically intertwined.
Indeed, the human possibility of creating affordances is constrained in this
interplay. More precisely, this possibility depends on:
•
the speciﬁc cognitive delegation to externalities suitably artiﬁcially modiﬁed, and
•
the particular intrinsic constraints of the manipulated materiality at play, which
usefully provide to us new—so to say—“insights”.
The ﬁrst aspect is closely related to the idea of humans as chance-seekers
illustrated above. As extensively argued throughout this chapter, securing meaning
to the environment relies on smart manipulations that are always hypothetical and
therefore withdrawable. That is, it depends on our ability to exploit latent chances.
Regarding the second aspect, the environment has constraints of its own. When
designing new affordances, we do not work on a blank slate. Conversely, we are
in a network of pre-existing ones that constrain our possibilities. On one hand, the
possibility of uncovering new latent chances depends on human agency. On the other
hand, this agency is mediated/constrained by what the environment offers in terms
of pre-existing affordances and its potentiality to provide new ones, as maintained.
This “hypothetical” status of affordances reminds us that it is not necessarily
the case that just anybody can detect it. Affordances are a mere potentiality for
organisms. First of all perceiving affordances results from an abductive activity
in which we infer possible ways to cope with an object from the signs and cues
available to us. Some of them are more or less unchanging and in some cases
they are neurally hardwired or pre-wired (pre-speciﬁed) in the perceptual system—
they are “invariants”, to exploit a term derived from physics, also used by Gibson:
this is the case of affordances that have a high cognitive valence.16 We said the
differences that we can appreciate are mostly inter-species—so to speak. In the
high-level cognitive performance on triangles there is something different, since
intra-species differences seem to be strongly involved. For instance, only a person
that has been taught about geometry can infer (and so “perceive”) the affordances
“inside” the new manipulated construction built on the original triangle I have
illustrated above. This concerns the problem of “expertise” I already noted. First of
all, artiﬁcial affordances are intimately connected to culture and the social settings
16 Perceiving the affordances of a chair is indeed rooted and “stabilized” in our cultural evolution
because for human beings it is easy—and possible, given our cognitive-biological conﬁguration—
to gain the corresponding cognitive ability as a “current” and “reliable” ability (Scarantino, 2003,
p. 959).

2.3
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness to Favor Abductive Cognition
43
in which they arise and the suitable availability of knowledge of the individual(s)
in question. Secondly, affordances deal with learning. Perceiving some affordances
like those of a triangle is not a built-in activity, indeed, once manufactured, they can
be learned and taught. Of course, acknowledging this last fact places much more
emphasis upon the dynamic character of affordances in organisms’ plastic cognitive
life, beyond their evolutionary character.
Hence, the capacity to perform smart manipulations is concerned with the activity
of creating external representations. Humans are continuously engaged in cognitive
mimetic and creative processes (cf. Donald, 2001 and Magnani, 2009, chapter three)
in which they represent thoughts, private ideas, solutions, into external structures
and suitably constructed artifacts. In doing so they create external counterparts
of some internal, already available propositional and model-based representations,
suitably stored in their brains. In some cases, these external counterparts, which
initially just simply mirror ideas or thoughts already present in the mind, later
on, can be creatively used to ﬁnd room for ﬁnding new concepts and new ways
of inferring that cannot be exhibited by the mere “internal” representation alone
(Magnani, 2006). In building these external representations (that—I repeat—can
be held as merely mimetic, but that can become “creative”), people manipulate
the world in such a way that new cognitive chances are uncovered, and so
discoverability or diagnosticability enhanced. In doing this, new affordances are
thus manufactured and made “socially” available. More generally, we can reiterate,
also from this perspective, that abduction also deals with the continuous activity
of manipulating the environment in order to create new chances and opportunities
to action, namely, affordances. Recent interesting research on the role of models,
deriving from 5-year empirical ethnographic study of two systems biology labs and
their collaborations with experimental biologists, has provided the analysis of the
so-called “adaptive problem solving” (MacLeod & Nersessian, 2016).17
2.3
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness to Favor Abductive
Cognition
An interesting application of the relationship between affordances, diagnosticability,
and abduction I am proposing in this chapter is given by (Abe, 2009). In order to
support dementia persons’ lives, a model-based approach grounded in the concepts
17 On the role of models to address just some sort of epistemic opacity in biological research
that takes advantage of computational visualizations cf. (Stuart & Nersessian, 2018). On the
exceptional role played by models in scientiﬁc research and in many other disciplines cf. the
handbook of model-based science I coedited (Magnani & Bertolotti, 2017). On the crucial role
of the propositional imagination in the construction and development of models for the purpose of
generating hypotheses that are plausible candidates for truth cf. (Salis, 2018). A synthetic analysis
of the role of models in science is (Gelfert, 2016).

44
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
of abduction and chance discovery, which implements a (semantic) dementia care
system under the concept of affordance, is proposed.
Perceptual affordances are mainly provided by spatial mappings referred for
example to iconic signs such as in the case of pictorial objects for ladies’ and men’s
restrooms: affordances in these cases are provided by cultural conventions. The
example of trafﬁc lights is mandatory, red means “stop,” yellow means “prepare to
stop”, and green means “go”. Knowledge is needed to recognize these affordances:
a triangle does not provide speciﬁc geometrical knowledge for people who have no
knowledge about Euclidean geometry. In this case, internal knowledge is needed in
recognizing suitable affordances.
Abe (2012) introduces the concept of affordance to a dementia care system.
Appropriate affordances might offer a certain support to dementia persons un-
derstanding/diagnosing (meanings of) objects. In therapy houses, there should be
objects and tools that cannot be appropriately used by dementia people. Obviously,
affordance changes depending on according on the user’s ability. For some indi-
viduals, a tree stump will function as a chair, but for other people it will not. Abe
observes that
For semantic dementia persons, it is observed that they did not achieve better performance
on a subset of affordable objects when the use of these was compared with a familiarity-
matched subset of objects lacking such affordances. Therefore, when we design an
environment for dementia persons, it is necessary to consider such unhappy situations. It is
necessary to prepare specialized affordances for dementia persons. Even if they can detect
affordance, they might not understand what it will emerge (Abe, 2012, p. 166).
This means that we have to improve and so cure the eco-cognitive situatedness
of dementia persons to favor diagnosticability of the functions of the objects that
compose their environments. Something similar is occurring in the case of human
and computer interaction: a user-friendly interface might favor users’ “discovery
processes” of otherwise hidden properties and relationships between entities and
data, as already illustrated in the previous sections. Other trivial examples coming
from everyday life can be seen in the area of business, in which the era of internet
interaction between a customer (user) and goods surely counts: the strategy of
information delivery in business is consequently extremely important and curating
it is necessary.
In this conceptual framework devoted to deepening the concept of affordance
Abe (2010) proposed the concept of curation for chance discovery, providing the
case of job in (art) museums and galleries, where curators “remain up-to-date in the
scholarly developments within their ﬁeld(s), conduct original research and develop
new scholarship that contributes to the advancement of the body of knowledge
within their ﬁeld(s) and within the museum profession as a whole” (Abe, 2012,
p. 168). Curation increases the opportunities of discovering further chances, both
explicit (but not previously seen) and implicit, also taking into account the user’s
interests and situations.
In the case of scientiﬁc cognition, curation can also be regarded as an action
related to the improvement of interactive “communication” between scientists and
their environment (artifacts, available knowledge, appropriate ethical and epistemic

2.3
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness to Favor Abductive Cognition
45
rules, collaborators, etc.) In this case, an important aspect of “curation” regards the
reaching of appropriate levels of “communication” to favor the best affordances.
In the framework of abduction the following formalization can render the
problem of curation in the case of affordances: the most important relationship
between an object and meaning is represented by the following formula:
Object ∪Object′ ∪M ∪affordance | meaning
(M is a mapping function from Object to Object′): “That is, to understand the same
meaning of the subset of or similar afforded objects, an additional mapping function
M is required. Thus if M can be determined and the usage of Object is known,
Object′ can also be understood” (Abe, 2012, p. 169).
Normal people can very simply understand M but this is not the case of
dementia persons, who cannot understand and determine M anymore. That is
the proper affordance given in the environment is jeopardized and, consequently,
the communication between the object and the person missed. Curation restores
affordances for dementia persons.
In the case of business we have quoted above the important is to cure the real
or digital environment to show rare or hidden but important matters to consumers
that in general tend to believe the (ﬁltered) information, that is intentionality, is
fundamental on the part of the sellers. In general, curation can be instead not
necessarily related to ﬁnalized intentions but, more simply, as the job to provide
users opportunities to discover chances that should not be explicitly displayed to
users, but simply rendered more reachable, according to the user’s interests and
situations: this consists in providing suitable affordances offered to the agents at
play, from the case of customers to the more complicates case of scientists.
Abe provides the clear case of the AED (Automated External Deﬁbrillator)
apparatus: if we cannot ﬁnd an AED apparatus and cannot ﬁnd or understand the
instruction, we cannot save an ill person. Thus two appropriate affordances have
to be provided, they should be explicitly displayed and the instruction should be
easy to understand. Abe further says that an AED apparatus can be regarded as a
“shikake” that functions as a trigger.18
Hence, in the case of scientiﬁc cognition, a chance is a rare and novel event
that can trigger discovery:19 a better and curated environment can be regarded as
18 (Abe, 2013). According to Matsumura (2012), a shikake is a trigger to start an action or to change
a person’s mind and behavior to the aim of solving a problem. It sometimes is not the person’s
will. Thus, as shikakeology teaches, such operation should be conducted implicitly. Matsumura
also suggests that shikake should be appropriately designed: the relationship between a problem to
solve and a trigger to action should be appropriately designed. Matsumura himself uses the term
“affordance” to explain such trigger.
19 Standard triggers of abductive cognition in science are anomalies (empirical but also theoretical),
events or problems not completely predicted by existing theories or events (or problems) partially
explained by more than one theory (Aliseda, 2006).

46
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
equipped with a shikake. The epistemic environment will have
1. to remain current in the scholarly developments within the scientiﬁc ﬁeld(s) at
stake;
2. to provide accessible, transparent, and updated knowledge;
3. to offer the more recent and appropriate technological artifacts, when required;
4. to assume responsibility for the overall care and development of the artifacts,
data, structures, laws, levels of commmodiﬁcation of scientiﬁc results, their
secreteness and intellectual property, which do not have to impede the knowledge
transfer, which characterizes scientiﬁc cognition starting from the time of Galileo
Galilei;
5. to be characterized by institutional policies and procedures for the care of the
reasoning activities of the humans involved and of their collectives, based on
accepted professional standards and best practices.
In the following chapters of this book I will illustrate the various dangers and
problems that can jeopardize that eco-cognitive openness I think mandatory to favor
those discoveries in science that are characterized by that “uberty” Charles Sanders
Peirce considered a fundamental quality of the best creative hypotheses.20
2.4
Protecting the Inferential View of Abduction,
Affordances, and Cognitive Niches
A ﬁnal note has to be added concerning some aspects of the framework of studies
about cognition that take advantage of the so-called free energy principle (FEP)
(organisms, that are “porous” to the world rather than distanced from it must be
acting to minimize long-term average prediction error).21 In the previous chapter
I introduced the distinctions between creative and selective abduction and also the
concept of abduction to the best explanation, distinctions which in this chapter have
been further complicated by the reference to manipulative abduction, affordances,
and cognitive niches, as concepts able to favor the study of the problem of discov-
erability. FEP is usually illustrated as active in an anti-inferentialist theory, which
emphasizes the role in human and animal cognition of the predictive processing
(PP), which operates with approximate Bayesian inference. The organism’s internal
model constantly updates the weighting of the sensory input it collects in the light of
the learned predictions of its precisions. Furthermore, dynamic precision weighting
guides at the same time both perception and action.
The theory provides a unifying framework in which the difference between
selective and creative abduction, abduction to the best explanation, and other kinds
of abduction are often described as “deceptive” effects of that “inferentialism”
20 On uberty cf. this book, Sect. 1.2 of the previous chapter.
21 Cf. for example the relevant (Clark, 2016).

2.4
Protecting the Inferential View of Abduction, Affordances, and Cognitive. . .
47
typical of the “intellectualist, epistemological vernacular” (Hohwy, 2019, p. 198) of
philosophical and cognitive science theories: simply, in this framework, inference to
the best explanation approximated Bayes. Indeed, to make an example, it is stated
that
Clark applies pressure in the opposite direction: internal processing “accommodates”
rather than “explains” the sensory barrage, and since all biological organisms, including
single-celled ones, are supposed to engage in prediction-error minimisation, intellectualist,
epistemological labels are incongruous. By removing PP from the epistemological, infer-
ential framework, Clark is in a better position to say that PP is servicing utility for the
organism rather than aiming at truth. This helps situate PP better in the EEE [embodied,
extended, enacted—author note] scheme. (Hohwy, 2019, p. 198)
I think it is possible to nullify the distinctions above concerning the various
types of abduction, but this “execution” is valid only in the light of the restricted
interpretation of FEP: indeed, this does not mean that the above distinctions become
a “deception”. EEE theories are not just “rhetoric” at all, as stated by Friston (2019,
p. 183). In this last case we face a hostile simpliﬁcation which is implied by a
kind of anti-philosophical and anti-cognitive FEP-based “scientism” (sometimes
typical of various reductionist forms of Bayesianism, I have to say). Seeing Peircean
abduction in the light of PP and “active inference” is certainly “natural”, but we have
to remember that in the perspective of that theory we cannot see anymore various
aspects of that fresh knowledge about human cognition that instead epistemology
and cognitive science profusely supply. If “inferentialism sits poorly with the idea
that PP also applies to simpler creatures than humans” (Hohwy, 2019, p. 200) it is
also because the concept of inference is considered in a restricted way: a simple
referral to Peirce would have provided a richer concept of inference. Indeed, I have
already repeatedly said that from Peirce’s philosophical perspective, all thinking is
in signs, and signs can be icons, indices or symbols: moreover, all inference is a
form of sign activity, where the word sign includes “feeling, image, conception,
and other representation” (Peirce, 1866–1913, 5.283), and, in Kantian words, all
synthetic forms of cognition.22 After all, I agree with Hohwy (2019, p. 201 and p.
203) that says:
So it is not out of the question to impute the epistemological and inferential vernacular to
simpler creatures [. . . ]. What makes the creatures “simpler” is not that they do not engage
in prediction-error minimisation but that their model is simpler. [. . . ] PP is so compelling
precisely because it is an account that works only by “closing the loop” between body, mind,
and world. The states of the world affect the senses, on the basis of which we perceive the
world, but likewise, the states of the brain and the body in turn affect the world, which again
causes new sensory input for us. We are causal creatures embedded in the causal structure
of the world. This is why PP seems a good marriage for EEE.
In the previous sections I have variously illustrated the role of affordances and
abduction in the light of the so-called cognitive niches, aiming at considering
22 An objection to the idea that it is right to say the PP process is not itself literally inference has
been advanced by (Kiefer, 2017). On modeling intuitive processes as inferences, cf. (Hermkes &
Mach, 2019). I will further illustrate the Peircean concept of inference in the following chapter.

48
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
the conceptual building blocks of discoverability. Still taking advantage of the
predictive processing theory (but now in the perspective of extended mind theory),
a recent interesting analysis of cognitive niche construction as a way adopted by
organisms to create and maintain cause-effect models of their niche as guides for
ﬁtness affecting behavior is illustrated in (Constant et al., 2020). We have seen
in the previous sections that cognitive functions such as action, perception, and
learning take advantage of emergent cognitive niches and their affordances: in
the light of the predictive processing theory and of active inference they have to
be re-conceptualized as various forms of optimization of organisms’ predictive
(i.e., generative) models of the world, that obviously derive from construction and
optimization of cognitive extensions in a process that is called “extended active
inference”.
The predictive processing theory is surely interesting and foundational of many
aspects of human and non-human animal cognition: also, it can be said that “[...]
evolution is just nature’s way of performing Bayesian model selection in accord
with the free energy principle” (Friston, 2019, p. 183). The problem is that recent
research has postulated a “sense of purposefulness” in evolution (Magnani, 2021a),
a result that predictive processing theory does not contemplate. Given the fact
human semiotic brains are engaged in a continuous process of delegation and
distribution of cognitive functions to the environment to lessen cognitive limitations,
also and especially taking advantage of what I have called “manipulative abduction”
and of the construction of cognitive niches, we face a second major participant, after
natural selection, in evolution. In sum the role of what has been called “extragenetic
information” plays an important role in evolution, potentially altering selective
pressures: the process of selection actually selects for “purposeful” organisms that
consequently affect evolution.
To defend the inferential view of abduction, affordances, and cognitive niches
against the reductionist attitudes of predictive processing theory based on a Bayesian
brain we have ﬁnally to object that the anti-inferential attitude presents a philosophi-
cal cost. Indeed the theory is not interested on how organisms generate, explain, and
select “things”: the semiotic exchange with the environment we have just illustrated,
that is related to abduction, to the construction of cognitive niches, and to the role of
extra-genetic information, is a continuous generation of meanings23 that deal with
purposeful choices of interactions with the environment, even when we are engaged
in promoting “discoverability”, that are extremely important.
23 On this issue cf. also (Fabry, 2018), who stresses that research on enculturation and recent
work on predictive processing are complementary because predictive processing operates at a sub-
personal level and on a physiological time scale of explanation only.

References
49
Summary
In this chapter I have contended that discoverability is of course related to the
availability of the appropriate affordances. As we have seen in the previous chapters,
humans continuously delegate and distribute cognitive functions to the environment
to lessen their limits. They create models, representations, and other various
mediating structures, that are thought to be an aid for thinking and sometimes
to favor discoverability. In dealing with the exploitation of cognitive resources
embedded in the environment I have further stressed the attention to the concept
of affordance, also to the aim of enriching the recent framework of the so-called
EEEE-cognition (extended, embodied, embedded, enacted). In this perspective I
have further described human cognition and its evolutionary dimension in terms of
environmental situatedness, in which bodies and external—also artifactual—objects
and devices play important roles: in this perspective it has been natural to exploit the
role of affordances. I have also indicated the function of artifactual cognitive objects
and devices in their capacity to extend, modify, or substitute “natural” affordances
actively providing humans and many animals with new opportunities for action.
Consequently, in my terminology, we have seen that new chances for discovery are
not simply information, but they are also “affordances”, as environmental anchors
that allow us to optimally take advantage of external cognitive resources. Abduction
has been still at play, in so far as it illustrates those hypothetical inferences that
are operated through actions made up of smart manipulations of the environment to
both detect new affordances and to create artefactual external objects that offer new
affordances/cues. Finally, I spent some paragraphs to vindicate the importance of
the epistemological and cognitive analysis of abduction, affordances, and cognitive
niche construction, and their importance for the analysis of discoverability, against
some reductionist attitudes generated by certain rigid interpretation of the predictive
processing theory based on the idea of “active inference”.
References
Abe, A. (2009). Cognitive chance discovery. In S. C. (Ed.), Universal access in HCI, part I,
HCII2009 (LNCS5614) (pp. 315–323). Berlin/New York: Springer.
Abe, A. (2010). Curation in chance discovery. In Proc. ICDM 2010 5th International Workshop on
Chance Discovery (pp. 793–799).
Abe, A. (2012). Cognitive chance discovery: From abduction to affordance. In L. Magnani & P. Li
(Eds.), Philosophy and cognitive science (pp. 155–172). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Abe, A. (2013). Relationship between curation, chance and shikake. Procedia Computer Science,
22, 1219–1228. 17th International Conference in Knowledge Based and Intelligent Information
and Engineering Systems—KES2013.
Adelman, L., Yeo, C., & Miller, S. (2006). Understanding the effects of computer displays and
time pressure on the performance of distributed teams. In A. Kirlik (Ed.), Human-technology
interaction. Methods and models for cognitive engineering and human-computer interaction
(pp. 43–54). Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.

50
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
Adolphs, R. (2006). How do we know the minds of others? Domain speciﬁcity, simulation, and
enactive social cognition. Brain Research, 1079, 25–35.
Aliseda, A. (2006). Abductive reasoning. Logical investigations into discovery and explanation.
Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Barrett, H. C., & Kurzban, R. (2006). Modularity in cognition: Framing the debate. Psychological
Review, 113(3), 628–647.
Bauters, M. (2007). Mediation seen through the sensory eye: An alternative to the “old” and “new”
media paradigm. International Journal of Applied Semiotics, 6(1) 79–101.
Brunswik, E. (1943). Organismic achievement and envornmental probability. Psychological
Review, 50, 255–272.
Brunswik, E. (1955). Representative design and probabilistic theory in a functional psychology.
Psychological Review, 62, 193–217.
Byrne, D., Kirlik, A., & Fick, C. S. (2006). Kilograms matter: Rational analysis, ecological
rationality, and closed-loop modeling of interactive cognition and behavior. In A. Kirlik (Ed.),
Human-technology interaction. Methods and models for cognitive engineering and human-
computer interaction (pp. 267–286). Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind. Embodiment, action, and cognitive extension. Oxford/New
York: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2016). Surﬁng uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the embodied mind. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Constant, A., Clark, A., Kirchhoff, M., & Friston, K. J. (2020). Extended active inference:
Constructing predictive cognition beyond skulls. Mind and Language. https://doi.org/10.1111/
mila.12330
Degani, A., Shafto, M., & Kirlik, A. (2006). What makes vicarious functioning work? Exploring
the geometry of human-technology interaction. In A. Kirlik (Ed.), Human-technology inter-
action. Methods and models for cognitive engineering and human-computer inter action (pp.
179–196). Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
Donald, M. (2001). A mind so rare. The evolution of human consciousness. London: Norton.
Fabry, R. (2018). Betwixt and between: The enculturated predictive processing approach to
cognition. Synthese, 195(6), 2483–2518.
Flach, J. M., & Warren, R. (1995). Active psychophysics: The relation between mind and what
matters. In J. M. Flach, J. Hancock, P. Caird, & K. Vincente (Eds.), Global perspectives on the
ecology of human-machine systems (pp. 189–209). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Friston, K. J. (2019). Beyond the desert landscape. In M. Colombo, E. Irvine, & M. Stapleton
(Eds.), Andy Clark and his critics (pp. 174–190). New York: Oxford University Press.
Gaver, W. W. (1991). Technology affordances. In CHI’91 Conference Proceedings (pp. 79–84).
Gelfert, A. (2016). How to do science with models. A philosophical primer. Springer.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Hermkes, R., & Mach, H. (2019). An inferential view on human intuition and expertise. In A.
Nepomuceno, L. Magnani, F. Salguero, C. Barés-Gómez, & M. Fontaine (Eds.), Model-based
reasoning in science and technology. Inferential models for logic, language, cognition and
computation (pp. 174–276). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Hohwy, J. (2019). Beyond the desert landscape. In M. Colombo, E. Irvine, & M. Stapleton (Eds.),
Andy Clark and his critics (pp. 191–205). New York: Oxford University Press.
Kiefer, A. (2017). Literal perceptual inference. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and
predictive processing. Frankfurt: MIND Group.
Kirlik, A. (1998). The ecological expert: Acting to create information to guide action. In
Human Interaction with Complex Systems, (HICS’98) Proceedings (pp. 22–25.). Fourth Annual
Symposium, Dayton, OH. IEEE Computer Society Press.
Kirlik, A. (2006a). Abstracting situated action: Implications for cognitive modeling and interface
design. In A. Kirlik (Ed.), Human-technology interaction. Methods and models for cognitive
engineering and human-computer interaction (pp. 212–226). Oxford/New York: Oxford
University Press.

References
51
Kirlik, A. (Ed.). (2006b). Human-technology interaction. Methods and models for cognitive
engineering and human-computer interaction. Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
Kirlik, A. (2007). Reiventing intelligence for an invented world. In R. J. Sternberg & D. D. Preiss
(Eds.), Intelligence and technology: The impact of tools on the nature and development of
human abilities (pp. 105–134). Mawhah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 73, 31–68.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic action. Cognitive
Science, 18, 513–549.
Laland, K. N., & Brown, G. R. (2006). Niche construction, human behavior, and the adaptive-lag
hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology, 15, 95–104.
Laland, K. N., & Sterelny, K. (2006). Perspective: Seven reasons (not) to neglect niche construc-
tion. Evolution. International Journal of Organic Evolution, 60(9), 4757–4779.
MacLeod, M., & Nersessian, N. J. (2016). Interdisciplinary problem-solving: Emerging modes in
integrative systems biology. European Journal for Philosophy of Science, 6(3), 401–418.
Magnani, L. (2006). Mimetic minds. Meaning formation through epistemic mediators and external
representations. In A. Loula, R. Gudwin, & J. Queiroz (Eds.), Artiﬁcial cognition systems (pp.
327–357). Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishers.
Magnani, L. (2007). Morality in a technological world. Knowledge as duty. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive cognition. The epistemological and eco-cognitive dimensions of
hypothetical reasoning. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2021a). Cognitive niche construction and extragenetic information: A sense of
purposefulness in evolution. Journal for General Philosophy of Science, 52, 263–276.
Magnani, L. (2021b). Computational domestication of ignorant entities. Unconventional cognitive
embodiments. Synthese, 198, 7503–7532. Special Issue on “Knowing the Unknown” (guest
editors L. Magnani and S. Arﬁni).
Magnani, L., & Bardone, E. (2005). Designing human interfaces. The role of abduction. In L.
Magnani & R. Dossena (Eds.), Computing, philosophy and cognition (pp. 131–146). London:
College Publications.
Magnani, L., & Bertolotti, T. (Eds.). (2017). Handbook of model-based science. Switzerland:
Springer.
Matsumura, N. (2012). Shikakeology as the dual problem. In Proc. of the 26th Annual Conference
of the Japanese Society for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (pp. 793–799).
McGrenere, J., & Ho, W. (2000). Affordances: Clarifying and evolving a concept. In Proceedings
of Graphics Interface (pp. 179–186). May 15–17, 2000, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Norman, D. A. (1988). The psychology of everyday things. New York: Basic Books.
Odling-Smee, F. J., Laland, K. N., & Feldman, M. W. (2003). Niche construction. The neglected
process in evolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1866–1913). Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. Vols. 1–6, C. Hartshorne
& P. Weiss (Eds.), vols. 7–8, A. W. Burks (Ed.). (1931–1958). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Powers, W. T. (1973). Behavior: The control of perception. Chicago, IL: Aladine.
Salis, F. (2018). Scientiﬁc discovery through ﬁctionally modelling reality. Topoi, 1–11.
Scarantino, A. (2003). Affordances explained. Philosophy of Science, 70, 949–961.
Stuart, M. T., & Nersessian, N. J. (2018). Peeking inside the black box: A new kind of scientiﬁc
visualization. Minds and Machines, 29(1), 87–107.
Thom, R. (1988). Esquisse d’une sémiophysique. Translated by V. Meyer, Semio Physics: A Sketch,
Addison Wesley, Redwood City, CA, 1990. Paris: InterEditions.
Turing, A. M. (1992). In D. C. Ince (Ed.), Collected works of Alan Turing. Mechanical intelligence.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Turner, P. (2005). Affordance as context. Interacting with Computers, 17, 787–800.
Vandi, C. (2007). Beyond metaphors and icons: Towards a perception-action model for graphic
user interfaces. Presented at the “Ninth World Congress of IASS/AIS, Communication:
Understanding/Misunderstanding”, Helsinki, June 2007.

52
2
Curing Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
Vicente, K. J. (2003). Beyond the lens model and direct perception: Toward a broader ecological
psychology. Ecological Psychology, 15(3), 241–267.
Warren, W. H. (1995). Constructing an econiche. In J. Flach, P. Hancock, J. Caird, & K. J. Vicente
(Eds.), Global perspective on the ecology of human-machine systems (pp. 210–237). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wells, A. J. (2002). Gibson’s affordances and Turing’s theory of computation. Ecological
Psychology, 14(3), 141–180.
Wheeler, M. (2004). Is language an ultimate artifact? Language Sciences, 26, 693–715.
Windsor, W. L. (2004). An ecological approach to semiotics. Journal for the Theory of Social
Behavior, 34(2), 179–198.

Chapter 3
Eco-Cognitive Openness
and Eco-Cognitive Closure
Locking or Unlocking Strategies? “Knowledge
in Motion” Defended
In this chapter, with the help of the concepts of locked and unlocked strategies,
abduction, and optimization of eco-cognitive openness, I will describe some central
aspects of the cognitive character of reasoning strategies and related heuristics, to
the aim of shedding new light on the cognitive aspects of deep learning machines
and on how they affect discoverability, and so creativity. Taking advantage of my
studies on abduction, I will contend that what I call eco-cognitive openness is under-
mined in the case of famous computational programs such as AlphaGo/AlphaZero,
because they are based on locked abductive strategies. Unlocked abductive strate-
gies, which are in tune with what eco-cognitive openness requires, qualify those
high-level kinds of abductive creative reasoning that are typical of human-based
cognition, locked abductive reasoning strategies are instead much simpler than
the unlocked ones to be rendered at the computational level. The second part
of the chapter emphasizes, taking advantage of the logical and cognitive studies
introduced in the previous chapters, the importance of knowledge in motion—in
multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, and transdisciplinary scientiﬁc research—and
its role in favoring high-level kinds of discoverability, and so of abductive results
and of the so-called “optimization of eco-cognitive openness and situatedness”. The
concept of “knowledge in motion” is also the necessary conceptual premise of the
analysis of various kinds of “epistemic irresponsibility”, which are treated in the
following chapter.
3.1
Locked and Unlocked Strategies in Natural and Artiﬁcial
Cognition
Go is a game played by human agents and AlphaGo is a computational deep
learning program that can play the role of an automatic agent/player, so that
competition with humans can become partially computationally determined. Go is
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
L. Magnani, Discoverability, Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning 26,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93329-6_3
53

54
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
already an “artiﬁcial” game, as it is invented by human beings and, consequently,
takes advantage of abstract rules and artifacts, such as the board and other material
objects. AlphaGo is artiﬁcial too, but a more complicated fruit of the technological
creativity of few human beings.1 However, we have to remember that also “natural
cognitive games”, so to speak, can be contemplated. For example, as I have
already illustrated in the previous chapter when delineating manipulative abduction,
a strategic human cognition not only refers to propositional aspects concerning
acts performed through written and spoken language, but it is also active in a
distributed cognition environment, in a kind of “game” in which models, artifacts,
internal and external representations, sensations, and manipulations play a central
function: imagine the pre-linguistic cognitive “natural game” between humans and
their surroundings, in which “unlocked” strategies (see below) are at play, such
as the phenomenological tradition has illustrated, exactly involving embodied and
distributed systems, and visual, kinesthetic, and motor sensations (Magnani, 2018).
What counts here is that in the natural games the strategies are unlocked because,
even if local constraints are always at play in the interaction humans/environments,
no predetermined background is established. On the contrary, what happens in
the case of human-made “artiﬁcial games” such as Go, or in the case of their
computational counterpart, such as AlphaGo/AlphaZero? In these two last cases,
the involved cognitive strategies are locked, and are related to a situation of “eco-
cognitive closure”, as I will describe in the following paragraphs. As the reader can
guess, different kinds of diagnosticability and discoverability are related to locked
and unlocked strategies.
Let us abandon the problem of the prelinguistic cognitive abductive strategies
which are at play in a natural interaction—natural game—between humans and
their prepredicative surroundings(for example, splendidly studied by Husserl, 1931)
and let us concentrate on the cognitive abductive strategies that are at play in the
artifactual case of the moves that are occurring in the adversarial game Go with two
players and their respective changing surroundings, which in this case are basically
formed by board, stones, and possible artifactual assisting accessories. In this game,
analogously to the case of the natural processes, we still obviously ﬁnd the role of
visual, kinesthetic, and motor sensations and actions (such as in the natural games
between humans and their prepredicative surroundings I have just quoted), but also
the strong function of visual, iconic, and propositional artiﬁcial representations,
anchored to the human-made “meanings” (both internal and external) which gave
birth to the game and which characterize its features and rules.
1 AlphaGo Zero is a version of DeepMind’s Go software AlphaGo; the recent AlphaZero further
enriches AlphaGo Zero, cf. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AlphaZero.

3.1
Locked and Unlocked Strategies in Natural and Artiﬁcial Cognition
55
3.1.1
Reading Ahead
A fundamental strategy we immediately detect in artiﬁcial games such as Go, which
is necessary for proﬁcient and smart tactical play, is the capacity to read ahead, as
the Go players usually say. Reading ahead is a practice of generating groups of
anticipations that aim at being very robust and complex (either serious-minded or
intuitive) and that demand the consideration of
1. clusters of moves to be adopted and their potential outcomes. Of course, the
moves embedded in these clusters do not have to be “discovered” because they
just have to be “selected” among a ﬁnite set of possible moves already available
(obviously, moves do not have to be invented/discovered): in this sense we can
say we have to diagnose the ones that can be a useful and efﬁcacious part of
a suitable cluster. The cluster of moves instead either can be selected in an
encyclopedia of clusters of moves already available or to be discovered/invented
in the sense that it can be excogitated for the ﬁrst time, as original and never
seen. The available scenario at time t1, exhibited by the board, represents an
adumbration2 of a subsequent potential more proﬁtable scenario at time t2,
which indeed is abductively credibly hypothesized: in turn, on the basis of
these excogitated scenarios, one more “selective” abduction is actuated, which—
consistently and believably—activates a particular move that can lead to an
envisaged more fruitful scenario.
2. Possible countermoves to each move.
3. Further chances after each of those countermoves. It seems that some of the
smarter players of the game can read up to 40 moves ahead even in hugely
complex positions.
In a book published in Japan, related to the description of various strategies that
can be exploited in Go games, Davies emphasizes the role of “reading ahead”:
The problems in this book are almost all reading problems. [. . . ] they are going to ask you
to work out sequences of moves that capture, cut, link up, make good shape, or accomplish
some other clear tactical objective. A good player tries to read out such tactical problems
in his head before he puts the stones on the board. He looks before he leaps. Frequently
he does not leap at all; many of the sequences his reading uncovers are stored away for
future reference, and in the end never carried out. This is especially true in a professional
game, where the two hundred or so moves played are only the visible part of an iceberg of
implied threats and possibilities, most of which stays submerged. You may try to approach
the game at that level, or you may, like most of us, think your way from one move to the
next as you play along, but in either case it is your reading ability more than anything else
that determines your rank (Davies, 1995, p. 6).
Further abductive strategies that are usefully adopted by human players in the
game Go are for instance related to “global inﬂuence, interaction between distant
2 The word belongs to the Husserlian philosophical lexicon (Husserl, 1931) I have analyzed in its
relationship with abduction in (Magnani, 2009, chapter four).

56
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
stones, keeping the whole board in mind during local ﬁghts, and other issues that
involve the overall game. It is therefore possible to allow a tactical loss when it
confers a strategic advantage”.3
The material and external conﬁgurations of the various scenarios (which are
composed by sensible objects—stones and board) that characterize artiﬁcial games
are the fruit of a cognition “sedimented”4 in their embodiment, after the starting
point of their creation and subsequent uses and modiﬁcations. The cognitive tools
that are related to the application of both the game allowed rules and the individual
inferential talents owned by the two players, strategies, tactics, heuristics, etc. are
sedimented in those material objects (artifacts, in this case) that become cognitive
mediators:5 for example they orient players’ inferences, transfer information, and
provoke reasoning chances. Once represented internally, the external subsequent
scenarios become object of mental manipulation and new ones are further made, to
the aim of producing the next most successful move.
It is important to note again that these strategies, when actuated, are certainty
characterized by an extended variety, but all are “locked”, because the elements
of each scenario are always the same (what changes is merely the number of
seeable stones and their dispositions in the board), in a ﬁnite and stable framework
(no new rules, no new objects, no new boards, etc.) These strategies are devoid
of the following feature: they are not able to recur to reservoirs of information
different from the ones available in the ﬁxed given scenario. It is important to
add a central remark: of course, the “human” player can enrich and fecundate
his strategies by referring to internal resources not necessarily directly related to
the previous experience with Go, but with other preexistent skills belonging to
disparate areas of cognition. This is the reason why we can say that the strategies of
a “human” player present a less degree of closure with respect to the automatic
player AlphaGo. In humans, strategies are locked with respect to the external
rigid scenario, but more open, and so unlocked, with respect to the mental ﬁeld
of reference to previous wide strategic experiences or to hypotheses about the
behavior of the adversary: however, everything concurs to the management of an
unalterable scenario. In this case, the human unlocked cognitive system may still
sadly lack sufﬁcient computational resources to win against the computational tool,
3 Cf. Wikipedia, entry Go (game) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Go_(game).
4 An expressive adjective still used by Husserl (1978).
5 This expression, I have extendedly used in (Magnani, 2001), is derived from Hutchins, who
introduced the expression “mediating structure”, which regards external tools and props that
can be constructed to cognitively enhance the activity of navigating. Written texts are trivial
examples of a cognitive “mediating structure” with clear cognitive purposes, so mathematical
symbols, simulations, and diagrams, which often become “epistemic mediators”, because related
to the production of scientiﬁc results. “Language, cultural knowledge, mental models, arithmetic
procedures, and rules of logic are all mediating structures too. So are trafﬁc lights, supermarkets
layouts, and the contexts we arrange for one another’s behavior. Mediating structures can be
embodied in artifacts, in ideas, in systems of social interactions [. . . ]” (Hutchins, 1995, pp. 290–
291) that function as an enormous new source of information and knowledge.

3.2
Locked Abductive Strategies Defeat the Eco-Cognitive Openness
57
notwithstanding the fact in computational programs such as AphaGo and deep
learning systems, the strategic reservoir cannot—at least currently—take advantage
of that mental openness and ﬂexibility typical of human beings. The repertoire is
merely formed/learned to play the game by checking data of thousands of games,
and no other sources. Of course, as I have already anticipated, it is this gap that
affects discoverability.
I have also to say that the notion of cognitive locked strategy I am referring to
here is not present in and it is unrelated to the usual technical categorizations of
game theory. Fundamentally, in combinatorial game theory, Go can be technically
illustrated as zero-sum (player choices do not increment resources available-
colloquially), perfect-information, partisan, deterministic strategy game, belonging
to the same class as chess, checkers (draughts) and Reversi (Othello). Moreover, Go
is bounded (every game has to end with a victor within a ﬁnite number of moves and
time), strategies are obviously associative (that is in function of board position), the
format is of course non-cooperative (no teams are allowed), positions are extensible
(that is they can be represented by board position trees).6
3.2
Locked Abductive Strategies Defeat the Eco-Cognitive
Openness
In my research I have recently emphasized (Magnani, 2017, chapter seven) the
knowledge enhancing character of abduction, which I have also sketched in the ﬁrst
chapter of this book. This means that in this case we are dealing with abductive
reasoning strategies that grant successful and highly creative outcomes. The knowl-
edge enhancing feature regards several kinds of newly generated knowledge of
various novelty degrees, from that new knowledge about a suffering patient we have
abductively accomplished in medical diagnosis (a case of selective abduction, as
no new biomedical knowledge is created, just new knowledge about a person) to
the new knowledge developed in scientiﬁc discovery, which many epistemologists
celebrated, for example, Paul Feyerabend in Against Method, as I have already
emphasized in chapter one of this book (Feyerabend, 1975). In the case of an
artiﬁcial game such as Go, the knowledge activated thanks to an intelligent choice
of already available strategies or thanks to the invention of novel strategies and/or
heuristics must also be considered a result of knowledge enhancing abduction.
I strongly contend that, to arrive to “uberous” selective or creative optimal
abductive results, in the case of scientiﬁc discovery, useful strategies must be
applied, but it is also needed to be in presence of a cognitive environment marked
by what I have called optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness, in which eco-
cognitive openness is fundamental (Magnani, 2016). This feature of the cognitive
environment is especially needed in the case of strong creative abduction, that is
6 Cf. Wikipedia entry Go (game) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Go_(game).

58
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
when the kind of novelty is not restricted to the case of the “simple” successful
diagnosis. In Sect. 3.3 I will illustrate in more detail that to favor good creative and
selective abduction reasoning and so diagnosticability and discoverability, strategies
must not be “locked” in an external restricted eco-cognitive environment, such as in
a scenario characterized by ﬁxed deﬁning rules and ﬁnite material aspects, which
would function as cognitive mediators able to constrain agents’ reasoning.
At this point, it is valuable to supply a brief sketch of the concept of eco-cognitive
openness, I have already explained in chapter one: I emphasized the importance in
good abductive cognition to hypotheses of what has been called optimization of
situatedness. Let us recall what is the meaning of the expression optimization of
situatedness thanks to the example of scientiﬁc reasoning. We already remarked
that abductive cognition is very important in scientiﬁc reasoning because it refers to
that activity of creative hypothesis generation which characterizes one of the more
important aspects of rational knowledge. To get abductive results in science, the
“situatedness” of the related cognitive activities is strongly connected with eco-
cognitive aspects, related to the contexts in which knowledge is “traveling”: in
the case of scientiﬁc abductive cognition (but also in other abductive cases, such
as diagnosis) to favor the solution of an inferential process the situatedness also
has to be characterized by the richness of the ﬂux of information, which has to
be maximized. This maximization aims at that optimization of situatedness, which,
as I quoted above, can only be made possible by a maximization of changeability
of the basic data which inform the abductive cognitive process: inputs have to be
maximally enriched, rebuilt, or modiﬁed and the same has to occur with respect to
the knowledge applied during the hypothetical reasoning process. Obviously, the
aim is to have at disposal a favorable “cognitive environment” in which available
data can become optimally positioned.7
In summary, we said that abductive processes to hypotheses—in a considerable
quantity of cases, for example in science—are highly information-sensitive, and
face with a ﬂow of information and data uninterrupted and appropriately promoted
and enhanced when needed (of course also thanks to artifacts of various kinds).
This means that also from the psychological perspectives of the individuals the
epistemological openness in which knowledge channeling has to be maximized is
fundamental.
3.3
Locking Strategies Restricts Creativity
Optimization of situatedness is related to unlocked strategies and grants a good
degree of both diagnosticability and discoverability. Locked strategies, such as the
ones active in Go game, AlphaGo/AlphaZero, and other computational AI systems
and deep learning devices, do not favor the optimization of situatedness. Indeed,
7 I have furnished more cognitive and technical details to explain this result in (Magnani, 2016).

3.3
Locking Strategies Restricts Creativity
59
I have already contended above that, to obtain certain good kinds of creative
and selective abductions, reasoning strategies must not be “locked” in bounded
eco-cognitive surroundings (that is, in scenarios designed by ﬁxed deﬁning rules
and ﬁnite material objects which would play the role of the so-called cognitive
mediators). In this perspective, a poor scenario is certainly responsible for the
minimization or, more simply, reduction, of the eco-cognitive openness and it is
the structural consequence of the constitutive organization of the game Go (and also
of Chess and other games), as I have already described in Sect. 3.1.1. I have said that
in the game Go stones, board, and rules are rigid and so totally predetermined; what
instead is undetermined are the strategies and connected heuristics that are adopted
to defeat the adversary in their whole process of application.8
As I have already said, the available strategies and the adversary’s ones are
always locked in the ﬁxed scenario: you cannot, during a Go game, play for a
few minutes Chess or adopt another rule or another unrelated cognitive process,
afﬁrming that that weird part of the game is still appropriate to the game you agreed
to play. You cannot decide to change the environment at will so unlocking your
strategic reasoning, for example because you think this will be an optimal way to
defeat the adversary. Furthermore, your adversary cannot activate at his discretion
a process of eco-cognitive transformation of that artiﬁcial game. On the contrary,
in the example of scientiﬁc discovery, the scientist (or the community of scientists)
frequently recur to disparate external models and change their reasoning strategies9
to produce new analogies or to favor other cognitive useful procedures (prediction,
simpliﬁcation, conﬁrmation, etc.) to enhance the abductive creative process.
The case of scenarios in human scientiﬁc discovery precisely represents the
counterpart of the ones that are poor from the perspective of their eco-cognitive
openness. Indeed, in these last cases, the reasoning strategies that can be endorsed
(and also created for the ﬁrst time), even if multiple and potentially inﬁnite, are
locked in a determined perspective where the components do not change (the stones
can just diminish and put aside, the board does not change, etc.) I would say
that in scenarios in which strategies are locked, in the sense I have explained, an
autoimmunization (Magnani & Bertolotti, 2011; Arﬁni & Magnani, 2015) is active,
that constitutes the limitations that preclude the application of strategies that are not
related to “pre-packaged” scenarios, strategies that would be foreigners to the ones
that are strictly intertwined with the components of the given scenario. Remember
I already said that these components play the role of cognitive mediators, which
anchor and constrain the whole cognitive process of the game.
8 Of course, many of the strategies of a good player are already mentally present thanks to the
experience of several previous games.
9 Many interesting examples can be found in the various parts of the recent Handbook of Model-
Based Science (Magnani & Bertolotti, 2017).

60
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
To summarize and further explain (by linking the problem of locked and
unlocked strategies to the various cases of selective and creative abduction):
1. Contrarily to the case of high level “human” creative abductive inferences such
as the ones expressed by scientiﬁc discovery or other examples of special
exceptional intellectual results, the status of artiﬁcial games (and of their com-
putational counterpart) is very poor from the point of view of the non-strategic
knowledge involved. We are dealing with stones, a modest number of rules, and
one board. When the game progresses, the shape of the scenario is spectacularly
modiﬁed but no unexpected cognitive mediators (objects) are appearing: for
example, no diversely colored stones, or a strange hexagonal board. On the
contrary, to continue with the example of high levels creative abductions in
scientiﬁc discovery (for example, in empirical science), ﬁrst of all the evidence
is extremely rich and endowed with often unexpected novel features (not only
due to modiﬁcations of aspects of the “same things”, as in the case of artiﬁcial
games). Secondly, the ﬂux of knowledge at play is multifarious and is related to
new analogies, thought experiments, models, imageries, mathematical structures,
etc. that are rooted in heterogeneousdisciplines and ﬁelds of intellectual research.
In sum, in this exemplary case, we are facing with a real tendency to a status
of optimal eco-cognitive situatedness (further details on this kind of creative
abduction are furnished in Magnani, 2015, 2016, 2017).
2. What happens when we are dealing with selective abduction (for example in
medical diagnosis)? How locked and unlocked strategies affect diagnosticability?
First of all, evidence freely and richly arrives from several empirical sources in
terms of body symptoms and data mediated by sophisticated artifacts (which
also change and improve thanks to new technological inventions). Second, the
encyclopedia of biomedical hypotheses in which selective abduction can work is
instead locked,10 but the reference to possible new knowledge (locally created
or externally available) is not inhibited, so the diagnostic inferences can be
enhanced thanks to scientiﬁc advancements at a ﬁrst sight not considered. Third,
novel inferential strategies and linked heuristics can be created and old ones used
in new surprising ways but, what is important, strategies are not locked in a ﬁxed
scenario. In sum, the creativity that is occurring in the case of human selective
abduction is poorer than the one active in scientiﬁc discovery, but richer than the
one related to the activity of the locked reasoning strategies of the Go game and
AlphaGo, I have considered above.
3. In Go (and similar games) and in deep learning systems such as AlphaGo, in
which strategies and heuristics are “locked”, these are exactly the only part of
the game that can be improved and rendered more fertile: strategies and related
heuristics can be used in a novel way and new ones can be invented, even
if always locked. Anticipations as abductions (which incarnate the activities
of “reading ahead”) just affect the modiﬁcations and re-grouping of the same
10 It is necessary to select from pre-stored diagnostic hypotheses.

3.3
Locking Strategies Restricts Creativity
61
elements. No other types of knowledge will increase; all the rest remains stable.11
Of course, this dominance of the strategies is the quintessence of Go, Chess, and
other games, and also reﬂects the spectacularity of the more expert moves of
the human champions. However, it has to be said that this dominance is also the
reason that explains the fact the creativity at stake is even more modest than the
one involved in the higher cases of selective abduction (diagnosis). I will soon
illustrate that this fact is also the reason that explains why the smart strategies of
Go or Chess games can be more easily simulated, for example with respect to the
inferences at play in human scientiﬁc discovery, by recent artiﬁcial intelligence
programs, such as the ones based on deep learning.12
The reader does not have to misunderstand me: I do not mean to minimize
the relevance of creative heuristics as they work in Go and other board games.
John Holland already clearly illustrated (1995, 1997) that board games such as
checkers, as well as Go, are wonderful cases of “emerging” cognitive processes,
where potentially inﬁnite strategies favor exceptional games: even if simply thanks
to a few rules regulating the moves of the pieces, games cannot be predicted
starting from the initial conﬁgurations. While other cases of emerging cognitive
processes (I have indicated the example of human scientiﬁc discovery) characterize
what can be called “vertical” creativity (that is, related to unlocked strategies),
board games are examples of “horizontal” creativity: even if board games are
circumscribed by locked strategies that constrain the game, “horizontal” creativity
can show astonishing levels of creativity and skillfulness. We already said that these
extraordinary humans skills have been notably appropriated by artiﬁcial intelligence
software (see below the last paragraphs of this section): the example given in this
chapter is the one of AI deep learning heuristics that were able to learn from human
games, such in the case of AlphaGo, and also from games autonomously played,
such in the case of AlphaZero. What are the remaining most important effects which
derive from these computational AI programs equipped to concretize cognitive
abductive inferences characterized by “locked” strategies?
At the beginning of this chapter, I have illustrated some amazing performances
of Google DeepMind’s program AlphaGo against human players and the fact the
system showed to be able to “create” unconventional moves—never played by
humans—thus building new strategies, a fact that undoubtedly favors the attribution
to the system of actual “human” capacities, and we have to add, better than the
ones of the more skilled humans. AlphaGo instructed itself to play “attending” (so
to speak) thousands of games played by human beings thanks to “reinforcement
learning”, which refers to that activity of self-playing of the machine (the machine
plays against itself) to further feed and adapt its own neural networks.
11 Obviously, for example, new rules and new boards can be proposed, so realizing new types of
game, but this chance does not jeopardize my argumentation.
12 On the results of the so-called—non-human—automated scientiﬁc discovery in AI cf. (Magnani,
2009, chapter two), section 2.7 “Automatic Abductive Scientists”.

62
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
In the passage I am reporting below, Colheo and Thompsen Primo seem to
corroborate my contention regarding the fact I consider these kinds of human
cognitive performances considerably simple to be reproduced at the computational
level with AI programs as AlphaGo because they are dealing with what I have called
in this chapter locked reasoning strategies. In summary, a kind of background reason
that explains this easiness would be that this type of human cognition is less creative
than others, even if it is so striking when optimally realized by very smart human
intelligent subjects.
Let us compare the key ideas behind Deep Blue (Chess) and AlphaGo (Go). The ﬁrst
program used values to assess potential moves, a function that incorporated lots of detailed
chess knowledge to evaluate any given board position and immense computing power (brute
force) to calculate lots of possible positions, selecting the move that would drive the best
possible ﬁnal possible position. Such ideas were not suitable for Go. A good program
may capture elements of human intuition to evaluate board positions with good shape, an
idea able to attain far-reaching consequences. After essays with Monte Carlo tree search
algorithms, the bright idea was to ﬁnd patterns in a high quantity of games (150,000) with
deep learning based upon neural networks. The program kept making adjustments to the
parameters in the model, trying to ﬁnd a way to do tiny improvements in its play. And, this
shift was a way out to create a policy network through billions of settings, i.e., a valuation
system that captures intuition about the value of different board position. Such search-and-
optimization idea was cleverer about how search is done, but the replication of intuitive
pattern recognition was a big deal. The program learned to recognize good patterns of play
leading to higher scores, and when that happened it reinforces the creative behavior (it
acquired an ability to recognize images with similar style) (Coelho & Thompsen Primo,
2017).
I think humans with their biological brains do not have to feel mortiﬁed by these
extraordinary skillful capacities of the AI programs. Unfortunately,given the present
worldwide status of mass media, other magniﬁcent human performances in various
ﬁelds of creativity, much more creative than the ones related to locked strategic
reasoning, are unable to reach the global echo AlphaGo/AlphaZero gained. Indeed,
human-more-skillful-abductive creative capacities, related to unlocked strategies,
as I have tried to demonstrate in this chapter—still cognitively beautiful—are not
sponsored by Google, which is a herculean corporation that can easily obtain the
attention of not only the monocultural media of our age but also of the social
networks: many human beings are more easily impressionable by the “miracles”
of AI, robotics, and information technologies, than by prodigious knowledge results
of human beings-like-us, too often out of sight (after all—ça va sans dire—also AI
traditional programs and AI deep learning systems have been created by humans...)
Google managers also think that AI deep learning programs similar to AlphaGo
could be exploited to help science resolve important real-world problems in health-
care but also in other ﬁelds. This would be a good research program. Google seems
to also expect to implement some business thanks to commercialization of new deep
learning AI powers to collect appropriate information and generate abductions in
some advantageous ﬁelds. Simply checking the Wikipedia entry DeepMind (https://

3.3
Locking Strategies Restricts Creativity
63
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DeepMind),13 [DeepMind is a British artiﬁcial intelligence
company instituted in September 2010 and took by Google in 2014, the company
created the AlphaGo program], the following non-contested passage is reported,
concerning the so-called “NHS data-sharing controversy”:
In April 2016, New Scientist obtained a copy of a data-sharing agreement between
DeepMind and the Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust. The latter operates three
London hospitals where an estimated 1.6 million patients are treated annually. The
agreement shows DeepMind Health had access to admissions, discharge, and transfer data,
accident and emergency, pathology and radiology, and critical care at these hospitals.
This included personal details such as whether patients had been diagnosed with HIV,
suffered from depression, or had ever undergone an abortion in order to conduct research
to seek better outcomes in various health conditions. A complaint was ﬁled to the
Information Commissioner’s Ofﬁce (ICO), arguing that the data should be pseudonymized
and encrypted. In May 2016, New Scientist published a further article claiming that the
project had failed to secure approval from the Conﬁdentiality Advisory Group of the
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. In May 2017, Sky News published
a leaked letter from the National Data Guardian, Dame Fiona Caldicott, revealing that in
her “considered opinion” the data-sharing agreement between DeepMind and the Royal
Free took place on an “inappropriate legal basis”. The Information Commissioner’s Ofﬁce
ruled in July 2017 that the Royal Free hospital failed to comply with the Data Protection
Act when it handed over personal data of 1.6 million patients to DeepMind.
Even if based on what I called in this chapter locked strategies, and thus far from
the highest levels of human creativity, AI deep learning systems and various other
programs can also offer chances for business and good integration in the market.
I think epistemologists and logicians have to monitor the use of these AI devices
(of course when less transparent than the natural and limpid—and so stupefying—
performance of AlphaGo in games against humans). Recent research in the ﬁeld
of epistemology, cognitive science, and philosophy of technology14 illustrate that
good AI software, which surely furnishes a big new chance for opportunity and data
analytics, can be transmuted in a tool that does not respect epistemological and/or
ethical rigor. For example, in the case regarding the computational exploitation
of big data, outcomes can inadvertently lead to epistemologically unacceptable
computer-discovered correlations (instead possibly good from a commercial per-
spective), but these tools are sometimes—unfortunately—seriously illustrated as
aiming at replacing tout-court human-based scientiﬁc research as a guide to
understanding, prediction, and action. Calude and Longo say: “Consequently, there
will be no need to give scientiﬁc meaning to phenomena, by proposing, say, causal
relations, since regularities in very large databases are enough: ‘with enough data,
the numbers speak for themselves’ ” (Calude & Longo, 2017, p. 595). Unfortunately,
some “correlations appear only due to the size, not the nature, of data. In ‘randomly’
generated, large enough databases too much information tends to behave like very
little information” (Calude & Longo, 2017, p. 595). I agree with these authors:
we cannot treat some spurious correlations as results of deep scientiﬁc creative
13 Date of access 8 of April, 2021.
14 Relatively recent bibliographic references can be found in my book (Magnani, 2007).

64
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
abduction, but just as trivial generalizations, even if reached with the help of
sophisticated artifacts.15 I cannot further deepen the problems regarding issues
connected to the impact of computational programs on ethics and society, that will
be treated in the following chapters. In the ﬁrst part of this chapter I limited myself
to deal with cognitive, logical, and epistemological aspects to the aim of introducing
the distinction between locked and unlocked strategies and its meaning with respect
to intelligent computation.
3.4
Governing Diagnosticability and Discoverability:
Conﬁnement, Filter Bubbles, and Ignorance
The recent studies concerning the so-called “cognitive conﬁnement” also deal with
aspects that can be referred to the dichotomy between locked and unlocked strate-
gies. Cognitive conﬁnement (Werner, 2021) refers “to a contingent, yet relatively
stable state of being structurally or systematically unable to gain information from
an environment, determined by patterns of interaction between the subject and
the world” and it is considered as a pathologized form of cognitive niche.16 It is
obvious that conﬁnement affects human and nonhuman animal abductive cognition.
In chapter two we have described the role of affordances, that emerge as the outcome
of speciﬁc patterns of subject/world interaction: “[...] cognitive conﬁnement is a
state of being systematically blocked from affordances or even disafforded, as it
were, and so provided with disﬁgured affordances due to the way in which the
subject’s environment (cognitive niche) is set up by the subject-world interactions”
(Werner, 2021). A situation of embodied and ecological ignorance, as the author
also calls it.
In the perspective of this book, we can further see conﬁnement as the situation
in which it is the eco-cognitive situatedness that is circumscribed and limited. The
complexity of the interactions between the agent and the environment governs the
kind of cognitive conﬁnement that is occurring. The example of the so-called “ﬁlter
bubbles” can be of help: access to online information—in the so-called virtual
cognitive niches—is constrained by algorithms that ﬁlter content in accordance with
the subject’s previously detected preferences or biases, and this of course diminishes
the likelihood of getting new or unexpected information. In my view, ﬁlter bubbles
are special cases of a more general phenomenon of cognitive conﬁnement—as
15 On this problem and other negative epistemological use of computational programs, cf. the
recent (Calude & Longo, 2017) and the last chapter of this book.
16 The concept of cognitive niche is explained in the previous chapter, Sect. 2.1.1.

3.4
Governing Diagnosticability and Discoverability
65
Werner says—related to processes of “ignorance-making”. We can face cases in
which
1. ignorance/conﬁnement is—explicitly or implicitly—but intentionally built: for
example, ﬁlter bubbles in social networks create collectives of people who are
ignorant because they are almost totally isolated from facts and opinions that
would for example change their political orientation. Of course this is a case
related to the violence and dangers of propaganda with respect to the good health
of liberal democracy, which degrades because of the lack of widespread well-
informed decisions and deliberations. The paradox is related to the fact that ﬁlter
bubbles endanger modern democracies exactly in a time in which people access
a huge quantity of data than ever before;
2. ignorance/conﬁnement is the unintentional objective effect of some changes that
occur in social equilibria pertaining to speciﬁc cognitive niches: in the remaining
sections of this chapter and in chapters four and ﬁve we will analyze the case of
recent “epistemic niches” that jeopardize (or tend to jeopardize) discoverability
in some areas of science such as biomedicine. In these cases dealing with
evidence and data available is not about any amount of data, but rather about
the value or utility of the data afforded to someone. Hence, the case is about the
variety and quality of the affordances (which constitute a fraction of the potential
ones) one can get from one’s environment, evaluated in terms of their use in
solving speciﬁc problems, such as for example in creative cases.
3.4.1
Disﬁgured Affordances, Adversarial Abduction, and Fake
Diagnosticability (and Discoverability)
Following Werner (2021) we can also consider the role of the so-called disﬁgured
or misleading affordances.
A different situation occurs when the subject does receive affordances which I call
disﬁgured, which means, roughly, the perception of something that seems to stand for a
possible course of action, e.g., the actions that someone might associate with bent sticks,
whereas in fact the actions in question are not a real option. A different way of putting the
latter is to say that the subject is disafforded.
I have to add that also deception as the activity of intentionally misleading
other agents’ hypothetical inferences has been fruitfully recently analyzed (Rovetta,
2020): deception is, in this case, analyzed as an intentional manipulation of others’
hypothetical inferences so that they will accept the false or disadvantageous abduced
hypothesis. This topic is also related to the role of the so-called adversarial cognition
in intelligence service, in which the main aim is “to detect and exploit adversarial
affordances”, as environmentally situated opportunities for knowledge and action
deﬁned by a mutual relationship between adversaries (Forsythe, 2017b). Of course
it is observed that the most salient and characteristic feature of an intelligence

66
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
system, common to all intelligence phenomena, is abductive cognition. In these
cases it is diagnosticability more than discoverability at play, and various ways of
jeopardizing selective abduction (diagnosis) of other human beings are active, so
as they consider the abductive performances reliable and good, but they are bad
results in the third-person perspective of the deceiver that collaborated to (usually
intentionally) generate them to get some advantages.17
A further related issue concerns the fact that chances as conditions of diagnosti-
cability and discoverability can further be faked. It seems intuitive to think that the
suppression of chance-faking contexts is an important activity of chance curation,
as I have illustrated in Sect. 2.3 of the previous chapter of this book. (Magnani &
Bertolotti, 2013) considered the amazing example of bullshit as a source of fake
chances, but at the same time also—rarely—as a fertile ground for learning and
developing some creative intuitions: a rich cognitive niche may beneﬁt from certain
kind of fake chances—which should therefore not be inhibited—whereas a poorer
niche might not beneﬁt from these fake aspects, and therefore the preclusion of fake
chances is an important act of chance curation (Magnani & Bertolotti, 2013).18
3.5
Maximizing Discoverability in Scientiﬁc Discovery:
The Centrality of Eco-Cognitive Openness
In the ﬁrst chapter of this book we have illustrated that in science the optimization
of eco-cognitive openness and situatedness also concerns the maximization of the
information that has to be made available, which epistemologically characterizes
the tradition of modern science. This fact favors a new attention to the current
fragile status of human abductive cognition in the scientiﬁc enterprise. Is the current
situation of scientiﬁc research facing problems that jeopardize the optimization
of situatedness needed by good abductive cognition? I plan to provide an illus-
tration of some negative aspects that have to be stressed when dealing with the
current challenges to the creative productiveness of human abductive cognition
in science. Indeed, I will stress the hot problem of the contemporary emergence
of disparate kinds of “epistemic irresponsibility”, related to the commodiﬁcation
and commercialization of science, the marketing of technoscientiﬁc products, the
impoverishment of the so-called “epistemic niches”, which show that human fruitful
17 The problem of evading detection in the information age, related to the problem of surveillance,
crypsis, and resistance is analyzed in (Forsythe, 2017a): Surveillance and countersurveillance are
seen as competing strategies for detecting—that is abducing—and concealing particular kinds of
affordance.
18 On scientiﬁc misconceptions, as beliefs that are considered to be false in light of accepted
scientiﬁc knowledge, seen as generated inside a system of inferences/explanations that do not
match a current scientiﬁc theory (as not merely isolated false beliefs) cf. (Dellantonio & Pastore,
2021).

3.5
Maximizing Discoverability in Scientiﬁc Discovery
67
abductive cognition in science is increasingly assaulted and jeopardized, and at the
same time human creativity possibly endangered.
In this book I am especially dealing with the important case of science, in which
the optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness has to respect various constraints.
In the last two chapters of this book I will stress that constraints, methods,
cognitive virtues, etc., which characterize scientiﬁc cognition certainly substantiate
limitations of the related cognitive behaviors but at the same time they are clearly
ﬁnalized to the maintenance of the optimization/maximization of eco-cognitive
openness, that solely can grant the ﬂourishing of abductive scientiﬁc creativity.
3.5.1
“Knowledge in Motion” Defended: Favoring Scientiﬁc
Abduction through the Maximization of Eco-Cognitive
Openness
In Sect. 1.5 of the ﬁrst chapter I have illustrated the role in abductive cognition
of what I have called the optimization of situatedness. Of course situatedness is
related to eco-cognitive aspects: to favor the solution of the abductive problem
input and output of the formula (3) given at p. 16 have to be thought as optimally
positioned. Not only, this optimality is also made possible by a maximization
of changeability of both input and output; again, not only inputs have to be
enriched with the possible solution but, to do that, other inputs have usually
to be changed and/or modiﬁed. This changeability ﬁrst of all refers to a wide
psychological/epistemological openness.
To take another example of how this openness can lead researchers to high
results, we can think of the adaptability to change required to make use of a
serendipitous event in scientiﬁc research. The notion of serendipity has been
used in the past ﬁfty years to describe the unintentional, accidental, and lucky
discoveries made both in lay environments and in the scientiﬁc framework. In the
latter category some game-changing events for the history of science stand out
as unquestionable instantiations of serendipity: Fleming’s discovery of penicillin
(cited by Slowiczek & Peters, 2007; Kakko & Inkinen, 2009; McCay-Peet &
Toms, 2015), Antoine Henri Becquerel’s ﬁnding of X-rays (cited by Cannon, 1940;
Allen, Erdelez, & Marinov, 2013; Rosenman, 1988), Watson and Crick’s reﬂection
on the alpha-helix structure of DNA (cited by Darbellay, Moody, Sedooka, &
Steffen, 2014; Campanario, 1996; Copeland, 2017), and the list grows longer as
the historiographical narrations (and the contemporary scientiﬁc reports) become
more detailed.
Indeed, the fortune of the term serendipity is connected to the recent acknowl-
edgement of the role of chance in scientiﬁc processes (Cannon, 1940; Austin, 2003;
Kipnis, 2005; Catellin, 2014) as well as the importance of a skillful perspective that
scientists need to enact in order to exploit those lucky events (Allen et al., 2013;
Copeland, 2017). For this reason, not only serendipity is a topic of growing fame

68
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
in the panorama of sociology and philosophy of science, but it can well be used
to discuss the maximization of changeability required to improve discoverability
in scientiﬁc endeavors. Indeed, what characterizes serendipity is a game-changing
property that allows the agents involved to make highly creative inferences, such as
trans-paradigmatic abductions (Arﬁni, Bertolotti, & Magnani, 2020).
Trans-paradigmatic abduction (Hendricks & Faye, 1999)—already introduced
above in chapter one, Sect. 1.3—is basically a concept that deﬁnes the possibility to
leap from one array of explanatory ideas to another by examining and discussing a
compelling hypothesis that belongs to the latter. Thus, we could use the concept of
trans-paradigmatic abduction to explain the necessary openness to new perspectives
that scientiﬁc research requires. To make a concrete example, we can consider the
case of Barry Marshall and Robin Warren, who proposed the theory that peptic
ulcers are caused by bacterial infections after having discovered a new kind of
bacteria in the stomachs of people with gastritis. As Thagard (1998, p. 114) states,
“The discovery of Helicobacter pylori, and the formation of the hypothesis that it
routinely colonizes human stomachs, are the result of a combination of serendipity,
questioning, and search.” This hypothesis was initially rejected by the medical
community because the stomach was previously believed to be a sterile environment
where bacteria could not survive long enough to damage it.
Thus the generation of the hypothesis (which emerged from a lucky observation
that led to a series of them) did not just provide a new explanation for the
phenomenon of peptic ulcers, but a new viewpoint on the biological composition
and balance of the stomach. This new point of view has been initially proposed
when the inference was generated to make a reason for an observation that could
not be explained within the previous theoretical framework. At that moment the
trans-paradigmatic abduction operated the game-changing switch that post hoc has
been recognized by the medical community when referring to that serendipitous
process.
As many authors in the literature of abduction afﬁrm, the mere consideration
of the new hypothesis does not initiate the process of abduction: the agent needs
to cognitively and epistemically invest in the hypothesis, actually embracing it, in
order to claim that the inferential process has been conducted (Gabbay & Woods,
2005). Thus, the conjunction of the lucky observation, the elaboration of the trans-
paradigmatic abduction, and its testing compose the game-changing serendipitous
process, which obviously can be enacted only by embracing a maximization of
changeability in the scientiﬁc environment. So, at this point we could ask: is
the current situation of scientiﬁc research facing problems that jeopardize the
optimization of situatedness needed by good abductive cognition? I plan to illustrate
in the following sections some negative aspects that have to be stressed when dealing
with the current challenges to the creative productiveness of abductive cognition in
science.
It is in this perspective that we will clearly see that in many ﬁelds of current
scientiﬁc and technological research we are not simply dealing with ethical prob-
lems, such as for example it is the case of research on information technology,
engineering, biomedical sciences, etc., but also with “epistemological” problems.

3.5
Maximizing Discoverability in Scientiﬁc Discovery
69
Some processes related to what I call “epistemic irresponsibility” are currently
active: this fact presents a new task for philosophy of science, now more directly
social relevant with respect to the whole community of citizens. Philosophy of
science, traditionally related to the analysis of scientiﬁc knowledge, methods, and
cognitive procedures, now can also address the problem of trust in the relations
between science and society (Whyte & Crease, 2010) and at the same time the
crucial obligation of detecting the situations in which epistemic rigor is jeopardized
in a way that renders scientiﬁc rationality annihilated or at best—so to speak—
“faked”.19
In what I have called epistemic niches,20 that is cognitive niches that are ex-
pressly built to host and favor scientiﬁc rationality and scientiﬁc reasoning, mindful
dissent is free and promoted, but also respected and taken into account, secrecy
abolished, exchange of ideas encouraged and always active, reliable evidence
respected, publicly recognized standards for the evaluation of research established,
etc. It is in this perspective that we can clearly see science as a valued-laden
enterprise, a perspective in which there is not a strict distinction between the moral
and the epistemic: practicing science requires a moral commitment to follow certain
adopted methods, rules, cognitive behaviors. In the absence of these aspects an
epistemic niche is simply no more epistemological, that is devoted to the progress
of science.
Longino contends that to make possible scientiﬁc research we need an ap-
propriate social dimension, that is communities that approximate an ideal free
communication of ideas, such as that the one illustrated by John Stuart Mill. Biddle
makes a clear criticism to this perspective (Biddle, 2009): Longino presupposes
a conception of the individual that undermines her own claim that scientiﬁc
knowledge is necessarily social. She would think that certain social arrangements
are just helpful ways of producing scientiﬁc knowledge, but not necessary. I simply
think wide individual freedom from any kind of constraint, which is granted in
certain communities (for example in the epistemic niches) is extremely important.
Of course this character of the community needs special care to be maintained and
preserved: for example in the case of scientiﬁc creative abduction, in which that
19 A recent analysis concerning the fact that commercial interests can have a negative impact
on the trustworthiness of science is given in (Fernández Pinto, 2020). The author contends that
commercial interests explicitly impact research in ways that render results unreliable, for example,
when patent cases of scientiﬁc fraud or misconduct occur policy makers and the general public
are well-justiﬁed to distrust such results. Hence, commercialized science is also considered the
central factor in the erosion of trust in science: commercial interests can promote the production
of consensus or dissent that is industry-friendly, but not epistemically acceptable, and commercial
interests generate a narrow understanding of trustworthiness that leads the industry to claim that
their research is reliable when it is not.
20 See above chapter two, this book, Sect. 2.1.1.

70
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
situation of eco-cognitive openness (related to the need for the optimization of eco-
cognitive situatedness) I described in (Magnani, 2017) is crucial.21
This does not mean that other—contextual—values play no role in science:
Popper emphasized that metaphysical or theological beliefs orient the kinds of
theoretical frameworks available to scientists and moral, economical, and political
values orient the choice of one theoretical framework over another. The essential
point, however, is that given that contextual values do play an inevitable role in
scientiﬁc reasoning, the ideal of value neutrality should be rejected. Actually, we can
say that certainly science is oriented by values but these values do not contaminate
its epistemic purity and its neutrality: just to make an example, we have a lot of
scientiﬁc research about biological cell and less research about animal cognition,
and this is deﬁnitely due to some external constraints that oriented research in a
certain direction, but in both cases epistemic purity is intact. Researchers in both
ﬁelds need an optimization of eco-cognitive openness, which can be reached thanks
to both the individual attitude and the social conditions of maximal elimination of
obstacles to free communication of ideas and criticism.22
Biddle continues his critique to Longino saying that her emphasis on what he
calls the “unencumbered selves” produces a false idea of individuals who have
complete freedom to choose their own aims, values, and conceptions, and this
would not reﬂect the attitude of real scientists (Biddle, 2009). I think that he
is wrong, at least in the perspective of the creative aspects of science. Creative
abductive scientists are individuals who have to actually be open to everything
and who live in a situation of “openness to all perspectives: no claim or belief
can be held immune to criticism” (Longino, 2002, p. 159). This does not mean
they are not socially located and that this freedom has to be seen active in other
aspects of scientiﬁc research, unrelated to creative abduction: in these last cases
individuals need not be—so to speak—completely open-minded, because they
belong to precise epistemic niches which provide established rules and heuristics,
and also methodologies and evaluative criteria, making them capable of questioning
and evaluating certain beliefs (and not all of their beliefs).
In sum, high levels of eco-cognitive openness regard the creative aspects of
scientiﬁc enterprise. In this perspective we do not have to see any tension between
Longino’s employment of Mill’s political philosophy and her account of the social
character of scientiﬁc enterprise. Individual scientists can be considered open to
everything at the cognitive level of abductive creativity, but at the same time they
live in social epistemic niches characterized by established paradigms, research
programs, exemplars, etc., which provide ﬁrm rules and criteria of various kinds able
to govern a great part of scientiﬁc cognitive processes, as already richly illustrated,
during the postpositivistic renaissance of philosophy of science, by Kuhn, Lakatos,
21 In the ﬁrst chapter I have also emphasized that in creative abduction irrelevance and implausi-
bility have to be exculpated (see also Magnani, 2017, chapter six): to favor free production and
communication of ideas, without barriers, they remain fundamental to foster innovation.
22 Cf. also the following chapter, Sect. 4.1.1.

3.5
Maximizing Discoverability in Scientiﬁc Discovery
71
Feyerabend (Kuhn, 1962; Lakatos, 1970; Feyerabend, 1975) and by their many
followers. In conclusion, individual scientists are certainly to be considered as
“advocates for particular approaches, paradigms, or research programs” as Biddle
says (2009, p. 622)—Lakatos famously wrote of “the rationality of a certain amount
of dogmatism” (1970, p. 175)—but also individuals who are open to everything
when they face with the problem of abducing new ideas.
Hence, sustaining discoverability, that is a situation of optimization of eco-
cognitive openness, is not only related to the individual attitude of the good
“creative” scientist but also to the speciﬁc character of the social, political, and
economical environment in which a certain scientiﬁc research is embedded, that
must constitute a good background, appropriate to the end.23
Hence, let us come back to the problem of the suitable conditions of eco-
cognitive openness necessary to creative abduction. Even if many contemporary
scientiﬁc research problems transcend disciplinary boundaries imposed by insti-
tutions of higher education, narrow-minded specialization certainly represents a
limitation to the ﬂourishing of abductive cognition: this aspect represents a ﬁrst
challenge to the exercise of good abductive cognition. A contrary example if
furnished by HIV/AIDS studies, I will illustrate below. This contemporary prosper
creative scientiﬁc research has been strongly characterized by the cross-fertilization
of ideas in a kind of situation of “knowledge in motion”.
Let us take a look at some recent aspects of scientiﬁc research related to health
problems, which demonstrate the importance for abduction of the optimization of
eco-cognitive openness. Recent studies in HIV/AIDS do not completely ﬁt into the
research ﬁelds typically found in the excess of blind disciplinarity. Researchers and
funding agencies have instead devoted increasing attention to projects that span
multiple disciplines. Taking advantage of scientometric computational techniques
(the so-called “topic models” of over 9000 abstracts from two prominent journals
on HIV/AIDS, from their inception through the end of 2010) Light and Adams, in
an article eloquently entitled “Knowledge in motion: the evolution of HIV/AIDS
research” (see Adams & Light, 2014; Light & Adams, 2016 and) describe how
research programs in this area moved through various states of integration including
disciplinarity, multidisciplinarity, interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity. In my
perspective these aspects are all related to the actual promotion of optimization of
that eco-cognitive openness which characterizes creative abductions in science.
Multidisciplinary research engages any single research area from the vantage
point of multiple disciplines, this approach poses little challenge to the specializa-
tion which characterizes the more disciplinary-based approaches. Light and Adams
23 Social epistemologists always emphasized the role in scientiﬁc rationality and objectivity of
the institutions and processes of knowledge acquisition and production (Longino, 1990; Kitcher,
1993). Recently Reiss—manly referring to biomedical research—noted the importance of not
restricting normative judgments about how to organize research to ethical aspects alone (for
example, discriminating against diseases of ethnic minorities and the poor in the Western world, or
the diseases of the global poor) but also to the epistemic components of research when for example
epistemic decency is disrespected (Reiss, 2010).

72
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
(2016, pp. 1229–1230) report that, following the suggestions given by the U.S.
National Academy of Sciences “[...] interdisciplinary research is a more integrative
form: interdisciplinary research consists of research conducted by teams or individu-
als that integrates information, data, techniques, tools, perspectives, concepts, and/or
theories from two or more disciplines or bodies of specialized knowledge to advance
fundamental understanding or to solve problems whose solutions are beyond the
scope of a single discipline or ﬁeld of research practice”. Finally, “transdisciplinarity
is characterized by relatively complete elimination of the salience of disciplinary
boundaries in the scientiﬁc enterprise. Within the literature conceptually clarifying
the typology of many-disciplined science, transdisciplinarity’s boundaryless science
arises via two quite different processes. The ﬁrst form comes from a reorganization
of scientiﬁc efforts—starting with the identiﬁcation of questions, and extending
straight through the strategies employed in answering them—around problem-based
areas. That is, research is no longer bound up within disciplinary conﬁnes”.
Fortunately, research on HIV/AIDS of the last decades has been characterized
by a balance between specialization and cross-pollination of ideas. The integration
across disciplinary boundaries is fundamentally dynamic:
HIV/AIDS research appears to have grown more multidisciplinary also consistent with
increased specialization, after an initial period of more interdisciplinary integration. In
other words, after an initial period of high cross-fertilization and joint problem-solving,
the researchers returned to their silos working on overlapping topics in a more disciplinary
fashion. As evidenced by the case of HIV/AIDS research, integrated programs are dynamic
and situate themselves into different states of organization (Light & Adams, 2016, p. 1245).
3.5.2
Marketing Technoscientiﬁc Results
The example of HIV/AIDS studies I have just illustrated exempliﬁes a case of
what we can call epistemic responsibility: scientists and the various agents involved
in decision making concerning their eco-cognitive environments all concur in
building policies, attitudes, intellectual habits, social and economical institutions,
appropriate artifacts, able to promote responsible epistemic actions: what happens
when “knowledge in motion” is not favored? To have an idea of the relatively recent
situation of the whole scientiﬁc research in U.S. it is sufﬁcient to quote the following
passage:
We are currently witnessing profound changes in the way in which scientiﬁc research in
the United States is organized. In 1964, 30.8% of U.S. R&D was funded by industry,
while 66.8% was funded by the federal government. The years between 1964 and the
present have witnessed an almost exact reversal; in 2004, 63.8% of national R&D was
funded by industry, while only 29.9% was funded by the federal government. [. . . ] Growing
numbers of both university and government scientists are developing ﬁnancial relationships
with private corporations, and many university scientists are starting their own companies,
simultaneously playing the roles of academic researchers and entrepreneurs. The result of
these changes is that commercial considerations are exerting increasing inﬂuence within

3.5
Maximizing Discoverability in Scientiﬁc Discovery
73
the practice of science, in both universities and governmental laboratories (Biddle, 2011,
pp. 245–246).
(Lazonick, 2007, p. 11) draws a similar picture but looking at the data about
internal R&D (i.e. R&D made in house by pharma companies). He makes the
example of Pﬁzer reporting that
In response to complaints that U.S. drug prices are at least twice those in any other country,
Pﬁzer and other U.S. pharmaceutical companies have argued that the proﬁts from these
high prices—enabled by a generous intellectual-property regime and lax price regulation—
permit more R&D to be done in the United States than elsewhere. Yet from 2003 through
2012, Pﬁzer funneled an amount equal to 71% of its proﬁts into buybacks, and an amount
equal to 75% of its proﬁts into dividends. In other words, it spent more on buybacks and
dividends than it earned and tapped its capital reserves to help fund them. The reality is,
Americans pay high drug prices so that major pharmaceutical companies can boost their
stock prices and pad executive pay.
In few words, scientists are now forced into areas that have the potential to be
proﬁtable, ﬁrst of all they are much less free than in the past to decide for them-
selves which questions to study. The introduction of market values—particularly
encouraged by the neoliberal politics—for example into the U.S. practice of science
aims at resulting in continued scientiﬁc progress (and so discovery) but also in a
huge economic and social growth. It is well-known that this policy also favors
deregulation,by removing the government-imposedbarriers, the ﬂow of information
between private and public sectors, the sharing of expertise and the transfer of
scientiﬁc research into marketable products.
Unfortunately, allowing market forces to guide some fundamental areas of
research, such as the biopharmaceutical one, has generated a degradation of the
epistemic quality: “a sacriﬁce of epistemic standards at the altar of proﬁt” (Biddle,
2011, pp. 246). Knowledge is no more “in motion”. The U.S. Congressional
Patent and Trademark Amendments Act of 1980—known as the Bayh-Dole Act—
allowed universities and private corporations to patent the results of publicly-funded
research, while the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (later
on revised in 1986) allowed for the patenting of results obtained in government
laboratories (Biddle, 2011). Prior to these acts, results deriving from privately-
funded research could be privately appropriated, whereas inventions resulting from
publicly-funded research obviously remained in the public domain. We are facing
with a clear “[...] proprietary treatment of research results, with the commercial
interest in secrecy overriding the public’s interest in free, shared knowledge”
(Brown, 2000, p. 1701). In sum, the new “obsession” regarding commercialization
generally, and patenting in particular, has obviously been generated not by the
scientiﬁc community, but rather by political and economic decisions (Biddle,
2012).24
24 I think that things are even worse as the neoliberals nowadays push (public) universities to
actively pursue the so-called “technology transfer”—which means that universities need to produce
knowledge that is quickly transferable to ﬁrms so that they can exploit it commercially. So
researchers are affected by the fact they are also constantly put at pressure by this “technology

74
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
This change has profoundly affected the eco-cognitive environment of important
parts of science: in the following chapter I will illustrate many aspects of the
current eco-cognitive situations which put in danger discoverability and so the
productivity of scientiﬁc discovery and consequently jeopardized and are jeopar-
dizing the richness of human abductive cognition in science. I will take advantage
of the prototypical case of biomedical and pharmaceutical research, in which the
dangers of an objective situation of epistemic irresponsibility are already more than
remarkable. I consider this example prototypical because it represents a clear kind
of epistemic irresponsibility, which might very likely spread all over many other
areas of science and of technological research and which surely is already seriously
threatening the survival of areas not directly marketable, such as ample parts of
humanities, mathematics, and science, instead fundamental to preserve and “feed”
western civilization.
A ﬁrst example regards the role of positive and negative freedom of research
in our era. Knowledge in motion, which is necessary to promote that “opti-
mization/maximization of eco-cognitive situatedness” needed by fostering good
human abductive creative reasoning is only promoted by the existence of the
so-called positive freedom, as freedom to act in particular ways or to achieve
particular results. Unfortunately, neoliberals sustain a short-sighted view of the
nature of freedom, as freedom from external obstacles, which is not sufﬁcient
to guarantee substantial freedom in scientiﬁc research. Commercialized scientists
have less obstacles—neoliberals weakened the state institutions that now no longer
can satisfactorily rule behaviors and circumstantiate distinctions between public
and private interests—but are oppressed by pre-established agendas. Not only,
paradoxically, and contrarily to all expectations—a new big obstacle appeared:
once “commercialized” and dependent upon the private sectors, the scientists are
no more free to communicate research results freely, so that negative freedom,
otherwise defended, is instead violated. For example, this outcome affects both
sponsored biopharmaceutical industry and agricultural biotechnology, where for-
proﬁt corporations have a tendency to only consider research that is beneﬁcial to
them ﬁnancially and to avoid research that is not (Elliott, 2012).25 A second example
relates to the fact that “for-proﬁt corporations have a history of biasing studies
to increase the likelihood of obtaining desired results” (Biddle, 2014, p. 17). Big
pharma tend to withhold information that might call the safety or efﬁcacy of their
drugs into question.
Financial considerations directly inﬂuence the choice of research problems, the
choice of methods, and the interpretation of data, and the ways in which research is
disseminated and rendered public, and indirectly inﬂuence research by generating an
transfer” obsession—which often sounds absurd in those countries which invest ridiculous amounts
of money in research.
25 This author also illustrates, on the contrary, how strategies of information dissemination are
often implemented for example just to dissipate public suspicions (for example in the case of the
genetic modiﬁcation (GM) of crops.)

Summary
75
atmosphere in which researchers fear to study particular topics. The overall effect
resorts to a kind of inhibition of various kinds of research and at the same time
of its potential creativity). (Biddle & Leuschner, 2015, p. 274) observe: “A recent
study (Shulman, 1999) found that more than one-third of recently published articles
produced by University of Massachusetts scientists had one or more authors who
stood to make money from the results they were reporting. That is, they were patent
holders or had some relationship, for example, as board members, to a company that
would exploit the results. The ﬁnancial interests of these authors were not mentioned
in the publications” (Brown, 2000, p. 1701). It is also interesting to quote the so-
called “publication bias”, due to the fact that some research results are not published,
usually the scientiﬁc publications which indicate “problems” with respect to some
important patented—or to be patented—products.26
To the eyes of a researcher in logic, epistemology, and cognitive science like me
it seems perverse to see realized the commercialization of many scientiﬁc processes
and results, for example the fact that few owners can control the “product” of a
scientiﬁc discovery/invention. It seems perverse because we all know that science
is a communal enterprise, which grew generation after generation so that all the
new results are in themselves also indebted to the past achievements. Some new
technologies would have been impossible without previous so-called “theoretical”
discoveries—which of course it was impossible to market—that now seem to
mean nothing in the perspective of the current commercialization process. Geniuses
and personalities are obviously important but their contribution has always been
strongly tied to the human social settings in which they worked and to the rich
cultural heritage arrived from the past, that is to something related to the cultural
“commons”. In this perspective, just to make a simple example, how to justify
exclusive property rights, when not a painting or a romance but a GMO is at stake,
appears to be extremely problematic.
Summary
In this chapter, with the help of the concepts of locked and unlocked strategies,
abduction, and eco-cognitive openness (and of its optimization), I have described
some central aspects of the cognitive character of reasoning strategies and related
heuristics, to the aim of shedding new light on the cognitive aspects of deep
learning machines and on how they affect discoverability, and so creativity. Taking
advantage of my studies on abduction, I have contended that what I call eco-
cognitive openness is undermined in the case of famous computational programs
26 We have to say that also in economics/management disciplines, studies that ﬁnd not-statistically
signiﬁcant relationships (i.e. they ﬁnd neither positive nor negative statistical relationships) are not
even published in journals. This is amazing because studies that found non-statistically signiﬁcant
results actually could potentially be highly interesting, especially for the fact that they might
reverse assumptions (van Hilten, 2015).

76
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
such as AlphaGo/AlphaZero, because they are based on locked abductive strategies.
Instead, unlocked abductive strategies, which are in tune with what eco-cognitive
openness requires, qualify those high-level kinds of abductive creative reasoning
that are typical of human-based cognition, locked abductive reasoning strategies are
instead much simpler than unlocked ones to be rendered at the computational level.
The second part of the chapter emphasized, taking advantage of the logical and
cognitive studies introduced in the previous chapters, the importance of knowledge
in motion—in multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, and transdisciplinary scientiﬁc
research—and its role in favoring in high-level kinds of abductive cognition the
so-called “optimization of eco-cognitive openness and situadedness”. The concept
of “knowledge in motion” is also the necessary conceptual premise of the analysis of
various kinds of “epistemic irresponsibility”, which will be treated in the following
chapter.
References
Adams, J., & Light, R. (2014). Mapping interdisciplinary ﬁelds: Efﬁciencies, gaps and redundan-
cies in HIV/AIDS research. PLoS One, 19(12). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0115092
Allen, C. M., Erdelez, S., & Marinov, M. (2013). Looking for opportunistic discovery of
information in recent biomedical research: A content analysis. Proceedings of the American
Society of Information Science and Technology, 50(1), 1–22.
Arﬁni, S., Bertolotti, T., & Magnani, L. (2020). The antinomies of serendipity. How to cognitively
frame serendipity for scientiﬁc discoveries. Topoi, 39, 939–948.
Arﬁni, S., & Magnani, L. (2015). An eco-cognitive model of ignorance immunization. In L.
Magnani, P. Li, & W. Park (Eds.), Philosophy and cognitive science II. Western & eastern
studies (Vol. 20, pp. 59–75). Switzerland: Springer.
Austin, J. H. (2003). Chase, chance, and creativity: The lucky art of novelty. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Biddle, J. B. (2009). Advocates or unencumbered selves? On the role of Mill’s political liberalism
in Longino’s contextual empiricism. Philosophy of Science, 76(5), 612–623.
Biddle, J. B. (2011). Bringing the marketplace into science: On the neoliberal defense of the
commercialization of scientiﬁc research. In M. Carrier & A. Nordmann (Eds.), Science in the
context of application (pp. 245–269). Cham: Springer.
Biddle, J. B. (2012). Tragedy of the anticommons? Intellectual property and the sharing of
scientiﬁc information. Philosophy of Science, 79(5), 821–832.
Biddle, J. B. (2014). Can patents prohibit research? On the social epistemology of patenting and
licensing in science. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A, 45(1), 14–23.
Biddle, J. B., & Leuschner, A. (2015). Climate skepticism and the manufacture of doubt: Can
dissent in science be epistemically detrimental? European Journal for Philosophy of Science,
5(3), 261–278.
Brown, J. R. (2000). Privatizing the university–the New Tragedy of the Commons. Science,
290(5497), 1701–1702.
Calude, C. S., & Longo, G. (2017). The deluge of spurious correlations in big data. Foundations of
Science, 22(3), 595–612.
Campanario, J. (1996). Using citation classics to study the incidence of serendipity in scientiﬁc
discovery. Scientometrics, 37(1), 3–24.
Cannon, W. B. (1940). The role of chance in discovery. The Scientiﬁc Monthly, 50(3), 204–209.
Catellin, S. (2014). Sérendipité. Du conte au concept. Paris: Seuil.

References
77
Coelho, H., & Thompsen Primo, T. (2017). Exploratory apprenticeship in the digital age with AI
tools. Progress in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1(6), 17–25.
Copeland, S. (2017). On serendipity in science: Discovery at the intersection of chance and
wisdom. Synthese 1–22. Online First.
Darbellay, F., Moody, Z., Sedooka, A., & Steffen, G. (2014). Interdisciplinary research boosted by
serendipity. Creativity Research Journal, 26(1), 1–10.
Davies, J. (1995). Tesuji. Elementary go series (Vol. 3). Tokyo: Kiseido Publishing Company.
Dellantonio, S., & Pastore, L. (2021). Ignorance, misconceptions and critical thinking. Synthese,
198, 7473–7501.
Elliott, K. (2012). Selective ignorance and agricultural research. Science, Technology, and Human
Values, 38(3), 328–350.
Fernández Pinto, M. (2020). Commercial interests and the erosion of trust in science. Philosophy
of Science, 87(5), 1003–1013.
Feyerabend, P. (1975). Against method. London-New York: Verso.
Forsythe, S. (2017a). Evading detection in the information age on surveillance, crypsis and
resistance. Technical Report.
Forsythe, S. (2017b). On affordance and the adversary: Intelligence in theory and practice. Under
graduate Dissertation, War Studies and Philosophy, Faculty of Social Science and Public Policy
Department of War Studies, King’s College London.
Gabbay, D. M., & Woods, J. (2005). The reach of abduction: Insight and trial, Amsterdam: North
Holland: Elsevier.
Hendricks, F. V., & Faye, J. (1999). Abducting explanation. In L. Magnani, N. J. Nersessian, &
P. Thagard (Eds.), Model-based reasoning in scientiﬁc discovery (pp. 271–294). New York:
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Holland, J. H. (1995). Hidden order. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Holland, J. H. (1997). Emergence: From chaos to order. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Husserl, E. (1931). Ideas. General introduction to pure phenomenology [First book, 1913].
Translated by W. R. Boyce Gibson. London: Northwestern University Press.
Husserl, E. (1970). The crisis of European sciences and transcendental phenomenology [1954].
Translated by. D. Carr. London: George Allen & Unwin and Humanities Press.
Husserl, E. (1978). The Origin of Geometry (1939). In J. Derrida (Ed.), Edmund Husserl’s “The
Origin of Geometry” (pp. 157–180). Translated by D. Carr and originally published in Husserl,
1970, pp. 353–378. Stony Brooks, NY: Nicolas Hays.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Kakko, I., & Inkinen, S. (2009). Homo creativus: Creativity and serendipity management in third
generation science and technology parks. Science & Public Policy, 36(7), 537–548.
Kipnis, N. (2005). Chance in science: The discovery of electromagnetism by H.C. Oersted. Science
& Education, 14(1), 1–28.
Kitcher P. (1993). The advancement of science: Science without legend, objectivity without
illusions Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. Second expanded edition, 1970.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakatos, I. (1970). Falsiﬁcation and the methodology of scientiﬁc research programs. In I. Lakatos
& A. Musgrave (Eds.), Criticism and the growth of knowledge (pp. 365–395). Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Lazonick, W. (2007). The big idea. Proﬁts without prosperity. Stock buybacks manipulate the
market and leave most Americans worse off. Harvard Business Review, 3 1–11.
Light, R., & Adams, J. (2016). Knowledge in motion: The evolution of HIV/AIDS research.
Scientometrics, 17, 1227–1248.
Longino, H. E. (1990). Science as social knowledge: Values and objectivity in scientiﬁc inquiry.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Longino, H. E. (2002). The fate of knowledge. Princeton University Press.
Magnani, L. (2001). Abduction, reason, and science. Processes of discovery and explanation.
New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.

78
3
Eco-Cognitive Openness and Eco-Cognitive Closure
Magnani, L. (2007). Morality in a technological world. Knowledge as duty. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive cognition. The epistemological and eco-cognitive dimensions of
hypothetical reasoning. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2015). The eco-cognitive model of abduction. ’Aπαγω´η now: Naturalizing the logic
of abduction. Journal of Applied Logic, 13, 285–315.
Magnani, L. (2016). The eco-cognitive model of abduction. Irrelevance and implausibility
exculpated. Journal of Applied Logic, 15, 94–129.
Magnani, L. (2017). The abductive structure of scientiﬁc creativity. An essay on the ecology of
cognition. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2018). Playing with anticipations as abductions. strategic reasoning in an eco-
cognitive perspective. Journal of Applied Logic—IfColog Journal of Logics and their Applica-
tions, 5(5), 1061–1092. Special Issue on “Logical Foundations of Strategic Reasoning” (guest
editors W. Park and J. Woods).
Magnani, L., & Bertolotti, T. (2011). Cognitive bubbles and ﬁrewalls: Epistemic immunizations in
human reasoning. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), CogSci 2011, XXXIII Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Boston MA: Cognitive Science Society.
Magnani, L., & Bertolotti, T. (2013). Selecting chance curation strategies: Is chance curation
related to the richness of a cognitive niche? International Journal of Knowledge and System
Science 4(1), 50–61.
Magnani, L., & Bertolotti, T. (Eds.). (2017). Handbook of model-based science. Switzerland:
Springer.
McCay-Peet, L., & Toms, E. (2015). Investigating serendipity: How it unfolds and what may
inﬂuence it. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 66(7), 1463–
1476.
Reiss, J. (2010). In favour of a Millian proposal to reform biomedical research. Synthese, 177(3),
427–447.
Rosenman, M. F. (1988). Serendipity and scientiﬁc discovery. The Journal of Creative Behavior,
22(2), 132–138.
Rovetta, F. F. (2020). Framing deceptive dynamics in terms of abductive cognition. Pro-Fil, 21(1),
1–10.
Shulman, S. (Ed.). (1999). Owning the future. Staking claims on the knowledge Frontier.
New York: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Slowiczek, F., & Peters, P. M. (2007). Discovery, chance, and the scientiﬁc method. Access
excellence classic collection. Retrived from http://www.accessexcellence.org/AE/AEC/CC/
chance.html
Thagard, P. (1998). Ulcers and bacteria I: Discovery and acceptance. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biology and Biomedical
Science, 29(1), 107–136.
van Hilten, L. (2015). Why it’s time to publish research “failures”. Science Communication. https://
www.elsevier.com/connect/scientists-we-want-your-negative-results-too
Werner, K. (2021). Cognitive conﬁnement: Theoretical considerations on the construction of a
cognitive niche, and on how it can go wrong. Synthese, 198, 6297–6328.
Whyte, K. P., & Crease, R. (2010). Trust, expertise and the philosophy of science. Synthese, 177(3),
411–425.

Chapter 4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
Epistemic Irresponsibility: Human Creative
Abduction Attacked
In this chapter I will analyze some important aspects of the organization of Research
and Development (R&D) in the case of biopharmaceutical companies, which repre-
sent a prototypical situation of what I call impoverished epistemic niches. At least
in this case we clearly see a challenge to the epistemic integrity of modern science.
Taking advantage of the logical and cognitive studies illustrated in the previous
chapters, which emphasize the crucial role played in abductive cognition by the
so-called “optimization/maximization of eco-cognitive openness and situadedness”,
this chapter will describe the hot problem of the current emergence of disparate
kinds of “epistemic irresponsibility” that strongly jeopardize discoverability.1 In-
teresting cases related to the commodiﬁcation and commercialization of science,
marketing of technoscientiﬁc products, impoverishment of the so-called epistemic
niches are illustrated, which show that human fruitful abductive cognition in science
is increasingly assaulted and jeopardized, and at the same time human creativity
seriously endangered.
1 In this chapter I prefer to adopt the expression epistemic irresponsibility (instead of epistemologi-
cal irresponsibility), because I attribute to the adjective epistemic a restricted meaning. “Epistemic”
pertains to scientiﬁc knowledge or the conditions for acquiring it, which involve eco-cognitive
situations in which not only scientists but also other economical, political, and institutional agents
directly or indirectly intertwined with scientiﬁc research are involved. Instead “epistemological”
also expressly refers to the philosophical community of epistemologists, who in general are not
affected by epistemic irresponsibility, but by other problems such as, for example, philosophical
irrelevance or scholasticism.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
L. Magnani, Discoverability, Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning 26,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93329-6_4
79

80
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
4.1
Jeopardizing Human Creative Abduction Through
Impoverished Epistemic Niches
4.1.1
Epistemic Irresponsibility I: Expensive Drugs Now
and the Undisciplined Commodiﬁcation of Abduction
in Science
The problem I will address in this subsection concerns other threats to the ﬂourish-
ing of human creative abductive processes when performed in high technological
business-oriented environments, in which what has been called a “commercializa-
tion of science” (Brown, 2000; Biddle, 2007) is active, consequent to increasing
dependence of universities on industry and philanthropy. It is not only important
the simple social and political fact that in the background there are forces that are
transforming the universities into servants of industry, rather we also need to address
the “epistemological” consequences of this processes on creativity and its survival
in scientiﬁc practice.
In general the effects of private sectors in orienting scientiﬁc (and not scientiﬁc)2
research are very well-known. When orienting values are “private” or “philan-
thropic” values, less neutral than the public ones, the situation is clear. Brown
illustrates this aspect, not related to our problem of the threat to human abductive
reasoning, but worthy to be reported, taking advantage of an amazing consideration,
which also indicates that promoting a certain kind of knowledge is at the same time
an act of “selecting ignorance” (Tuana, 2006; Proctor & Schiebinger, 2008; Elliott,
2012b):3
[. . . ] ﬁnancial institutions donated a very large sum to a Canadian university economics
department to study “the effects of high taxation on productivity”. The results may
inﬂuence government policy. In such cases, the public and its political decision-makers
get information only of a certain kind, because there is no private, well-funded foundation
called The Consortium of Single Mothers on Welfare that bestows similar massive funding
to discover the effects of poverty on the development of children. Public policy decisions
should be based on a variety of sources of information, but the privatization of research
means that one point of view – guess who’s? – will tend to prevail. Publicly funded science,
though far from perfectly serving all interests, has at least a chance of serving more (Brown,
2000, p. 1701).4
2 In this case one of the more patent effect has been the decimation of humanities, because
neoliberals continue to ignore that the utility of a liberal arts education resorts to the development
of general analytic and writing abilities which are fundamental in industry, government, and
administration. It has to be said that also various “scientiﬁc” departments, not inclined to do
patentable and marketable work, disappeared.
3 I have already introduced the notion of selective ignorance in Magnani (2017, chapter two).
4 An extreme paradoxical case of selective ignorance case is illustrated by Elliott (2012b, p. 335):
“Another crucial way in which the choice of questions can contribute to selective ignorance
is by steering society’s responses to a problem toward scientiﬁc or technical ﬁxes rather than
social or political solutions. Thus, before scientists even begin to formulate their own speciﬁc

4.1
Jeopardizing Human Creative Abduction
81
Further, Brown nicely describes the bad effects of a philanthropic group which,
for example, provides funds to a university for studying science and religion,
inclining the research to show that science and religion are in perfect harmony
(and giving the students this impression), also creating the premises for a potential
slippery slop “If religious foundations can fund science and religion courses,
then why can racist foundations not fund race and IQ courses?” (Brown, 2000,
p. 1701). Another example regards biopharmaceutical research: in approaching a
health problem the way that leads to market a new drug will be favored, another,
for example involving diet, exercise, or environmental control disregarded. Vaccine
research itself has declined also because these drugs are not proﬁtable as the ones
for clear chronic conditions, a situation recently totally reversed thanks to the
corona virus pandemic. The cognitive atmosphere that in these cases is created is
very epistemologically poor: the paucity of rival theories and approaches always
deprives science of the fundamental aspect of comparative evaluation, so strongly
emphasized by Popper and Lakatos.
It seems that in various areas of research the integrity of scientiﬁc knowledge
is challenged by heavily funded interest groups who aim at inﬂuencing research
to serve their needs: “These inﬂuences can take a wide variety of forms: funding
speciﬁc areas of research, designing studies so as to obtain particular results,
suppressing undesirable ﬁndings and harassing scientists that disseminate them,
paying scientists to produce opinionated letters or commentaries or review essays,
and developing strategic public-relations campaigns via the mass media [...]. These
interest-group strategies can affect scientiﬁc language as well as other areas of
science” (Elliott, 2012a, p. 16).
However, we have to illustrate a more focused concern: I contend that the
commercialization of science is detrimental to both scientiﬁc—especially with
respect to the creative parts of scientiﬁc cognition—and social progress. For
example the situation created in the case of biomedical research by the so-called
“Tragedy of Anticommons” is strikingly anti-innovative. Biddle contends it is
particularly interesting this tragedy, proposed by Heller & Eisenberg (1998), for
biomedical research: “According to this thesis, the proliferation of intellectual
property rights upstream (i.e., over the results of basic research included engineered
living organisms that are not ‘natural’, so to speak) creates a series of obstacles
to downstream (i.e., applied) research and product development; the result is that
upstream patenting not only fails to incentivize the development of innovative
questions about a research topic, a signiﬁcant and value-laden decision may already have been
made tacitly by citizens or policy makers—namely, the decision to treat the problem primarily as
a set of questions for scientists and engineers to address. For example, the IAASTD [International
Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development] emphasizes
that there are a number of non-technical solutions to agricultural problems: increasing poor
farmers’ security of access to land, promoting more transparent and high functioning markets,
and providing better social safety nets.” On the problem of ignorance with respect to the women’s
health movement and feminists’ commitment to uncovering the ways women’s bodies have been
ignored, also by science, such as for example in the case of drug companies that decided research
in the area of hormonal contraception for men would not be proﬁtable, cf. (Tuana, 2006).

82
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
products, it also discourages it” (Biddle, 2012, p. 821). For example, patents in
areas such as DNA diagnostics seem to jeopardize the development of certain kinds
of knowledge and certain technological capabilities that have the potential to save
lives. It is possible that, for many scientists—even unconsciously—projects that
have little commercial potential or little prospect of obtaining a patent are never
seriously considered. Empirical studies are reported that conﬁrm the anticommons
thesis, which I think represents a further humiliation of that need of also respecting
the “irrelevance” and the “implausibility” of guessed scientiﬁc hypotheses,5 which
is only occurring thanks to minimization of cognitive restrictions or obstructions.
A typical case of science privatized and commercialized is obviously represented
by pharmaceutical industries. There is a widespread agreement among researchers
that it is plausible to predict a further progressive decline of the pharmaceuti-
cal industries commitment to invest in Research and Development (R&D): new
discoveries—and so new creative abductions—will dramatically decrease and,
consequently, we will have fewer new drugs than expected. Currently, novel
pharmaceutical discovery and development is already a very expensive, difﬁcult,
and inefﬁcient process, especially due to the lack of models that accurately present
the appropriate condition or that reﬂect the appropriate response. This means that
ascertaining potential efﬁcacy and off-target toxicity of drugs is a large part of
the development process, often accomplished through the use of nonhuman animal
models (Anson, Ma, & He, 2009).
Fewer targets and more whole-animal experimentation were replaced during
the 1990s by more targets and in vitro screens. However, one key component
of animal model-based reasoning is the admission that we do not know a lot
of what we should know (or think we know): currently, several animal disease
models are not predictive of clinical outcome (oncology, immunology, central
nervous system (CNS) and other neurological and psychiatric conditions or pain—
which are especially in need of new medications), whereas other models tend to
be more reliable. We have to remember that protest against animal experimenta-
tion has had a heavy effect upon the pharmaceutical industry: unfortunately, the
availability of well-characterized, reproducible, and moderate throughput animal
models still furnishes a great reward during drug invention. The societal and
regulatory consequences on animal experimentation have resulted in relocation to
other countries, often involving obvious ethical outcomes. However, it is worth
quoting the following interesting considerations provided by Bennani, concerning
animal models predictivity: “Pharmaceutical research aimed at cancer treatment,
neurological or psychiatric diseases, in particular, are areas in utmost need of
new therapeutics, yet the most underserved from the discovery-to-clinical-success
standpoint. As mentioned above, animal models in these disease areas are not
predictive, yet regulatory agencies require preclinical investigational new drug
(IND) packages to contain in vivo animal efﬁcacy and data based on nonpredictive
5 I have illustrated above in the ﬁrst chapter of this book the role of irrelevance and implausibility
as crucial to “productive” abductive discoveries.

4.1
Jeopardizing Human Creative Abduction
83
or nonrelevant disease models. It is sad to see that many companies are giving up
on these diseases rather than tackling the fundamental biological, pharmacological,
and developmental causes of the failures. Perhaps the industry needs to tackle
this very problem to demonstrably affect change in the success rate of oncolytics,
neurological agents or neuroleptics, to name but a few” (Bennani, 2011, p. 784).6
The recent phenomenon of expensive drugs is already a clear consequence of
the fact that pharmaceutical discovery and development is highly commercialized
and at the same time a very expensive, difﬁcult, and inefﬁcient process. Indeed very
expensive and very effective hepatitis C and cancer medications recently appeared
in the market: private health insurers in U.S. and EU and welfare assistance in
some EU countries limited prescriptions to few considered very sickest people. It
seems we are facing with a kind of ﬁnancial hazard—a kind of unintended, potential
economic harm or paradoxical damage of therapy—which is consequently a critical
issue that has to be seriously considered as some new treatments disregard the aspect
of affordability to patients and their health systems.7 Of course it can be said that
insurers, by paying for the drug now, they can avoid later on paying for costly
complications, for example liver transplants in the case of hepatitis C, also freeing
up liver transplants for other people who need them. Is this true? Some economical
modeling seems to conﬁrm this prediction, but U.S. private insurance companies
are skeptical in taking this long view, which involves a huge amount of short-term
costs. Indeed they say that people regularly switch health plans, so insurers might
not reap the long-term economic beneﬁts of covering their members’ hepatitis C
treatments. Of course this fact discourages insurance companies from investing in
hepatitis C treatments for more of their members: “The misalignment between short-
term treatment costs and long-term beneﬁts that private payers face, however, may
not promote socially optimal treatment strategies” (Moreno et al., 2016, SP242).8
The rising costs of some drugs contract household budgets as well as federal
and state budgets, Medicare, Medicaid, and other EU public health care programs
that use taxpayer money to pay for drugs. The debate ranges from a discussion on
how these expensive drugs affect the economy overall, for example by reducing the
number of expensive hospital visits and allowing more people to get back to work
faster. Anyway, in so far as we will not be able to solve the problem of actually
having the people properly medicated using those expensive drugs, it will be difﬁcult
6 On some epistemological problems related to the role of animal models in bio-pharmaceutical
research cf. for example (Shelley, 2006).
7 The recent western ﬁnancial crisis has increased the exposure of patients and health systems
to the ﬁnancial hazard, because of cuts in health budgets along with soaring unemployment and
underemployment (Carrera & Olver, 2015).
8 The case of expensive new drugs recently convinced few U.S. Politicians to hold some
investigations into pharmaceutical companies such as Turing, whose former CEO Martin Shkreli
said he would have raised the price of an anti-malarian drug by 5000%. Shkreli resigned after he
was charged with securities fraud. Democrats have invited as a witness Valeant Pharmaceuticals
executive Michael Pearson, formerly criticized for having increased the prices of two heart
medications.

84
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
they will become cheaper. Not only, with the aging population, the health care costs
and demands on price-control of medicines are expected to increase. We can also
clearly note that the pharmaceutical industry’s proﬁtability and growth prospects are
under pressure as health care budgets become increasingly strained because of the
worldwide neoliberal policies which devastated the ﬁnancial equilibria of modern
western states.
The situation I have just described carries a clear consequence, which is
exquisitely epistemological: we have to ﬁgure out how to address these problems,
or run the risk that pharmaceutical companies will stop investing in the research
and development of cures. Recently, in 2015, two researchers in the area of pharma
consulting clearly addressed this aspect:
[. . . ] that cancer drug prices have been rising at rates well above the rate of inﬂation. This
is of concern to all the major stakeholders because it could impact the quality of cancer
care and bring undue ﬁnancial hardship to the patient. In addition, it may compromise
innovation and new drug discovery because it could force governments to implement
arbitrary price controls. Government-mandated price drops have already occurred in some
European countries. In addition, developing countries could also issue a compulsory license,
which would enable local production of the patented drug. This is possible under the
“Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights” agreement of the World Trade Organization
and has already occurred with some HIV drugs. The Indian government did this for imatinib
(Gleevec®), and it was upheld by the Indian Supreme Court. Such events do not support
innovation and the discovery of new drugs to ﬁght cancer (Dranitsaris & Papadopoulos,
2015, p. 299).
In summary, it is patent that both cognitive and technological creative processes
in biopharmaceutical science,9 which in the case of pharmaceutical companies are
highly commodiﬁed, are (and will further be) seriously compromised. In these
cases the commodiﬁcation of science resorts to a form of objective “epistemic
irresponsibility”, which of course also has a quick practical outcome: the worsening
of the general conditions of public health.10
9 Already in 2010 (Paul et al., 2010) said “A key aspect of this problem is the decreasing number
of truly innovative new medicines approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and
other major regulatory bodies around the world over the past 5 years (in which 50% fewer new
molecular entities (NMEs) were approved compared with the previous 5 years)”.
10 A recent research on the “commodiﬁcation of science—often identiﬁed with commercialization,
or the selling of expertise and research results—and the ‘capitalization of knowledge”’, as a
threat to the autonomy of science and academic culture, also criticized for undermining the social
responsibility of modern science, is richly illustrated in Radder (2019). Radder thinks that scientiﬁc
knowledge constitutes a common good and challenges the legitimacy of commercial monopolies
and the private appropriation and exploitation of research outcomes. Resnik (2021), in a recent
review of the book in which he shows his basic agreement with Radder’s treatment, also illustrates
the typical counterarguments he thinks would have to be taken into account: (1) ﬁrst, Radder
disregards the important role that the patent ofﬁces and the courts play in deﬁning and narrowing
the scope of product patents; (2) getting rid of product patents would have a negative impact on
private investment in research; (3) Radder also undervalues the important point that patents last at
most 20 years, and that other researchers and companies can make and commercialize a product
when a patent expires.

4.1
Jeopardizing Human Creative Abduction
85
4.1.2
Epistemic Irresponsibility II: How to Avoid the
Eco-Cognitive Shutdown of Creative Abduction
The reader would have noticed that the expression epistemic irresponsibility carries
a moral halo which seems unexpected when associated to the word epistemology:
let us further explain in detail my perspective on the interplay between epistemology
and ethics and its relationship with my eco-cognitive approach. Stating that
epistemology11 and ethics are entangled does not only mean that reasoning and
morality can be studied together, but rather that it beneﬁts to study them together.
The word entanglement is clearly borrowed from the language of quantum physics:
even if the two philosophical disciplines have each their own theoretical dignity,
many of the objects they deal with are just deeply entangled, so that ignoring one
aspect or the other may cause a philosophical misperception of the matter at stake.
For instance, by failing to appreciate the inferential dimension in a moral judgment
and its enactment, or conversely, how moral priorities strongly inform and override
our best hypothetical reasonings.12
The entanglement of epistemology and ethics has also tacitly emerged over the
past recent years, transcending the philosophical impasses of the is/ought debate.
Such appreciation seems to be more strongly nested in applied epistemology:
Coady explicitly connects the origins of applied epistemology to the tradition of
applied ethics (Coady, 2012, p. 1 and ff.), highlighting a theoretical practice of
mutual borrowing that has characterized the different branches of philosophy since
the very beginning. Clearing up the relationship, and the entanglement, between
epistemology and ethics will help to shed light on another entangled relationship,
that is the one between morality and violence. Indeed, the understanding of
each theoretical entanglement (epistemology-ethics, morality-violence) rests on the
understanding of the other, as the four poles are connected in a double dyadic system
that I also explored in previous works (Magnani, 2011, 2015).
In this section I will deal with a second kind of epistemic irresponsibility that
I think could be avoided taking advantage of some eco-cognitive suggestions that
patently incorporate both methodological recommendations and also the commit-
ment to a certain kind of what I call “moral epistemology”,13 such as in the case of
the so-called “Innovation ASAP”, I will soon illustrate.
11 In this paragraph I exceptionally refer the word epistemology to the whole area of cognitive
reasoned activities, such as it happens in a considerable part of current academic literature.
Anyway, the reader would have realized—I also made a remark in the preface—that in the present
book I adopted its classical intended meaning, which is only referred to scientiﬁc cognition.
12 Some topics that powerfully display such entanglement are gossip studies (Bertolotti &
Magnani, 2014), but also any epistemological approach on religion that cannot overlook how
the violence entailed by religious cognition is rooted both in the moral assumptions and in the
inferential regime that are typical of religion (Bertolotti, 2015), and overall the philosophical
approach to the relationships between morality and violence (Magnani, 2011).
13 I have quickly illustrated the concept of “moral epistemology” in Magnani (2017, chapter one).

86
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
Table 4.1 Opportunities and pitfalls for big pharma R&D (Lundberg & Reilly, 2009, p. 441).
©2009 Elsevier, reprinted by permission
Big Pharma R&D
Opportunities
Pitfalls
Strong drug-hunting expertise. Accessing best
scientists internally
Bureaucracy; process oriented static culture;
poor corporate reputation
Genuine willingness to consult and learn from
collective memory
Broad technology platforms
Lack of focus with frequent strategic shifts
Value chain integration (Discovery,
Development, Production, Market)
Unwillingness to change; ‘silo mentality’
Global asset and knowledge exploitation,
learning from failures
Not-invented-here’ syndrome
Small unit feel (enpowerment) within large
global organization (power)
R&D funding mainly late stage and short term
External transparent mindset
Intelligent rist taking, broad portfolio
‘Me too’ approach
Long-term innovation with constant
improvements. Clear, sustained goals
Constant reorganizations and
mergers—demotivation
The crisis of pharmaceutical research in big pharma,14 I have described in
the previous section had been caused by reduced output of new medicines from
research laboratories, drug pricing pressures, stricter regulatory environments,
and the current economic downturn, together with the recent job losses and a
considerable decrease of investments in Research and Development (R&D). This
situation surely depicts the ﬁnal result of previous eco-cognitive actions we see
as informed by a remarkable epistemic irresponsibility, which surely harmed the
productive performance of human abductive cognition in these areas of science
and technology. Impoverished epistemic niches generated the reduction of scientiﬁc
products and the breakdown of conceptual innovation.
Bennani (2011) ﬁrst of all observes that previous investments in high throughput
screening (HTS), combinatorial chemistry, genomics, and proteomics over the past
two decades (the very technologies that were supposed to keep the industry from
the abyss) have yielded a low return on investment, and consequently he suggests
a complementary perspective on the corporate culture aspect of innovation. The
epistemological aspects that are proposed are interesting and certainly highlight
updated eco-cognitive good features needed to foster good creative abductions
in science. The concept of “innovation ASAP” is introduced (an acronym for
asking powerful questions, seeking the outliers, accepting defeat and populating
astutely). In the background there is more than a suspect that the recent so-called
14 A nice complementary summary of opportunities and pitfalls for big pharma Research and
Development (R&D) is given in Table 4.1.

4.1
Jeopardizing Human Creative Abduction
87
(mega) blockbuster business model has had a profound effect on the pharmaceutical
industry, positive in terms of earnings but negative in terms of “epistemology”:
Nobody could argue, in this capitalistic world, against marketing a drug to achieve great
revenues. Revenue enables further investment, with the goal of repeating an even greater
achievement. Most major pharmaceutical companies have adopted this paradigm and
invested heavily in R&D over the past two decades, more so than any other industry as
a percentage of sales. This approach has forced R&D-intensive companies to focus mainly
on opportunities with > US$ 1 billion annual market potential, which, in return, has created
blind spots toward many diseases and perceived medical needs that did not meet these return
levels. In addition, it tended to attract several players into similar markets, which led to many
years of heavy investments to demonstrate clinical non-inferiority or marginal superiority to
gain Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval. The current trend to catch the current
biologics or bio-similar(s) wave, could well backﬁre in a similar way to small-molecule
follow-on approaches, over the next few decades. Furthermore, commercial functions have
been in the driver’s seat in clinical trial design, which has led to a business- rather than
science-led clinical trial approach, often leading to failure. Although large revenues were
sometimes achieved through this model, it seems to have led the industry to the edge of a
cliff, given how difﬁcult it has been to reproduce it routinely (Bennani, 2011, p. 780).
It is in this perspective of capitalistic competition, compelled to the innovation in
drug discovery, that also a big pharma (Vertex) researcher and manager like Youssef
L. Bennani has to recur to a program that is basically “epistemological”, rather
than directly “ethical”, even seen as a “survival necessity”: “innovation ASAP”
(see above the various items that compose the acronym) is the motto, and the
program seems to delineate a possible new fruitful policy able to foster creativity
and technological innovation. Indeed the whole idea of a culture of innovation in
the drug discovery settings remains unclear, given the multitude of pressure points:
investment, competition, science knowledge, time, management, the diversity of
sources of innovation and the still-unpredictable nature of medicinal chemistry,
drug discovery and clinical outcomes: an approach which exempliﬁes some of the
eco-cognitive features characterizing good creative abductions seems appropriate
to solve the problem. Here the main aspects of the program that, as I observed
above, incorporate at the same time both methodological recommendations and the
commitment to a certain kind of “moral epistemology”:
1. asking powerful questions. It echoes the speciﬁc character of creative abduction,
which has to be performed in a knowledge-rich epistemic niche. The corporate
epistemological environments have to avoid being dominated by a culture of
copycats, in which all work on the same targets, all do combinatorial chemistry,
all use outsourcing and the same consulting ﬁrms. All these negative aspects
depict a strong limitation to that maximization of eco-cognitive openness that
characterizes creative abduction in science;
2. seeking the outliers. “Outliers, as deﬁned here, are a composite of key indi-
viduals, teams, observations, research approaches, work environment, corporate
tolerance for, and reinforcement of, different perspectives, adequate reward sys-
tems, and the ability to seize those ‘aha’ moments: innovation is all about culture.
Outliers are not necessarily individual contributors; they are observations, unique
data relationships that do not ﬁt the hypothesis or dogma, or that cause a

88
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
rethink of assumptions” (Bennani, 2011, p. 785).15 Rules- or guidelines-based
drug discovery is widespread in the pharmaceutical industries and represents
a manager’s dream: unfortunately the establishment of too many rules, both
epistemological and pragmatic, constitutes barriers to innovation and to the
ﬁnding of new answers. We have said that creative abductions are looking
for guessed hypotheses where implausibility and irrelevance do not have to
be discriminated: having rules at all levels of a human enterprise of science
(cognitive activities included) is important and wise, but blindly following rules
can also lead to “blindness” and to repress creativity and exceptional innovations;
3. accepting defeat. Looking for falsiﬁcation is part and parcel of an epistemologi-
cally good scientiﬁc behavior. In the process of abductively guessing a new idea,
one will need to accept failure. We know that in every process of abductive
innovation the ability to deal with failure and to pass to new hypotheses is
fundamental. The perseverance in the face of negative research outcomes is
extremely negative but often affects R&D in pharmaceutical ﬁrms;
4. populating astutely. It suggests that, Bennani says, on the human resources side,
a fundamental component of employing or forming a new team is related to a
reasonable balance between people who disagree with the current standard of
knowledge and those that execute orders. Organizations should promote people
and teams able to enrich the various innovation incubators with complementary
cognitive attitudes to foster creativity, rather than rewarding “me-too”16 or “fast-
follower” products.17 Benchmarking itself can be creativity-threatening because
it tends to only favor incrementally inventive products.
4.1.3
Epistemic Irresponsibility III: Neoliberalism Assaults to
Epistemic Integrity of Biopharmaceutical Research
Interesting theoretical “philosophical” and sophisticated discussions about the
ethics of pharmaceutical pricing could be further speculated, for example taking
advantage of a Rawlsian view of distributive justice (Rawls, 1971; Spinello, 1992),
contending that necessary drugs should be priced so that ability and willingness
to pay will be within the reach of everyone, and a plenty of other argumentations
15 Jaakko Hintikka would have called these outliers “oracles” (Hintikka, 2007), fundamental to
perform good abductions (cf. section “The EC-Model of Abduction” in (Magnani, 2017, chapter
one)).
16 Copies of existing drugs, not exact copies because they need to be slightly different to be
patentable.
17 Brown reports the following amazing case related to the pathetic—and totally business-
oriented—strategy of “inventing of a new disease”: the drug maker Eli Lilly promoted a new
medical disease concept, “premenstrual dysphoric disorder” (PMDD), allegedly in order to create
new markets and patent protection for its drug Prozac (Brown, 2008, pp. 201–203).

4.1
Jeopardizing Human Creative Abduction
89
could be advanced and further reﬁned. The price of the AZT therapy puts it beyond
the reach of a lot of people suffering from AIDS. Communicable diseases such
as HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis affect people that live mostly in third-
world countries, receive only a small part of the investment per share in the global
disease burden as compared to ﬁrst-world diseases such as cardiovascular disease
and diabetes. Gewertz & Amado (2004) obviously contend (and admonish) that
“While the moral signiﬁcance Rawls places on the basic liberty of life and the
right to health is appealing and consistent with natural humanitarian concerns, the
practical limitations associated with implementing these ideals are overwhelming.
Ignoring economic factors and incentives in favor of providing treatment to every
individual in need of medication, as Rawls’s theory dictates, may undermine the
ability of a company to function as a viable business” (Gewertz & Amado, 2004,
p. 305). I think ethical lucubrations of this type, typical of the tradition of moral
philosophy—even if very honorable—mean almost nothing in our neoliberal era, so
I will immediately save my time and the time of the reader by renouncing to further
propose these kinds of edifying but unfruitful—because a decent and appropriate
context in which they could be listened to is lacking—intellectual exercises.
What is really the worst is that not only we are facing huge ethical problems, but
also challenges to the epistemic integrity of modern science. Typical of scientiﬁc
research in our era is the presence of strong relationships between universities
and government researchers, on the one hand, and for-proﬁt entities, on the other,
which involve the funding of research projects by for-proﬁt entities, consultancy
arrangements, gifts, stock ownership, and management of start-up companies. In
this context epistemic integrity of research is jeopardized, because scientists are
biased toward the companies with whom they have relationships: conﬂicts of interest
proliferate. The epistemologist James Robert Brown I have already quoted warns us
about some epistemological perversions: “The editors [of the New England Journal
of Medicine already in 2002] also claim in their editorial—and this is shocking—that
it is increasingly difﬁcult to ﬁnd people to do reviews who do not have economic ties
to the corporate world. If they left out such reviews, they claim, they would nothing
at all on new products, leaving readers with no means of evaluation except that
provided by the manufacturers themselves” (Brown, 2008, p. 194). Furthermore,
by illustrating the famous Calabrese case (Shrader-Frechette, 2010) a list of four
main ethical problems which afﬂict various ﬁelds of scientiﬁc research is provided
(1) having ﬁnancial conﬂicts–of-interest (extensive industry funding); (2) failing
to follow guidelines for disclosing ﬁnancial conﬂicts-of-interest; (3) failing to
disclose coauthors’ correct afﬁliations and conﬂicts-of-interest; and (4) censoring
whistleblowers who reveal questionable behaviors. It is more than obvious that these
four ethical problems can easily be responsible for damages to various levels of
epistemic integrity.
Indeed, as I have already remarked in the previous subsection, the problem is
that not only we are assisting to the birth of hyper expensive drugs (for example the
recent cases of Hepatitis C and some cancer treatments) but the current economical
system challenges the chances of making new discoveries themselves, and so
the possibility of freely exercising human creativity and capacity to discover and

90
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
innovate. It can be clearly said that economic medicalization of research “[...]
is a process where the traditional values associated with the scientiﬁc method are
replaced by research ethics that reﬂect the values of the market place” (Poitras &
Meredith, 2009, p. 318).
Reiss (2010, pp. 435–436) usefully remembers to us that care legislation in
the United States since 1980 has been extremely “business-friendly”, not always
acting with the patient’s welfare in mind and “doing violence to the production of
scientiﬁc knowledge”. Inadequate regulation (“both the failure to regulate certain
practices as well as the introduction of new regulations with adverse effects”) has
created a completely business-oriented system where everyone can make proﬁts:
“companies and their stockholders by high sales and proﬁt margins; doctors, by
gifts and ﬁnancial contributions from the industry; academic researchers, by the
possibility to patent the fruits of their research; politicians, by board memberships
in the industry and campaign donations; regulators, by so-called ‘user-fees’, paid for
by the industry; and ‘apparently’ patients, by an allegedly highly innovative industry
that is spending billions to ﬁnd new treatments for their health problems”.
In our era the practice of neoliberal economics is strongly associated with a “one
dimensional” ethics that privileges market valuation principles over all others, and,
regrettably, the epistemological ones included. How can the prevalence of the idea of
“economic liberty”, when privileged over all others, in the context of a deteriorated
democratic processes, jeopardize, and damage or pervert received epistemic values?
In the previous subsections I have described some of the so-called “impoverished
epistemic niches”, which represent an attack to the ﬂourishing development of
human creative abduction: it is obvious that at the basis of such a challenge we
can see a system that putting proﬁts over people will likely lead to a shortage of
essential drugs and instead to an increment of irrational, unessential, disused, and
insecure drugs, with thousands of brand names, promotional vacuities, etc. After
all big pharmaceutical corporations pursue strategies consistent with shareholder
wealth maximization (SWM).
Neoliberalism plus globalization also lead to more experimentation of new
drugs to third world countries and often the subjects of these trials are not be
clearly given the information about risks:18 the main strategic decision variables
at stake are pricing, quantity to be produced, advertising and publicity, product—
often superﬁcial—reshaping and development, and investment as strategic decision
variables. Pricing may be largely determined by marketing considerations, of course
related to compensating costs by suitable margin, which would be decided by
contribution to ﬁxed costs and the proﬁt rate and proﬁtability commanded by the
capital markets (D’Mello, 2002, p. 180). In sum, being a product and process
innovations are part of a competitive strategy and have to be coherent with ad-
vertising and promotion: “This may entail deliberate product proliferation, product
18 In the western world doctors are sometimes hugely paid to favor these experiments so opening
the door to possible abuses (Brown, 2008, p. 195).

4.1
Jeopardizing Human Creative Abduction
91
differentiation, including irrational combinations, the manipulation of patents and
the codes and standards set voluntarily by an industry”.
Moreover, medicalization is a social process where the medical profession
involves not only doctors and associations of doctors, but also the pharmaceutical
industry providing the drugs, the academic institutions and journals involved in
forming doctors and promoting fundamental research activities, the government
granting agencies and other sponsors, etc. As for now, given the fact that the
source of capital for the pharmaceutical industry is the global ﬁnancial markets,
the primary ethical motivations of big pharma profoundly differ from those of
the other actors.19 A dilemma for government regulators arises: how to balance
public health needs “with the need to restrict the economic footprint of the
regulatory framework on an industry that produces and distributes some of the most
important products of modern science?” (Poitras & Meredith, 2009, p. 313). After
all since the famous public policy disaster generated by thalidomide in the 1960s,
it has been acknowledged that in medical research and development (R&D) the
conﬂict of interests between proﬁt-maximizing of private sphere ﬁrms and those of
governments would need severe regulatory supervision.
Another aspect of current business-oriented medicalization is related to the fact
that it is becoming a process where more and more aspects of everyday life come
under medical dominion, inﬂuence and supervision. Poitras & Meredith (2009, p.
315) also stress the excesses of the so-called “marketing of disease” and illustrate
a “list of categories consistent with economic medicalization, including: senior
male disorders, such as andropause, baldness, and erectile dysfunction; behavioral
disorders, such as hyperactivity in children and adult ADHD; and, biomedical
enhancements, such as human growth hormone and steroids”.
Finally, here is a list of some derived forms of commercialization or commodiﬁ-
cation of aspects of the biomedical research (also other aspects are included), which
the neoliberal era has transformed into real challenges to epistemic integrity, which
the philosopher of science has the duty to highlight:
1. instead of trying to reduce the possibility of bias in the interpretation of the
observed data, the “moral codes” of the marketplace “require ﬁrms to be basically
concerned with abnormal gains (losses) associated with ‘positive’ (negative)
research results”: in few words, economic medicalization “occurs because there
is a decided bias towards unjust acceptance and against unjust rejection” (Poitras
& Meredith, 2009, p. 318). The tendency is to publish only favorable clinical
trial results regarding an experimental drug and suppress discordant evidence,
avoiding any kind of adversarial system (Biddle, 2013). It is obvious that it is not
19 The epistemologist Brown presents a very negative description of big pharma: “The swaggering
entrepreneurs of the pharmaceutical industry boast that they are doing risky, innovative research.
This is pure nonsense. [. . . ] Big pharma consists of business people exploiting the intellectual
work of others. Frankly, who needs these parasites? Their only contribution to medicine has been
marketing . . . ” (Brown, 2008, p. 205).

92
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
rewarding, so to say, to present negative information concerning products, which
already costed millions of dollars of investments;20
2. the so-called “muzzle clauses” in the contracts—which can involve lawsuits
etc.—intend to prevent researchers from releasing any information about the
clinical trial without the sponsor’s permission: when negative data are found they
tend to remain secret, even when could predict dangers to public health. The
knowledge in motion which I have described as necessary in Sect. 3.5.1 above
is stopped: scientiﬁc information cannot appropriately circulate. But also terrible
pragmatic and not only epistemic costs and consequences can derive. The tragic
consequences of OcyContin, Neurontin, Paxil, Accutane, Baycol (Caplovitz,
2006), Aprotinin and Vioxx (Avorn, 2006)21 testify more or less terrible dangers
and speak clearly regarding long-term effects emerged only after long periods
of time already in the market place, due to a lack of preventive trials before
marketing;
3. opinion leaders (also academics) and companies are too often complicit: for
example they are ﬁnanced for lectures at conferences or act as paid consultants
to some corporations so showing low degrees of independence. Some drug
companies adopt the so-called “ghost-writing” when they send the results (only
the positive ones) of their research to an author trying to secure her endorsement
to favor acceptance of their new drugs in the marketplace. Academics are often
seduced by the chance offered of publishing in prestigious journals appropriate
to favor career progress. Symmetrically, it is unlikely that unsuccessful clinical
trials will be published and physicians are in general exposed to articles that
support certain drugs or devices;
4. commercialization can affect even doctors’ diagnostic inferences (selective
abductions, as we know). The reliance of drug detailing and sampling on
pure marketing tactics raises suspicion of unethical economic medicalization.
Drug and medical devices are offered and sales representatives bring research
literature and clinical trial results to the doctors in efforts to inﬂuence their
prescription pattern choice (Turner, Matthews, Linardatos, Tell, & Rosenthal,
2008). Representatives make donations of free samples to hospital and doctors
20 Elliott links this behavior to the concept of the so-called selective ignorance: “[. . . ] the category
of selective ignorance can sometimes merge with the category of ignorance as a strategic ploy or
active construct. For example, industry groups may purposely study the beneﬁcial or neutral effects
of their products while avoiding research that might yield negative information” (Elliott, 2012b, p.
332).
21 Justin Biddle reports ﬁndings to the effect that Merck, the producer of Vioxx, mischaracterized
the state of knowledge regarding its possible cardiovascular side effects between 2000 and 2004
and accounted for data on the drug deﬁciently (Biddle, 2007). 17 members (against the remaining
15) of the FDA advisory committee in February 2005 decided to put Vioxx back on the market,
after Merck had removed it, and 10 of those 17 had ﬁnancial conﬂicts of interest with at least
one of the pharmaceutical companies that had drugs under examination, such as Merck, Pﬁzer,
and Novartis (Biddle, 2013). It is more than obvious that regulatory agencies have a very small
inﬂuence on private companies, given the fact such agencies are subjected to corporate funding
and to committee members who are scientists that are related to those companies.

4.1
Jeopardizing Human Creative Abduction
93
tending to insidiously inﬂuence general medical staff, avoiding ﬁrstly contact
pharmacologists, who are more expert and so more able to criticizing and
evaluate drugs;
5. clinical trials themselves22 are more oriented by marketing than by deep R&D
motivations: the physicians can licitly receive fees for the recruitment and
tracking of subjects admitted into the clinical trials. Two particularly famous
cases are (1) Bayer admitting to a “mistake” in suppressing a study that
showed dangerous side-effects related to the drug Baycol, and (2) the already
cited Merck’s suppression of research that showed Vioxx doubled the risk
of myocardial infarction and stroke (Avorn, 2006). Only the fact these drugs
presented adverse outcomes in a large quantity of treated people made possible
the discovery of these misconducts, which are horrible certainly from the ethical
point of view but in our perspective, especially from the epistemological point of
view.
In sum, epistemic decency and integrity are constantly in danger or at
risk thanks to the neoliberal attack—through excessive, almost anarchistic,
commercialization—to academy and public research, but we have to say that
also other more practical aspects were not favored by the neoliberal turn, such as
for example the ones described by Brown in 2008 in a famous article published in
Science:
The United States is unique among industrialized countries in not having a national health
system. Health care is overwhelmingly private and largely in the hands of insurance
companies. The cost is approaching 15% of the U.S. gross domestic product and more
than one-quarter of the population is not covered. By contrast, Canada (like most other
industrialized countries) has universal coverage at a cost of under 9% of gross domestic
product. Aside from the cost, it is hard to compare the relative quality of the health-care
systems, but one statistic is revealing: Cancer patients in Canada live an average of 14
months longer from the time of detection than those in the United States (Brown, 2000, p.
1702).23
We academics all know that philosophers of science are not involved—neither
directly nor indirectly—in decisions regarding public policy: it seems that policy
decisions must be based on social goals and other factors that have nothing to do
with epistemology. At this point it is clear that various aspects of current decision
making in commercialized research are jeopardizing scientiﬁc creativity and human
creative abduction in general. As an epistemologist I am just indicating the problem:
too many aspects of the socio-economical organization of science—increasingly
business-oriented—put in danger the genuine tradition of objective science and
22 The outsourcing of medical research has become a strong imperative in the global pharmaceu-
tical industry. Pressed by competition, the importance of speed in drug development, and higher
domestic costs, pharmaceutical companies have to outsource critical contracts, clinical research,
and drug testing, in general into emerging markets.
23 See also the Wikipedia entry: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_the_healthcare_
systems_in_Canada_and_the_United_States.

94
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
some of the best aspects of the human abductive scientiﬁc cognition.24 I do not have
practical suggestions and solutions, but surely the smart people who are involved in
economical and political decisions and at the same time are interested in favoring
the further growth of science in the western world will ﬁnd ones.
4.2
Optimizing the Eco-Cognitive Situatedness: Human
Creative Abduction between Academia and Corporations
To further analyze the role of the optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness in its
relationship with creative abduction in science it is important to deal with some
interesting aspects of the current interplay between academia and corporations. The
case of biopharmaceutical research is still exemplar. Still now, in an era of powerful
attack on higher education (Giroux, 2014), innovation and creativity are generally
fostered in academia, but pharmaceutical ﬁrms tend to redeﬁne the word “new” as a
trivial “me-too” or “me-better” (just modiﬁcations of existing substances), as I have
illustrated in the Sect. 4.1.2 above. Indeed biomedical research basically produce
drugs that are not at all innovative—but often very expensive—with uncertain
medical value and often not clearly checked from the point of view of safety and
effectiveness.
These scarce innovative fruits also derived from a change of the nature of
academia received from the past. For example, in the case of biopharmaceutical
research, proﬁt-oriented companies have substituted academic and other non-proﬁt
institutions in performing various medical research such as for example clinical
trials. Reiss observes that 71% of industry-sponsored clinical trials were outsourced
to academic medical centers in 1991 but, by 2001 this percentage had dropped
to 36%; moreover, we have already said that industry-sponsored research tends
to present results that are favorable for the tested drug. The commercialization of
research has also attenuated the standards and drugs are sometimes tested on patients
who are younger and more healthy than the general target population. Finally, a
considerable number of clinical trials is never published or described in a way
that makes possible positive judgments about the validity of the reported results
(Reiss, 2010, p. 431–432). Indeed, some of the countries targets of medical trials
outsourcing have been seen as serving of “guinea pigs” to the world (D’Mello,
2002; Shah, 1993), and also clearly testify the shift of clinical research and
drug development from academy to commercial contract research organizations.
Multinational companies like Pﬁzer, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, SanoﬁAventis,
and Roche have outsourced clinical studies abroad, especially in India.25
24 Indeed it seems that other political, economical, and social processes are jeopardizing the good
performance of various human expert cognitive skills, not only creativity. On social networks as
ignorance-makers cf. (Arﬁni, Bertolotti, & Magnani, 2019).
25 Various cases of clinical trial misconduct are described in Adobor (2012).

4.2
Optimizing the Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
95
Academic research remains relevant in commercially unattractive therapeutic
areas, such as rare disorders and parasitic diseases, and in research into natural
products, which are robustly disregarded by the big pharma.26 Unfortunately, after
the 1990s, the golden era of big pharma, the productivity is now very low and the
R&D costs are rising, and the dissipation of proprietary products and “dwindling
pipelines” are still active (Khanna, 2012).27 In the case of biomedical research,
we are currently in front of a kind of unsurprising paradox: in academy great
biomedical science is frequently done, but without immediate applicability to
human pathologies, instead pharmaceutical ﬁrms are engaged in a kind of “drug
hunting” often far from being highly innovative but simply resorting to an activity
of making medicines that just work in human beings. It is well-known that genomic
sequencing will not deliver large numbers of new, valid targets: the anti-infective,
antiviral and antiparasitic areas have had the complete genomic sequence of their
target organisms available for many years. Similarly, understanding the etiology of
a disease is not necessary positively linked to ﬁnding treatments: cystic ﬁbrosis is
well studied and understood, but is still poorly treated.
Bennani eloquently observes that the different organizational structure of indus-
try of research might be responsible for the failures and of the low level of innovative
results:
[. . . ] higher education systems are organized around scientiﬁc disciplines and departments,
whereas researchers naturally tend to congregate around similar models in the industrial
setting. Alternatively, the industry tends to be organized around diseases or therapeutic
areas, with emphasis on centers of excellence. There are few organizational models based
around “drug discovery excellence” or “integrated disease discovery and development
centers” or, better still, “chemical biology-pharmacology”, “pharmaceutics development”,
and so on. The point here is that much innovation, speed, productivity are probably lost
through lack of better integrative organizational, cultural, and scientiﬁc communication
models. Innovative organizational and management models, along the entire spectrum of
R&D, will be key in helping address current shortcomings (Bennani, 2011, pp. 784–785).
The contraction in research within pharma is surely due to the lack of that eco-
cognitive activity in which an environment characterized by that “knowledge in
motion” I have described above in Sect. 3.5.1 is active. This decline seems to be
accompanied by a renaissance of research within the academic setting: often, groups
grow organically from academic research laboratories, exploiting a particular area of
26 Big pharma are generalists and orphan drug development represents a small proportion of their
product portfolio (Bruyaka, Zeitzmann, Chalamon, Wokutch, & Thakur, 2013). I have already
said in Sect. 4.1.1 that the excess of patenting tends to discourage the creation of new drugs,
and especially for the third and developing world. In these worlds medicines cannot be easily
found: a commodiﬁed scientiﬁc research privileges the medicines that already exist and, moreover,
the program of developing new drugs to treat diseases that afﬂict primarily or exclusively the
developing world is fundamentally disregarded.
27 In between 2008 and 2012, the top ten pharma companies have lost more than 200,000 jobs.
A decline has not stopped even considering the exploitation of both China and India, which are
offering less expensive preclinical and clinical services (at savings of 30–80%), in a situation in
which informed consent and patient safeguard are often—de facto—lacking (Lee Chang, 2016).

96
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
novel biology or new technology and we are facing an increment of drug discovery
activities in the academic, charitable, and non-forproﬁt sectors. This is the case of
the Cancer Research UK (CR-UK) where the drug discovery team at the Manchester
Institute has been established to translate novel research from the Manchester cancer
research community into drug discovery programs (Jordan, Waddell, & Ogilvie,
2015).
Anyway, the general comments concerning the future of drug discovery are rather
pessimistic, as eloquently illustrated by the following passage, published in the
relatively recent and rich collective book Drug Discovery and Development:
However, there is cause for concern. Declining government funding and reformed educa-
tional policies in the western world are likely to have serious implications for drug discovery
educators and practitioners, which could widen the already signiﬁcant gap between
research scientists at the highest level and the education of students at undergraduate and
postgraduate levels. There is a real concern that the scientists of tomorrow will not possess
the “right”, tools in the toolkit to be able to effectively interrogate and address the questions
being asked by research scientists in academia and industry today. The challenges can
only be met if the government agencies worldwide are willing to invest in the education
of academics and students alike (Pors, 2011, p. 91).
4.2.1
“The Symbiotic Model of Innovation”
and the Precompetitive Collaborations
Crisis and devastating policies are already leading pharma explore external alliances
to further stimulate the stagnating innovative areas. This seems to offer a new
opportunity for collaboration between academic institutes and industry. Centuries
of academic scientiﬁc tradition has contributed gigantically to developing better
knowledge of hundred of disease states and to the respective therapies: of course this
tradition has always been less committed to the practical aim of creating new drugs
and at the same time not particularly sensitive to intellectual property protection.
During the last 20 years the strong reduction of funds devoted to academic research
from government and private agencies has created new attention of university
researchers to industry for support in fundamental research and identifying areas
of mutual interest. Steve Carney, editor of the international journal Drug Discovery
Today thinks that the “[...] days when big Pharma companies operated in glorious
isolation, ﬁnding their own targets and performing medicinal chemistry in house to
ﬁnd that elusive blockbuster compound are, generally, over” (Carney, 2016).
In the previous sections I have amply illustrated that, in a commercialized
model of research, creativity is jeopardized certainly because innovation chains and
knowledge in motion are humiliated. Given the simple fact that every new idea is
built on a previous idea, if the previous idea is protected, the new idea cannot be

4.2
Optimizing the Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
97
developed.28 In presence of an excess of patents it is clear that in some areas of
science, continuing research and trying innovation can be guaranteed only by some
patent infringement. For example, patents in areas such as DNA diagnostics seem to
jeopardize the development of certain kinds of knowledge and certain technological
capabilities that have the potential to save lives (Biddle, 2012). Patents and property
rights constitute a serious obstacle to perform research (both “normal”—in Kuhnian
sense—and innovative) and also to disseminate research results. Recent patent
infringement cases in the U.S., such as Monsanto vs. McFarling (2004), Monsanto
vs. Scruggs (2006), and Monsanto vs. Bowman (2011) are described in (Biddle,
2014):29 Monsanto prohibition of seed saving seems to violate the doctrine of patent
exhaustion, which states that a patent holder’s right to exclude others from using or
selling an invention is exhausted after an authorized sale.
Another threat to the epistemic integrity of research can be easily found in the
ﬁeld of ethnopharmacology: astonishingly we see in danger the celebrated rational
criterium of falsiﬁcation, jeopardized by the pressure to publish that afﬂicts those
scientists. In the interpretation of molecular pharmacological data published in
ethnopharmacology-related journals a very unsatisfactory level of self-evaluation is
observed. The problem is that there has been a rebirth in scientiﬁc study of medicinal
plants with medical effects, also enriched with new methods for the exploration
of new drugs candidates for several diseases. We academics all know that various
new policies regarding the evaluation of researchers have been implemented in
the last years with the aim of improving research and its “productivity” and the
“merit” of people. Consequently scientists are in general under pressure to publish.
In some cases—ethnopharmacology is just a minor example—this fact weakens the
commitment to falsify the theories, so generating epistemic irresponsibility.
Gertsch reminds us that we may obviously ascertain when a hypothesis or theory
is wrong when it can be “proved” wrong (Popper, 1959, 1963; Popper & Miller,
1983) and observes
In an “inﬂation-driven” scientiﬁc environment the currency (scientiﬁc publications) is
devaluated as the amount of currency increases, which motivates us to publish as many
claims as possible. [. . . ] The result is the fabrication of unscientiﬁc hypotheses and theories.
Is it correct to talk about an antimalarial activity of an extract when the readout is derived
from an in vitro model? Is a compound an anticancer agent only because it kills cancer
cells in vitro? If compound X shows anticancer effects in different in vitro models but
is completely inactive in vivo because it is not bioavailable or metabolized we have
the possibility of improving its chemical properties such that it becomes a therapeutic
candidate. [. . . ] Only when researchers start to try to falsify or refute their observations and
subsequently announce grown-up theories will we see an improvement in scientiﬁc quality
and a more efﬁcacious promotion of knowledge. In my opinion this is urgently needed in
ethnopharmacology (Gertsch, 2009, pp. 181 and 182).
28 I have described this issue above in Sect. 4.1.1 (cf. p. 81), when dealing with the so-called
“Tragedy of Anticommons”.
29 In (Biddle, 2014) many other examples are illustrated and some possible proposals for
overcoming this situation of epistemic hazard advanced: voluntary agreements to make research
feasible, elimination of patents, and research exemption.

98
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
Even if the situation of commercialized biopharmaceutical research (and agri-
cultural research, we have to add) presents all the epistemological problems that
I have illustrated in this chapter, fortunately, there are still alive many areas in
which commercialization of science is relatively not present and scientiﬁc progress
very relevant, for example in mathematics, high energy physics, and evolutionary
biology, which are patent-free.30 Of course these areas are considerably damaged in
their intellectual freedom because of a chronic lack of funds and especially because
of the obsessive request—addressed to all the academic departments—to organize
their courses and their research activities primarily for forging “workers”, to be
promptly used by the outside market.
To re-create the eco-cognitive conditions for favoring creative scientiﬁc ab-
duction pharmaceutical companies have to look outside of their towers with the
aim of generating new ideas, identifying targets, and reducing redundancy. In
this process academy will still play a fundamental role: sharing information early
in the scientiﬁc cognitive processes will enhance it without compromising the
“sacred” intellectual property positions.31 Some articles recently published in Drug
Discovery Today have just highlight some of these areas and the beneﬁts of the
so-called precompetitive approaches or collaboration. I have to say that it is really
amazing to see invented new neologisms exploiting the adjective “precompetitive”
to describe the creation of partnering models comprising both academic departments
and big and small pharma industry. These unions seem appropriate to develop a
better understanding of complicated diseases, identify and validate new therapies,
seek and validate novel biomarkers for prediction of efﬁcacy and safety. I was
saying that it is amazing to see the adoption of the neologism “precompetitive”:
it is also very revealing, is not it the admission of a strong failure of the attack
to higher education and academic scientiﬁc research with its paranoic emphasis
on commercialization and competition? The many decision-makers who follow
neoliberalism are just discovering—I have to say very slowly—that, having killed a
great part of the state structures and private ﬁnancial funds reserved to universities,
by concentrating everything in the private sector thanks to the adoption of a
totalitarian business-oriented model, they have also created and they are still—
obstinately—developing an eco-cognitive environment for scientiﬁc research in
which innovation, creativity, and so good human creative abductive cognition are
highly jeopardized.
30 In these cases Brown observes that “Curiosity, good salaries, and peer recognition are motivation
enough” (Brown, 2008, p. 209).
31 An interesting treatment of various problems related to intellectual property in life sciences
taking advantage of the history of the international patent regime and the life science industries,
both of which traced back to the late nineteenth century, is offered by Dutﬁeld (2009).

4.2
Optimizing the Eco-Cognitive Situatedness
99
The partners of these precompetitive unions return to have open access to the
data, technology, and training options to utilize in their own research or proprietary
projects. Already in 2012 Ish Khanna, experienced pharmaceutical researcher and
manager, said that
With constrained microeconomics, new creative deal structures and alliances are emerging
with emphasis on partnering to share risk and rewards. Although innovation is a driver
in deal-making, interest in early collaborations seems to have intensiﬁed during the past
two to 3 years. This is a marked shift from previous models wherein biotechs would
carry projects to clinical proof-of-concept before partnering with larger companies. Early
partnerships, equity holdings, option alliances with non-dilutive funding are emerging as
desirable alternates. The risk shared deals (preclinical and clinical) with preferred partners
are becoming common place (Khanna, 2012, p. 1098).
The so-called “Symbiotic Innovation Model” is related to this new research
perspective in terms of early partnership and aims both at beneﬁting all partners
and at being particularly relevant for the so-called novel mechanism-based drugs. It
seems that variations of this model will likely be adopted rapidly in pharma industry
during coming years.32
Reopening the barriers between public and private biopharmacological sectors
thanks to the precompetitive collaborations is a ﬁrst step to favor the “creative
scientist”, that is the unconventional thinker who currently feels imprisoned under
constrictive environment. Human creative abduction can ﬂourish beyond limits only
in eco-cognitive open systems.
It is simple to detect and criticize behaviors that testify patent forms of epistemic
irresponsibility, for example a corporation that refuses to reveal information about
the harmful effects of its products, but it will be more difﬁcult to criticize studies
organized in such a way of minimizing the chance of detecting negative effects. It
is obvious that selective ignorance is always at stake, and this regards the directions
of research science has to adopt, and that often reﬂect the interest of restricted
groups:33 criticizing it is related to the adoption of a different interest, for example
the one of the public goods. Another count is the critique to the threats to the
32 One such approach, the European Lead Factory (ELF), a project of the Innovative Medicine
Initiative, has recently created a collaborative lead generation platform to share research in
the early moments of drug discovery. “The state-of-the-art high-throughput screening (HTS)
infrastructure and the industrial-quality Joint European Compound Collection of the ELF are made
available at no cost to European research investigators, with a milestone payment system applied
to any exploitation projects targeting commercialization (https://www.europeanleadfactory.eu/)”
(Karawajczyk et al., 2015, p. 1310). The European Lead Factory is a collaborative public-private
partnership aiming to deliver innovative drug discovery starting points. Having established the ﬁrst
European Compound Library and the ﬁrst European Screening Centre, the EU Lead Factory gives
free access to up to 500,000 novel compounds, a unique industry-standard HTS platform, and much
more.
33 Sometimes it is the mere neoliberal organization of universities and research centers which
inhibits freedom and that eco-cognitive openness and optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness I
have introduced in this book. For example: idiot pressure to produce science that can be published
in disciplinary important journals, huge bureaucratization of academic departments that inhibits
creative collaborations and, so to speak, both “enthusiasm for understanding” and needed times for

100
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
productivity of science itself I have illustrated in the previous sections, which
jeopardize the entire way of producing rational knowledge.
In conclusion, political and academic strategies can be implemented to restore
epistemic responsibility when needed (for example (Elliott, 2012b) quotes political
activism and deliberative forums for both steering science toward public goods
and identifying public goods thanks to democratic policies). The success of these
processes will exclusively depend on the decisions and actions the human beings
will adopt (or will be able to adopt).
Summary
In this chapter the problem of discoverability has been characterized by the analysis
of some current difﬁculties that affect various aspects of the scientiﬁc enterprise
such as in the case of the organization of Research and Development (R&D) in
biopharmaceutical companies. I contended that this case symbolizes a paradigmatic
example of what I have called “impoverished epistemic niches”. It seems that some
of the fundamental aspects that characterize modern science are jeopardized: in
the light of the importance, I repeatedly stressed in the previous chapters, of the
crucial role played in scientiﬁc abductive cognition by the so-called “maximization
of eco-cognitive openness and optimization of eco-cognitive situadedness”, I have
examined various types of what we can call “epistemic irresponsibility”. I have
illustrated the current increasing expansion of commodiﬁcation and commercial-
ization of science, marketing of technoscientiﬁc products, impoverishment of the
epistemic niches, showing that a consequence is and could further be an attack
to the possibility of a ﬂourishing of human fecund and successful abductive
creative cognition in science, and so at the same time human creativity severely
compromised.
References
Adobor, H. (2012). Ethical issues in outsourcing: The case of contract medical research and the
global pharmaceutical industry. Journal of Business Ethics, 105(2), 239–255.
Anson, B., Ma, J., & He, J. (2009). Identifying cardiotoxic compounds human iPS cell-derived
cardiomyocytes (and other cell types) streamline quest for novel drug candidates. Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology News, 29(9), online.
Arﬁni, S., Bertolotti, T., & Magnani, L. (2019). Online communities as virtual cognitive niches.
Synthese, 196(1), 377–397.
Avorn, J. (2006). “Dangerous deception”: Hiding the evidence of adverse drug effects. The New
England Journal of Medicine, 355, 2169–2171.
“concentration”, lack of funds, funds that compel to study certain themes, obsession for increasing
proﬁts, etc.

References
101
Bennani, Y. L. (2011). Drug discovery in the next decade: Innovation needed ASAP. Drug
Discovery Today, 16(17/18), 780–792.
Bertolotti, T. (2015). Patterns of rationality: Recurring inferences in science, social cognition and
religious thinking. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Bertolotti, T., & Magnani, L. (2014). An epistemological analysis of gossip and gossip-based
knowledge. Synthese, 191, 4037–4067.
Biddle, J. B. (2007). Lessons from the Vioxx debacle: What the privatization of science can teach
us about social epistemology. Social Epistemology, 12(1), 21–39.
Biddle, J. B. (2012). Tragedy of the anticommons? Intellectual property and the sharing of
scientiﬁc information. Philosophy of Science, 79(5), 821–832.
Biddle, J. B. (2013). Institutionalizing dissent: A proposal for an adversarial system of pharmaceu-
tical research. Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal, 23(4), 325–353.
Biddle, J. B. (2014). Can patents prohibit research? On the social epistemology of patenting and
licensing in science. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A, 45(1), 14–23.
Brown, J. R. (2000). Privatizing the university–the New Tragedy of the Commons. Science,
290(5497), 1701–1702.
Brown, J. R. (2008). The community of science®. In M. Carrier, D. Howard, & J. A. Kourany
(Eds.), The challenge of the social and the pressure of practice: Science and values revisited.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Bruyaka, O., Zeitzmann, H. K., Chalamon, I., Wokutch, R. E., & Thakur, P. (2013). Strategic
corporate social responsibility and orphan drug development: Insights from the US and the EU
biopharmaceutical industry. Journal of Business Ethics, 117(1), 45–65.
Caplovitz, A. (2006). Turning medicine into snake oil: How pharmaceutical marketers put patients
at risk. Trenton, NJ: NJPIRG—New Jersey Public Interest Research Group Law and Policy
Center.
Carney, S. (2016). The topic of this month’s newsletter from drug discovery today is “precompeti-
tive intelligence”. Drug Discovery Today.com, 09 May, online.
Carrera, M., & Olver, I. (2015). The ﬁnancial hazard of personalized medicine and supportive care.
Supportive Care in Cancer, 23(12), 3399–3401.
Coady, D. (2012). What to believe now: Applying epistemology to contemporary issues. New York:
Blackwell.
D’Mello, B. (2002). Transnational pharmaceutical corporations and neo-liberal business ethics in
India. Journal of Business Ethics, 36, 165–185.
Dranitsaris, G., & Papadopoulos, G. (2015). Health technology assessment of cancer drugs in
Canada, the United Kingdom and Australia: Should the United States take notice? Applied
Health Economics and Health Policy, 13(3), 291–302.
Dutﬁeld, G. (2009). Intellectual property rights and the life science industries a twentieth century
history (2nd ed.). Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Elliott, K. (2012a). Ignorance, uncertainty, and the development of scientiﬁc language. In
N. Janich, A. Nordmann, & L. Schebek (Eds.), Nichtwissenskommunikation in den Wis-
senschaften. Interdisziplinäre Zugänge, (pp. 295–316). Frankfurt am Mein, Peter Lang.
Elliott, K. (2012b). Selective ignorance and agricultural research. Science, Technology, and Human
Values, 38(3), 328–350.
Gertsch, J. (2009). How scientiﬁc is the science in ethnopharmacology? Historical perspectives
and epistemological problems. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 122(2), 177–183.
Gewertz, N. M., & Amado, R. (2004). Intellectual property and the pharmaceutical industry: A
moral crossroads between health and property. Journal of Business Ethics, 55(3), 295–308.
Giroux, H. A. (2014). Neoliberalism’s war on higher education. Chicago, IL: Haymarket Books.
Heller, M. A., & Eisenberg, R. S. (1998). Can patents deter innovation? The anticommons in
biomedical research. Science, 280(5364), 698–701.
Hintikka, J. (2007). Socratic epistemology: Explorations of knowledge-seeking by questioning.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

102
4
Jeopardizing Discoverability
Jordan, A. M., Waddell, I. D., & Ogilvie, D. J. (2015). Rethinking “academic” drug discovery: The
Manchester Institute perspective. Drug Discovery Today, 20(5), 525–535.
Karawajczyk, A., Giordanetto, F., Benningshof, J., Hamza, D., Kalliokoski, T., Pouwer K.,
. . . Tzalis, D. (2015). Expansion of chemical space for collaborative lead generation and drug
discovery: The European Lead Factory Perspective. Drug Discovery Today, 20(11), 1310–1316.
Khanna, I. (2012). Drug discovery in pharmaceutical industry: Productivity challenges and trends.
Drug Discovery Today, 17(19/20), 1089–1102.
Lee Chang, P. (2016). The abandoned stakeholders: Pharmaceutical companies and research par
ticipants. Journal of Business Ethics, 143(4), 721–731.
Lundberg, J. M., & Reilly, C. (2009). The road ahead for large pharma: Long-term science and
innovation. Drug Discovery Today, 14(9/10), 439–441.
Magnani, L. (2011). Understanding violence. The intertwining of morality, religion, and violence:
A philosophical stance. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2015). Violence and abductive cognition. Epistemology and ethics entangled. In L.
Magnani, P. Li, & W. Park (Eds.), Philosophy and cognitive science II: Western and eastern
studies (pp. 95–113). Heidelberg: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2017). The abductive structure of scientiﬁc creativity: An essay on the ecology of
cognition. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Moreno, G. A., Mulligan, K., Huber, C., Linthicum, M. T., Dreyfus, D., Juday, T., . . . Lakdawalla,
D. N. (2016). Costs and spillover effects of private insurers’ coverage of Hepatitis C treatment.
The American Journal of Managed Care, 22(5), SP236–SP244. Special Issue: HCV, No. 6,
published online.
Paul, S. M., Mytelka, D. S., Dunwiddie, C. T., Persinger, C. C., Munos, B. H., Lindborg, S. R.,
& Schacht, A. L. (2010). How to improve R&D productivity: The pharmaceutical industry’s
grand challenge. Nature Reviews. Drug Discovery, 9(3), 203–214.
Poitras, G., & Meredith, L. (2009). Ethical transparency and economic medicalization. Journal of
Business Ethics, 86, 313–325.
Popper, K. R. (1959). The logic of scientiﬁc discovery. London, New York: Hutchinson.
Popper, K. R. (1963). Conjectures and refutations: The growth of scientiﬁc knowledge. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Popper, K. R., & Miller, D. (1983). A proof of the impossibility of inductive probability. Nature,
302, 687–688.
Pors, K. (2011). Drug Discovery into the 21st Century. In I. M. Kapetanovic (Ed.), Drug discovery
and development—present and future (pp. 69–96). Rijeka, Croatia: InTech.
Proctor, R. N., & Schiebinger, L. (Eds.). (2008). Agnotology: The making and unmaking of
ignorance. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Radder, H. (2019). From commodiﬁcation to the common good: Reconstructing science, technol-
ogy, and society. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Reiss, J. (2010). In favour of a Millian proposal to reform biomedical research. Synthese, 177(3),
427–447.
Resnik, D. B. (2021). Review of H. Radder: From commodiﬁcation to the common good:
Reconstructing science, technology, and society. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press,
2019. Metascience, 171–174.
Shah, S. (1993). The body hunters: Testing new drugs on the World’s Poorest Patients. New York:
New Press.
Shelley, C. (2006). Analogical reasoning with animal models in biomedical research. In L.
Magnani (Ed.), Model-based reasoning in science and engineering (pp. 203–213). London:
College Publications.
Shrader-Frechette, K. (2010). Conceptual analysis and special-interest science: Toxicology and the
case of Edward Calabrese. Synthese, 177(3), 449–469.
Spinello, R. A. (1992). Ethics, pricing and the pharmaceutical industry. Journal of Business Ethics
11, 617–626.

References
103
Tuana, N. (2006). The speculum of ignorance: The women’s health movement and epistemologies
of ignorance. Hypatia, 21(3), 1–19.
Turner E., Matthews, A., Linardatos, E., Tell, R., & Rosenthal, R. (2008). Selective publication
of antidepressant trials and its inﬂuence on apparent efﬁcacy. The New England Journal of
Medicine, 358, 252–260.

Chapter 5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
Computationally or Humanly Tailored?
Taking advantage of the logical and cognitive studies illustrated in the previous
chapters, which emphasize the crucial role played in abductive cognition by the so-
called “optimization of eco-cognitive openness and situadedness”, “knowledge in
motion”, and the concept of “epistemic irresponsibility”, the present chapter will in-
troduce the concept of overcomputationalism, to help interpret the related concepts
of pancognitivism, paninformationalism,and pancomputationalism and their impact
on discoverability. In the second part of the chapter I will submit to the attention of
the reader a question that in my opinion synthesizes many of the problems described
in this book: will the future of eco-cognitive settings computationally-tailored or
humanly-tailored? The challenges against human abduction and epistemic rigor
on the part of what I call computational invasive “subcultures” and unwelcome
effects of selective ignorance are illustrated. Finally, I will describe two fundamental
roles played by human knowledge and the need for their continuous enhancement
sustaining discoverability: to the aim of maximizing the ownership of their own
destinies, thanks to everyday, philosophical, and scientiﬁc knowledge about natural
and artiﬁcial phenomena human beings have improved their capacities to track the
external world; in turn thanks to ethical knowledge humans have learned to track
the behavior of other human beings to the aim of favoring cooperation.
5.1
Protecting Ignorance: Beyond Overcomputationalization
5.1.1
Pancognitivism, Paninformationalism,
Pancomputationalism
What I call overcomputationalization refers to the presence of too many entities and
artifacts that carry computational tasks and powers, for example, digital machines
embedded in laptops, cell phones, servers, videos, cameras, social networks, robots,
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
L. Magnani, Discoverability, Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning 26,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93329-6_5
105

106
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
and also various unconventional substrates, etc.1 Here the discourse becomes
moral, and solutions are multiple. Whereas many would agree that the diffusion
of computation is bringing havoc, some would say (like me) that it is caused by an
excess of computation, others would content the opposite, i.e. computation has not
spread enough.
Hence, our era is characterized by a progressive transformation of ignorant
entities not only in cognitive entities but also in computational ones: I would like
to suggest some humble considerations concerning the potential excesses of this
trend, that I think have to be analyzed and criticized. Indeed, I think that currently
we are facing an excess of computationalization of the world and I am consequently
complaining that too many ignorant entities are more and more computationally
“domesticated” (in the sense I have explained in this chapter). I will say more
words on this issue, related to desire and suggestion of protecting the ignorance of
some entities, in the following subsection of this chapter. There is no contradiction
between this celebration of ignorance and my commitment to discoverability and
diagnosticability because they are not favored by the excess of generic information.
In the last decades philosophers have celebrated the computational revolution
and positively evaluated many of its aspects and consequences. An interesting
position that has been elaborated is pancomputationalism that from a philosoph-
ical perspective, as we will soon see, is in some sense the rightful heir of
paninformationalism and pancognitivism. To better grasp my concerns regarding
overcomputationalization it is useful to analyze the intertwining between these
positions.
Pancomputationalist philosophers have imagined that everything is computing.
The problem of pancomputationalism can be nicely synthesized thanks to the
following argumentation, provided by Horsman et al. (2014, p. 2). To answer the
question when does a physical system compute? is very difﬁcult and no accepted
answer is currently available. There is not a formalism able to tell us whether a
computation is occurring physically, and various confusions affect the discussion
concerning non-standard forms of computation. It is obviously accepted that a
laptop processing a Matlab calculation and a server running a LATEX text are physical
systems operating a computation, but “However, when we move beyond standard
and mass-produced technology, the question becomes more difﬁcult to answer. Is a
protein performing a compaction computation as it folds? Does a photon (quantum)
compute the shortest path through a leaf in photosynthesis? Is the human mind a
computer? A dog catching a stick? A stone sitting on the ﬂoor?” If we say that all
are computers we afﬁrm that everything that possesses a physical status is executing
a computation by virtue of its own existence. It is obvious to derive that from a
conviction like this one, that sees a universe in which everything is a computer, the
concept itself of physical computation becomes empty. Indeed “To state that every
physical process is a computation is simply to redeﬁne what is meant by a ‘physical
1 In (Magnani, 2021) I have described in detail the case of the so-called “morphological
computation”.

5.1
Protecting Ignorance: Beyond Overcomputationalization
107
process’—there is, then, no non-trivial content to the assertion. A statement such as
‘everything is computation’ is either false, or it is trivial; either way, it is not useful in
determining properties of physical systems in practice” (Horsman, Stepney, Wagner,
& Kendon, 2014, p. 2).
Pancomputationalism is often defended explaining that when we state that
everything is computational, we are simply using the word computational as a way
of “interpreting” the system at stake, and of course everything can be interpreted
using that metaphor. We have to say that this position creates confusion between
computational modeling and computational explanation, as I will soon specify in the
following paragraph. Other kinds of pancomputationalism, appropriately linked to
paninformationalism, contend that the entire universe can be seen as computational
and also arrive to maintain that information and/or computation possess a kind of
priority with respect to physical materiality. Gordana Dodig Crnkovic (2011; 2013;
2017) proposes a richer info-computational and more circumscribed and integrated
view as a synthesis of pancomputationalism—naturalist computationalism—with
informational structural realism, and defends it by noting the fundamental role of
computing in nature (natural computing).
As I have illustrated in Magnani (2018), adopting an evolutionary view and ex-
ploiting some of Thom’s ideas expressed in the so-called catastrophe theory (Thom,
1988), paninformationalism is puzzling when seen in a naturalistic perspective.
Let us consider the following example. When we are analyzing the case of an
infection as a pregnance (carried by a virus, that is a material/biological mediator)
that involves healthy agents, who represent the invested saliences that in turn can
re-project that same contagion as a pregnance in a speciﬁc natural environment
(where, in turn, other mediators such as air or blood are the transmitters), it seems
bizarre to afﬁrm that information (or even computation) is at play: biomedical
scientiﬁc explanations of the phenomenon are already patently available and it
seems superﬂuous to resort to other concepts such as the ones of information or
of computation. One thing is to build a “model” of that event from an informational
point of view or by using a computational program, and another is to produce a
biological scientiﬁc knowledge of it. Of course, this critique does not jeopardize
the project (again, see for example the info-computational view (Dodig-Crnkovic,
2017)) of enabling a view of nature also referred to on computational modeling
(information processing) thanks to a conjugation of all those specialized approaches
in a perspective that does not aim at replacing natural sciences with computational
models, but that aims at establishing a fruitful epistemological collaboration.2
2 Still in Magnani (2018), taking advantage of the studies provided by Longo (2009, 2012, 2017) I
have described the dangers that can arise by thinking that mimetic computational digital modeling
“is” directly, ipso facto, scientiﬁc knowledge: for example, in the case of biological organisms, the
gap between simulation and intelligibility is very strong, also because the variability is dominant. A
different view is advanced by Denning (2007): information processes and computation continue to
be found abundantly in the deep structures of many ﬁelds. Computing is not—in fact, never was—a
science only of the artiﬁcial, cf. also Denning & Martell (2015). A good example of the interplay
between natural science and computational modeling is given by Fisher & Henzinger (2007),

108
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
However, defending paninformationalism and pancomputationalism can be good
for two fundamental reasons. The ﬁrst one relates to the centrality of natural
human evolution, which presents that widespread activity of semiosis, I quoted
above (including all kinds of signs, not only the propositional ones) that has been
already generated by our ancestors at the times of the birth of the so-called material
culture. Indeed humans have constructed those huge cognitive niches (Odling-
Smee, Laland, & Feldman, 2003; Laland & Sterelny, 2006; Laland & Brown,
2006), characterized by the presence of informational, cognitive (and more recently,
computational) processes (cf. chapter two, this book, Sect. 2.1). This evolutionary
evidence explains the philosophers’ attitude to grant some ontological status to
information and computation. However, I contend that adopting an approach in
terms of “disseminated computation”,3 helps consider pancomputationalism in
a naturalized way, acknowledging its limits and tempering its ontological and
metaphysical overstatements.
In this chapter there is no room for dealing with the intricate jungle of the various
concepts of pancomputationalism: the reader will ﬁnd a detailed and rich description
of various kinds of pancomputationalism, unlimited, limited, causal, interpretivist,
ontic, etc. in Piccinini (2017).4 Here it is sufﬁcient to note that Horsman’s and
his coauthors’ hostility against pancomputationalism seems to refer to the “ontic”
version of it, that is the idea that the universe itself is a computing system, and
everything in it is a computing system too (or at least to the view that every physical
system is a digital computing one and can be illustrated in computational terms).
We have to add that the strong advocates of the idea that universe computes
contemplate a rather uncomplicated idea, and maintain that this happens thanks
to different kinds of computation on different levels of organization, a contention
that does not imply the acceptation that “everything is computation” (cf., for exam-
ple, the already quoted info-computational view (Dodig-Crnkovic, 2017)), which
would instead become a vacuous statement equivalent to the claim that nothing
is computation. In this perspective, they say, by introducing the new notion of
universal computation where “universe” is a whole universe and not only the symbol
manipulation logical device, an epistemological gain is reached: for example, we
can build new theoretical frameworks across disciplines that can help common
understanding of the information processing in our brains and computations in
the DNA or quantum computer. Grand uniﬁcations have always been attractive
who call the approach of constructing computational models of biological systems “executable
biology”, which focuses on the design of executable computer algorithms that mimic biological
phenomena, an approach that the authors think must be integrated into biological research related
to mathematical modeling.
3 The expression is introduced and explained in section “The birth of mimetic bodies: Enhancing
ignorant bodies through disseminated computation” of Magnani (2021).
4 Pancomputationalism is also usefully discussed in the recent (Coelho Mollo, 2019), in the
framework of an interesting and intricate comparison between the so-called “computational per-
spectivalism” and the mainstream accounts of physical computation, especially the teleologically-
based mechanistic view.

5.1
Protecting Ignorance: Beyond Overcomputationalization
109
in physics and mathematics and they are not an obstacle to appreciating diversity
in which real world unfolds for us. Again, the strong advocates of the idea that
universe computes, conclude that there would be absolutely no danger in broadening
computational frameworks as much as it is justiﬁed by the behaviors of the systems
that we study within the computational area of research.
After all, as contended by Kari & Rozenberg (2008) in the article “The many
facets of natural computing”, the most important property of computation consists in
the multiplicity of its aspects and their efﬁcacy. If a concept is capable of providing
grand uniﬁcation such as in the case of the concepts of matter, energy, information
etc., it is worth to be used, developed, and explored. Finally, pancomputationalism is
seen as a claim not critically dependent on the idea of discrete computation because
the universe as an analog computer does not necessarily presuppose discrete com-
putation. A main objection to this perspective is related to the following problem:
one thing is modeling phenomena, systems, and data from a computational point of
view, or exploiting new and unconventional “ignorant” substrates as computational
tools, another is the adoption of the ontological idea that the objectivity itself
has a computational nature (this last conviction leading to the so-called “ontic
pancomputationalism”, Piccinini (2017)). Analogously, as I have already said, one
thing is to produce computational models for example of physical systems, another
is to produce scientiﬁc knowledge of them.5
The second reason is cognitive and epistemological: in the literature of various
disciplines often there is even an all-embracing concept of information, a kind of
paninformationalism, in which physical (or biological) information is generalized
to every state of a physical (or biological) system that is consequently deﬁned
as an information-pregnant state (Wolfram, 2002; Lloyd, 2006), which has to be
considered relevant. Indeed, this approach has fecundated various excellent studies
that physicists (for example Chiribella et al. (2012) and Goyal (2011)), and some
logicians, have realized, for instance developing mathematical frameworks for
considering quantum theory in the light of the principles of information processing.
This information physics is an attempt to reconstruct physics based on information.
These studies will not replace physics by computational theory of it, because
those types of knowledge operate in different realms: physical computation and
information physics would not replace but complement physics with new insights.
These results are appreciable, I am just showing my worries about the possible abuse
of the concepts of information (and of computation) in physics and biology, as I have
already said above.
Finally, what about pancognitivism? An old-fashioned metaphysical theory,
called synechism, contends that matter and mind are interrelated and in some
sense it is not possible to differentiate them. The human cognitive mind would
have germinated according to the same metaphysical laws that control the entire
universe leading us to guess that the mind has an inclination (as Peirce contended)
to ﬁnd true abductive hypotheses regarding nature and the entire universe itself. As
5 I have treated in detail this problem in Magnani (2018).

110
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
I have illustrated in Magnani (2009) it is Peirce himself that was convinced that
“thought” is not only related to the brain: he said that it appears in the work of
bees, crystals, and throughoutthe purely physical world. In sum, seeing information,
and/or cognition, and/or computation everywhere presents some virtues but some
limitations have to be established.
5.1.2
Protecting Ignorant Entities
Since the birth of the so-called material culture (Mithen, 1996, 1999), when
handaxes were made by Early Humans, the transformation of what I called ignorant
entities in cognitive ones (and more recently in computational ones), also thanks to
ancient techniques and modern technological advances, obviously had a tremendous
positive impact on western civilization. However, as I have anticipated, a kind of
warning has to be presented: I contend we are dealing in our era with what I call
overcomputationalization. This means we are in the presence of too many entities
and artifacts that carry computational tasks and powers. This implies some potential
dangers: for example overcomputationalisation(1) furnishes too many opportunities
to promote plenty of possible unresolvable disorganizational consequences in the
activities of our societies and, (2) favors philosophical reﬂections that, taking ad-
vantage of the seduction exercised by old-fashioned metaphysical allures disguised
as technical “analytical” studies depict an oversimpliﬁed vision of the world.
There is not enough space here to deal with the ﬁrst of the two issues above but I
can suggest that a lot of research in human sciences has been produced to deal with
the ethical consequences of our technological computational era.6 Instead, I would
like to say few words concerning the second issue: we face a decrease in entities
that remain simply “ignorant” from the informational/cognitive but especially from
the computational point of view. Buildings, streets, furniture, clothes, etc. became
carriers not only of simple traditional informational/cognitive obvious qualities
but also, thanks to computationalization, of further complicated propositional and
model-based information, sometimes related to redundant and oppressive political,
ideological, and economical aims.
Moreover, more and more engineered and artefactual ignorant entities, laptops,
cell phones, servers, videos, cameras, social networks, robots, and also various
unconventional substrates, intentionally computationally domesticated are invading
human environments. The recent relevance acquired by the studies on the so-called
Internet of Things is a clear indication of the importance of these processes (Smart,
Madaan, & Hall, 2019). The excesses of overcomputationalism can also generate
a decrease of attention to entities when simply seen as more or less “ignorant”
(that is devoid of complicated cognitive and computational endowments) and for
this reason they tend to appear more and more irrelevant. The same happens in the
6 See for example my own book (Magnani, 2007).

5.2
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
111
case of the excess of juxtaposition between new and complicated imposed informa-
tional/cognitive computational issues and various traditional entities. Unfortunately,
these effects (1) tend to cause, in the case of overcomputationalism, too many
constraints, limitations, and the weakening of discoverability and diagnosticability
and so of human fruitful standard and creative (abductive) cognitive activities, as
I have illustrated in this book and also in the last chapter of my book (Magnani,
2017) and, (2) in the case of the excess of redundant cognitive/informational
features computationally attributed to entities (features in this case exogenous to
the original functions of those entities) they incline to impede to beneﬁt from the
simpliﬁcation that would derive thanks to a reduction of the consequent cognitive
and informational overload, often potentially and negatively distracting.
The reader does not have to misunderstand me, I believe that we should
choose carefully what to defend from computationalization (for example because it
contrasts with the enhancing of discoverability in the case of human cognition), and
what is good to computationalize, and so my urgency to “protect ignorant entities”
does not have to be intended as a warning about all kinds of computationalization.
Computational modeling of human body and brain can for example fosters a better
understanding of diseases, degenerative processes, aging and other processes of life,
including processes in our brains that generate the human mind. Human brain is the
largely unknown organ in the human body and a lot of health problems, especially
of aging populations is related to brains. Just to make few examples, we do not
have cures for Alzheimer, Parkinson’s disease, or Autism. So fruitful current and
future computational modeling will not only favor further domestication of ignorant
entities by transforming them in “skilled” substrates able to carry computational
and so cognitive performances, but also will fecundate scientiﬁc research related
to the removal of another kind of ignorance, the classical one regarding the lack
of understanding of high-level cognitive capacities both in human, nonhuman
animals, and simpler organisms, and other biological entities such as cells, as
also hoped by the admonition contained in the recent review “Time to reinspect
the foundations? Questioning if computer science is outgrowing its traditional
foundations” (Copeland, Dresner, Proudfoot, & Shagrir, 2016).
5.2
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings: Computationally
or Humanly Tailored?
Data and types of problems that are basically privileged by current mainstream
AI programs are very restricted, data preferred are quantity-related (Big Data) and
the best strategies that can be simulated are the locked ones, that limit the eco-
cognitive openness and are typical of well-established games. It seems there is an
increasing urgency to prepare data capable to feed the AI programs and to do that
they have to be locked. This aspect generates a fundamental issue regarding ethics
of algorithms and consequently, a ﬁnal ethical warning has to be clearly stressed:

112
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
the widespread diffusion of standard and AI-based computational simulations will
obviously incline human collectives to more and more adopt habits and settings that
deal with data and problems appropriate to those same tools. This could generate
an effect of progressive computational conﬁguration of new social behaviors and
environments appropriate to conform themselves to the computational tools and
needs, to the detriment of old ones: in few words, will we face eco-cognitive
settings which are computationally tailored, characterized by the prevalence of
locked cognitive strategies or humanly tailored, characterized by the unlocked ones?
I said that I call eco-cognitive openness the appropriate cognitive niche in which
human creative cognition dwells, and this cognitive niche could be reduced and
jeopardized by the computationalization of the world, so threatening the chance of
getting new and important knowledge results (and not only in the case of science).
Something similar could happen in the case of the prevalence of “locked”—in this
case from the ethical point view—eco-cognitive settings in which the same chance
of making human ethical decisions will be threatened, because objectively impeded
by computational machines embedded in a triumphant “computationally tailored”
eco-cognitive ethical situation.7
5.2.1
Computational Invasive “Subcultures” Undermine
Human Creative Abduction in Science
In the various sections of the previous chapter I have illustrated how various groups
of technical, social, and political-economic forces can attract scientists’ attention,
constrain research and stimulate stakeholder interests along with particular direc-
tions. We have to say that also some computational research is directed by groups
that aim at promoting the related business, unfortunately also challenging epistemic
integrity, for example trivially contending their capacity to replace with artifacts
human scientiﬁc creative abduction. To make a paradigmatic example Calude and
Longo contend that
Very large databases are a major opportunity for science and data analytics is a remarkable
new ﬁeld of investigation in computer science. The effectiveness of these tools is used
to support a “philosophy” against the scientiﬁc method as developed throughout history.
According to this view, computer-discovered correlations should replace scientiﬁc under-
standing as a guide to prediction and action. Consequently, there will be no need to give
scientiﬁc meaning to phenomena, by proposing, say, causal relations, since regularities in
very large databases are enough: “with enough data, the numbers speak for themselves”.
The “end of science” is proclaimed (Calude & Longo, 2017, p. 595).
7 On the various “global catastrophic risk”, from the actual and potential effects of climate change
and nuclear war to plagues and pandemics, terrorism, biotechnologies, and nanotechnologies, but
also on the potential dangers of artiﬁcial intelligence see the rich (Bostrom & ´Cirkovi´c, 2008), in
which the need of “making progress on friendly artiﬁcial intelligence” is claimed (on this issue see
also Bostrom 2014).

5.2
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
113
The authors demonstrate, taking advantage of deep classical results from ergodic
theory, Ramsey theory, and algorithmic information theory, how absurd is this
contention and that instead very large database8 present too many arbitrary—and
so spurious—correlations, which surely cannot be considered examples of pregnant
scientiﬁc creative abduction, but just uninteresting generalizations,9 even if made
thanks to sophisticated artifacts: “Too much information tends to behave like very
little information” (Calude & Longo, 2017, p. 600). This study is the correct
answer to the implicit challenge to scientiﬁc cognition proposed in June 2008
by C. Anderson, former editor-in-chief of Wired Magazine, who wrote an article
titled “The end of theory: the data deluge makes the scientiﬁc method obsolete”
contending that “with enough data, the numbers speak for themselves” (Calude &
Longo, 2017, p. 595), science as we know will be replaced by robust correlations in
immense databases!10
Amazing examples of the use of these correlations are illustrated. The following
is an eloquent example that indicates the extreme spontaneity and naturalness of
some types of epistemic irresponsibility, especially in the case of the cognitive
performances of rudimentary politicians and mass media journalists:
A 2010 study conducted by Harvard economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff
reported a correlation between a country’s economic growth and its debt-to-GDP ratio. In
countries where public debt is over 90% of GDP, economic growth is slower, they found.
The study gathered a lot of attention. Google Scholar listed 1218 citations at the time of
writing, and the statistic was used in U.S. economic policy debates in 2011 and 2012 [. . . ].
The study isn’t conclusive, though-in fact, it’s far from it. As noted by John Irons and Josh
Bivens of the Economic Policy Institute, it’s possible that the effect runs the other way
round, with slow growth leading to high debt. Even more worryingly, the research didn’t
hold up on replication. But by the time that became clear, the original study had already
attracted widespread attention and affected policy decisions (Calude & Longo, 2017, p.
599).
8 Sax (2016) provides a discussion of the so-called libertarian-inspired “ﬁnders, keepers” ethics,
that is the curious “morality” adopted by the business model of big data companies, which can
“legitimately” appropriate (the fruits of) their results. Frizzo-Barker et al. (2016) also describe
large-scale networked genetic material as a disruptive technology. On one hand, clinical genomics
advances life-saving innovation through precision medicine. On the other, the digital databases that
are built upon raise new concerns for informational risk to personal privacy.
9 Such as the relation between the orientation of a comet’s tail and the Emperor’s chances of a
military victory. Large database seem to rejoin magic, where underlying rational causes are lacking:
but correlations do not supersede causation.
10 More and more often researchers in different disciplines have been interested in using big
data for their applications. Nonetheless, “For big data, spurious correlation refers to uncorrelated
variables being falsely found to be correlated due to the massive size of the dataset” (Gandomi &
Haider, 2015, p. 143). Studies that use big data are thus more likely to achieve the “generalizability”
criterion of the ﬁndings, yet they are also prone to potentially produce uninteresting and/or
insigniﬁcant, though generalizable, results due to the mentioned spurious correlations (see e.g.
Fan et al. 2014).

114
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
The authors also note that European policy makers largely referred to that paper
till 2013. The EU Commissioner for Economic Affairs—2009–13—referred to the
Reinhart-Rogoff correlation as a key guideline for his past and present economic
views and the British Chancellor of the Exchequer—since 2010—observed in April
2013 that Rogoff and Reinhart demonstrate “convincingly” that all ﬁnancial crises
have their ultimate origins in the public debt.
Let me remember another challenge to human abductive reasoning performed in
the area of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), very interesting but exaggeratedly emphasized
by mass media, social networks, and the corporation itself, which proudly made
it, that is Google. A long tradition in artiﬁcial intelligence—mainly in the area
usually called “machine learning”—concerned the epistemologically very impres-
sive computational AI applications that involve the abductive processes in scientiﬁc
discovery and mathematical reasoning and creativity.11
In chapter three I have described the AI program that was able to play the Game
Go very successfully, and so not involved in simulating scientiﬁc discovery but
certainly human skillful strategic ability and creativity. It is well-known that in 2015
Google DeepMind’s program AlphaGo beat Fan Hui, the European Go champion
and a 2 dan (out of 9 dan possible) professional, ﬁve times out of ﬁve with no
handicap on a full size 19 × 19 board. In March 2016, Google also challenged Lee
Sedol, a 9 dan considered the top world player, to a ﬁve-game match. The program
shot down Lee in four of the ﬁve games. I have clearly indicated the limitations of
these kinds of computational systems.
Strong criticism of another invasive computational “subculture” is provided by
Longo and Tendero (2007), who address their observations to the still widespread
metaphor “DNA is a program” (the programming paradigm), used both in molecular
biology and in its popularization. The authors contend that the metaphor and the
model are fundamentally inadequate not only in biology but also from the point of
view of both physics and computer science. Still in this case, analogously to the case
of big data I have just illustrated, the programming paradigm is not theoretically
sound as a causal framework for relating the genome to the phenotype, a much
more complex process than the one which is depicted by an explanation based on
this computational paradigm.
5.2.2
Science Impoverished: Encouraging Epistemic
Irresponsibility through Ignorance
A general taxonomy of ignorance, occasioned by the feminist tradition in episte-
mology, is usefully provided by Tuana (2006). The various items below compose
11 As already indicated in chapter three above I have discussed the problem of automatic scientiﬁc
discovery with AI programs in Magnani (2009, chapter two, section 2.7 “Automatic Abductive
Scientists”).

5.2
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
115
the program of the so-called “epistemology of ignorance”, which refers to a wide
group of problems regarding human cognitive behavior, beyond the ones strictly
referred to science. The list is interesting and some of the items can also regard
science. However, I added three items that are more directly related the relationship
between ignorance and scientiﬁc cognition:
1. “knowing that we do not know, but not caring to know”, in this case ignorance
is sometimes the result of the conﬁgurations of interest. I have already quoted
the case of drug companies that decided research in the area of hormonal
contraception for men would not be proﬁtable (cf. Tuana (2006, p. 4)):
2. “we do not even know that we do not know” because our current interests,
beliefs, and theories obscure some issues. A canonical example is provided by
the feminists’ notes about twentieth-century medical and anatomical illustrations
which included careful examinations of male and female genitalia, but the
anatomy of the clitoris was not a focus of attention and almost ignored in some
mid-century textbooks;
3. “they do not want us to know”, when the ignorance of certain groups is
systematically cultivated. Some knowledge is rendered secret because of national
security or because of business interests. I have to add that sometimes even
people that know tend to ignore what they know. Indeed, an important question
is not simply whether something is known but also who knows it and whether
that knowledge is adequately exploited in the decision making techniques used
by those in power: “Selective ignorance is important to emphasize even if it is
not a matter of complete ignorance but rather a matter of the relative attention
given to particular forms of information and research pathways” (Elliott, 2012,
p. 335);
4. “wilful ignorance”, which is related to the situation of people that do not know
and do not want to know, such as in some forms of racism, when a strong
ignorance of the lives and histories of those considered inferior is actively
cultivated;
5. “ignorance produced by the construction of epistemically disadvantaged identi-
ties”. In this case we see people that are constructed as untrustworthy or situations
in which a deliberate maintenance of ignorance to guarantee privileges and power
is activated: “What feminist epistemologists and science studies theorists have
carefully demonstrated is that our theories of knowledge and knowledge practices
are far from democratic, maintaining criteria of credibility that favor members of
privileged groups” (Tuana, 2006, p. 13);
6. “loving ignorance”, when accepting that it is better to ignore events, people
aspects, situations, that can increase conﬂicts or produce violence or disfavor
good projects;
and I would also add three further items, which are of direct interest in the case
of science:
7. “faking knowledge to preserve ignorance”: I have already quoted the case in
which some politicians and decision-makers address the solution of a problem
toward scientiﬁc or technical ﬁxes rather than social or political solutions. In this

116
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
case I have to say that scientiﬁc knowledge is not precisely faked, but, so to speak,
just reverberated as possible (and needed). Thus, before scientists even begin to
formulate their own speciﬁc questions about a research topic, a signiﬁcant and
value-laden decision may already have been made tacitly by citizens or policy
makers-namely, the decision to treat the problem primarily as a set of questions
for scientists and engineers to address. Of course there is a number of non-
technical solutions to social problems, which instead cannot be solved thanks
to science, even imagining for science the most shining future;
8. “epistemic irresponsibility”: I have illustrated in the previous chapter many
ways of jeopardizing science and its epistemological integrity, that is ways of
promoting a scientiﬁc ignorance that would have been avoided adopting more
epistemic rigor;
9. “distributed ignorance” through misinformation, widespread biased beliefs, ide-
ological just-so stories pertaining to science and pseudoscience in science-related
contexts, such as virtual online communities and—by now extremely degraded—
mass-media. This threat to science (and scientiﬁc mentality) is illustrated in
Arﬁni (2019): the diffusion of not veriﬁable scientiﬁc news through digital media
can contribute to the formation of huge bubbles of shallow understanding in the
laymen public.12
The recent (Kourany & Carrier, 2020) stressed various cases in which science
itself can become a source of ignorance. Generation of ignorance is active when in
presence of biased design and interpretation of experiments and empirical studies,
such in the case of “false advertising” by climate change deniers; in the “virtuous”
construction of ignorance—for example, by curtailing studies on race—and gender-
related cognitive differences; ignorance as the unintentional result of choices made
during the research process, especially when rules, motivations, and methodologies
promote an insistence on the primacy of commercial effects.13
An amazing case of ignorance management regards a recent analysis of humor
out of ignorance as a niche curation technique.14 The Incongruity Theory of humor
suggests that humor is triggered by the perception of ignorance, perceived as an
incongruity. If we understand humor as a social modality of signaling an instance
of ignorance which urges its resolution (in this case ignorance elicits amusement),
the cognitive process can be seen as a way of enhancing the quality of the related
cognitive niche by keeping the ignorant in line without excluding the others from
participating to common niche-construction activities (Bertolotti, 2020).
12 Dotson (2014) further analyzes “epistemic oppression” as a persistent epistemic exclusion
(more or less intentionally driven) that hinders one’s contribution to knowledge production: it can
result from inefﬁcient shared epistemic resources, like organizational schemata or instituted social
imaginaries, which generate epistemic exclusions, from scarce or inadequate epistemic resources.
13 On the identiﬁcation and evaluation of the epistemic and social concerns raised by the private
funding and performance of science and effect on ignorance studies see also Fernández Pinto
(2015).
14 On curation strategies cf. Sect. 2.3, chapter two, this book.

5.3
Enhancing Discoverability
117
It is mandatory to make a reference to the role of ignorance as epistemic
management that preserves the boundaries and relations of a rhetoric system, it
is a way of dealing with information inconsistent with one’s beliefs. In this case
ignorance is also considered productive because it triggers new knowledge that
works to make rhetoric systems more resilient to potential instability (Mays, 2021).
Finally, it is also important to note that there are cases in which people remain
ignorant not because of a lack of information and not because of certain costs
deriving from the problem of collecting knowledge, but because of the costs
associated with knowledge itself (Williams, 2021). When the costs of acquiring
knowledge surpass the beneﬁts of possessing it, ignorance is rational. In this case
ignorance is also “motivated”: to make an example, it plays a large role in the
high levels of voter ignorance in current democracies. The voter does not have
any practical incentive to collect knowledge (for example on climate change)
of the issues she votes on because her vote presents an insigniﬁcant impact on
political decisions. This means that there are eco-cognitive settings that do not favor
discoverability and diagnosticability and so potential new knowledge: instead they
promote ignorance and, in this perspective, a rational one!
5.3
Enhancing Discoverability as the Condition of Possibility
of Tracking the External World
We have just said at the end of the previous subsection that there are eco-cognitive
settings that do not promote neither discoverability nor diagnosticability and so
potential new knowledge because the costs of acquiring knowledge surpass the
beneﬁts of possessing it, and so ignorance is rational. This is of course a very rare
and extreme case, because, as I have tried to illustrate in all the chapters of this book,
favoring discoverability and diagnosticability, and consequently human creative and
selective abductive capacities to generate new fresh knowledge, is a crucial target for
human beings. As already explained in the preface, two objectives, and substantial
reasons justify the need to preserve and enhance the conditions of possibility of both
human creative abduction and abductive diagnostic virtues:
1. First of all, sustaining the eco-cognitive conditions of discoverability and
diagnosticability is fundamental because only cognitive creativity can grant the
implementation of the other kinds of ecology, which are urgently at play in our
era so that the ecological improvement can in turn affects human creativity: this
explains the fact I stressed the need an ecology of human creativity;
2. Second, fresh and innovative knowledge of various kinds is, and will be, nec-
essary to furnish the appropriate cognitive tools for managing our technological
era, full of artifacts of various types that are, in turn, mostly fruit of complicated
scientiﬁc knowledge. It is more than clear that the maintenance and ﬂourishing
of technological societies requires a great deal of new scientiﬁc and ethical
knowledge as well as modern approaches to moral deliberation.

118
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
To the aim of maximizing the ownership of their own destinies human beings
have created a huge quantity of knowledge: ﬁrst of all, thanks to everyday,
philosophical, and scientiﬁc knowledge about natural and artiﬁcial phenomena
human beings have improved their capacities to track the external world. In turn,
thanks to ethical knowledge humans have learned to track the behavior of other
human beings with the aim of favoring cooperation. I will describe in more detail
these fundamental roles played by knowledge in the following subsections: as a
consequence of their importance, in my book Morality in a Technological World
(Magnani, 2007). I contended that knowledge has to be a duty. In the present book
I have stressed the attention to a new meta-duty: to preserve, maintain, reﬁne, and
enhance these kinds of knowledge human beings also have to ﬁrst of all take care of
providing adequate room for discoverability and diagnosticability.
5.3.1
Tracking the External World I: Enhancing Predictive
Knowledge
I think that everyday, philosophical, and scientiﬁc knowledge about natural and
artiﬁcial phenomena (as well as the technologies that relate to them) have allowed
human beings a wide range of possibilities for choosing and acting: in many ways,
the more one knows, the more options one has.
The evolution of knowledge and its externalization in objects and artifacts are
directly related to our bodies’ and brains’ capacities for consciousness and free
will and is directly related to the role of abduction. Indeed, knowledge sheds light
on both natural and artiﬁcial external world, revealing two kinds of phenomena:
(1) regular, foreseeable phenomena whose predictability makes possible a range
of free choices and allows us to plan appropriate and effective responses and
(2) unpredictable or unprecedented phenomena that cannot be altered by human
intervention because we lack the knowledge to do so. Moreover, as we well
know, this second sort of knowledge, because of its dynamics, does not involve
“ontological” limitations: a phenomenon once considered beyond the reach of
human action can, with new understanding, become easily manageable, a process
that increases our options and, consequently, our free will. In the knowledge
framework of some primitive people, for example, the course of a river was not
considered modiﬁable, but new knowledge and new artifacts made it feasible to
govern ﬂowing water, allowing other ancient civilizations to “choose” between
natural and artiﬁcial courses.
Dennett lists ﬁve different kinds of natural phenomena that relate to the “elbow
room” he claims is the basic requirement for free will: those that are ﬁxed,

5.3
Enhancing Discoverability
119
beneath notice, changing (and worth caring about),15 trackable (“at least under
some conditions—and hence efﬁciently and usefully predictable under those condi-
tions”), and chaotic, that is (practically) unpredictable but still worth caring about).
These categories of phenomena—which, I repeat, are dynamic products of human
knowledge—provide us with what Dennett calls “epistemic possibilities”, which
are necessary for an agent to become a free deliberator. This variety encompasses
everything that is “possible-for-all-the-deliberator-knows-or-cares”and ensures that
every “deliberator-agent—a species, for instance—will always be equipped with
a somewhat idiosyncratic way of gathering and partitioning information about its
world so it can act effectively in it. [...] It is this epistemic openness, this possibility-
for-all-one-knows, that provides the elbow room required for deliberation”. This
epistemic openness also nulliﬁes deterministic objections to free will (Dennett,
1984, pp. 111 and 113). The tradition of western science maximizes the epistemic
openness that provides the elbow room required for deliberation and so the chances
of tracking the external world: in the previous chapters I have illustrated that science
is characterized by a maximization of abducibility, performed thanks to speciﬁc
constraints and through a process in which afﬁrming truths implies negating truths.
Two simple examples will clarify the problem of the choice and its “elbow
room” one related to everyday situations, the other related to science (cf. the
following subsection). It is supposed I have a normal brain endowed with normal
consciousness. Phylogenesis and (my personal) epigenesis have provided me with
“hardware”, the physical equipment that can be described as having free will
because it can adopt various cognitive approaches to decision making, strategies
human beings are now also able to model through algorithms (in my case, the non-
technical ones I acquired and reﬁned especially during my childhood).
At this moment, I am in my hotel room writing on my laptop; later today, I plan to
go to the Sun Yat-sen University, which is relatively close. My everyday knowledge
of the city (Guangzhou) (some of it is already stored in my memory) tells me that
I can “choose” many routes to reach Sun Yat-sen University. I already have the
mental representation of a possible route I used in the past, but I want to ﬁnd a new
one that is much shorter. All I need are new representations of the roads, which I can
easily “pick up” from a map. Most of the world’s information is stored in external
“mediators”—it is not necessarily found only in brains!
At this point all the required elements for decision making are present: brain,
consciousness, intentionality, free will, a reasoning mechanism guided by a system
of values, and adequate knowledge about my goal and the possible routes I might
take. Some aspects are internal and some are external. Some external ones—new
data about possible routes, for example—become internal when they are put in
memory and are therefore represented in my brain. I know there are routes I cannot
choose because they involve loops or a cul de sac. At this point, I can plan my route.
15 Dennett (1984, p. 109). Dennett also sees the chaotic systems as “the source of the ‘practical’
(but one might say inﬁnitely practical) independence of things that shufﬂe the world and makes it
a place of continual opportunity” (Dennett, 1984, p. 152).

120
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
At this stage, I can do more: I can externalize some data that are internal by
drawing a simple map for the brain of a friend who needs information about how to
get to the park. To an observer of this hypothetical interaction—a third brain—all
aspects of this exchange between my friend and me are “external”, and even my
brain is considered an external object by the observer. But that third brain easily
hypothesizes that my drawings derive from my existing “internal” representations.
Cognitive psychologists contend that human consciousness requires a capacity to
infer others’ mental states from their behavior (Wegner, 2002). In turn, philosophers
used those hypothesized mental states as evidence that being aware of our own
internal representations derives from the immaterial Cartesian Cogito, that famous
supplemental and embarrassing “ghost in the machine”.
Let us come back to the problems of conscious free will and the role of
knowledge, both internal and external. The simple example of my quest to reach
Sun Yat-sen University has a clear epistemological signiﬁcance; the new knowledge
involved, both available and represented, indicates that based on the external mixture
of natural things and artifacts that is my environment, “there are” various routes
shorter than the one already stored in my mind. These shortcuts are then revealed
and evaluated by the decision-making mechanisms operating in my brain. By
picking up new knowledge from external devices (a map, for example) and re-
representing it in my brain cells, I can enhance my range of possible choices and so
gain more room to ﬂex my free will.
As we can easily see, all the “characters” of this theater of consciousness are
intertwined with one another (Seth & Baars, 2005). Consciousness in human brains
(and so “my” consciousness) has evolved in this way because human brains, in
turn, have produced knowledge about the world that sanctioned as available and
believable multiple representations, that, once re-represented in the brain, further
expand our menu of possible choices, and vice versa. Consequently, I contend that
consciousness and higher mechanism of knowledge (such as abduction) are very
much interdependent.
5.3.2
Tracking the External World II: The Role of Scientiﬁc
Knowledge
It is not only everyday knowledge that helps us to track the external world; higher
levels of knowledge, like that found in philosophy and science, multiply the options
available to human beings for choosing and acting. Consider for a moment a set
of external natural circumstances and/or lack of knowledge that renders voluntary
choice impossible—volcanic eruption, for example. Stored in my brain, which
is endowed with consciousness function etc., is enough general knowledge of
volcanology for me to understand that neither I nor any other human being can
possibly predict the exact date of the next eruption of Vesuvius; even scientists who
are experts in the ﬁeld can only estimate that it will probably occur some time in

5.3
Enhancing Discoverability
121
the next 200 years. Consequently, in the next 200 years I cannot freely choose when
to go to Naples and be certain I will avoid an eruption. Human beings currently
have limited abilities to predict and thus to affect the impact of geological events
in particular and of chaotic events in general—we cannot, therefore, reconﬁgure
the Naples soccer team’s schedule so a game does not coincide with the eruption.
In this case, our capacity for free will is of no use: even with help from scientiﬁc
models, computational devices, and complicated calculations, our brains are not able
to pinpoint the precise day Vesuvius will erupt. Our best choice might be to postpone
a trip to Naples until after 2222! Future improvements in volcanology, however,
could allow more accurate predictions, even if we know that unpredictability is
constitutive in chaotic phenomena.
If the world “out there” were always cognitively dark and homogeneous, free
will would be impossible: free will and knowledge are two sides of the same coin.
In recent human evolution, there has been a general increase in the human abductive
production of philosophical and, subsequently, scientiﬁc knowledge (and in their
systematic “externalization”) as people have sought to free the human organism
from its immediate environment. It is easy to imagine how many representations
and inferential mechanisms can be stored in our brains and used at will: even those
not already consigned to our brain memory exist over there, crystallized in various
external mediators throughout the history of civilizations, ready to be “picked up”
when needed. To that same end, human beings also participate in the reverse process
by externalizing many techniques and technologies.
The roles of knowledge, however, extend beyond phenomena of the natural and
artiﬁcial world, beyond settings like the streets of a city. In the external world there
are also other human beings. What happens to our internal free will mechanisms
when we are faced with the behavior of other human beings?
5.3.3
Tracking Human Behavior: Rendering Human Behavior
Predictable Through Ethics
In the previous two subsections I contended that cognitively tracking the external
natural and artiﬁcial world provides the “elbow room” necessary to build a free
deliberative agent, and that, unfortunately, one of the main obstacles to free choice
(and thus to making free will effective) is not only the lack of suitable predictive
knowledge about the processes of the natural and artiﬁcial world, but also about
the behavior of other human beings. From this perspective, other people are
“natural things” whose behavior is a priori difﬁcult to predict: how can we track
human intentions? Consequently, human behavior poses a very different sort of
challenge, with respect to the constitutive incompleteness or lack of trustworthiness
of available knowledge about natural and artiﬁcial phenomena. Indeed, when we
“morally” seek ownership of our own destinies we expect to be able to reach
objectives through consciousness, free will, and intentionality, thus undertaking a

122
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
stand for the “best”. We can only obtain the desired results if we can count on
some consistency and predictability in the behavior of other human agents. If, in
an attempt to “author” my destiny, I consider merit as a way to achieve the desired
position, I must be able to assume that other human beings of my collectivity value
it similarly. I contend that many objectiﬁed entities like common and religious
morality, moral philosophy, human and social sciences, and of course all other kinds
of ethical knowledge, are clearly connected to our existing need to operate at our
highest level of conscious activity, as is the case when we seek to exercise free will
and to claim ownership of our destinies.
How can I fruitfully employ my brain’s free will mechanisms if I cannot trust
other human beings? How can I work on a personal project or participate in a social
project if not by relying on the commitment of other human agents? How may I
“author” my life and reach my goals if I am unsure which actions to choose because
I cannot be assured that others share my values and support my intentions? Religion,
morality, moral knowledge, and teaching enhance and permit free will because they
impose order on the randomness of human behaviors, giving people a better chance
of owning their destinies.
There are many human actions that affect others’ free will and ownership of des-
tiny; among them, as recently observed by some scholars is the practice of gossiping.
These authors afﬁrm that the practice is not just an exchange of information about
absent people, which can of course be a form of indirect aggression: it is also, they
contend, a form of sociable interaction16 processing others as “moral characters”
(Yerkovich, 1977). The narratives created by gossiping become a possible source
of shared knowledge about evaluative categories concerning (moral) ways of acting
and interacting. Gossip does not have to be evaluative, but it is “moral” insofar as it
describes behaviors and presents them as interesting and salient and, consequently,
as potentially or de facto sanctionable. Gossiping could play an important role in
morally—more or less violently—“policing free-riders” (Dunbar, 2004), that is,
those who enjoy the beneﬁts of sociality but refuse to pay their share of its costs.
Commenting on the behavior of such people, or casting aspersions on their character
helps us to control their potentially destructive effect on societies.
I have contended above that moral practices protect the ownership of our
destinies because ethics render human behavior more predictable, and when we
can count on shared values in dealing with other “moral” human beings, we can
better project our future. Consequently, gossip helps safeguard the ownership of our
destinies as it constantly shapes our narrative constructions of morality: empirical
data have shown, for example, that gossip works as a form of low-cost (moral)
social cognition that conveys valuable information about culture and society. The
16 In my research I often emphasized the role of gossip. Dunbar (2004) originally gives scientiﬁc
cognitive dignity to gossip explaining it in the framework of the so-called “social brain hypothesis”.
Posited in the late 1980s, this hypothesis contends that the relatively large brains of human beings
and other primates reﬂect the cognitive demands of complex social systems and not just the need
to process information of ecological relevance. Cf. also the recent (Magnani, 2011 and Bertolotti
and Magnani, 2014).

5.3
Enhancing Discoverability
123
act of gossiping can allow us to recognize that others are at risk of exploitation by
moral free-riders even though we ourselves are not (Dunbar, 2004, pp. 106–109).
Kant said that the “Kingdom of Ends”—that is, the moral world—“is a practical
Idea used to bring into existence what does not exist but can be made actual by our
conduct—and indeed to bring it into existence in conformity with this Idea” (Kant,
1964, p. 104).
Hence, the kingdom of ends is a kingdom of possible free choices created by
(and contingent upon) human beings, for it is only their reliability that makes free
will, and thus responsibility and freedom, possible. Dennett, when discussing the
status of “self-made selves”, makes the following comment: “Kant’s famous claim
in Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals that the law we give ourselves does not
bind us suggests that the selves we become in this process are not constrained by the
law we promulgate because these selves are (partly) constituted by those very laws,
partly created by a ﬁat that renders more articulate and deﬁnite something hitherto
underdone or unformed” (Dennett, 1984, p. 90). Moreover, human aspects that are
the underpinnings of the kingdom of ends—such as religion, for example—must
be successfully and appropriately activated; their being in good working order is
a basic condition for exercising morality and allowing free will to become “good”
will. As I have stressed in my book Morality on a Technological World (Magnani,
2007), I am a sustainer of the importance of knowledge in constructing a new ethical
commitment that embraces the idea of “respecting people as things”,17 and I always
stressed the fact that particular kinds of technologies can threaten the growth—and
even the existence—of freedom, responsibility, and the ownership of our destinies.
How could we use our free will without the constraints of objectiﬁed morality,
religions, laws, and institutions that impose regularity and predictability on human
behavior, and that, in turn, bolster people’s trustworthiness? In this sense, we
are responsible for our own free will (and, therefore, our freedom) because its
existence and its perpetuity seem not to be an inalienable given, but they depend
on our intellectual and practical choices about knowledge, religions, scientiﬁc and
moral institutions and the related techniques and technologies, and on their use in
everyday settings, work environments, education, communication, and economic
life. For example, environmental imperatives are matters of principle that cannot
be economically bargained away because they represent a kind of paradox of
liberalism. Indeed, in matters of conservation, one could maintain that neutrality
is necessary to preserve the rights of the individuals involved, but this notion is
obviously outweighed by the fact that the freedom to destroy natural goods and
things today will, paradoxically, inhibit freedom in the future, when people will
have as a result fewer options when choosing among competing ideas of the good
life.
17 In essence, the idea holds that human beings often can and even should be treated as “things”,
and that in the process they become “respected as things” that had been ascribed more value than
some people. We must reappropriate the instrumental and moral values that people have lavished
on external things and objects, which I contend is central to reconﬁguring human dignity in our
technological world.

124
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
Similarly, as I have tried to demonstrate in this book, we are responsible for the
preservation of high degrees of discoverability and diagnosticability, and therefore,
for potential fruits of human abductive creative and selective cognition, because
their abundance seems not to be an inalienable given too, but depends on our
intellectual and practical curation of eco-cognitive openness.
Summary
Enhancing discoverabiity and so human creativity is certainly related to the logical
and cognitive studies I have addressed in the previous chapters, which highlighted
many basic themes: “eco-cognitive openness and situadedness”, “knowledge in
motion”, and “epistemic irresponsibility”. The present chapter stressed the attention
to the actual and possible negative consequences on diagnosticability and on
discoverability (and so on human creativity) of that supposed excess of compu-
tationalization of the world that currently affects our societies. I have analyzed
the concept of overcomputationalism also to the aim of providing a novel clari-
ﬁcation of the concomitant concepts of pancognitivism, paninformationalism, and
pancomputationalism. The last part of the chapter provided some possible insights
that could be useful to answer the following question/warning: will the future
of eco-cognitive settings computationally-tailored or humanly-tailored? Current
threats against the ﬂourishing of human creative abductive cognition and capable
to possibly jeopardize epistemic rigor on the part of what I call computational
invasive “subcultures” and unwelcome effects of selective ignorance have been
illustrated. Finally, I have described two fundamental roles played by human
knowledge: everyday, philosophical, and scientiﬁc knowledge about natural and
artiﬁcial phenomena to the aim of tracking the external world; ethical knowledge
to the aim of tracking the behavior of other human beings to favor cooperation.
References
Arﬁni, S. (2019). Ignorant cognition: A philosophical investigation of the cognitive features of
not-knowing. Cham: Springer.
Bertolotti, T. (2020). Humor and ignorance in the perspective of cognitive niche curation.
In T. Bertolotti (Ed.), Cognition in 3E: Emergent, embodied, extended: Multidisciplinary
perspectives (pp. 23–35). Cham: Springer.
Bertolotti, T., & Magnani, L. (2014). An epistemological analysis of gossip and gossip-based
knowledge. Synthese, 191, 4037–4067.
Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, dangers, strategies. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bostrom, N., & ´Cirkovi´c, M. M. (Eds.). (2008). Global catastrophic risk. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Calude, C. S., & Longo, G. (2017). The deluge of spurious correlations in big data. Foundations of
Science, 22(3), 595–612.

References
125
Chiribella, G., D’Ariano, G. M., & Perinotti, P. (2012). Quantum theory, namely the pure and
reversible theory of information. Entropy, 14, 1877–1893.
Coelho Mollo, D. (2019). Against computational perspectivalism. The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 72(4), 1129–1153.
Copeland, J., Dresner, E., Proudfoot, D., & Shagrir, O. (2016). Time to reinspect the foundations?
Communications of the ACM, 59(11), 34–38.
Dennett, D. (1984). Elbow room: The variety of free will worth wanting. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Denning, P. J. (2007). Computing is a natural science. Communications of the ACM, 50(7), 14–18.
Denning, P. J., & Martell, C. H. (2015). Great principles of computing. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Dodig-Crnkovic, G. (2011). Signiﬁcance of models of computation, from Turing model to natural
computation. Minds and Machines, 21(2), 301–322.
Dodig-Crnkovic, G. (2013). The info-computational nature of morphological computing. In V. C.
Müller (Ed.), Philosophy and theory of artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 59–68). Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer.
Dodig-Crnkovic, G. (2017). Computational dynamics of natural information morphology, dis-
cretely/continuous. Philosophies, 2(4), 23.
Dotson, K. (2014). Conceptualizing epistemic oppression. Social Epistemology, 28(2), 115–138.
Dunbar, R. (2004). Gossip in evolutionary perspective. Review of General Psychology, 8(2), 100–
110.
Elliott, K. (2012). Selective ignorance and agricultural research. Science, Technology, and Human
Values, 38(3), 328–350.
Fan, J., Han, F., & Liu, H. (2014). Challenges of big data analysis. International Journal of
Information Management, 1(2), 293–314.
Fernández Pinto, M. (2015). Tensions in agnotology: Normativity in the studies of commercially
driven ignorance. Social Studies of Science, 45(2), 294–315.
Fisher, J., & Henzinger, T. A. (2007). Executable cell biology. Nature Biotechnology, 25, 1239–
1249.
Frizzo-Barker, J., Chow-White, P. A., Charters, A., & Ha, D. (2016). Genomic big data and privacy:
Challenges and opportunities for precision medicine. Computer Supported Cooperative Work,
25(2–3), 115–136.
Gandomi, A., & Haider, M. (2015). Beyond the hype: Big data concepts, methods and analytics.
International Journal of Information Management, 35(2), 137–144.
Goyal, P. (2011). Information physics—Towards a new conception of physical reality. Information,
3, 567–594.
Horsman, C., Stepney, S., Wagner, R. C., & Kendon, V. (2014). When does a physical system
compute? Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 470, 1–25. 470 20140182. https://doi.org/10.
1098/rspa.2014.0182. Published 9 July 2014.
Kant, I. (1964). Groundwork of the metaphysics of morals (1785) (3d Ed.). Reprint of 1956, edited
and translated by H. J. Paton, Hutchinson and Co., Ltd., London (3d Ed.). New York: Harper
and Row.
Kari, L., & Rozenberg, G. (2008). The many facets of natural computing. Communications of the
ACM, 51(10), 72–83.
Kourany, J., & Carrier, M. (2020). Science and the production of ignorance: When the quest for
knowledge is Thwarted. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Laland, K. N., & Brown, G. R. (2006). Niche construction, human behavior, and the adaptive-lag
hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology, 15, 95–104.
Laland, K. N., & Sterelny, K. (2006). Perspective: Seven reasons (not) to neglect niche construc-
tion. Evolution International Journal of Organic Evolution, 60(9), 4757–4779.
Lloyd, S. (2006). Programming the universe: A quantum computer scientist takes on the cosmos.
New York, NY: Knopf.

126
5
The Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings
Longo, G. (2009). Critique of computational reason in the natural sciences. In E. Gelenbe &
J.-P Kahane (Eds.). Fundamental concepts in computer science. London: Imperial College
Press/World Scientiﬁc.
Longo, G. (2012). Incomputability in physics and biology. Mathematical Structures in Computer
Science, 22(5), 880–900.
Longo, G. (2017). The biological consequences of the computational world: Mathematical
reﬂections on cancer biology. arXiv.org, eprint arXiv:1701.08085.
Longo, G., & Tendero, P.-E. (2007). The differential method and the causal incompleteness of
programming theory in molecular biology. Foundations of Science, 12(4), 337–366.
Magnani, L. (2007). Morality in a technological world: Knowledge as duty. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive cognition: The epistemological and eco-cognitive dimensions of
hypothetical reasoning. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2011). Understanding violence. The intertwining of morality, religion, and violence:
A philosophical stance. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2017). The abductive structure of scientiﬁc creativity: An essay on the ecology of
cognition. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2018). Computationalism in a dynamic and distributed eco-cognitive perspective. In
G. Dodig-Crnkovic & M. Burgin (Eds.), Philosophy and methodology of information (Vol. 1,
pp. 365–288). Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Magnani, L. (2021). Computational domestication of ignorant entities. Unconventional cognitive
embodiments. Synthese, 198, 7503–7532. Special Issue on “Knowing the Unknown” (guest
editors L. Magnani and S. Arﬁni).
Mays, C. (2021). Ignorance as a productive response to epistemic perturbations. Synthese, 198,
6491–6507.
Mithen, S. (1996). The prehistory of the mind: A search for the origins of art, religion, and science.
London: Thames and Hudson.
Mithen, S. (1999). Handaxes and ice age carvings: Hard evidence for the evolution of conscious-
ness. In A. R. Hameroff, A. W. Kaszniak, & D. J. Chalmers (Eds.), Toward a science of
consciousness III: The third tucson discussions and debates (pp. 281–296). Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Odling-Smee, F. J., Laland, K. N., & Feldman, M. W. (2003). Niche construction: The neglected
process in evolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Piccinini, G. (2017). Computation in physical systems. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The stanford
encyclopedia of philosophy (Summer 2017). Stanford: Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University.
Sax, M. (2016). Big data: Finders keepers, losers weepers? Ethics and Information Technology,
18(1), 25–31.
Seth, A. K., & Baars, B. J. (2005). Neural Darwinism and consciousness. Consciousness and
Cognition, 14, 140–168.
Smart, P., Madaan, A., & Hall, W. (2019). Where the smart things are: Social machines and the
internet of things. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 18(3), 551–575.
Thom, R. (1988). Esquisse d’une sémiophysique. Translated by V. Meyer, Semio Physics: A Sketch,
Addison Wesley, Redwood City, CA, 1990. Paris: InterEditions.
Tuana, N. (2006). The speculum of ignorance: The women’s health movement and epistemologies
of ignorance. Hypatia, 21(3), 1–19.
Wegner, D. M. (2002). The illusion of conscious will. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Williams, D. (2021). Motivated ignorance, rationality, and democratic politics. Synthese (Forth-
coming), 1–21.
Wolfram, S. (2002). A new kind of science. Champaign: Wolfram Media.
Yerkovich, S. (1977). Gossip as a way of speaking. Journal of Communication, 27, 192–196.

Conclusion
In place of a formal conclusion, I offer here a sort of ﬁnal comment about what I see
as the most important elements of Discoverability. I hope that I was able, through my
arguments, to encourage a serious commitment to increase our knowledge about the
importance of seeing the whole eco-cognitive aspects of either current incentives or
threats to discoverability, as a philosophical, epistemological, cognitive, and ethical
topic. The analysis of abductive cognition (especially creative) that I tried to operate
focused on the analysis of its “conditions of possibility”, as they are and as they
should become to the aim of enhancing their efﬁciency and power. I abstained
from explaining them away by any reduction to a rigid unilateral perspective,
instead, I favored a multifarious analysis to improve our chances to maintain
the theoretical commitment towards the study of human cognitive creativity as a
fundamental endowment, profoundly intertwined with human beings’ well-being
and their constructive chances of maintaining and increasing their capacity to
effectively govern the strictly concomitant ecological problems. I hope I have been
able to furnish an examination of discoverability in science because I think that
having a better knowledge of it not only is a task endowed with an intellectual
and didactic value, but also with “social” virtues: a fresh knowledge that promotes
scientiﬁc human creativity at the same time is the condition of possibility of
increasing the growth of other kinds of knowledge, which is desperately needed
in our technological era.
At the same time, given the importance of creativity as a crucial instrument
necessary to provide novel knowledge able to ﬁx the failures of our societies and our
lives, studies on discoverability help to maintain an intellectual focus on “moral”
and “ecological” commitments, hopefully, also beyond the restricted intellectual
community. The knowledge about discoverability I fervidly treated in this book
also aims at supplying researchers with the philosophical stance required to manage
disputable issues regarding the intertwining between freedom of research, eco-
cognitive openness of epistemic environments, knowledge in motion, affordances,
epistemic responsibility and irresponsibility, overcomputationalism, etc. and what
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
L. Magnani, Discoverability, Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning 26,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93329-6
127

128
Conclusion
I called “optimization of eco-cognitive openness and situadedness”, for example
jeopardized by the overwhelming commercialization of the results of various ﬁelds
of scientiﬁc research.
More or less hypothetical abductive creative thinking is so pervasive, so much a
part of human life, that it is not easy to imagine how to live without being positively
affected by its beneﬁts. Charles Sanders Peirce magniﬁcently said that “Our faculty
of guessing corresponds to a bird’s musical and aeronautic powers; that is, it is
to us, as those are to them, the loftiest of our merely instinctive powers”. The
huge impact that the constructive fruits of the human capacity to generate good
hypotheses bear (and can further bear) on civilizations, but also on animals and
nature in general, surely suggests that enhancing discoverability is the fundamental
condition of possibility of creativity and at the same time the ﬁrst ecological duty.
Sustaining the eco-cognitive conditions of discoverability is fundamental because
only creativity can grant the implementation of the other kinds of ecology, which
are urgently at play in our era so that the ecological improvement can in turn
affects human creativity. As I already said in the preface I consider the protection of
discoverability as the tool for building an ecology of human creativity as a conditio
sine qua non in the following sense: I am conﬁdent that without building appropriate
high degrees of discoverability (to favor creativity and skillful human capacities) all
the other envisaged and invoked ecologies and sustainability, in general, tend to
miserably fail.
People can make use of different hypothetical abductive cognition as weapons
of better well-being, but also to harm others—both for defensive and aggressive
scopes—as I for example described along with the various chapters of my previous
book Understanding Violence. However, poor creative cognitive capacities and
results are certainly harbingers of negative effects: our technological era is full of
artifacts of various type, all fruits of the “objectiﬁcation” of scientiﬁc knowledge,
and to manage them fresh and new knowledge in general (and scientiﬁc knowledge
in particular) is always fundamental to maintain their functions and to protect
humans from adverse and unintended negative damages. I tried to demonstrate
the importance of individuating cognitive ﬁrewalls able to prevent the decline of
discoverability, to further weaken this damage and to improve our human abductive
creativity, freedom, and safer ownership of our destinies.
In this book I wanted to provide an analysis, in the light of my eco-cognitive
approach to epistemology, of various threats to science—that I consider extremely
negative—to human creative abduction, and to the related ways of producing
rational knowledge developed in the last few centuries. Discoverability and diag-
nostcability seem jeopardized: consequently these threats seem to design a potential
future of decivilization, or at least a future characterized by different forms of
“civilization”, incommensurable with the one of democracies we have experienced
in the last part of the previous century in the western world. Unfortunately, it is
highly difﬁcult to address in a socially responsible manner the problems originated
by these transformations. To recognize some of these threats is already making a
good intellectual job, even if I am sure that many of these menaces, which are
already active, are still difﬁcult to be detected or completely out of intellectual sight.

Conclusion
129
In sum, understanding discoverability in an eco-cognitive perspective can be of
help, for example, to avoid falling into a situation when humans become passive
receivers of effects generated by technologies and/or ecological impairments in
an environment marked by a poorness of solutions able to manage pressing and
hazardous modiﬁcations, with consequent damage to the ownership of their destiny.
In sum, seeing discoverability as an essential eco-cognitive factor can help to grasp
the role of human creativity as a quality that cannot be disregarded and that is
worth be examined not only in the perspective of ethical frameworks regarding the
respect of human intelligence, merit, and high-level cognitive capacities but also as
an objective epistemological and ecological issue, which regards the well-being of
the humans as intertwined with nature.

Lexicon of Discoverability
Abductive Logic Programming Abductive logic programming (ALP) is a high
level knowledge-representation framework that can be used to solve problems
declaratively based on abductive reasoning. It extends normal logic programming
by allowing some predicates to be incompletely deﬁned, declared as abducible
predicates. Problem solving is accomplished by deriving hypotheses on these
abducible predicates (abductive hypotheses) as solutions of problems to be solved.
These problems can be either observations that need to be explained (as in classical
abduction) or goals to be achieved (as in normal logic programming). It can be used
to resolve problems in diagnosis, planning, natural language and machine learning.
It has also been used to handle negation as failure as a way of expressing some forms
of abductive reasoning.
Adversarial Abduction Adversarial abduction refers to deception as the activity of
intentionally misleading other agents’ hypothetical inferences. Deception is in this
case analyzed as an intentional manipulation of others’ hypothetical inferences so
that they will accept the false or disadvantageous abduced hypothesis. This topic is
also related to the role of the so-called adversarial cognition in intelligence service,
in which the main aim is to abductively detect and exploit adversarial affordances,
as environmentally situated opportunities for knowledge and action deﬁned by a
mutual relationship between adversaries. In these cases it is diagnosticability more
than discoverability at play, and various ways of jeopardizing selective abduction
(diagnosis) of other human beings are active, so as they consider they abductive
performances reliable and good, but they are bad results in the third-person
In this “Lexicon of Discoverability” also certain aspects of abductive cognition that are left
implicit in this book are illustrated. Further aspects of abduction are included in the more extended
“Lexicon of Abductive Cognition” of my earlier book Abductive Cognition. The Epistemological
and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of Hypothetical Reasoning (2009).
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
L. Magnani, Discoverability, Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning 26,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93329-6
131

132
Lexicon of Discoverability
perspective of the deceiver that collaborated to (usually intentionally) generate them
to get some advantages.
Affordances and Abducibility/Discoverability/Diagnosticability An affordance
is a resource or chance that the environment presents to the speciﬁc organism,
such as the availability of water or of ﬁnding recovery and concealment. From an
abductive perspective, affordances as environmental chances can be related to the
variable (degree of) abducibility (discoverability, diagnosticability) of a semiotic
conﬁguration of “signs”: a chair affords sitting in the sense that the action of sitting
is a result of a sign activity in which we perceive some physical properties (ﬂatness,
rigidity, etc.), and therefore we can ordinarily infer (in Peircean sense)—abduce—
that a possible way to cope with a chair is sitting on it.
AKM-Schema The classical schematic representation of abduction is expressed
by what (Gabbay & Woods, 2005) call AKM-schema, which is contrasted to their
own (GW-schema). For A they refer to Aliseda (1997, 2006), for K to Kowalski
(1979), Kuipers (1999), and Kakas et al. (1993), for M to Magnani (2001) and
Meheus et al. (2002).
The AKM-schema illustrates the explanatory dimension
of abduction. That is, it describes abduction as the kind of reasoning which aims at
generating hypotheses, which are related to considerations of plausibility, relevance,
and characteristicness. In this perspective abduction is immediately considered a
generation/selection of “plausible” hypotheses: minimality and consistency of the
results are mandatory. However, the AKM model does not exhaust the concept of
abduction, which also presents a non-explanatory, instrumental, and manipulative
dimension, possibly considered as not intrinsically consequentialist. AKM-schema
can be illustrated as follows:
1. E
2. K ̸↬E
3. H ̸↬E
4. K(H) is consistent
5. K(H) is minimal
6. K(H) ↬E
7. Therefore, H
(Gabbay & Woods, 2005, pp. 48–49)
where of course the conclusion operator ↬cannot be classically interpreted.1
1 The target has to be an explanation and K(H) bears Rpres [that is the relation of presumptive
attainment] to T only if there is a proposition V and a consequence relation ↬such that
K(H) ↬V , where V represents a payoff proposition for T . In turn, in this schema explanations are
interpreted in consequentialist terms. If E is an explanans and E′ an explanandum the ﬁrst explains
the second only if (some authors further contend if and only if) the ﬁrst implies the second. It is
obvious to add that the AKM schema embeds a D-N (deductive-nomological) interpretation of
explanation, as I have already stressed in (Magnani, 2001, p. 39).

Lexicon of Discoverability
133
Anticipation as Abduction In the tradition of phenomenology anticipations cor-
respond to a kind of an intentional expectation. When we see a spherical form
from one perspective, we will assume that it is effectively a sphere, but it could
be also a hemisphere. Anticipations share with other kinds of abductions various
features: they are highly conjectural and nonmonotonic, so wrong anticipations
have to be replaced by other plausible ones. Moreover, they constitute an activity
of “generating and testing” as a kind of action-based cognition. Not all the
anticipations are informationally equivalent and work like attractors for privileged
individuations of objects. In this sense the whole activity is toward “the best
anticipation”, the one that can display the object in an optimal way.
Anomalies as Triggers to Discovery Anomaly refers to unexpected and un-
characteristic events that create problems which demand a solution. Anomalous
events are marked by both an epistemic disadvantage and an emotional rating.
Philosophers of science in the last century have illustrated that inconsistencies
and anomalies often play an important role in the growth of scientiﬁc knowledge.
Hence, contradictions and inconsistencies are fundamental in abductive reasoning,
and abductive reasoning is appropriate for “governing” inconsistencies.
Aristotle’s
  Aristotle
clearly
states
that
in
syllogistic
theory
local/environmental cognitive factors—external to that peculiar inferential process,
for example regarding users/reasoners—are given up. At the same time in chapter
B25 of the Prior Analytics Aristotle presents a seminal perspective on abduction:
some of the current well-known distinctive characters of abductive cognition, and
of abductive cognition in science, are already expressed, which are in tune with
the Eco-Cognitive Model (EC-Model). By referring to the role of the method of
analysis and of the middle terms in Plato’s dialectic argumentation, considered
as related to the diorismic/poristic process in ancient geometry, Aristotle is still
pointing to the fundamental inferential and “distributed” role in reasoning of those
externalities that substantiate the process of “leading away” (an expression which
also translates what Aristotle calls
  , that is “abduction”).
Autoimmunization When inferential strategies are locked, both in human and
artiﬁcial cognition in a determined perspective where the components do not change
(for example in the case of games such as Go or Chess) an autoimmunization is
active, that constitutes the limitations that preclude the application of strategies that
are not related to “pre-packaged” scenarios, strategies that would be foreigners to
the ones that are strictly intertwined with the components of the given scenario.
Chance, Discoverability, Diagnosticability Humans can be considered chance
seekers as far as they are continuously engaged in a process of building up and then
extracting latent possibilities to conﬁgure discoverability and diagnosticability and
so to possibly uncover new valuable information and knowledge to trigger abduc-
tions. That is, humans like other organisms do not simply live their environment,
but they actively shape and change it looking for suitable chances. Hence, in this
perspective chances constitute that “information” which is not stored internally in
memory or already available in an external reserve, but that has to be “extracted”
and then picked up upon occasion.

134
Lexicon of Discoverability
Conﬁnement Cognitive conﬁnement refers to a contingent, yet relatively stable
state of being structurally or systematically unable to gain information from an
environment, determined by patterns of interaction between the subject and the
world. It is considered as a pathologized form of cognitive niche: conﬁnement af-
fects human and non human animal eco-cognitive situatedness and so the abductive
potential. If related to the concept of affordance, cognitive conﬁnement is a state
of being systematically blocked from affordances or even disafforded, as it were,
and so provided with disﬁgured affordances due to the way in which the subject’s
environment (cognitive niche) is set up by the subject-world interactions.
Curation of Eco-Cognitive Situatedness Curation of eco-cognitive situatedness
refers to all the activities capable to preserve, maintain, and enhance those aspects
that favor discoverability, for example in science. Indeed, to favor scientiﬁc
discovery, it has to be stressed that the optimization/maximization of eco-cognitive
situatedness derives from respecting various constraints, methods, cognitive virtues,
etc., which certainly substantiate limitations of the related cognitive behaviors but
at the same time they are clearly ﬁnalized to the maintenance of the optimiza-
tion/maximization of eco-cognitive openness, that solely can grant the ﬂourishing of
abductive scientiﬁc creativity. In other cases curing the eco-cognitive situatedness is
related to the fact that chances as conditions of diagnosticability and discoverability
can be faked. It seems intuitive to think that the suppression of chance-faking
contexts is an important activity of chance curation.
Creative Abduction Creative abduction is the process in which a completely new
hypothesis is created. An example of creative abduction is scientiﬁc discovery: the
discovery of a new disease and the manifestations it causes in the ﬁeld of medical
knowledge or the Kepler’s discovery of the elliptic orbit of the planets.
Deduction and Abduction Deduction is that kind of truth-preserving reasoning
which starts from reasons and looks for consequences. In doing so deduction does
not produce any new idea. New ideas are due to abduction that standardly involves
the generation and evaluation of hypotheses. In the process of hypothesis generation
and evaluation, deduction plays a fundamental role in deriving the consequences of
hypotheses, which, in turn, are compared with the available data by induction.
Diagnosis Conjectures can be either the fruit of an abductive selection in a set of
pre-stored hypotheses or the creation of new ones. “Creative” abduction deals for
example with the whole ﬁeld of the growth of scientiﬁc knowledge. This is irrelevant
in medical diagnosis where instead the task is to “select” from an encyclopedia
of pre-stored diagnostic entities. In this case abduction selects hypotheses; from
these hypotheses consequences are derived by deduction that are compared with the
available data by what Peirce called induction, in this case considered a method of
evaluation.2 Often the information available does not allow a physician to make a
2 Peirce was right in denying the role of “naked” induction in forming new hypotheses and
considered the term to indicate processes of evaluation. However, Hintikka usefully warns us about

Lexicon of Discoverability
135
precise diagnosis. Therefore, she has to get further data, or even try some different
manipulations to uncover symptoms otherwise hidden, so favoring diagnosticability.
Disﬁgured Affordances Disﬁgured affordances are affordances that are blocked
or, so to speak, disafforded, due to the way in which the subject’s environment
(cognitive niche) is set up by the subject-world interactions. The perception of
disﬁgured affordances favors a possible course of action, e.g., the actions that
someone might associate with bent sticks, whereas in fact the actions in question
are not a real option.
EC-Model and Knowledge Enhancing Abduction The backbone of the approach
to abduction illustrated in this book can be found in the original manifesto of my
Eco-Cognitive Model (EC-Model) of abduction in (Magnani, 2009). This model
always emphasizes the cognitive nature of abduction. Reasoning is something
performed by cognitive systems. At a certain level of abstraction and as a ﬁrst
approximation, a cognitive system is a triple (A, T, R), in which A is an agent,
T is a cognitive target of the agent, and R relates to the cognitive resources on
which the agent can count in the course of trying to meet the target-information,
time and computational capacity, to name the three most important. The agents are
also considered as embodied distributed cognitive systems: cognition is embodied
and the interactions between brains, bodies, and external environment are its central
aspects. Cognition is occurring taking advantage of a constant exchange of infor-
mation in a complex distributed system that crosses the boundary between humans,
artifacts, and the surrounding environment, where also instinctual and unconscious
abilities play an important role. This interplay is especially manifest and clear in
various aspects of abductive cognition. The EC-Model of abduction provides the
opportunity to illustrate the knowledge enhancing character of abduction, beyond
its ignorance preserving character, stated by the GW-schema: through abduction,
knowledge can be enhanced, even when abduction is not considered an inference
to the best explanation in the classical sense of the expression, that is an inference
necessarily characterized by an empirical evaluation phase, or an inductive phase,
as Peirce called it.3
Eco-Cognitive Openness, Discoverability, Abduction A new formal perspective
on abductive processes, in terms of the effort to naturalize the logic of its special
consequence relation, leads to the emphasis on the importance of the following main
the use of the word induction in the case of the testing of hypotheses: “[. . . ] I do not think that it is
instructive to call such reasoning inductive, but this is a merely terminological matter” (Hintikka,
2007, p. 55).
3 Peirce provides various justiﬁcations of the knowledge enhancing role of abduction: these
justiﬁcations basically resort to the conceptual exploitation of evolutionary and metaphysical ideas,
which clearly show that abduction is constitutively akin to truth, even if certainly always ignorance-
preserving or mitigating in the sense that the “absolute truth” is never reached through abduction.
Examples that indicate the knowledge enhancing role of abduction are: (1) abducing conventions
in empirical science and (2) the process of abducing those models in scientiﬁc reasoning which
play the “constitutive” function of enhancing knowledge.

136
Lexicon of Discoverability
aspects: “optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness”, “maximization of changeabil-
ity” of both input and output of the general form of an inferential abductive problem,
and high “information-sensitiveness”. Furthermore, a naturalized logic of abduction
must acknowledge the importance of keeping record of the “past life” of abductive
inferential praxes, contrarily to the fact that traditional demonstrative ideal systems
are prototypically characterized by what I call “maximization of memorylessness”.
In this perspective it is important to stress what can be called maximization of
abducibility, which is typical of scientiﬁc discovery. Constraints, methods, cognitive
virtues, etc. which characterize scientiﬁc cognition certainly substantiate limitations
of the cognitive behaviors but at the same time they are clearly ﬁnalized to
the maintenance of the optimization/maximization of eco-cognitive openness, that
solely can grant the ﬂourishing of abductive scientiﬁc creativity. Situatedness is
related to eco-cognitive aspects: to favor the solution of the abductive problem input
and output of the formula
Λ1, . . . , Λi, ?I ⊩X
L Υ1, . . . , .Υj
have to be thought as optimally positioned.4 This optimality is in turn made possible
in science by a maximization of changeability of both input and output. Not only
inputs have to be enriched with the possible solution but, to do that, other inputs
have usually to be changed and/or modiﬁed. Consequently, abductive inferential
processes are highly information-sensitive, that is the ﬂux of information which
interferes with them is continuous and systematically human(or machine)-promoted
and enhanced when needed. This is not true of traditional inferential settings, for
example proofs in classical logic, in which the modiﬁcations of the inputs are
minimized, proofs are usually taken with “given” inputs, and the burden of proofs
is dominant and charged on rules of inferences, and on the smart choice of them
together with the choice of their appropriate sequentiality; indeed, in the eco-
cognitive perspective, an “inferential problem” can be enriched by the appearance
of new outputs to be accounted for and the inferential process has to restart. This
is exactly the case of abduction and the cycle of reasoning reﬂects the well-known
nonmonotonic character of abductive reasoning. Abductive consequence is ruptured
by new and newly disclosed information, and so defeasible. In this perspective
abductive inference is not only the result of the modiﬁcation of the inputs, but, in
general, actually involves the intertwined modiﬁcation of both inputs and outputs.
Ecology of Human Creativity If creativity is jeopardized and in particular
scientiﬁc creativity, it is practically impossible to acceptably and successfully deal
with our technological societies, also from an ethical perspective: this means that
the need of an ecology of human creativity is mandatory.
4 ⊩
√
L will denote that the expected relation is obtained. This formula is illustrated in chapter one,
p. 16.

Lexicon of Discoverability
137
Embodied and Distributed Cognition Extra-theoretical aspects and manipula-
tions of “external” objects in reasoning are very important in hypothetical reasoning.
Paying attention to the perceptual and manipulative dimension of cognition, Peirce
already reminded us that human cognitive systems are not “isolated” and au-
tonomous entities. Cognition is embodied and the interactions between brains,
bodies, and external environment are its central aspects. Cognition is occurring
taking advantage of a constant exchange of information in a complex distributed
system that crosses the boundary between humans, artifacts, and the surrounding
environment. This interplay is especially manifest and clear in various aspects of
abductive cognition.
Emotion, Abducibility, Diagnosticability Emotion furnishes immediate abduc-
tive appraisals of the bodily states, and provides a kind of explanation of them.
Happiness, sadness, fear, anger, disgust, and surprise all can be viewed as judgments
about a person’s general state; a man who unexpectedly comes across a tiger on
the loose, for example, would be understandably afraid because the large carnivore
threatens his instinct to stay alive. In this sense, all emotions are connected to goal
accomplishment: people become angry when they are thwarted, for instance, and
feel pleased when they are successful.
Epistemic Responsibility/Irresponsibility and Creative Abduction The exam-
ination of some important aspects of the current organization of Research and
Development (R&D), for example in the case of biopharmaceutical companies,
represents a prototypical case of creation of the so-called impoverished epistemic
niches. In these cases I see a challenge to the epistemic integrity and rigor of modern
science and to the productivity of scientiﬁc abductive creativity. Currently a hot
problem is the emergence of various kinds of “epistemic irresponsibility”, such as
in the case of the increasing commodiﬁcation and commercialization of science, the
marketing of technoscientiﬁc products, the emergence of computational invasive
“subcultures”, and the unwelcome effects of selective ignorance. The subsequent
impoverishment of the so-called epistemological niches shows that discoverability
is jeopardized and consequently human fruitful abductive cognition is increasingly
assaulted, and at the same time human creativity seriously endangered.
Fake Discoverability and Fake Diagnosticability Chances as conditions of diag-
nosticability and discoverability can be faked. It seems intuitive to think that the
suppression of chance-faking contexts is an important activity of chance curation.
We can consider the amazing example of bullshit as a source of fake chances, but at
the same time also—rarely—as a fertile ground for learning and developing some
creative intuitions: a rich cognitive niche may beneﬁt from certain kind of fake
chances—which should therefore not be inhibited—whereas a poorer niche might
not beneﬁt from these fake aspects, and therefore the preclusion of fake chances is
an important act of chance curation to protect discoverability and dignosticability.
Fallacies and Abduction In the perspective of classical logic abductive reasoning
can be deﬁned as fallacious. More precisely, abduction is classiﬁed as the fallacy
of afﬁrming the consequent. In the light of an agent-based approach to logic the

138
Lexicon of Discoverability
fallacious character of abduction can be further clariﬁed and weakened: abduction
is recognized as a very precious method of explanation and discovery in science and
in everyday reasoning. Hence, in an agent-based perspective this kind of fallacious
reasoning can be redeﬁned and considered as a fundamental and good way of
reasoning.
Fallacy of Afﬁrming the Consequent Abduction appears to be a formal fallacy
that can be recognized in the perspective of classical logic: it is the fallacy of
afﬁrming the consequent. Basically it is an invalid inference, which assumes the
form: “if A, then B, B; then A. From the classical logic point of view this inference
is fallacious and not truth preserving.
Filter Bubbles The following example of the so-called “ﬁlter bubbles” is of help:
access to online information—in the so-called virtual cognitive niches—is con-
strained by algorithms that ﬁlter content in accordance with the subject’s previously
detected preferences or biases, and this of course diminishes the likelihood of
getting new or unexpected information. In this sense ﬁlter bubbles are special cases
of a more general phenomenon of cognitive conﬁnement related to processes of
“ignorance-making”.
Future of Eco-Cognitive Settings Data and types of problems that are basically
privileged by current mainstream AI programs are very restricted, data preferred
are quantity-related (big data) and the best strategies that can be simulated are
the locked ones typical of well-established games. It seems there is an increasing
urgency to prepare data capable to feed the AI programs and to do that they have to
be locked. This aspect generates a fundamental issue regarding ethics of algorithms
and consequently, a ﬁnal ethical warning has to be clearly stressed: the widespread
diffusion of standard and AI-based computational simulations will obviously incline
human collectives to more and more adopt habits and settings that deal with data
and problems appropriate to those same tools. This could generate an effect of
progressive computational conﬁguration of new social behaviors and environments
appropriate to conform themselves to the computational tools and needs, to the
detriment of old ones: in few words, will we face eco-cognitive settings which
are computationally tailored, characterized by the prevalence of locked cognitive
strategies or humanly tailored, characterized by the unlocked ones?
GW-Schema Focusing attention on basic cognitive aspects of abduction, and
adopting a logical framework centered on practical agents, (Gabbay & Woods,
2005) contend that abduction (basically seen as a scant-resource strategy, which
proceeds in absence of knowledge) presents an ignorance-preserving (or, better,
an ignorance mitigating) character. Woods says that of course “[...] it is not at all
necessary, or frequent, that the abducer be wholly in the dark, that his ignorance
be total. It needs not be the case, and typically is not, that the abducer’s choice of
a hypothesis is a blind guess, or that nothing positive can be said of it beyond the
role it plays in the subjunctive attainment of the abducer’s original target (although
sometimes this is precisely so)” (Woods, 2013, p. 249). In this perspective, abductive
reasoning responds to ignorance-problems. Ignorance-problems are deﬁned as the

Lexicon of Discoverability
139
impossible attainments of certain cognitive targets with the knowledge at one’s cur-
rent disposal. In response to ignorance-problems one can adopt three strategies: one
can attain some additional knowledge (subduance), overcoming one’s ignorance;
one can yield to ignorance (at least for the time being) (surrender); or one can
abduce, acquiring a new viewpoint for action, without getting rid of the constitutive
ignorance. One of the virtues of the GW-schema also resorts to its capacity to
provide the opportunity to illustrate non-explanatory and instrumentalist aspects of
abductive cognition. Examples of the non-explanatory features of abduction are for
example present in logic and mathematical reasoning. Furthermore, physics often
aims at discovering physical dependencies which can be considered explanatorily
undetermined. In this case abduction also exhibits an instrumental aspect.
From this perspective the general form of an abductive inference can be
symbolically rendered as follows. Let α be a proposition with respect to which you
have an ignorance problem. Putting T for the agent’s epistemic target with respect
to the proposition α at any given time, K for his knowledge-base at that time, K∗
for an immediate accessible successor-base of K that lies within the agent’s means
to produce in a timely way,5 R as the attainment relation for T , ⇝as the subjunctive
conditional relation, H as the agent’s hypothesis, K(H) as the revision of K upon
the addition of H, C(H) denotes the conjecture of H and H c its activation. The
general structure of abduction can be illustrated as follows (GW-schema):
1. T !α
[setting of T as an epistemic target with respect
to a proposition α]
2. ¬(R(K, T ))
[fact]
3. ¬(R(K∗, T ))
[fact]
4. H ̸∈K
[fact]
5. H ̸∈K∗
[fact]
6. ¬R(H, T )
[fact]
7. ¬R(K(H), T )
[fact]
8. If H ⇝R(K(H), T )
[fact]
9. H meets further conditions S1, . . . , Sn
[fact]
10. Therefore, C(H)
[sub-conclusion, 1–9]
11. Therefore, H c
[conclusion, 1–10].
It is easy to see that the distinctive epistemic feature of abduction is captured by the schema.
It is a given that H is not in the agent’s knowledge-set. Nor is it in its immediate successor.
Since H is not in K, then the revision of K by H is not a knowledge-successor set to K.
Even so, H ⇝R(K(H), T ). So we have an ignorance-preservation, as required (cf. Woods,
2013, p. 370).
5 K∗is an accessible successor of K to the degree that an agent has the know-how to construct it in
a timely way; i.e., in ways that are of service in the attainment of targets linked to K. For example
if I want to know how to spell “accommodate”, and have forgotten, then my target can’t be hit on
the basis of K, what I now know. But I might go to my study and consult the dictionary. This is
K∗. It solves a problem originally linked to K.

140
Lexicon of Discoverability
[Note: Basically, line 9. indicates that H has no more plausible or relevant rival
constituting a greater degree of subjunctive attainment. Characterizing the Si is the
most difﬁcult problem for abductive cognition, given the fact that in general there
are many possible candidate hypotheses. It involves for instance the consistency
and minimality constraints. These constraints correspond to the lines 4 and 5 of the
standard AKM schema of abduction.] Finally, in the GW-schema C(H) is read “It
is justiﬁed (or reasonable) to conjecture that H” and H c is its activation, as the basis
for planned “actions”.
In sum, in the GW-schema T cannot be attained on the basis of K. Neither
can it be attained on the basis of any successor K∗of K that the agent knows
then and there how to construct. H is not in K: H is a hypothesis that when
reconciled to K produces an updated K(H). H is such that if it were true, then
K(H) would attain T . The problem is that H is only hypothesized, so that the truth
is not assured. Accordingly Gabbay and Woods contend that K(H) presumptively
attains T . That is, having hypothesized that H, the agent just “presumes” that
his target is now attained. Given the fact that presumptive attainment is not
attainment, the agent’s abduction must be considered as preserving the ignorance
that already gave rise to her (or its, in the case for example of a machine) initial
ignorance-problem. Accordingly, abduction does not have to be considered the
“solution” of an ignorance problem, but rather a response to it, in which the agent
reaches presumptive attainment rather than actual attainment. C(H) expresses the
conclusion that it follows from the facts of the schema that H is a worthy object of
conjecture. It is important to note that in order to solve a problem it is not necessary
that an agent actually conjectures a hypothesis, but it is necessary that she states that
the hypothesis is worthy of conjecture. Brieﬂy, considering H justiﬁed to conjecture
is not equivalent to considering it justiﬁed to accept/activate it and eventually to
send H to experimental trial. H c denotes the decision to release H for further work
in the domain of enquiry in which the original ignorance-problem arose, that is the
activation of H as a positive cognitive basis for action.
We have to remember that the process of evaluation and so of activation of the
hypothesis, is not abductive, but inductive, as Peirce contended. In the framework
of the GW-schema it cannot be said that testability is intrinsic to abduction, such
as it is instead maintained in the case of some passages of Peirce’s writings. When
abduction stops at line 10. (cf. the GW-schema), the agent is not prepared to accept
K(H), because of supposed adverse consequences. This activity of testing, which
in turn involves degrees of risk proportioned to the strength of the conjecture, is
strictly cognitive/epistemic and inductive in itself, an experimental test, and it is
an intermediate step to release the abduced hypothesis for inferential work in the
domain of enquiry within which the ignorance-problem arose in the ﬁrst place.
Heuristic Strategies We can usefully see selective and creative abduction as
performed by the application of “heuristic procedures” (often called “heuristic
strategies”) that involve all kinds of good and bad inferential moves, beyond the
simple mechanical application of rules. It is only by means of these heuristic
procedures that the acquisition of new truths is guaranteed. Also Peirce’s mature

Lexicon of Discoverability
141
view on creative abduction as a kind of inference seems to stress the strategic
component of reasoning. Strategic rules are smart rules, even if they fail in
individual cases, and show a propensity for cognitive success. When there is a
problem to solve, we usually face several possibilities (hypotheses) and we have
to create or select the suitable one. In this situation we can rely on heuristics, that
are for example rules of thumb expressed in sentential terms and that help us reach
satisfactory choices without considering all the possibilities.
Hybrid Abducers The various abductive activities human agents are engaged in
drastically rely on external supports. For instance, human agents create mimetic
external representations which mirror concepts and problems that are already
represented in the brain and need to be enhanced, solved, further complicated, etc.
so they can sometimes creatively give rise to new concepts and meanings. In the
process of distributing the mind into the material world around them, human agents
develop new abductive skills, which would not be exhibited without the continuous
interplay with the various external supports. In doing so, human agents can be
described as hybrid abducers. Organic agents are spontaneous inducers and abducers
but human beings also construct logical and computational (ideal) systems both able
to mimic human inductions and abductions and to create new and more “rational”
ways of inducing and abducing. These systems are in turn used by human agents:
they consequently have to be seen as hybrid reasoners.
Ignorance, Diagnosticability, Discoverability A general taxonomy of ignorance
realizes the program of the so-called “epistemology of ignorance”, which refers to a
wide group of problems pertaining human cognitive behavior, also related to discov-
erability and diagnosticability. Cognitive conﬁnement is a state of being systemati-
cally blocked from affordances or even disafforded, and so provided with disﬁgured
affordances due to the way in which the subject’s environment (cognitive niche)
is set up by the subject-world interactions”: we can consider this case a situation
of embodied and ecological ignorance. Various cases of “ignorance-making”can
be further stressed: (1) ignorance/conﬁnement is—explicitly or implicitly—but
intentionally built: for example, ﬁlter bubbles in social networks create collec-
tives of people who are ignorant because they are almost totally isolated from
facts and opinions that would for example chance their political orientation; (2)
ignorance/conﬁnement is the unintentional objective effect of some changes that
occur in social equilibria pertaining to speciﬁc cognitive niches: the case of recent
“epistemic niches” that jeopardize (or tend to jeopardize) discoverability in some
areas of science such as biomedicine is an example.
Ignorant Entities and Overcomputationalization Our era is characterized by a
progressive transformation of ignorant entities not only in cognitive entities but also
in computational ones: currently we are facing with an excess of computationaliza-
tion (overcompulationalization) of the world and we can complain that too many
ignorant entities are more and more computationally “domesticated”.
Ignorance-Preserving Abductive Cognition Abduction is a procedure in which
something that lacks classical epistemic virtue is accepted because it has virtue

142
Lexicon of Discoverability
of another kind. For example: let S be the standard that you are not able to meet
(e.g., that of mathematical proof). It is possible that there is a lesser epistemic
standard S′ (e.g., having reason to believe) that you do meet. Focusing attention
on this cognitive aspect of abduction we can contend that abduction (basically seen
as a scant-resource strategy, which proceeds in absence of knowledge) presents an
ignorance preserving (but also an ignorance mitigating) character. Of course it is
not at all necessary, or frequent, that the abducer be wholly in the dark, that his
ignorance be total. It needs not be the case, and typically is not, that the abducer’s
choice of a hypothesis is a blind guess, or that nothing positive can be said of
it beyond the role it plays in the subjunctive attainment of the abducer’s original
target (although sometimes this is precisely so). Abductive reasoning is a response
to an ignorance-problem: one has an ignorance-problem when one has a cognitive
target that cannot be attained on the basis of what one currently knows. Ignorance
problems trigger one or other of three responses. In the ﬁrst case, one overcomes
one’s ignorance by attaining some additional knowledge (subduance). In the second
instance, one yields to one’s ignorance (at least for the time being) (surrender). In
the third instance, one abduces, and so has a positive and reasoned basis for new
action even if in the presence of the constitutive ignorance.
Induction and Abduction Since the time of John Stuart Mill, the name given to
the most important kinds of conjectural non deductive reasoning has been induction,
considered as an aggregate of many methods for discovering generalizations and
casual relationships. Consequently induction in its widest sense is an ampliative
process of generalization of knowledge. By using induction it is possible to
synthesize individual statements into general laws—inductive generalizations—in
a defeasible way, but it is also possible to evaluate (conﬁrm or discount) hypotheses
(on induction as a form of evaluation cf. the considerations contained in the
footnote 2 at p. 134.) In the case of the relationship between abduction, deduction,
and induction, illustrated by Peirce and exploited in the so called ST-Model (Select
and Test model), induction does not deal with the problem of individuating the ways
of “generating” inductive hypotheses but refers to a logic of hypothesis “evaluation”.
Abduction creates or selects hypotheses; from these hypotheses consequences are
derived by deduction that are compared with the available data by induction. In the
ST-model induction is used as the process of reducing the uncertainty of established
hypotheses by comparing their consequences with observed facts.
Inference to the Best Explanation There are two main epistemological/cognitive
meanings of the word abduction: (1) abduction that only generates plausible
hypotheses (selective or creative)—this is the meaning of abduction accepted in
my epistemological ST-model—and (2) abduction considered as an inference to the
best explanation, that also evaluates hypotheses by induction. In the latter sense
the classical meaning of abduction as an inference to the best explanation (for
instance in medicine, to the best diagnosis—selective abduction) is described by
the complete abduction-deduction-induction cycle.

Lexicon of Discoverability
143
Instinct as Abduction An example of instinctual (and putatively “unconscious”)
abduction is given by the case of animal embodied kinesthetic/motor abilities,
capable of leading to some appropriate cognitive behavior; Peirce says abduction
even takes place when a new born chick picks up the right sort of corn. This is
another example, so to say, of spontaneous abduction—analogous to the case of
some unconscious/embodied abductive processes in humans. Therefore, instinct vs.
inference represents a conﬂict we can overcome simply by observing that the work
of abduction is partly explicable as a biological phenomenon and partly as a more or
less “logical” operation related to “plastic” cognitive endowments of all organisms.
Instrumental Abduction Abduction exhibits an instrumental and strategic aspect,
for instance, when intertwined with the exquisite epistemological problem of the
role of unfalsiﬁable hypotheses in scientiﬁc reasoning. In this case, an abductive
hypothesis can be highly implausible from the “propositional” point of view and
nevertheless it can be adopted for its instrumental virtues, such as in the Newtonian
case of action-at-a-distance. Highly implausible hypotheses from the “proposi-
tional” point of view can be conjectured because of their high “instrumental”
plausibility, where a different role of characteristicness is at stake. We have to
note that in some sense all abductions embed instrumental factors. In the general
case, one accepts a hypothesis because doing so enables one’s target to be attained,
notwithstanding that lacks the relevant epistemic virtue of plausibility.
Locked and Unlocked Strategies Taking advantage of the concept of abduction,
we can contend that the eco-cognitive openness is undermined in the case of
famous computational programs such as AlphaGo, because they are based on locked
abductive strategies. Instead, unlocked abductive strategies, which are in tune with
what eco-cognitive openness requires, qualify those high-level kinds of abductive
creative reasoning that are typical of human-based cognition, locked abductive
reasoning strategies are instead much simpler than unlocked ones to be rendered
at the computational level.
Logical Abductive Agents Logical agents have to be seen as ideal “demonstrative
environments”, which in turn are suitable tools for the creation of logical/deductive
models of abductive reasoning itself. They are the fruit of cognitive externalizations
in objective logical systems, endowed with symbolic, abstract and rigorous cogni-
tive features, which are also potentially exploitable at the computational level.
Manipulative Abduction Manipulative abduction is a process in which a hy-
pothesis is formed and evaluated resorting to a basically extra-theoretical and
extra-sentential behavior that aims at creating communicable accounts of new
experiences to integrate them into previously existing systems of experimental
and linguistic (theoretical) practices. Manipulative abduction represents a kind of
redistribution of the epistemic and cognitive effort to manage objects and infor-
mation that cannot be immediately represented or found internally. An example of
manipulative abduction is the case of the human use of the construction of external
diagrams in geometrical reasoning, useful to make observations and “experiments”

144
Lexicon of Discoverability
to transform one cognitive state into another for example to discover new properties
and theorems.
Maximization of Cognition and Abduction When dealing with abduction in
a logical perspective, as an “inferential problem”, it is appropriate to adopt the
more general concepts of input and output instead of those of premisses and
conclusions. From this perspective abductive inferences can be seen as related
to logical processes in which input and output fail to hold each other in an
expected relation, with the solution involving the modiﬁcation of inputs, not that
of outputs. The chance of ﬁnding an abductive solution still appears to depend on
the Aristotelian concept of “leading away” (   ) , that is, on the starting of the
application of a supplementary logic implementing an appropriate formal inference
engine. In this perspective—and given the fact science produces and “maximizes”
cognition through a process in which afﬁrming truths implies negating truths—
the most important consequence for epistemology is that in scientiﬁc abductive
reasoning irrelevance and implausibility are not always offensive to reason. For
example, we cannot be sure, more broadly, that our guessed hypotheses are plausible
(even if we know that looking—in advance—for plausibility is a human good and
wise heuristic), indeed an implausible hypothesis can later on result plausible.
Model-Based Abduction Inaugurating the new semiotic perspective, Peirce stated
that all thinking is in signs, and signs can be icons, indices, or symbols and that all
inference is a form of sign activity, where the word sign includes “feeling, image,
conception, and other representation” (Peirce, 1866–1913, 5.283). In this light it can
be maintained that a considerable part of the abductive processes is model-based.
That is, a considerable part of hypothesis creation and selection is model-based: it
is occurring in the middle of a relationship between brains and model-based aspects
of external objects and tools that have received cognitive and/or epistemological
delegations.
Multimodal Abduction Multimodal abduction depicts hybrid aspects of abductive
reasoning. Abductive inference can be visual as well as verbal, and consequently
we have to acknowledge the sentential, model-based, and manipulative nature of
abduction. Both evidence and hypotheses can be represented using various sensory
modalities. Some basic aspects of this constitutive hybrid nature of multimodal
abduction involve words, sights, images, smells, etc. but also kinesthetic experiences
and other feelings such as pain, and thus all sensory modalities.
Naturalized Logic (of Abduction) A complete revision of mainstream logic is an
urgent task to be achieved. This revision will be able to bring logic into a creative
rapprochement with cognitive science. This can be achieved by trying to do for
logic what over forty years ago Quine and others attempted for epistemology. It is
necessary to propose a “naturalization” of the logic of human inference and of the
so-called third-way reasoning, which refers to those kinds of inference that owe their
rightness to the meeting of standards other than deductive validity and inductive
strength, certainly overworked and overvalued by logicians, and that instead show
the capacity to reach good and reliable results. Third-way reasoning refers to those

Lexicon of Discoverability
145
cases of human reasoning such as abduction, but also to many other kinds of the so-
called fallacies, disregarded or simply considered irremediable errors by logic since
its ancient and modern beginnings. To understand the naturalization of logic it is
very useful to take advantage of the case of a naturalized logic of abduction, which
leads us to the emphasis on the importance of the following main aspects: “optimiza-
tion of eco-cognitive situatedness”, “maximization of changeability” of both input
and output, and high “information-sensitiveness”. Furthermore, a naturalized logic
of abduction must acknowledge the importance of keeping record of the “past life”
of abductive inferential praxes, contrarily to the fact that traditional demonstrative
ideal systems are prototypically characterized by what I call “maximization of
memorylessness”.
Niche Construction and Abduction The theory of cognitive niches describes
the environment as a sort of “global market” that provides living creatures with
unlimited possibilities. Indeed, not all the possibilities that the environment offers
can be exploited by human and non-human animals that act on it. For instance, the
environment provides organisms with water to swim in, air to ﬂy in, ﬂat surfaces
to walk on, and so on. However, no creatures are fully able to take advantage of all
of them. Through the activity of niche construction all organisms try to modify
their surroundings in order to better exploit those elements that suit them and
eliminate or mitigate the effect of the negative ones. This activity is highly related
to the hypothetical virtues provided by abductive cognition. That is, the relevant
aspects of the environment are appropriately selected and/or reconstructed so as to
turn the local environment—inert from a cognitive point of view—into a cultural
mediating structure able to deliver suitable chances for behavior control. Through
cognitive niche construction organisms not only inﬂuence the nature of their world,
but also in part determine the Darwinian selection pressure to which they and
their descendants are exposed (and of course the selection pressures to which
other species are subjected). It is in this perspective that any abduced hypothesis
potentially introduces a change (and an opportunity) in the cognitive processes to
advance new perspectives in the coevolution of the organism and the environment.
Non-Explanatory Abduction Abduction is not intrinsically explanationist, like
for example in the case of its description in terms of inference to the best explanation
would suggest. If we maintain that E explains E′ only if the ﬁrst implies the second,
certainly the reverse does not hold. This means that various cases of abduction
are consequentialist but not explanationist. Other cases are neither consequentialist
nor explanationist. Non-explanatory modes of abduction are clearly exploited in
the “reverse mathematics” where propositions can be taken as axioms because they
support the axiomatic proofs of target theorems. Furthermore, often in physics the
target is the discovery of physical dependencies which we consider explanatorily
undetermined. In this case abduction can exhibit an instrumental aspect. Non-
explanatory abductions deal with those situations in which the plausibility of certain
hypotheses involves less “propositional” and more “strategical” and instrumental
aspects, so that propositional plausibility is lower and strategic plausibility higher.

146
Lexicon of Discoverability
These cases are far from the clear ones of explanatory abduction that are for example
occurring in science and in various kinds of diagnosis.
Nonmonotonic Reasoning A logical system is monotonic if the function Theo that
relates every set of wffs to the set of their theorems holds the following property:
for every set of premises S and for every set of premises S′, S ⊆S′ implies
Theo(S) ⊆Theo(S′). Traditional deductive logics are monotonic: intuitively, adding
new premises (axioms) will never invalidate old conclusions. In a nonmonotonic
system, when axioms, or premises, increase, their theorems do not. For example,
following this deductive nonmonotonic view of abduction, we can stress the fact
that in actual abductive medical reasoning, when we increase symptoms and
patients’ data [premises], we are compelled to abandon previously derived plausible
diagnostic hypotheses [theorems], as already—epistemologically—illustrated by
the Select and Test model (ST-model). If new information emerges, hypotheses
not previously considered can be suggested and a new cycle takes place. In
this case the nonmonotonic character of abductive reasoning is clear and arises
from the “classical” logical unsoundness of the inference rule: it draws defeasible
conclusions from incomplete information.
Overcomputationalization and Ignorant Entities See Ignorant Entities and
Overcomputationalization.
Perception as Abduction (and Visual Abduction) Perception is viewed by Peirce
as a fast and uncontrolled knowledge-production procedure. Perception, in this
philosophical perspective, is seen as a vehicle for the instantaneous retrieval of
knowledge that possibly was previously structured in our mind through more
structured inferential processes. By perception, knowledge constructions are so
instantly reorganized that they become habitual and diffuse and do not need any
further testing. By perception, knowledge constructions are so instantly reorganized
that they become habitual and diffuse and do not need any further testing: “[...] a
fully accepted, simple, and interesting inference tends to obliterate all recognition
of the uninteresting and complex premises from which it was derived” (Peirce,
1866–1913, 7.37). Many visual stimuli—that can be considered the “premises” of
the involved abduction—are ambiguous, yet people are adept at imposing order on
them. For example we readily form such hypotheses as that an obscurely seen face
belongs to a friend of ours, because we can thereby explain what has been observed.
This kind of image-based hypothesis formation can be considered as a form of what
I have called visual (or iconic) abduction.
Pregnances as Abductions In terms of the hypothetical abductive framework
we can say that a pregnant stimulus is highly diagnostic and a trigger to initiate
abductive cognition, like in the case of the hardwired pregnancy occurring regarding
a chicken and its food: the chicken promptly reacts when perceiving it. When a
pregnance affects an organism, the abductive reaction can be promptly triggered.
Selective Abduction Selective abduction is the process in which a hypothesis is
abductively selected from a pre-stored encyclopedia of “abducibles”. An example

References
147
of selective abduction is diagnostic reasoning in medicine: it starts from patient data
that is abstracted into clinical features to be explained. Then, selective abduction
generates plausible explanatory diagnostic hypotheses.
Sentential Abduction Sentential abduction—related to
logic and
to
ver-
bal/symbolic inferences—refers to those situations in which a hypothesis is formed
and evaluated relying to the sentential aspects of natural or artiﬁcial languages,
like in the case of logic. Sentential abduction can be rendered in different ways.
For example, in the Peircean syllogistic framework abduction is considered like
something propositional and as a type of fallacious reasoning. The sentential
models of abduction are powerful but limited, because they do not capture various
reasoning tasks which involve creative, model-based, and manipulative aspects.
ST-Model of Abduction The so-called Select and Test model (ST-Model) is an
epistemological model of medical reasoning, which can be described in terms
of the classical notions of abduction, deduction and induction; it describes the
different roles played by such basic inference types in developing various kinds
of medical reasoning (diagnosis, therapy planning, monitoring). The model is
consistent with the Peircean view about the various stages of scientiﬁc inquiry in
terms of “hypothesis” generation (abduction), deduction (prediction), and induction.
The model has been used to implement medical knowledge-based systems of
medical reasoning.
Unlocked and Locked Strategies See Locked and Unlocked Strategies.
References
Aliseda, A. (1997). Seeking explanations: Abduction in logic, philosophy of science and artiﬁcial
intelligence (Doctoral dissertation, Amsterdam: Institute for Logic, Language and Computa-
tion).
Aliseda, A. (2006). Abductive reasoning. Logical investigations into discovery and explanation.
Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Gabbay, D. M., & Woods, J. (2005). The reach of abduction. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Hintikka, J. (2007). Socratic epistemology. Explorations of knowledge-seeking by questioning.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kakas, A., Kowalski, R. A., & Toni, F. (1993). Abductive logic programming. Journal of Logic
and Computation, 2(6), 719–770.
Kowalski, R. A. (1979). Logic for problem solving. New York: Elsevier.
Kuipers, T. A. F (1999). Abduction aiming at empirical progress of even truth approximation
leading to a challenge for computational modelling. Foundations of Science, 4, 307–323.
Magnani, L. (2001). Abduction, reason, and science. Processes of discovery and explanation.
New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive cognition. The epistemological and eco-cognitive dimensions of
hypothetical reasoning. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Meheus, J., Verhoeven, L., Van Dyck, M., & Provijn, D. (2002). Ampliative adaptive logics and the
foundation of logic-based approaches to abduction. In L. Magnani, N. J. Nersessian, & C. Pizzi

148
Lexicon of Discoverability
(Eds.), Logical and computational aspects of model-based reasoning (pp. 39–71). Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Peirce, C. S. (1866–1913). Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. Vols. 1–6, C. Hartshorne, P.
Weiss (Eds.); Vols. 7–8, A. W. Burks (Ed.) (1931–1958). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Woods, J. (2013). Errors of reasoning. Naturalizing the logic of inference. London: College
Publications.

Index
A
Abduction, 3, 4, 21, 47, 114
and academia, 94–96, 98, 99
adversarial, 65, 66
and affordances, 32, 34, 35, 37–39, 41,
43–46
and Bayesianism, 47, 48
and best explanation, 5
and consistency, 140
and corporations, 94–96, 98, 99
creative, 5
and curation, 43–46
and eco-cognitive openness, 67, 69–73, 75
as the fallacy of afﬁrming the consequent,
8, 9, 18
and free energy principle, 46–48
and implausibility, 82
inferential view of, 46–48
and information sensitivity, 18
and irrelevance, 82
jeopardized, 80, 81, 83–94, 99, 112–114,
116
as “leading away”, 6
logic of, 14–17
manipulative, 30, 43
maximization of (in science), 14–19, 67
and maximization of changeability of input
and output, 18
and minimality, 140
model-based, 33
and multimodality, 19
multimodal logics of, 19
and the optimization of eco-cognitive
situatedness, 94–96, 98, 99
and optimization of situatedness, 18
and the plasticity of the environmental
situatedness, 32, 34, 35, 37
and predictive processing theory (PP), 47,
48
and the production of a deduction, 19–22
selective, 5, 92
trans-paradigmatic, 6, 68
transepistemic, 7
and testability, 140
Abe, A., 43–45
Academia
and creative abduction, 94–96, 98, 99
Adams, J., 71, 72
Adelman, L., 31
Adobor, H., 94
Adolphs, R., 32
Adversarial abduction, 65, 66
Affordances, 47
and abduction, 30, 32, 34, 35, 37–39, 41,
43–46
and attunement, 32, 34, 35
and cognition, 28
and the environment, 28
and latent constraints, 35
and proximal and distal variables, 37
Agricultural research, 98
AKM-schema of abduction, 9, 11, 14, 132
Albert the Great, 20
Alexander of Aphrodisias, 20
Aliseda, A., 7, 9, 14, 16, 45, 132
Allen, C.M., 67
AlphaGo, 53–63, 76, 114, 143
AlphaZero, 53–63
Amado, R., 89
Analog computation, 109
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
L. Magnani, Discoverability, Logic, Argumentation & Reasoning 26,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93329-6
149

150
Index
Anderson, C., 113
Animal experimentation, 82
Animal models, 82, 83
Anson, B.D., 82
Applied epistemology, 85
Arﬁni, S., 59, 68, 94
Aristotle, 4, 20–22, 133
Artifacts
and chance, 38, 39, 41, 43–46
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), 7, 8, 114
Attunement, 29
and affordances, 32, 34, 35
Austin, J.H., 67
Autoimmunization
and locked strategies, 59
Automatic scientiﬁc discovery, 114
Averroes, 20
Avorn, J., 92, 93
B
Baars, B.J., 120
Bailly, F., 107
Bardone, E., 35
Barrett, H.C., 29
Batens, D., 14
Bauters, M., 38
Bayesianism, 47, 48
Bayh-Dole Act, 73
Bayle, P., 21
Becquerel, A.H., 67
Bennani, Y.L., 82, 83, 86–88, 95
Bertolotti, T., 9, 43, 59, 66, 68, 85, 116, 122
Best explanation
and abduction, 5
Betz, G., 21
Biddle, J., 69–71, 73–75, 80–82, 91, 92, 97
Big data
as quantity related, 111, 112
and scientiﬁc method, 112–114
and spurious correlations, 63
Big pharma, 73, 74, 82, 84, 86–88, 91, 92,
94–96, 98, 99
Bivens, J., 113
Bochenski, I.N., 20
Bostrom, N., 112
Brandom, R., 8
Bricot, T., 20
Brown, B., 7
Brown, G.R., 28, 108
Brown, J.R., 73, 75, 80, 81, 88–91, 93, 98
Brunswik, E., 30
Bruyaka, O., 95
Bruza, P., 7
Buridan, J., 20, 21
Business-oriented medicalization, 91–93, 95,
96, 98, 99
Byrne, D., 31
C
Cabrera, F., 5
Calabrese, E., 89
Caldicott, F., 63
Calude, C.S., 63, 64, 112, 113
Campanario, J., 67
Campos, D.G., 14, 21
Cannon, W.B., 67
Caplovitz, A., 92
Carney, S., 96
Carrera, M., 83
Carrier, M., 116
Catellin, S., 67
Cellucci, C., 20
Chance
and artifacts, 38, 39, 41, 43–46
creation of, 38, 39, 41, 43–46
and manipulative abduction, 43
and serendipity, 67, 68
Chiribella, G., 109
Civilization
and decivilization, 128
Clark, A., 40, 46
Coady, D., 85
Coelho, H., 62
Coelho Mollo, D., 108
Coevolution, 38
Cognition
and affordances, 28
and morality, 121, 123, 124
Cognitive delegations, 36
Cognitive mediators, 56, 59
Cognitive niches, 108
Commercialization of science, 74, 75, 80–82,
87, 88, 90–93, 95, 96, 98, 99
Commodiﬁcation of scientiﬁc abduction
and big pharma, 80–94
as epistemic irresponsibility, 80–84
Computational invasive subcultures
and creative abduction, 112–114
and scientiﬁc abduction, 112–114
Computational perspectivalism, 108
Conﬁnement
and diagnosticability, 64, 65
and discoverability, 64, 65
Consistency
and abduction, 140
Constant, A., 48

Index
151
Constraints
and affordances, 35
latent, 35
Control of perception, 37
Conventions, 5
Copeland, J., 67, 111
Corporations
and creative abduction, 94–96, 98, 99
Counterinduction, 12
Creative abduction
and academia, 94–96, 98, 99
and corporations, 94–96, 98, 99
and the optimization of eco-cognitive
situatedness, 94–96, 98, 99
Creativity, 2–4, 22, 28, 29, 75, 81, 94, 96
and chance, 38, 39, 41, 43–46
horizontal, 61
vertical, 61
Crick, F., 67
Criteria
for “judging” abductive results, 5
Curation of eco-cognitive situatedness, 43–46
Cutdown problem, 10
D
Darbellay, F., 67
D’Ariano, G.M., 109
Davies, J., 55
Decivilization
and civilization, 128
Deduction
abductive production of, 19–22
Deep Blue, 62
Deep learning programs, 53–63
DeepMind, 62, 63, 114
Degani, A., 31
Dellantonio, S., 66
Dementia persons, 44
Dennett, D., 118, 119, 123
Denning, P.J., 107
Descartes, R., 12
Diagnosticability, 6, 32, 43–46
and conﬁnement, 64, 65
and disﬁgured affordances, 65, 66
as ecological validity, 30
fake, 65, 66
and ﬁlter bubbles, 64, 65
and ignorance, 64, 65
and locked and unlocked strategies, 54–64
Diagnostic reasoning, 5
Disciplinarity, 71, 72
Discoverability, 2–4, 6, 28, 29, 43–47
and conﬁnement, 64, 65
and disﬁgured affordances, 65, 66
as ecological validity, 30
fake, 65, 66
and ﬁlter bubbles, 64, 65
and ignorance, 64, 65
and locked and unlocked strategies, 54–64
Discrete computation, 109
Disﬁgured affordances
and diagnosticability, 65, 66
and discoverability, 65, 66
Distributed ignorance, 116
Distributive justice, 88
D’Mello, B., 90, 94
Dodig-Crnkovic, G., 107, 108
Donald, M., 43
Dorp, J., 20
Dranitsaris, G, 84
Dunbar, R., 122, 123
E
EC-Model of abduction, 7, 8, 11, 15
and logic, 9, 11–13, 20–22
Eco-Cognitive closure, 53–64
Eco-Cognitive discipline of logic, 14–17
Eco-Cognitive model of abduction (EC-
Model), 3–5
Eco-Cognitive interaction, 32
Eco-Cognitive openness, 5–8, 17, 53–64
and abduction, 67, 69–73, 75
and knowledge in motion, 67, 69–73, 75
and locked strategies, 57–64
and neoliberalism, 99
and unlocked strategies, 57–64
Eco-Cognitive shutdown of creative abduction
and epistemic irresponsibility, 85–88
Eco-Cognitive situatedness, 8
optimization of, 14–19, 67
Ecological validity, 30
as diagnosticability, 30
as discoverability, 30
Ecology of human creativity, 2–4
Einstein, A., 12
Eisenberg, R.S., 81
Elliott, K., 74, 80, 81, 92, 100
Encyclical Letter Laudato Si’, 2
Environment
and affordances, 28
Epistemic integrity, 89
and neoliberalism, 88–94
Epistemic irresponsibility, 69, 76, 79, 100
and big pharma, 80–88
and commodiﬁcation of abduction in
science, 80–84

152
Index
and the eco-cognitive shutdown of creative
abduction, 85–88
and epistemic integrity, 88–94
and ignorance, 99, 114, 116
and science impoverished, 99, 114, 116
and neoliberalism, 88–94
Epistemic niches, 69, 70
impoverished, 80, 81, 83–94, 99, 112–114,
116
Epistemic quality, 73
Epistemic responsibility, 72
Epistemology
applied, 85
and ethics, 85
of ignorance, 115, 141
moral, 87
wide and restricted meaning of, 85
Erdelez, S., 67
Estrada-González, L., 7, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16
Ethics
and epistemology, 85
Ethnopharmacology
and epistemic integrity, 97
Euclid, 20, 21
Expensive drugs, 83, 84, 89
F
Fabry, R., 48
Fake diagnosticability, 65, 66
Fake discoverability, 65, 66
Fallacy
of afﬁrming the consequent, 8, 9
Fan, J., 113
Fanti Rovetta, F., 65
Faye, J., 6, 68
Feldman, M.W., 28, 108
Fernández Pinto, M., 116
Feyerabend, P., 12, 57, 71
Fill-up problem, 19, 21
Filter bubbles
and diagnosticability, 64, 65
and discoverability, 64, 65
Financial crisis, 83
Fisher, J., 107
Flach, J.M., 37
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 84, 87,
92
Forsythe, S., 65, 66
Free energy principle (FEP)
as an anti-inferentialist theory, 46–48
Friston, K.J., 47, 48
Frizzo-Barker, J., 113
Future of eco-cognitive settings
computationally or humanly tailored?, 111,
112
G
Gabbay, D., 6, 7, 13, 14, 68, 132, 138–140
Games, 53–63
Gandomi, A., 113
Gaver, W.W., 29
Gelfert, A., 43
Genetic modiﬁcation (GM), 74, 75
George of Brussels, 20
Gertsch, J., 97
Gewertz, N.M., 89
Gibson, A., 7
Gibson, J.J., 28–30, 32, 33, 37, 42
Giroux, H.A., 94
Globalization
and neoliberalism, 90
Go game, 53–63, 114
Google, 62
Gossip, 85
and abduction, 8, 9
Goyal, P., 109
GW-schema of abduction, 9, 11, 13, 14, 16,
132, 139, 140
H
Haider, M., 113
Hall, W., 110
Hamblin, C.L., 20, 21
Hammond, K.R., 30
Heidegger, M., 40
He, J.-Q., 82
Heller, M.A., 81
Hendricks, F.V., 6, 68
Henzinger, T.A., 107
Heterogeneous logics, 15
Hintikka, J., 20, 88, 134
HIV/AIDS research, 71, 72
Hohwy, I., 47
Holland, J., 61
Horizontal creativity, 61
Horsman, C., 106
Ho, W., 29, 41
Hui, F., 114
Human abduction jeopardized
and the impoverishment of epistemic
niches, 80, 81, 83–94, 99, 112–114,
116
Husserl, E., 54–56
Hutchins, E., 56

Index
153
I
Icons, 21, 22
Ignorance
and diagnosticability, 64, 65
and discoverability, 64, 65
distributed, 116
and epistemic irresponsibility, 99, 114, 116
epistemology of, 115, 141
and faking knowledge to preserve
ignorance, 115
as “knowing that we do not know, but not
caring to know”, 115
loving, 115
as “produced by the construction of
epistemically disadvantaged
identities”, 115
selective, 80, 92, 99
and “they do not want us to know”, 115
as “we do not even know that we do not
know” , 115
wilful, 115
Ignorant entities
and overcomputationalization, 105–111
protecting, 110, 111
Implausibility
and abduction, 82
and irrelevance, 11–13
Indexes, 21, 22
Inference to the best explanation
and meta-syllogisms, 21
Inferential problems, 9, 11
Inferential view of abduction,
46–48
Information dissemination, 74
Information sensitivity
of abductive inferences, 18
Inkinen, S., 67
Inner-outer interaction
and proximal-distal dynamics, 38
Innovation ASAP, 86–88
Inputs and outputs
of inferences, 15–19
vs. premisses and conclusions, 9, 11, 15–19
Interdisciplinarity, 71, 72
International Assessment of Agricultural
Knowledge, Science and
Technology for Development
(AASTD), 81
inventio medii, 20
Irons, J., 113
Irrelevance
and abduction, 82
and implausibility, 11–13
J
Jordan, A.M., 96
K
Kakko, I., 67
Kant, I., 123
Karawajczyk, A., 99
Kari, L., 109
Kendon, V., 106
Khanna, I., 95, 99
Kiefer, A., 47
Kipnis, N., 67
Kirlik, A., 31, 36–38, 41
Kirsh, D., 36
Kitcher, P., 71
Knowledge in motion, 53–64
and eco-cognitive openness, 67, 69–73, 75
and scientiﬁc abduction, 67, 69–73, 75
Kourany, J., 116
Kowalski, R.A., 7, 132
Kuhn, T., 70
Kuipers, T.A., 7, 14, 132
Kurzban, R., 29
L
Lakatos, I., 70, 71, 81
Laland, K.N., 28, 108
Large database
and scientiﬁc method, 112–114
Lazonick, W., 73
Leo Chang, P., 95
Leuschner, A., 75
Levy, A., 21
Liberal arts education
and neoliberalism, 80
Light, R., 71, 72
Livio, M., 13
Lloyd, S., 109
Locked strategies, 111, 112
and autoimmunization, 59
and diagnosticablity, 54–64
and discoverability, 54–64
and eco-cognitive openness, 57–63
in natural and artiﬁcial cognition, 53–64
Logic
of abduction, 14–17
and the EC-model of abduction, 9, 11–13,
20–22
eco-cognitively disciplined, 14–17
Logic of abduction
and multimodality, 19
anthropomorphization of, 67

154
Index
Longino, H.E., 69–71
Longo, G., 63, 64, 107, 112–114
Loving ignorance, 115
Lucky discovery, 67
Lundberg, J.M., 86
M
Macleod, M., 43
Madaan, A., 110
Maglio, P., 36
Magnani, L., 3–10, 13, 14, 21, 30, 33, 35, 38,
39, 43, 48, 54–60, 63, 66, 68, 85,
106–111, 114, 122, 123, 132, 135
Ma, J., 82
Manipulative abduction, 30
and chance, 43
Marietti, S., 21
Marinov, M., 67
Marketing technoscientiﬁc results, 72–75
Marshall, B., 68
Martell, C.H., 107
Material culture, 110
Material validity, 8
Matlab, 106
Matsumura, N., 45
Maximization of changeability of inputs and
outputs, 18
Maximization of eco-cognitive openness, 5–8,
17
Mays, C., 117
Mcauliffe, W.H.B., 14
McCay-Peet, L., 67
McGrenere, J., 29, 41
McJohn, S.M., 14
Meheus, J., 7, 14, 132
Meredith, L., 90, 91
Middle terms, 22
Miller, D., 97
Mill, J.S., 69, 142
Minimality
and abduction, 140
Mithen, S., 110
Model-based abduction, 33
Moody, Z., 67
Moral epistemology, 87
Morality
and cognition, 121, 123, 124
in the predictability of human behavior,
121, 123, 124
and tracking human behavior, 121, 123,
124
Moreno, G.A., 83
Multidisciplinarity, 71, 72
Multimodality of logic, 19
N
Negative freedom
and positive freedom, 74
Neoliberalism, 73, 74, 89–91, 93, 98
and eco-cognitive openness, 99
and globalization, 90
and liberal arts education, 80
Nersessian, N.J., 43
Nonmonotonicity, 19
Norman, D.A., 29
O
Odling-Smee, F.J., 28, 108
Olver, I., 83
Optimization of eco-cognitive openness, 5–8,
17
Optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness,
14–19, 57, 67, 69–73, 75
and academia, 94–96, 98, 99
and corporations, 94–96, 98, 99
and creative abduction, 94–96, 98, 99
Oracles, 88
Orphan drugs, 95
Outsourcing of biomedical research, 87, 93, 94
Overcomputationalization
and ignorant entities, 105–111
P
Pancognitivism, 105–109
Pancomputationalism, 105–109
Paninformationalism, 105–109
Papadopoulos, G., 84
Park, W., 5
Pastore, L., 66
Pauli, W., 6
Paul, S.M., 84
Peirce, C.S., 4, 13, 14, 19, 21, 22, 27, 33, 34,
38, 42, 46, 47, 110, 134, 135, 137,
140–144, 146
Perinotti, P., 109
Peters, P.M., 67
Pharmaceutical research
and epistemic integrity, 88–94
Philanthropic groups
and science, 81
Philoponus, J., 20
Piccinini, G., 108, 109
Pietarinen, A., 14
Plato, 21

Index
155
Plausibility, 11
and relevance, 9, 11–13, 20–22
Poitras, G., 90, 91
Pons Asinorum, 20
Popper, K.R., 81, 97
Pors, K., 96
Positive freedom
and negative freedom, 74
Powers, W.T., 36
Precompetitive collaborations, 96–99
Predictability of human behavior
and morality, 121, 123, 124
Prediction
and tracking the external world, 118–120
Predictive processing theory (PP), 46–48
Pregnances, 107
Premisses and conclusions
vs. input and output, 9, 11
Priest, G., 7
Proctor, R.N., 80
Protecting ignorant entities, 110, 111
Provijn, D., 7
Publication bias, 75
R
Rabelais, F., 20
Rawls, J., 88, 89
Reading ahead, 55
Reilly, C., 86
Reinforcement learning, 61
Reinhart, C., 113, 114
Reiss, J., 71, 90, 94
Relevance, 11
and plausibility, 9, 11–13, 20–22
Religion
and science, 81
Research and Development (R&D), 72, 86, 91
Rogoff, K., 113, 114
Rosenman, M.F., 67
Rozenberg, G., 109
S
Saliences, 107
Salis, F., 43
Sax, M., 113
Scarantino, A., 29, 41, 42
Schiebinger, L., 80
Science maximizes abducibility, 14–19, 67
Scientiﬁc abduction
and knowledge in motion, 67, 69–73, 75
Scientiﬁc method
and big data, 112–114
and large database, 112–114
Scientiﬁc models
animal, 83
and animal models, 82
Sedol, L., 114
Sedooka, A., 67
Selective abduction, 92
Selective ignorance, 80, 92, 99
Semantic tableaux, 16
Serendipity, 67
and chance, 67, 68
Seth, A.K., 120
Shah, S., 94
Shelley, C., 83
Shkreli, M., 83
Shrader-Frechette, K., 89
Shulman, S., 75
Slowiczek, F., 67
Smart, P., 110
Social epistemology, 71
Spinello, R.A., 88
Spurious correlations
and big data, 63
Steffen, G., 67
Stepney, S., 106
Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act,
73
Steward, T.R., 30
Strategies
locked, 53–64, 111, 112
unlocked, 53–64
Stuart, M.T., 43
Syllogisms
of the ﬁrst ﬁgure, 22
of the second ﬁgure, 22
of the third ﬁgure, 22
Symbiotic model of innovation, 96–99
Symbols, 21, 22
Synechism, 109
T
Tartaret, P., 20
Technoscientiﬁc results
and market, 72–75
Tendero, P.-E., 114
Testability
and abduction, 140
Thagard, P., 68
Thom, R., 33, 107
Thompsen Primo, T., 62
Toms, E.G., 67
Tracking human behavior
and morality, 121, 123, 124

156
Index
Tracking the external world, 119, 120
and prediction, 118–120
through scientiﬁc knowledge, 120, 121
Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights, 84
Tragedy of the anticommons, 81, 97
Trajkovski, M., 22
Transdisciplinarity, 71, 72
Transepistemic abduction, 7
Trans-paradigmatic abduction, 6, 68
Tuana, N., 80, 81, 114
Turing, A.M., 39
Turner, E., 92
Turner, P., 40
U
Uberty, 5, 14, 46
Unlocked strategies
and diagnosticablity, 54–64
and discoverability, 54–64
and eco-cognitive openness, 57–63
in natural and artiﬁcial cognition, 53–64
V
Validity
material, 8
van Hilten, L., 75
van Benthem, J., 16
Vandi, C., 38
Van Dyck, M., 7
Variables
proximal and distal, 37
Verhoeven, L., 7
Vertical creativity, 61
Vicente, K.J., 30
Vortices
Cartesian, 12
W
Wagner, R.C., 106
Warren, R., 37, 68
Warren, W.H., 29
Watson, J., 67
Wells, A.J., 28, 29
Werner, K., 64, 65
Wheeler, M., 30
Whyte, K.P., 69
Wilful ignorance, 115
Williams, D., 117
Windsor, W.L., 32
Wolfram, S., 109
Woods, J., 6–10, 13, 14, 16, 17, 22, 68, 132,
138–140
Y
Yerkovich, S., 122
Z
Zardini, E., 12

