414
Nuclear Models
Nuclear Models
Brigitte Falkenburg
The atomic nucleus is made up of protons and neutrons, where the latter are made up
of quarks ( particle physics). It is a complex compound system which is held to-
gether by the strong interaction and may change its charge by radioactive processes
due to the (electro)weak interaction, giving rise to  nuclear ﬁssion and fusion. Due
to the complexity of the nuclei and their constituents (the nucleons, the proton and
neutron), there are several nuclear models. It is remarkable that quantum mechanical
and  semi-classical models co-exist with the quark  parton model of  quantum
ﬁeld theory. Quarks, see  Color Charge Degree of Freedom in Particle Physics;
Mixing and Oscillations of Particles; Particle Physics; Parton Model; QCD; QFT.
History
In the classical Rutherford model of the atom ( Rutherford atom; Bohr’s atom
model), the atomic nucleus is a classical point charge which generates a Coulomb
potential. Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937) ﬁrst found deviations from his scattering
formula ( large angle scattering) in 1909, when he made scattering experiments
with α particles and hydrogen. He interpreted them in his classical model as indica-
tions of nuclear force effects. At that time it was already clear that the atomic nucleus
must have a complex structure. In 1932, James Chadwick (1891–1974) discovered
the neutron. In the same year, Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976) proposed a dynamic
symmetry of the neutron and proton in view of the charge independence of the nu-
clear forces, giving rise to the concept of “isospin” [4]. In the 1930s, Carl Friedrich
von Weizs¨acker (1912–2007) developed the liquid droplet model. In the late 1940s,
Maria G¨oppert–Mayer (1906–1972), Hans D. Jensen (1907–1973) and Eugene
P. Wigner (1902–1995) developed the nuclear shell model [1, 2]. In the 1950s,
Robert Hofstadter (1915–1990) investigated the structure of heavy and light nuclei
by measuring their electromagnetic form factors in  scattering experiments [3].
In the 1960s and 1970s, the quark model of the proton and neutron was developed
in terms of group theory ( symmetry; particle physics, the quark–parton model
was developed on the basis of electron-nucleon scattering, and the quark model was
established ( large angle scattering, parton model, scattering experiments).
Liquid Droplet Model and Shell Model
The liquid droplet model and the shell model are based on the quantum mechanics
of a many-particle system. According to the liquid droplet model, a heavy nucleus

Nuclear Models
415
N
behaves like a Fermi gas. As  spin 1/2 particles, the protons and neutrons obey
Pauli’s principle, i.e., they are in different quantum states and behave independently.
According to the nuclear shell model, the nuclei form a periodic system of stable
and unstable energy states. In both models, there is a sum rule for the mass and
energy of the nucleus and its constituent parts. The nucleus mass differs from the
mass of its protons and neutrons by the binding energy.
Form Factors
The Rutherford model of the atom and Rutherford’s scattering formula are the ba-
sis for describing the nucleus as a non-pointlike structure in terms of form factors
[5]. In the classical model of scattering, an internal structure of the scattering cen-
ter is described by an extended charge distribution ρ(r) rather than a point charge.
In the non-relativistic case, the form factor is the Fourier transform of the charge
distribution. For the Coulomb potential, the classical description of the scattering
gives exactly the same result as the quantum mechanics of scattering. Based on
this exact  correspondence, the classical concept of the form factor could be ex-
tended to quantum mechanics. In this way, a semi-classical model of the nucleus is
obtained, according to which the charge distribution generated by a quantum me-
chanical many-particle system corresponds to a classical charge distribution. The
classical form factor describing the nucleus is then combined with the quantum
mechanics of scattering. According to this semi-classical model, a pointlike scatter-
ing center has a form factor 1 which does not depend on the momentum transfer of
the scattering. In  scattering experiments, pointlike particles give rise to “scaling”
behaviour, i.e., to a dimensionless effective cross section that does not depend on the
energy of the scattered probe particles, while non-pointlike structures or extended
charge distribution give rise to “scaling” violations, i.e., an energy dependence of
the dimensionless quantity extracted from a measured cross section.
The Quark–Parton Model
In high energy physics, the above semi-classical model was extended to the rela-
tivistic domain, giving rise to the “structure functions” of the proton and neutron.
The unexpected discovery of  large-angle scattering and “scaling behaviour” of
electron-nucleon scattering in 1968 gave rise to the quark–parton model of the pro-
ton and neutron [6]. The quark–parton model is a constituent model of the nucleons
proton and neutron. It gives sum rules for the mass-energy, momentum and spin of
the quarks and the proton or neutron. Scaling violations in certain kinematic do-
mains indicate that there are further nucleon constituents, namely quark-antiquark
pairs generated by virtual processes of quantum ﬁeld theory and gluons, i.e., the ex-
change particles of the strong interaction or quanta of  quantum chromodynamics.

416
Nuclear Models
Primary Literature
1. E. Fermi: Nuclear Physics. University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1950.
2. M. Goeppert-Mayer, J.H.D. Jensen: Elementary Theory of Nuclear Shell Structure. Wiley,
New York 1955.
3. R. Hofstadter: Electron Scattering and Nuclear Structure. Rev. Mod. Phys. 28 (1956), 214–59.
R. Hofstadter, F. Bumiller, M.R. Yearian: Electromagnetic Structure of the Proton and Neutron.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 30 (1958), 482–97.
Secondary Literature
4. A. Pais: Inward Bound. Clarendon Press, Oxford 1986, Chaps. 15 and 17.
5. B. Falkenburg: Probing Subatomic Structure and The Parts of Matter, in: Particle Metaphysics.
A Critical Account of Subatomic Reality. Springer, Heidelberg 2007, 125–61 and 246–56.
6. M. Riordan: The Hunting of the Quark. Simon & Schuster, New York 1987, Chaps. 6–8.

