Schr¨odinger Picture
689
S
that can be used to compute expectations about human experiences, but it cannot ra-
tionally be imagined to be real in sense that the waves in classical physical theories
could be imagined to be real.
Heisenberg suggested, later on, that the quantum state could be interpreted as an
“objective tendency” for an observational event to occur. There is no problem with
the idea that there is in the box a “state” that represents both a tendency for the cat
to be found completely dead when some person looks, and also an equally weighted
tendency for the cat to be found to be completely healthy, with no tendency for any
other possibility to be found.
Because science is regarded as a cooperative human endeavour, cats are not in-
cluded among the “we” who “can tell others what we have done and what we have
learned”.
The rational coherence of Bohr’s position rest squarely on his premise that
the purpose of science is to provide us with useful practical tools, not to explain
essences. Schr¨odinger’s cat highlights this fact.
Literature
1. E. Schr¨odinger: Die Gegenw¨artige Situation in der Quantummechanik. Naturwissenschaften
23, 807–812, 823–849 (November 1935)
2. N. Bohr: Atomic theory and the description of nature (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
1934)
3. N. Bohr: Atomic physics and human knowledge (Wiley, New York 1959)
Schr¨odinger Picture
Marianne Breinig
In non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the state of a physical system at a ﬁxed time
t0 is deﬁned by specifying a ket |ψ(t0)⟩belonging to the space ε. ε is a complex,
separable  Hilbert space, a complex linear vector space in which an inner product
is deﬁned and which possesses a countable,  orthonormal basis. The vectors in
such a space have the properties mathematical objects must have in order to be
capable of describing a quantum system.
In the Schr¨odinger picture the time evolution of the state vector is governed by
the  Schr¨odinger equation,
(iℏ∂/∂t)|ψ(t)⟩= H(t)|ψ(t)⟩,
which is a recipe for calculating |ψ(t)⟩when |ψ(t0)⟩is known. The Schr¨odinger
equation is linear. The correspondencebetween |ψ(t)⟩and |ψ(t0)⟩is therefore linear.

690
Selection Rules
There exists a linear operator that transforms |ψ(t0)⟩into |ψ(t)⟩.
|ψ(t)⟩= U(t, t0)|ψ(t0)⟩.
The operator U(t, t0) is called the evolution operator. The evolution operator is
a  unitary operator. If H does not explicitly depend on time, then U(t, t0) =
exp(−iH(t–t0)/ℏ). If |ψ(t0)⟩is expanded in terms of eigenstates of H, i.e. if
|ψ(t0)⟩= %n an(t0)|En⟩,
where H|En⟩= En|En⟩, then
|ψ(t)⟩=

n
an(t0) exp(−iEn(t −t0)/ℏ)|En⟩=

n
an(t) |En⟩.
Time evolution is a unitary transformation. All unitary transformations are changes
of representation. We distinguish between active and passive unitary transforma-
tions. Active transformation change all state vectors while leaving the basis vectors
unchanged.  Operators are deﬁned through their action on the basis vectors and
therefore do not change under an active transformation. Passive transformations
change the basis vectors and therefore change the operators, but leave the state vec-
tors
unchanged.
In the Schr¨odinger picture the time evolution of a physical system is a contin-
uous, active unitary transformation. The state vector is transformed, it evolves in
time. The basis vectors are not changing. All operators are constant in time, unless
they contain time explicitly. The Schr¨odinger equation describes the evolution of a
physical system in a particular representation.
Primary Literature
1. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, F. Lalo¨e: Quantum Mechanics, Volume One (Wiley, New York,
1977, 312–314)
Selection Rules
Klaus Hentschel
According to Niels Bohr’s (1885–1962)  Bohr’s atomic model, spectral lines oc-
cur when  electrons perform  quantum jumps between stable orbits around the
positively charged nucleus. For simple atoms like hydrogen and helium, Bohr’s

