Observable
425
O
Primary Literature
1. K. Popper: Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics (Routledge, London 1982, 126)
2. W. Heisenberg: Physics and Philosophy – The Revolution in Modern Science (Harper, New
York 1958, 54–5)
3. S. McCall: A Model of the Universe (Clarendon, Oxford 1994, 86–92)
Secondary Literature
4. S. McCall: QM and STR. Philosophy of Science (Proceedings) 67, S535–48 (2000)
5. See, for example, J. Baggott: The Meaning of Quantum Theory (Oxford University Press, Oxford
1992, 120–27, 141)
Observable
Paul Busch and Pekka Lahti
The term observable has become the standard name in quantum mechanics for what
used to be called physical quantity or measurable quantity in classical physics. This
term derives from observable quantity (“beobachtbare Gr¨osse”), which was used by
Werner Heisenberg in his groundbreaking work on  matrix mechanics [1] to em-
phasize that the meaning of a physical quantity must be speciﬁed by means of an
operational deﬁnition. Together with a state ( states in quantum mechanics), an ob-
servable determines the probabilities of the possible outcomes of a measurement of
that observable on the quantum system prepared in the given state. Conversely, ob-
servables are identiﬁed by the totalities of their measurement outcome probabilities.
Examples of observables in quantum mechanics are position, velocity, momentum,
angular momentum, spin, and energy.  Spin; Stern–Gerlach experiment; Vector
model.
In elementary quantum mechanics, the observables of a physical system are rep-
resented by, and identiﬁed with, selfadjoint operators A acting in the  Hilbert
space H associated with the system. For any pure states of the system ( states,
pure and mixed), represented by a unit vector ψ ∈H, the probability pA
ψ(X) that a
measurement of A leads to a result in a (Borel) set X ⊂R is given by the inner prod-
uct of ψ with EA(X)ψ, that is, pA
ψ(X) = ⟨ψ|EA(X)ψ⟩; here EA(X) is the spectral
projection of A associated with the set X, and the map X →EA(X) is called the
spectral measure of A. The probability measures pA
ψ, with ψ varying over all pos-
sible pure states of the system, determine the observable A. The expectation, or av-
erage

x dpA
ψ(x), of the measurement outcome distribution of an observable A in a
state ψ can be expressed as ⟨ψ|Aψ⟩whenever ψ is in the domain of the operator A.

426
Observable
The statistical meaning of quantum observables was ﬁrst recognized by Max
Born [2] who proposed that, in the position representation, the absolute square |ψ|2
of the ‘ wave function’ ψ gives the probability density of observing a quantum
object at a given point ( Born rule). This idea was systematically elaborated by
John von Neumann [3] who formulated and proved the spectral theorem for selfad-
joint (hypermaximal hermitian) operators and applied it to obtain the interpretation
of expectations as statistical averages given above.
In his seminal paper on the uncertainty relations [4] Werner Heisenberg argued,
among other things, that
all concepts which can be used in classical theory for the description of a mechanical system
can also be deﬁned exactly for atomic processes in analogy to classical concepts.
This statement can be substantiated in precise form by virtue of the mathematical
fact that for any value x in the spectrum of a selfadjoint operator A and for each
ϵ > 0 there is a state ψ such that pA
ψ((x −ϵ, x + ϵ)) = 1. In particular, if A has
an eigenvalue a, that is, there is a state ψ such that Aψ = aψ, then in such an
eigenstate of A a measurement of A is certain to yield the value a. Such a situation
is commonly described by saying that observable A has a deﬁnite value if the state
of the system is an eigenstate of A. The generic situation in quantum mechanics,
however, is that most observables have no deﬁnite value in a given pure state.
It is a basic feature of quantum mechanics that there are pairs of observables,
such as position and momentum, which do not commute. This fact, which lies at the
heart of the  complementarity principle and  Heisenberg uncertainty relation,
reﬂects a fundamental limitation on the possibilities of assigning deﬁnite values to
observables and to the possibilities of measurements in the quantum world. For ex-
ample, among the pairs of observables with discrete spectra there are those that do
not commute, and this implies that they do not share a complete system of eigen-
vectors. Then A has eigenstates that are not eigenstates of B. Moreover, according
to a theorem due to von Neumann [5], observables A, B are jointly measurable, that
is, they have a joint observable (see below), if and only if they commute.
The idea of identifying an observable (with real values) with the totality of the
outcome probabilities in a measurement does not single out spectral measures, but
is exhausted by the wider class of (real) positive operator (valued) measures, or
semispectral measures. A positive operator measure is a map E : X →E(X) that
assigns to every (Borel) subset X of R a positive operator E(X) in such a way
that for every pure state ψ the map X →pE
ψ(X) := ⟨ψ|E(X)ψ⟩is a probability
measure. This deﬁnition extends readily to cases where the measurement outcomes
are represented as elements of Rn or more general sets. Excellent expositions of the
deﬁnition and properties of positive operator measures can be found, e.g., in [8,9].
Observables represented by positive operator measures which are not projection
valued are referred to as generalized observables, or unsharp observables, while
spectral measures and generally all projection valued measures are called standard,
or sharp observables. Commonly used acronyms for positive operator measures are
 POVM or POM.

Observable
427
O
The generalized representation of observables as positive operator measures was
discovered by several authors in the 1960s (e.g., [6, 7, 10–13]) and has by now
become a standard element of quantum mechanics. It has greatly advanced the math-
ematical coherence and conceptual clarity of the theory. For instance, the problem
of the (approximate) joint measurability of noncommuting observables such as po-
sition and momentum and the relevance of the  Heisenberg uncertainty relations
to this question is now fully understood; for a survey, see, e.g. [14].
Two (real) POMs E, F are jointly measurable if and only if there is a third POM,
G, deﬁned on the (Borel) subsets of R2, which has E and F as marginals, that is,
E(X) = G(X×R) and F(Y) = G(R×Y) for all (Borel) subsets X, Y of R. For the
joint measurability of two unsharp observables E, F, their mutual commutativity
is sufﬁcient but not necessary. If one of the observables is sharp, then the joint
measurability implies commutativity.
As two noncommuting standard observables are never jointly measurable, one
can only try to approximate them (in a suitable sense) by some other observables
which in turn may be jointly measurable. This turns out indeed to be possible as has
been well demonstrated in the cases of position and momentum or spin components.
Finally, the introduction of POMs has widely increased the applicability of quan-
tum mechanics in the description of realistic experiments (see, e.g., [15, 16]), and
POMs are now in full use also in the relatively new ﬁelds of  quantum computa-
tion and information, see, e.g., [17,18]. See also  PVOM; Rigged Hilbert Spaces;
Superselection Rules; Wave function collapse.
Primary Literature
1. Heisenberg, W.:
¨Uber quantentheoretische Umdeutung kinematischer und mechanischer
Beziehungen. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 33 879-893 (1925).
2. Born, M.: Zur Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorg¨ange. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 37, 863-867 (1926).
3. von Neumann, J.: Mathematische Begr¨undung der Quantenmechanik. G¨ottinger Nachrichten
1–57 (1927). Wahrscheinlichkeitstheoretischer Aufbau der Quantenmechanik. G¨ottinger
Nachrichten 245–272 (1927). Allgemeine Eigenwerttheorie Hermitescher Funktionalopera-
toren, Mathematische Annalen 102, 49–131 (1929). This all is summarized in his book
Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer, Berlin 1932, 2nd ed. 1996); En-
glish translation (by R. Beyer): Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton
University Press, Princeton 1955).
4. Heisenberg, W.: ¨Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und
Mechanik. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 43, 172–198 (1927).
5. von Neumann, J.: ¨Uber Funktionen von Funktionaloperatoren. Annals of Mathematics 32,
191–226 (1931).
6. Ludwig, G.: Versuch einer axiomatischen Grundlegung der Quantenmechanik und allge-
meinerer physikalischer Theorien. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 181 233–260 (1964).
7. Davies, E.B., J.T. Lewis: An Operational Approach to Quantum Probability. Communication
in Mathematical Physics 17, 239–260 (1970).

428
One- and Two-Photon Interference
Secondary Literature
8. Davies, E.B.: Quantum Theory of Opens Systems (Academic, New York 1976).
9. Berberian, S.K.: Notes on Spectral Theory (D. van Nostrand, Princeton 1966).
10. Helstrom, C.W.: Quantum Detection and Estimation Theory (Academic, New York 1976).
11. Holevo, A.S.: Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory (North Holland,
Amsterdam 1982).
12. Ludwig, G.: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Springer, Berlin 1983).
13. Kraus, K.: States, Effects, and Operations (Springer, Berlin 1983).
14. Busch, P., T. Heinonen, P. Lahti: Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle, Physics Reports 452
(2007) 155–176.
15. Busch, P., M. Grabowski, P. Lahti: Operational Quantum Physics, Springer, LNP m31, 1995,
2nd Corrected Printing 1997.
16. Peres, A.: Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods (Kluwer, Dordrecht 1993).
17. Nielsen, M.A., I.L.Chuang: Quantum Computation and Quantum Information (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 2000).
18. Stenholm, S., K.-A. Suominen: Quantum Approach to Information (Wiley, New York 2005).
One- and Two-Photon Interference
Paul G. Kwiat
Taylor’s version of Young’s double-slit experiment with an attenuated light source is
often hailed as one of the key experiments demonstrating quantum mechanical inter-
ference [1]. Although it would be incorrect to say it is not quantum – all optical inter-
ference effects have their origin at the quantum level – it is now generally accepted
that such experiments are not non-classical. They usually allow a semi-classical
description in which the detector is treated quantum mechanically, but the ﬁeld is
treated classically. In fact, such descriptions can also account for a host of other
“quantum” phenomena, such as resonance ﬂuorescence and the photoelectric effect
[2,3]. For single-photon interference, one can readily convert from the classical ﬁeld
to the quantum mechanical description simply by relating the probability of a photon
being detected at a given location and time to the intensity of the classical ﬁeld.
The need for a quantum description of the light – the need for “photons” ( light
quantum) – arises when one considers higher-order photon statistics, e.g., involving
coincidences between 2 or more detectors. In fact, this is now the method of choice
for characterizing would-be single-photon sources [4]: send the light onto a beam-
splitter and measure the coincidence rate between the detectors in each output. For
a true single-photon input – formally described as an n = 1 Fock number state –
the coincidence rate will fall to zero (at equal detection times), a very non-classical
effect (a classical ﬁeld would necessarily cause detections in both output ports).1
1 More precisely, one measures g(2)(0), the second-order correlation function, equal to the number
of coincidence counts in a given time interval, divided by the product of the singles counts (at the
two detectors) in that interval. For an n-photon Fock state, g(2)(0) = 1–1/n.

