470
Pauli Spin Matrices
systems with spin S > 0, whereas the normal Zeeman effect governs atoms with
a total S = 0, the Paschen–Back effect could be understood as a decoupling of S
and orbital angular momentum L, since the inﬂuence of the total spin becomes
neglectable for diminishing spin-orbit coupling. (See also  Russell–Saunders cou-
pling,  jj-coupling, Stern–Gerlach experiment and  vector model).
Literature
1. F. Paschen, E. Back: Normale und anomale Zeemaneffekte. Annalen der Physik (4th ser.), 39,
897–932; 40, 960–970 (1912)
2. F. Paschen, E. Back: Liniengruppen magnetisch vervollst¨andigt. Physica 1, 261–273 (1921)
3. G. Herzberg: Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure (Dover, New York 1944, 112ff)
Pauli Exclusion Principle
See  exclusion principle.
Pauli Spin Matrices
Roderich Tumulka
The Pauli spin matrices are the following 3 complex 2 × 2 matrices:
σx =
0 1
1 0

,
σy =
0 −i
i 0

,
σz =
1 0
0 −1

.
(1)
These matrices represent the spin observables along the x- (respective y- and z-)axis
of physical 3-space for a spin- 1
2 particle, relative to an  orthonormal basis of spin
space consisting of eigenvectors of σz. (Spin observables are measured, e.g., in the
 Stern–Gerlach experiment.) The spin observable along any direction in physical
3-space deﬁned by the unit vector n = (nx, ny, nz) is given, relative to the same
basis, by
σn = nx σx + ny σy + nz σz = n · σ
(2)
with σ = (σx, σy, σz). The spin observable is related to the angular momentum
observable Jn along n according to
Jn = ℏ
2 σn + Ln,
(3)

Pauli Spin Matrices
471
P
where Ln = n · L is the n-component of the orbit angular momentum operator
L = q × p.  Spin; Stern–Gerlach experiment; Vector model.
The Pauli spin matrices, named after Wolfgang Pauli (1900–1958), are self-
adjoint (= Hermitian) and unitary. Each of them (as well as σn for every unit vector
n) has trace equal to zero, determinant equal to −1, and eigenvalues 1 and −1.
The Pauli matrices belong to the fundamental structure of spin space, as spin
space is deﬁned to be a 2-dimensional complex vector space Hspin ∼= C2 coupled to
physical 3-space by a law specifying how the elements of spin space transform under
rotations. The law involves the Pauli matrices and asserts that the rotation through
the angle ϕ ∈R about the axis spanned by the unit vector n ∈R3 transforms the
vector ψ ∈Hspin from spin space into
ψ′ = ±e−(i/2)ϕσnψ .
(4)
(Exponentiation of a matrix can be deﬁned by means of the power series ex =
 xk/k!.) As a consequence, for the rotation through an inﬁnitesimal angle δϕ one
can write, neglecting higher order terms in δϕ,
ψ′ = ψ −i
2δϕ σn ψ .
(5)
From this equation one can read off that the matrix −(i/2)σn (acting on ψ) repre-
sents the rate of change of ψ per angle when rotating around n.
Expressing these facts in a technical way, spin space is endowed with an ir-
reducible projective representation of the rotation group SO(3) (the set of all
orthogonal real 3 × 3 matrices with determinant 1), called the “spin- 1
2 represen-
tation.” Using the fact that SO(3) can be “unfolded” yielding the group SU(2) (the
set of all unitary complex 2×2 matrices with determinant 1), the irreducible projec-
tive representation of SO(3) can be translated into an irreducible representation
of SU(2), in fact the natural representation on C2 deﬁned by matrix multipli-
cation. In this translation, the rotation by ϕ about n corresponds to the matrix
±e−(i/2)ϕσn ∈SU(2), where the sign ambiguity arises from the “unfolding.” The
Lie algebra su(2) associated with the Lie group SU(2) consists of the inﬁnitesimal
generators of SU(2), and thus of all matrices of the form −(i/2)ϕσn, and that is
the 3-dimensional real vector space of all traceless skew-adjoint 2 × 2 matrices, of
which iσx, iσy, iσz form a basis.
The Pauli matrices satisfy the commutation relations
[σi, σj] = 2iσk
(6)
if ijk is any cyclic permutation of xyz. Except for the factor 2, these relations are the
same as those of any angular momentum operators; the reason is that these are
the deﬁning relations of the Lie algebra su(2), which is also the Lie algebra of
the rotation group SO(3), and thus are relations characteristic of rotations in
physical 3-space.

472
Photoelectric Effect
Higher spins: For spin-s particles, s ∈1
2Z, the matrices analogous to the Pauli
spin matrices are 3 complex (2s + 1) × (2s + 1) matrices. Higher dimensions: If
physical space had dimension d instead of 3, there would be d(d −1)/2 Pauli spin
matrices, as that number is the dimension of the rotation group SO(d).
Primary Literature
1. W. Pauli: Zur Quantenmechanik des magnetischen Elektrons. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 43, 601–
625 (1927)
Secondary Literature
2. R. U. Sexl, H. K. Urbantke: Relativity, Groups, Particles. (Springer-Verlag, New York, 2001)
Photoelectric Effect
Bruce R. Wheaton
When electromagnetic radiation strikes a metal,  electrons are released. This
simple statement hides a considerable history stretching back to Galvani and not
plumbed entirely to this day.
In its initial form, the effect was discovered by Heinrich Hertz (1857–94) during
his path-breaking corroboration of Maxwell’s laws in 1887. He was using spark-
discharges in one part of his laboratory in Karlsruhe to stimulate other, much weaker
ones, in another. To see the weaker ones he began to shield his eyes from the bright
primary spark, then, inspired, realized that the length of the weak ones diminished
when the blue primary spark light failed to reach the secondary electrodes. He called
it “a peculiar and surprising property of the spark,” showed by elimination that the
ultra-violet light of the primary eased the secondary sparks from the metal elec-
trodes, and put the matter out for others to investigate because it deterred him from
his Maxwellian objective.
Many took up the challenge with telling results. Wilhelm Hallwachs (1859–1922)
in Dresden gave it its modern form when he found that ultra-violet light from almost
any source will discharge a negatively-charged zinc plate. Augusto Righi (1850–
1920) in Padua named the device a “coppia fotoelettrica.” By 1889 both Hallwachs
and Righi showed that a neutral plate will acquire a positive charge from the action.
One must note here that the concept of the “electron” did not exist except in a few
prescient minds at the time, so the active mechanism remained unclear.

