Orthonormal Basis
447
O
governing their interaction are given by von Neumann. The causal connections be-
tween “potentialities for psychologically described events to occur” and such events
themselves are easier to comprehend and describe than causal connections between
the corresponding features of classical physics. For, both sides of the duality are
conceptually more like “ideas” than like “rocks”.
Primary Literature
1. E. Wigner: The Problem of Measurement. American Journal of Physics 31, 6–15 (1963)
2. J. Von Neumann: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantnmechanik (Springer, Berlin 1932)
(Translated as Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University Press,
1955)
3. N. Bohr: Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
UK 1961, 22–23)
4. E. Wigner: Remarks on the Mind-Body Problem, in The Scientist Speculates, I. J. Good, ed.
(Heinemann, London; Basic Books, New York 1962, 284–302)
Secondary Literature
5. N. Bohr: Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge (Wiley, New York 1958)
Orthonormal Basis
Roderich Tumulka
Orthonormal basis (plural orthonormal bases): a set B of vectors in Euclidean or
Hilbert space such that every vector can be written as a (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) linear
combination of vectors from B, while all vectors from B have length 1 and any two
of them are orthogonal. The number of vectors in B then equals the dimension of
the space, which can be ﬁnite or inﬁnite.
In the inﬁnite-dimensional  Hilbert spaces considered in quantum physics, the
appropriate sense of linear combination is that of a convergent series
ψ =
∞

n=1
cn φn,
(1)
where B = {φ1, φ2, . . .} and cn are complex coefﬁcients, called the expansion
coefﬁcients of ψ relative to B. (A basis in the sense that linear combinations are

448
Orthonormal Basis
convergent series is called a Schauder basis, whereas a basis in the sense that lin-
ear combinations can only involve ﬁnitely many terms is a called a Hamel basis.)
Thus, an orthonormal basis in (separable) Hilbert space is a set B = {φ1, φ2, . . .} of
vectors such that every vector ψ can be written in the form (1), and
⟨φn|φm⟩= δnm,
(2)
where ⟨·|·⟩is the scalar product in Hilbert space, δnm = 1 if n = m and δnm = 0
otherwise.
A set of vectors that satisﬁes (2) but does not permit us to represent every vec-
tor in the form (1) is called an orthonormal set or orthonormal sequence; it is an
orthonormal basis of a closed subspace. The word “orthonormal” means pairwise
orthogonal (⟨φn|φm⟩= 0 for all n ̸= m) and normalized (⟨φn|φn⟩= 1 for all n).
A set of vectors that permits us to represent every vector ψ in the form (1) is called
a complete set; if for every ψ the coefﬁcients cn are unique then the set is called a
basis, but not orthonormal if it does not satisfy (2). A complete orthonormal set is
the same as an orthonormal basis.
If, relative to an orthonormal basis {φ1, φ2, . . .}, ψ has expansion coefﬁcients
cn – as expressed in (1) – and ψ′ has expansion coefﬁcients c′
n then
⟨ψ|ψ′⟩=
∞

n=1
c∗
n c′
n ,
(3)
where ∗denotes the  complex conjugate. The coefﬁcients can be computed ac-
cording to
cn = ⟨φn|ψ⟩.
(4)
Just as a vector ψ is represented, relative to an orthonormal basis, by a se-
quence of numbers cn, an  operator T is represented by an (inﬁnite) matrix
Tnm = ⟨φn|T φm⟩. An operator T is diagonal in an orthonormal basis if Tnm = 0
for n ̸= m. A self-adjoint operator T can be diagonalized (i.e., an orthonormal
basis can be found in which T is diagonal) if and only if T has pure point spec-
trum. To diagonalize a self-adjoint operator T with continuous spectrum, one needs
the concept of a generalized orthonormal basis: in this case, the basis elements
are themselves not contained in the Hilbert space. For example, the generalized
orthonormal basis diagonalizing the quantum-mechanical position operator on the
Hilbert space L2(R) of square-integrable functions consists of Dirac delta functions,
not contained in L2(R), and the generalized orthonormal basis diagonalizing the
momentum operator consists of plane waves eikx, which are not square-integrable
either. A generalized orthonormal basis can be deﬁned rigorously as a unitary iso-
morphism between the given Hilbert space and L2(, μ), where  is the index set
of the generalized basis ( = R in the examples above), and μ is a measure on 
(the Lebesgue volume measure in the examples above).

Orthonormal Basis
449
O
Less frequently in quantum physics, one has to deal with Hilbert spaces of un-
countable dimension, so-called non-separable Hilbert spaces. For such spaces, an
orthonormal basis should be understood as a set B of vectors that is orthonormal
(i.e., ⟨φ|φ⟩= 1 and ⟨φ|χ⟩= 0 for every φ, χ ∈B with φ ̸= χ) and that is com-
plete in the sense that for every vector ψ there exist φ1, φ2, . . . ∈B such that ψ can
be written as a countable linear combination of φ1, φ2, . . . as in (1). One should dis-
tinguish the concept of an orthonormal basis in a non-separable Hilbert space from
that of a generalized orthonormal basis in a separable Hilbert space.

