744
States, Pure and Mixed, and Their Representations
replaced by Schr¨odinger’s wave equation ( wave mechanics; Schr¨odinger equa-
tion). But the notion of permitted states lingered on, with the stationary solutions
(energy eigenstates) of Schr¨odinger’s equation taking on the role of the “permit-
ted” orbits of the old theory. That notion is quite obsolete. There are now plenty of
experiments [2–4] that demonstrate the physical signiﬁcance of the nonstationary
solutions to Schr¨odinger’s equation, which are therefore every bit as “permitted” as
are the stationary solutions.
Literature
1. L. E. Ballentine: Quantum Mechanics – A Modern Development (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
1998) – a general reference on quantum states
2. J. A. Yeazell, C. R. Stroud: Observation of spatially localized atomic electron wave packets.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1494 (1998)
3. L. Marmet, H. Held, G. Raithel, J. A. Yeazell, H. Walter: Observation of Quasi–Landau wave
packets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3779 (1994)
4. J. Wals, H. H. Fielding, J. F. Christian, L. C. Snoek, W. J. van den Zande, H. B. van Linden van
den Heuvell: Observation of Rydberg wave packet dynamics in a Coulombic and magnetic ﬁeld.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3783 (1994)
States, Pure and Mixed,
and Their Representations
Leslie E. Ballentine
The concept of state in quantum mechanics, considered abstractly, is a means of cal-
culating probabilities and averages for all  observables. States can be given many
different mathematical representations. The most familiar are the  wave function
(x) and the state vector |⟩in  Hilbert space, but these describe only pure
states. A general quantum state is represented by a  state operator, ρ, (also called a
 statistical operator, or  a density matrix), which is a positive Hermitian operator
with unit trace. That is to say, it must satisfy the three conditions,
Trρ = 1 , ρ = ρ† , ⟨u|ρ|u⟩⩾0 for all vectors |u⟩.
(1)
The average value of an observable, represented by the operator A, is given by ⟨A⟩=
Tr(ρA).  Gleason’s theorem shows that, under broad but non-trivial conditions,
this state operator provides the most general means of introducing a probability
measure in Hilbert space. The distinction between “pure case” (reiner Fall) and
“mixed case” (Gemenge) was introduced by Hermann Weyl (1885–1955) [1].
A pure state with state vector |ψ⟩is obtained if ρ is a one-dimensional projection
operator, ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|, in which case the expression for the average reduces to

States, Pure and Mixed, and Their Representations
745
S
⟨A⟩= ⟨|A|⟩. A pure state operator can be identiﬁed by a variety of mathematical
conditions [2]. The most useful is that, in addition to (1), it also satisﬁes Tr(ρ2) = 1.
The set of all operators satisfying (1) is a convex set, with the pure states being the
extremal members.
Non-pure states are commonly called  mixed states because they can be repre-
sented as convex combinations of pure states (which need not be orthogonal),
ρ =

i
wi|i⟩⟨i| , 0 ⩽wi ⩽1.
(2)
However, this representation of ρ as a mixture of pure states cannot be taken lit-
erally, since every non-pure state has inﬁnitely many different representations as a
mixture of the form (2). These have been fully classiﬁed [3].
The distinction between pure and mixed states should not be confused with the
distinction between eigenstates and superpositions. Let A be a Hermitian opera-
tor that represents some physical observable. Corresponding to A there is a set of
solutions to the equation
A|ai⟩= ai|ai⟩
(3)
The vectors {|ai⟩} are called the eigenvectors of the operator A, and the real numbers
{ai} are called the eigenvalues. Eigenvectors are mathematically special because the
action of the operator A leaves their direction unchanged, and only multiplies them
by the eigenvalue. According to the fundamental postulates of quantum mechanics,
the eigenvalues are the possible values of the observable, and for the state ρ the
probability of obtaining the particular value ai in a measurement of the observable
will be ⟨ai|ρ|ai⟩. (We assume, for simplicity, that the set of eigenvalues is discrete,
and that the eigenvectors are normalized so that ⟨ai|ai⟩= 1.)
Now suppose that the state operator ρ is chosen to be the projection operator
ρ = |ai⟩⟨ai⟩, or equivalently, that the state vector is |ψ⟩= |ai⟩. Evidently, the
measurement will yield the value ai with probability one. Such a state is called an
eigenstate of the observable A. Conversely [4], if the measurement yields the value
ai with probability one, and if the set of eigenvalues is nondegenerate (ai ̸= aj for
i ̸= j), then the state must be the eigenstate represented by the vector |ai⟩.
A superposition state vector can be formed as a linear combination of
eigenvectors,
|ψ⟩=

i
ci|ai⟩
(4)
This is sometimes, misleadingly, refered to as a ‘mixture’ of the eigenstates. Such
terminology is to be deplored, since |ψ⟩is a pure state. The term ‘mixture’ should
be reserved for state operators of the form (2).
The state operator can be given a matrix representation (the density matrix) by
choosing a particular set of basis vectors, the “position” and “momentum” repre-
sentations being common examples. By writing the “position” density matrix as
⟨q−1
2x|ρ|q+ 1
2x⟩, and Fourier transforming with respect to the difference variable x
while keeping the centroidal variable q constant, we obtain the Wigner function

746
Stern–Gerlach Experiment
( Wigner distribution), which is a representation of the state operator that is in-
termediate between the position and momentum representations, and bears a partial
similarity to a classical phase space distribution.
Literature
1. H. Weyl: Quantenmechanik und Gruppentheorie. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 46, 1–46 (1927)
2. L. E. Ballentine: Quantum Mechanics – A Modern Development (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
1998, Sect. 2.3)
3. L. P. Hughston, R. Jozsa, W. K. Wooters: A Complete Classiﬁcation of Quantum Ensembles
having a given Density Matrix. Phys. Lett. A 183, 14 (1993)
4. Ref. [2], Sect. 2.4.
State Operator
The most general representation of a quantum state. See the articles States, Pure
and Mixed, and their Representations and States in Quantum Mechanics. The terms
 statistical operator and  density matrix are also used.
Statistical Operator
An alternative term for the  state operator, used mainly in quantum statistical
mechanics.
Stern–Gerlach Experiment
Friedel Weinert
The Stern–Gerlach experiments (SG experiments) were prepared and carried out by
Otto Stern (1888–1969) and his junior collaborator Walther Gerlach (1889–1979)
between 1921 and 1925. [1–6] According to modern textbook interpretations the
experiments established experimentally the so-called  quantization of angular mo-
mentum and therefore the discreteness of the magnetic moment of atomic particles
 Spin; Vector model. This phenomenon is known as ‘space quantization’ (Rich-
tungsquantelung) of angular momentum. As indicated below, the actual historical

