Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering
Vishal Santosh Sharma · 
Uday Shanker Dixit · Ajay Gupta · 
Rajeev Verma · Varun Sharma   Editors
Machining 
and Additive 
Manufacturing
Select Proceedings of CPIE 2023

Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering 
Series Editors 
Fakher Chaari, National School of Engineers, University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia 
Francesco Gherardini 
, Dipartimento di Ingegneria “Enzo Ferrari”, Università di 
Modena e Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy 
Vitalii Ivanov, Department of Manufacturing Engineering, Machines and Tools, 
Sumy State University, Sumy, Ukraine 
Mohamed Haddar, National School of Engineers of Sfax (ENIS), Sfax, Tunisia 
Editorial Board 
Francisco Cavas-Martínez 
, Departamento de Estructuras, Construcción y 
Expresión Gráﬁca Universidad Politécnica de Cartagena, Cartagena, Murcia, Spain 
Francesca di Mare, Institute of Energy Technology, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 
Bochum, Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germany 
Young W. Kwon, Department of Manufacturing Engineering and Aerospace 
Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering and Applied Science, Monterey, CA, 
USA 
Justyna Trojanowska, Poznan University of Technology, Poznan, Poland 
Jinyang Xu, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai, China

Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering (LNME) publishes the latest develop-
ments in Mechanical Engineering—quickly, informally and with high quality. 
Original research reported in proceedings and post-proceedings represents the core of 
LNME. Volumes published in LNME embrace all aspects, subﬁelds and new 
challenges of mechanical engineering. 
To submit a proposal or request further information, please contact the Springer 
Editor of your location: 
Europe, USA, Africa: Leontina Di Cecco at Leontina.dicecco@springer.com 
China: Ella Zhang at ella.zhang@springer.com 
India: Priya Vyas at priya.vyas@springer.com 
Rest of Asia, Australia, New Zealand: Swati Meherishi 
at swati.meherishi@springer.com 
Topics in the series include: 
. Engineering Design 
. Machinery and Machine Elements 
. Mechanical Structures and Stress Analysis 
. Automotive Engineering 
. Engine Technology 
. Aerospace Technology and Astronautics 
. Nanotechnology and Microengineering 
. Control, Robotics, Mechatronics 
. MEMS 
. Theoretical and Applied Mechanics 
. Dynamical Systems, Control 
. Fluid Mechanics 
. Engineering Thermodynamics, Heat and Mass Transfer 
. Manufacturing 
. Precision Engineering, Instrumentation, Measurement 
. Materials Engineering 
. Tribology and Surface Technology 
Indexed by SCOPUS, EI Compendex, and INSPEC. 
All books published in the series are evaluated by Web of Science for the Conference 
Proceedings Citation Index (CPCI). 
To submit a proposal for a monograph, please check our Springer Tracts in 
Mechanical Engineering at https://link.springer.com/bookseries/11693.

Vishal Santosh Sharma · Uday Shanker Dixit · 
Ajay Gupta · Rajeev Verma · Varun Sharma 
Editors 
Machining and Additive 
Manufacturing 
Select Proceedings of CPIE 2023

Editors 
Vishal Santosh Sharma 
School of Mechanical, Industrial 
and Aeronautical Engineering 
University of the Witwatersrand 
Johannesburg, South Africa 
Ajay Gupta 
Department of Industrial and Production 
Engineering 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute 
of Technology 
Jalandhar, Punjab, India 
Varun Sharma 
Department of Industrial and Production 
Engineering 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute 
of Technology 
Jalandhar, Punjab, India 
Uday Shanker Dixit 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati 
North Guwahati, Assam, India 
Rajeev Verma 
Department of Industrial and Production 
Engineering 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute 
of Technology 
Jalandhar, Punjab, India 
ISSN 2195-4356
ISSN 2195-4364 (electronic) 
Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering 
ISBN 978-981-99-6093-4
ISBN 978-981-99-6094-1 (eBook) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1 
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse 
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar 
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. 
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. 
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721, 
Singapore 
Paper in this product is recyclable.

Preface 
It gives immense pleasure and satisfaction to present the select proceedings from 
CPIE-2023, titled Machining and Additive Manufacturing, before the readers. This 
volume brings together a diverse range of research papers presented at the conference, 
highlighting the latest advancements and innovations in the ﬁeld of manufacturing. 
Machining and Additive Manufacturing has always been at the forefront of tech-
nological advancements, shaping industries and driving progress in various sectors. 
This collection aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the current trends, chal-
lenges, and solutions in these areas, presenting a valuable resource for researchers, 
engineers, and practitioners alike. 
The papers included in this volume cover a wide range of topics, encompassing 
both traditional machining techniques and cutting-edge additive manufacturing tech-
nologies. From the fundamentals of machining processes to the exploration of novel 
materials and the optimization of manufacturing systems, the contributions offer a 
wealth of insights into the ever-evolving landscape of manufacturing. 
Furthermore, this collection showcases the interdisciplinary nature of machining 
and additive manufacturing, highlighting the integration of engineering principles, 
materials science, computer-aided design, and advanced manufacturing techniques. 
The research presented here explores the symbiotic relationship between these 
domains, fostering collaboration and cross-pollination of ideas to drive innovation 
forward. 
We would like to express our gratitude to all the authors who have contributed 
their valuable research to this volume. Their expertise, dedication, and intellectual 
curiosity have made this collection a testament to the remarkable progress being 
made in the ﬁeld of machining and additive manufacturing. 
We also extend our thanks to the reviewers and editors who have diligently worked 
to ensure the quality and rigor of the papers included in this volume. Their expertise 
and commitment to scholarly excellence have played a vital role in shaping this 
collection.
v

vi
Preface
We hope that the research presented in Machining and Additive Manufacturing 
will inspire further exploration, spark new collaborations, and contribute to the 
advancement of manufacturing technologies. May this volume serve as a stepping 
stone toward a future where machining and additive manufacturing continue to 
revolutionize industries, drive innovation, and shape the world we live in. 
Johannesburg, South Africa 
North Guwahati, India 
Jalandhar, Punjab, India 
Jalandhar, Punjab, India 
Jalandhar, Punjab, India 
Prof. Vishal Santosh Sharma 
Prof. Dr. Uday Shanker Dixit 
Dr. Ajay Gupta 
Dr. Rajeev Verma 
Dr. Varun Sharma

Acknowledgments 
We would like to express our heartfelt gratitude to all the individuals and organi-
zations who have contributed to the creation of this book, Machining and Additive 
Manufacturing, a collection of select proceedings from CPIE-2023. 
First and foremost, we extend our sincere appreciation to the authors who have 
shared their research ﬁndings and insights in this volume. Their dedication, expertise, 
and scholarly contributions have enriched this book, offering valuable knowledge and 
advancements in the ﬁeld of machining and additive manufacturing. 
We would like to acknowledge the reviewers who selﬂessly dedicated their time 
and expertise to review and provide constructive feedback on the submitted papers. 
Their rigorous evaluation and insightful comments have played a pivotal role in 
ensuring the quality and academic integrity of this collection. 
We are grateful to the editorial team members who worked diligently behind the 
scenes to manage the submission and review process, ensuring the smooth progress 
of the publication. Their organizational skills, attention to detail, and commitment 
to excellence have been instrumental in bringing this book to fruition. Nonetheless, 
we would also like to extend our sincere gratitude to the Springer Team for their 
invaluable support in the publication of this book. Their expertise and assistance 
have been instrumental in bringing this collection to fruition. 
Our thanks also go to the conference organizers for providing a platform to foster 
knowledge exchange and collaboration among researchers and practitioners in the 
ﬁeld of machining and additive manufacturing. Their efforts in organizing CPIE-
2023 have facilitated the gathering of high-quality research and set the stage for the 
creation of this book. 
More importantly, we would like to acknowledge the support and guidance of 
Prof. Binod Kumar Kanaujia, Director Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of 
Technology Jalandhar for his wholehearted support for the smooth conduct of the 
conference. Their commitment to promoting academic research and technological 
advancements is truly commendable. 
Last but not least, we express our gratitude to the readers of this book. Your interest 
in the ﬁeld of machining and additive manufacturing is what drives us to continue 
exploring and disseminating knowledge in this exciting area.
vii

viii
Acknowledgments
We hope that this book serves as a valuable resource for researchers, engineers, 
and professionals in machining and additive manufacturing, and inspires further 
advancements and collaborations in the ﬁeld. 
Prof. Vishal Santosh Sharma 
Prof. Dr. Uday Shanker Dixit 
Dr. Ajay Gupta 
Dr. Rajeev Verma 
Dr. Varun Sharma

Contents 
Assessment of Sustainable Additive Manufacturing Drivers: 
A MCDM Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 
Neha Choudhary, Varun Sharma, and Pradeep Kumar 
Exploring Sustainable Manufacturing: A Comprehensive Review 
of Literature and Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11 
SantanKumar Chaurasiya and Gurraj Singh 
Performance Analysis of 3D Printed Impellers for Portable 
Vacuum Cleaner
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21 
Om Prakash Mishra, Surender Singh, Krishan Kumar, and Rakesh Kumar 
3D Printed Electronics: Role of Materials and Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31 
P. Akashraj, A. Maria Joseph Mervin, Harjot Chane, R. K. Lishwanth, 
Md Ahsanul Habib Rahat, Panjul Garg, Vishal Francis, 
and Narendra Kumar 
Electrochemical Micromachining: A Review on Principles, 
Processes, and Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47 
Rishikant Mishra, Ravi Pratap Singh, and R. K. Garg 
Friction and Wear Characteristics of Engine Oil Through 
Four-Ball Tester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59 
Venkateswara Babu Peddakondigalla, Ismail Syed, Vasavi Boggarapu, 
P. S. Rama Sreekanth, Santosh Kumar Sahu, Venkata Dinesh Avvari, 
Rajani Doppalapudi, and Lakshmi Sunitha Vikram 
Recent Trends in 4th Industrial Revolution for A Sustainable 
Future–A Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67 
Suman Gothwal, Alok Vardhan, Ashiwani Kumar, and Pradeep Jain 
AI Control of EMG Sensor Data for 3D Printed Prosthesis Hand
. . . . . .
77 
Gunasundar Paddam, Vishal Francis, and Narendra Kumar
ix

x
Contents
Methodology of Rapid Prototyping and Moulding of Net-Shaped 
Micro-structures Developed Using Lifting Plate Hele-Shaw Flow 
on Conical Surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87 
Sanmit Pandey, Yogini Chaudhari, Pranjal Pawar, 
and Kiran Suresh Bhole 
A Comprehensive Overview on Additive Manufacturing Processes: 
Materials, Applications, and Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95 
Nikhil Bharat, Rajat Jain, and P. S. C. Bose 
An Overview of the Untapped Potential of Soft Robotic Arms 
with Integration of Machining Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107 
Shaarif Hamdule and Shashikant S. Goilkar 
Life Cycle Assessment of Abrasive Flow Machining of 3D Printed 
Parts: A Comparative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117 
Muniram Meena, Nitin Dixit, and Varun Sharma 
Modelling and Simulation of Wire DED Additive Manufacturing 
Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127 
Akshay Arjun Pradhan, Rajeev Srivastava, and Abhinav Sarma 
An Overview of the Recent Advances in Additive Manufacturing, 
and Its Scope for the Beneﬁt of Research and Development 
in Commercial Vehicle Industries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135 
P. Sriram Madhav, R. Revathi, and D. Keerthi Vasan 
Design and Development of Customized Helmet for Military 
Personnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143 
Akhilesh Misra, Rajeev Srivastava, and Abhinav Sarma 
Additive Manufacturing and Sustainability: The Mediating Role 
of Supply Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151 
Praveen Kumar Dwivedi, Sumit Chawla, Manjeet, Saurabh Agrawal, 
Ranjana Mishra, and Mukesh Kumar 
Leverage of Metal 3D Printing Technology in the Automotive 
Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
159 
Altaf Khan, Akant Kumar Singh, and Navdeep Sharma Dugala 
Digital Twins of Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing 
Systems–A Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
173 
Rajat Jain, Nikhil Bharat, and P. Subhash Chandra Bose

About the Editors 
Prof. Vishal Santosh Sharma is an honorary Associate professor at the School of 
Mechanical, Industrial, and Aerospace Engineering at WITS University, Johannes-
burg, South Africa, and a professor in the Department of Industrial & Production 
Engineering at Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar, 
India. With over 25 years of teaching experience, he specializes in manufacturing 
processes/systems, industrial automation, CAD/CAM, and robotics. His research 
focuses on machining and additive manufacturing, including topics such as dimen-
sional accuracy, cutting tool wear, surface roughness, and optimization using artiﬁcial 
intelligence algorithms. Prof. Sharma has supervised numerous Ph.D. and master’s 
students, published over 105 papers with signiﬁcant citations, and organized inter-
national conferences. He serves as an associate editor for prestigious journals and 
has conducted training programs with renowned experts in the ﬁeld. 
Prof. Uday Shanker Dixit is a distinguished Scholar and an Educator in Mechan-
ical Engineering at IIT Guwahati. With a Ph.D. from IIT Kanpur and an M.Tech. 
from IIT Kanpur, he has made signiﬁcant contributions to research, teaching, and 
leadership. He served as the head of the Department of Mechanical Engineering 
and the ofﬁciating director at CIT, Kokrajhar. Prof. Dixit’s research interests include 
metal forming, manufacturing processes, and materials engineering. He has authored 
numerous publications and serves on editorial boards of prestigious journals. He is a 
respected member of professional societies such as the Indian Welding Society and 
has held signiﬁcant positions in various academic councils and boards. Prof. Dixit’s 
commitment to education, research, and accreditation activities has established him 
as a distinguished academician in the ﬁeld of Mechanical Engineering. 
Dr. Ajay Gupta is an Associate Professor in the Department of Industrial & Produc-
tion Engineering. He holds a Ph.D. degree in Industrial Engineering and an M.Tech. 
in Industrial Engineering from Dr. B. R. Ambedkar NIT Jalandhar. With research 
interests in Operations Management, Operations Research, Theory of Constraints, 
Data Analytics, MIS, Materials Management, Marketing Management, and Statis-
tics, Dr. Gupta has published more than 40 journal articles, 25 conference papers, and
xi

xii
About the Editors
5 book/chapter publications. He has organized numerous events, including confer-
ences and short-term courses and is a Fellow of The Institution of Engineers (India). 
With a track record of supervising 7 Ph.D. students and guiding 23 postgraduate 
dissertations, Dr. Gupta has also held various administrative positions such as the 
head of the department, the nodal ofﬁcer, the controller of examination, an associate 
dean, the deputy registrar, and is presently the head of Training and Placements at 
NIT Jalandhar. 
Dr. Rajeev Verma is an Assistant Professor in the Industrial and Production 
Engineering Department at Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology 
Jalandhar, Punjab, India. He obtained his Ph.D. and Masters in Engineering from the 
Production & Industrial Engineering Department of Punjab Engineering College, 
Chandigarh. With over 11 years of industrial and teaching experience, Dr. Verma’s 
current research interests include surface engineering, thermal spray coating tech-
nology, laser surface texturing, superhydrophobic surfaces, CAE, and Taguchi 
methodology. He has authored and co-authored 1 Book, 10 Book Chapters, 33 papers 
in International Journals, 30 papers in International Conferences, and 06 papers in 
National Conferences. Dr Verma has guided 11 postgraduate dissertations and 11 
undergraduate projects and is presently supervising 6 Ph.D. research scholars. He 
serves as a reviewer for prestigious scientiﬁc journals and has organized conferences, 
short-term courses, and internships. In addition to his accomplishments, Dr. Verma 
has been honored with the “Outstanding Faculty in Industrial and Production Engi-
neering” award at the 7th Venus International Science and Technology Awards— 
VISTA 2021, presented by the Venus International Foundation. Furthermore, Dr. 
Verma has been conferred with the “National Distinguished Young Aspirant Award 
2021,” instituted by the International Institute of Organized Research (I2OR). 
Dr. Varun Sharma is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Industrial and 
Production Engineering at Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology 
Jalandhar, India (NITJ). He has previously served as an Assistant Professor in the 
Department of Mechanical Engineering at Shoolini University and Sant Longowal 
Institute of Engineering & Technology Longowal. With a background in welding 
engineering, Dr. Sharma’s research interests span areas such as welding, materials 
science, physical metallurgy, tribology, additive manufacturing, and optimization 
through the design of experiments. He has published numerous research articles, 
ﬁled a patent, and led a research project funded by TEQIP-III. Dr. Sharma has 
supervised several postgraduate and undergraduate projects and has been actively 
involved in organizing conferences and short-term courses. He is a lifetime member 
of the Society of Materials and Mechanical Engineers (SOMME).

Assessment of Sustainable Additive 
Manufacturing Drivers: A MCDM 
Approach 
Neha Choudhary, Varun Sharma, and Pradeep Kumar 
Nomenclature 
AM
Additive Manufacturing 
BWM
Best Worst Method 
MCDM
Multi-Criteria Decision-Making 
1 
Introduction 
The manufacturing industry is expanding very quickly and making a signiﬁcant 
contribution to the global economy. In the current manufacturing system, increased 
demand, globalization, customized production, environmental concern, cost, and 
social responsibilities are the major issues [1]. The adoption of advanced technolo-
gies has the potential to mitigate these problems. Industry 4.0 has introduced the smart 
manufacturing process called Additive Manufacturing (AM). AM is a group of tech-
niques that fabricates 3-dimensional products by adding materials in a layer-by-layer 
fashion in a more sustainable way [2]. Sustainable manufacturing is one of the United 
Nations’ sustainable development goals. It is one of the measures toward sustainable 
development by minimizing environmental impacts while remaining economical and 
safe for employees and society [3]. 
AM is a new sustainable process being used by many industries today. It includes 
reduced cost, manufacturing time, tooling, assembly, resource efﬁciency, and provide 
ﬂexibility. It also has the potential to lessen the environmental impact by producing 
near-net shapes. Hence, adopting sustainable AM in the manufacturing area will
N. Choudhary envelope symbol · V. Sharma · P. Kumar 
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Roorkee 247667, India 
e-mail: nchoudhary@me.iitr.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_1 
1

2
N. Choudhary et al.
provide triple-bottom-line beneﬁts of sustainability, i.e., economic, environmental, 
and social [2]. 
Various authors have studied the beneﬁts of AM to achieve economic, envi-
ronmental, and social sustainability. The combination of life cycle assessment and 
life cycle costing methodology has also been studied for AM [4]. The mathemat-
ical model for the calculation of energy consumption, carbon emission, and cost 
involved during AM has shown its sustainable advantage [5, 6]. Few studies have also 
been conducted that involve the social sustainability aspect in AM [7, 8]. Addition-
ally, various multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) approaches have been used 
to select, interlink, and compare the sustainable aspects of AM. In this regard, a 
study has been carried out on selecting materials for AM technologies in a sustain-
able approach using different MCDM techniques. The selection of AM techniques 
considering the sustainable concept and challenges in the execution of sustainable 
AM has also been studied using MCDM techniques [9]. 
From the literature mentioned above, it can be seen that the ranking of the 
AM advantages in terms of sustainability has not been explored. The present work 
describes the setting of priority of the sustainable outcomes of AM by using an 
MCDM technique. The three pillars of sustainability, i.e., economic, environmental, 
and social, have been considered in the present work. 
2 
Methodology 
The present work focuses on prioritizing the sustainable outcomes of AM. The 
proposed methodology consists of four steps, as shown in Fig. 1. First, the liter-
ature review has been performed to identify the sustainable AM drivers in economic, 
environmental, and social aspects as presented in Table 1. The questionnaire has 
been prepared and shared with the experts. The experts are selected from different 
ﬁelds like academics (professors and researchers), and scientists. The opinions of the 
experts were then gathered. The Best Worst Method (BWM) was used to determine 
the ﬁnal ranking of the sustainable outcomes.
2.1 
Best Worst Method (BWM) 
The Best Worst method (BWM) is an MCDM method ﬁrst proposed by Rezaei [18]. 
This method is selected to prioritize/rank the drivers of sustainable AM. BWM has 
various advantages over other MCDM techniques. It has a smaller number of pairwise 
comparisons, ensuring high consistency in the outcome. It involves best and worst 
criteria comparison, eliminating the secondary comparison matrix like other MCDM 
methods. The steps of BWM are as follows [18]:
1. Find the criteria (drivers) from the literature.

Assessment of Sustainable Additive Manufacturing Drivers: A MCDM …
3
Fig. 1 Research 
methodology
2. Analyze the best and worst drivers with the help of experts. The best driver is 
the most vital driver and the worst driver is the least important driver. 
3. Determine the importance of the best driver over all other drivers using a 1–9 
scale. The best to others driver vector would be expressed as: 
up er D Sub scri p t  upper
 B Baseline equals left parenthesis d Subscript upper B Baseline 1 Baseline comma d Subscript upper B Baseline 2 Baseline comma ellipsis d Subscript upper B n Baseline right parenthesis
where d Subscript upper B j indicates the comparison of identiﬁed best driver B over other driver j. 
4. Determine the importance of all other drivers over the worst driver using a scale 
of 1–9. The others to worst driver vector would be expressed as: 
up er D Subs cript  u p per W Ba
seline equals left parenthesis d Subscript 1 upper W Baseline comma d Subscript 2 upper W Baseline comma ellipsis d Subscript n upper W Baseline right parenthesis Superscript upper T 
where d Subscript j upper W implies the comparison of other drivers j over identiﬁed worst driver W. 
5. Evaluate the optimal weights of each driver. 
The optimal weight of each driver is one where for each pair of StartFraction upper W Subscript upper B Baseline Over upper W Subscript j Baseline EndFraction
StartFraction upper W Subscript upper B Baseline Over upper W Subscript j Baseline EndFraction and StartFraction upper W Subscript j Baseline Over upper W Subscript w Baseline EndFraction
StartFraction upper W Subscript j Baseline Over upper W Subscript w Baseline EndFraction , we  
have.

4
N. Choudhary et al.
Table 1 Sustainable AM drivers 
Driver
References 
Economic drivers 
Cost reduction (EC1)
Chandra et al. [2, 10, 11] 
Just-in-time production (EC2)
Taddese et al. [11, 12] 
Part consolidation (EC3)
Hohn et al. [13] 
Design ﬂexibility (EC4)
Chandra et al. [2] 
Less energy and raw material use (EC5)
Chandra et al. [2] 
Environmental drivers 
Less carbon and greenhouse gas emission (EN1)
El Baz et al. [10, 14] 
Reduced noise production (EN2)
Taddese et al. [11] 
Digital production (EN3)
Gadekar [15] 
Recycling capability (EN4)
Taddese et al. [11] 
Less waste production (EN5)
Chandra et al. [2] 
Efﬁcient resource consumption (EN6)
El Baz et al. [10] 
Social drivers 
Customized product (S1)
Matos et al. [8, 13] 
Reduced labor workload (S2)
Matos et al. [1, 7] 
Reduced health risk and occupational hazard (S3)
Huang et al. [16] 
Skill and carrier development (S4)
Matos et al. [8] 
Increased accessibility (S5)
Hohn et al. [13, 17]
StartFraction upper W Subscript upper B Baseline Over upper W Subscript j Baseline EndFraction equals d Subscript upper B j Baseline a n d StartFraction upper W Subscript j Baseline Over upper W Subscript w Baseline EndFraction equals d Subscript j w
Sta
rtFrac tion  upper W Subscript upper B Baseline Over upper W Subscript j Baseline EndFraction equals d Subscript upper B j Baseline a n d StartFraction upper W Subscript j Baseline Over upper W Subscript w Baseline EndFraction equals d Subscript j w
Sta
rtFraction upper W Subscript upper B Baseline Over upper W Subscript j Baseline EndFraction equals d Subscript upper B j Baseline a n d StartFraction upper W Subscript j Baseline Over upper W Subscript w Baseline EndFraction equals d Subscript j w
To identify the weight, we have to minimize the maximum difference, 
min left 
brack et max 
Sub
scrip t j Bas
elin
e left parenthesis StartAbsoluteValue upper W Subscript upper B Baseline minus d Subscript upper B j Baseline upper W Subscript j Baseline EndAbsoluteValue comma StartAbsoluteValue upper W Subscript j Baseline minus d Subscript j w Baseline upper W Subscript w Baseline EndAbsoluteValue right parenthesis right bracket
s pe
r
io
d t  period sigma summation Underscript j Endscripts upper W Subscript j Baseline equals 1
up er W Subscript j Baseline greater than or equals 0 comma f o r a l l j
Equation (3) can be solved as linear optimization model, 
min 
Un
d
erscript j Endscripts bold xi
s pe
riod t perio
d Start Abso lute Value upper W Subscript upper B Baseline minus d Subscript upper B j Baseline upper W Subscript j Baseline EndAbsoluteValue less than or equals bold xi comma f o r a l l j

Assessment of Sustainable Additive Manufacturing Drivers: A MCDM …
5
Start Absolut
eV alue upper W Subscript j Baseline minus d Subscript j w Baseline upper W Subscript w Baseline EndAbsoluteValue less than or equals bold xi comma f o r a l l j
s
ig
ma sumation Underscript j Endscripts upper W Subscript j Baseline equals 1
up er W Subscript j Baseline greater than or equals 0 comma f o r a l l j
On solving Eq. (4), optimum weight of the drivers can be determined. The 
consistency ratio of the BWM can be obtained through Eq. (5), 
upper C o n s i s t e n  c y
 r a t i o l eft pa renth
esis upper C upper R right parenthesis equals bold xi divided by upper C o n s i s t e n c y i n d e x left parenthesis upper C upper I right parenthesis
The consistency index can be taken from. The consistency ratio ∈ (0,1), where a 
value approaching toward 0 shows maximum consistency and toward 1 shows weak 
consistency. 
For solving Eq. (4), BWM excels solver has been used. 
3 
Results and Discussions 
The present study aims to identify and prioritize the prominent drivers of sustainable 
AM in economic, environmental, and social aspects. The BWM MCDM technique 
has been used step-by-step to analyze the selected drivers, as explained in Sect. 2.1. 
The three different aspects of sustainability have been taken as of similar weigh-
tage. The weight of the different drivers for each aspect has been calculated and the 
consistency of the result has also been evaluated. Table 2 presents the response of 
respondent 1 for economic drivers of AM as an example. 
Table 2 Response for economic drivers (Respondent 1) 
Best to other drivers
EC1
EC2
EC3
EC4
EC5 
Best driver: EC5
2
4
6
3
1 
Others to worst
Worst driver: EC3 
EC1
4 
EC2
2 
EC3
1 
EC4
4 
EC5
5

6
N. Choudhary et al.
Table 3 Weight and ranks for economic drivers of AM 
Drivers
EC1
EC2
EC3
EC4
EC5 
Weight
0.201444
0.100112
0.101394
0.341565
0.255485 
Rank
3
5
4
1
2 
3.1 
Economic Drivers 
The ﬁve economic drivers have been selected and ranked, as shown in Table 3. 
From the analysis, it was found that “Design ﬂexibility” is the highest weighted 
driver, followed by “Less energy and raw material use,” “Cost reduction,” “Part 
consolidation,” and “Just in time production.” AM has increased the efﬁciency of 
ﬂexible designing, unlike traditional manufacturing. In traditional manufacturing, 
ﬂexibility in design is limited due to manufacturing constraints, and that too is time-
consuming and expensive. AM process initiates with CAD modeling of different 
geometries. These geometries can be quickly modiﬁed just by changing the CAD 
design. This ﬂexibility allows AM to produce difﬁcult geometries and customized 
structures in less time, ultimately reducing cost and proven economic process [2]. 
The other economic drives are also important such as fabricating multipart assembly 
into a single product reduces fabrication time. The on-demand production reduces 
inventory and storage costs of products and raw materials. As AM is a fast process that 
produces near-net shape products, it reduces material and electricity consumption 
[11]. Hence, AM provides cost reduction that includes manufacturing and other 
supply chain costs. 
3.2 
Environmental Drivers 
The ranking of environmental drivers highlights that “Less carbon and greenhouse 
gas emission,” “Recycling capability,” and “Less waste production” are the three top-
ranked drivers, and “Reduced noise production” is the least important driver of AM 
as presented in Table 4. AM takes less time to fabricate intricate, complex-shaped 
products that require less electricity consumption than traditional technologies. Less 
electricity consumption results in fewer emissions to the environment [11]. AM can 
use recycled materials like in fused deposition technology of AM support structures, 
defective products and failed prints can be reused after shredding. It also produces 
less waste during manufacturing and post-processing by fabricating the product near 
the required dimensions, unlike traditional manufacturing techniques.
Other environmental drivers, “Digital production,” “Efﬁcient resource consump-
tion,” and “Reduced noise production,” are also important drivers at their point. 
Digital production enables decentralized production that reduces long-distance trans-
portation, reducing carbon footprint. AM does not require much natural resource 
consumption (land, water, etc.) for establishing machinery and ﬁnished products due

Assessment of Sustainable Additive Manufacturing Drivers: A MCDM …
7
Table 4 Weight and ranks for environmental drivers of AM 
Drivers
EN1
EN2
EN3
EN4
EN5
EN6 
Weight
0.309007
0.072996
0.119873
0.182342
0.164525
0.151257 
Rank
1
6
5
2
3
4
Table 5 Weight and ranks for social drivers of AM 
Drivers
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5 
Weight
0.291041
0.152677
0.313999
0.146073
0.096209 
Rank
2
3
1
4
5 
to the compact nature of machines and on-demand production. AM machinery also 
has less noise production advantage, unlike traditional manufacturing like forging, 
machining, etc. [11]. 
3.3 
Social Drivers 
The selected social drivers have covered workers’ and customers’ communities. It 
can be seen from Table 5 that “Reduced health risk and occupational hazards” has 
been ranked ﬁrst followed by “Customized product,” “Reduced labor workload,” 
“Skill and carrier development,” and “Increased accessibility.” AM is an automated 
and green technology. It has less exposure to hazardous chemicals, dust, noise, risk, 
and vibrations, hence providing good working conditions to the workers. It also has 
the privilege of tailoring the product according to customers’ needs, which results in 
their satisfaction. AM permits ﬂexible and reduced working hours. It also beneﬁts the 
workers to develop skills and carrier opportunities. Additionally, remote production 
and home fabrication enhance the accessibility of the product to the customers [17]. 
In this way, all other drivers are also important in social assessment. 
3.4 
Consistency Ratio 
The Consistency Ratio (CR) measures the reliability and stability of the ranking 
obtained through the BWM method. The CR has been calculated using Eq. (5) for all 
three sustainability aspects. A low value of CR represents a high level of agreement 
and stability in the result. On the other hand, the high value of CR indicates less 
stability and reliability of the output. The value of CR exists in 0 ≤ CR ≥ 0.1 
range. Table 6 shows that the CR of the output lies in the deﬁned range for all AM 
sustainability aspects, conﬁrming that the ranking of the drivers is reliable.

8
N. Choudhary et al.
Table 6 Overall consistency 
ratio for each sustainability 
aspect 
Drivers
ξ
CI
CR 
Economic
0.168002
2.3
0.073045 
Environmental
0.149915
3
0.049972 
Social
0.168002
5
0.028029 
4 
Conclusions 
Sustainability has become a major concern for industries, and AM is one of the 
technologies that can meet that need. In this regard, the present study has used the 
BWM MCDM method to analyze and rank AM’s selected 16 sustainability drivers 
with 5 economic, 5 social, and 6 environmental drivers. The weight analysis revealed 
the top-ranked drivers as design ﬂexibility, less carbon and greenhouse gas emission, 
and reduced health risk and occupational hazards in economic, environmental, and 
social aspects of sustainability, respectively. The top prioritized drivers have ≥ 50% 
agreement among the total experts. The consistency ratio conﬁrmed the reliability 
of the obtained ranks, showing a value below 0.1. The analysis of AM drivers can 
compel industrial decision-makers to assess their willingness to deploy sustainable 
AM and its potential impact. 
In future studies, additional drivers related to institutional and managerial aspects 
could be considered. The different sustainability aspects’ weight could also be varied 
in future works. Other MCDM techniques could be used to validate the result in 
future. 
References 
1. Matos F, Godina R, Jacinto C, Carvalho H, Ribeiro I, Peças P (2019) Additive manufacturing: 
exploring the social changes and impacts. Sustain 11:3757 
2. Chandra M, Shahab F, KEK V, Rajak S (2022) Selection for additive manufacturing using 
hybrid MCDM technique considering sustainable concepts. Rapid Prototyp J 28:1297–1311 
3. Agrawal R, S. V (2020) Sustainability evaluation of additive manufacturing processes using 
grey-based approach. Grey Syst Theory Appl 10:393–412 
4. Ingarao G, Priarone PC (2020) A comparative assessment of energy demand and life cycle costs 
for additive-and subtractive-based manufacturing approaches. J Manuf Process 56:1219–1229 
5. Peng T, Kellens K, Tang R, Chen C, Chen G (2018) Sustainability of additive manufacturing: 
an overview on its energy demand and environmental impact. Addit Manuf 21:694–704 
6. Zavadskas EK, Govindan K, Antucheviciene J, Turskis Z (2016) Hybrid multiple criteria 
decision-making methods: a review of applications for sustainability issues. Econ Res Istraz 
29:857–887 
7. Naghshineh B, Ribeiro A, Jacinto C, Carvalho H (2021) Social impacts of additive manufac-
turing: a stakeholder-driven framework. Technol Forecast Soc Change 164:120368 
8. Matos F, Jacinto C (2019) Additive manufacturing technology: mapping social impacts. J 
Manuf Technol Manag 30:70–97 
9. Alsaadi N (2021) Prioritization of challenges for the effectuation of sustainable additive 
manufacturing: a case study approach. Processes 9

Assessment of Sustainable Additive Manufacturing Drivers: A MCDM …
9
10. El Baz J, Tiwari S, Akenroye T, Cherraﬁ A, Derrouiche R (2022) A framework of sustainability 
drivers and externalities for industry 4.0 technologies using the best-worst method. J Clean Prod 
344:130909 
11. Taddese G, Durieux S, Duc E (2020) Sustainability performance indicators for additive manu-
facturing: a literature review based on product life cycle studies. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 
107:3109–3134 
12. Ford S, Despeisse M (2016) Additive manufacturing and sustainability: an exploratory study 
of the advantages and challenges. J Clean Prod 137:1573–1587 
13. Hohn MM, Durach CF (2021) Additive manufacturing in the apparel supply chain—impact on 
supply chain governance and social sustainability. Int J Oper Prod Manag 41:1035–1059 
14. Top N, Sahin I, Mangla SK, Sezer MD, Kazancoglu Y (2022) Towards sustainable production 
for transition to additive manufacturing: a case study in the manufacturing industry. Int J Prod 
Res, 1–22 
15. Gadekar R, Sarkar B, Gadekar A (2022) Key performance indicator based dynamic decision-
making framework for sustainable industry 4.0 implementation risks evaluation: reference to 
the Indian manufacturing industries. Ann Oper Res 318:189–249 
16. Huang SH, Liu P, Mokasdar A, Hou L (2013) Additive manufacturing and its societal impact: 
a literature review. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 67:1191–1203 
17. Rayna T, Striukova L (2016) From rapid prototyping to home fabrication: how 3D printing is 
changing business model innovation. Technol Forecast Soc Change 102:214–224 
18. Rezaei J (2015) Best-worst multi-criteria decision-making method. Omega 53:49–57

Exploring Sustainable Manufacturing: 
A Comprehensive Review of Literature 
and Practices 
SantanKumar Chaurasiya and Gurraj Singh 
1 
Introduction 
Manufacturing has been a crucial component of global economic growth for decades, 
but this progress has come at a signiﬁcant cost to the environment. The traditional 
manufacturing practices have led to increased greenhouse gas emissions, depletion 
of natural resources, and waste generation. The need for a more sustainable approach 
to manufacturing has become more apparent in recent years, with climate change 
and environmental degradation posing a signiﬁcant threat to our planet’s future [1]. 
Sustainable manufacturing is an emerging ﬁeld that focuses on reducing the envi-
ronmental impact of manufacturing processes while maintaining economic growth. 
The concept of sustainable manufacturing involves integrating sustainability consid-
erations into all aspects of the manufacturing process, from the sourcing of raw 
materials to the disposal of end products. The goal is to minimize the use of non-
renewable resources, reduce waste generation, and promote environmentally friendly 
production practices [2, 3]. The concept of sustainable manufacturing has gained 
signiﬁcant attention from various stakeholders, including governments, companies, 
and consumers. Sustainable manufacturing practices have become a critical busi-
ness strategy for companies looking to reduce their environmental footprint, meet 
regulatory requirements, and improve their brand image. The trend toward sustain-
able manufacturing is also driven by consumer demand for environmentally friendly 
products and the desire to support socially responsible companies [4]. 
The principles of sustainable manufacturing are not only limited to environ-
mental considerations but also encompass social and economic factors. The concept 
of sustainable manufacturing involves a balance between economic growth, social 
responsibility, and environmental sustainability. Sustainable manufacturing practices
S. Chaurasiya envelope symbol · G. Singh 
Department of Industrial and Production Engineering, Dr B R Ambedkar National Institute of 
Technology, Jalandhar 144011, India 
e-mail: chaurasiyasantan@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_2 
11

12
S. Chaurasiya and G. Singh
must ensure that workers’ rights are protected, and the local communities beneﬁt 
from the manufacturing process [5]. The implementation of sustainable manufac-
turing practices involves a signiﬁcant shift in the manufacturing paradigm, which 
requires the integration of sustainability considerations into all levels of decision-
making. Sustainable manufacturing involves not only the adoption of new technolo-
gies and processes but also requires the development of new business models and 
supply chain management practices [6]. The importance of sustainable manufac-
turing is reﬂected in the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
SDG 9, Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure, speciﬁcally highlight the need for 
sustainable manufacturing practices. The goal is to promote inclusive and sustainable 
industrialization and foster innovation, while reducing the environmental impact of 
manufacturing processes [7]. 
The transition toward sustainable manufacturing requires a collaborative effort 
from all stakeholders, including companies, governments, non-governmental orga-
nizations (NGOs), and consumers. Companies can lead the way by implementing 
sustainable manufacturing practices that not only reduce their environmental foot-
print but also create value for their customers and stakeholders. Governments can play 
a signiﬁcant role in promoting sustainable manufacturing practices by implementing 
policies and regulations that incentivize companies to adopt sustainable practices. 
NGOs and consumer groups can also raise awareness of sustainable manufacturing 
practices and encourage companies to adopt environmentally and socially responsible 
practices [8–10]. 
2 
Sustainable Manufacturing Practice 
Sustainable manufacturing practice refers to the implementation of manufacturing 
processes that minimize negative impacts on the environment, while also promoting 
economic development and social well-being. This involves reducing waste and 
pollution, conserving natural resources, adopting renewable energy sources, and 
using sustainable materials. Sustainable manufacturing also involves incorporating 
social and ethical considerations into the design and production process, such as 
fair labor practices, human rights, and community engagement. The article “Sus-
tainable Manufacturing: Metrics, Standards, and Infrastructure” by Rachuri et al. 
[11] aim to provide an overview of the current state of sustainable manufacturing, 
including its metrics, standards, and infrastructure [11]. The article highlights the 
importance of measuring sustainability in manufacturing and provides an overview of 
the most commonly used metrics, including life cycle assessment (LCA) and carbon 
footprint. The authors also discuss the various standards that are used to evaluate 
sustainability, including ISO 14001 and the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). The 
article further delves into the infrastructure necessary for sustainable manufacturing, 
including technology and workforce development [12]. The authors highlight the 
importance of technological advancements in improving the sustainability of manu-
facturing processes, such as the use of renewable energy and the development of

Exploring Sustainable Manufacturing: A Comprehensive Review …
13
closed-loop manufacturing systems. They also discuss the need for a well-trained 
workforce with the necessary skills to implement sustainable manufacturing prac-
tices [13]. The article “Sustainable manufacturing: A bibliometric analysis” presents 
a bibliometric analysis of sustainable manufacturing research over a 30-year period 
from 1990 to 2019. The study aims to identify the intellectual structure, inﬂuential 
publications, and emerging trends in sustainable manufacturing research. The results 
show that sustainable manufacturing research has grown signiﬁcantly in recent years, 
with a noticeable increase in publications since 2010. The intellectual structure of 
the ﬁeld is diverse, with a wide range of topics and themes being studied, such as 
circular economy, ecodesign, and green supply chain management. The study identi-
ﬁes several inﬂuential publications and authors, as well as emerging research trends 
such as Industry 4.0 and sustainable production systems [14]. 
Machado et al. [15] focus on the role of innovation in promoting sustainable 
manufacturing practices. They highlight the importance of innovation in driving 
sustainable manufacturing practices and provide insights into the potential opportu-
nities and challenges associated with promoting sustainability through innovation. 
The study is also adding valuable contribution to the ﬁeld of sustainable manufac-
turing, and provides useful insights for policymakers, industry practitioners, and 
researchers [15]. The article by Miah & Ryan (2018) presents a study on the rela-
tionship between innovation and sustainability in manufacturing companies. The 
ﬁndings suggest that innovation positively impacts sustainability in manufacturing 
companies. They found that companies that adopted environmentally friendly tech-
nologies and practices were more likely to achieve sustainability goals. Additionally, 
they found that companies that emphasized social sustainability were more likely to 
achieve economic sustainability. Finally, they found that companies that invested in 
sustainable practices were more likely to be innovative. 
The article Habidin et al. [16] provides a comprehensive review of sustainable 
manufacturing practices in the automotive industry, including energy efﬁciency, 
material efﬁciency, waste reduction, and supply chain sustainability. The authors 
argue that the automotive industry is a signiﬁcant contributor to environmental degra-
dation and social issues, and that sustainable manufacturing practices are critical 
for addressing these challenges [16]. The article by Kumar and Mani [17] presents 
a review of sustainability assessment methodologies used in manufacturing. The 
authors review a range of assessment methodologies used in the manufacturing 
sector, including life cycle assessment (LCA), sustainability performance measure-
ment (SPM), sustainable value stream mapping (SVSM), and sustainability index 
(SI). They highlight the strengths and limitations of each methodology and discuss 
how they can be used in the manufacturing sector to support sustainable development. 
They also suggest that future research could focus on developing integrated assess-
ment methodologies that consider the interactions between environmental, social, and 
economic factors [17]. The article by Bendig et al. [18] aims to provide a systematic 
review of the role of government policies and regulations in promoting sustainable 
manufacturing practices. The article starts with a brief introduction to sustainable 
manufacturing practices and the importance of government policies in promoting

14
S. Chaurasiya and G. Singh
them. The authors reviewed 53 research articles and identiﬁed several key govern-
ment policies and regulations that have been successful in promoting sustainable 
manufacturing practices. These include ecolabeling and environmental standards, 
economic instruments, and regulatory frameworks. The article also discusses the 
challenges that governments face in implementing these policies and regulations, 
such as a lack of political will and resistance from industry stakeholders [18]. The 
article by Wasserbaur et al. [19] aims to provide a systematic review of the role of 
government policies and regulations in promoting sustainable manufacturing prac-
tices [19]. The article starts with a brief introduction to sustainable manufacturing 
practices and the importance of government policies in promoting them. The authors 
reviewed 53 research articles and identiﬁed several key government policies and regu-
lations that have been successful in promoting sustainable manufacturing practices. 
These include ecolabeling and environmental standards, economic instruments, and 
regulatory frameworks. The article also discusses the challenges that governments 
face in implementing these policies and regulations, such as lack of political will and 
resistance from industry stakeholders [18]. 
The article “Circular Economy in Manufacturing: A Review” explores the concept 
of circular economy and its potential application in manufacturing. The authors 
highlight that the traditional linear model of manufacturing, which involves extracting 
resources, making products, using them, and then disposing of them, is no longer 
sustainable due to limited resources and environmental concerns. They argue that 
a circular economy, which emphasizes reducing waste and reusing resources, can 
provide a more sustainable approach to manufacturing [20]. 
3 
Sustainable Supply Chain Management (SSCM) 
and Manufacturing Practice in Business Performance 
The article reviews the literature on sustainable manufacturing practices (SMPs) 
and their impact on business performance. The authors conducted a systematic 
literature review to identify and analyze the existing literature on SMPs and busi-
ness performance. They identiﬁed 84 studies published between 2000 and 2018 
and analyzed them using a thematic approach. The review ﬁnds that SMPs have a 
positive impact on business performance, including economic, environmental, and 
social performance. The economic beneﬁts include cost savings, increased revenue, 
and improved competitiveness. The environmental beneﬁts include reduced energy 
consumption, waste reduction, and decreased emissions. The social beneﬁts include 
improved health and safety, employee satisfaction, and community engagement [21]. 
The article “Building Information Modelling for Sustainable Construction” by Gao 
et al. provides an overview of Building Information Modelling (BIM) technology 
and its role in sustainable construction practices. The authors highlight the potential

Exploring Sustainable Manufacturing: A Comprehensive Review …
15
of BIM technology to improve the sustainability of the construction industry by facil-
itating more efﬁcient use of resources, reducing waste and emissions, and enhancing 
collaboration and communication among project stakeholders [22]. 
The article titled “Enhancing sustainability in supply chains through inter-ﬁrm 
collaborations: An empirical investigation” aims to explore the relationship between 
inter-ﬁrm collaboration and sustainability in supply chains. The study was conducted 
through a survey of 169 Indian manufacturing ﬁrms, and the data was analyzed using 
Structural Equation Modelling (SEM). The study highlights the importance of collab-
oration in achieving sustainability goals and emphasizes the need for policymakers to 
encourage such collaboration through appropriate policies and incentives. Overall, 
the study contributes to the literature on sustainable supply chains by providing 
insights into the role of inter-ﬁrm collaboration in enhancing sustainability [23]. 
In this article, Bovea and Pérez-Belis review the literature on models for sustain-
able supply chain management (SSCM). They provide an overview of various 
approaches to SSCM, such as life cycle assessment, ecodesign, and closed-loop 
supply chains, and discuss their strengths and weaknesses. The authors also examine 
the role of stakeholders in SSCM and the importance of collaboration and informa-
tion sharing among supply chain partners. The article concludes with a discussion of 
future research directions in SSCM, including the need for more empirical research, 
the development of integrated SSCM models, and the use of emerging technolo-
gies such as blockchain and the Internet of Things. The authors also emphasize the 
importance of considering social sustainability issues in addition to environmental 
concerns, and the need for SSCM models to be adapted to the speciﬁc context and 
goals of each supply chain [24]. In another study provided by Panigrahi et al. [25] a  
comprehensive review of the existing literature on sustainable supply chain manage-
ment (SSCM) and identiﬁes areas for future research. The article highlights the 
need for a more integrated and collaborative approach to SSCM, involving all stake-
holders in the supply chain. The authors suggest that future research should focus 
on developing frameworks and tools to enable organizations to implement SSCM 
effectively. They also call for more empirical studies to evaluate the impact of SSCM 
on organizational performance and sustainability outcomes [25]. 
4 
Sustainable Manufacturing Practice: Challenges 
and Future Trend 
The article “Sustainable manufacturing education and training: A review of current 
practices and future trends” presented by Domadi MK [26], authors conclude that 
sustainable manufacturing education and training should be integrated into existing 
engineering and business curricula to ensure that graduates have the necessary 
knowledge and skills to address sustainability challenges. They also recommend the 
development of new programs and the use of innovative teaching methods, such as

16
S. Chaurasiya and G. Singh
experiential learning and industry collaborations. Additionally, the authors empha-
size the importance of lifelong learning and professional development to ensure 
that professionals stay up to date with the latest sustainable manufacturing prac-
tices [26]. The article “Sustainable Production: A Critical Review” by Colicchia 
et al. examines the state of research on sustainable production, identifying gaps and 
opportunities for future research. They suggest that future research should aim to 
develop new models and frameworks that can better capture the complex interactions 
between these different factors. Additionally, the authors highlight the importance 
of engaging stakeholders and creating new business models that enable sustainable 
production practices to be integrated into the broader value chain [27]. In this article, 
the authors provide a comprehensive review of the literature on sustainable manufac-
turing systems (SMS). The study examines research trends and identiﬁes gaps in the 
ﬁeld, providing a roadmap for future research. The authors highlight the importance 
of sustainable manufacturing systems in achieving environmental sustainability, 
economic development, and social well-being. The article ﬁrst presents the evolu-
tion of sustainable manufacturing and then discusses the key elements of SMS such 
as design for sustainability, green supply chain management, lean manufacturing, 
and life cycle assessment. The article also discusses various drivers and barriers 
of SMS implementation and explores the role of government policies and regula-
tions in promoting sustainable manufacturing [28]. The article by Ocampo and Clark 
[29] presents a framework for developing a sustainable manufacturing and opera-
tions strategy. The framework provides a comprehensive perspective that considers 
environmental, social, and economic factors, as well as stakeholder engagement and 
collaboration, The article concludes by highlighting the need for further research to 
address the challenges associated with sustainable manufacturing modeling and opti-
mization. The authors argue that there is a need for more integrated approaches that 
can capture the interrelationships between product, process, and system levels, and 
that can account for the complex trade-offs between different sustainability objectives 
[29]. 
The article by Jayal et al. [30] presents a comprehensive review of the literature 
on sustainable manufacturing, and highlights some of the key research trends and 
directions in the ﬁeld. The authors argue that there is a need for more integrated 
approaches that can capture the interrelationships between product, process, and 
system levels, and that can account for the complex trade-offs between different 
sustainability objectives [30]. The article “Integrating sustainability into operations 
management research and practice: Recent progress and future directions” by Wu, 
Cegielski, and Hazen aims to examine the recent progress in integrating sustain-
ability into operations management (OM) research and practice and provide future 
research directions. The study identiﬁed that sustainability is becoming increas-
ingly integrated into OM research and practice, with a growing number of studies 
investigating the linkages between sustainability and OM. The review also iden-
tiﬁed gaps in current research, such as a lack of focus on the impact of sustain-
able practices on OM performance and a lack of attention given to the trade-offs 
between sustainability and other OM objectives. The authors suggest future research 
should focus on measuring the impact of sustainable practices on OM performance

Exploring Sustainable Manufacturing: A Comprehensive Review …
17
and identify trade-offs between sustainability and other OM objectives [31]. The 
article “Achieving sustainability through small business initiatives: Exploring the 
role of information technology” by Luederitz et al. [32] reviews the literature on 
how small businesses can achieve sustainability through the adoption of information 
technology (IT) initiatives. The authors identiﬁed six IT initiatives that can promote 
sustainability in small businesses: cloud computing, social media, big data analytics, 
mobile devices, radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID), and green IT. The authors then 
discuss the mechanisms through which these initiatives can promote sustainability, 
including reducing energy consumption, promoting waste reduction, and improving 
supply chain management [32]. 
We discussed a comprehensive review of the literature on sustainable manufac-
turing and operations management, identifying gaps and opportunities for future 
research. The authors highlight the importance of integrating sustainability into 
existing curricula, developing new programs, and using innovative teaching methods. 
They also emphasize the need for more integrated approaches that can capture 
the interrelationships between product, process, and system levels, and account for 
the complex trade-offs between different sustainability objectives. Additionally, the 
articles discuss the role of government policies, stakeholder engagement, and the 
adoption of information technology initiatives in promoting sustainable practices. 
5 
Conclusion 
Sustainable manufacturing is a critical component of the global effort to promote 
environmental sustainability, social responsibility, and economic growth. The ﬁeld 
of sustainable manufacturing has gained signiﬁcant attention from various stake-
holders, including governments, companies, and consumers. Sustainable manufac-
turing practices involve integrating sustainability considerations into all aspects of 
the manufacturing process, from the sourcing of raw materials to the disposal of end 
products. 
The implementation of sustainable manufacturing practices requires a signiﬁcant 
shift in the manufacturing paradigm, which requires the integration of sustainability 
considerations into all levels of decision-making. The transition toward sustainable 
manufacturing requires a collaborative effort from all stakeholders, including compa-
nies, governments, NGOs, and consumers. The importance of sustainable manufac-
turing is reﬂected in the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals, which 
speciﬁcally highlight the need for sustainable manufacturing practices. 
Overall, sustainable manufacturing practices have become a critical business 
strategy for companies looking to reduce their environmental footprint, meet regula-
tory requirements, and improve their brand image. Sustainable manufacturing prac-
tices not only reduce the environmental impact of manufacturing processes but also 
create value for customers and stakeholders. The transition toward sustainable manu-
facturing requires a collective effort from all stakeholders, and continued research and

18
S. Chaurasiya and G. Singh
innovation in this area can have a signiﬁcant impact on environmental sustainability 
and social responsibility. 
6 
Future Scope 
The future scope of sustainable manufacturing is promising, with many opportunities 
for improvement and growth. Companies that prioritize sustainable manufacturing 
practices will be better positioned to meet the evolving demands of consumers and 
regulators and contribute to a more sustainable future. 
References 
1. Rosen MA, Kishawy HA (2012) Sustainable manufacturing and design: concepts, practices 
and needs 
2. Opferkuch K, Caeiro S, Salomone R, Ramos TB (2021) Circular economy in corporate sustain-
ability reporting: a review of organisational approaches. Bus Strateg Environ 30:4015–4036. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2854 
3. Chaurasiya S, Singh G (2023) Life cycle assessment of nanocomposite manufactured using 
ultrasonic stir casting. J Mater Sci 58:5298–5318. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10853-023-08363-0 
4. Gupta DS, Dangayach G, Posinasetti N (2018) Implementation of sustainable manufacturing 
practices in Indian manufacturing companies. Benchmarking An Int J 25:2441–2459. https:// 
doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-12-2016-0186 
5. Bastas A (2021) Sustainable manufacturing technologies: a systematic review of latest trends 
and themes 
6. Felsberger A, Reiner G (2020) Sustainable industry 4.0 in production and operations 
management: a systematic literature review 
7. Jansen LJM, Kalas PP (2020) Improving governance of tenure in policy and practice: a 
conceptual basis to analyze multi-stakeholder partnerships for multi-stakeholder transformative 
governance illustrated with an example from South Africa 
8. Abubakr M, Abbas AT, Tomaz I, Soliman MS, Luqman M, Hegab H (2020) Sustainable and 
smart manufacturing: an integrated approach. Sustain 12:19. https://doi.org/10.3390/su1206 
2280 
9. Fofou RF, Jiang Z, Wang Y (2021) A review on the lifecycle strategies enhancing remanufac-
turing 
10. Garza-Reyes JA, Villarreal B, Kumar V, Ruiz P (2016) Lean and green in the transport and 
logistics sector–a case study of simultaneous deployment. Prod Plan Control 27. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/09537287.2016.1197436 
11. Rachuri S, Sriram R, Narayanan A, Sarkar P, Lee J, Lyons K, Kemmerer S (2010) Sustainable 
manufacturing: metrics, standards, and infrastructure-workshop summar 
12. Chaurasiya S, Singh G (2023) Sustainability assessment comparison of cutting ﬂuid for turning 
of titanium alloy grade II. Process Integr Optim Sustain. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41660-023-
00322-1 
13. Sudarsan R, Sriram RD, Narayanan A, Sarkar P, Lee JH, Lyons KW, Kemmerer SJ (2010) 
Sustainable manufacturing: metrics, standards, and infrastructure-workshop summary. In: 2010 
IEEE international conference on automation science and engineering. pp 144–149 
14. Bhatt Y, Ghuman K, Dhir A (2020) Sustainable manufacturing. Bibliometrics and content 
analysis. J Clean Prod 260:120988. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.120988

Exploring Sustainable Manufacturing: A Comprehensive Review …
19
15. Machado CG, Winroth MP, Hans E, Ribeiro D, Gonçalves C, Winroth MP, Hans E, Ribeiro D 
(2020) Sustainable manufacturing in industry 4. 0 : an emerging research agenda. Int J Prod 
Res 7543:24. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1652777 
16. Habidin NF, Zubir A, Fuzi N, Md Latip NA, Azman MNA (2015) Sustainable manufacturing 
practices in Malaysian automotive industry: conﬁrmatory factor analysis. J Glob Entrep Res 
5:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40497-015-0033-8 
17. Kumar M, Mani M (2022) Sustainability assessment in manufacturing for effectiveness: 
challenges and opportunities. Front Sustain 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/frsus.2022.837016 
18. Bendig D, Kleine-Stegemann L, Gisa K (2023) The green manufacturing framework—a 
systematic literature review. Clean Eng Technol 13:100613. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clet.2023. 
100613 
19. Wasserbaur R, Sakao T, Milios L (2022) Interactions of governmental policies and business 
models for a circular economy: a systematic literature review. J Clean Prod 337:130329. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.130329 
20. Bjørnbet MM, Skaar C, Fet AM, Schulte KØ (2021) Circular economy in manufacturing 
companies: a review of case study literature. J Clean Prod 294:126268. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.jclepro.2021.126268 
21. Abdul-Rashid SH, N. S., Raja Ghazilla RA, Ramayah T (2017) The impact of sustainable 
manufacturing practices on sustainability performance: empirical evidence from Malaysia. Int 
J Oper Prod Manag 37:182–204. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-04-2015-0223 
22. Haruna A, Shaﬁq N, Montasir OA (2021) Building information modelling application for 
developing sustainable building (multi criteria decision making approach). Ain Shams Eng J 
12:293–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asej.2020.06.006 
23. Alzoubi H, Ahmed G, Al-Gasaymeh A, Al Kurdi B (2019) Empirical study on sustainable 
supply chain strategies and its impact on competitive priorities: the mediating role of supply 
chain collaboration. Manag Sci Lett 10. https://doi.org/10.5267/j.msl.2019.9.008 
24. Seuring S (2013) A review of modeling approaches for sustainable supply chain management. 
Decis Support Syst 54:1513–1520. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2012.05.053 
25. Panigrahi S, Bahinipati B, Jain V (2018) Sustainable supply chain management: a review of 
literature and implications for future research. Manag Environ Qual Int J 30. https://doi.org/ 
10.1108/MEQ-01-2018-0003 
26. Domadi MK (2016) A review on current trend of sustainable manufacturing in Malaysia 
27. Geels FW, McMeekin A, Mylan J, Southerton D (2015) A critical appraisal of sustain-
able consumption and production research: the reformist, revolutionary and reconﬁguration 
positions. Glob Environ Chang 34:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.04.013 
28. Chan F, Li N, Chung S-H, Saadat M (2016) Management of sustainable manufacturing systems-
a review on mathematical problems. Int J Prod Res 55:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543. 
2016.1229067 
29. Ocampo L, Clark E (2015) A sustainable manufacturing strategy framework: the convergence 
of two ﬁelds. 20:29−57 
30. Jayal AD, Badurdeen F, Dillon OW, Jawahir IS (2010) Sustainable manufacturing: modeling 
and optimization challenges at the product, process and system levels. CIRP J Manuf Sci 
Technol 2:144–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2010.03.006 
31. Walker H, Klassen R, Sarkis J, Seuring S (2014) Sustainable operations management: recent 
trends and future directions. Int J Oper Prod Manag 34. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-12-
2013-0557 
32. Luederitz C, Caniglia G, Colbert B, Burch S (2021) How do small businesses pursue sustain-
ability? the role of collective agency for integrating planned and emergent strategy making. 
Bus Strateg Environ 30:3376–3393. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2808

Performance Analysis of 3D Printed 
Impellers for Portable Vacuum Cleaner 
Om Prakash Mishra, Surender Singh, Krishan Kumar, and Rakesh Kumar 
1 
Introduction 
3D printer is a new technology for the fabrication of prototypes and various models, 
which are difﬁcult to manufacture from traditional methods. This not only increases 
the ease of getting the prototype model fabricated but also creates the production 
process simple [1]. This paper illustrates the performance measurement of a portable 
vacuum cleaner (PVC) using three different impellers. This PVC will be used to clean 
PCB, keypad, and other electronic circuitry, small household purposes, computer 
motherboard, DVD player, sofa, bookshelf, desktop, where accessibility is a chal-
lenge. To carry out the performance check, designing and development of PVC has 
been carried out in an additive manufacturing lab. All the parts of PVC have been 
printed using a 3D printer of FDM technology. The three different types of impellers, 
i.e., open, semi-closed, and closed impellers have also been printed. This vacuum 
cleaner uses an impeller to suck the dust particles while cleaning operation. The 
assembling and test running have been carried out to check the operation ability. 
The performance of PVC has been modeled by changing the impeller. The smart 
features in the vacuum cleaner have been introduced such as, easy to operate, effec-
tive for small purposes, compact design, and rechargeable (so, no wiring connection 
needed). The various types of impellers, outer body designs, casing, slots, holders, 
seats for various components, blade fans, etc., have been developed with the help 
of a 3D printer. 3D printed parts stand quite robust, if designed well and give equal 
performance as any manufactured component [2]. The cleaning ability of any vacuum 
cleaner (VC) is not just about vacuum suction power, but other parameters are equally 
important such as; power consumption, noise level, vibration, etc. Dust particles are 
sucked by air, ﬂowing from the opening at the cleaning head or tool, through the
O. P. Mishra envelope symbol · S. Singh · K. Kumar · R. Kumar 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, J C Bose University of Science and Technology, YMCA, 
Faridabad 1210006, India 
e-mail: opmishra@jcboseust.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_3 
21

22
O. P. Mishra et al.
main body, the bag and/or ﬁlter system, and then out the exhaust port. This airﬂow 
is created by the vacuum motor, which also may be referred to as the suction motor. 
The motor consists of various electrical components attached to a fan or multiple 
fans called impellers. When the fans spin, a partial vacuum is created and the pres-
sure inside the vacuum cleaner drops below the ambient (or existing) air pressure in 
surrounding cleaning area. Because air pressure is higher outside the vacuum cleaner 
than inside, air rushes through the vacuum cleaner [3]. The paper is organized into 
six sections; Introduction, literature review, methodology, description of 3D printed 
PVC, setting up experiment, performance analysis, and conclusion. 
2 
Literature Review 
3D printed parts can be effectively used to design and analysis of any equipment 
after then further courses of correction are needed to make it commercialize [4]. 
By using a 3D printer to print all parts of vacuum cleaner except its motor and 
have demonstrated it working well. This research paper also focuses on assembles 
of different components and the proper working of fused ﬁlament fabrication 3D 
printers. Structural analysis of mini drones developed using 3D printing techniques 
can be commercialized [4]. Modeling of complicated design of the impeller of a 
Centrifugal Compressor on 3D-printing machine using FDM technology is advan-
tageous for several arrangements of the machining process [5, 6]. 3D printing for 
industrial applications is growing at a fast rate, which is saving a lot of cost, energy, 
effort, and human involvement [7]. Therefore, it is found that 3D printed compo-
nents are easy to fabricate, alter designs, and giving similar results in industrial 
applications. 
2.1 
Problem Formulation 
Vacuum cleaner works effectively with good performance of impellers. Impeller is 
a device used to increase the pressure of ﬂuid and is greatly inﬂuenced by the design 
of it. There are three types of impellers available which are open, semi-closed, and 
closed impellers. Out of the three important impellers, which one will give the best 
performance if it is ﬁtted in a portable vacuum cleaner? 
3 
Methodology 
The methodology of this representation (Fig. 1) is as follows.

Performance Analysis of 3D Printed Impellers for Portable Vacuum …
23
Fabrication and analysis of vacuum cleaner 
Assemble Different parts 
Fabrication of components for Vacuum cleaner 
Portable VC Design using Solid Work 
Operation check by changing 3 different types ofImpellers 
Suggesting Best Vacuum Cleaner 
Vacuum cleaner at a glance 
Fig. 1 Methodology to carry out performance analysis 
1. The method adopted here is to design, fabricate, assemble, and test the vacuum 
cleaner. The various parts of the vacuum cleaner will be printed using an FDM 
3D printer. The performance of PVC will be checked experimentally by ﬁtting 
the three impellers alternately. 
2. Comparative study of PVC performance by using analytic hierarchical process 
(AHP) will be done to verify the result obtained experimentally. 
4 
3D Printed VC at a Glance 
The schematic diagram of VC is shown in Fig. 2. The other printed parts are not 
shown in this paper.
The main components of PVC are cover, dust collector, impeller, motor, exhaust 
fan, ﬁltering mechanism, control panel, and battery. The ﬁtment of each component is 
shown in Fig. 2. As this paper is focusing on design variations of impellers, therefore, 
a brief discussion on impeller design is only mentioned here.

24
O. P. Mishra et al.
Fig. 2 Schematic diagram of vacuum cleaner
5 
Designing of Impeller 
Impeller plays an important role in the vacuum cleaner because, with the help of an 
impeller, suction pressure is created and sucks dust particles. Impellers are designed 
in solid works and then fabricated in an FDM machine with proper geometrical 
accuracy. Initially, the design parameters were set to fabricate impellers. We chose 
here three types of impellers.
. Open Impeller 
Open impeller creates low suction pressure as compared to closed impeller and semi-
closed impeller. Many dust particles are not sucked by an open impeller. The strength 
of an open impeller is weak. An open impeller is shown in Fig. 3.
. Semi-closed impeller: Practically, semi-closed impeller creates more suction 
pressure as compared to an open impeller and it creates less suction pressure 
as compared to a closed impeller, but it does not clean dust particles properly. 
Blade of semi-closed impeller is supported on one side of the wall as shown in 
Fig. 4.
. Closed impeller: Practically, a closed impeller sucks light dust particles and 
it creates more suction pressure as compared to semi-closed impeller and open 
impeller. Blades of closed impeller is supported back and front side walls as shown 
in Fig. 5.

Performance Analysis of 3D Printed Impellers for Portable Vacuum …
25
Fig. 3 Open impeller
Fig. 4 Semi-closed impeller
6 
Setting up Experiment 
After assembling of PVC, a simple experiment was performed to check the varying 
performance of this by replacing the three impellers. We carried out noting down 
the important parameters of a PVC performance based upon the ﬁtted impellers 
out of the three, i.e., open, semi-closed, and closed impellers. The following three

26
O. P. Mishra et al.
Fig. 5 Closed impeller
parameters were noted for each of the impeller-ﬁtted VC. Three parameters were 
checked with each impeller, i.e., noise level, sucking capacity, and battery running 
hours of PVC. The noting down of the below parameter has been performed in the 
additive manufacturing lab, where a clean environment was available. The value of 
three observations in each category is shown in Tables 1, 2, and 3. For checking these 
parameters, a PC keyboard was selected. Small pieces of paper and sand were placed 
on the board and VC was operated to such these items. We noted down noise level in 
dB with each impeller. Similarly, sucking capacity was checked in gm/s and then the 
running time of VC till the battery is completely exhausted. The battery is chargeable 
and after each charge, experiment was performed with the other two impellers ﬁtted. 
Table 1 Noise level 
S. No
Impeller
Value in decibel 
1
Closed
62 
2
Semi-closed
63 
3
Open
65
Table 2 Sucking capacity 
S. No
Impeller
Value in gm/sec 
1
Closed
0.1515 
2
Semi closed
0.0224 
3
Open
0.0143

Performance Analysis of 3D Printed Impellers for Portable Vacuum …
27
Table 3 Running time 
S. No
Impeller
Running time in min. for a 1200mAH battery 
1
Closed
43 
2
Semi-closed
41 
3
Open
40
6.1 
Experimental Analysis 
Noise Level: Vacuum cleaners generally operate at a noise level between 56 and 
80 dB. A full-sized vacuum cleaner outputs a noise level of 70–80 dB, which is 
extremely loud and is the same as a garbage disposal. We ﬁnd the best noise level is 
of closed impeller, i.e., 62dB, which is quite below the loudness limit. Table 1 shows 
the result. 
Sucking Capacity 
A “Vacuum Test Gauge” has been used for measuring the suction power. This actually 
measures the displacement of water, which says more about the suction power of a 
vacuum cleaner. The gauge measured the best result from VC ﬁtted with a closed 
impeller. It can suck up to 0.15g/s. Table 2 shows the result. 
Running Time 
To measure the power consumption of a vacuum cleaner with different impellers, a 
1200mAH battery is used to calculate the running time for single battery usage. This 
feature has been checked with the capacity of the current drawing from the battery. 
We ﬁnd closed impeller consuming minimum wattage and therefore, its running time 
is the highest. Table 3 shows the result. 
6.2 
AHP Analysis 
The above parameters show the best result given by a closed impeller. But the overall 
result will be valid, when vacuum cleaner is also checked on some general categories 
such as the material of the casing of PVC, dust collecting performance, operational 
noise level, aesthetic look, and power consumption. AHP has been used extensively in 
different areas of decision-making, even in complex situations as an effective tool of 
MCDM [8]. It has emerged as a very effective tool because the pair-wise comparison 
makes the procedure impervious to comparison inaccuracies. The methodology is 
quite suitable and simple to meet the objective of this study. Here, comparison of three 
PVCs with ﬁtted impellers is to be carried out on general perceptions as mentioned 
above. Thus, comparison may also solidify our experimental result obtained. The 
AHP model to ﬁnd an optimum performing VC is shown in Fig. 6.

28
O. P. Mishra et al.
Fig. 6 AHP model to ﬁnd optimum performing VC 
Overall Priority Vector 
MC
DCP
ONL
AL
PC
Overall priority vector 
OPEN
0.127
0.284
0.273
0.238
0.103
0.2317 
SEMI
0.512
0.096
0.086
0.621
0.664
0.2925 
CLOSED
0.36
0.619
0.638
0.136
0.23
0.4685 
Based upon the above observation, it is found that PVC ﬁtted with closed impeller 
is best performing if all other variables are ﬁxed. Regarding its sustainability, the 
author clearly stated that 3D printed material can well sustain vibration and dynamic 
forces [1]. 
7 
Conclusion 
This paper illustrated the performance analysis of a PVC based on the performance of 
the three-impeller designed in-house in an additive manufacturing lab. The complete 
parts of the PVC have been printed using 3D printer of FDM technology. The ﬁlament 
used is ABS material. The impeller being a very important component of any VC, this 
paper undertook to measure its performance using three different shaped impellers, 
i.e., open, semi-closed, and closed. These three impellers were ﬁtted one by one 
to measure three parameters i.e.; noise level, sucking particle diameter, and battery 
running hours. The experiment was performed and observation was noted. Measure-
ment of these parameters shows that closed impeller is the best performing in all the 
three categories. To verify this result, we used AHP considering general criteria such 
as; dust collecting performance, operational noise level, aesthetic look, and power

Performance Analysis of 3D Printed Impellers for Portable Vacuum …
29
consumption. The AHP also ﬁgures out the closed impeller as best performing. 
This paper may be very useful for academicians and industrialists to understand the 
importance of the shape of impeller ﬁtted in any vacuum cleaner as well as several 
parameters, which are necessary to examine for various usages. 
Limitation: The paper is written based upon in-house experiment by measuring only 
three parameters of performance of tis VC. Whereas more parameters such as ﬂow 
rate, dynamics of ﬂow, etc., can also be measured using CFD (Computation Fluid 
dynamics). 
References 
1. Joshi SC, Sheikh AA (2015) 3D printing in aerospace and its long-term sustainability. Virtual 
Phys Prototyp 10(4):175–185 
2. Mirón V, Ferràndiz S, Juàrez D, Mengual A (2017) Manufacturing and characterization of 3D 
printer ﬁlament using tailoring materials. Procedia Manuf 13:888–894 
3. Nirupan R, Pothiraj S, Roopan P, Uthranarayan C (2019) Floor cleaning robot with 3D printed 
vacuum impeller and casing. Int Res J Eng Technol 6(2):1082–1086 
4. Krishna, Gundeti A (2017) A comparative study on the components fabricated by injection 
moulding and fdm 3d printing process. Int J Mech Prod Eng 5(12):116–121 
5. Muralidharan N, Pratheep VG, Shanmugam A, Hariram A, Dinesh P, Visnu B (2021) Structural 
analysis of mini drone developed using 3D printing technique. Mater Today: Proc 46:8748–8752 
6. Sandeep DC, Chhabra D (2017) Comparison and analysis of different 3d printing techniques. Int 
J Latest Trends Eng Technol 8:264–272 
7. Jandyal A, Chaturvedi I, Wazir I, Raina A, Haq MIU (2022) 3D printing–a review of processes, 
materials and applications in industry 4.0. Sustain Oper Comput 3:33–42 
8. Saaty TL (1980) The analytic hierarchy process, McGraw-Hill, New York.

3D Printed Electronics: Role of Materials 
and Processes 
P. Akashraj, A. Maria Joseph Mervin, Harjot Chane, R. K. Lishwanth, 
Md Ahsanul Habib Rahat, Panjul Garg, Vishal Francis, 
and Narendra Kumar 
1 
Introduction 
As technology grows in rapid phases, the process of developing electronic compo-
nents is also expanding. 3D printing has made it easier to fabricate electronics and 
also plays a major role in innovation. The global electronics components market is 
expected to rise continuously by 7.7% as a result of the current electronics boom, 
from 5.41 million US dollars in 2017 to 7.86 million US dollars in 2022 [1]. The 
most common method for producing printed electronics is to use printing processes 
frequently used in the graphics sector to impart functional inks to plates (screen, 
ink-jet, ﬂexo, gravure, etc.) [2]. There are several methods of 3D printing electronic 
components or circuits. They may be contact type or noncontact type. Majorly, the 3D 
printing techniques are noncontact in nature. The materials used are widely pursued 
since they offer numerous advantages in terms of ease of processing, good compati-
bility with a variety of substrates, and a great opportunity for structural modiﬁcation 
[3]. In recent years, various printing technologies have been developed in the areas 
of screen printing, inkjet printing, and microcontact printing. Most of the work has 
been for the development of an inkjet solution capable of processing conductive mate-
rial. The biggest potential beneﬁt for high-density, high-speed, miniature innovative 
packaging is offered by nanomaterials, composites, and hybrids. These structures 
are incredibly unique materials with a wide range of potential uses due to their small 
dimensions, strength, and remarkable physical and electrical properties. With the 
utilization of 3D printing for electronic components, the application area is enlarged
P. Akashraj · A. Maria Joseph Mervin · H. Chane · R. K. Lishwanth · M. A. H. Rahat · P. Garg · 
V. Francis envelope symbol
School of Mechanical Engineering, Lovely Professional University, Jalandhar, India 
e-mail: vishal.24813@lpu.co.in 
N. Kumar 
Department of Industrial and Production Engineering, Dr. B R Ambedkar National Institute of 
Technology, Jalandhar 144027, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_4 
31

32
P. Akashraj et al.
[4]. There have been efforts to develop post-processing procedures for 3D printed 
parts to give them the appropriate electronic properties to get around the high cost 
and constraints of speciﬁc 3D printed electronic systems employing surface direct 
write technologies. The most well-known of these is probably electroplating plastic 
components, which is done after a preliminary metallization by electroless deposi-
tion or conductive paint [2]. The application area of 3D printed electronics covers 
stretchable electronics, radio frequency antennae, and 3D structural electronics [5– 
23]. The present paper discusses the recent advances in 3D printing techniques for 
printed electronics. Moreover, the materials required for electronics applications are 
also discussed along with the applications areas of 3D printed technology. 
2 
Techniques for Printed Electronics 
2.1 
Conventional Techniques for Printed Electronics 
There is direct contact between the print head and the intended substrate when 
using conventional electronic fabrication techniques known as contact printing to 
transfer the required inked patterns. The functional ink is normally transferred to 
the target substrate by contact printing procedures using a single sheet or engraved 
roll. However, the beneﬁts and drawbacks of various contact printing methods could 
differ based on the printing principles used, therefore critical to carefully compare 
how each contact printing method operates. There are two steps in the printing process 
for gravure printing. During the ﬁrst stage, an ink fountain’s inks are collected by a 
gravure roller, and the amount of ink that is applied is controlled by a blade. Similarly, 
an ink-blocking stencil prevents an unwanted part of the substrate from touching the 
functional ink. 
Rotary Screen printing uses pressure from an impression roller to imprint predeter-
mined patterns on the substrate. Flexographic printing (also known as offset printing), 
in contrast to gravure printing and rotary screen printing, uses a soft plate roller 
to transport a controlled measure of ink. The pattern is indirectly imprinted on the 
substrate and the screen-printing technique variation known as ﬂatbed screen printing 
recently allured a lot of attention. 
2.2 
Screen Printing 
Screen printing can be applied in many ways, including Roll-to-Roll (R2R) produc-
tion with an optimum solution and printing settings. Using an optimal approach 
and the same process constraints, screen printing can be done again and again with 
identical results [24].

3D Printed Electronics: Role of Materials and Processes
33
Fig. 1 Classiﬁcation of noncontact type printing 
For screen printing, typically, ﬂatbed screen printing involves coating the screen 
with a printable solution, coating the mesh on the stencil with ink using a squeegee, 
and then pressure applied in a controlled manner. High-speed production is made 
possible by rotary system screens, but they are costly and need frequent cleaning 
owing to material clogging. However, several factors, including the geometry of the 
squeegee angle, the mesh size, the solution viscosity, and the snap-off between the 
screen and the substrate, have an impact on the quality of screen printing. 
2.3 
3D Printing Techniques for Printed Electronics 
Regardless of the various beneﬁts, the printing quality and setup costs of contact 
printing limit its application for the fabrication of electronics. Noncontact 3D printing 
helps to create adaptable and affordable electronic device applications. The noncon-
tact 3D printing method, in contrast, printing may generate less waste and reach a 
greater resolution. As a result, it has received considerable interest in several areas. 
The noncontact 3D printing techniques are further categorized into three types as 
illustrated in Fig. 1. 
2.4 
Material Extrusion-Based Printing 
In this material extrusion-based printing, the ﬁlament is fabricated using the hot 
extruder head and the ﬁlament is made of thermoplastic material shown in Fig. 3a. 
In the working principle of the fused deposition modeling (FDM) technique, the 
melted ﬁlament is extruded through a nozzle. Though fused deposition modeling is 
used in printed electronics, the application of the printed electronics is very conﬁned 
because of resolution and printing quality. Direct ink writing (DIW) is similar to

34
P. Akashraj et al.
the fused deposition modeling (FDM) technique, the difference is that DIW uses 
functional ink instead of ﬁlament, and the ink is stored in the barrel. The ink is 
deposited in the substrate by extruding out from a nozzle shown in Fig. 3b. The 
ink should be considered low-viscosity ink and shear-thinning ink are two different 
types of functional inks that can be used with DIW. Low-viscosity ink runs down 
the nozzle without any difﬁculty, whereas shear-thinning ink needs a much stronger 
pushing effort. A curing system must be employed when using low-viscosity ink to 
guarantee that the extruded ﬁlament material ﬁxes promptly and maintains its 3D 
structure. The result functional material is often combined with additional binding 
material in functional inks, which might reduce the functional material’s electrical 
performance. Dispensing techniques come in a variety of forms, including pneumatic, 
piston, and screw. To guarantee, the printed ﬁlament creates a steady structure; it is 
essential to apply the right printing parameters and conditions. 
2.5 
Vapor-Based Printing 
The modiﬁed technique of laser direct-writing (LDW) known as laser-induced 
forward transfer (LIFT) has been used to deposit materials to use for electronic 
applications. This method concentrated laser pulse with high intensity as employed 
to deliver energy enough to heat the thin ﬁlm interface. High-quality electrical designs 
can be created by vaporizing metal from the melted solid ﬁlm interface and depositing 
it on a target substrate because of energy accumulation. Organic vapor jet printing 
(OVJP) method utilizes heated cells that house the molecular organic source mate-
rial to create saturated source vapor that is carried by a hot inert carrier gas. After 
expanding, the gas mixture impinges on the substrate creating a high-resolution line. 
2.6 
Material Jetting-Based Printing 
There is growing engrossment in adopting material jetting-based printing for manu-
facturing electronics, because of the beneﬁts of higher precision and less waste. Inkjet 
printing (IJP) can be divided into two categories based on different operating princi-
ples: continuous inkjet (CIJ) printing systems and drop-on-demand (DoD) printing 
systems. The printed pattern is produced by the uncharged drops while the charged 
ones are reused. In systems based on DoD, the droplets are ejected. An innovative 
noncontact ink writing method called AJP is used to create electronic circuits instead 
of IJP. Using a carrier gas ﬂow, the functional ink is ﬁrst atomized into droplets (2– 
5 m) and then transferred to the print head. AJP has the potential to print with highly 
viscous inks and even on curved surfaces maintain a good resolution.

3D Printed Electronics: Role of Materials and Processes
35
2.7 
Inkjet Printing 
Using a nozzle to deposit drops which may be coupled to a basin of liquid material, 
inkjet printing is a type of digital printing. The resolution level is determined by 
the droplet’s volume and area covered as it leaves the nozzle. Additionally, it is 
reliant on how the substrate wets. When it comes to reducing ﬂoor space, the initial 
investment, and the commissioning time, inkjet or digital printing facilities are a 
preferred option among other printing equipment. A production line can be scaled 
up to produce electronic prototypes using simultaneous printing on a large number 
of printers. 
Due to their superior conductivity and endurance (several thousands of operating 
hours), inorganic/metal inks are most frequently utilized for inkjet printing. The 
affordable materials can be utilized for single-use applications like radio frequency 
identiﬁcation (RFID) antennas, which are often employed as distinguishing tags 
for inventory control in retail outlets or to expedite payment processes. Continuous 
inkjet (CIJ) and drop-on-demand (DOD) printing techniques are the two primary 
inkjet printing subcategories (Figs. 2 and 3).
2.8 
Aerosol Jet Printing 
Aerosol jet printing (AJP) provides a rapid way to create miniature features on 
the substrate material. The technique does not require a mask, therefore, some-
times referred to as maskless material deposition. Various electronic components 
and devices can be printed with this technique. Moreover, many materials can be 
used in this process such as materials required for the fabrication of dielectric and 
conductive traces. In contrast to conventional electronics production or commonly 
used direct-write technologies, a key component of AJP facilitates the development 
of a wide range of devices with higher geometric complexity. 
The technique can be used for fabricating intricate features and even solar cells 
and screens. A wide range of material viscosities can be used in AJP and printing 
can be done on even nonplanar surfaces. The gas ﬂow that results from atomization 
or ultrasonication produces a spray of tiny droplets that power the aerosol printing 
process. Because it can handle, AJP is regarded as the most intriguing technology 
among other contact-less printing methods since it can print on various materials with 
greater resolution designs. Figure 3 illustrates the comparison of printing techniques.

36
P. Akashraj et al.
Fig. 2 Categorization of inkjet printing
3 
Material for 3D Printed Electronics 
Printing conductive materials has gained the most interest among these methods 
for the manufacture of complex 3D electronics due to the durability, affordability, 
and development of new printers. Printing enables the construction of intricate elec-
trical circuits in a 3D way, in contrast to conventional microfabrication techniques 
that often produce ﬂat devices. When using different 3D printing methods for elec-
tronics manufacture, knowledge of the spectrum of materials and accendibility, or 
from prototype to manufacturing, are crucial factors to take into account. Under-
standing the characteristics of the existing materials for electronic manufacturing 
and the technologies employed is essential to comprehending the future function 
of 3D printing processes. These fundamental electronic parts are constructed from 
functional materials including metal, semiconductors, dielectrics, and polymers that 
may be connected, printed, or physically positioned on a variety of substrates using

3D Printed Electronics: Role of Materials and Processes
37
Fig. 3 Comparison of printing techniques for printed electronics [25]
various printing and patterning methods. The materials for 3D printed electronics 
can be solids, inks, pastes, etc. 
3D printed electronics can be made using various materials such as: 
1. Conductive Filaments: ﬁlaments that contain conductive materials such as metals 
or carbon-based composites. 
2. Resins: photopolymer resins that contain conductive materials or nanoparticles. 
3. Metal Powders: metal powders such as copper or nickel that can be sintered or 
fused using a laser or other heat source to create conductive paths within a 3D 
printed structure. 
4. Graphene and Carbon Nanotubes: These materials can be added to resins or 
ﬁlaments to enhance their conductive properties. 
5. Silicone Rubber: silicone rubber for ﬂexible and stretchable electronics. 
The choice of material depends on the speciﬁc requirements of the 3D printed 
electronics such as ﬂexibility, conductivity, and resistance to heat or chemicals. To 
be processed in the same layer as other functional, dielectric, and photo-imageable 
materials, printable materials must be physically stable toward them. Devices and 
packages must maintain their structural and electrical integrity and be sturdy to 
provide a longer service life. Since organic and polymeric materials have several 
beneﬁts, such as processing under low temperatures, durability, and a large possi-
bility for change in structure, organic materials have been extensively sought for 
these uses. Nanomaterials are also a great choice for 3D printed electronics because 
of the biggest potential advantage for high speed, miniature innovative bundling that 
is offered by nanomaterials, composites, and hybrids. These structures are extremely

38
P. Akashraj et al.
unusual materials with a wide range of intriguing uses because of their tiny dimen-
sions, strength, and exceptional physical and electrical characteristics. Functional 
polymer, composite, and hybrid-based semiconductor devices are regarded as good 
choices for applications involving electronics, where they completely use printable 
polymer technologies and various ﬁllers may be added to a functional polymer 
system. Advanced packaging uses have been described for several nanocomposites. 
There is room for improvement in the current materials, allowing for the develop-
ment of low processing temperature, adaptable, and affordable printable processes, 
as well as materials for mass production, even though some of the nanocomposites 
used to advance semiconductor packaging technology are not always printable. 
3.1 
Conductive Polymer Filaments 
Over the past two decades, conductive inks have attracted a growing amount of 
interest and are transforming the industry. Mainly because of their qualities including 
conductivity, appropriateness for printing substrates, ease of processing, and mechan-
ical ﬂexibility, as well as for their capacity to impart new traits, prowess, and intricate 
functions. 
For use in electronics, a wide range of materials, including organic and inorganic 
materials as well as conductors and semiconductors, have been investigated. Water, 
oil, or solvent-based inks are the most popular varieties. The ink’s basic composi-
tion consists of various substances both in solid and liquid-based materials, each 
with unique properties that are tailored to the characteristics of printing technology, 
allowing the ink to be applied to a wide range of applications with ease. Because 
conductive nanoscale particles are included in the mix, conductive inks are electri-
cally conductive. Metallic nanoparticles are frequently stabilized in ink solutions by 
organic ligand shells or capping agents. This creates a uniform and stable dispersion 
and prevents particles from sticking to one another [25]. 
3.2 
Semiconductors 
Semiconductors adjust their electrical characteristics in reaction to environmental 
factors such as electric ﬁelds, mechanical strains, and chemical adsorptions. However, 
under electrical control, they can also change their physical properties. Semiconduc-
tors are necessary for many different electronic devices, including transistors and 
sensors, because of these characteristics. Even though silicon- or oxide-based inor-
ganic semiconductor materials have traditionally been used in high-performance 
electronics by the photolithography-based subtractive fabrication process, organic 
semiconductor materials have been actively researched as 3D printable inks due to 
their easy deformability and solubility to various organic solvents [26].

3D Printed Electronics: Role of Materials and Processes
39
In general, inorganic semiconductors perform better and are more stable than 
organic semiconductors. As a result, research was done on creating printable ink 
using inorganic semiconductor materials. Dynamic 3D structures are made possible 
by semiconducting inks’ manipulation of viscosity. 
3.3 
Dielectric 
Electrically insulating materials have been made easier to use as dielectric materials 
for transistors and capacitors, or as substrates on which other electronics may be built. 
Electronics’ structural variety and integrity have recently been shown to increase with 
the use of 3D printing for insulating materials. Electrically insulating materials have 
been made easier to use as dielectric materials for transistors and capacitors, or as 
substrates. Electronics’ structural variety and integrity have recently been shown 
to increase with the use of 3D printing for insulating materials. Despite having a 
lower dielectric constant than inorganic materials, polymers have been intensively 
explored as 3D printed inks because of their low processing temperature properties. 
Particularly, the brittleness of inorganic materials can become a restriction in ﬂexible/ 
soft electronics, while organic materials can get around this problem. The use of 
hybrid ink made of organic–inorganic substances has recently been described in 
investigations for 3Dprintable dielectric layers. 
3.4 
Metallic Nanoparticle 
They have unique physical, chemical, and biological properties that make them 
promising materials for 3D printed electronics. For example, nanoparticles can be 
used as conductive inks in 3D printing to create electronic devices with high conduc-
tivity and improved mechanical properties. Additionally, nanoparticles can be used 
in the development of 3D printed sensors, actuators, and energy storage devices. 
Nanoparticle-based 3D printing has the potential to revolutionize the way electronics 
are manufactured and enable the creation of new and innovative devices. The indi-
vidual metallic nanoparticles in metallic nanoparticle inks are enclosed in a layer of 
insulating organic additives and stabilizing agents and suspended in liquid media. 
In addition to preventing the metallic nanoparticles from agglomerating, the organic 
additives and stabilizing agents also obstruct the passage of electrons from the parti-
cles to the surface [27]. Figure 4 shows some of the applications of nanocomposite 
in 3D printed electronics.

40
P. Akashraj et al.
Fig. 4 Overview of some of the potential applications of nanocomposite in 3D printed electronics 
[27] 
3.5 
Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene 
Because of their unique traits, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are still one of the most 
researched materials in use today. They ﬁnd use in wearable electronics, energy 
storage and harvesting devices, optoelectronics, chemical sensors, and water ﬁlters. 
Conductive inks and an accumulation process make use of several printing methods, 
including screen printing, transfer printing, and contact printing, creating conductive 
patterns on ﬂexible substrates like carbon nanotubes. The conductive inks used in 
printing techniques are mainly based on volatile solutions containing conducting or 
semiconducting micro- and nanoscale materials, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 
graphene, conducting polymer nanoparticles, metallic nanorods, or a mix of this 
material [3]. Because of exceptional mechanical qualities, particularly electrical 
conductivity, CNT-based inks in particular have become an attractive contender for 
the construction of malleable electronics utilizing printing technology. Additionally, 
the adaptability of CNTs has made it possible to print a variety of devices, including 
ﬂexible actuators, supercapacitors, sensors, and transistors. 
The ink is suitable for screen printing, dip coating, and traditional printing 
methods. Additionally, it has two-step 3D printing capabilities, which would make it 
simple to fabricate patterned conductive structures on a variety of ﬂexible substrates 
without subjecting them to difﬁcult processing conditions. 
4 
Applications of 3D Printed Electronics 
The innovative technology of 3D printing commonly referred to as additive manufac-
turing or AM, has been around for quite some time but has recently gained more and 
more popularity. 3D printed electronics offer great potential for building complex 
objects with multiple features.

3D Printed Electronics: Role of Materials and Processes
41
Fig. 5 The e-3DP procedure 
is illustrated schematically 
[30] 
3D printed electronics have been presented as the next additive frontier. In previous 
years, a large amount of research and effort related to 3D printed electronics has 
been carried out by universities and industry. Due to its layer-by-layer or point-by-
point properties, 3D printing encourages the integrated assembly and embedding 
of additional components. Sensors, electronics, and embedded components, among 
others, are incorporated into 3D printed goods. In printed electronics, metal-based 
particle-containing solutions or suspensions are used to print contacts and intercon-
nects. Metal nanoparticles, often known as nanoparticle inks, are employed in ink 
formulations in the suspension form [28, 29]. 
4.1 
Stretchable Electronics 
Stretchable electronics are a brand-new class of electronic devices made possible by 
recent interest in wearable electronics and soft robotics (Fig. 5). e-3DP’s invention of 
incredibly ﬂexible sensors opens up new options for manufacturing soft-functioning 
gadgets for wearable electronics, soft robotics, and other applications. It makes it 
possible for electrical devices to have conformance, a lightweight design, and shock-
resistant construction, which are difﬁcult to achieve when utilizing rigid substrates 
like glass plates and semiconductor wafers [30]. 
4.2 
Radio Frequency Antenna 
AM has potential use in the construction of RF antennas (Fig. 6). Due to material and 
processing limitations, conventional antennas are rarely conformal or ﬂexible, but 
AM makes it possible to create antennas that are more effective, lighter in weight, 
and smaller in size. Because UAVs are frequently used for high-risk missions and 
certain UAVs are not designed to be retrieved at all, the advantages of AM in terms 
of faster fabrication times and lower costs become increasingly alluring for UAV

42
P. Akashraj et al.
Fig. 6 Antenna radiating patch parts made additively and b feed network with SMA connector 
[31] 
antennas. Increased installation sites, reduced weight, smaller size, and lower cost 
are made possible by this impact of aerodynamics on the airborne platform. 
Figure 6 shows a conformal AM antenna as an illustration. An existing UAV plat-
form’s skin was used in the design of this antenna to ensure a smooth ﬁt. Using a 
poly jet printer, the substrate material was 3D-produced and had a variety of curva-
tures throughout the sample. The micro-dispense nozzle is kept evenly spaced from 
the substrate throughout the printing process thanks to the printer’s utilization of 
the coordinates established by laser mapping. This guarantees that the ﬁnal print 
will have the greatest resolution available. This technique was used to print the feed 
network, the vias linking the two, and the radiating patch elements [31]. 
4.3 
3D Structural Electronics 
A PµSL (projection micro stereolithography) method is one method used to construct 
3D structures. Combining hybrid manufacturing and additive manufacturing (AM)

3D Printed Electronics: Role of Materials and Processes
43
Fig. 7 a A game die with a microcontroller and an accelerometer. b, c A magnetometer system 
that includes a microcontroller and orthogonal Hall Effect sensors [25] 
technologies will enable fully 3D, high-resolution, multi-material, and large-area 
fabrication. The conductive tracks were created by combining DWC (direct-write/ 
cure) with CNT/polymer nanocomposites, which could pave the way for a new 
generation of affordable 3D structural electronics in the ﬁeld of consumer, defense, 
and medical electronics (Fig. 7). The use of various viscous materials in a single build 
might cause contamination problems, and there are still difﬁculties with throughput, 
limited materials, and conductive inks that can cure at low temperatures [25]. 
5 
Conclusions 
3D printed electronics offer great potential for the fabrication of electronic compo-
nents and devices. Compared to traditional techniques 3D printed techniques offer 
numerous advantages for printed electronics. Utilizing the beneﬁts of 3D printing 
techniques has opened new avenues in the ﬁeld of printed electronics. Moreover, the 
development of viable materials for the fabrication of electronic components and 
devices has further paved the way for the utilization of the 3D printing approach for 
printed electronics. One of the main beneﬁts of 3D printing electronics is the ability 
to create highly customized and optimized devices. This customization can lead to 
better performance and efﬁciency compared to off-the-self-help components. Addi-
tionally, not all materials are suitable for electronic components, so careful selection 
is important. Despite these challenges, 3D printing electronics has the potential to 
revolutionize the way we design and manufacture electronic devices, especially for 
small-scale production and prototyping. As the technology continues to improve 
and mature, we will likely see even more innovative applications of 3D printing 
in electronics. It can be concluded that 3D printed electronics have revolutionized 
the way we think about manufacturing and production. It offers numerous beneﬁts 
over traditional methods, such as speed, customization, and cost-effectiveness. The 
ability to print complex electronic components and circuits with precision and accu-
racy has opened new possibilities in various ﬁelds, including healthcare, aerospace, 
and consumer electronics. Additionally, the technology has the potential to reduce

44
P. Akashraj et al.
waste and environmental impact by allowing for on-demand production and mini-
mizing the need for excess inventory. While there are still challenges to overcome, 
such as improving the speed and quality of printing, the future looks bright for 3D 
electronic printing, and it is sure to continue to transform the manufacturing industry 
in the years to come. 
References 
1. Espera AH, Dizon JRC, Chen Q, Advincula RC (2019) 3D-printing and advanced manufac-
turing for electronics. Prog Addit Manuf 4(3):245–267 
2. Flowers PF, Reyes C, Ye S, Kim MJ, Wiley BJ (2017) 3D printing electronic components and 
circuits with conductive thermoplastic ﬁlament. Addit Manuf 18:156–163 
3. Das RN, Lin HT, Lauffer JM, Markovich VR (2011) Printable electronics: towards materials 
development and device fabrication. Circuit World 37(1):38–45 
4. Maalderink HHH, Bruning FBJ, de Schipper MMR, van der Werff JJJ, Germs WWC, Remmers 
JJC, Meinders ER (2018) 3D printed structural electronics: embedding and connecting 
electronic components into freeform electronic devices. Plast, Rubber Compos 47(1):35–41 
5. Wiklund J, Karakoç A, Palko T, Yi˘gitler H, Ruttik K, Jäntti R, Paltakari J (2021) A review 
on printed electronics: fabrication methods, inks, substrates, applications, and environmental 
impacts. J Manuf Mater Process 5(3):89 
6. Rigon D, Ricotta M, Meneghetti G (2020) A literature survey on the structural integrity of 3D 
printed virgin and recycled ABS and PP compounds. Procedia Struct Integr 28:1655–1663 
7. Yan C, Yang X, Wu H (2023) 4D printing of stimuli-responsive materials. Addit Manuf, 85–112 
8. Saengchairat N, Tran T, Chua C-K (2017) A review: additive manufacturing for active electronic 
components. Virtual Phys Prototyp 12(1):31–46 
9. Lau G-K, Shrestha M (2017) Ink-jet printing of micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). 
Micromachines 8(6):194 
10. Smith M, Choi YS, Boughey C, Kar-Narayan S (2017) Controlling and assessing the quality 
of aerosol jet printed features for large area and ﬂexible electronics. Flex Print Electron 
2(1):015004 
11. Lin C-T, Hsu C-H, Chen I-R, Lee C-H, Wu W-J (2011) Enhancement of carrier mobility in all-
inkjet-printed organic thin-ﬁlm transistors using a blend of poly(3-hexylthiophene) and carbon 
nanoparticles. Thin Solid Films 519(22):8008–8012 
12. de Gans B-J, Duineveld PC, Schubert US (2004) Inkjet printing of polymers: state of the art 
and future developments. Adv Mater 16(3):203–213 
13. Li M, Li Y-T, Li D-W, Long Y-T (2003) Recent developments and applications of screen printed 
electrodes in environmental assays—a review. Anal Chim Acta 734:31–44 
14. Cruz SMF, Rocha LA, Viana JC (2018) Printing technologies on ﬂexible substrates for printed 
electronics. Flex Electron 
15. Elschner A, Kirchmeyer S, Lovenich W, Merker U, Reuter K (2010) PEDOT: principles and 
applications of an intrinsically conductive polymer. CRC Press 
16. Kim K, Kim G, Lee BR, Ji S, Kim S-Y, An BW, Song MH, Park J-U (2015) High-resolution 
electrohydrodynamic jet printing of small-molecule organic light-emitting diodes. Nanoscale 
7(32):13410–13415 
17. Kimura Y, Nagase T, Kobayashi T, Hamaguchi A, Ikeda Y, Shiro T, Takimiya K, Naito H (2015) 
Soluble organic semiconductor precursor with speciﬁc phase separation for high performance 
printed organic transistors. Adv Mater 27(4):727–732 
18. Kwon J, Takeda Y, Shiwaku R, Tokito S, Cho K, Jung S (2019) Three-dimensional monolithic 
integration in ﬂexible printed organic transistors. Nat Commun 10(1):54

3D Printed Electronics: Role of Materials and Processes
45
19. Ortiz RP, Facchetti A, Marks TJ (2010) High- k organic, inorganic, and hybrid dielectrics for 
low-voltage organic ﬁeld-effect transistors. Chem Rev 110(1):205–239 
20. Jung S, Kim JH, Kim J, Choi S, Lee J, Park I, Hyeon T, Kim D-H (2014) ReverseMicelle-
induced porous pressure-sensitive rubber for wearable human-machine interfaces. Adv Mater 
26(28):4825–4830 
21. Shin SR, Farzad R, Tamayol A, Manoharan V, Mostafalu P, Zhang YS, Akbari M, Jung SM, 
Kim D, Comotto M, Annabi N, Al-Hazmi FE, Dokmeci MR, Khademhosseini A (2016) A 
bioactive carbon nanotube-based ink for printing 2D and 3D ﬂexible electronics. Adv Mater 
28(17):3280–3289 
22. Lu B-H, Lan H-B, Liu H-Z (2018) Additive manufacturing frontier: 3D printing electronics. 
Opto-Electron Adv 1(1):17000401–17000410 
23. Molesa S, Redinger DR, Huang DC, Subramanian V (2003) High-quality inkjet-printed multi-
level interconnects and inductive components on plastic for ultra-low-cost RFID applications. 
MRS Proc 769:1–6 
24. Palavesam N, Marin S, Hemmetzberger D, Landesberger C, Bock K, Kutter C (2018) Rollto-
roll processing of ﬁlm substrates for hybrid integrated ﬂexible electronics. Flex Print Electron 
3(1):014002 
25. Tan HW, An J, Chua CK, Tran T (2019) Metallic nanoparticle inks for 3D printing of electronics. 
Adv Electron Mater 5(5):1800831 
26. Lin C-T, Hsu C-H, Lee C-H, Wu W-J (2011) Inkjet-printed organic ﬁeld-effect transistor by 
using composite semiconductor material of carbon nanoparticles and poly(3-Hexylthiophene). 
J Nanotechnol, 1–7 
27. Tan HW, Tran T, Chua CK (2016) A review of printed passive electronic components through 
fully additive manufacturing methods. Virtual Phys Prototyp 11(4):271–288 
28. Muth JT, Vogt DM, Truby RL, Mengüç Y, Kolesky DB, Wood RJ, Lewis JA (2014) Embedded 
3D printing of strain sensors within highly stretchable elastomers. Adv Mater 26(36):6307– 
6312 
29. Heckman EM, Bartsch CM, Kreit EB, Aga RS, Ouchen F (2020) Printed electronics for 
aerospace applications, 93–104 
30. Lu Y, Vatani M, Choi J-W (2013) Direct-write/cure conductive polymer nanocomposites for 
3D structural electronics. J Mech Sci Technol 27(10):2929–2934 
31. Goh GL, Zhang H, Chong TH, Yeong WY (2021) 3D printing of multilayered and multimaterial 
electronics: a review. Adv Electron Mater 7(10):2100445

Electrochemical Micromachining: 
A Review on Principles, Processes, 
and Applications 
Rishikant Mishra, Ravi Pratap Singh, and R. K. Garg 
1 
Introduction 
Industries such as automotive, aerospace, electronics, optics, medical devices, and 
communications have experienced a signiﬁcant increase in the necessity for large-
and small-scale products and parts created from machining-impossible materials 
including titanium alloys, super alloys, carbides, tool steel, and carbides. Despite 
having remarkable properties, many of these materials are underutilized. Using 
traditional machining techniques like turning and milling on these materials is chal-
lenging. For example, titanium alloys tend to harden during work and have poor heat 
conductivity and high chemical reactivity, which leads to high cutting temperatures, 
tool wear, and strong adherence to the workpieces. A better option for creating precise 
3D complicated shapes characteristics and parts out of difﬁcult-to-machine materials 
is electrochemical micromachining (ECMM). This technique employs electrochem-
ical reactions to selectively remove material from the workpiece, resulting in the 
fabrication of micro-objects with high precision and accuracy, including complex 
geometries and high aspect ratio structures. ECMM is a versatile and cost-effective 
method that can be applied to a wide range of materials, such as metals, semicon-
ductors, and ceramics. Its ability to create microstructures with high precision and 
accuracy has made electrochemical micromachining a promising option for various 
applications, such as micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), microﬂuidics, and 
biomedical devices. The utilization of challenging-to-process substances such as tita-
nium alloy and Inconel alloy has notably risen in present times. There is a group of
R. Mishra envelope symbol · R. K. Garg 
Department of Industrial and Production Engineering, Dr B R Ambedkar National Institute of 
Technology, Jalandhar, Punjab, India 
e-mail: rishikantm.ip.22@nitj.ac.in 
R. P. Singh 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National Institute of Technology Kurukshetra, Thanesar, 
Haryana, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_5 
47

48
R. Mishra et al.
nickel-based superalloys that can uphold their durability despite being repeatedly 
exposed to elevated temperatures. This alloy possesses improved welding charac-
teristics and has robust strength, high-temperature resistance, and protection against 
corrosion [1]. 
There are several variations of the process being researched around the world 
right now, including pulsed electrochemical machining (PECM), through-mask elec-
trochemical micromachining (TMECMM), wire-electrochemical machining (Wire-
ECM), jet-electrochemical machining (Jet-ECM), and electrochemical grinding 
(ECG). From a fundamental standpoint, all variations of ECM use the same material 
removal mechanism (anodic dissolution at the ionic level in the presence of elec-
trolyte), but they vary in the size, form, and kinematics of the tool and workpiece 
[2]. The anodic dissolution rate, surface topology, and precision of the machined 
component or feature in the ECM process are inﬂuenced by the kinematics and 
elemental composition of the electrolysis in the electrode spacing. During any elec-
trochemical reaction, mass movement signiﬁcantly affects these parameters [3]. As 
the electrochemical dissolution process progresses, byproducts of electrolysis, such 
as air pockets and precipitates begin to form in the interelectrode gap and inﬂuence 
the electrical conductivity of the electrolyte. For better mass transportation, often 
a speed of (15–45 m/s) electrolyte jet is needed (hence, machining accuracy). Due 
to the electrolyte’s high momentum, electrolysis products are efﬁciently and swiftly 
evacuated from the cutting zone as sludge. In the case of micromachining, however, 
issues including vibrations of the machine’s structure and microtools as well as elec-
trolyte loss must be dealt with. An alternative approach to isolate the dissolving 
region and promote effective sludge draining is to use a pulsating power source. 
In this scenario, the electrolysis is allowed to relax between two successive pulses 
by following the machining time with idle time. The alternating current method for 
various anodic dissolutions of low-carbon steel and copper was the prior name for 
the pulsing technique [3–5]. 
Until now, various experimental studies have been conducted on microelectro-
chemical machining to explore the impact of multiple process parameters on its 
performance. These parameters can be classiﬁed into six categories, as illustrated in 
Fig. 1 using a ﬁshbone diagram. For the purpose of microelectrochemical machining, 
to obtain precise and controlled material removal, optimizing various machining 
settings is crucial. The tool feed rates, electrolyte concentration, electrolyte concen-
tration, applied voltage, and pulse amplitude, all have an impact on how much 
material is removed from the surface and how rough it is.
The impact of various process parameters on the performance of micro-ECM is 
outlined in Table 1. This paper aims to bridge a signiﬁcant gap in the current state 
of knowledge regarding ECMM and its hybrid variants. This review aims to better 
understand ECMM with microelectrochemical machining-based hybrid microma-
chining technologies in a single document because the creation of hybrid processes 
necessitates a thorough grasp of the parent process. While there are fundamental 
reviews on electrochemical micromachining in the literature, like those found in 
references [9–12], these articles only cover the early fundamental understanding of

Electrochemical Micromachining: A Review on Principles, Processes …
49
Fig. 1 Fish-bone diagram
the ﬁeld. References [9] and [10] provided an early introduction to localized elec-
trochemical machining processes many years ago, while Bhattacharya et al. [11] 
presented the basics of ECMM. Landolt et al. [12] focus on fundamental chemical 
factors, mass transport effects, passive oxide laser etching, and the formation of multi-
level structures. A review of electrochemical machining drilling by Sen et al. [13] 
focused on hole quality and the effects of process factors. They did not, however, 
fully address issues like tooling, interelectrode spacing, energy sources, and the 
choice of electrolyte for particular materials. It should be noted that since the review 
was conducted, technology has rapidly progressed. A conference review article [14] 
provided a brief overview of ECM technology and did not go into the speciﬁcs of the 
processes involved. It mainly consisted of information gathered from existing liter-
ature on ECM. On the other hand, Leese et al.’s work [15] presented an overview of 
process parameters involved in ECM. In this review article provided, an overview of 
ECM technology by including the latest research from both academic and industrial 
ﬁelds. This article is aimed at audiences from both academia and industry.
2 
Principle of Material Removal 
The fundamental idea behind the removal of material in microelectrochemical 
machining (micro-ECM), which involves anodic dissolution of the workpiece, is 
the same as that in electrochemical machining. In contrast, the goal of microelectro-
chemical machining is to pinpoint material removal in order to obtain exact control

50
R. Mishra et al.
Table 1 Observed parameter of process performance in µ-electrochemical machining [6–8] 
Machining gap
MRR
Surface ﬁnish
Shape precision 
Electrolyte concentration 
Voltage 
Duty cycle 
Pulse on time 
Pulse frequency
over the morphology. Compared to other localized material removal procedures, 
micro-ECM provides a number of beneﬁts. For instance, because the dissolving 
takes place at the atomic level, it is unaffected by the workpiece’s hardness, can be 
utilized to make complex shapes, and has no tool wear. As a result, the surface quality 
is very good. 
Micro-ECM may be precisely controlled in micromachining by applying ultra-
short pulse power. Furthermore, it is a non-contact technique that doesn’t generate 
any machining forces, making size effects irrelevant. To improve process capabilities 
and widen the material processing area, micro-ECM can potentially be integrated 
with several other processes. Finally, electrical factors like electrical current and 
voltage as well as pulse properties like frequency ratio, on time, length, and pulse 
duration can be used to accurately control material removal rates in micro-ECM. 
The workpiece serves as the anode as well as the tools electrode as the cathode in an 
anodic reaction. The metallic workpiece goes through oxidation during this process, 
which releases electrons [16]. 
Various process inputs utilized in the electrochemical machining process are 
shown in Fig. 1 with the help of the Ishikawa diagram in which four main factors, 
i.e., electrolyte, tool used in the process, workpiece nature, and electrical parameters 
considered in the process are highlighted with their subparts. 
Schematic diagram of ECM process with the pulse power supply is shown in 
Fig. 2. The main elements of the ECM process are connected in series.

Electrochemical Micromachining: A Review on Principles, Processes …
51
Fig. 2 Schematic diagram of ECMM 
3 
Literature Review 
Kumar et al. [17] conducted experiments on the ﬂoating metal powder with moving 
on Stainless steel 316L through the ECMM process. The purpose of the experiment 
was to investigate the effectiveness of ECMM in cutting SS316L using citric acid 
as an environmentally friendly electrolyte. The results of employing copper powder 
material immersed in a citric acid electrolyte without the aid of a mechanical over-
head stirrer were compared to those of using copper powdered material immersed in 
an acid electrolyte with that assistance. To determine the output performance char-
acteristics, such as material removal rate and overcut, the researchers changed the 
input effect of various parameters, including operating voltage, pulse duration, and 
solution concentration. 
A study conducted by Ayyappan et al. [18] investigate the use of a magnetic 
ﬂux-assisted low-frequency vibrating tool as a productive hybrid ECM method to 
improve MRR and surface quality index. The researchers created a mathematical 
model that connected surface roughness with machining factors like voltages, solu-
tion concentration, and IEG. Despite its potential beneﬁts, ECM was not widely used 
due to accuracy issues, challenges in tool design, and parameter control difﬁculties. 
Using contour plots, the importance of electrochemical machining process variables 
was examined. 
Singh et al. [19] introduced a new experimental technique, known as “one param-
eter at a time” approach, to evaluate a diamond cut-off grinding system using elec-
trochemical methods on a locally made setup. The study focused on the grinding 
of nickel-based superalloy (Inconel 925), which is challenging to machine using 
traditional methods. Electrochemical grinding is a valuable technique for machining 
conductive materials that are newly developed or difﬁcult to cut.

52
R. Mishra et al.
Sethi et al. [20] investigate how nitinol dissolves electrochemically in different 
electrolytes for micro-ECM purposes. Nitinol is an ideal shape memory alloy for 
microelectromechanical systems, especially in biomedical applications, due to its 
super elasticity, biocompatibility, and shape memory effect. However, the conven-
tional machining process for creating micro features on nitinol is difﬁcult because 
of its temperature-dependent material transformation properties. 
Ayyappan et al. [21] investigate the ECM properties of 20MnCr5 steel in their 
work. Certain mechanical regulating parts, which are challenging to produce using 
conventional machine tools, like pistons screws, spindle, overhead cams, gearboxes, 
and shaft, are frequently made of this type of alloy steel, particularly, 20MnCr5. 
To investigate the machining performance, the researchers used two electrolytes— 
aqueous potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7) and sodium chloride (NaCl). K2Cr2O7 
was added to the NaCl bath due to its oxidizing properties. The rate of material 
removal and surface roughness were the two variables that the study looked at in 
relation to common electrochemical machining parameters such voltage level, IEG, 
and solution concentration. 
Cao et al. [22] study to investigate the behavior of TA15 anode in anode dissolving 
and obtain the necessary surface attributes for counter-rotating electrochemical 
machining. The researchers measured the anodic characteristics and examined the 
passive–trans passive behavior of TA15 using a polarized and voltammetry curve. 
Unfortunately, limited research has been done on the anodic behavior of the counter-
rotating state. A quantitative dissolution model was developed to explain the elec-
trochemical dissolution and structural evolution of the revolving surfaces after elec-
trochemical impedance spectroscopy was used to investigate the electrode structure 
at various phases. 
Rahi et al. [23] conducted a study to use an electrochemical method to cut 
metal matrix composites. However, they faced two signiﬁcant obstacles: low mate-
rial removal rate and oxide layer buildup on the machined surface. To overcome 
these issues, they proposed a hybrid approach combining conventional grinding and 
electrochemical machining. To test this approach, they designed an electrochemical 
surface grinding experiment to compare its effectiveness with the ECM method for 
cutting the challenging Al-SiC-Gr metal matrix composite. 
Rajesh et al. [24] examined how several electrochemical hole-digging process 
variables, such as supply voltage, electrolyte solution, and pulse duration, affected the 
rate at which material was removed from aluminum 7075 alloy composites containing 
silicon carbide and ﬂy ash particles. These composites have potential applications 
in the construction of trusses, frameworks, and vessels that hold pollutants, dairy, 
and other acidic substances in areas with high salt concentration, as an alternative to 
stainless steel, which is commonly used to prevent corrosion. 
The impact of several factors on the macroelectrochemical machining of 
aluminum alloy 7075 composite with silicon carbide and ﬂy-ash was examined by 
Chinailli et al. [25]. To examine the effects of process variables such voltages, solu-
tion concentration, interelectrode spacing, as well as drilling time, the researchers 
employed a central composite design technique. According to the study, drilling time, 
voltage, and electrolyte concentration all had a substantial impact on the drilled hole

Electrochemical Micromachining: A Review on Principles, Processes …
53
removal rate of material and surface quality. The surface morphology and elemental 
makeup of the drill holes were also examined by the researchers using scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). 
Singh and Sharma [26] investigated the usage of innovative thermoplastic slit 
proﬁles in electrochemical machining (ECM). The performance of the thermoplastic 
slit proﬁles in comparison to traditional slit proﬁles was assessed using a micro-ECM 
setup in terms of the amount of material removed and surface quality. The study found 
that the thermoplastic slit proﬁles produced a higher MRR and a lower SR compared 
to the conventional slit proﬁles. The researchers also observed a longer tool life for 
the thermoplastic slit proﬁles, indicating that they had less tool wear compared to 
the conventional slit proﬁles. 
Vijayakumar et al. [27] studied the optimizing electrochemical micromachining 
(ECMM) process for a copper alloy. The removal rate of material and surface quality 
are two examples of the output parameters that the authors investigate using a (RSM). 
Voltage, solution concentration, and IEG are the three input parameters that are varied 
in the experimental design. The authors use a Box-Behnken design to generate 15 
experimental runs, with the removal rate of material and surface quality observed 
from each run. The resulting data is used to build regression models for each output 
parameter, which are then optimized using a multiobjective genetic algorithm. 
Aravind and Hiremath [28] developed a model to optimize the microelectro-
chemical machining (micro-ECM) parameters for machining holes on copper plates. 
The impact of various input variables, such as ion concentration, voltage, and 
machining time, on the rate of material removal and surface morphology of the 
machined holes was examined by the researchers using a mathematical model and 
the response surface methodology (RSM). The surface shape and elemental makeup 
of the machined surface were further examined using an EDS and a scanning elec-
tron microscopy. The ﬁndings demonstrated that a greater MRR and a lower SR were 
produced by the ideal set of input parameters. 
Kumar et al. [29] investigated the use of electrochemical jet machining (ECJM) 
for surface ﬁnishing of an additively manufactured (AM) part. The researchers used 
a stainless steel AM part and evaluated the surface roughness (SR) and material 
removal rate (MRR) of the part using ECJM. To examine the impact of various 
parameters, including electrolyte concentration, tools feed rate, and applied voltage 
on the SR and MRR, the study employed a Taguchi-based methodology. 
In order to increase the removal rate of material (MRR) and decrease sludge 
formation during the ECM of the Monel 400 alloy, Nagarajan et al. [30] examined 
the application of a meta-heuristic approach. To examine the impact of multiple 
input factors, including machining voltage, solution concentration, tools feed rate, 
and machining time on the MRR and sludge formation, the researchers employed 
a Taguchi-based design of experiments (DOE) strategy. The grey wolf optimization 
(GWO) algorithm was employed in the study to enhance the input variables and 
improve the efﬁciency of the machining. The results showed that the GWO algorithm 
produced better results compared to the Taguchi-based DOE approach in terms of 
MRR and sludge reduction.

54
R. Mishra et al.
Deepak and Hariharan [31] investigated the inﬂuence of auxiliary electrodes and 
magnets on electrochemical machining (ECM) of SS304 using NaCl and NaNO3 
electrolytes. The experimental setup involved a stainless steel workpiece, a copper 
auxiliary electrode, and a magnet, which were placed in the electrolyte solution. The 
outcomes showed that the addition of copper auxiliary electrodes reduced the surface 
roughness of the machined surface, with a smoother surface being produced by the 
NaNO3 electrolyte than by NaCl. The presence of a magnet had a considerable 
impact on the rate of machining, with the magnetized setting outperforming the 
non-magnetized setup. 
Kumar et al. [32] investigate the impact of tool rotation on the fabrication process 
of micro-tools using electrochemical micromachining (ECMM) technology. ECMM 
is a non-conventional process that is used to fabricate micro- and nano-scale features 
on conductive materials. The study evaluates how the ECMM process is affected 
by two alternative tool rotation speeds. The researchers have found that a fast-
rotating tool produced a more even distribution of material removal throughout the 
tool surface, producing a smoother tool surface and a more exact shape. They also 
found that higher rotation speeds allowed for a faster fabrication process, with a 
higher material removal rate. 
Sahai et al. [33] investigate a new method for micromachining silicon using a 
combination of electrochemical and spark-assisted milling techniques. The study 
aims to develop an efﬁcient and cost-effective method for fabricating microstruc-
tures on silicon, which is an important material for microelectromechanical systems 
(MEMS) and microﬂuidics. The researchers ﬁrst developed a mathematical model of 
the M-ECSMM process, which takes into account the various parameters involved 
in the machining process, such as voltage, current, and electrolyte concentration. 
4 
Future Scope and Research Aspects for Research 
in ECMM 
Electrochemical micromachining (ECMM) is a specialized ﬁeld that involves the use 
of electrochemical processes to fabricate miniature structures and devices with high 
precision and accuracy. The technology has numerous applications across several 
industries, including microelectronics, medical devices, and aerospace. In recent 
years, there has been a growing interest in the use of ECMM for fabricating micro-
electromechanical systems (MEMS) and microﬂuidic devices. These tiny devices 
have the potential to revolutionize several ﬁelds, including biomedical research, 
drug delivery, and diagnostic testing. The future scope of research in ECMM is 
quite promising, and some of the key areas of focus include: 
1. Development of new electrochemical machining techniques: Researchers are 
constantly working to improve existing ECMM techniques and develop new 
methods that can produce even more precise and complex structures.

Electrochemical Micromachining: A Review on Principles, Processes …
55
2. Advancement of MEMS technology: The development of MEMS technology is 
a major focus in ECMM research, and future advancements in this area could 
lead to the creation of new devices with improved capabilities and functionality. 
3. Integration of ECMM with other fabrication techniques: The integration of 
ECMM with other fabrication techniques such as photolithography and 3D 
printing could lead to the creation of even more complex structures and devices. 
4. Applications in biomedical research: ECMM has several potential applications 
in biomedical research, including the fabrication of microscale sensors for moni-
toring biological processes and the creation of microﬂuidic devices for drug 
delivery. 
Overall, the future scope of research in ECMM is quite broad, and continued 
advancements in this ﬁeld could have signiﬁcant impacts across several industries. 
5 
Conclusion 
Based on a study of numerous machining methods, researchers have concluded that 
ECMM is highly useful for machining aero-engine components, biomedical compo-
nents, etc. This review article proposes a potential advancement in electrochemical 
machining or hybrid techniques, as well as the design of intricate machining proﬁles, 
numerical analysis of the electrochemical process, and prediction of anode shape 
using ﬂow ﬁeld simulation. The following recommendations are made for additional 
research. 
1. Precision and necessary geometric accuracies can be challenging to achieve when 
machining high-strength material. Electrochemical micromachining (ECMM), 
one of the available machining techniques, is frequently used to make prod-
ucts of excellent quality from metals and alloys and can minimize machining 
time and expense. According to the available literature, it has been shown that 
employing the electrochemical micromachining technique to machine these high-
temperature titanium alloys produced certain results that are appealing to users 
in the industry and provide room for future research. 
2. The majority of research is focused on fundamental questions, such as how well 
different materials can be machined, how well processes can be developed, how 
to use pulsed power supplies, and how to use parametric studies to evaluate 
process performance. There are a few areas that still require investigation and 
are not fully developed: development of specialized machinery, evaluation of 
the micro-ECM process’s product and process characteristics, the correlation 
between material clearance and micro-ECM pulses, interelectrode phenomena 
characterization using customized settings, multidisciplinary modeling, which 
takes into account bubble phenomena, mass and charge movement, and the 
fundamental concept of the micro-ECM process creation of ecologically friendly 
electrolytes and alternatives for acidic electrolytes.

56
R. Mishra et al.
3. The design and development of universal or multifunctional machine tools that 
can be used with multiple process energies, understanding of material removal 
mechanisms on different materials when two or more process energies act simul-
taneously in the same machining zone, and synchronization of two process ener-
gies on the same machining axis to control precision of material removal and 
shape control are a few of the critical elements that literature has not yet fully 
addressed. enhancing knowledge of the interplay between two process energy. 
4. ECMM offers several advantages over traditional micromachining techniques, 
such as high accuracy, excellent surface ﬁnish, and the ability to machine complex 
geometries. ECMM can be used for a variety of applications, including micro-
electrodes, micromolds, microﬂuidic devices, and micro-sensors. The process 
capabilities of ECMM can be enhanced by combining it with other microma-
chining technologies, such as micro-milling, microgrinding, and laser machining, 
to form hybrid variants. 
5. The development of micro-scale features on a variety of materials, including 
metals, semiconductors, and insulators, is made possible by the promising 
ECMM technology. Hybrid variants of ECMM can provide additional beneﬁts, 
such as improved material removal rate, reduced machining time, and enhanced 
surface quality. 
6. The development of a passivation layer on the workpiece surface, which can 
restrict the rate of material removal and lower machining precision, is one of 
the main difﬁculties faced by ECMM. Several approaches have been developed 
to overcome this challenge, including the use of high-frequency pulsing, the 
application of ultrasonic vibration, and the addition of surface-active agents. 
7. The choice of electrolyte solution is critical for achieving high-quality machining 
results in ECMM. The electrolyte solution should have high conductivity, low 
viscosity, and high stability. The process variables, like feed rate, voltages, solu-
tion concentration, and current density, greatly affect how well the ECMM can 
machine materials. 
Overall, ECMM and its hybrid variants offer great potential for producing high-
quality microscale features on a wide range of materials, and further research and 
development are needed to fully explore their capabilities and applications. 
Acknowledgements The authors would like to recognize the monetary support attained from 
SERB, New Delhi, India under grant no EEQ/2021/000031. 
References 
1. Sharman ARC, Hughes JI, Ridgway K (2004) Workpiece surface integrity and tool life issues 
when turning inconel 718TM nickel based superalloy. Mach Sci Technol 8(3):399–414. https:// 
doi.org/10.1081/MST-200039865 
2. Patel D, Jain VK, Ramkumar J (2018) Micro texturing on metallic surfaces: state of the art. 
Proc Inst Mech Eng Part B J Eng Manuf 232(6): 941–964

Electrochemical Micromachining: A Review on Principles, Processes …
57
3. Datta M, Landolt D (1975) Surface brightening during high rate nickel dissolution in nitrate 
electrolytes. J Electrochem Soc 122(11):1466–1472. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2134043 
4. Berkeley L (2011) This is a library circulating copy 
5. Mao K-W (1973) Anodic polarization study of mild steel in NaCl solution during electrochem-
ical machining. J Electrochem Soc 120(8):1056. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2403627 
6. Bhattacharyya B, Munda J (2003) Experimental investigation on the inﬂuence of electrochem-
ical machining parameters on machining rate and accuracy in micromachining domain. Int J 
Mach Tools Manuf 43(13):1301–1310. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0890-6955(03)00161-5 
7. Kim BH, Ryu SH, Choi DK, Chu CN (2004) Micro electrochemical milling. J Micromechanics 
Microengineering 15(1):124 
8. Kurita T, Chikamori K, Kubota S, Hattori M (2006) A study of three-dimensional shape 
machining with an ECµM system. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 46(12–13):1311–1318. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2005.10.013 
9. Van Osenbruggen C (1985) Electrochemical micromachining. Philips Tech Rev 42:22 
10. Papers K (1999) New developments in electro-chemical machining. 48(2):567–579 
11. Bhattacharyya B, Munda J, Malapati M (2004) Advancement in electrochemical micro-
machining. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 44(15):1577–1589. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools. 
2004.06.006 
12. Landolt D, Chauvy PF, Zinger O (2003) Electrochemical micromachining, polishing and 
surface structuring of metals: fundamental aspects and new developments. Electrochim Acta 
48(20–22):3185–3201. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0013-4686(03)00368-2 
13. Sen M, Shan HS (2005) A review of electrochemical macro-to micro-hole drilling processes. 
Int J Mach Tools Manuf 45(2):137–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2004.08.005 
14. Rajurkar KP, Sundaram MM, Malshe AP (2013) Review of electrochemical and electrodis-
charge machining. Procedia CIRP 6:13–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2013.03.002 
15. Leese R, Ivanov A (2018) Electrochemical micromachining: review of factors affecting the 
process applicability in micro-manufacturing. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part B J Eng Manuf 
232(2):195–207. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954405416640172 
16. Joshi SS, Marla D (2014) 11.15-electrochemical micromachining. Compr Mater Process, 373– 
403. Oxford Elsevier 
17. Vinod Kumaar JR, Thanigaivelan R, Soundarrajan M (2022) A performance study of electro-
chemical micro-machining on SS 316L using suspended copper metal powder along with stir-
ring effect. Mater Manuf Process 37(13):1526–1539. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2022. 
2030874 
18. Ayyappan S, Sivakumar K, Kalaimathi M (2017) Electrochemical machining of 20MnCr5 alloy 
steel with magnetic ﬂux assisted vibrating tool. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part C J Mech Eng Sci 
231(10):1956–1965. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954406215623310 
19. Singh R, Narayan A (2022) Parametric study of indigenously developed electrochemical 
diamond cut-off grinding setup using inconel 925. Int J Mach Mach Mater 24(5):370–390 
20. Sethi A, Acharya BR, Saha P (2022) Study of the electrochemical dissolution behavior of 
nitinol shape memory alloy in different electrolytes for micro-ECM process. Int J Adv Manuf 
Technol 121(9–10):7019–7035. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-022-09802-z 
21. Ayyappan S, Sivakumar K (2015) Investigation of electrochemical machining characteristics 
of 20MnCr5 alloy steel using potassium dichromate mixed aqueous NaCl electrolyte and opti-
mization of process parameters. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part B J Eng Manuf 229(11):1984–1996. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0954405414542136 
22. Cao WJ, Wang DY, Cui GW, Zhu D (2022) Anodic dissolution mechanism of TA15 titanium 
alloy during counter-rotating electrochemical machining. Sci China Technol Sci 65(6):1253– 
1262. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11431-021-1999-7 
23. Rahi DK, Dubey AK (2022) Comparative study of machining quality for the Al--SiC--Gr 
hybrid metal matrix composite using ECM and ECSG. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part C J Mech Eng 
Sci 236(12):6740–6751 
24. Rajesh S et al (2022) Electrochemical machining of aluminium 7075 alloy, silicon carbide, 
and ﬂy ash composites: an experimental investigation of the effects of variables on material 
removal rate. Mater Today Proc 62:863–867. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2022.04.054

58
R. Mishra et al.
25. Swamy Chinamilli NVS et al (2023) An empirical study of the impacts of parameters in micro 
electrochemical drilling of Al 7075 alloy composites with SiC and ﬂy-ash. Mater Today Proc. 
72:2464–2468. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2022.09.453 
26. Singh R, Sharma AD (2023) Innovative thermoplastic slit proﬁles for electrochemical 
machining. Int J Interact Des Manuf. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12008-022-01174-8 
27. Vijayakumar K, Jayaseelan GAC, Shakil OV M, Asharaf MJ M, Nafeel VC M (2023) Multi-
objective optimization of electrochemical micromachining of copper alloy by response surface 
methodology. AIP Conf Proc 2523(1):20001 
28. Aravind S, Hiremath SS (2023) Modelling of micro-electrochemical machining parameters 
used for machining of holes on copper plate. J Indian Chem Soc 100(3):100933. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jics.2023.100933 
29. Kumar P, Dixit P, Chaudhary B, Jain NK (2023) Surface ﬁnishing of an additively manufactured 
part using electrochemical jet machining. Mater Today Commun 35 December 2022, 105581. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtcomm.2023.105581 
30. Nagarajan V et al (2022) Meta-heuristic technique-based parametric optimization for electro-
chemical machining of monel 400 alloys to investigate the material removal rate and the sludge. 
Appl Sci 12(6). https://doi.org/10.3390/app12062793 
31. Deepak J, Hariharan P (2022) Study on the inﬂuence of auxiliary electrode and magnet 
on electrochemical machining of SS304 using NaCl and NaNO3. Surf Topogr Metrol Prop 
10(1):15045 
32. Kumar A, Yadav HNS, Kumar M, Das M (2022) Effect of tool rotation on the fabrication of 
micro-tool by electrochemical micromachining. J. Micromanufacturing 5(2):217–223. https:// 
doi.org/10.1177/25165984211031687 
33. Sahai K, Narayan A, Yadava V (2023) Development and experimental study of milling elec-
trochemical spark micromachining (M-ECSMM) of silicon. SILICON 15(1):473–497. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s12633-022-02023-9

Friction and Wear Characteristics 
of Engine Oil Through Four-Ball Tester 
Venkateswara Babu Peddakondigalla, Ismail Syed, Vasavi Boggarapu, 
P. S. Rama Sreekanth, Santosh Kumar Sahu, Venkata Dinesh Avvari, 
Rajani Doppalapudi, and Lakshmi Sunitha Vikram 
1 
Introduction 
It is well-known that proper lubrication is one of the critical factors that enhance 
the tribological behavior of interacting sliding surfaces. Lubricant is a widely used 
element between the interacting surfaces in various mechanical components, which 
are in relative motion. The condition and performance of the lubricant oil affect 
the overall performance of the mechanical systems. The properties of the engine 
oil reﬂect the performance of an internal combustion (IC) engine, and thus affect 
fuel consumption [1]. The primary purpose of a lubricating oil is to enhance the anti-
friction and anti-wear behavior of the interacting surfaces by avoiding metal-to-metal 
contact. In addition, it can also reduce corrosion, temperature, contamination, and 
vibrations between the sliding surfaces. Proper lubrication enhances the working life 
as well as the fuel efﬁciency of the engine. The tribological properties such as friction 
and wear of engine components can signiﬁcantly affect the engine performance. If 
the tribological performance of the engine components decreases, the working life 
of the engine reduces. The relationship between lubricating oil and the performance
V. B. Peddakondigalla 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vasireddy Venkatadri Institute of Technology, Guntur, 
Andhra Pradesh, India 
I. Syed 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National Institute of Technology Warangal, 
Hanamkonda, Telangana, India 
V. Boggarapu · P. S. R. Sreekanth envelope symbol · S. K. Sahu · V. D. Avvari 
School of Mechanical Engineering, VIT AP University, Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh, India 
e-mail: happyshrikanth@gmail.com 
R. Doppalapudi 
Department of English, RVR and JC College of Engineering, Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India 
L. S. Vikram 
Department of Physics, RVR and JC College of Engineering, Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_6 
59

60
V. B. Peddakondigalla et al.
Table 1 Properties of selected lubricants 
Lubricant
Density (gm/cm3)
Flash point (°C)
Kinematic viscosity at 40°C (cSt) 
SAE20W-50
0.87
214
172.3 
SAE15W-40
0.866
232
107 
SAE10W-30
0.875
210
67.5 
of the engine is an important diagnostic tool to decide the overall efﬁciency of the 
engine [2]. 
Recently, some of the researchers used the synthetic engine oils such as SAE15W-
40 and SAE10W-30 for tribological analysis of sliding pairs under different 
contact conditions [3–7]. Furthermore, many researchers utilized the four-ball tester 
assembly in order to evaluate the tribological performance, load-carrying capacity, 
extreme pressure, and extreme temperature analysis of the different lubricants under 
different scenarios [8–13]. In the present work, different engine oils are tested in 
order to select the appropriate lubricant for better tribological performance. The 
experiments are conducted on a four-ball tester and the lubrication performance of 
considered engine oils is characterized. 
2 
Experiment 
2.1 
Test Lubricants 
In the present work, three lubricants, namely, SAE20W-50, SAE15W-40, and 
SAE10W-30, were selected, which are commercially available lubricants for auto-
mobiles. The selected lubricants are synthetic in nature, and the viscosity of these 
lubricants does not change much during the test period. Castrol India Limited supplies 
all the selected lubricants, and the same brand has been used during all the tests. These 
are tested on a four-ball tester for a better understanding of their frictional and wear 
properties. The properties of the selected lubricants are presented in Table 1. 
2.2 
Apparatus 
The selected lubricants are tested for better lubricity performance in terms of friction 
and wear properties. The friction and wear tests are conducted on a four-ball tester 
(Ducom made, model: TR-30L-IAS) according to a standard test procedure of ASTM 
D4172. The schematic view of the four-ball tester assembly is shown in Fig. 1. The  
four-ball tester assembly consists of four steel balls out of which three balls remain 
stationary, while the fourth ball rotates against these three balls (see Fig. 1).

Friction and Wear Characteristics of Engine Oil Through Four-Ball Tester
61
Fig. 1 Four-ball tester assembly 
Before each test, the four steel balls are cleaned with acetone and wiped dry with 
a tissue. Three steel balls are placed in a ball pot and tightened to a torque of a 
minimum 67 Nm using a torque wrench in order to avoid relative motion between 
them. Then, 10 ml of test lubricant is poured into the ball pot and ensured that the 
lubricant ﬁlls all the voids in the ball pot. This ball pot is placed beneath the spindle 
to which the fourth ball is ﬁxed through a collet chuck, and this ball rotates against 
three balls, which are placed in the ball pot. 
The operating conditions of a four-ball tester are shown in Table 2. Each test is 
conducted for 1 h, and new steel balls are used for each test. After each test, the fric-
tional torque can be measured with the help of a torque sensor for the corresponding 
applied normal load. Afterward, the friction coefﬁcient is calculated by Eq. (1). 
upper F r  i c t  i  o n c o e f f i c i e n t equals StartFraction upper T StartRoot 6 EndRoot Over 3 upper W 1 r EndFraction
√
upper F r i c t i o n c o e f f i c i e n t equals StartFraction upper T StartRoot 6 EndRoot Over 3 upper W 1 r EndFraction
upper
 F r i c t i o n c o e f f i c i e n t equals StartFraction upper T StartRoot 6 EndRoot Over 3 upper W 1 r EndFraction
Table 2 Operating 
conditions of four-ball tester
Parameter
Condition 
Experimental conditions (ASTM D4172) 
Load
15 kg 
Speed
600, 900, 1200, 1500 rpm 
Test duration
1 h  
Testing ball conditions 
Ball material
AISI E-52100 
Ball diameter
12.7 mm 
Ball hardness
62 HRC 
Ball roughness
0.1 µm

62
V. B. Peddakondigalla et al.
Fig. 2 Wear scar captured by image acquisition system 
where, T is the frictional torque in Kg-mm, W1 is the applied load in Kg, and r 
(3.67 mm) is the center distance between the contacting lower ball surfaces to the 
axis of rotation. 
After the completion of each test on the four-ball tester, the wear scar diameter 
of three stationary balls which are in ball pot is measured with the help of an image 
acquisition system, as shown in Fig. 2. It consists of a camera to capture the image 
of the wear scar and a compound lens to capture the image at predeﬁned focal length 
to measure the wear scar diameter. The wear scar can be viewed on the PC with the 
help of SCARVIEW software, and the wear scar is measured using the ellipse tool. 
The focal length can be adjusted to get a clear image, and this image is captured by 
the camera, which would be transferred and stored in a PC. 
3 
Results and Discussion 
The variation of frictional torque for different test lubricants is depicted in Fig. 3. 
The tests are conducted at an applied load and rotating speed of 15 kg and 1200 rpm, 
respectively. Among the tested lubricants, SAE10W-30 shows maximum frictional 
torque while SAE15W-40 exhibits minimum frictional torque (see Fig. 3).
Figure 4 shows the measured mean friction coefﬁcient and wear scar diameter 
of different tested lubricants at an applied load of 15 kg and speed of 1200 rpm. 
It is observed that the mean friction coefﬁcient of SAE20W-50, SAE15W-40, and

Friction and Wear Characteristics of Engine Oil Through Four-Ball Tester
63
Fig. 3 Frictional torque versus time for different lubricants
SAE10W-30 lubricants are 0.097, 0.092, and 0.116, respectively (see Fig. 4a). The 
mean wear scar diameter for SAE20W-50, SAE15W-40, and SAE10W-30 lubricants 
are 72 µm, 68 µm, and 78 µm, respectively (as can be seen in Figs. 4b and 5). The 
test results revealed that lubricant SAE15W-40 exhibits excellent frictional and wear 
resistance when compared with other lubricants. This friction and wear reduction 
with SAE15W-40 lubricant may be due to lower frictional torque when compared 
with other lubricants, which can be observed in Fig. 3. 
Fig. 4 a Friction coefﬁcient and b Wear scar diameter of different lubricants

64
V. B. Peddakondigalla et al.
Fig. 5 Measured wear scar diameters of different lubricants by the image acquisition system 
4 
Conclusion 
In the present work, the lubrication performance of various lubricants is tested 
according to ASTM D4172. The lubrication performance is evaluated in terms of 
friction coefﬁcient and wear scar diameter. The results exhibited that SAE15W-40 
has excellent anti-friction and anti-wear properties, and thus good lubrication perfor-
mance compared to SAE20W-50 and SAE10W-30 lubricants. The percentage reduc-
tion of 5.2%, 20.7% in friction coefﬁcient, and 5.5%, 12.8% in wear scar diameter are 
achieved with SAE15W-40 compared to SAE20W-50 and SAE10W-30, respectively. 
References 
1. Yadav G, Tiwari S, Jain ML (2018) Tribological analysis of extreme pressure and anti-wear 
properties of engine lubricating oil using four ball tester. Mater Today: Proc 5(1):248–253 
2. Farhanah AN, Bahak MZ (2015) Engine oil wear resistance. J Tribol 4, 10−20 
3. Grabon W, Koszela W, Pawlus P, Ochwat S (2013) Improving tribological behaviour of piston 
ring–cylinder liner frictional pair by liner surface texturing. Tribol Int 61:102–108 
4. Ryk G, Kligerman Y, Etsion I (2012) Experimental investigation of laser surface texturing for 
reciprocating automotive components. Tribol Trans 45(4):444–449

Friction and Wear Characteristics of Engine Oil Through Four-Ball Tester
65
5. Babu PV, Ismail S, Ben BS (2020) Experimental and numerical studies of positive texture effect 
on friction reduction of sliding contact under mixed lubrication. Proc Inst Mech Eng, Part J: J 
Eng Tribol 1350650120930911 
6. Babu PV, Syed I, Beera SB (2020) Inﬂuence of positive texturing on friction and wear properties 
of piston ring-cylinder liner tribo pair under lubricated conditions. Ind Lubr Tribol 71(4):515– 
524 
7. Babu PV, Syed I, Ben BS (2020) Optimization of texture geometry for enhanced tribological 
performance in piston ring-cylinder liner contact under pure hydrodynamic and mixed lubrica-
tion. In: Innovative product design and intelligent manufacturing systems. Springer, Singapore, 
pp 799–808 
8. Suresha B, Hemanth G, Rakesh A, Adarsh KM (2020) Tribological behaviour of neem oil with 
and without graphene nanoplatelets using four-ball tester. Adv Tribol 2020:1–11 
9. Aiman Y, Syahrullail S (2017) Development of palm oil blended with semi synthetic oil as a 
lubricant using four-ball tribotester. J Tribol 13:1–20 
10. Saravanakumar N, Saravanan MJ, Barathkumar KE, Kannan KG, Karthikeyan R (2019) Devel-
opment and testing of nano particulate lubricant for worm gear application. J Mech Sci Technol 
33(4):1785–1791 
11. Dandan MA, Samion S, Yahaya WMAW, Hadi F (2019) Tribological analysis of modiﬁed 
RBD palm kernel containing anti-oxidant additive using four-ball tribotester. J Adv Res Fluid 
Mech Therm Sci 56(2):157–164 
12. Nazare MI, Paleu V, Bhaumik S, Ianu¸s G, Olaru DN (2018) Performances of automotive 
lubricants–tests on four ball machine. MS&E 444(2):022013 
13. Deri MM (2019) Evaluation of engine oil mix with palm oil using four ball tribotester with 
various speed. J Biolubricant Eng Sci 1(2):1–3

Recent Trends in 4th Industrial 
Revolution for A Sustainable 
Future–A Review 
Suman Gothwal, Alok Vardhan, Ashiwani Kumar, and Pradeep Jain 
1 
Introduction 
Recent technology advances have led to “Industry 4.0”. It surpasses mechani-
sation, industrialisation, and computerisation. Industry 4.0 covers data manage-
ment, manufacturing processes, competitiveness, and efﬁciency. Industry 4.0 concept 
involves information and communication technologies, cyber-physical systems, arti-
ﬁcial intelligence, big data analytics, IoT, autonomous robotics, cloud computing, 
and augmented reality. These technologies may be the main drivers of automated and 
digital industrial environments. These technologies enable intelligent manufacturing 
by allowing devices, machines, production modules, and products to autonomously 
share information, trigger action, and control each other [1]. Industry 4.0 also goals 
to integrate human personnels into industrial processes to enhance, add value, and 
reduce waste. 
The steam engine sparked the ﬁrst Industrial Revolution in England in the mid-
eighteenth century. Steam and water power mechanised manufacturing [2]. Europe 
and the United States began the second Industrial Revolution in the late nineteenth 
century, harnessing electrical power for mass production [3]. The third Industrial 
Revolution employed electronics and computer technology to automate production in 
several industrialised countries in the late twentieth century [4, 5]. The steam engine, 
electricity, and digital technologies used in the ﬁrst three Industrial Revolutions 
increased production and efﬁciency [6]. Industry 4.0’s smart factory technologies
S. Gothwal envelope symbol · A. Vardhan · P. Jain 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Ajay Kumar Garg Engineering College, 
Ghaziabad 201009, India 
e-mail: gothwalsuman@akgec.ac.in 
A. Kumar 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Feroze Gandhi Institute of Engineering and Technology, 
Raebareli (UP), India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_7 
67

68
S. Gothwal et al.
Fig. 1 From industry 1.0 to industry 5.0 
have a huge impact on the industry. Figure 1 shows Industrial Revolution 1 to 5 
(future) with special features and the year of revolution. 
Germany’s strategic plan coined “Industry 4.0”. Hannover Messe, a German 
industrial expo, introduced Industry 4.0 in 2011. German Trade and Invest (GTAI) 
calls Industry 4.0 “a paradigm change enabled by technology innovations that 
reverses the previous industrial process logic”. Industrial manufacturing equipment 
now “trains” products instead of just “processing” them [7]. As per experts, three 
potential areas of the industry’s future are more clarity in energy system, demand 
ﬂexibility, and energy efﬁciency. Industry 4.0 and the sustainable energy transition 
share basic qualities that might promote the transition. The sustainable development 
goal (SDG)’s energy, climate, and other aims might guide integrated approaches. 
Industry 4.0 prioritises energy efﬁciency. 
2 
Industry 4.0 Technologies 
Industry 4.0 originally had nine pillars: big data, cyber-physical systems, the Internet 
of Things, 3D printing, robotics, simulation, augmented reality, cloud computing, 
and cyber security [8]. For better conceptual clariﬁcation, these technologies and 
their relevance have been explained in detail.

Recent Trends in 4th Industrial Revolution for A Sustainable …
69
2.1 
Big Data and Data Analytics 
Data science analyses data sets using methods, scientiﬁc models, assumptions, and 
specialised equipment and software. Smart gadgets and advanced technologies like 
IoT, AI, social networking (SNS), and others have increased data sources, digital 
content, types, forms, and structure [9]. Five exabytes or ﬁve million terabytes of 
data are created daily [10]. Industry 4.0 generates data from sensors, log ﬁles, video/ 
audio, network trafﬁc, transactions, and social media [11]. 
Analysis complexity affects accuracy and quality. As ﬁrms receive more compli-
cated data, they need technical, math/statistical, and business skills to design and 
provide an appropriate solution. 
Thus, big data or heterogeneous data is generated daily and develops fast. Big data 
differs in volume, variety, honesty, velocity, and value [9, 12]. Big data gives indus-
tries and intelligent manufacturing several advantages, merits, and beneﬁts via predic-
tive and prospective insights. Therefore, to remain competitive, organisations should 
implement and apply contemporary advanced analytical tools, methods, methodolo-
gies, and applications for processing big data, obtaining insight, and recovering the 
value of each case’s vital data. Big data analytics (BDA) uses parallel and analytic 
methods to analyse massive amounts of diverse, fast-changing data, making it easier 
to acquire, analyse, and manage vital information and statistics [9, 13]. The best 
method for companies to surpass competition, optimise operations, boost produc-
tivity, quality, and efﬁciency, and minimise operating costs is to use newly discovered 
information to deliver important insights and improve equipment servicing and main-
tainability [14]. Businesses must change their decision-making culture and remember 
that human understanding is still needed, even as big data and analytic technologies 
grow [12]. Figure 2 shows the data science model, Fig. 3 shows industry-wide appli-
cations and use cases, and Fig. 4 shows data analytics methodology, implementation, 
and measurement.
2.2 
The Internet of Things (IoT) 
Atzori et al. [16] describe IoT as “global network of uniquely addressable things 
employing standard communication protocols”. Vermesan et al. [13] describe IoT 
as a self-conﬁguring, global network architecture with open, standardised commu-
nication protocols. This network includes “things” with identities, physical traits, 
and virtual personalities [17]. Intelligent manufacturing uses the Industrial Internet 
of Things (IIoT). IIoT uses modern fundamental technologies to improve system 
efﬁciency [18]. IIoT services and apps increase industrial process and system plan-
ning, management, and scheduling [14, 19]. Networked devices will decentralise 
analytics and decision-making for real-time reactions [20]. Minimising unexpected 
downtime improves “availability, maintainability, operational efﬁciency, produc-
tivity, and new product time-to-market”. It boosts industry [19]. Khan et al. [21]

70
S. Gothwal et al.
Fig. 2 The data science model [15] 
Manufacturing
Retail 
Supply 
Chain 
Assortment 
Planning 
Quality & 
Promotion 
Planning 
& 
Measurement 
Process 
Improvem
-ent 
Revenue & 
Cost 
Demand 
Forecasting 
Market Basket 
Analysis 
Customer 
Segmentation 
Healthcare 
Clinical 
Care 
Predictive 
Care 
Related 
Analysis 
Service 
Demand 
Forecasting 
Service 
Quality 
Analysis 
Customer 
Segmentation 
Promotion 
Analysis 
Banking & 
Finance 
Customer 
Transaction 
Analysis 
Credit 
Scoring 
Risk 
Analysis 
IT& ITES
Software 
Development 
Cycle Time 
Demand 
Forecastin 
g, Market 
Potential 
Fig. 3 Industry wide application and use cases [15]
examined “interoperability, standardisation, data and information secrecy, encryp-
tion, privacy, name and identity management, IoT greening, object and network secu-
rity”. Miorandi et al. examined communication, identiﬁcation, distributed system, 
intelligence, security, data privacy, conﬁdentiality, and trust [22]. Gubbi et al. studied 
“safe reprogrammable networks, privacy, QoS, energy-efﬁcient sensing, architecture, 
and protocols, GIS-based visualisation, data mining, and cloud computing” [23]. 
Borgia includes “object mobility, M2M communications, device and data manage-
ment, network architecture, system design, addressing, naming, trafﬁc categoriza-
tion, and security” [24]. As per Perera et al., privacy, data analytics, product and

Recent Trends in 4th Industrial Revolution for A Sustainable …
71
Problem 
Statement 
Data
Exploratory 
Data Analysis 
Feature 
Engineering 
Model 
Tunning/Testing
Model Building
Dimension 
Reduction 
Feature 
Selection 
Model 
Validation 
Model 
Explainability 
Model 
Deployment
Model ROI 
Fig. 4 A typical data analytics process, implementation, and measurement [15]
service interoperability, resource and energy management are key challenges [25]. 
AL-Faqaha et al. “examined IoT challenges and QoS demands such as availability, 
reliability, mobility, performance and management, scalability and interoperability, 
security, and privacy” [26]. Breivold and Sandstrom list IIoT problems as fault toler-
ance, functional safety, data latency and scalability, mixed-criticality, and secure 
real-time collaboration [27]. Lee considers data management, mining, security, and 
privacy the biggest IoT problems [28]. Sadeghi et al. [29] evaluated IIoT security, 
privacy, and attack weaknesses. 
2.3 
The Cloud 
Benchmarking, colour management, and remote services utilise Cloud. Cloud 
computing, sometimes known as “Cloud”, is a kind of outsourcing that uses 
many computer servers and resources to provide computer programmes, high-level 
services, and resources on demand or on a paper-cycle basis [30]. Wang et al. deﬁne 
cloud computing as “A set of network-enabled services that offer scalable, QoS-
guaranteed, frequently customisable, and economical computing infrastructure on 
demand that can be accessed in a simple and broad way” [31]. Cloud computing 
services include SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS, which provide different levels of solution stack 
virtualisation and management [30]. Advanced apps and services that expand with 
users are one of the biggest beneﬁts of cloud computing [32]. Consumers and compa-
nies may quickly access “Cloud” applications, programmes, and services with little 
administrative effort and from anywhere and at any time. Thus, industrial companies 
use cloud-based customer relationship management (CRM) and human resources 
management (HRM) apps to enhance critical processes. Cloud computing also elim-
inates the hassle of creating and maintaining an IT infrastructure and the upfront 
costs of the “Pay-as-you-go” approach [32]. Letting ﬁrms start as small and expand

72
S. Gothwal et al.
as demand rises [33, 34]. Due to cloud computing’s fast growth, a wide range of 
applications and many advantages, businesses of all sorts are quickly adopting it to 
increase their capacity and capabilities at the lowest cost [34]. 
2.4 
Autonomous Robots 
Industry 4.0 relies on robotic manufacturing methods that prioritise safety, ﬂexi-
bility, diversity, and cooperation. More industrial robots are helping the Industrial 
Revolution with contemporary technologies. People and robots, work together using 
smart sensors and human–machine interfaces in Industry 4.0. Intelligent robots can 
be controlled by remote [35]. 
Industry 4.0 pioneers include some cutting-edge robotics. The lightweight Kuka 
LBR IIWA (Industrial Intelligent Work Assistant) is designed for human–robot coop-
eration on delicate tasks. It can independently check, optimise, and record its results 
while connected to the cloud [36]. Bosch also offers the APAS family robot system, 
which includes the APAS assistant, inspector, and base, for agile and ﬂexible produc-
tion based on a production system that can be easily retooled [37]. Rethink Robotics’ 
Baxter makes interactive packages. BioRob Arm works near humans. Automated 
equipment performs repetitive operations quickly and accurately in locations where 
humans cannot reach easily [11]. 
2.5 
Augmented Reality 
Augmented Reality (AR) is used in computer and video games, social networking 
app ﬁlters, education, and learning to merge digital and real-world information. 
Milgram and Kishino [38] deﬁned augmented reality as the interaction between 
real space, virtual space, and any intermediate mixed space in 1994. The AR Tool 
Kit was originally released outside US academic institutions at SIGGRAPH in 1999, 
launching the AR company. Two years later, it was released as open-source software. 
Smartphones and tablets have all the sensors and processing units needed to design 
and launch augmented reality apps. The Emacula contact lenses by Innoyega, the 
Vuzix blade 3000 AR glasses, and the Meta 2 AR headset are examples of emerging 
kinds of AR gadgets. Augmented reality’s fast growth and widespread usage suggest 
a major social inﬂuence. AR in industry accelerates and improves product design 
and manufacturing development by boosting communication. 
Some of the industrial AR applications: human–robot collaboration, maintenance-
assembly-repair, training, product inspection, and building surveillance. Human– 
robot collaboration uses AR to create industrial robot interfaces. AR boosts 
maintenance-assembly-repair productivity. AR enhances skills in training. Inspec-
tors may ﬁnd product ﬂaws using a sophisticated and adaptive AR system. Finally, 
augmented reality simpliﬁes facility issues in building monitoring.

Recent Trends in 4th Industrial Revolution for A Sustainable …
73
2.6 
Cyber Security 
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) underpin Industry 4.0 [39]. CPS automate physical 
reality operations using computer and communication infrastructures [40, 41]. A 
CPS are a network-capable embedded system. The “Internet of Things” includes 
internet-connected CPS. CPS connect devices, unlike standard embedded systems 
[41]. In today’s digitally networked culture, CPS provide information and services 
everywhere. 
CPS, the Internet of Things, and services have started the fourth Industrial Revo-
lution. Germany leads CPS with almost 20 years of experience. Internet-enabled 
objects provide new services including cost-effective and efﬁcient Internet-based 
diagnostics, maintenance, and operation. It also helps to adopt new business models, 
operational concepts, and intelligent controls while focussing on the user and their 
needs [42]. 
2.7 
3D Printing 
3D printing, known as additive manufacturing (AM) in Industry 4.0, can create 
complex metal or plastic structures [8]. AM, unlike subtractive manufacturing, 
combines materials to create a whole assembly using 3D model data created using 
particular software tools, frequently layer by layer [43, 44]. It allows varied produc-
tion locations, reduced transportation, and inventories [11]. Due to technological 
breakthroughs, additive manufacturing in industry is growing despite worries about 
its mass production practicality. Since it can quickly produce precise, strengthened, 
and intricate items, it may replace traditional manufacturing procedures in the future. 
AM will improve technologies. Metal additive manufacturing is popular in this new 
age because metals are the most widely utilised industrial material [14, 16–19]. Digi-
talisation and the need to reduce product life cycles are attracting more sectors. Tech-
nologies like fused deposition, selective laser melting, and selective laser sintering 
are also covered [11]. 
2.8 
Simulation 
Product development and production are simulated using real-time data. Simulation 
can provide real-time data to speed up and improve testing. This optimises proce-
dures and settings before production. It may speed up and improve product quality 
also. Plant operations need extensive simulation. Simulation may ensure product 
quality and reduce market price volatility [11]. It can decrease error-related down-
time. Simulation helps Industry 4.0 to create exploratory and planning models for 
better decision-making, design, and operation of complex systems.

74
S. Gothwal et al.
3 
Opportunities, Issues, and Challenges in Industry 4.0 
These new technologies enable real-time monitoring to improve product quality and 
encourage innovation across a wide range of applications, which has a stronger inﬂu-
ence on economic growth. Automation and optimisation improve output, provide 
economic advantages through lower transaction and transit costs, predictive and 
remote maintenance, effective use of resources and staff, energy-efﬁcient and 
ecologically friendly production system, and many more. 
In the age of Industry 4.0, developing nations must keep up with the technology. 
Digital strategies demand technological knowledge and a business-friendly envi-
ronment. Establishing places for discussion, information exchange and experience 
sharing would help society and government ﬁrms to boost up the development 
of emerging technologies for inclusive and sustainable industrial and economic 
progress. 
These new technologies will have numerous beneﬁts but also drawbacks. 
Researchers found many concerns and impediments, including: many present 
systems lack autonomy, most network protocols lack capacity, and many sectors 
have yet to secure data quality and integrity [45]. There is no standard technique for 
data entity annotations [46], complicated system modelling and analysis are not yet 
viable [45], and changing production routes to accept a big dynamical reconﬁgura-
tion for individualised and customised goods is challenging [11], CPS stability, new 
talent development, privacy, ethics, and management change, outdated international 
laws, and data quality. 
4 
Conclusion and Future Work 
The fourth Industrial Revolution of the twenty-ﬁrstst century enables intelligent, 
effective, personalised and tailored production. This study examines Industry 4.0, 
its development, and its components. Industrial progress has been extensively docu-
mented. The beneﬁts, drawbacks, and challenges of Industry 4.0 are discussed with 
its nine pillars. Since Industry 4.0 is new, future challenges will undoubtedly rise. 
Industry 4.0 may change an organisation’s value chain and provide it with a compet-
itive edge in the global market. It promotes social growth, good governance, and 
transparency. 
References 
1. Weyer S, Schmitt M, Ohmer M, Gorecky D (2015) IFAC-Papers on Line 48(3):579–584 
2. Lasi H, Fettke P, Kemper HG, Feld T, Hoffmann M (2014) Industry 4.0. Bus Inf Syst Eng 
6:239–242

Recent Trends in 4th Industrial Revolution for A Sustainable …
75
3. Chen B, Wan J, Shu L, Li P, Mukherjee M, Yin B (2017) Smart factory of industry 4.0: key 
technologies, application case, and challenges. IEEE Access 6:6506–6519 
4. Acemogu D (2002) Technical change, inequality, and the labor market. J Econ Lit 40(1):7–72 
5. Tunzelmann NV (2003) Historical coevolution of governance and technology in the industrial 
revolutions. Struct Chang Econ Dyn 14(4):365–384 
6. Schuh G et al (2013) Sust. Increase of overhead productivity due to cyber-physical system. In: 
Seliger G (ed) Proceedings of the 11th global conference on sustainable manufacturing 
7. Kumar A, Kumar S (2020) Industry 4.0: evolution, opportunities and challenges. Int J Res Bus 
Stud 5(1). ISSN: 2455–2992 
8. Yang F, and Gu S (2021) Industry 4.0, a revolution that requires technology and national 
strategies. Complex & Intell Syst 7:13, 11–1325 
9. Gahi Y, Guennoun M, Mouftah HT (2016) Big data analytics: security and privacy challenges. 
In: 2016 IEEE symposium on computers and communication (ISCC). IEEE, pp 952–957 
10. Proctor M, Wilkins J (2019) 4.0 sight—digital industry around the world. Technical report, EU 
Automation 
11. Vaidya S, Ambad P, Bhosle S (2018) Industry 4.0—a glimpse. Procedia Manuf 20:233–238 
12. McAfee A, Brynjolfsson E, Davenport TH, Patil DJ, Barton D (2012) Big data: the management 
revolution. Harv Bus Rev 90(10):60–68 
13. Parwez MS, Rawat DB, Garuba M (2017) Big data analytics for user-activity analysis and 
useranomaly detection in mobile wireless network. IEEE Trans Industr Inf 13(4):2058–2065 
14. Gilchrist A (2016) Industry 4.0: the industrial internet of things. Apress, New York, NY. ISBN: 
1484220463 
15. Kaliraj P, Devi T (eds) (2022) Big data applications in industry 4.0, 1st edn. Auerbach 
publications 
16. Atzori L, Iera A, Morabito G (2010) The internet of things: a survey. Comput Netw 
54(15):2787–2805 
17. Vermesan O, Friess P, Guillemin P, Gusmeroli S, Sundmaeker H, Bassi A, Doody P (2011) 
Internet of things strategic research roadmap. In: Internet of things-global technological and 
societal trends, vol 1. pp 9−52 
18. Lampropoulos G, Siakas K, Anastasiadis T (2018) Internet of things (IoT) in industry: contem-
porary application domains, innovative technologies and intelligent manufacturing. Int J Adv 
Sci Res Eng 4(10):109–118 
19. Bi Z, Da Xu L, Wang C (2014) Internet of things for enterprise systems of modern 
manufacturing. IEEE Trans Industr Inf 10(2):1537–1546 
20. ¸Sen KO, Durakbasa MN, Baysal MV, ¸Sen G, Ba¸s G (2018) Smart factories: a review of situation, 
and recommendations to accelerate the evolution process. In: The international symposium for 
production research. pp 464–479 
21. Khan R, Khan SU, Zaheer R, Khan S (2012) Future internet: the internet of things architecture, 
possible applications and key challenges. In: 2012 10th international conference on frontiers 
of information technology. IEEE, pp. 257–260 
22. Miorandi D, Sicari S, De Pellegrini F, Chlamtac I (2012) Internet of things: vision, applications 
and research challenges. Ad Hoc Netw 10(7):1497–1516 
23. Gubbi J, Buyya R, Marusic S, Palaniswami M (2013) Internet of things (IoT): a vision, 
architectural elements, and future directions. Futur Gener Comput Syst 29(7):1645–1660 
24. Borgia E (2014) The internet of things vision: key features, applications and open issues. 
Comput Commun 54:1–31 
25. Perera C, Liu CH, Jayawardena S, Chen M (2014) A survey on internet of things from industrial 
market perspective. IEEE Access 2:1660–1679 
26. Al-Fuqaha A, Guizani M, Mohammadi M, Aledhari M, Ayyash M (2015) Internet of things: a 
survey on enabling technologies, protocols, and applications. IEEE communications surveys & 
tutorials 17(4):2347–2376 
27. Breivold HP, Sandström K (2015) Internet of things for industrial automation--challenges and 
technical solutions. In: 2015 IEEE international conference on data science and data intensive 
systems. IEEE, pp 532–539

76
S. Gothwal et al.
28. Lee J, Bagheri B, Kao HA (2015) A cyber-physical systems architecture for industry 4.0-based 
manufacturing systems. Manuf lett 3:18–23 
29. Sadeghi AR, Wachsmann C, Waidner M (2015) Security and privacy challenges in industrial 
internet of things. In: 2015 52nd ACM/EDAC/IEEE design automation conference (DAC). 
IEEE, pp 1–6 
30. Bhardwaj S, Jain L, Jain S (2010) Cloud computing: a study of infrastructure as a service 
(IAAS). Int J Eng Inf Technol 2(1):60–63 
31. Wang L, Von Laszewski G, Younge A, He X, Kunze M, Tao J, Fu C (2010) Cloud computing: 
a perspective study. N Gener Comput 28(2):137–146 
32. Lu Y, Cecil J (2016) An internet of things (IoT)-based collaborative framework for advanced 
manufacturing. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 84(5–8):1141–1152 
33. Zhang Q, Cheng L, Boutaba R (2010) Cloud computing: state-of-the-art and research 
challenges. J Internet Serv Appl 1(1):7–18 
34. Zhong RY, Xu X, Klotz E, Newman ST (2017) Intelligent manufacturing in the context of 
industry 4.0: a review. Eng 3(5):616–630 
35. Roland Berger Strategy Consultants (2014) Industry 4.0, The new industrial revolution: how 
Europe will succeed. In: International conference the next industrial revolution manufacturing 
and society in the XXI century, Turin, November 14–15. 
36. Bauer A (2016) KUKA LBR Iiwa. Kuka Roboter GmbH, Augsburg 
37. Robert Bosch GmbH (2015) Changeable automation with the APAS family. Stuttgart 
38. Milgram P, Kishino F (1994) A taxonomy of mixed reality visual displays. IEICE Trans Inf 
Syst 77(12):1321–1329 
39. Ji C, Shao Q, Sun J, Liu S, Pan L, Wu L, Yang C (2016) Device data ingestion for industrial 
big data platforms with a case study. Sensors 16(3):279 
40. Broy M (2010) Cyber Physical Systems-Wissenschaftliche Herausforderungen bei der 
Entwicklung. Verlag: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; Auﬂage: 1st Edition 
41. Lee E (2008) Cyber physical systems: design challenges. University of California, Berkeley 
Technical Report No. UCB/EECS-2008–8. http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/ 
2008/EECS-2008-8.html 
42. Bohler TM (2012) Industrie 4.0–Smarte Produkte und Fabriken revolutionieren die Industrie. 
In: Produktion Magazin, 10. Mai 2012; Abgerufen am 5. September 2012 
43. Mehrpouya M, Dehghanghadikolaei A, Fotovvati B, Vosooghnia A, Emamian SS, Gisario A 
(2019) The potential of additive manufacturing in the smart factory industrial 4.0: a review. 
Appl Sci 9(18):3865 
44. Prashar G, Vasudev H (2021) A comprehensive review on sustainable cold spray additive 
manufacturing: state of the art, challenges and future challenges. J Clean Prod 310:127606 
45. Wang S, Wan J, Li D, Zhang C (2016) Implementing smart factory of industrie 4.0: an outlook. 
Int J Distrib Sens Netw 1–1 
46. Thoben KD, Wiesner S, Wuest T (2017) Industrie 4.0 and smart manufacturing—a review of 
research issues and application examples. Int J Autom Technol 11(1):4–16

AI Control of EMG Sensor Data for 3D 
Printed Prosthesis Hand 
Gunasundar Paddam, Vishal Francis, and Narendra Kumar 
1 
Introduction 
Around 40 million amputees live in underdeveloped nations, according to the World 
Health Organization. Additionally, prostheses are necessary for 0.5% of the world’s 
population [1, 2]. Amputation signiﬁcantly limits functionality, negatively impacts 
social relationships, and undermines a person’s conﬁdence. A prosthetic for the 
upper limb is highly expensive, and they are hard to come by in many remote places. 
Many amputees opt not to utilize prosthetic hands because of these circumstances. 
In addition, many of the existing prostheses lack aesthetic appeal and are too heavy 
for an amputee. Children from underdeveloped nations who eventually outgrow their 
prostheses have it even worse. 
Another key element of a successful prosthetic hand is customization, therefore, 
an upper extremity must be amputated in order to create the prosthesis. The fabri-
cation of economical and dependable prostheses can be a feasible remedy for rural 
communities in this situation. 
The fabrication of any complex and customized shape geometry using 3D printing 
is facilitated and is a prerequisite for the creation of prosthetics. The major features 
of 3D printing that makes it a useful tool for prosthesis development are speed, 
customization, growth of amputees, and comfort. Prosthetics created using 3D 
printing can be created in a matter of days as opposed to the longer time frame 
which is the case with other traditional methods. To meet the patient’s unique needs, 
customized prostheses can be created using the 3D printing method without the use
G. Paddam · V. Francis envelope symbol
School of Mechanical Engineering, Lovely Professional University, Jalandhar, India 
e-mail: vishal.24813@lpu.co.in 
N. Kumar 
Department of Industrial and Production Engineering, Dr B R Ambedkar Natrional Institute of 
Technology, Jalandhar 144027, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_8 
77

78
G. Paddam et al.
of tools. Since prostheses for growing children must be replaced after a few years, 
they should be cost-effective [3–5]. 
Many families may ﬁnd affordable 3D printed prosthetics to be a good choice. 
Additionally, a custom-made socket can be created based on the structure of the 
amputee’s hand to increase comfort. 
Depending on how they operate, prosthetic hands can be divided into three cate-
gories. The ﬁrst has either no or very little utility, and it is passive. Another sort 
of prosthetic hand that doesn’t require electronics and can have a limited range of 
motion is body powered. Another class of prosthetic hand that offers more degrees 
of ﬂexibility than other prosthetic hand categories is external powered. 
The use of various printing materials, such as metal powders, thermoplastic poly-
mers, photo polymers, molding sands for casting, etc., is made possible by 3D printing 
technology. The 3D printing process is distinct from traditional production methods. 
The material is removed via conventional machining. The reverse is the fundamental 
idea behind additive manufacturing. By adding layers, the ﬁnal 3D shape “grows.” 
The term “additive manufacturing” was used to describe this type of production 
(AM). 
For a diverse range of reasons, 3D printing has been successful in producing pros-
theses. The time, cost, and weight required to manufacture prosthetics are signiﬁ-
cantly reduced when they are created using 3D printing. The cost of 3D printed pros-
thetics is low, the production time is quick, and the materials are easily accessible. 
3D printing is classiﬁed into seven broad categories by the International Standards 
Organization as illustrated in Fig. 1.
The control of the prosthetic hand is very crucial for improved functionality of the 
printed hand. Over the past decades, the advancements in the control strategies and 
the use of sensors for feedback have improved the functionality of prosthetic hands. 
The incorporation of electromyographic (EMG) sensors for the control of the 
printed hand has further opened the scope for better control and functionality. 
However, the signals captured from the muscle’s sensor need to be classiﬁed for 
controlling the actuators. Therefore, the pattern needs to be recognized and features 
extracted to make full use of EMG sensors for 3D printed prosthetic control. 
Various Artiﬁcial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML) algorithms are used for 
this purpose. The present paper discusses the various methods used for the control 
of prosthetic hands along with the data acquisition from muscle sensors and their 
placement. The 3D printed prosthetic hand with improved functionality and control 
can open avenues for developing low-cost functional prosthesesand. 
2 
EMG Sensor 
An electromyography sensor, also known as an EMG sensor, detects small electrical 
signals produced by your muscles as you move them. It works on the principle of 
electrodes are placed close to muscle groups to record EMG signals. The length of 
the muscle shortens as it is activated, and the muscle, skin, and electrodes move

AI Control of EMG Sensor Data for 3D Printed Prosthesis Hand
79
Fig. 1 Classiﬁcation of 3D 
printing process
in relation to one another. The electrodes will show some movement artifacts at 
that time [6]. EMG results can reveal nerve dysfunction, muscle dysfunction, or 
problems with nerve-to-muscle signal transmission. By measuring the response of 
muscles to stimulation, the EMG is used to assess muscle health. When a patient 
exhibits unexplained muscle weakness, doctors can use this information to rule out 
multiple sclerosis and other diseases [7]. 
2.1 
Myoelectric Hand 
Myoelectric prosthetic hand is one that is controlled by myoelectric sensors. It has a 
number of sEMG sensors to operate various prostheses portions. Figure 2 illustrates 
a block diagram depicting the operation of the myoelectric hands. The shaded area 
represents amputation, which is replaced by a prosthetic hand [8].

80
G. Paddam et al.
Hand Amputation
Prosthesis
Battery
Control 
Muscles signals 
Fig. 2 Myoelectric hand function representation [8] 
2.2 
Postures and Muscle Locations 
Based on the different postures of the hand, various muscles of the forearm are 
stretched and/or contracted (Fig. 3). These different hand postures have been repre-
sented in the data mapping with various muscles, which actuate the ﬁngers [9, 10] 
since speciﬁc muscles of the forearm are required to move different ﬁngers. 
Fig. 3 Finger and muscle 
location [10]

AI Control of EMG Sensor Data for 3D Printed Prosthesis Hand
81
2.3 
EMG in Prostheses 
Alexander Calando et al. conducted a review of commercially available anthropo-
morphic myoelectric prosthetic hand and concluded that pattern-recognition-based 
microcontrollers for prostheses are still uncommon due to funding issues in this area 
[11]. Chenguang Yang et al investigated the human–robot interaction system and 
concluded that EMG-based results yielded improved performance [12]. In this way, 
Lingling Chen et al explored the selection of EMG sensors based on motion analysis 
and identiﬁed the directed network and key muscle groups. Using convergent cross-
mapping, an absolute contrast between strong restrained movement and unrestrained 
movement exhibited [13]. 
On the other hand, Seulah Lee et al. developed a knit band sensor for myoelectric 
control, whereas most sEMG sensors use disposable electrodes and have an accuracy 
of 87.9%. The developed knit band has a higher signal to noise ratio (17.91 dB) than 
disposable electrodes (13.3 dB) and can classify motion with 93.2% accuracy [9]. 
3 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is the competence of a computer or robot that is self-
controlled to perform functions that are typically carried out by humans. The rapid 
development of AI has gained popularity. Almost all industries are using AI to fore-
cast various factors from “Big Data” sets [14]. Here the study will be conducted using 
the purposive sampling approach, with analysis based on the resources relevant to 
the subject chosen. The element here is to assess the relevance and rising needs of AI 
and ML. A systematic comprehension of the problem necessitates engaging some 
study participants to assess the level of performance and resource management [15]. 
Figure 4 illustrates the classiﬁcation of artiﬁcial intelligence.
3.1 
Machine Learning 
Machine learning incorporates aspects of mathematics, statistics, and computer 
science. It is the exploration of computer algorithms. There are two forms of machine 
learning. Learning methods: supervised and unsupervised. Machine learning is a 
subtechnique of artiﬁcial intelligence as shown in Fig. 4. According to many authors, 
machine learning is a ﬁeld that enables systems to learn on their own. Here, training 
data sets will be used to train the machine, and test data will be used to evaluate 
it later. There are still several areas where this sector has to expand in which the 
invention is required [16–18].

82
G. Paddam et al.
Fig. 4 Artiﬁcial intelligence 
classiﬁcation
AI 
ML 
Neural Nets 
Deep 
Learning 
3.2 
Supervised Machine Learning 
Supervised learning is a technique in which the model is trained using labeled data, 
and the function mapping is based on the known output utilized during training. 
Algorithms then predict and classify data based on the speciﬁed labels. Its perfor-
mance is determined by the number of correctly predicted predetermined labels. This 
category includes regression and classiﬁcation [19, 20]. 
3.3 
Unsupervised Machine Learning 
Unsupervised learning is a technique in which the model is fed with unlabeled data. 
The objective in this case is to extract the structure and pattern from the input data. 
This category includes clustering and association [19, 20]. In this ﬁeld of research, 
this division of technique RNN (recurrent neural network) has been implied. As 
a signal classiﬁcation technique, the recurrent neural network is an unsupervised 
learning system that has the ability to remember input data due to internal memory. 
As a result, this approach is ideal for sequential data [21]. Figure 5 illustrates the 
sequence of capturing muscles and ﬁnal control of prosthetic hand using ML models.

AI Control of EMG Sensor Data for 3D Printed Prosthesis Hand
83
Fig. 5 Signal classiﬁer in 
the prosthetic hand [21] 
Muscles data 
Feature extraction 
AI/ML model 
Predict 
movement 
Prosthethic hand 
3.4 
Neural Networks 
A neural network is a nonlinear mathematical function that precisely turns a set 
of input variables into a set of output variables. This process is guided by a set of 
parameters known as weights. The needed mapping can determine weights [18, 22]. 
In this area of investigation, this method is used. 
3.5 
Deep Learning 
Deep learning is a subtype of machine learning in which neural networks learn from 
massive sets of data and have hundreds of representation layers. This method is 
employed in the recognition of objects, speech, and objects [23]. It employs artiﬁ-
cial neural networks (ANN) representation learning, which is inspired by the human 
neural network. Figure 6 shows the hidden layers in ANN. It falls under both super-
vised and unsupervised learning [24]. The ANN approach has implications in the 
prosthetic hand ﬁeld. Figure 7 illustrates the use of ANN as a signal classiﬁer for 
prosthetic hands.
4 
AI in Prosthetics 
Artiﬁcial intelligence is being employed everywhere in the evolving globe. The large 
amount of information that we produce will assist us in developing ideal solutions 
by analyzing the relationships and patterns. Basmajian et al. stated that, because 
of rapid improvements in robotics technology, robots are expected to physically 
execute human interactions to support daily operations [26]. The data from several

84
G. Paddam et al.
Hidden layers 
Input layers
Output layers 
Fig. 6 Layers of artiﬁcial neural network [24] 
Fig. 7 Basic structure of prosthetic control using artiﬁcial neural network [25]
writers who implemented artiﬁcial intelligence in the ﬁeld of prosthetics is as follows. 
Authors Diu Khu et al. have developed a real-time intuitive control of prostheses. 
By nerve data here, an AI agent uses a peripheral nerve interface to communicate 
the intent of an amputee. The recurrent neural network (RNN) was used in this study 
[27]. Another researcher Artal-Sevil et al. used a neural networks approach to map 
muscle data for a gesture detection system and achieved satisfactory results [28]. 
Bittibissi et al. implemented a recurrent neural network (RNN) based on long-
term short-term memory (LTSM) and gated recurrent unit (GRU). According to the 
study’s ﬁndings, GRU is the best option due to its simpler and faster model than the 
convolution LTSM model [29]. Another researcher, Rezwanul et al., created an ANN-
based signal recognition model. Backpropagation is used in this network, which is 
based on the Levenberg Marquardt equation and achieved an 88.4% success rate 
[22]. Khomami et al. have investigated language recognition using IMU and EMG 
sensors on Persian signs. Surface electromyography (sEMG) and Inertial Measure-
ment Unit (IMU) sensors were employed in the low-cost device that researchers 
designed and fabricated. Sign capture accuracy increased when these two sensors 
were used together and achieved 96.13 average accuracy, using the KNN classiﬁer 
method [30]. KNN is a non-parametric, simple, and efﬁcient supervised machine 
learning classiﬁcation approach [31].

AI Control of EMG Sensor Data for 3D Printed Prosthesis Hand
85
5 
Conclusions 
The 3D printed prosthetic hand with improved functionality and control is of utmost 
importance. Generally, the EMG sensors are utilized to collect data from muscles 
and map signals. This data needs to be processed for further control of the prosthetic 
hand which can improve the control and functionality. However, there is a need to 
increase the accuracy in control which is a very important aspect in prosthetics. 
The inclusion of AI/ML techniques in control of the prosthetic hand can improve 
its functionality. AI approaches like KNN, RNN, and ANN are been employed, 
where ANN being the only supervised learning methodology. The accuracy can be 
signiﬁcantly improved by employing these techniques. Further exhaustive studies 
are needed to fully explore and utilize the beneﬁt of AI/ML techniques in control of 
prosthetic hands. It can be concluded that the use of AI/ML techniques for control of 
3D printed prosthetic hands can be a viable solution for economical prostheses with 
adequate functionality. 
References 
1. Dally C, Johnson D, Canon M, Ritter S, Mehta K (2015) Characteristics of a 3D-printed 
prosthetic hand for use in developing countries. In: 2015 IEEE global humanitarian technology 
conference (GHTC). IEEE, pp 66–70 
2. Baril M, Gosselin C, de Jesus Lima E, Arabiam A (2017) Development of a 3d printed prosthetic 
myoelectric hand driven by Dc actuators, vol 4. Technology Department State University of 
Feira de Santana, BA, Brazil 
3. Dombroski CE, Balsdon MER, Froats A (2014) The use of a low cost 3D scanning and printing 
tool in the manufacture of custom-made foot orthoses: a preliminary study. BMC Res Notes 
7(1):1–4 
4. Muilenburg AL, LeBlanc MA (1989) Body-powered upper-limb components. In: Comprehen-
sive management of the upper-limb amputee. pp 28–38 
5. Zuniga JM (2018) 3D printed antibacterial prostheses. Appl Sci 8(9):1651 
6. Chowdhury RH, Reaz MBI, Ali MABM, Bakar AAA, Chellappan K, Chang TG (2013) Surface 
electromyography signal processing and classiﬁcation techniques. Sensors 13(9):12431–12466 
7. Doheny EP, Goulding C, Flood MW, Mcmanus L, Lowery MM (2019) Feature-based evaluation 
of a wearable surface EMG sensor against laboratory standard EMG during force-varying and 
fatiguing contractions. IEEE Sens J 20(5):2757–2765 
8. Hudgins B, Parker P, Scott RN (1993) A new strategy for multifunction myoelectric control. 
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 40(1):82–94 
9. Lee S, Kim M-O, Kang T, Park J, Choi Y (2018) Knit band sensor for myoelectric control of 
surface EMG-based prosthetic hand. IEEE Sens J 18(20):8578–8586 
10. Unanyan NN, Belov AA (2019) Signal-based approach to EMG-sensor fault detection in upper 
limb prosthetics. In: 2019 20th international Carpathian control conference (ICCC). IEEE, pp 
1–6 
11. Calado A, Soares F, Matos D (2019) A review on commercially available anthropomorphic 
myoelectric prosthetic hands, pattern-recognition-based microcontrollers and sEMG sensors 
used for prosthetic control. In: 2019 IEEE international conference on autonomous robot 
systems and competitions (ICARSC). IEEE, pp. 1–6

86
G. Paddam et al.
12. Yang C, Zeng C, Liang P, Li Z, Li R, Chun-Yi S (2017) Interface design of a physical human– 
robot interaction system for human impedance adaptive skill transfer. IEEE Trans Autom Sci 
Eng 15(1):329–340 
13. Chen L, Liu X, Xuan B, Zhang J, Liu Z, Zhang Y (2021) Selection of EMG sensors based on 
motion coordinated analysis. Sensors 21(4):1147 
14. Xu Y, Zhang X, Li H, Zheng H, Zhang J, Olsen MS, Varshney RK, Prasanna BM, Qian Q (2022) 
Smart breeding driven by big data, artiﬁcial intelligence and integrated genomic-enviromic 
prediction. Mol Plant 
15. Gong Y, Chen K, Niu T, Liu Y (2022) Grid-based coverage path planning with NFZ avoidance 
for UAV using parallel self-adaptive ant colony optimization algorithm in cloud IoT. J Cloud 
Comput 11(1):29 
16. Hurwitz J, Kirsch D (2018) Machine learning IBM limited edition. Accessed 22 Mar 2021 
17. Jordan MI, Mitchell TM (2015) Machine learning: trends, perspectives, and prospects. Science 
349(6245):255–260 
18. Bishop CM (1994) Neural networks and their applications. Rev Sci Instrum 65(6):1803–1832 
19. Alloghani M, Al-Jumeily D, Mustaﬁna J, Hussain A, Aljaaf AJ (2020) A systematic review 
on supervised and unsupervised machine learning algorithms for data science. Supervised 
Unsupervised Learn Data Sci, 3–21. 
20. Ozgur A (2004) Supervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques for text document 
categorization. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, ˙Istanbul: Bo˘gaziçi University 
21. Yin W, Kann K, Yu M, Schütze H (2017) Comparative study of CNN and RNN for natural 
language processing. arXiv:1702.01923 
22. Ahsan MR, Ibrahimy MI, Khalifa OO (2011) Electromygraphy (EMG) signal based hand 
gesture recognition using artiﬁcial neural network (ANN). In: 2011 4th international conference 
on mechatronics (ICOM). IEEE, pp 1–6 
23. LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G (2015) Deep learning. nature, 521 (7553), 436–444. Google Sch 
Google Sch Cross Ref Cross Ref 25 
24. Spiers DL (2016) Facial emotion detection using deep learning 
25. Englehart K, Hudgins B, Parker PA (2001) Multifunction control of powered prostheses using 
the myoelectric signal. In: Intelligent technologies for rehabilitation. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
FL1–61 
26. Basmajian JV (1985) Their function revealed by electromyography. Muscle Alive 212 
27. Luu DK, Nguyen AT, Jiang M, Drealan MW, Xu J, Wu T, Tam W et al (2022) Artiﬁcial 
intelligence enables real-time and intuitive control of prostheses via nerve interface. IEEE 
Trans Biomed Eng 69(10):3051–3063 
28. Artal-Sevil JS, Perez-Cebolla FJ, Pascual-Acon A, Dominguez JA (2020) Control of a bionic 
hand based on neural networks and improved gesture recognition techniques using multiple 
EMG sensors. In: 2020 XIV technologies applied to electronics teaching conference (TAEE). 
IEEE, pp 1–8 
29. Bittibssi TM, Genedy MA, Maged SA (2021) sEMG pattern recognition based on recurrent 
neural network. Biomed Signal Process Control 70:103048 
30. Khomami SA, Shamekhi S (2021) Persian sign language recognition using IMU and surface 
EMG sensors. Measurement 168:108471 
31. Guo G, Wang H, Bell D, Bi Y, Greer K (2003) KNN model-based approach in classiﬁcation. 
In: On the move to meaningful internet systems 2003: CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE: OTM 
confederated international conferences, CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE 2003, Catania, Sicily, 
Italy, November 3–7, 2003. Proceedings. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp 986–996

Methodology of Rapid Prototyping 
and Moulding of Net-Shaped 
Micro-structures Developed Using 
Lifting Plate Hele-Shaw Flow on Conical 
Surfaces 
Sanmit Pandey, Yogini Chaudhari, Pranjal Pawar, and Kiran Suresh Bhole 
1 
Introduction 
Fractals are one of those discoveries, which humans made by closely observing 
nature. Structures like snowﬂakes, human veins and veins of a leaf [1] have thrilled 
us to work on fractals. Humans have there on made multiple attempts to mimic fractals 
in a laboratory; many of which yielded fruitful results. These fractals can be used for 
beneﬁts such as cache locality [2], micro-mixing [3], bio-mimicking [4] and many 
more. When we use the lifting plate Hele-Shaw ﬂow methodology, fractals are formed 
as a result of instabilities occurring due to the interaction of high-viscosity and low-
viscosity ﬂuids. In the context of manufacturing net-shaped micro-structures, this 
method proves to be far superior to bulk lithography[5], microstereolithography[6], 
interference lithography and so on [7]. Extending these beneﬁts from 2-D ﬂat plates to 
3-D curved conical plates shall have various beneﬁts. The fractal formation process 
can also be controlled using certain methods, which further aids the use case of 
fractals [8]. In this work, we shall be doing these experiments using conical plates 
in order to get three-dimensional fractals [9].
S. Pandey envelope symbol · Y. Chaudhari envelope symbol · P. Pawar envelope symbol · K. S. Bhole 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Sardar Patel College of Engineering, Andheri, 
Mumbai 400078, India 
e-mail: m1910046@spce.ac.in 
Y. Chaudhari 
e-mail: m1910010@spce.ac.in 
P. Pawar 
e-mail: m1910051@spce.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_9 
87

88
S. Pandey et al.
2 
Experimentation 
2.1 
Fractal Formation Methodology 
The fractals are formed using the setup shown in Fig. 1. In a study, the non-Newtonian 
ﬂuid, which in our case happens to be toothpaste[10] is ﬁlled between the narrow gap 
of two closely ﬁtting conical surfaces (refer Fig. 2). The upper plate is then brought 
down till its distance from the lower plate is very small as close as 0.1 mm after which 
the upper plate is slowly [11] moved back to its original position. This is called the 
Lifting Plate Hele-Shaw ﬂow [12]. The velocity is varied using a stepper motor[13] 
which is controlled by a GUI made in the pronterface (refer Fig. 1). The small gap 
position is responsible for promoting Saffman-Taylor [14] instabilities [15], which 
corresponds to fractal formation [16]. 
Fig. 1 Fractal formation setup 
(A)
(B) 
Fig. 2 Position of plates a initial position b small gap position

Methodology of Rapid Prototyping and Moulding of Net-Shaped …
89
(A)
(B) 
Fig. 3 Conical plates a lower plate b upper plate 
2.2 
Conical Plates 
Considering the effects of surface roughness and the beneﬁts obtained through 
the designed setup in our investigation using a transparent material, the study has 
chosen to use acrylic plates (refer Fig. 3a and b). The dimensions of these plates are 
constrained largely to the setup. For the work, we have fabricated various types of 
conical plates, with the solid angle being the only intended variable parameter. 
2.3 
Moulding Methodology 
Moulding of these fractals is crucial to make any substantial use of our fractals either 
by using a mechanically stronger alternative or for uses like micro-mixing [3]. With 
perspectives of mould removal, economic feasibility and ease of handling, we have 
chosen to use Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) as our mould material. It has been 
widely used in microﬂuidics. We mix the PDMS polymer along with PDMS curing 
agent and then the mixture undergoes degassing for the removal of air bubbles after 
which it can be used (refer Fig. 4).

90
S. Pandey et al.
Fig. 4 Degassing of PDMS 
mixture 
3 
Results and Discussions 
3.1 
Fractal Formation 
On experimenting with all conical plates, fractal formation is evident. These fractals 
are not completely symmetric as seen in 2-D ﬂat plates[17] but show a close resem-
blance to each other (refer Fig. 5). The fractals were very similar to the ones attained 
on ﬂat plates, but they are imprinted along the curvature of the cone.
With experiments conducted using other non-Newtonian ﬂuids, it was also estab-
lished that higher viscosities tend to give better fractals. The thickness of these fractals 
had a lot to do with the amount of non-Newtonian ﬂuid used and was also a crucial 
parameter for fractal formation. 
3.2 
Mould Formation 
Moulding around a conical plate is viable. The fractals are suitably imprinted on 
the surface. Unlike ﬂat plates, moulds made by the upper plate and lower plate are 
completely different (refer Fig. 6). The mould made on the upper plate resembles 
the fractals obtained on the lower plate and vice versa.

Methodology of Rapid Prototyping and Moulding of Net-Shaped …
91
(A) Top view of the lower plate
(B) Top view of the upper plate 
(C) Curvature of fractals on the lower plate
(D) Curvature of fractals on the upper plate 
Fig. 5 Results of fractals formation
Fig. 6 Moulds formed of fractals using PDMS 
4 
Conclusions 
The lifting plate Hele-Shaw methodology was used to obtain fractals on curved 
conical surfaces with varying solid angles, which were then processed to make 
moulds of these fractals for various applications. There were observations drawn

92
S. Pandey et al.
and demonstrated regarding the differences between the fractals formed over a 2-D 
Flat plate and a 3-D conical plate with discussions around the curvature of the fractals 
formed. 
The moulding techniques used were also discussed and demonstrated for conical 
fractals obtained using lifting plate Hele-shaw ﬂow. 
Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge support for this work by the Science and Engi-
neering Research Board (SERB), Government of India through Project Grant CRG/2021/000747. 
References 
1. Kale BS et al (2022) Effect of polygonal surfaces on development of viscous ﬁngering in lifting 
plate Hele-Shaw cell. Int J Interact Des Manuf IJIDeM. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12008-022-
01030-9 
2. Bilardi G, D’Alberto P, Nicolau A (2001) Fractal matrix multiplication: a case study on 
portability of cache performance. In: algorithm engineering, Berlin, Heidelberg. pp 26–38 
3. Kale BS, Bhole KS, Bhole D, Kolhe S (2023) A practical approach towards utilisation of the 
net-shaped micro-structures developed in the lifting plate Hele-Shaw cell for micro-mixing. 
Int J Interact Des Manuf IJIDeM. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12008-022-01167-7 
4. Kale BS, Bhole K (2019) Parametric analysis for forming meso fractals from nanoparticle 
seeded resin in Hele Shaw cell. IOP Conf Ser Mater Sci Eng 577(1):012154. https://doi.org/ 
10.1088/1757-899X/577/1/012154 
5. Gandhi P, Bhole K (2013) Characterization of ‘bulk lithography’ process for fabrication of 
three-dimensional microstructures. J Micro Nano-Manuf 1(4). https://doi.org/10.1115/1.402 
5461 
6. Bhole KS, Kale B (2022) Techniques to minimise stair-stepping effect in micro-
stereolithography process: a review. Adv Mater Process Technol 8(4):3615–3634. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/2374068X.2021.1970997 
7. Singare AA, Kale BS, Bhole KS (2018) Experimental characterization of meso-micro fractals 
from nanoparticle seeded resin in lifting plate hele-shaw cell. Mater. Today Proc 5(11), Part 
3:24213–24220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2018.10.216 
8. Kale BS, Bhole KS, Sharma C (2022) Effect of anisotropies in formation of viscous ﬁngering 
in lifting plate Hele-Shaw cell. Adv Mater Process Technol 8(4):3780–3793. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/2374068X.2021.2013679 
9. T. ul Islam and P. S. Gandhi, “Spontaneous Fabrication of Three-Dimensional Multiscale 
Fractal Structures Using Hele-Shaw Cell,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng., vol. 139, no. 3, Oct. 2016, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4034624. 
10. Sinha S, Dutta T, Tarafdar S (2008) Adhesion and ﬁngering in the lifting Hele-Shaw cell: Role 
of the substrate. Eur Phys J E 25(3):267–275. https://doi.org/10.1140/epje/i2007-10289-9 
11. Zare Vamerzani B, Zadehkabir A, Saffari H, Hosseinalipoor SM, Mazinani P, Honari P (2021) 
Experimental analysis of ﬂuid displacement and viscous ﬁngering instability in fractured porous 
medium: effect of injection rate. J Braz Soc Mech Sci Eng 43(2):66. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s40430-020-02790-9 
12. ul Islam T, Gandhi PS (2018) Controlling interfacial ﬂow instability via micro engineered 
surfaces towards multiscale channel fabrication. In :ASME 2018 16th international confer-
ence on nanochannels, microchannels, and minichannels. https://doi.org/10.1115/ICNMM2 
018-7668 
13. Kasambe PV, Bhole KS, Bage AA, Raykar NR, Bhoir DV (2022) Analytical modeling and 
numerical investigation of a variable width piezoresistive multilayer polymer micro-cantilever

Methodology of Rapid Prototyping and Moulding of Net-Shaped …
93
air ﬂow sensor. Adv. Mater. Process. Technol. 8(4):4365–4383. https://doi.org/10.1080/237 
4068X.2022.2076974 
14. Saffman PG (1986) Viscous ﬁngering in Hele-Shaw cells. J Fluid Mech 173:73–94. https:// 
doi.org/10.1017/S0022112086001088 
15. Kessler DA, Levine H (1986) Coalescence of Saffman-Taylor ﬁngers: a new global instability. 
Phys Rev A 33(5):3625–3627. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.33.3625 
16. ul Islam T, Gandhi PS (2017) Viscous ﬁngering in multiport hele shaw cell for controlled 
shaping of ﬂuids. Sci Rep 7(1):16602. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-16830-3 
17. Kale BS, Bhole K, Khond P (2019) Experimental modeling of meso fractals generated from 
non newtonian ﬂuid from lifting plate Hele-Shaw Cell 9(2):29–35 (2019)

A Comprehensive Overview on Additive 
Manufacturing Processes: Materials, 
Applications, and Challenges 
Nikhil Bharat, Rajat Jain, and P. S. C. Bose 
1 
Introduction 
The term “additive manufacturing” refers to the process of using a digital 3D 
model as a starting point for the creation of a physical object. The process requires 
layering elements in successive prints. First came stereolithography (SLA), then 
came advances like contour crafting, inkjet printing, fused deposition modeling, and 
powder bed fusion. Three-dimensional printing (3D printing), which makes use of a 
number of distinct processes, materials, and tools, has developed through time and has 
the potential to revolutionize manufacturing and supply chain management. Indus-
tries such as prototyping, construction, and biomechanical engineering all beneﬁt 
from additive manufacturing. Slow and restricted progress toward automation, less 
waste, and other beneﬁts of 3D printing in the construction sector [1–5]. 
The development of new additive manufacturing technologies and materials 
always leads to the discovery of new applications. The expiry of past copyrights 
is one of the primary reasons why this ability is becoming more accessible. This has 
enabled fabricators to choose to invest in novel 3D printing equipment, which is one 
of the primary reasons why this skill is becoming more accessible. As a consequence 
of recent technological advancements, the cost of 3D printers has decreased, making 
it possible for these machines to be used in a wider variety of settings, including labs, 
libraries, private homes, and even educational institutions. The ability of 3D printing 
to create prototypes in a short amount of time and at a low cost ﬁrst attracted a lot 
of attention from designers and engineers, who used it to make prototypes that were 
both aesthetically pleasing and practically useful [6, 7]. 
Printing in three dimensions presents a number of difﬁculties and constraints, 
including the lack of stiffness and strength in the printed construction materials, as 
well as the dimensions of the printed objects themselves. The fact that the suggested
N. Bharat envelope symbol · R. Jain · P. S. C. Bose 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National Institute Technology, Warangal 506004, India 
e-mail: nikhilbharat@student.nitw.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_10 
95

96
N. Bharat et al.
printed magnitude does not ﬁt the criteria of fully 3D printers is an additional issue. 
Each individual printer has its own set of structural element production parameters, 
thus the proposed printed magnitude does not match these standards. Issues have 
also been expressed about the technology used for 3D printing, such as the demand 
for support to sustain the load of the object that is being made until the substance 
becomes sufﬁciently strong. Mix design and the use of coarse particles provide 
another challenge for the 3D printing of concrete. Inside the conﬁnes of their 3D 
printing software [8, 9]. 
The development of 3D printing technology may be traced back to the production 
of 3D assemblies one layer at a time, layer by layer, directly from computer-aided 
design (CAD) models. Printing in three dimensions (3D printing) is a cutting-edge 
technique that has shown to be incredibly versatile. It enables a variety of options 
and expands the scope of activities that are aimed at boosting industrial productivity. 
Nowadays, 3D printing technology can be used to create objects out of a wide variety 
of materials, including the more common thermoplastics, metals, graphene-based 
materials, and ceramics [10–13]. 
Being a relatively new technology, 3D printing has the potential to signiﬁcantly 
alter manufacturing and assembly lines. Thanks to 3D printing, production costs 
will be minimal and quantity requirements will be easily met. More weight will be 
given to customer input throughout manufacturing. Customers may specify their own 
requirements for the ﬁnal product and have it made accordingly. Concurrently, 3D 
printing facilities will be located closer to clients, allowing for a more adaptable and 
accessible industrial process and better quality control. In addition, the equipment 
needed for 3D printing reduces the requirement for transport across borders. This is 
because it is more efﬁcient to use ﬂeet monitoring technology to complete all supplies 
when production facilities are situated closer to the ﬁnal destination. Furthermore, the 
company’s logistics may be affected by the incorporation of 3D printing equipment. 
Companies’ internal logistics divisions may oversee the whole journey and provide 
comprehensive, end-to-end services [14]. 
2 
Additive Manufacturing Processes 
2.1 
Extrusion-Based Process 
Extrusion-based additive manufacturing systems use a nozzle or extruder to deposit 
molten material layer by layer to create a 3D object. These systems typically use ther-
moplastic materials such as ABS or PLA, which are fed through a heated nozzle and 
deposited onto a build platform in the desired pattern. The process begins with a 3D 
model, which is sliced into thin layers using specialized software. The extruder moves 
along the X and Y axes, depositing the molten material in the desired pattern. As the 
material cools, it solidiﬁes and fuses with the previous layer to create a strong and 
durable ﬁnal part. Extrusion-based systems are widely used in additive manufacturing

A Comprehensive Overview on Additive Manufacturing Processes …
97
due to their versatility and relatively low cost. They are capable of producing a wide 
range of objects, from simple geometric shapes to highly complex designs. Addition-
ally, these systems can use a variety of materials, allowing for a range of functional 
and aesthetic properties in the ﬁnal part. However, extrusion-based systems can have 
some limitations in terms of surface ﬁnish, dimensional accuracy, and strength, which 
can be inﬂuenced by factors such as the type of material used, the layer height, and the 
printing speed. As a result, careful design and processing considerations are required 
to produce high-quality parts using extrusion-based systems [15]. Figure 1 shows the 
extrusion-based additive manufacturing process. 
Fig. 1 Standardized additive manufacturing method based on extrusion, starting with CAD 
renderings [15]

98
N. Bharat et al.
2.2 
Powder Bed Fusion Process 
Powder bed fusion is an additive manufacturing process that creates 3D objects 
layer-by-layer by selectively fusing together particles of a powdered material using 
a heat source, such as a laser or electron beam. There are several types of powder 
bed fusion processes, including selective laser sintering (SLS), selective laser melting 
(SLM), and electron beam melting (EBM). In all powder bed fusion processes, a thin 
layer of powder is spread over a build platform and a heat source is used to selec-
tively fuse together the particles in the desired pattern. Once the layer is complete, 
another layer of powder is spread over the top and the process is repeated until the 
object is complete. Powder bed fusion is particularly useful for the production of 
complex geometries and intricate internal structures, as it can create parts with high 
levels of accuracy and detail. The technology is used in a wide range of industries, 
including aerospace, automotive, medical, and consumer products. One of the advan-
tages of powder bed fusion is that it allows for the use of a wide range of materials, 
including metals, plastics, and ceramics. This makes the technology highly versatile 
and suitable for a wide range of applications. However, powder bed fusion can be 
a time-consuming process, and the quality of the ﬁnal part can be inﬂuenced by a 
range of factors, including the type of material used, the quality of the powder, and 
the operating conditions of the machine. As a result, careful control of the process 
is required to ensure consistent and high-quality parts [16]. The systematic diagram 
of laser powder bed fusion is shown in Fig. 2. 
Fig. 2 Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) technique [17]

A Comprehensive Overview on Additive Manufacturing Processes …
99
Fig. 3 Photopolymerization 
process [19] 
2.3 
Photopolymerization Process 
Photopolymerization is an additive manufacturing process that uses light to selec-
tively cure and solidify a liquid resin into a 3D object. In this process, a liquid 
photopolymer resin is selectively exposed to a light source, typically an ultraviolet 
(UV) laser or projector, in the desired pattern to cure the material and create the 
object layer-by-layer. In photopolymerization, the liquid resin is typically contained 
in a vat, and the build platform is lowered into the resin. The light source then 
cures the material in the desired pattern, solidifying the resin into a layer of the 
object. The build platform is then lifted out of the resin and a new layer of liquid 
resin is spread over the top, and the process is repeated until the object is complete. 
One of the advantages of photopolymerization is that it can create highly detailed 
and accurate parts with smooth surface ﬁnishes. The process is particularly useful 
for creating objects with intricate internal structures or ﬁne details, such as dental 
models, jewelry, and small mechanical components. However, photopolymerization 
can have some limitations, such as the need for support structures to prevent the 
object from collapsing during printing, which can be time-consuming and require 
post-processing to remove. Additionally, the materials used in photopolymerization 
can be more expensive than those used in other types of additive manufacturing, 
making them less suitable for large-scale production [18]. The schematic diagram of 
photopolymerization process is shown in Fig. 3. 
3 
AM Materials for 3D Printing 
3.1 
Metals and Alloys 
The beneﬁts of metal 3D printing have aroused the interest of the automotive, 
aerospace, industrial, and medical sectors. Metals are highly desirable due to their 
adaptability and versatility; they can be used for everything from 3D printing to 
making airplane components to producing human organs. Titanium alloys, nickel

100
N. Bharat et al.
alloys, cobalt alloys, and aluminum alloys are a few examples of such materials. 
Metal alloys based on cobalt are suitable for use in 3D printed dental applications. The 
creation of polymer parts, ranging from simple patterns to fully functional assemblies 
with intricate geometry, is a common use of the 3D printing technique. Fused deposi-
tion modeling allows for the production of 3D printed objects by depositing consec-
utive layers of extruded thermoplastic ﬁlaments such as polyethylene, polypropy-
lene, acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), and polylactic acid (PLA). Recently, 3D 
printing has made use of thermoplastic ﬁlaments with higher melting points, such as 
PEEK and PMMA [20–24]. 
3.2 
Composite Materials 
Composites combine materials with distinct physical and chemical characteris-
tics. Composites offer superior mechanical, physical, and chemical qualities. 3D 
printers can print composites, which are used in additive manufacturing owing to 
their cheap cost, availability, improved characteristics, and cost-effective product 
customization with great precision compared to conventional techniques. Compos-
ites are used in manufacturing, electronics, aircraft, biomedical, structural, sports, 
wearable, and cars. Recent research has succeeded in fabricating a wide range of 
composites, including particle-reinforced composites, natural and synthetic ﬁber-
reinforced composites, nanomaterial-reinforced composites, ionic polymer metal 
composites, graphene-based composites, and lightweight cellular composites. These 
categories include several composite materials. Fused deposition modeling (FDM), 
and selective laser sintering (SLS) may be used to print composite materials [25–28]. 
3.3 
Biomaterials 
Healthcare items are made using biomaterials. As 3D printing becomes cheaper, this 
industry relies on additive manufacturing. Recent research suggests that 3D printing 
advances like enhanced accuracy, speed, capacity to print complicated structures, 
decreased cost and material waste, and more promote the usage of bio-materials in 
additive manufacturing. Additive manufacturing technology enables medical equip-
ment, cell printing, and implant materials to progress greatly. 3D printing can directly 
build defective sites from patient CT and MRI data. First, capture the region of interest 
from medical imaging. Then, create a 3D geometry from the dataset unique to the area 
of interest. After that, transform the 3D object into a ﬁle suited for printing. Finally, 
pick a 3D printer and material. 3D printing technology is employed in tissue engi-
neering, organ model printing, customized scaffold printing, and dentistry. Additive 
manufacturing may employ many biomaterials. Biological materials such as living 
cells, extracellular matrix (ECM), and tissue-speciﬁc biomaterials are used in addi-
tive manufacturing for the fabrication of tissue constructs for regenerative medicine

A Comprehensive Overview on Additive Manufacturing Processes …
101
applications. These materials are typically used in bioprinting, which is a type of 
additive manufacturing that involves the printing of living cells and biomaterials to 
create functional tissue constructs [29–33]. 
4 
Applications and Challenges in Additive Manufacturing 
4.1 
Applications of Additive Manufacturing 
Aerospace: The aerospace industry is one of the primary users of additive manu-
facturing. Additive manufacturing is used to manufacture components with complex 
geometries that are difﬁcult to produce using traditional methods. The parts produced 
using additive manufacturing are lighter and have improved mechanical properties, 
which leads to more fuel-efﬁcient and high-performance aircraft. 
Biomedical: Additive manufacturing has revolutionized the ﬁeld of biomedical 
engineering. The technology is used to produce custom implants, prosthetics, and 
other medical devices. The technology has the potential to transform healthcare, 
enabling faster, cheaper, and more personalized medical treatments. 
Automotive: The automotive industry is another major user of additive manufac-
turing. The technology is used to produce lightweight components with improved 
strength and durability. Additive manufacturing is also used to produce complex 
geometries, such as engine parts, that are difﬁcult or impossible to produce using 
traditional manufacturing methods. 
Architecture: Additive manufacturing is used in architecture to produce complex 
models and prototypes of buildings. The technology enables architects to create 
intricate designs that would be difﬁcult to produce using traditional methods. 
Consumer Goods: Additive manufacturing is also used in the consumer goods 
industry to produce customized products, such as jewelry, toys, and household items. 
The technology enables manufacturers to produce products with a high level of 
customization, which leads to improved customer satisfaction. 
4.2 
Challenges in Additive Manufacturing 
Material Selection: The range of materials that can be used in additive manufacturing 
is limited compared to traditional manufacturing processes. Therefore, it can be 
challenging to ﬁnd the right material for a speciﬁc application. 
Part Quality: The quality of the parts produced using additive manufacturing is 
highly dependent on the printing parameters used, such as layer thickness, print 
speed, and temperature. Therefore, optimizing the printing parameters is essential to 
produce parts with consistent quality.

102
N. Bharat et al.
Cost: Additive manufacturing can be more expensive than traditional manufac-
turing methods, particularly when producing large quantities of parts. However, 
the cost of additive manufacturing has been decreasing in recent years, and the 
technology has become more affordable. 
Post-processing: Additive manufacturing often requires post-processing, such as 
sanding, polishing, or painting, to achieve the desired surface ﬁnish. Post-processing 
can add time and cost to the manufacturing process. 
Intellectual Property: Additive manufacturing has raised concerns about intel-
lectual property. The technology enables the production of parts without the need 
for traditional manufacturing tooling, which makes it difﬁcult to protect intellectual 
property rights. 
5 
Conclusion 
This review covers industrial 3D printing applications. 3D printing is entering indus-
trial engineering, and it helps people, companies, and governments. So, better 3D 
printing tactics need more data. Businesses and governments may enhance their 3D 
printing setup with more proof. So, this article describes several 3D printing methods, 
manufacturing components, and applications. Further investigation will examine the 
various 3D printing machines and their resources. Manufacturing advances need 
innovative research in materials, processes, and product design. Product complexity 
requires new and imaginative manufacturing methods. Additive manufacturing is a 
contemporary industrial trend because of its beneﬁts and challenges. Researchers 
analyzed and reviewed. This article presents the results of an in-depth investigation 
on AM that was carried out. The importance of component alignment, construction 
time estimate, and budget calculation has been explored. The most important part 
of this study is identifying AM approach issues. AM difﬁculties include part size 
constraints, anisotropic mechanical characteristics, high costs, low accuracy, mass 
manufacturing, wrapping, layer misalignment, and material limitations. 
6 
Future Scope 
Due to its widespread use in aerospace, automotive, medical, and consumer goods 
sectors, additive manufacturing (AM), commonly known as 3D printing, is a 
fast-developing technology. Despite substantial advances in AM technology, some 
hurdles remain to fully fulﬁl its promise. 
The creation of new materials is one topic that might be investigated. Advanced 
polymers, composites, and metals are just some of the novel materials that have 
attracted a lot of attention for application in additive manufacturing. Possible direc-
tions for further study include expanding our understanding of the capabilities of 
novel materials and designing materials that are more amenable to AM processes.

A Comprehensive Overview on Additive Manufacturing Processes …
103
Researchers may, for instance, create materials with enhanced attributes like strength, 
durability, and heat resistance, or with specialized features like conductivity or 
biocompatibility. Research into better methods of process control and quality assur-
ance is also vital. In order to guarantee that the components made using AM methods 
are up to par, it will be necessary to reﬁne process control and quality assurance 
methods. This is especially signiﬁcant in sectors where high-quality components 
are crucial, such as the aerospace and medical ﬁelds. Better process control may 
also allow for more dependable printing at higher speeds, saving time and money 
in production. The use of AM in mass manufacturing is another promising area 
of research. While AM methods work best for low-volume manufacturing, there is 
much enthusiasm for scaling up to factory-scale production. The potential for AM 
to be employed in the industrial manufacturing of large quantities of components 
may motivate further study. Researchers may, for instance, create faster and more 
efﬁcient printing methods to facilitate mass manufacturing. The ability to print using 
more than one material is also quite intriguing. As several materials may be used 
in the printing process, more complicated components with enhanced functionality 
may be manufactured. The ability to print multi-material components with ﬁne-
grained control over material location and composition may be the focus of future 
studies. Last but not least, sustainability is a focus of much study in AM. Although, 
while AM is generally regarded as a more environmentally friendly manufacturing 
technology than more conventional approaches, it may always do better. Improved 
recyclability, less waste, and lower energy use are all potential areas of investiga-
tion for the near future. New materials derived from sustainable sources might be 
developed, or methods of recycling or reusing AM components could be investigated. 
References 
1. Ru C, Luo J, Xie S, Sun Y (2014) A review of non-contact micro- and nano-printing technolo-
gies. J Micromech Microeng 24:53001. https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/24/5/053001 
2. Bhushan B, Caspers M (2017) An overview of additive manufacturing (3D printing) 
for microfabrication. Microsyst Technol 23:1117–1124. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00542-017-
3342-8 
3. Jadhav A, Jadhav VS (2022) A review on 3D printing: an additive manufacturing technology. 
Mater Today Proc 62:2094–2099. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2022.02.558 
4. Mahamood RM, Jen T-C, Akinlabi SA, Hassan S, Akinlabi ET (2023) Chapter 1—Introduction 
to additive manufacturing technologies. In: Kumar A, Mittal RK, Haleem ABT-A in AM (eds) 
Additive manufacturing materials and technologies. Elsevier, pp 3–13 
5. Zhang X, Liou F (2021) Chapter 1—Introduction to additive manufacturing. In: Pou J, Riveiro 
A, Davim JPBT-AM (eds) Handbooks in advanced manufacturing. Elsevier, pp 1–31 
6. Chohan JS, Singh R, Boparai KS, Penna R, Fraternali F (2017) Dimensional accuracy anal-
ysis of coupled fused deposition modeling and vapour smoothing operations for biomedical 
applications. Compos Part B Eng 117:138–149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2017. 
02.045 
7. Parandoush P, Lin D (2017) A review on additive manufacturing of polymer-ﬁber composites. 
Compos Struct 182:36–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruct.2017.08.088

104
N. Bharat et al.
8. Travitzky N, Bonet A, Dermeik B, Fey T, Filbert-Demut I, Schlier L, Schlordt T, Greil P (2014) 
Additive manufacturing of ceramic-based materials. Adv Eng Mater 16:729–754. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/adem.201400097 
9. Dou R, Wang T, Guo Y, Derby B (2011) Ink-jet printing of zirconia: Coffee staining and line 
stability. J Am Ceram Soc 94:3787–3792. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-2916.2011.04697.x 
10. Khoshnevis B (2004) Automated construction by contour crafting—related robotics and infor-
mation technologies. Autom Constr 13:5–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2003.08.012 
11. Singh R, Singh N, Amendola A, Fraternali F (2017) On the wear properties of Nylon6-SiC-
Al2O3 based fused deposition modelling feed stock ﬁlament. Compos Part B Eng 119:125–131. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2017.03.042 
12. Regassa Hunde B, Debebe Woldeyohannes A (2022) Future prospects of computer-aided design 
(CAD)—a review from the perspective of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), extended reality, and 3D 
printing. Results Eng 14:100478. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rineng.2022.100478 
13. Scerrati A, Trovalusci F, Albanese A, Ponticelli GS, Tagliaferri V, Sturiale CL, Cavallo MA, 
Marchese E (2019) A workﬂow to generate physical 3D models of cerebral aneurysms applying 
open source freeware for CAD modeling and 3D printing. Interdiscip. Neurosurg. 17:1–6. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inat.2019.02.009 
14. Han Q, Geng Y, Setchi R, Lacan F, Gu D, Evans SL (2017) Macro and nanoscale wear behaviour 
of Al-Al2O3 nanocomposites fabricated by selective laser melting. Compos Part B Eng 127:26– 
35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2017.06.026 
15. Altıparmak SC, Yardley VA, Shi Z, Lin J (2022) Extrusion-based additive manufacturing 
technologies: state of the art and future perspectives. J Manuf Process 83:607–636. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2022.09.032 
16. Abd-Elaziem W, Elkatatny S, Abd-Elaziem A-E, Khedr M, Abd El-baky MA, Hassan MA, 
Abu-Okail M, Mohammed M, Järvenpää A, Allam T, Hamada A (2022) On the current research 
progress of metallic materials fabricated by laser powder bed fusion process: a review. J Mater 
Res Technol 20:681–707. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmrt.2022.07.085 
17. Tian Z, Zhang C, Wang D, Liu W, Fang X, Wellmann D, Zhao Y, Tian Y (2020) A review on 
laser powder bed fusion of inconel 625 nickel-based alloy 
18. Andjela L, Abdurahmanovich VM, Vladimirovna SN, Mikhailovna GI, Yurievich DD, Alek-
seevna MY (2022) A review on Vat Photopolymerization 3D-printing processes for dental 
application. Dent Mater 38:e284–e296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2022.09.005 
19. Davoudinejad A, Diaz Perez LC, Quagliotti D, Pedersen DB, Albajez García JA, Yagüe-Fabra 
JA, Tosello G (2018) Geometric and feature size design effect on vat photopolymerization 
micro additively manufactured surface features. In: Proc. - 2018 ASPE euspen Summer Top. 
Meet. Adv. Precis. Addit. Manuf. pp 55–59 
20. Duda T, Raghavan LV (2016) 3D Metal Printing Technology. IFAC-PapersOnLine. 49:103– 
110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2016.11.111 
21. Lee T, Jeong W, Chung S, So KP, Ryu HJ (2023) Novel solid-state metal powder surface 
modiﬁcation process for additive manufacturing of metal matrix composites and alloys. Appl 
Surf Sci 615:156364. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2023.156364 
22. Wei F, Cheng B, Chew LT, Lee JJ, Cheong KH, Wu J, Zhu Q, Tan CC (2022) Grain distribution 
characteristics and effect of diverse size distribution on the Hall-Petch relationship for additively 
manufactured metal alloys. J Mater Res Technol 20:4130–4136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmrt. 
2022.09.006 
23. Alkhatib SE, Sercombe TB (2022) High strain-rate response of additively manufactured light 
metal alloys. Mater Des 217:110664. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2022.110664 
24. Moghimian P, Poirié T, Habibnejad-Korayem M, Zavala JA, Kroeger J, Marion F, Larouche 
F (2021) Metal powders in additive manufacturing: a review on reusability and recyclability 
of common titanium, nickel and aluminum alloys. Addit Manuf 43:102017. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.addma.2021.102017 
25. Jiang L, Peng X, Walczyk D (2020) 3D printing of bioﬁber-reinforced composites and their 
mechanical properties: a review. Rapid Prototyp J 26:1113–1129. https://doi.org/10.1108/RPJ-
08-2019-0214

A Comprehensive Overview on Additive Manufacturing Processes …
105
26. Adeniran O, Cong W, Aremu A (2022) Material design factors in the additive manufacturing 
of carbon ﬁber reinforced plastic composites: a state-of-the-art review. Adv Ind Manuf Eng 
5:100100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aime.2022.100100 
27. Yao D, Wang J, Cai Y, Zhao T, An X, Zhang H, Fu H, Yang X, Zou Q, Wang L (2022) Compo-
sition regulation of composite materials in laser powder bed fusion additive manufacturing. 
Powder Technol 408:117795. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2022.117795 
28. McCarthy E, Brabazon D (2021) Additive manufacturing for sustainability of composite 
materials production. Presented at the (2021) 
29. Vyavahare S, Mahesh V, Mahesh V, Harursampath D (2023) Additively manufactured meta-
biomaterials: a state-of-the-art review. Compos Struct 305:116491. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compstruct.2022.116491 
30. Singh D, Kumar R, Ramniwas S (2023) Chapter 6—from drosophila material to functional 
structures: biomimetic through additive manufacturing technology. In: Singh S, Prakash C, 
Ramakrishna SBT-IP, M in AM (eds) Woodhead publishing reviews: mechanical engineering 
series. Woodhead Publishing, pp 129–151 
31. Davoodi E, Montazerian H, Mirhakimi AS, Zhianmanesh M, Ibhadode O, Shahabad SI, 
Esmaeilizadeh R, Sarikhani E, Toorandaz S, Sarabi SA, Nasiri R, Zhu Y, Kadkhodapour J, 
Li B, Khademhosseini A, Toyserkani E (2022) Additively manufactured metallic biomaterials. 
Bioact Mater 15:214–249. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2021.12.027 
32. Pesode P, Barve S (2022) Additive manufacturing of metallic biomaterials and its biocompat-
ibility. Mater Today Proc. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2022.11.248 
33. Simorgh S, Alasvand N, Khodadadi M, Ghobadi F, Malekzadeh Kebria M, Brouki Milan P, 
Kargozar S, Baino F, Mobasheri A, Mozafari M (2022) Additive manufacturing of bioactive 
glass biomaterials. Methods 208:75–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2022.10.010

An Overview of the Untapped Potential 
of Soft Robotic Arms with Integration 
of Machining Tools 
Shaarif Hamdule
and Shashikant S. Goilkar 
1 
Introduction 
Soft robotics is a branch of robotics that utilizes actuators made of ﬂexible materials 
instead of rigid links, with or without minimal number of rigid parts for mounting 
purposes. These actuators are inspired by nature, movements of an elephant’s trunk 
[1], locomotion of earthworms [2], jellyﬁsh, and rays [3] are a few examples of 
biomimetics in this ﬁeld. Actuation uses pneumatical control, electrical activation, 
on-board combustion of fuel [4], electrothermal actuation for shape-memory alloys, 
optical actuation [5], and biohybrid actuation [6]. Soft robots ﬁnd their applications in 
various ﬁelds. In industries, soft grippers are used to handle fragile objects with minor 
uncertainties in shapes and sizes. In the medical ﬁeld, they are used as wearables 
[7], to augment the motion capabilities of a healthy person on those suffering from 
muscle weakness due to physical or neurological disorders, and as prosthetics [8] 
as a cheap and lightweight solution. Other uses of soft robotic arms (SRA) include 
deep sea exploration [9] of delicate organisms, nuclear decontamination [10], and 
much more. Several other applications such as planetary exploration [11–13], and 
surgical uses [14] are actively studied. 
1.1 
Soft Actuators and Sensors 
In rigid robots, actuators, often paired with encoders, at joints, position the links in 
desirable orientation. In soft robotics, the actuation process is integrated into and 
throughout the manipulator. SRA employing bellows and Honeycomb Pneumatic 
Networks (HPN) [15] conﬁgure themselves due to differences in the inﬂation state
S. Hamdule envelope symbol · S. S. Goilkar 
Finolex Academy of Management and Technology, Ratnagiri, MH 415639, India 
e-mail: m.shaarif@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_11 
107

108
S. Hamdule and S. S. Goilkar
of one unit of manipulator with respect to the inﬂation state of other units. That 
is, inﬂated bellows or HPN tends to take a convex proﬁle over the uninﬂated units. 
McKibben muscles and other ﬁber-reinforced actuators [16] extend, contract, bend, 
or twist depending on the conﬁgurations of ﬁber covering the inﬂatable bladder. As 
non-pneumatic actuators are not usually implemented in SRA, they are omitted in 
this paper. 
To implement a closed-loop control system, the use of encoders is imperative. 
Similar to actuators, these encoders are made of ﬂexible material too. Eutectic Ga-
In sensor [17] uses liquid metals encased in silicones. When the setup is stretched, 
dimensional changes of channels containing the liquid alloy affect its impedance, 
which can be calibrated to the measure of change in its length. Other such sensors, that 
rely on impedance are the smart braid sensor [18] and the silicone-textile composite 
capacitive strain sensor [19] with the former relying on change in inductance and 
resistance and the later, relying mostly on change in capacitance. 
1.2 
Beneﬁts and Constrains of Soft Robots 
Designing a conventional robot requires taking spatial constraints into account such 
as the surrounding machinery and processes, as they deﬁne the dimensional character-
istics. To carry out any operation, the automaton changes the position and orientation 
of its links between a number of pre-set states. Any obstructions amidst the paths 
of transition may hinder the operation. In the case of SRA, links cannot only attain 
various lengths but also curve along these lengths, bending across the obstruction. 
Hence, soft robots are said to be highly compliant to their surroundings and can 
be used in unspeciﬁed environments. This merit is not only limited to arms but also 
grippers, as they easily conform to objects that are fragile or have minor uncertainties 
in shapes and sizes. Soft robots also provide a safer working environment, as they 
are mostly made of ﬂexible materials with minimal amounts of rigid components. 
This makes soft robots ideal in places with signiﬁcant human–machine interaction 
such as personal care for elderly [20], or in medical ﬁeld for endoscopy [21]. 
Soft robots come with their own set of complications. Actuators are highly inﬂu-
enced by the effect of gravity. Unlike rigid links, soft actuators may undergo sagging 
along the length and the desired position of the end effector may not be attained. 
Factors such as extension, contraction, bending, and torsion of links come into 
play. Actuators are also application-speciﬁc and, therefore, a general control strategy 
cannot provide solution in all scenarios, making a design of control strategies [22], 
a major problem. However, with the recent advancements in machine learning and 
modern computational power, the solution gets more viable by the day.

An Overview of the Untapped Potential of Soft Robotic Arms …
109
2 
Present Scenario of Soft Robotic Arms 
To facilitate the ease of operation in unspeciﬁed environments, SRA can be used 
to provide better compliance to the surroundings by bending around obstructions 
amidst the path to the ﬁnal orientation. SRA resembles the movements of that of an 
elephant’s trunk. A rigid alternative that mimics such motion characteristics would be 
a hyper-redundant manipulator, having multitudes of joints and therefore, a myriad 
of actuators and encoders. 
Bionic Handling Assistant [23] developed by Festo in cooperation with Fraunhofer 
IPA comprises three modules for spatial movements, as well as a hand axis and a 
gripper. Each basic module comprises of three circularly arranged actuators with 
a loop-like design, tapering at an angle of 3°. Compressed air is used to inﬂate 
actuators and orient the arm in the desired position, while, resetting is done because 
of the loop-like structure that acts as a spring when the air is discharged. Bowden 
cable potentiometers are used to measure the extension and control the arm’s spatial 
movement. The hand axis consists of three actuators, that are arranged around a ball 
joint. The gripper uses adaptive ﬁngers to conform to the object. In total, the arm 
provides 11 degrees of freedom and extends a total of 40 cm in length. The entirety of 
the arm was constructed using selective laser sintering, hence giving high ﬂexibility 
to the arm with lightweight design. 
The OctArm [24] is another pneumatically actuated SRA that makes use of 
McKibben actuators, constructed by covering latex tubing with double helical weave, 
and plastic mesh sheaths. These extensors provide a large strength-to-weight ratio. 
OctArm V is tested to successfully grasp objects of different shapes and sizes, even 
maintaining the stability of grasp under dynamic disturbances. Using 8.27 bar of 
pressure, this model is said to have a vertical load-carrying capacity of 890 N and a 
transverse load-carrying capacity of 250 N at its proximal section. 
The Tentacle Manipulator developed by Kinetic Sciences Inc. (KSI) is driven by 
a hybrid system of pneumatic bellows and electric motors. In addition to extending 
and contracting, it can bend independently in two or more regions along its length. 
Contraction and bending are achieved with the use of tendons threading cable guides, 
providing a total of 6 degrees of freedom. Kinetic Sciences Inc. has sold a Tentacle 
to Battelle Paciﬁc Northwest Labs at the Department of Energy, Hanford site in 
Washington State for application in clearing nuclear decontamination of a hot cell 
by vacuuming radioactive detritus off the ﬂoor. 
All the aforementioned designs made use of pneumatic actuators in conjunction 
with tendon cables. Use of tendons can be explained with the demerits of using a 
hyper-redundant robot. Although, hyper-redundant system provides a better solution 
in case of rigid robotics when used in unspeciﬁed environments, it is more practical 
to move the actuators and encoders off the body, otherwise, each actuator will have to 
carry the load of all the proceeding actuators, encoders, links, and other auxiliaries. 
Moving all such driving and sensing parts to the base of the arm and transmitting 
motion and torque by tendons [25] can overcome the limitations.

110
S. Hamdule and S. S. Goilkar
HPN manipulator mentioned earlier does not make use of tendons. It is constructed 
by integrating pneumatic networks into compressed honeycomb structures, made 
up of elastomers. These hexagonal frames have airbags within them that inﬂate 
during actuation. Two rows of HPN units, stacked one above the other, can be 
inﬂated with the left row separately from the right, and top rows separately from 
the bottom. Because of the structure’s resilience, the non-inﬂated side gains the 
concave proﬁle during bending. When both chambers in left and right or top and 
bottom are inﬂated together, mere lengthwise elongation takes place. The compressed 
honeycomb structure provides a high elongation rate and crush resistance. 
3 
The Untapped Potential of Soft Robotic Arms 
All the earlier-mentioned uses of SRA were speciﬁc to only picking up, grasping, 
and placing objects, with KSI Tentacle Manipulator as an exception. The range of 
applications can widely be increased by focusing on the variety of tools that can be 
mounted at the end effector. For better integration in industrial automation, surgical 
purposes, exploratory bots, and several other ﬁelds, it is imperative for SRA to be 
able to perform operations such as drilling, grinding, etc. Thereby, implying a need 
for research for tools to be mounted at the end effector and a viable way to drive 
these tools such that the ﬂexible setup can endure the undesired wobble caused by 
them. This study speciﬁcally concerns with drilling operations performed by a soft 
robotic arm. 
The literature reviewed so far shows that with an exception of HPN manipulator, 
each design can be divided along their lengths into segments, with each segment 
consisting of circularly arranged pneumatic actuators. The relative pressure within 
each actuator of a segment decides its spatial conﬁguration. And, the spatial conﬁg-
uration of each segment decides the orientation of the entire SRA, hence, also the 
position of the end effector. Therefore, a similar design can be used for a soft robotic 
drilling arm (see Fig. 1) with segments consisting of circularly arranged pneumatic 
actuators such as bellows and tendon cables to help in contraction and bending.
As the distal segment is only required to linearly elongate to thrust the drill bit 
inside the workpiece, it can be exempted from the use of tendon cables. SRA being 
relatively ﬂexible may not necessarily endure the wobble caused by the drive. If the 
motor is mounted at the tip of the SRA, under dynamic load, the design becomes 
highly unstable. Hence, the motor needs to be moved off the body of the arm, to its 
base. Motion and torque required by the tools can be transmitted by a ﬂexible shaft. 
However, the length of the arm is variable, but, the length of the ﬂexible shaft is not. 
Providing appropriate slack within each segment to compensate for the variation in 
arm’s length can be a viable solution. Flexible shaft can be placed at the core of the 
arm between the circularly arranged actuators. Pneumatic connections are explained 
in Fig. 2.
For further stabilization, laminar jamming structures [26] consisting of layers of 
sandpaper enclosed in ﬂat silicone tubes in an arrangement as shown in Fig. 3 (left)

An Overview of the Untapped Potential of Soft Robotic Arms …
111
Fig. 1 Solid model of the proposed design
can be implemented in the form of a sleeve (solid model depicted in Fig. 3 (right)). 
The sleeve can jacket around all the modules except for the distal one. Once the 
SRA takes the ﬁnal orientation, the sleeve can be subjected to vacuum, resulting 
in it getting stiffer, thereby, increasing the rigidity of the entire setup. During the 
drilling operation, the rigidity of the arm can be temporarily enhanced, and once the 
operation is completed, the setup can be reverted back to its compliant self.
The effectiveness of all the design decisions taken so far in order to stabilize 
the setup can be studied by measure of deviation from the required orientation at 
certain points of interest. A simple setup shown in Fig. 4 can help better study these 
deviations.
The coupling between adjacent segments can be mounted with sensors to study 
the stability provided by laminar jamming structures, similarly, displacement of end 
effector from its mean position can be studied for measuring the overall accuracy of 
the design.

112
S. Hamdule and S. S. Goilkar
Fig. 2 Pneumatic circuit of the proposed design
Fig. 3 Laminar jamming sleeve schematic (left) and solid model (right)

An Overview of the Untapped Potential of Soft Robotic Arms …
113
Fig. 4 Acquisition of data from soft robotic arm for testing
4 
Conclusions 
This study provides an overview on soft robotics arms, stating its present scenario as 
well as outlining the applications in research. Therefore, illuminating its untouched 
potential. Soft robotic arms are often limited to uses pertaining to grasping and relo-
cation of objects. The range, however, can be further expanded by integrating tools 
at the end effector of the arm, thereby, making the arm capable of performing simple 
machining operations. The later part of this study states challenges in achieving 
these operations and proposes a design for a soft robotic drilling arm. Owing to the 
compliant nature to its environment and lightweight, such tool-integrated soft robotic 
arms can be used in a number of applications such as in the surgical ﬁeld, for marine 
and space exploration missions, in industries dealing with products having complex 
frames with links often hindering the path of conventional robotic arms and many 
more.

114
S. Hamdule and S. S. Goilkar
References 
1. Yang J, Pitarch EP et al (2006) Synthesis and analysis of a ﬂexible elephant trunk robot. Adv 
Robot 20(6):631–59 
2. Seok S, Onal CD et al (2013) Meshworm: a peristaltic soft robot with antagonistic nickel 
titanium coil actuators. IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatron 18(5):1485–97 
3. Park S-J, Gazzola M et al (2016) Phototactic guidance of a tissue-engineered soft-robotic ray. 
Science 353(6295):158–162 
4. Onal CD, Chen X et al (2017) Soft mobile robots with on-board chemical pressure generation. 
In: Robotics research-the 15th international symposium ISRR, vol 100. pp. 525–40 
5. Satapathy P, Adiga R et al (2022) Porous nanocarbon particles drive large magnitude and fast 
photomechanical actuators. J Nanostructure Chem 12:235–248 
6. Carlsen RW, Sitti M (2014) Bio-hybrid cell-based actuators for microsystems. Small 
10(19):3831−3851 
7. Thalman C, Artemiadis P (2020) A review of soft wearable robots that provide active assistance: 
trends, common actuation methods, fabrication, and applications. Wearable Technol 1:e3 
8. Guoying G, Ningbin Z et al (2021) A soft neuroprosthetic hand providing simultaneous 
myoelectric control and tactile feedback. Nat Biomed Eng 
9. Phillips BT, Becker KP et al (2018) A dexterous, glove-based teleoperable low-power soft 
robotic arm for delicate deep-sea biological exploration. Scientiﬁc Reports 8, Article 14779 
10. Immega G, Antonelli K, The KSI tentacle manipulator. In: Proceedings of 1995 IEEE 
international conference on robotics and automation 3: 3149–54 
11. Trimmer B, Lin H-T et al (2013) Soft robots in space: a perspective for soft robotics. Acta 
Futura 6:69–79 
12. CSX Ng, Lum GZ (2022) Untethered soft robots for future planetary explorations? Adv Intell 
Syst 2100106 
13. Methenitis G, Hennes D et al (2015) Novelty search for soft robotic space exploration. In: 
Proceedings of the 2015 annual conference on genetic and evolutionary computation (GECCO 
‘15). pp 193–200 
14. Runciman M, Darzi A et al (2019) Soft robotics in minimally invasive surgery. Soft Rob 
6(4):423–443 
15. Jiang H, Liu X et al (2016) Design and simulation analysis of a soft manipulator based on honey-
comb pneumatic networks. In: 2016 IEEE international conference on robotics and biomimetics 
(ROBIO). pp 350–56 
16. Daerden F, Lefeber D (2002) Pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles: actuators for robotics and 
automation. Eur J Mech Environ Eng 47(1):11–21 
17. Ali MM, Narakathu BB et al (2016) Eutectic Ga-In liquid metal based ﬂexible capacitive 
pressure sensor. In: 2016 IEEE SENSORS. pp 1–3 
18. Felt W, Remy CD (2014) Smart braid: air muscles that measure force and displacement. In: 
2014 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems. pp 2821–26 
19. Atalay A, Sanchez V et al (2017) Batch fabrication of customizable silicone-textile composite 
capacitive strain sensors for human motion tracking. Adv Mater Technol 2(9):1700136 
20. Manti M, Pratesi A et al (2016) Soft assistive robot for personal care of elderly people. In: 2016 
6th IEEE international conference on biomedical robotics and biomechatronics (BioRob). pp 
833–8 
21. Gifari MW, Naghibi H et al (2019) A review on recent advances in soft surgical robots for 
endoscopic applications. Int J Med Robot Comput Assist Surg 15(5):e2010 
22. George Thuruthel T, Ansari Y et al (2018) Control strategies for soft robotic manipulators: a 
survey. Soft Robot 5(2):149–63 
23. Grzesiak A, Becker R et al (2011) The bionic handling assistant: a success story of additive 
manufacturing. Assem Autom 31(4):329–333 
24. Grissom MD, Chitrakaran V et al (2006) Design and experimental testing of the OctArm soft 
robot manipulator. In: SPIE proceedings volume 6230, unmanned systems technology VIII, 
62301F

An Overview of the Untapped Potential of Soft Robotic Arms …
115
25. Hemami A (1985) Studies on a light weight and ﬂexible robot manipulator. Robotics 1(1):27–36 
26. Narang YS, Vlassak JJ et al (2018) Mechanically versatile soft machines through laminar 
jamming. Adv Func Mater 28(17):1707136

Life Cycle Assessment of Abrasive Flow 
Machining of 3D Printed Parts: 
A Comparative Analysis 
Muniram Meena, Nitin Dixit, and Varun Sharma 
Nomenclature 
AFM
Abrasive Flow Machining 
FDM
Fused Deposition Modeling 
FL
Flood Lubrication 
FS
Fumed Silica 
MQL
Minimum Quantity Lubrication 
PLA
Polylactic Acid 
SLM
Selective Laser Melting 
XG
Xanthan Gum 
SiC
Silicon Carbide 
1 
Introduction 
The surface ﬁnish of micron and nano-level is desirable in applications like turbine 
blades, medical instruments, biomedical implants, automotive, and aerospace indus-
tries. The use of conventional methods is exclusive to simple cylindrical and 
ﬂat surfaces. Therefore, non-conventional processes are preferred over traditional 
methods of ﬁnishing. AFM provides better ﬂexibility to ﬁnish components with
M. Meena · V. Sharma 
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Roorkee 247667, India 
N. Dixit envelope symbol
Mechanical Engineering Department, Punjab Engineering College (Deemed to be University), 
Chandigarh 160012, India 
e-mail: ndixit111@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_12 
117

118
M. Meena et al.
complex shapes and inaccessible areas owing to the self-deformable property of abra-
sive media. The abrasive media accomplishes the ﬁnishing action. The constituents of 
the media are polymer bases, processing oil, and abrasives. The polymer base holds 
the abrasives during ﬁnishing, and processing oil helps to control media ﬂow. Abra-
sive particles behave as a multipoint cutting tool when these abrasive media extrude 
through a conﬁned passage between the tooling and workpiece. The properties of 
abrasive media possess a signiﬁcant impact on the ﬁnishing performance. Polymers, 
rubber, and hydrogels are used as base polymers to make abrasive media. These bases 
are needed to be heated sometimes during the media preparation. Different abrasive 
media have dissimilar constituents and making processes [1–3]. 
Every raw material, product, waste, production process, and other inputs and 
outputs involved in the process have some impact on society, the environment, social 
life, and the economy [4]. Therefore, the manufacturing processes, materials, and 
products should be sustainable. Sustainability depends upon three dimensions, i.e., 
environmental life cycle analysis, life cycle costing, and social life cycle assess-
ment [5]. Life cycle analysis (LCA) is a tool to evaluate the ecological impacts and 
resources used during a product life cycle. The product life cycle involves raw mate-
rial extraction, manufacturing, and use of application levels, to waste control. The 
waste control segment includes disposal in addition to recycling. There are three 
different types of studies in LCA, based on the process involved or product used, 
cradle-to-grave, cradle-to-gate, and gate-to-gate. The term “product” consists of both 
goods and services. LCA is an exhaustive appraisal and considers all the elements 
of the impacts occurring on nature, human health, and environmental resources [6]. 
In machining, LCA is essential in determining, optimizing, and minimizing the 
environmental impact of processes, services, and products. LCA has been performed 
for drilling and milling in Flood Lubrication (FL) and Minimum Quantity Lubrication 
(MQL) conditions. It was found that the environmental impact was more adverse in 
FL than in MQL [7]. In a similar line, FL, MQL, and cryogenic cooling have been used 
to machine Ti-6Al-4 V. MQL was found less hazardous [8]. The ecological and soci-
etal assessment of two novel cooling strategies showed that normal minimum quantity 
cutting ﬂuid condition has a minimum impact on human health and the ecosystem 
compared to Ranque-Hilsch vortex tube-assisted minimum quantity cutting ﬂuid 
condition for machining titanium alloy [9]. 
The literature study reveals that LCA of ﬁnishing processes is essential to examine 
the impact of processes and materials on the environment, society, and economy. 
Also, no such attempt has been reported regarding the life cycle assessment of the 
AFM process and its abrasive media. In this research study, LCA has been performed 
on the AFM process for ﬁnishing FDM-printed PLA parts using natural polymer-
based and hydrogel-based abrasive media. SimaPro (Version 9.1.0.8) software was 
used to perform this analysis. The ReCiPe 2016 V 1.04 midpoint(E) and endpoint(E) 
module was used to evaluate impact assessment.

Life Cycle Assessment of Abrasive Flow Machining of 3D Printed Parts…
119
2 
Experimentation 
PLA is a biodegradable material used in biomedical applications. Cylindrical PLA 
parts were printed using an FDM printer available in the lab (Make: AHA 3-D, 
Model: Proto Centre 999) layer-by-layer. These 3D-printed parts have been ﬁnished 
using an indigenously developed AFM facility [10]. The details of the AFM setup, 
preparation of abrasive media, LCA inventory, and impact assessment are illustrated 
in this section. 
2.1 
Experimental Setup 
An indigenously developed AFM setup consists of two hydraulic cylinders, two 
media cylinders, a power pack assembly, a three-phase power supply, and a control 
panel. The maximum weight of media used in ﬁnishing is 800 gm, based on the 
volume of the media cylinder. 
2.2 
Abrasive Media 
In the present study, hydrogel-based abrasive media and natural polymer-based abra-
sive media have been synthesized and utilized in AFM. The processes of preparation 
of these abrasive media are explained below. 
2.2.1
Hydrogel-Based Abrasive Media 
In hydrogel-based abrasive media preparation, Xanthan Gum (XG), Fumed Silica 
(FS), Locust Bean Gum (LBG), Silicon Carbide (SiC) abrasives, and water were used 
as main constituents. Initially, a solution of XG and water was prepared, and then LBG 
and FS were introduced as a crosslinker and thickening agent to prepare hydrogel. 
Lastly, SiC abrasives have been added to prepare abrasive media. A mechanical 
mixture with a power rating of 300 Watts was used to properly mix media constituents 
for 45 min. The media preparation consumed 0.075 kWh of electrical energy. The 
abrasive media can effectively remove material up to 1000 ﬁnishing cycles. In this 
study, each PLA part was ﬁnished for 300 cycles. Prepared abrasive media (800 gm) 
prepared once has been used to ﬁnish three parts. Therefore, 266.667 gm abrasive 
media have been used effectively for each PLA part. The constituent of media to 
prepare 266.667 gm of abrasives is given in Table 1.

120
M. Meena et al.
Table 1 Constituents of hydrogel-based abrasive media 
Hydrogel-based abrasive media
Natural polymer-based abrasive media 
Constituents
%
Weight (266.667 
gm) 
Constituents
%
Weight (266.667 
gm) 
XG
5
13.333
Natural polymer
37.5
100 
LBG
2.5
6.667
Dimethyl silicone 
oil 
12.5
33.333 
FS
2.5
6.667
Abrasive (SiC)
50
133.333 
Water
40
106.667 
Abrasive (SiC)
50
133.333 
Total
100
266.667
Total
100
266.667 
2.2.2
Natural Polymer-Based Abrasive Media 
Natural polymer, dimethyl silicone oil, and SiC abrasive were used as the main 
constituents to prepare natural polymer-based abrasive media as tabulated in Table 1. 
This media was prepared by heating a natural polymer in a hot air oven (power rating 
300 watts) to 200°C for 2 h and mixing dimethyl silicone oil and abrasives using 
a mechanical mixture for 1 h. The preparation of polymer-based abrasive media 
consumed 1.767 KWh of electrical energy. The same abrasive media has been used 
to ﬁnish three PLA parts. 
2.3 
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
A life cycle assessment tool was used to analyze the environmental emission and the 
impact of the process on the environment. According to ISO 14040, LCA analysis 
has four stages: the deﬁnition of goal and scope, inventory, impact assessment, and 
interpretation phases shown in Fig. 1. SimaPro (version 9.1.0.8) software was used 
for the analysis.
2.3.1
Goal and Scope Deﬁnition 
This deﬁnes the purpose of analysis and system boundary. In the present study, the 
scope of the work was gate-to-gate, which excluded the transport of raw material, 
application of the ﬁnished product, and waste management of the process and product. 
The abrasive media, workpiece material, and energy consumption are functional 
units. The Ecoinvent v1.03 was selected as a database for the current study. Figure 1b 
shows the scope of the LCA study.

Life Cycle Assessment of Abrasive Flow Machining of 3D Printed Parts…
121
(a)
(b) 
Fig. 1 a Stages of LCA. b. Scope of the LCA study
2.3.2
Inventory Analysis 
The constituents of hydrogel and natural polymer-based abrasive media with quantity 
are tabulated in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. The inventory ﬂow diagrams of the AFM 
process using these abrasive media are presented in Fig. 2a and b. 
Table 2 Comparison of environmental damage due to AFM of PLA workpiece 
Damage category
Unit
Hydrogel abrasive 
media-based AFM 
Natural polymer abrasive 
media-based AFM 
Human health
DALY
1.76E-04
3.65E-04 
Ecosystem
Species. yr
1.35E-07
2.80E-07 
Resources
USD2013
8.52E-02
0.192 
(a)
(b) 
Fig. 2 a. Inventory ﬂow diagram of hydrogel media-based AFM. b. Inventory ﬂow diagram of 
natural polymer media-based AFM

122
M. Meena et al.
2.3.3
Impact Assessment 
The present study assessed ecological impacts using two methods, i.e., ReCiPe 
2016 endpoint (E) and midpoint(E). The ReCiPe 2016 endpoint(E) method eval-
uates the impact into three categories, i.e., human health, ecosystem, and resources. 
The measurement unit of human health is DALY (disability-adjusted life year), 
indicating the equivalent health loss. The unit of resources is species/year, i.e., 
an average threat to species in a year. The unit of resources scarcity indicator is 
USD2013 which estimates the cost incurred due to resources used. The ReCiPe 
2016 midpoint(E) method evaluates the impacts into 18 categories. This approach 
gives a comprehensive analysis involving several categories with different measuring 
units. 
2.3.4
Interpretation 
In this phase, the results of the other three steps are interpreted according to the deﬁned 
goal. After getting all the inventory data related to the processes, introduce it into 
SimaPro (version 9.1.0.8) software, and get the LCA output. This phase interprets 
the output of impact assessment into a meaningful result by using world ReCiPe 
midpoint(E) and endpoint(E) methods and ﬁnding the best method that has less 
impact on the environment. 
3 
Results and Discussions 
The comparative damage assessment analysis has been done for the AFM processes, 
and evaluated their environmental impact and emissions by LCA are as follows. 
3.1 
Effect of AFM Processes on Environmental Indicators 
Figures 3a and b show characterized results of the impact on the environment 
category-wise because of the hydrogel and polymer abrasive media-based AFM 
process, respectively, using the midpoint(E) method. It can be seen from the ﬁgures 
that the major ecological impact was because of two energy consumed in the prepa-
ration of abrasive media, printing PLA parts on FDM, and energy used in the AFM 
process. These results revealed that energy consumption signiﬁcantly affects the 
environment.

Life Cycle Assessment of Abrasive Flow Machining of 3D Printed Parts…
123
(a)
(b) 
Fig. 3 a Impact due to hydrogel abrasive media-based AFM. b Impact due to polymer abrasive 
media-based AFM 
3.2 
Comparison of Environmental Emissions 
Figure 4 compares the total emission of hydrogel media-based AFM and polymer 
media-based AFM. The major emission categories are the 1,4-DCB, CO2-eq, OIL-
eq, and CO-60-Eq. 1,4-DCB and are highest for polymer abrasive media-based AFM. 
All other emissions are also higher for the polymer abrasive media-based AFM 
process. 
Fig. 4 Comparison of environmental emissions

124
M. Meena et al.
Fig. 5 Comparison of the different environmental indicators 
3.3 
Comparison of Environmental Indicators 
Emissions of all the environmental indicators from the midpoint(E) method for both 
processes are compared with the help of a radar diagram shown in Fig. 5. It has 
been clearly shown that all the emissions are higher for the polymer abrasive media-
based AFM process. CO2 eq., 1,4-DCB eq., NOx eq., CFC11 eq., and SO2 eq. are 
very less for hydrogel abrasive media-based AFM. Therefore, the impact on global 
warming, terrestrial ecotoxicity, marine ecotoxicity, human carcinogenic toxicity, 
etc., was found to be signiﬁcantly less for the hydrogel abrasive media-based AFM 
than polymer abrasive media-based AFM. 
3.4 
Effect of AFM Processes on Human Health, Ecosystems, 
and Resources 
Table 2 shows the effect of used processes on human health, ecosystems, and 
resources. It has been shown that the most affected category is resource. It has 
a 55.62% higher ecological impact because of polymer abrasive media-based 
AFM. Also, human health and the ecosystem also have a greater impact because 
of the polymer abrasive media-based AFM process. Electricity consumption for

Life Cycle Assessment of Abrasive Flow Machining of 3D Printed Parts…
125
media preparation is the major contributor to this trend, and it is 95.74% less for 
hydrogel-based media. 
4 
Conclusions 
The conclusions of the present study include:
. XG abrasive media-based AFM has less environmental damage, i.e. human health, 
ecosystem, and resources, and very few emissions like CO2 eq., 1,4-DCB eq., NOx 
eq., CFC11 eq., SO2 eq., etc., than polymer abrasive media-based AFM.
. In preparing hydrogel-based abrasive media, energy consumption is 95.74% less 
than polymer-based abrasive media.
. Hydrogel abrasive media-based AFM has 51.78% less impact on human health, 
51.78% less on the ecosystem, and 55.62% less on resources than polymer abrasive 
media-based AFM.
. Hence, hydrogel abrasive media-based AFM has excellent potential to reduce 
environmental impact and is recommended over polymer abrasive media-based 
AFM. 
References 
1. Dixit N, Sharma V, Kumar P (2021) Research trends in abrasive ﬂow machining: a systematic 
review. J Manuf Process 64:1434–1461 
2. Dixit N, Sharma V, Kumar P (2021) Development and characterization of xanthan gum-based 
abrasive media and performance analysis using abrasive ﬂow machining. J Manuf Process 
67:101–115 
3. Jain VK, Adsul SG (2000) Experimental investigations into abrasive ﬂow machining (AFM). 
Int J Mach Tools Manuf 40:1003–1021 
4. Singh AK, Sharma V (2022) A comparative appraisal of sustainable strategy in ultrasonic 
assisted grinding of nimonic 80A using novel green atomized cutting ﬂuid. Sustain Mater 
Technol 32:e00423 
5. Tarne P, Traverso M, Finkbeiner M (2017) Review of life cycle sustainability assessment and 
potential for its adoption at an automotive company. Sustain 9(4):670 
6. Singh R, Sharma V (2022) Experimental investigations into sustainable machining of Hastelloy 
C-276 under different lubricating strategies. J Manuf Process 75:138–153 
7. Campitelli A, Cristóbal J, Fischer J, Becker B, Schebek L (2019) Resource efﬁciency analysis 
of lubricating strategies for machining processes using life cycle assessment methodology. J 
Clean Prod 222:464–475 
8. Khanna N, Shah P, de Lacalle LNL, Rodríguez A, Pereira O (2021) In pursuit of sustain-
able cutting ﬂuid strategy for machining Ti-6Al-4V using life cycle analysis. Sustain Mater 
Technology 29:e00301 
9. Gupta MK, Song Q, Liu Z, Pruncu CI, Mia M, Singh G (2020) Machining characteristics-based 
life cycle assessment in eco-benign turning of pure titanium alloy. J Clean Prod 251:119598 
10. Dixit N, Sharma V, Kumar P (2021) Experimental investigations into abrasive ﬂow machining 
(AFM) of 3D printed ABS and PLA parts. Rapid Prototyp J 28:161–174

Modelling and Simulation of Wire DED 
Additive Manufacturing Process 
Akshay Arjun Pradhan, Rajeev Srivastava, and Abhinav Sarma 
Nomenclature 
AM
Additive Manufacturing 
FEA
Finite Element Analysis 
WAAM
Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing 
DED
Direct Energy Deposition 
1 
Introduction 
Additive manufacturing methods are classiﬁed on the basis of three components 
viz., the heating power source used (e.g., laser, electron beam, electric arc), the ﬁller 
material status (powder, wire), and the shape-forming method (selective melting, 
direction deposition). Due to its inherent cheap cost, high material deposition rate, 
and direct full-density build-up nature, wire-arc additive manufacturing (WAAM), 
has been regarded as the most promising AM method of low-cost mass production 
application for medium- to large-sized components. 
Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing (WAAM) constitutes the category of Direct 
Energy Deposition (DED), where ﬁller wire is constantly melted using a heat source 
emanating from the nozzle. Metal layers made up of the drops are deposited one 
on top of the other. This is very similar to how traditional welding is done. The 
classiﬁcation of direct energy deposition is shown in Fig. 1.
Although the WAAM is a technique that mass production ﬁrms ﬁnd highly 
appealing, this process is still in its early stages of development. The large residual
A. A. Pradhan envelope symbol · R. Srivastava · A. Sarma 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology 
Allahabad, Prayagraj 211004, India 
e-mail: akahay424@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_13 
127

128
A. A. Pradhan et al.
Direct Energy 
Deposition 
Type of 
feedstock 
Powder based 
Technology 
Wire based 
Technology 
Type of energy 
source 
Heat energy 
Laser beam
Electron beam 
Plasma
Electric arc 
Kinetic energy 
Fig. 1 Classiﬁcation direct energy deposition
stress, which would result in part distortion, deposition ﬂaws, and build-up failure, 
is one of the most worrisome problems due to the high heat input during layer depo-
sition. As it is well-known, the temperature gradient produced by the arc in arc 
deposition mostly induces residual stress. 
The present study has developed a ﬁnite element model that predicts the 
temperature ﬁelds and residual stress distribution in SUS 304 plates. 
2 
Methodology 
Simulation plays a very crucial role in additive manufacturing processes. We get 
to know the stresses developing beforehand and gives us an idea about the model 
that is to be manufactured. Firstly, the 3D model of the plate will be modeled in the 
ABAQUS. Further, meshing and initial boundary conditions will be applied, as can 
be seen from the ﬂow chart (Fig. 2) given. The material template is created as per 
the properties of SUS304 [1].

Modelling and Simulation of Wire DED Additive Manufacturing Process
129
Modelling as per the geometry 
Meshing 
Temperature 
dependent thermal 
properties 
Boundary 
Conditions 
Initial conditions 
Thermal analysis 
using 3D moving 
heat source 
Prediction of 
thermal histories 
Fig. 2 Flow chart of methodology 
3 
Numerical Simulation 
We can investigate “what if” scenarios and questions through simulation rather than 
by performing actual system experiments. Before you start printing, it will assist to 
optimize the setup of your machine, parts, and material combinations, reduce, and 
perhaps, even eliminate the physical process of trial-and-error testing as a result. It 
aids in locating obstructions in the movement of materials, information, and goods. 
Understanding which factors are most crucial to system performance is helpful. 
Table 1 shows the thermal and mechanical properties of SUS304 material.
3.1 
Modeling 
The dimensions of the plate used are 30 × 2 × 100 mm. The material used in this 
simulation is Steel SUS304. The approximate global size of the mesh is 2 mm. The

130
A. A. Pradhan et al.
Table 1 Thermal and mechanical properties of SUS304 [2] 
S.no. Temperature 
(ºC) 
Density 
(Kg/ 
m3) 
Speciﬁc 
heat (J/ 
kg ºC) 
Conductivity 
(W/m ºC) 
Thermal 
expansion 
(X10−5 ºC−1) 
Yield 
stress 
(MPa) 
Young’s 
modulus 
(GPa) 
Poisson’s 
ratio 
1
0
7900
462
14.6
1.70
265
198.50
0.294 
2
100
7880
496
15.1
1.74
218
193
0.295 
3
200
7830
512
16.1
1.80
186
185
0.301 
4
300
7790
525
17.9
1.86
170
176
0.310 
5
400
7750
540
18.0
1.91
155
167
0.318 
6
600
7660
577
20.8
1.96
149
159
0.326 
7
800
7560
604
23.9
2.02
91
151
0.333 
8
1200
7370
676
32.2
2.07
25
60
0.339 
9
1300
7320
692
33.7
2.11
21
20.00
0.342 
10
1500
7320
700
120
2.16
10
10
0.388
initial conditions of the plate are at 25 ºC. The plate has ﬁxed support along the length 
on both sides. Since the weld bead and material type won’t have a big impact on the 
outcome, the aim of this study is to simply detect variations in residual stresses and 
distortion. Hence the study doesn’t need to go into great depth about the geometry of 
the bead or the material used. The temperature-dependent properties of the material 
mentioned in the table are considered during the analysis. 
3.2 
Heat Source Model 
In order to simulate a WAAM process accurately, the intricate physical processes 
that produce heat must be replaced with a mathematical simulation of a heat source 
with the correct input power distribution. As with all other comparable procedures, 
the heat source is used to create the weld pool by melting the metal and using the heat 
generated. In this study, Goldak’s double ellipsoidal model (Fig. 3) is used, given in 
Eq. 1 [3] 
q Subscript r Bas
eline left parenthesis x comma y comma z comma t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 6 StartRoot 3 upper Q f Subscript r Baseline EndRoot Over a b c upper C Subscript r Baseline pi StartRoot pi EndRoot EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 x squared Over a squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 y squared Over b squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 left bracket z plus v left parenthesis tau minus t right parenthesis right bracket squared Over upper C Subscript r Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction√q Subscript r Baseline left parenthesis x comma y comma z comma t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 6 StartRoot 3 upper Q f Subscript r Baseline EndRoot Over a b c upper C Subscript r Baseline pi StartRoot pi EndRoot EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 x squared Over a squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 y squared Over b squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 left bracket z plus v left parenthesis tau minus t right parenthesis right bracket squared Over upper C Subscript r Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction
q Subscript r Baseline left parenthesis x comma y comma z comma t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 6 StartRoot 3 upper Q f Subscript r Baseline EndRoot Over a b c upper C Subscript r Baseline pi StartRoot pi EndRoot EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 x squared Over a squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 y squared Over b squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 left bracket z plus v left parenthesis tau minus t right parenthesis right bracket squared Over upper C Subscript r Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction√q Subs cript r Baseline left parenthesis x comma y comma z comma t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 6 StartRoot 3 upper Q f Subscript r Baseline EndRoot Over a b c upper C Subscript r Baseline pi StartRoot pi EndRoot EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 x squared Over a squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 y squared Over b squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 left bracket z plus v left parenthesis tau minus t right parenthesis right bracket squared Over upper C Subscript r Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction
q S
ubsc ript r Baseline left parenthesis x comma y comma z comma t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 6 StartRoot 3 upper Q f Subscript r Baseline EndRoot Over a b c upper C Subscript r Baseline pi StartRoot pi EndRoot EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 x squared Over a squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 y squared Over b squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 left bracket z plus v left parenthesis tau minus t right parenthesis right bracket squared Over upper C Subscript r Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction
q S
ubsc ript r Baseline left parenthesis x comma y comma z comma t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 6 StartRoot 3 upper Q f Subscript r Baseline EndRoot Over a b c upper C Subscript r Baseline pi StartRoot pi EndRoot EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 x squared Over a squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 y squared Over b squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 left bracket z plus v left parenthesis tau minus t right parenthesis right bracket squared Over upper C Subscript r Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction
q Sub
script r Baseline left parenthesis x comma y comma z comma t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 6 StartRoot 3 upper Q f Subscript r Baseline EndRoot Over a b c upper C Subscript r Baseline pi StartRoot pi EndRoot EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 x squared Over a squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 y squared Over b squared EndFraction exp StartFraction minus 3 left bracket z plus v left parenthesis tau minus t right parenthesis right bracket squared Over upper C Subscript r Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction
where V = arc voltage; Q = η; VI  = power of the arc; η = arc efﬁciency of the 
TIG welding process; I = welding current. The fractions f r and f f are two different 
parameters for heat deposition in the front and rear of two ellipsoids. The sum of f f 
and f r is considered as 2 ( f f = 1.4, f r = 0.6) [1, 6].

Modelling and Simulation of Wire DED Additive Manufacturing Process
131
Fig. 3 Goldak moving heat source model [1]
3.3 
Simulation 
The Python run script was developed to run the moving heat source model. All the 
parameters of the model discussed above are given with the help of the Python run 
script. It includes dimensions of the heat source model, values for calculating the 
heat ﬂux, and Goldak’s heat source model equation. 
The simulation shows the Von Mises stress, residual stress developing throughout 
the moving heat source. The maximum yield stress developed in the plate is 679 MPa 
and the maximum principle stress is 285 MPa. The residual stresses developing in 
the plate are less than the yield stress of the material. As time increases, the peak 
temperature values the decreased at the weld zone. These peak temperature values 
(Fig. 5) and accumulation of more heat can have effects on developing more stress 
near the molten pool zone [4]. The graphs are plotted at 50 s time interval and along 
the moving heat source model, i.e., in the longitudinal direction. The path distance 
is 100 mm. The Yield stress developing at 50 s time interval is 294 MPa and residual 
stress is 153 MPa. Further, residual stress is maximum at 900mm approximately 
from the starting of the heat source model [5]. 
The above graphs (Fig. 6) are plotted at 50 s time intervals and along the moving 
heat source model, i.e., in the longitudinal direction. The path distance is 100 mm. 
The yield stress developing at a 50 s time interval is 294 MPa and the residual stress 
is 153 MPa can be seen from Fig. 4a and b. Further, residual stress is maximum at 
90 mm approximately from the start of the heat source model.

132
A. A. Pradhan et al.
Fig. 4 Goldak’s moving heat source model a Von Mises Stress b Residual stress
4 
Conclusions 
The present study has focused on how well the ABAQUS CAE 2020 AM can handle 
rigors of a two-plate geometry full process simulation. Goldak’s heat source model 
is used to predict the residual stresses and thermal cycles on the SUS 304 and the 
Python run script is developed to run the model. Initially, the plate is modeled as 
per the dimensions 30 × 2 × 100 mm with a material SUS 304 and then after, a 
partition is created to convert it into two plates. The residual stress developing in the 
plate during the moving heat source is about 381 MPa. The maximum yield stress 
developed in the plate is 679 MPa and the maximum principle stress is 285 MPa. 
The study builds that the residual stresses in the deposited material are accurately 
predicted using Goldak’s 3D heat source model.

Modelling and Simulation of Wire DED Additive Manufacturing Process
133
Colour Indicates temperature distribution
Description 
Maximum Temperature 
Molten pool temperature 
Heat affected zone 
Less affected or unaffected zone 
Fig. 5 Color indication for temperature distribution 
(a) Residual stress distribution along 
the length. 
(b) Temperature distribution along 
the length. 
Fig. 6 a Residual stress distribution along the length. b Temperature distribution along the length
References 
1. Balram Y, Sridhar Babu B, Vishnu Vardhan T et al (2019) Residual stress analysis of dissim-
ilar tungsten inert gas weldments of AISI 304 and Monel 400 by numerical simulation and 
experimentation. Mater Today: Proc. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2019.07.639 
2. Deng D, Murakawa H (2006) Numerical simulation of temperature ﬁeld and residual stress 
in multi-pass welds in stainless steel pipe and comparison with experimental measurements. 
Comput Mater Sci 37(3):269–277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2005.07.007 
3. Amal MS, Justus Panicker CT, Senthilkumar V (2022) Simulation of wire arc additive manufac-
turing to ﬁnd out the optimal path planning strategy. Mater Today: Proc 66:2405–2410. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2022.06.338 
4. Colegrove P, Ganguly S (2017) Residual stress characterization and control in the additive 
manufacture of large scale metal structures. Residual Stress 2016:455. https://doi.org/10.21741/ 
9781945291173-77.

134
A. A. Pradhan et al.
5. Venkatkumar D, Ravindran D (2016) 3D ﬁnite element simulation of temperature distribution, 
residual stress and distortion on 304 stainless steel plates using GTA welding. J Mech Sci Technol 
30(1):67–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12206-015-1208-5 
6. Goldak J, Chakravarti A, Bibby M (1984) A new ﬁnite element model for welding heat sources. 
Metall Trans B 15(2):299–305. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf02667333

An Overview of the Recent Advances 
in Additive Manufacturing, and Its Scope 
for the Beneﬁt of Research 
and Development in Commercial Vehicle 
Industries 
P. Sriram Madhav, R. Revathi, and D. Keerthi Vasan 
1 
Introduction 
Industry 4.0 is the latest prevailing Industrial Revolution, and it differs from earlier 
ones in that it was based on advances in energy innovation and development, whereas 
Industry 4.0 is based on a combination of cutting-edge technologies that helped to 
advance the manufacturing sector into this new era. These cutting-edge technolo-
gies include, among others, additive manufacturing (AM), robots, big data, and the 
Internet of Things. It is not possible to exaggerate the importance of AM technolo-
gies in Industry 4.0. It is the primary driver of Industry 4.0, and other cutting-edge 
technologies are providing crucial assistance for the effective functioning of AM [1]. 
It is evolving as a technology that will enable and ensure a wide range of new 
applications. Primarily, the material availability, production speed, and resolution 
of 3D rapid prototyping techniques must be taken into account for any given appli-
cation. This overview covers the principles of 3D printing methods as well as the 
current development of unique 3D printing materials. It should be emphasized that 
the diversity of 3D printing materials arises from the wide range of 3D printing 
systems available, and no new printers or methods for unique materials have gone 
beyond the seven categories outlined in the ISO/ASTM standard. 
3D printing, on the other hand, should never be viewed as a stand-alone process; 
rather, it is becoming an intrinsic element of a multiprocess system or an integrated 
process of numerous systems to match the development of innovative materials and 
new product needs. Standard 3D printing techniques that are the most widely used
P. Sriram Madhav envelope symbol · R. Revathi · D. Keerthi Vasan 
Department of Production Engineering, PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore 641004, India 
e-mail: srimadp1123@gmail.com 
R. Revathi 
Department of Product Engineering, Daimler India Commercial Vehicles, Chennai 603109, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_14 
135

136
P. Sriram Madhav et al.
include vat photopolymerization (stereo lithography), powder bed fusion, material 
extrusion; PLT (paper lamination technology), DED (directed energy deposition), 
poly jet printing, and holography-infused sintering. 
These techniques all build parts layer by layer and provide various options for 
price, feature detail, and materials. Since there is no requirement for a mold/die, and 
design concepts are developed into products through digital prototyping, 3D printing 
is best suited for the mass customization of complex geometric shapes. This is in 
contrast to conventional manufacturing technologies, such as casting, forging, and 
machining, which are best suited for the mass production of identical commodity 
items. In addition to this, the layer-by-layer approach makes it possible to combine 
several components into a single piece, eliminating the need for additional assembly 
steps. 
2 
Am in Commercial Vehicle Industries 
2.1 
Overview 
Recent patent expirations for the initial 3D printing technologies have led to a surge 
of low-cost desktop systems that make 3D printing more accessible to the public. 
The manufacturing sector has realized the beneﬁts of these advancements and is 
investing in production systems to produce complicated parts for jet engines, specially 
customized vehicle bodywork, and even medications. Despite the fact that standard 
3D printing technology has advanced to the point where it is now possible to print 
in a variety of materials [1, 2]. 
One sector with an interest in more extensive AM uses is the commercial vehicle 
sector. Investment groups are the typical purchasers of commercial cars, and these 
organizations must tailor the vehicles to meet their particular investment needs. In 
addition, the infrastructure and legal requirements for various markets vary. As a 
result, in order to meet these demands, manufacturers and suppliers must broaden 
their range of products and create more customized, non-standard parts in small 
batches. In order to handle the variety of products and the manufacture of small 
batches, they must also set up more systems and procedures, which eventually 
increases the complexity of their manufacturing processes. AM has great promise 
for assisting commercial vehicle manufacturers to increase their level of product and 
system ﬂexibility [2]. 
For instance, on the level of the individual product, AM enables the development 
and production of geometrically complex features by using topology optimization 
and light weighting, and as a result, manufacturers can design and produce more 
complex parts to enhance the overall performance of their vehicles. Another signif-
icant advantage of using additive manufacturing for tooling is the ability for manu-
facturers to build assembling tools in one-off or small-batch production at a cheaper 
cost. AM allows cost reductions and a shortened process chain at the system level.

An Overview of the Recent Advances in Additive Manufacturing, and Its …
137
Since more equipment and production procedures are needed in conventional manu-
facturing, items with more geometrical complexity have higher manufacturing costs 
and longer process chains [3]. 
Companies have been using 3D printers to make prototypes and concept models 
for more than 30 years, largely for “ﬁt and form” inspections. Because we were aware 
that plastic 3D-printed pieces would not be as durable as the ﬁnished injection-molded 
parts, functionality was not a priority. Companies may now additively produce func-
tioning prototypes instead of merely ﬁt-and-form models since we can now print 
metallic components. 
2.2 
Material Availability—Metals 
List of materials available for metal additive manufacturing applicable for commer-
cial vehicle industries is listed (Table 1). The properties of various materials listed in 
Table 1 are shown in Fig. 1. ASTM F2792-12a is Standard Terminology for Additive 
Manufacturing Technologies. 
Compared to polymers, metal additive manufacturing plays a much more impor-
tant role in commercial vehicle industries. This is because, majority of the compo-
nents require high strength and hardness, and plastics cannot attain those parameters. 
On the other hand, even metal powders are very limited as depicted above; moreover, 
the setup cost is very high compared to the conventional manufacturing techniques. 
The above alloys are named as per their primary or base metal, with an indication of 
other elements in order of mass percent [9].
Table 1 AM metal powder list 
S. no.
Alloy
Description 
1
AlSi10Mg
Hardenable aluminum-based alloy 
2
18Ni300
Maraging steel 
3
13Ni400
Maraging steel 
4
SS316L
Stainless steel (with low carbon content) 
5
17-4PH
Martensitic stainless steel 
6
IN625
Inconel with higher level of chromium and molybdenum than grade 718 
7
IN718
Inconel 
8
CoCrMo
Cobalt chromium alloy 
9
Ti64AlV
Titanium alloy

138
P. Sriram Madhav et al.
Materials 
Properties 
Fig. 1 Metal additive manufacturing material data sheet [4–8]
2.3 
Material Availability—Plastics 
Some of the most commonly used polymer materials for additive manufacturing 
include: 
i. Polypropylene (PP): This group of materials, which makes up around 20% of 
the world’s output of plastic components, is the second-most signiﬁcant form of 
plastic. E.g., Wiper cover, bezel, INS dashboard, and mirror mounting bracket. 
ii. Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS): ABS is a widely used thermoplastic 
material known for its strength, durability, and heat resistance. E.g., Styling parts 
and aero corner. 
These are just a few examples of the polymer materials that are commonly used 
in additive manufacturing. There are many other materials available, each with their 
unique properties and applications. The choice of material depends on the speciﬁc 
requirements of the part being produced and the printing technology being used. 
2.4 
Comparing Polymer and Metal Additive Manufacturing 
Polymer and metal additive manufacturing (AM) are two distinct approaches to 3D 
printing that use different materials and printing technologies. There are several key 
differences between polymer and metal AM that affect the production process, the 
properties of the ﬁnished parts, and the applications in which they are used. 
i. Printing technology: Polymer AM typically uses extrusion-based printing tech-
nology, where molten polymer material is extruded through a nozzle to create 
the part layer by layer. Metal AM, on the other hand, typically uses a powder

An Overview of the Recent Advances in Additive Manufacturing, and Its …
139
bed fusion technique, where a laser or electron beam is used to selectively melt 
and fuse metal powder to build the part layer by layer. 
ii. Material properties: Polymer materials typically have lower strength and stiff-
ness compared to metals, but they offer advantages such as low density, ﬂexi-
bility, and ease of processing. Polymer parts are often used for non-structural 
components, such as housings, enclosures, and prototypes. Metal materials, 
on the other hand, offer high strength, stiffness, and thermal conductivity, and 
are commonly used for functional and structural parts in industries such as 
aerospace, automotive, and medical. 
iii. Post-processing: Polymer parts may require less post-processing compared to 
metal parts, as polymer parts typically have a smoother surface ﬁnish and may not 
require additional heat treatment or polishing. Metal parts may require additional 
post-processing steps such as heat treatment, machining, or surface ﬁnishing to 
achieve the desired mechanical properties and surface ﬁnish. 
iv. 
Cost: Polymer AM is typically less expensive compared to metal AM, as the 
materials and equipment used in polymer AM are generally less expensive. 
However, the cost of metal AM is decreasing as the technology improves and 
becomes more widely adopted. 
Overall, both polymer and metal additive manufacturing offer unique beneﬁts and 
limitations. The choice of polymer or metal additive manufacturing in the automotive 
industry depends on the speciﬁc application and the performance requirements of 
the part being produced [10]. Both technologies have unique advantages and limi-
tations, and they can be used in combination to produce high-quality, cost-effective 
automotive components [4]. 
3 
Am in Research and Development 
With additive manufacturing, researchers can create prototypes much more quickly 
and with fewer resources than traditional manufacturing methods. This allows for 
faster iterations and testing, ultimately leading to faster development times and more 
rapid innovation. It enables researchers to create highly customized designs that are 
not possible with traditional manufacturing methods. This can be useful in devel-
oping specialized components or medical devices tailored to an individual’s unique 
anatomy. AM allows for complex shapes and internal structures to be produced that 
would be difﬁcult or impossible to achieve using traditional manufacturing methods. 
This ﬂexibility in design can lead to improved functionality and performance. 
AM can signiﬁcantly reduce waste in the research and development process by 
using only the exact amount of material needed to create a part or component. This is 
particularly important when working with expensive or rare materials. AM can often 
be more cost-effective than traditional manufacturing methods for small production 
runs or for the creation of prototypes. This can be useful in the early stages of research 
and development when budgets are often limited. It allows quick and easy changes to

140
P. Sriram Madhav et al.
be made to a design or prototype. This means that researchers can iterate on a design 
more easily and quickly than with traditional manufacturing methods, leading to 
a more reﬁned ﬁnal product. AM has enabled the development of new materials 
and structures, leading to advancements in ﬁelds such as aerospace, biomedical 
engineering, and materials science. 
4 
Research Gap 
Additive manufacturing has the potential to revolutionize the automotive industry 
by enabling the production of complex parts with less waste and shorter lead times. 
However, despite the numerous beneﬁts of additive manufacturing, there are still 
several research gaps that need to be addressed to fully realize its potential in the 
automotive industry. One of the major research gaps is the need to develop new 
materials that are suitable for use in additive manufacturing processes. Most of the 
materials used in the automotive industry, such as steel, aluminum, and carbon ﬁber, 
are difﬁcult to print using conventional additive manufacturing techniques. There-
fore, there is a need to develop new materials that can be used in 3D printing and 
meet the speciﬁc requirements of the automotive industry, such as high strength, 
durability, and temperature resistance. 
Another research gap is the need to optimize the design and production process 
of additive manufacturing in the automotive industry. While additive manufacturing 
offers the potential for signiﬁcant improvements in the production process, it also 
requires a new approach to design and production. Currently, there is a lack of 
standardized design and production processes for additive manufacturing, which can 
lead to increased costs and longer lead times. 
Furthermore, there is a need to address the issue of scalability in additive 
manufacturing. 
While 3D printing is ideal for producing small batches of parts or prototypes, it 
is still challenging to scale up the process for mass production. This is due to the 
limitations of current additive manufacturing technology, such as slower printing 
speeds and the limited size of the printing bed. Finally, there is a need for more 
research on the economic feasibility of additive manufacturing in the automotive 
industry. 
While there are many potential beneﬁts of additive manufacturing, such as reduced 
material waste, lower tooling costs, and faster production times, the initial investment 
costs for additive manufacturing equipment and materials can be high. Therefore, 
there is a need for further research to evaluate the economic feasibility of additive 
manufacturing in the automotive industry and to develop business models that can 
effectively incorporate this technology.

An Overview of the Recent Advances in Additive Manufacturing, and Its …
141
5 
Conclusions 
Additive manufacturing is increasingly being used in the commercial vehicle industry 
for a variety of applications. One of the most signiﬁcant beneﬁts of additive manu-
facturing is that it allows for the production of complex parts with less waste 
and shorter lead times, which can be particularly advantageous for the commer-
cial vehicle industry. One application of additive manufacturing in the commercial 
vehicle industry is the production of parts for prototyping and testing. 3D printing 
allows engineers and designers to quickly create prototypes of new commercial 
vehicle parts and test them for ﬁt, form, and function. This can help to accelerate 
the design and development process and reduce the time and cost associated with 
traditional prototyping methods. 
Another application of additive manufacturing in the commercial vehicle industry 
is the production of replacement parts. Commercial vehicles often operate in harsh 
environments, which can lead to wear and tear on parts over time. With 3D printing, 
replacement parts can be produced on demand, reducing the need for a large inventory 
and decreasing the downtime associated with waiting for replacement parts to arrive. 
In addition, additive manufacturing can be used to produce lightweight components 
for commercial vehicles, which can help to improve fuel efﬁciency and reduce emis-
sions. 3D printing can be used to produce parts with complex geometries and internal 
structures that would be difﬁcult or impossible to produce using traditional manufac-
turing methods. Overall, the use of additive manufacturing in the commercial vehicle 
industry has the potential to improve the efﬁciency, reliability, and sustainability of 
commercial vehicle manufacturing and maintenance. However, there are still several 
research gaps and technical challenges that need to be addressed to fully realize the 
potential of additive manufacturing in the commercial vehicle industry. 
References 
1. Yi L, Gläßner C, Aurich JC (2019) How to integrate additive manufacturing technologies into 
manufacturing systems successfully: a perspective from the commercial vehicle industry. J 
Manuf Syst 53:195–211 
2. Vasco JC (2021) Additive manufacturing for the automotive industry. In: Additive manufac-
turing. Elsevier, pp 505–530 
3. Leal R, Barreiros FM, Alves L, Romeiro F, Vasco JC, Santos M, Marto C (2017) Additive 
manufacturing tooling for the automotive industry. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 92:1671–1676 
4. Muhammad MS, Kerbache L, Elomri A (2022) Potential of additive manufacturing for upstream 
automotive supply chains. Supply Chain Forum Int J 23(1):1–19. Taylor & Francis 
5. Cooke A, Slotwinski J (2012) Properties of metal powders for additive manufacturing: a review 
of the state of the art of metal powder property testing. Gaithersburg, MD, USA: US Department 
of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology 
6. Moghimian P, Poirié T, Habibnejad-Korayem M, Zavala JA, Kroeger J, Marion F, Larouche F 
(2021) Metal powders in additive manufacturing: a review on reusability and recyclability of 
common titanium, nickel and aluminum alloys. Addit Manuf 43:102017 
7. Mooney B, Kourousis KI (2020) A review of factors affecting the mechanical properties of 
maraging steel 300 fabricated via laser powder bed fusion. Metals 10(9):1273

142
P. Sriram Madhav et al.
8. Sulong AB, Ramli MI, Hau SL, Sahari J, Muhamad N, Suherman H (2013) Rheological and 
mechanical properties of carbon nanotube/Graphite/SS316L/polypropylene nanocomposite for 
a conductive polymer composite. Compos Part B: Eng 50:54–61 
9. Bayley J (1991) Alloy nomenclature. Dress Accessories c, 13–17 
10. Richardson M, Haylock B (2012) Designer/maker: the rise of additive manufacturing, domestic-
scale production and the possible implications for the automotive industry. Comput-Aided Des 
Appl PACE 2:33–48

Design and Development of Customized 
Helmet for Military Personnel 
Akhilesh Misra, Rajeev Srivastava, and Abhinav Sarma 
Nomenclature 
TBI
Traumatic Brain Injury 
IED’s
Improvised Explosive Devices 
PASGT
Personnel Armor System for Ground Troops 
ACH
Advanced Combat Helmet 
PBO
Poly-Phenylene Benzobis Oxazole 
1 
Introduction 
The helmets are normally manufactured to some standard sizes. There is a need 
to use customization and smart manufacturing concepts for the soldiers safety and 
comfort. The mass customization concepts (can be seen in Fig. 1 [1]) can be used in 
the manufacturing of customized helmets, speciﬁcally for soldiers who are serving 
at the borders of the country and facing issues with their helmets. A certain quantity 
of individually designed soldier helmets can be manufactured through collaborative 
customization by understanding their problems and preferences. A helmet that incor-
porates protection mechanisms (against ballistics), sensors, night vision equipment, 
etc. is necessary for modern military operations and technology-driven warfare tactics 
[2]. Many factors are considered during ballistic helmet design, including comfort, 
weight, and ﬁt [3]. Helmets, after continuous use, become heavy and unstable for 
many users, which is why some soldiers do not use helmet when necessary [4]. These 
factors affect the soldier’s decision about the use of the helmet.
A. Misra envelope symbol · R. Srivastava · A. Sarma 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology 
Allahabad, Prayagraj, UP 211004, India 
e-mail: akhilesh.2021cc22@mnnit.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_15 
143

144
A. Misra et al.
Mass Customization 
Transparent 
Customization 
Collaborative 
Customization 
Adaptive 
Customization 
Cosmetic 
Customization 
Fig. 1 Types of mass customization [1] 
Table 1 Types of blast injuries and their causes [2, 5] 
Type of blast 
injury 
Cause of injury 
Primary blast 
injury 
The passage of the shock wave through the skull, with the skull absorbing 
incidental pressure, results in primary blast injuries 
Secondary blast 
injury 
Blast winds travel at high speeds during IED (improvised explosive device) 
explosions and bombing events, and the debris driven by these blast winds 
results in secondary blast injury 
Tertiary blast 
injuries 
The blast winds accelerate the body parts with high intensity. Because the 
inertia of the skull is greater than that of the brain tissue, high-shearing strains 
are generated in the intracranial region. This results in tertiary blast injuries 
Quaternary blast 
injuries 
After an explosion, high-temperature heat gases are released. This results in 
burns and respiratory injuries brought on by breathing hazardous gases and 
fumes. The brain tissues are permanently damaged due to the heating of the 
skull by these hot gases and fumes 
1.1 
Traumatic Brain Injury 
Traumatic brain injury (TBI), also known as intracranial injury, is damage to the brain 
caused by external forces, resulting in either temporary or permanent impairment of 
brain functions. The following causes (can be seen in Table 1) have been identiﬁed 
for blast-induced TBI, based on the existing experimental studies. 
1.2 
Materials Used in the Manufacture of Military Helmets 
The following materials are normally used for the manufacture of military ballistic 
helmets. 
1.2.1
PBO 
The Poly-phenylene Benzobis Oxazole (PBO) ﬁbre is commercially known as 
Zylon®. The tensile modulus of Zylon® ﬁbre is roughly three times that of aramid

Design and Development of Customized Helmet for Military Personnel
145
ﬁbre. PBO ﬁbre’s ballistic qualities are substantially degraded by their low resilience 
to hot and humid environments, which restricts their use in combat helmets [6]. 
1.2.2
Spectra 1000 
Spectra® is a manufactured ﬁbre made from ultra-high molecular weight polyethy-
lene. This remarkably durable material is one of the world’s strongest and lightest 
ﬁbres. The substance has a speciﬁc strength that is 40% higher than aramid ﬁbre, 
40% more durable than polyester, and ten times stronger than steel. Additionally, it 
is immune to ultraviolet light (UV) degradation [6]. 
1.2.3
Dyneema® 
The Dyneema® ﬁbre originates from an ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene 
solvent spinning process. On a weight-for-weight basis, it is up to 15 times stronger 
than steel and up to 40% stronger than aramid ﬁbres. Therefore, Dyneema® ﬁbre is 
an important component in body armor [6]. 
1.2.4
Kevlar 
Kevlar® is a heat-resistant para-aramid synthetic ﬁbre with a molecular structure of 
many inter-chain bonds that make Kevlar® incredibly strong. On an equal weight 
basis, Kevlar® has a tensile strength ten times greater than steel. When a bullet or 
other high-velocity projectile hits Kevlar®, the ﬁbres essentially catch the projectile 
while absorbing and dissipating its energy[6]. 
1.3 
Types of Helmets 
Combat helmets have evolved considerably over the years. There are various types 
of combat helmets that are used by military personnel, as shown in Table 2.
2 
Methodology 
The helmets used by the defense units are manufactured in general sizes with standard 
measurements, which sometimes causes comfort issues (tight or loose ﬁt) for some 
of the soldiers, due to which they avoid using helmets even when it is necessary. A 
speciﬁc number of helmets can be manufactured for the soldiers facing issues with 
the size of the helmet by taking measurements of their heads. The 3D model of the

146
A. Misra et al.
Table 2 Types of ballistic helmets [6] 
Helmet type
Visual 
representation 
Material
Features
Weight of 
the helmet 
PASGT 
[personnel 
armor system 
for ground 
troops] 
It is a 
one-piece 
composite 
structure 
made of 
Kevlar 
aramid ﬁbre 
It Protects against shrapnel and 
various handgun bullet impacts. 
These helmets allow troops to 
wear a face shield and other 
tactical equipment along with 
their helmets 
The weight 
of PASGT 
helmet 
ranges from 
1.4 to 1.9 kg 
ACH 
[advanced 
combat 
helmet] 
ACH helmet 
is made of 
polyethylene 
It has increased blunt impact and 
ballistic protection, better 
compatibility with mission 
equipment, better 
three-dimensional sound 
localization, and reduced combat 
injuries 
The weight 
of ACH 
helmet is 
under 
1.13 kg 
MUKUT 
advanced 
combat 
helmet 
It is an 
advanced 
combat 
helmet type 
Kevlar 
helmet 
It is used by Army, Air force, and 
Paramilitary units in India. It is 
effective against 9 mm rounds. It 
has no holes and no drill 
technology giving it 360° 
protection and pads are available 
to protect against brain injuries 
The weight 
of MUKUT 
advanced 
combat 
helmet is 
under 1.2 kg 
PATKA
PATKA is 
made of 
ﬁberglass 
PATKAs were actually been 
developed for Sikh soldiers, as 
they always wear their ‘Pagdi’ 
(Turban). So, initiation was to 
make a helmet, which could 
comfortably ﬁt into the soldiers 
head 
The weight 
of the 
PATKA 
helmet 
ranges 
from 1.4 to 
1.5 kg
head can be obtained by photogrammetry method, and helmets can be modelled with 
reference to the 3D head model obtained. In this study, the methodology that was 
followed in the design and analysis of customized ballistic helmets can be seen in 
Fig. 2. 
Fig. 2 Methodology chart

Design and Development of Customized Helmet for Military Personnel
147
Fig. 3 Human head model obtained from 3DF Zephyr 
2.1 
3D Scanning of Human Head Using Photogrammetry 
Method 
By using the photogrammetry method, pictures of the human head from different 
views are taken and uploaded into the software (3DF Zephyr) to obtain the 3D 
model of the human head. The human head model is obtained, which serves as the 
foundation for designing a customized helmet. 
After uploading the pictures of the human head into 3DF Zephyr software, the 
human head model is obtained, as shown in Fig. 3. 
2.2 
Modelling of Helmet 
The obtained head model is used as a reference, and a helmet is designed for the 
human head model using the modelling software (SOLIDWORKS). The modelled 
helmet is camouﬂaged to deceive the enemy’s viewpoint. The different views of the 
helmet model can be seen in Fig. 4. 
Fig. 4 Different views of helmet model a isometric view, b cross-sectional view, c side view, d front 
view, e top view, f bottom view

148
A. Misra et al.
3 
Results and Discussions 
By using photogrammetry, a model of the human head is generated, and the model 
is used to design a helmet. The strength of the helmet is evaluated by an impact 
analysis. In order to conduct the analysis, the 9 × 19 Parabellum bullet is used as a 
projectile because it is the most widely used military handgun cartridge in the world 
[7]. The helmet shell is considered to be made of Kevlar material, and the Kevlar 
material properties are taken into account based on Chang-Chang failure criteria [7]. 
Ansys LS-DYNA has been used to conduct the analysis and obtain results. 
Figure 6 shows the deﬂection of the helmet when the bullet strikes it. The 
maximum deﬂection when the bullet strikes the helmet from the side is 51.68 mm, 
and the maximum deﬂection when the bullet strikes the helmet from the top is 32.23 
mm. Various studies have been conducted on ballistic helmets so far, which show 
that the maximum deﬂection when the bullet strikes the helmet from the side is 27.4 
mm [8]. From this, it can be inferred that the ballistic helmet designed in this work 
meets the strength criteria. 
Figures 7 and 8 show the energy conversion when the bullet strikes the helmet. 
Initially, when time t = 0, the total energy is equal to the kinetic energy of the bullet. 
However, when the bullet strikes the helmet at time t = 0.05 s, the kinetic energy 
decreases as some of the kinetic energy is absorbed by the helmet, while the internal 
energy of the system increases as the helmet absorbs the most amount of internal 
energy and the bullet also absorbs a huge amount of internal energy prior to the 
helmet. The total energy of the system is simply the sum of its internal, kinetic, 
and potential energies. In this case, the total energy of the system is decreased as 
the potential energy is absent and the decrease in kinetic energy is greater than the 
increase in internal energy.
Fig. 6 Resultant displacement when bullet strikes the helmet from side and top 

Design and Development of Customized Helmet for Military Personnel
149
Fig. 7 Kinetic energy, internal energy and total energy plots when the bullet strikes the helmet 
from sideway 
Fig. 8 Kinetic energy, internal energy and total energy plots when bullet strikes helmet from the 
top 
4 
Conclusions 
In this study, a human head model was generated using the photogrammetry method, 
and from that model, a helmet was designed and an analysis was performed on the 
helmet. It was found that the deﬂection of the helmet when the bullet strikes it from the 
side ranges from 0 mm to 51.68 mm, and the deﬂection when the bullet strikes from 
the top ranges from 0 mm to 32.23 mm, which means that the strength of the helmet 
at the sides is greater than the top portion. The ballistic helmet meets the strength 
criteria. In a similar manner, various head scans can be taken by the photogrammetry 
method, and a wide range of data related to human head measurements can be 
obtained. Head models obtained can be used in the design and manufacture of helmets 
based on the dimensions of the head. Customized helmets for military personnel can 
be manufactured in this manner.

150
A. Misra et al.
References 
1. Da Silveira G, Borenstein D, Fogliatto HS (2001) Mass customization: literature review and 
research directions. Int J Prod Econ 72(49) 
2. Kulkarni SG, Gao X, Horner SE, Zheng JQ, David NV (2013) Ballistic helmets—their design, 
materials, and performance against traumatic brain injury. Compos Struct 101:313–331. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruct.2013.02.014 
3. Ivins GBJ et al (2007) How satisﬁed are soldiers with their ballistic helmets? A comparison of 
soldiers’ opinions about the advanced combat helmet and the personal armor system for ground 
troops helmet. Mil Med 172(June):586–591 
4. Catapan MF, Okimoto MLLR, Santana FE, Silva MA, Rodrigues YW (2015) Anthropometric 
analysis of human head for designing ballistic helmets. Procedia Manuf 3(Ahfe):5475–5481. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.689 
5. Cernak I, Noble-haeusslein LJ (2009) Traumatic brain injury: an overview of pathobiology with 
emphasis on military populations. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 30(2):255–266. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/jcbfm.2009.203 
6. Li Y, Fan H, Gao X (2022) Ballistic helmets: recent advances in materials, protection mech-
anisms, performance, and head injury mitigation. Compos. Part B 238(April):109890. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2022.109890 
7. Yang JJ, Dai J (2014) Simulation-based assessment of rear effect to ballistic helmet impact 
simulation-based assessment of rear effect to ballistic helmet impact. https://doi.org/10.3722/ 
cadaps.2010.59-73 
8. Palta E, Hongbing F, Weggel DC (2018) Finite element analysis of the advanced combat helmet 
under various ballistic impacts. Int J Impact Eng 112(September):125–143. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.ijimpeng.2017.10.010

Additive Manufacturing 
and Sustainability: The Mediating Role 
of Supply Chain 
Praveen Kumar Dwivedi, Sumit Chawla, Manjeet, Saurabh Agrawal, 
Ranjana Mishra, and Mukesh Kumar 
Nomenclature 
AM
Additive Manufacturing 
1 
Introduction 
Emerging Industry 4.0 technologies can affect the performance of manufacturing 
systems, and the selection of any disruptive technology can be both a strategic 
opportunity as well a threat for organizations. Hence, the right selection of such 
technologies would signiﬁcantly affect the success of the ﬁrm. In traditional manu-
facturing, most of the parts are manufactured either by cutting away sections in raw 
materials or by molding the material in molten form. Additive Manufacturing (AM) 
is a novel production technique, which is transforming the whole product life cycle. 
AM’s unique ability to produce parts of complex designs, reduced manufacturing 
costs (less material waste, less assembly steps due to part consolidation, and no need 
for tools and ﬁxtures), is contributing to both environmental and economic sustain-
ability. In this era of global competition, attention is increasing toward the environ-
mental and social responsibilities of organizations and purposive and proportionate 
choice of technology would certainly help to achieve these goals. AM presents huge 
potential beneﬁts in terms of sustainability perspectives with the mediating role of 
the supply chain. Industries have been attracted since they could beneﬁt from the
P. K. Dwivedi envelope symbol · S. Chawla · Manjeet · S. Agrawal · R. Mishra 
Department of Applied Science, Bharati Vidyapeeth’s College of Engineering, New 
Delhi 1110063, India 
e-mail: praveendwivedi05@gmail.com 
M. Kumar 
Indian Air Force, New Delhi, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_16 
151

152
P. K. Dwivedi et al.
implementation of AM by accelerating and making cost-effective the new product 
development processes [1], producing customized products [2] and presenting inno-
vative and complex parts to their customers [3]. On this note, the following key 
issues related to AM role in supply chain and its opportunities for sustainability can 
be summarized as follows: 
1. What are the applications of AM in the supply chain? 
2. What are the key factors that inﬂuence the implementation of AM in the supply 
chain, and how can these factors be addressed to promote sustainability? 
3. What is the impact of AM supply chain on Sustainable Business Models? 
On this backdrop, it is required to look at the diffusion of this technology and 
study its important factors in implementing AM technology into ﬁrms. Thus, this 
study provides a conceptual framework laying out the important AM implementation 
factors, which promote sustainability in the supply chain. 
2 
Additive Manufacturing and Supply Chain 
The right product at a lower cost with a smaller lead time has emerged as a critical 
success factor for manufacturing companies. In fact, capturing the real need and 
designing the right products with less utilization of company resources is the key 
to sustainability in the present competitive era [4, 5]. As a result, product varieties 
are increasing to satisfy the diversiﬁed needs of customers [6, 7]. AM is expected to 
incline supply chains toward more localized approaches [2], which would fundamen-
tally change supply chain management due to changes in the replacement techniques, 
packaging and labeling, production costs, and storage. The next decade is likely to see 
some critical changes in supply chain elements and steps. Looking at the emerging 
state of the application of AM in the processes of different industries, it is required 
to study the role of AM in supply chain management which has not yet been dealt 
with in depth. 
3 
Additive Manufacturing for Sustainable Business Models 
In recent years there has been considerable interest in how AM technologies will 
shape the business model of manufacturing ﬁrms. This section concerns the incre-
mental change in position and earnings in the market followed by disruptive change, 
which will increase the current distribution of economic value. Moreover, a life-
cycle perspective and consideration of new business models are important factors to 
consider when assessing the sustainability of AM technology and its potential appli-
cations. AM does not require dedicated die or tool development. Overall, AM is a 
highly versatile technology that offers many beneﬁts, including greater design ﬂexi-
bility, faster prototyping, reduced waste, and the ability to create complex geometries

Additive Manufacturing and Sustainability: The Mediating Role …
153
that would be difﬁcult or impossible to produce using traditional manufacturing tech-
niques [3, 8]. However, AM technology diffusion to current manufacturing systems 
is a little disappointing both in terms of economies involved and technology. High 
raw material cost and its slow deposition rate through AM, boil down total process 
feasibility. 
3.1 
Economic Implications of Additive Manufacturing 
The ﬁrst barrier faced by smaller ﬁrms is scale economies, and organizations, which 
operate below efﬁcient scale economies are thrown out or acquired by bigger ones. 
It is interesting to note that unit cost under AM manufacturing is independent of the 
scale of production, whereas in conventional manufacturing, it declines with produc-
tion increases. Nevertheless, there is still scope for smaller ﬁrms to compete in the 
market if there is not much difference in cost. Niche market segments with specialized 
heterogeneous demands like customization and shorter lead time can be best served 
by AM technology. In addition, distributed manufacturing is also one of the main 
attributes of AM manufacturing systems, and it will lower the transportation cost due 
to closer to customer production. Indeed, AM is not only a disruptive technology 
[9] but it has potential to ﬂourish new business models as well as supply chains. 
Notably, quality issues and return policy may discourage some potential customers 
from buying products produced with AM technology. Since AM is supposed to enable 
distributed supply chain and manufacturing system, the issue of intellectual property 
rights is the most severe economic consequence of AM [10]. To conclude, Table 1 
summarizes opportunities and limitations from a ﬁnancial perspective for AM-based 
consumer-centric business models. 
Table 1 Opportunities and limitations from an economic perspective 
Sr. no Opportunities
Limitations 
1
Innovation through speciﬁc design 
characteristics and rapid prototyping 
High raw material cost 
2
Mass customization and mass 
personalization 
Poor economies of scale 
3
Distributed manufacturing: ease to 
explore new markets 
Intellectual property infringement 
4
Reduction in assembly steps and 
inventory through part consolidation 
Higher skill set and experience required to 
design products 
5
Change of product designs without cost 
penalty in manufacturing 
More responsive to heterogeneous customer 
demands and seasonal variations 
6
Customer co-design possibilities
Lack of quality standards, reproducibility

154
P. K. Dwivedi et al.
3.2 
Technological Implications of Additive Manufacturing 
Bower and Christensen [11] highlighted that, most well-managed companies are 
consistently ahead of their peer industries in commercializing new technologies 
and as long as these sustaining technologies address the next-generation perfor-
mance needs of their customers. Same time these ﬁrms are hesitant to commercialize 
those technologies, which appeal to smaller and emerging market segments. AM is 
argued to be the most suitable technology for mass customization and functionally 
better-performing products [12]. Aerospace industries has adopted AM technology 
to reduce cost during new model developments. Due to one-step manufacturing 
process, AM can incorporate part consolidation, further reducing manufacturing 
costs and assembly steps. Additionally, AM has better raw material efﬁciency and less 
scrap with respect to traditional manufacturing. Numerous multifaceted dynamics 
are shaping AM technique, but still, it has several restrictions limiting its successful 
application. The degree of ﬁnish, available printable material, and choice of colors 
are still limited. To conclude, Table 2 summarizes opportunities and limitations from 
a technology perspective for AM-based consumer-centric business models. 
4 
Proposed Additive Manufacturing Supply Chain 
Framework for Sustainability 
The conceptual framework for AM supply chain for sustainability is illustrated in 
Fig. 1. Framework for sustainability with AM in supply chain is developed with a 
comprehensive approach by structuring four constructs, i.e., AM strategy, AM supply 
chain, AM production planning, and organizational change along with external chal-
lenges. Factors grouped in these four constructs affect successful AM implementation 
and help to develop a strategy to counter potential external challenges. The following 
section discusses framework constructs and external challenges.
Table 2 Opportunities and limitations from a technology perspective 
Sr. 
no 
Opportunities
Limitations 
1
Flexibility in terms of design, variety, on-demand 
production, production without tooling, and fabricating a 
wide range of complex geometries 
Lack of design tools, limited 
reproducibility, limited 
printable materials 
2
High manufacturing ﬂexibility
High throughput time 
3
High raw material efﬁciency
Limited printable materials 
4
Digital printing without tools and molds
Product size is limited with 
3D printer size 
5
Ability to fabricate a wide range of complex geometries
Skilled workforce and high 
experience required 

Additive Manufacturing and Sustainability: The Mediating Role …
155
Fig. 1 Additive manufacturing supply chain framework for sustainability 
4.1 
Additive Manufacturing Strategy 
Investing in AM technologies can offer several beneﬁts to businesses, such as faster 
and more efﬁcient production, increased design ﬂexibility, reduced waste, and lower 
costs over time. However, it’s important to weigh the beneﬁts and risks before making 
a decision to invest. When it comes to AM, strategic alignment among business, 
manufacturing, and R&D is important to ensure that the technology is integrated 
effectively into the overall business strategy. To enhance sustainability, a thorough 
analysis of the company’s operations is required to identify parts or products that 
can be produced using AM to reduce waste, minimize material usage, and increase 
resource efﬁciency. Further integrating sustainable practices, such as using renew-
able energy sources, reducing water usage, and minimizing waste with production 
processes, can move a step further toward sustainability. Therefore, it is proposed to 
develop a detailed plan that outlines the speciﬁc sustainability goals and targets the 
company wants to achieve, the steps required to achieve these goals, and the metrics 
used to measure progress. 
4.2 
Organizational Change 
To sustain the beneﬁts of AM and achieve ongoing improvements in sustainability, 
organizations must foster a culture of innovation and continuous improvement. This 
involves encouraging employees to identify and implement new ideas and processes 
that further reduce waste, lower energy consumption, and decrease transportation 
emissions. The successful adoption of AM requires the development of new skills and

156
P. K. Dwivedi et al.
capabilities. Organizations must invest in training programs that provide employees 
with the skills and knowledge needed to use the new technology effectively. To fully 
realize the beneﬁts of AM, organizations must invest in the necessary infrastruc-
ture and equipment. This includes acquiring the essential software, hardware, and 
materials to support the AM process. 
4.3 
Additive Manufacturing Production Planning 
Successful AM production planning requires careful consideration of design, mate-
rial selection, machine selection, post-processing requirements, quality control, 
production scheduling, and inventory management. Sustainable design of products 
refers to the practice of creating products that are environmentally friendly, econom-
ically viable, and socially responsible throughout their entire life cycle. This involves 
considering the impact of a product from its raw material extraction to its eventual 
disposal or recycling and ﬁnding ways to minimize any negative environmental or 
social effects while maximizing beneﬁts [13]. AM has the ability to create complex, 
custom-made parts with high precision and efﬁciency. However, as with any manu-
facturing process, ensuring the quality of the ﬁnal product is critical to its overall 
sustainability. One of the key aspects of quality control in AM is to select from 
sustainable material options, such as bioplastics or recycled materials, which have 
a lesser environmental impact. Continuous monitoring through sensors and moni-
toring software can help to identify and prevent errors that could lead to material 
waste and increased energy consumption. Eventually, adhering to recognized quality 
standards and certiﬁcations, such as ISO 9001, can help ensure that the AM process 
is conducted in a sustainable and environmentally responsible manner. Diegel et al. 
[13] highlighted that AM has the potential to target cost efﬁciency and product 
quality while maintaining sustainable product design. However, training to integrate 
sustainability and certifying new components as sustainable design is still a challenge. 
4.4 
Additive Manufacturing Supply Chain 
Intelligent warehousing and smart, interoperable logistics can work together to 
promote both economic and environmental sustainability in AM. By combining 
real-time tracking and intelligent warehousing with smart, interoperable logistics, 
manufacturers can optimize transportation routes and reduce the carbon footprint 
associated with transportation. This can improve the environmental sustainability 
of AM while also reducing transportation costs and improving economic sustain-
ability. Further, by using intelligent warehousing and smart, interoperable logistics, 
manufacturers can facilitate collaboration between different actors in the AM supply 
chain, including designers, manufacturers, and logistics providers. This can improve 
communication, coordination, and efﬁciency, which can lead to cost savings and

Additive Manufacturing and Sustainability: The Mediating Role …
157
improved economic sustainability. By using green energy transportation, such as 
electric or hybrid vehicles, manufacturers can further reduce the carbon footprint of 
transportation. This can reduce the environmental impact of AM while also reducing 
transportation costs, which can improve the economic sustainability of the process. 
4.5 
Challenges to the Sustainability of Additive 
Manufacturing Supply Chain 
While AM has the potential to promote economic and environmental sustainability, 
there are still several challenges that need to be addressed to achieve these goals in 
the AM supply chain. AM can involve multiple suppliers and partners, which can 
increase the complexity of the supply chain. This can make it difﬁcult to ensure 
that sustainable practices are being used throughout the process and can increase 
the risk of waste or environmental impacts. There is still a lack of industry-wide 
standards for AM, particularly in the areas of quality control and sustainability. AM 
is still limited in the number and types of materials that can be used. This can limit the 
ability to use sustainable materials and can result in waste and environmental impacts 
from the production of non-sustainable materials. The growth of AM has led to an 
increased focus on regulatory and environmental legislation that governs the AM 
supply chain. Ensuring compliance with these regulations can be time-consuming 
and costly, particularly for smaller companies. Many industries, such as aerospace 
and medical, require certiﬁcation for components and products. Ensuring that AM 
products meet certiﬁcation requirements can be challenging, particularly for new or 
innovative products. As AM becomes more connected, there is an increased risk of 
cyberattacks that can compromise the security of sensitive information. Regulations 
related to data security can add additional costs and complexity to the supply chain. 
5 
Conclusion and Future Research Directions 
Organizations can develop a sustainable additive manufacturing supply chain that 
reduces waste, lowers energy consumption, and minimizes transportation emissions. 
This approach can help organizations build a more sustainable and resilient supply 
chain that can better meet the needs of customers and stakeholders. The concep-
tual framework for the AM supply chain in the context of sustainability can help 
businesses reduce their environmental impact and promote sustainable manufac-
turing practices. By prioritizing sustainability in their AM processes, businesses can 
contribute to a more sustainable future. Legislation and regulation related to the AM 
supply chain are still evolving, and it is important for manufacturers and researchers 
to stay up-to-date with the latest developments. As AM continues to grow in popu-
larity, it is likely that new regulations will be introduced to address emerging concerns

158
P. K. Dwivedi et al.
related to the technology. In conclusion, additive manufacturing (AM) has the poten-
tial to transform the manufacturing industry, including the supply chain, by enabling 
customization, reducing material waste, and improving energy efﬁciency. However, 
to fully realize the potential of AM for sustainability, there are still many challenges 
that need to be addressed. Future research in sustainable materials, process optimiza-
tion, supply chain optimization, circular economy, design for AM, and policy and 
regulation can help further the development of sustainable manufacturing practices 
through AM and promote the adoption of the technology in industry. By addressing 
these challenges, the additive manufacturing supply chain can contribute to a more 
sustainable future. It is important for the industry and researchers to work together 
to achieve a sustainable future through additive manufacturing. 
References 
1. Chen Z (2016) Research on the impact of 3D printing on the international supply chain. In: 
Advances in materials science and engineering 
2. Bogers M, Hadar R, Bilberg A (2016) Additive manufacturing for consumer-centric business 
models: implications for supply chains in consumer goods manufacturing. Technol Forecast 
Soc Change 102:225–239 
3. Ford SLN (2014) Additive manufacturing technology: potential implications for US manufac-
turing competitiveness. J Int Com Econ 6:40 
4. Chao RO, Kavadias S (2008) A theoretical framework for managing the new product devel-
opment portfolio: when and how to use strategic buckets. Manag Sci 54:907–921. https://doi. 
org/10.1287/mnsc.1070.0828 
5. Grifﬁn A, Page AL (1996) PDMA success measurement project: recommended measures for 
project development success and failure. J Prod Innov Manag 13:478–496 
6. Kamalini R (2003) Managing product variety: an integrative review and Research Di. Prod 
Oper Manag 12:79–101 
7. Pine B II, Victor B (1993) Making mass customization work. Harv Bus Rev 71:108–117 
8. Haleem A, Javaid M (2019) Additive manufacturing applications in industry 4.0: a review. J 
Ind Integr Manag 4:1930001 
9. Hannibal M, Knight G (2018) Additive manufacturing and the global factory: disruptive 
technologies and the location of international business. Int Bus Rev 27:1116–1127 
10. Holland M, Stjepandi´c J, Nigischer C (2018) Intellectual property protection of 3D print supply 
chain with blockchain technology. In: 2018 IEEE international conference on engineering, 
technology and innovation (ICE/ITMC). IEEE, pp 1–8 
11. Bower JL, Christensen CM (1995) Disruptive technologies: catching the wave 
12. Dwivedi PK, Kumar G, Singh RC (2021) Challenges for mass customization in industry 4.0 
environment: an analysis using fuzzy TOPSIS approach. In: Recent advances in mechanical 
engineering: select proceedings of RAME 2020. Springer, pp 1079–1089 
13. Diegel O, Singamneni S, Reay S, Withell A (2010) Tools for sustainable product design: 
additive manufacturing

Leverage of Metal 3D Printing 
Technology in the Automotive Industry 
Altaf Khan, Akant Kumar Singh, and Navdeep Sharma Dugala 
Nomenclature 
CAD
Computer-Aided Design 
MAM
Metal Additive Manufacturing 
DED
Directed Energy Deposition 
DLF
Directed Light Fabrication 
EBM
Electron Beam Melting 
PBF
Power Bed Fusion 
3D
Three Dimensional 
1 
Introduction 
Additive manufacturing, which is commonly referred to as 3D printing, is a method 
of producing three-dimensional objects by adding successive layers of material on 
top of each other. It was ﬁrst developed in the 1980s and is divided into three main 
categories based on the type of raw material used in additive manufacturing tech-
nology that is solid, liquid, and powder. Figure 1 shows the history and evolution
A. Khan envelope symbol · N. S. Dugala envelope symbol
Automobile Engineering Department, Chandigarh University, Gharuan, Punjab 140413, India 
e-mail: altafkhankolimkk@gmail.com 
N. S. Dugala 
e-mail: hod.automobile@cumail.in 
A. K. Singh envelope symbol
Mechanical Engineering Department, Chandigarh University, Gharuan, Punjab 140413, India 
e-mail: akant.e13980@cumail.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_17 
159

160
A. Khan et al.
of additive manufacturing technology. One of the most popular methods of addi-
tive manufacturing is metal additive manufacturing (MAM), which allows for the 
production of complex, customized metallic parts directly from a 3D computer-aided 
design (CAD) model. MAM has several advantages over traditional manufacturing 
techniques, including the ability to produce desired parts on demand and reduced 
design cycle time. It is also proﬁtable for low and medium-volume production. The 
versatility of additive manufacturing, or 3D printing, has made it an attractive option 
for a wide range of industries, including aerospace, automotive, medical, and energy, 
among others [1].
In recent years, 3D printing has emerged as a key technology in the manufacturing 
industry. With the ability to produce complex and customized parts from 3D CAD 
models, this process has revolutionized the way in which products are designed and 
produced. Instead of the traditional subtractive manufacturing techniques that involve 
removing material from a part, 3D printing builds up layers of material to create the 
desired shape. This 3D printing process also eliminates the need for molds, jigs, and 
ﬁxtures. This toolless approach allows for greater design ﬂexibility and a shorter time 
to market, while also reducing energy consumption. This 3D printing technology is 
used in a variety of practices, including rapid prototyping, rapid tooling, composite 
parts, and direct part manufacturing [2]. 
In short, metal 3D printing is a technology that is used to produce metal compo-
nents using a layer-by-layer process. This process typically involves utilizing special-
ized software, known as computer-aided design (CAD) software, to develop a digital 
model or design of the speciﬁc component. The virtual design is then utilized to 
direct and oversee the printing process. There are several types of metal 3D printing 
technologies, including Directed Energy Deposition (DED), Electron Beam Melting 
(EBM), Binder Jetting, Powder Bed Fusion (PBF), and Sheet Lamination. 
2 
Metal 3D Printing Technologies 
2.1 
Directed Energy Deposition (DED) 
It is also known as Directed Light Fabrication (DLF), is an additive manufacturing 
technology that uses a laser or electron beam to fuse metal powder into a solid form. 
The process involves depositing metal powder on the surface of the build platform, 
followed by the application of a high-energy beam that melts and fuses the powder 
into a solid layer. The process is repeated layer by layer until the desired ﬁnal shape 
is achieved. DLF is versatile and highly accurate, making it ideal for applications 
that require tight tolerances and high-quality surface ﬁnishes. It is also useful for 
repairing or restoring damaged parts and can be used to create large parts as the laser 
beam can be easily repositioned. DLF’s speed, efﬁciency, and versatility make it a 
valuable tool for manufacturers looking to produce complex parts with precision and

Leverage of Metal 3D Printing Technology in the Automotive Industry
161
1980's: 
1. Rapid prototyping (RP) 
developed using layer-by-
layer manufacturing. 
2. Solid, liquid, and powder 
materials used in RP. 
1990's: 
1. Carl Deckard patents selective laser sintering (SLS) technique. 
2. Introduction of EOSINT 160 machine for direct metal laser sintering (DMLS). 
3. Introduction of FDM, SGC, and LOM techniques. 
4. DTM and Solidform systems introduce SLS. 
5. MIT develops and patents Direct Shell Production Casting (DSPC) technique. 
6. Introduction of EOSINT M160 and EOSINT M250 machines for metal additive 
manufacturing. 
2000's: 
1. Introduction of Genesis machine for material extrusion. 
2. Z-Corp launches Z402 3D printer using starch and plaster-based 
powders. 
3. AeroMet develops laser additive manufacturing system. 
4. Optomec introduces powder-laser interaction-based AM 
systems. 
5. Trumpf and DMG develop Directed Energy Deposition (DED) 
techniques. 
6. Roders markets Controlled Metal Build-up (CMB) machine. 
7. Extrude Hone commercializes Pro-metal rapid tooling system 
RTS-300. 
8. Fockele and Schwarze develop steel powder-based selective 
laser-melting system. 
9. CONCEPT LASER develops laser curing technique. 
10. ARCAM commercializes electron beam powder bed fusion 
technology. 
11. Trumpf commercializes powder bed fusion (PBF) technique. 
12. Sony Precision Technology introduces stereolithography. 
13. Solidscape introduces T612 system for wax pattern fabrication. 
2010's: 
1. EOS launches EOSINT M270 machines for 
cobalt-chrome powder-based parts. 
2. Norsk Titanium develops rapid plasma 
deposition technique (RPD). 
3. ARCAM and EOS introduce A2 electron 
beam melting (EBM) machine and Formiga 
P100 Laser-sintering system. 
4. OBJET GEOMETRIES launches multi-
material Connex50 series machines. 
5. Desktop Metal and HP commercialize metal 
binder jet technology (BJT). 
6. GE-Aviation invests in PBF-EB for 
customized aircraft parts. 
7. Adoption of PBF-LB in jewelry and 
ornamental fields. 
8. TU GRAZ introduces LED-Based metal 
additive manufacturing. 
2020's: 
1. Market expansion of metal binder jet 
technology (BJT). 
2. Integration of powder bed fusion with laser 
beam (PBF-LB) in jewelry design. 
3. TU GRAZ introduces LED-Based metal 
additive manufacturing with improved time 
efficiency and reduced rework. 
Recent Evolution: 
1. Increased adoption of metal binder jetting for high-
speed printing of metal parts. 
2. Advancements in powder bed fusion (PBF) techniques 
for improved part quality and production rates. 
3. Multi-material printing enables the creation of complex 
structures with tailored properties. 
4. Integration of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine 
learning for optimized designs and enhanced production 
efficiency. 
Fig. 1 History and evolution of additive manufacturing processes
efﬁciency [3−5]. Figure 2 shows the schematic diagram of the laser powder-directed 
energy deposition.
2.2 
Electron Beam Melting (EBM) 
It is another type of metal 3D printing technology that works by using high-powered 
electron beams to melt the metal powder. The process starts by ﬁlling a build chamber

162
A. Khan et al.
Fig. 2 Schematic diagram of the laser powder directed energy deposition
with a layer of metal powder, which is then melted and deposited layer by layer 
using an electron beam. The melted material solidiﬁes quickly, producing dense and 
homogeneous parts with high-quality surface ﬁnishes. EBM is commonly used for 
aerospace, medical, and automotive applications due to its high accuracy, speed, and 
material strength [6]. Figure 3 shows the schematic diagram of the electron beam 
melting.
2.3 
Binder Jetting 
It is a type of metal 3D printing process that works by depositing metal powder and 
a binding agent layer by layer. The binding agent holds the powder in place while 
it is being processed, forming the ﬁnal product. The process is known for its speed, 
affordability, and ability to produce large parts with high resolution. However, the 
parts produced by binder jetting are typically not as strong as those produced by 
other metal 3D printing processes, and they may require further processing to reach

Leverage of Metal 3D Printing Technology in the Automotive Industry
163
Fig. 3 Schematic diagram of the electron beam melting
the desired strength and durability [5, 7, 8]. Figure 4 shows the schematic diagram 
of the binder jetting.
2.4 
Powder Bed Fusion (PBF) 
It is a type of metal 3D printing process that works by fusing metal powder into a solid 
part. The process starts by spreading a layer of metal powder on a build platform and 
then melting it with a high-powered laser. The laser then moves across the powder, 
fusing it layer by layer to form the ﬁnal product. PBF is known for its high precision, 
speed, and material strength, making it ideal for aerospace, medical, and industrial 
applications [5, 9, 10]. Figure 5 shows the schematic diagram of the powder bed 
fusion.

164
A. Khan et al.
Fig. 4 Schematic diagram of the binder jetting
Fig. 5 Schematic diagram of the powder bed fusion

Leverage of Metal 3D Printing Technology in the Automotive Industry
165
2.5 
Sheet Lamination 
Sheet Lamination is a metal 3D printing technology process that works by layering 
sheets of metal to form the ﬁnal product. The process starts by cutting the metal 
sheets into speciﬁc shapes and then layering them on top of each other. The layers 
are then bonded together using heat and pressure to create the ﬁnal product. Sheet 
lamination is a fast and affordable process, making it ideal for producing large parts 
with high strength and durability. However, the process is not as precise as other metal 
3D printing processes, making it better suited for applications that don’t require high 
accuracy [10, 11]. Figure 6 shows the schematic diagram of the sheet lamination. 
3 
Materials Used in Metal 3D Printing Technology 
Metal 3D printing technology can be performed using various types of metal mate-
rials, including stainless steel, aluminum, cobalt-chrome, titanium, nickel-based 
alloys, and copper. The choice of material depends on the application and the prop-
erties required, such as strength, stiffness, toughness, and thermal resistance. In the 
automobile industry, titanium, aluminum, and stainless steel are the most commonly 
used materials for metal additive manufacturing. Metal 3D printing technology is 
becoming increasingly important in the automotive industry due to its ability to 
produce high-performance, lightweight, and cost-effective components, as well as 
its ability to produce customized and complex parts, reducing lead times and produc-
tion costs. Here is a brief overview of the most commonly used metals in 3D printing 
for automobiles and their properties, advantages, and applications [7, 8, 10, 11].
Fig. 6 Schematic diagram of the sheet lamination 

166
A. Khan et al.
3.1 
Aluminum 
Aluminum is one of the most commonly used metals in 3D printing technology 
for the automotive industry due to its lightweight, corrosion-resistant, and thermally 
conductive properties. This metal is known for its high strength-to-weight ratio, 
which makes it ideal for lightweight applications and for improving fuel efﬁciency. 
In addition, aluminum has good machinability, making it easier to produce complex 
parts in large quantities. Applications of aluminum in the automotive industry include 
brackets, engine components, heat exchangers, and various body parts such as doors 
and hoods [7, 10, 11]. 
3.2 
Steel 
Steel is another popular metal in the automotive industry, known for its strength, 
durability, and stiffness. This metal can be used in its traditional form or as a powdered 
metal for 3D printing technology. Steel is ideal for high-load-bearing parts such as 
gears, cogs, and other transmission components. In addition, steel is known for 
its ability to withstand high-stress and high-temperature environments, making it 
suitable for use in various applications such as engine components, drive shafts, and 
suspension systems [7, 10, 11]. 
3.3 
Titanium 
Titanium is highly in demand in the automotive industry due to its high strength, low 
weight, and excellent corrosion resistance. This metal is often used in 3D printing 
technology to produce lightweight, high-performance parts such as exhaust systems, 
turbochargers, and suspension components. Due to its high melting point, titanium 
is also ideal for use in high-temperature environments, making it suitable for use in 
engine components and turbochargers [7, 10, 11]. 
3.4 
Nickel Alloys 
Nickel alloys such as Inconel and Hastelloy are generally known for their corrosion 
resistance, high strength, and ability to withstand high temperatures. These alloys are 
often used in automotive applications such as turbochargers, exhaust systems, and 
engine components due to their high performance and durability. These alloys are 
also known for their excellent resistance to oxidation and high-temperature corrosion,

Leverage of Metal 3D Printing Technology in the Automotive Industry
167
making them ideal for use in high-performance vehicles and racing applications 
[7, 10, 11]. 
3.5 
Copper 
Copper is another popular metal in the automotive industry, known for its good 
thermal and electrical conductivity. This metal is ideal for use in electric vehicle (EV) 
components, heat exchangers, and electrical wiring due to its high conductivity and 
thermal resistance. In addition, copper is known for its high strength and toughness, 
making it ideal for use in high-performance and racing applications. Copper is also 
used in 3D printing technology to produce high-performance components for racing 
and high-performance vehicles [7, 10, 11]. 
3.6 
Cobalt-Chrome 
Cobalt-chrome is a metal that is commonly used in medical and aerospace appli-
cations, but it is also gaining popularity in the automotive industry due to its high 
strength and toughness. This metal is known for its excellent resistance to wear and 
corrosion, making it ideal for applications that require high durability and reliability. 
Applications of cobalt-chrome in metal 3D printing technology for the automotive 
industry include engine components, turbochargers, and heat exchangers [7, 10, 11]. 
4 
Applications of Metal 3D Printing Technology 
in the Automotive Industry 
The automotive industry is one of the industries that have greatly beneﬁted from metal 
3D printing. The technology has been used to produce several components, including 
engine components, suspension parts, exhaust systems, and body parts, among others. 
Some of the applications of metal additive manufacturing in the automobile industry 
include [10−12]. 
4.1 
Engine Components 
The use of metal 3D printing technology in the production of engine components has 
revolutionized the automobile industry. The ability to produce complex geometries 
with reduced weight has enabled manufacturers to produce highly efﬁcient engines.

168
A. Khan et al.
For example, the production of turbochargers using metal 3D printing technology 
has allowed for the creation of designs with intricate internal passages, which were 
previously not possible using traditional manufacturing methods. This has resulted in 
improved engine performance and reduced emissions, as lighter components reduce 
the overall weight of the vehicle, which in turn improves fuel efﬁciency [10, 11, 13]. 
4.2 
Suspension Parts 
Suspension parts play a vital role in the stability and handling of a vehicle. Metal 3D 
printing technology has allowed manufacturers to produce suspension components, 
such as control arms, with improved strength and stiffness, which enhances the 
overall performance of the vehicle. The ability to produce complex geometries with 
reduced weight has also resulted in improved fuel efﬁciency, as lighter components 
reduce the overall weight of the vehicle. This, in turn, reduces emissions and results 
in a more environmentally friendly vehicle [10, 11, 13]. 
4.3 
Exhaust Systems 
Exhaust systems play a crucial role in reducing emissions and improving fuel efﬁ-
ciency. The use of metal additive manufacturing in the production of exhaust systems 
has enabled manufacturers to produce parts with complex geometries, which were 
previously not possible using traditional manufacturing methods. This has resulted 
in improved performance and reduced emissions, as the ability to produce lighter 
components results in reduced weight and improved fuel efﬁciency. In addition, metal 
3D printing technology has enabled the production of highly durable components, 
which have longer life spans and require less maintenance compared to traditional 
components [10, 11, 13]. 
4.4 
Body Parts 
The production of body parts, such as spoilers and grilles, using metal 3D printing 
technology has revolutionized the automobile industry. The ability to produce intri-
cate designs with reduced weight has enabled manufacturers to produce highly aero-
dynamic components that not only improve fuel efﬁciency and reduce emissions but 
also provide a stylish appearance to the vehicle. The use of metal additive manufac-
turing has also resulted in improved durability, as components produced using this 
technology are highly resistant to wear and tear [10, 11, 13].

Leverage of Metal 3D Printing Technology in the Automotive Industry
169
5 
Beneﬁts of Metal 3D Printing Technology 
in the Automotive Industry 
5.1 
Customization 
Metal 3D printing technology enables manufacturers to produce customized and 
complex components for different models of vehicles. This results in reduced design 
and manufacturing time, allowing for more ﬂexibility and quicker time to market 
[14]. 
5.2 
Lightweight Components 
Metal 3D printing technology can produce components that are lighter than tradi-
tionally manufactured components, which can reduce the weight of a vehicle and 
improve fuel efﬁciency [14]. 
5.3 
Cost Efﬁciency 
Metal 3D printing technology allows for the production of components in small 
quantities, reducing the cost and waste associated with mass production. This is 
particularly useful for producing low-volume components or replacement parts [14]. 
5.4 
Complex Geometries 
Metal 3D printing technology enables the production of components with complex 
geometries that are not feasible with traditional manufacturing methods. This allows 
for new and innovative designs that can improve the performance and efﬁciency of 
vehicles [14]. 
5.5 
Environmentally Friendly 
Metal 3D printing technology reduces the waste generated in the production process, 
reducing the environmental impact of manufacturing [14].

170
A. Khan et al.
6 
Challenges of Metal 3D Printing Technology 
in the Automotive Industry 
6.1 
High Cost 
Metal 3D printing equipment and material costs are still high, making it a more 
expensive option compared to traditional manufacturing methods [4, 11, 14]. 
6.2 
Lack of Standardization 
Metal 3D printing is still in its early stages, and there is a lack of standardization in 
terms of materials, processes, and equipment. This can lead to inconsistencies in the 
quality and performance of printed components [11, 14]. 
6.3 
Limited Material Options 
The range of materials available for metal 3D printing is still limited, and some 
materials may not be suitable for use in high-stress environments like automobiles 
[11, 14]. 
6.4 
Post-Processing Requirements 
Metal 3D-printed components often require post-processing to improve their strength 
and durability. This can be time-consuming and may increase the overall cost of the 
components [11, 14]. 
6.5 
Quality Control 
Maintaining consistent quality control in metal 3D printing technology can be chal-
lenging due to the newness of the process and the specialized skills and expertise 
required [11, 14].

Leverage of Metal 3D Printing Technology in the Automotive Industry
171
7 
Future Scope of Metal 3D Printing in the Automotive 
Industry 
The future of metal 3D printing technology in the automobile industry is quite 
promising due to the rapid advancement of technology and the decreasing cost of the 
process. The use of metal 3D printing technology has likely revolutionized the auto-
mobile industry by providing a cost-effective and efﬁcient method for the production 
of high-performance and lightweight components. These components will play a crit-
ical role in improving the overall performance and efﬁciency of vehicles, as they will 
reduce the weight of the vehicle while maintaining its structural integrity [4, 13, 15]. 
Moreover, the ﬂexibility offered by metal 3D printing technology allows manu-
facturers to manufacture components with complex geometries and intricate designs, 
which will not only improve the aesthetic appeal of vehicles but also provide new 
design possibilities. This opens up new avenues for innovation in the automobile 
industry and will help in the development of highly customized vehicles [4, 13, 15]. 
So, the future of metal additive manufacturing in the automobile industry is bright, 
and we can expect to see signiﬁcant advancements in this ﬁeld in the coming years. 
The application of this technology can revolutionize the approach to designing, 
producing, and manufacturing vehicles. This advancement is expected to create 
numerous prospects for innovation within the automobile industry [4, 13, 15]. 
8 
Conclusions 
The automotive industry has been on a constant quest to improve its manufacturing 
processes and produce better-performing vehicles. Here are some points that are 
concluded from this review paper.
. Metal 3D printing technology is a game-changer in the automobile industry.
. It has enormous potential due to its ability to produce lightweight, high-
performing, and intricate parts.
. Metal 3D printing has several advantages over traditional manufacturing, 
including faster production time, improved performance, and design versatility.
. However, the technology also faces challenges, such as high costs, limited material 
options, and a lack of standardization.
. Despite these obstacles, the future of metal additive manufacturing in the automo-
tive industry looks promising, with continued advancements in technology and 
cost reductions expected.
. Metal 3D Printing is set to revolutionize the automotive industry, and its impact 
will only grow in the coming years.

172
A. Khan et al.
References 
1. Pratheesh Kumar S, Elangovan S, Mohanraj R, Ramakrishna JR (2021) Review on the evolution 
and technology of state-of-the-art metal additive manufacturing processes. Mater Today: Proc 
46:907–7920. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.02.567. 
2. Gadagi B, Lekurwale R (2020) A review on advances in 3D metal printing. Mater Today: Proc 
45:277–283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.10.436 
3. Gibson I, Rosen D, Stucker B (2015) Directed energy deposition processes. In: Additive manu-
facturing technologies. Springer New York, pp 245–268. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-
2113-3_10 
4. jue Tang Z et al (2020) A review on in situ monitoring technology for directed energy deposition 
of metals. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 108, 11–12. Springer, pp 3437–3463. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s00170-020-05569-3 
5. Dev Singh D, Mahender T, Raji Reddy A (2021) Powder bed fusion process: a brief review. 
Mater Today: Proc 46:350–355. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.08.415 
6. Kolamroudi MK, Asmael M, Ilkan M, Kordani N (2021) Developments on electron beam 
melting (EBM) of Ti–6Al–4V: a review. Trans Indian Inst Met 74(4):783–790. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s12666-021-02230-9 
7. Mostafaei A et al (2021) Binder jet 3D printing—process parameters, materials, properties, 
modeling, and challenges. Prog Mater Sci 119. Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci. 
2020.100707 
8. Ziaee M, Crane NB (2019) Binder jetting: A review of process, materials, and methods. Addit 
Manuf 28:781–801. Elsevier B.V. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2019.05.031. 
9. Singh R et al (2019) Powder bed fusion process in additive manufacturing: an overview. Mater 
Today: Proc 26:3058–3070. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.02.635 
10. Shahrubudin N, Lee TC, Ramlan R (2019) An overview on 3D printing technology: techno-
logical, materials, and applications. Procedia Manuf 35:1286–1296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
promfg.2019.06.089 
11. Ngo TD, Kashani A, Imbalzano G, Nguyen KTQ, Hui D (2018) Additive manufacturing (3D 
printing): a review of materials, methods, applications and challenges. Compos Part B: Eng 
143: 172–196. Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2018.02.012. 
12. Sargini MIM, Masood SH, Palanisamy S, Jayamani E, Kapoor A (2021) Additive manufac-
turing of an automotive brake pedal by metal fused deposition modelling. Mater Today: Proc 
45:4601–4605. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.01.010 
13. Duda T, Raghavan LV (2016) 3D metal printing technology. IFAC-PapersOnLine 49(29):103– 
110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2016.11.111 
14. Buchanan C, Gardner L (2019) Metal 3D printing in construction: a review of methods, research, 
applications, opportunities and challenges. Eng Struct 180:332–348. Elsevier Ltd. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2018.11.045 
15. Matta AK, Kodali SP, Ivvala J, Jamaleswara Kumar P (2018) Metal prototyping the future of 
automobile industry: a review, 5. [Online]. www.sciencedirect.comwww.materialstoday.com/ 
proceedings2214-7853

Digital Twins of Hybrid Additive 
and Subtractive Manufacturing 
Systems–A Review 
Rajat Jain, Nikhil Bharat, and P. Subhash Chandra Bose 
Nomenclature 
DT
Digital Twin 
IOT
Internet of Things 
IIOT
Indusrial Internet of Things 
HASM
Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing Systems 
1 
Overview of Digital Twins and Hybrid Manufacturing 
Systems 
1.1 
Digital Twins for Manufacturing Systems 
Digital twins have emerged as a powerful tool for optimizing manufacturing systems. 
A digital twin is a virtual replica of a physical system that simulates its behavior and 
performance. By combining sensor data, machine learning, and other technologies, 
digital twins provide manufacturers with the ability to monitor, analyze, and optimize 
their manufacturing processes in real time [1]. Digital twins are used across a wide 
range of industries, including manufacturing, where they have become increasingly 
popular in recent years. In manufacturing, digital twins enable manufacturers to create 
virtual replicas of their production processes, which can be used to identify inefﬁcien-
cies, optimize production, and reduce costs. The potential beneﬁts of digital twins for 
manufacturing systems are signiﬁcant, including improved product quality, reduced 
downtime, increased productivity, and enhanced safety. As technology continues to
R. Jain envelope symbol · N. Bharat · P. S. C. Bose 
Mechanical Engineering Department, National Institute of Technology, Warangal 506004, India 
e-mail: rj712074@student.nitw.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
V. S. Sharma et al. (eds.), Machining and Additive Manufacturing, Lecture Notes 
in Mechanical Engineering, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6094-1_18 
173

174
R. Jain et al.
advance, digital twins are poised to play an increasingly important role in the future 
of manufacturing [2]. 
1.2 
Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing Systems 
Hybrid additive and subtractive manufacturing systems combine the beneﬁts of both 
additive and subtractive manufacturing processes, allowing for the production of 
complex parts with high precision and accuracy. Additive manufacturing involves 
building up a part layer-by-layer using materials such as plastics, metals, or ceramics, 
while subtractive manufacturing involves removing material from a block or sheet 
of material using cutting tools such as drills or mills. By integrating both additive 
and subtractive processes in a single system, manufacturers can leverage the beneﬁts 
of each to produce parts with unique geometries and characteristics. Hybrid manu-
facturing systems also enable manufacturers to produce parts with reduced material 
waste, faster production times, and lower costs compared to traditional manufacturing 
methods [3]. 
There are several different approaches to hybrid additive and subtractive manu-
facturing, including simultaneous processing, sequential processing, and parallel 
processing. In simultaneous processing, both additive and subtractive processes are 
carried out on the same part at the same time, while in sequential processing, the addi-
tive and subtractive processes are carried out one after the other. In parallel processing, 
multiple parts are produced simultaneously, with each part undergoing both addi-
tive and subtractive processing steps. Hybrid additive and subtractive manufacturing 
systems are becoming increasingly popular in a variety of industries, including 
aerospace, automotive, medical, and consumer goods. The ability to produce complex 
parts with high precision and accuracy, combined with the reduced material waste 
and production times, make hybrid manufacturing systems an attractive option for 
many manufacturers. As the technology continues to advance, hybrid additive and 
subtractive manufacturing systems are poised to play an increasingly important role 
in the future of manufacturing, enabling manufacturers to produce parts with greater 
efﬁciency, speed, and quality than ever before [4]. 
1.3 
Combination of Digital Twins and Hybrid 
Manufacturing Systems 
The integration of Digital Twins and Hybrid Manufacturing Systems offers a number 
of beneﬁts to manufacturers. One of the key advantages is the ability to simulate and 
optimize manufacturing processes before they are implemented in the real world. 
This can signiﬁcantly reduce the time and cost involved in product development, as

Digital Twins of Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing …
175
Fig. 1 Conceptual model of the digital twin for hybrid manufacturing systems 
well as improve the overall quality of the end product [5]. A conceptual model of 
DT is shown in Fig. 1. 
2 
Design and Development of Digital Twins for Hybrid 
Manufacturing Systems 
2.1 
A Short Review on Open Source and Commercially 
Available Digital Twin Solutions 
In recent years, there has been a surge of both open source and commercially avail-
able Digital Twin solutions. Open-source Digital Twin solutions such as Eclipse 
Ditto, ThingWorx, and Eclipse Vorto offer developers the freedom to modify and 
customize the software to meet their speciﬁc needs. These solutions provide a strong 
foundation for building complex and robust Digital Twin systems, with a commu-
nity of developers constantly contributing to the software’s evolution. On the other 
hand, commercially available Digital Twin solutions such as Microsoft Azure Digital 
Twins, Siemens Digital Industries Software, ANSYS Twin Builder, and GE Digital 
provide pre-built Digital Twin models and user interfaces, simplifying the implemen-
tation process for companies. These solutions often offer additional features such as 
advanced analytics, simulation capabilities, and machine learning algorithms, which 
are critical for predictive maintenance and optimal performance. Overall, both open 
source and commercially available Digital Twin solutions have their own strengths 
and limitations. Open-source solutions unhook are ideal for companies looking to 
develop custom solutions, while commercially available solutions offer a quicker 
path to implementation and more advanced features [6].

176
R. Jain et al.
2.2 
Key Technology Enablers for Digital Twins 
Digital Twins are complex systems that require various technological enablers to 
function effectively as shown in Fig. 2. Some of the key technology enablers for 
Digital Twins are [7, 8]: 
. Internet of Things (IoT): IoT is a fundamental enabler for Digital Twins as it 
provides a network of sensors and devices that can collect and transmit data from 
the physical environment. IoT devices can collect a wide range of data, such as 
temperature, humidity, vibration, and energy consumption, which can be used to 
create a digital replica of the physical environment.
. Cloud Computing: Cloud computing provides the scalability and computational 
power necessary for creating and managing complex Digital Twins. Cloud plat-
forms like Microsoft Azure and Amazon Web Services offer advanced services 
such as data storage, processing, and analytics that are crucial for Digital Twins.
. Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI): AI is used to analyze and process data collected 
from IoT devices to create insights and predictions for the physical environment. 
Machine learning algorithms can be trained to detect anomalies and patterns in the 
data and identify potential issues in the physical system, allowing for proactive 
maintenance and optimization.
. 3D Modeling and Visualization: 3D modeling and visualization technologies are 
used to create a digital replica of the physical environment, allowing for better 
visualization and analysis of the system. Technologies such as Augmented Reality 
(AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) can also be used to provide a more immersive 
experience and enable better training and simulation capabilities.
. Data Analytics: Advanced analytics tools are required to process and analyze 
the vast amounts of data collected from the physical environment. Tools such as 
data visualization, predictive analytics, and machine learning can be used to gain 
insights into the system, enabling better decision-making and optimization.
. Cybersecurity: Digital Twins require robust security measures to protect sensi-
tive data and ensure the physical environment is not vulnerable to cyber-attacks.
Fig. 2 Key technology enablers for the digital twins [5]

Digital Twins of Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing …
177
Technologies such as encryption, access control, and intrusion detection systems 
are crucial to maintain the security of the system.
2.3 
Designing and Developing Digital Twins Using Microsoft 
Azure Digital Twin Platforms 
Designing and developing Digital Twins using Microsoft Azure Digital Twin 
Platforms8 can be achieved through the following steps [5, 6]:
. Identify the physical system and its components that will be modeled in the Digital 
Twin.
. Deﬁne the interface and protocols to collect data from the physical environment, 
using IoT devices or other sensors.
. Design the Digital Twin model and deﬁne the relationships between the compo-
nents and their behavior.
. Develop the Digital Twin using the Azure Digital Twins platform, using Azure 
Digital Twins Explorer for modeling and deﬁning the Digital Twin components.
. Deﬁne the data schema, including data types, units of measure, and data 
relationships.
. Develop the data ingestion process, using Azure IoT Hub to collect data from 
sensors and devices and send them to the Digital Twin.
. Use Azure Stream Analytics to process real-time data and generate insights and 
predictions about the physical system.
. Use Azure Functions to create workﬂows that automate actions based on the 
insights generated from the Digital Twin, such as triggering alerts or notiﬁcations.
. Test and validate the Digital Twin by simulating different scenarios, using tools 
such as Azure Digital Twins Explorer and Power BI for visualization and analysis. 
Deploy the Digital Twin to production and monitor its performance, using Azure 
Application Insights and other monitoring tools to identify and address issues in real 
time. 
2.4 
Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing System 
Digital Twin Example 
Suppose a manufacturing company produces parts using both additive and subtractive 
manufacturing processes, with a CNC machine performing the subtractive manufac-
turing and a WAAM (Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing System) performing the 
additive manufacturing. The company can create a Digital Twin of this manufac-
turing system, which would include a digital model of the manufacturing process, 
the machines, and the parts being produced [9].

178
R. Jain et al.
Fig. 3 WAAM–digital twin framework [9]
The Digital Twin (Fig. 3) can be used to simulate the manufacturing process and 
optimize it for efﬁciency, quality, and productivity. For example, the Digital Twin 
can be used to simulate the path of the CNC machine and WAAM, ensuring that 
they do not interfere with each other during the manufacturing process. It can also be 
used to optimize the process parameters, such as the speed of the CNC machine and 
the temperature of the WAAM, to ensure that the parts are produced with the desired 
quality. Following are the points that explain how DT of WAAM can be used: 
. Design: The ﬁrst step in the WAAM process is to create a 3D model of the part 
to be printed using computer-aided design (CAD) software. This 3D model can 
then be imported into a Digital Twin platform, such as Microsoft Azure Digital 
Twins.
. Simulation: Once the 3D model is imported into the Digital Twin platform, a 
simulation can be run to analyze the WAAM process. The simulation considers 
factors such as the properties of the metal wire, the arc voltage, the wire feed rate, 
and the speed of the print head. The simulation generates data that can be used to 
optimize the process, such as the optimal parameters for the arc voltage and wire 
feed rate.
. Printing: Once the simulation is complete, the Digital Twin can be used to control 
the WAAM machine. The Digital Twin sends commands to the machine, such as 
the arc voltage and wire feed rate, to ensure that the part is printed according to 
the optimized parameters generated by the simulation.

Digital Twins of Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing …
179
. Quality control: As the part is being printed, sensors can be used to collect data 
on the temperature, the geometry, and the quality of the part. This data is sent 
back to the Digital Twin platform in real time, where it is analyzed to ensure that 
the part is being printed correctly. Any deviations from the expected quality can 
be ﬂagged, and the process can be adjusted accordingly.
. Post-processing: Once the part is printed, it may need to undergo post-processing, 
such as sanding or polishing, to achieve the desired ﬁnish. The Digital Twin can 
be used to simulate the post-processing steps and optimize the process to achieve 
the desired ﬁnish. 
Additionally, the Digital Twin can be used to monitor the performance of the 
manufacturing system in real time. It can collect data from sensors on the machines 
and use it to predict when maintenance is needed or to detect any anomalies in 
the manufacturing process. This can help to reduce downtime and improve overall 
efﬁciency (Fig. 3). 
2.5 
Optimizing the Process Parameters Using Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence Along with Using Real-Time Data Analytics 
(Microsoft Power Bi) for Condition Monitoring 
The following steps can be used for improving the process parameters of WAAM-
DT (Fig. 4) [3, 4]:
. Data Preprocessing: The collected data from the sensors needs to be pre-processed 
to ensure that it is of good quality, consistent, and relevant. This involves data 
cleaning, data normalization, and data transformation.
. Feature Selection: Feature selection is the process of selecting the most relevant 
features that are needed to control the WAAM process. This involves selecting 
the most important parameters such as voltage, current, temperature, and feed.
. Machine Learning Model Development: Machine Learning (ML) models can be 
developed using tools such as Azure Machine Learning Studio. The ML models 
can be used to analyze the preprocessed data and predict the output parameters 
such as the quality of the part.
. AI-Based Control System: An AI-based control system can be developed using 
machine learning models. This system can be used to control the WAAM process 
parameters such as voltage, current, temperature, and speed in real time.
. Condition Monitoring using Power BI: Power BI can be used to create a real-time 
dashboard to monitor the condition of the WAAM process. The dashboard can 
display the performance of the process, quality of the part, and any anomalies that 
may occur during the process.
. Real-time Alerts and Notiﬁcations: Real-time alerts and notiﬁcations can be set 
up using Power BI to alert the operators and engineers if the WAAM process

180
R. Jain et al.
Fig. 4 Real time and ofﬂine data monitoring of WAAM-DT for condition monitoring purposes [1, 
9, 10] 
parameters go out of range, or if there are any anomalies or faults detected during 
the process.
3 
Challenges in the Implementation of Digital Twins 
for Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing 
Systems 
The implementation of Digital Twins for Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manu-
facturing (HASM) presents some challenges that need to be addressed to maximize 
their effectiveness. Here are some of the main challenges [10–15]:
. Integration of different manufacturing processes: Digital Twins for HASM 
need to simulate multiple manufacturing processes, which can be challenging 
as each process has its own variables and parameters. Integrating the data from 
different processes and creating an accurate simulation model is crucial for the 
effective implementation of Digital Twins for HASM.

Digital Twins of Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing …
181
. Multi-objective optimization: Hybrid manufacturing systems have the poten-
tial to produce parts with superior performance and functionality compared to 
single-process manufacturing systems. However, optimizing the manufacturing 
process for multiple objectives such as quality, speed, and cost can be difﬁcult. 
The challenge is to develop Digital Twins that can optimize the manufacturing 
process for these multiple objectives simultaneously.
. Big data and cybersecurity: Digital Twins for HASM require a large amount of 
data from different sources, such as sensor data, material properties, and design 
parameters. Collecting and managing this data can be a challenge, as even small 
inaccuracies can have a signiﬁcant impact on the simulation results.
. Complexity of the simulation models and high amount of computation 
resources requirement: The simulation models for HASM are complex and 
require high computing power. The challenge is to create accurate and efﬁcient 
models that can handle the complexity of the hybrid manufacturing process, 
including the effects of material properties, heat transfer, and ﬂuid ﬂow.
. Lack of standards and frameworks for Digital twin implementation: As with 
Digital Twins for AM, there are no standardized methods for developing Digital 
Twins for HASM, which can make it difﬁcult to compare and validate results 
across different systems. This lack of standards can also hinder the adoption of 
Digital Twins by manufacturers.
. Requirement of high capital investment: Building a Digital Twin for HASM 
requires signiﬁcant resources, including hardware, software, and personnel. The 
challenge is to balance the cost of developing and maintaining the Digital Twin 
with the potential beneﬁts that it can provide.
. Issues relating to communication networks: Building quicker and more effec-
tive communication interfaces, like 5G is necessary. The use of 5G technology for 
smart manufacturing is urgently needed due to its numerous beneﬁts, including 
the expansion of the number of sensors and devices that can be connected, high-
speed ubiquitous connectivity, improved reliability and redundancy, and ultra-low 
power consumption. It is also very important to enable real-time data connectivity 
and operational efﬁciency for the Digital Twins. 
4 
Future Scope of Digital Twins for Hybrid Additive 
and Subtractive Systems 
The future scope of Digital Twins for Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing 
(HASM) is signiﬁcant, as the technology has the potential to transform the manu-
facturing industry. Here are some potential future developments and applications of 
Digital Twins for HASM [13, 14, 16].
. Advanced process control and optimization: Digital Twins can be used to opti-
mize the manufacturing process for multiple objectives, such as quality, speed, 
and cost. In the future, we can expect to see even more advanced optimization

182
R. Jain et al.
algorithms that can adapt to changing process conditions and make real-time 
adjustments to the manufacturing process.
. Predictive maintenance: Digital Twins can be used to monitor the health of 
machines and predict when maintenance is needed. In the future, we can expect 
to see more advanced predictive maintenance algorithms that can detect potential 
issues before they occur and recommend preventative measures.
. Supply chain optimization: Digital Twins can be used to optimize the supply 
chain for HASM, including material sourcing, transportation, and inventory 
management. In the future, we can expect to see more integrated supply chain 
models that use Digital Twins to optimize the entire manufacturing process.
. Adoption of Digital Twins by small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs): 
Currently, the adoption of Digital Twins is primarily limited to large companies 
with signiﬁcant resources. In the future, we can expect to see more SMEs adopting 
Digital Twins for HASM as the technology becomes more accessible and cost-
effective. 
Overall, the future scope of Digital Twins for HASM is vast and exciting, with 
the potential to transform the manufacturing industry and create signiﬁcant value for 
manufacturers. 
References 
1. Gopal L, Singh H, Mounica P, Mohankumar N, Challa NP, Jayaraman P (2023) Digital twin 
and IOT technology for secure manufacturing systems. Meas: Sens 25. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.measen.2022.100661 
2. Bhattacharya M, Penica M, O’Connell E, Southern M, Hayes M (2023) Human-in-loop: a 
review of smart manufacturing deployments. Systems 11:35. https://doi.org/10.3390/system 
s11010035 
3. Isaja M, Nguyen P, Goknil A, Sen S, Husom EJ, Tverdal S, Anand A, Jiang Y, Pedersen KJ, 
Myrseth P, Stang J, Niavis H, Pfeifhofer S, Lamplmair P (2023) A blockchain-based framework 
for trusted quality data sharing towards zero-defect manufacturing. Comput Ind 146. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2023.103853 
4. Nath SV, van Schalkwyk P, Isaacs D (2021) Building industrial digital twins design, develop, 
and deploy digital twin solutions for real-world industries using Azure Digital Twins. Packt 
Publishing, Limited 
5. Bamunuarachchi D, Georgakopoulos D, Banerjee A, Jayaraman PP (2021) Digital twins 
supporting efﬁcient digital industrial transformation. Sensors 21. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21 
206829 
6. Damjanovic-Behrendt V, Behrendt W (2019) An open source approach to the design and 
implementation of digital twins for smart manufacturing. Int J Comput Integr Manuf 32:366– 
384. https://doi.org/10.1080/0951192X.2019.1599436 
7. IEEE Communications Society. Internet of Things, AHSNTC, IEEE Internet of Things (Initia-
tive), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers: GIoTS, Global IoT Summit: 2020 
conference proceedings 
8. Makarov VL, Bakhtizin AR, Beklaryan GL (2019) Developing digital twins for production 
enterprises. Bus Inform 13:7–16. https://doi.org/10.17323/1998-0663.2019.4.7.16

Digital Twins of Hybrid Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing …
183
9. Mu H, He F, Yuan L, Commins P, Wang H, Pan Z (2023) Toward a smart wire arc additive 
manufacturing system: a review on current developments and a framework of digital twin. J 
Manuf Syst 67:174–189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2023.01.012 
10. Botín-Sanabria DM, Mihaita S, Peimbert-García RE, Ramírez-Moreno MA, Ramírez-Mendoza 
RA, de Lozoya-Santos JJ (2022) Digital twin technology challenges and applications: a 
comprehensive review 
11. Phua A, Davies CHJ, Delaney GW (2022) A digital twin hierarchy for metal additive 
manufacturing 
12. Rasheed A, San O, Kvamsdal T (2019) Digital twin: values, challenges and enablers 
13. Xie X, Merino J, Moretti N, Pauwels P, Chang JY, Parlikad A (2023) Digital twin enabled fault 
detection and diagnosis process for building HVAC systems. Autom Constr 146. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104695 
14. Kritzinger W, Karner M, Traar G, Henjes J, Sihn W (2018) Digital twin in manufacturing: 
a categorical literature review and classiﬁcation. In: IFAC-PapersOnLine. Elsevier B.V., pp 
1016–1022 
15. Cai Y, Wang Y, Burnett M (2020) Using augmented reality to build digital twin for recon-
ﬁgurable additive manufacturing system. J Manuf Syst 56:598–604. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jmsy.2020.04.005 
16. Stojanovic N, Milenovic D (2019) Data-driven digital twin approach for process optimization: 
an industry use case. In: Proceedings-2018 IEEE International conference on big data, big data 
2018. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp 4202–4211

