Semi-classical Models
697
S
4. W. Młak: Hilbert Spaces and Operator Theory (Springer, Dordrecht 1991)
5. D. Werner: Funktionalanalysis (Springer, Berlin 1995, third edition 2000)
6. G. Ludwig: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics I (Springer, New York 1983), Appendix IV
7. E. Prugoveˇcki: Quantum Mechanics in Hilbert Space (Academic Press, New York 1971, second
edition 1981; reprint Dover Publications, Mineola 2006)
8. O. M. Nikodym: The Mathematical Apparatus for Quantum Theories (Springer, Berlin 1966)
9. A. B¨ohm: The Rigged Hilbert Space and Quantum Mechanics, Springer Lecture Notes in
Physics 78 (Springer, Berlin 1978)
Semi-classical Models
Markus Arndt
The Notion of Semi-classicality
Within the literature on quantum physics the word “semi-classical” is used both very
often and with different meanings. But three situations are most commonly encoun-
tered: Firstly, quantum systems that are approximated by classical models at high
 quantum numbers. Secondly, the mathematical description of composite systems
which can be simpliﬁed by dividing the problem into a classical and a quantum
sector. And ﬁnally, open quantum systems which reveal classical properties in their
interaction with a complex environment.
The various deﬁnitions of semi-classicality apply to a vast range of physical
systems, covering quantum optics [1], atomic physics [2], molecular physics [3],
mesoscopic and solid state physics [4] or even  quantum gravity [5]. A recent
and comprehensive resource letter by Gutzwiller [6] provides nearly four hundred
commented references to important papers on that subject. And a number of these
papers have been collected and reprinted in [7].
Systems at High Quantum Numbers
It has been proven in countless experiments, that quantum physics is the correct
theory for describing the world of elementary particles, atoms and molecules. It
is also widely believed, that quantum theory is equally correct in the macroscopic
world. However, in many cases the use of classical models is simpler and already
fully sufﬁcient for the description of observed phenomena. This is why Niels Bohr
suggested the  correspondence principle, which should connect the two worlds in
the limit of sufﬁciently high quantum numbers [8]. In this sense, quantum theory
should become “semi-classical”.
A good example for this is the hydrogen atom: When Bohr built his ﬁrst atom
model  Bohr’s atom model [8], aiming at the quantitative understanding of atomic

698
Semi-classical Models
spectra, he started from the assumption that  electrons were circulating around
the nucleus on trajectories similar to those of planets around the sun. However, he
had to complement this classical model by the quantum hypothesis that the elec-
tron can only travel with discrete angular momenta. Such a trajectory picture is
incompatible with energy conservation, as circulating charges inevitably emit elec-
tromagnetic radiation, but Bohr’s analysis allowed to explain the observed atomic
spectra surprisingly well.
In 1926, Schr¨odinger solved the inconsistencies of this “semi-classical” view by
assigning a stationary complex  wave function, of amplitude A and phase φ, to
the atomic electrons. The square modulus |A|2 of this function then describes the
probability to ﬁnd the electron in a particular state. The hydrogen ground state is
then correctly represented by a spherical wavefunction rather than a circular race
track for electrons. The quantum picture thus differs markedly from Bohr’s ﬁrst
“semi-classical” view.
However, it turns out that the quantum and the classical description approach
each other again in Rydberg atoms, i.e. in atoms excited to high electron ener-
gies [9]. When the atom’s valence electron is excited to a high electronic quantum
number n, a high orbital angular momentum l and a high magnetic quantum number
m, with l = |m| = n −1, the electron’s wavefunction is again rather well local-
ized on a tight torus which resembles a lot the original idea of a classical electron
trajectory.
Such “circular” Rydberg states are the most classical atomic states that can ac-
tually be prepared in the lab. They couple only weakly to the nuclear core but
very efﬁciently to external ﬁelds. They are therefore very interesting in laboratory
demonstrations of fundamental quantum information phenomena [10].
A second example for classical physics as a limiting case of quantum theory can
also be identiﬁed for continuous variable systems. Similarly to the case of optics,
where wave optics is approximated by geometrical ray optics for sufﬁciently short
wavelengths, one may also ﬁnd a classical approximation for the motion of a quan-
tum object at high momentum and correspondingly short  de Broglie wavelength.
This idea is implemented in the Wenzel–Kramers–Brillouin (WKB) method,
which is a “semi-classical” technique for solving the  Schr¨odinger equation:
iℏ∂
∂t ψ(x, t) =

−ℏ2
2m + U(x)

ψ(x, t).
(1)
If we rewrite the wavefunction of a propagating particle in the exponential form
ψ(x, t) ≡A(x) · eiS(x,t)/ℏ.
(2)
and insert this into (1), we ﬁnd two expressions for the real and imaginary part, and
in particular:
∂S
∂t + (∇S)2
2m
+ U = ℏ2
2m
A
A .
(3)

Semi-classical Models
699
S
Equation (3) is usually identiﬁed as a classical limit of the quantum description,
since for ℏ→0 it corresponds to the Hamilton–Jacobi equation. In classical physics
it describes both the ﬂow of interaction free particles in an external potential U(x),
and the physics of ray optics as a limiting case for the propagation of electro-
magnetic waves. Of course it is not physically possible to reduce a fundamental
constant to zero, but classical mechanics represents a good approximation to quan-
tum physics as long as the phase and amplitude of the wave vary sufﬁciently slowly.
Division into Classical and Quantum Sectors
Frequently, semi-classical models represent also a mathematical simpliﬁcation of a
problem which can be achieved by dividing a complex system into at least two parts.
One of these parts is sufﬁciently simple and sufﬁciently important to be treated by
quantum theory, while the other subsystem may still be described using classical
physics.
For instance, “semi-classical gravity” usually describes an approach to  quan-
tum gravity in which matter ﬁelds are taken to be quantum while the gravitational
ﬁeld is treated classically.
A typical example from quantum optics is the atom-photon interaction, which
can be treated at different levels of classicality. In general, the Hamiltonian of the
atom–light system reads:
ˆHtot = ˆHatom + ˆHﬁeld + ˆHint.
But depending on the experimental situation, it may be sufﬁcient to choose the math-
ematical treatment to be fully classical, semi-classical or fully quantum mechanical.
a. Classical matter and classical light: In most situations of our everyday life, we
can rely on a purely classical treatment of both the atoms and the light. This is for
instance the case when we irradiate a solid lump with light from a lamp. As soon
as we know the intensity and color of the light, as well as the absorption coefﬁcient
and the heat capacity of the solid, we can for instance determine the temperature
increase in the irradiated solid. This does not require any detailed knowledge of the
underlying quantum properties.
b. Classical light ﬁeld coupled to quantized internal atomic states: Of course,
matter is actually composed of discrete atoms, and each of them has an inﬁnite
set of quantized energy levels. But in the interaction with monochromatic light it is
often justiﬁed to approximate atoms as two-level quantum systems, when the pho-
ton energy EL is resonant with the energy difference between the excited state |e⟩
and the ground state |g⟩: EL = ℏωL ≃Ee −Eg = ℏωA. In this simpliﬁed situation
the atom is described by the Hamiltonian
Hatom = 1
2ℏω(|e⟩⟨e| −|g⟩⟨g|).
(4)

700
Semi-classical Models
The presence of the monochromatic light ﬁeld of amplitude E = E0 · cos(ωt) is
included in the time-dependent external potential
ˆHint = −ˆd · E,
where the dipole operator ˆd = d|g⟩⟨e| + d∗|e⟩⟨g| describes the quantum transi-
tion between the two atomic levels. It is proportional to the dipole matrix element
d = −e⟨e|r|g⟩, and thus a real quantum entity. But the electric ﬁeld amplitude
E =√2I/cε0 can still be related to the light intensity using classical electrodynamics.
This procedure is very often justiﬁed, as an intensity as little as 1 mW already
corresponds to a photon ﬂux of about ∼1016 photons per second. The quantum
granularity of the photon ﬁeld, i.e. the addition or removal of a few photons from
the beam, can then be safely neglected. The semi-classical Hamiltonian then reads
ˆHtot = ˆHatom + ˆHint.
This atom–light interaction model is for instance relevant in most practical situations
related to the description of atomic spectra or optical atom traps [11].
c. Quantum atom and quantum light: A full quantum treatment becomes neces-
sary, when only a few photons ( light quantum) are strongly coupled to a few
atomic levels. A typical example is that of two-level atoms inside a cavity, i.e. in
experiments testing cavity  quantum electrodynamics [10, 12]. The presence of
the cavity dramatically enhances the interaction between photon and atom. A single
photon inside the cavity may then sufﬁce to cause internal or external state changes
of the atom. The photonic Hamiltonian is then described by
Hﬁeld = ℏωˆa
† ˆa,
(5)
with the photon  creation and annihilation operators ˆa
† and ˆa. The interaction
Hamiltonian now includes the electric ﬁeld of a single photon of frequency ω within
the volume V :
ˆE =
)
(ℏω)/(ε0V )(ˆa + ˆa†).
Open Quantum Systems, Coupled to a Complex Environment
Open quantum systems, i.e. systems in interaction with a complex environment, are
also often denoted as semi-classical systems. Here the name refers to the fact that
most of the unique quantum features – such as  superposition and  entanglement
– seem to vanish after contact with the experimentally uncontrollable many-body
system.
Decoherence theory [13, 14] elucidates how the coupling between a quantum
system S and its environment E reduce the coherence within the quantum system

Semi-classical Models
701
S
and leads to the appearance of classical properties. Recent experimental examples
from quantum optics, are coherent photon states in a lossy cavity [15] or molec-
ular  de Broglie wavelength interacting with their environment through thermal
photons or collisions with residual gas atoms [16].
Interestingly,  decoherence only leads to “semi-classical” phenomena: no quan-
tum phase relation is actually lost. The quantum correlations ( correlations in
quantum mechanics) only extend to and get entangled with an enormously larger
system of many particles in a complex environment. And this is the reason why
we cannot trace and retrieve them any more. In this sense, the apparent classicality
turns out to be a result of our ﬁnite information handling capacities but one might
still think of the underlying world as being ruled by quantum theory.
Literature
1. P. Meystre, Murray III Sargent: Elements of Quantum Optics (Springer, Heidelberg, 2006)
2. B. G. Englert: Semiclassical Theory of Atoms, Lecture Notes in Physics (Springer, Heidelberg,
1988)
3. M. S. Child: Semiclassical Mechanics with Molecular Applications, Int. Ser. of Monographs
on Chemistry (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1991)
4. M. Brack, R. Bhaduri: Semiclassical Physics, Frontiers in Physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA, 1997)
5. P. Fr´e, V. Gorini, G. Magli, U. Moschella (eds.): Classical and Quantum Black Holes, Studies
in High Energy Physics, Cosmology and Gravitation (Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol,
1999)
6. M. C. Gutzwiller, Resource letter ICQM-1: the interplay between classical and quantum me-
chanics. Am. J. Phys. 66, 304–324 (1998)
7. M. C. Gutzwiller: The Interplay Between Classical and Quantum Mechanics (American Asso-
ciation of Physics Teachers, College Park, MD, 2001)
8. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, F. Laloe: Quantum Mechanics (Wiley, New York, 2nd edn., 1991)
9. T. F. Gallagher: Review Article: Rydberg Atoms, Reports on Prog. Phys. 51, 143–188 (1988)
10. J. M. Raimond, M. Brune, S. Haroche: Manipulating quantum entanglement with atoms and
photons in a cavity. Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 565–582 (2001)
11. S. Chu: Cooling and trapping of atoms and biomolecules. Opt. Soc. Am. 559, 199 (1998)
12. H. Walther: Cavity quantum electrodynamics. Rep. Prog. Phys. 69, 1325–1382 (2006)
13. W. H. Zurek: Decoherence, Einselection, and the quantum origins of the classical. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 75, 715–775 (2003)
14. D. Giulini, E. Joos, C. Kiefer, J. Kupsch, O. Stamatescu, H. D. Zeh: Decoherence and the
Appearance of the Classical World in Quantum Theory (Springer, Berlin, 2003)
15. M. Brune, E. Hagley, J. Dreyer, X. Matre, A. Maali, C. Wunderlich, J. M. Raimond, S. Haroche:
Observing the Progressive Decoherence of the “Meter” in a Quantum Measurement. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 77, 4887–4890 (1996)
16. M. Arndt, K. Hornberger, A. Zeilinger: Probing the limits of the quantum world. Phys. World
18, 35–40 (2005)

