420
Objective Quantum Probabilities
Secondary Literature
7. Wheeler, J. A., W. H. Zurek (eds.): Quantum Theory and Measurement. Princeton University
Press, Princeton NJ (1983).
8. d’Espagnat, B.: Reality and the Physicist. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, p. 85 (1989).
Objective Quantum Probabilities
Storrs McCall
Objective quantum probabilities represent the polar opposite to the Bayesian ap-
proach to quantum probabilities, which assumes probabilities to be subjective
degrees of belief. In the objective theory, probabilities of quantum events are part
of the physical world, and take their values independently of what human beings
believe. The ﬁrst objective theory was Karl Popper’s propensity theory of prob-
abilities, which identiﬁed propensities as the dispositional properties of particles
to assume certain states under given conditions [1]. The propensity theory placed
Popper squarely on the “particle” side of de Broglie’s and Bohr’s  wave-particle
duality. Propensities, however, suffered from the defect that Popper was unable to
specify where in the physical world the values of his propensities lay. The present
theory deals with this problem in locating precise quantum probability values in
space-time structure.
Imagine that a spin-1/2 particle with direction of  spin at an angle of 60◦to the
vertical is passed through an “HV apparatus”, a vertically-oriented Stern–Gerlach
magnet with two exit channels which separates particles into a “spin-up” stream
(direction of spin v or vertical) and a “spin-down” stream (direction of spin h or hori-
zontal). The spin-60◦particle has a probability of cos2 30◦= 3/4 of emerging in the
spin-up channel. In the objective theory, this value is encoded in space-time structure
in the following way. Imagine that at the time the particle enters the apparatus the
4-dimensional manifold divides into non-mutually-accessible future branches, and
that on 75% of these branches the particle is measured spin-up and that on 25% it is
measured spin-down. Figure 1, part (i), depicts a simple instance of this branching
in space-time.
The future branches represent possible outcomes of the experiment, and the
relative proportionality of sets of branches containing different kinds of outcome
represent the probabilities of each outcome. But when the particle has exited from
the apparatus there is only one actual outcome, and this “passage from potential-
ity to actuality” (Heisenberg [2]) is represented by the progressive vanishing of all
branches but one in space-time structure (Fig. 1 part (ii)). There will, of course,
always be many more branching surfaces and future branches higher up on the se-
lected branch.

Objective Quantum Probabilities
421
O
Part (ii): time t+ t’
Part (i): time t
Fig. 1 At time t, 75% are spin-up branches and 25% spin-down branches. Hence the probability
of a spin-up branch being randomly selected as the sole surviving “actual” branch is 0.75
The emergence of actuality, and the progressive vanishing of all but one fu-
ture branch, is one of the two principal differences between the present theory and
the  many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. The other is that in the
many-worlds theory the probabilities of the different future outcomes are “put in by
hand”, whereas in the objective theory probability values are represented by branch-
proportionality. The probability of a spin-up or a spin-down outcome is determined
by the proportionality of the spin-up and spin-down branch subsets relative to the
set of all branches above a given branching surface. (In the example above, this is
the totality of spin-up and spin-down branches when the particle measured by the
HV apparatus has spin-orientation 60◦). The latter set is symmetric in the sense that
each branch has an equal chance of being selected as the actual branch. The breaking
of this symmetry and the selection of the actual branch models the collapse of the
superposition, i.e. the superposition of vertically-oriented and horizontally-oriented
spin-states which describes the state of the particle when it enters the apparatus.
Collapse in branching space-time is constituted by random branch selection of the
actual branch.
In the example given of the particle with spin-orientation 60◦the probabilities of
the different future outcomes were 3/4 and 1/4, and it might be asked whether only
rational probability values, corresponding to proportions among ﬁnite sets of dif-
ferent outcomes, can be objectively represented. The answer is no. Although Georg
Cantor has shown that there can be no ﬁxed proportions among subsets of a denu-
merably inﬁnite set, there exist non-denumerably inﬁnite sets of branches with a
tree-like structure which possess subsets with proportionality corresponding to any
real number between 0 and 1 [3]. Under appropriate initial conditions, the proportion
of spin-up branches in some experiment will be precisely cos2 20◦, an irrational
number.

422
Objective Quantum Probabilities
In relativistic 4-dimensional Minkowski space-time, the surfaces along which
branches split are 2-dimensional spacelike hypersurfaces. These are constant-time
hyperplanes in different frames of reference, and since the number of different
inertial frames is unlimited, so will be the number of families of parallel hyper-
surfaces along which space-time branching occurs. Each of these families partitions
space-time. The hypersurfaces in them criss-cross one another, and make the over-
all branching structure very complex. The complexity is necessary if we are to have
a way of relativistically transforming the description of a quantum process in one
frame of reference to a description of the same process in another frame [4]. The
fact that branching is along spacelike hypersurfaces greatly increases the number of
branches, since in one and the same set of branches there may be found, for example,
proportionalities (and hence probabilities) for the outcomes of a  Stern–Gerlach
experiment in Montreal, for the possible transition from one energy state to another
of a hydrogen atom in Alpha Centauri, and for the pending death of a mosquito in
Mexico. The probability values of all these different events are Lorentz-invariant,
remaining the same no matter which hypersurface they sit upon.
An important consequence of the space-time modelling of objective quantum
probabilities, and in particular the splitting of branches along spacelike hypersur-
faces, is the light shed by this approach on the nonlocal correlations and inﬂuences
seen in the EPR  Aspect experiment. If two entangled photons ( light quan-
tum) with parallel polarization emitted by an atomic cascade are sent through a
pair of aligned two-channel HV analyzers, either both photons will pass h or both
will pass v. If the analyzers are misaligned, the left analyzer being HV and the
right one oriented at an angle ϕ to the vertical, as in Fig. 2, the probabilities of
the joint measured outcomes (v, ϕ+), (v, ϕ−), (h, ϕ+), and (h, ϕ−) are respectively
p(v, ϕ+) = p(h, ϕ−) = 1/2 cos2 ϕ, p(v, ϕ−) = p(h, ϕ+) = 1/2 sin2 ϕ [5].
When ϕ = 30◦, 1/2 sin2 ϕ = 1/8 and 1/2 cos2 ϕ = 3/8. Let A and B denote
the polarization measurement events on the left and right photons respectively. A
branching space-time diagram yielding the probability values for the joint outcomes
(v, ϕ+), (v, ϕ−), (h, ϕ+), and (h, ϕ−) is given in Fig. 3.
From the diagram, p(v) = p(v, ϕ+)+p(v, ϕ−) = 3/8+1/8 = 1/2, and p(ϕ+) =
p(v, ϕ+) + p(h, ϕ+) = 3/8 + 1/8 = 1/2. Consequently p(v, ϕ+) ̸= p(v) × p(ϕ+),
which is to say that the outcome v on the left is not independent of the outcome ϕ+
on the right. The EPR experiment provides an instance of the “distant correlations”
of observed outcomes that have intrigued and bafﬂed students of quantum physics
for the last 70 years.
Since the two photons in the entangled quantum state are ﬂying apart from each
other at the speed of light, the two measurements at A and B will be spacelike sepa-
rated events. Their outcomes are correlated, but the correlation cannot be explained
+ 
−
φ
HV
v
h
S
Fig. 2 Two entangled photons leave a source S and enter left and right polarization analyzers

Objective Quantum Probabilities
423
O
Fig. 3 The relative
proportions of possible joint
measurement outcomes when
φ = 30◦
v, φ+
v, φ-
8
3
8
1
h, φ+
8
1
h, φ-
8
3
in terms of “ hidden variables”, or instruction sets which travel with the photons.
The problem becomes particularly acute when a frame of reference is chosen in
which A occurs before B, or vice versa. If the stochastic outcome of the left mea-
surement is v, then the probability of the right photon being measured ϕ+ is 3/4.
But if the left outcome happens to be h, then the probability for ϕ+ on the right is
1/4. How does the information about the outcome on the left get communicated to
the photon on the right, so that it “knows” its probability of being measured ϕ+?
Barring superluminal signalling ( superluminal communication), which would re-
quire causal inﬂuences travelling faster than light, there exists no apparent answer
this question.
That being said, an explanation of the distant EPR correlations based on branch-
ing space-time structures is possible, when splitting takes place along spacelike
hypersurfaces. Figure3 is a picture of such a structure relative to a frame of ref-
erence in which the left and right measurement events are simultaneous. Figure 4
pictures the same experiment in a frame in which A occurs before B. Since A and B
are spacelike separated events, such a frame always exists.
In Fig. 4, splitting occurs along a constant-time hypersurface on which A occurs,
but relative to which B is future. The photon at A has a 50% probability of being
measured v or h. If it is measured v, the branches on which it is measured h vanish
instantaneously, along the whole length of the hypersurface. On the sole remaining
v-branch, the probability of the right photon being measured ϕ+ is 3/4. If, however,
the stochastic outcome of the left measurement had been h, then all v-branches
would have vanished, and the probability of the right photon passing ϕ+ would
have been 1/4 instead of 3/4.
Figure 5 is a picture of the same EPR experiment in a frame in which the right
measurement B occurs before A. As before, branch attrition explains how the
right outcome ϕ+ or ϕ−instantaneously affects the probabilities for the outcome
on the left. The conclusion is that branch attrition along spacelike hypersurfaces
or hyperplanes provides an objective, realistic explanation of the instantaneous

424
Objective Quantum Probabilities
φ+
φ+
4
3
4
3
4
1
φ-
φ-
4
1
2
1
2
1
h
v
Fig. 4 In a frame in which A occurs before B, the probabilities for the right outcome depend upon
the outcome of the left measurement
h
4
1
v
4
1
h
4
3
v
4
3
2
1
2
1
φ+
φ-
Fig. 5 When B occurs before A, the dependence is reversed. The probability of the left outcome
depends on the right outcome
information transfers which underlie the distant correlations of the EPR experiment.
These information transfers do not involve superluminal signalling, since nothing
travels from B to A or vice versa. Nevertheless, information is effectively transferred
by the instantaneous vanishing of the non-actual branches along hypersurfaces. See
also  Probability in Quantum Mechanics; Propensities in Quantum Mechanics.

Observable
425
O
Primary Literature
1. K. Popper: Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics (Routledge, London 1982, 126)
2. W. Heisenberg: Physics and Philosophy – The Revolution in Modern Science (Harper, New
York 1958, 54–5)
3. S. McCall: A Model of the Universe (Clarendon, Oxford 1994, 86–92)
Secondary Literature
4. S. McCall: QM and STR. Philosophy of Science (Proceedings) 67, S535–48 (2000)
5. See, for example, J. Baggott: The Meaning of Quantum Theory (Oxford University Press, Oxford
1992, 120–27, 141)
Observable
Paul Busch and Pekka Lahti
The term observable has become the standard name in quantum mechanics for what
used to be called physical quantity or measurable quantity in classical physics. This
term derives from observable quantity (“beobachtbare Gr¨osse”), which was used by
Werner Heisenberg in his groundbreaking work on  matrix mechanics [1] to em-
phasize that the meaning of a physical quantity must be speciﬁed by means of an
operational deﬁnition. Together with a state ( states in quantum mechanics), an ob-
servable determines the probabilities of the possible outcomes of a measurement of
that observable on the quantum system prepared in the given state. Conversely, ob-
servables are identiﬁed by the totalities of their measurement outcome probabilities.
Examples of observables in quantum mechanics are position, velocity, momentum,
angular momentum, spin, and energy.  Spin; Stern–Gerlach experiment; Vector
model.
In elementary quantum mechanics, the observables of a physical system are rep-
resented by, and identiﬁed with, selfadjoint operators A acting in the  Hilbert
space H associated with the system. For any pure states of the system ( states,
pure and mixed), represented by a unit vector ψ ∈H, the probability pA
ψ(X) that a
measurement of A leads to a result in a (Borel) set X ⊂R is given by the inner prod-
uct of ψ with EA(X)ψ, that is, pA
ψ(X) = ⟨ψ|EA(X)ψ⟩; here EA(X) is the spectral
projection of A associated with the set X, and the map X →EA(X) is called the
spectral measure of A. The probability measures pA
ψ, with ψ varying over all pos-
sible pure states of the system, determine the observable A. The expectation, or av-
erage

x dpA
ψ(x), of the measurement outcome distribution of an observable A in a
state ψ can be expressed as ⟨ψ|Aψ⟩whenever ψ is in the domain of the operator A.

