476
Pilot Waves
Photon
See  Light Quantum.
Pilot Waves
Basil James Hiley
The notion of a pilot wave was ﬁrst proposed by Louis de Broglie (1892–1987)
in his doctorate thesis in 1924 [1] and eventually published in 1927 [2]. Earlier
experiments on the  photoelectric effect showed the need to introduce the notion
of a ‘packet’ of electromagnetic energy, the photon, into what had till then been
thought to be a purely wave phenomena. How then was it possible to bring together
the particle and the wave, two apparently contradictory physical notions into one
theory?
De Broglie summarised his ideas in what he called “the theory of the double solu-
tion”. In this approach he proposed that the equations of  wave mechanics would
admit two kinds of solution. One solution would be a continuous wave solution,
, and the other would be a singular solution which would represent the physical
“particle”. This singular solution would be localised and incorporated within the
extended wave phenomena. De Broglie’s brilliant perception [3] was that this idea
could be applied, not only to photons ( light quantum), but to quantum particles in
general, namely those with non-zero rest mass. What was missing was the general
non-linear wave equation which would unite wave behaviour with particle behaviour
in one comprehensive theory.
To a ﬁrst approximation, de Broglie [10] argued that we can treat the two so-
lutions separately provided we ﬁnd some way of locking the particle to the 
wave, which he assumed would satisfy the  Schr¨odinger equation. To achieve
this de Broglie ﬁrst noticed that a particle has an internal energy, m0c2 = hν0,
so that it can be compared with a small clock of proper frequency ν0. When the
particle is in motion with a velocity v, relativity tells us that its frequency would
be ν = ν0(1 −v2/c2)1/2. This is different from the frequency of a wave which
transforms as ν1 = ν0/(1 −v2/c2)1/2. However combining these two results gives
ν1 = ν(1 −v2/c2), a relation which we will now exploit.
How does this result ‘lock’ the wave and particle aspects together? Notice that
an observer will see the moving particle represented by a wave ψ = sin(2πν1t). If
at time t = 0 there is agreement between the internal phase of the particle described
by ψ and the phase of the wave , then we want this agreement in phase to persist
throughout the movement of the particle.
At time t, the particle will have moved a distance x = vt from its original posi-
tion. Its internal motion will then be represented by ψ = sin[2π(x/v)ν1]. Now the
-wave at this point will be given by

Pilot Waves
477
P
 = sin[2πν(t −xv/c)] = sin[2π(x/v)ν(1 −v2/c2)].
Using the relation ν1 = ν(1 −v2/c2), we ﬁnd the -wave is given by  =
sin[2π(x/v)ν1], which is exactly the same as the internal motion represented by
ψ. In this way the particle is locked to the wave, so that the wave can be regarded
as “piloting” the particle.
In pursuing the idea, de Broglie [10] then analysed the singularity further and
found that the velocity of the particle could be given by v = ∇φ/m where φ was
the phase of the wave. He regarded this as a fundamental formula and called it “the
guidance formula”. Furthermore he immediately recognised the similarity with the
classical Hamilton-Jacobi theory of classical mechanics in which there appears a
canonical relation p = ∇S, where S was the classical action. It is through this
relation that de Broglie had anticipated the 1952  Bohm model [4].
De Broglie was invited to present these ideas at the 1927 Solvay Congress held in
Brussels, which he did under the title “The Pilot-Wave Theory”. The paper was not
well received and the alternative  probabilistic interpretation of Bohr and others
was preferred by most of those present. During the course of the conference Pauli
[5] raised detailed objections to the work, which de Broglie was unable to answer
at the time and he was disappointed that Einstein did not support his ideas. As a
consequence de Broglie stopped working on this approach.
However de Broglie did take up his ideas again [6, 10] after David Bohm (1917–
92) [4] published his papers containing an analysis of the  Schr¨odinger equation
that exploited formulae similar to those presented in the pilot-wave theory. The sig-
niﬁcant feature of Bohm’s work for de Broglie was that Pauli’s speciﬁc objections
had been answered. Furthermore the papers also outlined how the ideas could be
extended to deal with, not only many of the troubling paradoxes of the standard in-
terpretation ( errors and paradoxes in quantum mechanics), but also how to extend
these ideas to  quantum ﬁeld theory.
More recently D¨urr, Goldstein and Zang´ı [7] have proposed a new way of de-
riving the guidance condition. They begin by assuming the velocity of the particle
is determined by the  wave function, ψ so that v = vψ. Then by also assum-
ing Galilean invariance, together with vaψ = vψ and time-reversal symmetry,
vψ∗= vψ, they were able to derive the de Broglie guidance condition,
vψ = ℏ
mℑ∇ψ
ψ
= ∇φ
m .
where φ is again the phase of the wave. D¨urr et al. called their approach “Bohmian
mechanics”, a rather unfortunate terminology as Bohm himself had argued against
the notion of “mechanics” as underlying quantum phenomena, arguing that his pre-
ferred term was “quantum non-mechanics” [8], a position he maintained throughout
his life [9].
However the possibility of a mechanical explanation of quantum phenomena is
a legitimate area for exploration and shows how far one can take these ideas with-
out the need to follow the more exotic interpretations of the formalism discussed

478
Planck’s Constant h
elsewhere in this compendium. In fact approaches based on such considerations do
provide a consistent and coherent account of quantum phenomena, removing many
of the paradoxes thrown up by the even more conventional approaches. Nevertheless
there has been a general reluctance amongst the majority of physicists to embrace
the approach based on the notion of a pilot wave.
A comprehensive survey of the pilot wave theory can be found in de Broglie
[10,11].
Primary Literature
1. L. de Broglie: Th`eses de Doctorat (Masson, Paris 1924)
2. L. de Broglie: La m´echanique ondulatoire et la structure atomique de la mati´ere et du rayon-
nement. J. Phys. Radium, 6e series 8, 225–41 (1927)
3. L. de Broglie: Ondes et quanta. Compt. Rendus 177, 507–510 (1923)
4. D. Bohm: A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of Hidden Variables I.
Phys. Rev. 85, 166–193 (1952)
5. W. Pauli: ´Electrons et photons. Comptes Rendus du Ve Conseil de Physique Solvay (Gauthier-
Villars, Paris 1928, pp. 282–4)
6. L. de Broglie: The Reinterpretation of Wave Mechanics. Found. Phys. 1, 5–15 (1970)
7. D. D¨urr, S. Goldstein, N. Zang´ı: Quantum Equilibrium and the Origin of Absolute Uncertainty.
J. Stat. Phys. 67, 843–907 (1992)
8. D. Bohm: Quantum Theory (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1951, p. 167)
9. D. Bohm: Hidden variables and the Implicate Order, in Quantum Implications: Essays in Hon-
our of David Bohm, ed. B. J. Hiley, F. D. Peat (Routledge, London, 1987, pp. 33–44)
Secondary Literature
10. L. de Broglie: Non-linear Wave Mechanics: A Causal Interpretation (Elsevier, Amsterdam,
1960)
11. L. de Broglie: The Current Interpretation of Wave Mechanics: A Critical Study (Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 1964)
Planck’s Constant h
Dieter Hoffmann
Planck’s constant h is one of the fundamental constants of nature and crucial for
our physical understanding of atomic and subatomic processes. It was introduced
in 1899 by Max Planck (1858–1947) in the context of his investigations of heat
radiation. While trying to derive Wien’s radiation law and to examine the thermal

