B
Bacon, Roger
▶Roger Bacon
Baconthorpe, John
▶John Baconthorpe
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯
▶ʿAbdallat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯
▶Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯
al-Balkhı¯, Abu¯ Zayd
HANS HINRICH BIESTERFELDT
Seminar fu¨r Orientalistik
Bochum University
Bochum
Germany
Abstract
Despite Abu¯ Zayd al-Balkhı¯’s (d. 934 CE) extensive and
multifarious bibliography,
he is known today almost
exclusively as an author of geographical works and the
founder of the so-called Balkhı¯School, a type of geograph-
ical writing that combines – highly stylized – regional
maps of the Islamic world with detailed descriptions of
its provinces, including information on climate, agricul-
ture, etc. Regrettably, Abu¯ Zayd’s geographical work is lost,
surviving only in later adaptations, as are almost all his
works dealing with the Hellenistic scholarly, particularly
philosophical, heritage on the one hand and with Islamic
theology and Qurʾa¯nic scholarship on the other – the latter
an object of some praise from his contemporaries and later
biographers. Abu¯ Zayd’s wide-ranging interests (which
include topics of traditional Arabic culture) are shared
by al-Sarakhsı¯ (d. 899 CE), and both their ‘‘encyclopedic’’
outlooks belong to the tradition of the ‘‘philosopher of the
Arabs,’’ al-Kindı¯ (d. soon after 870). Three fragments of
works by Abu¯ Zayd that are preserved as quotations – ﬁrst
on the deﬁnition of politics, second on the question of free
will vis-a`-vis divine determination, third on the typology
of religious idols – show his independence of thought and
ability to apply adequate categories; his one surviving
monograph on the Welfare of Body and Soul is a witness
to his limpid, elegant style and his virtuosity in integrating
the Arabic–Islamic heritage, distinct elements of Sasanian
political and ethical thought, and the Hellenistic philo-
sophical and scientiﬁc tradition.
Life
Abu¯ Zayd Ah:mad b. Sahl al-Balkhı¯is, along with Ah:mad b.
al-T˙ayyib al-Sarakhsı¯, a prominent follower of ‘‘the phi-
losopher of the Arabs,’’ al-Kindı¯. Though he is likely to
have missed al-Kindı¯ – born around 850 in a village near
Balkh (halfway between today’s Kabul and Bukhara), he
came to Baghdad only as a young man, that is, very close
to, or after, al-Kindı¯’s death – he shares with him and his
circle a keen interest in all branches of the Hellenistic
scholarly heritage, particularly in philosophy, but also an
encyclopedic approach to a number of indigenous Arabic–
Islamic subjects. Abu¯ Zayd spent eight years in Baghdad
studying philosophy, astrology and astronomy, medicine,
the natural sciences, and Qurʾa¯nic disciplines. For
unknown reasons, he did not stay on in the political and
cultural capital of the Islamic world and declined the
invitation of the Sa¯ma¯nid ruler to act as one of his viziers
at his court in Bukhara, but returned to Balkh, where he
worked as a teacher, and eventually to an estate in his
native village, proﬁting from a stipend of the local ruler
of Balkh and his learned vizier, Abu¯ l-Qa¯sim al-Kaʿbı¯
(d. 931) with whom he conducted a scholarly correspon-
dence. His known pupils are the great philosopher and
physician Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯ (d. 925, or later, whose pre-
scription for Abu¯ Zayd’s rose allergy is preserved), Abu¯ l-
H˙ asan al-ʿA¯mirı¯ (d. 992), and a little known author of
a conspectus of the sciences, Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n. Abu¯ Zayd died
in 934.
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

Works
Arabic
bibliographical
scholarship
has collected
an
impressive list of his writings – all of them lost, except
a full-scale work on physical and mental hygiene, three
fragments on diverse topics, and a few brief quotations.
For classical Islamic scholarship, Abu¯ Zayd’s merits lie,
besides his exemplary prose style, in his mastery of theo-
logical subjects, that is, exegesis of Qurʾa¯nic passages or
a study of the names and attributes of God. Today, he is
best known as an early representative of Islamic geogra-
phy, the eponym of the so-called Balkhı¯ School. Unfortu-
nately, his geographical work is not extant and survives
only in the later geographical descriptions by al-Is:t:akhrı¯
(d. 934) and Ibn H˙ awqal (d. after 973). Abu¯ Zayd’s Geog-
raphy is said to have consisted of 20 regional maps accom-
panied by descriptions; its principal new feature being,
beyond the data of physical geography, a special interest in
climate, agricultural produce, and their impact on the
ge´ographie humaine.
Abu¯ Zayd’s smooth and elegant style, his appeal to the
tastes of the educated court ofﬁcial, and his balance
between technical terminology and common ethical
sense can best be studied in his sole extant monograph
on the Welfare of the Body and the Soul. Its ﬁrst part treats
the principles of the interaction between the four ele-
ments, seasons, bodily elements, temperaments, etc.,
and the traditional ‘‘non-natural’’ factors of health,
among them food, drink, sleep, bath, and gymnastics,
including a quite sophisticated chapter on music ther-
apy. The second, shorter, part of the book on the hygiene
of the human soul deals with four mental disorders:
anger, fear, sadness, and hallucinations. The concept of
interaction between body and soul, and particularly Abu¯
Zayd’s demonstration of how the bodily disposition and
dietetic and behavioral measures may correct an unsta-
ble condition of the soul, constitute a remarkable con-
tribution to contemporary discussions between ethics
and medicine in the Alexandrian tradition and Islamic
theology. Obviously, Abu¯ Zayd’s psychosomatic concept
and his physiology are indebted to Galen’s writings; his
ethics of the equilibrium between extremes (Greek
mesote¯s, Arabic iʿtida¯l) and his types of principal mental
diseases are largely due to al-Kindı¯’s reception of Aristo-
telian and Neoplatonic concepts. In some contexts, nota-
bly in his discussion of themes in poetry and songs, we
also ﬁnd consideration of old Arabic Bedouin ideals, but
more pervasive is Abu¯ Zayd’s concern for the welfare
of the ruler and his entourage, which he sees as
a prerequisite for the welfare of his subjects and which
is a distinct echo of Sasanian political thought and court
ethics.
In a fragment, preserved in an anthology of the great
litte´rateur al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ (d. after 1009), Abu¯ Zayd deﬁnes
politics (siya¯sa) as a craft which serves the cultivation of
a country and protects its inhabitants. The ‘‘product’’ of
politics, he says, is owed to ﬁve causes (ʿilal): the material
cause that corresponds with the affairs of the subjects; the
formal cause: their general welfare; the active cause: the
ruler’s concern for the affairs of his subjects; the inten-
tional cause: the perpetuation of the general welfare; and
the instrumental cause: the employment of incitement and
intimidation (targ˙ı¯b wa-targ˙ı¯b, echoing the Qurʾa¯nic
rag˙aban wa-rag˙aban, sura 21, verse 90). As an illustration
of how these causes are valid for other crafts, too, Abu¯
Zayd names architecture and medicine, where, for
instance, the material cause is earth, clay, stones, and
wood for the former, and the human body for the latter,
etc. Another parallel between politics and medicine lies in
the double function of both the ruler and the physician, to
maintain and to restore order. The combination of the
four established Aristotelian causes with the Neoplatonic
instrumental cause may be due to al-Kindı¯’s understand-
ing of Proclus’ commentary on the Timaeus (cf. I 263,
19–30, Diehl (ed)) or of the Theologia Aristotelis, and the
parallelization of architecture and medicine as practical
crafts is a common feature of the classiﬁcation of sciences
and arts in late antiquity. The inclusion of statecraft,
however, especially the usage of terms such as mas:lah:a,
‘‘common welfare,’’ and the pair targ˙ı¯b-targ˙ı¯b, is a feature
of Abu¯ Zayd’s own characteristic design to combine three
traditions of political thought: Hellenistic, Islamic, and
Iranian.
Another fragment of Abu¯ Zayd takes the games of
backgammon and chess as examples of the principles of
deterministic thinking (jabr, ‘‘compulsion’’) versus free
will (qadar). Determinists, the backgammon players, he
says, would attribute the source of human action to God
or to the inﬂuence of the celestial spheres, and the pro-
ponents of free will, the chess players, would hold the
individual good or bad choice responsible for a person’s
fate. In the medieval discussions, notably among Islamic
theologians, on the relative admissibility of chess and
backgammon, chess was mostly given precedence. Abu¯
Zayd refrains from offering his own preference, and his
noncommittal and rational report on both positions is as
remarkable as his analysis of the types of, and motives for,
the veneration of heathen idols, preserved in a Qurʾa¯n
commentary of Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ (d. 1209). However,
it has been suggested that Abu¯ Zayd’s analysis of the
principles of chess might be interpreted as ‘‘an argument
in favor of Muʿtazilism, as against the ‘orthodox’ Muslim
nard view of the world, and it could have been the brilliant
140 B
al-Balkhı¯, Abu¯ Zayd

invention of one of the proponents of Muʿtazilah views’’
(Rosenthal Gambling 167).
Although Abu¯ Zayd’s orthodoxy has been attested
to by his contemporaries, later Islamic scholarship has
neglected his memory. This is shown by how small the
extant part of his considerable œuvre is and how
ambiguously later biographers have labeled him. For
all of them, the range of his scholarship was notable,
but some hesitated whether to list him as a philosopher
or a litte´rateur, others wavered between putting him
into philosophy or theology, yet others admired his
ability to combine both, h:ikma and sharı¯ʿa. This multiple
outlook is precisely a central feature of the scholarship as it
was conducted in the Eastern provinces of the Islamic
Empire in the few decennia between al-Kindı¯ and
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯.
See also: ▶al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan ▶Aristotle, Arabic
▶Ethics, Arabic ▶Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ ▶Galen, Arabic
▶Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q
▶Proclus, Arabic ▶al-Sarakhsı¯, Ah˙mad ibn al-T˙ayyib
▶al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Balkhı¯ Abu¯ Zayd (1984) Sustenance for body and soul, ed. Sezgin F.
Mas:a¯lih: al-abda¯n wa’l-anfus. Series C: Facsimile editions, vol 2
(reproduced from MS 3741, Ayasofya Library, Istanbul). Institute
for the History of Arabic-Islamic Science at the Johann Wolfgang
Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main
al-Balkhı¯ Abu¯ Zayd Ah:mad b. Sahl (2005) Mas:a¯lih: al-abda¯n wa-l-anfus,
tah:qı¯q wa-dira¯sat Mah:mu¯d Mis:rı¯. Maʿhad al-makht:u¯t:a¯t al-ʿarabiyya,
al-Qa¯hira
Zahide O¨ zkan (1990) Die Psychosomatik bei Abu¯ Zaid al-Balh˘ı¯ [. . .]. In:
Sezgin F (ed) Vero¨ffentlichungen des Institutes fu¨r Geschichte der
Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften. Reihe A: Texte und Studien,
Bd. 4 (translation of part 2 of the Mas:a¯lih: dealing with mental
diseases).
Institut
fu¨r
Geschichte
der
Arabisch-Islamischen
Wissenschaften an der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universita¨t, Frank-
furt am Main
Primary Fragmentary Sources in Translation
Monnot Guy (1986) Islam et religions. Maisonneuve et Larose, Paris,
pp 213–219 (on heathen idols)
Rosenthal Franz (1975) Gambling in Islam. Brill, Leiden, pp 165–167 (on
chess and backgammon)
Rosenthal F (1989) Abu¯ Zayd al-Balkhı¯ on Politics. In: Bosworth CE et al
(eds) The Islamic world, from classical to modern times. Essays in
honor of Bernard Lewis. Darwin Press, Princeton, pp 287–301
Secondary Sources
Reference Works
Brockelmann C (1937) Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur, Erster
Supplementband. Brill, Leiden, p 408
Kutluer I˙ (1992) Belhıˆ, Ebuˆ Zeyd. In: Tu¨rkiye Diyanet Vakfı I˙slam
Ansiklopedisi, cilt 5. Tu¨rkiye Diyanet Vakfı, I˙stanbul, pp 412–414
Watt WM (1985) Abu¯ Zayd [. . .] Balk¯ı¯. In: Yarshater E (ed) Encyclopaedia
Iranica, vol 1. Routledge & Kegan Paul, London/Boston/Henley,
pp 399–400
Articles in Journals and Collective Volumes
Biesterfeldt HH (1978) Notes on Abuˆ Zayd al-Balh˘ıˆ’s medico-ethical
treatise Mas:aˆlih: al-abdaˆn wa-l-anfus. In: La signiﬁcation du bas
moyen aˆge dans l’histoire et la culture du monde musulman. Actes
du 8me congre`s de l’Union Europe´enne des Arabisants et Islamisants.
Edisud, Aix-en-Provence, pp 29–34
Biesterfeldt H (2005) Ein Philosoph trinkt Wein. In: Alltagsleben und
materielle Kultur in der arabischen Sprache und Literatur. Festschrift
fu¨r Heinz Grotzfeld zum 70. Geburtstag, [. . .]. Steiner, Wiesbaden,
pp 89–103
De Goeje MJ (1871) Die Is:t:ah˘rı¯-Balh˘ı¯-Frage. Z Dtsch Morgenl Ges
25:42–58
Hau FR (1975) Razis Gutachten u¨ber Rosenschnupfen. Medizin J
10:94–102
Kramers JH (1932) La question Balh˘ı¯ – Is:t:ah˘rı¯ – Ibn H˙ awqal et l’atlas de
l’Islam. Acta Orientalia 10:9–30
Rowson EK (1990) The philosopher as litte´rateur: al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ and his
predecessors. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 6:50–92 (for Abu¯ Zayd
see pp 61–71)
Savage-Smith E (2003) Memory and maps. In: Daftary F, Meri JW (eds)
Culture and memory in medieval Islam. Essays in honour of Wilferd
Madelung. Tauris, London/New York, pp 109–127
Tibbets GR (1992) The Balkhı¯ school of geographers. In: Harley JB,
Woodward D (eds) The history of cartography, vol 2. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 108–136
Waines D (1994) Abu¯ Zayd al-Balkhı¯ on the nature of a forbidden drink:
a medieval Islamic controversy. In: Marı´n M, Waines D (eds) La
alimentacio´n en las culturas isla´micas. Agencia Espan˜ola de
Cooperacio´n Internacional, Madrid, pp 111–127 (repr. Waines
D (ed) Patterns of everyday life. Ashgate-Variorum, Aldershot, pp
329–344)
Barhebraeus
▶Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-ʿIbrı¯ (Barhebraeus)
Barlaam of Calabria
JOHN A. DEMETRACOPOULOS
Department of Education
University of Patras
Patras
Greece
Abstract
Barlaam of Calabria (c. 1290?–1348) was a theologian,
philosopher, and mathematician. Born Orthodox in
Calabria (South Italy), he ﬂed to Byzantium to join
Barlaam of Calabria B
141
B

Greek monasticism. Commanding both Greek and Latin
and well versed in ancient Greek, Patristic, and Byzantine
literature, he was recognized by most Greeks as a sage both
in profane and religious matters. His attack, however, on
Gregory Palamas, a leading spiritual authority at the
Mount Athos, and on his peculiar trend of ‘‘hesychasm,’’
led to a condemnation of Barlaam by the Byzantine
Church. Turning back to the West, he converted to Cathol-
icism and became a bishop. Clashing with a strong Byz-
antine
tradition,
he
highly
evaluated
philosophy,
regarding Platonism as compatible with Christianity and
Aristotle as compatible with Platonism. Though fond of
Neoplatonic literature, he had no taste for its mystical
aspect; instead, he regarded moral puriﬁcation and acqui-
sition of scientiﬁc knowledge as means of one’s ‘‘assimila-
tion to God.’’
Life
Barlaam was born Orthodox in Seminara (Calabria).
Ordained monk and priest, he was eager to live in some
Greek coenobium imbued by genuinely ascetic spirit. He
reached Greece through Arta (c. 1325); he then reached
Thessaloniki and Constantinople. Though commanding
both Greek and Latin, no Latin inﬂuences are traceable in
him; his intellectual formation was based almost exclu-
sively on a thorough knowledge of ancient Greek, Patristic,
and Byzantine literature. Though admired for his philo-
sophical and scientiﬁc (astronomical and mathematical)
skills, in 1330 he was ﬁercely attacked by Nikephoros
Gregoras as ‘‘arrogant’’ and a ‘‘Latin ignorant.’’ Also
admired
for
his
theological
erudition
and
being
heˆgoumenos of the Monastery of Our Saviour, he was
probably
appointed
by
emperor
Andronikos
III
(1328–1341) and patriarch John Kalekas (1334–1347) as
the representative of the Orthodox party in the discussions
of the Byzantine Church with two papal legates held in
Constantinople (1334–1335). His numerous treatises
Against the Latins date from these years. Bad feeling as
well as his peculiar method of refuting the Filioque (which
seemed as threatening the Orthodox position alike) pro-
voked a reaction by Gregory Palamas, who described him
as a ‘‘Latin agent.’’ From 1336 onward, he was engaged in
the so-called ‘‘hesychast controversy,’’ by attacking the
psychophysical method of ‘‘omphalicism’’ (probably
deriving from the Suﬁtradition). After coming back
from a failed diplomatic mission to the West (1339),
Barlaam published his Against the Massalians, where he
described Palamas’ doctrine of ‘‘seeing’’ God by means of
the bodily eyes as a revival of the Massalian heresy. A synod
held at Constantinople in 1341 condemned his anti-
Palamite views and writings (the latter were destroyed)
and exiled him. Turning back to the West, he was converted
to Catholicism; in 1342, he was appointed bishop of Ierax
(Seminara). He then wrote some epistles and speeches on
behalf of the Catholic doctrines. He was for a short while in
personal contact with Petrarch (1304–1374), whom he
taught some rudimentary Greek. In 1346, he was sent by
Pope Clement VI (1342–1352) to Constantinople to discuss
with the Byzantines a unionist project.
Thought
Most of Barlaam’s philosophical ideas should be gathered
from his theological and scientiﬁc works, the only purely
philosophical work among his indisputably genuine writ-
ings being the short Solutions to the Questions Addressed by
George Lapithes (c. 1334).
Barlaam regarded religion and philosophy as two dis-
tinct yet compatible ways (i.e., faith and reasoning) of
reaching the same end, that is, truth. Placing reason side
by side with revelation amounted to a revival of the Early
Christian doctrine of ‘‘seminal reasons.’’ Since, however,
this clashed with the established Byzantine stereotype that
‘‘Hellenism’’ (i.e., fervently studying and ranking ancient
Greek philosophy high) was an attitude incompatible with
Christianity, Barlaam was presented by Palamas as
a ‘‘crypto-pagan.’’ Still, Barlaam explained that most of
the ancient philosophical schools failed to raise themselves
above the realm of the sensibles. Only Platonism did it;
thus, it is the only philosophy compatible with Christianity.
Neither the Stoic nor the Epicurean attendants of St. Paul’s
speech in Athens converted to Christianity, but only
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, whom Barlaam regarded
as a Platonist in view of the corpus Dionysiacum. The close
afﬁnities of this corpus with Proclus made Barlaam feel
free to integrate into his writings numerous terms and
doctrines from several Proclean works (Elements of
Theology, Platonic Theology, Commentaries on Alcibiades,
Parmenides, Timaeus et al.) and eclectically combine them
with Christianity. Barlaam did the same with Plato’s texts
(e.g., Euthyphro, Phaedo, Phaedrus, Timaeus, Republic) as
well as with those by many other Neoplatonists (Porphyry,
Iamblichus, Syrianus, Olympiodorus), along with some
Byzantine
Neoplatonizing
authors
(Michael
Psellos,
Michael of Ephesus, Eustratios of Nicaea).
Doing philosophy has two prerequisites. (1) One must
purify one’s soul by ‘‘mortifying its passions.’’ This is
necessary, because the human soul is impeded on the
one hand by the bodily needs, which tend to turn it into
a slave of theirs, and on the other, by the senses, which
provide it with data which can show to the right direction
142 B
Barlaam of Calabria

only if carefully used. (2) One must get rid of the preju-
dices inserted into one’s soul by the social environment
and scrutinize one’s mature views lest one mistakes a false
statement for true. Barlaam presents Socrates as the ideal
of living philosophically and adopts verbatim Proclus’
elaboration of this ideal (ﬁrmly believing in one’s own
wisdom leads one astray from truth more than just lacking
any belief at all, since it amounts to a ‘‘double ignorance,’’
i.e., ignorance both of truth and of one’s own ignorance).
Discerning truth from falsehood can be achieved by using
Aristotle’s ‘‘dialectic,’’ that is, by carefully evaluating the
opposite doctrines on any matter. This, however, is a hard
task, because falsehood often takes the appearance of
truth. This results from one’s own desires, which cause
wishful thinking, as well as from a basic feature of reality,
that is, its being divided into an intelligible and a sensible
realm, the latter being a foggy reﬂection of the former.
Man participates in both, ‘‘phantastikon’’ being the
‘‘mediator’’ between the intellect and the bodily senses.
True knowledge results from ‘‘direct acquaintance.’’
Since, however, most men’s knowledge derives either ex
auditu or inferentially, error lurks everywhere. Still,
although he states that detecting truth on intelligible real-
ities, such as God’s triunity, by means of syllogisms is
impossible,
because
premises
are
meaningful
only
inasmuch as they describe things known by acquaintance,
he did not share the radical skepticism of Gregoras; he
only wanted to qualify what is accessible to humans (and
how) and what not.
Aristotle’s philosophy is in the main compatible with
Platonism. Aristotle’s logic is an indispensable tool for any
high human activity (philosophical, scientiﬁc, theological,
and political). Aristotle’s categories (which regard mean-
ingful words) apply only to the realm of sensibles; using
words to describe the intelligible realm can be only meta-
phorical (yet not fully univocal). Demonstration by syllo-
gisms
regards
philosophical
and
scientiﬁc
(strictly
speaking, only mathematical and, probably, astronomical)
statements. ‘‘Dialectical’’ conclusions regard natural sci-
ence; as Plato says, any theory of nature is, in the best case,
just a ‘‘plausible description,’’ because, in contrast with
mathematics, where deduction is possible, natural science
uses induction. The remaining branches of Aristotle’s phi-
losophy are compatible with Platonism and Christianity;
for most of Aristotle’s statements regard the sensible
beings and cannot, therefore, clash with Plato’s tenets on
what lies beyond sense experience and above discursive
thought.
Knowledge consists in grasping the ‘‘reasons of
beings,’’ that is, the species of beings, the sensible reality
consists of as well as the regular activities of these beings.
In this respect, Barlaam adheres to the Neoplatonic doc-
trine of the ‘‘universals’’ as preexisting in God’s mind,
inhering in the sensible beings, and grasped by means of
philosophy and science. This knowledge is a sort of knowl-
edge of God, inasmuch as it shows that the rationality of
the creature reﬂects the wisdom of its Creator (‘‘natural
theology’’; I Cor. 1, 21). Barlaam looks indecisive on
whether the mind extracts the ‘‘reasons of beings’’ from
the sensibles (Aristotle) or sense experience just ‘‘awakes’’
or ‘‘digs out’’ (i.e., renders conscious) what is innately yet
implicitly present in the soul (Plato, Proclus).
Barlaam knew that Proclus and some of the con-
temporary ‘‘hesychasts’’ accepted a higher (non-discur-
sive) knowledge, ‘‘enthusiasm’’ or ‘‘ecstasy,’’ but he
rejected it; for he adhered to Synesius of Cyrene’s idea
that ‘‘Hellenic philosophy’’ differs from ‘‘barbaric phi-
losophy’’ (i.e., Christian monasticism) inasmuch as the
former deems knowledge as a quality of the pars
intelligibilis of the human soul, whereas the latter naively
claims that purifying the pars passibilis affords humans
(even uncultivated humans) direct access to the things
divine.
A Latin Ethica secundum Stoicos is of doubtful authen-
ticity. If genuine, it must have been written after 1342,
probably in the context of Barlaam’s contact with
Petrarch, whose moral thought is Stoically coloured. Its
main point is that the most important virtue is not scientia
(which is left out from the prerequisites of happiness) but
constantia (the Latin equivalent of the Greek eupatheia),
which is attainable only through ‘‘extirpating’’ (not just
‘‘moderating’’) passions.
See also: ▶Gregory Palamas ▶Nikephoros Gregoras
▶Pseudo-Dionysius, the Areopagite
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Fyrigos A (1998) Barlaam Calabro. Opere contro i Latini. Introduzione,
storia dei testi, edizione critica, traduzione e indici, vols I–II. Studi
e Testi, 347 and 348. Citta` del Vaticano
Fyrigos A (2005) Dalla controversia palamitica alla polemica esicastica.
Con un’edizione critica delle epistole greche di Barlaam. Medioevo,
11. Pontiﬁcia Universita` Antoniana, Rome, pp 169–191 (full list of
primary and secondary sources)
Hogg ChR (1997) Barlaam of Calabria. Ethica secundum Stoicos. An
edition, translation, and critical essay. Unpublished doctoral disser-
tation, Indiana University
Migne Jacques-Paul (1865) Patrologia Graeca. Paris, 151:1341–1364
Sinkewicz RE (1981) The Solutions addressed to George Lapithes by
Barlaam the Calabrian and their philosophical context. Mediaev
Stud 43:151–217
Barlaam of Calabria B
143
B

Secondary Sources
Demetracopoulos JA (2003) Further evidence on the ancient, Patristic,
and Byzantine sources of Barlaam the Calabrian’s Contra Latinos.
Byzantinische Zeitschrift 96(2):83–122
Demetracopoulos JA (2010) The Christian Platonism of Barlaam the
Calabrian. A research into the philosophical and theological sources
of his Greek Epistles. Parousia, Athens
Ierodiakonou K (2002) The anti-logical movement in the fourteenth
century. In: Ierodiakonou K (ed) Byzantine philosophy and its
ancient sources. Oxford University Press, pp 219–236
Sinkewicz RE (1982) The doctrine of the knowledge of God in the early
writings of Barlaam the Calabrian. Mediaev Stud 44:181–242
Bartholomaeus Arnoldi de
Usingen
PEKKA KA¨RKKA¨INEN
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Bartholomaeus Arnoldi (b. c. 1465, d. September 9, 1532)
(also called Usingen after his birthplace), began as
a philosopher in the via moderna school and later became
a member and a theologian of the Order of Augustinian
Hermits. Together with Jodocus Trutfetter he was the most
prominent philosopher in Erfurt in the early sixteenth
century. Usingen’s main authorities were Buridan, Ock-
ham, Gregory of Rimini, Peter of Ailly and Gabriel Biel.
The focus of his teaching was on a ‘‘common view of the
via moderna,’’ which was strongly involved in semantic–
metaphysical questions. Usingen stressed the importance
of logic as a necessary tool for gaining scientiﬁc knowl-
edge, but his works on natural philosophy in particular
were respected by his contemporaries. In natural philoso-
phy, he generally followed the Buridanian tradition. His
discussion on the theory of supposition follows Ockham.
On the relationship between theology and philosophy, he
strongly posited the unity of truth by allowing certain
theological truths a sufﬁcient degree of plausibility as
truths in natural philosophy. This view was partly based
on Lawrence of Lindores.
Bartholomaeus Arnoldi began his studies at the University
of Erfurt in 1484. He became a bachelor of arts in 1486 and
master of arts in 1491. Together with his colleague Jodocus
Trutfetter he was active in an inﬂuential quodlibet
disputation in 1497. In 1498, he became a member of the
council of the faculty of arts and afterward was active in
several ofﬁcial positions. During 1504, he was the dean of
the faculty. Usingen joined the Augustinian hermits in
1512 and was promoted to doctor of theology in 1514.
He became actively involved in the German Counter Ref-
ormation and in particular opposed the Wittenberg
reformers. In 1522, he became an archdeacon. He was
forced to leave Erfurt during the Peasants’ War in 1525
and ended up in Wu¨rzburg where he stayed at the local
Augustinian monastery. During his last years, Usingen
followed the local bishop in visitations to the monasteries
and even participated in the Diet of Augsburg in 1530,
where he was appointed as a member of the commission to
examine the Augsburg Confession and where he contrib-
uted to the writing of the Catholic Response. He died in
Wu¨rzburg in 1532.
Along with his teaching activities, Usingen frequently
published textbooks on the liberal arts that were reprinted
several times. His compendium on natural philosophy was
reprinted in Erfurt as late as 1543. Johann Eck made use of
Usingen’s writings in his philosophical works written in
Ingolstadt in the 1510s. As a philosopher, Usingen
belonged to the via moderna school as did all his col-
leagues at the faculty of arts in Erfurt. After becoming an
Augustinian friar, he distanced himself from scholastic
philosophy and from 1517 onward he did not publish
any books on philosophy. Instead, he wrote several theo-
logical treatises, most of them directed against the Wit-
tenberg reformers. Already during his time as a master of
arts, he had shown a strong afﬁliation with the humanists
and as a theologian, his ideal was that of a humanist-
oriented theology, which based its argumentation exclu-
sively on the Scriptures and the Church Fathers.
As a follower of the via moderna, Usingen was com-
mitted to respecting certain authoritative writers and to
adopting some key doctrines. These authorities included,
above all, John Buridan and William of Ockham, but also
such authors as Gregory of Rimini, Peter of Ailly, and
Gabriel Biel. None of the authorities were uncontested in
the via moderna school at the time; on some points of
doctrine their views were disagreed with. As for the con-
tents of the doctrine, the more or less commonly held
views of the via moderna are also found in Usingen’s
writings. These include the use of the principle of parsi-
mony, a moderate nominalist view of universals, and the
denial of a real distinction between the powers of the soul
as well as between the entities denoted by the Aristotelian
categories other than substance and quality. He seems to
have elaborated the views of the school to some degree,
particularly the theory of signs. In his discussion of
144 B
Bartholomaeus Arnoldi de Usingen

individual topics, Usingen frequently refers to the ‘‘com-
mon opinion of the via moderna.’’
For Usingen, logic is a science that provides scientiﬁc
knowledge with a methodological basis. There is also a
certain inner order to the logic itself, which places the
logic of terms (‘‘old logic’’) ahead of propositional logic
(‘‘new logic’’). Usingen seems to reformulate some of his
deﬁnitions of key logical concepts, such as that of uni-
versals, in a manner that points to certain underlying
changes in his conception of metaphysics and semantics.
In his logic, he devotes special attention to the properties
of terms, and bases his account on supposition on
Ockham’s views.
In natural philosophy, Usingen also focuses on
presenting the ‘‘common view of the via moderna.’’ In
some cases, he chooses to present or even defend
conﬂicting views on a particular question (see, e.g., the
probable arguments for and against the view that there is
a real distinction between quantity and substance in the
Exercitium physicorum). The authority of Peter of Ailly
and Buridan over Ockham is evident for example in the
discussion of species in psychology and his adherence to
Buridan’s theory of sense perception. On the relationship
between natural philosophy and theology, Usingen offered
a solution that strongly suggested a consonance of truths
among diverse sciences. Disagreement between the views
of some philosophers and the revealed truths of theology
are not to be attributed to distinct sources of truth, but to
these philosophers’ deviance from the true natural light
of reason. Usingen’s view of the matter was also based
here on the tradition of the via moderna and in particu-
lar the views of Lawrence of Lindores. Usingen also
wrote a commentary on Donat’s grammar, which gives
a semantic reading of basic grammatical concepts such as
terms and the modes of signiﬁcation.
See also: ▶Gabriel Biel ▶Gregory of Rimini ▶Jodocus
Trutfetter ▶John Buridan ▶Peter of Ailly ▶William of
Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Bartholomaeus
Arnoldi
de
Usingen
(1499)
Parvulus
philosophie
naturalis. Wolfgang Sto¨ckel, Leipzig
Bartholomaeus Arnoldi de Usingen (1509) Compendium novum totius
logice. Wolfgang Schenk, Erfurt
Bartholomaeus Arnoldi de Usingen (1978) Responsio contra Apologiam
Philippi
Melanchthonis,
ed.
Simoniti
P.
Augustinus-Verlag,
Wu¨rzburg
Bartholomaeus Arnoldi de Usingen (2001) Questio de quiditate
quantitatis continue in disputatione de quolibet Erffordie A. D.
1497 determinata secundum editionem Lipsiensem A. D. 1499, ed.
Wo¨hler H-U. In: Disputatio de quolibet Erffordie 1497. Bochumer
philosophisches Jahrbuch fu¨r Antike und Mittelalter 6, 161–195
Secondary Sources
Ba¨umer R (1985) Bartholoma¨us von Usingen OESA (ca. 1465–1532). In:
Iserloh E (ed) Katholisches Leben und Kirchenreform im Zeitalter
der
Glaubensspaltung.
Vereinsschriften
der
Gesellschaft
zur
Herausgabe des Corpus Catholicorum 45. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster,
pp 27–37
Dieter Th (2001) Der junge Luther und Aristoteles. Eine historisch-
systematische Untersuchung zum Verha¨ltnis von Theologie und
Philosophie. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin
Ha¨ring N (1939) Die Theologie des Erfurter Augustiner-Eremiten
Bartholoma¨us Arnoldi von Usingen. Pallottiner, Limburg
Ka¨rkka¨inen P (2005) Theology, philosophy and immortality of soul in the
late via moderna of Erfurt. Vivarium 43(2):337–360
Ka¨rkka¨inen P (2008) Objects of sense perception in late medieval
Erfurtian nominalism. In: Knuuttila S, Ka¨rkka¨inen P (eds) Theories
of perception in medieval and early modern philosophy. Springer,
Dordrecht
Kleineidam E (1992) Universitas studii Erffordiensis. U¨ berblick u¨ber die
Geschichte der Universita¨t Erfurt im Mittelalter 1392–1521, vol II.
Benno, Leipzig
Lalla S (2003) Secundum viam modernam. Ontologischer Nominalismus
bei Bartholoma¨us Arnoldi von Usingen. Epistemata. Wu¨rzburger
wissenschaftliche Schriften, Reihe Philosophie, 343. Ko¨nigshausen
& Neumann, Wu¨rzburg
Paulus N (1893) Der Augustiner Bartholoma¨us Arnoldi von Usingen.
Luthers Lehrer und Gegner Strassburger theologische Studien I, 3.
Herder, Strassburg
Urban W (1981) Die ‘via Moderna’ an der Universita¨t Erfurt am
Vorabend der Reformation. In: Oberman HA (ed) Gregor von
Rimini Werk und Wirkung bis zur Reformation, Spa¨tmittelalter
und Reformation, Texte und Untersuchungen 20. Gruyter, Berlin,
pp 311–330
Wo¨hler H-U (2004) Die Erfurter Via moderna im Spiegel der Naturphi-
losophie. In: Aertsen JA, Pickave´ M (eds) Herbst des Mittelalters?
Fragen zur Bewertung des 14. und 15. Jahrhunderts Miscellanea
Mediaevalia 31. Gruyter, Berlin, pp 524–538
Basil Bessarion
GEORGE KARAMANOLIS
Department of Philosophy and Social Studies
University of Crete
Rethymno
Greece
Abstract
Basil Bessarion (c. 1400/1408–1472) was an eminent
scholar and philosopher of the late Byzantium, engaged
in the theological and philosophical controversies of his
time, such as those regarding the union of the churches,
Basil Bessarion B
145
B

the procession of the Holy Spirit, and the question of how
the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle compare. After the
end of the council at Ferrara/Florence, Bessarion left
Byzantium and settled in Italy where he made a career
as a cardinal. He was an avid collector of manuscripts,
which he left to the Republic of Venice, now preserved in
the Bibliotheca Marciana. Bessarion recommended to the
West the study of the classical philosophers from the
original. His work In calumniatorem Platonis is a detailed
exposition of Platonic philosophy and an attempt to place
it in its historical framework. Bessarion’s views on sub-
stance, the soul, on cognition, and the divine are mainly
inspired by the Neoplatonists.
Bessarion was born at Trebizond between 1400 and 1408,
originally named Basil. He was educated in Constantino-
ple and Mystras by teachers like George Chrysococces and
George Gemistos Plethon, and he became a monk in 1423
when he acquired the name Bessarion. After spending
some years in the monastery of St. Basileios in Constanti-
nople, Bessarion became bishop of Nicaea in 1437 in Asia
Minor. Bessarion was invited to attend the council of
Ferrara/Florence in 1438/1439 and was very active in
supporting the union of the Greek Orthodox Church
with the Latin Catholic, maintaining that their difference
is minimal. Bessarion eventually sided with Catholicism
and Pope Eugenius IV, who made him cardinal, yet he kept
the Orthodox manners. Bessarion spent the rest of his life
in Italy, appointed to several ecclesiastical positions, while
he was twice a candidate for the papacy (1455, 1471). In
1465, he acquired the title of Patriarch of Constantinople
by Pope Pius II.
Bessarion was engaged in the contemporary theologi-
cal and philosophical debates, such as on the union of the
two Churches, on the procession of the Holy Spirit, and
the debate on the value of the philosophies of Plato and
Aristotle. He wrote theological treatises in support of the
union of the two churches (Oratio dogmatice de unione,
Encyclica ad Graecos), on the Holy Communion, arguing
against the Greek-Orthodox positions (De sacramento
eucharistiae; Mohler 1923:I.211–247), and rhetorical
works
such as
the Praise for
Trebizond
(Laudatio
Trapezuntis). In the ﬁeld of philosophy, Bessarion contrib-
uted a Latin translation of Aristotle’s Metaphysics, presum-
ably relying on the version of William of Moerbeke
(Wilson 1992:58), while he also composed a summary of
Aristotle’s Physics. Most notable is his long treatise In
calumniatorem Platonis, published in 1469, where he
meant to discredit the attack against Plato by George
Trapezountios
in
his
Comparationes
philosophorum
Aristotelis et Platonis (published in 1458), which criticized
Plethon’s condemnation of Aristotelian philosophy in his
work On the Differences Between Plato and Aristotle (De
differentiis). Philosophically important are also a treatise
on Whether Nature Deliberates or Not (De natura et arte)
and a reply to Plethon about Aristotle’s view of substance
(Mohler 1942:III.148–150; see below).
Bessarion also translated into Latin Demosthenes’
First Olynthiac and Xenophon’s Memorabilia. The reason
behind the translation of the former was to remind his
compatriots of their duty to liberate Byzantium from the
Ottomans, allegedly analogous with the duty of resistance
to the Macedonians argued by Demosthenes. Xenophon’s
work was translated presumably because it was considered
a guide to ethical action (Wilson 1992:57–58).
Bessarion became famous as a collector of manuscripts
of Greek authors, which he left to the Republic of Venice,
making the core of the later Bibliotheca Marciana (Mohler
1923:I.408–415; Labowsky 1979). The inventory of the
Bibliotheca lists 482 manuscripts (Wilson 1992:62).
Bessarion was assisted by a number of copyists employed
by him, such as Michael Apostoles and Demetrios Trivolis
(Mioni 1994:238). Most importantly, Bessarion often
added comments to manuscripts, showing remarkable
acumen. Bessarion had a circle of students and copyists
(Wilson 1992:66), and he was in contact with many intel-
lectuals of his time. He had mastered both Greek and
Latin, and he circulated his works in two versions,
although the Latin version was probably taken care of by
his secretary Niccolo Perrotti (Monfasani 1981). Bessarion
died in Ravenna in 1472 and was buried in Rome.
Philosophy
Bessarion’s more important philosophical works are the In
calumniatorem Platonis and the De natura et arte. The
former is a long and scholarly work, consisting of four
books
(Monfasani
1976).
The
ﬁrst
book
refutes
Trapezountios’ criticisms of Plato, arguing that Plato was
very erudite and covered all parts of philosophy. Bessarion
also puts Plato’s philosophy in its historical framework; he
adopts the view of the ancient apologists and Numenius
that Plato borrowed from the wisdom of Moses and that
he shared several Pythagorean doctrines, another ancient
view, which was also defended by Plethon. In the second
book Bessarion sets out to show that Plato’s philosophy
comes closer to the Christian doctrine than that of Aris-
totle, although he acknowledges that neither of them
arrived at it. In order to substantiate this claim, Bessarion
offers a detailed exposition of Plato’s philosophy, in which
he presents the most signiﬁcant doctrines of Plato, making
also reference to the relevant ones of Aristotle. Bessarion is
not polemical to Aristotle, arguing that the defense of
146 B
Basil Bessarion

Plato should not entail the rejection of Aristotle (In
calumniatorem, II.3). In his third book, Bessarion aims
to show that Plato’s doctrines had many followers, includ-
ing Aristotle. A large part of this book deals with theology,
the questions of divine providence, and the immortality
of the soul, connecting Plato with Thomas Aquinas, Albert
the Great, and Averroes (Mohler 1942:III.6.3–6.4, 10.9, 15,
17.2, 21.7). The ﬁnal book takes issue with Trapezountios’
claims that question the morality and usefulness of
Platonic philosophy, such as the claim that Plato exhorts
the youths to a life of pleasure and that he supports the
sharing of wives. Bessarion argues that Plato must be
judged by the standards of his time, which was ignorant
of the Christian teaching (IV.3).
Bessarion’s treatise On Whether Nature Deliberates or
Not (De nature et arte; Mohler 1942:III.92–147) addresses
a topic much discussed at the time (Monfasani 1976:166–
167). In it, Bessarion defends the view that nature delib-
erates and acts with a certain purpose and in this, he
claims that Plato and Aristotle are in accord (Chap. 2).
Bessarion takes position on the perennial philosophical
issue of how the intellect differs from nature (Chap. 7).
Replying to Plethon, Bessarion argues that the intellect is
different from nature by being separable from it and
a moving cause, and that nature is moved by the divine
intellect. In this sense, nature is the instrument of the
intellect through which the latter gives, completes, and
perfects things (Mohler 1942:III.132). Bessarion main-
tains that the soul is not separable from nature, which
implies that Bessarion, following the Neoplatonists, con-
siders the intellect to be the essence of the soul.
On the question of substance, Bessarion defends Aris-
totle against Plethon in his attitude to consider as sub-
stances the individual things, while he maintains that the
universals, the Platonic Forms exist essentially as concepts
in the intellect (Against Plethon on Aristotle About Sub-
stance, Mohler 1942:III.149–150). Bessarion adopts an
interpretation of the Forms that goes back to Neoplato-
nists from Porphyry onwards. According to this interpre-
tation, the Forms are either ‘‘in the things’’ (en tois
pragmasi), determining the nature of things, or applied
‘‘on the things’’ (epi tois pollois), being concepts in the
human intellect by means of which man cognizes, and
also ‘‘before the things’’ (pro toˆn polloˆn), being causes
and models of everything that there is. Bessarion argues
that Aristotle preserves all these uses of Forms, as he
accepts immanent Forms, concepts, and also a ﬁrst god
who thinks (Mohler 1942:III.150), which means that
Bessarion adopts the interpretation of later Platonists
according to which the transcendent Forms exist only in
the divine mind.
Bessarion was important in the history of philosophy
ﬁrst for his attempt to introduce the classical Greek phil-
osophical tradition to the westerners and also for raising
the standards for the scholarly study of classical philoso-
phers in the West. His detailed presentation of Platonic
philosophy in his In calumniatorem Platonis was the ﬁrst
of its kind in the Latin world, and it was also the ﬁrst
to deal at length with later Platonists, preserving long
quotations from them. Unlike the medieval students
of Aristotle, Bessarion makes the study of Greek philoso-
phers from the original a requirement, while he also
puts emphasis on the knowledge of the relevant philo-
sophical tradition, ancient and medieval, before treating
a philosophical question.
See also: ▶George Gemistos Plethon ▶Metaphysics,
Byzantine ▶Thomism, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Bessarion (1927) In calumniatorem Platonis, ed. Mohler L., Kardinal
Bessarion als Theologe, Humanist und Staatsmann, vol II. Quellen
und Forschungen aus der Geschichte, Paderborn
Bessarion (1942a) Against Plethon on Aristotle about substance, ed.
Mohler L., Kardinal Bessarion als Theologe, Humanist und
Staatsmann, vol III. Quellen und Forschungen aus der Geschichte,
Paderborn, pp 148–150
Bessarion (1942b) Letter to Georgios Gemistos I, ed. Mohler L., Kardinal
Bessarion, vol III. Quellen und Forschungen aus der Geschichte,
Paderborn, pp 455–458
Bessarion (1942c) Letter to Georgios Gemistos II, ed. Mohler L., Kardinal
Bessarion, vol III. Quellen und Forschungen aus der Geschichte,
Paderborn, pp 463–465
Bessarion (1942d) De natura et arte, ed. Mohler L., Kardinal Bessarion,
vol III. Quellen und Forschungen aus der Geschichte, Paderborn, pp
91–147
Secondary Sources
Garin E (1952) L’umanesimo italiano. Filosoﬁa e vita civile nel
Rinascimento. Laterza, Bari
Labowsky L (1967) Bessarione. In: Dizionario biograﬁco degli italiani,
vol IX. Istituto Treccani, Roma, pp 686–696
Labowsky L (1979) Bessarion’s library and the Biblioteca Marciana.
Edizioni di storia e litteratura, Rome
Mioni E (1994) La formazione della biblioteca greca di Bessarione. In:
Fiaccadori G (ed) Bessarione e l’Umanesimo. Catalogo della mostra,
Vivarium, Napoli, pp 229–240
Mohler L (1923–1942) Kardinal Bessarion als Theologe, Humanist und
Staatsmann, vols I–III. Quellen und Forschungen aus der Geschichte,
Paderborn
Monfasani J (1976) George of Trebizond. A study of his rhetoric and logic.
Brill, New York
Monfasani J (1981) Bessarion Latinus. Rinascimento 21:165–221 (repr.
Monfasani J (1995) Byzantine scholars in renaissance Italy: Cardinal
Bessarion and other Emigre´s, II. Variorum, London)
Wilson N (1992) From Byzantium to Italy. Greek studies in the Italian
renaissance. Duckworth, London
Basil Bessarion B
147
B

al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯, Abu¯ Muh:ammad ibn
al-Sı¯d
MARC GEOFFROY
Laboratoire d’E´tudes sur les Monothe´ismes
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque
Villejuif
France
Abstract
Ibn al-Sı¯d was the ﬁrst signiﬁcant western Muslim philos-
opher whose works have survived. His main works are The
Book of Questions and The Book of Circles; both show the
introduction into the western Muslim world of themes of
the falsafa that originated in ninth- to tenth-century
Baghdad. In particular, the Book of Circles counts as an
evidence of the circulation of an emanatist metaphysics of
clear Neo-Pythagorean bent, as the one witnessed in the
encyclopedia of the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’.
Life
Abu¯ Muh:ammad ibn ‘Abdalla¯h ibn al-Sı¯d al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯ is
the ﬁrst faylasu¯f or h:akı¯m (i.e., follower of the philosoph-
ical doctrines) of the western Muslim world whose written
works have survived. Born in Badajoz in 1052 at the court
of the Aft:asid prince al-Muz˙affar, his education beneﬁted
greatly from the ﬂowering arts and literature of the city
under this Taifa prince. It is not known what kind of
philosophical education he had, but he received primarily
literary and grammatical training. After the city was taken
by the Almoravids, he took refuge in Teruel, where he held
the ofﬁce of Secretary (ka¯tib) to the local sovereign. He
retired to Toledo, Zaragoza (before 1110, where he met the
young Ibn Ba¯jja, or Avempace), and ﬁnally ended up in
Valencia where he died in 1127.
Works
Ibn al-Sid was the ﬁrst author to explicitly seek to harmo-
nize religion with the ‘‘sciences of the Ancients.’’ He is
best known for his many philological and grammatical
works. His main works are a commentary on a classical
source of Arabic literary art, Adab al-Kutta¯b (The Secre-
taries’
Guide)
of
Ibn
Qutayba,
entitled
al-Iqtid˙a¯b
(Improvisation), and a treatise on the dogmatic differences
in Islam, al-Ins:a¯f fı¯ al-asba¯b al-mu¯jiba li-khtila¯f al-umma
(The Equitable Judgment on the Causes Originating
Discrepancies in the Community).
In addition, he wrote two books of philosophical
content. The ﬁrst of these was the Kita¯b al-Masa¯’il
(The Book of Questions), which is a compilation of
questions written in a sometimes lively and personal style.
Several questions relate to philosophy. In the most impor-
tant of these, he narrates that he had a visit from a friend
who told him he regretted having heard the reciting of two
verses of Abu¯ l-Walı¯d al-Waqqashı¯, a learned Muʿtazilite,
then deceased, who was suspected of heresy. These verses
were ambiguous and seemed to emphasize the futility of
religion. Ibn al-Sı¯d then begins to explain to his friend that
these words may also be understood differently. Referring
to al-Fa¯rabı¯, he shows that philosophy and religion come
together as for their ultimate goal. The two channels differ
only by the means used to reach this goal, namely the
cognition of truth. One is concerned with demonstration
and the other with persuasion and imagination. The reason
for the existence of these two complementary, though dis-
tinct, modalities of science (‘ilm) is the inequality of
human nature. Some humans are not equipped with
a power of understanding sufﬁcient to reach the truth
through demonstration: thus, religion establishes the
same truths by means of persuasion. This is a theme that
would subsequently be taken up by Averroes.
Religion need not be demonstrated by apodictic rea-
soning, since it is, according to the teaching of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
based on different modes of rhetorical persuasion. Its
foundations, its ‘‘demonstration,’’ as explained in the con-
tinuation of this text, is exterior to the discourse, and
consists in the miracles accomplished by the Prophet.
One can thus conceive of the coexistence of two models
of truth that do not interfere with one another, namely
that of the Law, ‘‘followed by persuasion and imitation,’’
and that of philosophy. The latter remains dependent on
the maintaining of religion, because the acquisition of
philosophy necessarily requires a habit of virtue that can-
not be instilled by anything but religion.
Another ‘‘Question’’ reﬂects a controversy with Ibn
Ba¯jja, which was likely to have taken place in Zaragoza
during Ibn al-Sı¯d’s stay in the city. Ibn al-Sı¯d accused Ibn
Ba¯jja of unreasonably reducing the grammatical notions
of ‘‘theme’’ and ‘‘rheme’’ of the utterance (mubtada’ and
khabar) to the logical notions of ‘‘subject’’ and ‘‘predicate.’’
The latter imply an ontological relationship of inherence
of the predicate in the subject, while the utterance on the
linguistic level tells nothing about such a relation: instead,
it is an act inscribed in the proper order of language,
independent of categorical logic. Ibn al-Sı¯d testiﬁes to
a rejection of the introduction of logical concepts in
grammar, stating that ‘‘their aim is not the same.’’ This
debate introduced into Hispanic-Muslim territory the
theme of the famous controversy held in Baghdad,
between the logician Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ and the grammarian
148 B
al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯, Abu¯ Muh:ammad ibn al-Sı¯d

al-Sirafı¯ (see the entries on Translations from Greek into
Arabic and Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ in this volume).
The second philosophical book is the Kita¯b al-H˙ ada¯i’q
(The Book of Circles). This book, divided into seven chap-
ters, is the ﬁrst relatively systematic presentation known in
Andalusia of a Graeco-Arabic emanationist metaphysics
inspired by Neoplatonism, which Ibn al-Sı¯d notably
refers to ‘‘Socrates, Plato, Aristotle.’’ The symbolism of
the three degrees of emanation, that is, the Intellect,
Soul, and the body, as interlocked circles where the
Agent Intellect, the universal Soul, and the human being,
respectively, occupy the tenth place, the concept of man as
a microcosm, the numerological determinism controlling
the procession of beings, with the prominent place given
to the Decade, all this refers to a source inspired by Neo-
Pythagoreanism, namely the encyclopedia of the ‘‘Breth-
ren of Purity’’ (Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’), a major source of the
early western Muslim falsafa. The general framework of
the metaphysical ‘‘system’’ presented by Ibn al-Sı¯d is
clearly dependent on al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. The procession of beings
from the One (explained in chapter 1) occurs through
a process of successive mediations (tawassut:). The ‘‘sec-
ondary causes,’’ that is, the intellects moving the spheres,
are distinguished, as in al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, from the Agent Intellect
that informs and enlightens the human intellect. The
perfection of the human being, treated in chapter 3, con-
sists in the return toward its principle. This requires an
ascension through the degrees of the theoretical sciences,
that is, mathematics, physics, metaphysics, and theology.
This intellectual training produces the union of the
human with the Agent Intellect, and allows the human to
join a ‘‘boundary’’ between the inferior world and the
world of separated beings. Overall, the work shows
a high degree of eclecticism. The tradition of the ‘‘Sages’’,
whose doctrines Ibn al-Sı¯d wants to expound – as stated in
the prologue – generates a kind of timeless continuum
where Greeks are not distinguished from Muslims,
included the theologians (mutakallimu¯n). This is illus-
trated by the ﬁfth chapter, dealing with certain issues of
negative theology (i.e., whether we can positively predi-
cate the attributes of creatures of God, or we should limit
ourselves to deny their opposites) with references directly
issued from the treatises of kala¯m. The theme of the ﬁnal
chapter, i.e., proofs of the immortality of the soul, reﬂects
the author’s concern to harmonize his doctrine with reli-
gious teaching.
The Book of Circles had a signiﬁcant posterity in medi-
eval Jewish thought, from Bahiya ibn Paquda to Isaac
Abravanel. It was translated twice into Hebrew, and in
particular by the famous Samuel ibn Tibbon (c. 1271).
It was likely known, in the Almohad period, by Ibn T˙ufayl.
In the thirteenth century, the fourth Sicilian Question by
Ibn Sab‘ı¯n, On the Soul, follows verbatim the arguments of
the last chapter of The Book of Circles on soul’s
immortality.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯
Nas.r ▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙ (Avempace) ▶Ibn
Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of ▶Ibn Sabʿı¯n ʿAbd
al-H˙ aqq ▶Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer) ▶Ikhwa¯n
al-S˙afa¯ʾ, Encyclopedia of ▶Kala¯m ▶Philosophy, Arabic
▶Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab World
▶Translations from Greek into Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ası´n Palacios M (1935) La tesis de la necesidad de la revelacio´n en el islam
y en la escola´stica. al-Andalus 3:345–389 (appendix, pp 380–389
(partial edn of the K. al-Masa¯’il))
Ası´n Palacios M (1940) Ibn al-Sı¯d de Badajoz y su ‘Libro de los Cercos’
(Kita¯b al-h:ada¯’iq). al-Andalus 5:45–155 (ed. and trans. of the Book of
Circles, pp 63–154)
Elamrani-Jamal Abdelali (1996) Ibn al-Sı¯d al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯ et l’enseignement
d’al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. Bulletin d’E´tudes Orientales 48:155–164 (appendix,
pp 162–164 (French trans. of one question of the K. al-Masa¯’il))
Ibn al-Sı¯d (1984) Il Libro dei Cerchi (Kita¯b al-h:ada¯’iq), ed. and trans. into
Italian by Jevolella M. Arche`, Milan
Ibn al-Sı¯d al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯ (1988) K. al-h:ada¯’iq: al-h:ada¯’iq fı¯ l-mat:a¯lib al-
‘a¯liya, ta’lı¯f. Abı¯ Muh:ammad al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯ al-Andalusı¯, ed. al-Da¯ya
Mh: Da¯r al-ﬁkr, Damascus
Tornero Emilio (1984) Cuestiones ﬁloso´ﬁcas del Kita¯b al-masa¯’il de Ibn
al-Sı¯d de Badajoz. al-Qant:ara 5:15–31
Secondary Sources
Ası´n Palacios M (1935) La tesis de la necesidad de la revelacio´n en el Islam
y en la escola´stica. al-Andalus 3:345–389
Ası´n Palacios M (1940) Ibn al-Sı¯d de Badajoz y su ‘Libro de los Cercos’
(Kita¯b al-h:ada¯’iq). al-Andalus 5:45–155; 46–48 (biography of Ibn
al-Sı¯d)
Elamrani-Jamal A (1979) Les rapports entre logique et grammaire dans le
Kita¯bal-Masa¯’ild’al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯(444–521=1052–1127).Arabica26:76–89
Go´mes Nogales S (1983) La corte de los Aftasies de Badajoz,
principalemente en el campo de la ﬁlosoﬁa. In: Actas del IV coloquio
hispano-tunecino, Palma de Mallorca, 1979. Madrid: Instituto
Hispano-a´rabe de Cultura, pp 129–153
Kauffmann D (1879–1880) Die Spuren al-Bataljuˆsi’s in der ju¨dischen
Religions-Philosophie
nebst
einer
Ausgabe
des
hebra¨ischen
U¨ bersetzungen
seiner
‘Bildlichen
Kreise’.
Jahresbericht
der
Landesrabbinerschule in Budapest fu¨r das Schuljahr 1879–1880. pp
1–64
Kauffmann D (1884) Les cercles intellectuels de Batalyousi. Revue des
e´tudes juives 8:131–134
Serrano D (2002) Ibn al-Sı¯d al-Bat:alyawsı¯ (444/1052–521/1127): de los
Reinos de Taifas a la e´poca almoravide a trave´s de la biograﬁa de un
ule´ma poliface´tico. al-Qant:ara 23(1):53–92 (biography of Ibn al-Sı¯d)
Vajda G (1947) Une version he´braı¨que inconnue des ‘cercles imaginaires’
de Bat:alyawsı¯. In: Schreiber S (ed) Semitic studies in memory of
Immanuel Lo¨w. Budapest: Alexander Kohut Memorial Foundation,
pp 202–204
al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯, Abu¯ Muh:ammad ibn al-Sı¯d B
149
B

Beauty
▶Aesthetics
Being
GYULA KLIMA
Department of Philosophy
Fordham University
New York, NY
USA
Abstract
The notion of being is the most fundamental notion in
medieval metaphysics, but in some ways also in medieval
theology, logic and epistemology. Given its centrality, it
would be impossible to provide here even a sketchy his-
torical survey of the variety of ways in which medieval
authors handled this notion. Therefore, this article will
rather survey those paradigmatic characteristics of the
medieval notion that make it most difﬁcult for contem-
porary philosophers to approach it.
The Semantics of Ens, Esse, and Est
According to medieval philosophers, the notion of being is
simple, indeﬁnable, and in some sense precedes all other
concepts we have. This, however, does not mean that it
cannot be clariﬁed. For instance, the notion of proposi-
tional conjunction is also simple and thus indeﬁnable in
terms of other, simpler concepts. Still, the notion can be
clariﬁed by describing the semantic function of the word
expressing it in the following manner: the word ‘‘and’’ in
English has the function of joining two propositional
clauses in such a way that the conjunctive proposition
expressed by the resulting compound sentence is true if
and only if both propositions expressed by the clauses of
the compound sentence are true. Likewise, we may pro-
vide a similar clariﬁcation of the notion of being through
ﬁrst characterizing the semantic functions of the words
expressing it as these functions were typically conceived by
medieval philosophers.
The English word ‘‘being’’ translates both the present
tense active participle form ‘‘ens’’ and the inﬁnitive form
‘‘esse’’ of the Latin verb ‘‘est,’’ corresponding to the English
verb ‘‘is.’’ Just like the English verb, the Latin verb func-
tions both as a copula, joining subject and predicate into
a proposition, and as an absolute verb, asserting the exis-
tence of the thing referred to by the subject.
Inﬂuenced
by
the
post-Kantian/Fregean
mantra
according to which ‘‘existence is not a predicate,’’ many
contemporary philosophers might be inclined to part
company with their medieval colleagues already at this
point. However, this oft-quoted slogan in the sense in
which it is trivially true is simply irrelevant, whereas in
the sense in which it is clearly relevant, it is simply false.
For, in the sense in which it expresses the claim that the
verb ‘‘be’’ and its cognates (including ‘‘exists’’ and its
derivatives) used in the sense in which they express
a Fregean second order concept (a concept that operates
on other concepts) do not express a ﬁrst order concept (a
concept true of things), the slogan is trivially true. But in
that sense it is irrelevant, as it says nothing about how
medieval philosophers could or could not use the verb
‘‘est’’ and its cognates (cf. Klima 2004). However, in the
sense in which the slogan would claim that medieval
philosophers could not have possibly used ‘‘est’’ and its
cognates as a predicate, the slogan, though clearly relevant,
is simply false, for our medieval colleagues just did use
them as such. Indeed, they did so consistently, and reﬂec-
tively, within the framework of some truly intriguing
semantic considerations.
One question that immediately crops up if one reﬂects
on the syntactic role of ‘‘est’’ both as a copula (esse tertium
adiacens) and as an absolute predicate (esse secundum
adiacens) is whether it is a mere coincidence that it is the
verb expressing existence that is used in both roles, both to
copulate subject and predicate (to distinguish the
resulting proposition from a mere list of names) and to
predicate the actual existence of something. The question
was already systematically considered by Abelard, who
deployed an impressive array of arguments concerning
the issue. However, his preferred theory, which would
provide a noun-phrase/verb-phrase analysis of all categor-
ical propositions (and thus would accord the copula the
function of merely turning a nominal predicate term into
a verb phrase), did not catch on, and did not have fol-
lowers in the thirteenth century (cf. Jacobi 1986; King
2008).
The typical thirteenth century analysis followed
Aristotle’s considerations, not only in the Peri Hermeneias
known to Abelard, but also in Aristotle’s later recovered
works, especially the two Analytics and the Metaphysics,
along with Avicenna’s and Averroes’ immensely inﬂuential
interpretations of Aristotle’s doctrine. These consider-
ations suggested both that the copula is essential in all
predications for joining two noun-phrases in a proposition
(thus, even a verb is supposed to contain an implicit
150 B
Beauty

copula, and so is to be analyzed into a copula-plus-
participle construction, such as ‘‘A man runs’’ = ‘‘A man
is running’’) and that the sense of the verb ‘‘est’’ even in its
copulative function is somehow related to or is even
derivable from its existential sense. The idea is neatly
expressed by Thomas Aquinas in his commentary on
Aristotle’s Peri Hermeneias:
"
The reason why [Aristotle] says that the verb ‘is’ co-
signifies composition is that it does not principally signify
composition, but secondarily; for it primarily signifies what
occurs to the mind in the way of actuality absolutely: for
‘is’, uttered absolutely, signifies being in act, and hence it
signifies as a verb. However, since actuality, which the verb
‘is’ principally signifies, is in general the actuality of every
form (whether it is a substantial or an accidental actuality),
when we want to signify any form or act to actually inhere
[inesse] in a subject, we signify this by means of the verb
‘is’, either absolutely [simpliciter] or with some qualiﬁca-
tion [secundum quid]. . . (In Perihermeneias lb. 1, lc. 5, n. 22).
So, on Aquinas’ view, the verb ‘‘est’’ primarily signiﬁes an
act of being (esse or actus essendi) of that to which it is
attributed (whether it is its substantial act, as in ‘‘Socrates
is’’ or ‘‘Socrates is a man’’, or some accidental act, as in
‘‘Socrates is wise’’ or ‘‘Socrates is tall’’), and only second-
arily signiﬁes the composition of subject and predicate.
Taking the verb ‘‘est’’ to signify an act of being (esse) is
based on an analogy with any other verb that signiﬁes
some act, just as the verb ‘‘currit’’ (‘‘runs’’) signiﬁes an
act of running (currere) (cf. In De hebdomadibus lc. 2,
n. 22). Thus, when ‘‘est’’ is used as an absolute predicate,
when it is to be analyzed into copula and participle just as
any other verb, as in ‘‘x est’’ = ‘‘x est ens’’, then ‘‘est’’
signiﬁes the substantial act of being of x (as does the
nominal predicate ‘‘ens’’), and it is the actuality of this
act of being that veriﬁes the predication. However, when
‘‘est’’ is construed with another predicate as the copula, as
in ‘‘x est N’’, where ‘‘N’’ is some noun-phrase, then it still
primarily signiﬁes existence, although in a sense somehow
modiﬁed by the content of the predicate, which signiﬁes
a form of the subject. In that case, the act of being signiﬁed
by ‘‘est’’ is the act of being of the form signiﬁed by the
predicate, which is the substantial act of being of the
subject, provided the form signiﬁed by the predicate is
the substantial form of the subject, or an accidental act of
being of the subject, if the form signiﬁed by the predicate is
an accidental form (cf. Klima 2002a).
From Semantics to Metaphysics
We can have a better understanding of this somewhat
obscure point, if we consider how Aquinas conceives of
the modiﬁcations of the sense of ‘‘is’’ imposed on it by
different predicates in different categories, relating his
theory of the copula to his conception of the analogy of
being, the semantic theory that the term ‘‘ens’’ is neither
univocal, nor equivocal, but analogical, because it applies
to several things of different kinds neither in exactly the
same sense (as the term ‘‘animal’’ applies to cats and
mice), nor in utterly diverse, unrelated senses (as the
word ‘‘bat’’ applies to ﬂying mammals and baseball
bats), but in different, yet related senses (as the word
‘‘sees’’ applies to the eye and to the mind). Thus, according
to Aquinas, beings (entia) come in different varieties,
expressed by the different, yet related senses of the verb
‘‘est’’, signifying the different ways in which these things
are, on account of having their characteristic way or mode
of being (modus essendi) (cf. Klima 2002b).
In his commentary on the Metaphysics, Aquinas
writes:
"
being cannot be narrowed down to something definite in
the way in which a genus is narrowed down to a species by
means of differences. [. . .] Being must then be narrowed
down to diverse genera on the basis of a different mode of
predication, which flows from a different mode of being;
for ‘being [esse] is signiﬁed,’ i.e., something is signiﬁed to
be, ‘in just as many ways as something is said to be
a being,’ that is, in as many ways as something is predi-
cated. And for this reason the ﬁrst divisions of being are
called predicaments [i.e., categories], because they are
distinguished on the basis of different ways of predicating.
Therefore, since some predicates signify what [something
is], i.e., substance; others of what kind [something is, i.e.,
quality]; and yet others how much [something is, i.e.,
quantity]; and so on; it is necessary that for each mode of
predication, being should signify the same [mode of
being]. For example, when it is said that a man is an
animal, ‘is’ signiﬁes [the mode of being of] substance;
and when it is said that a man is white, ‘is’ signiﬁes [the
mode of being of] quality; and so on (In Metaphysicam
lb. 5, lc. 9, n. 5).
The main point of this passage is that the division of being
into the categories is not like the division of a genus into
its species by means of speciﬁc differences, which is the
division of a univocal term. This point is made even more
explicit in the following passage:
"
There are two ways in which something common can be
divided into those that are under it, just as there are two
ways in which something is common. There is the division
of a univocal [term] into its species by differences by which
the nature of the genus is equally participated in the
Being B
151
B

species, as animal is divided into man and horse, and the
like. Another division is that of something common by
analogy, which is predicated according to its perfect con-
cept [ratio] of one of those that divide it, and of the other
[s] imperfectly and with qualiﬁcation [secundum quid], as
being is divided into substance and accident, and into
being in actuality and in potentiality, and this sort of
division is, as it were, midway between [the division of
something]
equivocal
and
[something]
univocal
(In
Secundum Sententiarum d. 42, q. 1, a. 3).
So, Aquinas’ idea seems to be the following. Every predi-
cation we make is a predication of being, but, depending
on the predicate we use, it is a predication of being with
some qualiﬁcation or other. Thus, for instance, when I say
‘‘Tom is a cat’’ or ‘‘Jerry is a mouse’’, these predications
assert the being of Tom cat-wise and the being of Jerry
mouse-wise, respectively. This is because what the predi-
cates of these predications signify are the respective
essences of Tom and Jerry, which determine their modes
of being, namely, cat-life and mouse-life, respectively. But
as the above-quoted passage from the Commentary on the
Metaphysics indicates, this idea is extended to all catego-
ries, including all nine categories of accidents. Indeed, the
idea is further extended to all predicates, which may not
even signify accidental forms, such as privative predicates,
which signify rather the lack of such forms, and relational
predicates that do not signify real inherent relations of
things, but rather mere relations of reason. Such signiﬁcata
of predicable terms, then, were regarded by Aquinas (and
practically everyone else working in the same semantic
framework) as specifying the mode of being of an alto-
gether different realm of entities, whose being consists in
their being conceived by reason (cuius esse est intelligi),
though not without some foundation in reality, namely,
beings of reason (cf. Klima 1996).
Thus, for Aquinas, the verb ‘‘est’’, both as an absolute
predicate and as a copula, signiﬁes existence (esse). As an
absolute predicate, as in ‘‘Tom is’’ or ‘‘Jerry is’’ it signiﬁes
the acts of existence (esse, or actus essendi) of the things of
which it is predicated. But since these acts of existence are
determined by the essences which they actualize and
which are signiﬁed by the same things’ essential predicates,
the verb can also signify the same acts of existence when it
joins the names of these things to their essential predicates,
as in ‘‘Tom is a cat’’ or ‘‘Jerry is a mouse’’. But then again,
when the verb copulates accidental predicates to their
subjects, then it will signify the acts of being of their
accidents, its sense now being determined to express the
peculiar mode of being (modus essendi) of accidents, as in
‘‘Tom is black’’ or ‘‘Jerry is grey’’. And for the same reason
the same verb will express yet another sense of being when
its sense is determined by what is signiﬁed by a privative
predicate, or any other predicate signifying some being of
reason (ens rationis), as in ‘‘Tom is blind’’ or ‘‘Jerry is
desired by Tom’’.
Accordingly, in Aquinas’ view, the different analogical
senses of being, related to its primary sense (expressing
existence absolutely speaking) closely reﬂect the different
ways in which things are: their modi essendi. In this way,
his doctrine is akin in spirit to the theories of the
modists (modistae), whose main tenet was that different
ways of being are reﬂected in corresponding ways of
understanding (modi intelligendi), expressed, in turn, in
corresponding ways of signifying (modi signiﬁcandi)
(cf. modistae; Ebbesen 1998; Marmo 1999; Zupko 2008).
However, even the modists did not think that one could
simply ‘‘read off’’ one’s ontology from one’s syntax, and
neither did Aquinas, nor any other medieval thinker. On
a general level, nearly everybody would hold that the ways
in which things exist are reﬂected somehow in the ways in
which we think, which in turn are reﬂected in the ways in
which our words signify. But the important metaphysical
differences between individual thinkers of the period can
actually be characterized by the different ways in which they
would depart from a simplistic ‘‘mirroring’’ interpretation
of this ‘‘modistic principle’’: the different ways in which
they think the structure of language and thought diverges
from the structure of reality.
For instance, Aquinas insists time and again that Plato’s
main error concerning universals was his failure to realize
the difference between modi essendi and intelligendi and
signiﬁcandi: just because we have universal words and
concepts, it does not mean that there are corresponding
universal things, for our universal words and concepts
represent only singular things (since every really existing
thing is singular), but in a universal manner. So, there are
certain words and concepts representing things in some
way, but there are no things existing in the same way:
things exist in one way (singularly and materially) and
are
represented
in
another
way
(universally
and
immaterially) (Summa theologiae I, q. 85 a. 1 ad 1). There-
fore, the ‘‘modistic principle’’ in its simplistic, ‘‘mirroring’’
interpretation cannot be upheld by any philosophers who
reject a naı¨ve Platonic conception of universals, as did all
major thinkers in the thirteenth century. The differences
among these thinkers were always in the ﬁner details.
The Analogy Versus Univocity of Being and
the Thesis of Real Distinction
Although Aquinas’ theory of the analogy of being seemed
to cohere well both with Aristotle’s teaching and with the
152 B
Being

requirements of religious and theological language about
God, many authors challenged the view that the sense of
‘‘being’’ would vary with whatever it is attributed to. To be
sure, thirteenth-century authors agreed that different
kinds of things existed in radically different ways. Indeed,
based on Aristotle’s considerations in the Categories alone,
it was taken for granted that the mode of being of sub-
stances (namely, subsisting on their own without inhering
in an underlying subject) is radically different from
(indeed, opposite to) the mode of being of accidents
(namely, inhering in an underlying subject) (see the
entry on Substance, Accidents and Modes in this volume).
And of course it was also generally held that the way God
exists is inﬁnitely more perfect and, hence, is radically
different from the way limited creaturely natures can
exist. But there were differences in how individual authors
interpreted these differences themselves in their meta-
physics and theology, and how they thought these differ-
ences are properly reﬂected in thought and language, in
their semantic considerations.
For Aquinas (who was inﬂuenced on this point by
Avicenna’s doctrine), the ultimate difference between
God and creatures is the real distinction between essence
and existence in creatures and the identity thereof in the
absolutely simple God. It is precisely this famous ‘‘thesis of
the real distinction’’ that prompts Aquinas to think of
creaturely natures as imposing diminishing determina-
tions on being, which without such a limitation is
unlimited:
"
A created spiritual substance has to contain two [princi-
ples], one of which is related to the other as potency to act.
And this is clear from the following. It is obvious that the
first being, which is God, is infinite act, namely, having in
Himself the whole plenitude of being not contracted to
the nature of some genus or species. Therefore it is nec-
essary that His being itself should not be an act of being
that is, as it were, put into a nature which is not its own
being, for in this way it would be confined to that nature.
Hence we say that God is His own being. But this cannot
be said about anything else, just as it is impossible to think
that there should be several separate whitenesses, but if
a whiteness were separate from any subject and recipient,
then it would be only one, so it is impossible that there
should be a subsistent act of being, except only one.
Therefore, everything else after the first being, since it is
not its own being, has being received in something, by
which its being is contracted; and thus in any created
being the nature of the thing that participates being is
other than the act of being itself that is participated
(De spiritualibus creaturis q. un., a. 1).
Thus, for Aquinas, creaturely essences impose a limitation,
and so a diminishing determination on being itself (as it
would be found in God, without any limitation), precisely
because of the real distinction between essence and exis-
tence in creatures, whereas the divine essence does not
impose such a limitation on divine being, precisely
because they are really one and the same inﬁnite reality.
It is this order of reality of the different modes of being
that is reﬂected in the different, analogically related senses
of ‘‘being’’, expressing an analogical notion of being. The
reason for this parallelism between different modes of
being and the analogical senses of ‘‘being’’ seems to be
that predications of ‘‘being’’ of any creature x of nature
N may be viewed as a predication of ‘‘IS’’ in the unlimited
sense (in which it only applies to God) with the added
diminishing qualiﬁcation referring to N, determining pre-
cisely the sense of ‘‘being’’ in which it can apply to
a creature of nature N; that is to say, ‘‘x is a being (of
nature N)’’ if and only if ‘‘x IS-with-respect-to-N’’
(cf. Klima 2002c).
However, motivated either by Averroes’ interpretation
of Aristotle, or by Augustine’s Neoplatonic theological
doctrine, philosophers, such as Siger of Brabant, as well
as theologians, such as Henry of Ghent, rejected a real
distinction of essence and existence even in creatures,
arguing that existence cannot be something really distinct,
added to essence as another ‘‘thing’’ (although Giles of
Rome held precisely this view in his debate with Henry of
Ghent)
(cf.
Lambertini
2008).
Consequently,
these
authors had a different interpretation of both the Aristo-
telian metaphysical doctrine of the analogy of being
between substance and accident, and the philosophical-
theological doctrine of the difference between God and
creatures. However, if essence and existence are not really
distinct
in
creatures,
then
essences cannot
act
as
diminishing determinations on existence in the way
Aquinas conceived.
On Henry’s view, essences in themselves, as they are
eternally in the divine mind, have their own eternal essen-
tial being (esse essentiae), grounding the eternal truths of
essential predications (such as ‘‘Man is an animal’’). How-
ever, these essences are realized in actual existence in the
creation of singulars, in which their acts of actual existence
(esse actualis existentiae) are intentionally distinct (are
represented by different intentions, that is, concepts),
but not really distinct from the essences of these singulars
(although, as Henry insists, this distinction is not merely
a conceptual one) (cf. Porro 2008). But then this concep-
tion breaks the strict logical relationship of the Thomistic
conception between different modes of being and the
different analogical senses of the term ‘‘being’’ in which
Being B
153
B

it is truly predicable of different sorts of entities of differ-
ent natures. If different creaturely natures are not con-
strued as adding diminishing determinations to their
distinct acts of being, then the analogically related notions
of being are not regarded as derivable from a primary
notion through extension by the addition of diminishing
qualiﬁcations. Rather, different notions of being are
arrived at simply through the speciﬁcation of different
kinds of beings in terms of their different natures. How-
ever, this move, at least in principle, gives rise to the
possibility of abstracting some generic notion of being
univocally applying to several kinds of entities, just as we
can abstract generic notions of different speciﬁc natures,
and so, the more speciﬁc notions of being expressing the
different ways of being in which things of different natures
exist are just different speciﬁcations of the original, con-
fused, unlimited notion, applying to all.
To be sure, Henry still insists that our intellect cannot
form a single concept that would equally apply to God and
creatures, on account of the inﬁnite essential difference of
perfection between God and creatures. But, at the same
time, he also granted that we at least appear to have
a single concept of being applying to God and creatures,
because we just tend to confuse the two different ways of
abstracting the notion of being that applies to God and the
notion of being that applies to creatures, resulting in
a concept of being which is ‘‘something analogous com-
mon to Creator and creature, containing under itself being
as principle and being as produced (commune analogum
ad creatorem et creaturam, continens sub se ens principium
et ens principiatum)’’ (Henry of Ghent 1520: Summa, art.
21, q. 3, f. 126rD).
Nevertheless, this conception quite clearly opens up
the possibility of another departure from the ‘‘modistic
principle’’: different modes of being do not demand dif-
ferent senses of the term ‘‘being’’ to express them, for all
these different modes can be apprehended indifferently by
a single concept, providing the meaning of a single univ-
ocal term, allowing reasoning about any being as such,
without a risk of the fallacy of equivocation. In fact, this
was precisely one of the main motivations for Duns Scotus
to endorse a theory of the univocity of being, as opposed
to the Thomistic theory of the analogy of being, or rather
as more directly opposed to Henry’s conception of two
distinct,
yet
analogically
related
notions
of
being
(cf. Scotus 1950: Ord., 1, d. 3, pars 1, q. 1–2, n. 26–56;
Dumont 1998).
Consider the following syllogism: Anything that is
a bat is a ﬂying mammal; any baseball bat is a bat; there-
fore, any baseball bat is a ﬂying mammal. The argument is
clearly not valid, insofar as the premises are true, because
in the sense in which a ﬂying mammal is a bat, a baseball
bat is not a bat. The argument is vitiated by the fallacy of
equivocation. But this holds, apparently, not only in the
case of equivocal terms, but also in the case of analogical
terms. Consider the following argument: Everything that
is healthy is alive; but the food on your plate is healthy;
therefore, the food on your plate is alive. Clearly, unless
you are about to consume something that is alive, the food
on your plate is healthy only in the sense that it makes you
healthy, but not in the sense that it is alive and well.
However, it is only in that sense of ‘‘healthy’’ that the
ﬁrst premise can be true. So, an argument of this sort is
fallacious even with analogical terms. Accordingly, if
‘‘being’’ cannot be predicated of God and creatures in
the same sense, then, apparently, all arguments arguing
from creaturely being to divine being are fallacious (which
would render absolutely all arguments about God falla-
cious, provided that all predications are just variously
determined predications of being, and all our cognition
derives from our cognition of creatures).
To be sure, Thomists could still respond, as for
instance Aquinas’ great commentator Cajetan did, that
some analogical terms still possess sufﬁcient unity to
secure the validity of reasoning with them. Take for
instance the following argument: Whatever is seen is cog-
nized; this mathematical problem is seen by the intellect;
therefore this mathematical problem is cognized. Clearly,
in this piece of reasoning, the minor premise is true only in
the secondary sense of ‘‘see,’’ in which it applies to the
intellect, whereas the major premise is true whether ‘‘see’’
is taken in the bodily or in the intellectual sense. By
contrast, consider the following argument: Whatever is
seen is colored; this mathematical problem is seen by the
intellect; therefore this mathematical problem is colored.
In this case, the major premise is true only in the bodily
sense of ‘‘see,’’ whereas the minor premise is only true in
the intellectual sense, and that is why there is fallacy in the
argument. However, in the previous argument there is no
fallacy precisely because the major premise is true in both
related senses (cf. Hochschild 2007).
Nevertheless, however the case may be with the debate
between Thomists and Scotists, it is clear that Scotus’
doctrine is another step away from a simplistically
interpreted ‘‘modistic principle,’’ although in the opposite
direction: just as the order of being need not precisely
match the conceptual order (that is, every distinction of
concepts need not have a corresponding real distinction
among beings), so different modes of being need not be
reﬂected in different (although possibly related or ‘‘par-
tially identical’’) concepts. Thus, Scotus’ doctrine of the
univocity of being, while still recognizing different modes
154 B
Being

of being in reality, simply allows the possibility that the
intellect
can
form
a
simple
concept
indifferently
representing them all, without there being a simple, com-
mon reality directly and adequately represented by this
concept. Viewed from this perspective, Scotus’ move
seems to ﬁt squarely into a general trend in late-medieval
philosophy: the elaboration of ever more reﬁned accounts
of just how the conceptual order may differ from the real
order, culminating in fourteenth-century nominalism.
Although Scotus’ treatment of the notion of being may
be regarded as a part of this trend, his treatment of uni-
versals in general still seems to hearken back to ‘‘the
modistic principle’’: common terms of our language
apply to several, numerically distinct singular things of
the same kind, because these things share a common
nature, which, to be sure, is not some numerically one
real entity on a par with the singulars themselves, but
still has its own ‘‘less-than-numerical unity’’ and its
corresponding mode of being, preceding any act of the
intellect conceiving it. Yet, Scotus’ treatment of ‘‘being’’
indicates that, at least from a semantic point of view, there
is no real need to posit such common natures to account
for the universal mental and linguistic representation of
singulars. Thus, his younger contemporary Henry of
Harclay could rightly insist, precisely on the basis of Scotus’
own doctrine of the univocity of being, that our intellect is
capable of forming concepts that indifferently represent
singulars of the same kind without representing a single
common entity (whether it is supposed to be numerically
or merely less-than-numerically one). It is precisely this
idea that seems to have been seized upon by William
Ockham, to be worked out in detail in his nominalist
philosophy and theology (Henninger 2006).
From Metaphysics, Back to Semantics
Given its centrality in the semantic framework in which it
was articulated, it is no wonder that the notion of being
took on so many varieties and gave rise to so many meta-
physical problems. After all, in this framework, all true
predications are taken to be veriﬁed by the actual being of
the signiﬁcata of our predicates, whether those signiﬁcata
are taken to be the natures or substantial forms of sub-
stances, or their accidental forms, their quantities, quali-
ties, relations, actions, passions, times, places, positions or
habits, or even not any genuine forms, but rather the lack
thereof, that is, privations, or other beings of reason, such
as negations or relations of reason. In fact, we may add to
the list of such ‘‘quasi-entities’’ demanded by this frame-
work the signiﬁcata of entire propositions, variously
called dicta, enuntiabilia, or complexe signiﬁcabilia, etc.
(Nuchelmans 1973, 1980).
In general, one may say that in this framework there is
some ‘‘nonchalance’’ toward admitting semantic values
(as they called them, signiﬁcata and supposita, cf. Read
2008) of our expressions in our ontology, relegating the
task of sorting them out to metaphysics. And this is pre-
cisely what thirteenth-century metaphysicians do: they
make various classiﬁcations of various sorts of beings
(based primarily on Aristotle’s system of the categories),
and ever more reﬁned distinctions and identiﬁcations
among the semantic values of various expressions in dif-
ferent linguistic categories, leading to a bourgeoning
ontology of entities and quasi-entities, having different
degrees of reality (or unreality, for that matter), and dif-
ferent, sometimes rather obscure criteria of identity or
distinctness (or quasi-identity and quasi-distinctness: see
the above-mentioned examples of Scotus’ less-than-
numerical-unity, or Henry of Ghent’s intentional distinc-
tion, let alone Scotus’ formal distinction, or Suarez’s
modal distinction) (see Suarez 1947).
The following table provides a general overview of the
varieties of being entertained by medieval philosophers
working in this framework, sketching out ‘‘the big picture’’
of the ontology or ‘‘quasi-ontology’’ (containing also var-
ious sorts of quasi-entities) of what may be termed the
framework of the realist ‘‘via antiqua semantics’’ in con-
trast to the nominalist ‘‘via moderna semantics,’’ emerging
in the works of William Ockham and his followers, such as
John Buridan, Albert of Saxony, Marsilius of Inghen, Peter
of Ailly or Gabriel Biel (Table 1).
Given the immense complexity of the resulting ontol-
ogy, one can certainly understand Ockham’s complaint,
according to which his contemporaries are guilty of ‘‘mul-
tiplying beings according to the multiplicity of terms. . .
which, however, is erroneous and leads far away from the
truth’’ (Ockham 1974:169; see also page 171, where Ock-
ham explicitly claims that this is the root (radix) of the
errors of ‘‘the moderns’’).
To be sure, Ockham’s charge is not exactly justiﬁed.
After all, as we could see, even earlier authors could reduce
the ontological commitment of their theories by either
identifying the semantic values of expressions across dif-
ferent categories (as when following Aristotle, they declare
that action and passion are the same motion, or when they
identify relations with their foundations in the categories
of quality or quantity, etc.) or by assigning them some
‘‘diminished’’ ontological status, by relegating them to
some class of ‘‘quasi-entities.’’ However, it is true that
earlier authors, taking it for granted that our meaningful
words are meaningful because they express concepts
whereby we conceive of something, never worried about
assigning semantic values to our phrases, and took it to be
Being B
155
B

a metaphysical task to sort out the ontological status,
identity, and distinctness of these semantic values, leading
to the ever more rariﬁed metaphysical and theological
questions in this framework.
Ockham’s real innovation, therefore, consisted not so
much in producing a simpler ontology (since that, in
principle, would have been available to his predecessors
as well), but rather in reining in any unwanted ‘‘ontolog-
ical excesses’’ already in his semantics. That is to say, the
real novelty in Ockham’s approach is the elimination of
unwanted ontological commitments, not only through
metaphysical argument (resulting in identifying the
semantic values of different expressions across categories
or relegating them to some diminished ontological status),
but rather through semantic analysis, which has remained
ever since the most powerful weapon in the conceptual
arsenal of nominalist philosophers (cf. Goodman and
Quine 1947).
Just by way of a quick illustration, let us consider
a simple example of how commitment to such quasi-
entities as privations comes about in the older framework,
and how Ockham can get rid of it through logical analysis
(cf. Klima 1993). Take the privative term ‘‘blind’’, which
can obviously be true of something only if the thing in
question lacks sight, that it could and ought to have by
nature (namely, an animal that ought to have sight, but
lacks it for some reason or other). In the older framework,
if the predication ‘‘Jerry is blind’’ is true, then this is so,
just as in the case of every other true predication, because
what the predicate signiﬁes in the subject is actually there
in the subject (which is precisely the actuality that the
word ‘‘is’’ signiﬁes). But precisely because for blindness
Being. Table 1 The ‘‘quasi-ontology’’ of ‘‘via antiqua semantics’’
Past
Present
Future
Real beings
Ten categories of real
entities, possible in the
past
Ten categories of real
entities, possible in the
present
Ten categories of real
entities, possible in the
future
Possible
Ten categories of real
entities, actual in the
past
Ten categories of real
entities, actual in the
present
Ten categories of real
entities, actual in the
future
Actual
‘‘Quasi-beings’’ in esse
intentionale, esse
objectivo, esse rationis
Individual quasi-
entities (privations,
relations of reason),
signiﬁcata of
propositions, actual in
the past
Individual quasi-
entities (privations,
relations of reason),
signiﬁcata of
propositions, actual in
the present
Individual quasi-
entities (privations,
relations of reason),
signiﬁcata of
propositions, actual in
the future
Individual quasi-
entities (privations,
relations of reason),
signiﬁcata of
propositions, possible
in the past
Individual quasi-
entities (privations,
relations of reason),
signiﬁcata of
propositions, possible
in the present
Individual quasi-
entities (privations,
relations of reason),
signiﬁcata of
propositions, possible
in the future
Possible
Individual quasi-
entities (privations,
relations of reason),
signiﬁcata of
propositions,
impossible in the past
Individual quasi-
entities (privations,
relations of reason),
signiﬁcata of
propositions,
impossible in the
present
Individual quasi-
entities (privations,
relations of reason),
signiﬁcata of
propositions,
impossible in the future
Impossible
Universals
Abstract
Note that I am using the designations of ‘‘via antiqua semantics’’ and ‘‘via moderna semantics’’ slightly anachronistically, to designate two radically
different ways of construing semantic theory in late-medieval philosophy and theology, which I take to be the conceptual basis for the historically
somewhat later separation of the two viae as the altogether different ways of doing philosophy and theology, leading to the so-called Wegestreit,
the historical ‘‘quarrel of the ways’’ in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries. For a detailed historical discussion of the late-medieval separation of
the via antiqua and the via moderna, see Moore 1989. For the impact of the separation of these two ways on the emergence of ‘‘the battle of the
faiths,’’ Glaubenskampf, in the age of the Protestant Reformation, see Oberman 1977.
156 B
Being

to be there is for the corresponding sight not to be there,
the being of blindness cannot be taken to be being in the
same sense as the being of sight; therefore, blindness has to
be a being in a different sense, a being of reason. And
similar considerations apply to all sorts of privations,
negations, or relations of reason, thus opening up the
‘‘quasi-ontological’’ realm of beings of reason in this
framework.
Ockham, on the other hand, uses logical analysis to
show that for the true predication of the term ‘‘blind’’ and
similar privative terms we need not posit any such quasi-
entities. As the nominal deﬁnition of the term shows, this
syntactically simple term must have a complex concept
corresponding to it in the mind, namely, the concept
properly expressed by the nominal deﬁnition ‘‘animal
not having sight.’’ Now, in this phrase, there are two
absolute terms (terms applying equally and indifferently
to whatever they signify, on account of being subordinated
to the corresponding absolute concepts), namely, ‘‘ani-
mal’’ and ‘‘sight.’’ There is also a connotative term (signi-
fying some of the things it signiﬁes primarily and others
secondarily, connoting them only in relation to the for-
mer, on account of being subordinated to a connotative
concept), namely, the term ‘‘having’’, primarily signifying
the things that have something and connoting the things
had by them. Finally, there is the syncategorematic term
‘‘not,’’ which does not signify anything in external reality,
only the mental concept of negation, which is a mental
act, merely modifying the representative function of
the categorematic concept with which it is construed
(cf. Klima 2006). Thus, the complex connotative concept
to which the term ‘‘blind’’ is subordinated will signify
animals, while connoting their sight; however, on account
of the implied negation it will only apply to animals that
do not have sight. Thus, on this analysis, the sentence ‘‘Jerry
is blind’’ will be true just in case Jerry is one of the animals
that do not have sight, just as it should be. However, the
important difference of this analysis from the former is that
this analysis does not require the actuality of some
quasi-entity, namely, the privation of Jerry’s sight: the
term ‘‘blind’’ applies to Jerry simply because he does not
have sight, which is just what the negative connotation of
the term requires. But this negative connotation is effected
through the term’s signifying only positive, real entities,
namely, animals, their sights, and a positive quality of the
mind, namely, the syncategorematic concept of negation.
Without going into further details, perhaps, even this
brief illustration will sufﬁce to indicate how, through such
and similar analyses, Ockham is eventually able to come
up with a much simpler, reduced ontological picture (see
Klima
1999).
In
his
semantics,
all
our
linguistic
expressions are mapped onto an ontology containing
only two really distinct categories of entities, namely,
entities belonging to the category of substance, and enti-
ties pertaining to the category of quality, some of which,
however, are qualities of the mind, namely, those naturally
representative mental concepts whereby we conceive of
objects of our cognition (i.e., the categorematic concepts
that provide the sense of our categorematic terms) or
those mental concepts that merely have the function of
modifying the representative function of the former (i.e.,
our syncategorematic concepts, providing the meaning of
our syncategorematic terms).
As we can see, the semantic construction of the via
antiqua certainly demanded the mapping of language
onto a rich and complex structure of semantic values,
accorded with different degrees or modes of reality,
expressed perhaps in correspondingly distinguished senses
of ‘‘being’’ (ens), among those who endorsed a strong
doctrine of the analogy of being, such as Aquinas and his
followers, or without such distinctions, among those who
endorsed the doctrine of the univocity of ‘‘being,’’ such as
Scotus and his followers. In any case, the rather ‘‘cavalier’’
assignment of semantic values to all linguistic items in any
syntactical category in this semantic framework left it to
metaphysics to sort out into which ontological categories
these semantic values fall, and whether they are distinct or
identical. Indeed, the latter questions led to distinctions
among various forms of distinctions as well, ranging from
numerical and real, to less-than-numerical, intentional,
formal, modal, or mere conceptual distinctions. Neverthe-
less, the metaphysical strategies of distinguishing various
modes of being and/or senses of ‘‘being’’ and allowing the
identiﬁcation or quasi-identiﬁcation of semantic values of
expressions in various categories could in principle yield
in this framework a real ontology (i.e., an ontology of real
entities, not considering any quasi-entities) no more prof-
ligate than the parsimonious nominalist ontology of Ock-
ham, acknowledging only two distinct categories of
singular entities, namely, substances and qualities.
Ockham’s genuine innovation, therefore, was not so
much in ontology per se, but rather in the ways and
strategies he applied to reduce ontological commitment
in the semantic theory itself. Thus, for him, the reduction
of ontological commitment, in contrast to the via antiqua
strategy, was not a separate metaphysical task to bring
metaphysical order to a burgeoning quasi-ontology of
‘‘recklessly’’ assigned semantic values, but rather the direct
task of semantic theory itself, carefully working out the
mappings
of
distinct
linguistic
categories
onto
a parsimoniously construed ontology, containing only
real entities in the ‘‘permitted’’ categories.
Being B
157
B

Thus, Ockham’s ontology can be represented by means
of the following, much simpler diagram, cutting the for-
mer diagram in half, and reducing its inner contents as
well (Table 2).
In this diagram, quasi-entities are gone: the phrases
apparently designating them are all analyzed in terms of
their nominal deﬁnitions, containing only phrases that
denote or connote entities in the ‘‘permitted’’ distinct cat-
egories of substance and quality. A similar strategy allows
the reduction of really distinct real categories from ten to
just two. In fact, Ockham’s approach is so successful that
one wonders why he even needs two categories. In princi-
ple, a simple homogenous category, the category of sub-
stance, would do for the purposes of his semantics.
As Marilyn Adams has convincingly argued (notably,
on the basis of a passage from Buridan’s Questions on
Aristotle’s De anima, see Adams 1989:283–285), the need
to posit a distinct category of quality stems from the need
to explain genuine alteration as a change in quality, with-
out having to resort to a ‘‘quantitative’’ analysis of it in
terms of an atomistic physics. Thus, although logical anal-
ysis alone would allow a reduction of ontology to a single
category, further considerations in metaphysics and phys-
ics do necessitate further ontological distinctions.
Indeed, it is precisely such further, metaphysical and
physical reasons that prompt the great ‘‘systematizer and
legitmizer’’ of Ockhamist nominalism, John Buridan to
depart from Ockham’s ontology, despite sharing virtually
the same semantics (see the entry on John Buridan in this
volume).
To be sure, despite the nominalist project of ‘‘ontolog-
ical reduction,’’ in the nominalist semantic framework
itself there is still what contemporary philosophers
would identify as ‘‘quantiﬁcation over non-existents,’’
and hence ontological commitment to some ‘‘weird
entities.’’ However, in general, in medieval logic, quantiﬁ-
cation was not regarded as carrying ontological commit-
ment. What we can refer to and quantify over may have
been something, could be something, or, possibly, will be
something, but if it is not actually one among the things
presently populating our universe, then it is not anything,
i.e., it is literally nothing (cf. Klima 2001:197–226,
2009:143–174). Thus, in the nominalist logical framework
to be is simply to be identical with one of the actually
existing things. Accordingly, although the afﬁrmative cop-
ula in this framework still carries ‘‘existential import,’’ it
does not predicate existence (whether absolutely or as
qualiﬁed by the signiﬁcata of the predicate). Rather, it is
merely a syncategorematic sign of the identity of the
supposita of the terms of an afﬁrmative proposition.
Therefore, perhaps paradoxically, the verb ‘‘est’’, function-
ing as a copula, does not even express the notion of being.
In this sense, nominalist logic completely broke the strong
links assumed in the older framework between the various
modes of predication (construed as various ways of saying
that something is), and the various ways in which
things are.
See also: ▶Albert of Saxony ▶Essence and Existence
▶Gabriel Biel ▶Giles of Rome, Political Thought
▶Henry of Ghent ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad
al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
▶John Buridan ▶Marsilius of Inghen ▶Peter Abelard
▶Peter of Ailly ▶Siger of Brabant ▶Substance, Accident
and
Modes
▶Thomas
Aquinas
▶Thomas
of
Vio
(Cajetan) ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1980) Opera Omnia. Frommann-Holzboog, Bad-
Cannstatt
Duns Scotus John (1950) Opera Omnia. Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis,
Civitas Vaticana
Henry
of
Ghent
(1520)
Summae
quaestionum
ordinariarum.
Vaenundatur in aedibus Iodoci Badii Ascensii, Parisiis. (Repr.
(1953). The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure; E. Nauwelaerts,
Louvain; F. Scho¨ningh, Paderborn)
Ockham William (1974) Summa Logicae, eds. Boehner Ph et al. Opera
Philosophica, vol I. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Suarez
Francisco
(1947)
On
the
various
kinds
of
distinctions
(Disputationes
metaphysicae,
Disputatio
VII,
de
variis
distinctionum generibus), trans. intro. Vollert C. Marquette Univer-
sity Press, Milwaukee
Being. Table 2 Ockham’s ontology
Past
Present
Future
Real beings
Two categories of real
entities, possible in the
past
Two categories of real
entities, possible in the
present
Two categories of real
entities, possible in the
future
Possible
Two categories of real
entities, actual in the
past
Two categories of
actual real entities
Two categories of real
entities, actual in the
future
Actual
158 B
Being

Secondary Sources
Adams MM (1989) William Ockham, 2 vols. University of Notre Dame
Press, Notre Dame, pp 283–285. 2nd rev. edn., 1987
Dumont S (1998) Henry of Ghent and Duns Scotus. In: Marenbon J
(ed) Medieval philosophy. Routledge, London-New York, pp
291–328
Ebbesen S (1998) The Paris arts faculty: Siger of Brabant, Boethius of
Dacia, Radulphus Brito. In: Marenbon J (ed) Medieval philosophy.
The Routledge history of philosophy, III. Routledge, London/New
York, pp 269–290
Goodman N, Quine WVO (1947) Steps toward a constructive nominal-
ism. J Symbolic Logic 12:105–122
Henninger M (2006) Henry of Harclay on the univocal concept of being.
Mediaeval Stud 68:205–237
Hochschild J (2007) Cajetan on Scotus on univocity. Proc Soc Medieval
Logic Metaphys 7:32–42. http://faculty.fordham.edu/klima/SMLM/
PSMLM7/PSMLM7.pdf
Jacobi K (1986) Peter Abelard’s investigations into the meaning and
function of the speech sign ‘‘Est.’’ In: Knuutila S, Hintikka J (eds)
The logic of being. Reidel, Dordrecht, pp 145–180
King P (2008) Peter Abelard. The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy
(Fall 2008 Edition). In: Zalta EN (ed) http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/fall2008/entries/abelard/
Klima G (1993) The changing role of Entia Rationis in medieval
philosophy: a comparative study with a reconstruction. Synthese
96:25–59
Klima G (1996) The semantic principles underlying Saint Thomas
Aquinas’s metaphysics of being. Medieval Phil Theol 5:87–141
Klima G (1999) Ockham’s semantics and ontology of the categories. In:
Spade PV (ed) The Cambridge companion to Ockham. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp 118–142
Klima G (2001) Existence and reference in medieval logic. In: Hieke A,
Morscher E (eds) New essays in free logic. Kluwer, Dordrecht,
pp 197–226
Klima G (2002a) Contemporary ‘‘Essentialism’’ vs. Aristotelian Essential-
ism.’’ In: Haldane J (ed) Mind, metaphysics, and value in the Tho-
mistic and analytic traditions. University of Notre Dame Press, South
Bend, pp 175–194
Klima G (2002b) Aquinas’ theory of the copula and the analogy of being.
Logical Anal Hist Phil 5:159–176
Klima G (2002c) Thomas Sutton and Henry of Ghent on the analogy of
being. Proc Soc Medieval Logic Metaphys 2:34–44. http://www.
fordham.edu/gsas/phil/klima/SMLM/PSMLM2/PSMLM2.pdf
Klima G (2004) On Kenny on Aquinas on being: a critical review of
Aquinas on being by Anthony Kenny. Feature Rev Int Phil Quart
44:567–580
Klima G (2006) Syncategoremata. In: Brown K (ed) Elsevier’s encyclope-
dia of language and linguistics, 2nd edn., vol 12. Elsevier, Oxford,
pp 353–356
Klima G (2009) John Buridan, great medieval thinkers series, Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Lambertini R (2008) Giles of Rome. The Stanford encyclopedia of phi-
losophy (Fall 2008 Edition). In: Zalta EN (ed) http://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/fall2008/entries/giles/
Marmo C (1999) The semantics of the Modistae. In: Ebbesen S, Friedman
RL (eds) Medieval analyses in language and cognition. Acts of the
Symposium, ‘‘The Copenhagen School of Medieval Philosophy,’’
January 10–13, 1996. Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters.
Reitzels, Copenhagen, pp 83–104
Moore WL (1989) Via Moderna. In: Strayer JR (ed) Dictionary of Middle
Ages, vol 12. Scribner, New York, pp 406–409
Nuchelmans G (1973) Theories of the proposition: ancient and medieval
conceptions of the bearers of truth and falsity. North Holland,
Amsterdam
Nuchelmans G (1980) Late scholastic and humanist theories of the prop-
osition. North Holland, Amsterdam
Oberman HA (1977) Werden und Wertung der Reformation: Vom
Wegestreit zum Glaubenskampf. J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebect),
Tuebingen
Porro P (2008) Henry of Ghent. The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy
(Fall 2008 Edition). In: Zalta EN (ed) http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/fall2008/entries/henry-ghent/
Read S (2008) Medieval theories: properties of terms. The Stanford
encyclopedia of philosophy (Fall 2008 Edition). In: Zalta EN (ed)
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/medieval-terms/
Zupko J (2008) Thomas of Erfurt. The Stanford encyclopedia of philos-
ophy (Fall 2008 Edition). In: Zalta EN (ed) http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/fall2008/entries/erfurt/
Bernard of Clairvaux
CONSTANT J. MEWS
Centre for Studies in Religion and Theology
School of Historical Studies
Monash University
Clayton, VIC
Australia
Abstract
Bernard, abbot of Clairvaux 1115–1153, was one of
the most eloquent preachers and spiritual writers of
the medieval period. His involvement in public affairs
led him into conﬂict with two of the most distinguished
schoolmen of his day, namely with Peter Abelard (1079–
1142) at the Council of Sens (1141) and Gilbert of
Poitiers (1076–1154) at the Council of Reims (1148).
Nonetheless, he offered his own understanding on
what he calls consideratio, strongly shaped by his reading
of Augustine and other Church Fathers, of enormous
inﬂuence over subsequent centuries. In particular, his
emphasis on the role of experience and of desire for God
in the spiritual life, and on the nature and character of
love, would offer a perspective on the path to wisdom very
different from that associated with either Aristotle or
Boethius.
Biography
Bernard (1090/1091–1153), born to a noble Burgundy
family, decided to join the ﬂedgling monastic community
at Cıˆteaux, along with a group of companions, in around
1113. Stephen Harding had established a new monastic
Bernard of Clairvaux B
159
B

community there in 1098, dedicated to strict observance
of the Rule of Benedict, free from the accretions of monas-
tic practice that had grown up over the centuries – such as
had happened at Cluny. According to his friend and biog-
rapher, William of Saint-Thierry (Vita prima 4, PL 185,
237C), his arrival there with more than 30 companions
transformed the struggling community. In 1115, he was
befriended and consecrated abbot of a new daughter
house at Clairvaux by William of Champeaux, bishop of
Chaˆlons (1113–1122) and previously a distinguished
teacher of grammar, dialectic, and rhetoric. Although he
had previously founded a community of canons regular at
Saint-Victor, William spent much time until his death in
1122, in the company of Bernard, either at Chaˆlons or at
Clairvaux. By the early 1120s, he was emerging as
a powerful voice in supporting the cause of monastic
reform, not least through his Apologia – a devastating
critique of worldliness in the monastic order – dedicated
to
William
of
Saint-Thierry
in
around
1121/1122
(according to Holdsworth 1994). He also became an
important advocate for the cause of just war, in his De
laude novae militiae, written for the Order of Knights
Templar. He was a proliﬁc writer of letters, and during
the 1130s, became closely involved in supporting Pope
Innocent II against a rival claimant, Anacletus II, to the
papal throne. In Lent 1140, the more philosophically
trained William of Saint-Thierry urged him to act against
the inﬂuence of Peter Abelard, whose theological ideas, he
feared, might provoke schism in the Church. The situation
was aggravated by the enthusiastic support Abelard
received from Arnold of Brescia, expelled from Rome at
the II Lateran Council, held in 1139. This led to Bernard
confronting Abelard at the Council of Sens on May 25,
1141 and writing many inﬂuential letters to Rome that
secured Abelard’s condemnation by the Pope (Mews
2002). In 1145/1146, Pope Eugenius III (the ﬁrst Cister-
cian Pope and a prote´ge´ of Bernard) asked him to preach
the Second Crusade, following the loss of the short-lived
colony at Edessa. In 1148, he was urged by admirers to act
against Gilbert of Poitiers, whose sophisticated analysis of
the theological writings of Boethius, was construed by
some critics as being as dangerous as that of Peter Abelard.
These ultimately unsuccessful forays into public life may
have harmed his wider reputation, but they did not detract
from his enduring popularity as a writer and theorist of
the spiritual life.
Thought
Little is known about Bernard’s education at Chaˆtillon
prior to his becoming a monk at Cıˆteaux. William of
Saint-Thierry would later recall that he gained his most
important insights not from reading or from teachers, but
rather from the experience of solitude, gained from med-
itating ‘‘in woodland or ﬁeld’’ (Vita prima 4, PL 185,
240CD). Monasticism provided a creative framework by
which Bernard could channel his literary and spiritual
energies, as well as formulate his own form of philosoph-
ical reﬂection, framed in terms of interior reﬂection rather
than of academic enquiry.
Bernard was always interested in the need for authen-
ticity in the religious life, and the importance of
consideratio, or sustained reﬂection (Michel 1993). In an
early work (1118/1119; Holdsworth 1994), the De gradibus
humilitatis et superbiae, he builds on Benedict’s relatively
impersonal reﬂection on the stages of humility to reﬂect on
the example presented by Christ in humbling himself to
death. By overcoming personal obstacles, ‘‘they may cross
over through contemplation to the third level of truth’’ (De
gradibus 19; SBO 3:30). He was critical of monks who
pursued vainglory rather than interior wisdom.
"
The first grade of pride is curiosity. You can see this in
various ways: if you see a monk, in whom you had previ-
ously trusted well, standing, walking sitting everywhere,
beginning to wander with his eyes, his head erect, ears
attentive, you know the unchanged interior character of
a man from external movements (De gradibus 28; SBO
3:38).
"
The monk praises fasting, commends vigils, elevates
prayers above everything, disputes fully but uselessly
about patience, humility or each of the virtues, so that
you may say that the mouth speaks from the abundance
of the heart, and that the good man offers good things
from his good treasury (De gradibus 41; SBO 3:48).
His observations about false monasticism provide some of
his most poignant insights, and help explain his continu-
ing popularity down through the centuries in an ascetic
milieu.
In another early treatise addressed to William of Saint-
Thierry, the De gratia et libero arbitrio, Bernard addresses
a doctrinal issue, that of grace and free will, drawing ﬁrmly
on the teaching of Augustine and the intellectual tradi-
tions of the school of Laon. He analyzes the nature of the
free will or judgment that deﬁnes our humanity. This
capacity for freedom is what deﬁnes us, as made in the
image of God. He considers the various pressures acting
against free will, and the need for active consent to a good
will. Everything good comes from divine grace, but cannot
be received without active choice on our part.
Bernard acquired perhaps the most distinctive aspect
of his thought, his fascination with the Song of Songs as an
160 B
Bernard of Clairvaux

account of the desire of the soul for the Word of God,
through his encounter with the commentary on that work
of Origen, preserved in the Latin translation of Ruﬁnus.
Origen’s writings had been little studied prior to the late
eleventh century, having been ofﬁcially condemned (apart
from those approved by Jerome) in the ﬁfth century.
Bernard’s discovery of Origen’s commentary provided
a new impetus for his reﬂection on the Song of Songs as
a medium for reﬂecting on love and spiritual transforma-
tion. In the prologue to that commentary (In Cant. Prol. 2),
Origen had spoken of the interest of the Greeks in
composing many dialogues de amoris natura, but sought
to correct deﬁciencies by framing his reﬂection in terms of
the Song of Songs – a treatise that he considered to focus
on the contemplation of divinity, the ultimate focus of
‘‘true philosophy.’’ Origen’s commentary, in which amor
was used interchangeably with dilectio and caritas (even
though Origen recognized that in scripture, the term amor
was often replaced by dilectio and caritas) helped Bernard
interpret the Song of Songs as the springboard for his own
reﬂection on the spiritual life, in which he placed new
attention on the role of experience. William of Saint-
Thierry recalled the intimacy of the moment, when they
were both convalescing at Clairvaux and debating the
spiritual nature of the soul and the remedies offered by
virtues against the vices (Vita prima 12, PL 185, 259B;
dated to 1128 by Verdeyen 1992:570, but perhaps earlier,
following Holdsworth 1994). Bernard began to speak
about the Song of Songs, very likely inspired by their
reading of Origen, whose writings were preserved at
Clairvaux.
Bernard was interested in the Song of Songs for what it
had to say about the transformation of the soul in its desire
for God. In his De diligendo Deo, composed probably in
the early 1130s, he makes the ﬁrst attempt in Christian
tradition to write a treatise about loving God. While God
should be loved for his own sake, he acknowledges that
initially human beings love themselves for their own sake.
Man must come acknowledge the supreme dignity that
they have been accorded as creatures of free will made in
the image of God. Self-knowledge is the most important
path of any inquiry. Even those who did not know Christ
were able to recognize that God should be loved for his
own sake, although this could not be achieved by their
own effort (De diligendo Deo 6; SBO 3:123). He is acutely
aware of the selﬁshness of human nature unredeemed by
grace. This greed has to be subject to reason, in order to be
transcended. Rather than urge the study of philosophy, he
argues that the transformation takes place through loving
God. Whereas William of Saint-Thierry had emphasized
the gulf between carnal and spiritual love, Bernard focuses
on the evolving stages of different kinds of love, beginning
with love of self, evolving to love of neighbor, initially for
one’s own sake, but subsequently for the sake of God. Man
loves God initially for one’s own sake, then for God’s sake,
and then only ﬁnally does man love himself for the
sake of God.
Bernard started to compose his sermons on the Song
of Songs during the mid-1130s, continuing to work on
them over the next 2 decades. He sought to provide not
a formal exegesis of its text, but a reﬂection on the core
themes of desire for God, and the visiting of the soul by the
Word of God. Because he was addressing monks rather
than students of philosophy, he had no need to acknowl-
edge formal sources of inspiration other than scripture.
Nonetheless, his commentary was profoundly shaped by
Origen’s recasting of Platonist philosophy within the
framework of the Song of Songs. In particular, he was
excited by the bride’s opening exclamation, Osculetur me
osculo oris sui (Cant. 1:1) as a way of understanding scrip-
ture as a whole. The ﬁrst kiss was the desire of those who
longed for Christ, the second was that of Jesus as man,
the third the anticipated mystery of the incarnation, and
the fourth the incarnation itself (super Cantica 2; SBO
1:8–13). In a late sermon (super Cantica 74.3; SBO
2:241), he speaks of his having been frequently received
visited by the Word, as a moment of mystical understand-
ing that helped him understand scripture and Christian
tradition. While Abelard emphasized the role of reason
and the need to understand words in understanding God
as supreme good, and Hugh of Saint-Victor the value of
physical sacramenta as manifesting God’s grace, Bernard
highlighted the role of personal experience in this process.
Although not the ﬁrst monastic author to do so, his use of
the language of experience, of which he had great literary
command, was of enormous inﬂuence within a monastic
environment in creating an image of the self as alienated
from its true goal (Pranger 1994). While more educated
monks in the twelfth century would continue to study
systematic works of philosophy and theology within
a monastic context, his writings helped shape a more
interior, devotional spirituality, employing the literary
artiﬁce of the devotional prayers and meditations of
St Anselm.
Bernard’s fame as a preacher led him to be increasingly
involved in public affairs. In Lent 1140, William of Saint-
Thierry – alarmed by reports of Abelard’s inﬂuence within
the Church – composed a detailed analysis of his theolog-
ical errors to Bernard, who responded by addressing to
Pope Innocent II a treatise of his own (Epist. 190; SBO
8:17–40) on the various errors of Peter Abelard, in large
part derived from the writing of William of Saint-Thierry
Bernard of Clairvaux B
161
B

and a summary of texts, excerpted by an aide, very likely
Thomas of Morigny. The ﬁnal list of 19 heresies imputed
to Abelard, agreed to by a meeting of these authors, was
circulated by Bernard at the end of his Epist. 190 (Mews
1985). Whereas in the De gradibus humilitatis et superbiae
he had inveighed against the spirit of curiositas in other
monks, he now turned his rhetorical skills to caricature
Abelard as embodying intellectual arrogance. He accused
Abelard of undermining divine omnipotence and mini-
mizing the signiﬁcance of the redemption brought about
by Christ’s death. Misunderstanding Abelard’s emphasis
on the goodness of the Holy Spirit and reserve toward the
doctrine of original sin, he painted his adversary as an
arrogant philosopher, unwilling to submit himself to the
discipline of the Christian faith.
In sermon 36 on the Song of Songs, written around the
time of his confrontation with Abelard, Bernard defends
himself against charges of anti-intellectualism:
"
Perhaps I might seem excessive in criticizing science as if
rebuking learned men, and in prohibiting the study of
letters. Far from it! I am not unaware of how great
a service to the Church learned men have made, whether
to refute adversaries or to instruct the simple (super
Cantica 36.1; SBO 2:4).
He insists that his criticism is reserved only for those who
misuse
science
by
seeking
self-aggrandizement
or
curiositas, or seeking knowledge for its own sake, and fail
to pursue the only true scientia, that of self-knowledge,
‘‘because this is what reason, usefulness, and order,
demand’’ (super Cantica 36.5; SBO 2:7).
Bernard
composed
his
last
major
work,
De
consideratione, between 1148 and his death in 1153, as
a treatise addressed to Pope Eugenius III, urging him to
turn from public affairs and engage in consideratio, mature
reﬂection ‘‘that puriﬁes the mind. . . confers knowledge of
human and divine affairs. . . hunts down truth, scrutinizes
what seems to be true, and explores lies and deceit’’ (De
consideratione 1.8; SBO 3:403). In particular, he reﬂects in
relation to the four virtues, that consideratio guides the
mind into conformity with virtue (De consideratione 1.10;
SBO 3:405). While he addresses Eugenius, reminding him
that he is still a man, even though he has been elected
Pope, the treatise can be read as a reﬂection on his own
struggle to free himself from the trials of public life. The
ﬁnal end of consideration has to be oneself (De
consideratione 2.6; SBO 3:414). After reﬂecting on the
corruption, wealth and legalism that has crept into the
Church, and the curia in particular, he devotes a long ﬁnal
book to reﬂecting on the third kind of consideration,
namely that which goes beyond its ﬁrst and second
kinds, namely practical (dispensativa) and reﬂective
(aestimativa) to that which is speculative (speculativa)
and frees itself for contemplation (De consideratione 5.4;
SBO 3:469). He concludes the work by laying out his
understanding of God, employing the formula of St
Anselm, ‘‘that than which nothing better can be thought’’
(De consideratione 5.15–16; SBO 3:479). What Abelard had
presented as theologia, Bernard refers to as consideratio, his
considered reﬂection on how God may be transcribed,
what Origen had described as the goal of true philosophy.
His response to the question ‘‘What is God?’’ offers reﬂec-
tion on divine simplicity. Speaking of God’s charity, maj-
esty, and wisdom, he observes ‘‘It is not disputation but
sanctity that comprehends them, if, however, what is
incomprehensible can in any way be comprehended’’ (De
consideratione 5.30; SBO 3:492). This leads him to reﬂect
on contemplation, as distinct from consideration, namely
admiration of divine majesty, observation of the judg-
ments of God, the recollection of divine blessings, and
the expectation of what is to come.
Bernard never called himself a philosopher, and stood
in an ambiguous relationship to those who pursued phil-
osophical enquiry. His public criticism of both Peter Abe-
lard and Gilbert of Poitiers led to him being considered as
an anti-intellectual by his critics. Yet, there was much that
was philosophical about his reﬂection on the role of expe-
rience and the limits of reason (Brague 1993).
See also: ▶Augustine ▶Church Fathers ▶Gilbert of
Poitiers ▶Hugh of St. Victor ▶Peter Abelard ▶William
of Champeaux
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Bernard of Clairvaux. Apologia ad Guillelmum abbatem. SBO 3,
pp 81–108
Bernard of Clairvaux. De consideratione. SBO 3, pp 393–493
Bernard of Clairvaux. De diligendo Deo. SBO 3, pp 119–154
Bernard of Clairvaux. De gradibus humilitatis et superbiae. SBO 3,
pp 13–59
Bernard of Clairvaux. De gratia et libero arbitrio. SBO 3, pp 165–203
Bernard of Clairvaux. De laude novae militiae. SBO 3, pp 213–239
Bernard of Clairvaux. Epistulae. SBO 7–8
Bernard of Clairvaux. Epistula de erroribus Petri Abaelardi (Ep. 190).
SBO 8, pp 17–40
Bernard of Clairvaux. Sermones de diversis. SBO 6.1, pp 73–406
Bernard of Clairvaux. Sermones super Cantica Canticorum. SBO, pp 1–2
Bernard of Clairvaux (1957–1977) Sancti Bernardi Opera [SBO], 8 vols,
ed. Leclercq J, Rochais H, Talbot CH. Editiones cistercienses, Rome,
(Latin text reproduced alongside a useful annotated French transla-
tion in Bernard de Clairvaux (1990–) Oeuvres completes I-XXXI.
Sources chre´tiennes 367, 390, 393, 414, 431, 452, 458, 474 (still
incomplete). Cerf, Paris)
162 B
Bernard of Clairvaux

Origen (1991–1992) Commentaire sur le Cantique des Cantiques, Texte
de la version latine de Ruﬁn, 2 vols, trans. Bre´sard L, Crouzel H,
Borret M. Sources chre´tiennes 375–376. Cerf, Paris
William of Saint-Thierry (1855) S. Bernardi Vita prima, Patrologia Latina
185, cols 225–446, ed. Migne J-P, Paris
Secondary Sources
Bertrand D, Lobrichon G (eds) (1992) Bernard de Clairvaux: histoire,
mentalite´s, spiritualite´: colloque de Lyon-Cıˆteaux-Dijon. Sources
chre´tiennes 380. Cerf, Paris
Brague R (1993) Saint Bernard et la philosophie. Presses Universitaires de
France, Paris
Gilson E (1940) The mystical theology of Bernard of Clairvaux. Sheed &
Ward, London (repr. Cistercian Publications, Kalamazoo, 1990)
Holdsworth C (1994) The early writings of Bernard of Clairvaux. Cıˆteaux
Commentarii Cistercienses 45:21–60
Mews CJ (1985) The lists of heresies imputed to Peter Abelard. Revue
be´ne´dictine 95:77–108
Mews CJ (2002) The Council of Sens (1141): Bernard, Abelard and the
fear of social upheaval. Speculum 77(2):342–382
Michel B (1992) La philosophie: le case du De consideratio. In: Bertrand
D, Lobrichon G (eds) Bernard de Clairvaux: histoire, mentalite´s,
spiritualite´: colloque de Lyon-Cıˆteaux-Dijon. Sources chre´tiennes
380. Cerf, Paris, pp 579–603
Michel B (1993) La consideration et l’«unitas spiritus». In: Brague R (ed),
Saint Bernard et la philosophie. Presses Universitaires de France,
Paris, pp 109–127
Pranger MB (1994) Bernard of Clairvaux and the shape of monastic
thought: broken dreams. Brill, Leiden
Verdeyen P (1992) Un the´ologien de l’expe´rience. In: Bertrand D,
Lobrichon G (eds) Bernard de Clairvaux: histoire, mentalite´s,
spiritualite´: colloque de Lyon-Cıˆteaux-Dijon. Sources chre´tiennes
380. Cerf, Paris, pp 557–577
Berthold of Moosburg
IRENE ZAVATTERO
Dipartimento di Filologia Classica e Scienze Filosoﬁche
Universita` del Salento
Lecce
Italy
Abstract
Berthold of Moosburg was a fourteenth-century German
Dominican. He was called to direct the Dominican studium
in Cologne in 1335, where he was involved in resolving
the crisis caused by the conviction of Meister Eckhart’s
doctrines (1329). The doctrinal solution proposed by
Berthold is contained in his Commentary on Proclus’s
Elements of Theology (Expositio super elementationem
theologicam Procli), the only medieval commentary on
Proclus, a veritable summa of Neoplatonism. Berthold’s
project was to promote the return to the Neoplatonic
tradition of the German Dominicans, dating back to
Albert the Great. He demonstrated that the Albertine
school was an autonomous and unitary cultural identity
that had its roots in ancient wisdom, of which Proclus,
according to Berthold, was the most outstanding expo-
nent. Berthold sees in the Greek diadochus a ‘‘divine
man’’ who could scan the divine properties, which are
present in the totality of the real world, and therefore
ascend to God only by means of the natural reason. In
the same way, according to Berthold, the philosopher who
studies Proclian theorems performs a cognitive ascent that
leads him to the contemplation of God. This is possible by
virtue of the presence in man of a divine faculty, which is
the ‘‘One of the soul.’’
The few data available about Berthold of Moosburg’s life
date to the period between 1316 and 1361. He was one
of the most prominent Dominican lecturers teaching in
Germany in the fourteenth century and his career was that
typical of an intellectual belonging to the Dominican
Order. He studied abroad, in Oxford (1316), was lecturer
in Regensburg in 1327, and from 1335 to 1343 held the
prestigious ofﬁce of ‘‘chief lecturer’’ (lector principalis) at
the studium generale in Cologne, a position which had
previously been occupied by such ﬁgures as Albert the
Great and Meister Eckhart. He had to leave Cologne
when the
city authorities expelled the Dominicans
(1346–1351) as the result of a dispute over their incomes.
Berthold seems to have spent these years in Nuremberg,
where his presence is attested in 1348 as ‘‘vicar of the
preaching friars for Bavaria.’’ After this date, we ﬁnd his
name only in the testamentary papers of a Beguine, for
whom he was the executor until 1361, when he renounced
his assignment in favor of another executor.
He most likely wrote his monumental work Expositio
super Elementationem theologicam Procli, a commentary
on Proclus’ Elements of Theology, during his stay in
Cologne. This is in fact the only work by Berthold that
has been handed down to us, if we exclude some glosses to
a text by Dietrich of Freiberg concerning the determina-
tion of the poles of a rainbow.
Berthold, who was a contemporary of John Tauler
(1300–1361) and Henry Suso (c. 1295/97–1366), belonged
to that group of young intellectuals who were directly
involved in the crisis and the discussions caused by the
trial for heresy brought against Meister Eckhart, which
ended in 1329 with the promulgation of a conviction
bull (In agro dominico). Appointed director of the Cologne
studium, Berthold contributed to resolving the post-
Eckhartian crisis by promoting a return to the philosoph-
ical tradition of the German Dominicans, which could be
Berthold of Moosburg B
163
B

traced back, through Ulrich of Strasburg and Dietrich of
Freiberg, to Albert the Great. He carried out his philo-
sophical project by commenting on Proclus’ Elements of
Theology, that is, by choosing a Neoplatonic work –
instead of an Aristotelian text, as was usual at that time –
which had had limited inﬂuence in Parisian scholasticism
but was much-appreciated from a doctrinal point of view
at Albert the Great’s school in Cologne (by Dietrich of
Freiberg and Eckhart), deﬁnitely oriented toward Neopla-
tonism. Berthold ushered in the most mature phase of
Proclus’ reception, also using the Commentary on Plato’s
Parmenides and the Opuscula. In particular, the great
novelty introduced by Berthold was the use of the Opus-
cula, having understood its importance for ethics and
anthropology.
In the Expositio, Berthold gathers the doctrines of the
principal authors of the Neoplatonic tradition – from
Augustine and the Pseudo-Dionysius to the contemporary
German Dominicans (Albert the Great, Ulrich of Stras-
bourg, and Dietrich of Freiberg) – in order to construct
a unitary system, a veritable
summa
of medieval
Neoplatonism.
In the prologue, Berthold states the reasons for his
decision to comment on Proclus’ work. The metaphysics
contained in the Elements of Theology is a ‘‘divine philos-
ophy,’’ made up of 211 theorems, which deals with God
and the divine properties. These theorems describe reality
according to the twofold movement, typical of the Neo-
platonic doctrine, of procession from the One and return
to him. Reality, produced by God, is described by Berthold
from a ‘‘natural’’ point of view. He deals with the natural
order of totality made up of a series of symmetrical planes,
identical to each other in terms of essence and different in
terms of being: these are Proclus’ four maneries, that is,
One, intellect, soul, and body.
Berthold maintains that, by means of the philosophy
contained in the Proclean theorems, man performs the
ascent, which leads him to the contemplation of the
‘‘divine exclusively divine,’’ that is, of the Highest Good.
Man returns to the ﬁnal perfection for which he was
created, that is to beatitude, and becomes not only blessed
but also divine. The aim of Proclus’ work thus lies in
performing a gradual ascent which, starting from the real
world – which is divine by participation – reaches the
divine world, which is such by essence. In particular,
he who contemplates, that is, the philosopher, grasps the
divine realities by means of that cognitive principle that
enables him to perform the ascent. Said principle is the
‘‘One of the soul’’ (unum animae), which possesses abso-
lute superiority compared to every other principle
within us.
Berthold asserts that Proclean henology is superior to
Aristotelian ontology because it does not stop at the
dimension of being, as happens in Aristotle’s metaphysics.
Actually, Proclus, like Plato and the Pre-Socratics, exalts
a super-intellective knowledge produced by the ‘‘One of
the soul,’’ which grasps the principles of principles, that is,
the supreme beings (super-entia) and, above all, the First
Good. Berthold points out the limits of Aristotle’s meta-
physics: it has failed because its range of investigation is
conﬁned to the plane of being and because it has not been
able to see in man the presence of that divine principle – by
far superior to the intellect – which enables him to know
the divine things. Therefore, the ‘‘One of the soul’’
becomes for Berthold the reason for the superiority of
Platonic thought over all other philosophies.
Berthold sees in Proclus an example of ‘‘divine man’’,
the most prominent representative of those pagans who
scanned the divine properties (invisibilia Dei) by means of
the natural reason so deeply as to ascend to God. The
German Dominican wants therefore to tie his commen-
tary to ancient wisdom, as is also demonstrated by his
frequent use of the Hermetic writings. From the Asclepius,
Berthold derives the concepts of ‘‘macrocosm’’ and
‘‘microcosm’’, and through the Hermetic deﬁnition of
man as ‘‘link between God and the world’’ (homo nexus
dei et mundi) he explains how man is the connection point
between the two planes of reality, the material and the
divine.
The topics mentioned so far do not exhaust the prob-
lems tackled by Berthold in his Expositio, which amounts
to nearly 2,000 printed pages (a critical edition is near
completion), but they are crucial points in Berthold’s
doctrine, which echo the typical doctrines of the German
Dominican school, that is, of Albert the Great’s school.
For example, Berthold explains the structure of the
Proclian cosmos by means of the ‘‘ﬂuxus-doctrine’’ of
Albert the Great and Ulrich of Strasbourg, namely as
a causal emanation of the First Principle, which, as
light, spreads everywhere producing the multitude of
the beings. The latter are identical to the First Principle
in essence, but manifold in terms of existence. In order to
explain how this emanation takes place, Berthold resorts
to Dietrich of Freiberg’s theory of essential causality.
Moreover, Albert the Great had already developed the
doctrine of the divine man in his theory of the intellect.
However, Berthold develops it further, concentrating his
attention on the Proclian concept of the ‘‘One of the
soul’’, which he takes from the Opuscula. In many pas-
sages of the Expositio, Berthold identiﬁes the ‘‘One of the
soul’’ with Augustine’s ‘‘profundity of the mind’’ (abditum
mentis) and with Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite’s
164 B
Berthold of Moosburg

‘‘union’’ (unitio, translation of Greek e nosiz) surpassing
the nature of the soul. This identiﬁcation had already been
partially stated by Dietrich of Freiberg in deﬁning the
agent intellect, and by Eckhart in describing the ‘‘ground
of the soul’’ (grunt der seˆle). Therefore, Berthold operates
a speculative synthesis of all his sources and transforms
the doctrine of the divine man into the theoretical bond
of the German Dominican school. The principal source
for the homo nexus dei et mundi theorem and other
Hermetic doctrines is again Albert the Great. However,
the writings ascribed to the mythical ﬁgure of Hermes
Trismegistus were often used in early fourteenth-century
Germany
in
connection
with
Proclus’
philosophy
because the Neoplatonic and Hermetic doctrines were
thought to derive from an ancient wisdom and to be the
product of a philosophical revelation granted to a
chosen few.
Berthold’s Expositio elaborates a synthesis of medieval
Neoplatonic tradition and takes stock of the German
Dominican school in the thirteenth and fourteenth cen-
turies. By inserting the doctrines of his German predeces-
sors into the vast panorama of ancient and medieval
Neoplatonism; Berthold consolidates the cultural identity
of the Albertine school and emphasizes its autonomy and
unitary character. The recourse to Neoplatonism thereby
assumes the attributes of a cultural plan carefully elabo-
rated by the German Dominicans and overtly contrasting
with Parisian scholasticism, which in those same years was
engaged in interpreting Aristotle’s texts.
Berthold’s attempt to expand on the speculative tenets
of the Albertine school by means of the Expositio failed
soon after his death due to opposition from Thomists and
orthodox followers of Eckhart. A century later, this tradi-
tion would be revived thanks to Nicholas of Cusa, an
admirer of Berthold’s commentary, who mentions him
in his Apology of the Learned Ignorance together with the
exponents of Christian Neoplatonism, in dispute with the
Aristotelian school.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Albertism ▶Dietrich of
Freiberg
▶Hermes
Trismegistus
▶Meister
Eckhart
▶Proclus, Arabic ▶Pseudo-Dionysius, the Areopagite
▶Ulrich of Strasbourg
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Bertholdus de Mosburch (1974) Expositio super Elementationem
theologicam Procli, 184–211, De animabus, ed. Sturlese L. Edizioni
di Storia e Letteratura, Roma
Bertholdus de Mosburch (1984–2007) Expositio super Elementationem
theologicam Procli, I–IV,VI–VII, ed. Sturlese L et al. Meiner,
Hamburg (Corpus Philosophorum Teutonicorum Medii Aevi VI,
1–4; 6–7)
Bertoldo di Moosburg (2000) Tabula contentorum in Expositione super
Elementationem theologicam Procli, ed. Beccarisi A. Scuola Normale
Superiore, Pisa
Secondary Sources
de Libera A (1984) Introduction a` la mystique rhe´nane d’Albert le Grand a`
Maıˆtre Eckhart. O.E.I.L, Paris, pp 317–442
Gersh SE (2001) Berthold von Moosburg and the content and method of
platonic philosophy. In: Aersten JA et al (eds) Nach der Verurteilung
von 1277. Philosophie und Theologie an der Universita¨t von Paris im
letzen Viertel des 13. Jahrhunderts. Studien und Texte, W. de Gruyter,
Berlin/New York, pp 493–503
Imbach R (1996) Chronique de philosophie. Le (ne´o-)platonisme me´di-
e´val, Proclus latin et l’e´cole dominicaine allemande. In: Imbach
R Quodlibeta. Ausgewa¨hlte Artikel. Universita¨tsverlag, Freiburg
Schweiz, pp 129–151
Iremadze T (2004) Konzeptionen des Denkens im Neuplatonismus: Zur
Rezeption
der
Proklischen
Philosophie
im
Deutschen
und
Georgischen Mittelalter Dietrich von Freiberg – Berthold von
Moosburg – Joane Petrizi. Gruner, Amsterdam/Philadelphia
Sannino A (2000) The hermetic sources in Berthold of Moosburg.
J Warburg Courtauld Inst 63:243–258
Sannino A (2003) Il concetto ermetico di natura in Bertoldo di Moosburg.
In: Lucentini P et al (eds) Hermetism from late antiquity to human-
ism. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 203–221
Sannino A (2008) Il ‘‘Liber viginti quattuor philosophorum’’ nella
metaﬁsica di Bertoldo di Moosburg. In: Beccarisi A et al (eds) Per
perscrutationem philosophicam. Neue Perspektiven der mittelal-
terlichen Forschung. Loris Sturlese zum 60. Geburtstag gewidmet,
Meiner, Hamburg, pp 252–272
Sturlese L (1984) Proclo ed Ermete in Germania da Alberto Magno
a Bertoldo di Moosburg. Per una prospettiva di ricerca sulla cultura
ﬁlosoﬁca tedesca nel secolo delle sue origini (1250–1350). In: Flash
K (ed) Von Meister Dietrich zu Meister Eckhart, Meiner, Hamburg,
pp 22–33
Sturlese L (1985) Note su Bertoldo di Moosburg O.P., scienziato e ﬁlosofo.
Freib Z Philos Theol 32:249–259
Sturlese L (1987) Il dibattito sul Proclo latino nel Medioevo fra
l’universita` di Parigi e lo ‘studium’ di Colonia. In: Boss G, Seel
G (eds) Proclus et son inﬂuence, E´ditions du Grand Midi, Zu¨rich,
pp 261–285
Sturlese L (2007) Homo divinus. Der Prokloskommentar Bertholds von
Moosburg und die Probleme der nacheckhartschen Zeit. In:
Sturlese L (ed) Homo divinus. Philosophische Projekte in Deutsch-
land zwischen Meister Eckhart und Heinrich Seuse. Kohlhammer,
Stuttgart, pp 137–154
Tautz IJ (2002) Erst-Eines, Intellekte, Intellektualita¨t: eine Studie zu
Berthold von Moosburg. Kovacˇ, Hamburg
Zavattero I (2005) La ﬁgura e il pensiero di Proclo in Bertoldo di
Moosburg. ARKETE 1:51–67
Bessarion, Basil
▶Basil Bessarion
Bessarion, Basil B
165
B

Biel, Gabriel
▶Gabriel Biel
Billingham, Richard
▶Richard Billingham
al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯, Abu¯ Rayh:a¯n
GOTTHARD STROHMAIER
Freie Universita¨t Berlin
Berlin
Germany
Abstract
Al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯, Abu¯ Rayh:a¯n Muh:ammad ibn Ah:mad was one
of the most original minds of the Muslim world, and by
the encyclopedic scope of his interests, perhaps of the
whole Middle Ages. In contrast to many less important
scientists of the Muslim world, he left no impact on
western scholasticism. The titles of his works amount to
148, but only a part of them is still extant. They deal with
astronomy and astrology, geography and geodesy, mathe-
matics and calendar reckoning, mechanics, mineralogy
and pharmacognosy, and history of religions and culture.
Being a committed Muslim, he was at the same time an
enthusiastic admirer of the Greek thinkers. His Arabic
style is sometimes sarcastic, especially when dealing with
Muslim theologians who rejected obvious facts. Remark-
able is also a cautious use of experiments, which are not to
prove some preconceived ideas but to falsify them. From
his native region at the Amu Darya river, he did not travel
further westward than to the Caspian Sea, but he had the
opportunity, when accompanying military excursions, to
become acquainted with the religion and customs of the
Hindus, whose beliefs and sciences he censures from the
standpoint of both his Muslim conviction and Greek
science.
Al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯ was born in 973 CE in Kath, a city on the Amu
Darya river, the ancient Oxus, then the capital of
Khwarezm. Although, as it seems, of humble origin, he
was fortunate enough of being educated at the court of the
ruling Khwarezm-Shahs, where one of the princes, Abu¯
Nas:r Mans:u¯r ibn ῾Ira¯q, a leading mathematician of the
time, taught him the elements of geometry and astron-
omy. Very early in his youth, he began with astronomical
observations and the construction of the necessary instru-
ments. Due to political conﬂicts, he had to settle tempo-
rarily in Persia, ﬁrst Rayy, near modern Teheran, where he
had the opportunity to participate in the observations
with a large mural sextant. Here in Rayy lived 100 years
earlier the great physician and alchemist Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯.
Al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯ compiled a bibliography of his works while not
failing to distance himself sharply from his heresies.
Later, he had to settle in Gurga¯n at the southern coast
of the Caspian Sea, where he dedicated to the sultan Qa¯bu¯s
his Chronology. In this book, he discusses the astronomical
foundations of calendar reckoning of all the people and
religions known to him. It contains a lot of interesting
details of cultural history. Remarkable in this context is
also his intimate knowledge of the Bible. Back in
Khwarezm, he became, as a counselor of the ruling
Khwarezm-Shah, involved in the inner politics of the
country that was threatened, and in the end occupied by
the sultan Mah:mu¯d of Ghazna, who extended his empire
from Afghanistan to Persia, Georgia, and the whole
Central Asia. Al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯ was deported together with
other intellectuals to Mah:mu¯d’s residence in Ghazna, pre-
sent-day Ghazni. Here he could continue his astronomical
observations. For a woman named Rayh:a¯na who hailed
also from Khwarezm, he wrote an Introduction into the
Art of Astrology in the form of questions and answers.
From a mountain that offered a far-reaching sight over
the Indus plain, he measured the circumference of the
earth with a method that was already used by the Caliph
al-Maʾmu¯n (r. 813–833). Either willingly or unwillingly,
he accompanied the repeated military incursions into
Punjab, where Mah:mu¯d pillaged the temples and took
rich booty of gold and slaves. The fruit of al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯’s
observations is a great monograph on the Hindus, their
language, literature, religion, and customs. He ﬁnds most
of this bizarre and the state of their astronomy below the
standard of Greek science. He even learnt Sanskrit and
tried, with the help of indigenous assistants, to translate
some basic mathematical and astronomical texts into this
language for the beneﬁt of Hindu colleagues who were,
though,
unwilling
to
learn
something
new.
With
Mah:mu¯d’s son and successor Masʿu¯d he was, as it seems,
on friendly terms as he dedicated to him a huge astro-
nomical handbook which bears therefore the title The
Masʿu¯dic Canon. A description of precious stones and
metals, written in a more entertaining style and nowadays
called
The
Mineralogy,
was
dedicated
to
Masʿu¯d’s
166 B
Biel, Gabriel

successor al-Mawdu¯d. In an earlier tract, he had deter-
mined with a specially designed vessel the speciﬁc weight
of 18 such substances. The last big work is a pharmacog-
nosy, a list of 1,116 articles, where he equates about
4,500 names in 27 languages of plants and mineral sub-
stances used in therapy and diet. The arid philological
subject appears sometimes enriched with interesting anec-
dotes. He left it partly unﬁnished when he died in 1048 CE
in Ghazna.
Al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯ was one of those enlightened intellectuals in
the Muslim world, who were ﬁrm adherents of the Greek
scientiﬁc heritage that came down to them via the Alex-
andrian school of late antiquity and the indefatigable
activities of the Syrian and Arab translators working in
ninth-century Baghdad. In a sarcastic style, he censures
often those people who did not share his belief in the
primary of the Greeks. Typical for a medieval intellectual,
in general, are derogatory remarks on his mother tongue,
the now extinct Khwarezmian. He praises instead the
Arabic language that he had to learn later in life as the
only suitable medium for the cultivation of the sciences.
Sometimes, he stands out by a new and daring approach to
geodetic and astronomical problems. While celestial
globes with the pictures of the Greek constellations were
widely in use, he was the ﬁrst to construct a terrestrial
globe, that is, a model of the northern hemisphere with
a diameter of 5 m where he could combine the geograph-
ical latitudes and longitudes of the cities with their dis-
tances in miles as reported by travelers. While being in
Kath, he determined in collaboration with a colleague in
Baghdad the longitudinal difference between the two cit-
ies. This was possible by a lunar eclipse, which was to be
observed at different times of the day in both places, in
Kath 1 h earlier, what corresponded to 15. In a special
treatise on the various types of the astrolabe, he mentions
one which was constructed on the conception that the
sphere of the ﬁxed stars rests immobile while the earth is
rotating on its place in the centre. He adds that this would
not be impossible on mathematical grounds, but he sees
difﬁculties in bringing this in accord with the physical
realities. Occasionally, he made a cautious use of experi-
ments, but not to prove some preconceived ideas, as was
often the case in Greek science and later on, but to falsify
them when showing that the observed facts did not tally
with them.
In a correspondence with his younger colleague
Avicenna, he shows certain dissatisfaction with Aristotle’s
natural philosophy, while the latter feels obliged to defend
the great master. Al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯ touches on a variety of ques-
tions: When the heavy elements earth and water gather
around the center of the universe and the water is less
heavy, why does it not cover the earth equally from all
sides? Air and ﬁre are, according to Aristotle, absolutely
light, while air is less light. Here al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯ puts forward the
alternative that both may possess also heaviness, and that
the air, while being heavier, presses the sphere of ﬁre
against that of the moon. We all know that the cold lets
bodies contract, while warmth causes them to expand. But
why do glass vessels shatter when water contained therein
freezes? And why does ice swim on the water despite its
solid ‘‘earthy’’ nature? When water evaporates, does it
really become air or are its particles only scattered in the
air? This leads to the question of the existence of a vac-
uum, what both try to solve with the help of experiments.
Al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯ thinks that a vacuum in the air is necessary
when one assumes a corpuscular nature of light. Al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯
defends not only a physical but also a mathematical
atomism, arguing that otherwise one side of a square
and the diagonal would be of equal length, as both consist
of the same, that is, an inﬁnite number of parts.
In the correspondence, he articulates also his Muslim
faith. He doubts the eternity of the world and defends the
creationism of the Alexandrian Christian thinker John
Philoponus, whom Avicenna on the other hand treats as
a hypocrite. Al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯ contradicts even the opinion that
our cosmos should be the only exemplar of its kind and
accuses Avicenna, who follows Aristotle in this respect, of
trying to limit God’s omnipotence. It may be that his
skepticism toward these basic tenets of the Aristotelian
and Neoplatonic mainstream as prevalent in Arabic phi-
losophy has earned him the nickname al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯, which
sounds like the so-called nisba, which was usually given to
a person after his birthplace. But a place called Bı¯ru¯n or
Be¯ru¯n cannot easily be determined. The Bı¯ru¯niyyu¯n
were in Arabic transcription the philosophical sect of
the Pyrrhonists, whose radical skepticism was known
through doxographies or occasional remarks of Galen of
Pergamum.
He shows his truly scientiﬁc outlook when dealing
with the reports about wondrous and unexplained phe-
nomena, as, for example, Saint Elmo’s ﬁre on high sea or
strange therapeutic methods of the Indians or the ﬁre that
appears at Easter in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in
Jerusalem. He refrains from rash statements and leaves the
question open until more evidence may be found. On the
other hand, he is nevertheless, seen in the context of his
time, an outstanding representative of historical criticism
when he analyses, for example, the tendentiousness of the
legends told by the Persians about Alexander the Great.
Due to the wideness of his interests, it proves to be
difﬁcult to appreciate equally all his various achievements.
The last monograph by Pavel G. Bulgakov about his life
al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯, Abu¯ Rayh:a¯n B
167
B

and works appeared in 1972 in Russian and was not
translated into any other language.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ
(Rhazes) ▶Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Medicine
▶Alexandrian
Tradition
into
Arabic:
Philosophy
▶Astronomy
and
Astrology
in
the
Arab
World
▶Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna)
▶John
Philoponus
▶Mathematics
and
Philosophy in the Arab World ▶Translations from
Greek into Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources (in Translation)
Kennedy Edward S (1976) al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯. The exhaustive treatise on shadows,
2 vols. Institute for the History of Arabic Science, Aleppo
Sachau Edward (1879) al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯. The chronology of ancient nations.
Allen, London
Sachau Edward (1888) Alberuni’s India, 2 vols. Routledge and Kegan,
London
Strohmaier Gotthard (2002) al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯. In den Ga¨rten der Wissenschaft.
Ausgewa¨hlte Texte, 3rd edn. Reclam, Leipzig
Wright R Ramsay (1934) al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯. The book of instruction in the
elements of the art of astrology. Luzac, London
Secondary Sources
Bulgakov PG (1972) Жuзнь u тpyДы Берунu. Fan, Tashkent
Kennedy ES (1970) al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯. In: Gillispie CC (ed) Dictionary of scientiﬁc
biography, vol 2. Scribner, New York, pp 147–158
Kennedy ES (1973) A commentary upon Bı¯ru¯nı¯‘s Kita¯b tah:dı¯d al-ama¯kin.
American University of Beirut, Beirut
Sezgin F (1974, 1978, 1979, 2000, 2007) Geschichte des arabischen
Schrifttums. Brill, Leiden, vol 5, pp 375–383; vol 6, pp 261–276;
vol 7, pp 188–192, pp 288–292/Institut fu¨r Geschichte der
Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften, Frankfurt am Main, vol 10,
pp 150–161; vol 13, pp 279–299
Strohmaier
G
(1992)
Avicenna
und
al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯
im
Dialog
u¨ber
aristotelische Naturphilosophie. Antike Naturwissenschaft und ihre
Rezeption 1–2:115–130 (repr. Strohmaier G (1996) Von Demokrit
bis Dante. Die Bewahrung antiken Erbes in der arabischen Kultur.
Olms, Hildesheim, pp 342–357)
Strohmaier G (1994) Das Bild der Antike im Werk al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯s, eines
muslimischen Philhellenen des Mittelalters. Int J Class Tradit
1(1):17–22 (repr. Strohmaier G (2003) Hellas im Islam. Interdis-
ziplina¨re Studien. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, pp 62–66)
Strohmaier G (2008) The picture of the world in al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯‘s ‘Pharmacog-
nosy.’ Eur Rev 16(2):241–248
Ullmann M (1970) Die Medizin im Islam. Brill, Leiden, pp 272–273
Ullmann M (1972) Die Natur- und Geheimwissenschaften im Islam. Brill,
Leiden, pp 121–122, 3350
Blemmydes, Nikephoros
▶Nikephoros Blemmydes
Boethius
ANDREW W. ARLIG
Department of Philosophy
Brooklyn College of The City University of New York
Brooklyn, NY
USA
Abstract
Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius, a late ancient Roman
thinker, profoundly inﬂuenced western medieval philoso-
phy, literature, and the liberal arts. Boethius translated and
commented on a number of important Aristotelian logical
works. These translations and commentaries provided
the foundations for early medieval logic, philosophy of
language, and metaphysics. Boethius’ short theological
treatises are remarkable for the way in which they apply
Greek philosophical concepts to Christian doctrine. His
Consolation of Philosophy is a vivid synthesis of Stoic,
Aristotelian, and especially Neoplatonic ethics and philo-
sophical theology. It is a masterpiece, whose literary qual-
ities as well as its philosophical material has inﬂuenced
generations of humanists.
Biography
Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius was born into
a Roman aristocratic family in the second half of the
ﬁfth century (c. 475–477 CE). For most of his life, Boe-
thius lived and worked in Rome, where he was appointed
consul in 510 CE, and perhaps subsequently, prefect.
These traditional ofﬁces were mostly symbolic. The Ostro-
gothic king Theodoric ruled Italy from Ravenna. In
522 CE, Boethius accepted the appointment of Master of
Ofﬁces at Ravenna and became one of Theodoric’s most
important functionaries. Shortly thereafter Boethius was
accused of treason and practicing black magic. Boethius
might have been the hapless victim of low-level political
intrigues and rivalries, but some historians speculate that
Boethius was active in a plot to undermine Theodoric. In
the event, Theodoric was convinced that Boethius was
guilty and he sentenced Boethius to death. Boethius was
executed sometime between 524 and 526 CE. The time
that Boethius remained imprisoned before his execution
was sufﬁcient for composing his most famous work, the
Consolation of Philosophy.
Works and Thought
In addition to the Consolation, Boethius produced
a number of important translations and treatises. He
168 B
Blemmydes, Nikephoros

translated most, if not all, of Aristotle’s Organon as well as
Porphyry’s Isagoge. He composed commentaries on sev-
eral of the works that he translated, a series of handbooks
on various topics in logic, a series of handbooks on the
mathematical sciences, and ﬁve short theological treatises.
1. Translations. Boethius planned to translate and com-
ment upon all the known writings of Plato and Aristotle
(in De int. 2nd edn. 79–80). However, Boethius only
managed to complete a fraction of his proposed project.
Boethius probably produced a complete translation of
Aristotle’s Organon. Versions of his translations of the
Categories, On Interpretation, Prior Analytics, Topics, and
Sophistical Refutations survive and have been critically
edited in the Aristoteles Latinus series (Minio-Paluello
1961–1975). Many scholars believe that Boethius ﬁnished
a translation of Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, but if it ever
did exist, it is now lost. In addition to the Organon,
Boethius translated Porphyry’s Isagoge, which is tradition-
ally taken to be an introduction to Aristotle’s logic. Those
works of Aristotle that did not get rendered into Latin by
his hand were, by and large, lost to the West until the latter
part of the twelfth century.
Boethius labored over his translations. Some of them
seem to have gone through several editions. Boethius
aimed for accuracy over elegance, and by most estimates,
he
succeeded
at
rendering
Aristotle’s
thoughts
in
a rigorous and faithful manner (Barnes, in Gibson 1981;
Ebbesen 1990).
2. Commentaries. Boethius managed to comment on
Aristotle’s Categories, Aristotle’s On Interpretation (twice,
once in introductory form and once in intermediate),
Porphyry’s
Isagoge
(twice,
ﬁrst
based
on
Marius
Victorinus’ translation, and later in a version based on
his own translation), and Cicero’s Topics. He may have
commented on at least some of the rest of the Organon,
and he may have composed a greater commentary on the
Categories, but only fragments of unknown authenticity
survive (Hadot 1959).
Boethius’ commentaries on Aristotle and Porphyry
belong to the tradition of Neoplatonic commentaries on
these logical works. Boethius’ commentary on the Catego-
ries by and large follows Porphyry’s shorter question and
answer commentary. His greater commentary on On
Interpretation primarily follows Porphyry’s now lost com-
mentary on that same work.
While Boethius tends to follow mainly Porphyry, he is
well aware of the views of other Neoplatonists. At least one
scholar has argued that Boethius attended lectures at the
Neoplatonic
school
in
Alexandria
(Courcelle
1948,
299–300 [= 1969, 316–318]). However, the current con-
sensus
is
that
Boethius
probably
learned
about
Neoplatonism in writings that he would have come across
in Italy, and that he did not study in Egypt or Athens.
The commentary is a genre that places a premium on
passing on the received wisdom of a particular school.
Boethius’ commentaries are no exception to this general
rule. One should not expect to ﬁnd Boethius’ most orig-
inal and creative work in his commentaries. However, one
should be careful before subscribing to Shiel’s (1958) thesis
that Boethius merely cobbled together material that he
found in the scholia of his manuscripts of Aristotle. Boe-
thius probably had to make decisions about what to
include, what to omit, and what to emphasize (Barnes,
in Gibson 1981; Ebbesen 1990). Furthermore, there are
a number of excurses scattered throughout Boethius’
commentaries that do not appear to be slavishly copied
from his source material.
Perhaps the most famous digression is Boethius’
treatment of the problem of universals in his second
commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge (In Isag. 2nd edn., I,
10–11, 159–167; English translation in Spade 1994).
Therein Boethius developed a series of intriguing argu-
ments in favor of the conclusion that universals do not
exist outside the mind. The main thrust of these argu-
ments is that something exists outside the mind only if it is
a unity, but universals cannot be a unity and also exhibit
the property of universality, viz., to be common to many
things. Boethius, then, posed a dilemma for those who
believe that universals do not exist outside the mind. We
surely have concepts that are universal. But if these con-
cepts do not represent the world as it truly is, then these
concepts appear to be empty and false. Boethius offered
a solution that he attributed to the third-century Aristo-
telian philosopher Alexander of Aphrodisias. The mind is
capable of considering things in a manner different from
that in which they exist. In particular, the mind is able to
consider and compare the features of concrete particulars
without reference to the particular, even though these
features cannot actually be separated from the particulars.
By abstracting features in this manner, the mind is able to
construct universal concepts. Hence, while universals do
not exist in things as something common to many, the
concept of a universal – since it is abstracted from things in
the right way – can be truthfully attributed to many things.
3. Logical Handbooks. In addition to his commentaries,
Boethius wrote several handbooks on logic. Five of these
treatises survive: On the Categorical Syllogism, Introduction
to the Categorical Syllogism (incomplete), On Division, On
the Hypothetical Syllogism, and On Topical Differences.
Boethius planned to write an overview of the study of
logic entitled On the Order of the Peripatetic Disciplines,
but no such work survives.
Boethius B
169
B

On the Categorical Syllogism and Introduction to the
Categorical Syllogism introduce the student to the forms of
valid syllogisms presented in Aristotle’s Prior Analytics and
On Interpretation. These treatises were quickly superseded
by Aristotle’s work once it became available again in the
West.
On Division presents an introduction to the logical
exercise of ‘‘division’’ and its correlative process ‘‘collec-
tion.’’ Division is a process of resolving wholes into parts;
collection is a process of determining what items are
contained by some whole. Hence, Boethius’ presentation
of division requires that he discuss the varieties of parts
and wholes. Boethius’ remarks about parts and wholes
were instrumental in the development of medieval
mereology
(see
the
entry
on
Mereology
in
this
Encyclopedia).
For historians of logic, Boethius’ treatises on the hypo-
thetical syllogism and the topics are perhaps the most
interesting. In part, this is due to the fact that they are
almost the only surviving late ancient treatments of these
important ﬁelds in the history of logic.
Boethius’ treatise on the hypothetical syllogism is the
only surviving late ancient treatment of the conditional.
Superﬁcially, the treatise appears to present a version of
the propositional logic that is credited to the Stoics. This
impression has led to some puzzlement over Boethius’
peculiar views about the conditional. For example, Boe-
thius appears to have assimilated p ! ¬q to ¬(p ! q),
whereas modern logicians sharply distinguish these prop-
ositions from one another (Barnes, in Gibson 1981). But
as Christopher Martin (1991) has shown, uncritically
representing Boethius’ claims about conditionals in
terms of propositional logic is highly misleading. In
order to have a propositional logic, one must have the
concepts of propositional content and propositional oper-
ations. According to Martin, Boethius had neither. Rather,
Boethius worked with a muddled version of Aristotelian
term logic. Once this fact is grasped, one is in a better
position to appreciate the remarkable innovations of the
twelfth century. Peter Abelard and his fellow twelfth-
century logicians, not Boethius, were the true heirs to
the Stoics.
The treatise on topical reasoning, along with his com-
mentary on Cicero’s Topics, gives us a rare glimpse into the
late ancient understanding of this complex outgrowth
from Aristotle’s Topics. Topical theory focuses upon the
discovery of dialectical arguments. Boethius’ discussion of
the topics breaks down into two parts. One part consists of
a list of key terms (the differentiae) that the dialectician
seeks in order to construct an argument that will settle
a dispute. The other part consists of a list of the ‘‘maximal
sentences’’ that are associated with each differentia. The
maximal sentence is a general proposition concerning the
key term that will help the dialectician to construct his
proof. Boethius noted that there are two different lists of
topical differentiae, one handed down from Cicero and
another handed down from Themistius. Boethius took it
upon himself to show that these two lists really coincide.
As with his logical commentaries, most scholars
believe that Boethius’ textbooks are largely derivative.
Some are believed to be adapted from earlier Greek
works. For example, it appears that Boethius consulted
Porphyry’s commentary on Plato’s Sophist and perhaps
some earlier Aristotelian material when he composed his
On Division. In other cases, Boethius may have had
a greater hand in the selection and presentation of the
material. It is possible that On Hypothetical Syllogisms is, as
Boethius himself claimed, his most original work.
4. Handbooks on the Quadrivium. In the ancient world
music and astronomy (or astrology), in addition to arith-
metic and geometry, were considered mathematical sci-
ences. Boethius appears to have
coined
the term
‘‘quadrivium’’ to denote these four sciences. There is
some historical evidence that Boethius composed treatises
on all four topics. However, only Boethius’ treatises on
arithmetic and music (in part) survive. There are a few
fragments of a book on geometry that some have attrib-
uted to Boethius (Folkerts 1970), but this attribution has
been questioned (Caldwell and Pingree, in Gibson 1981).
Boethius’ book on arithmetic is in large part
a translation with elaborations of a book by the second-
century
Neo-Pythagorean
scholar
Nichomachus
of
Gerasa. It is concerned with the abstract properties of
number.
Boethius’ treatise on music is probably also dependent
upon the work of previous, mostly Greek, authors, but the
arrangement of the material seems to be at least in part
attributable to Boethius himself (Caldwell, in Gibson
1981).
5. The Theological Tractates (Opuscula Sacra). Over the
course of his career, Boethius composed ﬁve short treatises
on theological topics. Several of these were written in
response to theological disputes that were raging during
Boethius’ lifetime (see Chadwick 1981, chap. 4).
On the Trinity (Opusc. I) and, in much more superﬁ-
cial manner, Whether the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit Are
Substantially Predicated of the Divine (Opusc. II), deal with
the unity and diversity of the Trinity. In these works
Boethius aimed to show that, one the one hand, state-
ments involving the Trinity are not statements about
170 B
Boethius

God’s substance – since that would compromise the unity
of God; and, on the other hand, sentences pertaining to
the Trinity are not merely ﬁgurative – rather, the Persons
are real features of God, and there is a real difference
between the Persons.
To extricate himself from this dilemma Boethius pro-
posed a third way to predicate something of God – namely,
by predicating the non-accidental relations of God (Opusc.
I, 5; Opusc. II, 3). If the Persons are relatives, then the
Persons are real aspects of the Divine, but they in no way
compromise God’s substance. Boethius devoted the rest of
On the Trinity to the defense of the notion of a non-
accidental relative. He allowed himself a caveat, however:
if one cannot fully comprehend the way in which the
Persons are non-accidentally related to one another and
to God, this is a function of the fact that God is transcen-
dent and his nature is intractably obscure to us
(Opusc. I, 6).
The treatise How Substances Can Be Good in That They
Are When They Are Not Substantial Goods (Opusc. III),
which is known in the Middle Ages by the title On the
Hebdomads, is perhaps the one work, apart from the
Consolation, that has attracted the most scholarly interest
(see Hadot 1963; MacDonald 1988; Nash-Marshall 2000;
Marenbon 2003, and the bibliographies in the latter two
works).
Boethius intended to explain how a corporeal sub-
stance is good in that it exists, even though it is not
a substantial good. He began by presenting a list of terms
and ‘‘rules’’ (regulae) that may or may not be axioms or
even premises in his overall argument (Schrimpf 1966; De
Rijk 1988). He then presented a dilemma. To illustrate
Boethius’ dilemma let us pick a concrete example of
a corporeal substance – say, an apple. The apple cannot
be good by participation in the good, for if the apple
were good by participation, the apple would be good in
virtue of something else. It would not be good in virtue
of itself. But this appears to conﬂict with a Neoplatonic
thesis about being: everything that exists is good merely
in virtue of the fact that it exists, which seems to entail
that every independent being – i.e., substance – is good
in virtue of itself. So, it seems that the apple must be
good by substance, not participation. Yet, Boethius con-
tinued, there are reasons to reject the claim that the apple
is good by substance. Anything that is predicated of God
denotes God’s substance. God is good. Hence, God’s
substance is the good. By hypothesis, the apple is also
good in substance. Given that God’s substance is not
shared by anything other than Himself, it follows that
the apple is God.
Boethius resolved the dilemma by, in effect, forging
a middle way between its horns. He invited the reader to
imagine the impossible scenario where God does not exist.
In this scenario, it would be clear that the apple’s existence
is one thing and its goodness is something separate. The
apple’s substance is not the good. Nevertheless, the apple
in fact derives its being (esse) from God, and it derives its
goodness from God in so far as He is the First Good. The
apple is good merely in virtue of the fact that the First
Good wills that the apple exist. Hence, it is proper to say
that the apple is good in that it is, even though it is not
a substantial good.
On the Catholic Faith (Opusc. IV) is a straightforward
confession of Christian principles. It contains very little of
the philosophical concepts and principles that inform the
other theological treatises. In the past some have
questioned the authenticity of Opuscula IV. The current
consensus is that Boethius is the author.
In Against Eutyches and Nestorius (Opusc. V) Boethius
applied his Aristotelian tools to the Incarnation. The
orthodox position is that Christ is one person who consists
in two natures. But a person seems to be an individual
substance – a view reinforced by Boethius’ preferred def-
inition of a ‘‘person’’ as ‘‘an individual substance of
a rational nature’’ (Opusc. V, 3, 171, 172) – and it is
difﬁcult to comprehend how any individual substance
can have two natures. It is this difﬁculty that motivates
the solutions that Nestorius and Eutyches respectively
endorsed, and which Boethius attempted to undermine
in favor of the orthodox position.
Nestorius’ position that Christ consists in two natures
and in two persons is repugnant because either it entails
that Christ is a universal, or it entails that ‘‘Christ’’ is no
more than the name of an aggregate. Boethius thinks that
neither result is acceptable (Opusc. V, 4).
Eutyches argued that, because there is only one
person who is Christ, there can only be one nature.
Boethius challenged him: which nature is now present
in Christ? There seem to be only three options: (1) the
two natures combine to form a divine nature, (2) the
two natures combine to form a human nature, or
(3) the two natures combine to form a new nature,
which is neither human nor divine. The ﬁrst and second
options are ruled out because there is no common sub-
strate that can stand under the exchange of corporeality
for incorporeality, or vice versa. The third possibility is
ruled out since a rational substance must either be
corporeal or incorporeal (Opusc. V, 6, 497–541).
Hence, we must assert that Christ is one person who
consists in two natures. Boethius attempted to make this
Boethius B
171
B

intelligible by resorting to an analogy. The person of
Christ is something like a gem-encrusted crown, which
retains both the gem’s nature and the gold’s nature (Opusc.
V, 7, 595–607). Just as the crown is one thing consisting
both from and in two natures, Christ can consist in two
natures.
6. Consolation of Philosophy. The Consolation is Boethius’
masterpiece. In it we ﬁnd a thinker at the height of his
intellectual and poetic powers. The work presents a vivid
outline of a systematic, monotheistic theology and theod-
icy, which is inspired by Aristotle, the Stoics, and most of
all the Neoplatonists. From the beginning, commentators
have noted that the Consolation has a lack of unambigu-
ously Christian doctrines. This has prompted a number of
commentators, from the Middle Ages forward, to worry
that Boethius was really a pagan. Most modern commen-
tators, however, point out that there is nothing in the
Consolation that would be objectionable to a Christian
with Platonic sensibilities.
The setting of the Consolation is a prison where the
character Boethius is awaiting execution. Boethius ﬁnds
himself tormented not only by his current situation, but
also by the more general suspicion that wicked people
thrive, whereas the virtuous suffer. A personiﬁcation of
Philosophy offers to properly cure Boethius of his current
distress. Despite appearances, Philosophy will argue, Boe-
thius has lost nothing of true value, happiness is still
within his grasp, and it actually is not the case that wicked
people ﬂourish at the expense of the virtuous.
In Book II, Philosophy argues that Fortune by her very
nature is ﬁckle. Humans have no claim on the goods that
Fortune gives them. Hence, they should not lament the
loss of those things that Fortune takes away.
In Book III, Philosophy discusses the nature of the
Good and its relation to human happiness. Philosophy
reminds Boethius that one must distinguish between true
happiness and the image of happiness (III.1). All humans
strive for true happiness. The problem is that most
humans either have a distorted understanding of true
happiness or they go after happiness in the wrong manner.
Philosophy shows how the paths that are commonly
thought to lead one to happiness (such as the paths of
acquiring money or political power) fail to produce true
human happiness (III.3–8).
In the latter part of Book III, Philosophy gives an
account of true happiness. She shows that there is an
intimate connection between unity, existence, and good-
ness. In very rapid succession, she demonstrates that the
highest Good exists and that God is identical to the highest
Good. The highest Good is the source of all other goods.
God’s creations are by nature inclined to these goods
because they are images of the creative source of every-
thing. Something exists only insofar as it is one. If it is
divided into many, it will cease to exist. This is why all
creatures strive to preserve themselves. What an x strives
for is the good for xs. Thus, the good is encoded into the
very essences of creatures. To be happy, humans must
discover their true nature and strive to realize fully that
nature.
Despite agreeing with Philosophy’s propositions to
this point, the character Boethius has not yet forgotten
his sorrow. At the beginning of Book IV, he asks how evil
is possible when God is good – a problem Boethius ﬁnds
especially troubling because Philosophy has just asserted
that the world and all its affairs are governed by Provi-
dence. Philosophy answers the character Boethius by
showing that the virtuous are always powerful and the
vicious always ultimately without power. Both the vir-
tuous person and the vicious person aim for the Good.
But while the virtuous person achieves the Good, the
vicious person does not. Given that one is powerful only
if one achieves what one aims for, the vicious person is
not powerful (IV.2). Indeed, Philosophy adds, humans
who actively choose evil abandon their true nature. They
are no longer human beings, but rather irrational ani-
mals with a human shape. Hence, the vicious are
punished for turning away from the Good, whereas the
virtuous are rewarded. While Boethius suffers now, he
has not lost the Good (IV.6). Philosophy adds that every
hardship is part of the plan and in the end is a good.
A bad change in fortune, such as the one Boethius now
suffers, is an opportunity to improve one’s wisdom and
virtue (IV.7).
At the end of Book IV, Philosophy discusses the rela-
tion between Fate and Providence. She argues that they are
really two aspects of the same thing. Providence is the law
of Nature viewed from the perspective of simplicity of the
Divine Intellect. Fate is the law viewed from the perspec-
tive of the complexity of the Divine Will’s effects (IV.6).
But this only prompts Boethius to raise a further worry: if
everything is due to Providence, is there any room for
chance (V.1)? For if there is no room for chance in the
scheme of things, then there seems to be no room for
freedom of the will. Philosophy rejects the notion that
some event might be the result of random, uncaused
motion, yet claims that there is room for freedom of
judgment (V.1.8). Free deliberation is a necessary compo-
nent of rationality. Hence, insofar as one is a rational
being, one is a free being. Given that God is the perfect
rational being, God is perfectly free. A human who exer-
cises her rational capacities as they should be exercised is
relatively free (V.2).
172 B
Boethius

Given that God is the perfect rational being, God
knows everything, including all future events. This
prompts the character Boethius to voice his ﬁnal worry:
divine foreknowledge appears to be incompatible with
human freedom, for if God knows what will be the case
in advance, then what will be must happen (V.3). But if
what will be must happen, then there seems to be no room
for free human choices, for one’s choice is free only if one
could have done otherwise. Boethius continues by articu-
lating the repercussions of this line of thought. But if what
I will do tomorrow is not something I could refrain from
doing, how can I be punished or rewarded for doing what
I do? In other words, Divine foreknowledge seems to
threaten the very basis of retributive justice.
Philosophy tries to get to the heart of Boethius’ worry.
It cannot be that Boethius is worried that somehow the
fact that God knows that some event E will occur is the
cause of E’s occurrence (V.4). The fact that E occurs causes
the knower to know that E occurs, not vice versa. If
knowing that E occurs does not cause E to occur, then
foreknowing that E occurs will certainly not cause E to
occur. An action will be free and contingent provided that
the agent is free.
Philosophy’s considered diagnosis is that Boethius
believes there is something fundamentally incoherent
about the notion that a future event can be both contin-
gent and foreknown (V.4.21–23). If someone knows that
some event E is occurring, then he knows that E is occur-
ring determinately. For if one were to comprehend an
indeterminate event as if it were determinate, in no way
could this be said to be knowledge. Only what is necessary
can occur determinately. Hence, if God knows E is occur-
ring, then E is necessary. But a future contingent event is,
by deﬁnition, not necessary. Therefore, if God knows that
a future event will occur, that future event cannot be
contingent. It is logically impossible that there be any
future contingent events that are foreknown.
Lady Philosophy responds to this worry by attacking
the claim that someone knows that E occurs only if he
knows that E determinately occurs. Philosophy insists,
instead, that a knower does not know x as x is in its nature;
rather, the manner in which x is known is dependent upon
the power and nature of the knower (V.4–5). For example,
a creature who possesses only the ﬁve senses will grasp the
spherical properties of a ball in so far as these properties
are manifested in this bit of matter. A creature with the
power of imagination will be able to grasp the three-
dimensional properties of the ball abstracted from the
ball’s matter. A rational being, such as a human, from its
universal perspective can grasp the three-dimensional
structure of the ball as it is manifested in a number of
particulars. In other words, the senses grasp the spherical
properties of the ball materially. The imagination grasps
the same properties abstractly (yet particularly). And rea-
son grasps these properties universally. God’s mode of
understanding is superior even to reason. His understand-
ing transcends universality and views the one simple form
itself (V.4.30).
Philosophy applies this principle to the problem of
foreknowledge (V.6). Humans dwell in a world of constant
change. Things only ever partially exist at any one moment
in time. Future things and their properties are especially
obscure to us. Hence, we perceive them as if they were
indeterminate and, thus, contingent. God, in contrast,
does not exist in part by part fashion. He exists completely
and all at once in what we might describe as an eternal
‘‘now.’’ From God’s perspective, all things and events have
the same status. What I did yesterday, what I am doing
now, and what I will do tomorrow are all comprehended
by God as if these events are settled and determinate.
Hence, from God’s perspective all events, including future
events, are perceived as if they were determinate and
necessary. But one cannot infer that some event is in its
nature necessary from the fact that the event is known in
a determinate manner.
Philosophy concedes that there is a legitimate sense in
which one can know something only if the facts have been
settled, and so if the character Boethius insists on saddling
her with the word ‘‘necessity,’’ he may in the following
sense (V.6.25 ff.). I can only know that there is a coffee cup
on the table to my left if it is settled that there is a coffee
cup and it is now to the left of me. It is even true that there
is a sense in which if I know that there is a coffee cup to my
left, it is necessary that there is a coffee cup to my left. If
there were no cup there, I could not be said to know that it
is there. But it does not follow from this ‘‘conditional’’
necessity that the cup is necessarily to my left on the table,
where I mean by this that it could not have been the case
that the cup were to my right (or that there was no cup at
all). Clearly, the fact that I know that the cup is sitting to
my left does not entail that stronger claim of ‘‘simple’’
necessity. Likewise, it does not follow from the fact that
God knows that I will steal a bagel tomorrow morning that
I could not have refrained from stealing the bagel
simpliciter. All that the claim about foreknowledge entails
is that if God knows that I steal the bagel tomorrow, then
I in fact steal the bagel tomorrow. This is compatible with
the notion that I could have done otherwise.
It is not clear whether Philosophy has really addressed
the substance of Boethius’ puzzle, for Philosophy’s solu-
tion seemingly ignores the question whether any events
really are contingent. When Philosophy lists the various
Boethius B
173
B

grades of knowing, she suggests that the higher grades are
superior to the lower grades because they come closer to
revealing things as they really are (V.4). Presumably
God’s mode of existing and knowing things is superior
to our mode of existing and knowing things. But this
suggests that events really are ﬁxed and necessary, despite
the fact that humans comprehend them as if they were
contingent.
The Consolation ends with a brief summary of the
results of their investigation and an exhortation to follow
the path of righteousness (V.6.44–48). Some believe that
Philosophy has more or less succeeded at consoling the
character Boethius. But other scholars are not so sure.
Boethius consciously appropriates some of the stylistic
elements of Menippean satire, another ancient literary
genre exhibited most notably by Petronius’ Satyricon.
Menippean satire is associated with works that ridicule
those who pretend to make authoritative claims to
wisdom. Hence, it has been suggested that the Consolation
should be understood ironically as an account of the
insufﬁciency
of
philosophy
to
provide
consolation
(Relihan 2007). A somewhat less extreme interpretation
is that philosophy can provide arguments and solutions to
many problems, but it cannot give us comprehensive
understanding of our selves and our place in the universe
(Marenbon 2003).
Influence
Boethius’ works have had a tremendous inﬂuence on
subsequent generations of philosophers, humanists, and
poets in the medieval West.
Boethius’ commentaries and handbooks provided the
foundations of the liberal arts curriculum in the medieval
West. His handbooks on arithmetic and music were stud-
ied with keen interest continuously and well into the
ﬁfteenth century (White in Gibson 1981). Boethius’ com-
mentaries on the Aristotelian logical corpus as well as his
logical handbooks provided not only the foundations of
medieval logic, but also medieval philosophy of language.
In particular, the semantic theory that Boethius sketches
in his greater commentary on Aristotle’s On Interpretation
greatly inﬂuenced the development of the philosophy of
language and mind in the Middle Ages. Even after the
recovery of Aristotle’s Analytics, Topics, and Sophistical
Refutations, two of Boethius’ logical handbooks, On Divi-
sion and On Topical Differences, continued to be studied
for some time afterward in the western universities
(Lewry, in Gibson 1981).
Boethius also played a decisive role in the development
of metaphysics in the early medieval centuries. Boethius’
commentaries on the Organon and his theological treatises
provided the concepts and principles needed to develop
accounts of, for example, identity and difference, individ-
uation, and the ontological status of universals.
Boethius’ remarks on individuation provide a good
example of the nature of his inﬂuence on medieval meta-
physics. In his commentaries and theological treatises,
Boethius hinted at four distinct theories of individuation.
The ﬁrst suggestion was that individuation is caused by all
(or some speciﬁc set of) the thing’s accidental forms
(Opusc. I, 1, 56–63; In Isag. 2nd edn. III, 11, 235–236).
The second suggestion was that individuation occurs
when forms occupy different locations at the same time
(also Opusc. I, 1, 56–63). Thirdly, Boethius suggested that
individuation is due to matter (Opusc. I, 2, 102–110;
cf. Opusc. V, 3, 213–220). And ﬁnally, Boethius suggested
that a special form individuates things. Plato and Socrates
are both human beings in virtue of a substantial form of
humanity, but Plato has a formal component, ‘‘Platonity,’’
that no other thing has, and Socrates has ‘‘Socrateity’’ (in
De int. 2nd edn, 136–139). Boethius only hinted at these
theories of individuation, he never gave a fully developed
theory of individuals or individuation. However, the
scattered remarks on individuals found in Boethius’
works were picked up and developed into fully formed
theories by subsequent generations of medieval philoso-
phers (Gracia 1984; King 2004).
Boethius’ Opuscula did not ﬁnd a place in the formal
curriculum of the major universities in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries. Nevertheless, they were studied and
they inﬂuenced subsequent philosophers in a number of
ways (Gibson in Gibson 1981). Boethius’ discussion of
substantial goods in Opuscula III is one of the ﬁrst in
a long line of treatises on the ‘‘transcendentals,’’ that is,
properties that are possessed by a thing merely in virtue of
the fact that it exists. Boethius’ suggestion that the Chris-
tian doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation are, at least to
some degree, amenable to logical analysis inspired other
philosophers – notably, Peter Abelard – to try their own
hand at unraveling some of the deepest ‘‘mysteries’’ of
Christianity.
The Consolation is without question Boethius’ most
popular and enduring work. It has become a classic whose
inﬂuence is felt far beyond the Middle Ages. The Consola-
tion was not studied formally at universities, but it was
studied and commented well into the sixteenth century.
The Consolation was translated into vernaculars such as
Old English and Old High German, and it inﬂuenced
some of the greatest poets of the Middle Ages, including
Chaucer, Dante, and Boccaccio. The discussion of fore-
knowledge and freedom, along with the particular inter-
pretation of Divine eternity that Philosophy employs to
174 B
Boethius

develop her solution, has inspired generations of philoso-
phers and theologians, from the Middle Ages to the
present day.
See also: ▶Being ▶Boethius’ De topicis differentiis,
Commentaries on ▶Future Contingents ▶Happiness
▶Liberal
Arts
▶Logic
▶Mereology
▶Metaphysics
▶Music, Medieval ▶Platonism ▶Syllogism, Theories of
▶Time ▶Trinity ▶Universals
Bibliography
Primary Sources (editions and select translations)
Boethius (1833) In Topica Ciceronis Commentaria, ed. Orelli JC. Cicero
Opera Omnia, V 1. Orelli, Fuesslini & Co., Turin
Boethius (1867) De institutione musica libri quinque, ed. Friedlein G.
Teubner, Leipzig
Boethius (1880) Commentarii in librum Aristotelis Peri Hermenias, ed.
Meiser C. Teubner, Leipzig
Boethius (1891) Opera, ed. Migne JP et al. Patrologiae cursus completas,
series latina, 64. Migne, Paris
Boethius (1906) In Isagogen Porphyrii Commentorum, ed. Brandt S.
Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum, 48. F. Tempsky,
Vienna
Boethius (1990) De topicis differentiis. In: Nikitas DZ (ed) De topicis
differentiis und die byzantinische Rezeption dieses Werkes: Anhang,
Eine Pachymeres-Weiterbearbeitung der Holobolos-U¨ bersetzung,
Corpus Philosophorum Medii Aevi Philosophi Byzantini 5, The
Academy of Athens/Librairie J. Vrin, Athens/Paris
Boethius (1995) De institutione arithmetica, ed. and trans. Guillaumin JY.
Belles Lettres, Paris
Boethius (1998) De Divisione liber: critical edition, translation, prole-
gomena, and commentary, ed. and trans. Magee J. Brill, Leiden
Boethius (2000) De Consolatione Philosophiae/Opscula Theologica, ed.
Moreschini C. Saur, Munich/Leipzig
Boethius (2008a) De syllogismo categorico: Critical edition with intro-
duction, translation, notes, and indexes, ed. Tho¨rnqvist CT. Studia
Graeca
et
Latina
Gothoburgensia
68.
Acta
Universitatis
Gothoburgensis, Gothenborg
Boethius (2008b) Introductio ad syllogismos categoricos: Critical edition
with introduction, commentary, and indexes, ed. Tho¨rnqvist CT.
Studia Graeca et Latina Gothoburgensia 69. Acta Universitatis
Gothoburgensis, Gothenborg
Folkerts M (ed) (1970) ‘‘Boethius’’ Geometrie II: Ein mathematisches
Lehrbuch des Mittelalters, Boethius: Texte und Abhandlungen zur
Geschichte der exakten Wissenschaften 9. F. Steiner, Wiesbaden
Kretzmann Norman (trans) (1998) Boethius on Aristotle’s ‘On Interpre-
tation’ 9. In: Blank D, Kretzmann N (eds and trans) Ammonius on
Aristotle’s ‘On Interpretation’ 9 with Boethius on Aristotle’s ‘On
Interpretation’ 9. Cornell University Press, Ithaca
MacDonald Scott (trans) (1991) Boethius’s De hebdomadibus (How can
substances be good in virtue of the fact that they have being when
they are not substantial goods?). In: MacDonald S (ed) Being and
goodness: the concept of the good in metaphysics and philosophical
theology. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, pp 299–304
Minio-Paluello L et al (eds) (1961–1975) Aristoteles Latinus. vols 1, 2, 3,
5, 6. Descle´e De Brouwer, Bruges – Paris (and later Brill, Leiden)
Relihan Joel C (trans) (2001) Boethius, ‘Consolation of Philosophy.’
Hackett, Indianapolis
Spade Paul V (trans) (1994) Five texts on the mediaeval problem of
universals. Hackett, Indianapolis
Stewart HF, Rand EK, Tester SJ (eds and trans) (1973) Boethius: Tractates;
The Consolation of Philosophy, Loeb Classical Library 74. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge
Stump Eleonore (trans) (1978) Boethius’s ‘De topicis differentiis’. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca
Stump Eleonore (trans) (1988) Boethius’s ‘In Ciceronis Topica’. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca
Secondary Sources
Chadwick H (1981) Boethius: the consolations of music, logic, theology,
and philosophy. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Courcelle P (1948) Les Lettres Grecques en Occident de Macrobe a`
Cassiodore. E. de Boccard, Paris (English trans. Courcelle P (1969)
Late Latin writers and their greek sources. (trans: Wedeck HE),
Harvard University Press, Cambridge)
De Rijk LM (1988) On Boethius’s notion of being. In: Kretzmann N (ed)
Meaning and inference in medieval philosophy: studies in memory of
Jan Pinborg. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 1–29
Ebbesen S (1990) Boethius as an Aristotelian Commentator. In: Sorabji
R (ed) Aristotle transformed: the ancient commentators and their
inﬂuence. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, pp 373–391
Gersh S (1986) Middle Platonism and Neoplatonism, the Latin tradition,
2 vols. The University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Gibson M (ed) (1981) Boethius: his life, thought and inﬂuence. Basil
Blackwell, Oxford
Gracia JJE (1984) Introduction to the problem of individuation in the
early middle ages. Philosophia/The Catholic University Press of
America, Munich/Vienna/Washington DC
Gruber J (1978) Kommentar zu Boethius De Consolatione Philosophiae,
Texte und Kommentare – eine altertumswissenschaftliche Reihe 9.
Gruyter, Berlin/New York
Hadot P (1959) Un fragment du commentaire perdu de Boe`ce sur les
Cate´gories d’Aristote dans le Codex Bernensis 363. Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen Age 26:11–27
Hadot P (1963) La Distinction de l’Eˆtre et de l’E´tant dans le ‘‘De
Hebdomadibus’’ de Boe`ce. In: Wilpert P (ed) Die Metaphysik im
Mittelalter:
Ihr
Ursprung
und
Ihre
Bedeutung
(Miscellanea
Mediaevalia 2). Gruyter, Berlin, pp 147–153
King P (2000) The problem of individuation in the Middle Ages. Theoria
66:159–184
MacDonald S (1988) Boethius’s claim that all substances are good. Archiv
fu¨r Geschichte der Philosophie 70:245–279
Magee J (1989) Boethius on signiﬁcation and mind, Philosophia Antiqua
52. Brill, Leiden
Marenbon J (2003) Boethius, great medieval thinkers series. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Martin CJ (1991) The logic of negation in Boethius. Phronesis 36:277–304
Nash-Marshall S (2000) Participation and the good: a study in Boethian
metaphysics. Crossroads, New York
Obertello L (1974) Severino Boezio. Academia Ligure di Scienze e Lettere,
Genoa
Relihan J (2007) The prisoner’s philosophy: life and death in Boethius’s
‘Consolation.’ University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Schrimpf G (1966) Die Axiomenschrift des Boethius (De hebdomadibus)
als philosophisches Lehrbuch des Mittelalters. Brill, Leiden
Shiel J (1958) Boethius’ commentaries on Aristotle. Mediev Renaiss Stud
4:217–244 (Revised and reprinted in Sorabji R (ed) (1990) Aristotle
transformed: the ancient commentators and their inﬂuence. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca, pp 349–372)
Boethius B
175
B

Boethius’ De topicis differentiis,
Commentaries on
HEINE HANSEN
Centre for the Aristotelian Tradition
The SAXO Institute, University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen
Denmark
Abstract
Boethius’ On Topical Differences (De topicis differentiis) is
a monograph in four books on topical argumentation,
that is, argumentation based on so-called topoi or loci
(literally: ‘‘places’’). The seminal treatment of this subject
is found in Aristotle’s Topics, but Boethius’ treatise served
as the main foundation of medieval theorizing in the ﬁeld
for almost two centuries before the gradual rediscovery
and introduction of Aristotle’s text. In this way, Boethius
deﬁned some of the basic features of the medieval
approach to the issue, and as a consequence came also to
inﬂuence the medieval interpretation of Aristotle’s Topics.
This article surveys the surviving medieval commentaries
on On Topical Differences and their approach to two ques-
tions raised by Boethius’ text, namely, what loci are and
how they function.
Roughly, two dozen medieval commentaries on Boethius’
monograph are known to be extant. By far the larger
portion of these have survived only in more or less frag-
mentary form, are found only in a single manuscript, and
lack, as is often the case with medieval commentaries,
a clear indication of the identity of their author, their
place of provenance, and date of composition. Only a few
of them are, at this point, available in modern editions, and
it is at the present stage of research not possible to establish
more than a very rough chronology of the material.
The earliest extant commentaries date, as far as can be
gathered, from around the end of the eleventh century.
From the discussions they contain, it appears that they
were not the ﬁrst to have been written. Interest in Boe-
thius’ text seems to have peaked in the twelfth century,
and more than half of the extant commentaries were
composed in this period. Little more than a handful of
commentaries from the thirteenth century are extant,
and no proper commentary from after 1300 has come
down to us.
According to Boethius, the aim of his work is to show
which loci there are, what their differences are, and which
loci are suitable for which syllogisms. To this end, he will
give two lists of loci, which he will then compare, and he
will show how one list can be reduced to the other (books
II–III). Finally, because not only dialecticians but also
rhetoricians avail themselves of loci, he will discuss rhe-
torical loci (book IV). All of this is prefaced by an expli-
cation of the basic concepts of the discipline, culminating
in the concept of the locus (books I–II). On the whole,
Boethius’ discussion is rather sketchy and leaves much
open to interpretation.
Following Cicero, Boethius deﬁnes the locus as ‘‘the
basis of the argument’’ (sedes argumenti). According to
Boethius, a locus consists of a maximal proposition
(maxima propositio) and a topical difference (locus
differentia). A maximal proposition is described as
a proposition that is self-evident (per se nota) and which
is not provable by something else but whereby other prop-
ositions can be proved; Boethius’ initial example of such
a proposition being ‘‘If equals are removed from equals,
equals remain.’’ The topical difference (locus differentia) is
likened to the speciﬁc difference and is said to be that
whereby maximal propositions are differentiated. For
example, as the species man is differentiated from other
species of animal by the speciﬁc difference rationality, so
the maximal proposition ‘‘That to which the deﬁnition of
the genus does not belong is not a species of the genus
deﬁned’’ will be differentiated by the topical difference
from the deﬁnition.
One of the central questions Boethius’ text posed for
its medieval interpreters was what type of items loci – or
topical differences – are. Often, the answer to this question
would be determined by that given to a more general one,
for example, what type of items does logic treat of?
Shortly before the turn of the twelfth century, logicians
were in disagreement about the correct way of reading the
ancient logical texts available at the time, some thinkers
preferring to expound the texts as treating of words (in
voce), others as treating of things (in re). This discussion is
evident in what is perhaps the earliest of the extant com-
mentaries on On Topical Differences. Here Boethius’ text is
subjected to a thoroughgoing in voce reading, according to
which the loci are linguistic items, the maximal proposi-
tions being sentences, and the topical differences single
words. Central to the interpretation is a distinction
between two levels of language. On the ﬁrst level, we ﬁnd
words such as ‘‘man’’ and ‘‘animal,’’ which are names of
things, and on the second level, words such as ‘‘species’’
and ‘‘part,’’ which are said to be names of words occuring
on the ﬁrst level. A maximal proposition may only contain
names belonging to the second level (a requirement that
leads the author to reject or reformulate a number of
Boethius’ maxims). With regard to the topical differences,
176 B
Boethius’ De topicis differentiis, Commentaries on

the author wavers between two different interpretations.
Initially, the topical difference is described as the middle
term of a valid syllogistic argument, which, occuring in
both premisses, is said to either join or disjoin the two
terms of the conclusion. On this view, topical differences
are words belonging to the ﬁrst level of language; they are
names of the things about which we argue. If one chooses
this option, one will have to say that the topical differences
differentiate the maximal propositions via their higher-
level names actually occuring in the maximal proposi-
tions. Alternatively, one may take the topical differences
to be these higher-level names themselves.
During the twelfth century, the purely linguistic inter-
pretation appears to have been dropped and the topical
differences are now commonly construed as things (res).
Famously, the century is one in which the problem of
universals was a hotly debated issue, and whether one
construed the topical differences as particulars or univer-
sals seems to some degree to have depended on what one
was willing to include in one’s ontology. Generally, how-
ever, commentators agree in emphasizing the relative
nature of the items, such as genus, species, part, whole,
etc., around which Boethius’ maximal propositions
revolve, and in stressing that it is precisely by virtue of
bearing some such relation (habitudo) that things are
capable of functioning as bases for arguments or loci.
In the thirteenth century, the discussion of the nature
of the topical differences becomes tied up with the gradual
elaboration
of
the
doctrine
of
second
intentions
(intentiones secundae). The approach culminates with
Radulphus Brito, whose commentary, written at the turn
of the fourteenth century, is the latest of those extant.
According to Brito, a topical difference is a concrete sec-
ond intention, that is, a higher-order concept such as, say,
generality (generalitas), taken not in its abstract but in its
concrete form, namely, genus (genus). In this manner,
the locus is neither the intention nor the thing in itself
but the intention taken as a way of conceiving the thing or
the thing taken as falling under the intention.
Another difﬁcult question posed by Boethius’ text is
how exactly the loci function. One aspect of this problem is
whether or not they have a role to play with respect to
formally valid arguments such as categorical syllogisms in
the canonical ﬁgures and moods. In the late eleventh-
century commentary already mentioned, the topical dif-
ference is identiﬁed as the middle term of an argument, for
example, ‘‘animal,’’ or a higher level name of such a middle
term, for example, ‘‘genus.’’ The author exempliﬁes by
means of a syllogism in the ﬁrst mode of the ﬁrst ﬁgure:
All men are animals; all animals are substances; therefore,
all men are substances. Here, then, the topical difference is
‘‘animal’’ or ‘‘genus’’ and the applicable maximal propo-
sition will be: ‘‘What belongs to the genus, belongs to the
species.’’ The author is not too speciﬁc about the role
played by the maxim here, but he appears to hold that it
is not to make the conclusion follow from the premises but
rather to make it more evident (evidentior).
The idea that maximal propositions have a role to play
in even formally valid arguments such as categorical syl-
logisms was to be a matter of controversy in the twelfth
century. Some commentators draw a distinction between
complexional (complexionales) and topical (locales) argu-
ments. Complexional arguments are such as are valid by
virtue of the arrangement (complexio) of their terms, that
is, formally valid arguments such as categorical syllogisms
in the canonical ﬁgures and moods. Topical arguments are
such as are not valid by virtue of their form but where on
the basis of a maximal proposition the conclusion can
nonetheless be inferred from the premise(s). For example,
the enthymeme ‘‘Socrates is a human being; therefore,
Socrates is an animal’’ is not a formally valid argument,
but on the basis of the maximal proposition ‘‘Of whatever
the species is predicated, the genus is predicated,’’ the
conclusion can nonetheless be inferred from the premise.
With the advent of Aristotle’s Topics, the debate
changed. Aristotle begins his treatise on topical argumen-
tation by deﬁning what he calls the dialectical syllogism,
the characteristic feature of which it is to have plausible
premises. As the medieval commentators understood him,
Aristotle is here speaking of categorical syllogisms in the
valid ﬁgures and moods, and so they had, after all, to
account for how loci function in such arguments. This
was never done by compromising the insight that such
syllogisms are valid solely by virtue of their form, that is,
the ﬁgures and moods. In the ﬁrst half of the thirteenth
century, some thinkers suggested that the dialectical syl-
logism has an additional form or force (virtus) consisting
in the topical relation (habitudo localis), but the more
common strategy seems to have become to posit
a connection between the plausibility of the premises of
the dialectical syllogism and the status of the topical dif-
ferences as second intentions.
Apart from the commentaries on On Topical Differ-
ences, there are a vast number of medieval handbooks on
logic containing sections on topical argumentation based
on Boethius’ text. These handbooks sometimes display
developments that have little or no basis in On Topical
Differences. There are, for example, some handbooks from
the ﬁrst half of the twelfth century that operate with
a very short list of loci, different from the lists found in
On Topical Differences and containing only four or ﬁve
items.
Boethius’ De topicis differentiis, Commentaries on B
177
B

See also: ▶Boethius ▶Garlandus the Computist ▶Inten-
tions, Primary and Secondary ▶Peter Abelard ▶Peter of
Spain ▶Radulphus Brito ▶Universals
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1969) Super Topica glossae, ed. dal Pra M. Pietro Abelardo,
Scritti di Logica. La Nuova Italia, Firenze, pp 206–330
Anonymous (2005) De topicis differentiis, ed. Hansen H. Cahiers de
l’Institut du Moyen-Age Grec et Latin 76:45–130
Boethius (1990) De topicis differentiis, ed. Nikitas DZ. The Academy of
Athens/Vrin, Athens/Paris
Boethius (1978) De topicis differentiis, trans. Stump E. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca
Brito Radulphus (1978) Quaestiones super Libro topicorum Boethii, ed.
Green-Pedersen NJ. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Age Grec et Latin
26:1–92
Secondary Sources
Ebbesen S (1993) The theory of loci in antiquity and the Middle Ages. In:
Jacobi K (ed) Argumentationstheorie. Brill, Leiden, pp 15–39
Green-Pedersen NJ (1973) On the interpretation of Aristotle’s Topics in
the thirteenth century. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Age Grec et
Latin 9:1–46
Green-Pedersen NJ (1976) Discussions about the status of the Loci
Dialectici in works from the middle of the 13th century. Cahiers de
l’Institut du Moyen-Age Grec et Latin 20:38–78
Green-Pedersen NJ (1977) The doctrine of ‘Maxima Propositio’ and
‘Locus Differentia’ in commentaries from the 12th century on
Boethius’ ‘Topics’. Studia Mediewistyczne 18(2):125–163
Green-Pedersen NJ (1984) The tradition of the topics in the Middle Ages.
Philosophia Verlag, Mu¨nchen
Green-Pedersen NJ (1987) The topics in medieval logic. Argumentation
1:407–417
Hansen H (forthcoming) In voce/in re in the Primum oportet. In: Rosier-
Catach I (ed) Arts du langage et the´ologie aux conﬁns des XIe/XIIe
sie`cles. Brepols, Turnhout
Stump E (1989) Dialectic and its place in the development of medieval
logic. Cornell University Press, Ithaca
Boethius of Dacia
LIDIA LANZA1, MARCO TOSTE2
1Fribourg
Switzerland
2Beauregard Centre
Universite´ de Fribourg
Fribourg
Switzerland
Abstract
Boethius of Dacia was a Master of the Arts Faculty of Paris
in the 1260s and 1270s of the thirteenth century. He was
one of the main targets of the 1277 condemnation. His
main contribution lies in the deﬁnition of both the limits
and the autonomy of philosophical inquiry and in his high
appraisal of the ﬁgure of the philosopher.
Boethius of Dacia was a Danish Master of the Parisian Arts
Faculty that was active in the 1260s and 1270s of the
thirteenth century. Nothing more is known about his
life, except that he might have entered the Dominican
Order, judging by his inclusion in the fourteenth century
catalog of Dominican authors composed by Stams.
Together with Siger of Brabant, Boethius was arguably
one of the most representative and inﬂuential philoso-
phers of the Arts Faculty, his reading of Aristotle often
being labeled as ‘‘radical Aristotelianism.’’ Siger and
Boethius have also been identiﬁed as main targets of the
1277 condemnation by the Paris bishop Stephen Tempier
of 219 propositions supposedly held by members of the
Arts Faculty of Paris. Although Boethius is not cited by
name in the condemnation, scholarship has traced 14
propositions of the condemnation back to statements
diffused by various works by Boethius. Moreover, a
‘‘Boethius’’ is named in one manuscript of Raymond
Lull’s Declaratio and in two manuscripts containing list-
ings of condemned articles. His importance at the Faculty
of Arts is attested by the fact that some of his works were
abridged by Godfrey of Fontaines. There are no details
about his academic career after 1277, it being impossible
to know whether it was forcibly interrupted or even
whether Boethius was still a Master at that time.
Apart from a set of questions on Priscian (Modi
signiﬁcandi), Boethius’ surviving output can be divided
into commentaries on Aristotle, namely on the Physics,
Meteorology, On Generation and Corruption, On the Soul
and Topics, and short treatises which cover different
domains of philosophy, such as ethics (De summo bono),
metaphysics (De aeternitate mundi), natural philosophy
(De somniis), and logic (Sophismata). His works were
mostly transmitted in manuscripts that were either anon-
ymous or under other authors’ names, which can be partly
attributed to the fact that his name was associated with the
condemnation. This could be why he was forgotten for
more than six centuries. Analysis of his thought was long
conditioned by anachronistic views of his positions and by
various historiographical categories, ‘‘Latin Averroism’’
being the ﬁrst category used to label his work: scholarship
used to refer to a set of philosophical theories supposedly
defended by Arts Masters from the late thirteenth century
onward who lectured on the corpus Aristotelicum through
the interpretation put forward by Averroes and who totally
supported Aristotle’s philosophy, regardless of its contrast
178 B
Boethius of Dacia

with Christian views. According to this historical recon-
struction, these ‘‘Latin Averroists’’ were opposed by theo-
logians with an Augustinian–Platonic orientation, who
simply rejected Aristotle whenever he spoke contrary to
Christian teaching and allowed the use of philosophy only
if integrated into theology. This reconstruction started to
fade out with the ﬁrst edition of Boethius’ De aeternitate
mundi in 1954. Ever since, scholarship has disputed the
very notion of ‘‘Latin Averroism,’’ as many of the theories
advanced by the Arts Masters – including those put for-
ward by Boethius himself – had their origins in Albert the
Great and Thomas Aquinas’ writings. Scholarship has also
disputed the identiﬁcation of the doctrinal content of this
philosophical current with the condemned propositions
by Bishop Tempier (see Fioravanti 1966).
Despite these controversies, the theological concep-
tion underlying the condemnation – that any discipline
has signiﬁcance only if subordinated to theology – is
certainly in contrast with Boethius of Dacia’s works. This
is mostly apparent in his De aeternitate mundi, where
Boethius strongly argues for the autonomy of philosoph-
ical inquiry as well as for precise delimited borders
between the different branches of philosophy. For this
reason, his works should be seen against the institutional
and doctrinal background both before and after the stat-
ute of 1272 forbidding the Arts Masters to deal with
theological issues. (Boethius’ relationship with this statute
remains an open question; it is not clear whether he was at
its origin or whether he was its target and he reacted to it.)
Unsurprisingly therefore, at the Arts Faculty his method-
ological approach was not a unique one, as the numerous
Aristotelian commentaries produced there have the same
approach, one of leaving aside theological issues and
commenting
exclusively
in
terms
of
Aristotelian
principles.
For Boethius, the principles of philosophy do not
derive from another superior ﬁeld, but originate from
generalization of empirical experience, which means that
they do not hold the same degree of absoluteness as the
principles of Christian teaching. Nonetheless, Boethius
argues that any branch of knowledge can have a scientiﬁc
status insofar as it exclusively follows its own principles,
without considering the principles of other domains, such
as Christian principles. Moreover, each particular science
has to infer all its conclusions from its own principles,
regardless of their inconsistency with respect to conclu-
sions inferred from principles of other domains. Analysis
of the subject matter of a given science has to be carried
out strictly within the borders of that science, but this does
not prevent two different sciences from studying the same
subject from different perspectives. As Boethius states in
his commentary on the ﬁrst two books of the De anima,
the soul is studied by physics inasmuch as it is a living
body that acts and by metaphysics in as far as it is
a substance; though the two sciences may come to oppos-
ing conclusions, this does not invalidate those conclu-
sions. This sharp specialization avant la lettre has
a twofold consequence: philosophical inquiry is limited
to its principles, but precisely for this reason it is autono-
mous of every other domain. Applied to particular sci-
ences, this means that the principles of each science are
also its limits. Against the unity of knowledge, Boethius
champions
an
‘‘epistemological
pluralism’’
(Bianchi
2003). The plurality of results reached by the different
sciences are all legitimate and, in terms of their domain,
true. Far from being a defense of a ‘‘double truth,’’ which
Boethius never made, Boethius’ epistemological approach
shows that the accusation in propositions 90, 113, and 184
of Tempier’s condemnation is theoretically mistaken. This
is where the notion of ‘‘double truth’’ is expressed, that an
utterance can be considered true according to philosophy
and false in terms of faith, and also the reverse. However,
this ignores a principle of Aristotelian logic which
Boethius conscientiously observes: it is no contradiction
at the same time to assert a predicate in a relative sense
(secundum quid) and deny it in an absolute sense
(simpliciter).
Boethius makes use of this distinction in his De
aeternitate mundi, and this, in all probability, is what was
targeted in proposition 90 (that the natural philosopher
has to deny absolutely the world’s creation, while the
believer can deny the world’s eternity). For Boethius, the
natural philosopher can hold the eternity of the world in
terms of the principles of his science. But this thesis cannot
be sustained if taken in an absolute sense (accepta abso-
lute), that is, outside the limits of natural philosophy; in
such case, it is false (Bianchi 2003). Therefore, the notion
that the world began to be, and that there was a ﬁrst
motion, is true according to faith and in an absolute
sense; indeed, it is heretical to state otherwise and any
attempt at rational demonstration is senseless. Although
Boethius declares that the philosopher has the competence
to deal with every aspect of reality and might dispute
everything that can be rationally discussed, an idea
targeted in proposition 145 of Tempier’s condemnation,
he argues that the question of whether the world began at
some point or has always been eternal cannot be deter-
mined by the philosopher: neither the natural philoso-
pher, nor the metaphysician, nor the mathematician can
reach a conclusion. The natural philosopher is not com-
petent insofar as nature is the object of his science, and in
nature everything is produced by way of generation, not
Boethius of Dacia B
179
B

creation. As generation presupposes a preexistent matter,
the natural philosopher cannot argue for the Christian
notion of creation, the existence of a ﬁrst man, and the
doctrine of resurrection and the numerical identity of the
resurrected body (this last idea is targeted in propositions
17 and 18 of the condemnation). Likewise, the mathema-
tician cannot consider the beginning of motion because
the principles of his science remain the same whether the
world is eternal or created. Finally, advancing a solution
close to that of Aquinas in his Sentences commentary and
to Siger of Brabant, Boethius argues that the metaphysi-
cian cannot consider whether the world began to be,
because this was caused by God’s will ab aeterno, and
metaphysics does not extend its inquiry to the divine will
(being an individual which does not belong to any species,
the First Cause can only be considered as an individual
qua individual, and for this reason it cannot be the object
of scientiﬁc knowledge; see Ebbesen 2005). Further, the
metaphysician cannot explain creation as he is unable to
prove that an effect (creation) has not been immediately
produced by its cause (God), given that its cause had all
the possible requisites to produce it.
What Boethius, following Aquinas, does not accept is
the theoretical confusion between the ontological and the
temporal dimensions of creation. The notions of ‘‘to be
created’’ and ‘‘to be eternal’’ are not logically incompati-
ble: the absolute dependence upon God is what distin-
guishes the state of being a creature, regardless of its
temporality or eternity – this dependence lies both in its
constitutive act and in its permanence in being. Having
been created does not necessarily involve being temporally
ﬁnite. In this way, Boethius does not reject creation
because, following Aquinas, he does not equate eternal
with uncreated.
The autonomy of natural philosophy is the grounds
for Boethius’ De somniis, devoted to the delicate question
of divination by dreams and whether the resulting
knowledge can be regarded as scientiﬁc. The topic had
previously been addressed in Aristotelian terms by
Averroes and Albert the Great, who rejected scientiﬁc
status for foreknowledge by dreams, as man does not
hold in himself the principles of this knowledge, this
being given by an external agent – the Agent Intellect
for Averroes, a superior inﬂuence for Albert. Nonethe-
less, for both authors foreknowledge is possible only
when the senses are withdrawn and the soul becomes
more spiritual (magis spiritualis). In contrast, Boethius
deals with the topic from the viewpoint of the natural
philosopher: his explanations remain exclusively on
a naturalistic, psychophysiological level, leaving aside the
study of those cases depending upon divine will.
With regard to the different kinds of connections
between dreams and foreknowledge, Boethius deals brieﬂy
with some kinds of dreams that do not produce divina-
tion. This is the case of dreams that seem to foretell an
event and are nothing more than a random coincidence,
and those dreams that might genuinely be causes of future
events, but only because thoughts occurring to a man
while asleep might have as their effect the production of
a phantasm, whose effect remains after awakening and
leads that man to act in a similar way to that
‘‘preconceived in his dream.’’ The core of his exposition
focuses on dreams that are signs of future events, whether
those dreams involve external causes (such as the inﬂuence
of some constellation) or causes internal to man, from
both body and soul (as in the case of a strong passion).
Boethius supplies a naturalistic account, based on Aristo-
telian natural philosophy. For all these cases, his account
reveals numerous similarities with Aquinas’ treatment of
the lawfulness of divination (Summa Theologiae, II-IIae,
q. 95, art. 6). The causes of such dreams may be vapors
originating from overheated nourishment, vapors which
interfere with the organ of the imagination, or phantasms
resembling the passions by which the body is affected. In
contrast to Averroes and Albert, for Boethius the body is
the requisite which makes possible the occurrence of
dreams as signs of future events. The explanation is thus
built up in terms of natural causes and effects, that is,
strictly within the borders of natural philosophy. And as
with other sciences, it is possible to trace the cause from its
effect, which makes it possible to diagnose and prevent the
harmful effects of passions to which dreamers are subject.
Boethius’ epistemological principles, such as the limits
of scientiﬁc knowledge and his view of science as a kind of
archipelago made up of various self-coherent systems, are
further asserted in his writings on logic and grammar.
First, those principles can be related to his sophism
Omnis homo de necessitate est animal and to his commen-
tary
on
Aristotle’s
Topics,
where
he
denies
that
a proposition – tautologies included – can be true if its
referent does not exist. This means that the philosopher
cannot deal with the ﬁgmenta mentis, as Boethius repeat-
edly stresses throughout his writings, and principally that
each scientiﬁc proposition on contingent objects is not
strictly speaking necessary, being valid only with regard to
the principles of its science and to the ﬁeld in which it can
be applied (Ebbesen 2000, 2005). Second, Boethius
extends his idea of science to grammar. Together with
other modistae, such as Martin of Dacia, Boethius con-
siders grammar as a science, its principles being the
‘‘modes of signifying’’ (modi signiﬁcandi), that is, the
ways in which a lexical notion, in addition to its essential
180 B
Boethius of Dacia

reference, can express different values. These principles are
rooted in reality, as they reﬂect the ‘‘modes of being’’
(modi essendi), which are conceptualized by the intellect
in corresponding ‘‘modes of understanding’’ (modi
intelligendi). In this way, the structure of grammar is
universal, while the different particular languages are acci-
dental. Here too, Boethius is extremely concerned with
establishing a narrow connection between scientiﬁc
knowledge and reality. This can be illustrated by calling
attention to his disagreement with Martin of Dacia
regarding the case of empty terms, dealt with in his Modi
signiﬁcandi. The fact that Martin argues for a strict deriv-
ative connection between the three modes renders it
impossible to explain a term such as nihil, as it has no
corresponding object in reality. Boethius avoids this prob-
lem by proposing a certain degree of autonomy between
terms and signiﬁcation of terms, according to which
a ‘‘mode of signifying’’ of a term does not necessarily
derive from the signiﬁcation of that term. However,
while this solution solves this particular issue, it seems to
undermine the foundation of grammar on reality, which,
for Boethius, is the essential requisite for science. Hence,
he provides a further solution in the same work –
a solution to be followed by succeeding modistae, such as
John of Dacia: he distinguishes between extramental enti-
ties (where the correspondence between ‘‘modes of being’’
and ‘‘modes of signifying’’ can be maintained through the
mediation of the ‘‘modes of understanding’’) and entities
having only a mental existence (where only the correspon-
dence between ‘‘modes of being’’ and their ‘‘modes of
understanding’’ has to be observed because, in this case,
‘‘modes
of
being’’
and
‘‘modes
of
understanding’’
coincide).
A further divergence between Martin and Boethius
concerns the fact that the latter defends a relationship of
similarity, not of identity, between the modes (see the
entry on Martin of Dacia). If the modes were the same
thing, albeit accidentally different, then, according to Boe-
thius, from the existence of the ‘‘mode of existing’’ of
a thing, it would be possible to derive immediately the
corresponding ‘‘mode of signifying,’’ and, in this way,
everything that is signiﬁed would have a corresponding
extramental reality, which is false, as the case of nihil
shows. Thus, the ‘‘modes of signifying’’ are rather signs
of the ‘‘modes of being’’ from which they derive and have
as substrate of inherence the expression endowed with
meaning (dictio) and not, as for Martin, the signiﬁed
thing. In this way, for Boethius it is possible that many
properties of one thing are not signiﬁed by the ‘‘modes of
signifying’’ of its dictio, or, in other words, not all the
possibilities of meaning are expressed in grammar.
Hence, grammar does not provide an exhaustive account
of the whole structure of language, which means that, like
all the other sciences, grammar has a limited range.
A full understanding of Boethius’ conception of
philosophy is provided in his De summo bono, probably
written around 1270, where he deals with the question of
human happiness on strictly philosophical grounds, with-
out any use of theological categories. In this short work,
Boethius advances ideas also present, albeit in condensed
form, in his commentary on Aristotle’s On Generation and
Corruption and in the anonymous Metaphysics commen-
tary inﬂuenced by him (ed. Fioravanti 2009). Drawing
partly on the ﬁrst book, but predominantly on the tenth
book of Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, Boethius enquires
how man can reach happiness in this life and what this
happiness consists of. His answer is that the kind of
happiness accessible to man in this life can be reached
through the activity of the highest faculty of the soul, that
is, the speculative intellect, which is the divine element of
man. This activity, according to Boethius, consists in
carrying out philosophical speculation, its aim being
the full knowledge of truth, including the knowledge of
the First Cause of the universe, God. As the object of this
happiness is God, the most honorable being, the activity
of those who devote their lives to the knowledge of truth
is not only the most enjoyable activity, but also the most
honorable kind of life. In this way, those devoted to
philosophical speculation – the philosophers – will be
praised as a superior class of men worthy of being hon-
ored, a statement which echoes proposition 40 of
Tempier’s condemnation. This activity is temporally lim-
ited, but it resembles the happiness of the afterlife.
Although Boethius states that the ‘‘intellectual happi-
ness’’ of this life is neither a necessary requisite nor
a preparation for happiness in the afterlife, which he
refuses to deal with, the fact that he afﬁrms that those
who are happy in this life are ‘‘nearer’’ to happiness in the
afterlife could be read by Christian authorities as render-
ing the lives of theologians and Christian saints useless,
or at least inferior to those of the philosophers. In any
case, Boethius does not tackle ‘‘the ultimate end,’’ happi-
ness in the afterlife, in this work and limits to a small
number of men the possibility of reaching philosophical
happiness. This extreme intellectualist anthropology was
based more on Albert the Great, Michael of Ephesus, and
Eustratius’ commentaries on the Ethics than on Averroes
(Bianchi 2002). Moreover, it was not exclusive to Boe-
thius, but was asserted in the late thirteenth-century com-
mentaries on the Ethics and by Peter of Auvergne in his
two commentaries on the Politics. It therefore became
common at the Arts Faculty of Paris.
Boethius of Dacia B
181
B

See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Godfrey of Fontaines
▶Martin of Dacia ▶Modistae ▶Parisian Condemnation
of 1277 ▶Siger of Brabant ▶Sophisms ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶Universities and Philosophy
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Boethii Daci (1969) Modi signiﬁcandi sive Quaestiones super Priscianum
maiorem, ed. Pinborg J, Roos H, Skovgaard Jensen S. Corpus
Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi, 4. G.E.C. Gad, København
Boethii Daci (1972–1974) Quaestiones de generatione et corruptione.
Quaestiones
super
libros
Physicorum,
ed.
Sajo´
G.
Corpus
Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi, 5. G.E.C. Gad, København
Boethii Daci (1976a) Quaestiones super librum Topicorum, ed. Green-
Pedersen NG, Pinborg J, schedis usi Otto A. Corpus Philosophorum
Danicorum Medii Aevi, 6/1. G.E.C. Gad, København
Boethii Daci (1976b) Opuscula: De aeternitate mundi, De summo bono,
De somnis, ed. Green-Pedersen NG. Corpus Philosophorum
Danicorum Medii Aevi, 6/2. G.E.C. Gad, København
Boethii Daci (1979) Quaestiones super IVm Meteorologicorum, ed.
Fioravanti G. Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi, 8.
G.E.C. Gad, København
Boethii Daci (2009) Quaestiones super Librum de Anima I–II. In: Boethii
Daci Quaestiones super Librum de Anima I–II, ed. Wielockx R;
Anonymi
Boethio
Daco
usi
Quaestiones
metaphysicae,
ed.
Fioravanti G. Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi, 14.
G.E.C. Gad, København
Boethii
Daci,
Petri
Alverniensis,
Aliorumque
(in
preparation)
Sophismata, ed. Ebbesen S, Rosier I. Corpus Philosophorum
Danicorum Medii Aevi, 9. G.E.C. Gad, København
Secondary Sources
Bianchi L (1999) Censure et liberte´ intellectuelle a` l’Universite´ de Paris:
(XIIIe-XIVe sie`cles). Les belles lettres, Paris
Bianchi L (2002) Felicita` terrena e beatitudine ultraterrena: Boezio di
Dacia e l’articolo 157 censurato da Tempier. In: Chemins de la pense´e
me´die´vale. E´tudes offertes a` Ze´non Kaluza, ed. Bakker PJJM. Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 193–214
Bianchi L (2003) Boezio di Dacia. Sull’eternita` del mondo. Traduzione,
introduzione e note di Bianchi L. Testo latino a fronte. Edizioni
Unicopli, Milano
Bursill-Hall GL (1976) Some notes on the grammatical theory of
Boethius of Dacia. In: History of linguistic thought and contempo-
rary linguistic. W. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 164–188
Dales R (1990) Medieval discussions of the eternity of the world. Brill,
Leiden/New York/København/Ko¨ln
Ebbesen S (2000) Boethius of Dacia: science is a serious game. Theoria
66:145–158 (repr Ebbesen S (2009) Topics in Latin philosophy from
the 12th–14th centuries: collected essays of Sten Ebbesen, vol 2.
Ashgate, Aldershot)
Ebbesen S (2005) The man who loved every. Boethius of Dacia on
Logic
and
Metaphysics.
Mod
Schoolman
82(3):235–250
(repr Ebbesen S (2009) Topics in Latin philosophy from the
12th–14th centuries: collected essays of Sten Ebbesen, vol 2. Ashgate,
Aldershot)
Fioravanti G (1966) Boezio di Dacia e la storiograﬁa sull’Averroismo. Stud
Mediev 7:283–322
Fioravanti G (1966–1967) La scientia sompnialis di Boezio di Dacia. Atti
della Accademia delle Scienze di Torino. II. Classe di scienze morali,
storiche e ﬁlologiche 101:329–369
Fioravanti G (1970) Scientia, ﬁdes, theologia in Boezio di Dacia. Atti
dell’Accademia delle Scienze di·Torino. II. Classe di scienze morali,
storiche e ﬁlologiche 104:525–632
Marmo C (1994) Semiotica e linguaggio nella Scolastica: Parigi, Bologna,
Erfurt 1270–1330. La semiotica dei Modisti. Istituto storico italiano
per il Medio Evo, Roma
Pinborg J (1974) Zur Philosophie des Boethius de Dacia. Ein U¨ berblick.
Studia Mediewistyczne 15:165–185 (repr Pinborg J (1984) Medieval
semantics. Selected studies on medieval logic and grammar, ed.
Ebbesen S. Variorum, London)
Roos H (1968) Der Unterschied zwischen Metaphysik und Einzelwis-
senschaft nach Boetius von Dazien. In: Universalismus und
Partikularismus im Mittelalter. Miscellanea Mediaevalia 5. W. De
Gruyter, Berlin, pp 105–120
Rosier I (1983) La grammaire spe´culative des Modistes. Presses
Universitaires de Lille, Lille
Wippel JF (1987) Boethius of Dacia. On the supreme good, On the
eternity of the world, On dreams, trans Wippel JF. Pontiﬁcal Institute
of Medieval Studies, Toronto
Bonaventure
MATTHEW J. PEREIRA
Department of Religion
Columbia University
New York, NY
USA
Abstract
Bonaventure O.F.M. (c. 1217-July 15, 1274) was the lead
representative of thirteenth century Augustinianism. Bon-
aventure was a traditional Augustinian; however, he was
also signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by Aristotelianism. Among
other intellectual movements, Augustinianism and Aris-
totelianism signiﬁcantly shaped Bonaventure’s search for
wisdom
(sapientia).
The
Bonaventurean
synthesis
attempted to account for a wide breadth of sensible and
spiritual realities, ranging from God, humanity, morality,
and nature. Essentially, Bonaventure favored faith and
theology
over
reason
and
philosophy.
However,
Bonaventure’s approach was all embracing, he was com-
mitted to employing all ﬁelds of knowledge in his pursuit
of knowledge. One of Bonaventure’s most signiﬁcant
accomplishments was his appropriation and advancement
of Anselm of Canterbury’s (1033–1109) ontological argu-
ment. He was the ﬁrst of the thirteenth-century theolo-
gians to vigorously engage Anselm’s inﬂuential ontology.
182 B
Bonaventure

In his Disputed Questions on the Mystery of the Trinity,
Bonaventure advances his most concentrated argument
for the existence of God. In this treatise, Bonaventure
argues for three ways, or proofs of the existence of God,
which involved the nature of the soul, being and truth, or
goodness. The three ways, when fully explicated and
understood, will lead the seeker to the indubitable truth
of God.
The Life of Bonaventure
Bonaventure O.F.M. (c. 1217-July 15, 1274) was Minister
General of the Franciscan Order, and the Cardinal-bishop
of Albano. Bonaventure, who was as the lead representa-
tive of thirteenth century Augustinianism, integrated the-
ology and philosophy into a compelling synthesis, which
attempted to account for sensible and spiritual reality. As
the Minister General of Franciscans, Bonaventure pro-
moted intellectual rigor that sought to harmonize faith
with reason.
There are no extant contemporary biographies of Bon-
aventure. A Spanish Franciscan, named Zamorra, wrote
a life of Bonaventure in the thirteenth century. Unfortu-
nately, this biography is not extant. The earliest available
biography of Bonaventure, written by Mariano of Flor-
ence, dates from the ﬁfteenth century. Further, the Chron-
icle of the Twenty-four Generals (c. 1369) contains
signiﬁcant biographical details. While a precise chronol-
ogy of Bonaventure’s life remains conjectural, a general
timeline of signiﬁcant events may be sufﬁciently outlined.
Bonaventure,
who
assumed
his
father’s
name
(Giovanni di Fidanza) at birth, was born in Bagnoregio,
Tuscany, either in 1217 or 1221, with the latter being the
traditional date (Crowley 1974). Bonaventure’s father, who
likely practiced medicine, belonged to the noble family of
Fidanza di Castello. Bonaventure reports that he endured
a serious childhood malady, whereupon his mother, Maria
di Ritello, invoked Saint Francis of Assisi, who interceded
and brought healing to the young boy (Legenda S. Francisci
Prolog). According to a ﬁfteenth-century legend, Francis
bestowed upon the young Giovanni the name O buona
ventura during this encounter.
Bonaventure entered the Orders of Friars Minor either
in 1238 or in 1243. In the mid-1230s, Bonaventure entered
the University of Paris, where he studied under the inﬂu-
ential Alexander of Hales. In 1254, Bonaventure received
his teaching license. Thereafter, Bonaventure lectured at
the University of Paris until 1256, when the conﬂict
between the Mendicant orders and secular professors led
to a cessation in the Franciscan’s teaching. In 1254,
William of Saint-Amour, who was a secular master at the
University of Paris, wrote a treatise titled Liber de
antichristo, which condemned the mendicant’s life of pov-
erty. In 1256, Saint-Amour wrote another attack against
the mendicants, titled The Perils of the Last Times
(Tractatus de perculis novissimorum temporum). Upon
the request of Louis IX, king of France, Bonaventure
answered Saint-Amour’s invective with his Disputed Ques-
tions on Evangelical Perfection (Quaestiones disputatae de
perfectione evangelica). In this text, Bonaventure advo-
cated for a moderate approach. In the midst of this tur-
moil, the papacy decided in favor of Bonaventure and his
mendicant associates. Consequently, in October 1256,
Pope Alexander IV reinstated the mendicants while
condemning the work Saint-Amour. Further, in October
1257, under papal support, Bonaventure entered the aca-
demic association of masters of theology. In August 1257,
Bonaventure assumed the Franciscan chair in theology at
the University of Paris.
On February 2, 1257, Bonaventure was elected as Min-
ister General of the Friars Minor. At this time, the Friars
were divided into two camps, the Spirituales and the
Relaxati, later known as the Coventuals. The Spirituales
followed the literal observance of the rule, with particular
emphasis placed on the role of poverty. Contrarily, the
Coventuals were open to alterations and novelty within
the rule, such as the possibility of the papacy permitting
the use of property. Bonaventure, as Minister General, ener-
getically engaged the divisive representatives within both
branches of the Friars Minor. Soon after becoming the
Minister
General,
Bonaventure
attacked
Joachimite
Spirituales at an ecclesiastical convocation in Citta` della
Pieve. Further, Bonaventure composed an encyclical letter,
which addressed the reform of the Coventuals. Three years
after this encyclical letter, Bonaventure sought to enforce his
reforms at the General Chapter of Narbonne. The so-called
Constitutiones Narbonenses consists of 12 chapters, which
correspond with the chapters within the Franciscan rule.
Upon ecclesial request, in 1260, Bonaventure com-
posed a Life of Francis (Legenda major sancti Francisci).
In 1263, Bonaventure’s Life of Francis was declared the
authoritative biography at the Chapter of Pisa. In 1264,
under the urging of Cardinal Cajetan, Bonaventure rein-
stated the Poor Clares, which were condemned at the
Chapter of Pisa only one year earlier. In 1266, at the General
Chapter of Paris, it was decreed that all Lives of Francis,
other than Bonaventure’s version, were to be eradicated in
order to promote unity throughout the Friars Minor. This
ecclesial decision was not unanimously received, oppo-
nents of the decision argued the decree was a blatant
attempt to silence the early sources of Franciscan history.
Bonaventure B
183
B

Around 1264, Bonaventure founded the Society of
Gonfalone in Rome. This society, which stands as one
of the earliest confraternities, emphasized the honoring
of the Virgin Mary. In 1269, Bonaventure convened his
fourth general council, the Chapter of Assisi. At this coun-
cil, Bonaventure instituted a Mass in honor of the Virgin
Mary, which the Franciscan order was instructed to sing
every Saturday.
In 1272, Bonaventure convoked another Chapter at
Pisa, where further decrees deﬁned the role of the Poor
Clares. On May 23, 1273, Pope Gregory X appointed Bon-
aventure to the seat of cardinal. Later that year, in Novem-
ber 1273, Bonaventure was elevated to the bishopric of
Albano. In May 1274, Bonaventure resigned from the role
of Minister General. In accordance with Pope Gregory’s
instructions,
Bonaventure
organized
the
Fourteenth
Oecumenical Council, which convened at Lyons, May 7,
1274. Pope Gregory presided over the Council of Lyons,
while Bonaventure had a decisive role in the shaping the
deliberations. In particular, Bonaventure mediated the
reunion between the Latin West and Greek East on
July 6, 1274.
Bonaventure died at Lyons on July 15, 1274, while the
Council
of
Lyon
was
in
session.
The
cause
of
Bonaventure’s
death
remains
unknown.
However,
Peregrinus of Bologna, who was Bonaventure’s secretary,
maintains he was poisoned. The day after his death, Bon-
aventure was buried in the church of the Friars Minor at
Lyons. On April 14, 1432, Pope Sixtus IV canonized Bon-
aventure. On March 14, 1588, Pope Sixtus V named Bon-
aventure as one of the Doctors of the Church, with the
honorary title, the ‘‘Seraphic Doctor.’’ Bonaventure’s feast
day is celebrated on July 14.
The Literary Works of Bonaventure
Beyond the above-mentioned Life of Francis and the Dis-
puted Questions on Evangelical Perfection, Bonaventure’s
numerous writings span the wide range of Scholastic
issues. The majority of his writings are philosophical and
theological orientated, falling under the rubrics of dog-
matic, mystic, exegetical, and homiletic. In particular, four
works provide a comprehensive overview of Bonaventure’s
intellectual synthesis: Commentary on the Sentences
(Commentaria in quatuor libros sententiarum), Brief Com-
mentary(Breviloquium), Journey of the Mind to God
(Itinerarium Mentis in Deum), and On the Reduction of
the Arts to Theology (De reductione Artium ad Theologiam).
Bonaventure’s Commentary on the Sentences, which is his
longest and most signiﬁcant text, engages the breadth of
Scholastic teachings, from the Trinity, to Creation and
Fall, to the Sacraments and the Last Judgment. The
Breviloquium, written before 1257, is a shorter summary
on Scholastic theology, which prominently reﬂects the
Augustinian emphases on faith, illumination, and the
scriptures. Bonaventure’s Journey of the Mind to God,
which was written on Mount la Verna in 1259, reﬂects
upon the human ascent back to God, which occurs in sex
progressive movements from the sensible world to con-
templation and communion with God. De reductione
Artium ad Theologiam assesses the arts, philosophy and
theology, and these disciplines relationship to a natural
center. Another important theological text, Bonaventure’s
Disputed
Questions
on
the
Mystery
of
the
Trinity
(Quaestiones disputate de mysterio Trinitatis) examines
the possibility of knowing God’s being, in relation to
Anselm’s ontological doctrine. After establishing the
truth of God’s being, Bonaventure considers how human-
ity apprehends the inner reality of God’s being through
natural reason and faith.
Bonaventure’s mysticism, which permeates much of
his thought, was shaped within the Victorine tradition.
A select number of Bonaventure’s treatises speciﬁcally
examine mystical, or spiritual theology. Perhaps, On the
Threefold Way (De triplici via) provides the most impor-
tant summary of Bonaventure’s spirituality. In this trea-
tise, Bonaventure describes the spiritual life as a series of
ascents through three stages known as the purgative, the
illuminative,
and
the
unitive.
In
his
Soliloquies
(Soliloquium), Bonaventure offers a spiritual commentary
on sayings of the Church Fathers. Bonaventure’s other
mystical writings are the Tree of Life (Lignum vitae),
which consists of 48 meditations on the life of Christ; On
the Six Wings of the Seraphim (De sex alis seraphim), which
is a minor work on virtues of superiors; On the Perfection
of the Life of the Sisters (De perfectione vitae ad sorores),
which is a reﬂection on virtues for religious perfection; On
the Five Feasts of the Child, Jesus (De quinque festivitatibus
pueri Jesu); On the Rule of the Soul (De regimine animae);
and Treatise on the Preparation for Mass (Tractatus de
praeparatione ad missam).
Another important source exists in the form of lec-
tures, which Bonaventure delivered at the university. The
most
signiﬁcant
of
the
university
conferences,
or
collationes, is the unﬁnished Collations on the Six Days
(Collationes in Hexameron), which were authored at
Paris in 1273. Other extant conferences are the Collations
on
the
Ten
Commandments
(Collationes
de
decem
praeceptis) and Collations on the Seven Gifts (Collationes
de septem donis). In the Collations on the Six Days, Bona-
venture examines the ﬁrst chapter of Genesis while
advancing an argument against the Aristotelianism of
the Averroists. Of note, Bonaventure commends the
184 B
Bonaventure

literalist interpretation of Genesis while recognizing the
value in Augustine’s ﬁgurative readings. Certainly, Bona-
venture appreciated the mystical sense of the scriptures;
however, his exegetical writings often reﬂect his position as
a preacher concerned with succinct exegesis of the Gospel.
Bonaventure was a proliﬁc preacher; there are 569 extant
sermons. His sermons reﬂect the Scholastic method,
whereby the subject is divided and then elaborated upon
in accordance with the varied senses.
From Bonaventure’s exegetical works, there are four
extant biblical commentaries, on Ecclesiastes, Wisdom,
the Gospel of Luke, and the Gospel of John. Furthermore,
Bonavenutre wrote on the religious life in order to
encourage his fellow Franciscans. From his position as
the spiritual master of the Friars Minor, Bonaventure
indelibly
shaped
western
Christian
spirituality.
Bonaventure’s most well-known writing on the religious
life was his explanation of the rule of the Friars Minor.
This work, reminiscent of Bonaventure’s 17-year gener-
alship, is marked with an attitude of reconciliation. Ulti-
mately, Bonaventure’s via media was unsuccessful, as the
contentious parties proved intransigent in their respective
positions. Following his explanation of the rule, Bonaven-
ture wrote the Constitutions of Narbonne. Also, we have
a treatise on instructing novices, and a minor work on the
role of preaching and hearing confession within the Friars
Minor. Finally, there are numerous extant letters, both
personal and ecclesiastical. Finally, Bonaventure’s Life of
St. Francis represents an attempt to bring reconciliation
among the Friars Minor.
The Bonaventurean Synthesis
Bonaventure’s synthesis of Augustinianism, Aristotelian-
ism, and Scholasticism, masterfully exempliﬁes the intel-
lectual dynamism of the thirteenth century. Of note, the
breadth and complexity of the Bonaventurean synthesis
has led to a diverse range of assessments. Bonaventure’s
dependence and relationship, or lack thereof, to a wide
range of persons and movements has bequeathed a wide
range of assessments, which offer nuanced characteriza-
tions.
The
conﬂicting
evaluations
demonstrate
the
breadth and diversity of Bonaventure’s writings. Rather
than isolating one particular school of thought as the
essential
component,
Bonaventure’s
achievement
is
appropriately assessed by maintaining his dynamic syn-
thesis, which is exempliﬁed throughout his literary corpus.
The following overview considers some of the more salient
features of Bonaventure’s philosophy and theology, which
has been deemed a Christian philosophy.
Bonaventure’s philosophy is primarily traditional. He
was an ardent disciple of Alexander of Hales, and
a promulgator of the old Franciscan school. Bonaventure,
who considered himself a continuator of Alexander of
Hales, was signiﬁcantly shaped by Alexander’s Augustin-
ian
approach
to
Aristotelianism.
Alexander,
while
remaining Augustinian, copiously examined and quoted
Aristotle’s works in order to appropriate philosophy for
the advancement of theology. Further, Bonaventure was
a steadfast follower of Augustine, albeit interpreted
through the lens of Anselm of Canterbury (1033–1109)
and Hugh of St. Victor (1096–1141) (Cullen 2006).
Beyond Augustine, Bonaventure drew on the cosmic
vision of Pseudo-Dionysius, and the psychology of Ber-
nard
of
Clairvaux,
and
Richard
of
St.
Victor.
Bonaventure’s philosophy is developed within the frame-
work of the Christian tradition; consequently, while dif-
ferent aspects within his intellectual program could be
emphasized as novel, his thought certainly represents
a mode of Christian philosophy guided by tradition
(Gilson 1965).
While antecedents signiﬁcantly shaped Bonaventure’s
philosophy, his thought is marked with originality, exem-
pliﬁed in the coalescing of Augustinianism and Aristote-
lianism into a novel reconﬁguration. Unlike Aquinas,
Bonavenutre never composed a commentary on Aristotle,
although he quoted the Stagirite 1,015 times (Bougerol
1974). On occasion, Bonaventure favored aspects of Plato
over Aristotle; however, he was neither a strict Platonist
nor Aristotelian. In the thirteenth century, a kind of
‘‘Neoplatonizing Aristotelianism’’ emerged at the Univer-
sity of Paris. Bonaventure’s approach, while guided by an
Augustinian framework, was decidedly colored by the
thirteenth-century syncreticism of ancient philosophies
(Van Steenberghen 1955). In the 1260s, Bonaventure con-
vened conferences, where he attacked Aristotelianism.
This series of Anti-Aristotelian conferences should be
assessed within the context of the Averroists movement.
Bonaventure extensively employed Aristotle’s thought;
however, he was against particular strict readings, which
the Averroists epitomized. Primarily, Bonaventure only
employed the teachings of Avicenna and Averroes in
order to support his favored authors, such as Boethius
and Aristotle. On one hand, Bonaventure argues that the
Church Fathers are the primary source for working
through Christian philosophy; however, within his order
of philosophy, Bonaventure often employs Aristotle on his
own terms and merits (Quinn 1973).
Bonaventure’s assessment of philosophy as a self-
contained and independent discipline is nuanced and
multilayered. On one level, for Bonaventure, the discipline
of philosophy is autonomous, even while the ancient pur-
suit is ultimately subordinate to theology (De Wulf 1926).
Bonaventure B
185
B

However, prior to theology, Bonaventure deems philoso-
phy a valid, if albeit an incomplete science. Bonaventure
delineates the principles and methodology of philosophy
from theology while ultimately fulﬁlling and coalescing
both disciplines under Christian wisdom (sapientia)
(Robert 1951). In short, the Bonaventurean synthesis epit-
omizes the thirteenth-century pursuit to organize all
knowledge in a manner that explicates universal knowl-
edge. Bonaventure offers a dynamic philosophy and the-
ology, which was contoured by many movements, but
ultimately rooted in Augustinianism.
The Ontological Argument
Among thirteenth-century intellectuals, Bonaventure was
one of the ﬁrst philosophers to exhaustively examine and
appropriate Anselm’s ontological argument. Bonaventure
believed the God and the human soul belong to the intel-
ligible order (I Sent. 3, 1, 1, ad 2m). On the basis of this
shared intelligibility, Bonaventure reasoned that humanity
is enabled to apprehend God. The soul is imprinted with
knowledge of God, which nourishes the soul. In the Dis-
puted Questions on the Mystery of the Trinity, Bonaventure
offers a sustained disputation concerning the existence of
God. In this important text, Bonaventure asserts three
‘‘ways,’’ or ‘‘proofs,’’ that provide incontrovertible proofs
of God’s existence.
The ﬁrst proof of God’s existence is grounded in the
innate nature of the soul, or mind (De myst. Trin. I, 1). For
Bonaventure, this innate knowledge is only related to
God’s existence, with no reference to God’s essence. This
is the case, according to Bonaventure, when humanity
prescribes a false view of God, while simultaneously
assuming God’s existence (I Sent. 8, 1, 1, 2; De myst.
Trin. 1, 1, ad 1m). Bonaventure argues that innate knowl-
edge of an immutable and eternal being is proved by the
mind’s desire for the true and the good. According to
Bonaventure, the search for truth presupposes a perfect
and absolute truth; consequently, every assertion of truth
is simultaneously a positing of God’s existence (De myst.
Trin. 1, 1, 5–8). Further, one presupposes the truth when
denying the existence of truth; therefore, the denial of
truth, or God, only afﬁrms the reality of God and the
truth (De myst. Trin. 1, 1, 26, t. v). More so, the soul’s
desire for the true and the good in their eternal and perfect
forms resides within humanity as an innate predisposi-
tion. The intelligibility of God is recognized, even if in an
imperfect state, within the intelligibility of the human soul
(De myst. Trin. 1, 1, 10, t. V). Human knowledge of God is
rooted in this relationship between the cause (God)
and the image or likeness (soul) (De myst. Trin. 1, 1,
Concl. t. V).
The second proof of God’s existence is arrived at
through an analysis of cause and effect demonstrated in
the relationship between God and creation. Since God is
the cause of creation, Bonaventure reasons one is able to
gain knowledge of divinity through these sensible effects.
For Bonaventure, it is easier to approach God through the
senses, rather than purely spiritual means. Consequently,
Bonaventure asserts it is permissible to begin with creation
in order to apprehend God (I Sent. 3, 1, 2, Contra 2 and
Concl. t.1). Bonaventure appeals to arguments of cause
and effect in order to demonstrate that there is necessarily
an absolute being that all other beings derive their being
(I Sent. 3, 1, 2, Concl. t. 1). Bonaventure was not
concerned with a formal starting point, or a strictly
deﬁned set of proofs derived from creation. Rather, Bon-
aventure believed God was attested throughout all crea-
tion to such a degree that God’s existence is readily
apparent. All creation witnesses to a Creator God
(De myst. Trin. 1, 1, 10–20, t. V). The human intellect
recognizes the mind’s knowledge of the First Being when it
compares the perfections of God with the insufﬁciency of
humanity (Iten. III, 3). Creation enables one to discover
the innate conception of God within the soul, which is the
foundation for the existence of God. For Bonaventure,
humanity is certain God exists because of the innate
capacity of the soul, which makes it impossible to think
God does not exist (De myst. Trin. 1, 1, 20, t. V).
Bonaventure’s third proof asserts that God’s existence
is immediately and absolutely apparent. With this asser-
tion, Bonaventure demonstrates his steadfast adherence to
Anselm’s thesis, which he held throughout his theological
work. God, as the ﬁrst principle, does not require further
demonstration beyond the fact that the predicate is
assumed in the subject. Bonaventure simpliﬁes Anselm’s
dictum, ‘‘God as the being than which no greater can be
conceived.’’ Accordingly, Bonaventure translates Anselm’s
ontological deﬁnition into an immediate experience. Fur-
ther, Bonaventure posits since that which cannot not-be is
greater than that which can not-be. Consequently,
according to Bonaventure, the being which none greater
can be thought of necessarily exists (I Sent. 8, 1, 1, t. 1).
More so, Bonaventure reﬁnes the above assertion by
stating that if God is God, where the antecedent is
readily evident, the conclusion is likewise plainly evident
(De myst. Trin. 1, 1, 29, t. V). Bonaventure recognizes the
inﬁnite gap between humanity and God; however, the soul
and the Creator, which are both intelligibles, analogously
share a nature even if only by largely different degrees.
Bonaventure differentiates between the ‘‘order of being’’
and the ‘‘order of knowledge.’’ God and humanity may be
inﬁnitely separated in the order of being; however, there
186 B
Bonaventure

may be a level of communion within the order of knowl-
edge. Divine grace makes God knowable proportionately
to our apprehension as an interior object of recollection (I
Sent. 1, 3, 1, ad 2m, t. 1). Bonaventure advances Anselm’s
ontological proof within his own synthesis through pos-
iting the interiority of the soul as the epistemological
foundation for knowledge of God. In sum, according to
Bonaventure, divine illumination makes the denial of
God’s existence an impossibility (In Hex. IV, 1, t. v).
The above three arguments for God’s existence are
closely interrelated. Each of the three proofs is grounded
in the kindred relationship between God and the soul,
which has the innate capacity to apprehend God (I Sent.
1, 3, 2, Concl. t. 1). Aquinas’ doctrine differs from Bona-
venture on the above point, for the Dominican asserts that
the intellect does not possesses an innate idea of God
(Sum. theol. 1, 2, 1, ad 1m, 3m). For Aquinas, contra
Bonaventure, knowledge of God is derived from nature,
or outside objects, rather than an innate capacity within
the human mind (Quinn 1973).
See also: ▶Alexander of Hales ▶Anselm of Canterbury
▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and
Hebrew Traditions ▶Augustine ▶Being ▶Bernard of
Clairvaux ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-
H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Proofs of the Existence of God
▶Pseudo-Dionysius
the
Areopagite
▶Richard
of
St. Victor ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Latin Editions of Bonaventure
Bonaventure (1882–1902) Doctoris seraphici S. Bonaventurae opera
omnia: vols I – IV, Commentaria in quator libros sententiarum;
vol V, Opuscula varia theologica; vol VI, Commentarius in Sacrum
Scripturam; vol VII, Commentarius in evangelium. S. Lucae;
vol VIII, Opuscula varia ad theologicam mysticam et res Ordiniis
Fratrum minorum spectantia; vol IX, Sermones de tempore, de
sanctis, de B. Virgine Maria et de diversis; vol X, Operum omnium
complementum, ed. The Fathers of the Collegium S. Bonaventure. Ex
typographia Collegii S. Bonaventure, Ad Claras Aquas (Quaracchi)
Bonaventure (1934) Collationes in hexaemeron, ed. Delorme F, OFM.
Bibliotheca Franciscana Scholastica Medii Aevi, vol 8. Collegium S.
Bonaventure, Ad Claras Aquas (Florentia)
Bonaventure (1977) Sancti Bonaventure sermones dominicales, ed.
Bourgerol J. Collegio S. Bonaventura
English Translations of Bonaventure
Bonaventure (1946) Breviloquium, trans. Nemmers EE. Herder, St. Louis
Bonaventure (1956) Itinerarium mentis in Deum, trans. Boehnwe
P, OFM. Vol 2 of works of Saint Bonaventure, ed. Boehner P, Laughlin
MF Sr, SMIC. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Bonaventure (1970) Collations on the six days, trans. de Vink J. Vol 5 of
works of Saint Bonaventure. St. Anthony Guild, Paterson
Bonaventure (1978) The tree of life in Bonaventure, trans. Cousins E. The
classics of western spirituality. Paulist, New York
Bonaventure (1979) Disputed questions on the mystery of the trinity,
trans. Hayes Z, OFM. Vol 3 of works of Saint Bonaventure, ed. Marcil
G, OFM. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Bonaventure (1989) Christ the one teacher of all. What manner of man:
Sermons on Christ by St. Bonavenutre, trans. Hayes Z, OFM. Fran-
ciscan Herald, Chicago
Bonaventure (1992) Disputed questions on the knowledge of Christ,
trans. Hayes Z, OFM. Vol 4 of works of Saint Bonaventure, ed. Marcil
G, OFM. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Bonaventure (1996) On the reduction of the arts to theology, trans. Hayes
Z, OFM). Vol 1 of works of Saint Bonaventure, ed. Coughlin FE,
OFM. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Bougerol JG (1966) Saint Bonaventure: un maıˆtre de sagesse. Editions
franciscaines, Paris
Cullen CM (2006) Bonaventure. Oxford University Press, Oxford
de Wulf M (1926) The history of medieval philosophy, 2 vols (trans:
Messenger E). Longmans Green, London
Gilson E (1965) The philosophy of Saint Bonaventure (trans: Trethowan
DI and Sheed FJ). St. Anthony Guild, Paterson
Meyer V (1924) The doctrine of St. Bonaventure concerning our knowl-
edge of God: St. Bonaventure, the seraphic doctor, his life and works.
Wagner, New York
Quinn JF (1973) The historical constitution of St. Bonaventure’s philos-
ophy. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies, Toronto
Ratzinger J (1959) Die Geschichtstheologie des heiligen Bonaventura.
Schnell & Steiner, Mu¨nchen/Zu¨rich
Ratzinger J (1989) The theology of history in St. Bonaventure. Franciscan
Herald, Chicago
Szabo T (1955) Die Trinita¨tslehre des hl. Bonaventura: Eine systematische
Darstellung und historiche Wu¨rdigung. Aschendorf, Mu¨nster
van der Laan H (1968) De wijsgerige grondslag van Bonaventura’s
theologie. Bujiten & Schipperheijn, Amsterdam
van Steenberghen F (1955) Aristotle in the west (trans: Johnston L).
Nauwelaerts, Louvain.
van Steenberghen F (1966) La philosophie au XIII sie`cle. Be´atrice-
Nauwelaerts, Paris
Journal Articles
Bougerol JG (1974) Dossier pour l’e´tude des rapports entre Bonaventure
et Aristote. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du moyen age
31:135–222
Crowley T (1974) St. Bonaventure chronology reappraisal. Franzisk Stud
310–322
Doyle JP (1974) Saint Bonaventure and the ontological argument. Mod
Schoolman, 27–48
Robert P (1950) Le proble`me de la philosophie bonaventurienne. I.
Aristote´lisme platonisant ou augustinisme? LTP 6:145–163
Robert P (1951) Le proble`me de la philosophie bonaventurienne. II.
Discipline autonome ou he´teronome? LTP 7:9–58
Roch R (1959) The philosophy of St. Bonaventure – A controversy.
Francisc Stud 19:209–226
Bradwardine, Thomas
▶Thomas Bradwardine
Bradwardine, Thomas B
187
B

Brinkley, Richard
▶Richard Brinkley
Brito, Radulphus
▶Radulphus Brito
Burgundio of Pisa
▶Ethics
Buridan, John
▶John Buridan
Burley, Walter
▶Walter Burley
Byzantine Aesthetics
▶Aesthetics, Byzantine
Byzantine Epistemology
▶Epistemology, Byzantine
Byzantine Ethics
▶Ethics, Byzantine
Byzantine Logic
▶Logic, Byzantine
Byzantine Medicine
▶Medicine, Byzantine
Byzantine Metaphysics
▶Metaphysics, Byzantine
Byzantine Natural Philosophy
▶Natural Philosophy, Byzantine
Byzantine Philosophical
Psychology
▶Philosophical Psychology, Byzantine
Byzantine Philosophical Theology
▶Philosophical Theology, Byzantine
Byzantine Philosophy
▶Philosophy, Byzantine
Byzantine Political Philosophy
▶Political Philosophy, Byzantine
Byzantine Thomism
▶Thomism, Byzantine
188 B
Brinkley, Richard

