632
Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
2. J. L. Heilbron: The Scattering of α and ß Particles and Rutherford’s Atom. Archive for History
of Exact Sciences 4, 247–307 (1968)
3. St. Weinberg: The Discovery of Subatomic Particles (Harmondsworth, Penguin Books 1993)
Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
Helge Kragh
Attempts to establish a relativistic quantum mechanics – an integration of  quan-
tum theory and the theory of relativity – predate the emergence of quantum
mechanics in the 1920s. Shortly after Niels Bohr had proposed his  atom model
in 1913, he and a few others realized that  quantum theory might be improved
by using relativity rather than classical mechanics. These efforts culminated in
1916–17 when Arnold Sommerfeld in Munich devised a modiﬁed version of Bohr’s
model by incorporating the relativistic variation of the mass of an electron moving
around an atomic nucleus. That is, rather than assuming the mass to be constant,
Sommerfeld adopted the expression m(v) = m0(1–v2/c2)−1/2, where v is the elec-
tron’s velocity and c the velocity of light. The result was an expression of the energy
levels in hydrogen-like atom  Bohr’s atom model that predicted a ﬁne structure
with a separation in frequency proportional to α2Z2, where α is the ﬁne-structure
constant and Z the nuclear charge (or atomic number). Sommerfeld’s theory re-
ceived experimental support from measurements in both the optical and the X-ray
region, and the conﬁrmation was widely seen as a triumph of the Bohr-Sommerfeld
atomic model as well as the special theory of relativity.
A few physicists believed that gravitation theory, in the form of Einstein’s general
theory of relativity, had to be incorporated in atomic theory. The Kepler motion of
 electrons around an atomic nucleus was analyzed by means of general relativity
by Georg Jaff´e, Mandoval Vallarta and others in 1922–25; however, their works
were ignored by most mainstream physicists who believed that general relativity
was of no importance in atomic physics. In a paper of 1922, Erwin Schr¨odinger
applied Hermann Weyl’s extension of Einsteinian general relativity to atomic theory.
Although Schr¨odinger’s paper would later come to appear as prescient, at the time
his work attracted no more attention than other theories in the same tradition.
Louis de Broglie’s innovative theory of 1922–23, which postulated the existence
of  matter waves, was solidly founded on the (special) theory of relativity. Ac-
cording to de Broglie, quantum theory and special relativity theory were uniﬁed by
the relativistic formula mc2 = hν = hc/λ, or λ = h/p (where λ is the wavelength
associated with the momentum p of some particle, whether a  light quantum or
an  electron). In late November 1925 Schr¨odinger reached the decision that to
transform de Broglie’s hypothesis into a wave theory of atomic structure he would
need a wave equation governing the behaviour of de Broglie’s somewhat mysterious

Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
633
R
matter waves. Since de Broglie’s hypothesis was thoroughly relativistic, naturally
Schr¨odinger sought for a wave equation that satisﬁed the requirements of the special
theory of relativity: its form had to be Lorentz invariant. At new year’s time he had
found such an equation for the amplitude connected with the electron, and after hard
mathematical work he succeeded in solving it in the case of the hydrogen atom.
Schr¨odinger calculated (what came to be known as) the energy eigenvalues and
from these he derived the energy spectrum of hydrogen. Although his calculations
gave a ﬁne structure for the red Hα line, it did not ﬁt with the experimentally
conﬁrmed Sommerfeld theory: Schr¨odinger’s  wave mechanics yielded a ﬁne-
structure separation of the Hα doublet nearly thrice the observed value. Conse-
quently he was forced to use the non-relativistic approximation, and it was this form
– since then known as the  Schr¨odinger equation – that he reported in his famous
series of papers in the spring of 1926. The relativistic eigenvalue equation for an
electron in the electrostatic ﬁeld of potential ϕ reads
ℏ2c2ψ + [(E −eϕ)2 −m0c4]ψ = 0
where ℏ= h/2π. Shortly after the appearance of Schr¨odinger’s  wave mechanics,
the equation was derived by several physicists, including Oskar Klein, Wolfgang
Pauli, Vladimir Fock, Walter Gordon, de Broglie, and Schr¨odinger himself. Klein,
ignorant about Schr¨odinger’s unpublished derivation, may have been the ﬁrst to de-
rive the equation, which he framed in the context of a ﬁve-dimensional uniﬁcation of
wave mechanics, electromagnetism and general relativity. Whatever the parentage,
Schr¨odinger’s relativistic equation came to be known as the Klein-Gordon equation.
The corresponding time-dependent equation for a free electron reads
ℏ2c2ψ + ℏ2∂2ψ/∂t2 = m0c4ψ
The equation is Lorentz invariant and reduces to the ordinary Schr¨odinger equation
in the limit v/c →0. But is it the right equation for an electron?
There were two problems that indicated that this was not the case. First, the
equation did not result in the right doublet splitting of the lines in the hydrogen
spectrum. Second, it did not incorporate the electron’s  spin, which by the fall of
1926 had become accepted by most physicists and somehow had to be understood in
terms of quantum mechanics. The problems seemed to have no solutions within the
Klein-Gordon framework, but in Germany an alternative approach was followed,
namely by including relativistic effects as corrections to the non-relativistic theory.
This method led to a partial success in the spring of 1926, when Pascual Jordan and
Werner Heisenberg, developing ideas due to Wolfgang Pauli, succeeded to derive
the ﬁne-structure formula in a ﬁrst-order approximation. They added to the usual
Hamiltonian not only a perturbation term describing the relativistic correction to the
kinetic energy but also a term referring to the spin of the electron. However, in spite
of its empirical success the phenomenological Jordan–Heisenberg–Pauli theory was
not entirely satisfactory. Since relativity was added as a ﬁrst-order correction, the
theory was not genuinely relativistic; moreover, the spin effect was introduced in an

634
Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
ad hoc manner, being grafted to the theory rather than explained by it. An entirely
satisfactory theory would not only be able to account for the doublet phenomena
but also explain them in the sense of deducing them from the basic principles of
relativity and quantum mechanics.
The quantum-mechanical understanding of spin improved with the theories in-
dependently proposed by Pauli and Charles Darwin in the spring of 1927. However,
these theories did not go substantially beyond the phenomenological level of the
Jordan-Heisenberg-Pauli theory and they failed to combine spin and relativity. In
spite of their importance, they did not offer a solution to the still more delicate prob-
lem of integrating quantum mechanics with the theory of relativity. Such a solution,
based on an entirely novel approach, came in early 1928.
Paul Dirac reasoned that according to the general principles of quantum me-
chanics the formal structure of the Schr¨odinger equation – meaning the expression
Hψ = iℏ∂ψ/∂t – must be retained in any future uniﬁcation of relativity and the
quantum theory of electrons. This ruled out the Klein-Gordon equation and implied
that the relativistic wave equation had to be of the ﬁrst order in the space derivatives.
Dirac’s reasoning suggested the starting procedure
iℏ∂ψ/∂t = c
9
m2
0c2 + p2
1 + p2
2 + p2
3ψ
where p1 = −iℏ∂/∂x, etc. By “playing around with mathematics” he found a way
to linearize the square root, i.e. to write it in the form α1p1 +α2p2 +α3p3 +α4m0c.
The α-coefﬁcients were matrices of the same kind as those Pauli had introduced in
his spin theory, but they had four rows and columns (whereas Pauli’s were 2 × 2
matrices).
Dirac’s paper, entitled “The Quantum Theory of the Electron,” appeared in the
Proceedings of the Royal Society in January 1928. It is noteworthy that originally
he did not think of the electron’s spin. It was only after having found the wave equa-
tion that he discovered that it, in an extended form where the electromagnetic ﬁeld
was taken into account, included a term representing the magnetic moment of the
electron. Since this quantity is given by the spin vector, the electron’s spin appeared
as a consequence of the theory. Dirac proved that his equation satisﬁed Lorentz
invariance, and he also showed that its ﬁrst approximation led to the approximate
ﬁne-structure formula. He did not attempt to ﬁnd the exact solution but supposed
that it would result in the same energy spectrum that Sommerfeld had found more
than a decade earlier. This was indeed the case, such as shown by Gordon and
Darwin in the spring of 1928.
Dirac’s theory of the electron was received with enthusiasm by his colleagues and
had a revolutionary effect on quantum physics. It was primarily for this work that
he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1933. Although the theory was very much the
result of Dirac’s genius, it (or something like it) would most likely have been found
by other physicists even had he not presented the theory in January 1928. Several
physicists tried at the time to construct a relativistic spin quantum theory, and some
of them, such as Jordan and Hendrik Kramers, came close to the goal. Kramers

Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
635
R
obtained an approximate quantum description of a relativistic spinning electron in
terms of a second-order wave equation and later proved that his equations were
equivalent to Dirac’s linear equation.
The new theory of relativistic quantum mechanics was quickly explored by
physicists and mathematicians. For example, the Dirac matrices and the properties
of the Dirac wave function were studied by Hermann Weyl, Bartel L. van der
Waerden, John von Neumann and others. Several theoretical physicists – including
Weyl, Fock and Georges Lemaˆıtre – transformed the wave equation in forms
that could be incorporated into the framework of general relativity. Gregory Breit
showed in 1928 that the Dirac matrices can be understood as velocities in the sense
that dxμ/dt = cαμ (μ = 1, 2, 3). Because of the property α2
μ = 1 the result seemed
to lead to the paradoxical conclusion that a free electron will always move with the
velocity of light (v = ±c), a paradox that was taken up by Schr¨odinger in 1930 in
his theory of the so-called Zitterbewegung of the electron (a microscopic, rapidly
oscillatory motion superposed on the electron’s “macroscopic” velocity).
Dirac’s theory of the electron also inspired cosmological thinking, if only indi-
rectly. Arthur Eddington was greatly impressed by the  Dirac equation which he
elevated to a status of universal signiﬁcance and used to derive relationships between
cosmic and atomic constants. Based on his own interpretation of the Dirac equation,
he calculated the value of the ﬁne structure constant and related it to the number
of protons in the universe. The general idea of integrating quantum mechanics, cos-
mology and general relativity was pursued also by the Russian physicist Matvei
Bronstein who in 1933–36 discussed uniﬁed “cGh physics” and examined the quan-
tum limits of general relativity at what later would be called the Planck length,
lP = (hG/c3)1/2. However, Bronstein’s works attracted little attention at the time.
From an empirical point of view, Dirac’s theory faced successes as well as prob-
lems. On the one hand, it proved successful in the study of relativistic scattering
processes, ﬁrst investigated by Nevill Mott in Cambridge and Klein and Yoshio
Nishina in Copenhagen. On the other hand, some of the predictions that followed
from Dirac’s theory disagreed with experiment. For example, the theory, believed to
apply also to protons, predicted a value of the proton’s magnetic moment that was
nearly three times smaller than the measured value. It also led Mott to predict that
free electrons should be polarized, yet experiments failed to detect the effect. (After
more than a decade’s confusion, it turned out that the early experiments were wrong.
Free electrons are polarized, in agreement with the Mott-Dirac prediction.)
The most serious problem of the Dirac equation was the “ ± difﬁculty” referring
to the fact that the equation formally included solutions with negative energies. Of
the four components of the wave function, two referred to positive-energy states and
two to negative-energy states. In late 1929 Dirac believed he had found a solution
to the problem. He assumed a world of negative-energy states occupied by an inﬁ-
nite number of electrons and argued that the few unoccupied states – the “holes” –
would appear as observable physical entities, particles with positive energy and
positive charge. He originally suggested that the holes were protons, but was unable
to account for their large mass and also the stability of ordinary matter (where pro-
tons and electrons would presumably annihilate to gamma rays). This ﬁrst theory of

636
Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
antiparticles was universally met with skepticism. It caused Schr¨odinger to propose
an alternative relativistic theory of the electron which avoided the ± difﬁculty and
retained the empirically conﬁrmed results of Dirac’s theory. However, Schr¨odinger’s
theory was shortlived. Not only did it face experimental difﬁculties, it also failed to
obey strict Lorentz invariance, and for these reasons it was not considered a valid
alternative to Dirac’s theory.
Dirac’s shortlived idea of representing protons as antielectrons was philosophi-
cally appealing because of its unitary character. In 1930 all matter was believed to
consist of protons and electrons; thus, if the proton was a vacant negative-energy
state – an electron in disguise – Dirac would in effect have reduced the known el-
ementary particles to just one fundamental entity, the electron. However, what he
referred to as “the dream of philosophers” remained a dream. In a remarkable paper
of 1931, mainly dealing with the possible existence of magnetic monopoles, he ad-
mitted that the proton could not be the antiparticle of the electron. As an alternative
he suggested the existence of a new elementary particle with the same mass and spin
as the electron, but of opposite charge. He thought that such hypothetical particles
existed somewhere in nature and that they might be produced in collision processes
involving two gamma photons ( light quantum). Moreover, because the proton
was now a separate species of particle, it would probably have its own antiparticle,
a negatively charged proton.
The hypothesis of antielectrons was considered speculative, but the situation
changed dramatically in 1932–33 when Dirac’s particle was detected in cosmic ray
experiments. Although Carl Anderson found cloud chamber tracks from positive
electrons in 1932, at ﬁrst he failed to identify them correctly and it was only in
1933 that he realized that he had discovered the positive electron or “positron,” as
he called it. However, Anderson did not identify his positron with Dirac’s antielec-
tron, which he probably was unaware of. The correct identiﬁcation positive electron
= positron = antielectron came later in 1933 when Patrick Blackett and Guiseppe
Occhialini analyzed cosmic ray data. Naturally, the discovery of the positron greatly
enhanced the status of Dirac’s theory of antiparticles, and that in spite of widespread
opposition to his interpretation in terms of holes. In 1934 Robert Oppenheimer and
Wendell Furry, and independently Enrico Fermi, showed that antiparticles could be
accounted for by quantum ﬁeld theory without introducing the Dirac “sea” of unob-
servable negative-energy particles.
The great success of the Dirac equation caused interest in the older Klein-Gordon
equation to fade away. That the Klein–Gordon equation is really as good as any
quantum-mechanical equation, was made clear only in 1934 when Pauli and Victor
Weisskopf revived the Klein–Gordon theory. If interpreted correctly, namely as a
ﬁeld theory for Bose-Einstein particles, there is nothing wrong with the Klein-
Gordon theory, Pauli and Weisskopf argued. They proved that concepts such as
pair creation, annihilation and antiparticles could be established without accepting
the idea of a vacuum ﬁlled with negative-energy particles. Ever since, the Klein-
Gordon equation has proved an indispensable tool in quantum ﬁeld theory. See also
 algebraic quantum mechanics; operational quantum mechanics.

Renormalization
637
R
Primary Literature
1. P. Dirac: The Quantum Theory of the Electron. Proceedings of the Royal Society A 117,
610–624 (1928)
2. P. Dirac: Quantised Singularities in the Electromagnetic Field. Proceedings of the Royal Soci-
ety A 133, 60–72 (1931)
3. W. Heisenberg, P. Jordan: Anwendung der Quantenmechanik auf das Problem der anomalen
Zeemaneffekte. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 37, 263–277 (1926)
4. O. Klein, Oskar (1926). Quantentheorie und f¨unfdimensionale Relativit¨atstheorie. Zeitschrift
f¨ur Physik 37, 895–906 (1926)
5. W. Pauli, V. Weisskopf: ¨Uber die Quantisierung der skalaren relativistischen Wellengleichung.
Helvetica Physica Acta 7, 709–731 (1934)
Secondary Literature
6. N. R. Hanson: The Concept of the Positron (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1963)
7. H. Kragh: Equation with the Many Fathers: The Klein-Gordon Equation in 1926. American
Journal of Physics 52, 1024–1033 (1984)
8. H. Kragh: Unifying Quanta and Relativity? Schr¨odinger’s Attitude to Relativistic Quantum
Mechanics, in M. Bitbol, O. Darrigol, eds., Erwin Schr¨odinger. Philosophy and the Birth of
Quantum Mechanics (Editions Frontieres, Paris 1992, 315–338)
9. J. Mehra: The Golden Age of Theoretical Physics (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 2001,
1030–1091)
10. M. St¨ockler: Philosophische Probleme der relativistischen Quantenmechanik (Duncker &
Humblot, Berlin 1984)
Renormalization
Arianna Borrelli
Procedures of renormalization are used in  quantum ﬁeld theory to deal with
divergent integrals appearing in perturbative calculations of order higher than the
lowest one. These ill-deﬁned expressions would seem to render perturbative com-
putations meaningless, thus depriving quantum ﬁeld theory of an essential tool for
obtaining phenomenological predictions. However, in some theories it is possible to
circumvent this problem and formally compensate for the divergencies, obtaining
for observable quantitites ﬁnite predictions which closely match experimental data.
This was shown to be possible for  QED in the late 1940s, when the development
of renormalization procedures resulted in agreement between theoretical estimates
and experimental measurements of the ﬁne and hyperﬁne structure of the hydrogen
spectrum ( spectroscopy; Bohr’s atom model).
The central idea of renormalization is to systematically isolate and remove the
divergencies by means of a redeﬁnition (renormalization) of the nonperturbed ﬁeld

