Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering
Yash Agrawal
Kavicharan Mummaneni
P. Uma Sathyakam   Editors
Interconnect 
Technologies 
for Integrated 
Circuits and 
Flexible Electronics

Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics 
Engineering 
Series Editors 
Brajesh Kumar Kaushik, Department of Electronics and Communication 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India 
Mohan Lal Kolhe, Faculty of Engineering and Sciences, University of Agder, 
Kristiansand, Norway

Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering (STEEE) publishes the 
latest developments in Electrical and Electronics Engineering - quickly, informally 
and with high quality. The intent is to cover all the main branches of electrical and 
electronics engineering, both theoretical and applied, including:
●Signal, Speech and Image Processing
●Speech and Audio Processing
●Image Processing
●Human-Machine Interfaces
●Digital and Analog Signal Processing
●Microwaves, RF Engineering and Optical Communications
●Electronics and Microelectronics, Instrumentation
●Electronic Circuits and Systems
●Embedded Systems
●Electronics Design and Veriﬁcation
●Cyber-Physical Systems
●Electrical Power Engineering
●Power Electronics
●Photovoltaics
●Energy Grids and Networks
●Electrical Machines
●Control, Robotics, Automation
●Robotic Engineering
●Mechatronics
●Control and Systems Theory
●Automation
●Communications Engineering, Networks
●Wireless and Mobile Communication
●Internet of Things
●Computer Networks 
Within the scope of the series are monographs, professional books or graduate text-
books, edited volumes as well as outstanding PhD theses and books purposely 
devoted to support education in electrical and electronics engineering at graduate 
and post-graduate levels. 
Review Process 
The proposal for each volume is reviewed by the main editor and/or the advisory 
board. The books of this series are reviewed in a single blind peer review process. 
Ethics Statement for this series can be found in the Springer standard guidelines 
here https://www.springer.com/us/authors-editors/journal-author/journal-author-hel 
pdesk/before-you-start/before-you-start/1330#c14214.

Yash Agrawal · Kavicharan Mummaneni · 
P. Uma Sathyakam 
Editors 
Interconnect Technologies 
for Integrated Circuits 
and Flexible Electronics

Editors 
Yash Agrawal 
Department of Information 
and Communication Technology 
DA-IICT 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India 
P. Uma Sathyakam 
School of Electrical Engineering 
Vellore Institute of Technology 
Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India 
Kavicharan Mummaneni 
Department of Electronics 
and Communication Engineering 
NIT Silchar 
Silchar, Assam, India 
ISSN 2731-4200
ISSN 2731-4219 (electronic) 
Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
ISBN 978-981-99-4475-0
ISBN 978-981-99-4476-7 (eBook) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7 
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse 
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar 
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. 
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. 
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721, 
Singapore

Preface 
Interconnects have become essentially important in integrated circuit (IC) and 
printed-circuit board (PCB) designs. In the present state-of-the-art technologies such 
as network-on-chip, system-on-chip and 3D staggered integrated circuit designs, 
interconnects constitute large portion of the entire system. Interconnects dominantly 
control the signal integrity and are the major source for causing latency, crosstalk 
and power dissipation in the system. These non-idealities exaggerate deeper in 
nanotechnology dimension nodes as technology scales down. 
In an advent to improve the performance of these systems, exploration of 
emerging on-chip/off-chip interconnects has become highly important. This book 
is dedicated towards investigation and modelling of advanced interconnects that 
can suitably match the current as well as future technology requirements. Different 
aspects of interconnects such as materials, its physical characteristics, parasitic 
extraction, design, structure, modelling, machine learning and neural network-based 
models, signalling schemes, crosstalk, signal integrity performance analysis, vari-
ability, reliability and associated electronic-design automation tools are explored and 
systematically detailed. 
The book also covers interconnect technologies for ﬂexible electronic system. 
The ﬂexible electronics have gained much importance in today’s electronic industry 
and are expected to cover a major portion of all consumable electronic products in 
near future. The interconnect technology for ﬂexible electronics system design is 
highly vital and different from the traditional rigid-based interconnects those are laid 
over the hard bound PCBs. The ﬂexible electronics-based systems require assimila-
tion of advanced designs such as stretchable interconnects. These require different 
sets of materials, fabrication process as well as consideration of new added design 
parameters such as elasticity, twisting, folding and bendability. In order to realize 
a wide range of applications where stretching movements are prevalent, such as 
wearable healthcare monitoring, ﬂexible electronic systems comprising of stretch-
able interconnects are essential. The research in ﬂexible electronics and stretchable 
interconnects have progressed gradually over time. However, hunt for sustainable 
ﬂexibility and improved electrical performance still offers a vast ﬁeld of research 
and opportunities to potential researchers.
v

vi
Preface
The various concepts for the aforesaid topics and technologies have been system-
atically covered in the following chapters. The basic analytical modelling of intercon-
nects is handled in Chaps. 1–4. Chapter 1 discusses the importance of reducing the 
complexity of interconnect models that are used to calculate the delay and run time, 
by decreasing the model order through pole clustering and Pade’s approximation. 
Delay and overshoot modelling of T-tree interconnects is outlined in Chap. 2. The  
ﬁnite-difference time-domain (FDTD) model is employed to ﬁnd the performance 
of copper and SWCNT bundle interconnects in Chap. 3. Performance metrics like 
delay, power dissipation and power delay product are modelled for the two cases of 
voltage and current mode signalling schemes. In Chap. 4, factors like delay, crosstalk 
delay, overshoot, peak noise and timing instance are analysed for copper and CNT 
interconnects. 
Long interconnects suffer from propagation delay and signal degradation. So, 
repeaters must be inserted to reduce signal delay and decay. In Chap. 5, the optimal 
repeater number for an interconnect segment is found by using particle swarm opti-
mization and artiﬁcial neural networks-based approach. Chapter 6 is devoted to the 
analysis of Through Silicon Vias (TSVs). They are used for connecting the metal 
layers in a 3D IC. Here the fabrication challenges, geometry, shape and ﬁller materials 
associated with TSVs are discussed. Chapters 7 and 8 discuss about application of 
neural networks and swarm intelligence-based algorithms for on-chip interconnect 
modelling. 
Encoding schemes and test sequences using three level pulse amplitude modula-
tion are discussed in Chap. 9. The PAM3 is compared to non-return to zero (NRZ) 
and four level PAM. Analysis is carried out to ﬁnd the reﬂection coefﬁcient, crosstalk 
and noise interconnects and circuits. 
Chapters 10–16 provide an exhaustive account of ﬂexible and stretchable inter-
connects for emerging applications such as ﬂexible electronics, wearable electronics, 
portable medical devices, defence and aerospace applications. This also includes 
review chapters, which explore the recent, intensive and trendy development of ﬂex-
ible electronics and stretchable interconnects. The study speciﬁcally discusses the 
substrate, device and encapsulation approaches. In addition, an overview of stretch-
able interconnect geometries, fabrication techniques and materials used to fabri-
cate substrate materials are presented. Further, development of sensors on ﬂexible 
substrate is presented to demonstrate the concept of low-cost, lightweight system 
design for application such as plant disease monitoring. Finally, the key develop-
ments in the ﬁeld of ﬂexible electronics and stretchable interconnects have been 
emphasized by including a wide variety of applications. 
Gandhinagar, India 
Silchar, India 
Vellore, India 
Yash Agrawal 
Kavicharan Mummaneni 
P. Uma Sathyakam

Contents 
1
An Efﬁcient Model Order Reduction of Interconnects Using 
Machine Learning for Timing Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 
Kavicharan Mummaneni, Malvika, and Vivek Kumar 
2
Delay and Overshoot Modelling of Asymmetric T-Tree 
Interconnects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9 
Malvika, Vivek Kumar, and Kavicharan Mummaneni 
3
Explicit Power-Delay Models for On-Chip Copper 
and SWCNT Bundle Interconnects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21 
Yash Agrawal, Vinay Palaparthy, Mekala Girish Kumar, 
Kavicharan Mummaneni, and Rajeevan Chandel 
4
Modelling and Analysis of Copper and Carbon Nanotube 
VLSI Interconnects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37 
Kavicharan Mummaneni, Vivek Kumar, Malvika, 
and P. Uma Sathyakam 
5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects . . . . . . . . . . .
57 
Wen-Sheng Zhao 
6
Through Silicon Vias for 3D Integration—A Mini Review . . . . . . . . .
81 
Yachana Arora, Vandana Boora, Rohit Dhiman, 
and Rajeevan Chandel 
7
Neural Networks for Fast Design Space Exploration 
of On-Chip Interconnect Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99 
Somesh Kumar and Rahul Kumar 
8
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Variants of Swarm 
Intelligence for Circuits and Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115 
Surendra Hemaram, Aksh Chordia, and Jai Narayan Tripathi
vii

viii
Contents
9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison 
to NRZ and PAM4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137 
Sherman Shan Chen, Francesco de Paulis, David R. Stauffer, 
and Brian Holden 
10 
Emerging Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits 
and Flexible Electronics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
161 
Hansel Desmond D’Silva and Amit Kumar 
11 
Contact and Interconnect Considerations for Organic 
and Flexible Electronics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
181 
Gargi Konwar and Shree Prakash Tiwari 
12 
Stretchable Interconnects: Materials, Geometry, Fabrication, 
and Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
203 
Vivek Kumar, Malvika, Yash Agrawal, and Kavicharan Mummaneni 
13 
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
221 
Gulafsha Bhatti, Yash Agrawal, Vinay Palaparthy, 
Mummaneni Kavicharan, and Meenu Agrawal 
14 
Delay Analysis of Different Stretchable Interconnect 
Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
249 
Kavicharan Mummaneni, Vivek Kumar, Malvika, and Yash Agrawal 
15 
Flexible Sensors for Plant Disease Monitoring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
259 
Kamlesh S. Patle, Priyanka Khaparde, Gulafsha Bhatti, 
Yash Agrawal, and Vinay S. Palaparthy 
16 
GaitTracker: A Digital Platform for Measuring, Detecting 
and Analyzing Gait Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
269 
Aniruddh Jayant Muley, Kalyan Sasidhar, and Ronak Dhokai

About the Editors 
Dr. Yash Agrawal is faculty at Dhirubhai Ambani Institute of Information and 
Communication Technology (DA-IICT) Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India. He has accom-
plished his Postdoc in network-on-chip design and graphene materials from Univer-
sity of Rennes, France. He graduated with his Ph.D. and M.Tech. degrees from the 
National Institute of Technology (NIT) Hamirpur, HP, India. He attained university 
rank from Nagpur University during his B.E. degree in Electronics and Communica-
tion in 2009. He achieved the third place in all India Mentor Graphics design contest 
held at Bengaluru, India, in 2011. 
His research interest includes VLSI interconnects, EMC and signal integrity 
of high speed interconnects, optimization schemes, numerical method anal-
ysis, nanotechnology, network-on-chip designs, ﬂexible electronics, FPGA-based 
designs, image processing using VLSI architectures, VLSI design for bio-medical 
devices, etc. He has conducted various Government funded workshops and confer-
ences. He has several publications in contributed books, journals, and various national 
and international conferences of repute. He has received IETE K. S. Krishnan Memo-
rial Award for best system oriented paper in 2017. He is reviewer of various reputed 
journals. He is a member of IEEE and chair of IEEE SSC&ED societies, Gujarat 
section 2023. 
Dr. Kavicharan Mummaneni received B.Tech. degree in Electronics and Commu-
nication Engineering Department from JNTU Hyderabad, M.Tech. degree in Elec-
tronics Design and Technology specialization from NIT Calicut and Ph.D. in VLSI 
domain from NIT Warangal. Currently working as an Assistant Professor-I at 
National Institute of Technology Silchar. His research interests include: Micro-
electronic devices, VLSI interconnects, Signal Integrity, Power Integrity, Device 
Modelling, Carbon Nanotube Interconnects, Flexible electronic design. He has 
published several research papers and book chapters in the domain of Micro/ 
Nanoelectronic devices and circuits. He is a Senior IEEE member and Fellow of 
IETE India.
ix

x
About the Editors
Dr. P. Uma Sathyakam is working as Associate Professor in the School of Electrical 
Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, where he earned his M.S. (by 
Research) in Nanoelectronics and VLSI in 2011 and his Ph.D. in Nanoelectronics in 
2018. Prior to this, he earned his B.Sc. Electronics from University of Kerala, Thiru-
vananthapuram in 2005 and M.Sc. Applied Electronics from Bharathiar University, 
Coimbatore with distinction and Gold medal in 2007. 
He served as a Research Fellow in a MHRD sponsored project on ‘Development 
of online Lab in Microelectronics and VLSI’ at VIT. He was also a Research Asso-
ciate during his M.S. at VIT. He has more than 13 years of teaching and research 
experience. 
His current research interests are nano-electrodes for supercapacitors, Plasmonics, 
VLSI interconnects, carbon nanotube electronics, graphene, electronic materials and 
renewable energy materials. He has authored three books and 25 papers in peer 
reviewed journals and conferences. He is an Associate Editor of Nanotechnology for 
Environmental Engineering, a Springer Nature journal. He is also a peer reviewer 
for many journals. He has reviewed more than 75 papers for journals from IEEE, 
Elsevier, Springer, IET, Nature, Taylor & Francis, Trans Tech Publishers, and Wiley. 
He is a Senior Member of IEEE EDS/EPS.

Chapter 1 
An Efﬁcient Model Order Reduction 
of Interconnects Using Machine Learning 
for Timing Analysis 
Kavicharan Mummaneni, Malvika, and Vivek Kumar 
Abstract An interconnect can be modeled as a linear RLC equivalent, and this 
accurate interconnect structure can be modeled by using complex and higher-order 
transfer functions. These complex and higher-order transfer functions generally 
require large resources in terms of memory and time, especially for a timing anal-
ysis tool to calculate the interconnect delay (net delay) and run time, which is very 
high because of higher number of poles. This chapter describes the methodology to 
reduce the higher-order transfer function to lower-order transfer function keeping in 
view that stability and response of the reduced system should be matched with the 
original higher-order system. The model order reduction achieves an advantage in 
terms of memory and time complexity. This work utilizes pole clustering and Pade’s 
approximation techniques to reduce the order of the system. 
Keywords Machine learning · Pole clustering · Interconnects · Pade’s 
approximation · Markov parameters 
Introduction 
The research of algorithms which get better over practice is known as machine 
learning. Utilizing sample data, machine learning aims to establish a model known 
as training dataset. It is mostly chosen for predicting and decision-making which is 
not externally programmed. In machine learning (ML), mainly two types of clus-
tering techniques are useful in these applications. Those are partitional clustering and 
hierarchical clustering. Along with these clustering techniques, numerator reduction 
has been performed using Pade’s approximation. The objective of this work is to 
condense the order of higher-order original transfer function so that the reduced 
ordered system should mimic the original system. The correlation between two
K. Mummaneni envelope symbol · Malvika · V. Kumar 
Department of Electronics and Communication, NIT Silchar, Silchar, Assam, India 
e-mail: kavicharan@ece.nits.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_1 
1

2
K. Mummaneni et al.
systems can be observed by the metrics such as the integral square error of step 
responses and transient delay parameters like rise time, settling time, and delay time 
differences. In addition, timing metrics correlation in frequency response has been 
calculated in terms of bandwidth. 
The proposed machine learning technique is based on pole clustering approach 
(Beyene 2017) and Pade’s approximation (Jay Singha and Vishwakarma 2016) for  
reducing the order of transfer function. The denominator of the higher-order transfer 
function has been simpliﬁed by pole clustering approach and for numerator reduction, 
the moments matching technique is used. However, order reduction should be done 
in such a way that stability and response of the system must be retained in the reduced 
model. To compare both the reduced system with original system, integral square 
error (ISE) and timing metrics are introduced in the work. 
Pole clustering is a technique that clusters a given set of poles by searching the 
hidden patterns that may be present in the set. It is a process of grouping “similar” 
poles into disjointed pole clusters. Clustering is generally of two types: partitional 
clustering and hierarchical clustering. Partitional clustering divides random poles 
into a set of clusters called as partitions. In this kind of clustering, initially the 
user must deﬁne the required number of clusters such as K-Means clustering. In 
hierarchical clustering, the algorithms repeat the cycle of either merging smaller 
clusters into larger ones or dividing larger clusters into smaller ones. Finally, it 
produces a hierarchy of clusters called a dendrogram (Beyene 2017), which is a 
graphical representation of the clusters to display the hierarchy very clearly. 
Both K-means and agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithms require some 
distance measure to be deﬁned in the data space. Euclidean distance, Manhattan 
distance, Minkowski distance, and cosine similarity are some of the most used metrics 
of similarity for numeric data. For pole clustering, the distance measure that preserves 
the dominant poles has been used to generate stable reduced order models (Han and 
Kamber 2012; Vishwakarma and Prasad 2008a). The methods calculate the cluster 
centers using the poles in each cluster by applying the Inverse Distance Measure 
(IDM) criteria. 
Proposed Model Order Reduction 
A SISO causal LTI dynamic system is represented below. 
Let the transfer function of higher-order original system be of the order “n” (Jay 
Singha and Vishwakarma 2016). 
upper G Sub script  n Base l in e  le ft parenthesis s right parenthesis equals StartFraction a 0 plus a 1 s plus a 2 s squared plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus a Subscript n minus 1 Baseline s Superscript n minus 1 Baseline Over b 0 plus b 1 s plus b 2 s squared plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus b Subscript n Baseline s Superscript n Baseline EndFraction
up er G S ubscrip t  n  B as eline 
left parenthesis s right parenthesis equals StartFraction a 0 plus a 1 s plus a 2 s squared plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus a Subscript n minus 1 Baseline s Superscript n minus 1 Baseline Over b 0 plus b 1 s plus b 2 s squared plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus b Subscript n Baseline s Superscript n Baseline EndFraction
The corresponding desired reduced order model for kth order system 
(Vishwakarma and Prasad 2008b) is

1
An Efﬁcient Model Order Reduction of Interconnects Using Machine …
3
upper G Sub script  k Base lin e  left parenthesis s right parenthesis equals StartFraction c 0 plus c 1 s plus c 2 s squared plus ellipsis a Subscript k minus 1 Baseline s Superscript k minus 1 Baseline Over d 0 plus d 1 s plus d 2 s squared plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus d Subscript n Baseline s Superscript k Baseline EndFraction
up er G S ubscrip t  k  B as eline 
left parenthesis s right parenthesis equals StartFraction c 0 plus c 1 s plus c 2 s squared plus ellipsis a Subscript k minus 1 Baseline s Superscript k minus 1 Baseline Over d 0 plus d 1 s plus d 2 s squared plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus d Subscript n Baseline s Superscript k Baseline EndFraction
The resultant denominator from pole clustering results as 
upper D Sub script k Baselin e  l e f t  pa renthe
sis s right parenthesis equals left parenthesis s minus p Subscript e Baseline 1 Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis s minus p Subscript e Baseline 2 Baseline right parenthesis ellipsis ellipsis left parenthesis s minus p Subscript e k Baseline right parenthesis
The reduced numerator is obtained by applying Pade’s approximations. 
Denominator Reduction 
The denominator of transfer function is reduced to kth order using pole clustering 
approach by using inverse distance metric. The initial step of denominator reduction 
is to divide the total poles in the form of clusters. The outcome of clustering will 
be groups of poles (clusters) with disjoint poles, i.e., clusters that are formed must 
be different; any two clusters should not have even a single common pole. In the 
formation of clusters, one needs to arrange the poles in an order so that they can be 
easily divided. The poles are arranged in the decreasing order of their dominance and 
clusters are formed in such a way that the ﬁrst cluster has the most dominant poles 
and subsequent clusters can have lesser dominant poles than their previous cluster 
(Vishwakarma and Prasad 2009). The cluster center is derived by using the following 
algorithm and the output of algorithm is a reduced order pole. 
Algorithm 
Let us assume each cluster has “r” number of poles p1, p2, p3 ….. pr respectively. 
1. Let “r” denotes number of poles in the cluster such that |p1| < |  p2 |< | p3|…..|pr| 
2. Set j = 1 
3. Find the pole cluster using 
c  S ub
sc
ri
pt
 j
 
B
ase
l
i
ne equals left bracket left parenthesis sigma summation Underscript j equals 2 Overscript r Endscripts left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue p Subscript i Baseline minus p 1 EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue p 1 EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis right parenthesis divided by r right bracket Superscript negative 1 Baseline
c Su bscri
p
t
 
j Baseline equals left bracket left parenthesis sigma summation Underscript j equals 2 Overscript r Endscripts left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue p Subscript i Baseline minus p 1 EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue p 1 EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis right parenthesis divided by r right bracket Superscript negative 1 Baseline
c Su
bsc
ript j
 B
as
eli
ne equals left bracket left parenthesis sigma summation Underscript j equals 2 Overscript r Endscripts left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue p Subscript i Baseline minus p 1 EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue p 1 EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis right parenthesis divided by r right bracket Superscript negative 1 Baseline
4. Set j = j + 1. 
5. Now ﬁnd a modiﬁed or new cluster center from Vishwakarma and Prasad (2008b). 
c  S u
bsc
ri pt j Baseline equals left bracket left parenthesis left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue p 1 EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis right parenthesis plus left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue c Subscript j minus 1 Baseline EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis right parenthesis divided by 2 right bracket Superscript negative 1
c Su
bs
c
r
i
pt j Baseline equals left bracket left parenthesis left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue p 1 EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis right parenthesis plus left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue c Subscript j minus 1 Baseline EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis right parenthesis divided by 2 right bracket Superscript negative 1
c S ubs
cr
ip
t j
 Bas
eline equals left bracket left parenthesis left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue p 1 EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis right parenthesis plus left parenthesis minus StartFraction 1 Over StartAbsoluteValue c Subscript j minus 1 Baseline EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction right parenthesis right parenthesis divided by 2 right bracket Superscript negative 1

4
K. Mummaneni et al.
6. Check whether j = r + 1, if not go to step 4 
7. Else consider the result in 5th step as cluster center. 
Let us consider an example transfer function 
uper G  S ubscri pt n Basel ine left pa renthesis s  right par enthesis equals S tartFraction 40320 plus 185760 s plus 222088 s squared plus 122664 s cubed plus 36380 s Superscript 4 Baseline plus 5982 s Superscript 5 Baseline plus 514 s Superscript 6 Baseline plus 18 s Superscript 7 Baseline Over 40320 plus 109584 s plus 118124 s squared plus 67284 s cubed plus 2244 s Superscript 4 Baseline plus 4536 s Superscript 5 Baseline plus 514 s Superscript 6 Baseline plus 36 s Superscript 7 Baseline plus s Superscript 8 Baseline EndFraction
upper G Subscrip t n Baselin e left par enthesis s right p arenthes is equa ls St
artFraction 40320 plus 185760 s plus 222088 s squared plus 122664 s cubed plus 36380 s Superscript 4 Baseline plus 5982 s Superscript 5 Baseline plus 514 s Superscript 6 Baseline plus 18 s Superscript 7 Baseline Over 40320 plus 109584 s plus 118124 s squared plus 67284 s cubed plus 2244 s Superscript 4 Baseline plus 4536 s Superscript 5 Baseline plus 514 s Superscript 6 Baseline plus 36 s Superscript 7 Baseline plus s Superscript 8 Baseline EndFraction
The above transfer function has 8 poles, and it can be reduced to 2nd order by 
reducing the effective number of poles to 2. 
Total number of poles (n) = 8. 
Order of required reduced model (k) = 2. 
As can be seen now, number of clusters = order of reduced model. 
Number of clusters required = 2. 
Maximum number of Poles per cluster = n/k = 4. 
1st cluster: (−1, −2, −3, −4), 2nd cluster: (−5, −6, −7, −8). 
Cluster centers obtained from algorithm are 
1st cluster center: −1.0186, 2nd cluster center: −4.5606. 
2nd order Denominator is (S + 1.0186) (S + 4.5606) 
equal s upper S squared 
plus 5.5792 upper S plus 4.6454
Numerator Reduction 
Numerator of reduced order model is obtained from Pade’s approximations. The 
original nth order system can be expanded in power series about s = 0 as  
upper G Sub script  n Base lin e  left parenthesis s right parenthesis equals StartFraction a 0 plus a 1 s plus a 2 s squared plus ellipsis plus a Subscript n minus 1 Baseline s Superscript n minus 1 Baseline Over b 0 plus b 1 s plus b 2 s squared plus ellipsis plus b Subscript n Baseline s Superscript n Baseline EndFraction equals t 0 plus t 1 s plus t 2 s squared plus period period period
upp er G S ubscrip t n  B aseline 
left parent hesis s  righ
t parenthesis equals StartFraction a 0 plus a 1 s plus a 2 s squared plus ellipsis plus a Subscript n minus 1 Baseline s Superscript n minus 1 Baseline Over b 0 plus b 1 s plus b 2 s squared plus ellipsis plus b Subscript n Baseline s Superscript n Baseline EndFraction equals t 0 plus t 1 s plus t 2 s squared plus period period period
where t0, t1, t2 are called timing moments. 
The timing moments capture the low-frequency dynamics of the system response. 
In general, the low-frequency variations are observed during the steady state behavior 
of the system. These coefﬁcients are also termed as low-frequency moments, and 
purposefully introduced to match steady-state moments of reduced model to that 
of original model. These parameters can be obtained from simulations in a simple 
method by dividing the numerator with its denominator of the transfer function by 
arranging the terms from lower powers of “s” to higher powers of “s”. 
The transfer function considered in (1.6) has timing moments as 1.0000, 1.8893, 
and 2.5563 respectively. In contrast to these timing moments, original transfer 
function can be expanded in power series about S = ∞ as

1
An Efﬁcient Model Order Reduction of Interconnects Using Machine …
5
upper G Sub script  n Base l in e  le ft parenthesis s right parenthesis equals StartFraction a 0 plus a 1 s plus a 2 s squared plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus a Subscript n minus 1 Baseline s Superscript n minus 1 Baseline Over b 0 plus b 1 s plus b 2 s squared plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus b Subscript n Baseline s Superscript n Baseline EndFraction equals upper M 0 s Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper M 1 s Superscript negative 2 Baseline plus upper M 2 s Superscript negative 3 Baseline plus ellipsis
up er G S ubscrip t  n  B as eline 
left par enthesis  s right  pa r e n
thesis equals StartFraction a 0 plus a 1 s plus a 2 s squared plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus a Subscript n minus 1 Baseline s Superscript n minus 1 Baseline Over b 0 plus b 1 s plus b 2 s squared plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus b Subscript n Baseline s Superscript n Baseline EndFraction equals upper M 0 s Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper M 1 s Superscript negative 2 Baseline plus upper M 2 s Superscript negative 3 Baseline plus ellipsis
where M0, M1, and M2 are called Markov parameters (Vishwakarma and Prasad 
2008b). 
The Markov parameters capture the high-frequency dynamics of system at expan-
sion point S = ∞. In general, the high-frequency variations are observed during the 
initial transient behavior of the system. 
up er M Subscript i Baseline equals StartFraction d Superscript i Baseline h left parenthesis t right parenthesis Over d Superscript i Baseline t EndFraction
uper
 M Subscript i Baseline equals StartFraction d Superscript i Baseline h left parenthesis t right parenthesis Over d Superscript i Baseline t EndFraction
The ﬁrst Markov moment is nothing but the impulse response at t = 0. The 
transfer function considered in (1.6) has Markov parameter values as 18, −134, and 
978 respectively. 
To ﬁnd out the reduced order model numerator coefﬁcients, equate the assumed 
reduced model transfer function in (1.2) with power series about S = 0 and S = ∞ 
(Jay Singha and Vishwakarma 2016). 
upper G Sub script  k Base lin e  left parenthesis s right parenthesis equals StartFraction c 0 plus c 1 s plus c 2 s squared plus ellipsis a Subscript k minus 1 Baseline s Superscript k minus 1 Baseline Over d 0 plus d 1 s plus d 2 s squared plus ellipsis plus d Subscript n Baseline s Superscript k Baseline EndFraction equals t 0 plus t 1 s plus t 2 s squared plus period period period
up er G S ubscrip t k  B aseline left parent hesis s  righ
t parenthesis equals StartFraction c 0 plus c 1 s plus c 2 s squared plus ellipsis a Subscript k minus 1 Baseline s Superscript k minus 1 Baseline Over d 0 plus d 1 s plus d 2 s squared plus ellipsis plus d Subscript n Baseline s Superscript k Baseline EndFraction equals t 0 plus t 1 s plus t 2 s squared plus period period period
Reduced order denominator is obtained with pole clustering as in (1.3). Cross-
multiply (1.11) is followed by comparison of coefﬁcients. The reduced numerator 
coefﬁcients are 
c 0  equals d 0 t 0
c 1  equals  d 0 t 1 plus d 1 t 0
c 2  equals  d 0 t 2 plus
 d 1 t 1 plus d 1 t 0
These equations are valid only if timing moments are used in the numerator 
reduction. The method to ﬁnd timing moments is observed as dividing numerator by 
denominator when terms are arranged from lower powers of “s” to higher powers of 
“s”. In the other way, Markov parameters are observed when numerator is divided 
by denominator when terms are arranged from higher powers of “s” to lower powers 
of “s”. As a result, in reduced numerator coefﬁcients, lower powers of “s” coefﬁ-
cients are associated with timing moments and higher powers of “s” coefﬁcients are 
associated with Markov parameters as follows: 
Lower power “s” coefﬁcients: c 0  equals d 0 t 0
c 1  equals  d 0 t 1 plus d 1 t 0

6
K. Mummaneni et al.
Higher power “s” coefﬁcients: c Sub scrip t k minus 1 Baseline equals d Subscript k Baseline upper M 0
c Sub scrip t k  minus 2 
Baseline equals d Subscript k Baseline upper M 1 plus d Subscript k minus 1 Baseline upper M 0
These equations can be generalized to any higher-order transfer function reduc-
tion. 
Results and Discussions 
Consider the timing moments in numerator reduction from the values in (1.12) and 
(1.7). 
C0 = 4.6454, C1 = 14.3557, which results in 2nd order transfer function (Fig. 1.1): 
upper G
 2 left p arenthesis s right parenthesis equals StartFraction 14.3557 s plus 4.6454 Over s squared plus 5.5792 s plus 4.6454 EndFraction
up er G 2 lef t parenth
esis s right parenthesis equals StartFraction 14.3557 s plus 4.6454 Over s squared plus 5.5792 s plus 4.6454 EndFraction
Consider both timing and Markov moments, from the Eqs. (1.13) and (1.7) 
c 0 = 4.6454, c 1 = 18, which results in 2nd order transfer function (Fig. 1.2): 
upper G
 2 l eft parenthesis s right parenthesis equals StartFraction 18 s plus 4.6454 Over s squared plus 5.5792 s plus 4.6454 EndFraction
up er G 2 lef t parenth
esis s right parenthesis equals StartFraction 18 s plus 4.6454 Over s squared plus 5.5792 s plus 4.6454 EndFraction
Fig. 1.1 Step response 
comparison of original 
system and reduced system 
(with timing moments) 

1
An Efﬁcient Model Order Reduction of Interconnects Using Machine …
7
Fig. 1.2 Step response 
comparison of original 
system and reduced system 
(with timing moments and 
Markov parameters) 
The Integral Square Error (ISE) is considered to compare the step response of 
reduced system and original system, because square of the error value gives an actual 
idea about accuracy and the difference may nullify the actual error by canceling the 
positive errors and negative errors. It can be observed from Table 1.1 that the error 
value is less as compared to others when only timing moments are used. The rise 
time, peak time, and settling time of Markov moments-based method provides close 
match with the original system (Vishwakarma and Prasad 2009, 2011; Komarasamy 
2011). 
Table 1.2 presents the comparison of step response of original system and 
reduced systems. As discussed already, Markov moments capture the high frequency 
dynamics of the system in terms of rise time and bandwidth parameters which are 
closer to the original system when Markov moments are introduced as compared to 
other methods. The purpose of order reduction is mainly used in timing analysis, as 
paramount importance is given to match the response parameters.
Table 1.1 Comparison of step response of proposed method with existing method 
S.no
Method
Rise time
Peak time 
1
Timing moments
0.0692
0.5049 
2
Timing and Markov parameters
0.0525
0.4847 
3
Existing method (Ramawat et al. 2012)
0.082
0.531 

8
K. Mummaneni et al.
Table 1.2 Comparison of step response of original system and reduced systems 
S. no
Response parameter
Original system
Reduced system with 
timing moments 
Reduced system with 
timing and Markov 
moments 
1
Rise time (sec)
0.0569
0.0692
0.0525 
2
Peak time (sec)
0.4490
0.5049
0.4847 
3
Settling time (sec)
4.8201
4.5992
4.5781 
4
Bandwidth (Hz)
24.3644
19.7336
24.9933 
5
ISE
0.299
0.0094 
Conclusion 
This chapter presented signiﬁcant improvement in estimation of rise time, peak time, 
and bandwidth with the introduction of timing moments and Markov moments as 
compared to the existing methods. The proposed method mainly depends upon devel-
oping an expansion point and cluster center formula. Expansion points are considered 
here as S = 0 and S = ∞. Having S  = 0, same steady state accuracy and gain is 
attained by accounting timing moments, while, at S = ∞, a relatively similar behavior 
by taking Markov moments into consideration is obtained, thereby, preserving the 
transient response. By choosing further optimized proper expansion point, i.e., region 
of frequency of interest, better accuracy can be attained. 
References 
Beyene WT (2017) Reduced-order modeling of high-speed channels using machine learning 
techniques: partitional and hierarchical clustering. IEEE EPEPS. 
Bhasker J, Chadha R (2009) Static timing analysis for nanometer designs. A Practical Approach, 
Springer 
Han J, Kamber M (2012) Data mining concepts and techniques, Waltham. Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, MA 
Komarasamy R, Albhonso N, Gurusamy G (2011) Order reduction of linear systems with an 
improved pole clustering. J Vib Control, 1876–1885 
Ramawat K, Bhandari M, Kumar A (2012) Model order reduction by pade approximation 
and improved pole clustering technique. In: Energy Technology & Ecological Concerns: A 
Contemporary Approach, pp 103–107. 
Singha J, Vishwakarma CB, Chattterjeea K (2016) Biased reduction method by combining improved 
modiﬁed pole clustering and improved pade approximations. Appl Math Model 1418–1426 
Vishwakarma CB, Prasad R (2008a) System reduction using modiﬁed pole clustering and pade 
approximation. In: xxii national system conference. 
Vishwakarma B, Prasad R (2008b) Clustering method for reducing order of linear system using 
padé approximation. IETE J Res 54:326–330 
Vishwakarma CB, Prasad R (2009) MIMO system reduction using pole clustering and genetic 
algorithm. Model Simul Eng 1–5. 
Waste NHE, Harris DM (2011) CMOS VLSI design a circuits and systems perspective. Pearson 
Education

Chapter 2
Delay and Overshoot Modelling
of Asymmetric T-Tree Interconnects
Malvika, Vivek Kumar, and Kavicharan Mummaneni
Abstract With lower technology nodes and higher data rates, signal integrity has
become a big challenge nowadays. The chip performance and signal integrity depend
on interconnect delay in deep submicron (DSM) technology nodes. The performance
and packing density of high functionality chips are limited by the interconnect
delay than the overall circuit delay. This paper discusses the delay and overshoot
modeling of asymmetric T-tree interconnect. These delay and overshoot modeling
areperformedbasedonthenumericalLaplaceinversionmethod.Theproposedmodel
is based on the Gaver-Stehfest method, which provides a relationship between the
time-varying function and the linear combination of values of transform function. In
this work, 50% delay and overshoot are estimated for asymmetric T-tree intercon-
nect for different line lengths, source resistance, and load capacitance. In order to
validate the accuracy of the proposed model, the estimated 50% delay and overshoot
values are compared with the standard LT Spice model and are found to be in good
agreement.
Keywords Delay · Signal integrity · Asymmetric T-tree interconnect ·
ABCD-matrix · Gaver-stehfest based model
Introduction
Nowadays due to scaling down the transistor sizes, i.e., lower technology node,
owing to higher data rate and larger operating frequency of devices, signal integrity
has become a big challenge. Since the area of chip is decreasing and the number
of transistors in a chip is increasing, interconnect modeling has become more chal-
lenging. Due to this, the spacing between interconnect is decreasing which leads
to higher coupling between interconnects and signal integrity issues. Delay is an
important factor for determining the performance of silicon on chip (SoCs) where
Malvika envelope symbol · V. Kumar · K. Mummaneni
Department of Electronics and Communication, NIT Silchar, Silchar, Assam, India
e-mail: malvikathakur16@gmail.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024
Y. Agrawal et al. (eds.), Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_2
9

10
Malvika et al.
long interconnects are used for the connection of cores of Intellectual property blocks.
This is because as technology scaled down, interconnect delay does not scale along
with gate delay. The performance and packing density of high-functionality chips are
limited by the interconnect delay than the overall circuit delay. One in ﬁve chips fails
due to signal integrity. Due to the lower technology node, millions of transistors are
used in a single chip and correspondingly millions of interconnects are required to
connect those transistors that make the distance between interconnect very less and
causing crosstalk induced delay which makes interconnect analysis very challenging.
Hence, calculation of delay and overshoot is highly important for the performance
of the chip and reliability.
Delay and overshoot analyses can be implemented through analytical models or
simulation techniques (tools) like SPICE to get accurate results. For layout optimiza-
tion, these simulation techniques are computationally expensive. Hence analytical
models can be used for ﬁnding delay and overshoot (Sakurai 1993; Kobayashi and
Sakurai 1991; Friedman et al. 2000; Mehrotra and Bannerjee 2002; Muddu and
Kahng 1997; Coulibaly and Kadim 2005; Asai and Tanji 2004). Earlier, the signal
delay is calculated by using Elmore’s model which uses only resistance and capaci-
tance where inductance is neglected. Elmore’s models are used for two-pole transfer
functions. To ﬁnd the signal delay and to capture the high-frequency effect of the
dominant inductive RLC line, two poles are not enough, hence these models are
limited. Nowadays due to higher operating speed and longer length of interconnect,
wire inductance cannot be ignored. To obtain higher accuracy in a high-speed VLSI
circuit, effect of inductance needs to be included along with resistance and capac-
itance. Several research works are going on for analytical modeling of RLC inter-
connect. Model order reduction techniques such as asymptotic waveform evaluation
(AWE) and passive reduced-order interconnect macro-modeling algorithm (PRIMA)
have been used for accurate modeling of interconnects in Pillage and Rohrer (1990);
Odabasioglu et al. 1998). These two methods yield the higher-order transfer func-
tion, which makes the computation complex. These model order reduction techniques
are restricted to two and multi-conductor lines which are identical and having the
same driver and load. In (Dounavis et al. 1999, 2001), interconnect analysis is devel-
oped which utilizes exponential matrix rational approximation models such as Pade
approximation (Roy and Dounavis 2009) and matrix Pade approximation method
(Kavicharan et al. 2015) that can be obtained from predetermined co-efﬁcient. Many
delay models have been proposed to calculate the delay of symmetric single, tree, and
multi-conductor lines (Pillage and Rohrer 1990; Odabasioglu et al. 1998; Dounavis
et al. 1999, 2001; Roy and Dounavis 2009; Kavicharan et al. 2015). Hence, there is a
great demand for developing accurate models for the analysis of asymmetric T-tree
interconnect.
In this work, an analytical method for on-chip RLC distributed interconnect is
proposed for signal delay evaluation. The proposed model is more accurate than
above mentioned analytical models (Roy and Dounavis 2009; Kavicharan et al.
2015). In this paper, delay and overshoot of asymmetric T-tree interconnect are esti-
mated. These delay and overshoot modeling are performed based on the numerical
Laplace inversion method. It is based on the Gaver-Stehfest method, which provides

2
Delay and Overshoot Modelling of Asymmetric T-Tree Interconnects
11
a relationship between the time-varying function and the linear combinations of the
transform functions values. The paper is organized as follows. Section “Proposed
Model” contains the analysis of 1:2 asymmetric T-tree interconnect network. The
overall voltage transfer function is calculated with the help of ABCD-matrix anal-
yses and the expression for ﬁnal output voltage is derived. Then the Gaver-Stehfest
algorithmisemployedforthecalculationofdelayandovershoot.Section“Simulation
and Results” contains the simulation results. Finally, Sect. “Conclusion” concludes
the work.
Proposed Model
Analysis of 1:2 Asymmetric T-Tree InterConnect
In this section, 1:2 asymmetrical T-tree interconnect is considered. The distributed
asymmetric T-tree interconnect is considered as single input multiple output (SIMO)
topology. The asymmetrical T-tree interconnect transfer function is extracted with
the help of ABCD-matrix analysis. The elements of the T-tree interconnect topology
are considered as transmission lines which are deﬁned with the physical length and
characteristic impedance. The asymmetrical T-tree interconnect network comprises
a single input node and two output nodes. The equivalent circuit of input and output
path is represented with simpliﬁed single input and single output (SISO) ABCD-
matrix. The analytical expression of single input single output transfer function is
the behavioral model of T-tree interconnect. This transfer function is used for the
predictionoftimedomainandfrequencydomainresponsesofthe1:2asymmetricalT-
tree interconnect for any electrical path (Modelling and of asymmetrical interconnect
T-tree laminated on ﬂexible substrate (2015); Ravelo et al (2014)).
Figure 2.1 shows the representation of 1:2 asymmetrical distributed T-tree inter-
connect network with single input and two output branches. The input transmission
line is denoted by characteristic impedance upper Z Subscript i n and physical length d Subscript i n. The output
transmission line branches are denoted by characteristic impedance upper Z Subscript upper C k and physical
length d Subscript k where k = 1, 2. The source voltage upper V Subscript i n is connected to input transmission
line u pper T upper L Subscript i n through source impedance upper Z Subscript s. u pper T upper L Subscript 1 and u pper T upper L Subscript 2 denote ﬁrst and second output
branch transmission line with load impedances upper Z Subscript upper L Baseline 1 and upper Z Subscript upper L Baseline 2.
The characteristic impedance of output transmission lines “u pper T upper L Subscript k” is given as
upper Z Subscript upper C k Baseline left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis equals StartRoot upper R left parenthesis s right parenthesis plus s upper L left parenthesis s right parenthesis divided by upper G left parenthesis s right parenthesis plus s upper C left parenthesis s right parenthesis EndRoot w h e r e k equals 1 comma 2
/
uppe r sZ Subscri p t upp er C k  Ba s
eline left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis equals StartRoot upper R left parenthesis s right parenthesis plus s upper L left parenthesis s right parenthesis divided by upper G left parenthesis s right parenthesis plus s upper C left parenthesis s right parenthesis EndRoot w h e r e k equals 1 comma 2
The propagation constant of output transmission lines “u pper T upper L Subscript k” is given as
norma l gamma Subscript k Baseline left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis equals StartRoot left parenthesis upper R left parenthesis s right parenthesis plus s upper L left parenthesis s right parenthesis right parenthesis asterisk left parenthesis upper G left parenthesis s right parenthesis plus s upper C left parenthesis s right parenthesis right parenthesis EndRoot
/
norma l sgamma  Subsc r iptsk 
Baseline left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis equals StartRoot left parenthesis upper R left parenthesis s right parenthesis plus s upper L left parenthesis s right parenthesis right parenthesis asterisk left parenthesis upper G left parenthesis s right parenthesis plus s upper C left parenthesis s right parenthesis right parenthesis EndRoot
Electrical length of input transmission line “u pper T upper L Subscript i n” is obtained as

12
Malvika et al.
Fig. 2.1 1:2 asymmetrical distributed T-tree interconnect network
normal  theta S ubs
cript i n Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis equals normal gamma Subscript i n Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis asterisk normal gamma Subscript i n
Electrical length of output transmission line “u p per T upper L Subscript upper K” is evaluated as
norma l  thet a  S
ubscript k Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis equals normal gamma Subscript k Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis asterisk d Subscript k
The ABCD matrices of input transmission line “u pper T upper L Subscript i n” is given as
left bra c
k et normal  upper A nor
mal upper B normal upper C normal upper D right bracket Subscript i n Baseline equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta normal i normal n right parenthesis 2nd Column normal upper Z normal i normal n normal s normal i normal n normal h left parenthesis theta normal i normal n right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column StartFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta normal i normal n right parenthesis Over upper Z i n EndFraction 2nd Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta normal i normal n right parenthesis EndMatrix
lef
t bracket
 
normal upper A normal upper B normal upper C normal upper D right bracket Subscript i n Baseline equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta normal i normal n right parenthesis 2nd Column normal upper Z normal i normal n normal s normal i normal n normal h left parenthesis theta normal i normal n right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column StartFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta normal i normal n right parenthesis Over upper Z i n EndFraction 2nd Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta normal i normal n right parenthesis EndMatrix
The ABCD matrices of output transmission lines “u pper T upper L Subscript k” is deﬁned as
left br ac k
e
t ABCD r
ight bracke
t Subscript 
upper T 
u
pper L Sub Subscript k Baseline equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column cosine h left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis 2nd Column Zcksinh left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column hyperbolic sine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis divided by upper Z Subscript upper C k Baseline 2nd Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis EndMatrix
The asymmetric T-tree network output load impedance ABCD-matrix is given as
left bra c
k
e
t
 upp e
r
 A upper B upper C upper D right bracket Subscript upper Z Sub Subscript k Baseline equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column 1 divided by upper Z Subscript k Baseline 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix
The ABCD matrices of equivalent output branches “u pp e r T upper L Subscript k Baseline minus upper Z Subscript k” is obtained from
(1.6)*(1.7) as
left br acket upper A upper B upper C upper D right bracket Subscript upper T upper L Sub Subscript k Subscript minus upper Z Sub Subscript k =
S
tart 2 B
y 2 Matrix 
1st Row 1st 
Column h
yperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis 2nd Column upper Z c k s i n h left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column hyperbolic sine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis divided by upper Z Subscript upper C k 2nd Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis EndMatrix
*
S
t
a
rt 2  
By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column 1 divided by upper Z Subscript k 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix
left br acket  
u pper A u p per B upper C up
per D right
 bracket Subsc r ipt upper T u
pper L S
u
b Subscript k Subscript minus upper Z Sub Subscript k Baseline equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis plus left parenthesis upper Z Subscript upper C k Baseline divided by upper Z Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis 2nd Column upper Z Subscript upper C k Baseline hyperbolic sine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column left parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis divided by upper Z Subscript upper C k Baseline right parenthesis plus left parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis divided by upper Z Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis 2nd Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis EndMatrix
In order to reduce SIMO (single input multiple output) into SISO (single input
single output), the remaining branches of the network can be considered as an

2
Delay and Overshoot Modelling of Asymmetric T-Tree Interconnects
13
equivalent input admittance with respect to Min to Mk,
upp er Y  
k
 comma n o d e equals StartStartFraction left parenthesis StartFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis Over upper Z c k EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis StartFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis Over upper Z k EndFraction right parenthesis OverOver hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis plus left parenthesis upper Z Subscript upper C k Baseline divided by upper Z Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis EndEndFraction
upp
e
r
 
Y k comma n o d e equals StartStartFraction left parenthesis StartFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis Over upper Z c k EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis StartFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis Over upper Z k EndFraction right parenthesis OverOver hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis plus left parenthesis upper Z Subscript upper C k Baseline divided by upper Z Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis EndEndFraction
up
per Y k comma n o d e equals StartStartFraction left parenthesis StartFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis Over upper Z c k EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis StartFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis Over upper Z k EndFraction right parenthesis OverOver hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis plus left parenthesis upper Z Subscript upper C k Baseline divided by upper Z Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis EndEndFraction
upper Y k  comma n o d e e
quals StartStartFraction left parenthesis StartFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis Over upper Z c k EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis StartFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis Over upper Z k EndFraction right parenthesis OverOver hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis plus left parenthesis upper Z Subscript upper C k Baseline divided by upper Z Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta k right parenthesis EndEndFraction
The total ABCD-matrix of any upper M Subscript i n Baseline normal bar upper M Subscript k electrical path of the network shown in
Fig. 2.1 can be determined with the overall matrix relation as
left bracket  
A B C
D  
r
i ght brac k
e
t
 
Sub scri p
t
 upper M  S u b Subscr
ipt i n Subscript normal bar upper M Sub Subscript k Baseline equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column upper R 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix asterisk left bracket ABCD right bracket Subscript i n Baseline asterisk Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column upper Y k comma n o d e 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix asterisk left bracket ABCD right bracket Subscript upper T upper L Sub Subscript k Baseline asterisk left bracket ABCD right bracket Subscript upper Z Sub Subscript k
Here upper A 11 is the ﬁrst matrix element of above 2*2 matrix multiplication
Sta r tLayout 1s t  Row 1st C
o lumn upper A 11 2nd Column equals left bracket hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper R Over z i n EndFraction sine h left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus left bracket upper Y k comma n o d e upper Z i n hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta i n right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket upper Y k comma n o d e upper R hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket 3rd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z i n Over upper Z c k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis plus right bracket EndLayout
Sta rtL ayout 1s t Row 1s
t
 Colu mn u ppe r A 11 2n d Column e qual s le f t bracket  hyperbol
i
c  cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper R Over z i n EndFraction sine h left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus left bracket upper Y k comma n o d e upper Z i n hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta i n right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket upper Y k comma n o d e upper R hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket 3rd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z i n Over upper Z c k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis plus right bracket EndLayout
Sta rtLayout  1st Row 1st
 Column upper A 11 2nd Column equals left bracket hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper R Over z i n EndFraction sine h left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus left bracket upper Y k comma n o d e upper Z i n hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta i n right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket upper Y k comma n o d e upper R hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket 3rd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z i n Over upper Z c k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis plus right bracket EndLayout
S tartLayout 1st Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column left bracket StartFraction upper R Over upper Z c k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis dot hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis right bracket 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus left bracket StartFraction upper R upper Z c k Over upper Z k upper Z i n EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Y k comma n o d e upper Z i n upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis normal s normal i normal n normal h left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
Sta rtLayout  1st Row 1s
t
 
C olumn Blank 2nd Column left bracket StartFraction upper R Over upper Z c k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis dot hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis right bracket 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus left bracket StartFraction upper R upper Z c k Over upper Z k upper Z i n EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Y k comma n o d e upper Z i n upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis normal s normal i normal n normal h left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
St artLayout  1st Row 1
s
t
 Column Blank 2nd Column left bracket StartFraction upper R Over upper Z c k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis dot hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis right bracket 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus left bracket StartFraction upper R upper Z c k Over upper Z k upper Z i n EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Y k comma n o d e upper Z i n upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis normal s normal i normal n normal h left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
Start Layout 1st Row 1st C
o
l
umn Blan k 2 nd Column left bracket StartFraction upper R Over upper Z c k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis dot hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis right bracket 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus left bracket StartFraction upper R upper Z c k Over upper Z k upper Z i n EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Y k comma n o d e upper Z i n upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis normal s normal i normal n normal h left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
St
artLayout 1st Row
 1st Column Blank 2nd Column left bracket StartFraction upper R Over upper Z c k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis dot hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis right bracket 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus left bracket StartFraction upper R upper Z c k Over upper Z k upper Z i n EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis asterisk right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Y k comma n o d e upper Z i n upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis normal s normal i normal n normal h left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket EndLayout
l e ft bracket StartFraction upper R upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction Cosh left parenthesis theta i n right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z i n Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper R Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket
le
ft bracket StartF
r
a
c tion upper R upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction Cosh left parenthesis theta i n right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z i n Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper R Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket
le ft bracket StartF
r
a
c tion upper R upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction Cosh left parenthesis theta i n right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z i n Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper R Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket
le ft bracket StartF
r
action upper R upper Z c k Over upper Z k EndFraction Cosh left parenthesis theta i n right parenthesis hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper Z i n Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic sine left parenthesis theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket plus left bracket StartFraction upper R Over upper Z k EndFraction hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript i n Baseline right parenthesis hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis normal theta Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis right bracket
The  overal l transf er funct io n is gi ve n  by upper T Subscript upper K Baseline equals StartFraction upper V k left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis Over upper V i n left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper A 11 EndFraction comma w h e r e k equals 1 comma 2
The ov e
rall transfer function is given by upper T Subscript upper K Baseline equals StartFraction upper V k left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis Over upper V i n left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper A 11 EndFraction comma w h e r e k equals 1 comma 2
The
 overa l l  t r
ansfer function is given by upper T Subscript upper K Baseline equals StartFraction upper V k left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis Over upper V i n left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper A 11 EndFraction comma w h e r e k equals 1 comma 2
The Gaver-Stehfest Algorithm
This method is the one-dimensional inversion algorithm in the uniﬁed framework
for numerically inverting Laplace transforms (Sakurai 1993). The uniﬁed framework
for Laplace inversion is based on the given expressions as

14
Malvika et al.
f  le f t par e nthesis t right parenthesis almost equals f Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 1 Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript n Endscripts omega Subscript k Baseline f Superscript and Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction alpha k Over t EndFraction right parenthesis comma 0 less than t less than normal infinity
f
 
l
eft
 p a r
enthesis t right parenthesis almost equals f Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 1 Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript n Endscripts omega Subscript k Baseline f Superscript and Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction alpha k Over t EndFraction right parenthesis comma 0 less than t less than normal infinity
f
 
l e f t  p
arenthesis t right parenthesis almost equals f Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 1 Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript n Endscripts omega Subscript k Baseline f Superscript and Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction alpha k Over t EndFraction right parenthesis comma 0 less than t less than normal infinity
where omega Subscript k represents weights and alpha Subscript k denotes nodes
These weights and nodes are complex numbers and derived from
e S
u
p
ers
cript z Baseline almost equals sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript n Endscripts StartFraction alpha Subscript k Baseline Over omega Subscript k Baseline minus upper Z EndFraction
e S u
perscript z Baseline almost equals sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript n Endscripts StartFraction alpha Subscript k Baseline Over omega Subscript k Baseline minus upper Z EndFraction
The inversion formula for a Laplace transform F(s) is given as
f  le f t parenthesis t right parenthesis almost equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript 2 upper M Endscripts zeta Subscript k Baseline upper F left parenthesis StartFraction k ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
f
 l
e
ft 
pa r
en thesis t right parenthesis almost equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript 2 upper M Endscripts zeta Subscript k Baseline upper F left parenthesis StartFraction k ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
f
 
left parenthesis t right parenthesis almost equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript 2 upper M Endscripts zeta Subscript k Baseline upper F left parenthesis StartFraction k ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
where zeta Subscript k = left parenthesis negative 1 right parenthesis Superscript upper M plus k sigma sum
mation Unde
r script j equals left bracket left parenthesis k plus 1 right parenthesis divided by 2 right bracket Overscript min left brace k comma upper M right brace Endscripts StartFraction j Superscript upper M plus 1 Baseline Over upper M factorial EndFraction
sigma summation Underscript j equals left bracket left parenthesis k plus 1 right parenthesis divided by 2 right bracket Overscript min left brace k comma upper M right brace Endscripts StartFraction j Superscript upper M plus 1 Baseline Over upper M factorial EndFraction
S t
a
rtB i
n
om
i
a l O
rMatrix upper M Choose j EndBinomialOrMatrix StartBinomialOrMatrix 2 j Choose j EndBinomialOrMatrix StartBinomialOrMatrix j Choose k minus j EndBinomialOrMatrix
.
The Pade approximation and matrix Pade-type approximation (MPTA) algorithms
require expressions to calculate poles and residues (Noda et al. 1991; Friedman et al.
2000), where the Gaver-Stehfest inversion formula uses only numerical calculations.
The precision and signiﬁcant digits produced by the above algorithm are directly
proportional to M. For all the simulations, we considered M = 10. For discrete time
calculation, we considered t, ζk and k as vectors of dimensions 1 × T, 1 × 2 M and
1 × 2 M, respectively.
StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction equals left bracket StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 1 EndFraction comma StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 2 EndFraction comma period period period StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t Subscript upper T Baseline EndFraction right bracket
S
t
a rtFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction equals left bracket StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 1 EndFraction comma StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 2 EndFraction comma period period period StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t Subscript upper T Baseline EndFraction right bracket
St
a rtFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction equals left bracket StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 1 EndFraction comma StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 2 EndFraction comma period period period StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t Subscript upper T Baseline EndFraction right bracket
St
a rtF raction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction equals left bracket StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 1 EndFraction comma StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 2 EndFraction comma period period period StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t Subscript upper T Baseline EndFraction right bracket
St
artFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction equals left bracket StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 1 EndFraction comma StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 2 EndFraction comma period period period StartFraction upper I n left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t Subscript upper T Baseline EndFraction right bracket
ze t a Su bsc r i p t k  Base l i ne eq ua ls left bracket zeta 1 comma zeta 2 comma ellipsis period period comma zeta Subscript 2 upper M Baseline right bracket comma k equals left bracket 1 comma 2 comma 3 comma period period .2 upper M right bracket
For single line interconnect, the output function in frequency domain is given as
upper  V Su b scrip
t o Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis equals upper H left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis asterisk upper V Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis
The ﬁnal output is obtained as
up p er V Subscript o Baseline almost equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction ring zeta Subscript k Baseline upper V Subscript o Baseline left parenthesis k Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
u
p per 
V
 S ubscript o Baseline almost equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction ring zeta Subscript k Baseline upper V Subscript o Baseline left parenthesis k Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
u
p
per V Subscript o Baseline almost equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction ring zeta Subscript k Baseline upper V Subscript o Baseline left parenthesis k Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
where ◯represents element-wise multiplication of two matrices of same dimensions.

2
Delay and Overshoot Modelling of Asymmetric T-Tree Interconnects
15
Simulation and Results
1:2 Asymmetrical T-Tree Interconnect
The interconnect parameters are provided in (Table 2.1Kavicharan et al. 2013), which
are used to estimate delay and overshoot for single input two outputs 1:2 asymmetric
T-tree interconnect network as shown in Fig. 2.1. In this section, delay and over-
shoot values of asymmetric T-tree interconnect are compared with SPICE values and
average error percentages are calculated. The 50% delay and overshoot of 1:2 asym-
metric T-tree are calculated using proposed Gaver-Stehfest-based model for various
lengths, source resistance (RS), and load capacitance (Cl) of ﬁrst and second output
lines. Tables 2.2 and 2.3 illustrate the 50% delay and overshoot of the proposed
model and LT spice results for various transmission (Tx) line lengths of ﬁrst output
line, respectively. It can be observed that the proposed model results match very
well with LT SPICE except for longer lengths. Similarly, Tables 2.4 and 2.5 demon-
strate the 50% delay and overshoot of the proposed model and LT SPICE results
for various transmission (Tx) line lengths of second output line, respectively. In this
case, the estimated 50% delay and overshoot values of the proposed model are in
good agreement with LT SPICE.
The time domain analyses are carried out by injecting a unit ramp input with
amplitude of 1 V, rise time of 0.1 ns. Figures 2.2 and 2.4 show the time domain
analysis for input Tx line length = 0.2 cm, RS = 50Ω, Cl = 50fF of ﬁrst output line
and second output line, respectively. Figures 2.3 and 2.5 present the time domain
analysis for input Tx line length = 0.5 cm, RS = 50Ω, Cl = 50fF of ﬁrst output line
Table 2.1 Typical parameters of asymmetric T-tree interconnect
Parameters
Input Tx line values
First output Tx line
values
Second Output Tx line
values
VDD−V
1
−
−
Length (l)−cm
0.2 to 1
0.2
0.3
Resistance
(R)−Ohm
88.29
100
100
Inductance (L)–nH
15.38
16.15
16.15
Capacitance (C)–pF
1.8
1.8
1.8
Load capacitance
(Cl)−fF
−
50
50
Source resistance
(RS)–Ohm
50
−
−
Input rise time
(Tr)−ns
0.1
−
−

16
Malvika et al.
Table 2.2 Comparison of 50% delay of proposed Gaver-Stehfest-based model and LT spice for
various input transmission (Tx) line lengths of ﬁrst output line
Input Tx line
length (cm)
upper R Subscript upper S (Ω)
upper C Subscript l(fF)
LT Spice
Proposed model
Proposed model
50% Delay(ps)
50% Delay(ps)
Error %
0.2
50
50
139.74
137.56
1.56
0.3
50
50
159
156.96
1.28
0.4
50
50
181.38
176.22
2.84
0.5
50
50
201.72
195.92
2.87
0.6
50
50
223.48
216.14
3.28
1
50
50
320.38
301.85
5.78
Average % error
2.93%
Table 2.3 Comparison of overshoot of proposed Gaver-Stehfest-based model and LT spice for
various input transmission (Tx) line lengths of ﬁrst output line
Input Tx line length (cm)
upper R Subscript upper S
(Ω)
upper C Subscript l
(fF)
LT spice
Proposed model
Proposed model
Overshoot
Overshoot
Error %
0.2
50
50
1.077
1.066
1.02
0.3
50
50
1.066
1.069
0.28
0.4
50
50
1.059
1.064
0.47
0.5
50
50
1.057
1.055
0.18
0.6
50
50
1.050
1.045
0.47
1
50
50
1.00
1.01
1.00
Average % error
0.57%
Table 2.4 Comparison of 50% delay of proposed Gaver-Stehfest-based model and LT spice for
various input transmission (Tx) line lengths of second output line
Input Tx line length
(cm)
upper R Subscript upper S (Ω)
upper C Subscript l (fF)
LT spice
Proposed model
Proposed model
50% delay(ps)
50% delay(ps)
Error %
0.2
50
50
159.86
157.69
1.35
0.3
50
50
177.99
178.32
0.18
0.4
50
50
197.77
198.87
0.55
0.5
50
50
217.54
219.86
1.06
0.6
50
50
237.32
241.45
1.7
1
50
50
332.25
334.12
0.56
Average % error
0.9%

2
Delay and Overshoot Modelling of Asymmetric T-Tree Interconnects
17
Table 2.5 Comparison of overshoot of proposed Gaver-Stehfest-based model and LT spice for
various input transmission (Tx) line lengths of second output line
Input Tx line length
(cm)
upper R Subscript upper S (Ω)
upper C Subscript l (fF)
LT spice
Proposed model
Proposed model
Overshoot
Overshoot
Error %
0.2
50
50
1.061
1.035
2.5
0.3
50
50
1.068
1.037
2.90
0.4
50
50
1.076
1.034
3.90
0.5
50
50
1.070
1.027
4.01
0.6
50
50
1.055
1.020
3.31
1
50
50
1.00
0.997
0.3
Average % error
2.82%
and second output line, respectively. It is apparent that the proposed model results
well match with LT SPICE results except during transition of signals, which is due
to the approximation of transfer function for simplicity of analysis. Furthermore, the
proposed models deliver beneﬁts in terms of simplicity and accuracy.
Fig. 2.2 Time domain
analysis of ﬁrst output line,
for input Tx line length =
0.2 cm, Rs = 50Ω, Cl = 50fF
Fig. 2.3 Time domain
analysis of ﬁrst output line,
for input Tx line length =
0.5 cm, Rs = 50Ω, Cl = 50fF

18
Malvika et al.
Fig. 2.4 Time domain
analysis of second output
line, for input Tx line length
= 0.2 cm, Rs = 50 Ω, Cl =
50fF
Fig. 2.5 Time domain
analysis of second output
line, for input Tx line length
= 0.5 cm, Rs = 50Ω, Cl =
50fF
Conclusion
The behavioral modeling of asymmetrical T-tree interconnect has been investigated.
The delay and overshoot of single input-two outputs 1:2 asymmetrical T-tree inter-
connect are estimated. Overshoot and 50% delay of 1:2 asymmetrical T-tree inter-
connect by using proposed Gaver-Stehfest-based model for various lengths, source
resistance, and load capacitance of ﬁrst and second output lines are estimated and
respective graphs are plotted and compared with SPICE values. It is investigated that,
the proposed Gaver-Stehfest-based model is more accurate and seems to be in good
agreement with SPICE values. This research may serve as a base for future studies
of crosstalk analysis of various asymmetrical tree branches.

2
Delay and Overshoot Modelling of Asymmetric T-Tree Interconnects
19
References
Asai H, Tanji Y (2004) Closed-form expressions of distributed RLC interconnects for analysis of
on-chip inductance effects. In: Proceedings of the 41st annual Design Automation Conference
Coulibaly LM, Kadim HJ (2005) Analytical crosstalk noise and its induced-delay estimation for
distributed RLC interconnects under ramp excitation. In: IEEE International Symposium on
Integrated Circuits and Systems
Dounavis A, Achar R, Nakhla M (2001) A general class of passive macromodels for lossy
multiconductor transmission lines. IEEE Trans Microw Theory Tech 49:1686–1696
DounavisA,AcharR,XinL (1999)Passive closed-formtransmissionline model forgeneral-purpose
circuit simulators. IEEE Trans Microw Theory Tech 47:2450–2459
Friedman EG, Ismail YI, Neves JL (2000) Equivalent elmore delay for RLC trees. IEEE Transaction
Comput-Aided Des Integr Circuits Syst.
Kavicharan M, Murthy NS, Rao NB (2013) An efﬁcient delay estimation model for high speed VLSI
interconnects. In: 2013 International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications
and Informatics (ICACCI)
Kavicharan M, Murthy NS, Rao NB, Prathima A (2015) Modeling and analysis of on-chip single
and H-tree distributed RLC interconnects. Circuits Syst Signal Process 35(9):3049–3065
Mehrotra M, Bannerjee K (2002) Analysis of on-chip inductance effects for distributed RLC
interconnects. IEEE Trans Comput-Aided Des Integr Circuits Syst
Muddu S, Kahng AB (1997) An analytic delay model for RLC interconnects. IEEE Transacion
Comput-Aided Des Integrated Circuits Syst
Noda M, Kobayashi S, Sakurai T (1991) Simple expressions for interconnection delay, coupling and
crosstalk in VLSI’s. In: Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems
Odabasioglu A, Celik M, Pileggi LT (1998) PRIMA: passive reduced order interconnect macro-
modeling algorithm. IEEE Trans Comput-Aided Design Integr Circuits Syst 17: 645–654
Pillage LT, Rohrer RA (1990) Asymptotic waveform evaluation for timing analysis. IEEE Trans
Comput-Aided Design Integr Circuits Syst 9: 352–366.
Raveloa B (2015) Modelling of asymmetrical interconnect T-tree laminated on ﬂexible substrate.
Eur Phys J Appl Phys 72: 20103
Ravelo B, Vurpillot F, Jastrzebski AK (2014) Asymmetrical PCB interconnect tree modelling
with coupling effect. In: Proceedings of 2014 International Symposium on Electromagnetic
Compatibility (EMC Europe 2014). Gothenburg, Sweden
RoyS,DounavisA(2009)Closed-formdelayandcrosstalkmodelsfor$RLC$on-chipinterconnects
using a matrix rational approximation. IEEE Trans Comput Aided Des Integr Circuits Syst
28(10):1481–1492
Sakurai T (1993) Closed-form expressions for interconnection delay, coupling, and crosstalk in
VLSIs. IEEE Transactions Electron Devices.

Chapter 3 
Explicit Power-Delay Models 
for On-Chip Copper and SWCNT 
Bundle Interconnects 
Yash Agrawal, Vinay Palaparthy, Mekala Girish Kumar, 
Kavicharan Mummaneni, and Rajeevan Chandel 
Abstract In the present chapter, the transient behavior and delay investigation 
of high-performance interconnects is modeled using ﬁnite-difference time-domain 
(FDTD) technique. Further, an explicit power estimation model for both on-chip 
conventional copper and futuristic single-wall carbon nanotube (SWCNT) bundle 
interconnects using FDTD technique is proposed. The model deals with the analysis 
of two signaling schemes, namely, voltage-mode signaling (VMS) and current-mode 
signaling (CMS). Power-dissipation, delay, and power_delay_product are the inter-
connect performance metrics considered. The interconnect is characterized by equiv-
alent single conductor model and CMOS inverter gate is used to drive it. It is inves-
tigated that CMS scheme is good for delay-centric designs while for power-centric 
designs, VMS scheme can be adopted. However, owing to lower power_delay_ 
product, CMS outperforms VMS scheme. Further, it is analyzed that SWCNT bundle
Y. Agrawal envelope symbol · V. Palaparthy 
VLSI and Embedded Systems Research Group, Dhirubhai Ambani Institute of Information and 
Communication Technology, Gandhinagar, Gujarat 382 007, India 
e-mail: yash_agrawal@daiict.ac.in 
V. Palaparthy 
e-mail: vinay_shrinivas@daiict.ac.in 
M. G. Kumar 
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, TKR College of Engineering and 
Technology, Hyderabad, Telangana 500 097, India 
e-mail: giri.frds@gmail.com 
K. Mummaneni 
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National Institute of Technology, 
Silchar, Assam 788 010, India 
e-mail: kavicharan@ece.nits.ac.in 
R. Chandel 
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National Institute of Technology, 
Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh 177 005, India 
e-mail: rchandel@nith.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_3 
21

22
Y. Agrawal et al.
interconnects are better in terms of energy efﬁciency as compared to copper inter-
connects. The results of the proposed analytical model are validated using SPICE, 
with a maximum error of less than 3%. 
Keywords Current-mode signaling · Energy · Finite-difference time-domain 
(FDTD) · Interconnects · SWCNT bundle · Voltage-mode signaling 
Introduction 
The incessant and stupendous advancements in semiconductor technology have led to 
the giga-scale integration of nano-scale devices and transistors in integrated circuits 
(ICs) (Kumar et al. 2016). At scaled technologies, local interconnects that connect 
devices in ICs shrink. However, global interconnects which transmit power and 
clock signals in an IC, exaggerate in length due to larger chip size and added func-
tionalities on the same chip area for highly miniaturized technologies (Naeemi and 
Meindl 2007). The operation of interconnects at multi-gigahertz frequency range in 
nanometer regime causes huge power dissipation in ICs which makes it a leveraging 
factor in determining the overall system performance. 
Traditionally aluminum and consecutively copper have been the choice of the 
designers as interconnect materials in ICs. However, at scaled dimensions the global 
interconnects possess high resistance and are more prone to electro-migration, 
hillock, and void formations (Kumar et al. 2016). Unlike, copper and aluminum, 
single-wall carbon nanotube (SWCNT) bundle possesses better current capability, 
longer mean free path of charge carriers, greater thermal conductivity, remarkable 
mechanical and thermal stability (Naeemi and Meindl 2007). SWCNT bundle has 
been investigated by researchers and is found to be a suitable replacement to metallic 
copper and aluminum for on-chip interconnect applications (Naeemi and Meindl 
2007; Rai et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2012; Sahoo et al. 2014). 
Apart from incorporating appropriate interconnect materials, employing proper 
signaling schemes plays a vital part in evaluating the overall system performance 
in ICs. Current-mode signaling (CMS) scheme is characterized by small voltage 
swing, has higher speed and data-rate over traditional full voltage rail voltage-mode 
signaling (VMS) scheme (Katoch et al. 2005; Agrawal et al. 2016; Dave et al.  2013; 
Venkatraman and Burleson 2007; Agrawal and Chandel 2016; Bashirullah et al. 
2003; Tuuna et al. 2012; Lee et al. 2010). Hence, CMS scheme is well matched for 
high-speed applications in ICs. 
The advanced CMS scheme has been relatively lesser explored compared to tradi-
tional VMS scheme. To improve the performance of CMS scheme, equalization 
circuits are used for 5, 10, and 15 mm interconnect lengths (Kim 2010). Equal-
ization is used to minimize inter-symbol interference and throughput. However, 
equalization circuits lead to large area overhead and also require additional power 
supply. Moreover, in repeated equalization interconnects, optimum length needs

3
Explicit Power-Delay Models for On-Chip Copper and SWCNT Bundle …
23
to be determined to achieve optimum results. The essential beneﬁts of equaliza-
tion are more explicit at very long wire lengths where added area overhead and 
power of equalization circuit is marginal in comparison to the overall system perfor-
mance improvements. Katoch et al. have presented various circuits for current-mode 
driver and receiver and observed that a factor of three can be gained in delay using 
CMS over VMS scheme (Katoch et al. 2005). In (Agrawal et al. 2016; Dave et al.  
2013; Venkatraman and Burleson 2007), multi-level current-mode signaling scheme 
has been used which is effective for attaining smaller latency along with higher 
throughput in the system. In (Agrawal and Chandel 2016; Bashirullah et al. 2003; 
Tuuna et al. 2012; Lee et al. 2010), CMOS inverter is incorporated as driver for inter-
connects in CMS scheme. CMOS inverter has simple design, high signal integrity, 
and consumes less silicon chip area (Lee et al. 2010; Kang and Leblebici 2003). 
Literature reports about the various research works carried out in copper intercon-
nects using CMS scheme (Katoch et al. 2005; Agrawal et al. 2016; Dave et al.  2013; 
Venkatraman and Burleson 2007; Agrawal and Chandel 2016; Bashirullah et al. 2003; 
Tuuna et al. 2012; Lee et al. 2010). However, no substantial work has been informed 
in SWCNT bundle interconnects and hence needs more research investigations. 
Performance of SWCNT bundle interconnects has been investigated by 
researchers in Naeemi and Meindl (2007); Rai et al. (2014); Zhang et al. (2012); 
Sahoo et al. (2014). Naeemi et al. have presented physics-related circuit models for 
SWCNTs (Naeemi and Meindl 2007). In (Rai et al. 2014), it is investigated that 
crosstalk noise in CNT bundles is signiﬁcantly lesser than the copper interconnects. 
In (Zhang et al. 2012; Sahoo et al. 2014), modeling and performance of SWCNT 
bundle interconnect has been performed using equivalent single conductor model. 
The work reported in literature on SWCNT bundle interconnects has been performed 
for VMS scheme. However, modeling and investigation of SWCNT bundle intercon-
nects have not been explored using CMS scheme. Thus, research in this area is still 
needed. 
Modeling the transient behavior, crosstalk noise, signal integrity, and propagation 
delay for an interconnect system has been performed by various techniques, namely, 
moment-based (Bashirullah et al. 2003), ABCD (Sahoo et al. 2015), FDTD models 
(Agrawal and Chandel 2016; Paul 1994; Li et al.  2011; Liang et al. 2012). Moment-
based models have limited accuracy as the system poles are approximated by a 
few dominant poles (Bashirullah et al. 2003). ABCD is based on two-port network 
model which requires approximation of non-linear CMOS driver gate as lumped 
capacitive and resistive elements. This approximation causes lesser accurate results 
(Sahoo et al. 2015). FDTD is a numerical-based technique and beneﬁcial for attaining 
accurate results (Paul 1994). FDTD-based models have been presented for copper 
interconnects in Agrawal and Chandel (2016); Paul (1994); Li et al. (2011) and 
for CNT interconnects in Liang et al. (2012). The models in Li et al. (2011) have  
incorporated practical CMOS driver for copper interconnects using VMS scheme. 
This work has been extended to CMS scheme in Agrawal and Chandel (2016). Till 
date, the models for CNT structures using FDTD technique have used simpliﬁed 
resistive driver model (Liang et al. 2012). However, for accurate analysis, a practical

24
Y. Agrawal et al.
CMOS driver gate is needed. Hence, further comprehensive model formulation is 
essential. 
The power modeling in interconnects is typically a non-linear function and has 
been meagerly explored by researchers. The power model for metallic copper inter-
connects has been presented in Uchino and Cong (2002); Aswatha et al. (2008). 
These models have used linear resistive driver model and neglected inductive para-
sitics while modeling the interconnect structures. These approximations lead to less 
accurate results. Consequently, more accurate power modeling is required. 
The above discussed literature reveals various gaps in the current research. The 
aforementioned issues have been appropriately alleviated in this chapter. The major 
objectives of the current work are stated as follows. (i) A novel uniﬁed model for VMS 
and CMS schemes along with copper and SWCNT bundle interconnects has been 
formulated. (ii) Performance evaluation of CNT interconnects with CMS scheme 
has been innovatively taken up in this chapter. (iii) Most of the research and model 
formulations are focused toward transient and delay analysis. However, analysis of 
power dissipation is also signiﬁcant in an interconnect system. Consequently, in the 
present work, analytical models for both power and delay have been formulated, 
using FDTD technique. 
This chapter comprises four sections. The present section brieﬂy introduces on-
chip interconnects. Section “Model Formulation” presents the novel uniﬁed model 
for copper and SWCNT bundle interconnects. Furthermore, analytical modeling for 
transient response, delay, and power dissipation have been formulated. The results 
are presented and discussed in Sect. “Results and Discussion”. Finally, concluding 
remarks are made in Sect. “Conclusion”. 
Model Formulation 
The uniﬁed model and interconnect equivalent electrical circuit for copper and 
SWCNT bundle using VMS and CMS schemes are illustrated in Fig. 3.1. CMOS  
inverter driver is used in both VMS and CMS schemes. The analysis is performed 
for global interconnect length of 1 mm. This length is sufﬁcient to provide signal 
connections in 14 nm technology node (Rai et al. 2014; Sahoo et al. 2014). Hence, 
buffer insertion for VMS and equalization circuits for CMS are not required in the 
present analysis. The CMOS inverter characteristics is deﬁned using nth power-law 
model (Sakurai and Newton 1991). The interconnect is characterized by equivalent 
single conductor (ESC) model (Amore et al. 2010) and quasi-transverse electromag-
netic (TEM) model is used for analytical formulation (Paul 1994). The receiver of 
the interconnect system is equivalently modeled by a capacitive load (CL) and a 
load resistance (RL). Constant α denotes material of the interconnect. Its value is 
“1” and “0” for SWCNT bundle and copper interconnects respectively. Parameter 
β delineates the signaling scheme. It is zero and unity for VMS and CMS schemes 
respectively. The current (I) and voltage (V) in the distributed sections of interconnect 
are formulated using TEM model as

3
Explicit Power-Delay Models for On-Chip Copper and SWCNT Bundle …
25
Fig. 3.1 Uniﬁed model and equivalent circuit for copper and SWCNT bundle interconnects 
Sta rtFraction partial differential upper V left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis Over partial differential z EndFraction plus upper L Subscript d i s Baseline StartFraction partial differential upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis Over partial differential t EndFraction plus upper R Subscript d i s Baseline upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis equals 0
Sta
rtFract
ion partial differential upper V left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis Over partial differential z EndFraction plus upper L Subscript d i s Baseline StartFraction partial differential upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis Over partial differential t EndFraction plus upper R Subscript d i s Baseline upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis equals 0
St
artFracti on partial
 differential upper V left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis Over partial differential z EndFraction plus upper L Subscript d i s Baseline StartFraction partial differential upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis Over partial differential t EndFraction plus upper R Subscript d i s Baseline upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis equals 0
Star tFraction partial differential upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis Over partial differential z EndFraction plus upper C Subscript d i s Baseline StartFraction partial differential upper V left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis Over partial differential t EndFraction equals 0
Star
tFracti
on p artial differential upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis Over partial differential z EndFraction plus upper C Subscript d i s Baseline StartFraction partial differential upper V left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis Over partial differential t EndFraction equals 0
St
art
Fract
where I and V are function of time (t) and position (z) along the interconnect. 
Equations (3.1) and (3.2) are discretized in time and position along the intercon-
nect which are solved as 
St artF
ract ion uppe
r V Subscript k plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 Baseline Over normal upper Delta z EndFraction plus upper L Subscript d i s Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 3 divided by 2 Baseline minus upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus upper R Subscript d i s Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 3 divided by 2 Baseline plus upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline Over 2 EndFraction right parenthesis equals 0
St
artFra
c
ti on upp
e
r V Subscr
ipt k plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 Baseline Over normal upper Delta z EndFraction plus upper L Subscript d i s Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 3 divided by 2 Baseline minus upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus upper R Subscript d i s Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 3 divided by 2 Baseline plus upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline Over 2 EndFraction right parenthesis equals 0
St
a
rtFrac
t
io n uppe
r
 V S ubscri
pt k plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 Baseline Over normal upper Delta z EndFraction plus upper L Subscript d i s Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 3 divided by 2 Baseline minus upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus upper R Subscript d i s Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 3 divided by 2 Baseline plus upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline Over 2 EndFraction right parenthesis equals 0
S
t
art
Fraction upper V Subscript k plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 Baseline Over normal upper Delta z EndFraction plus upper L Subscript d i s Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 3 divided by 2 Baseline minus upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus upper R Subscript d i s Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 3 divided by 2 Baseline plus upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline Over 2 EndFraction right parenthesis equals 0
St artFra
c
tion  upper
 I Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline minus upper I Subscript k minus 1 Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline Over normal upper Delta z EndFraction plus upper C Subscript d i s Baseline StartFraction upper V Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript k Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction equals 0
St
artFrac
ti on u
p
er I  S
ubscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline minus upper I Subscript k minus 1 Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline Over normal upper Delta z EndFraction plus upper C Subscript d i s Baseline StartFraction upper V Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript k Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction equals 0
St
art
Fract
On solving (3.3) and (3.4), recursive expressions for current and voltage are 
derived and given as below 
up per I 
S
ubscript k S
u
perscr ipt 
n 
plus  3 d
ivid e
d by 2 Baseline equals upper B upper D upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline plus upper B left parenthesis upper V Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript k plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline right parenthesis
where 
up p
er B equals left parenthesis StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction upper L Subscript d i s Baseline plus StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over 2 EndFraction upper R Subscript d i s Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
upp er B e quals left parenthesis StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction upper L Subscript d i s Baseline plus StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over 2 EndFraction upper R Subscript d i s Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
up per 
B eq
uals left parenthesis StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction upper L Subscript d i s Baseline plus StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over 2 EndFraction upper R Subscript d i s Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
and 
up p
er D equals left parenthesis StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction upper L Subscript d i s Baseline minus StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over 2 EndFraction upper R Subscript d i s Baseline right parenthesis
up er D e quals left parenthesis StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction upper L Subscript d i s Baseline minus StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over 2 EndFraction upper R Subscript d i s Baseline right parenthesis
up per 
D
 equals left parenthesis StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction upper L Subscript d i s Baseline minus StartFraction normal upper Delta z Over 2 EndFraction upper R Subscript d i s Baseline right parenthesis

26
Y. Agrawal et al.
where k in (3.5), (3.6) and (3.7) ranges from 1, 2, 3,….., NDZ while n denotes a 
positive integer. 
up per 
V 
Subs cr
ip t k Su perscr
ipt 
n pl us 1 B
a
s
eline equals upper V Subscript k Superscript n Baseline plus upper A left parenthesis upper I Subscript k minus 1 Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline minus upper I Subscript k Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline right parenthesis
where 
up p
e r A equals left parenthesis StartFraction normal upper Delta t Over normal upper Delta z EndFraction period StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript d i s Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis
up er  A equals left parenthesis StartFraction normal upper Delta t Over normal upper Delta z EndFraction period StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript d i s Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis
uppe
r
 A equals left parenthesis StartFraction normal upper Delta t Over normal upper Delta z EndFraction period StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript d i s Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis
for k = 2, 3, 4,…, NDZ and n is a positive integer. 
The discretized current and voltage varying with position and time can be 
represented as 
up pe
r V S ubscrip t i Su
perscript n Baseline equals upper V left bracket left parenthesis i right parenthesis normal upper Delta z comma left parenthesis n right parenthesis normal upper Delta t right bracket
up per I S
u
bscript  i Supers cri pt n plus
 1 divided by slash 2 Baseline equals upper I left bracket left parenthesis i plus 1 divided by 2 right parenthesis normal upper Delta z comma left parenthesis n plus 1 divided by 2 right parenthesis normal upper Delta t right bracket
where i ranges as 1, 2, 3,….., NDZ while n denotes a positive integer. 
The near-end, recursive and far-end current and voltage along interconnect are 
evaluated according to Fig. 3.2. The boundary condition associated with near-end 
case is deﬁned by CMOS inverter. It is evaluated at nodes N_0 and N_1. The boundary 
condition associated with far-end is deﬁned by load capacitance (CL) and load resis-
tance (RL). These are computed at nodes N_NDZ + 1 and N_NDZ + 2. The current 
and voltage at the intermediate nodes are evaluated alternatively and recursively at 
Δt/2 period apart in temporal domain and Δz/2 distance apart in spatial domain. 
The Courant condition ascertains the stability of FDTD model which is deﬁned as
nor m al
 
upper Delta t less than or equals normal upper Delta z divided by v(Paul 1994), where v denotes the signal velocity in interconnects.
The boundary condition associated with near-end case is deﬁned at node N_0 
by variables V 0 and I0. The current I0 for different time instant is evaluated using 
Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL) at node N_0 as  
up per 
I 
0 Su pers
cr
ipt n pl
us
 1 B
a
se line
 eq
uals  u
pper I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript i n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript i n Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis StartFraction upper V 0 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V 0 Superscript n Baseline Over 2 EndFraction right parenthesis
up
p
er Im0  Super
s
cr ipt 
n 
plus  1
 Baseline equals upper I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript i n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript i n Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis StartFraction upper V 0 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V 0 Superscript n Baseline Over 2 EndFraction right parenthesis
u
p
per I 0 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline equals upper I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript i n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript i n Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis StartFraction upper V 0 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V 0 Superscript n Baseline Over 2 EndFraction right parenthesis
where up per 
I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1
and up per 
I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1
denote PMOS and NMOS currents, respectively. These are 
obtained using nth power law model (Sakurai and Newton 1991). 
Using Ohm’s law, up per 
V 0 Superscript n plus 1
is investigated and given as 
up per 
V 
0 Su pers
cr
ipt n plus  1 B asel
i
ne equals upper V 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime dot upper I 0 Superscript n plus 1
where up per 
V 1 Superscript n plus 1
in (3.13) is derived by substituting k equal N_1 in (3.5). Since I0 and 
I1 are separated by distance Δz/2, therefore, Δz is replaced as Δz/2 in parameter A. 
up per 
V 1 Superscript n plus 1
is obtained as

3
Explicit Power-Delay Models for On-Chip Copper and SWCNT Bundle …
27
Fig. 3.2 Representation of current and voltage in spatial, temporal, and nodal domains
up per 
V 
1 Su pe
rs cript n  plus 
1
 Bas eline 
e
q
uals upper V 1 Superscript n Baseline plus 2 upper A left parenthesis upper I 0 Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline minus upper I 1 Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline right parenthesis
where 
up per I 
0
 S up er
sc ript  n p
lus 1 divided by 2 Baseline equals StartFraction upper I 0 Superscript n Baseline plus upper I 0 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline Over 2 EndFraction
up
per I 0 Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline equals StartFraction upper I 0 Superscript n Baseline plus upper I 0 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline Over 2 EndFraction
Using (3.12) and (3.13), the equivalent discretized current at node N_0 is  
formulated as 
up per 
I 
0 
Su
perscript n
 p lus 
1 
Base line
 e
qual
s
 S tart
 3 
By 1  M
atrix 1st Row upper I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript i n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript i n Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row minus left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis StartFraction upper V 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V 1 Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis 3rd Row plus alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis StartFraction upper I 0 Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis EndMatrix
up
p
er I 0 Supe
r
sc ript
 n
 plu s 
1 Baseline equals Start 3 By 1 Matrix 1st Row upper I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript i n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript i n Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row minus left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis StartFraction upper V 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V 1 Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis 3rd Row plus alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis StartFraction upper I 0 Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis EndMatrix
up
p
er I 0 Supers cript 
n  p lu
s 1 Baseline equals Start 3 By 1 Matrix 1st Row upper I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript i n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript i n Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row minus left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis StartFraction upper V 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V 1 Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis 3rd Row plus alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis StartFraction upper I 0 Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis EndMatrix
up
p
er
 I 0 Supers
cript n plus 1 Baseline equals Start 3 By 1 Matrix 1st Row upper I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript i n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript i n Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis 2nd Row minus left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis StartFraction upper V 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V 1 Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis 3rd Row plus alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis StartFraction upper I 0 Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis EndMatrix

28
Y. Agrawal et al.
where 
up p
e
r H equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
up
per 
H equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
Using (3.14), (3.15), (3.16) and (3.17), V 1 is further modiﬁed as 
up per 
V 
1 
Su
pers
cr ip
t n p lu
s
 1
 
Ba seli
ne 
equa ls
 StartBinomialOrMatrix upper V 1 Superscript n Baseline plus upper E upper A upper H left bracket upper C Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript i n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript i n Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper H EndFraction plus StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis upper I 0 Superscript n Baseline right bracket Choose minus 2 upper E upper A upper I 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus upper E upper A upper H left parenthesis upper I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix
up
p
e
r  V 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline equals StartBinomialOrMatrix upper V 1 Superscript n Baseline plus upper E upper A upper H left bracket upper C Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript i n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript i n Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper H EndFraction plus StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis upper I 0 Superscript n Baseline right bracket Choose minus 2 upper E upper A upper I 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus upper E upper A upper H left parenthesis upper I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix
up per V 1 Supers cript n plus 1 Baseline equals StartBinomialOrMatrix upper V 1 Superscript n Baseline plus upper E upper A upper H left bracket upper C Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript i n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript i n Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper H EndFraction plus StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis upper I 0 Superscript n Baseline right bracket Choose minus 2 upper E upper A upper I 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus upper E upper A upper H left parenthesis upper I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix
up
p
er  V
 
1
 Su pe rscri
pt
 n pl us 1  Bas
el
ine equa
l
s 
St
artB
inomialOrMatrix upper V 1 Superscript n Baseline plus upper E upper A upper H left bracket upper C Subscript m Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript i n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript i n Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper H EndFraction plus StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis upper I 0 Superscript n Baseline right bracket Choose minus 2 upper E upper A upper I 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline plus upper E upper A upper H left parenthesis upper I Subscript p Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper I Subscript n Superscript n plus 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix
where 
up p
e
r E equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction upper A upper H left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
up
per 
E equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction upper A upper H left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
Similarly, boundary condition associated with far-end case is deﬁned at node N_ 
NDZ + 2 by variables V NDZ+2 and INDZ+1. INDZ+1 for varying time instant is obtained 
using KCL at the node N_NDZ + 2: 
up per 
I  Subsc ript
 
up per 
N  upper  D u pp
e r  Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline equals upper C Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 2 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 2 Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus beta left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 2 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis
up
p
er 
I
 S ubsc
r i pt upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline equals upper C Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 2 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 2 Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus beta left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 2 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis
up
p
er I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline equals upper C Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 2 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 2 Superscript n Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis plus beta left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 2 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis
At far-end node N_Nz + 2, using Ohm’s law the obtained voltage is 
up per 
V  Subsc ript  up
e r  N up per D uppe r  Z plus
 2  Sup
erscript n plus 1 Baseline equals upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline minus alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime dot upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1
up per 
V  Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 in (3.21) is derived by substituting k = NDZ + 1 in (3.5) and Δz by Δz/ 
2 in  A. This gives 
up per 
V  Subsc ript  u
p p er N uppe
r
 D  upper
 Z  p l us 1  Super
s c ript
 
n plus 1 Baseline equals upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline plus 2 upper A left parenthesis upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline minus upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline right parenthesis
where 
up per I 
S u bscri pt  u pp
e r  N up per D up
p e r Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline equals StartFraction upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline plus upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline Over 2 EndFraction
up
per I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline equals StartFraction upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline plus upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline Over 2 EndFraction
Using (3.20), (3.21) is further formulated as

3
Explicit Power-Delay Models for On-Chip Copper and SWCNT Bundle …
29
up per 
I  Subsc ript
 u
ppe
r N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline equals upper J StartBinomialOrMatrix left parenthesis StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline plus left parenthesis StartFraction upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction plus StartFraction beta Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline right parenthesis Choose minus left parenthesis StartFraction upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix
up
p
er  I
 S ubscr i
pt upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline equals upper J StartBinomialOrMatrix left parenthesis StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline plus left parenthesis StartFraction upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction plus StartFraction beta Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline right parenthesis Choose minus left parenthesis StartFraction upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix
up er  I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline equals upper J StartBinomialOrMatrix left parenthesis StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline plus left parenthesis StartFraction upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction plus StartFraction beta Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline right parenthesis Choose minus left parenthesis StartFraction upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix
up
pe
r I Su
b s crip
t
 
upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline equals upper J StartBinomialOrMatrix left parenthesis StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline plus left parenthesis StartFraction upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction plus StartFraction beta Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline right parenthesis Choose minus left parenthesis StartFraction upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix
up
pe
r I 
S u bscr
i
pt
 upp
er N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline equals upper J StartBinomialOrMatrix left parenthesis StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline plus left parenthesis StartFraction upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction plus StartFraction beta Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline right parenthesis Choose minus left parenthesis StartFraction upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix
where 
up p
e
r J equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction plus StartFraction alpha beta upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
up
per J equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction plus StartFraction alpha beta upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
up
per 
J equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction alpha upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction plus StartFraction alpha beta upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
up per 
V  Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 in (3.22) is further solved as 
up per 
V  Subsc ript upp
e r  N up per D upper Z
 p lu s  1 S
u
pe rscri pt n plus 1 Baseline equals upper F upper G upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline plus 2 upper F upper A upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline minus upper F upper A left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction alpha upper J upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n
up
p
er  V
 S ubscr
ipt upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n plus 1 Baseline equals upper F upper G upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n Baseline plus 2 upper F upper A upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z Superscript n plus 1 divided by 2 Baseline minus upper F upper A left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction alpha upper J upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis upper I Subscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Superscript n
where 
up p
e
r F equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction upper A upper J upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction plus StartFraction beta upper A upper J Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
up
er F equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction upper A upper J upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction plus StartFraction beta upper A upper J Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
up
per 
F equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction upper A upper J upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction plus StartFraction beta upper A upper J Over upper R Subscript upper L Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
and 
up p
e
r G equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction upper A upper J upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis
up
p
er G equals left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction upper A upper J upper C Subscript upper L Baseline Over normal upper Delta t EndFraction right parenthesis
The major components of power-dissipation in interconnects are dynamic, static, 
and short-circuit. The charging and discharging of interconnect load capacitance 
leads to dynamic-power dissipation. At time value n, dynamic power is given as 
upp
er P  Subsc r
i
ptmd  y n S
u
pe rs
c
rip t n Bas
e
li ne
 e qu
als  a
l p ha d
o
t f 
left
 
br ac
k
et
 
left parenthesis upper C Subscript m Baseline plus upper C Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V 0 Superscript n Baseline right parenthesis squared plus left parenthesis upper C Subscript upper L Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper N upper D upper Z Superscript n Baseline right parenthesis squared plus sigma summation Underscript k equals 2 Overscript upper N upper D upper Z plus 1 Endscripts left parenthesis upper C Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis upper V Subscript k Superscript n Baseline right parenthesis squared right bracket
where f denotes frequency of signal and α represents switching activity factor. 
The static power dissipation at time instant n occurs due to static current ﬂow 
through the interconnect and load resistance. It is formulated as 
upp
er P S
ubscript s t a t Superscript n Baseline equals StartStartFraction beta left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper D upper D Baseline right parenthesis squared OverOver 2 left bracket upper R Subscript upper L Baseline plus beta dot upper N upper D upper Z dot upper R Subscript d i s Baseline plus 2 beta dot alpha dot upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime plus beta left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript upper D upper D Baseline minus upper V 0 Superscript n Baseline Over upper I Subscript p Superscript n Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndEndFraction
u
p
per  P Subs c ri pt s t a  t Superscript n B as
e
line e qu
als StartStartFraction beta left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper D upper D Baseline right parenthesis squared OverOver 2 left bracket upper R Subscript upper L Baseline plus beta dot upper N upper D upper Z dot upper R Subscript d i s Baseline plus 2 beta dot alpha dot upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime plus beta left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript upper D upper D Baseline minus upper V 0 Superscript n Baseline Over upper I Subscript p Superscript n Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndEndFraction
up per
 P
 Subscript s t a t Superscript n Baseline equals StartStartFraction beta left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper D upper D Baseline right parenthesis squared OverOver 2 left bracket upper R Subscript upper L Baseline plus beta dot upper N upper D upper Z dot upper R Subscript d i s Baseline plus 2 beta dot alpha dot upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline prime plus beta left parenthesis StartFraction upper V Subscript upper D upper D Baseline minus upper V 0 Superscript n Baseline Over upper I Subscript p Superscript n Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis right bracket EndEndFraction
As β approaches zero in (3.30), the static component becomes zero.

30
Y. Agrawal et al.
The short-circuit power dissipation
l
eft
 p
arenthesis upper P Subscript s c Superscript n Baseline right parenthesis
at varying time instant n occurs owing 
to direct ﬂow of current between supply voltage (V DD) and ground. It is given as 
fraction (x) of total dynamic-power dissipation (Gowan et al. 1998), 
up
er P S ubs
cri
pt s c Superscript n Baseline equals x upper P Subscript d y n Superscript n
where x varies from 0.1 to 0.2. 
Results and Discussion 
Copper and SWCNT bundle interconnects are analyzed using VMS and CMS 
schemes for 14 nm technology node (International Technology Roadmap for Semi-
conductors 2012; Predictive Technology Models 2015). The analyses are performed 
using the proposed FDTD model and are validated using SPICE (2015). The intercon-
nect parasitics for SWCNT bundle are determined using the formulations presented 
in Naeemi and Meindl (2007);  Rai et al.  (2014); Zhang et al. (2012); Sahoo et al. 
(2014). The interconnect dimensions are taken according to ITRS (International 
Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors 2012). The SWCNT bundle interconnect 
parasitics, viz., Rdis, Cdis, and Ldis are computed as 16.67 MΩ/m, 5.45 pF/m, and 
10.4 µH/m, respectively. The imperfect contact resistance per SWCNT is 6.5KΩ. 
Rlump comprises imperfect contact resistance and quantum resistance. Rlump for the 
bundled structure is 27.87Ω. Rdis, Cdis, and Ldis for copper interconnect are 23.50 
MΩ/m, 25.66 pF/m, and 2.16 µH/m, respectively (Predictive Technology Models 
2015). Rlump is zero for copper interconnect as the contact resistance between the 
substrate and copper is negligible (Kumar et al. 2016). The load capacitance (CL) 
and load resistance (RL) for CMS scheme are 1KΩ and 0.5fF, respectively. CL for 
VMS scheme is 1fF (Agrawal and Chandel 2016). The terminal load in VMS is very 
large and hence RL is considered as inﬁnity (Bashirullah et al. 2003). 
The nodal voltages and branch currents computed by (3.5)–(3.28) are used for 
transient analysis and propagation delay computation. Equations (3.29), (3.30) and 
(3.31) are used to evaluate power dissipation in the interconnect system. Variations in 
power dissipation, delay, and power_delay_product (PDP) with interconnect length 
are illustrated in Figs. 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5, respectively. The interconnect length is 
changed from 200 to 1000 µm for experimentation.
Figure 3.3 depicts delay in both the interconnect materials using VMS and CMS 
schemes. It is observed from the ﬁgure that, irrespective of the interconnect material 
and signaling schemes, propagation delay increases with interconnect length, in 
all the cases. This is so, owing to higher parasitics of interconnect for longer wire 
lengths. Further, it is seen that propagation delay is smaller in CMS scheme over VMS 
scheme. For example, at interconnect length of 1000 µm, percentage reduction in 
delay using CMS over VMS scheme with SWCNT bundle interconnect is 139.8%. 
This is nearly 170.5% for copper interconnects. The smaller propagation delay in 
CMS scheme is due to reduced voltage swing which allows faster charging and

3
Explicit Power-Delay Models for On-Chip Copper and SWCNT Bundle …
31
0 
100 
200 
200
400
 600
800
 1000
 
Propagation delay (ps) 
Interconnect length (μm) 
VMS_Copper 
VMS_SWCNT bundle 
CMS_Copper 
CMS_SWCNT bundle 
Copper 
SWCNT 
bundle 
Proposed model               SPICE 
Fig. 3.3 Variation of propagation delay with length of interconnect 
Fig. 3.4 Variation of power dissipation with interconnect length
discharging of capacitances associated at interconnect node. It is also observed that 
SWCNT bundle interconnects have beneﬁt of smaller delay compared to copper 
interconnects in both the signaling schemes. 
The variations of power dissipation for all the considered signaling schemes and 
interconnect materials have been presented in Fig. 3.4. The input is a pulse signal 
of width 1 ns ( f = 1 GHz) and signal rise/fall time of 50 ps. The activity factor 
(α) is unity. It is seen from the ﬁgure that, with escalation in length of the inter-
connect, power-dissipation in VMS scheme surges nominally, while it reduces for 
CMS scheme. However, it is also analyzed that power dissipation is higher in CMS 
scheme. This occurs due to high static power dissipation in CMS scheme. Further, 
it is seen that the results of the proposed FDTD-based model are in good agreement 
with SPICE, with an average percentage error of 2.3%.

32
Y. Agrawal et al.
Fig. 3.5 Power_delay_product variation with interconnect length
From Figs. 3.3 and 3.4, a trade-off is observed between power dissipation and 
propagation delay for VMS and CMS schemes. The efﬁcacy between the VMS and 
CMS schemes can be investigated by analyzing PDP. PDP gives the total energy 
dissipated in the system and hence is a vital ﬁgure of merit. 
A lower value of PDP implies low energy dissipation and is therefore desirable 
for high-performance applications. From Fig. 3.5, it is seen that CMS has advan-
tage of having lower PDP over VMS scheme. Further, it is inferred that SWCNT 
bundle interconnect outperforms its counterpart conventional copper interconnect. 
For instance, at wire length of 1000 µm, PDP in copper interconnect is 6.5 times 
higher than SWCNT bundle interconnect for VMS scheme. This is about 4.5 times 
in case of CMS scheme. 
Figure 3.6 shows the percentage error in analytical model with respect to SPICE 
for PDP at different interconnect length. It is observed that maximum percentage 
error between the two is within 3% for varying interconnect structures and different 
signaling schemes.
The comparative analysis of computational efﬁciency of the FDTD-based model 
with respect to SPICE is illustrated in Fig. 3.7. The analysis is performed on Intel 
Pentium Dual-Core processor running at 1.73 GHz with 1.5 GB RAM PC and 
Windows 7 operating system. For the analysis, the interconnect line segmentation is 
varied from 1 to 1000. The number of time segment is kept as 1000. It is analyzed that 
the computational runtime is signiﬁcantly lesser in FDTD technique. The average 
percentage reduction in CPU runtime using FDTD over SPICE is nearly 64%.

3
Explicit Power-Delay Models for On-Chip Copper and SWCNT Bundle …
33
1 
2 
3 
200
400
600
800
1000 
% Error 
Interconnect length (μm) 
VMS_Copper 
VMS_SWCNT bundle 
CMS_Copper 
CMS_SWCNT bundle 
Fig. 3.6 Percentage error in analytical model with respect to SPICE for PDP at different 
interconnect length
54% 
57% 
60% 
63% 
64% 
65% 
66% 
67% 
68% 
70% 
72% 
0 
30 
60 
90 
1
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 1000 
CPU runtime (s) 
Number of space segments 
Proposed model 
SPICE 
Fig. 3.7 Comparative analysis of CPU runtime of the proposed analytical model with respect to 
SPICE 
Conclusion 
The chapter presents a uniﬁed power-dissipation model for SWCNT bundle and 
copper interconnects using VMS and CMS schemes. Concurrently, the model is 
applicable for evaluation of propagation delay and hence power_delay_product in 
interconnects. It is analyzed that VMS is efﬁcient for power-centric designs. The 
percentage reduction in dissipated power in VMS over CMS scheme at 1000 µm for  
SWCNT bundle interconnect is nearly 98% while this is 20.8% for copper intercon-
nect. Further it is seen that CMS is good for delay-centric designs. Delay in CMS 
scheme is nearly 170.6% lesser over VMS for SWCNT bundle interconnect. This is

34
Y. Agrawal et al.
nearly 139.9% for copper interconnect. The analysis also reveals that PDP is lower 
in CMS scheme. The reduction in PDP in CMS over VMS for SWCNT bundle and 
copper interconnects is 6.5 and 4.5 times, respectively. Thus, CMS has higher efﬁ-
cacy over VMS scheme. It is also investigated that, irrespective of signaling schemes, 
SWCNT bundle outperforms copper interconnect. Thus, it may be summarized that 
SWCNT interconnects along with CMS scheme are delay and energy efﬁcient and 
hence a better solution for high-performance on-chip interconnects. The present 
study shall be beneﬁcial for VLSI designers and further research work in this area. 
References 
Agrawal Y, Chandel R (2016) Crosstalk analysis of current-mode signaling-coupled RLC inter-
connects using FDTD technique. IETE Tech Rev 33(2):148–159. https://doi.org/10.1080/025 
64602.2015.1056258 
Agrawal Y, Kumar MG, Chandel R (2016) Comprehensive model for high-speed current-mode 
signaling in next generation MWCNT bundle interconnect using FDTD technique. IEEE Trans 
Nanotechnol 15(4):590–598. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNANO.2016.2558475 
Amore MD, Sarto MS, Tamburrano A (2010) Fast transient analysis of next-generation interconnects 
based on carbon nanotubes. IEEE Trans Electromagn Compat 52(2):496–503. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/TEMC.2010.2045383 
Aswatha R, Basavaraju T, Kalpana AB (2008) Efﬁcient power modeling for on-chip global inter-
connects. In: Proceedings of IEEE Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 458–46. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MWSCAS.2008.4616835 
Bashirullah R, Liu W, Cavin RK (2003) Current-mode signaling in deep submicrometer global 
interconnects. IEEE Trans Very Large Scale Integr Syst 11(3):406–417. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TVLSI.2003.812366 
Dave M, Jain M, Baghini MS, Sharma D (2013) A variation tolerant current mode signaling scheme 
for on-chip interconnects. IEEE Trans Very Large Scale Integr Syst 21(2):342–353. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/TVLSI.2012.2185835 
Gowan MK, Biro LL, Jackson DB (1998) Power considerations in the design of the alpha 21264 
microprocessor. In: Proceedings of IEEE Design Automation Conference, pp. 726–731. https:// 
doi.org/10.1145/277044.277226 
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (2012) http://public.itrs.net 
Kang SM, Leblebici Y (2003) CMOS digital integrated circuits, TMH, New Delhi 
Katoch A, Veendrick H, Seevinck E (2005) High speed current-mode signaling circuits for on-chip 
interconnects. In: Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, vol 
4, pp 4138−4141. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCAS.2005.1465542 
Kim (2010) Equalized on-chip interconnect: modeling, analysis, and design. Ph.D. Dissertation, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. https://www.rle.mit.edu/isg/documents/BSKimPhDT 
hesis.pdf 
Kumar MG, Agrawal Y, Chandel R (2016) Carbon nanotube interconnects–a promising solution 
for VLSI circuits. IETE J Educ 57(2):46–64. https://doi.org/10.1080/09747338.2016.1158129 
Lee K, Qazi M, Kong J, Chandrakasan AP (2010) Low-swing signaling on monolithically integrated 
global graphene interconnects. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 57(12):3418–3425. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/TED.2010.2083667 
Li XC, Mao JF, Swaminathan M (2011) Transient analysis of CMOS-gate-driven RLGC intercon-
nects based on FDTD. IEEE Trans Comput-Aided Des 30(4):574–583. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TCAD.2010.2095650

3
Explicit Power-Delay Models for On-Chip Copper and SWCNT Bundle …
35
Liang F, Wang G, Lin H (2012) Modeling of crosstalk effects in multiwall carbon nanotube intercon-
nects. IEEE Trans Electromagn Compat 54(1):133–139. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEMC.2011. 
2172982 
Naeemi A, Meindl JD (2007) Design and performance modeling for single-walled carbon nanotubes 
as local, semiglobal, and global interconnects in gigascale integrated systems. IEEE Trans 
Electron Devices 54(1):26–37. https://doi.org/10.1109/TED.2006.887210 
Paul R (1994) Incorporation of terminal constraints in the FDTD analysis of transmission lines. 
IEEE Trans Electromagn Compat 36(2):85–91. https://doi.org/10.1109/15.293284 
Predictive Technology Models (2015). http://ptm.asu.edu 
Rai MK, Khanna R, Sarkar S (2014) Crosstalk analysis in CNT bundle interconnects for VLSI 
applications. IEEJ Trans Electr Electron Eng 9(4):391–397. https://doi.org/10.1002/tee.21984 
Sahoo M, Ghosal P, Rahaman H (2014) Performance modeling and analysis of carbon nanotube 
bundles for future VLSI circuit applications. J Comput Electron 13(3):673–688. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10825-014-0587-7 
Sahoo S, Ghosal P, Rahaman H (2015) Modeling and analysis of crosstalk induced effects in 
multiwalled carbon nanotube interconnects: An ABCD parameter based approach. IEEE Trans 
Nanotechnol 14(2):259–274. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNANO.2014.2388252 
Sakurai T, Newton AR (1991) A simple MOSFET model for circuit analysis. IEEE Trans Electron 
Devices 38(4):887–894. https://doi.org/10.1109/16.75219 
Tanner EDA tools for SPICE simulation (2015) http://www.tannereda.com 
Tuuna S, Nigussie E, Isoaho J, Tenhunen H (2012) Modeling of energy dissipation in RLC current-
mode signalling. IEEE Trans Very Large Scale Integr Syst 20(6): 1146−1151. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/TVLSI.2011.2140345 
Uchino T, Cong J (2002) An interconnect energy model considering coupling effects. IEEE Trans 
Comput-Aided Des 21(7):763–776. https://doi.org/10.1145/378239.379022 
Venkatraman V, Burleson W (2007) An energy efﬁcient multi-bit quaternary current-mode signaling 
for on-chip interconnects. In: Proceedings of IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conference, 
pp. 301–304. https://doi.org/10.1109/CICC.2007.4405738 
Zhang K, Tian B, Wang F, Wei J (2012) Crosstalk analysis of carbon nanotube bundle interconnects. 
Nanoscale Res Lett 7(1):1–5. https://doi.org/10.1186/1556-276X-7-138

Chapter 4 
Modelling and Analysis of Copper 
and Carbon Nanotube VLSI 
Interconnects 
Kavicharan Mummaneni, Vivek Kumar, Malvika, and P. Uma Sathyakam 
Abstract In this chapter, a numerical inverse Laplace Transform-based model is 
presented to estimate the delay and crosstalk noise of Copper (Cu) and Carbon 
Nanotube (CNT) interconnects. The proposed model is formulated on the Gaver-
Stehfest method, which provides a relation between the time domain function and 
linear combination of the transfer function values. The values of delay and overshoot 
in single Cu and CNT lines are estimated for different line lengths, load capacitance 
and source resistances. The proposed model is utilized to calculate crosstalk delay, 
peak noise voltage and timing instance of peak voltage. All the estimated parameters 
are compared with the existing Padé model and SPICE and are found to be in good 
agreement. The 50% delay, overshoot and crosstalk results of Cu interconnects match 
to SPICE results with 0.37%, 0.65% and 0.58%, respectively. In CNT interconnects, 
the average error of 50% delay, overshoot and crosstalk of the proposed model are 
1.2%, 0.06% and 0.22%, respectively. 
Keywords Cu & CNT interconnects · Laplace transform · Dynamic crosstalk ·
Pade model · FDTD method · LTSPICE 
Introduction 
In VLSI technology, the overall performance of the chip signiﬁcantly relies on 
interconnect delay in deep submicron technology (DSM). Aggressive scaling of 
interconnects has led to signiﬁcant coupling capacitance among adjacent intercon-
nects (Srivastava and Banerjee 2005). Capacitive and inductive coupling between
K. Mummaneni envelope symbol · V. Kumar · Malvika 
Electronics and Communication Engineering Department, National Institute of Technology, 
Silchar, Assam, India 
e-mail: kavicharan@ece.nits.ac.in 
P. Uma Sathyakam 
School of Electrical Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, India 
e-mail: umasathyakam.p@vit.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_4 
37

38
K. Mummaneni et al.
contiguous lines results in crosstalk noise which impacts the reliability and signal 
integrity of circuits. Thus, an accurate computational model is required for deter-
mining the interconnect delay and crosstalk (Li, 2008). Continuous decrease in size 
of electronic devices accompanied with increase in lengths of interconnects in VLSI 
circuits has led to the research of new materials for interconnects such as Carbon 
Nanotubes (CNTs). CNTs are graphene sheets folded into cylinders having diameter 
of the order of a nanometer. There are mainly two types of CNTs which will have 
higher structural perfection. Single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) contain single graphite 
sheet continuously encased into a cylindrical tube. Multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) 
contain an array of such concentrically nested nanotubes. Because of the unique 
physical properties of Carbon Nanotubes such as high current carrying capability, 
higher mechanical strength, CNTs have caught the eye of researchers in modern times 
(Elmore 1948). In order to use CNTs as interconnects, comprehensive investigation 
for various CNT structures need to be carried out. 
Only resistance and capacitance are used in Elmore delay model to calculate 
the interconnect delay (Elmore 1948). The predictions of Elmore delay model are 
accurate only when the inductance value is very small since for small inductance, the 
step response of the circuit will be independent of the effect of inductance. To obtain 
better accuracy in high-speed VLSI circuits, the effect of inductance needs to be 
included along with them. Also, the signal integrity losses are due to the distributed 
nature of parasitic resistance, capacitance and inductance. 
In practical VLSI circuits, the load is capacitive in nature (Ravindra and Srinivas 
2007a). The driver’s series impedance may not necessarily match with the character-
istic impedance of the transmission line. This results in overshoots or undershoots of 
the voltage waveforms. The circuit becomes less reliable because of the overshoots 
produced in the output voltage level and may cause glitches or false transitions. 
Therefore, accurate estimation of overshoots is necessary in DSM technology. 
Earlier, the delay and crosstalk phenomenon were estimated by several analytical 
models Sahoo and rahaman (2013), Abate and Whitt (2006), Agrawal et al. (2017), 
Das and Rahaman (2011), Fathi and Forouzandeh (2012), Dounavis et al. (2001), 
(1999), Elmore (1948), Fathi and Forouzandeh (2009),  Fathi et al.  (2009), Haji-Nasiri 
et al. (2012), Hermite (1908). This chapter introduces an analytical model for single 
and coupled Cu and CNT lines using a numerical Laplace inversion method. The 
proposed model is based on the Gaver-Stehfest Algorithm (Abate and Whitt 2006). 
The Gaver-Stehfest algorithm can be put into the uniﬁed framework for numerical 
inversion of Laplace transform. The result of the inverse transform depends only on 
the number of weights used; it does not depend on the Laplace Transform or the 
independent variable, time t. The uniﬁed framework is derived by approximating the 
exponential function by a rational function, which is further represented as a partial 
fraction (Abate and Whitt 2006). The proposed model is easy to implement. The 
time domain analysis for single, coupled Cu and CNT interconnects are performed 
by applying the proposed model. The results of the proposed model are compared 
with existing Padé model (Roy and Dounavis 2009) and SPICE.

4
Modelling and Analysis of Copper and Carbon Nanotube VLSI …
39
Analysis of Cu and CNT Interconnects 
A. Analysis of Single Cu Interconnect 
In this type of interconnect, single line Cu based RLC is considered. The single 
Cu-RLC line is described by Telegrapher’s equations which are given as 
StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential z EndFraction upper V left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis plus upper L StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential t EndFraction upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis plus upper R upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis equals 0
Star tF raction par tial differential Over partial differential z EndFraction upper V left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis plus upper L StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential t EndFraction upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis plus upper R upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis equals 0
Sta rtFraction partial differential Over partial differential z EndFraction upper V left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis plus upper L StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential t EndFraction upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis plus upper R upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis equals 0
StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential z EndFraction upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis plus upper C StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential t EndFraction upper V left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis equals 0
Star tFraction par tial differential Over partial differential z EndFraction upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis plus upper C StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential t EndFraction upper V left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis equals 0
Sta rt Fraction p
artial differential Over partial differential z EndFraction upper I left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis plus upper C StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential t EndFraction upper V left parenthesis z comma t right parenthesis equals 0
where V and I represent transmission line voltage and current, respectively and R, 
L, C are per unit length resistance (Ω/m), inductance (H/m) and capacitance (F/m), 
respectively. Equation (4.1) can be expressed in the frequency domain as 
StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential z EndFraction upper V left parenthesis z comma s right parenthesis plus left parenthesis upper R plus s upper L right parenthesis upper I left parenthesis z comma s right parenthesis equals 0
Sta rt Fraction par tial di fferential Over partial differential z EndFraction upper V left parenthesis z comma s right parenthesis plus left parenthesis upper R plus s upper L right parenthesis upper I left parenthesis z comma s right parenthesis equals 0
StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential z EndFraction upper I left parenthesis z comma s right parenthesis plus s upper C upper V left parenthesis z comma s right parenthesis equals 0
Star tFraction partial differe
ntial
The solution of (4.2) is written in exponential matrix form (Roy and Dounavis 
2009) as  
e Su p
e rscript empty set l Baseline equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Z upper Y l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Column upper Z Subscript o Baseline hyperbolic sine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Y upper Z l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column upper Y Subscript o Baseline hyperbolic sine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Y upper Z l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Z upper Y l EndRoot right parenthesis EndMatrix equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column upper A 11 2nd Column upper A 12 2nd Row 1st Column upper A 21 2nd Column upper A 22 EndMatrix
√
e Supe rscript empty set l Baseline equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Z upper Y l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Column upper Z Subscript o Baseline hyperbolic sine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Y upper Z l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column upper Y Subscript o Baseline hyperbolic sine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Y upper Z l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Z upper Y l EndRoot right parenthesis EndMatrix equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column upper A 11 2nd Column upper A 12 2nd Row 1st Column upper A 21 2nd Column upper A 22 EndMatrix
√
e  Sup
erscript empty set l Baseline equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Z upper Y l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Column upper Z Subscript o Baseline hyperbolic sine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Y upper Z l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column upper Y Subscript o Baseline hyperbolic sine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Y upper Z l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Z upper Y l EndRoot right parenthesis EndMatrix equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column upper A 11 2nd Column upper A 12 2nd Row 1st Column upper A 21 2nd Column upper A 22 EndMatrix
√
e  Sup erscript empty set l Baseline equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Z upper Y l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Column upper Z Subscript o Baseline hyperbolic sine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Y upper Z l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column upper Y Subscript o Baseline hyperbolic sine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Y upper Z l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Z upper Y l EndRoot right parenthesis EndMatrix equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column upper A 11 2nd Column upper A 12 2nd Row 1st Column upper A 21 2nd Column upper A 22 EndMatrix
√
e Sup
e
r
s crip t em
pty set
 
l Baseline equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Z upper Y l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Column upper Z Subscript o Baseline hyperbolic sine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Y upper Z l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column upper Y Subscript o Baseline hyperbolic sine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Y upper Z l EndRoot right parenthesis 2nd Column hyperbolic cosine left parenthesis StartRoot upper Z upper Y l EndRoot right parenthesis EndMatrix equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column upper A 11 2nd Column upper A 12 2nd Row 1st Column upper A 21 2nd Column upper A 22 EndMatrix
where 
upper Z Subscript o Baseline StartRoot left parenthesis upper Y upper Z right parenthesis divided by upper Y EndRoot a n d upper Y Subscript o Baseline equals upper Y divided by StartRoot upper Y upper Z EndRoot
/
up p er Z  Su bscr ipt o Baseline StartRoot left parenthesis upper Y upper Z right parenthesis divided by upper Y EndRoot a n d upper Y Subscript o Baseline equals upper Y divided by StartRoot upper Y upper Z EndRoot
√
u p
per Z Subscript o Baseline StartRoot left parenthesis upper Y upper Z right parenthesis divided by upper Y EndRoot a n d upper Y Subscript o Baseline equals upper Y divided by StartRoot upper Y upper Z EndRoot
emp
t y se
t e
quals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column upper Z 2nd Row 1st Column upper Y 2nd Column 0 EndMatrix
B. Delay and Crosstalk Model 
The circuit model for a single Cu line is shown in Fig. 4.1. It depicts a point-to-point 
interconnection model where the input voltage is connected to a source resistance 
RS and output has a load capacitance Cl. The ﬁnal transfer function using ABCD 
matrix is
S tartBin
omialO
r
M
a tr ix 
u p
pe r V Subs
crip t i
 B a s e
line  
le f t  
pare n
th esis s
 righ
t
 parenthesis Choose upper V Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column upper R Subscript s Baseline 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column upper A 11 2nd Column upper A 12 2nd Row 1st Column upper A 21 2nd Column upper A 22 EndMatrix Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column s upper C Subscript t Baseline 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column s upper C Subscript t Baseline 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix StartBinomialOrMatrix upper V Subscript o Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis Choose upper V Subscript o Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix

40
K. Mummaneni et al.
Fig. 4.1 Circuit model for single line interconnect 
Simplifying Eq. (4.5) results in the frequency-time domain solution as 
upper V Subscript o
 Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis equals upper H left parenthesis s right parenthesis upper V Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis
where 
upper H left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis equals left parenthesis upper A 11 plus upper R Subscript s Baseline upper A 21 plus s upper A 12 upper C 1 plus s upper R Subscript s Baseline upper A 22 upper C 1 right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 
C. Proposed Approximation Technique 
The Gaver-Stehfest algorithm (Abate and Whitt 2006) is one among the precise 
inversion algorithms within the uniﬁed framework used for inversion of Laplace 
transforms numerically. The uniﬁed framework is derived by approximating the 
exponential function by a rational function, which is further expressed as a partial 
fraction. The uniﬁed framework for Laplace inversion is based on the formula, 
f left p arenthesis t right parenthesis almost equals f Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 1 Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript n Endscripts omega Subscript k Baseline f Superscript prime left parenthesis StartFraction alpha Super Subscript k Superscript Over t EndFraction right parenthesis Baseline comma 0 less than t less than normal infinity
f 
l
e
ft p
are n the
sis t right parenthesis almost equals f Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 1 Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript n Endscripts omega Subscript k Baseline f Superscript prime left parenthesis StartFraction alpha Super Subscript k Superscript Over t EndFraction right parenthesis Baseline comma 0 less than t less than normal infinity
f left pare nth
esis t right parenthesis almost equals f Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals StartFraction 1 Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript n Endscripts omega Subscript k Baseline f Superscript prime left parenthesis StartFraction alpha Super Subscript k Superscript Over t EndFraction right parenthesis Baseline comma 0 less than t less than normal infinity
where ωk and αk are weights and nodes respectively and are complex numbers. They 
are independent of transform or argument t. They rely upon n. The nodes and weights 
are obtained from 
e S up
e
r
scri
pt z Baseline almost equals sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript n Endscripts StartFraction omega Subscript k Baseline Over alpha Subscript k Baseline minus z EndFraction
e S uperscript z Baseline almost equals sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript n Endscripts StartFraction omega Subscript k Baseline Over alpha Subscript k Baseline minus z EndFraction
The Gaver-Stehfest inversion formula for a Laplace transform F(s) is given as 
f left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript 2 upper M Endscripts zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper F left parenthesis StartFraction k ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
f 
le
f
t pa
ren t
hesis t right parenthesis equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript 2 upper M Endscripts zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper F left parenthesis StartFraction k ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
f
 
left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction sigma summation Underscript k equals 0 Overscript 2 upper M Endscripts zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper F left parenthesis StartFraction k ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
where 
zet a Subscrip
t upper 
K
 B
a
seline equals left parenthesis negative 1 right parenthesis Superscript upper M plus k Baseline sigma summation Underscript j equals left bracket StartFraction left parenthesis k plus 1 right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction right bracket Overscript m i n left brace k comma upper M right brace Endscripts StartFraction j Superscript upper M plus 1 Baseline Over upper M factorial EndFraction StartBinomialOrMatrix upper M Choose j EndBinomialOrMatrix StartBinomialOrMatrix 2 j Choose j EndBinomialOrMatrix StartBinomialOrMatrix j Choose k minus j EndBinomialOrMatrix
z
e
ta  Subscript upper K Baseline equals left parenthesis negative 1 right parenthesis Superscript upper M plus k Baseline sigma summation Underscript j equals left bracket StartFraction left parenthesis k plus 1 right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction right bracket Overscript m i n left brace k comma upper M right brace Endscripts StartFraction j Superscript upper M plus 1 Baseline Over upper M factorial EndFraction StartBinomialOrMatrix upper M Choose j EndBinomialOrMatrix StartBinomialOrMatrix 2 j Choose j EndBinomialOrMatrix StartBinomialOrMatrix j Choose k minus j EndBinomialOrMatrix
ze
t a 
S
ub sc ri
p
t 
up
pe r K
 
Baseline equals left parenthesis negative 1 right parenthesis Superscript upper M plus k Baseline sigma summation Underscript j equals left bracket StartFraction left parenthesis k plus 1 right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction right bracket Overscript m i n left brace k comma upper M right brace Endscripts StartFraction j Superscript upper M plus 1 Baseline Over upper M factorial EndFraction StartBinomialOrMatrix upper M Choose j EndBinomialOrMatrix StartBinomialOrMatrix 2 j Choose j EndBinomialOrMatrix StartBinomialOrMatrix j Choose k minus j EndBinomialOrMatrix

4
Modelling and Analysis of Copper and Carbon Nanotube VLSI …
41
Unlike the exponential matrix approximation techniques such as Pade Approxi-
mation which requires symbolic expressions to ﬁnd poles and residues, the Gaver-
Stehfest inversion formula works using only numerical calculations. The precision 
and signiﬁcant digits produced by the above algorithm is directly proportional to M. 
For all the simulations, M = 10 has been considered. 
For discrete time calculation, we consider t, ζ k and k as vectors of dimensions 
1 × T, 1 × 2 M  and 1 × 2 M,  respectively. 
StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction equals left bracket StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 1 EndFraction comma StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 2 EndFraction comma ellipsis period StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t Subscript upper T Baseline EndFraction right bracket
St
a
rtFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction equals left bracket StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 1 EndFraction comma StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 2 EndFraction comma ellipsis period StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t Subscript upper T Baseline EndFraction right bracket
Sta
rtFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction equals left bracket StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 1 EndFraction comma StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 2 EndFraction comma ellipsis period StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t Subscript upper T Baseline EndFraction right bracket
Sta
r t F r a ction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction equals left bracket StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 1 EndFraction comma StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 2 EndFraction comma ellipsis period StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t Subscript upper T Baseline EndFraction right bracket
St
a
rtFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction equals left bracket StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 1 EndFraction comma StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t 2 EndFraction comma ellipsis period StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t Subscript upper T Baseline EndFraction right bracket
zet a Subs cri p t  upper K  Basel in e equals l e f t  br
acket zeta 1 comma zeta 2 comma ellipsis period period zeta Subscript 2 upper M Baseline right bracket w h e r e k equals 1 comma 2 comma 3 comma ellipsis 2 upper M
For single interconnect line with output function in frequency domain is 
upper V Subscript
 o Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis equals upper H left parenthesis s right parenthesis upper V Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis
The output obtained from (4.9) expressed in matrix form is 
up er V 0 equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V 0 left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
up
per V 
0
 e qu als StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V 0 left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
u
p
per V 0 equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V 0 left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
where ◯ represents element-wise multiplication of two matrices of the same 
dimension. 
D. Analysis for N-Coupled Cu Interconnect 
Here, N distributed coupled RLC lines are considered and the circuit model is shown 
in Fig. 4.2. The voltages and currents are in N X 1  matrix form. The R, L, C are also 
in N X N  matrix form. For N-coupled lines, in (4.3), the exponential matrix is further 
divided into four submatrices A11, A12, A21 and A22 each of dimensions N X N. The  
source resistance and load capacitance matrix is RS = diag(RS1, RS2, … RSN) and 
Cl = diag(Cl1, Cl2, … ClN,), respectively. For N-coupled interconnects, the output 
voltage can be represented in matrix form as 
St
art 4 B
y 1 Mat
rix 1st
 R
ow
 StartLa
yo
ut 1st 
Ro
w 
upper V Subs
cri
pt o  B a s elin
e 1 Ba sel
in
e 
le
ft
 p a r enth
esis  s r i g h t  p a r
en
thesis 2nd R
ow
 upper 
V Subsc
ript o 
Ba
se
li n e 2 B
as
eline l
eft parenthesis s right parenthesis EndLayout 2nd Row period 3rd Row period 4th Row upper V Subscript o upper N Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis EndMatrix equals Start 1 By 1 Matrix 1st Row StartLayout 1st Row 1st Column upper H 11 2nd Column upper H 12 ellipsis 3rd Column upper H Subscript 1 upper N Baseline 2nd Row 1st Column upper H 21 2nd Column upper H Subscript StartLayout 1st Row StartLayout 1st Row 22 2nd Row period EndLayout 2nd Row period 3rd Row period 4th Row period EndLayout Baseline ellipsis 3rd Column upper H 21 3rd Row 1st Column upper H Subscript upper N Baseline 1 Baseline 2nd Column upper H Subscript upper N Baseline 2 Baseline ellipsis 3rd Column upper H Subscript upper N upper N Baseline EndLayout EndMatrix Start 4 By 1 Matrix 1st Row StartLayout 1st Row upper V Subscript i Baseline 1 Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis 2nd Row upper V Subscript i Baseline 2 Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis EndLayout 2nd Row period 3rd Row period 4th Row upper V Subscript i upper N Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis EndMatrix
uppe r V Subscript 0 i Baseline equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V Subscript 0 i Baseline left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
up
per V S
u
bs cr ipt 0 i Baseline equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V Subscript 0 i Baseline left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
u
p
per V Subscript 0 i Baseline equals StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V Subscript 0 i Baseline left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln left parenthesis 2 right parenthesis Over t EndFraction right parenthesis

42
K. Mummaneni et al.
Fig. 4.2 Circuit model for n-coupled line interconnects 
The output from (4.15) is found by modifying (4.14) for  the  ith interconnect 
line as an approximate inverse Laplace Transform which has been derived using the 
Gaver-Stehfest algorithm. This approximated output is used for the calculation of 
interconnect delay, overshoot and crosstalk induced noise of Cu and CNT RLC lines. 
E. Analysis of Single Line CNT Interconnects 
The transfer functions of the SWCNT (Single-Walled) and MWCNT (Multi-Walled) 
interconnect distributed lines are extracted to ﬁnd the 50% delay and overshoot at 
different interconnect lengths by employing the equivalent single conductor CNT 
interconnect in the Driver-Interconnect-Load system (Mekala Girish Kumar 2017). 
Figure 4.3a assumes the single line distributed CNT interconnect as an equivalent 
single conductor.
The system takes into account the driver parasitics, i.e. resistance (Rd) and capaci-
tance (Cd) as shown in Fig. 4.3a. In order to ﬁnd the transfer function, the DIL system 
is considered as a cascaded connection of two-port networks as shown in Fig. 4.3b. 
The two-port system is represented by ABCD parameters. The transfer function 
has been realized using the transmission matrix
S tartBin
omialO
r
M
a tr ix 
u p
pe r
 
V
 Sub s
cr ip t i Ba
s
e
li ne l eft 
pare nth
es is  s rig
h
t
 p a
r
e
nthe s
is  Choos
e upp
e
r I Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column upper R Subscript d Baseline 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column s upper C Subscript d Baseline 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column upper A 11 2nd Column upper A 12 2nd Row 1st Column upper A 21 2nd Column upper A 22 EndMatrix Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column upper R Subscript l u m p Baseline 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column s upper C 1 2nd Column 1 EndMatrix StartBinomialOrMatrix upper V Subscript o Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis Choose upper I Subscript o Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis EndBinomialOrMatrix
Simplifying (4.16) gives  
upper V Subscript
 o Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis equals upper H left parenthesis s right parenthesis upper V Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis
where 
upper 
H 
le ft parenth
e
sis s  r ight par e
n
th esis equal
s
 left  parenthe
sis 
left parenthesis 1 plus sC Subscript 1 Baseline upper R Subscript lump Baseline right parenthesis DA Subscript 11 Baseline plus sC Subscript 1 upper D Baseline upper A Subscript 12 Baseline plus left parenthesis 1 plus sC Subscript 1 Baseline upper R Subscript lump Baseline right parenthesis upper Y upper A Subscript 21 Baseline plus sC Subscript 1 Baseline YA Subscript 22 Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
Here,

4
Modelling and Analysis of Copper and Carbon Nanotube VLSI …
43
Fig. 4.3 a Driver-Interconnect-load system. b Cascaded connections of distributed interconnect 
load (DIL) of 3a
up per D equa ls 1 plus s upper C Subscript d Baseline upper R Subscript d
up per Y  equals left p aren
thesis 1 plus sC Subscript d Baseline upper R Subscript d Baseline right parenthesis upper R Subscript lump Baseline plus upper R Subscript d Baseline
F. 
Crosstalk Analysis of CNT Interconnect 
The two-coupled line CNT interconnect structure is shown in Fig. 4.4. Here, R1, 
R2 are scattering resistances; LK1 and LK2 are kinetic inductances; LE1 and LE2 are 
electrostatic inductances; CE1, CE2 are electrostatic capacitances; CQ1, CQ2 are elec-
trostatic capacitances and CL1, CL2 represent the load capacitances of each line. The 
parameters L12 and C12 are mutual inductances and coupling capacitances, respec-
tively. All the line parasitics are per unit length. The voltages and currents in the 
transmission lines are in 2 X 1  matrix form. The line parasitics are in 2 X 2  per unit 
length matrix form. 
up p
e r R  e
qu al
s
 Sta r
t  2  By 2 Ma tr
ix 1
st 
Ro w 1s t Co lu
mn upper R 1 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column upper R 2 EndMatrix comma upper L equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column upper L Subscript upper K Baseline 1 Baseline plus upper L Subscript upper E Baseline 1 Baseline 2nd Column upper L 12 2nd Row 1st Column upper L 12 2nd Column upper L Subscript upper K Baseline 2 Baseline plus upper L Subscript upper E Baseline 2 Baseline EndMatrix

44
K. Mummaneni et al.
Fig. 4.4 Coupled-two CNT interconnect (Vobulapuram Ramesh Kumar 2014) 
up pe
r 
C
 
equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper E Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper C 12 2nd Column negative upper C Subscript 12 Baseline 2nd Row 1st Column negative upper C Subscript 12 Baseline 2nd Column left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 2 Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript upper E Baseline 2 EndMatrix
uppe r C equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper E Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper C 12 2nd Column negative upper C Subscript 12 Baseline 2nd Row 1st Column negative upper C Subscript 12 Baseline 2nd Column left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 2 Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript upper E Baseline 2 EndMatrix
upp
er C
 equa
ls St
art 
2
 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper E Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper C 12 2nd Column negative upper C Subscript 12 Baseline 2nd Row 1st Column negative upper C Subscript 12 Baseline 2nd Column left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 2 Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript upper E Baseline 2 EndMatrix
uppe r C equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper E Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper C 12 2nd Column negative upper C Subscript 12 Baseline 2nd Row 1st Column negative upper C Subscript 12 Baseline 2nd Column left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 2 Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript upper E Baseline 2 EndMatrix
upp
er C
 equal
s 
S
tart 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper E Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper C 12 2nd Column negative upper C Subscript 12 Baseline 2nd Row 1st Column negative upper C Subscript 12 Baseline 2nd Column left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 2 Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript upper Q Baseline 1 Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper C Subscript upper E Baseline 2 EndMatrix
The driver parasitics, i.e. resistances (Rd1 and Rd2) and capacitances (Cd1 and Cd2) 
are diagonal matrices of dimension 2 X 2.  The output is obtained by modifying (4.21) 
for interconnect line as 
uppe r V 01 equals StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V 01 left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
up per V 0
1
 e qu als StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V 01 left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
u
pper V 01 equals StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V 01 left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
uppe r V 02 equals StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V 02 left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
up per V 0
2
 e qu als StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V 02 left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
u
p
per V 02 equals StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction o zeta Subscript upper K Baseline upper V 02 left parenthesis upper K Superscript upper T Baseline StartFraction ln 2 Over t EndFraction right parenthesis
The approximated output is used to examine both functional and dynamic 
crosstalk. It is used to calculate the interconnect delay and crosstalk noise of the 
CNT- interconnect lines. 
Results and Calculations 
Single line and 2-coupled lines for both Cu interconnects and CNT Interconnects are 
presented to validate the proposed model based on Gaver-Stehfest algorithm. The 
results obtained are compared with existing models such as Padé model and SPICE 
results. 
A. Single Line Copper (Cu) Interconnect 
A single line interconnect is employed to check the accuracy and efﬁciency of 
the proposed model. The interconnect parameters are given in Table 4.1 which is 
collected from Roy and Dounavis (2009).

4
Modelling and Analysis of Copper and Carbon Nanotube VLSI …
45
Table 4.1 Typical values for 
single line copper 
interconnect parameters 
Parameters
Values 
VDD
1 V  
Length (l)
0.2 to 0.5 cm 
Resistance (R)
88.29 Ω/cm 
Capacitance (C)
1.8 pF/cm 
Inductance (L)
15.38 nH/cm 
Load capacitance
50 to 100 fF 
Source resistance
50 to 100Ω
Input ramp rise time (Tr)
0.1 ns 
The obtained values of 50% time delay and overshoot are compared with the 
results of the Padé model and SPICE results in Tables 4.2 and 4.3, respectively. It 
is clearly seen that the results obtained by the proposed model are more accurate 
than the previously proposed Padé model. The response of a rising ramp is shown in 
Figs. 4.5 and 4.6 with different source resistance and load capacitance. The average 
error percentage in the 50% delay and overshoot calculations using the proposed 
Gaver-Stehfest model are 0.37% and 0.63% respectively. 
B. Two-Coupled Cu Interconnect Lines 
Here, a line of length 2 mm is considered. The interconnect wire parameters are 
obtained from Sharma et al. (2012) as  RS = diag(75, 50) kΩ, Cl = diag(30, 30) fF, 
R1 varies  from  0 to 90 kΩ. 
up p
er R eq
ua
l
s Star
t 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 653.67 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 653.67 EndMatrix StartFraction k normal upper Omega Over m EndFraction comma upper L equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 14.83 2nd Column 0.61 2nd Row 1st Column 0.61 2nd Column 14.83 EndMatrix StartFraction mu upper H Over m EndFraction
up per R
 equals  Star
t 2 B y 2 M
atrix 1st Row 1st Column 653.67 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 653.67 EndMatrix StartFraction k normal upper Omega Over m EndFraction comma upper L equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 14.83 2nd Column 0.61 2nd Row 1st Column 0.61 2nd Column 14.83 EndMatrix StartFraction mu upper H Over m EndFraction
upper R equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 653.67 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 653.67 EndMatrix StartFraction k normal upper Omega Over m EndFraction comma upper L equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 14.83 2nd Column 0.61 2nd Row 1st Column 0.61 2nd Column 14.83 EndMatrix StartFraction mu upper H Over m EndFraction
Table 4.2 Comparison between 50% delay of LTSPICE, Pade model and proposed Gaver-Stehfest-
based model for various lengths, source resistance and load capacitance of a single line interconnect 
L (cm)
Rs (Ω)
Cl (fF)
LT SPICE
Pade model (3/3)
Proposed model (M = 
10) 
50% delay (ps)
50% delay (ps) (% 
Error) 
50% delay (ps) (% 
Error) 
0.2
50
50
79.8
80.2 (0.5)
80.1 (0.37) 
100
100
98.7
98.6 (0.1)
98.6 (0.1) 
0.3
50
50
98.8
99.3 (0.5)
99.0 (0.1) 
100
100
116.9
118.6 (1.45)
117.1 (0.17) 
0.5
50
50
135.2
137.8 (1.92)
135.4 (0.14) 
100
100
156.6
151.9 (3.00)
154.5 (1.34) 
Average error percentage
1.245
0.37

46
K. Mummaneni et al.
Table 4.3 Comparison between overshoot of proposed Gaver-Stehfest-based model, Pade and 
LTSPICE for various lengths, source resistance and load capacitance of a single line interconnect 
l (cm)
Rs (Ω)
Cl (fF)
LT SPICE
Pade model
Proposed model (M = 
10) 
Over shoot (V)
Overshoot (V) (% 
Error) 
Overshoot (V) (% 
Error) 
0.2
50
50
1.125
1.14 (1.33)
1.11 (0.89) 
100
100
1
1 (0)
1 (0)  
0.3
50
50
1.15
1.15 (0)
1.15 (0) 
100
100
1.00
1.01(0.99)
1.00 (0) 
0.5
50
50
1.01
1.057 (4.653)
1.05(2.94) 
100
100
1.00
1.01(0.99)
1.00(0) 
Average error percentage
1.327
0.63 
Fig. 4.5 Time domain analysis of single copper line, for length = 0.3 cm, Rs = 50Ω, Cl = 50fF
up p
e r C eq uals St
art 2 B y 2 M
a trix 1st Row 1st Column 93.33 2nd Column negative 71.50 2nd Row 1st Column negative 71.50 2nd Column 93.33 EndMatrix StartFraction p normal upper F Over m EndFraction
up
per C equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 93.33 2nd Column negative 71.50 2nd Row 1st Column negative 71.50 2nd Column 93.33 EndMatrix StartFraction p normal upper F Over m EndFraction
In coupled-2-line systems, line 1 and line 2 are named victim and aggressor 
lines, respectively. There are two types of crosstalk, namely, functional crosstalk and 
dynamic crosstalk. For the case of functional crosstalk, the aggressor line is switched 
from logic low to logic high while the victim line is kept quiet in logic low level. For 
the case of dynamic crosstalk, both the lines are switched simultaneously. Firstly, 
functional crosstalk is analysed. The aggressor line is excited by a ramp signal with

4
Modelling and Analysis of Copper and Carbon Nanotube VLSI …
47
Fig. 4.6 Time domain analysis of single Cu line, for length = 0.3 cm, Rs = 100Ω, Cl = 100fF
a rise time of 50 ps and  V DD = 1.2 V, while the victim line is grounded. The time 
domain response for the victim line is shown in Fig. 4.7.
In the second case, dynamic crosstalk is considered. Both victim and aggressor 
lines are driven with the same phase inputs at the same time. The time domain 
response is plotted in Fig. 4.8.
Table 4.4 shows the comparison for crosstalk induced delay in the aggressor line 
between the proposed model and the existing models with LTSPICE results. It is 
observed that the average error in estimation of 50% delay in the aggressor line is 
0.61%. Table 4.5 presents the 50%-time delay for dynamic crosstalk. The results 
obtained using the proposed model are compared with the results of Pade model 
and the results of LTSPICE simulation tool. The average error percentage in the 
calculation using the proposed model is 0.55%.
C. Single Line CNT Interconnect 
The CNT parameters in Table 4.6 are used to calculate the 50% delay and overshoot 
of SWCNT and MWCNT (Mekala Girish Kumar 2017). The values of overshoot and 
delay for SWCNT and MWCNT are compared with the results of Pade model and 
LTSPICE. The response of a rising ramp is shown in Figs. 4.9 and 4.10 for SWCNT 
and MWCNT, respectively. Table 4.7 presents the 50% delay for both Single-walled 
CNTs and Multi-walled CNTS of the proposed model, existing Pade model and 
LTSPICE.
Figure 4.11 represents a plot between delay and interconnect length for Single-
Walled CNTs and Multi-Walled CNTs which is further utilized for comparative study 
of SWCNT and MWCNT.

48
K. Mummaneni et al.
Fig. 4.7 Functional crosstalk in victim line when aggressor is rising ramp while victim is grounded 
for the case of 2-coupled Cu
It can be clearly seen from Table 4.7 that, by using the proposed model, the average 
error associated with the estimation of 50%-time delay for SWCNTs is 1.118% and 
for MWCNTs is 1.344%. Therefore, the delay is predicted better by the proposed 
model and is easier to implement than the existing Pade Model. It is observed from 
Fig. 4.11 that Multi-walled CNTs exhibit lesser time delay as compared to Single-
Walled CNTs. Hence, MWCNTs are considered as potential candidates for global 
interconnects (Table 4.8).
D.
Two-Coupled Line CNT Interconnect 
The length of the interconnect lines have been taken as 1 mm. The corresponding 
line parasitics, obtained from Vobulapuram Ramesh Kumar (2014) are  
up p
er R eq
ua
l
s Star
t 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 653.67 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 653.67 EndMatrix StartFraction k normal upper Omega Over m EndFraction comma upper L equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 14.83 2nd Column 0.61 2nd Row 1st Column 0.61 2nd Column 14.83 EndMatrix StartFraction mu upper H Over m EndFraction
up per R
 equals  Star
t 2 B y 2 M
atrix 1st Row 1st Column 653.67 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 653.67 EndMatrix StartFraction k normal upper Omega Over m EndFraction comma upper L equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 14.83 2nd Column 0.61 2nd Row 1st Column 0.61 2nd Column 14.83 EndMatrix StartFraction mu upper H Over m EndFraction
upper R equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 653.67 2nd Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 653.67 EndMatrix StartFraction k normal upper Omega Over m EndFraction comma upper L equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 14.83 2nd Column 0.61 2nd Row 1st Column 0.61 2nd Column 14.83 EndMatrix StartFraction mu upper H Over m EndFraction
up p
e r C eq uals St
art 2 B y 2 M
a trix 1st Row 1st Column 93.33 2nd Column negative 71.50 2nd Row 1st Column negative 71.50 2nd Column 93.33 EndMatrix StartFraction p normal upper F Over m EndFraction
up
per C equals Start 2 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column 93.33 2nd Column negative 71.50 2nd Row 1st Column negative 71.50 2nd Column 93.33 EndMatrix StartFraction p normal upper F Over m EndFraction

4
Modelling and Analysis of Copper and Carbon Nanotube VLSI …
49
Fig. 4.8 Dynamic crosstalk in 2-coupled Cu lines when both inputs are rising ramp
Table 4.4 Comparison between 50% delay of LTSPICE, Pade model and proposed Gaver-Stehfest-
based model for functional crosstalk in the aggressor line for Cu interconnect 
Line resistance (Ω)
50% delay 
LTSPICE (ps)
Pade model) (ps) (% Error)
Proposed model (M = 10) 
(ps) (% Error) 
0
33.45
33.64 (0.5)
32.69 (2.3) 
15
34.66
35.62 (2.15)
34. 64(0.09) 
30
36.57
37.59 (1.57)
36.60 (0.05) 
45
38.76
38.88 (0.3)
38.54 (0.56) 
60
40.44
40.58 (0.32)
40.47 (0.05) 
75
42.18
42.29 (0.23)
42.41(0.52) 
90
44.03
43.99 (0.11)
44.37 (0.75) 
Average error percentage
0.87
0.61
The driver parasitics are Rd = diag(13.85,13.85) kΩ and Cd = diag (0.07, 0.07) 
fF. The load capacitance is varied to verify the robustness of the model. Here, the two 
lines, viz., line 1 and line 2 are named as aggressor line and victim line, respectively. 
The crosstalk effects are examined for two cases. In the ﬁrst case, i.e. functional 
crosstalk, the aggressor line is switched from logic low level to logic high level

50
K. Mummaneni et al.
Table 4.5 Comparison between 50% delay of LTSPICE, Pade model and proposed Gaver-Stehfest-
based model for dynamic crosstalk 
50% delay 
Line resistance (Ω)
LT 
SPICE (ps) 
Pade model(2/2) (ps) 
(% Error) 
Proposed model (ps) 
(% Error) 
0
30.49
31.67 (3.87)
30.26 
15
31.53
32.85 (4.15)
31.33 
30
32.71
33.95 (3.76)
32.44 
45
33.58
35.00 (4.2)
33.55 
60
34.77
36.02 (3.57)
34.67 
75
35.98
37.00 (2.86)
35.81 
90
37.18
37.96 (2.19)
36.95 
Average error percentage
3.52
0.55
Table 4.6 Typical values for 
CNT interconnect parameters
Parameters
Values 
VDD
1 V  
Length (l)
500 to 2500 μm 
Resistance (R)
SWB
4.4 Ω/μm 
MWB
1.6 Ω/μm 
Inductance (L)
SWB
2.75 pH/μm 
MWB
2.17 pH/μm 
Capacitance (C)
SWB
14.97 aF/μm 
MWB
13.37 aF/μm 
Driver resistance (Rd)
13.80 kΩ
Driver capacitance (Cd)
0.07 fF 
Load capacitance (Cl)
1 fF
while the victim line is kept quiet in logic low level. For the next case, i.e. dynamic 
crosstalk, both lines are switched at the same time, either in-phase or out-phase. 
The functional crosstalk is shown in Figs. 4.12 and 4.13 for victim and aggressor 
lines, respectively. The aggressor line is excited with a ramp input signal having 
rising time of 50 ps and VDD = 1 V. Table 4.9 presents the error associated with 
the prediction of crosstalk induced peak voltage (crosstalk noise) and timing instant 
on the victim line using the proposed Gaver-Stehfest based model with respect to 
LTSPICE simulations and existing Pade model (Vobulapuram Ramesh Kumar 2014). 
The average error percentage for peak voltage between the obtained analytical results 
and simulation (LTSPICE) results is 0.17%. The average error in estimating the peak 
voltage timing is 0.27%. This is more accurate than the existing FDTD method 
(Vobulapuram Ramesh Kumar 2014). Hence, both peak voltage and peak voltage 
timing instance are predicted accurately using the proposed model.

4
Modelling and Analysis of Copper and Carbon Nanotube VLSI …
51
Fig. 4.9 Time domain analysis of SWCNT (single-walled CNT) line, for length = 500 μm 
Fig. 4.10 Time domain analysis of MWCNT (multi-walled CNT) line, for length 1000 μm
For dynamic crosstalk, both the lines give the same phase inputs at the same time. 
The output for dynamic crosstalk is shown in Fig. 4.14.
As per Table 4.10, it is found that the average error percentage in the calculation of 
propagation delay in aggressor line for dynamic crosstalk using the proposed model 
is 0.39% which is less than average error percentage for existing Pade method. Hence, 
the proposed model predicts the crosstalk in CNTs accurately with less than 1% error.

52
K. Mummaneni et al.
Table 4.7 Comparison between 50% delay of LTSPICE, Pade model and proposed model for 
different lengths of single-walled CNT and multi-walled CNT 
Inter connect 
length (μm) 
50% delay (single-walled CNT)
50% delay (multi-walled CNT) 
LT SPICE 
(ps) 
Pade model 
(% error) 
Proposed 
model (M 
= 10) (% 
error) 
LTSPICE 
(ps) 
Pade model 
(% error) 
Proposed 
model (M 
= 10) (% 
error) 
500
74.442
75.449 
(1.35) 
75.584 
(1.53) 
73.17
74.264 
(1.49) 
74.421 
(1.7) 
1000
83.249
84.194 
(1.13) 
84.006 
(0.90) 
80.28
81.97 (2.1)
81.859 
(1.96) 
1500
91.085
92.177 
(1.19) 
91.845 
(0.83) 
88.52
88.996 
(0.53) 
88.689 
(0.19) 
2000
98.792
99.589 
(0.80) 
99.432 
(0.64) 
94.177
95.489 
(1.39) 
95.187 
(1.07) 
2500
105.215
106.82 
(1.52) 
107.00 
(1.69) 
99.756
101.57 
(1.81) 
101.56 
(1.80) 
Average error percentage
1.198
1.118
Average 
error 
percentage 
1.464
1.344
Fig. 4.11 50% Time delay comparison between SWB and MWB for various lengths

4
Modelling and Analysis of Copper and Carbon Nanotube VLSI …
53
Table 4.8 Comparison between overshoot of proposed Gaver-Stehfest-based model and Pade 
model for several lengths of Single-Walled CNT and Multi-Walled CNT 
Interconnect 
length (μm) 
Overshoot (MWCNT) 
Overshoot (SWCNT) 
LTSPICE 
(V) 
Pade model 
(V) (% 
error) 
Proposed 
model (M 
= 10) (% 
Error) 
LT SPICE (V)
Pade 
model (% 
error) 
Proposed 
model (M 
= 10) (% 
error) 
500
1.003
1.021 
(1.79) 
1.0002 
(0.09) 
1.001
1.002 
(0.09) 
1.002 
(0.09) 
1000
1.0013
1.022 
(−0.88) 
1.0001 
(0.12) 
1.003
1.007 
(0.39) 
1.001 
(0.19) 
1500
1.0001
1.0001 (0)
1.0002 
(0.01) 
1.0001
1.001 
(0.18) 
1.0001 (0) 
2000
1
1.001 (0.1) 
1 (0)
1.001
1.006 
(−0.49) 
1 (0.09) 
2500
1.001
1.004 
(0.21) 
1 (0.09)
1
1(0)
1 (0)  
Average error percentage
0.5
0.6
Average error 
percentage 
0.23
0.07
Fig. 4.12 Functional crosstalk in victim line of MWCNT when aggressor input is rising ramp while 
victim is grounded (Cl = 40fF)

54
K. Mummaneni et al.
Fig. 4.13 Output in aggressor line of MWCNT in functional crosstalk 
Table 4.9 Error associated with the calculation of peak voltage and timing instant of peak voltage 
on victim line for the case of functional crosstalk 
Load 
capacitance 
(CL) (fF) 
Peak voltage on the victim line
Timing of peak voltage on victim line 
LTSPICE 
(V) 
Pade model 
(V) (% 
error) 
Proposed 
model (V) 
(% error) 
LTSPICE 
(ps) 
Pade model 
(ps) (% 
error) 
Proposed 
model (ps) 
(% error) 
10
0.39
0.390 (0)
0.390 (0)
72.5
73.3 (1.1)
72.9 (0.50) 
20
0.318
0.318 (0)
0.318 (0)
77.6
77.9 (0.3)
78.0 (0.51) 
30
0.263
0.262 (0.38) 
0.263 (0)
80.9
80.8 (0.12)
80.9 (0.00) 
40
0.223
0.221 (0.89) 
0.222 
(0.44) 
83.1
82.3 (0.96)
82.9 (0.24) 
50
0.193
0.191 (1.03) 
0.192 
(0.51) 
84.4
84.9 (0.6)
84.5 (0.11) 
Average error percentage 
0.46
0.19
Average 
error 
percentage 
0.61
0.27

4
Modelling and Analysis of Copper and Carbon Nanotube VLSI …
55
Fig. 4.14 Dynamic crosstalk in MWCNT when both inputs are rising ramp
Table 4.10 Comparison of 50% delay for dynamic crosstalk when inputs are in-phase 
Load capacitance (CL) 
(fF) 
Aggressor line delay 
SPICE (ps)
Pade model (ps) (% error)
Proposed model (ps) (% 
error) 
10
20.85
21.25 (1.91)
21.12 (1.29) 
20
29.49
30.15 (2.23)
29.52 (0.10) 
30
36.44
37.19 (2.05)
36.52 (1.21) 
40
43.58
43.96 (0.87)
43.61 (0.06) 
50
47.41
48.36 (2.00)
48.50 (2.29) 
Average error percentage
1.82
0.39 
Conclusion 
This chapter investigated the delay and crosstalk effects in single line and coupled 
line interconnects for both copper and carbon nanotube interconnects using the 
proposed Gaver-Stehfest based method. The delay, overshoot and crosstalk are esti-
mated analytically and compared with existing models and SPICE simulation results. 
The study of functional crosstalk and dynamic crosstalk in two coupled lines has been 
presented. Furthermore, the proposed model based on Gaver-Stehfest algorithm can 
be broadened to analyse n-coupled lines. The proposed model is found to be more 
accurate than the prevailing models and is in good agreement with SPICE values. 
The analysis suggests that the proposed model can play a big role in performance 
analysis of Cu and CNT interconnects and possible to integrate in TCAD simulators.

56
K. Mummaneni et al.
References 
Abate J, Whitt W (2006) A uniﬁed framework for numerically inverting laplace transform. 
INFORMS J Comput 18(4):408–421 
Agrawal Y, Kumar MG, Chandel R (2017) A uniﬁed delay, power and crosstalk model for current 
mode signaling multiwall carbon nanotube interconnects. Springer Science+Business Media 
Das D, Rahaman H (2011) Analysis of crosstalk in single-and multiwall carbon nanotube 
interconnects and its impact on gate oxide reliability. IEEE Trans Nanotechnol 10(6). 
Dounavis A, Achar R, Nakhla M (2001) A general class of passive micromodels for lossy 
multiconductor transmission lines. IEEE Microw Theory Tech 49(10):1686–1696 
Dounavis A, Achar R, Xin L (1999) Passive closed-form transmission line model for general-
purpose circuit simulators. IEEE Trans Microw Theory Tech 47:2450–2459 
Elmore WC (1948) The transient response of demand linear networks with particular regard to 
wideband ampliﬁers. J Appl Phys 19(1):55–63 
Fathi D, Forouzandeh B (2009) A novel approach for stability analysis in carbon nanotube 
interconnects. IEEE Electron Device Lett 30(5). 
Fathi D, Forouzandeh B, Mohajerzadeh S, Sarvari R (2009) Accurate analysis of carbon nanotube 
interconnects using transmission line model. Micro & Nano Lett. 
Fathi D, Forouzandeh B (2012) Time domain analysis of carbon nanotube interconnects based on 
distributed RLC model. World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company 
Haji-Nasiri S, Faez R, Moravvej-Farshi MK (2012) Stability analysis in multiwall carbon nanotube 
bundle interconnects. 
Hermite C (1908) Sur la résolution de l’équation du cinquème degré. Œuvres De Charles Hermite 
2:5–21 
Kumar MG, Agrawal Y, Chandel R (2017) Stability analysis of carbon nanotube interconnects. 
Springer Science+Business Media Singapore. 
Kumar VR, Kaushik BK, Patnaik A (2014) Crosstalk noise modeling of multiwall carbon nanotube 
(MWCNT) interconnects using ﬁnite-difference time-domain (FDTD) technique. Microelectron 
Reliab 
Li H, Yin WY, Banerjee K, Mao JF (2008) Circuit modeling and performance analysis of multi-
walled carbon nanotube interconnects. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 55(6). 
Ravindra JV, Srinivas MB (2007a) Analytical crosstalk model with inductive coupling in VLSI 
interconnects. In: IEEE Workshop on Signal Propagation on Interconnects. 
Ravindra JV, Srinivas MB (2007b) Analytical crosstalk model with inductive coupling in VLSI 
interconnects. In: IEEE Workshop on Signal Propagation on Interconnect. 
Roy S, Dounavis A (2009) Closed-form delay and crosstalk models for RLC on-chip interconnects 
using a matrix rational approximation. IEEE Trans Comput-Aided Des Integr Circuits Syst 
28(10) 
Sahoo M, Rahaman H (2013) Modeling of crosstalk delay and noise in single-walled carbon 
nanotube bundle interconnects. IEEE 
Sharma DK, Mittal S, Kaushik B, Sharma R, Yadav K, Majumder M (2012) Dynamic crosstalk 
analysis in RLC modeled interconnects using FDTD method. In: Third International Conference 
in Computer and Communication Technology. 
Srivastava N, Banerjee K (2005) Performance analysis of carbon nanotube interconnects for VLSI 
applications. In: IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design 
Sathyakam PU, Mallick PS, Singh P (2020) Geometry-based crosstalk reduction in CNT 
interconnects. J Circuits, Syst, Comput 29(6)

Chapter 5 
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube 
Interconnects 
Wen-Sheng Zhao 
Abstract Optimal repeater insertion techniques are usually employed in long inter-
connects to improve the performance. As a promising alternative interconnect mate-
rial, carbon nanotube (CNT) has attracted much attention in past several years. 
However, it is worth noting that the implementation of CNT interconnects is hindered 
by large contact resistance, which would affect the number and size of repeaters. In 
this chapter, the repeater insertion technique is explored for CNT interconnects, with 
the contact effect treated appropriately. It is demonstrated that multi-walled CNT 
(MWCNT) is susceptible to the contact resistance, and special attention should be 
paid to the repeater insertion in MWCNT interconnects. Further, both the delay and 
power consumption are considered in the design of repeaters. The particle swarm 
optimization (PSO) algorithm is employed to capture the optimal number and size 
of repeaters, and the results are used to train an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN). The 
developed procedure can be applied to the optimal design of interconnect system in 
nano-CMOS and future nano-carbon-based ICs. 
Keywords Carbon nanotube · Interconnect · Circuit model · Repeater insertion 
Introduction 
With the rapid development of semiconductor manufacturing technologies, the 
feature size of integrated circuits (ICs) is continually shrinking and the device dimen-
sions are continually scaling down. Unlike transistors, interconnects suffer from limi-
tations of both diminishing current-carrying capacity and a nonlinear increase in the 
resistivity, mainly attributed to the decreased conductor area. The interconnect delay 
has become much larger than the transistor delay and hence the interconnect era has
W.-S. Zhao envelope symbol
Zhejiang Provincial Key Lab of Large-Scale Integrated Circuit Design, School of Electronics and 
Information, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China 
e-mail: wsh.zhao@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_5 
57

58
W.-S. Zhao
been launched (Meindl 2003; Venkatesan et al. 2001; Wong et al. 2020). More impor-
tantly, the current density of on-chip interconnects increases dramatically, thereby 
threatening the reliability of the integrated circuits (Zhao et al. 2022a; Sathyakam 
and Mallick 2017). 
Carbon nanotube (CNT) are considered as a promising candidate for interconnect 
applications due to their extraordinary electrical, thermal, and mechanical proper-
ties (Srivastava et al. 2005; Close and Wong 2007; Zhao et al. 2019a; Todri-Sanial 
et al. 2017; Chiariello et al. 2013). For instance, the ampacity of CNTs could be 
about an order of magnitude higher than Cu counterpart (Radosavljevic et al. 2001; 
Wei et al. 2001), thereby signiﬁcantly improving the IC reliability. According to 
the number of layers of carbon atoms, CNTs can be divided into two categories: 
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and multi-walled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs) (Avourise et al. 2003). An SWCNT is a rolled-up graphene sheet with 
diameter of a few nanometers, and an MWCNT can be viewed as a parallel assembly 
of SWCNTs (Li et al. 2008). In general, the intrinsic resistance of an SWCNT 
is too large for interconnect applications, the monolayer or bundled SWCNTs are 
usually employed to reduce resistive losses (Zhao et al. 2015; Naeemi and Meindl 
2007; Maffucci et al. 2009). It was demonstrated that the monolayer SWCNTs could 
reduce the power dissipation and crosstalk, which are mainly attributed to their low 
parasitic capacitance, while bundled SWCNTs exhibit better transmission perfor-
mance than their Cu counterpart due to low effective resistivity. It is worth noting 
that SWCNTs could be metallic or semiconducting depending on their chirality. In 
contrast, all the MWCNTs are metallic and therefore, they are more suitable for 
interconnect applications (Close and Wong 2008; Majumder et al. 2012; Liang et al. 
2011a). After developing a multi-conductor circuit model of MWCNT intercon-
nects (Li et al. 2008), it is demonstrated that MWCNT interconnects could provide 
better performance than conventional Cu and bundled SWCNTs at the intermediate 
and global interconnect levels. To simplify the modeling procedure, an equivalent 
single-conductor (ESC) transmission line model was established later for MWCNTs 
(Sarto and Tamburrano 2009), where the equivalent kinetic inductance and quantum 
capacitance were extracted from inductance and capacitance networks. Further, the 
application range of ESC model for characterizing the MWCNT interconnects was 
also examined (Tang and Mao 2014). 
Figure 5.1 plots the diagram of interconnect delay versus length, and the schematic 
of driver-interconnect-load (DIL) system is shown in the ﬁgure inset. In the DIL 
model, uper R Subscript normal d and uper C Subscript normal d denote the resistance and capacitance of the driver, uper C Subscript normal upper L is the load 
capacitance, and r Subscript i n t and c Subscript i n t represent the per-unit-length resistance and capacitance 
of the interconnect, respectively. Here, the interconnect length is denoted by l. It  
is evident that both the interconnect resistance and capacitance are proportional to 
the length. For interconnect of very short length, the delay is mainly determined by 
the driver’s elements, and the corresponding region is deﬁned as sub-linear region. 
As the interconnect length exceeds a certain value, the interconnect delay reaches 
linear region, i.e., the delay increases linearly with the length. For interconnect length 
longer than 50 gate pitches, the inﬂuences of both interconnect resistance and capac-
itance becomes nonnegligible, i.e., the interconnect delay is determined by r Subscript i n t Baseline c Subscript i n t Baseline l squared

5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects
59
106 
104 
102 
100 
10−2 
100 
101
102 
103 
104 
Interconnect length (× gate pitch) 
Delay (ps) 
Sub-
linear
Linear
Super-
linear
Quadratic 
Interconnect
d
a
o
L
r
e
v
ir
D 
Rd 
Cd 
rint 
cint
CL 
Fig. 5.1 Interconnect delay versus length 
(Rakheja and Naeemi 2010). It is evident that there is signiﬁcant quadratic pattern 
between the interconnect delay and length in quadratic region. It is evident that by 
inserting repeaters in a long interconnect, the interconnect delay of each segment 
can be suppressed from quadratic region to linear region or super-linear region, 
thereby reducing the total delay signiﬁcantly. Several studies have been carried out 
to investigate the repeater insertion methodology for on-chip interconnects (Li et al. 
2005; Ismail and Friedman 2000; Banerjee and Mehrotra 2002, 2006). For instance, 
considering the inﬂuence of the inductance, the analytical expressions were derived 
in Ismail and Friedman (2000) for predicting the optimal number of repeaters and 
repeater size. Aiming at achieving low power dissipation, the power-optimal repeater 
insertion in nanometer interconnects was studied in Banerjee and Mehrotra (2002). 
It was demonstrated that the total interconnect delay could be effectively suppressed 
by inserting repeaters in a long interconnect. 
The repeater insertion techniques were also investigated for CNT interconnects. It 
was claimed (Guistininai et al. 2010) that the performance improvement by inserting 
repeaters in bundled SWCNTs is not signiﬁcant. Further, the MWCNT interconnects 
were investigated using ﬁnite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method (Liang et al. 
2011b), and the optimal repeater insertion in intermediate and global level MWCNT 
interconnects were calculated using an analytical expressions (Ismail and Friedman 
2000). However, it is worth noting that CNT interconnects, which are different to their 
Cu counterpart, have signiﬁcant contact resistance although considerable efforts have 
been devoted to improving contact performance (Chai et al. 2012). Therefore, the 
implementation of each repeater inserted in the CNT interconnect would introduce 
two additional contact resistances, which must be treated in an appropriate way.

60
W.-S. Zhao
Repeater Insertion in CNT Interconnects 
Figure 5.2 shows the schematic diagram of a CNT interconnect inserted with a series 
of equispaced repeaters. Here, the number of segments divided by the repeaters is 
denoted as k, the size of repeaters with respect to the minimum-sized gate is h. That 
is, the repeaters are h times the minimum size, with the output resistance upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline divided by h, 
output capacitance h upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0, and input capacitance h upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0, where upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0, upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0, and upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 are 
the output resistance, output capacitance, and input capacitance of the minimum-
sized repeater, respectively. In the ﬁgure, uper R Subscript normal c denotes the contact resistance of a CNT 
interconnect, and as described earlier, when a repeater is inserted, two additional 
contact resistances would be introduced at two sides of the repeater. 
Figure 5.3a shows the cross-sectional schematic of a Cu wire placed above the 
ground plane. Here, epsilon Subscript normal r represents the relative permittivity of surrounding dielectric, 
h is the distance between Cu wire and ground plane, and w and t are the width and 
thickness of the Cu wire, respectively. The effective resistance of nanoscale Cu wire 
can be calculated by uppe r R Subscript upper C u Baseline equals rho Subscript upper C u Baseline l divided by left parenthesis w t right parenthesis, and the effective resistivity is given as (Im 
et al. 2005) 
rho Subs
c
ript upper C u Baseline equals rho 0 left bracket one third StartFraction 1 Over 1 divided by 3 minus alpha divided by 2 plus alpha squared minus alpha cubed ln left parenthesis 1 plus alpha Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction plus three eighths upper C left parenthesis 1 minus p right parenthesis StartFraction 1 plus upper A upper R Over upper A upper R EndFraction StartFraction lamda Over w EndFraction right bracket
rh
o Subscript upper C u Baseline equals rho 0 left bracket one third StartFraction 1 Over 1 divided by 3 minus alpha divided by 2 plus alpha squared minus alpha cubed ln left parenthesis 1 plus alpha Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction plus three eighths upper C left parenthesis 1 minus p right parenthesis StartFraction 1 plus upper A upper R Over upper A upper R EndFraction StartFraction lamda Over w EndFraction right bracket
rho Subscr ipt u pper C
 
u Baseli ne equals rho 0 left bracket one third StartFraction 1 Over 1 divided by 3 minus alpha divided by 2 plus alpha squared minus alpha cubed ln left parenthesis 1 plus alpha Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction plus three eighths upper C left parenthesis 1 minus p right parenthesis StartFraction 1 plus upper A upper R Over upper A upper R EndFraction StartFraction lamda Over w EndFraction right bracket
rho Su bscript  upper C u Baseline equals rho 0 left bracket one third StartFraction 1 Over 1 divided by 3 minus alpha divided by 2 plus alpha squared minus alpha cubed ln left parenthesis 1 plus alpha Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction plus three eighths upper C left parenthesis 1 minus p right parenthesis StartFraction 1 plus upper A upper R Over upper A upper R EndFraction StartFraction lamda Over w EndFraction right bracket
rho
 Subscript upper C u Baseline equals rho 0 left bracket one third StartFraction 1 Over 1 divided by 3 minus alpha divided by 2 plus alpha squared minus alpha cubed ln left parenthesis 1 plus alpha Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction plus three eighths upper C left parenthesis 1 minus p right parenthesis StartFraction 1 plus upper A upper R Over upper A upper R EndFraction StartFraction lamda Over w EndFraction right bracket
r
h
o Subscript upper C u Baseline equals rho 0 left bracket one third StartFraction 1 Over 1 divided by 3 minus alpha divided by 2 plus alpha squared minus alpha cubed ln left parenthesis 1 plus alpha Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction plus three eighths upper C left parenthesis 1 minus p right parenthesis StartFraction 1 plus upper A upper R Over upper A upper R EndFraction StartFraction lamda Over w EndFraction right bracket
where rho 0 is the bulk resistivity, alpha e
q
uals lamd
a upper R divided by left bracket d Subscript g Baseline left parenthesis 1 minus upper R right parenthesis right bracket
, lamdais the mean free path (MFP), 
upp er A upper R equals t divided by w, p is the specularity parameter, upper R is the reﬂectivity coefﬁcient at grain 
boundaries, d Subscript g is the average distance between grain boundaries, and up per C equals 1.2. Here, 
both p and upper R are set as 0.5, and the line edge roughness is about 40% (Ceyhan 
and Naeemi 2013). The parasitic capacitance of Cu wire could be extracted using 
full-wave electromagnetic solver (e.g., ANSYS Q3D Extractor).
Similarly, the parasitic capacitances of monolayer SWCNTs and bundled 
SWCNTs could be obtained using full-wave electromagnetic solver as the capaci-
tance of SWCNTs is close to that of Cu wires with equal cross-sectional area (Naeemi 
and Meindl 2007). The quantum capacitance of SWCNT is usually neglected as it is 
much larger than electrostatic one (Zhao et al. 2014). Different with Cu wire, a CNT 
interconnect has a quantum contact resistance upper R Subscript upper Q and imperfect contact resistance 
upper R Subscript m c, i.e., upp er  R Subscript upper C Baseline equals upper R Subscript upper Q Baseline plus upper R Subscript m c. The imperfect contact resistance highly depends on 
the fabrication process, and is usually neglected in the modeling and performance 
analysis. The quantum contact resistance of an SWCNT can be calculated by
h
h
h
h
l/
l
k
/k 
Rc/2 
Fig. 5.2 Schematic of repeaters inserted into a CNT interconnect 

5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects
61
t 
h
w 
Ground Plane 
εr 
t 
h
w 
εr 
h
w 
εr 
Dcnt=1 nm 
h
w 
εr 
w/2 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) 
Fig. 5.3 Cross-sectional views of (a) Cu,  (b) monolayer SWCNTs, (c) bundled SWCNTs, and 
(d) MWCNT interconnects
up er  R Subscript upper Q Baseline equals StartFraction h Over 2 q squared EndFraction StartFraction 1 Over upper N Subscript c h Baseline EndFraction
uppe
r R Subscript upper Q Baseline equals StartFraction h Over 2 q squared EndFraction StartFraction 1 Over upper N Subscript c h Baseline EndFraction
uppe
r R Subscript upper Q Baseline equals StartFraction h Over 2 q squared EndFraction StartFraction 1 Over upper N Subscript c h Baseline EndFraction
where h is the Planck’s constant, q is the electron charge, and upper N Subscript c h denotes the 
number of conducting channels. The per-unit-length (p.u.l.) scattering resistance of 
an SWCNT is given as (Naeemi and Meindl 2007) 
upp er  R Subscript upper S Baseline equals StartFraction h Over 2 q squared EndFraction StartFraction 1 Over upper N Subscript c h Baseline EndFraction StartFraction 1 Over lamda EndFraction period
uppe
r R Subscript upper S Baseline equals StartFraction h Over 2 q squared EndFraction StartFraction 1 Over upper N Subscript c h Baseline EndFraction StartFraction 1 Over lamda EndFraction period
uppe
r R Subscript upper S Baseline equals StartFraction h Over 2 q squared EndFraction StartFraction 1 Over upper N Subscript c h Baseline EndFraction StartFraction 1 Over lamda EndFraction period
upp
er R Subscript upper S Baseline equals StartFraction h Over 2 q squared EndFraction StartFraction 1 Over upper N Subscript c h Baseline EndFraction StartFraction 1 Over lamda EndFraction period
In general, upper N Subscript c h is 2 for the metallic SWCNT, and lamdais about 1 µm. In general, the 
fraction of metallic SWCNTs in a bundle is about 1/3, and it could be improved 
through speciﬁc fabrication process (Harutyunyan et al. 2009). Therefore, the 
monolayer SWCNTs shown in Fig. 5.3b are assumed as metallic, while the frac-
tion of metallic SWCNTs in the bundle shown in Fig. 5.3c is set as 1/3. The 
number of SWCNTs in monolayer and bundled SWCNTs could be calculated by 
upper I n t left bracket w divided by left parenthesis upper D Subscript c n t Baseline plus delta right parenthesis right bracket and 
n Sub script w Baseline n Subscript t minus upper I n t left bracket upper N Subscript t Baseline divided by 2 right bracket
where
n 
S
ubscript w Baseline e quals 
up
per I n t left bracket left parenthesis w minus upper D Subscript c n t Baseline right parenthesis divided by left parenthesis upper D Subscript c n t Baseline plus delta right parenthesis right bracket plus 1,
n 
Su
bsc
r
ipt t Baseli
ne equals upper I n t left bracket 2 left parenthesis t minus upper D Subscript c n t Baseline right parenthesis divided by left parenthesis StartRoot 3 EndRoot left parenthesis upper D Subscript c n t Baseline plus delta right parenthesis right parenthesis right bracket plus 1√
n Subsc ript
 t
 Baseline equals upper I n t left bracket 2 left parenthesis t minus upper D Subscript c n t Baseline right parenthesis divided by left parenthesis StartRoot 3 EndRoot left parenthesis upper D Subscript c n t Baseline plus delta right parenthesis right parenthesis right bracket plus 1, and de lt a equals 0.34 nm is Van der Waal’s 
gap (Srivastava et al. 2005). upper I n t left bracket dot right bracket denotes that only the integer part is considered. 
The contact resistance and p.u.l. scattering resistances of monolayer SWCNTs and 
bundled SWCNTs could be obtained by dividing the corresponding resistance of an 
isolated SWCNT by the number of SWCNTs. 
As shown in Fig. 5.3d, two MWCNTs are usually employed as on-chip intercon-
nects, and the aspect ratio is therefore set as 2. As shown in Fig. 5.4, the diameter 
of the MWCNT is equal to the interconnect width w, and the innermost diameter is 
set as half of the MWCNT diameter. The number of shells in an MWCNT can be 
calculated by Liu et al. (2018)

62
W.-S. Zhao
Fig. 5.4 Cross-sectional 
diagram of an MWCNT 
h 
nshell+1 
i−1 
i 1 
i 
1 
nshell 
w/2 
w 
n Subsc ript  s h 
e l l Baseline equals 1 plus upper I n t left bracket one half StartFraction w Over delta EndFraction right bracket period
n 
Subscript s h e l l Baseline equals 1 plus upper I n t left bracket one half StartFraction w Over delta EndFraction right bracket period
n
 
S
ubscript s h e l l Baseline equals 1 plus upper I n t left bracket one half StartFraction w Over delta EndFraction right bracket period
The radius of i th shell is r S ubscr ipt i  Baseline equals r 1 plus left parenthesis i minus 1 right parenthesis delta. The terminal contact resistance of 
an MWCNT is given as 
up e
r R Subsc
rip
t
 upper C Baseline equals left bracket sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript n Subscript s h e l l Baseline Endscripts left parenthesis StartFraction h Over 4 q squared upper N Subscript c h comma i Baseline EndFraction plus upper R Subscript m c comma i Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline right bracket Superscript negative 1
upper R Su
bscript
 upper 
C Baseline equals left bracket sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript n Subscript s h e l l Baseline Endscripts left parenthesis StartFraction h Over 4 q squared upper N Subscript c h comma i Baseline EndFraction plus upper R Subscript m c comma i Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline right bracket Superscript negative 1
where upper N Su bscri pt c h comma i Baseline equals a dot r Subscript i Baseline plus b, a equals 0 .122 n m Superscript negative 1, and b equals 0.425. As an MWCNT can be 
viewed as a parallel assembly of SWCNTs, its p.u.l. scattering resistance could be 
calculated by 
up er  R Subscript upper S Baseline equals StartFraction h Over 2 q squared EndFraction left parenthesis sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript n Subscript s h e l l Baseline Endscripts upper N Subscript c h comma i Baseline lamda Subscript i Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
upp
er R Subs
crip t upper 
S Ba
seline equals StartFraction h Over 2 q squared EndFraction left parenthesis sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript n Subscript s h e l l Baseline Endscripts upper N Subscript c h comma i Baseline lamda Subscript i Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1
where lam da Subscript i Baseline equals 2000 r Subscript i is the MFP of the i th shell. 
After the values of resistance and capacitance are determined, the interconnect 
can be modeled as a simple RC model, and the 50% time delay of one segment in 
CNT interconnect can be calculated as 
StartLayout 1st Row 1stLCo lumn tau 
Subscr
i pt seg Baseline left parenthesis h comma k right parenthesis 2nd Column equals 0.69 left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper C Baseline h upper C Subscript upper L 0 Baseline plus upper R Subscript d 0 Baseline upper C 0 right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus 0.69 left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline upper C Over 2 EndFraction plus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline h upper C Subscript upper L 0 Baseline plus StartFraction upper R Subscript d 0 Baseline upper C Over h EndFraction right parenthesis StartFraction l Over k EndFraction plus 0.38 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper C left parenthesis StartFraction l Over k EndFraction right parenthesis squared EndLayout
St
artLayout  1st Row 1st Column tau Subscript seg Baseline left parenthesis h comma k right parenthesis 2nd Column equals 0.69 left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper C Baseline h upper C Subscript upper L 0 Baseline plus upper R Subscript d 0 Baseline upper C 0 right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus 0.69 left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline upper C Over 2 EndFraction plus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline h upper C Subscript upper L 0 Baseline plus StartFraction upper R Subscript d 0 Baseline upper C Over h EndFraction right parenthesis StartFraction l Over k EndFraction plus 0.38 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper C left parenthesis StartFraction l Over k EndFraction right parenthesis squared EndLayout
S
t artLayout 1st Row 1st Column tau Subscript seg Baseline left parenthesis h comma k right parenthesis 2nd Column equals 0.69 left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper C Baseline h upper C Subscript upper L 0 Baseline plus upper R Subscript d 0 Baseline upper C 0 right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus 0.69 left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline upper C Over 2 EndFraction plus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline h upper C Subscript upper L 0 Baseline plus StartFraction upper R Subscript d 0 Baseline upper C Over h EndFraction right parenthesis StartFraction l Over k EndFraction plus 0.38 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper C left parenthesis StartFraction l Over k EndFraction right parenthesis squared EndLayout
St artLayout
 1st Row 1st Column tau Subscript seg Baseline left parenthesis h comma k right parenthesis 2nd Column equals 0.69 left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper C Baseline h upper C Subscript upper L 0 Baseline plus upper R Subscript d 0 Baseline upper C 0 right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus 0.69 left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline upper C Over 2 EndFraction plus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline h upper C Subscript upper L 0 Baseline plus StartFraction upper R Subscript d 0 Baseline upper C Over h EndFraction right parenthesis StartFraction l Over k EndFraction plus 0.38 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper C left parenthesis StartFraction l Over k EndFraction right parenthesis squared EndLayout
S
tar
tLayout 1st Row 1st Column tau Subscript seg Baseline left parenthesis h comma k right parenthesis 2nd Column equals 0.69 left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper C Baseline h upper C Subscript upper L 0 Baseline plus upper R Subscript d 0 Baseline upper C 0 right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus 0.69 left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline upper C Over 2 EndFraction plus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline h upper C Subscript upper L 0 Baseline plus StartFraction upper R Subscript d 0 Baseline upper C Over h EndFraction right parenthesis StartFraction l Over k EndFraction plus 0.38 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper C left parenthesis StartFraction l Over k EndFraction right parenthesis squared EndLayout
where upper C denotes the parasitic capacitance of the on-chip interconnect, and up er
 C 0  equals upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline plus upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0. The total time delay is up per T l ef t parenthesis h comma k right parenthesis equals k tau Subscript s e g Baseline left parenthesis h comma k right parenthesis, and by satisfying

5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects
63
part ial differ ential upper T left parenthesis h comma k right parenthesis divided by partial differential h equals 0 and par tial diffe rential upper T left parenthesis h comma k right parenthesis divided by partial differential k equals 0, an equation can be obtained as 
69 left p arenthesis upper 
R
 Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C 0 plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h right parenthesis equals 38 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper C left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h Over upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C minus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h squared EndFraction right parenthesis squared period
69 le ft parent
hes
i
s upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C 0 plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h right parenthesis equals 38 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper C left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h Over upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C minus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h squared EndFraction right parenthesis squared period
The optimal value of h can be calculated as h Subscript o p t by solving the above expression, 
and the optimal number of segments k Subscript o p t can be obtained by 
k Sub scrip
t 
o p t Baseline equals upper I n t left bracket left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C Over upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h Subscript o p t Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction minus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline right parenthesis StartFraction l Over upper R Subscript upper C Baseline EndFraction right bracket period
kLSubs
crip
t o 
p
 t Baseline equals upper I n t left bracket left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C Over upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h Subscript o p t Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction minus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline right parenthesis StartFraction l Over upper R Subscript upper C Baseline EndFraction right bracket period
k 
S
u
bscript o p t Baseline equals upper I n t left bracket left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C Over upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h Subscript o p t Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction minus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline right parenthesis StartFraction l Over upper R Subscript upper C Baseline EndFraction right bracket period
By substituting h Subscript o p t and k Subscript o p t into up per T l ef t parenthesis h comma k right parenthesis equals k tau Subscript s e g Baseline left parenthesis h comma k right parenthesis, the minimum time 
delay of the CNT interconnect can be obtained accordingly. It is evident that h Subscript o p t
is independent with the interconnect length, while k Subscript o p t increases linearly with the 
length. 
A transition length is deﬁned as a value where the repeaters begin to work, and it 
is given as 
l Subscript t r a n s i t i o n Baseline equals StartFraction 69 Over 38 EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline Over upper R Subscript upper S Baseline h Subscript o p t Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline Over 2 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h Subscript o p t Baseline Over upper C EndFraction right parenthesis period
l 
S
ubscript t r a n s i t i o n Baseline equals StartFraction 69 Over 38 EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline Over upper R Subscript upper S Baseline h Subscript o p t Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline Over 2 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h Subscript o p t Baseline Over upper C EndFraction right parenthesis period
l Subsc
ri pt t r a n s i t i o n Baseline equals StartFraction 69 Over 38 EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline Over upper R Subscript upper S Baseline h Subscript o p t Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline Over 2 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h Subscript o p t Baseline Over upper C EndFraction right parenthesis period
l Su
bscript t r a n s i t i o n Baseline equals StartFraction 69 Over 38 EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline Over upper R Subscript upper S Baseline h Subscript o p t Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline Over 2 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h Subscript o p t Baseline Over upper C EndFraction right parenthesis period
l
 
S
ubscript t r a n s i t i o n Baseline equals StartFraction 69 Over 38 EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline Over upper R Subscript upper S Baseline h Subscript o p t Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction upper R Subscript upper C Baseline Over 2 upper R Subscript upper S Baseline EndFraction plus StartFraction upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline h Subscript o p t Baseline Over upper C EndFraction right parenthesis period
Taking the interconnect parameters at the 14 nm technology node as an example 
(see Table 5.1), it is calculated that the transition length is about 100 µm, and increases 
with the contact resistance, in particular for MWCNT interconnects. Figure 5.5 
shows the total time delay of the bundled SWCNTs and MWCNT interconnects 
with different lengths. In the ﬁgure, h Subscript o p t is calculated by solving (5.8), and the cases 
with h eq uals 50 are also plotted. When the length is shorter than l Subscript t r a n s i t i o n, as shown  
in Fig. 5.5a, the time delay increases almost linearly with the number of repeaters. 
That is, the inserted repeaters have little inﬂuence on the time delay. However, for 
a long CNT interconnect, as shown in Fig. 5.5b, there exists a minimum value of 
time delay, implying that the repeaters could reduce the total time delay effectively. 
Moreover, it is found in Fig. 5.5b that the optimal number of repeaters k Subscript o p t remains 
unchanged for different values of h for ideally contacted CNT interconnects. This 
is because that the contact resistance can be neglected for ideally contacted CNT 
interconnects, and therefore, k Subscript o p t and h Subscript o p t become irrelevant with each other. Then, 
the optimal value of repeater size is plotted in Fig. 5.6 for different imperfect contact 
resistance per channel. It is evident that h Subscript o p t decreases with the increasing imperfect 
contact resistance, in particular for MWCNT interconnects.
In previous studies, the contact resistance of CNT interconnect was usually 
combined into the total interconnect resistance in the repeater design. The optimal 
values of repeater size and number of repeaters could be calculated by Liang et al. 
(2011b)

64
W.-S. Zhao
Table 5.1 Geometrical and physical parameters adopted from ITRS 2013 
Technology node
14 nm
7 nm  
Intermediate
Width (nm)
14
7 
Aspect ratio
2.1
2.3 
Dielectric thickness (nm)
26.6
13.3 
Cu resistivity (μΩ·cm)
7.43
11.41 
Capacitance for Cu wire (pF/μm)
130.8
110.3 
Capacitance for MWCNT (pF/μm)
115.8
92.4 
Global
Width (nm)
21
11 
Aspect ratio
2.34
2.34 
Dielectric thickness (nm)
31.5
16.5 
Cu resistivity (μΩ·cm)
6.11
8.97 
Capacitance for Cu wire (pF/μm)
143.6
115 
Capacitance for MWCNT (pF/μm)
124.2
99.7 
Minimum-sized gate
Output resistance (kΩ)
30.3
69.7 
Input capacitance (fF)
0.22
0.13 
Relative permittivity of the ILD
2.0
1.6 
0
2
 4
6
8
 
15 
30 
45 
60 
75 
Number of repeaters 
Time delay (ps)
 Bundled SWCNT, h=hopt
 Bundled SWCNT, h=50
 MWCNT, h=hopt
 MWCNT, h=50 
Time delay (ps) 
Number of repeaters 
0
2
 4
6
 8
 
75 
90 
105 
Minimum 
l = 50 μm
l = 200 μm 
(a)
(b) 
Fig. 5.5 Time delay against number of repeaters for ideally contacted SWCNT bundle and 
MWCNT interconnects with length of a 50 µm and  b 200 µm
h Sub s cript o p t Baseline prime equals StartRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C l Over upper R Subscript normal t Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline EndFraction EndRoot
/
h Subscript o p t Baseline prime equals StartRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C l Over upper R Subscript normal t Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline EndFraction EndRoot
h Subs
cript o p t Baseline prime equals StartRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C l Over upper R Subscript normal t Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline EndFraction EndRoot
k Sub s crip
t o p t Baseline prime equals upper I n t left bracket StartRoot StartFraction 38 upper R Subscript normal t Baseline upper C l Over 69 upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C 0 EndFraction EndRoot right bracket/
k Subscript o p t Baseline prime equals upper I n t left bracket StartRoot StartFraction 38 upper R Subscript normal t Baseline upper C l Over 69 upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C 0 EndFraction EndRoot right bracket
k Subsc
r
ipt o p t Baseline prime equals upper I n t left bracket StartRoot StartFraction 38 upper R Subscript normal t Baseline upper C l Over 69 upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C 0 EndFraction EndRoot right bracket

5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects
65
Fig. 5.6 Optimal value of 
repeater size h Subscript o p t versus 
imperfect contact resistance 
per channel
where upp er R S ubscript t Baseline equals upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C. As  uper R Subscript upper C do exist in each segment, the percentage error induced 
by the above simpliﬁed treatment is deﬁned as 
upper E
 
r
 
r o r equals
 left bracket StartFraction upper T left parenthesis h Subscript o p t Baseline prime comma k Subscript o p t Baseline prime right parenthesis Over upper T left parenthesis h Subscript o p t Baseline comma k Subscript o p t Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction minus 1 right bracket times 100 percent sign period
u
p
per E r r 
o  r 
e
quals l
eft bracket StartFraction upper T left parenthesis h Subscript o p t Baseline prime comma k Subscript o p t Baseline prime right parenthesis Over upper T left parenthesis h Subscript o p t Baseline comma k Subscript o p t Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction minus 1 right bracket times 100 percent sign period
It is evident that the percentage error is independent with the interconnect length. 
Figure 5.7 shows the percentage error versus imperfect contact resistance per channel 
for CNT interconnect with length of 1000 µm. It is evident that the percentage error 
increases slightly with the imperfect contact resistance for monolayer SWCNTs and 
bundled SWCNTs, but it is still acceptable. However, as the imperfect contact resis-
tance is larger than ~70 kΩ, the percentage error in the case of MWCNT intercon-
nect would exceed 10%, implying that the optimal repeater insertion for MWCNT 
interconnects must consider the inﬂuence of contact resistance.
Inﬂuence of Inductance on the Repeater Insertion 
in MWCNT Interconnects 
As indicated in Ismail and Friedman (2000), the inductance has a certain inﬂuence 
on the time delay and repeater design of on-chip interconnect. Here, the inﬂuence 
of kinetic inductance on the repeater design in MWCNT interconnect would be 
discussed in the following. As shown in Fig. 5.8, when a repeater is inserted in a 
long MWCNT interconnect, two contact resistance would be introduced, and each 
segment of MWCNT could be equivalent to a RLC model. The p.u.l. inductance of 
an MWCNT is calculated as up pe r L  equals upper L Subscript normal upper K Baseline plus upper L Subscript normal upper M, where uper L Subscript normal upper M and uper L Subscript normal upper K are the magnetic 
inductance and kinetic inductance, respectively. The magnetic inductance could be

66
W.-S. Zhao
Fig. 5.7 Percentage error 
versus imperfect contact 
resistance per channel
obtained by up er L Subscript normal upper M Baseline equals mu 0 epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript normal r Baseline divided by upper Cr
, and the kinetic inductance is given by up er L Subscrip
t normal 
uppe r K B
aseline equals upper L Subscript normal upper K divided by c h a n n e l Baseline dot left parenthesis sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript n Subscript s h e l l Baseline Endscripts upper N Subscript c h comma i Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1, where upper L Sub script normal upper K divided by c h a n n e l Baseline almost equals 8 n upper H divided by mu normal m is the kinetic inductance per channel. 
The 50% time delay of one segment in MWCNT interconnect can be given by 
tau Subscript s e  g Basel ine left p
arenthesis h comma k right parenthesis equals tau Subscript upper R upper C Baseline plus left parenthesis tau Subscript upper R upper L upper C Baseline minus tau Subscript upper R upper C Baseline right parenthesis dot upper M
where 
up
p
e
r M equal
s
 le
f
t pa
r
enth esis 1 plus 0.005  left paren
thesis cosine left parenthesis 9 cosine left parenthesis left parenthesis a 1 plus a 2 right parenthesis Superscript 0.294 Baseline divided by left parenthesis 1.2 minus 0.0498 a 3 right parenthesis right parenthesis right parenthesis right parenthesis squared right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 divided by 2
, 
tau
 
Sub
sc ript up per R upp er C Ba seline equals tau Subscript normal f Baseline dot left parenthesis 0.4 a 1 plus 0.7 left parenthesis a 2 plus a 1 a 3 plus a 2 a 3 right parenthesis right parenthesis,
and
tau 
S
ubs
c
r
ip t up
p
er R u pper L up er C Baseline
 e
quals tau Su
bs cript 
n
ormal f Baseline dot left parenthesis 1 plus a 3 left parenthesis 0.342 plus 0.397 a 2 plus 0.229 a 1 Superscript 2.34 Baseline plus 0.642 a 1 Superscript 1.3 Baseline a 2 Superscript 1.35 Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesis
.
.
The
three
basic 
coefﬁcients are the normalized ratio deﬁned as (Lu et al. 2016) 
a 1  
equal s StartFraction line resistance Over characteristic impedance EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper Z 0 EndFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper C Baseline plus StartFraction upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l Over k EndFraction right parenthesis
a 1 equals Star tFraction li ne resistance Over characteristic impedance EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper Z 0 EndFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper C Baseline plus StartFraction upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l Over k EndFraction right parenthesis
a 
1
 eq uals StartFraction line resistance Over characteristic impedance EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper Z 0 EndFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper C Baseline plus StartFraction upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l Over k EndFraction right parenthesis
a
 
1 equals StartFraction line resistance Over characteristic impedance EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper Z 0 EndFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper C Baseline plus StartFraction upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l Over k EndFraction right parenthesis
Contact 
resistance 
Input
Output 
Distributed elements 
RC/2
RC/2
RSΔx LΔx 
CΔx 
h
h
h
h
l/
l
k
/k 
Fig. 5.8 Schematic of MWCNT interconnect inserted with equispaced repeaters 

5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects
67
a 2  e quals S tartFra ction driver output resistance Over characteristic impedance EndFraction equals StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline Over h upper Z 0 EndFraction
a 2 equals Star tFraction dr iver output resistance Over characteristic impedance EndFraction equals StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline Over h upper Z 0 EndFraction
a 2 
equals StartFraction driver output resistance Over characteristic impedance EndFraction equals StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline Over h upper Z 0 EndFraction
a 3  
equal s StartFraction load resistance Over characteristic impedance EndFraction equals StartFraction h k upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline Over upper C l EndFraction
a 3 equals Star tFraction load resistance Over characteristic impedance EndFraction equals StartFraction h k upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline Over upper C l EndFraction
a 3
 equals StartFraction load resistance Over characteristic impedance EndFraction equals StartFraction h k upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline Over upper C l EndFraction
where upp er Z 0 equals StartRoot upper L divided by upper C EndRoot√upper Z 0 equals StartRoot upper L divided by upper C EndRoot is the characteristic impedance and tau  Subscript normal f Baseline equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l divided by k
√
tau Subscript normal f Baseline equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l divided by k is the time-
of-ﬂight (Venkatesan et al. 2003). It is evident that tau Subscript s e g is a function of a 1, a 2, and 
a 3, and it is written as tau S ubscr ipt s e g Baseline equals tau Subscript normal f Baseline dot upper F left parenthesis a 1 comma a 2 comma a 3 right parenthesis. The total time delay of the MWCNT 
interconnect is given as 
upper T  Subsc ript t o t a l Baseline equals k tau Subscript normal f Baseline dot upper F left parenthesis a 1 comma a 2 comma a 3 right parenthesis equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l dot upper F left parenthesis a 1 comma a 2 comma a 3 right parenthesis period
√
uppe r T Subscript t 
o t a l Baseline equals k tau Subscript normal f Baseline dot upper F left parenthesis a 1 comma a 2 comma a 3 right parenthesis equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l dot upper F left parenthesis a 1 comma a 2 comma a 3 right parenthesis period
According to Ismail and Friedman (2000), the optimal repeater size and optimal 
number of segments can be expressed as 
h Sub script o p t Baseline equals StartRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C l Over upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction EndRoot h prime
/
h Subscript o p t Baseline equals StartRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C l Over upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction EndRoot h prime
hLSubscr ipt o p t
 Baseline equals StartRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C l Over upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction EndRoot h prime
k Sub script o p t Baseline equals StartRoot four sevenths StartFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C l Over upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline EndFraction EndRoot k prime
/
k Subscript o p t Baseline equals StartRoot four sevenths StartFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C l Over upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline EndFraction EndRoot k prime
k 
Subsc ript o p t Baseline equals StartRoot four sevenths StartFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C l Over upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline EndFraction EndRoot k prime
k Subsc
ri
pt o p t Baseline equals StartRoot four sevenths StartFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C l Over upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline EndFraction EndRoot k prime
where h prime and k prime are the correction factors. By substituting h Subscript o p t and k Subscript o p t into upper T Subscript t o t a l, the  
total time delay can be written as 
upper T  Subscript t o t a l Baseline equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l dot upper F left parenthesis m plus StartRoot seven fourths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over k prime p q EndFraction comma StartFraction q Over h prime p EndFraction comma StartRoot four sevenths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over h prime k prime EndFraction right parenthesis
√
uppe r T
 
Su bscript t o t a l Baseline equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l dot upper F left parenthesis m plus StartRoot seven fourths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over k prime p q EndFraction comma StartFraction q Over h prime p EndFraction comma StartRoot four sevenths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over h prime k prime EndFraction right parenthesis
/
upper T Subscript t o t a l Baseline equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l dot upper F left parenthesis m plus StartRoot seven fourths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over k prime p q EndFraction comma StartFraction q Over h prime p EndFraction comma StartRoot four sevenths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over h prime k prime EndFraction right parenthesis
up p
er T Subscript t o t a l Baseline equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l dot upper F left parenthesis m plus StartRoot seven fourths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over k prime p q EndFraction comma StartFraction q Over h prime p EndFraction comma StartRoot four sevenths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over h prime k prime EndFraction right parenthesis
upper  T  Subscript t o t a l Baseline equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l dot upper F left parenthesis m plus StartRoot seven fourths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over k prime p q EndFraction comma StartFraction q Over h prime p EndFraction comma StartRoot four sevenths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over h prime k prime EndFraction right parenthesis
uppe r T Subscript t o t a l Baseline equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l dot upper F left parenthesis m plus StartRoot seven fourths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over k prime p q EndFraction comma StartFraction q Over h prime p EndFraction comma StartRoot four sevenths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over h prime k prime EndFraction right parenthesis
/
upper T Subscript t o t a l Baseline equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l dot upper F left parenthesis m plus StartRoot seven fourths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over k prime p q EndFraction comma StartFraction q Over h prime p EndFraction comma StartRoot four sevenths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over h prime k prime EndFraction right parenthesis
up pe r T Subscript t o t a l Baseline equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l dot upper F left parenthesis m plus StartRoot seven fourths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over k prime p q EndFraction comma StartFraction q Over h prime p EndFraction comma StartRoot four sevenths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over h prime k prime EndFraction right parenthesis
uppe
r
 T Subscript t o t a l Baseline equals StartRoot upper L upper C EndRoot l dot upper F left parenthesis m plus StartRoot seven fourths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over k prime p q EndFraction comma StartFraction q Over h prime p EndFraction comma StartRoot four sevenths EndRoot dot StartFraction 1 Over h prime k prime EndFraction right parenthesis
where p equals StartRoot upper L divided by left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndRoot √p equa ls StartRoot upper L divided by left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndRoot, q equals StartRoot 1 plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline divided by left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l right parenthesis EndRoot √q equals StartRoot 1 plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline divided by left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l right parenthesis EndRoot, and m eq uals upper R Subscript upper C Baseline divided by upper Z 0. As  uper R Subscript upper C is 
usually smaller than upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l, q, and p could be limited to [1, 1.4] and [0, 10], respectively. 
Moreover, after calculating upper Z 0 according to the parameters adopted from ITRS 2013, 
m is limited to the range of [0, 10]. To minimize the time delay, the expressions of 
partial  differential upper F divided by partial differential h prime equals 0 and partial  differential upper F divided by partial differential k prime equals 0 should be solved simultaneously. By utilizing the 
multivariable curve ﬁtting technique, the closed-form expressions of h prime and k prime could 
be obtained as 
h
 Superscr ipt prime B aseline e quals cosi ne left pare nthesis q minus  1 right parenthesis StartFraction 0.839 plus 0.269 m minus 0.021 m squared minus 0.917 ln p plus 0.345 left parenthesis ln p right parenthesis squared minus 0.037 left parenthesis ln p right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus 0.209 m plus 0.045 m squared minus 0.005 m cubed minus 0.854 ln p plus 0.361 left parenthesis ln p right parenthesis squared EndFraction
h Superscri pt prime B aseline eq uals cosine left parenthes
is q minus 1 right parenthesis StartFraction 0.839 plus 0.269 m minus 0.021 m squared minus 0.917 ln p plus 0.345 left parenthesis ln p right parenthesis squared minus 0.037 left parenthesis ln p right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus 0.209 m plus 0.045 m squared minus 0.005 m cubed minus 0.854 ln p plus 0.361 left parenthesis ln p right parenthesis squared EndFraction
k
 Superscr ipt Super S uperscrip t prime Su perscript Baseline equ als cosine left parenthesis q minus 1 right parenthesis StartFraction 0.835 plus 0.307 m minus 0.047 m squared plus 0.002 m cubed minus 0.606 ln p plus 0.116 left parenthesis ln p right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus 0.739 m minus 0.073 m squared plus 0.002 m cubed minus 0.474 ln p plus 0.161 left parenthesis ln p right parenthesis squared EndFraction period
k Superscri pt Super S uperscript  prime Super script Baselin
e 
equals cosine left parenthesis q minus 1 right parenthesis StartFraction 0.835 plus 0.307 m minus 0.047 m squared plus 0.002 m cubed minus 0.606 ln p plus 0.116 left parenthesis ln p right parenthesis squared Over 1 plus 0.739 m minus 0.073 m squared plus 0.002 m cubed minus 0.474 ln p plus 0.161 left parenthesis ln p right parenthesis squared EndFraction period

68
W.-S. Zhao
The ﬁnal values of h Subscript o p t and k Subscript o p t could be captured by substituting (5.22) and (5.23) 
into (5.19) and (5.20), respectively, and then, the minimum time delay upper T Subscript t o t a l could be 
obtained. 
To explore the inﬂuence of contact resistance and inductance, three types of 
MWCNT interconnects are investigated, as listed in Table 5.2. MWCNT 1 denotes 
that only the quantum contact resistance is considered, i.e., the MWCNT intercon-
nects with minimum contact resistance. However, the imperfect contact resistance 
is inevitable in real-world applications. Therefore, a contact resistance of 10 kΩ is 
considered in the case of MWCNT 2. It is worth noting that the kinetic inductance 
of an isolated CNT may be 15 times larger than the theoretical value. Therefore, 
MWCNT 3 denotes an MWCNT interconnect with contact resistance of 10 kΩ and 
kinetic inductance per channel of 60 nH/μm. 
Figure 5.9 shows the time delay for 1000 µm-long intermediate level Cu and 
MWCNT interconnects with different number of inserted repeaters. The cases of h Subscript o p t
and h equals 50 are considered, and it is evident that minimum total time delay could 
be achieved by employing h Subscript o p t. The estimated values from the derived analytical 
expressions are also compared with the simulated results at 14 and 7 nm technology 
nodes, as listed in Tables 5.3 and 5.4. It is found that the minimum time delay increases 
signiﬁcantly as the IC feature size scales down, and at the same time, the required 
number of repeaters increases. Moreover, it is found that MWCNT interconnects 
require less repeaters than their Cu counterpart, and therefore, the implementation 
of MWCNT interconnects could save power consumption and chip area. However, 
the contact resistance has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the time delay of MWCNT 
interconnects at the 14 nm node, and its inﬂuence could be suppressed at 7 nm node.
Then, the optimal repeater insertion in global Cu and MWCNT interconnects 
are explored, as shown in Fig. 5.10. Similarly, the simulated and estimated k Subscript o p t
for global level interconnect at the 14 and 7 nm technology nodes are compared in 
Tables 5.5 and 5.6. It is evident that the estimated values agree well with the simulated 
results. The contact resistance has a certain inﬂuence on the repeater design in global 
level MWCNT interconnects, implying that reducing the contact resistance is always 
desired.
Table 5.2 Circuit parameters of three types of MWCNT interconnects 
Type
MWCNT 1
MWCNT 2
MWCNT 3 
uper R Subscript upper C (kΩ)
0.55 (intermediate level) 
0.29 (global level) 
10
10 
LK/channel (nH/μm)
8
8
60 

5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects
69
0
 20
40
 60
80
 100
 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
7 nm
 h = 50
 h = hopt 
Delay (ns) 
Number of repeaters 
14 nm 
0
10
 20
 30
 40
 
0 
2 
4 
6 
7 nm
 h = 50
 h = hopt 
Delay (ns) 
Number of repeaters 
14 nm 
0
 10
20
30
 40
 
0 
2 
4 
6 
7 nm
 h = 50
 h = hopt 
Delay (ns) 
Number of repeaters 
14 nm 
0
 10
20
 30
40
 
0 
2 
4 
6
 h = 50
 h = hopt 
7 nm 
Delay (ns) 
Number of repeaters 
14 nm 
MWCNT 3 
(a)
(b) 
(c)
(d) 
Fig. 5.9 Time delay versus number of repeaters for 1000 µm-long intermediate level Cu and 
MWCNT interconnects. a Cu; b MWCNT 1; c MWCNT 2; d MWCNT 3 
Table 5.3 k Subscript o p t and h Subscript o p t for intermediate level interconnect at the 14 nm technology node 
Type
Cu
MWCNT 1
MWCNT 2
MWCNT 3 
Simulated k Subscript o p t
45
22
13
12 
Estimated k Subscript o p t
44
20
12
10 
Estimated h Subscript o p t
10
17
10
10 
upper T Subscript t o t a l (ns)
0.974
0.651
1.538
1.522 
Table 5.4 k Subscript o p t and h Subscript o p t for intermediate level interconnect at the 7 nm technology node 
Type
Cu
MWCNT 1
MWCNT 2
MWCNT 3 
Simulated k Subscript o p t
84
37
25
26 
Estimated k Subscript o p t
80
32
25
20 
Estimated h Subscript o p t
8
12
11
7 
upper T Subscript t o t a l (ns)
2.473
1.303
1.865
1.890

70
W.-S. Zhao
0
20
 40
 60
 80
 
100
 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
7 nm
 h = 50
 h = hopt 
Delay (ns) 
Number of repeaters 
14 nm 
0
 10
20
30
40
 
0 
2 
4 
6 
7 nm
 h = 50
 h = hopt 
Delay (ns) 
Number of repeaters 
14 nm 
0
10
 20
 30
 40
 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
7 nm
 h = 50
 h = hopt 
Delay (ns) 
Number of repeaters 
14 nm 
0
 10
 20
30
40
 
0 
2 
4 
6
 h = 50
 h = hopt 
7 nm 
Delay (ns) 
Number of repeaters 
14 nm 
(a)
(b) 
(c)
(d) 
Fig. 5.10 Time delay versus number of repeaters for 2000 µm-long global level Cu and MWCNT 
interconnects. a Cu; b MWCNT 1; c MWCNT 2; d MWCNT 3 
Table 5.5 k Subscript o p t and h Subscript o p t for global level interconnect at the 14 nm technology node 
Type
Cu
MWCNT 1
MWCNT 2
MWCNT 3 
Simulated k Subscript o p t
54
23
12
11 
Estimated k Subscript o p t
52
20
13
10 
Estimated h Subscript o p t
18
25
14
14 
upper T Subscript t o t a l (ns)
1.172
0.678
2.067
2.038 
Table 5.6 k Subscript o p t and h Subscript o p t for global level interconnect at the 7 nm technology node 
Type
Cu
MWCNT 1
MWCNT 2
MWCNT 3 
Simulated k Subscript o p t
96
42
26
24 
Estimated k Subscript o p t
92
38
26
21 
Estimated h Subscript o p t
14
22
17
15 
upper T Subscript t o t a l (ns)
2.828
1.562
2.776
2.758

5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects
71
Repeater Design in CNT Interconnects to Reduce Delay 
and Power 
The above analysis aims at reducing the time delay of CNT interconnects with the 
consideration of contact resistance. However, such delay-minimal repeater inser-
tion methodology might result in overestimating the number of repeaters, which 
would lead to excessive power dissipation. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop 
repeater design in on-chip interconnects with the consideration of both time delay 
and power dissipation. Similar with above analysis, equispaced repeaters are inserted 
in a long interconnect, as shown in Fig. 5.2, and the time delay of one segment is 
given as (Ismail and Friedman 2000) 
tau S u
b
script s e 
g
 Baseline equals left parenthesis 1.48 xi plus exp left parenthesis minus 2.9 xi Superscript 1.35 Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesis StartRoot StartFraction upper L l Over k EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper C l Over k EndFraction plus h upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndRoot
/
tau Subscript s e g Baseline equals left parenthesis 1.48 xi plus exp left parenthesis minus 2.9 xi Superscript 1.35 Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesis StartRoot StartFraction upper L l Over k EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper C l Over k EndFraction plus h upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndRoot
t
au Subscript s e g Baseline equals left parenthesis 1.48 xi plus exp left parenthesis minus 2.9 xi Superscript 1.35 Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesis StartRoot StartFraction upper L l Over k EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper C l Over k EndFraction plus h upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndRoot
ta u Subs
c
ript s e g Baseline equals left parenthesis 1.48 xi plus exp left parenthesis minus 2.9 xi Superscript 1.35 Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesis StartRoot StartFraction upper L l Over k EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction upper C l Over k EndFraction plus h upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndRoot
where 
xi e quals StartFraction upper R Subscript t Baseline Over 2 EndFraction StartRoot StartFraction upper C Over upper L EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript t Baseline plus upper C Subscript t Baseline plus upper R Subscript t Baseline upper C Subscript t Baseline left parenthesis 1 plus upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline divided by upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis plus 0.5 Over StartRoot 1 plus upper C Subscript t Baseline EndRoot EndFraction
xi equals StartFraction upper R Subscript t Baseline Over 2 EndFraction StartRoot StartFraction upper C Over upper L EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript t Baseline plus upper C Subscript t Baseline plus upper R Subscript t Baseline upper C Subscript t Baseline left parenthesis 1 plus upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline divided by upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis plus 0.5 Over StartRoot 1 plus upper C Subscript t Baseline EndRoot EndFraction
/
xi equals StartFraction upper R Subscript t Baseline Over 2 EndFraction StartRoot StartFraction upper C Over upper L EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript t Baseline plus upper C Subscript t Baseline plus upper R Subscript t Baseline upper C Subscript t Baseline left parenthesis 1 plus upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline divided by upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis plus 0.5 Over StartRoot 1 plus upper C Subscript t Baseline EndRoot EndFraction
xi
 eq uals StartFract ion upper R Subscript t Baseline Over 2 EndFraction StartRoot StartFraction upper C Over upper L EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript t Baseline plus upper C Subscript t Baseline plus upper R Subscript t Baseline upper C Subscript t Baseline left parenthesis 1 plus upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline divided by upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis plus 0.5 Over StartRoot 1 plus upper C Subscript t Baseline EndRoot EndFraction
√xi  equa
ls StartFraction upper R Subscript t Baseline Over 2 EndFraction StartRoot StartFraction upper C Over upper L EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript t Baseline plus upper C Subscript t Baseline plus upper R Subscript t Baseline upper C Subscript t Baseline left parenthesis 1 plus upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline divided by upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis plus 0.5 Over StartRoot 1 plus upper C Subscript t Baseline EndRoot EndFraction
upp er R Subscript t Baseline equals upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline divided by left parenthesis h left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l divided by k plus 2 upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesisand up er C Subscript t Baseline equals h k upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline divided by left parenthesis upper C l right parenthesis. The total time delay upper T  S
ubscript t o t a l Baseline equals k tau Subscript s e g. The power dissipation consumed by one segment can be approximated as 
upper  
P Subscript s e g Baseline equals left parenthesis StartFraction upper C l Over k EndFraction plus h left parenthesis upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline plus upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesis upper V Subscript d d Superscript 2 Baseline period
up per P Su bscrip
t
 s  e
 g 
Baseline equals left parenthesis StartFraction upper C l Over k EndFraction plus h left parenthesis upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline plus upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesis upper V Subscript d d Superscript 2 Baseline period
The total power dissipation is upper P  Subscript t o t a l Baseline equals k upper P Subscript s e g. . Here, a ﬁgure-of-merit (FOM) is 
deﬁned as (Li et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2019b) 
uppe r F upper O upper M equa
ls left parenthesis upper P Subscript t o t a l Baseline right parenthesis Superscript p Baseline dot left parenthesis upper T Subscript t o t a l Baseline right parenthesis Superscript q
where p and q are weighting factors, and they are (0, 1) for delay-optimal and (1, 0) 
for power-optimal repeater designs, respectively. For simplicity, they are set as 1 in 
this study. 
Here, the particle-colony optimization (PSO) algorithm is employed for delay-
power-product-optimal repeater designs in Cu and CNT interconnects. The PSO 
algorithm is a stochastic procedure and could realize search process in the space by 
mutual cooperation and competition among particles (Zhao et al. 2022b). The total 
number of particles in the swarm is p o p s i z e, the particle dimension is m, and the 
termination condition of the algorithm is m a x i t e r. The ﬂight speed and position of 
i th particle at time t in the search space are deﬁned as 
uper V Subscript i Basel i n e  left paren
thesis t right parenthesis equals left bracket upper V Subscript i Baseline 1 Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis comma upper V Subscript i Baseline 2 Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis comma ellipsis comma upper V Subscript i m Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis right bracket Superscript upper T

72
W.-S. Zhao
uper X Subscript i Basel i n e  left paren t
hesis t right parenthesis equals left bracket upper X Subscript i Baseline 1 Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis comma upper X Subscript i Baseline 2 Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis comma ellipsis comma upper X Subscript i m Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis right bracket Superscript upper T Baseline period
The individual extremum and the population extremum of i th particle at time t
in the search space are 
p b e s t Subscript i Baselin e  l e ft parenth
esis t right parenthesis equals left bracket p Subscript i Baseline 1 Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis comma p Subscript i Baseline 2 Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis comma ellipsis comma p Subscript i m Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis right bracket Superscript upper T 
g b e s t Subscript i Baselin e  l e ft parenth e
sis t right parenthesis equals left bracket g Subscript i Baseline 1 Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis comma g Subscript i Baseline 2 Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis comma ellipsis comma g Subscript i m Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis right bracket Superscript upper T Baseline period
The update formulas for all particles can be expressed as 
upper V  Subscript i plus 1 Baseline left parenthesis t plus 1 right parenthesis
 equals upper W Subscript e i Baseline upper V Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis plus c 1 r 1 left parenthesis p b e s t Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis minus upper X Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis right parenthesis plus c 2 r 2 left parenthesis g b e s t left parenthesis t right parenthesis minus upper X Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis right parenthesis
upper X  Subscript i plus 1 Bas elin
e left parenthesis t plus 1 right parenthesis equals upper X Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis plus upper V Subscript i plus 1 Baseline left parenthesis t plus 1 right parenthesis
where uppe r W Sub script e  i Baseline equals upper W Subscript max Baseline minus left parenthesis upper W Subscript max Baseline minus upper W Subscript min Baseline right parenthesis dot i t e r divided by m a x i t e r is the inertia weighting coefﬁ-
cient, and i t e r is the current number of iteration. Here, upper W Subscript max and upper W Subscript min are set as 0.9 
and 0.4, respectively. c 1 and c 2 are the learning factors of the PSO algorithm, and 
they affect the self-learning ability and social learning ability of the particles. r 1 and 
r 2 are the random numbers in the range of [0, 1]. 
Figure 5.11 shows the ﬂowchart of the PSO algorithm. The parameters of the 
particle such as m, upper W Subscript e i, c 1, and c 2 as well as a group of particles including the ﬂight 
speed and information of position are initialized. Here, m, c 1, and c 2 are set as 2, and 
p o p s i z e and m a x i t e r are 50 and 1000, respectively. The ﬁtness value of i th particle 
and best position of the swarm are set as current individual extremum p b e s t Subscript i, and 
the total extremum g b e s t, respectively. The ﬂight speed and position of the particle 
are updated by comparing the current value with best value found previously. The 
searching is ﬁnally stopped as the termination condition is satisﬁed, and the desired 
result would be output.
To verify the feasibility of the PSO algorithm, the global interconnects at 14 and 
7 nm technology nodes are considered. The delay-optimal repeater designs (p equals 0
and q equals 1) are conducted using the PSO algorithm, and the results are compared 
with the following analytical expressions (Ismail and Friedman 2000) 
h Sub script o p t Baseline equals StartRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C l Over left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction 1 Over left bracket 1 plus 0.18 left parenthesis upper T Subscript normal upper L divided by normal upper R Baseline right parenthesis cubed right bracket Superscript 0.26 Baseline EndFraction
/
h Subscript o p t Baseline equals StartRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C l Over left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction 1 Over left bracket 1 plus 0.18 left parenthesis upper T Subscript normal upper L divided by normal upper R Baseline right parenthesis cubed right bracket Superscript 0.26 Baseline EndFraction
h Sub script o p
 t Baseline equals StartRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C l Over left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction 1 Over left bracket 1 plus 0.18 left parenthesis upper T Subscript normal upper L divided by normal upper R Baseline right parenthesis cubed right bracket Superscript 0.26 Baseline EndFraction
h
 S ubscri
p
tLo 
p t Bas
eline equals StartRoot StartFraction upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline upper C l Over left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction 1 Over left bracket 1 plus 0.18 left parenthesis upper T Subscript normal upper L divided by normal upper R Baseline right parenthesis cubed right bracket Superscript 0.26 Baseline EndFraction
k Sub script
 o
 p t Baseline equals upper I n t left bracket StartRoot StartFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript s Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C l Over 2 upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline left parenthesis upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline plus upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction 1 Over left bracket 1 plus 0.21 left parenthesis upper T Subscript normal upper L divided by normal upper R Baseline right parenthesis cubed right bracket Superscript 0.28 Baseline EndFraction right bracket
/
k Sub script o p t Baseline equals upper I n t left bracket StartRoot StartFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript s Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C l Over 2 upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline left parenthesis upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline plus upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction 1 Over left bracket 1 plus 0.21 left parenthesis upper T Subscript normal upper L divided by normal upper R Baseline right parenthesis cubed right bracket Superscript 0.28 Baseline EndFraction right bracket
k Subscri pt o p 
t Baseline equals upper I n t left bracket StartRoot StartFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript s Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C l Over 2 upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline left parenthesis upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline plus upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction 1 Over left bracket 1 plus 0.21 left parenthesis upper T Subscript normal upper L divided by normal upper R Baseline right parenthesis cubed right bracket Superscript 0.28 Baseline EndFraction right bracket
k
 S ubscri
p
tLo 
p t Base
li
ne
 equals upper I n t left bracket StartRoot StartFraction left parenthesis upper R Subscript s Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis upper C l Over 2 upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline left parenthesis upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline plus upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction EndRoot StartFraction 1 Over left bracket 1 plus 0.21 left parenthesis upper T Subscript normal upper L divided by normal upper R Baseline right parenthesis cubed right bracket Superscript 0.28 Baseline EndFraction right bracket

5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects
73
No 
Yes 
Start 
Initialize particles in 
the feasible area 
Calculate the fitness 
value f(Xi) 
Update pbesti 
and gbest 
Update Vi and Xi 
Maximum number 
of times reached 
Iteration stop 
Output gbest 
Over 
Fig. 5.11 Flowchart of the PSO algorithm
where 
upper  T Subscript normal upper L divided by normal upper R Baseline equals StartRoot StartFraction upper L l Over upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline plus upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction EndRoot period
/
upper T Subscript normal upper L divided by normal upper R Baseline equals StartRoot StartFraction upper L l Over upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline plus upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction EndRoot period
upper T Subscript n ormal up
per L divided by normal upper R Baseline equals StartRoot StartFraction upper L l Over upper R Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline left parenthesis upper R Subscript upper S Baseline l plus upper R Subscript upper C Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis upper C Subscript normal d Baseline 0 Baseline plus upper C Subscript normal upper L Baseline 0 Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction EndRoot period
As shown in Fig. 5.12, the optimal repeater numbers obtained using the PSO algo-
rithm agree well with the values estimated by analytical expressions. It is evident 
that CNT interconnects require less repeaters than their Cu counterpart, thereby 
consuming less power. Moreover, as the technology node advances, the required 
number of repeaters would increase, implying that the power dissipation becomes 
more important in advanced technology node. Then, the optimal repeater designs 
aiming at minimum power-delay-product (PDP) are performed using the PSO algo-
rithm, as shown in Fig. 5.13. The optimal repeater numbers predicted using the PSO 
algorithm are compared with those from the genetic algorithm (GA).
Furthermore, the inﬂuence of kinetic inductance on the optimal number of 
repeaters in CNT interconnects is explored. As aforementioned, the measured kinetic 
inductance of CNT might be 15 times larger than the theoretical value. As shown 
in Fig. 5.14, the variation in the kinetic inductance has negligible inﬂuence on

74
W.-S. Zhao
Fig. 5.12 Optimal repeater number in delay-optimal repeater design obtained by the PSO algorithm 
and analytical expression at a 14 nm node and b 7 nm node (line: PSO; symbol: expression) 
Fig. 5.13 Optimal repeater number in PDP-optimal repeater design obtained by the PSO and GA 
algorithms at a 14 nm node and b 7 nm node (line: PSO; symbol: GA)
the optimal number of repeaters in bundled SWCNTs due to its large number of 
conducting channels. However, the optimal repeater number decreases dramatically 
with increasing kinetic inductance for MWCNT interconnects, which is because 
that MWCNT has high MFP but low number of conducting channels. Therefore, 
MWCNTs are susceptible to the variation in the kinetic inductance. It is well known 
that the inﬂuence of inductance on the interconnect response tends to be trivial as the 
damping factor increases. As shown in Fig. 5.15, the inﬂuence of kinetic inductance 
would tend to decline with the increasing of imperfect contact resistance.
It is worth noting that although the PSO algorithm could be used in the repeater 
design, it is time-consuming for real-world applications. Artiﬁcial neural network 
(ANN) is a typical class of machine learning algorithm, and it gained attention as a 
fast and ﬂexible vehicle to electronic designs. ANN mimics the structure of human

5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects
75
Fig. 5.14 Optimal number of repeaters in a bundled SWCNTs and b MWCNT with uppe r R Subscript m c Baseline equals 0 at 
the 14 nm technology node 
Fig. 5.15 Optimal number 
of repeaters in MWCNT 
interconnect with length of 
4000 µm at the 14 nm 
technology node
synapse connections to imitate the brain’s function. As shown in Fig. 5.16, a two-layer 
feedforward ANN is trained using the backpropagation algorithm, and the number of 
nodes in these layers are denoted as m and n, respectively. The process of information 
forward propagation and error backpropagation goes round and round. The input 
variables pass from the input layer to the hidden layers during the forward propagation 
phase, and they are processed by activation function and then enter to the output 
layer. The error backpropagation is utilized for updating the network parameters and 
minimizing the error function. The Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) algorithm is used 
for training the network as it could overcome the drawback that training the ANN 
using gradient method converges slowly and may fall into local minimum point.
The repeater designs in global level Cu, bundled SWCNTs, and MWCNT inter-
connects at the 14 nm technology node are conducted for establishing training

76
W.-S. Zhao
H2,1 
H2,2 
H2,3 
H2,n 
X1 
X2 
X3 
H1,1 
H1,2 
H1,3 
H1,m 
Y1 
Y2 
Input 
Input 
Input 
Input layer 
Output layer 
Output 
Output 
Hidden layers 
Target 
Adjust Weights 
Fig. 5.16 Schematic of artiﬁcial neural network
dataset. The input variables consist of interconnect width, interconnect length, and 
metal-CNT contact resistance, while the outputs include the optimal number of 
repeaters and optimal repeater size. The outputs are obtained using the PSO algo-
rithm. Although the MWCNT interconnect could provide superior performance over 
the Cu wire, its diameter is limited, and therefore, its maximum value is set as 40 nm 
in the preparation of dataset. As normalization is a way to simplify the calculations 
and to speed up the convergence of the training network, the dataset is normalized 
to the range of [0, 1] by linearization. The number of nodes in two hidden layers are 
m equals 40 and n equals 15, respectively. Here, 70% of the input data is used as the training 
dataset, and the rest is used as the test dataset. 
Figure 5.17a shows the number of iterations of the ANN to achieve convergence 
for MWCNT interconnects at the 14 technology, and the goal of mean square error 
(MSE) is set as 10−8. The recursive process of the learning algorithm stops when 
the error cannot be reduced anymore. A comparison between the ANN outputs and 
desired targets is shown in Fig. 5.17b. The solid line represents the best-ﬁt linear 
regression line between the outputs and targets, and the dashed line denotes the 
perfect results. The solid and dashed linear completely overlap with each other, 
implying a good ﬁt for the repeater designs in MWCNT interconnects. The relative 
error between ANN outputs and targets is shown in Fig. 5.17c, and it is evident that 
the error of most samples is close to 0 (Fig. 5.18).

5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects
77
0
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
861 Epochs 
10-8 
10-6 
10-4 
10-2 
100 
Mean Squared Error  (mse) 
Train 
Validation 
Test 
Best
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1 
Target
-1
-0.5 
0 
0.5 
1 
Output 
R=0.99999 
Data 
Fit 
Y = T 
Errors 
2000 
6000 
10000 
14000 
18000 
Train 
Test 
Zero Error 
Optimal repeater number 
Instances 
0 
4000 
8000 
12000 
16000
Train 
Test 
Zero Error 
Optimal repeater size 
Instances
-0.04372
-0.0397
-0.03567
-0.03165
-0.02762
-0.0236
-0.01957
-0.01554
-0.01152
-0.00749
-0.00347 
0.00056 
0.004586 
0.008612 
0.01264 
0.01666 
0.02069 
0.02472 
0.02874 
0.03277 
0
-0.02986
-0.02594
-0.02203
-0.01812
-0.0142
-0.01029
-0.00638
-0.00246 
0.001452 
0.005366 
0.00928 
0.01319 
0.01711 
0.02102 
0.02493 
0.02885 
0.03276 
0.03668 
0.04059 
0.0445 
(a)
(b)
(c) 
Fig. 5.17 a Squared error versus curves, b ANN output versus target regression curves, and c rela-
tive errors between outputs and targets for PDP-optimal repeater designs in MWCNT interconnects 
at the 14 nm technology node 
(a)
(b) 
Fig. 5.18 a Optimal number of repeaters and b optimal repeater size of MWCNT interconnects 
obtained using PSO algorithm and trained ANN 
Using the trained ANN, the optimal number of repeaters and optimal repeater 
size can be obtained readily, and the ANN outputs overlaid on the results from the 
PSO algorithm. It is found that ANN requires less simulation time than conventional 
methods. For instance, by using the PSO algorithm for handling tens of thousands 
of data, the CPU times would exceed 25, 25, and 55 h for repeater designs in Cu, 
bundled SWCNTs, and MWCNT interconnects, respectively. However, by using the 
trained ANN, the CPU times could be reduced to 4.34, 4.07, and 4.43, implying that 
the implementation of the ANN could effectively save computational time.

78
W.-S. Zhao
Conclusion 
In this chapter, the repeater designs in CNT interconnects were investigated based 
on the distributed RC model. It was demonstrated that CNT interconnects require 
less repeaters than their Cu counterpart, thereby saving the chip area and power 
consumption. However, MWCNTs are susceptible to the contact resistance, which 
must be taken into account in the repeater designs in MWCNT interconnects. Then, 
the inductance was considered in the circuit model of MWCNT interconnect, and 
closed-form expressions were derived for predicting the optimal number of repeaters 
and repeater size for MWCNT interconnects. It was found that the inﬂuence of contact 
resistance on the repeater designs in MWCNT interconnect becomes more signiﬁ-
cant at advanced technology node, and therefore more fabrication efforts need to be 
pursued. Finally, the product of time delay and power dissipation of on-chip intercon-
nects were used as the optimization objective. The PSO algorithm was developed to 
extract the optimal number of repeaters and repeater size, and it was veriﬁed against 
analytical expressions and GA. To avoid time-consuming numerical optimization, 
the dataset was developed by using the PSO algorithm for a speciﬁc technology node. 
An ANN was employed and trained to establish the relationship between the phys-
ical parameters and the optimal repeater design, and it was found that this procedure 
could dramatically reduce the computational time, and it could be applied to the 
optimal designs in future nanoscale CMOS and carbon-based ICs. 
Acknowledgements This study was supported in part by the National Natural Science Founda-
tion of China under Grant No. 62222401, and in part by the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science 
Foundation under Grant No. LXR22F040001. 
References 
Avourise P, Appenzeller J, Martel R, Wind SJ (2003) Carbon nanotube electronics. Proc IEEE 
91(11):1772–1784 
Banerjee K, Mehrotra A (2002) A power-optimal repeater insertion methodology for global 
interconnects in nanometer designs. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 49(11):2001–2007 
Ceyhan A, Naeemi A (2013) Cu interconnect limitations and opportunities for SWNT interconnects 
at the end of the roadmap. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 60(1):374–382 
Close GF, Wong HSP (2008) Assembly and electrical characterization of multiwall carbon nanotube 
interconnects. IEEE Trans Nanotechnol 7(5):596–600 
Close GF, Wong HSP (2007) Fabrication and characterization of carbon nanotube interconnects. 
IEDM Tech Dig 203–206 
Chai C, Hazeghi A, Takei K, Chen HY, Chan PCH, Javey A, Wong HSP (2012) Low-resistance 
electrical contact to carbon nanotubes with graphitic interfacial layer. IEEE Trans Electron 
Devices 59(1):12–19 
Chiariello AG, Maffucci A, Miano G (2013) Circuit models of carbon-based interconnects for 
nanopackaging. IEEE Trans Compon Packag Manuf Technol 3(11):1926–1937 
Chen G, Friedman FG (2006) Low-power repeaters driving RC and RLC interconnects with delay 
and bandwidth constraints. IEEE Trans Very Large Scale Integr (VLSI) Syst 14(2): 161–172

5
Repeater Insertion for Carbon Nanotube Interconnects
79
Guistininai A, Tucci V, Zamboni W (2010) Modeling issues and performance analysis of high-speed 
interconnects based on a bundle of SWCNT. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 57(8):1978–1986 
Harutyunyan AR, Chen G, Paronyan TM, Pigos EM, Kuznetsov OA, Hewaparakrama K, Kim SM, 
Zakharov D, Stach EA, Sumanasekera GU (2009) Preferential growth of single-walled carbon 
nanotubes with metallic conductivity. Science 326(5949):116–120 
Ismail YI, Friedman EG (2000) Effects of inductance on the propagation delay and repeater insertion 
in VLSI circuits. IEEE Trans Very Large Scale Integr (VLSI) Syst 8(2): 195–206 
Im S, Srivastava N, Banerjee K, Goodson KE (2005) Scaling analysis of multilevel interconnect 
temperatures for high-performance ICs. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 52(12):2710–2719 
Liang F, Wang G, Lin H (2011a) Modeling of crosstalk effects in multiwall carbon nanotube 
interconnects. IEEE Trans Electromagnetic Compatibility 54(1):133–139 
Liang F, Wang G, Ding W (2011b) Estimation of time delay and repeater insertion in multiwall 
carbon nanotube interconnects. IEEE Tarns Electron Devices 58(8):2712–2720 
Li XC, Mao JF, Huang HF, Liu Y (2005) Global interconnect width and spacing optimization for 
latency, bandwidth and power dissipation. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 52(10):2272–2279 
Li H, Yin WY, Banerjee K, Mao JF (2008) Circuit modeling and performance analysis of multi-
walled carbon nanotube interconnects. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 55(6):1328–1337 
Li W, Zhao WS, Liu PW, Wang J, Wang G (2020) Optimal repeater insertion for horizontal and 
vertical graphene nanoribbon interconnects. Int J Numer Model 33:e2696 
Lu Q, Zhu Z, Yang Y, Ding R (2016) Analysis of propagation delay and repeater insertion in 
single-walled carbon nanotube bundle interconnects. Microelectron J 54:85–92 
Liu PW, Cheng ZH, Zhao WS, Lu Q, Zhu Z, Wang G (2018) Repeater insertion for multi-walled 
carbon nanotube interconnects. Appl Sci 8:236 
Meindl JD (2003) Beyond Moore’s law: the interconnect era. Comput Sci Eng 5:20–24 
Majumder MK, Pandya ND, Kaushik BK, Manhas SK (2012) Analysis of MWCNT and bundled 
SWCNT interconnects: Impact on crosstalk and area. IEEE Electron Device Lett 33(8):1180– 
1182 
Maffucci A, Miano G, Villone F (2009) A new circuit model for carbon nanotube interconnects 
with diameter-dependent parameters. IEEE Trans Nanotechnol 8(3):345–354 
Naeemi A, Meindl JD (2007) Design and performance modeling for single-walled carbon nanotubes 
as local, semiglobal, and global interconnects in gigascale integrated systems. IEEE Trans 
Electron Devices 54(1):26–37 
Radosavljevic M, Lefebvre J, Johnson AT (2001) High-ﬁeld electrical transport and breakdown in 
bundles of single-wall carbon nanotubes. Phys Rev B 64(24):241307 
Rakheja S, Naeemi A (2010) Interconnects for novel state variables: performance modeling and 
device and circuit implications. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 57(10):2711–2718 
Sarto MS, Tamburrano A (2009) Single-conductor transmission-line model of multiwall carbon 
nanotubes. IEEE Trans Nanotechnol 9(1):82–92 
Sathyakam PU, Mallick PS (2017) Carbon nanotube interconnects with air-gaps: effect on thermal 
stability, delay and area. J Nano Res 48:29–37 
Srivastava N, Joshi RV, Banerjee K (2005) Carbon nanotube interconnects: implications for 
performance, power dissipation and thermal management. IEDM Tech Dig 249–252 
Tang M, Mao J (2014) Modeling and fast simulation of multiwalled carbon nanotube interconnects. 
IEEE Trans Electromagnetic Compatibility 57(2):232–240 
Todri-Sanial A, Dijon J, Maffucci A (2017) Carbon nanotubes for interconnects. Springer, Zurich, 
Switzerland 
Venkatesan R, Davis JD, Meindl JD (2003) Compact distributed RLC interconnect models—Part 
IV: Uniﬁed models for time delay, crosstalk and repeater insertion. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 
50(4):1094–1102 
Venkatesan JAR, Kaloyeros A, Beylansky M, Souri SJ, Banerjee K, Saraswat KC, Rahman A, Reif 
R, Meindl JD (2001) Interconnect limits on gigascale integration (GSI) in the 21st century. Proc 
IEEE 89(3):305–324

80
W.-S. Zhao
Wei BQ, Vajtai R, Ajayan PM (2001) Reliability and current carrying capacity of carbon nanotubes. 
Appl Phys Lett 79(8):1172–1174 
Wong HSP, Akarvardar K, Antoniadis D, Bokor J, Hu C, King-Liu TJ, Mitra S, Plummer JD, 
Salahuddin S (2020) A density metric for semiconductor technology. Proc IEEE 108(4):478–482 
Zhao WS, Fu K, Wang DW, Li M, Wang G, Yin WY (2019a) Mini-review: modeling and 
performance analysis of nanocarbon interconnects. Appl Sci 9(11):2174 
Zhao WS, Liu PW, Yu H, Hu Y, Wang G, Swaminathan M (2019b) Repeater insertion to reduce delay 
and power in copper and carbon nanotubes-based nanointerconnects. IEEE Access 7:13622– 
13633 
Zhao WS, Zhang R, Wang DW (2022a) Recent progress in physics-based modeling of electromi-
gration in integrated circuit interconnects. Micromachines 13(883):1–31 
Zhao WS, Wang BX, Wang DW, You B, Liu Q, Wang G (2022b) Swarm intelligence algorithm-based 
optimal design of microwave microﬂuidic sensors. IEEE Trans Industrial Electron 69(2):2077– 
2087 
Zhao WS, Wang G, Hu J, Sun L, Hong H (2015) Performance and stability of monolayer single-
walled carbon nanotube interconnects. Int J Numer Model 28:456–464 
Zhao WS, Wang G, Sun L, Yin WY, Guo YX (2014) Repeater insertion for carbon nanotube 
interconnects. Micro Nano Lett 9(5):337–339

Chapter 6 
Through Silicon Vias for 3D 
Integration—A Mini Review 
Yachana Arora, Vandana Boora, Rohit Dhiman, and Rajeevan Chandel 
Abstract Three-dimensional integration of integrated circuits (ICs) has shown a 
better utilization of space on the substrate by stacking the chips one onto another 
than its planar counterparts. This effective use of space and thus miniaturization has 
led to a holistic performance enhancement of the very large-scale integration (VLSI) 
systems. Vertical interconnects or through silicon vias (TSVs) are the foundation 
of 3D integration. The fabrication technologies required to incorporate the through 
silicon vias in the substrate and the challenges associated with their fabrication are 
signiﬁcantly important, as these may hugely affect the ﬁnal product performance 
and cost. To increase the reliability and maintain the signal integrity of an overall 
IC, various novel structures of TSVs have been devised by the researchers, wherein 
it is attempted to ﬁnd the better geometry, shape, and ﬁller materials for the vias. 
Subsequently, a brief overview of the different aspects of TSVs for 3D integration is 
presented in the current chapter. The electrical characteristics of the vias are high-
lighted, considering the lumped equivalent model which may be analyzed using 
various numerical techniques. 
Keywords Through Silicon Vias (TSVs) · Signal Integrity · 3D Integration ·
Reliability · Via Fabrication · Equivalent Circuit · Stacking · Modeling
Y. Arora envelope symbol · V. Boora · R. Dhiman · R. Chandel 
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National Institute of Technology 
Hamirpur, Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh 177 005, India 
e-mail: 184533@nith.ac.in 
V. Boora 
e-mail: 184535@nith.ac.in 
R. Dhiman 
e-mail: rohitdhiman@nith.ac.in 
R. Chandel 
e-mail: rchandel@nith.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_6 
81

82
Y. Arora et al.
Introduction to 3D IC 
In order to meet the goals of power reduction and high integration in very large-scale 
integration (VLSI) systems, a novel chip-stacking packaging technique known as 
the three-dimensional integrated circuit (3D IC) has been developed recently. When 
many layers of active devices are stacked and connected vertically to create 3D ICs, 
the process is known as 3D integration packaging technology which is many times 
also referred to as vertical integration. 
This approach has potential to greatly enhance chip functionality, packing density, 
and performance (Guarini et al. 2002). 3D ICs may facilitate the integration of diverse 
materials, devices, and signals and also offer the microchip architecture (Topol et al. 
2006). By utilizing quick, dense inter die vias, 3D ICs aim to break through intercon-
nect scaling obstacles, opening the door for further improvements in complementary 
metal-oxide semiconductors (CMOS) performance. 
Furthermore, 3D ICs allow for the fusion of several fabrication techniques to 
create a genuine system on chip (SoC) by integrating them on the same chip and 
shrinking the form factor (Lee and Chakrabarty 2009). 
3D integration presents a graceful approach to the off-chip connection difﬁculty 
by physically bringing the communication ICs closer to one another and concurrently 
lowering the area footprint, which is critical for handheld devices. Given this, 3D 
integration is thought to be an effective way to deal with the off-chip connectivity 
problems (2018). 
Challenges in 3D Integration 
Though 3D ICs offer better space utilization, decreased resistance-capacitance delay, 
miniaturization, etc., but the fact that these are complex structures to fabricate, and 
test cannot be ruled out. There are several challenges in the way to design a highly 
reliable 3D structure. The following are some of the problems that a designer needs 
to address before jumping to a ﬁnal design for its system on chip. 
Testing of IC and Its Yield 
When dies are fabricated on the wafer, it is tested for each of the dies using a probe. 
The die that passes the test is called a known good die (KGD) and only KGD are 
involved to form the 3D stack. Another method of assembly is done at wafer level 
where the die is packaged while it is still on wafer and then diced. This method is 
far cheaper than individual testing of die, but it can lead to loss in yield if any of the 
die in the wafer breaks down.

6
Through Silicon Vias for 3D Integration—A Mini Review
83
Heat Removal 
Power consumed by the IC and how effectively it is cooled down are the important 
factors that determine efﬁciency and longevity of the electronic gadgets. With the 
3D integrated topology, the distance between the die at the top level and heat sink is 
signiﬁcantly increased. Improper thermal management may lead to junction leakage 
and electro-migration may deteriorate device performance. For every 10 ºC rise in 
junction temperature, there is a decrease in performance of clock buffer by 1.2% (Im 
and Banerjee 2000). Hence, thermal management in IC is a critical issue that needs 
to be addressed to decrease the thermal hotspots in 3D IC. Ref. (Tavakkoli et al. 
2016) suggested the use of liquid cooling technique using microﬂuidic channels to 
address this issue. 
Reliability 
3D stacking of chips requires vertical interconnections for signal and power supply. 
This vertical interconnection goes directly through the substrate of the chip, hence the 
name through silicon via (TSV). There are already fabricated components present on 
the substrate, hence the TSV fabrication must be carefully done without disturbing 
the surrounding environment of the substrate. 
TSVs can be fabricated using various processes. The selection of the fabrication 
process must be carefully done as it could affect the stress proﬁle of the substrate, 
thereby posing severe challenges to the already fabricated transistor. For these 3D 
ICs to function properly and possibly set a performance ceiling, the on-chip wires 
connecting the inputs/outputs (I/Os) to the TSVs must be reliable. 
Power Distribution Networks 
In 3D ICs, power needs to be vertically transported from package pins through the 
stacks. Vertical vias called TSVs are used to distribute the power/ground to the die 
present higher up in the stack. Improving the internal power grid/network will greatly 
inﬂuence the voltage drop across the chip and the chip area requirements (Kim et al. 
2010). 
Many dedicated power/grounds TSVs may be required for the chip stack, but this 
will add to increased crosstalk problems. Hence, an innovative 3D power delivery 
solution is essential to provide high-quality voltage levels.

84
Y. Arora et al.
Fig. 6.1 Different 
placement of chips in 2.5D 
and 3D IC (Medhat 2022) 
Placement of Chips and Vias 
The goal of the designer is to get a signiﬁcantly improved utilization of substrate 
area, and improved wire length to have good signal integrity, lesser stress, and a good 
thermal proﬁle. Therefore, the designer needs to pre-decide the placement of chips 
and vias onto the substrate to get better performance beneﬁts. Figure 6.1 shows the 
placement of chips in 2.5D and 3D integration depicting better space utilization and 
lesser footprint due to the different placement of chips. 
Clock Distribution Network 
The performance of the entire SoC is highly dependent on how the clock network is 
distributed in the system. Data is transmitted synchronously between the data lines 
using a clock distribution network (CDN). To satisfy performance parameters like 
clock skew/slew and power, conventional clock network designs must be expanded 
to include the resistance-capacitance properties of the via. 
Signal Integrity 
There are several TSVs used in the 3D stack. If placed closer to each other, it will 
lead to TSV-to-TSV noise coupling and crosstalk. To get a good signal integrity 
(SI) measure, both insertion loss and noise coupling need to be taken care of. Ref. 
(Cho and Kim 2013) analyzed that TSV noise coupling is a more signiﬁcant factor 
than insertion loss. It was observed that for TSV diameter of 30µm and height of 
100µm, noise coupling is about −35dB at 1GHz reﬂecting the fact that interconnect 
geometry, its placement inside the substrate, and signaling model play a signiﬁcant 
role in maintaining the integrity of the signal.

6
Through Silicon Vias for 3D Integration—A Mini Review
85
Via Reliability 
Vertical vias form the fundamental technology of 3D integration and its reliability 
needs to be addressed. Thermal proﬁle, stress induced, via placement, via fabrication 
process and techniques add up to the reliability of the via. Numerical methods that 
are conventionally used to capture these via failures are not always computationally 
feasible for chip-level analysis and optimization. Therefore, researchers are coming 
up with many possible structures which could improve the signal integrity issues of 
vertical vias (Rahman et al. 2013; Qian et al. 2016, 2017; Rao  2020; Hu et al.  2020; 
Kim et al. 2015; Kumar et al. 2022; Kumar and Dhiman 2022; Nilsson et al. 2009, 
2021; Liang et al. 2013; Lu et al.  2018; Ruehli 1996). 
Via Fabrication Process and Technologies 
Via Fabrication Steps 
Various processes are carried out to fabricate a TSV onto the substrate. Etching for via 
production is one of the numerous phases in the fabrication of vias and the deposition 
of oxide layer is carried out to form insulation between the two conducting materials. 
A barrier or seed layer is laid down followed by the addition of ﬁller material, such 
as copper (Cu). The unwanted materials from the Cu plating are removed using 
the chemical mechanical polishing (CMP) technique. Each of the steps is explained 
pictorially in Fig. 6.2 and detailed in the following sub-sections.
Etching 
The silicon is cut into deep pits with a large aspect ratio, and then ﬁller material 
is inserted into them. A trench typically measures 100–150 µm in height and 1– 
5 µm in breadth. Etching is the method used to create these trenches. A thin ﬁlm 
of a substrate is selectively removed, allowing the material to be reconﬁgured into 
the desired pattern. Depending on the desired proﬁle, the etching method may be 
wet, dry, laser drilled, reactive ion, or deep reactive ion. Anisotropic wet etching 
is typically utilized for TSV production with a very big pitch to create a trench. 
However, the desired proﬁle can be altered by combining isotropic wet etching and 
dry etching (Garrou et al. 2014). Laser drilling and reactive-ion etching (RIE) are the 
main processes used in dry etching. The RIE technique typically uses a high-density 
plasma source, where the plasma’s ions and radial species chemically and physically 
etch the surface. 
Following etching, the residual byproducts are eliminated, resulting in continuous 
plasma reactivity. Scientist Bosch patented the Bosch technique, also known as DRIE

86
Y. Arora et al.
Fig. 6.2 Via fabrication steps: a Silicon substrate b Deposition of oxide layer on the substrate by 
thermal oxidation c Photoresist d Lithography to mark pattern of via e Oxide etch f Etching of 
TSV using technique such as dry etching g Strip resist h Seed/barrier layer of titanium (Ti), oxide 
layer deposition by plasma etch technique i Copper plating/Via ﬁlling j CMP to remove unwanted 
material from top

6
Through Silicon Vias for 3D Integration—A Mini Review
87
or the Bosch etching alternative, in response to the slowness of RIE method (Laermer 
et al. 2003). 
Deposition of the Oxide Layer 
The signal will be lost if the ﬁller material, which is metallic, is placed directly into 
a silicon trench. A further insulating layer is therefore needed between the trench 
and ﬁller material which requires some deposition techniques. A few of the deposi-
tion techniques include atomic layer deposition (ALD) and plasma-enhanced chem-
ical vapor deposition (PECVD). These methods offer good adhesion with silicon at 
temperature range between 100 and 200 °C. 
ALD produces oxide layers with low breakdown voltage. Therefore, for the depo-
sition of oxide layers in TSVs, high-quality PECVD is preferred. The chemical 
vapor deposition (CVD) method is perfect for dielectric applications in TSV-based 
interconnects. This method demonstrates an inherently conformal deposition that is 
essential for covering the titanium metal barrier and copper seed in the next steps. 
Organic dielectrics can be processed using deposition methods such as spin coating 
and spraying. Because of their low modulus and ability to be coated at ambient 
temperature, these materials function as a stress buffer layer. 
Seed Layer 
A metal barrier or seed layer is added after the oxide isolation layer has been 
deposited. These layers are there to stop metal from diffusing into the silicon or 
the oxide layer, hence the layer should be uniform. To achieve equal thicknesses 
on the top and sides during the application of the barrier layer, the oxide must be 
deposited. The most difﬁcult and expensive activity in the TSV fabrication process 
ﬂow is the application of the barrier layer and subsequent through-ﬁlling. Titanium 
(Ti) and tantalum (Ta) are the best barrier materials. These materials, which can 
provide extremely uniform step coverage and sheet resistance, are deposited via a 
PVD method. As a result, the barrier for depositing a ﬁlm is thinner. A physical vapor 
deposition (PVD) of tantalum nitride and seed copper can be used, followed by a full 
metal deposition (Riedel et al. 2000). Ionized metal plasma (IMP) sputtering offers 
superior step coverage due to the directionality of the deposited atoms and utilization 
of ion bombardment to sputter materials from the bottom of the via to the sidewall. 
IMP-based PVD enables copper seed layer conformality either on the via sidewall 
or at the via bottom. 
Via Filling/Plating 
The traditional wafer manufacturing procedures use tungsten as via ﬁller to ﬁll the 
connection of 1µm diameter and a depth of 2 µm. Sputtered titanium is typically

88
Y. Arora et al.
used as the contact and barrier layer for the ﬁlling. For the via to be ﬁlled with 
tungsten, more than half of its diameter must be deposited since tungsten ﬁlling is 
conformal. It can be referred to as the common, high-throughput wafer production 
process. However, ﬁlm stress and wafer bow are the potential concerns with tungsten 
TSV ﬁlling, which limits the thickness that can be deposited. Hence, only tungsten 
is used for small-diameter holes and annular vias, while polysilicon is no longer 
commonly considered for use in TSVs due to concerns over via resistance (2016). 
A layer of oxide, such as silicon dioxide (SiO2), is necessary for the commonly 
used electrodeposition of copper to create a conducting channel in the substrate. 
However, it is complicated in several ways, including dependability, throughput, and 
process controllability. Implementing high-aspect-ratio TSVs with conductive TSV 
metal cores that are void-free is very challenging. Therefore, research is necessary 
to discover some alternative plating processes. The use of solder balls, ﬁlling with 
conductive metal pastes, wire-bonded gold cores, and other potential methods are a 
few of these. 
Chemical Mechanical Polishing 
After ﬁller material is added to the via, an unwanted layer of metal or oxide is 
deposited on the ends of TSV, which is removed using the process called CMP. 
The name is so because CMP uses both mechanical abrasions of the surface metal 
with a mechanical polishing pad and an abrasive colloidal slurry. This combines 
mechanical material removal and a chemical reaction to remove excessive metal. 
Since alumina is more similar in hardness to tungsten than most other abrasives, 
it is the most often utilized abrasive material for tungsten CMP. The removal of 
tungsten involves mechanical abrasion followed by continual, self-limiting oxidation 
of the tungsten surface (Liu et al. 1996). An aqueous solution with nanoparticles 
with a diameter of several hundred nanometers is used to polish copper. Nitric acid, 
hydrogen peroxide, and ammonium hydroxide are common ingredients in slurry 
solutions. Because copper is a soft material as opposed to tungsten, mechanical 
effects play a big part in the polishing process. 
There are two steps to the polishing process: An oxide with a higher removal 
rate, excellent polarization, and little nonuniformity is utilized in the ﬁrst step. The 
second phase, which often selectively dishes to the barrier and has a lower removal 
rate, continues the process (Xu and Lu 2013). One of the challenges this polishing 
approach has is the quick removal of thick materials without compromising wafer 
topography. By reducing the size of the TSV and developing bottom-up copper 
plating, it is possible to reduce the copper overburden and the polishing time. 
Wafer Thinning 
Wafer thinning is done to maintain the total thickness variation (TTV) of the wafer. 
Minimization of this thickness and adhesive are done at the initial bonding step,

6
Through Silicon Vias for 3D Integration—A Mini Review
89
Fig. 6.3 Via fabricating 
techniques a Via-ﬁrst 
b Via-middle c Via-last 
hence a careful measurement of TTV is required. Wafers are typically thinned in 
two steps: (i) adding metal ﬁlms to the back to facilitate backside contact with the 
device, and (ii) lowering the TSV depth. Silicon substrates can be thinned after being 
bonded together to either make room for the formation of an interconnect on the back 
of the bonded wafer or to make an existing connection visible for bonding to another 
substrate. Wafer thinning generally involves a procedure called back grinding. To 
protect the front side of the device wafer during this operation, a “back grind tape” 
with a thickness of roughly 100–300 µm is placed (Hosali et al. 2008). 
TSV Process Technologies 
Vias are fabricated mainly by three techniques, namely, via-ﬁrst, via-middle, and 
via-last. These are depicted in Fig. 6.3 and are detailed in further sub-sections. 
Via-First 
This approach produces TSVs by printing the transistors in silicon prior to the front-
end (FE) process as shown in Fig. 6.3a. For TSVs created utilizing the via-ﬁrst 
method, high temperatures (about 1000°C) are reached during transistor manufac-
ture. Consequently, the coefﬁcient of thermal expansion (CTE) of the TSV materials 
must be decreased. 
When employing the via-ﬁrst technique, traditional materials with high CTEs 
such as copper (177 ppm/K) and tungsten (4.6 ppm/K) are used. Polysilicon is widely 
used as a ﬁller because of its tolerance to higher temperatures and fewer impurities. 
However, the TSV resistance of polysilicon material is very high which limits its 
use, leading TSV fabrication designers to ignore the via-ﬁrst method.

90
Y. Arora et al.
Via-Middle 
Figure 6.3b depicts the fabrication of TSVs after the front-end (FE) process but 
before the back end (BE) process, or after the transistors are created but prior to the 
design of the metallization layers. The ideal materials for the via-middle approach 
are copper or tungsten. Tungsten is widely used as the ﬁller material to produce 
on-chip metallization layers, which require temperature of about 400 °C, due to its 
lower CTE than Cu. 
Via-Last 
Using via-last technology, TSVs are produced by following FE and BE methods as 
seen in Fig. 6.3c. Because high-temperature FE and BE processes are completed 
before TSV production, Cu can be used as the ﬁller material due to its low resistivity. 
However, further limitations on the usage of Cu include material diffusion in the 
silicon substrate and electro-migration effects at high frequencies. All these issues 
make the system unreliable. The materials employed in the current research initiatives 
must therefore be carbon-based and possess low CTE, resistivity, electro-migration 
effect, and contamination. 
The via-last technique has been determined to be the most efﬁcient way to make 
TSVs with regular Cu ﬁller. This approach can also be used with image sensors and 
layered dynamic random-access memory (DRAM). The low electrical resistance of 
the vias serves as the primary defense for this method. For instance, a CMOS image 
sensor displays vias with a 2:1 aspect ratio and a diameter greater than 40 µm. Other 
devices have a 5:1 aspect ratio and through diameters between 10 and 25 µm. 
Progress in 3D ICs 
3D ICs offer enhanced performance owing to utilization of the z-direction of the 
chips. As the boundaries for scaling CMOS continue to rise, system designers are 
increasingly looking for multichip packages to improve performance without packing 
more devices on a single chip. To connect the various chips in stacked-die packages, 
wire bonds are frequently formed from the chip edges to the substrate. This technique 
still has latency, bandwidth, and power issues due to increasing circuit complexity and 
density, as well as the resulting increase in signal trafﬁc on the interconnect. New 3D 
chip-stacking techniques that create multilayer connections directly through active 
circuitry now promise to signiﬁcantly improve system performance. The best way 
to progress toward “More-than-Moore” technologies is through 3D IC packaging, 
which stacks dies vertically. Overall, three-dimensional integration can be divided 
into two approaches as follows:

6
Through Silicon Vias for 3D Integration—A Mini Review
91
One-dimensional approach: It entails sequential device processing. Prior to the 
back-end processing, that connects the devices via interconnects, the front-end 
processing, which creates layers of devices, is repeated multiple times on a single 
wafer to produce multiple active device layers. 
Stacking approach: Wafer-to-wafer, wafer-to-die, and die-to-die are the three 
stacking techniques. In stacking approach, each layer is handled independently 
using traditional manufacturing methods. Bonding technology is used to join these 
processed layers together to form a 3D IC. 
Traditional packaging technology uses wire bonding technique while TSVs and 
micro bumps are used for 3D stacking of chips. TSVs have been able to provide the 
highest integration density as it has led to shorter signal paths with improved electrical 
performance due to reduced capacitive, inductive, and resistive components. The 
TSVs in 3D ICs also have the beneﬁt of having ﬁne pitches. Due to its smallest 
space, connectivity density, and smallest form factor, this technology offers the best 
performance. 
As a result, the primary goal of the current scenario is to develop TSVs that are 
both trustworthy and cost-effective. Wafer thinning and die bonding are the two main 
procedures used in TSV fabrication for 3D stacking. The wafer thinning procedure 
helps to reduce the impact of TSVs on the surrounding environment. It is not expected 
that the scaling rate of TSV dimensions in TSV bonding will match feature size. This 
is due to the alignment tolerance during bonding, which limits TSV scaling. However, 
the monolithic approach to 3D integration allows TSV scaling to be equivalent to 
feature size. This is because the connections make use of local wires. 
Literature Survey on Via Modeling 
To keep up with the demand of modern technology requirements, the advanced ICs 
require major changes both in terms of their design and the way these are packaged. 
By reducing resistance-capacitance delays in comparison to a conventional planar 
connection design, the 3D integration has been viewed for enhanced chip perfor-
mance. Use of TSV for 3D integration is viewed as a solution to reach “More than 
Moore” demands. These interconnects travel through the substrate directly, thereby 
decreasing the interconnect length required. Since TSV conducts signal through it, 
it is ﬁlled with some conducting materials. TSV with copper ﬁllers are currently 
being used in industry as they have been able to provide important beneﬁts for 
increasing chip functionality while maintaining the same die size. However, it has 
electrical and mechanical issues as well. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are seen as an 
alternative to copper as they offer higher current carrying capacity, high resistance 
toward electro-migration, and very high mechanical and thermal strength compared 
to copper (Awano et al. 2010). Besides material, geometry of TSV and signaling 
scheme in TSV are also considered to have a signiﬁcant effect on the performance.

92
Y. Arora et al.
In Ref. (Rahman et al. 2013), TSV is analyzed with optimization in its struc-
tural geometry such as cylindrical, conical, and square. It is noted that the perfor-
mance of TSV is greatly inﬂuenced by design parameters and structural geometry 
and concluded that insertion loss varied least in cylindrical TSV. The performance 
of the cylindrical TSV is superior to that of other types of structures in terms of TSV 
characteristics (height, diameter, and insulation gap). An equivalent lumped model 
is also suggested which can be used to simulate 3D circuits. 
The behavior of TSV with differential signaling scheme was studied in Qian et al. 
(2016) and compared it with single-ended TSV. The transmission characteristics of 
TSV were found to be highly affected by the thickness of dielectric at high frequencies 
and conductor loss at lower frequencies due to ﬁnite conductivity of via material. 
An increase in dielectric thickness from 100 to 400 nm led to an improvement in 
magnitude of insertion loss (S21) at 5 GHz. This so happened because increase in 
dielectric thickness decreases the TSV conductance G and thereby dielectric loss. 
However, the effect of dielectric thickness is relatively smaller in the frequency region 
of under 1 GHz and over 50 GHz, since the overall loss is dominated by resistance-
dependent conductor loss and substrate dependent dielectric loss, respectively, at 
these regions. 
The doping concentration of the silicon substrate is another important factor. When 
the doping concentration varies from 1 × 1022 to 4 × 1022 m−3, the magnitude of S21 
at a frequency of 50 GHz decreases by 205.76% and 203.57% in odd- and even-mode 
excitations, respectively. In contrast, the effect of doping concentration is negligible 
below 5 GHz due to dominance of conductor and dielectric losses. 
Rao has modeled a cylindrical proﬁle that uses both copper and CNT (Rao 2020). 
After CNT (both single-walled and multi-walled) is grown inside TSV, it is ﬁlled 
with copper. Now the performance of TSV also depends on the ratio in which Cu 
and CNT are ﬁlled and the proportion of multi-walled and single-walled CNT. 
It is recommended that to get an improved signal, a higher proportion of 
MWCNTs, and copper must be ﬁlled. To achieve higher current density along the 
surface model, a higher proportion of SWCNTs and lesser copper must be present. 
This model showed similar values for crosstalk issues, but improved results were 
seen for delay model. 
Qian et al. (2017) have investigated the electrical–thermal performance of through 
glass vias ﬁlled with CNTs and a tapered geometry in S-G-S type signaling scheme. 
A property of glass via was observed that inductive element of conductor loss is 
dominant when used a glass substrate unlike silicon TSV. The signal loss in differen-
tial scheme is found to be less than in common mode, while it increases with increase 
in via pitch. 
Fabricating several TSVs in the substrate adds to crosstalk issues but providing 
signal, power, ground to each layer of the stack is also essential. So, aiming at the 
problem of input/output (I/O) limitation, a differential multi-bit carbon nanotube TSV 
is reported in Hu et al. (2020) where each TSV carries two types of signals, hence the 
name multibit. Single ended TSV carries only one signal (G-S-S-G) through it, but 
a two-bit TSV will have G-SS-G or GS-SG type of signaling scheme. Here S stands 
for signal and G stands for ground. This resulted in improved integration density,

6
Through Silicon Vias for 3D Integration—A Mini Review
93
lesser crosstalk and noise propagation problems and increased number of I/O in 3D 
IC. 
The RLGC circuit model of single-ended signal through glass via (TGV) assuming 
it to be cylindrical is given in Kim et al. (2015). In this, instead of using silicon 
substrate, a separate layer made up of glass is added which is called glass interposer. 
The via passing through this interposer is accordingly referred to as through glass 
via. Glass is used because it offers higher resistivity (1012–1016 Ω-cm) than silicon 
(0.16–0.60 Ω-cm). There is no need to provide insulation between substrate and via 
etch, due to very less conductivity of glass, hence this structure is less complex than 
TSV. The proposed model is veriﬁed up to 40 GHz with full-3D simulation. Using 
the proposed model with parasitic components of through glass via, it is reported that 
the inductance of via is the most dominant parameter to the result of s-parameter. It 
conﬁrmed that the insertion loss of TGV is minimized with minimum height and pitch 
between the GS pair and a maximum diameter of through glass via. It is observed 
that inductance of via greatly inﬂuences the S-parameters. Variation in geometrical 
parameters such as pitch between adjacent via, height and diameter of via was studied 
in detail and they concluded that insertion loss will be minimum when height and 
pitch of adjacent vias, i.e., G-S pair is kept to its minimum and diameter of via is 
kept high. 
Kumar et al. (2022) proposed a cylindrical differential multibit TGV(DM-TGV) 
design with CNT ﬁller. An improvement of around 44% is reported in DM-TGCVs 
under differential mode with respect to differential TSVs for varying via radius and 
nearly 22% for differential multibit CNT TSVs. An improvement in crosstalk up to 
89% is reported when compared to the differential TSVs at 20 GHz. 
Various other novel structures such as tapered multibit differential multibit TGV, 
three-bit TSV, coaxial TSV with variation in ﬁller materials and signal schemes are 
explored in Kumar and Dhiman (2022), Nilsson et al. (2009, 2021), Liang et al. 
(2013), Lu et al. (2018). 
Electrical Modeling of Vias 
At high frequencies, via is modeled as a transmission line cable due to increase in 
rise time of the signal through it. A transmission line is modeled as a distributed 
passive network of R, L, C, and G parameters, where R, L, C, and G are resistance, 
inductance, capacitance, and conductance respectively. Hence, via is an example of 
distributed element model. Figure 6.4 shows the front view of single-ended TSVs 
inside a substrate. In Fig. 6.4, the thickness of the oxide is represented by tox, while 
dTSV and hTSV represent the diameter and height of the TSV, respectively. Further, the 
top view of coupled signal-ground TSVs is shown in Fig. 6.5. In this ﬁgure, Cox is the 
oxide capacitance, whereas CSi and Gsi represent the capacitance and conductance 
offered by the silicon substrate, respectively.
An electrical equivalent model of single-ended TSV is presented in Fig. 6.6. It is  
modeled as a series of resistances and inductances. The copper TSV is covered by

94
Y. Arora et al.
Fig. 6.4 Front view of TSVs 
inside the substrate 
Fig. 6.5 Top view of 
coupled signal-ground TSVs
an oxide layer which acts as an insulation between the conducting channel and Si 
substrate. Due to the presence of oxide layer, a MOS capacitance is formed (metal— 
Cu of TSV, oxide—dielectric layer, semiconductor—silicon substrate) modeled as 
Cox. This comes into play when dielectric is present. The ﬁnite resistivity of substrate 
material is modeled by CSi and Gsi in parallel. In Fig. 6.6, Δx is the inﬁnitesimal 
segment of hTSV.
Numerical Techniques 
The operational characteristics of a via are explored using equivalent circuit model. 
Frequency and time domain analyses of the model can be performed to deduce 
the behavior of the via in terms of its RLGC parameters. Some of the numerical 
techniques useful for these analyses include ﬁnite-difference time-domain (FDTD), 
partial element equivalent circuit (PEEC), and ABCD (Ruehli 1996). FDTD is a

6
Through Silicon Vias for 3D Integration—A Mini Review
95
Fig. 6.6 Electrical 
equivalent model of 
single-ended TSV
popular computational electrodynamics modeling technique. In this technique, time-
dependent partial differentials are discretized using central-difference approxima-
tions to space and time. To know the effect on signal due to variation in frequency, 
researchers have been popularly using the techniques, namely, PEEC and ABCD. 
The PEEC method is a type of electromagnetic simulation that relies on the integral 
formulation of Maxwell’s equation. As vias are modeled as transmission line cables, 
ABCD technique is a popular choice to solve two-port network under high-frequency 
operations. There are several TSVs etched in the substrate which will eventually form 
an equivalent circuit which is cascade of several of two TSVs. ABCD technique can 
easily solve such series of cascade of two-port network. 
The design and modeling of high frequency electromagnetic structure can be 
carried out using commercially available electronic design automation (EDA) tool, 
namely, high frequency structure simulator (HFSS) provided by Ansys (Ansys EDA 
tool 2022). 
Ansys is a software company that provides engineering simulation platforms and 
delivers 3D design software. HFSS is a solution for electromagnetic structures using 
the ﬁnite element method. Since the impact of different ﬂaws on the TSV performance 
parameters can be thoroughly described, it is perfect for TSV fault analysis. It may 
be utilized to determine how electric and magnetic ﬁelds are distributed and how 
intense they are not just within the entire TSV, but also in the surrounding medium, 
which includes the substrate and the dielectric. 
Summary 
Traditionally, the packaging of integrated circuits was meant to provide mechan-
ical and environmental support from any kind of abrasions. But today the world of 
packaging has got a whole new meaning. The way the ICs are packaged deﬁnes the 
performance of SoC. Packaging techniques such as 2D, 2.5D, and 3D integration,

96
Y. Arora et al.
wafer-level packaging, chip-scale integration are some industry-level solutions to get 
increased performance from SoC. 
3D integration promises better performance than 2D or 2.5D integration. In the 
past few years, 3D integrated circuits have emerged as a solution to miniaturization, 
offering beneﬁts of improved performance, higher memory bandwidth, smaller form 
factor, and heterogeneous integration. It has provided a holistic approach to multi-
die integration, for an optimal system to SoC solution. However, choice of adapting 
the packaging techniques solely depends on the requirement of the designer and the 
cost considerations. 3D integration is a more complex technique than 2D or 2.5D 
integration. This is because it involves the fabrication of vertical vias or TSVs in 
addition to interposer technology like in 2.5D. 
The different methods to integrate a via in the IC be it TSV ﬁrst, middle, or last 
largely affect the performance of signal through it. The different approaches such as 
monolithic or stacking to integrate different die onto a single substrate are important 
choices that need to be made prior that could best enable the multilayer connections 
to considerably boost system performance. Therefore, these integration methods are 
important choices that must be pre-decided from all angles as these could affect 
the ﬁnal product performance and cost dramatically. Thus, being a very essential 
requirement of present-day integrated chips, different aspects of 3D integration and 
via modeling are presented in the current chapter which will signiﬁcantly beneﬁt the 
VLSI designers and academia. 
Acknowledgements The authors sincerely acknowledge with gratitude the technical and ﬁnancial 
support received from the Science and Engineering Research Board, Department of Science and 
Technology (SERB-DST), GoI, New Delhi, through the Core Research Grant [Ref. No.: CRG/ 
2021/000780]. 
References 
Ansys EDA tool (2022) https://www.ansys.com 
Awano Y, Sato S, Nihei M, Sakai T, Ohno Y, Mizutani T (2010) Carbon nanotubes for VLSI: 
interconnect and transistor applications. In: Proceedings of the IEEE, vol 98, no 12, pp 2015– 
2031 
Cho J, Kim J (2013) Signal integrity design of TSV and interposer in 3D-IC. In: IEEE 4th Latin 
American symposium on circuits and systems (LASCAS). Cusco, Peru, pp 1–4. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/LASCAS.2013.6519092 
Garrou P, Koyanagi M, Ramm P (2014) Handbook of 3D integration volume 3: 3D process 
technology. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany 
Guan W, Lu H, Zhang Y, Zhang Y (2021) A novel differential multi-bit carbon nanotube through 
silicon vias. In: 4th international conference on advanced electronic materials, computers and 
software engineering (AEMCSE). Changsha, China, pp 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/AEMCSE 
51986.2021.00042

6
Through Silicon Vias for 3D Integration—A Mini Review
97
Guarini KW, Topol KW, Ieong M, Yu R, Shi L, Newport MR, Frank DJ, Singh DV, Cohen GM, Nitta 
SV, Boyd DC, O’Neil PA, Tempest SL, Pogge HB, Purushothaman S, Haensch WE (2002) Elec-
trical integrity of state-of-the-art 0.13µm SOI CMOS devices and circuits transferred for three-
dimensional (3D) integrated circuit (IC) fabrication. In: Int electron devices meeting (IEDM). 
San Francisco, CA, USA, pp 943–945. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEDM.2002.1175992 
Hosali S, Smith G, Smith L, Vitkavage S, Arkalgud S (2008) Through-silicon via fabrication, 
backgrind and handle wafer technologies. In: Tan C, Gutmann R, Reif L (eds) Wafer level 3-D 
ICs process technology. Integrated circuits and systems. Springer, Boston, MA. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-0-387-76534-1_5 
Hu Q-H, Zhao W-S, Fu K, Wang G (2020) Modeling and characterization of differential multibit 
carbon-nanotube through-silicon vias. In: IEEE transactions on components, packaging and 
manufacturing technology, vol 10, no 3, pp 534–537. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCPMT.2020.297 
2340 
Im S, Banerjee K (2000) Full chip thermal analysis of planar (2-D) and vertically integrated (3-D) 
high performance ICs. In: International electron devices meeting. Technical Digest. IEDM (Cat. 
No.00CH37138). San Francisco, CA, USA, pp 727–730. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEDM.2000. 
904421 
Kaushik BK, Kumar VR, Majumder MK, Alam A (2016) Through silicon vias materials, models, 
design, and performance, 1st edn. CRC Press. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315368825 
Kim J, Hwang I, Kim Y, Cho J, Sundaram V, Tummala R, Kim J (2015) Precise RLGC modeling 
and analysis of through glass via (TGV) for 2.5D/3D IC. In: IEEE 65th electronic components 
and technology conference (ECTC). San Diego, CA, USA, pp 254–259. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
ECTC.2015.7159601 
Kim K et al. (2010) Analysis of power distribution network in TSV-based 3D-IC. In: 19th Topical 
meeting on electrical performance of electronic packaging and systems. Austin, TX, USA, pp 
177–180. https://doi.org/10.1109/EPEPS.2010.5642575 
Kumar A, Chandel R, Dhiman R (2022) Proposal and analysis of carbon nanotube based differential 
multibit through glass vias. Microelectronics J 126: 105500. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mejo. 
2022.105500 
Kumar A, Dhiman R (2022) Tapered differential multibit through glass vias for three dimensional 
integrated circuits. In: IEEE electrical design of advanced packaging and systems (EDAPS). 
Urbana, IL, USA, pp 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1109/EDAPS56906.2022.9995142 
Laermer F, Schilp A (2003) Method of anisotropic etching of silicon. US Patent 6531068B2 
Lee H-HS, Chakrabarty K (2009) Test challenges for 3D integrated circuits. In: IEEE design and 
test of computers, vol 26, no 5, pp 26–35. https://doi.org/10.1109/MDT.2009.125 
Liang F, Wang G, Zhao D, Wang B-Z (2013) Wideband impedance model for coaxial through-
silicon vias in 3-D integration. IEEE Trans Electron Dev 60(8): 2498–2504. https://doi.org/10. 
1109/TED.2013.2268869 
Liu CW, Tseng WT, Dai BT, Lee CY, Yeh CF (1996) A perspective on the wear mechanism during 
CMP of tungsten thin ﬁlms. In: Proceedings of CMP VLSI/ULDI multilevel interconnection 
conference, pp 138–144 
Lu Q, Zhu Z, Liu Y, Liu X, Yin X (2018) Wideband electromagnetic modeling of coaxial-annular 
through-silicon vias. IEEE Trans Electromagnetic Compatibility 60(6): 1915–1922. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/TEMC.2017.2771293 
Medhat D (2022) 2.5/3D IC reliability veriﬁcation has come A long way, semiconductor engineering. 
https://semiengineering.com/2-5-3d-ic-reliability-veriﬁcation-has-come-a-long-way 
Nilsson P, Ljunggren A, Thorslund R, Hagstrom M, Lindskog V (2009) Novel through-silicon 
via technique for 2d/3d SiP and interposer in low-resistance applications. In: 59th electronic 
components and technology conference. San Diego, CA, USA, pp 1796–1801. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/ECTC.2009.5074261 
Qian L, Xia Y, Shi G (2016) Electrical modeling and analysis of a mixed carbon nanotube-based 
differential through silicon via in 3-D integration. IEEE Trans Nanotechnol 15(2): 155–163. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNANO.2015.2509019

98
Y. Arora et al.
Qian L, Xia Y, Shi G, Wang J, Ye Y, Du S (2017) electrical–thermal characterization of through 
packaging vias in glass interposer. IEEE Trans Nanotechnol 16(6): 901–908. https://doi.org/10. 
1109/TNANO.2017.2722686 
Rahman T, Miao J, Youcef H (2013) Structure optimization of through silicon via (TSV) interconnect 
as transmission channel for 3D integration. In: 5th IEEE international symposium on microwave, 
antenna, propagation and EMC technologies for wireless communications. pp 668–671. https:// 
doi.org/10.1109/MAPE.2013.6689929 
Rao M (2020) Electrical modeling of copper and mixed carbon bundles as a composite for 3D 
interconnect applications. In: IEEE 15th international conference on nano/micro engineered 
and molecular system (NEMS). San Diego, CA, USA, pp 495–499. doi: https://doi.org/10. 
1109/NEMS50311.2020.9265633 
Riedel S et al (2000) Investigation of plasma treatment in a multistep TiN MOCVD process. 
Microelectron Eng 50:533–540. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-9317(99)00324-X 
Ruehli A (1996) Partial element equivalent circuit (PEEC) method and its application in the 
frequency and time domain. In: Proceedings of symposium on electromagnetic compatibility. 
Santa Clara, CA, USA, pp 128–133. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISEMC.1996.561214 
Satomi Y, Hachiya K, Kanamoto T, Kurokawa A (2018) Optimization of full-chip power distri-
bution networks in 3D ICs. In: IEEE 3rd international conference on integrated circuits and 
microsystems (ICICM). Shanghai, China, pp 134–138. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICAM.2018.859 
6650 
Tavakkoli F, Ebrahimi S, Wang S, Vafai K (2016) Analysis of critical thermal issues in 3D integrated 
circuits. Int J Heat Mass Transf 97:337–352. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2016. 
02.010 
Topol AW et al (2006) Three-dimensional integrated circuits. IBM J Res Dev 50(4.5): 491–506. 
https://doi.org/10.1147/rd.504.0491 
Xu Z, Lu J-Q (2013) Through silicon-via fabrication technologies, passives extraction, and electrical 
modeling for 3-D integration/packaging. IEEE Trans Semicond Manuf 26(1): 23–34. https:// 
doi.org/10.1109/TSM.2012.2236369

Chapter 7 
Neural Networks for Fast Design Space 
Exploration of On-Chip Interconnect 
Networks 
Somesh Kumar and Rahul Kumar 
Abstract In this chapter, we will look at how artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) models 
may be used to design on-chip interconnects for integrated circuits and systems. 
Conduct of on-chip copper (Cu) interconnect networks is restricted by dispersive 
processes such as grain boundary scattering, surface roughness scattering, top/bottom 
surface, and sidewall scattering when minimum interconnect width scales below the 
22 nm mark. The resistance of the interconnects, measured over a unit of length, 
is greatly inﬂated over the bulk value due to these scattering phenomena. Enhanced 
signal attenuation, delay, and power loss are all consequences of such extremely resis-
tive interconnects. Augmenting to causing discontinuities in the interconnect line, 
the migration of copper ions into the dielectric layer increases dielectric conduc-
tivity and leakage losses. To prevent copper ions from diffusing away from the 
copper conductor, a barrier layer is often positioned around it. Recently, many studies 
have investigated the potential of employing graphene nanoribbons as a replacement 
barrier material for Cu interlinks. At ambient temperature, the mean free route for 
electrons in graphene nanoribbons is much greater than in copper. Therefore, in addi-
tion to the copper conductor, the barrier layer provides extra low-resistance routes 
for conducting electrons. It is becoming more important to do SPICE-based simula-
tions of hybrid Cu-Graphene on-chip interconnect networks due to their rising popu-
larity. Simulations of interconnects using SPICE are notoriously time-consuming 
and computationally intensive. Using surrogate models is one way to deal with 
the computational overhead of exploring design space. Due to their capacity to 
mimic the extremely nonlinear input–output correlations of electronic packaging 
systems, surrogate templates based on machine learning (ML) regression are now 
quite sought-after. We will also collate the results of our ML-based models to those 
of our comprehensive EM and SPICE simulations.
S. Kumar envelope symbol
ABV-Indian Institute of Information Technology and Management Gwalior, Gwalior, M.P, India 
e-mail: somesh@iiitm.ac.in 
R. Kumar 
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 
e-mail: fmr5281@psu.edu 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_7 
99

100
S. Kumar and R. Kumar
Keywords Copper · EM solver · Graphene · Interconnect · Neural networks ·
On-chip 
Introduction 
Performance characteristics including attenuation, latency, and power loss of on-chip 
copper (Cu) interconnect networks increase when any dimension (width, length, 
thickness) of interconnects scales below the 22 nm threshold. This is because of 
scattering at the grain boundaries, top and bottom surfaces, and sidewalls (Meindl 
2001; Steinhögl et al. 2005; Todri-Sanial et al. 2017). Because copper ions diffuse 
into the dielectric layer, conductivity and leakage losses increase. The barrier layer 
surrounding the copper layer is a common strategy for preventing diffusion. Mate-
rials like tantalum (Ta) and tantalum nitride (TaN) are often employed for the barrier 
layers (Yang et al. 2004). These capping layers are not conducive to electron conduc-
tion because they have greater resistance than copper. The maximum current carrying 
capacity of the connecting wires also drops because of the decrease in the effective 
cross-section area. Graphene nanoribbons have been the subject of much research as a 
possible replacement barrier material for Cu interconnects in recent years (Zhao et al. 
2015; Achar and Nakhla 2001). We observed that the ampacity of copper conduc-
tors increases when covered with ultra-thin graphene sheets. In addition, graphene 
nanoribbons are remarkably resistant to thermal oxidation even when subjected to 
extreme heat. At ambient temperature, graphene nanoribbons have far longer elec-
tron mean free pathways than copper. Because of this, the barrier layer complements 
the copper conductor by providing a second, low-impedance channel for the ﬂow of 
electrons (Zhao et al. 2015). These low-resistance routes prevent copper ions from 
diffusing into the dielectric and greatly reduce the equivalent resistance per unit 
length (p.u.l.) of the whole conductor and junction. Due to these factors, researchers 
have shown a strong desire to create hybrid Cu-graphene-on-chip interconnects for 
use at the sub-22 nm technology node. 
Simulating hybrid Cu-graphene on-chip interconnect networks using SPICE is 
becoming more important as their use rises. Typically, there are two stages involved in 
running a network simulation using SPICE. Parameters p.u.l. of networks are initially 
calculated using quasi-TEM approximations of linked structures, often with electro-
magnetic (EM) solvers (Achar and Nakhla 2001). Transient analysis of networks 
is then performed by plugging the collected characteristics into preexisting multi-
conductor transmission line (MTL-SPICE) models (Achar and Nakhla 2001). It is 
common knowledge that the ﬁrst of the aforementioned stages has a higher temporal 
complexity than the second. When doing a design space exploration, the time required 
for this ﬁrst stage increases dramatically. Simply expressed, design space explo-
ration is the process of running SPICE simulations using the aforementioned two 
phases over thousands of iterations, each time varying the input geometric, phys-
ical, and material characteristics of the network. Using surrogate models is one 
approach to coping with the computing work required to explore the design space.

7
Neural Networks for Fast Design Space Exploration of On-Chip …
101
A surrogate model is a closed-form mathematical formula that mimics or emulates 
the input–output relationships of the particular system under test. Machine learning 
(ML) regression-based surrogate models are widely used nowadays (Torun et al. 
2020) because they can simulate the extremely nonlinear input–output connection 
of electronic packaging architectures. Artiﬁcal neural networks (ANNs) are created 
to simulate the functional dependency of parameters for the values of geometric, 
physical, and material-technical characteristics of networks. It is hypothesized that 
ANNs, if taught to faithfully imitate this input–output function dependence, would 
be far more effective than full-wave EM solvers. 
Despite ANNs’ numerical efﬁciency, training data must be retrieved from rigorous 
full-wave EM solvers, a process that entails several iterations and a signiﬁcant amount 
of computer overhead. In order to cut down on the high price tag associated with this 
lengthy ANN training period, several methods have been documented in the literature, 
such as source difference method, prior knowledge integration, and space-mapping 
techniques. 
Each of these methods relies on the premise that the pulse has strong functional 
dependencies. Empirical models may provide close approximations of the linked 
network parameters of the input geometric, physical, and material characteristics. 
So, a very little quantity of training data derived from more stringent full-wave EM 
solvers may be used to efﬁciently train ANNs, whereas a relatively big volumes of 
training data collected from lighter numerical models can be used instead. Training 
time for conventional ANNs is prohibitively time-expensive, but we can drastically 
cut that cost here without compromising accuracy. Knowledge-based neural networks 
(KBNN) (Zhang et al. 2003) are ANNs that may be trained on such data combinations. 
In comparison to classic ANNs, KBNNs have been found to have superior conver-
gence qualities; nevertheless, they do have some signiﬁcant drawbacks. The empirical 
model required to train the KBNN must be known in advance. This is a substantial 
difﬁculty for interconnect networks based on hybrid Cu-graphene materials. 
ANNs for Interconnect Modeling 
In order to do transient analysis on high-speed connections, several different SPICE 
models of MTLs have been created over the years (Achar and Nakhla 2001; Paul 
2007). The electrical behavior of networks is modeled utilizing the Telegraph and 
partial differential equations. For the performance benchmarking of any network, 
it is of utmost importance to extract RLC p.u.l. parameters. Because of this, we 
must ﬁrst extricate network p.u.l. RLC attributes based on our existing knowledge 
of the network’s shape and architecture in order to run a SPICE simulation of the 
linked network. The use of a full-wave rigorous EM solver is common place for 
this goal. Extraction of RLC parameters is a time-consuming procedure due to the 
high computational intricacy of such solvers. Parametric sweeps and investigations 
of design space increase this problem. The electronic packaging industry has taken 
an interest in ML regression models (Park et al. 2020) because of their capacity to

102
S. Kumar and R. Kumar
simulate the complicated input–output nonlinear behavior of devices, circuits, and 
systems. Particularly, ANNs have risen in popularity as a widely used ML regression 
model. The fragmental interdependence of p.u.l. RLC attributes of interconnections 
in terms of values of geometric, material, and physical design characteristics of 
network are the subject of most current efforts on building ANNs. The fundamental 
beneﬁt of these ANN models is that, unlike conventional full-wave EM solvers, they 
are intrinsically closed and can be queried for attributed coverage and design space 
searches in snatch of time required by the CPU. 
a. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks for Interlink Network P.U.L. Modeling 
Think of a linked network in general that has N geometric, physical, and material 
design characteristics. Each design parameter may have a value anywhere within 
a certain range of values called a “support interval” [pi,min, pi,max] to optimize the 
operation of a network. That being said, we may use a mathematical representation 
of the input parameters, which looks like this: 
p S u
b
script i Baseli
ne equals StartFraction left parenthesis p Subscript i comma min Baseline plus p Subscript i comma max Baseline right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction plus StartFraction left parenthesis p Subscript i comma max Baseline minus p Subscript i comma max Baseline right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction lamda Subscript i Baseline semicolon i equals 1 comma period period period comma upper N
p
 
S
ubscrip t i Base
line equals StartFraction left parenthesis p Subscript i comma min Baseline plus p Subscript i comma max Baseline right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction plus StartFraction left parenthesis p Subscript i comma max Baseline minus p Subscript i comma max Baseline right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction lamda Subscript i Baseline semicolon i equals 1 comma period period period comma upper N
p 
Subs cr ipt i Basel
ine equals StartFraction left parenthesis p Subscript i comma min Baseline plus p Subscript i comma max Baseline right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction plus StartFraction left parenthesis p Subscript i comma max Baseline minus p Subscript i comma max Baseline right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction lamda Subscript i Baseline semicolon i equals 1 comma period period period comma upper N
here the variables λi represent uncertainties in design parameters, and typically value 
lies between −1 and 1. RLC attributes of the interlinked network are denoted through 
matrices R, L, and C with constant values λ = [λ1, …,  λN], at very high time-
costs. Similar functional relationships may be modeled using a multilayer perceptron 
(MLP) implementation of ANN (2000), as seen in Fig. 7.1a. Neurons in this MLP 
design are stacked in levels, with information from every level being passed on to 
the next. The measures of lamdaat a given design spot are fed into the network at the 
input layer, a group of neurons located on the network’s left side. The output layer 
is the last stage of the MLP, and it gives the values of the R, L, or C matrices that go 
with them.
Next, to assimilate the process through which data passes through the MLP, 
Fig. 7.1 shows the structure and connectivity of individual neurons within the MLP. 
As per Fig. 7.1b, the neuron accepts as inputs the weighted sum S as 
bo ld
 u
pp
er
 W 
equa
ls 
St
ar
t 3  B y 
1 
Ma
tr
ix 
1st 
Row
 w
 1
 2n d Row vertica l el li
p
s
is 3
rd Row  
w Subscript n Baseline EndMatrix semicolon bold upper X equals Start 3 By 1 Matrix 1st Row x 1 2nd Row vertical ellipsis 3rd Row x Subscript n Baseline EndMatrix semicolon bold upper S equals b plus bold upper W Superscript t Baseline bold upper X equals b plus sigma summation Underscript j equals 1 Overscript n Endscripts w Subscript j Baseline x Subscript j Baseline
The weight vector, input data vector, bias term, and the total number of input 
terms are all denoted by the letters W, X, b, and n, respectively. To get the scalar 
output, we take the scalar sum S and run it through a nonlinear activation function, 
which is given as 
y equals sigma
 l
eft  p
a
r
enth
esisxb ol
d 
u
pper S right parenthesis equals sigma left parenthesis b plus sigma summation Underscript j equals 1 Overscript n Endscripts w Subscript j Baseline x Subscript j Baseline right parenthesis

7
Neural Networks for Fast Design Space Exploration of On-Chip …
103
Fig. 7.1 Predicting the p.u.l. characteristics of interlink networks using artiﬁcial neural networks 
(ANNs). a The interconnections between neurons in a multilayer perceptron ANN. b Transmission 
of information inside a single neuron
Thus, when the input data X passed through a neuron, the nonlinear output y(X) 
is produced. The functional dependencies {R(λ), L(λ), C(λ)} are thus recorded by 
the ANN as shown in Fig. 7.1. 
Importantly, each neuron’s weight and bias values are adjusted so that errors within 
the predicted ANN output and parameters computed using the full-wave EM solver 
are minimized when λ is covered in the attributed space of the multidimensional 
hypercube. “Training” an ANN refers to the process of optimizing its performance. 
Various gradient or non-gradient-based schemes are currently known for training 
ANNs, of which the class of gradient-based back-propagation techniques is very 
popular. Usually, for the interconnect problem, we need to train three different ANNs 
to reproduce the functional dependencies of R(λ), L(λ), and C(λ) separately. If the 
ANN is trained such that the error between the predicted ANN output and the results 
of the full-wave EM solver is small enough in the multidimensional parametric space, 
then ANN behaves as a closed-form surrogate for the full-wave EM solver.

104
S. Kumar and R. Kumar
b. 
Knowledge-Based Neural Networks (KBNNs) 
The key difﬁculty in training the above ANN is running the full-wave EM solver 
many times (let’s say K) to extract the training data and additional problem-speciﬁc 
knowledge needed to speed up the training of the ANN (Bakr et al. 2000) as shown  
in Fig. 7.2. 
The key difﬁculty in training the above ANN is the need to run the full-wave EM 
solver many times (say, K times) to extricate the problem-speciﬁc auxiliary knowl-
edge needed to speed up the training of the ANN (Bakr et al. 2000). Knowledge-based 
neural networks are networks that can be taught to utilize more knowledge to converge 
more quickly. In order to train KBNNs more quickly than conventional ANNs, a 
number of methods have been devised, including source difference, previous knowl-
edge, and space-mapping. The source differencing approach, for instance, considers 
the inter-dependencies between p.u.l. functional components. Empirical models like 
as (Watson et al. 1996) are used to ﬁt R, L, and C matrices on the input vector lamda.
Fig. 7.2 Informed neural networks. a The functional dependence of the error matrices in (7.5) on  
the input variables lamda, as shown by the source difference formalism of KBNNs. b Artiﬁcial neural 
network (ANN) design based on multilayer perceptrons to model error matrices (7.5) 

7
Neural Networks for Fast Design Space Exploration of On-Chip …
105
up er R over Til de equals up er F Sub
script upper R Baseline left parenthesis lamda right parenthesis comma upper L overTilde equals upper F Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis lamda right parenthesis comma upper C overTilde equals upper F Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis lamda right parenthesis
where
S
tartSet up
per R overTilde comma upper L overTilde comma upper C overTilde EndSet
indicate the estimated values for the R, L, and C matrices that may 
be inferred through the empirical models FR(λ), FL(λ), and FC(λ) respectively. The 
empirical model in (7.4) represents auxiliary knowledge about p.u.l. matrices unavail-
able from network-structured quasi-TEM solutions (that is, training data obtained 
from EM solvers). 
StartLayout 1st Row up
per E Subscript upper 
R Baseline left paren
thesis bold lamda right parenthesis equals upper R left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis minus bold upper F Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis semicolon 2nd Row upper E Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis equals upper L left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis minus bold upper F Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis semicolon 3rd Row upper E Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis equals upper C left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis minus bold upper F Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis EndLayout
The norms of the error matrices in (7.5) are the equivalent R, L, and C matrices 
if the ﬁndings of the empirical model in (7.4) agree well with those of the full-wave 
EM solver. Therefore, the ANN needs far less training samples to correctly imitate 
an error matrix of (7.5) than p.u.l. R, L, and C matrices. Because of this, the source 
differencing method suggests ANN instead of p.u.l. R, L, and C matrices to imitate 
the error matrix in (7.5). 
StartLayout 1st Row bo
ld upper R left parenthe
sis bold lamda right pa
renthesis equals bold upper E Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis plus bold upper F Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis semicolon 2nd Row bold upper L left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis equals bold upper E Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis plus bold upper F Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis semicolon 3rd Row bold upper C left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis equals bold upper E Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis plus bold upper F Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis bold lamda right parenthesis EndLayout
where the second component in RHS (7.6) is the well-known empirical model of 
(7.4), and the ﬁrst term is the ANN depiction of the error matrix in (7.5). Figure 7.3 
depicts KBNN, which is the combination of this ANN with the empirical model of 
(7.6). 
Despite KBNNs’ capacity to train quicker than traditional ANNs, their key difﬁ-
culty is the need to know in advance a sufﬁcient empirical model of (7.4). This is 
especially difﬁcult for hybrid Cu-graphene interconnects since the well-established 
empirical model of (7.4), which applies to pure copper interconnects, is grossly wrong
Fig. 7.3 True measures of 
the p. u. l.  R, L, and C 
matrices using the source 
difference formulation in 
Fig. 7.2 

106
S. Kumar and R. Kumar
when dealing with heterogeneous topologies. At now, there is no established empir-
ical template of hybrid Cu-graphene linked networks for training KBNNs. Therefore, 
there is a deﬁciency in the existing research about the viability of KBNN for swift 
design space analysis of hybrid Cu-graphene interlink networks. 
KBNNs for Hybrid Cu-Graphene Interlink Networks 
a. Recognizing Potential Empirical Models for KBNNs 
The paper (Cheng et al. 2018) mentions a closed-form model which was developed 
to estimate the dependence of p.u.l. R, L, and C matrices of the hybrid Cu-graphene 
interlink network for the input variable λ. The resistance of Cu-graphene interconnect 
networks is given as (Cheng et al. 2018): 
StartFraction 1 Over upper R Subscript h y b r i d Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper R Subscript upper C u Baseline EndFraction plus sigma summation Underscript k equals t comma b comma l comma r Endscripts StartFraction 1 Over upper R Subscript g Superscript k Baseline EndFraction
StartFra
ct ion 1 Over upper R Subscript h y b r i d Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper R Subscript upper C u Baseline EndFraction plus sigma summation Underscript k equals t comma b comma l comma r Endscripts StartFraction 1 Over upper R Subscript g Superscript k Baseline EndFraction
Star
t
F
raction 1 
Over upper R Subscript h y b r i d Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper R Subscript upper C u Baseline EndFraction plus sigma summation Underscript k equals t comma b comma l comma r Endscripts StartFraction 1 Over upper R Subscript g Superscript k Baseline EndFraction
Start
Fraction 1 Over upper R Subscript h y b r i d Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over upper R Subscript upper C u Baseline EndFraction plus sigma summation Underscript k equals t comma b comma l comma r Endscripts StartFraction 1 Over upper R Subscript g Superscript k Baseline EndFraction
where the quantities
S
tar
tSet u
pper R
 Subsc
r
ipt g Superscript t Baseline comma upper R Subscript g Superscript b Baseline comma upper R Subscript g Superscript l Baseline comma upper R Subscript g Superscript r Baseline EndSet
in (7.7) mean the upper, lower, left, and right 
graphene resistive layer p.u.l equivalent resistive effects. Following this, the effective 
parameters of capacitance and inductance with respect to every conductor in a hybrid 
connection network are determined as (Zhao et al. 2015): 
StartLay o
u t
 1st Row 
u
ppe
r C
 Sub sc ript h y b r i d Baseline equals left bracket sigma summation Underscript k equals t comma b comma l comma r Endscripts left parenthesis upper C Subscript r e c Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript e Baseline EndFraction right bracket Superscript negative 1 Baseline 2nd Row upper L Subscript h y b r i d Baseline equals left parenthesis sigma summation Underscript k equals t comma b comma l comma r Endscripts StartFraction 1 Over upper L Subscript r e c Superscript k Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper L Subscript e Baseline EndLayout
St
artL
ayout 1s t
 R
ow upper C
 Subscript h y b r i d Baseline equals left bracket sigma summation Underscript k equals t comma b comma l comma r Endscripts left parenthesis upper C Subscript r e c Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript e Baseline EndFraction right bracket Superscript negative 1 Baseline 2nd Row upper L Subscript h y b r i d Baseline equals left parenthesis sigma summation Underscript k equals t comma b comma l comma r Endscripts StartFraction 1 Over upper L Subscript r e c Superscript k Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper L Subscript e Baseline EndLayout
StartL
ayou
t 1st
 Row upper C Subscript h y b r i d Baseline equals left bracket sigma summation Underscript k equals t comma b comma l comma r Endscripts left parenthesis upper C Subscript r e c Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus StartFraction 1 Over upper C Subscript e Baseline EndFraction right bracket Superscript negative 1 Baseline 2nd Row upper L Subscript h y b r i d Baseline equals left parenthesis sigma summation Underscript k equals t comma b comma l comma r Endscripts StartFraction 1 Over upper L Subscript r e c Superscript k Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper L Subscript e Baseline EndLayout
here Ce and Le represent the p.u.l. electrostatic capacitance and magnetic induc-
tance components and upper  L Subscript e Baseline upper C Subscript e Baseline equals mu 0 epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r. The quantities
S
tar
tSet up
er C Sub
script r
 e 
c Superscript t Baseline comma upper C Subscript r e c Superscript b Baseline comma upper C Subscript r e c Superscript r Baseline comma upper C Subscript r e c Superscript l Baseline EndSet
and
S
tar
tSet upp
er L Sub
script r
 e 
c Superscript t Baseline comma upper L Subscript r e c Superscript b Baseline comma upper L Subscript r e c Superscript r Baseline comma upper L Subscript r e c Superscript l Baseline EndSet
in (7.8) for each conductor are the recursive approach used 
to compute the p.u.l. equivalent capacitance and inductance from the top, bottom, 
left, and right sides of the graphene barrier layers as described in Zhao et al. (2015). 
Then, for every potential structure, a set of Ntest testing nodes are selected where 
Ntest = {100, 200, 500, 1000}. An error matrix of (7.5) is computed for each test 
node and a ﬁxed measure of Ntest. The error matrix in (7.5) is then converted to a 
scalar quantity normalized with respect to the nominal p.u.l. parameter as

7
Neural Networks for Fast Design Space Exploration of On-Chip …
107
Sta r
tLayout 1st Row e Subscript upper R Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper R left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 2nd Row e Subscript upper L Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper L left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 3rd Row e Subscript upper C Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper C left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon EndLayout
√StartLayout 1st Row e Subscript upper R Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper R left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 2nd Row e Subscript upper L Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper L left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 3rd Row e Subscript upper C Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper C left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon EndLayout
[
|
|
|
Start
L
a y o
ut 1st Row e 
Sub s
cript upper R Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper R left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 2nd Row e Subscript upper L Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper L left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 3rd Row e Subscript upper C Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper C left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon EndLayout
√StartLayout 1st Row e Subscript upper R Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper R left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 2nd Row e Subscript upper L Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper L left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 3rd Row e Subscript upper C Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper C left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon EndLayout
[
|
|
|
Start
L
a y o
ut 1st Row e 
Sub s
cript upper R Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper R left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 2nd Row e Subscript upper L Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper L left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 3rd Row e Subscript upper C Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper C left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon EndLayout
√StartLayout 1st Row e Subscript upper R Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper R left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 2nd Row e Subscript upper L Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper L left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 3rd Row e Subscript upper C Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper C left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon EndLayout
[
|
|
|
Start
L
a y o
ut 1st Row e 
Subscript upper R Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper R left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 2nd Row e Subscript upper L Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper L left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon 3rd Row e Subscript upper C Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot upper N Subscript test Baseline EndRoot double vertical bar upper C left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis double vertical bar EndFraction StartRoot sigma summation Underscript k equals 1 Overscript upper N Subscript test Baseline Endscripts double vertical bar upper E Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis lamda Subscript upper K Baseline right parenthesis double vertical bar squared EndRoot semicolon EndLayout
where the Frobenius norm is utilized as the matrix norm in (7.9). Applying (7.9)’s 
calculations to a variety of interconnect test conﬁgurations, we may draw the 
following three conclusions as 
(i) Error quantities of (7.9) normally saturate for Ntest = 200. This is justiﬁed 
through the fact that for Ntest ≥ 200, the variation in magnitude of error in (7.9) 
is negligible. 
(ii) For all investigated interconnect test structures, p.u.l. inductance (e Subscript upper L) error  is  
lower than 1%. This suggests that the p.u.l. inductance template described in 
Zhao et al. (2015) is correct in its closed-form approximation, (i.e., FL(λ)) is 
adequately precise in serving as the emulator of a full-wave EM solver (i.e., 
bold upper F Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis lamda right parenthesis almost equals bold upper L left parenthesis lamda right parenthesisor as per the converse double ver tical bar upper E Subscript upper L Baseline left parenthesis lamda right parenthesis double vertical bar almost equals 0). 
(iii) The error regarding p.u.l. resistance (eR) is constant within 4–8% while 
regarding p.u.l. capacitance (eC) precisely within 10–25% for all the distinct 
interlink test structures observed. 
Since the e Subscript upper R and e Subscript upper C errors are not insigniﬁcant, it is anticipated that the p.u.l. 
R, L, and C matrices of hybrid Cu-graphene interlink networks cannot be predicted 
directly using the closed-form models of Cheng et al. (2018). However, the closed-
form templates in Cheng et al. (2018) aren’t ruled out as viable empirical templates 
in (7.4) since the quantities of errors e Subscript upper R and e Subscript upper C aren’t too huge in (7.5). This crucial 
feature of the closed-form models of Cheng et al. (2018) makes them attractive for 
training KBNNs—something that is not known about the work of Cheng et al. (2018). 
Numerical Example 
Here, we demonstrate how the proposed KBNN can be used to conduct design 
space survey for hybrid Cu-graphene interconnects with improved accuracy and 
numerical efﬁciency compared to traditional ANNs and the closed-form models in 
Cheng et al. (2018). The commercial full-wave EM solver ANSYS Q3D Extractor 
is used to collect the training data for this purpose. All of the three-layer ANNs 
and KBNNs implemented in some illustrated instances were constructed, trained, 
and evaluated with the help of MATLAB R2019a machine-learning toolbox. As

108
S. Kumar and R. Kumar
illustrated in Fig. 7.4, we take into account an MTL network with three lines of Cu-
graphene hybrid conductors. Lines 1 and 3 are activated by a saturated ramp voltage 
source with a rise time Tr = 0.1 ps and an amplitude of 1 V, respectively. Table 7.1 
displays the design parameters used in this instance. Analyzing the data shown in 
Table 7.1, one can infer that N = 5 dimensions are needed for this example’s design 
space. 
The ﬁrst section of this example employs the full-wave ANSYS Q3D Extractor 
tool, a traditional ANN, and suggested KBNN to extract p.u.l. RLC attributes for 
the network are shown in Fig. 7.4. The closed model of Cheng et al. (2018) has 
errors of eL = 0.66%, eR = 3.63%, and eC = 11.85%. Just because such errors 
are relatively small, we expect the closed model of Cheng et al. (2018) to serve as 
a valid empirical model. Importantly, this example assumes that the closed model
Fig. 7.4 a Schematic of Hybrid copper and graphene interconnects b Interconnect with driver and 
load circuits

7
Neural Networks for Fast Design Space Exploration of On-Chip …
109
Table 7.1 Design parameters for the network 
Design attributes
Nominal measures ( nm)
% Variable perimeter 
1
Width (w)
13.7
±10% 
2
Thickness (t)
27.31 
3
Spacing (S)
13 
4
Height of interconnect from GDN 
layer (h1) 
26 
5
Barrier layer thickness (tgr)
0.83
of Cheng et al. (2018) for matrix L exactly emulates the ANSYS Q3D extraction 
tool. However, e Subscript upper R and e Subscript upper C are not trivial mistakes, necessitating the use of ANNs to 
simulate their error matrices ER(λ) and EC(λ). 
By thoroughly exploration of all the above ANNs, it is conceived that when it 
comes to ANNs, a hyperbolic tangent function makes for the ideal activation function. 
Regular ANN training calls for 3 hidden neurons and 4000 epochs. However, an ANN 
mimicking error matrices upper E Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis lamda right parenthesisand uper E Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis lamda right parenthesisonly needed 500 epochs to train and 3 
hidden neurons. Each ANN’s training phase involves an incremental increase in the 
number of training nodes: Nt = [15, 25, 35, 70, 140, 350, 700, 1000]. 500 test nodes 
are randomly chosen in the design space without crossing into the area occupied by 
the training nodes. 
Figure 7.5 illustrates the relationship between the test error and the number of 
training nodes (Nt) for the suggested KBNN and the traditional ANN. The selected 
settings increase the error between the closed model of Cheng et al. (2018) and 
the results anticipated by ANSYS Q3D Extractor. This indicates that mimicking 
the matrices upper E Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis lamda right parenthesisand upper E Subscript upper C Baseline left parenthesis lamda right parenthesisfor these parameters is the most challenging (i.e., it 
takes the most training nodes) and thus, the suggested KBNNs exhibit the slowest 
convergence. Now, Fig. 7.5 demonstrates that for the same number of training nodes 
(upper N Subscript t), the suggested KBNNs are consistently capable of attaining a lower testing error 
norm than the traditional ANNs of Fig. 7.1a. This data conspicuously demonstrates 
that the suggested KBNNs have a quicker convergence rate than standard ANNs. In 
fact, Fig. 7.5 reveals that if a minute error perimeter of 2% is required while computing 
the p.u.l. attributes of the hybrid Cu-graphene interlink network of Fig. 7.4, the  
suggested KBNNs entail roughly P = 25 training nodes as opposed to the traditional 
ANNs in Fig. 7.1a, which entail roughly Q = 125 training nodes. It indicates that 
the proposed KBNNs will give a training speedup of Q/P = 5 times that of standard 
ANNs. It is a decrease of 80% with respect to count of training samples required to 
obtain equivalent inaccuracy. SPICE-based design space explorations are then done 
to evaluate the precision of the suggested KBNNs and collate it to that provided by 
traditional ANNs.
The short-term crosstalk behavior at node N2 in Fig. 7.4 is ﬁrst predicted using the 
HSPICE W element template at two random design spots, having lamda equals[0.54 −0.91 
0.49 −0.90 −0.39] or lamda equals[−0.97 −0.67 0.45 0.25 0.95]. The W element template’s 
parameters are retrieved using the KBNN, standard ANN, and closed-form models

110
S. Kumar and R. Kumar
Fig. 7.5 Comparing the 
convergence of proposed 
KBNNs with conventional 
ANNs a Scaling of testing 
error norm with respect to 
number of training nodes for 
R11. b Scaling of testing 
error norm with respect to 
number of training nodes for 
C12
suggested in Cheng et al. (2018). Figure 7.6 illustrates the imprecision of the closed-
form model (Cheng et al. 2018) through transient ﬁndings acquired using all three 
approaches. Because of this, the model presented in Cheng et al. (2018) cannot be 
used directly to examine the design spectrum of hybrid Cu-graphene networks. On 
the other hand, Fig. 7.6 demonstrates that the ﬁndings of the suggested KBNN are in 
excellent agreement with those of the standard ANN, even though they were trained 
from atleast Q/P = 5 times fewer nodes. As a result, the suggested KBNN becomes 
very attractive to use for design space exploration.
Finally, we utilize the HSPICE W-Element template for doing a full search of the 5-
dimensional design spectrum with ten-thousand symmetrically sampled points. Each 
sample point’s W-element model parameters are retrieved using the aforementioned

7
Neural Networks for Fast Design Space Exploration of On-Chip …
111
Fig. 7.6 Accuracy 
comparison of proposed 
KBNNs, conventional ANNs 
with models in Cheng et al. 
(2018); Transient Response 
at N2 for a lamda= [0.54 −0.91 
0.49 −0.90 −0.39] b lamda= 
[−0.97 −0.67 0.45 0.25 
0.95]
three techniques. Three crucial signal integrity (SI) qualities are tracked during the 
design space sweep: the maximal crosstalk at node N2, the rising time of the transient 
response at node N1, and the settling time of the transient response at node N1. When 
comparing the ﬁndings produced from the standard ANN to those acquired from the 
proposed KBNN, Fig. 7.6 shows the RMS errors reported for the SI values above 
using the closed model of Cheng et al. (2018). 
Finally, 10,000 evenly spaced sample points are utilized to do a full sweep of the 
5-dimensional design spectrum using the HSPICE W-element template. The same 
three procedures are used to extract the p.u.l. attributes concerning the W-element 
template at each sample spot. Time consumption for the response at node N1 to rise 
from 0.1V to 0.9V (the rise time), time taken for response in node N1 to reach 0.5V 
(the time delay), and the peak crosstalk with respect to the response at node N2 are 
3 crucial SI entities measured during the design space sweep. Table 7.2 displays the

112
S. Kumar and R. Kumar
root-mean-square error (RMS) reported for the aforementioned SI values produced 
using the suggested KBNNs along with the closed-form models from Cheng et al. 
(2018) in comparison to the results gathered through the traditional ANNs in Fig. 7.1a. 
Additionally, Table 7.2 also displays the total CPU time spent exploring design space 
for each approach. Time spent on processing the training data and carrying out the 
optimization are included in this overall CPU cost. To compute p.u.l. set attributes for 
each design point and conduct a SPICE simulation at that design point, the suggested 
KBNN requires Ne = 500 epochs, whereas the traditional ANN requires Ne = 4000 
epochs. 
The suggested KBNN produces comparable errors (less than 3% error) to the 
standard ANN, but with substantially reduced CPU cost, as shown in Table 7.2, 
which also shows that the speedup gained by KBNN compared to traditional ANN 
is somewhat lower than the predicted Q/P = 5 times. Reasonable, here we taking 
into account the expense of training in terms of time. Here, we calculate the total 
amount of CPU time spent on a ten-thousand-point design space coverage using a 
SPICE simulation, and we see that KBNN has no effect on this time. Meanwhile, 
the suggested KBNN is substantially slower than the closed-form model in Cheng 
et al. (2018), but the latter results in much greater errors for all three SI values. This 
exempliﬁes how the proposed KBNN outperforms both traditional ANN and the 
work of Cheng et al. (2018).
Table 7.2 Comparing the precision and numerical efﬁcacy of proposed KBNNs to traditional ANN 
along with closed-form models of Cheng et al. (2018) 
SI 
quantitites 
for example 
1 
Suggested KBNNs (P = 25)
Closed-form model of Cheng et al. 
(2018) 
Mean 
squared 
error (%) 
CPU time 
(min) 
Speedup 
compared to 
traditional 
ANNs (Q = 
125) 
Mean 
squared 
error (%) 
CPU time 
(min) 
Speedup 
compared to 
traditional 
ANNs (Q = 
125) 
Node 
response 
time rise N1 
2.904
103.352
4.713
11.884
20.8
24.341 
Response 
delay time 
at node N1 
2.526
11.713 
Peak 
crosstalk for 
response at 
node N2 
1.052
13.091 

7
Neural Networks for Fast Design Space Exploration of On-Chip …
113
Summary 
In this chapter, we develop a neural network to rapidly explore the layout 
options regarding hybrid Cu-graphene interlink networks on integrated circuits. This 
chapter’s cardinal handout is the spotting of the closed model of Cheng et al. (2018) 
as a thoroughly efﬁcacious empirical model, which are utilized in the efﬁcient extrac-
tion of information about the effects of geometric, material, and physical dimensions 
of interconnect structures on p.u.l. R, L, C attributes. When combined with data gath-
ered through full-wave EM solvers with the received information, this helps tradi-
tional ANNs learn faster. Such ANNs are called knowledge-based neural networks 
(KBNN). 
References 
Achar R, Nakhla MS (2001) Simulation of high-speed interconnects. Proc IEEE 89(5):693–728 
Bakr MH, Bandler JW, Ismail MA, Rayas-Sánchez JE, Zhang QJ (2000) Neural space-mapping 
optimization for EM-based design. IEEE Trans Microw Theory Tech 48(12): 2307–2315 
Cheng Z et al (2018) Analysis of Cu-graphene interconnects. IEEE Access 6:53499–53508 
Meindl JD (2001) Interconnect limits on gigascale integration (GSI). In: 2001 6th international 
symposium on plasma- and process-induced damage (IEEE Cat. No.01TH8538) 
Park H et al (2020) Deep reinforcement learning-based optimal decoupling capacitor design method 
for silicon interposer-based 2.5-D/3-D ICs. IEEE Trans Components, Packaging Manuf Technol 
10(3):467–478 
Paul CR (2007) Analysis of multiconductor transmission lines. Wiley 
Steinhögl W, Schindler G, Steinlesberger G, Traving M, Engelhardt M (2004) Comprehensive study 
of the resistivity of copper wires with lateral dimensions of 100 nm and smaller. J Appl Phys 
97(2): 023706 
Todri-Sanial A, Dijon J, Maffucci A (2017) Carbon nanotubes for Interconnects. Springer 
Torun HM, Durgun AC, Aygün K, Swaminathan M (2020) Causal and passive parameterization of 
s-parameters using neural networks. IEEE Trans Microw Theory Tech 68(10):4290–4304 
Watson PM, Gupta KC (1996) EM-ANN models for microstrip vias and interconnects in dataset 
circuits. IEEE Trans Microw Theory Tech 44(12): 2495–2503 
Yang LY, Zhang DH, Li CY, Foo PD (2004) Comparative study of Ta, TaN and Ta/TaN bi-layer 
barriers for Cu-ultra low-k porous polymer integration. Thin Solid Films 462–463: 176–181 
Zhao W, Wang D, Wang G, Yin W (2015) Electrical modeling of on-chip cu-graphene heterogeneous 
interconnects. IEEE Electron Device Lett 36(1):74–76 
Zhang QJ et al (2003) Artiﬁcial neural networks for RF and microwave design—from theory to 
practice 51(4): 1339–1350 
Zhang QJ, Gupta KC (2000) Neural networks for RF and microwave design (Book+ Neuromodeler 
Disk). Artech House, Inc.

Chapter 8 
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging 
Variants of Swarm Intelligence 
for Circuits and Systems 
Surendra Hemaram, Aksh Chordia, and Jai Narayan Tripathi 
Abstract With the growing complexity in semiconductor technology, the design 
and optimization of VLSI circuits are automated with a high degree of reliability 
and precision. There are many applications of VLSI circuits and systems that require 
solving optimization problems of large-scale degrees. While analytical methods may 
suffer from slow convergence and the curse of dimensionality, metaheuristics-based 
swarm intelligence algorithms are proven to be an efﬁcient alternative. This chapter 
presents the applications of emerging swarm intelligence-based techniques for the 
optimization of VLSI circuits and systems. In this chapter, the recent advances in 
particle swarm optimization algorithms are used to solve the optimization problem 
encountered in the VLSI industry. The efﬁcacy of these algorithms is illustrated 
using two practical case studies. The ﬁrst case study is related to the design of a 
2.4 GHz CMOS LC tank oscillator, and the second one is optimizing a practical power 
delivery network. A comparative analysis of the performances of these algorithms 
is presented. This study helps the reader to choose an appropriate PSO optimization 
algorithm for their required application. 
Keywords VLSI circuits and systems · Swarm intelligence · Variants of particle 
swarm optimization 
S. Hemaram · A. Chordia (B) · J. N. Tripathi 
Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, India 
e-mail: chordia.2@iitj.ac.in 
S. Hemaram 
e-mail: surendra.1@iitj.ac.in 
J. N. Tripathi 
e-mail: jai@iitj.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_8 
115

116
S. Hemaram et al.
Introduction 
The continuous scaling down of switching devices increases the complexity of 
modern-day Integrated Circuits (ICs). The design and optimization of Very Large-
Scale Integration (VLSI) circuits have become complex with increasing complexity. 
Due to the downscaling of the devices, the sensitivity of circuit response to techno-
logical variation increases. For getting a high parametric yield, it is very important 
to reduce the performance variations so that VLSI circuits with close tolerance can 
be manufactured. Thus, computational intelligence techniques emerge to fulﬁll this 
requirement for optimizing the technological parameter values (Hocevar et al. 1988; 
Hoenigschmid et al. 1997; Chen et al. 2000; Rutenbar et al. 2007; Lyu et al. 2018). 
These techniques formulate the design problems as constrained optimization prob-
lems to optimize the technological parameters in circuits. 
The primary issue lying in optimization is searching for the global optimum 
results, for which swarm intelligence-based algorithms are proven to be effec-
tive. One of these algorithms, namely the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), 
is a widely popular swarm intelligence-based metaheuristic optimization algo-
rithm (Kennedy and Eberhart 1995). The PSO is proven to be one of the prominent 
optimization algorithms in the ﬁeld of VLSI circuits and systems (Park and Allstot 
2004; Park et al. 2004; Kamisetty et al. 2011; Khan and Khalifa 2011; Sabat et al. 
2009; Tripathi et al. 2013; Kim et al. 2018; Hussein and Jarndal 2018; Garbaya et al. 
2018). PSO is becoming more popular, because of its relatively fast convergence, 
ease of implementation, and has more effective memory capacity (del Valle et al. 
2008). In this chapter, the applications of different PSO variants are demonstrated 
to solve the practical problems of circuits and systems. The recent advances in PSO 
techniques have resulted in various variants of the standard PSO algorithm having 
a better performance. The recently introduced PSO variants used in this chapter are 
Linear Decreasing Inertia Weight PSO (LDIW-PSO), Chaos Enhanced PSO (CE-
PSO), Adaptive Inertia Weight PSO (AIW-PSO), and Gaussian Quantum Behaved 
PSO (GQPSO). The efﬁcacy of these algorithms is performed using two practical 
case studies; one is at the system level, and another one is at the circuit level. This 
study also employs two population-based state-of-the-art metaheuristic optimization 
algorithms, namely real coded genetic algorithm (GA) and differential evolution 
(DE), and their comparison with different PSO variants for a holistic analysis (Man 
et al. 1996; Deb and Kumar 1995; Deb and Deb 2014; Chuang et al. 2016; Storn and 
Price 1997; Das and Suganthan 2011). 
There are two case studies presented for the purpose of comparison and bench-
marking. The ﬁrst case study is a circuit-level problem that is related to the design 
of a 2.4 GHz CMOS LC tank oscillator with minimized phase noise. This circuit 
is considered for study as the oscillators are integral parts of almost all VLSI cir-
cuits having essential applications in phase-locked loops, clock recovery circuits, 
frequency synthesizers, etc. The most important quality metric of these oscillators is 
phase noise which is deﬁned as the noise power relative to the carrier power occurring 
at a particular offset frequency away from the carrier frequency (Lee and Hajimiri

8
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Variants …
117
2000). Here, the automated framework of optimization using PSO variants is used 
to minimize oscillator phase noise. 
The second case study is a system-level problem related to optimizing the power 
delivery network (PDN) to minimize supply noise. In general, as a solution to this 
problem, decoupling capacitors are used to minimize the supply noise by minimizing 
the cumulative impedance of PDN (Swaminathan and Engin 2007). When the num-
ber of capacitors and the number of the port for placing them is more, then intuitive 
selections and placements of decoupling capacitors become very difﬁcult in design-
ing a PDN. In such cases, the importance of optimization algorithms becomes crucial 
to solving this problem. In the literature, there are several methodologies available 
for the optimal selection and placement of decoupling capacitors using different 
optimization techniques (Kahng 2006; Piersanti et al. 2018; Choi and Swaminathan 
2011; Tripathi et al. 2014; Erdin and Achar 2019; Xu et al. 2020). Here, the cumu-
lative impedance of PDN is minimized by optimal selections and placements of 
decoupling capacitors by the different strategies of PSO. 
The main contributions of this chapter can be summarized as 
1. The chapter provides an insight to recent and emerging variants of the PSO algo-
rithms and their applications for the optimization of Circuits and Systems. Two 
diverse case studies of optimization are presented to compare and benchmark 
these algorithms. Passive design. 
2. It introduces an efﬁcient strategy of optimization for the circuits and system-
level problems. For the circuits level, a framework is developed that interfaces 
the simulation engine (Cadence-Spectre) and equation engine (MATLAB) in real 
time. The circuit is implemented in the simulation engine, and the optimization 
algorithm is implemented in the equation engine. Such an optimization strategy 
is generic in nature and can easily be extended for the optimization of the other 
case studies as well. 
3. A comparative analysis of the performance of these algorithms is presented. Also, 
other state-of-the-art optimization strategies like Genetic Algorithm and Differ-
ential Evolution methods have been considered for solving the problem to prove 
the efﬁcacy of PSO-based optimization. 
4. Such a ubiquitous demonstration interests the reader as this optimization problem 
and its implementation are generic in nature and can be extended to any other 
optimization problem easily. 
Particle Swarm Optimization 
Particle swarm optimization (PSO) is a class of swarm intelligence-based metaheuris-
tic techniques invented by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995 (Kennedy and Eberhart 
1995; Shi and Eberhart 1998). The PSO is a population-based optimization algorithm 
simulating swarm behavior such as ﬁsh and bird schooling. In PSO, swarms are also

118
S. Hemaram et al.
called particles, and these particles move toward the optimum position by following 
a speciﬁc trajectory based upon their memory. 
The algorithms start with random initialization of the population within the deﬁned 
search space. As time progresses, a particle moves its position in the search space 
based on two factors: its best position so far (‘local best’ or ‘lbest’) and the best 
position obtained by any particle so far (‘global best’ or ‘gbest’). The new positions 
and velocities of all the particles are deﬁned based on these two equations and are 
given as follows: 
v Subscript i d Superscript k plus 1 Baseline equals v Subscript i d Superscript k Baseline plus r 1 c 1 left parenthesis x Subscript i d Superscript p Baseline minus x Subscript i d Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis plus r 2 c 2 left parenthesis x Subscript d Superscript g Baseline minus x Subscript i d Superscript k Baseline right parenthesisvk+1
id
= vk
id + r1c1(x p
id −xk
id) + r2c2(xg
d −xk
id)
(8.1) 
x Subscript i d Superscript k plus 1 Baseline equals x Subscript i d Superscript k Baseline plus v Subscript i d Superscript k plus 1xk+1
id
= xk
id + vk+1
id
(8.2) 
where nn represents population size, the maximum number of iterations is denoted 
by upper NN, upper DD represents the number of dimensions, i.e. d equals 1 comma 2 comma ellipsis comma upper Dd = 1, 2, . . . , D; kk represents 
the current iteration, x Subscript i d Superscript px p
id represents local best of each particle and x Subscript d Superscript gxg
d is the current 
global best, c 1c1 and c 2c2 are acceleration coefﬁcients, and r 1r1 and r 2r2 represent random 
numbers in the interval (0, 1). The steps for PSO are summarized as a pseudocode 
in Algorithm 8.1 (Kennedy and Eberhart 1995; Shi and Eberhart 1998). 
Algorithm 8.1 PSO 
1: begin 
2: Objective function f , initialize  v and x for n particles having D number of dimensions, deﬁne 
maximum number of iterations N. 
3: Calculate the initial minimum ﬁtness f k=0 
min . 
4: while (k < N ) 
5:
for i = 1, 2, . . . ,  n do 
6:
for d = 1, 2, . . . ,  D do 
7:
Update the velocity (v) and position (x). 
8:
end for 
9:
Calculate f at new position xk+1 
id . 
10:
Compute minimum ﬁtness f k+1 
min . 
11:
end for 
12:
Compute the current personal best x p 
id. 
13:
Compute the current global best xg 
d and f (xg 
d ). 
14: end while 
15: Output: xg 
d and f (xg 
d ). 
16: end 
Recent Advances in Particle Swarm Optimization 
In this section, different variants of the PSO are brieﬂy discussed. The different 
variants of PSO used in this chapter are Linear Decreasing Inertia Weight PSO 
(LDIW-PSO), Chaos Enhanced PSO (CE-PSO), Adaptive Inertia Weight PSO (AIW-
PSO), and Gaussian Quantum Behaved PSO (GQPSO).

8
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Variants …
119
Linear Decreasing Inertia Weight PSO 
The inertia weight in PSO is able to control the global exploration and local exploita-
tion abilities. The inertia weight strategy in PSO was introduced in Shi and Eberhart 
(1998). PSO with linearly decreasing inertia weight (LDIW-PSO) is endorsed in Shi 
and Eberhart (1998), Xin et al. (2009), Shi and Eberhart (1999) due to its good per-
formance over a large number of optimization problems. The velocity and position 
vector for inertia weight PSO is deﬁned as follows: 
v Subscript i d Superscript k plus 1 Baseline equals w v Subscript i d Superscript k Baseline plus r 1 c 1 left parenthesis x Subscript i d Superscript p Baseline minus x Subscript i d Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis plus r 2 c 2 left parenthesis x Subscript d Superscript g Baseline minus x Subscript i d Superscript k Baseline right parenthesisvk+1
id
= w vk
id + r1c1(x p
id −xk
id) + r2c2(xg
d −xk
id)
(8.3) 
x Subscript i d Superscript k plus 1 Baseline equals x Subscript i d Superscript k Baseline plus v Subscript i d Superscript k plus 1xk+1
id
= xk
id + vk+1
id
(8.4) 
where ww represents the inertia weight and the remaining parameters are similar to 
the classical PSO algorithm. 
In linear decreasing inertia weight (LDIW) strategy, weight is a function of maxi-
mum number of iterations as well as current time step (i.e. iteration), and it is deﬁned 
as follows (Xin et al. 2009): 
w equals w Subscript f Baseline plus left parenthesis w Subscript i Baseline minus w Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis times StartFraction upper N minus k Over upper N EndFractionw = w f + (wi −w f ) × N −k
N
(8.5) 
where upper NN represents the maximum number of iterations, w Subscript iwi and w Subscript fw f represent the 
initial and ﬁnal inertial weights, respectively, andkk denotes the current iteration. The 
steps to implement LDIW-PSO are similar to Algorithm 8.1 with updated velocity 
Eq. (8.3) which incorporates the inertia weight strategy deﬁne by Eq. (8.5). 
Chaos Enhanced PSO 
Chaos is a bounded unstable dynamic behavior that shows sensitive dependency 
on initial conditions and includes inﬁnite unstable periodic movements in nonlinear 
systems. Chaos mechanism became a very helpful mechanism to avoid the PSO from 
getting trapped into the local optimum in a searching process (Alatas et al. 2009; 
Feng et al. 2007). The basic idea of chaos-based PSO is the incorporation of chaotic 
mapping to the inertia weight coefﬁcient. In general, logistic mapping is used as 
chaotic mapping, and it is deﬁned as follows (Feng et al. 2007): 
y Subscript k plus 1 Baseline equals y Subscript k Baseline times left parenthesis 1 minus y Subscript k Baseline right parenthesis muyk+1 = yk × (1 −yk)μ
(8.6) 
where 3.57 less than< muμ less than or equals≤4. 
Generally, mu equals 4μ = 4 is used in the logistic mapping. But it does not assure chaos on 
initial values ofy 0y0element of∈left parenthesis 0 comma 0.25 comma 0.5 comma 0.75 comma 1 right parenthesis(0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1) that may arise during the initial generation 
process (Hong et al. 2016). In chaos enhanced PSO (CE-PSO), an enhanced version

120
S. Hemaram et al.
of chaotic inertia weight is used which employs sine chaotic mapping (Hong et al. 
2016; Arasomwan and Adewumi 2014). 
The inertia weight strategies for CE-PSO are given as follows (Hong et al. 2016): 
• Choose the random number rr in the interval (0, 1) and make y 0 equals ry0 = r. 
• Formulate the chaotic mapping as 
y Subscript k plus 1 Baseline equals StartAbsoluteValue sine left parenthesis StartFraction pi y Subscript k Baseline Over r EndFraction right parenthesis EndAbsoluteValueyk+1 = | sin (πyk
r )|
(8.7) 
wherey Subscript k Baseline comma y Subscript k plus 1 Baseline element of left parenthesis 0 comma 1 right parenthesisyk, yk+1 ∈(0, 1),kk is current iteration, andrr represents the random number 
in the interval (0, 1). The absolute sign in the expression ensures that the next 
iteration process in chaos space has y Subscript k plus 1 Baseline element of left parenthesis 0 comma 1 right parenthesisyk+1 ∈(0, 1). 
• Formulate the inertia weight ww as follows: 
w equals 0.5 times r plus 0.5 times y Subscript k plus 1w = 0.5 × r + 0.5 × yk+1
(8.8) 
The steps to implement the CE-PSO are similar to Algorithm 8.1 with updated 
velocity Eq. (8.3) which incorporates the inertia weight strategy deﬁne by Eq. (8.8). 
Adaptive Inertia Weight PSO 
The aim of adaptive inertia weight PSO (AIW-PSO) is also to enhance the exploration 
and exploitation ability of PSO algorithms. The exploration means the ability of the 
algorithm to abandon the current peak and search for better solutions. The exploita-
tion characteristic of PSO states that all the particles converge to the same peak and 
remain there. To have an adaptive inertia weight strategy, ﬁrstly, it is required to 
determine the swarm situation at each iteration. The adaptive inertia weight (AIW) 
strategy involves the concept of particle success rate, which acts as a feedback quan-
tity to discover the swarm’s position in the search space. 
The success of particle ii at iteration kk in a minimization problem is deﬁned as 
follows (Nickabadi et al. 2011): 
upper S left parenthesis i comma k right parenthesis equals StartLayout Enlarged left brace 1st Row 1st Column 1 comma 2nd Column if f left parenthesis p b e s t Subscript i d Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis less than or equals f left parenthesis p b e s t Subscript i d Superscript k minus 1 Baseline right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column 0 comma 2nd Column if f left parenthesis p b e s t Subscript i d Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis equals f left parenthesis p b e s t Subscript i d Superscript k minus 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndLayoutS(i, k) =
{
1, if f (pbestk
id) ≤f (pbestk−1
id )
0, if f (pbestk
id) = f (pbestk−1
id )
(8.9) 
wherep b e s t Subscript i d Superscript kpbestk
id is the best position found by particleii until iterationkk, i.e.left parenthesis x Subscript i d Superscript p Baseline right parenthesis(x p
id), and 
d equals 1 comma 2 comma ellipsis comma upper Dd = 1, 2, . . . , D is variable for dimension space. The success percentage of a swarm 
is calculated using this success value and is deﬁned as 
upper P Subscript s Baseline left parenthesis k right parenthesis equals StartFraction sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript n Endscripts upper S left parenthesis i comma k right parenthesis Over n EndFractionPs(k) =
Σn
i=1 S(i, k)
n
(8.10)

8
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Variants …
121
where nn represents the number of particles and upper P Subscript s Baseline element of left parenthesis 0 comma 1 right parenthesisPs ∈(0, 1) is success percentage of 
the swarm. The inertia weightww can be formulated as a function ofupper P Subscript sPs and is deﬁned 
as follows (Nickabadi et al. 2011): 
w equals w Subscript f Baseline plus left parenthesis w Subscript i Baseline minus w Subscript f Baseline right parenthesis times upper P Subscript sw = w f + (wi −w f ) × Ps
(8.11) 
where w Subscript iwi and w Subscript fw f represent the initial and ﬁnal inertia weight, respectively. 
The steps to implement the AIW-PSO are summarized as a pseudocode in 
Algorithm 8.2 (Nickabadi et al. 2011). 
Algorithm 8.2 AIW-PSO 
1: begin 
2: Initialize the velocity v and location x of n particles having D dimensions (d = 1, 2, . . . ,  D), 
deﬁne the maximum number of iterations N . 
3: Initialize personal best to current position of particle, x p 
id = xid. 
4: Calculate the initial global best xg 
d . 
5: Initialize inertia weight function w = 1. 
6: while (k < N) 
7:
S = 0.  
8:
for i = 1, 2, . . . ,  n 
9:
for d = 1, 2, . . . ,  D 
10:
Update Velocity (v) and Position (x). 
11:
end for 
12:
if ( f (xid ) <  f (x p 
id )) 
13:
S = S + 1 
14:
Update personal best x p 
id = xid. 
15:
if ( f (xid ) <  f (xg 
d )). 
16:
Update global best xg 
d = xid . 
17:
end if 
18:
end if 
19:
end for 
20:
Compute: PS = S 
n and Update inertia weight (8.11). 
21: end while 
22: end 
Gaussian Quantum Behaved PSO 
The quantum-behaved PSO was developed by Sun et al. (2011). In the quantum 
model of a PSO, the situation of a particle is obtained by a wave function psi left parenthesis x comma k right parenthesisψ(x, k)
(Schrödinger equation) instead of computation of the position (xx) and velocity (vv) 
vectors. In this context, the probability of the particle appearing in position x Subscript ixi is 
given by the probability density function StartAbsoluteValue psi left parenthesis x comma k right parenthesis EndAbsoluteValue squared|ψ(x, k)|2, the form of which depends on 
the potential ﬁeld the particle lies in. The quantum-PSO algorithm has been shown to 
solve a wide range of continuous optimization problems successfully, and many efﬁ-

122
S. Hemaram et al.
cient strategies have been proposed to improve the algorithm (Mikki and Kishk 2006; 
Omkar et al. 2009; dos Santos Coelho 2008). In Gaussian quantum PSO (GQPSO), 
random numbers are generated using the absolute value of Gaussian probability 
distribution with zero mean and unit variance, i.e. upper G equals StartAbsoluteValue left parenthesis upper N left parenthesis 0 comma 1 right parenthesis right parenthesis EndAbsoluteValueG = |(N(0, 1))| instead of the 
uniform probability distribution functions in the range (0, 1). Generating random 
numbers using the Gaussian probability distribution function for the stochastic coef-
ﬁcients of PSO may provide a good compromise between the probability of having 
a large number of small amplitudes around the current points and a small probabil-
ity of having higher amplitudes, which may allow particles to move away from the 
current point and escape from local minima. The update of the position of particles 
in GQPSO is given as follows (Sun et al. 2011; Coelho 2010): 
x Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis k plus 1 right parenthesis equals StartLayout Enlarged left brace 1st Row 1st Column upper P Subscript l Baseline plus beta period StartAbsoluteValue upper M b e s t Subscript i Baseline minus x Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis k right parenthesis EndAbsoluteValue period ln left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper G EndFraction right parenthesis comma 2nd Column if r greater than or equals 0.5 2nd Row 1st Column upper P Subscript l Baseline minus beta period StartAbsoluteValue upper M b e s t Subscript i Baseline minus x Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis k right parenthesis EndAbsoluteValue period ln left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over upper G EndFraction right parenthesis comma 2nd Column if r less than 0.5 EndLayoutxi(k + 1) =
{
Pl + β.|Mbesti −xi(k)|. ln( 1
G ), if r ≥0.5
Pl −β.|Mbesti −xi(k)|. ln( 1
G ), if r < 0.5
(8.12) 
whereupper G equals StartAbsoluteValue left parenthesis upper N left parenthesis 0 comma 1 right parenthesis right parenthesis EndAbsoluteValueG = |(N(0, 1))|,betaβ is contraction–expansion coefﬁcient,rr is random number 
in the interval (0, 1), and theupper M b e s tMbest is mean of personal bestleft parenthesis x Subscript i Superscript p Baseline right parenthesis(x p
i ) position of all the 
particles and it can be deﬁned as follows: 
upper M b e s t Subscript i Baseline equals StartFraction 1 Over upper N EndFraction sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript n Endscripts x Subscript i Superscript p Baseline left parenthesis k right parenthesisMbesti = 1
N
n
Σ
i=1
x p
i (k)
(8.13) 
upper P Subscript lPl is local attractor and is deﬁned as follows: 
upper P Subscript l Baseline equals StartFraction upper G x Subscript i d Superscript p Baseline plus g x Subscript d Superscript g Baseline Over upper G plus g EndFractionPl = G x p
id + g xg
d
G + g
(8.14) 
where g equals StartAbsoluteValue left parenthesis upper N left parenthesis 0 comma 1 right parenthesis right parenthesis EndAbsoluteValueg = |(N(0, 1))|, x Subscript i d Superscript px p
id is personal best, x Subscript d Superscript gxg
d is global best, d equals 1 comma 2 comma ellipsis comma upper Dd = 1, 2, . . . , D and 
i equals 1 comma 2 comma ellipsis comma ni = 1, 2, . . . , n. 
The steps for GQPSO are summarized as a pseudocode in Algorithm 8.3 (Sun 
et al. 2011; Coelho 2010). 
Case Studies 
In this section, two case studies which are used as examples for the purpose of 
benchmarking are explained. Both case studies are having practical relevance in the 
VLSI industry—one at the circuit level and another one at the system level.

8
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Variants …
123
Algorithm 8.3 GQPSO 
1: begin 
1: Objective function f , initialize x for n particles having D dimensions (d = 1, 2, . . . ,  D), deﬁne  
N. 
2: Calculate the initial minimum ﬁtness f k=0 
min . 
3: while (k < N) 
4:
for i = 1, 2, . . . ,  n do 
5:
Update the position as follows: 
6:
if r ≥ 0.5 
7:
xid (k + 1) = Pl + β.|Mbestid − xid (k)|.ln( 1 
G ) 
8:
else 
9:
xid (k + 1) = Pl − β.|Mbestid − xid (k)|.ln( 1 
G ) 
10:
end if 
11:
Calculate f at new position xi (k + 1). 
12:
Compute minimum ﬁtness f k+1 
min . 
13:
end for 
14:
Compute the current personal best x p 
id. 
15:
Compute the current global best xg 
d and f (xg 
d ). 
16: end while 
17: Output: xg 
d and f (xg 
d ). 
18: end 
Case Study I: Phase Noise Minimization in an Oscillator 
Circuit Description 
In most of the VLSI systems, oscillators fulﬁll the clock signal requirements. An 
important class of oscillators is CMOS LC tank oscillators that are widely used for 
their relative ease of implementation and superior output characteristics such as jitter 
and phase noise (Lee and Hajimiri 2000; Hajimiri and Lee 1998). This case study 
aims to improve the phase noise quality of a 2.4 GHz cross-coupled CMOS LC tank 
oscillator as shown in Fig. 8.1. Phase noise is deﬁned as the irregularities in the phase 
of the periodic output signal arising due to short-term ﬂuctuations (Koukab 2011; Lee  
and Hajimiri 2000). It is represented as the noise power relative to the carrier power, 
measured at a certain offset frequency away from the carrier frequency. Phase noise 
in an oscillator directly disturbs the timing accuracy and affects the signal-to-noise 
ratio as well (Hajimiri and Lee 1998; Tripathi et al. 2011). 
It is worth noting that phase noise of oscillators is directly affected by the lengths 
and widths of the constituting transistors along with inductor and capacitor val-
ues (Tripathi et al. 2011). Hence, this study aims to optimize the phase noise when 
these parameters are varied within a predeﬁned design space. Here, the objective 
function, i.e. the phase noise is considered at a speciﬁc offset frequency (100 kHz) 
which needs to be minimized. In this chapter, all the phase noise results are presented 
for this speciﬁc frequency point. Phase noise at only a speciﬁc offset is reported for 
ease of presentation; however, it is implied that minimizing the phase noise at a 
single frequency point automatically minimizes the phase noise for the complete

124
S. Hemaram et al.
Fig. 8.1 CMOS LC tank 
oscillator 
frequency range. Such an offset frequency is chosen to be reported due to its appli-
cations in wireless communication domain. The technology node for this study is 
180 nm. The optimization is performed in MATLAB acting as a computational tool, 
and the Cadence-Spectre is chosen to be the simulation engine. 
Automated Framework for Phase Noise Minimization 
The objective is to minimize the phase noise with a constraint that the fundamental 
frequency of the oscillator does not deviate signiﬁcantly. The parameters that directly 
affect the phase noise are taken into consideration as shown in Table 8.1. These 
parameters become the decision variables for the optimization problem. 
An automated framework is designed in the C shell scripting language that enables 
the simulation engine to talk to the computational tool in real time. It enables the 
computational tool to provide the inputs for simulations, invoke the simulations for 
these parameters, and parse back the simulation results to the computational tool. 
Figure 8.2 shows the steps involved in one data cycle from optimization engine to 
simulation engine to giving back the results to the optimization engine. The same 
framework can be used for all the variants of PSO. Such a framework is generic in 
nature and carries the potential to be used for other optimization problems as well.

8
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Variants …
125
Table 8.1 List of decision variables and their speciﬁcations for test circuit I 
Parameter
Unit
Lower bound
Upper bound 
Width ofupper M Baseline 1M1 (W1)
mu mµm
4.08
5.04 
Width ofupper M Baseline 2M2 (W2)
mu mµm
4.08
5.04 
Width ofupper M Baseline 3M3 (W3)
mu mµm
4.08
5.04 
Width ofupper M Baseline 4M4 (W4)
mu mµm
4.08
5.04 
Width ofupper M Baseline 5M5 (W5)
mu mµm
4.08
5.04 
Inductor value (L)
nHnH
4.00
4.80 
Capacitor value (C)
pFpF
0.90
1.10 
Fig. 8.2 Framework of 
design automation between 
the computational tool and 
simulation engine

126
S. Hemaram et al.
Fig. 8.3 Self-impedance of 
PDN with default decoupling 
capacitors 
Case Study II: Optimization of Decoupling Capacitors in a PDN 
System Description 
In an IC, a PDN is responsible for supplying the power to the entire system by pro-
viding the upper V Subscript d dVdd and the ground voltages. Typically, a PDN consists of several com-
ponents which includes DC–DC converters (also called voltage regulator modules 
(VRM)), decoupling capacitors, interconnects onboard and packages, etc. (Tripathi 
et al. 2019). In a PDN, there exist inductive and capacitive effects associated with 
all these components, which affects the system performances in different frequency 
ranges (Swaminathan and Engin 2007). It is crucial to control the variations in the 
supply voltage to system assertively because these variations can lead to false switch-
ing in dynamical digital circuits along with timing and delay variations (Haihua Su 
et al. 2003). In analog circuits, these imperfections can lead to improper biasing of 
the transistors leading to signal corruptions (Tripathi et al. 2019). 
The most common and powerful technique to minimize the power supply noise 
is by intentionally placing the on-chip capacitors (‘decaps’) onto the PDN. These 
decap helps reduce the cumulative impedance of PDN below a certain limit called the 
target impedance left parenthesis upper Z Subscript upper T Baseline right parenthesis(ZT ). However, selecting and placing the capacitors intuitively is 
not feasible when there are innumerable capacitors available commercially. In such 
cases, optimization techniques are required to solve such problems. 
Figure 8.3 shows the self-impedance of a practical PDN at the pad of the IC (i.e. at 
silicon). This impedance is the equivalent impedance of PDN component modeling 
such as VRM, package, PCB, and the on-chip load. For the PCB and the package, 
upper SS-parameters are extracted from a commercial 3D solver, and for the on-chip PDN, 
a Chip Power Model (CPM) is used (Kulali et al. 2007). 
The reduction in cumulative impedance of the PDN by appropriate placement 
of the decaps can be evidenced by Fig. 8.3. Here, two cases are shown, one shows 
the self-impedance of the PDN without decaps (indicated by a dotted line) and the 
another one shows the self-impedance of the PDN with intuitive placement of decaps 
(indicated by a solid line). The maximum value of the self-impedance of the PDN 
without decaps is 361.2 m normal upper Omega361.2 mΩ. With decaps, the value reduces to 203.9 m normal upper Omega203.9 mΩ.

8
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Variants …
127
Decap Optimization Framework 
This optimization problem is solved by considering the upper SS-parameter data of both 
PDN and the decaps. This data (equivalent upper SS-parameters data) can be extracted for 
the available ports (without placing decoupling capacitors) using the commercially 
available 3D solvers. The upper SS-parameter data is then converted to the corresponding 
upper ZZ-parameter (upper Z Subscript p d nZ pdn) data by simple transform relationship. 
Now, in order to reduce the impedance of PDN, the decaps are placed at the 
corresponding ports and the resultant equivalent impedance upper Z Subscript e qZeq (at the port where 
impedance is observed) of the network is given as follows (Kahng 2006): 
upper Z Subscript e q Baseline equals left parenthesis upper Z Subscript p d n Superscript negative 1 Baseline plus upper Z Subscript d e c a p Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1Zeq = (Z−1
pdn + Z−1
decap)−1
(8.15) 
where upper Z Subscript d e c a pZdecap represent the upper ZZ-parameter matrix of the decaps which only carry the 
diagonal elements. Alternately, (8.15) can be be written as 
upper Z Subscript e q Baseline equals left parenthesis upper Y Subscript p d n Baseline plus upper Y Subscript d e c a p Baseline right parenthesis Superscript negative 1Zeq = (Ypdn + Ydecap)−1
(8.16) 
where 
upper Y Subscript d e c a p Baseline equals upper Z Subscript d e c a p Superscript negative 1 Baseline equals Start 4 By 5 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column StartFraction 1 Over z 1 EndFraction 2nd Column 0 3rd Column 0 4th Column ellipsis 5th Column 0 2nd Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column StartFraction 1 Over z 2 EndFraction 3rd Column 0 4th Column ellipsis 5th Column 0 3rd Row 1st Column vertical ellipsis 2nd Column vertical ellipsis 3rd Column vertical ellipsis 4th Column down right diagonal ellipsis 5th Column vertical ellipsis 4th Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column 0 3rd Column 0 4th Column ellipsis 5th Column StartFraction 1 Over z Subscript n Baseline EndFraction EndMatrixYdecap = Z−1
decap =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣
1
z1 0 0 . . . 0
0
1
z2 0 . . . 0
...
... ... ... ...
0 0 0 . . .
1
zn
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎦
where z Subscript kzk are z 11z11 values of decoupling capacitors at k Subscript t hkth port. 
It is worth noting that the upper ZZ-parameter data considered here has a dimension 
with respect to frequency also. The shape of upper ZZ-matrix is p times p times fp × p × f where pp rep-
resents the number of ports and f f is the number of frequency points. Generally, 
the impedance is measured at the port which is nearer to the chip. Throughout this 
case study, measurement of the impedance is done at port 1 of the considered PDN. 
Correspondingly, the objective function becomes to maximize the self-impedance at 
this port. This can be formulated as 
upper Z Subscript o b j Baseline equals max left parenthesis upper Z Subscript e q Baseline left parenthesis 1 comma 1 right parenthesis right parenthesisZobj = max(Zeq(1, 1))
(8.17) 
Here, the number of decision variables upper DD is equal to 2 for each capacitor: port 
number and the capacitor index (the index of decap to be considered). 
Algorithm 8.4 summarizes the steps involved for the computation of the optimum 
number of decaps to stabilize the PDN using the different variants of PSO. Here, 
upper Z Subscript p times p times fZ p×p× f is the impedance of PDN without decaps,upper Z Subscript 1 times fZ1× f is the impedance of decou-
pling capacitors,pp is the number of ports available for the placement of decaps,f f is 
the number of frequency points taken for analysis,upper CC represents the index of decaps, 
upper PP represents the port numbers corresponding to capacitor indices, andupper N Subscript upper DND represents 
the number of decaps.

128
S. Hemaram et al.
Algorithm 8.4 Decap Optimization Framework 
begin 
Input: Z p×p× f , Z1× f , ZT . 
Output: C, P, max(Zeq (1, 1)). 
Objective function: Zobj = max(Zeq (1, 1)), 
(Zeq ) f = (Z−1 
pdn + Z−1 
Decap)−1 
f , ∀ f ∈[0, fmax]. 
Initialize ND = 0. 
while (Zobj > ZT ) do 
ND = ND + 1. 
Initialize k = 0, deﬁne N. 
for i = 1, 2, . . . ,  n do 
for ic = 1, 2, . . . ,  ND do 
Generate initial population (vi and xi ). 
end for 
end for 
Calculate initial minimum Zk=0 
obj . 
while (k < N) do 
k = k + 1. 
Update inertia weight w. 
for i = 1, 2, . . . ,  n do 
for ic = 1, 2, . . . ,  ND do 
Update velocity vi and position xi 
end for 
Compute current minimum of Zk+1 
obj . 
end for 
Compute personal best (x p 
id) and global best (xg 
d ) .  
Compute Zobj at xg 
d . 
end while 
end while 
Out: Zobj , xg 
d :(P, C). 
end 
Results and Comparative Analysis 
In order to demonstrate that these algorithms can adequately evaluate and reproduce 
the results, each PSO variant is executed ten times. The population size nn is taken 
to be 30, and the maximum number of iterations upper NN is set to 25. The c 1c1 and c 2c2 are 
taken as 1.5 each, and the values of w Subscript iwi and w Subscript fw f are 0.9 and 0.4, respectively. The 
algorithms were implemented using MATLAB R2019b and were run on a personal 
portable computer with 8 GB RAM and Intel i Baseline 5i5 9 Superscript t h999 Superscript t h Gen 2.4 GHz cores. 
Case Study I 
Table 8.2 compares the performance of all the algorithms for ten independent runs. It 
gives the average, the best case result of phase noiseleft parenthesis upper P Subscript n Baseline right parenthesis(Pn) for the considered oscillator 
out of these ten runs along with the average CPU time for each of the algorithms. 
Also, the fundamental frequency left parenthesis f 0 right parenthesis( f0) of the considered oscillator is reported at 
the best case result for each algorithm. Table 8.3 reports the optimized values of

8
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Variants …
129
Table 8.2 Performance comparison of the algorithms for Case Study I out of 10 runs 
Criterion
PSO
LDIW-
PSO 
CE-PSO
AIW-PSO 
GQPSO
DE
GA 
Average 
phase 
noise 
(dBc/Hz) 
minus−115.16
minus−115.24
minus−115.22
minus−115.30
minus−115.50
minus−115.28
minus−114.76 
Minimum 
phase 
noise 
(dBc/Hz) 
minus−115.54
minus−115.52
minus−115.61
minus−115.45
minus−115.62
minus−115.81
minus−115.30 
Frequency 
(f 0 f0) at  
min. 
Phase 
noise 
(GHz) 
2.37
2.37
2.38
2.28
2.34
2.33
2.35 
Average 
CPU time 
(s) 
1180.6
1182.7
1176.5
1163.8
1175.3
1168.1
1171.4 
Table 8.3 Best case (out of 10 runs) phase noise and optimized value of decision variables for 
different optimization algorithms 
Algorithm
upper P Subscript nPn
(dBc/Hz) 
f 0 f0 (GHz) 
W1 (mu mµm) 
W2 (mu mµm) 
W3 (mu mµm) 
W4 (mu mµm) 
W5 (mu mµm) 
L (nHnH)
C (pFpF) 
PSO
minus−115.54
2.37
4.08
4.08
4.74
4.08
4.22
4.00
1.10 
LDIW-PSO minus−115.52
2.37
4.08
4.08
4.66
4.08
4.08
4.00
1.10 
CE-PSO
minus−115.61
2.38
4.08
4.11
4.84
4.08
4.10
4.00
1.10 
AIW-PSO
minus−115.45
2.28
4.08
4.08
4.08
4.08
4.59
4.35
1.10 
GQPSO
minus−115.62
2.34
4.12
4.16
5.04
4.87
4.11
4.14
1.10 
DE
minus−115.81
2.33
4.08
4.08
4.08
4.67
5.04
4.80
1.10 
GA
minus−115.30
2.35
4.08
4.08
4.08
4.21
4.08
4.11
1.10 
the considered seven decision variables as obtained from the best case result from 
each study. Figure 8.4 exhibits the best case phase noise convergence plots of all the 
considered algorithms. In order to understand the phase noise optimization for the 
complete spectrum (10 Hz–1 GHz offset), Fig. 8.5 is plotted. It shows the minimum 
noise obtained at each offset frequency point for each of the considered algorithm. 
For this optimization study at circuit level, the following observations can be 
made: 
• The best case results obtained by all the PSO algorithms are comparable to each 
other. The average CPU time for all the PSO algorithms is also similar. In case of 
CPU time, the time required to interface the data between EDA tool and compu-
tation tool is neglected.

130
S. Hemaram et al.
Fig. 8.4 Phase noise 
convergence plot of all the 
algorithms 
Fig. 8.5 Phase noise plot 
• CE-PSO and GQPSO perform better than the rest of PSO variants in an average 
sense and can be considered the most reliable for such studies. 
• CE-PSO and GQPSO were able to minimize the phase noise to minus−115.62 and 
minus−115.61 dBc/Hz at 100 kHz, with the fundamental frequency being 2.38 and 
2.34 GHz, respectively. 
• The results obtained by PSO variants are comparable to DE and are better than 
GA. 
Case Study II 
In this work, the Z-parameter data used for the analysis is having dimensions of 22times×
22 times× 1571, where 22 represents the number of ports and 1571 is the number of fre-
quency points. For minimizing the equivalent impedance of the PDN, the observing 
port is marked as port-1 and the impedanceupper Z 11Z11 is measured at port-1. Thus, there are 
21 ports available for placing decaps. The target impedance of the PDN is deﬁned 
as 60 m normal upper Omega60 mΩ as per the system requirement. Table 8.4 shows the performance compar-
ison of all the algorithms for 10 independent runs. Table 8.5 shows the optimized 
impedance obtained with the minimum number of decaps by different algorithms. 
The best case convergence plots of the algorithms are shown in Fig. 8.6.

8
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Variants …
131
Table 8.4 Performance comparison of the algorithms for Case study II out of 10 runs 
Criterion
PSO
LDIW-PSO
CE-PSO 
AIW-
PSO 
GQPSO
DE
GA 
Minimum no. 
of decaps 
6
4
4
4
4
4
4 
Average
no. 
of decaps 
8
5
5
5
5
6
6 
Average value 
of Imp (m normal upper OmegamΩ) 
57.1
57.5
56.9
56.8
56.1
57.6
57.5 
Imp
(m normal upper OmegamΩ) 
with Min no. 
of decaps 
59.4
57.5
56.3
55.9
55.5
56.9
56.3 
Average 
computa-
tion
(CPU) 
time (s) 
791.6
438.7
485.2
590.3
412.5
553.2
549.7 
Table 8.5 Default and optimized PDN impedance 
Criterion
Self-impedance 
Without decaps
361.2 
Default decaps
203.9 
Optimized (with 6 decaps by PSO)
59.4 
Optimized (with 4 decaps by LDIW-PSO)
57.5 
Optimized (with 4 decaps by CE-PSO)
56.3 
Optimized (with 4 decaps by AIW-PSO)
55.9 
Optimized (with 4 decaps by GQPSO)
55.5 
Optimized (with 4 decaps by DE)
56.9 
Optimized (with 4 decaps by GA)
56.3 
For this optimization problem: 
• The minimum number of decaps obtained by PSO variants are equal to four only, 
but GQPSO gives the best optimized impedance value compared to others algo-
rithm for the same number of decaps which is shown in Fig. 8.7. 
• The GQPSO algorithm reduced the PDN impedance from 203.9 to 55.5m normal upper OmegamΩ with 
only four decaps and is shown in Table 8.5. The GQPSO also achieves the minimum 
average impedance of the PDN and the minimum average computation time which 
is shown in Table 8.4. 
• The results obtained by PSO variants are better than the classical PSO (without 
inertia weight) and also comparable to other state-of-the-art algorithms, namely 
GA and DE which are shown in Table 8.4. 
• The optimized impedance value obtained by GQPSO is better than the GA and 
DE for the same number of decaps and is shown in Table 8.5.

132
S. Hemaram et al.
Fig. 8.6 Convergence plot 
of self-impedance for all the 
algorithms 
Fig. 8.7 Self-impedance of 
PDN with optimum number 
of decaps 
Table 8.6 Optimized decoupling capacitors with their corresponding port numbers by GQPSO 
Capacitor index
Capacitor model
Manufacturer
Port number 
7
C1005X5R0J475M050BC
TDK
6 
2
GRT155R61E105KE01
Murata
10 
4
GRT155R61A684KE01
Murata
11 
3
CL05B104KO5NNN
Samsung
16 
Table 8.6 shows the list of the optimum number of decaps with their index num-
bersleft parenthesis upper C right parenthesis(C) and corresponding port numbersleft parenthesis upper P right parenthesis(P). Figure 8.7 shows the self-impedance 
proﬁle of the PDN without decaps, default decaps, and optimized decaps by GQPSO. 
Conclusion 
In this work, the application of different PSO variants is illustrated to optimize the 
VLSI circuits and systems. The efﬁcacy of each algorithm is illustrated using two

8
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Variants …
133
practical case studies; the ﬁrst one is a circuit level optimization problem, i.e. phase 
noise minimization in a oscillator circuit. Also, a system-level optimization, i.e. 
optimal selection and placement of decoupling capacitors in a power delivery net-
work, is illustrated. The circuit level optimization strategy discussed here introduces 
the utilization of a real-time interfacing strategy between the simulation and equa-
tion engine. Such an optimization strategy is generic in nature and can be adapted 
for similar optimization problems easily. The results obtained by PSO variants are 
also comparable to two other population-based state-of-the-art metaheuristic algo-
rithms, namely differential evolution (DE) and real coded genetic algorithm (GA). 
The GQPSO outperforms the other PSO variants. 
References 
Alatas B, Akin E, Ozer AB (2009) Chaos embedded particle swarm optimization algorithms. Chaos 
Solit Fractals 40(4):1715–1734. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2007.09.063 
Arasomwan AM, Adewumi AO (2014) An investigation into the performance of particle swarm 
optimization with various chaotic maps. Math Probl Eng 2014:178959 
Chen HM, Samudra GS, Chan DSH, Ibrahim Y (2000) Global optimization for digital MOS circuits 
performance. IEEE Trans Comput Aided Des Integr Circuits Syst 19(1):161–164. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/43.822628 
Choi JY, Swaminathan M (2011) Decoupling capacitor placement in power delivery networks using 
MFEM. IEEE Trans Compon Packag Manuf Technol 1(10):1651–1661. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TCPMT.2011.2165954 
Chuang YC, Chen CT, Hwang C (2016) A simple and efﬁcient real-coded genetic algorithm for 
constrained optimization. Appl Soft Comput 38:87–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2015.09. 
036 
Coelho LdS (2010) Gaussian quantum-behaved particle swarm optimization approaches for con-
strained engineering design problems. Expert Syst Appl 37(2):1676–1683. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.eswa.2009.06.044 
Das S, Suganthan PN (2011) Differential evolution: a survey of the state-of-the-art. IEEE Trans 
Evol Comput 15(1):4–31 
Deb K, Deb D (2014) Analysing mutation schemes for real-parameter genetic algorithms. Int J Artif 
Intell Soft Comput 4:1–28. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJAISC.2014.059280 
Deb K, Kumar A (1995) Real-coded genetic algorithms with simulated binary crossover: studies 
on multimodal and multiobjective problems. Complex Syst 9 
del Valle Y, Venayagamoorthy GK, Mohagheghi S, Hernandez J, Harley RG (2008) Particle swarm 
optimization: basic concepts, variants and applications in power systems. IEEE Trans Evol Com-
put 12(2):171–195. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEVC.2007.896686 
dos Santos Coelho L (2008) A quantum particle swarm optimizer with chaotic mutation operator. 
Chaos Solit Fractals 37(5):1409–1418. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2006.10.028 
Erdin I, Achar R (2019) Multi-objective optimization of decoupling capacitors for placement and 
component value. IEEE Trans Compon Packag Manuf Technol 9(10):1976–1983. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/TCPMT.2019.2930565 
Feng Y, Teng G, Wang A, Yao Y (2007) Chaotic inertia weight in particle swarm optimization. 
In: Second international conference on innovative computing, information and control (ICICIC 
2007), pp 475–475. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICICIC.2007.209 
Garbaya A, Kotti M, Drira N, Fakhfakh M, Tlelo-Cuautle E, Siarry P (2018) An RBF-PSO tech-
nique for the rapid optimization of (CMOS) analog circuits. In: 2018 7th international confer-

134
S. Hemaram et al.
ence on modern circuits and systems technologies (MOCAST), pp 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
MOCAST.2018.8376657 
Haihua S, Sapatnekar SS, Nassif SR (2003) Optimal decoupling capacitor sizing and placement for 
standard-cell layout designs. IEEE Trans Comput Aided Des Integr Circuits Syst 22(4):428–436. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCAD.2003.809658 
Hajimiri A, Lee TH (1998) Phase noise in CMOS differential LC oscillators. In: 1998 symposium 
on VLSI circuits. Digest of technical papers (Cat. No. 98CH36215), pp 48–51. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/VLSIC.1998.687999 
Hocevar DE, Cox PF, Yang P (1988) Parametric yield optimization for MOS circuit blocks. IEEE 
Trans Comput Aided Des Integr Circuits Syst 7(6):645–658. https://doi.org/10.1109/43.3204 
Hoenigschmid H, Miura-Manausch M, Prigge O, Rahm A, Savignac D (1997) Optimization of 
advanced MOS technologies for narrow distribution of circuit performance. IEEE Trans Comput 
Aided Des Integr Circuits Syst 16(2):199–204. https://doi.org/10.1109/43.573834 
Hong YY, Beltran AA, Paglinawan AC (2016) A Chaos-enhanced particle swarm optimization 
with adaptive parameters and its application in maximum power point tracking. Math Probl Eng 
2016:6519678 
Hussein AS, Jarndal AH (2018) Reliable hybrid small-signal modeling of GaN HEMTs based on 
particle-swarm-optimization. IEEE Trans Comput Aided Des Integr Circuits Syst 37(9):1816– 
1824. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCAD.2017.2782779 
Park J, Choi K, Allstot DJ (2004) Parasitic-aware RF circuit design and optimization. IEEE Trans 
Circuits Syst I: Regular Papers 51(10):1953–1966. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSI.2004.835691 
Kahng S (2006) GA-optimized decoupling capacitors damping the rectangular power-bus’ cavity-
mode resonances. IEEE Microw Wirel Compon Lett 16(6):375–377 
Kamisetty S, Garg J, Tripathi JN, Mukherjee J (2011) Optimization of analog RF circuit parameters 
using randomness in particle swarm optimization. In: 2011 world congress on information and 
communication technologies, pp 274–278. https://doi.org/10.1109/WICT.2011.6141257 
Kennedy J, Eberhart R (1995) Particle swarm optimization. In: Proceedings of ICNN’95: Interna-
tional conference on neural networks, vol 4, pp 1942–1948 
Khan BK, Khalifa YA (2011) An evolutionary method for analog circuits optimization utilizing 
Mosfet-C ﬁlters. In: 2011 18th IEEE international conference on electronics, circuits, and systems, 
pp 362–365. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICECS.2011.6122288 
Kim K, Kang S, Sim J, Park H, Kim B (2018) A search algorithm for the worst operation scenario of a 
cross-point phase-change memory utilizing particle swarm optimization. IEEE Trans Very Large 
Scale Integr (VLSI) Syst 26(12):2591–2598. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVLSI.2018.2855959 
Koukab A (2011) Reactive power imbalances in LC VCOS and their inﬂuence on phase-noise mech-
anisms. IEEE Trans Microw Theory Tech 59(12):3118–3128. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMTT. 
2011.2169496 
Kulali E, Wasserman E, Zheng J (2007) Chip power model—a new methodology for system power 
integrity analysis and design. In: 2007 IEEE electrical performance of electronic packaging, pp 
259–262. https://doi.org/10.1109/EPEP.2007.4387176 
Lee TH, Hajimiri A (2000) Oscillator phase noise: a tutorial. IEEE J Solid-State Circuits 35(3):326– 
336. https://doi.org/10.1109/4.826814 
Lyu W, Xue P, Yang F, Yan C, Hong Z, Zeng X, Zhou D (2018) An efﬁcient Bayesian optimization 
approach for automated optimization of analog circuits. IEEE Trans Circuits Syst I: Regular 
Papers 65(6):1954–1967. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSI.2017.2768826 
Man KF, Tang KS, Kwong S (1996) Genetic algorithms: concepts and applications [in engineering 
design]. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 43(5):519–534 
Mikki SM, Kishk AA (2006) Quantum particle swarm optimization for electromagnetics. IEEE 
Trans Antennas Propag 54(10):2764–2775. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2006.882165 
Nickabadi A, Ebadzadeh MM, Safabakhsh R (2011) A novel particle swarm optimization algorithm 
with adaptive inertia weight. Appl Soft Comput 11(4):3658–3670. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc. 
2011.01.037

8
A Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Variants …
135
Omkar S, Khandelwal R, Ananth T, Narayana Naik G, Gopalakrishnan S (2009) Quantum behaved 
particle swarm optimization (QPSO) for multi-objective design optimization of composite struc-
tures. Expert Syst Appl 36(8):11312–11322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2009.03.006 
Jinho P, Allstot DJ (2004) RF circuit synthesis using particle swarm optimization. In: 2004 IEEE 
international symposium on circuits and systems (IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37512), vol 5, pp V–V. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCAS.2004.1329466 
Piersanti S, de Paulis F, Olivieri C, Orlandi A (2018) Decoupling capacitors placement for a mul-
tichip PDN by a nature-inspired algorithm. IEEE Trans Electromag Compat 60(6):1678–1685. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEMC.2017.2770089 
Rutenbar RA, Gielen GGE, Roychowdhury J (2007) Hierarchical modeling, optimization, and 
synthesis for system-level analog and RF designs. Proc IEEE 95(3):640–669. https://doi.org/10. 
1109/JPROC.2006.889371 
Sabat SL, Kumar KS, Udgata SK (2009) Differential evolution and swarm intelligence techniques 
for analog circuit synthesis. In: 2009 world congress on nature biologically inspired computing 
(NaBIC), pp 469–474. https://doi.org/10.1109/NABIC.2009.5393356 
Shi Y, Eberhart R (1998) A modiﬁed particle swarm optimizer. In: 1998 IEEE international con-
ference on evolutionary computation proceedings. IEEE world congress on computational intel-
ligence (Cat. No. 98TH8360), pp 69–73 
Shi Y, Eberhart RC (1998) Parameter selection in particle swarm optimization. In: Porto VW, Sara-
vanan N, Waagen D, Eiben AE (eds) Evolutionary programming VII. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
pp 591–600 
Shi Y, Eberhart RC (1999) Empirical study of particle swarm optimization. In: Proceedings of the 
1999 congress on evolutionary computation-CEC99 (Cat. No. 99TH8406), vol 3, pp 1945–1950. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC.1999.785511 
Storn R, Price K (1997) Differential evolution–a simple and efﬁcient heuristic for global 
optimization over continuous spaces. J Glob Optim 11:341–359. https://doi.org/10.1023/A: 
1008202821328 
Sun J, Fang W, Palade V, Wu X, Xu W (2011) Quantum-behaved particle swarm optimization with 
gaussian distributed local attractor point. Appl Math Comput 218(7):3763–3775. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.amc.2011.09.021 
Swaminathan M, Engin E (2007) Power integrity modeling and design for semiconductors and 
systems. Prentice Hall Modern semiconductor design series, Pearson Education 
Tripathi JN, Mukherjee J, Apte PR (2011) Optimizing phase noise of 2 GHz RF oscillator with 
minimum frequency deviation. In: 2011 IEEE 54th international midwest symposium on circuits 
and systems (MWSCAS), pp 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/MWSCAS.2011.6026275 
Tripathi JN, Mukherjee J, Apte PR, Chhabra NK, Nagpal RK, Malik R (2013) Selection and place-
ment of decoupling capacitors in high speed systems. IEEE Electromag Compat Mag 2(4):72–78 
Tripathi JN, Mahajan A, Mukherjee J, Nagpal RK, Malik R, Gupta N (2014) Decoupling network 
optimization in high speed systems by mixed-integer programming. In: 2014 IEEE international 
symposium on circuits and systems (ISCAS), pp 1010–1013. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCAS. 
2014.6865309 
Tripathi JN, Sharma VK, Shrimali H (2019) A review on power supply induced jitter. IEEE Trans 
Compon Packag Manuf Technol 9(3):511–524. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCPMT.2018.2872608 
Xin J, Chen G, Hai Y (2009) A particle swarm optimizer with multi-stage linearly-decreasing inertia 
weight. In: 2009 international joint conference on computational sciences and optimization, vol 1, 
pp 505–508 
Xu Z, Wang J, Fan J (2020) Decoupling capacitor placement optimization with Lagrange multiplier 
method. In: 2020 IEEE international symposium on electromagnetic compatibility signal/power 
integrity (EMCSI), pp 22–25. https://doi.org/10.1109/EMCSI38923.2020.9191625

Chapter 9 
PAM3: History, Algorithm, 
and Performance Comparison to NRZ 
and PAM4 
Sherman Shan Chen 
, Francesco de Paulis 
, David R. Stauffer 
, 
and Brian Holden 
Abstract The origin and evolution of Three-level Pulse Amplitude Modulation 
(PAM3) are introduced. Two PAM3 variant encoding schemes (3-bit-to-2-trit (3B2T) 
and 11-bit-to-7-trit (11B7T)) are described, along with the trit test sequence for 
PAM3. The high-speed transmission performance of PAM3 is investigated under the 
inﬂuences of ﬁve major channel impairments, with NRZ and PAM4 as comparisons. 
The work reveals that PAM3 has a certain performance advantage over NRZ and 
PAM4 in terms of reﬂection coefﬁcient, insertion loss, and mode conversion, while 
being relatively more sensitive to crosstalk and noise. 
Keywords PAM3 · NRZ · PAM4 · High-speed transmission · Channel 
impairment · Noise 
Introduction 
Three-level Pulse Amplitude Modulation (PAM3) is a high-speed modulation tech-
nique that converts the binary bit stream into three-level symbols so as to reduce 
the bandwidth requirement on the frequency spectrum, at the cost of a lowered eye 
height (EH) and associated complexity. The use of a three-level signal to transmit 
S. S. Chen (B) 
Northampton, UK 
e-mail: shan@kandou.com 
F. de Paulis 
University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy 
D. R. Stauffer 
Essex Junction, VT, USA 
B. Holden 
Los Gatos, CA, USA 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_9 
137

138
S. S. Chen et al.
information emerged as early as 1961 when a three-level code, Alternate Mark Inver-
sion (AMI), was used in the ﬁrst T-Carrier system (Wikipedia 2022). This code sent 
a zero input as a 0 line code and a one input as either plus+ or minus−line code, alternating 
between the two values when a one was the input. One’s density was ensured by 
the constraint that the 00 code was not used for voice samples. AMI was a Return 
to Zero (RZ) code to help along the low-performance clock recovery circuits of the 
day. 
In 1963, a three-level encoding scheme called Duobinary was proposed with the 
purpose of reducing the bandwidth requirement (Lender 1963). The encoding algo-
rithm of Duobinary is essentially determining the output level negative 1−1, 0, or 1, based 
on whether there is an odd/even number of 0s between the two preceding non-zero 
bits. Therefore, it does not follow a ﬁxed n-binary-to-m-ternary mapping relation. 
Interested readers can refer to Lender (1963) for more details. While reducing the 
Nyquist frequency to only a half of NRZ, Duobinary has some drawbacks including 
low eye height, high power, and others (David 2022). In 1995, Fast Ethernet 802.3u 
(100Base-TX) was released which brought another three-level modulation technol-
ogy called Multi-Level Transition (MLT-3) to the public (IEEE Computer Society 
2018). The encoding process of MLT-3 is to cycle sequentially through the voltage 
levels [minus−1, 0, plus+1] in accordance with the following rules: 
• If the next bit is 1, move to the next state; 
• If the next bit is 0, stay in the same state. 
Such an encoding algorithm reduces the number of transitions and consequen-
tially lowers the power consumption and electromagnetic interference (EMI). MLT-3 
however does not reduce the Nyquist frequency of the signal which still remains at 
31.25 MHz (1/4 of the aggregate bit rate) for each pair in a four-pair channel. Also, 
it is not an n-binary-to-m-ternary encoding scheme either. 
The earliest adoption of PAM3 dates back to also 1995 when 100BASE-T4 (100 
Mbit/s over four-pair Cat3 or better cable) was released. 100BATE-T4 uses the 8B6T 
code which converts 8 binary bits into 6 base-3 digits, i.e., 3-level symbols. After 
this ﬁrst time standard-adoption, PAM3 was not used by any prevalent standards 
until 2011. Due to the increasing popularity of electric vehicles, the demand for 
upgrading the traditional Controller Area Network (CAN) bus or Local Intercon-
nect Network (LIN) to Automotive Ethernet led to the revival of the technique of 
PAM3. Originated from the BroadR-Reach (BR) standard (published by the One-Pair 
Ethernet (OPEN) Alliance Special Interest Group (SIG) in 2011 (Broadcom Corpo-
ration 2014)), both 100BASE-T1 (100 Mbit/s Ethernet over a single twisted pair for 
automotive applications, released in March 2016 (IEEE Computer Society 2016a)), 
and 1000BASE-T1 (1000 Mbit/s Ethernet over a single twisted pair for automotive 
applications, released in September 2016 (IEEE Computer Society 2016b)) adopted 
PAM3 as the line code. The reason for such a decision could be that PAM3 is rel-
atively better balanced between the various requirements including the full-duplex 
operation over a single unshielded pair (UTP), the bandwidth requirement, and the 
EMI which is extremely stringent in automotive applications (Thain et al. 2016).

9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison …
139
The Universal Serial Bus 4 (USB4Superscript TMTM) Speciﬁcation Version 2.0 (shorthanded as 
“USB4v2.0”) was released in October 2022 (USB-IF 2022), doubling the speed of 
USB4v1 (20 Gbps/lane) to 40 Gbps/lane. In addition, the line code was changed 
from non-return-to-zero (NRZ) to PAM3, resulting in a baud rate of 25.6 Gbd/lane. 
In December 2022, Samsung announced its plan for the 36 Gbps-rated next-
generation graphics double data rate 7 (GDDR7) memory (VideoCardz.com 2022). 
Despite the GDDR6X (18 Gbps to 23 Gbps), which was co-developed by NVIDIA 
and Micron Technology, adopting four-level pulse amplitude modulation (PAM4), 
Samsung chose PAM3 as the line code for GDDR7 (TechPowerUp 2022). It should be 
noted that neither GDDR6X nor GDDR7 has made it into the JEDEC speciﬁcation 
yet. This may indicate that, at least for the DDR applications, which modulation 
technique, PAM3 or PAM4, will triumph remains yet to be determined. Even in the 
applications where differential pair dominates, although there seems to be a trend 
that most of the latest high-speed standards turned to PAM4 as the line code including 
200/400 Gbps Ethernet (IEEE Computer Society 2018), and Optical Internetworking 
Forum Common Electrical I/O (OIF CEI) middle-reach (MR) and long-reach (LR) 
56/112 Gbps (OIF 2022), the latest USB speciﬁcation, i.e., USB4v2.0, however, 
selected PAM3 as its encoding scheme for PAM3’s better performance in terms of 
handling the USB Type-C connector, as well as other comparative advantages over 
PAM4. The variations in selecting PAM3 or PAM4 existing among the latest high-
speed standards reﬂect that PAM3 possesses some distinct features that bolster its 
position in the competition with PAM4 for the high-speed modulation technique, at 
least in particular application scenarios. 
Unlike NRZ and PAM4, which have been extensively studied, there are signif-
icantly fewer research works carried out on PAM3, let alone making an explicit 
comparison between PAM3 and other modulation techniques. The work in Holden 
(2013) compared the bandwidth requirements for NRZ, PAM3, PAM4, and other line 
codes in order to achieve a 400 Gbps backplane high-speed transmission system. The 
performances of ensemble NRZ (ENRZ), NRZ, PAM3, and PAM4 in terms of the 
sensitivity to crosstalk are evaluated by Chen et al. (2021). The tolerance of ENRZ, 
NRZ, PAM3, and PAM4 to the channel skew is examined in Chen and Xu (2021). 
In this chapter, we investigate the high-speed transmission performance of PAM3, 
with NRZ and PAM4 as the comparison. The remainder of the chapter is struc-
tured as follows: Section “The Encoding Schemes and Test Sequences of PAM3” 
describes the two encoding schemes of PAM3 (3-bit-to-2-trit (3B2T) and 11-bit-
to-7-trit (11B7T)), along with the two test sequences for PAM3 (pseudo-random 
binary sequence of n-th order (PRBSn), pseudo-random ternary sequence of n-th 
order (PRTSn)). Section “Performance Analysis: In Comparison to NRZ and PAM4” 
examines the performances of the four line codes (including two PAM3 encoding 
schemes) under the inﬂuences of various channel impairments. Section “Summary” 
summarizes the chapter.

140
S. S. Chen et al.
Table 9.1 USB4v2.0 3B2T (USB-IF 2022) 
Binary
Ternary 
000
negative 1−1,minus−1 
001
negative 1−1,plus 1+1
010
negative 1−1,plus 1+1
011
plus 1+1,negative 1−1
100
0,plus 1+1
101
plus 1+1,negative 1−1
110
plus 1+1, 0  
111
plus 1+1,plus 1+1
Table 9.2 100BASE-T1 3B2T (IEEE Computer Society 2016a) 
Binary
Ternary 
000
negative 1−1,negative 1−1
001
negative 1−1, 0  
001
negative 1−1, 1  
011
0,negative 1−1
100
0,plus 1+1
101
plus 1+1,negative 1−1
110
plus 1+1, 0  
111
plus 1+1,plus 1+1
The Encoding Schemes and Test Sequences of PAM3 
3B2T Versus 11B7T 
When migrating from a binary system to a ternary system, corresponding to the “bit” 
used to represent one symbol in binary systems, the term “trit” is used to refer to 
one ternary symbol. Each trit can be at one of three voltage levels in [minus−1 0 1], or  
[0 1 2] when dealing with a single-ended system. The basic encoding format for PAM3 
is 3B2T which maps 3 bits to 2 trits and achieves a transmission efﬁciency of 1.5 
bits/symbol. In terms of the speciﬁc mapping codebook, variants exist. For example, 
the 3B2T mapping scheme used in USB4v2.0, 100BASE-T1, and 1000BASE-T1 are 
all different from each other, as presented by Tables 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3. 
It can be seen that in both 3B2T mapping schemes, the ternary combination “00” 
is not employed. There are two reasons for doing so: 
1. DC balance: Without the (0, 0) code, the DC balance is maintained. Adding the 
(0, 0) code will however inevitably breach the DC balance.

9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison …
141
Table 9.3 1000BASE-T1 3B2T (IEEE Computer Society 2016b) 
Binary
Ternary 
000
negative 1−1,negative 1−1
001
0,negative 1−1
010
negative 1−1, 0  
011
negative 1−1,plus 1+1
100
0,plus 1+1
101
plus 1+1,negative 1−1
110
plus 1+1,plus 1+1
111
0,plus 1+1
2. According to 802.3 section “96.3.3.3.5 Generation of ternary pair (TAn, TBn)” 
(IEEE Computer Society 2018), the ternary symbol pair (0, 0) is used in certain 
special, non-data codes. 
Based on our experiment, replacing either (negative 1−1, negative 1−1) and (1, 1) by (0, 0) indeed 
improves the resulting eye diagrams—due to the less inter-symbol interference (ISI) 
as a result of the replacement. But because of the above two reasons, the 802.3 com-
mittees (and USB-IF as well) decided not to use the (0, 0) code for data transferring 
and instead use it for the control signals. 
In USB4v2.0, based on the fundamental 3B2T codebook, additional processing is 
conducted to formulate a new encoding scheme called 11B7T, i.e., mapping 11 bits 
into 7 trits. By doing so, the transmission efﬁciency is increased to 1.57 bits/symbol 
(USB-IF 2022). In addition, the 11B7T code was reported to have a better noise 
immunity performance than 3B2T (and other schemes such as 10B7T) (Liu and 
Marvel Corp. 2014). Interested readers can consult the USB4v2.0 speciﬁcation for 
the implementation details of the 11B7T encoding (USB-IF 2022). 
PRBS Versus PRTS 
For binary systems, PRBSn is widely used as the stimulus source, along with other 
test patterns each carrying speciﬁc characterization purpose (OIF 2022). When the 
line code is changed to PAM3, the binary sequence accordingly needs to be replaced 
by a ternary sequence. This can be done in two ways. The ﬁrst is utilizing a PRTSn 
sequence generator which directly outputs the PRTS trit stream (USB-IF 2022). 
Equation (9.1) gives the generation equation of PRTS19 
italic Trit Subscript italic PRTS 19 Baseline equals 1 plus upper X squared plus upper X Superscript 19TritPRTS19 = 1 + X2 + X19
(9.1) 
As can be seen, the structure of a PRTS generator is very similar to that of a PRBS 
generator, with the following differences:

142
S. S. Chen et al.
Fig. 9.1 Eye diagram: PRBS11 versus PRTS11 (Channel loss: 8 dB@10 GHz. Only linear equal-
izations are applied) 
1. Both addition and multiplication are modulo-3 operations. 
2. All signals are of three levels, i.e., [negative 1−1 0 1].  
The second method is to use the conventional PRBSn to generate the binary 
pseudo-random sequence and then convert it into PAM3 ternary stream using a BIN-
to-PAM3 encoder. 
Both methods are adopted by USB4v2.0. In USB4v2.0, PRBS11 and PRTS7 
are used as the transmitter data source for the victim channel, while PRTS19 is 
used as the source for the aggressor channel. The reason for such an arrangement 
might be that PRBS11 has a sequence length of 2047 (2 Superscript 11211) and PRTS7 has a similar 
sequence length of 2187 (3 Superscript 737). In the mean time, PRTS19 has a much larger length 
of 1,162,261,467 trits. Figure 9.1 compares the eye diagrams obtained with PRBS11 
and PRTS7. We can see that both sequences produce quite similar eye diagrams with 
PRTS7 negligibly worse than PRBS11. Throughout this study, PRBS11 is used as 
the data source for all the simulations. 
Scrambling and Pre-coding 
In order to limit the running length, i.e., the length of consecutive same bits/trits, it is 
necessary to add scrambling to the bit/trit stream. In this study, we use the scrambler 
used by 10/100/200GBASE-T for the NRZ bit stream scrambling. Equation (9.2) 
gives the construction formula of the 58-tap scrambler 
upper G left parenthesis x right parenthesis equals 1 plus x Superscript 39 Baseline plus x Superscript 58G(x) = 1 + x39 + x58
(9.2) 
It has been proven that by applying a partial response adjustment to the transmit 
signal, a certain level of known ISI can be added to the signal. At the receiver side, 
apply the reverse operation and the known ISI can be removed. The beneﬁt of doing

9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison …
143
Fig. 9.2 100GBASE-KP4 
PMA ﬂow (IEEE Computer 
Society 2018) 
Fig. 9.3 PAM3 pre-coder 
(USB-IF 2022) 
so is that the channel transmission SNR can be improved (Law and Masouros 2018). 
This technique is called Pre-coding which normally utilizes a Tomlinson-Harashima 
Pre-coder at the transmitter (TX), and a corresponding decoder at the receiver (RX). 
The structures of the binary/ternary/quarternary pre-coders remain the same except 
for the modulo operation being different. Figures 9.3 and 9.4 give the block diagrams 
of PAM3 and PAM4 pre-coders. The NRZ pre-coder can be obtained by simply 
changing the modulus to 2. 
For PAM4, we follow the PMA transmit process speciﬁed in 100GBASE-KP4 as 
illustrated in Fig. 9.2. Note that in the PAM4 PMA encoding process, scrambling is 
applied before the Gray coding. 
Instead of using the conventional scrambler as adopted by the majority of stan-
dards, USB4v2.0 employs a unique structure for its trit scrambler. The USB4v2.0 
scrambler ﬁrst performs a special operation (called F-function operation) on the pre-
built PRBS11 and PRTS19 bit/trit streams, the result then is performed modulo 3

144
S. S. Chen et al.
Fig. 9.4 PAM4 pre-coder 
(IEEE Computer Society 
2018) 
with the input trit stream to generate the scrambled output trit stream. Interested 
readers can refer to “Figure 4-40. Scrambler Operation” in USB-IF (2022) for  more  
details. 
As a default conﬁguration, throughout this study, the scrambler and pre-coder 
corresponding to each modulation technique are applied in all simulations. 
Performance Analysis: In Comparison to NRZ and PAM4 
In this section, we investigate the performances of PAM3, in comparison to NRZ and 
PAM4. For PAM3, the 3B2T scheme will be examined throughout the study and the 
11B7T scheme will be included in the analyses of reﬂection coefﬁcient (RC, or return 
loss (RL)), insertion loss (IL), and crosstalk (XT). The performance comparison 
is conducted by comparing the best eye diagrams obtained using each modulation 
technique, in the presence of various channel impairments. For a high-speed channel, 
the major performance-impacting factors are RL, IL, XT, mode conversion (MC), and 
noise. In the following contents, these impairments will be examined individually. 
Reﬂection Coefﬁcient 
The reﬂection coefﬁcient refers to the ratio of the reﬂected energy versus the incident 
energy. It may be necessary to distinguish the reﬂection coefﬁcient from a widely mis-
used
term
“return
loss”.
According
to
the
standard
deﬁnitions 
(Everything RF 2023; Electronics Notes 2023) 
italic Return Loss left parenthesis dB right parenthesis equals minus italic Reflection Coefficient left parenthesis dB right parenthesisReturn Loss (dB) = −Reﬂection Coefﬁcient (dB)
(9.3) 
Based on this, for a reﬂective system, its dB 1-valued reﬂection coefﬁcient is always 
less than zero and its dB-valued return loss should always be greater than zero. 
However, in much literature return loss is often used where the reﬂection coefﬁcient 
actually should be used. For example, many articles present negative return loss 
results which should actually be the reﬂection coefﬁcient. A possible reason for such
1 Decibel.

9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison …
145
Fig. 9.5 upper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11,upper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21 of Ch1, Ch2. Yellow: Ch1upper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11; Purple: Ch1upper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21; Blue:  Ch2upper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11; Red:  
Ch2upper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21
a widespread misuse could be that return loss is shorter and more distinctive as a term 
than reﬂective coefﬁcient which can be confused with the resistor-capacitor network 
(also shorthanded as RC), and therefore is preferable to use. In this chapter, we use 
the reﬂection coefﬁcient as the parameter of the reﬂection level. 
Two channels aiming to run at 112 Gbps, Ch1 and Ch2, are built representing the 
low/high reﬂection levels, respectively. Figure 9.5 plots the upper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11 and upper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21 of the 
two test channels, with the values at 56 GHz annotated. We can see that Ch1 has a 
reﬂective coefﬁcient ofnegative 26.07−26.07 dB while Ch2 has a level ofnegative 6.2−6.2 dB, indicating that 
Ch2 has a signiﬁcantly higher reﬂection level than Ch1. Meanwhile, both channels 
have a nearly identical insertion loss about 50.1 dB@56 GHz. This way, we eliminate 
the inﬂuence of the insertion loss on the simulation results obtained with these two 
channels since the deviations in the results can only come from the different levels 
of reﬂection. 
A PRBS11 pseudo-random sequence running at 112 Gbps is used as the transmit-
ter data for the simulation. Both rise/fall times are set to 0.15 UI, as a representation 
of the typical situation seen in most applications (OIF 2022; IEEE Computer Soci-
ety 2018). A 3-tap FIR, an IEEE 802.3 CTLE, and a 2-tap DFE are implemented 
as the equalization devices. As mentioned, the scramblers and the pre-coders suit-
ing each modulation technique are implemented. In addition, a fourth-order But-
terworth ﬁlter is also implemented in accordance with the requirements from IEEE 
802.3/USB4v2.0. Except in the study of the inﬂuences of noise, noises are not con-
sidered in the simulation. Ideal clocking is assumed which means there will be no 
impact of jitter. The settings of all three equalizers i.e., FIR, CTLE, and DFE, are 
swept so as to obtain the optimal eye diagrams. All eye diagrams are plotted in a 
single-ended manner so as to align with the waveforms seen by the slicers in the 
RX. In all sections except for the “Noise”, the eye height and eye width (EW) are 
measured over the 40–60% range centered at the peak point. Throughout this chapter, 
the above settings are used as the baseline conﬁguration for all simulations unless 
otherwise indicated (such as in the study of crosstalk).

146
S. S. Chen et al.
Fig. 9.6 Eye diagrams obtained with the high reﬂection channel (Ch2). a NRZ; b PAM4; c PAM3 
(3B2T); d PAM3 (11B7T) 
Fig. 9.7 Sensitivity to reﬂection coefﬁcient a EH; b EW. Blue: Low RL; Red: High RL 
Figure 9.6 presents the eye diagrams obtained with Ch2, i.e., the high reﬂection 
channel, 2 and Fig. 9.7 shows the comparison of the EH and the EW obtained with 
the two channels using the four codes. The following observations can be made: 
1. PAM3 (3B2T) and NRZ appear to be relatively more robust against reﬂection 
compared to PAM3 (11B7T) and PAM4, evidenced by similar degradation on 
EH, and no or nearly no degradation on EW as the level of reﬂection increases. 
2. PAM3 (11B7T), despite it producing eye diagrams slightly better than PAM3 
(3B2T) with the low reﬂection channel, degraded more signiﬁcantly when the 
reﬂection level increased. 
Overall, as the reﬂection level increases, PAM3 (3B2T) and NRZ demonstrate a 
certain level of performance edge against PAM3 (11B7T) and PAM4.
2 The eye diagrams obtained with Ch1 are omitted due to space limitation. 

9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison …
147
Fig. 9.8 IR versus CTLE. Obtained with the 49 dB@56 GHz channel. Blue: Impulse response 
with CTLEequals= 0 dB. Red: Impulse response with CTLEequals negative 11= −11 dB 
Loss 
Next, we look at the inﬂuences of channel loss on the four codes. For an adequately 
designed high-speed transmission channel, channel loss is often the most critical 
property of the channel. This is because the insertion loss (IL) usually imposes the 
largest impairment on the channel performance, demanding the application of sophis-
ticated equalization in order to counter the attenuation and signal distortion caused 
by the IL. Figure 9.8 shows the impulse response (IR) applied with the continuous 
time linear equalization (CTLE) of 0 dB and negative 11−11 dB, respectively, with the two 
values of the DC gain providing no equalization and a quite high level of attenuation 
of the low-frequency transfer function to balance the higher frequency channel loss. 
Figure 9.9 shows the channel output waveforms of an 112 Gbps PAM3 data stream 
passing through a 49 dB@56 GHz channel, under the same values of CTLE. We 
have the following observations: 
1. With no CLTE applied (i.e., 0 dB), the IR presents a fairly slow-falling edge, 
denoting a large ISI. This is evidenced by the channel output waveform which 
shows signiﬁcant ISI and is unlikely to produce an open eye diagram. 
2. With adequate CLTE applied (negative 11−11dB in this case), the ISI is signiﬁcantly reduced. 
Despite this improvement coming at the cost of a lowered signal amplitude, the 
equalized channel output shows a smaller but less ISI-disturbed waveform which 
is able to produce an open eye diagram. 3
To evaluate the performance of the line codes under the inﬂuences of varying chan-
nel losses, two channels, Ch3 and Ch4, are built as the test vehicles for this study. Ch3 
is a 26 dB@56 GHz channel sourced from 802.3df task force (IEEE P802.3df 2022) 
and Ch4 is created by cascading two Ch3 channels so as to obtain a higher insertion 
loss. Figure 9.10 plots theupper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11 andupper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21 of the two test channels, with the values at 
56 GHz annotated. Except that the channels are different, other simulation settings
3 Due to space limitation, the eye diagrams are omitted. 

148
S. S. Chen et al.
Fig. 9.9 PAM3 ISI versus CTLE. Obtained with the 49 dB@56 GHz channel. Blue: Channel output 
with CTLEequals= 0 dB. Red: Channel output with CTLEequals negative 11= −11 dB 
Fig. 9.10 upper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11, upper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21 of Ch3, Ch4. Yellow: Ch3 upper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11 (negative 6.81−6.81 dB@56 GHz); Purple: Ch3 
upper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21 (negative 26.01−26.01 dB@56 GHz). Blue: Ch4 upper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11 (negative 8.3−8.3 dB@56 GHz); Red: Ch4 upper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21 (negative 49.27−49.27
dB@56 GHz) 
follow the baseline simulation conﬁgurations (with equalizers swept to achieve the 
optimal settings). Figures 9.11 and 9.12 present the eye diagrams obtained with Ch3 
and Ch4 using the four codes. Figure 9.13 depicts the comparison of the EH and the 
EW obtained with the two channels. We have the following observations: 
1. As insertion loss goes up, NRZ and PAM4 have worse EH degradation than PAM3 
(3B2T). 
2. Less EW degradation is seen with NRZ and PAM3 (3B2T) than PAM4. 
3. PAM3 (3B2T) demonstrates a better performance than PAM3 (11B7T), especially 
with the high loss channel. 
In summary, both PAM3 (3B2T) and PAM3 (11B2T)) are less sensitive to channel 
loss than NRZ and PAM4, whereas PAM3 (3B2T) and PAM3 (11B7T) have similar 
performances.

9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison …
149
Fig. 9.11 Eye diagrams obtained with Ch3 (26 dB@56 GHz). a NRZ; b PAM4; c PAM3 (3B2T); 
d PAM3 (11B7T) 
Fig. 9.12 Eye diagrams obtained with Ch4 (49 dB@56 GHz). a NRZ; b PAM4; c PAM3 (3B2T); 
d PAM3 (11B7T)

150
S. S. Chen et al.
Fig. 9.13 Sensitivity to channel loss a EH; b EW. Blue: Low loss (Ch3); Red: High loss (Ch4) 
Crosstalk 
The subsequent analysis involves the investigation of the performances of the four 
codes under the inﬂuence of crosstalk. Two 12-port channels, Ch5 and Ch6, are 
created as the test vehicles with the center differential pair being the victim and the 
pairs on each side as the aggressors. Figure 9.14 shows the differential reﬂection 
coefﬁcient, IL, near-end crosstalk (NEXT 4), and far-end crosstalk (FEXT 5). As can 
be seen, both channels have an insertion loss of 28 dB at 14 GHz, with Channel 
1 showing a normal level of NEXT/FEXT (negative 39−39 dB/negative 35−35 dB), in contrast to the 
signiﬁcantly high level (negative 26−26 dB/negative 27−27 dB) of Channel 2. The simulation is performed 
with the following conﬁgurations: 
1. PRBS11 with different seeds are used as the source data for the victim, aggressor 
1, and aggressor 2. Equations (9.4) to (9.6) give the formulas used to produce the 
three PRBS11 source streams: 
StartLayout 1st Row 1st Column italic bits 2nd Column equals italic mxlfsr left parenthesis left bracket 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 right bracket comma left bracket 1 comma 9 comma 11 right bracket comma 2 Superscript 11 Baseline minus 1 right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 3rd Row 1st Column italic bits Subscript italic agg 1 2nd Column equals italic mxlfsr left parenthesis left bracket 1 1 0 0 1 1 right bracket comma left bracket 1 comma 9 comma 11 right bracket comma 2 Superscript 11 Baseline minus 1 right parenthesis 4th Row 1st Column Blank 5th Row 1st Column italic bits Subscript italic agg 2 2nd Column equals italic mxlfsr left parenthesis left bracket 1 1 0 0 0 1 right bracket comma left bracket 1 comma 9 comma 11 right bracket comma 2 Superscript 11 Baseline minus 1 right parenthesis EndLayoutbits = mxlfsr([11101110000], [1, 9, 11], 211 −1)
(9.4) 
bitsagg1 = mxlfsr([110011], [1, 9, 11], 211 − 1)
(9.5) 
bitsagg2 = mxlfsr([110001], [1, 9, 11], 211 − 1)
(9.6) 
2. The data rate is 28 Gbps. 
3. Other settings are the same as the baseline simulation conﬁguration. 
The eye diagrams obtained with the four codes are shown in Figs. 9.15 and 9.16. 
The EH and EW results are summarized in Fig. 9.17. The following observations are 
made: 
1. PAM3 (3B2T) and PAM3 (11B7T) demonstrate very similar performances under 
the inﬂuences of crosstalk. 
2. The order of sensitivity (EH and EW jointly) to crosstalk from high to low is 
PAM3 (3B2T)/PAM3 (11B7T) right arrow→PAM4 right arrow→NRZ.
4upper S Subscript d d Baseline 31Sdd31. 
5upper S Subscript d d Baseline 41Sdd41. 

9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison …
151
Fig. 9.14 S-parameters of Ch5 (Normal crosstalk level), Ch6 (High crosstalk level). a Blue: Ch5 
upper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11; Red: Ch5upper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21; Yellow: Ch6upper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11; Purple: Ch6upper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21; b Blue: Ch5upper S Subscript d d Baseline 31Sdd31; Red: Ch5upper S Subscript d d Baseline 41Sdd41; 
Yellow: Ch6upper S Subscript d d Baseline 31Sdd31; Purple: Ch6upper S Subscript d d Baseline 41Sdd41
Fig. 9.15 Eye diagrams obtained with Ch 5 (Normal crosstalk level) 
In summary, NRZ demonstrates the strongest robustness in the presence of 
crosstalk among the four codes, and PAM4 is slightly superior to both variants of 
PAM3. 
Mode Conversion 
Mode conversion refers to the conversion between the common mode energy and the 
differential mode energy in a signal. When mode conversion exists, the differential 
part of the signal, which is utilized to transmit information in differential signaling 
techniques, will be compromised. This will not only reduce the effective amplitude 
of the differential signal but also can increase the risk of potential EMI problems due

152
S. S. Chen et al.
Fig. 9.16 Eye diagrams obtained with Ch 6 (High crosstalk level) 
Fig. 9.17 Sensitivity to crosstalk a EH; b EW. Blue: Normal crosstalk (Ch5); Red: High crosstalk 
(Ch6) 
to the energy leakage from the differential to the common mode. Popular reasons 
causing mode conversion are 
1. Intra-pair skew: This is the unequal propagation time between the P and N leads 
within one differential pair. 
2. Asymmetric design: Any asymmetries on the structure of a component in the 
channel, such as connector, differential via, and routing, as well as the property of 
the materials used by the channel, can lead to a certain level of mode conversion. 
Since both the above mechanisms have similar impacts on the resulting level of 
mode conversion, we use the ﬁrst mechanism to create the mode conversion for 
this study. Based on Ch4, by adding 10 and 20 ps intra-pair skews, we create two 
channels, Ch7 and Ch8, with two levels of mode conversion. Figure 9.18 shows the

9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison …
153
Fig. 9.18 upper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11,upper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21 of Ch4 (no skew), Ch7 (10 ps skew), and Ch8 (20 ps skew) 
Fig. 9.19 upper S Subscript c d Baseline 21Scd21 of Ch4 (no skew), Ch7 (10 ps skew), and Ch8 (20 ps skew). Blue: 20 ps skew; Red: 
10 ps skew; Yellow: No skew 
upper S Subscript d d Baseline 11Sdd11 andupper S Subscript d d Baseline 21Sdd21 of the two channels, along with Ch4 as the baseline. Figure 9.19 plots 
out the upper S Subscript c d Baseline 21Scd21 of the three channels. 
In previous studies conducted on reﬂection, loss, and crosstalk, we have sufﬁ-
ciently examined and demonstrated the performance of the 11B7T PAM3. Conﬁned 
by the space limitation of the chapter, in the subsequent studies, we will only use 
3B2T as the representative of PAM3. By running the baseline simulation on Ch7 and 
Ch8, we obtain the eye diagrams as plotted in Fig. 9.20 and the bar graph comparison 
is plotted in Fig. 9.21. The following observations are made: 
1. PAM3 (3B2T) demonstrates less degradation than NRZ and PAM4, on both EH 
and EW. 
2. With 20 ps skew, which is 2.24 times the unit interval of NRZ 112 Gbps (8.929 
ps), PAM3 produces the highest EH and EW among the three line codes. 
Overall, PAM3 is less sensitive to the intra-pair skew (and the consequently pro-
duced mode conversion) compared to NRZ and PAM4.

154
S. S. Chen et al.
Fig. 9.20 Eye diagrams obtained with Ch7 (10 ps skew) and Ch8 (20 ps skew). a, c, e: Ch7; b, d, 
f: Ch8  
Fig. 9.21 Sensitivity to skew a EH; b EW. Blue: No skew; Red: 10 ps skew; Yellow: 20 ps skew 
Noise 
For an electronic communication system, the dominant noise types are typically 
ﬂicker noise in the low-frequency range and thermal noise in the high-frequency 
range. Since the corner frequency, which is the intersection of the two types of 
noises, is normally below 1 MHz, thermal noise should have a greater impact on 
a high-speed transmission system than ﬂicker noise (Analog Devices 2013). In this 
study, we will focus on the impact of thermal noise. Equation (9.7) gives the equation 
for calculating thermal noise 
StartLayout 1st Row upper P Subscript n Baseline equals left angle bracket i squared right angle bracket dot upper R equals 4 dot upper K dot upper T dot upper N Subscript upper F Baseline dot upper B dot upper R EndLayoutPn = <i2> · R = 4 · K · T · NF · B · R
(9.7)

9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison …
155
where upper P Subscript nPn is the noise power, left angle bracket i squared right angle bracket<i2> is the variance of the noise current, upper KK is Boltz-
mann’s constant,upper TT is the Kelvin temperature,upper N Subscript upper FNF is the noise ﬁgure,upper BB is thenegative 3−3 dB 
bandwidth, and upper RR is the real part of the termination impedance. 
The noise ﬁgure upper N Subscript upper FNF denotes the SNR degradation of a system, which can be 
calculated by Eq. (9.8) 
StartLayout 1st Row upper N Subscript upper F Baseline equals StartFraction italic SNR Subscript i Baseline Over italic SNR Subscript o Baseline EndFraction EndLayoutNF = SNRi
SNRo
(9.8) 
where italic SNR Subscript iSNRi and italic SNR Subscript oSNRo are the input and output signal-to-noise ratios, respectively. 
Equation (9.7) tells us that the thermal noise power is linearly proportional to absolute 
temperature, noise ﬁgure, bandwidth, and resistance. Here, the noise ﬁgure upper N Subscript upper FNF can 
be considered as representing the encoding/decoding system of each line code, as 
we will show in the passages to follow. 
For a standard-type high-speed transmission system, the noise at the RX analog 
input, which is usually the input of automatic gain control (AGC), has the predomi-
nant impact on the overall signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the high-speed transmission 
system. As a high-level evaluation of the noise performance, as is the case for this 
study, the test noise only needs to be applied at the input of AGC since such an 
application of noise is able to characterize the majority of the noise performance of 
a system.  
For an encoding system, its SNR is deﬁned as 
StartLayout 1st Row italic SNR Subscript italic code Baseline equals StartFraction upper P Subscript s Baseline Over upper P Subscript n Baseline EndFraction EndLayoutSNRcode = Ps
Pn
(9.9) 
where upper P Subscript sPs is the signal power, and upper P Subscript nPn is the noise power. 
We are not able to ﬁnd literature that clearly deﬁnes the SNR of a channel consist-
ing of a number of cascaded components. Based on the method presented in Analog 
Devices (2013); Yang et al. (2012), we derive the recursive deﬁnition of SNR at the 
k t hkth component’s output in a channel 
italic SNR Subscript k Baseline equals StartFraction upper P Subscript s normal bar k Baseline Over upper P Subscript n normal bar k Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction upper P Subscript s normal bar 0 Baseline product Underscript i equals 0 Overscript k Endscripts alpha Subscript i Baseline Over upper P Subscript n normal bar k minus 1 Baseline alpha Subscript k Baseline plus upper P Subscript n normal bar k Baseline EndFractionSNRk = Ps_k
Pn_k
=
Ps_0
Πk
i=0 αi
Pn_k−1αk + Pn_k
(9.10) 
where upper P Subscript s normal bar kPs_k and upper P Subscript n normal bar kPn_k are the signal power and the noise power at the output of the 
k t hkth segment, respectively.upper P Subscript s normal bar 0Ps_0 is the signal power generated by the TX silicon, i.e., 
the 0th component. alpha Subscript kαk is the attenuation/gain of the k t hkth component. upper P Subscript n normal bar k minus 1Pn_k−1 is the 
noise power of the left parenthesis k minus 1 right parenthesis t h(k −1)th component. 
Before we start to compute the SNR of each line code, the following assumptions 
are made as the foundation of the noise performance comparison: 
1. All line codes use the same termination impedance and temperature. 
2. The thermal noise is a Gaussian stochastic process with a steady distribution. 
3. The noises applied to each wire are of equal levels and are fully uncorrelated.

156
S. S. Chen et al.
Due to the Gaussian nature of the noise, the combined effect of multiple processing 
circuits, with each of them corresponding to a wire, should be calculated using the 
variance (or standard deviation) rather than the peak voltage of the noises. Also based 
on Eq. (9.7), the noise level relates to the bandwidth of the processing circuit which 
is in proportion to the Nyquist frequency of the line code; thus, the bandwidth of 
each line code must be reﬂected in the SNR calculation. The three codes’ SNRs are 
calculated as follows: 
StartLayout 1st Row 1st Column italic SNR Subscript italic NRZ 2nd Column equals StartFraction left parenthesis upper V Subscript s w i n g Superscript italic NRZ Baseline right parenthesis squared Over left parenthesis upper V Subscript n o i s e Superscript italic NRZ Baseline right parenthesis squared EndFraction 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column equals StartFraction 1 Over sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript 2 Endscripts sigma Subscript i Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over 2 sigma Subscript n Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction EndLayout
SNRNRZ =
(V NRZ
swing)2
(V NRZ
noise)2
=
1
2Σ
i=1
σ 2
i
=
1
2σ 2n
(9.11) 
StartLayout 1st Row 1st Column italic SNR Subscript italic PAM 3 2nd Column equals StartFraction left parenthesis upper V Subscript italic swing normal bar italic min Superscript italic PAM 3 Baseline right parenthesis squared Over left parenthesis upper V Subscript italic noise Superscript italic PAM 3 Baseline right parenthesis squared EndFraction 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column equals StartFraction one fourth Over sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript 2 Endscripts sigma Subscript i Superscript 2 Baseline dot upper B Subscript italic PAM 3 Baseline EndFraction equals StartStartFraction 1 OverOver StartFraction 16 Over 3 EndFraction sigma Subscript n Superscript 2 Baseline EndEndFraction EndLayout
SNRPAM3 =
(V PAM3
swing_min)2
(V PAM3
noise )2
=
1
4
2Σ
i=1
σ 2
i · BPAM3
=
1
16
3 σ 2n
(9.12) 
StartLayout 1st Row 1st Column italic SNR Subscript italic PAM 4 2nd Column equals StartFraction left parenthesis upper V Subscript italic swing normal bar italic min Superscript italic PAM 4 Baseline right parenthesis squared Over left parenthesis upper V Subscript italic noise Superscript italic PAM 4 Baseline right parenthesis squared EndFraction 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column equals StartFraction one ninth Over sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript 2 Endscripts sigma Subscript i Superscript 2 Baseline dot upper B Subscript italic PAM 4 Baseline EndFraction equals StartFraction 1 Over 9 sigma Subscript n Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction EndLayout
SNRPAM4 =
(V PAM4
swing_min)2
(V PAM4
noise )2
=
1
9
2Σ
i=1
σ 2
i · BPAM4
=
1
9σ 2n
(9.13) 
where sigma Subscript iσi is the standard deviation of the noise on wire ii, and sigma Subscript nσn is the uniform 
value chosen forsigma Subscript iσi—as aforementioned, all wires have an equal noise level.upper B Subscript upper P upper A upper M Baseline 3BP AM3, 
upper B Subscript upper P upper A upper M Baseline 4BP AM4, upper B Subscript upper E upper N upper R upper ZBE N RZ are the bandwidths required by each code normalized to NRZ, i.e., 
0.667, 0.5, and 0.667. 
The SNR here is calculated in a voltage-based manner. The same results should 
be obtained if changed to the power-based manner, with the equations modiﬁed 
accordingly. 
The SNR ratio of the four signalings (using NRZ as the baseline) can be further 
calculated as follows: 
StartLayout 1st Row upper N upper R upper Z colon upper P upper A upper M Baseline 3 colon upper P upper A upper M Baseline 4 2nd Row equals 1 colon 0.612 colon 0.471 3rd Row equals 0 dB colon negative 4.26 dB colon negative 6.53 dB EndLayout
N RZ : P AM3 : P AM4
= 1 : 0.612 : 0.471
= 0 dB : −4.26 dB : −6.53 dB
(9.14) 
It should be noted that the SNRs calculated above have taken into account the 
amplitude penalty of PAM3 and PAM4 with respect to NRZ, i.e., 6.02 dB for PAM3, 
and 9.54 dB for PAM4. Therefore, the reduced noise penalty of PAM3 (minus−4.26 dB) 
and PAM4 (minus−6.53 dB) shows that if the amplitude penalty is taken out of the equation,

9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison …
157
then PAM3 and PAM4 have a better noise performance than NRZ—thanks to their 
smaller Nyquist frequencies. 
The simulation is performed on Ch3 with the baseline simulation conﬁguration. 
An AGC thermal noise of varying levels over 3 dB BW, i.e., 1.5 Nyquist frequency, 
or 0.75 bit rate for NRZ, is applied to each of the wires during the simulation of 
each line code. Since the AGC thermal noise is speciﬁed in RMS, the amplitude 
needs to be multiplied by 1.414 when applied to the wires. Equation (9.15) gives  the  
computation of the AGC noise 
upper V Subscript n normal bar upper A upper G upper C Baseline equals 1.414 dot upper V Subscript n normal bar w h i t e normal bar r m s Baseline dot upper BVn_AGC = 1.414 · Vn_white_rms · B
(9.15) 
where upper V Subscript n normal bar upper A upper G upper CVn_AGC is peak-to-peak noise voltage produced by the AGC circuit at RX, 
upper V Subscript n normal bar w h i t e normal bar r m sVn_white_rms is the root mean square (RMS) thermal noise of the AGC circuit, and B 
is the minus−3 dB bandwidth. 
With the AGC noise voltage obtained, we can calculate the channel output under 
the inﬂuences of noise. As an example, the output of wire 0 is calculated as follows: 
upper V Subscript w Baseline 0 Baseline equals StartRoot upper V Subscript w Baseline 0 normal bar i n Superscript 2 Baseline plus upper V Subscript n normal bar upper A upper G upper C Superscript 2 Baseline EndRootVw0 =
/
V 2
w0_in + V 2
n_AGC
(9.16) 
whereupper V Subscript w Baseline 0Vw0 is the output of wire 0 under the inﬂuence of the AGC noise,upper V Subscript w Baseline 0 normal bar i nVw0_in is the 
wire 0 signal arriving at the input of AGC where it has not been impacted by the RX 
noise yet. All three signals are of RMS values. 
For the three differential signalings NRZ, PAM3, and PAM4, independent Gaus-
sian noises are applied to the P and N wires. 
In both the OIF CEI and the Ethernet 802.3 standards, there is a channel operating 
margin (COM) parameter called “one-sided noise spectral density” used to represent 
the noise level at RX (IEEE 802.3 ck Work Group 2020). 
For 200GAUI-4 and 400GAUI-8 chip-to-chip Ethernet channel, this noise param-
eter (eta 0η0) is deﬁned as 2.6 e Superscript negative 8 Baseline upper V squared divided by upper G upper H z2.6e−8V 2/GHz which can be translated into the amplitude 
spectrum density as shown by Eq. (9.17) 
StartLayout 1st Row 1st Column eta 0 equals 2.6 dot 10 Superscript negative 8 Baseline dot upper V squared divided by upper G upper H z 2nd Column equals 2.6 dot 10 Superscript negative 8 Baseline dot 10 Superscript negative 9 Baseline upper V squared divided by upper H z 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column left right double arrow 5.10 n upper V divided by StartRoot upper H z EndRoot EndLayout
η0 = 2.6 · 10−8 · V 2/GHz = 2.6 · 10−8 · 10−9V 2/Hz
⇔5.10nV/
√
Hz
(9.17) 
In this study, only thermal noise is considered, and all other types of noises, as 
well as all types of jitters, are ignored. For this reason, our experiments show that an 
AGC thermal noise of 5.18 nV slash StartRoot Hz EndRootnV/
√
Hz does not produce much notable degradation. 
Such a result, we deem, should be reasonable since many other impairments are not 
included in this study. After increasing the noise level to 10 nV slash StartRoot Hz EndRootnV/
√
Hz, signiﬁcant 
degradation starts to show. Therefore, we use 10 nV slash StartRoot Hz EndRootnV/
√
Hz and 20 nV slash StartRoot Hz EndRootnV/
√
Hz as two 
noise levels to evaluate the performances of the four codes. 
The simulation results obtained with 20 nV slash StartRoot Hz EndRootnV/
√
Hz noise applied are presented in 
Fig. 9.22. The EHs and EWs are measured at 1e–12 bit error rate. Figure 9.23 presents

158
S. S. Chen et al.
Fig. 9.22 Eye diagrams obtained with the three encoding schemes, with 20nV slash StartRoot Hz EndRootnV/
√
Hz noise applied 
Fig. 9.23 Sensitivity to noise a EH; b EW. Blue:  No  skew; Red: 10 ps skew;  Yellow: 20 ps skew  
the comparison of the EH and EW obtained with the three line codes. We have the 
following observations: 
1. EH-wise, the order of sensitivity with respect to noise is PAM4, PAM3, and NRZ, 
with PAM4 being the most sensitive code scheme. 
2. EW-wise, the order of sensitivity with respect to noise is PAM3, PAM4, and NRZ, 
with all three codes being relatively insensitive to noise, at least for the noise levels 
below 20 nV slash StartRoot Hz EndRootnV/
√
Hz. 
In summary, NRZ demonstrates the best noise performance among the three, and 
PAM3 is ranked in the middle, with PAM4 having the worse performance under the 
inﬂuence of noise. 
Summary 
In this chapter, we start with a brief history of the 3-level modulation technique, 
then move on to the discussion of PAM3. Two encoding scheme variants 3B2T and 
11B7T, and the two ways of producing the pseudo-random test sequence for PAM3 
are explained. The high-speed transmission performance of PAM3 is analyzed, in the 
presence of various channel impairments including reﬂection coefﬁcient, insertion

9
PAM3: History, Algorithm, and Performance Comparison …
159
loss, crosstalk, skew, and noise. For the purpose of performance comparison, NRZ 
and PAM4 are included in the simulation and analysis. The results show that while 
PAM3 has a certain level of robustness in terms of reﬂection coefﬁcient, insertion 
loss, and mode conversion, it also has a relatively higher sensitivity with respect to 
crosstalk and noise. This work and its conclusion can be used as a reference when 
deciding on the optimal high-speed modulation method for a certain implementation. 
References 
Analog Devices (2013) Managing noise in the signal chain, Part 1: annoying semiconductor noise, 
preventable or inescapable? https://www.analog.com/en/technical-articles/managing-noise-in-
the-signal-chain.html/. Accessed 17 September 2022 
Broadcom Corporation (2014) BroadR-Reach? Physical layer transceiver speciﬁcation for automo-
tive applications, V3.0, May 2014 
Chen SS, Xu Z (2021) The sensitivity of ENRZ to Skew—in comparison to NRZ, PAM3, and 
PAM4. In: 2021 IEEE 25th workshop on signal and power integrity (SPI), pp 1–4 
Chen SS, Xu Z, Holden B, Tajalli A (2021) The sensitivity of ENRZ to crosstalk—in comparison to 
NRZ, PAM3, and PAM4. In: IEEE international joint EMC/SI/PI and EMC Europe symposium, 
pp 1116–1121 
David B (2015) The mysterious disappearance of duo-binary signaling. https://www.edn.com/the-
mysterious-disappearance-of-duo-binary-signaling/. Accessed 17 September 2022 
Holden B (2013) An exploration of the technical feasibility of the major technology options for 
400GE backplanes. http://www.ieee802.org/3/400GSG/public/13_07/holden_400_01_0713.pdf 
https://www.electronics-notes.com (2023) Understanding reﬂection coefﬁcient. https://www. 
electronics-notes.com/articles/antennas-propagation/vswr-return-loss/reﬂection-coefﬁcient. 
php. Accessed 7 January 2023 
https://www.everythingrf.com (2023) Return loss to reﬂection coefﬁcient calculator—everything 
RF.
https://www.everythingrf.com/rf-calculators/return-loss-to-reﬂection-coefﬁcient-
calculator. Accessed 7 January 2023 
http://www.techpowerup.com (2022) Samsung reveals GDDR7 memory uses PAM3 signalling 
to achieve 36 Gbps data-rate. https://www.techpowerup.com/301767/samsung-reveals-gddr7-
memory-uses-pam3-signalling-to-achieve-36-gbps-data-rate. Accessed 11 December 2022 
https://www.videocardz.com 
(2022) 
SAMSUNG 
conﬁrms 
GDDR7 
uses 
PAM3 
signal-
ing. https://videocardz.com/newz/samsung-gddr7-memory-to-offer-36-gbps-bandwidth-uses-
pam3-signaling. Accessed 11 December 2022 
IEEE P802.3df 200 Gb/s, 400 Gb/s, 800 Gb/s, and 1.6 Tb/s Ethernet Task Force (2022) Tools and 
channel data area. https://www.ieee802.org/3/df/public/tools/index.html. Accessed 7 October 
2022 
IEEE 802.3 ck Work Group (2020) IEEE 802.3 ck COM script. http://www.ieee802.org/3/ck/public/ 
tools/. Accessed 11 October 2022 
IEEE Computer Society (2016a) IEEE standard for ethernet amendment 1: physical layer speciﬁ-
cations and management parameters for 100 Mb/s operation over a single balanced twisted pair 
cable (100BASE-T1). IEEE Standard for Ethernet, March 2016 
IEEE Computer Society (2016b) IEEE standard for ethernet amendment 4: physical layer speciﬁ-
cations and management parameters for 100 Mb/s operation over a single balanced twisted pair 
cable (1000BASE-T1). IEEE Standard for Ethernet, September 2016 
IEEE Computer Society (2018) IEEE Standard for Ethernet 802.3-2018, December 2018 
Law KL, Masouros C (2018) Symbol error rate minimization precoding for interference exploitation. 
IEEE Trans Commun 66(11):5718–5731

160
S. S. Chen et al.
Lender A (1963) The duobinary technique for high-speed data transmission. IEEE Trans Commun 
Electron 82(2):214–218 
Liu Z, Marvel Corp. (2014) Line code and FEC performance. In: IEEE 802.3bp RTPGE, July 2014 
Plenary Meeting 
OIF (Optical Internetworking Forum) (2022) Common electrical I/O (CEI)-electrical and jitter 
interoperability agreements for 6G+ bps , 11G+ bps, 25G+, 56G+ bps and 112G+ bps I/O (OIF-
CEI-05.0), pp 1–300 
Thain A, Le Sergent F, Marot C, Pasquier B (2016) Suitability of 2-wire ethernet solutions for 
aerospace applications. In: Proceedings of 2016 ESA workshop on aerospace EMC, Aerospace 
EMC 2016, no 1, pp 4–7 
USB-IF (2022) Universal serial bus 4 (USB4) Retimer Speciﬁcation, Version 2.0, Revision 1.0, 
October 2022 
Wikipedia (2022) T-carrier. https://www.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T-carrier. Accessed 7 January 2022 
Yang N, Yeoh PL, Elkashlan M, Yuan J, Collings IB (2012) Cascaded TAS/MRC in MIMO multiuser 
relay networks. IEEE Trans Wirel Commun 11(10):3829–3839

Chapter 10 
Emerging Interconnect Technologies 
for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics 
Hansel Desmond D’Silva and Amit Kumar 
Abstract The chapter examines the latest advancements in electronic intercon-
nect technologies and their effects on system design. It discusses the increasing need 
for advanced interconnect technologies in catering to faster data transfer, advanced 
image processing, and stronger computing power, emphasizing the signiﬁcance of 
integrating various components into one device. The chapter also analyzes current 
trends in chip-packages, circuit boards, cables, and connectors, and their contri-
bution to the electronic industry’s growth. A brief overview on the trends in the 
technologies pertaining to high-speed serializer/deserializer, memory and printed/ 
ﬂexible electronics is presented. The chapter offers a comprehensive overview of the 
most signiﬁcant trends and advancements in high-speed electronics, making it an 
indispensable resource for designers and engineers in the ﬁeld. 
Keywords High-speed · Data Rate · Chip · Package · Connector · Cable · Printed 
Circuit Board 
Introduction 
As high-speed data rates continue to increase, reaching 25 Gbps and beyond, the 
application of microwave theory to signal propagation becomes increasingly impor-
tant (Gao et al. 2020a, 2010; Mingmin et al. 2006; Ng and Yeo 1998). The need 
for high bandwidth drives data rates closer to 100 Gbps, creating new challenges in 
effectively managing heat and routing signals through various components such as 
the package, cable, connector, and printed circuit board.
H. D. D’Silva envelope symbol · A. Kumar 
Achronix Semiconductor Corporation, Bangalore, India 
e-mail: hanseldsilva@achronix.com 
A. Kumar 
e-mail: amitkumar@achronix.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_10 
161

162
H. D. D’Silva and A. Kumar
To meet these challenges, innovation in signaling and channel topology is required. 
This requires a thorough understanding of technology trends for different components 
in a high-speed channel. It has become crucial for designers to integrate different 
modules into a single device while choosing to create a robust design that can support 
a variety of products through multiple suppliers. The result is a growing number of 
innovations aimed at delivering higher throughput and improved performance in 
electronic products (Kim and Noquil 2005). 
The trend toward higher data rates and the need for innovation in high-speed 
channel technology highlights the importance of staying current with the latest 
advancements and techniques in the ﬁeld of electronics. By doing so, designers and 
engineers can create products that meet the ever-growing demands of technology and 
provide users with a seamless experience. This chapter delves into the forefront of 
advancements within package technology, printed circuit boards (PCBs), and ﬂexible 
electronic technologies. Its purpose is to comprehensively comprehend the transfor-
mative innovations occurring in these domains, innovations that play a pivotal role 
in equipping us to effectively meet the escalating demands for elevated data rates 
and enhanced bandwidth and throughput capabilities. 
Package Technology 
The increasing demand for compact and portable devices is driving the need to minia-
turize individual components. Moore’s law, named after Gordon Moore, co-founder 
of Intel, stated that the number of transistors on a microprocessor would double 
approximately every two years, leading to exponential growth in computing power 
and miniaturization of electronic devices. However, as transistors have approached 
the physical limits of miniaturization, the rate of growth has slowed down, and experts 
predict that the law has reached its limits. This has resulted in a shift in focus from 
shrinking transistors to miniaturizing and integrating components at the package 
level (Acito 2019). 
Packaging technology has become increasingly important in recent years as it 
plays a critical role in accommodating more and more components at the chip-
package level. By integrating components that were previously located on the printed 
circuit board as on-package components, the design of the device can be simpliﬁed 
while making it more power-efﬁcient. The advancements in semiconductor pack-
aging are helping to meet the demands of emerging technologies, both in terms of 
application and design, while still considering cost considerations. 
As technology advances, the trend in semiconductor packaging is shifting toward 
a more three-dimensional (3D) approach from the earlier two-dimensional (2D) and 
two-and-a-half dimensional (2.5D) realized approaches, providing greater design 
density and performance in a compact form factor (Wu 2015). This shift toward 
3D packaging has been driven by the need for ever-increasing data rates and minia-
turization of components at the chip-package level. The 1970–2050 semiconductor 
packaging roadmap highlights the evolution of packaging technology and the need for

10
Emerging Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits …
163
greater integration of components at the chip-package level (Status of The Advanced 
Packaging Industry 2021). 
One approach to achieve greater integration is through the use of the chiplet-based 
design at the chip-package level by the heterogeneous integration of components. 
This design approach has led to innovations such as the 3D NAND, High Bandwidth 
Memory (HBM), 3D System-on-Chip (SoC), and large body sized packages for 
supporting AI, HPC, and networking applications. The trend toward high-density 
fan-out packaging accelerates in these areas, as well as in mobile devices. 
Additionally, advancements in packaging technologies are also supporting the 
growth of 5G mm Wave technology in mobile devices, such as through the use 
of double-side molded Ball Grid Array (BGA), low dielectric loss materials, and 
Antenna in Package (AiP). The trend toward larger package designs using all-side 
molded Wafer Level Chip Scale Packages (WLCSP) is also expected to increase. 
The current trend in the roadmap of packaging technology presents the need for 
greater integration of components from the perspective of functionality, miniaturiza-
tion, interconnect density, reliability, and yield, while maintaining cost-effectiveness 
as the main driving factor. With the increasing demand for high-speed data rates, the 
development and advancement of packaging technology plays a critical role in the 
future of electronics. 
In summary, the integration of components at the chip-package level has become 
increasingly important as electronic devices become smaller. Moreover, power 
consumption is also of prime importance. The trend toward miniaturization and 
increased data rates has driven the development of a range of package technolo-
gies that can meet the demands of emerging technologies while still maintaining 
performance, reliability, and cost-effectiveness. 
Combining Multiple Technologies—Chiplets 
The use of chiplets in semiconductor packaging at the chip-package provides a new 
and innovative solution to the integration of multiple different technologies in minia-
turizing components. Instead of trying to integrate multiple technologies on a single 
substrate, which can result in design and performance limitations, chiplets offer a 
more efﬁcient approach. This approach involves combining chiplets of different tech-
nologies from different suppliers, such as different materials and functions, from 
different sources, including fabless design houses, foundries, wafer sizes, feature 
sizes, and companies, using different packaging technologies (Lau 2019a, b). This 
provides a way to bring together the best of each technology in one integrated 
system, resulting in improved performance and reduced costs. The ability to inte-
grate chiplets of different technologies allows for greater ﬂexibility and customiza-
tion, enabling the development of innovative solutions to meet the speciﬁc needs of 
different applications across different technologies. 
The various companies in the chip industry are pushing for the standardization 
of the necessary infrastructure for integrating different IP blocks using chiplets.

164
H. D. D’Silva and A. Kumar
The chiplet-based design makes it easier to design more efﬁcient systems for 
speciﬁc applications by allowing designers to choose IP blocks from various vendors 
across different technologies. Chiplets have emerged as a way to continue or even 
surpass Moore’s Law. The introduction of the Universal Chiplet Interconnect Express 
(UCIe) Speciﬁcation 1.0 provides designers with a standardized method of inte-
grating diverse IP blocks of different technologies using chiplets (https://www. 
uciexpress.org/why-choose-us; https://semiengineering.com/standardizing-chiplet-
interconnects). UCIe follows a similar path as the Peripheral Component Intercon-
nect Express (PCIe), which standardizes the interface for add-in card functionality, 
enabling vendors to mix and match devices for different functions such as graphics, 
memory, and storage. 
The traditional System-on-Chip (SoC) package typically incorporates multiple 
functional blocks such as processors, co-processors, accelerators, memories, and 
other input/output functions. However, a chiplet-based approach breaks down these 
functional blocks into smaller IP blocks which may be manufactured using different 
technologies, called chiplets. The advantage of this approach is that during manu-
facturing, any faulty chiplet can be easily replaced, leading to improved yield, 
cost-effectiveness, and efﬁciency. The increased level of integration through the 
use of chiplets allows for a more ﬂexible and scalable design that goes beyond 
a vendor-speciﬁc implementation. By discarding unneeded IP blocks, the chiplet-
based approach enables designers to focus on speciﬁc applications, resulting in a 
more robust design. 
The AMD 4th generation of EPYC server CPUs, features the use of chiplets 
in the design. The AMD 4th Gen EPYC 9004 series processors, referred to as 
Genoa, are based on the Zen 4 DNA technology also used in the company’s Ryzen 
7000 series of desktop CPUs (https://www.amd.com/en/partner/4th-generation-amd-
epyc). The Zen 4 CPU dies are produced with 5 nm technology, while the I/O die 
is created using 6 nm processes (https://www.amd.com/system/ﬁles/documents/4th-
gen-epyc-processor-architecture-white-paper.pdf). The use of chiplets in the design 
of the EPYC Genoa processors enhances the scalability and robustness of the design, 
allowing for the integration of different IP blocks and the possibility of discarding and 
replacing individual chiplets during the manufacturing process, resulting in increased 
efﬁciency, reduced costs, and improved yield. 
Die Stacking 
Die stacking is an assembly technique where two or more dies are stacked and bonded 
inside a single package. It was initially designed to increase memory density by 
stacking two memory chips together. The process of die stacking provides beneﬁts 
such as improved performance, enhanced reliability, reduced time-to-market, and 
the ability to integrate multiple technologies into one package (Die stacking and 
the system 2012, 2018). There are two types of die stacking: 3D stacking and 2.5D 
stacking based on interposer, both of which are depicted in Fig. 10.1.

10
Emerging Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits …
165
Fig. 10.1 Two ﬂavors of die stacking 
The electronics industry is moving toward advanced techniques at the chip-
package level instead of placing discrete chips on a board. These techniques include 
2.5D, bridges, fan-out, and multi-chip modules (Marte et al. 2018). In 2.5D, the dies 
are stacked adjacent to each other and connected through through-silicon vias (TSVs) 
on top of an interposer (Gao et al. 2020b). However, the cost of the interposer can 
be relatively high, limiting the adoption of 2.5D packaging (Chen et al. 2015; Duan 
et al. 2021). As a cost-effective alternative, silicon bridges have been introduced as a 
solution for integrating multiple dies for both logic and memory on a single package 
(Wu et al. 2018). 
Intel’s Embedded Multi-die Interconnect Bridge (EMIB) is a solution to the prob-
lems posed by the high cost and limited die size of 2.5D packaging with silicon 
interposers (Duan et al. 2021). EMIB employs a small silicon bridge embedded 
within a substrate to provide connections between multiple dies in a single package. 
The advantage of using a silicon bridge with interposer is that it allows for higher 
bandwidth communication between the two dies than traditional packaging methods. 
This is because the interposer can be designed to have a large number of connections 
and can be made using advanced manufacturing techniques to achieve high density 
and high performance. 
Silicon bridges offer customers a cost-effective solution for interconnecting IP 
blocks manufactured through different technologies for speciﬁc applications. Silicon 
bridge with interposer technology is commonly used in high-end applications such 
as graphics processing units (GPUs), high-performance computing (HPC), and data 
center applications where high-speed communication between chips is critical. 
Silicon bridges, along with interposers, help to address the bottleneck in memory 
bandwidth, particularly in DRAM (https://www.chipestimate.com/Addressing-
Memory-Performance-for-100G-Ethernet-Networking/Memoir-Systems/Techni 
cal-Article/2012/09/18). The current double data rate four (DDR4) only offers a 
limited improvement in data rates compared to its predecessor, while Ethernet port 
speeds have increased signiﬁcantly over the past decade. To address this issue, the 
industry has developed high bandwidth memory (HBM), a 3D DRAM technology 
aimed at high-end systems. HBM stacks multiple DRAM dies on top of each other, 
providing more IOs. The speeds of DDR4, DDR5, LPDD4, LPDD5, and HBM2 
are 3.2 Gbps, 6.4 Gbps, 4.267 Gbps, 6.4 Gbps, and 2.0 to 2.4 Gbps, respectively. 
The corresponding bandwidths are 25.6 GBps, 51 GBps, 34 GBps, 51 GBps, and 
307 GBps. HBM presents signiﬁcantly greater bandwidth, even though it operates

166
H. D. D’Silva and A. Kumar
at lower data rates in comparison to DDRx interfaces. This disparity arises from 
HBM’s utilization of dense routing across an interposer or silicon bridge, enabling 
the interface to accommodate a substantial 2048 I/Os per HBM interface. However, 
HBM2 memory, which offers high bandwidth and low capacity, is expensive (price 
per GB). The industry is exploring other options to address this issue. The use of 
DDR4 and HBM2 memory helps to balance high performance and low latency, with 
DDR4 used as high performance memory and HBM2 used as L4 cache memory 
(https://www.techdesignforums.com/practice/technique/choosing-between-ddr4-
and-hbm-in-memory-intensive-applications). 
Printed Circuit Board Technology 
The advancements in manufacturing technology have allowed for signiﬁcant growth 
in the printed circuit board industry. These advancements have resulted in a more 
ﬂexible design process, enabling designers to incorporate a wider range of structures 
onto the circuit board (Pfahl et al. 2013). The ease of manufacturing has led to the 
incorporation of a number of structures on a printed circuit board, which earlier would 
have been difﬁcult to fabricate. This evolution of printed circuit board technology 
has created new opportunities for innovation and has opened up new avenues for the 
development of advanced electronics systems. 
The research and development of printed circuit board materials is critical, as each 
ﬁeld of application has unique environmental conditions that affect performance. 
Even small imperfections in printed circuit boards operating at high frequencies can 
result in various mechanisms that can degrade system margins (Zhang et al. 2019; 
Hou et al. 2019; Li et al.  2009). To mitigate these effects, a variety of mathematical 
models have been developed to capture the different mechanisms involved in mate-
rial properties, which are then incorporated into high-frequency electromagnetic 
simulations (Engin et al. 2019, 2011). 
In the design and fabrication of a printed circuit board, the layer count and the 
thickness of each layer play a critical role in the overall performance and functionality 
of the board. The number of layers in a stackup is not a ﬁxed limit and there can be 
more or fewer layers as per the requirements and capabilities of the manufacturer. As 
the layer count increases, so does the board thickness, which can impact the board’s 
rigidity. The core layer thickness contributes to the board’s overall rigidity, while the 
thickness of the prepreg layers affects the insulation properties and the thickness of 
the copper layers impacts the conductivity, resistance, and overall functionality of the 
board. It is crucial to work with the printed circuit board manufacturer to determine 
the optimal layer count and thickness for a given application, as each application has 
unique requirements and environmental conditions.

10
Emerging Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits …
167
Impedance discontinuities can have a signiﬁcant impact on the overall perfor-
mance of the circuit board and the devices connected to it. As the frequency of the 
signal increases, the impact of impedance discontinuities become more pronounced, 
leading to further degradation of the signal quality (https://www.nwengineeringllc. 
com/article/how-to-design-your-hdi-pcb-stackup.php; Zhang et al. 2014). It is there-
fore important to carefully design and fabricate the trace and VIA components to 
minimize impedance discontinuities and maintain signal integrity. 
This requires a deep understanding of the electrical properties of the materials used 
in the circuit board, as well as a knowledge of the various manufacturing processes 
and techniques involved when creating the trace and VIA components. In addition, 
careful planning of the routing layers and the placement of the trace and VIA compo-
nents is essential to minimize the impact of impedance discontinuities on the signal 
integrity. 
To ensure optimal performance, it is advisable to use simulation tools and tech-
niques to model and predict the impact of trace and VIA design on signal integrity, and 
to validate the design with measurements taken during the manufacturing process. 
In this way, the impact of impedance discontinuities can be reduced and the signal 
integrity of the printed circuit board can be maintained, even at high frequencies. 
Figure 10.2 illustrates the routing of 16 Gbps GDDR6 signals on a printed 
circuit board, which was a part of a layout viewed in the Ansys EM Desktop 
(https://www.ansys.com/en-in/products/electronics). The increasing complexity of 
signal routing on PCBs is driving the need for innovative routing structures. The 
design of a PCB requires careful planning to accommodate an increasing number of 
high-speed signals pertaining to memory due to the growing demand for bandwidth. 
Figures 10.3 and 10.4 demonstrate the routing of data and command signals for 16 
Gbps GDDR6 on a PCB which is was part of a layout viewed in the Ansys EM 
Desktop (https://www.ansys.com/en-in/products/electronics). Each signal route on 
a PCB may vary, and ongoing research focuses on ﬁnding innovative ways to route 
signals in dense areas. 
The rise of design complexity and density requires exploration of new structures 
for routing on different layers. One such structure is the Vertical Conductive Structure 
(VeCS), a slot technology that presents a potential alternative to the VIA technology
Fig. 10.2 Routing of signals for 16 Gbps GDDR6 across different layers

168
H. D. D’Silva and A. Kumar
Fig. 10.3 Routing of a data signal for 16 Gbps GDDR6 
Fig. 10.4 Routing of a command signal for 16 Gbps GDDR6
for accommodating denser trace routing with lower plane inductance (https://www. 
nextgin-tech.com/innovation-areas/vecs). VeCS technology allows traces to travel 
vertically through the layer stack-up. Figure 10.5 displays a three-dimensional view 
in comparing a VIA and VeCS for differential signaling, which was drawn in Ansys 
EM Desktop (https://www.ansys.com/en-in/products/electronics).
VeCS fabrication involves standard fabrication procedures, including slot drilling 
in the layer stack-up, followed by metallization and plating of the slot, and ﬁnally, 
hole drilling to remove excess metal, resulting in the creation of vertical trace struc-
tures (https://resources.pcb.cadence.com/blog/2020-vertical-conductive-structures-
vecs-for-pcb-hd-trace-routing). Figure 10.6 illustrates the fabrication steps of VeCS 
for differential signaling.
The slot structure of VeCS provides a well-deﬁned ground return path, resulting 
in improved impedance control at layer transitions and optimized crosstalk at 
the pin ﬁeld. The close proximity of the signal and ground in VeCS results 
in lower plane impedance and improved power delivery. The adoption of VeCS 
allows for denser trace routing at transition layers, reducing the number of 
required layers (https://resources.pcb.cadence.com/blog/2020-vertical-conductive-
structures-vecs-for-pcb-hd-trace-routing).

10
Emerging Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits …
169
Fig. 10.5 
Three-dimensional view of a 
VIA and VeCS for 
differential signaling
Fig. 10.6 Fabrication of a 
VeCS for differential 
signaling

170
H. D. D’Silva and A. Kumar
Trend in Data Rate of High-Speed Interfaces 
The exponential growth in the demand for data, fueled by the proliferation of appli-
cations, is putting pressure on high-speed interfaces to keep pace with increasing 
data rates. To meet this demand, engineers and researchers are exploring various 
innovations at both the chip-package and printed circuit board level. 
At the same time, there is work in exploring the different signaling and modulation 
schemes that are tailored to the unique requirements of each application, given the 
wide range of form-factors that exist at the system level. Table 10.1 provides a visual 
representation of the different SerDes high-speed interfaces, their corresponding data 
rates, signaling methods, and unit intervals (Dsilva et al. 2021). 
As data rates continue to increase, the unit interval, or the time between consecu-
tive bits, also decreases. This makes it increasingly challenging to detect the signal 
accurately within the clock cycle. To overcome this challenge, various equalization 
schemes aimed at detecting the received signal with the maximum accuracy and 
ensuring error-free transmission are incorporated into the system. 
The exponential growth in bandwidth-intensive applications such as artiﬁcial 
intelligence, virtual and augmented reality, and the internet of things are fueling 
the demand for faster and more efﬁcient memory interfaces. To keep up with the 
high-speed SerDes interfaces, high-performance memory technologies are becoming 
increasingly important. Table 10.2 shows the trend in the development of high-speed 
memory interfaces across DDR (Double Data Rate), GDDR (Graphics Double and 
LPDDR (Low Power Double Data Rate).
Table 10.1 Different high-speed SerDes interfaces 
IO standard
Released year
Signaling
Data rate [Gbps]
Unit interval [psec] 
PCIe 
Gen3 
2010
NRZ
8
125.00 
10G 
Ethernet 
2002
NRZ
10.3125
96.97 
PCIe 
Gen4 
2017
NRZ
16
62.50 
25G 
Ethernet 
2014
NRZ
25.78125
38.79 
50G 
Ethernet 
2018
PAM4
53.125
37.65 
PCIe 
Gen5 
2019
NRZ
32
31.25 
PCIe 
Gen6 
2021
PAM4
64
31.25 
100G 
Ethernet 
2010
PAM4
106.25
18.82 

10
Emerging Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits …
171
Table 10.2 Trend in the speed of high-speed memory interfaces 
Interface
Released year
Maximum Gbps per pin 
DDR1
1998
0.278 (for desktop/laptop modules) 0.213 (for server modules) 
DDR2
2003
1.066 
DDR3
2007
2.133 
DDR4
2014
3.2 
DDR5
2020
4.8 
GDDR1
1998
3.2 
GDDR2
2002
6.4 
GDDR3
2004
8 
GDDR4
2006
10 
GDDR5
2008
8 
GDDR5X
2016
12.8 
GDDR6
2018
20 
GDDR6X
2020
24 
LPDDR1
2003
2.5 
LPDDR2
2011
4.26 
LPDDR3
2012
8.5 
LPDDR4
2014
4.26 
LPDDR4X
2016
6.4 
LPDDR5
2018
6.4 
LPDDR5X
2021
8.5 
One of the most popular high-speed memory interfaces is GDDR, which 
offers a high data rate compared to other memory technologies such as DDR 
and LPDDR. This high-speed memory interface provides reduced latency and 
high bandwidth as an on-board memory solution, making it an attractive solu-
tion for applications that require high performance and reliability, such as self-
driving vehicles (https://www.chipestimate.com/Going-Beyond-GPUs-with-DDR6/ 
Rambus/Technical-Article/2019/04/09). 
GDDR6 is a newer and faster version of GDDR, with a bandwidth of 20 Gbps per 
pin (https://www.gamesradar.com/gddr6-memory-explained), which is more than × 
6.25 that of DDR4 and ×3.125 that of DDR5 and LPDDR5. This technology provides 
a signiﬁcant increase in performance and is well-suited for the ever-growing data-
intensive applications that require high bandwidth and low latency.

172
H. D. D’Silva and A. Kumar
High-Speed SerDes Channel Topologies 
A SerDes Physical Layer (PHY) is a crucial component in a high-speed data trans-
mission system, as it is responsible for transmitting digital signals over a channel. The 
channel topology refers to the physical arrangement of the elements in the channel, 
including the cable or connector in deﬁning the environment in which it operates. 
The topology has a signiﬁcant impact on the overall performance of the channel, 
including the amount of attenuation and reﬂections experienced by the signal as it 
travels from the transmitter to the receiver. 
The SerDes PHY is a critical component in high-speed data transmission systems, 
as it is responsible for transmitting digital signals over a channel with varying channel 
topologies. The PHY must be robust enough to support a wide range of equalization 
schemes in accommodating the different channel topologies for loss and reﬂections, 
including chip-to-chip, chip-to-module, and chip-to-chip over connector or cable 
topologies (IEEE: IEEE Standard for Ethernet 2016; Teng et al. 2022; IEEE 2022). As 
SerDes technology pushes for higher data rates to meet the demands of modern 
communication systems, channel topology must adapt in tandem to accommodate the 
increased frequency and complexity of signal transmission. The synergistic evolution 
of SerDes data rates and channel topologies underscores the critical interdependence 
between these two domains in the pursuit of seamless high-speed communication. 
The chip-to-chip topology is a common interconnect solution used in high-speed 
communication between two integrated circuits on a printed circuit board (PCB). The 
communication between the two chips is established over a medium-reach channel 
that consists of interconnect elements such as traces and vias. Figure 10.7 shows an 
example of this topology where two chips communicate over a PCB. 
The chip-to-module topology is designed for high-bandwidth switch applica-
tions where communication is established over a short-reach channel. The inter-
connect consists of a combination of elements such as traces, vias, and connectors. 
Figure 10.8 represents the chip-to-module topology in which a chip communicates 
with a pluggable optical or copper cable module. 
Fig. 10.7 Chip-to-chip topology 
Fig. 10.8 Chip-to-module topology

10
Emerging Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits …
173
Fig. 10.9 Chip-to-chip over backplane or cable topology 
In chip-to-chip over connector or cable topology, the communication is established 
over a long-reach channel that could be either a cabled solution or advanced PCB 
technology. The interconnect between the two chips is established over a backplane 
connector or cable and consists of elements such as traces, vias, and connectors. 
Figure 10.9 represents the chip-to-chip over connector or cable topology where two 
chips communicate over a printed circuit board and backplane connector or cable. 
Overall, the choice of channel topology depends on the communication require-
ments, reach, and performance. A robust SerDes PHY needs to be able to support a 
range of equalization to accommodate the different channel topologies and ensure 
error-free communication. 
The next generation of Ethernet is aiming to reach a data rate of 224 Gbps, which 
is more than double of the current 100G standard. However, this increased speed 
also presents new technical challenges, particularly for the chip-to-chip over cable 
topology. This topology involves connecting two chips using a one-meter cable and 
two connectors, with printed circuit board trace routing between the chips measuring 
seven to twelve inches. 
To successfully implement this topology at this high data rate, it is important to 
carefully consider the components and requirements in meeting the speciﬁcations. 
This includes analyzing the link budget, which is a comprehensive evaluation of 
all the losses and gains in the signal transmission path. This analysis is crucial in 
determining what is needed to meet the tentative target end-to-end loss of 40 dB up 
to 53 GHz for 224 Gbps PAM4 signaling. 
The goal of this development is to allow faster communication between chips and 
to ensure the stability of the transmission. 
At 224 Gbps PAM4 signaling, for the PCB trace routing, it is recommended to 
use a ball pitch of 0.8 mm or less to facilitate trace breakout in a dense pin ﬁeld area 
(Jiang et al. 2021, 2022). To reduce conductor loss and ensure low loss, it is important 
to work with the manufacturer to ensure a smooth copper surface roughness. 
In the package, the core thickness should be less than thousand micrometers and 
the total number of routing layers should be no more than twenty-two to meet the 
one-decibel vertical loss target. In the PCB, accommodation for up to eight signal 
routing layers is required, with a controlled maximum VIA length of less than sixty 
ﬁve mils and a VIA stub length smaller than six middles to meet the one-decibel of 
vertical loss target.

174
H. D. D’Silva and A. Kumar
The loss budget of the cable assembly is ﬁfteen decibels for a one-meter cable with 
two connectors. System designers are working with connector and cable suppliers to 
optimize the cable assembly for both attenuation and reﬂections along with reliability. 
The described link budgeting can be used to guide the routing on the PCB to ensure 
compliance with the end-to-end speciﬁcation. 
High-Speed Memory Channel Topologies 
The integration of equalization into memory PHYs is a response to the growing 
demand for low latency and high bandwidth memory channels in today’s modern 
computing applications (Kim et al. 2019; Na and To 2019; Nitin et al. 2018; Kabat 
et al. 2022). This integration is necessary to overcome the limitations posed by 
the increase in attenuation, reﬂections, and crosstalk at higher frequencies during 
the routing of traces to memory modules. This integration helps to optimize the 
system’s performance and ensure that the data transmission remains reliable, even 
at high speeds. 
In the past, equalization was only implemented in SerDes PHYs, which handle 
data transmission between two integrated circuits. However, with the growing 
demand for memory channels with higher bandwidth requirements, more complex 
equalizations are now being incorporated into memory PHYs. This helps to mitigate 
the impact of losses due to attenuation and crosstalk, which can signiﬁcantly degrade 
the overall performance of the system. 
The GDDR6 interface is a cutting-edge solution for memory systems in response 
to the need for high bandwidth and low latency. The data rate of 16 Gbps offered 
by the GDDR6 interface is able to support a range of demanding applications such 
as high-performance computing and machine learning operations, which require 
large amounts of data to be processed quickly (https://www.chipestimate.com/ 
Going-Beyond-GPUs-with-DDR6/Rambus/Technical-Article/2019/04/09; 
https:// 
www.gamesradar.com/gddr6-memory-explained). The high frequency of operation 
associated with this interface means that the design of both the package and PCB 
must be optimized to minimize losses, reﬂections, and crosstalk. The GDDR6 inter-
face also employs equalization techniques to counteract the degraded signal quality at 
higher frequencies. By meeting the requirements of high-bandwidth and low-latency 
applications, the GDDR6 interface is well suited for systems that require efﬁcient 
memory communication. 
Memory systems based on GDDR6 SDRAM technology are structured into chan-
nels to increase the overall performance and efﬁciency of the memory system. Each 
channel is designed around a 16-bit wide data path, which provides a high-speed 
data transfer rate. The channels can be conﬁgured in different ways to meet the 
speciﬁc requirements of the system (https://www.gamesradar.com/gddr6-memory-
explained). 
One of the conﬁgurations is the ×16 bit data channel conﬁguration, which consists 
of two independent ×16 bit data channels. Figure 10.10 shows GDDR6 signals in

10
Emerging Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits …
175
Fig. 10.10 GDDR6 signals 
in × 16 mode 
×16 mode. In this conﬁguration, each channel is connected directly to the memory 
controller, which allows for a maximum data transfer rate of sixteen bits per clock 
cycle. The two channels are independent, which means that they can operate simul-
taneously and independently, providing increased performance and ﬂexibility for the 
system. 
Another conﬁguration is the ×8 channel conﬁguration, which consists of two 
devices, each with ×8 channels, in a back-to-back clamshell conﬁguration. In this 
conﬁguration, each device operates as a separate channel, and the two channels are 
placed back-to-back, which reduces the signal trace length and the associated signal 
degradation. The ×8 channel conﬁguration provides a more compact and efﬁcient 
memory solution for systems that require a lower memory capacity or for systems 
that operate at a lower frequency. 
For the ×8 conﬁguration, the devices are typically positioned on opposite sides 
of the printed circuit board, with one device on the top layer and the other on the 
bottom layer, forming a clamshell layout. In the ×16 conﬁguration, a 16-bit channel 
uses two devices in a clamshell design, where byte 0 comes from channel A of the 
top device and byte 1 comes from channel B of the bottom device, appearing as a 
single ×16 channel to the controller. 
In the ×8 conﬁguration for data connections, only one of the two data bytes per 
channel is enabled (byte 0 of channel 0 and byte 1 of channel 1), while the other two 
data bytes are disabled during data transfer. This conﬁguration follows a T-topology, 
as shown in Fig. 10.11, where the command/address (CA) bytes for both channels 
are routed together to both DRAMs located on the bottom and top layers. 
Overall, the different channel conﬁgurations available with GDDR6 SDRAM-
based memory systems provide system designers with the ﬂexibility to design 
memory solutions that meet their speciﬁc requirements. The optimized channel 
design and the high-speed data transfer rate offered by GDDR6 technology make 
it a popular choice for high-performance applications, such as high-performance 
computing and machine learning operations.
Fig. 10.11 GDDR6 signals 
in ×8 mode 

176
H. D. D’Silva and A. Kumar
Printed/Flexible Electronics 
Printed and ﬂexible electronics are a growing ﬁeld in the electronics industry that 
have the potential to revolutionize the way we access and use electronics. The trend 
of printed and ﬂexible electronics has been rapidly increasing, moving from being 
an in-development concept to becoming a commercially viable product (Electronics 
and in 2021: New Applications Emerging. 2021). 
One of the key beneﬁts of printed and ﬂexible electronics is their ability to be easily 
incorporated into various forms, allowing for unique and innovative applications. For 
instance, in the healthcare sector, ﬂexible thin-ﬁlm devices such as skin patches have 
gained popularity as they enable continuous monitoring of vital signs while providing 
comfort to patients (Electronics and in 2021: New Applications Emerging. 2021). The 
recent COVID-19 pandemic has increased the demand for remote consultation and 
monitoring, which has in turn resulted in a growing need for more printed electronics 
in the healthcare industry. The ability of printed and ﬂexible electronics to be used in 
a variety of applications, combined with the recent advancements in the technology, 
makes it an exciting and promising ﬁeld for the future. 
The use of printed and ﬂexible electronics in the automotive industry is growing 
as the trend toward electriﬁcation in vehicles increases (https://www.idtechex.com/ 
en/research-report/electronic-skin-patches-2021-2031/821#:~:text=It%20reveals% 
20signiﬁcant%20opportunity%2C%20with,products%20attached%20to%20the% 
20skin). The application of these technologies offers several beneﬁts to vehicle 
manufacturers, such as increased customization options and improved functionality. 
For example, the integration of printed and ﬂexible electronics can enhance the in-car 
experience by adding high-performance displays and capacitive control surfaces. 
These technology advancements have already resulted in the commercialization of 
backlit capacitive touch sensors in Volkswagen models, which utilize transparent 
printed metal mesh ﬁlms and thermoformed parts (https://www.idtechex.com/ 
en/research-report/printed-and-ﬂexible-electronics-for-automotive-applications-
2021-2031-technologies-and-markets/806). This highlights the potential of printed 
and ﬂexible electronics to help vehicle manufacturers provide innovative and 
high-quality experiences for their customers. Furthermore, the use of printed and 
ﬂexible electronics in automotive radar systems is also increasing, demonstrating 
the versatility of these technologies in different aspects of the automotive industry. 
As the demand for printed/ﬂexible electronics continues to grow, the industry is 
expected to experience further commercialization and expansion in 2022. The unique 
feature of ﬂexibility provided by printed/ﬂexible electronics is attracting its adoption 
across various industries. In response to this growing trend, simulation methodologies 
are also being updated to accommodate the adoption of printed/ﬂexible electronics. 
This involves incorporating new mathematical models into existing simulation infras-
tructure to better predict and understand the behavior of these devices. This helps 
companies to design and develop printed/ﬂexible electronics with improved perfor-
mance, reliability, and cost-effectiveness. As a result, the widespread adoption of

10
Emerging Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits …
177
printed/ﬂexible electronics likely continue to drive innovation and growth across a 
variety of industries in the coming years. 
Summary 
The trends in the technologies at the chip-package level, printed circuit board, cable, 
and connector levels indicate the growth of electronic industry. The availability of 
different technologies enables designers to develop chips that can be customized 
for performance and area. High data rates require optimization at the system level, 
not just at the component level. Current chip-packages need to support different 
channel topologies while supporting different data rates. As the data rates for SerDes 
approach 100G+, designers need to work with connector and cable vendors to opti-
mize the product. Innovation in memory design is necessary to keep up with the 
ever-increasing data rate of high-speed SerDes interfaces. 
Printed/ﬂexible electronics are being adopted in various applications and are 
moving from a prototype phase to commercialization. New mathematical models are 
necessary for simulating printed/ﬂexible electronics. The current trend in the adop-
tion of printed/ﬂexible electronics is driving an update in simulation methodologies 
using existing infrastructure with the acceptance of new mathematical models. 
Acknowledgements The author, Hansel Desmond D’Silva, would like to express his gratitude to 
his son, Howard, his wife, Chrisenn, for their encouragement and support throughout the writing of 
this chapter. He would also like to acknowledge his parents and godparents for instilling in him the 
values and wisdom that have contributed to his success and strong faith. The author Amit Kumar 
would like to express his gratitude to his son, Avyan, his wife, Anupriya, his parents, brother, and 
the entire family for always standing with him and supporting him in every phase of life. 
References 
Acito B (2019) Leveraging the best of package and IC design for system enablement. In: 2019 
international wafer level packaging conference (IWLPC). IEEE, San Jose, CA, USA, pp 1–4. 
https://doi.org/10.23919/IWLPC.2019.8914109 
AMD EPYC™ 9004 series processors. https://www.amd.com/en/partner/4th-generation-amd-epyc 
Addressing memory performance for 100G ethernet networking. https://www.chipestimate.com/ 
Addressing-Memory-Performance-for-100G-Ethernet-Networking/Memoir-Systems/Techni 
cal-Article/2012/09/18 
Ansys electronics-electromagnetic, signal integrity, thermal and electro-mechanical simulation 
solutions. https://www.ansys.com/en-in/products/electronics 
Chen S, Li C, Chen Y, Zhang W, Zhong J, Cai J (2015) Study on electrical performance of stacking die 
package with silicon interposer. In: 2015 16th international conference on electronic packaging 
technology (ICEPT). IEEE, Changsha, China, pp 1158–1161. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEPT. 
2015.7236785 
Chunquan L, Xiaole K (2010) Effects of ground vias on high-speed signal transmission in high-
speed PCB design. In: 2010 11th international conference on electronic packaging technology &

178
H. D. D’Silva and A. Kumar
high density packaging. IEEE, Xi’an, China, pp 88–91. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEPT.2010.558 
2357 
Choosing between DDR4 and HBM in memory-intensive applications. https://www.techdesignfo 
rums.com/practice/technique/choosing-between-ddr4-and-hbm-in-memory-intensive-applic 
ations 
Duan G, Kanaoka Y, McRee R, Nie B, Manepalli R (2021) Die embedding challenges for EMIB 
advanced packaging technology. In: 2021 IEEE 71st electronic components and technology 
conference (ECTC). IEEE, San Diego, CA, USA, pp 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ECTC32696. 
2021.00012 
Die stacking and the system(2012) In: 2012 IEEE hot chips 24 symposium (HCS). IEEE, Cupertino, 
CA, USA, pp 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1109/HOTCHIPS.2012.7476475 
Dsilva H, McMorrow S, Gregory A, Krooswyk S, Mellitz R, Lee B (2021) De-mystifying the impact 
of Intra-pair Skew on high-speed SerDes Interconnect. In: 2021 IEEE 25th workshop on signal 
and power integrity (SPI). IEEE, Siegen, Germany, pp 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/SPI52361. 
2021.9505171 
Electronic skin patches 2021–2031. https://www.idtechex.com/en/research-report/electronic-
skin-patches-2021-2031/821#:~:text=It%20reveals%20signiﬁcant%20opportunity%2C%20w 
ith,products%20attached%20to%20the%20skin 
Engin AE, Ndip I, Lang K-D, Aguirre J (2019) Closed-form multipole debye model for time-domain 
modeling of lossy dielectrics. IEEE Trans Electromagn Compat 61:966–968. https://doi.org/10. 
1109/TEMC.2018.2838522 
Gao H, De S, Payne S (2020a) Impact of surface roughness on return planes in high speed signal prop-
agation. In: 2020a IEEE international symposium on electromagnetic compatibility & signal/ 
power integrity (EMCSI). IEEE, Reno, NV, USA, pp 150–154. https://doi.org/10.1109/EMC 
SI38923.2020.9191511 
Gao G, Theil J, Fountain G, Workman T, Guevara G, Uzoh C, Suwito D, Lee B, Bang KM, Katkar 
R, Mirkarimi L (2020b) Die to wafer hybrid bonding: multi-die stacking with Tsv integration. 
In: 2020b international wafer level packaging conference (IWLPC). IEEE, San Jose, CA, USA, 
pp 1–8. https://doi.org/10.23919/IWLPC52010.2020.9375884 
GDDR6 memory explained: what it is, and why it matters for next-gen. https://www.gamesradar. 
com/gddr6-memory-explained 
Going beyond GPUs with GDDR6. https://www.chipestimate.com/Going-Beyond-GPUs-with-
DDR6/Rambus/Technical-Article/2019/04/09 
Hou F, Wang W, Lin T, Cao L, Zhang GQ, Ferreira JA (2019) Characterization of PCB embedded 
package materials for SiC MOSFETs. IEEE Trans Compon, Packag Manuf Technol 9: 1054– 
1061. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCPMT.2019.2904533 
How to design your HDI PCB stackup. https://www.nwengineeringllc.com/article/how-to-design-
your-hdi-pcb-stackup.php 
Institute of electrical and electronics engineers (IEEE) (2022) IEEE standard for ethernet amend-
ment 4: physical layer speciﬁcations and management parameters for 100 Gb/s, 200 Gb/s, and 
400 Gb/s electrical interfaces based on 100 Gb/s signaling, In: IEEE Std 802.3ck-2022 (Amend-
ment to IEEE Std 802.3–2022 as amended by IEEE Std 802.3dd-2022, IEEE Std 802.3cs-2022, 
and IEEE Std 802.3db-2022), pp 1–316. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2022.9999414 
IEEE (2016) IEEE Standard for Ethernet. In: IEEE Std 802.3–2015 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.3– 
2012). USA, pp 1–4017. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2016.7428776 
Jiang X et al (2022) 224 Gbps-PAM4 end-to-end channel solutions for high-density networking 
system. In: DesignCon, USA 
Jiang X et al (2021) Designing 224G High performance FPGA package and board with conﬁdence. 
In: DesignCon, USA 
Kabat AK, Pandey S, Gopalakrishnan VT (2022) Performance evaluation of high bandwidth 
memory for HPC workloads. In: 2022 IEEE 35th international system-on-chip conference 
(SOCC). IEEE, Belfast, United Kingdom, pp 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/SOCC56010.2022. 
9908071

10
Emerging Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits …
179
Kim S, Kim S, Kim H, Cho K, Kim J (2019) Design methodology of passive equalizer for GDDR6 
memory test. In: 2019 joint international symposium on electromagnetic compatibility, sapporo 
and Asia-Paciﬁc international symposium on electromagnetic compatibility (EMC Sapporo/ 
APEMC). IEEE, Sapporo, Japan, pp 270–273. https://doi.org/10.23919/EMCTokyo.2019.889 
3936 
Kim J, Noquil JA, keng Tan T, Wu C-L, Choi S-Y (2005) Multi-ﬂip chip on lead frame overmolded 
IC package: a novel packaging design to achieve high performance and cost effective module 
package. In: Proceedings electronic components and technology, 2005. ECTC ’05. IEEE, Lake 
Buena Vista, FL, USA, pp 1819–1821. https://doi.org/10.1109/ECTC.2005.1442043 
Lau JH (2019a) Heterogeneous integrations. Springer Singapore, Singapore 
Lau JH (2019b) Recent advances and trends in heterogeneous integrations. J Microelectron Electron 
Packag 16:45–77. https://doi.org/10.4071/imaps.780287 
Li L, Lee DW, Hwang K-P, Min Y, Wang SX (2009) On-package magnetic materials for embedded 
inductor applications. In: 2009 international conference on electronic packaging technology & 
high density packaging. IEEE, Beijing, China, pp 471–474. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEPT. 
2009.5270707 
Marte A, Ernst U, Wu J, Yauw O, Clauberg H, Buergi D, Chylak B, Friederichs U, Barthold U (2018) 
Advances in memory die stacking. In: 2018 IEEE 68th electronic components and technology 
conference (ECTC). IEEE, San Diego, CA, pp 407–418. https://doi.org/10.1109/ECTC.2018. 
00068 
Mingmin Z, Donglin S, Fei D, Shenqing K, Xiaoxiao W (2006) The effect of impedance matching 
to high-speed connector’s signal integrity. In: 2006 7th international symposium on antennas, 
propagation & EM theory. IEEE, Guilin, China, pp 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISAPE.2006. 
353324 
Muraoka S, Shinkai G, Yagyu M, Uematsu Y, Ogihara M, Sezaki N, Osaka H (2011) PCB trace 
modeling and equalizer design method for 10 Gbps backplane. In: 2011 IEEE electrical design 
of advanced packaging and systems symposium (EDAPS). IEEE, Hanzhou, pp 1–4. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/EDAPS.2011.6213769 
Na N, To H (2019) Effectiveness of equalization and performance potential in DDR5 channels with 
RDIMM(s). In: 2019 IEEE 69th electronic components and technology conference (ECTC). 
IEEE, Las Vegas, NV, USA, pp 1208–1214. https://doi.org/10.1109/ECTC.2019.00187 
Nitin B, Randy W, Shinichiro I, Eiji F, Shibata R, Yumiko S, Megumi O (2018) DDR5 design 
challenges. In: 2018 IEEE 22nd workshop on signal and power integrity (SPI). IEEE, Brest, pp 
1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/SaPIW.2018.8401666 
Ng CS, Yeo TS (1998) Effects of interline coupling on bit error rate for high-speed digital signal 
propagation on PCB. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 45:362–364. https://doi.org/10.1109/41.681238 
Pfahl B, Fu H, Richardson C (2012) Highlights of iNEMI 2013 technology roadmaps. In: 2012 35th 
IEEE/CPMT international electronics manufacturing technology conference (IEMT). IEEE, 
Ipoh, Perak, Malaysia, pp 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMT.2012.6521822 
Printed electronics in 2021: new applications emerging. https://screenprintingmag.com/printed-ele 
ctronics-in-2021-new-applications-emerging 
Printed and ﬂexible electronics for automotive applications 2021–2031: technologies and 
markets. https://www.idtechex.com/en/research-report/printed-and-ﬂexible-electronics-for-aut 
omotive-applications-2021-2031-technologies-and-markets/806 
Status of The Advanced Packaging Industry (2021) https://s3.i-micronews.com/uploads/2021/09/ 
YINTR21223-Status-of-the-Advanced-Packaging-Industry-2021-ﬂyer.pdf 
Standardizing chiplet interconnects. https://semiengineering.com/standardizing-chiplet-interconn 
ects 
Teng T, Wang M, Hsu J, Lee W, Su T, Kan J, Chen B (2022) PCIe-Express channel design optimiza-
tion for out-of-guideline three connector topology. In: 2022 17th international microsystems, 
packaging, assembly and circuits technology conference (IMPACT). IEEE, Taipei, Taiwan, 
pp. 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/IMPACT56280.2022.9966687 
Universal Chiplet Interconnect Express. https://www.uciexpress.org/why-choose-us

180
H. D. D’Silva and A. Kumar
Vertical conductive structure a new interconnect technology. https://www.nextgin-tech.com/innova 
tion-areas/vecs 
Vertical conductive structures (VeCS) for PCB HD trace routing. https://resources.pcb.cadence. 
com/blog/2020-vertical-conductive-structures-vecs-for-pcb-hd-trace-routing 
Wu X (2015) 3D-IC technologies and 3D FPGA. In: 2015 international 3D systems integration 
conference (3DIC). p. KN1.1-KN1.4. IEEE, Sendai, Japan. https://doi.org/10.1109/3DIC.2015. 
7334564 
Wu J, Yauw O, Tan A, Clauberg H, Buergi D (2018) Thin die stacking technologies for 3D memory 
packages. In: 2018 China semiconductor technology international conference (CSTIC). IEEE, 
Shanghai, pp 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1109/CSTIC.2018.8369299 
Zhang W, Li N, Kasper E, Zheng Z, Shi L (2019) Impact analysis of high-frequency material and 
pcb fabrication technology on antenna design for 77/79 GHz automotive radar. In: 2019 IEEE 
Asia-Paciﬁc microwave conference (APMC). IEEE, Singapore, Singapore, pp 655–657. https:// 
doi.org/10.1109/APMC46564.2019.9038424 
Zhang J, Lim J, Yao W, Qiu K, Brooks R (2014) PCB via to trace return loss optimization for >25 
Gbps serial links. In: 2014 IEEE international symposium on electromagnetic compatibility 
(EMC). IEEE, Raleigh, NC, pp 619–624. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISEMC.2014.6899045 
4TH Gen AMD EPYC™ processor architecture. https://www.amd.com/system/ﬁles/documents/ 
4th-gen-epyc-processor-architecture-white-paper.pdf

Chapter 11 
Contact and Interconnect Considerations 
for Organic and Flexible Electronics 
Gargi Konwar and Shree Prakash Tiwari 
Abstract Flexible electronics has emerged as a promising technology for demon-
stration of smart and wearable products due to inherent capabilities for low temper-
ature, low cost, and large-area processing along with multi-functional capabilities 
in devices. Moreover, this technology has shown other important advantages over 
conventional electronics such as possibility of fabrication with natural materials 
and biodegradable substrates leading a path toward eco-sustainable, edible, and 
green electronics. Organic ﬁeld-effect/thin-ﬁlm transistors (FETs/TFTs) are widely 
explored active devices for ﬂexible electronics due to their suitability for ﬂexible 
circuits and sensing applications. These devices can act as a crucial block for smart 
wearable applications such as real-time health monitoring, electronic textiles, and 
electronic skin due to ﬂexibility and conformability. However, in real systems, these 
devices face various mechanical, thermal, electrical, and other environmental stim-
ulations during operation. Hence, these devices should be highly stable and reli-
able under internal or external inﬂuences. For integration of the ﬂexible devices in 
real systems, various contact resistances have to be minimized. Moreover, parasitic 
effects arising from overlaps and interconnects have to be carefully looked into. In 
this chapter, ﬁrstly, a historical perspective along with potential application areas 
of ﬂexible electronics are summarized. Further, crucial aspects for designing high-
performance organic TFTs with low contact resistance are discussed. New ways 
adapted by researchers for designing interconnects for ﬂexible and skin-like systems 
are discussed. Finally, options for alternative natural and biodegradable materials and 
processes are discussed aiming for eco-sustainable, ingestible, and green electronics. 
Keywords Biodegradability · Contact resistance · E-skin · Edible electronics ·
Flexible electronics · Organic ﬁeld-effect transistors (OFETs) · Thin-ﬁlm 
transistors (TFTs)
G. Konwar · S. P. Tiwari envelope symbol
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur, 
Rajasthan 342037, India 
e-mail: sptiwari@iitj.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_11 
181

182
G. Konwar and S. P. Tiwari
Introduction 
In the era of modern internet of things (IoT) enabled smart systems, ﬂexible and 
stretchable electronics have exhibited massive potential in making human lives easier 
through various innovative devices (Shi et al. 2020). This ﬁeld has gained signiﬁcant 
exposure in last three decades as one of the emerging research areas with promising 
applications toward real-time sensors, radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) tags, 
rollable display screens, biomedical, e-textile, and wearable as well as implantable 
electronics (Kim et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022; Rahmanudin et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2020; 
Singh et al. 2017). As an alternative to traditional rigid electronics, both industry 
and academia have explored this area for developing smaller and smarter devices 
with their inherent advantages of lightweight, bendability, large-area processability, 
and cost-effectiveness as well as compatibility with various ﬂexible and uncon-
ventional substrates including thin plastics, textile, paper, etc. Moreover, the use 
of organic materials adds inherent advantages including solution processability, 
low-temperature processing, ease of integration, etc. Thin-ﬁlm transistors (TFTs) 
are considered to be the most crucial component for ﬂexible electronic systems, 
especially in circuit components such as backplane drivers and analog interfacing 
circuits. Intense efforts have been made toward the development of high-performance 
ﬂexible organic TFTs to reach a level of performance equivalent to amorphous 
silicon transistors (Sirringhaus 2014). In general, heterogeneous integration is 
needed to achieve multi-functionality. However, ﬂexible organic TFTs can demon-
strate multi-functional properties from a single device, simplifying the preparation 
process and lowering the overall cost of systems (Kumaresan et al. 2021; Liu et al. 
2020; Maddirala et al. 2022; Park et al.  2021; Shang et al. 2021). Moreover, rapid 
growth of disposable electronics has exacerbated the electronic-waste issue over time, 
causing serious health and environmental concerns. For this, a variety of environmen-
tally friendly, biodegradable, eco-sustainable smart devices have emerged as a result 
of the integration of nature-induced materials such as silk, gelatin, egg albumen, 
chitosan, cellulose, starch, etc., which all offer good degradability, biocompatibility, 
no requirement of chemical synthesis, that makes them crucial for future sustainable 
and green electronics (Han et al. 2020; Irimia-Vladu 2014b; Liu et al. 2020; Petritz 
et al. 2013). They can also be employed as implantable devices in real-time health 
care and medical diagnosis without harming people’s health. 
Performance of ﬂexible organic TFTs is highly dependent on various factors 
starting from material properties, fabrications procedures, quality of ﬁlms, and crucial 
interfaces of devices such as semiconductor: dielectric and metal: semiconductor 
interfaces (Lamport et al. 2018). To achieve high-performance parameters, a suitable 
selection of these is highly recommended. Low voltage operation with high ﬁeld-
effect mobility (μ), high on–off current ratio (Ion/Ioff), low subthreshold swing (SS), 
and high environmental stability are the important requirements for high-quality 
transistors (Sirringhaus 2014). For consistent and stable characteristics in ﬂexible 
organic TFTs, thermally evaporated organic semiconductors (OSCs) are preferable;

11
Contact and Interconnect Considerations for Organic and Flexible …
183
however, solution-processable OSCs are required for low-cost and large-area produc-
tion capabilities such as inkjet or roll-to-roll printing. In addition, dielectric materials 
with smooth surface morphology and low gate leakage concerns are highly desirable 
for these devices as charge conductions happen near the few monolayers of dielec-
tric: semiconductor interfaces (Ortiz et al. 2010). The improvement in interfacial 
properties of semiconductor/dielectric by introducing hydrophobic self-assembled 
monolayers (SAMs) or ultrathin polymer ﬁlms is widely explored. Moreover, high-
quality OSCs ﬁlm can be grown over smooth dielectric surfaces with lower charge 
trapping sites there. Various high-k inorganics, polymers, and biopolymer dielectrics 
were introduced as gate insulators over the years to accomplish high electrical perfor-
mances in ﬂexible devices. High-k dielectrics were widely studied since they provide 
high gate capacitance for low-voltage operation. However, these have some limita-
tions of charge trapping and lower ﬂexibility as compared to polymer dielectrics. The 
low dielectric constant (2–5) of a majority of these polymer hinders obtaining low 
operating voltage TFTs. Bilayer of inorganic/organic hybrid gate dielectric combi-
nations was introduced, where polymer nanolayers were coated over high-k metal 
oxide dielectrics to reduce surface scattering and eventually help to grow highly 
oriented π-conjugated semiconductor molecules on top of the dielectrics (Ortiz et al. 
2010; Petritz et al. 2013; Rahmanudin et al. 2020). Another important interface 
that affects the device performance is semiconductor: metal interface. In general, 
a Schottky contact is seen at the semiconductor metal interface affecting the injec-
tion of carriers from source to semiconductor which is needed for charge transport in 
devices. Larger contact resistances impact more for short-channel devices. Moreover, 
device geometries also affect contact resistance (Lamport et al. 2018). Devices with 
staggered conﬁgurations have lower contact resistance as the charges are injected 
over a large area of semiconductors. Several interface engineering has been intro-
duced to suppress the overall contact resistance values (Hou et al. 2016; Lamport 
et al. 2018). Moreover, in ﬂexible devices, printable nanocomposite and ink based 
stretchable interconnects were investigated to make it feasible for ﬂexible substrates 
while providing an extra degree of freedom (Dang et al. 2017; Li et al.  2019; Zhao 
et al. 2022). Finally, these devices are connected through interconnect metal lines 
for implementation of circuits which have to be suitably designed for ﬂexible and 
stretchable applications. 
This chapter ﬁrstly discusses the operation and development of TFT devices with 
various organic/inorganic material components. Further, the two crucial aspects, i.e., 
contact resistance in the TFT device and interconnects suitable for ﬂexible circuits 
and systems for e-textile and large-area applications will be discussed in detail. 
The new designs for reducing contact resistances and interconnect reliability for 
ﬂexible and stretchable devices, along with new easy and cost-effective processes 
for roll-to-roll and large-area processing, will be ﬁnally discussed.

184
G. Konwar and S. P. Tiwari
Organic and Flexible Electronics: Historical Developments 
Though some initial explorations had earlier happened, in 1977, a demonstration of 
electrical conductivity in polyacetylene, conjugated polymer, played a huge role in 
revolutionizing organic electronics (Chiang et al. 1977). In the year 2000, the Chem-
istry Nobel Committee awarded A. J. Heeger, A. G. MacDiarmid and H. Shirakawa 
Nobel prize in chemistry (Chiang et al. 1977; Shirakawa et al. 1977) for the discovery 
of conductive polymers. Organic transistors with polythiophene (Koezuka et al. 1987; 
Tsumura et al. 1988) and small conjugate oligomers were demonstrated in the late 
1980s (Garnier et al. 1990). On the other hand, development for the fabrication of 
devices on ﬂexible substrates had started much earlier in 1960s, when the ﬁrst ﬂex-
ible solar cell arrays were demonstrated by thinning a single crystal silicon wafer up 
to 100 μm and then integrating on a plastic substrate to offer ﬂexibility (Crabb and 
Treble 1967; Ray  1967). Brody and colleagues developed the ﬁrst ﬂexible TFT in 
1968, when they fabricated a tellurium TFT on a strip of paper for displays (Brody 
1969). Further, they had developed TFTs on a wide range of ﬂexible substrates, 
including polyethylene, mylar, and anodized aluminum foil. Moreover, in the early 
1980s, solar cells on organic polymer substrates were also demonstrated with inor-
ganic active materials (Okaniwa et al. 1982a, b). For organic electronics, Burroughes 
and coworkers demonstrated the ﬁrst conjugated polymer-based light-emitting diode 
(PLED) in year 1990 (Burroughes et al. 1990). Apart from organic light-emitting 
diodes (OLEDs), organic FETs (Mannsfeld et al. 2010; Meager et al. 2014) and 
circuits based on organic FETs (Di et al. 2013; Khim et al.  2013; Li et al.  2018), 
solar cells (Chen et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2016), photodiodes (Lamprecht et al. 2005; 
Ng et al. 2008; Rauch et al. 2009), and lasers (Gaal et al. 2003) with organic materials 
have been demonstrated, leading the organic and ﬂexible electronics to the commer-
cial level. Developments toward ﬂexible inorganic electronics excelled mid-1980s 
for the display industry in Japan. Backplane driving circuitry for ﬂexible displays 
with Si:H TFTs sparked huge interest in ﬂexible electronics. Since then, various 
research groups and industries have started to explore technologies for ﬂexible elec-
tronics extensively. As compared to rigid technology, factors including ruggedness, 
portability, lightweight, and low production costs contribute to growth of this area. 
Later researchers demonstrated high-performance ﬂexible transistors with various 
vacuum evaporated semiconductors making these devices a real competitor to Si:H 
TFTs which were earlier considered to be suitable for ﬂexible transistors (Bisoyi 
et al. 2014; Geiger et al. 2022; Leise et al. 2021). Moreover, high processing temper-
atures required for inorganic semiconductors made it more challenging for ﬂexible 
electronics. Printed electronics, polymer electronics, plastics electronics, ﬂexible 
large-area electronics, etc. are some of the common names used today for ﬂexible 
organic electronics. Foldable displays, ﬂat panel display drivers, radio frequency 
identiﬁcation (RFID) tags, solar cells, printable batteries, smart packaging, ﬂexible 
sensors, printable circuits are examples of the advancement of ﬂexible electronics 
(Singh et al. 2017; Sirringhaus 2014).

11
Contact and Interconnect Considerations for Organic and Flexible …
185
Fig. 11.1 Examples of some ﬂexible electronic devices developed by academia. a A ﬂexible display 
developed by Arizona State University (CC BY 2.0), b An organic CMOS logic circuit with total 
thickness is less than 3 μm by Yasunori Takeda et al. at Yamagata University (CC BY 4.0), and 
c Typical organic transistor devices on transparent ﬂexible substrates by FLAME Research Group, 
IIT Jodhpur 
Moreover, today’s ﬂexible electronics has reached to a stage where heterogeneous 
integration of inorganic and organic devices can be utilized to develop a ﬂexible 
system for various smart applications (Kumaresan et al. 2021; Ma et al.  2022). 
Examples of some ﬂexible electronic devices developed by academic institutes are 
given in Fig. 11.1. These demonstrations range from developing large-area displays 
to high-performance CMOS-like circuits and multi-functional devices suitable for 
real-time health monitoring applications (Konwar et al. 2022a, b; Maddirala et al. 
2022). Though high performance, stability, and ﬂexibility are demonstrated from 
many of these devices, multiple implementation challenges are faced at system level 
when multiple devices are connected together. Contact resistance and interconnect 
issues become very important for development of reliable systems. 
Flexible Electronics: Advantages and Potential Applications 
The primary advantages of ﬂexible electronics include bendability, low-temperature 
processing, large-area processing, multi-functionality, and cost-effectiveness. The 
property of ﬂexibility allows roll-to-roll fabrications in which batch fabrication is 
possible at a high speed. In addition, mechanical ﬂexibility broadens the applications 
of devices in various ﬁelds like health care, wearable, implantable, and skin-like elec-
tronics, etc. Also, nature-originated materials were recently used for the development 
of ﬂexible devices to suppress the negative impact of technology on the environment 
and human health. The major applications are ﬂexible OLED displays, bendable 
sensors, and arrays, smart cards, ﬂexible circuitry, organic memory devices, artiﬁcial 
skin, etc. Developing OLED-based displays with TFT pixel driver circuits allows 
them to be fabricated on suitable lightweight and ﬂexible substrates providing desir-
able features like portability, foldability, rollability, wide viewing angle, etc. More-
over, ﬂexible printed components such as batteries and RFIDs offer various beneﬁts 
of energy autonomy and IoT capabilities. In 2007, PolyIC had presented the ﬁrst

186
G. Konwar and S. P. Tiwari
printed RFID tag for frequency of 13.56 MHz. These tags have useful for various 
emerging applications for IoT and wearable devices. Low-cost ﬂexible sensors based 
on TFT, resistor, or capacitor devices have shown potential applications for human 
activity monitoring, electronic skin, implantable systems, etc. Organic TFT-based 
sensors exhibit higher selectivity and sensitivity than the two-terminal-based sensors, 
because of speciﬁc properties of wide range of component materials which are used, 
and the unique signal ampliﬁcation capacity of device conﬁguration. The inherent 
advantages of organic materials have led to the development of lightweight, cost-
effective, and easily processable sensors applicable for various smart and stretchable 
applications. 
Flexible Organic TFTs 
Solution processability of organic semiconductors helps the TFT devices to be even-
tually fabricated using printing, making it a suitable candidate for future printed 
electronics. Organic semiconductors have been deposited by various solution casting 
techniques, including spin coating, spray coating, printing, etc. at temperatures 
<100 °C which is much lower than that for polycrystalline Si (~600 °C) and the 
hydrogenated amorphous Si (~300 °C). This property makes it suitable and compat-
ible to be integrated on ﬂexible substrates like plastics, cloth, paper, etc., which glass 
transition temperature is around 150 °C. These organic materials can be processed 
on bendable and foldable substrates due to their soft nature and help to overcome 
the limitations of existing silicon technology, where skin-like systems are required 
for health care monitoring devices. The overall advantages and simple processing 
techniques reduce the budget requirement and help to produce cost-effectively. In 
1983, the ﬁrst organic TFT was demonstrated by Ebisawa where the device was 
made using polyacetylene as an active semiconductor (Ebisawa et al. 1983). Even 
though organic TFTs have shown a lot of advantages, achieving high carrier mobility 
while environmental stability is still a critical challenge. Signiﬁcant efforts have been 
made in last decade for achieving mobility higher than 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Konwar et al. 
2022a, b), which is typical for ﬂexible Si:H TFTs. Organic TFTs comprise organic 
semiconductors as an active layer in place of inorganic active layer. Similar to conven-
tional MOSFET devices they have three terminals naming gate, source, and drain, 
however, the source and drain are metal in these TFTs contrary to MOSFETs where 
these electrodes are created by doping or implantation. 
Device Structure and Operation 
Depending on the position of the electrodes, i.e., gate and source-drain, organic TFTs 
can have four possible structures as schematically shown in Fig. 11.2. These are called

11
Contact and Interconnect Considerations for Organic and Flexible …
187
Fig. 11.2 Various conﬁgurations of organic TFTs depend on the relative positions of gate, source, 
and drain contacts. a bottom gate top contact, b bottom gate bottom contact, c top gate bottom 
contact, and d top gate top contact 
(a) bottom gate top contact (BGTC), (b) bottom gate bottom contact (BGBC), (c) 
top gate bottom contact (TGBC), and (d) top gate top contact (TGTC). 
Each device structures have their own advantages and disadvantages. For example, 
top contact structures are preferred for better contact formation and low contact 
resistance by introducing a large uniform area for charge injection into semicon-
ductor channel. In this conﬁguration, OSCs were deposited over the smooth dielectric 
surface and do not face many dissimilarities in interfaces hence able to grow better 
semiconductor ﬁlm. One of the most signiﬁcant drawbacks is that photolithography 
contact patterning is not possible since the contacts must be deposited on the top of 
OSCs, which may be dissolved by the used solvents in the lithography. 
On the other hand, pre-patterned bottom contact electrodes are mostly used for 
material screening offering simplicity but having issue of large contact resistance due 
to bad contacts at the electrode edges. Here, photolithographic contact patterning is 
possible. Top gate structures offer better environmental stability due to the protec-
tion layers formed over the semiconductor but it has a lot of process integration 
limitations as both the gate dielectric and gate contact must be deposited on top of 
semiconductor layer. Similarly, TGTC conﬁguration is rarely used where physical 
deposition method like sputtering is not compatible with the gate dielectric layer. 
Suitable selection of device geometry is recommended to achieve high-performance 
parameters. Moreover, it eventually depends on the processing methods used for the 
fabrication of devices.

188
G. Konwar and S. P. Tiwari
Operation and Parameter Extraction 
It is important to note that organic TFTs work in accumulation mode. However, the 
characteristics achieved from these devices are identical to those of conventional 
enhancement mode MOSFETs (Bharti et al. 2016). Since the source-drain elec-
trodes are mostly metals, the charge injection from source to semiconductor is very 
crucial for operation of these devices. Unlike crystalline silicon which has conduc-
tion and valance bands, the energy levels of organic semiconductors are termed 
as lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and highest occupied molecular 
orbital (HOMO) corresponding to these levels. For the injection of electrons, the 
work function of the metal has to be aligned with LUMO level of semiconductor. 
Similarly, for injection of holes, the work function of the metal has to be aligned 
with HOMO level of semiconductor. Moreover, these energy levels are shifted with 
help of applied gate and drain voltages to achieve an n-channel or p-channel device 
operation. The charge conduction for both types of charge transport is summarized 
through schematic diagrams in Fig. 11.3. On varying the input gate voltage V GS, the 
level of HOMO and LUMO were changed to match with the Fermi level of source 
metal contact as explained in Fig. 11.3. 
Initially, when V DS = V GS = 0 V, p-type TFT is in an equilibrium state where 
no current ﬂows between source and drain, and device is in OFF condition as shown 
in Fig. 11.3a. When V DS < 0;  V GS = 0 V, holes present in p-type OSC migrate
Fig. 11.3 Demonstration of the operating principle of TFTs with p-type OSC a–c and n-type OSC 
d–f depending on applied VGS 

11
Contact and Interconnect Considerations for Organic and Flexible …
189
toward negative biased drain contact. However, the current at this condition is very 
negligible since no mobile charges are present due to zero V GS. On applying negative 
gate voltage (Fig. 11.3c), mobile charges accumulate at the dielectric: semiconductor 
interface through the dielectric layer, and the transistor starts to conduct. These 
mobile charges resulted in a high electric ﬁeld at the interface and shifted HOMO 
and LUMO levels upward to match the Fermi energy level of drain contact with 
HOMO level. Similarly, for n-type OSCs (Fig. 11.3d–f) positive biased is applied to 
turn ON the transistor. Due to similarity of achieved characteristics of organic TFTs 
with conventional MOSFET, the standard drain current equations are used to model 
the operation of TFTs in linear and saturation regime. 
upper L  i n e a r  r e g i m e comma upper I Subscript upper D upper S comma upper L i n Baseline equals StartFraction mu upper C Subscript normal i Baseline upper W Over upper L EndFraction left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper G upper S Baseline minus upper V Subscript upper T upper H Baseline right parenthesis upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline semicolon upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline less than left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper G upper S Baseline minus upper V Subscript upper T upper H Baseline right parenthesis
up
per L  i n e a r r e g i m e  comma
 upper I Subscript upper D upper S comma upper L i n Baseline equals StartFraction mu upper C Subscript normal i Baseline upper W Over upper L EndFraction left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper G upper S Baseline minus upper V Subscript upper T upper H Baseline right parenthesis upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline semicolon upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline less than left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper G upper S Baseline minus upper V Subscript upper T upper H Baseline right parenthesis
upper S a t  u r a t i  o n r e g i m e comma upper I Subscript upper D upper S comma upper S a t Baseline equals StartFraction mu upper C Subscript normal i Baseline upper W Over 2 upper L EndFraction left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper G upper S Baseline minus upper V Subscript upper T upper H Baseline right parenthesis squared semicolon upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline greater than left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper G upper S Baseline minus upper V Subscript upper T upper H Baseline right parenthesis
up
er S a t u r a t i  o n r e g i 
m e comma upper I Subscript upper D upper S comma upper S a t Baseline equals StartFraction mu upper C Subscript normal i Baseline upper W Over 2 upper L EndFraction left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper G upper S Baseline minus upper V Subscript upper T upper H Baseline right parenthesis squared semicolon upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline greater than left parenthesis upper V Subscript upper G upper S Baseline minus upper V Subscript upper T upper H Baseline right parenthesis
where Ci is gate capacitance density; L and W are length and width of conducting 
channel, V GS is applied gate input, V DS is drain to source voltage and V TH is threshold 
voltage. 
Device Performance Parameters 
Crucial performance parameters of organic TFTs are μ, V TH, Ion/Ioff, subthreshold 
swing (SS), interface trap density (Dit), operational stability, and speed of the device. 
μ is one of the crucial parameters to deﬁne the performance efﬁciency of any organic 
transistors, which measures the average charge carrier drift velocity per unit of elec-
trical ﬁeld. This can be extracted in both linear and saturation regime from their 
respective (IDS) drain current equations, as given below. 
mu Su b
script upper L i n Baseline equals StartFraction upper L Over upper W upper C Subscript normal i Baseline upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction partial differential upper I Subscript upper D upper S comma upper L i n Baseline Over partial differential upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis
mu Sub
script upper L i n Baseline equals StartFraction upper L Over upper W upper C Subscript normal i Baseline upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction partial differential upper I Subscript upper D upper S comma upper L i n Baseline Over partial differential upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis
mu Su
b
script upper L i n Baseline equals StartFraction upper L Over upper W upper C Subscript normal i Baseline upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction partial differential upper I Subscript upper D upper S comma upper L i n Baseline Over partial differential upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis
mu Su bs cript upper S a t Baseline equals StartFraction 2 upper L Over upper W upper C Subscript normal i Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction partial differential StartRoot upper I Subscript upper D upper S comma upper S a t Baseline EndRoot Over partial differential upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis squared
mu 
S
ubscript upper S a t Baseline equals StartFraction 2 upper L Over upper W upper C Subscript normal i Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction partial differential StartRoot upper I Subscript upper D upper S comma upper S a t Baseline EndRoot Over partial differential upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis squared
/
mu Subscript upper S a t Baseline equals StartFraction 2 upper L Over upper W upper C Subscript normal i Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction partial differential StartRoot upper I Subscript upper D upper S comma upper S a t Baseline EndRoot Over partial differential upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis squared
mu S
ubs
cript upper S a t Baseline equals StartFraction 2 upper L Over upper W upper C Subscript normal i Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction partial differential StartRoot upper I Subscript upper D upper S comma upper S a t Baseline EndRoot Over partial differential upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis squared
Low V TH values are preferred for low voltage operation of the device. It deﬁnes 
the minimum V GS required to accumulate sufﬁcient charge at the semiconductor: 
dielectric interface to turn on the device. This value is generally from the maximum 
slope of√StartRoot upper I Subscript upper D upper S Baseline EndRoot versus V GS plot of the transfer characteristics in saturation regime along 
with the extraction of μ. Moreover, a higher Ci value is required to achieve lower V TH 
and lower voltage operation. Various dielectrics like high-k inorganic or inorganic/ 
organic bilayer hybrid gate dielectric combinations were used to achieve this high Ci

190
G. Konwar and S. P. Tiwari
value (Rahi et al. 2022). Ion/Ioff is another important factor which deﬁnes as the drain 
to source current ratio between on and off current. For high-performance devices, it 
should be high so that both on and off states should be clearly distinguishable. Ioff can 
be suppressed through the proper choice of gate material, interface engineering, and 
patterning of gate electrodes, etc. Similarly, Ion is dependent on numerous factors 
like μ, Ci, operating voltage, trap density, etc. SS or inverse subthreshold slope is a 
measure of how sharply the devices are turned on from the off state which can be 
deﬁned by following formula 
upp e
r S upper S equals StartFraction partial differential upper V Subscript upper G upper S Baseline Over partial differential left parenthesis log Subscript 10 Baseline left parenthesis upper I Subscript upper D upper S Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesis EndFraction
upper S upper 
S equals StartFraction partial differential upper V Subscript upper G upper S Baseline Over partial differential left parenthesis log Subscript 10 Baseline left parenthesis upper I Subscript upper D upper S Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesis EndFraction
The minimum theoretical SS value for any transistors is 60 mV/dec. In general, 
lower value of SS is preferable to turning on the device at a smaller V GS value. More-
over, Dit is another crucial parameter to deﬁne the number of trapping densities at 
the dielectric semiconductor interfaces. In general, lower trapping sites are advanta-
geous to operate the device at high charge carrier conductions. Dit is calculated by 
following formula (Held et al. 2015) 
uppe r D Subscript it Baseline equals StartFraction c Subscript i Baseline Over q EndFraction left bracket upper S upper S StartFraction log left parenthesis e right parenthesis Over k upper T divided by q EndFraction minus 1 right bracket
u
p
per D Subscript it Baseline equals StartFraction c Subscript i Baseline Over q EndFraction left bracket upper S upper S StartFraction log left parenthesis e right parenthesis Over k upper T divided by q EndFraction minus 1 right bracket
upp
er
 D 
S
ubscript it Baseline equals StartFraction c Subscript i Baseline Over q EndFraction left bracket upper S upper S StartFraction log left parenthesis e right parenthesis Over k upper T divided by q EndFraction minus 1 right bracket
where q is electronic charge, k is Boltzmann’s constant, and T is temperature at 
Kelvin. A bad interface leads to slower devices, whereas a high-quality interface 
helps toward performance and speed of the devices. An appropriate selection of 
semiconductor: dielectric interface is needed to achieve high performance. Moreover, 
high operational and electrical stability are other crucial aspects required from the 
devices in real-world applications. For that, various stability studies are performed 
including multiple scanning of transfer characteristics, bias-stress, cyclic, electro-
mechanical, and shelf-life stability. For most reported bias-stress studies, a constant 
V GS is applied for long duration and normalized decay in IDS is observed as given 
in Eq. (11.7). 
StartFraction upper I Subscript upper D upper S Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis Over upper I Subscript upper D upper S Baseline left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis EndFraction equals exp left bracket minus 2 left parenthesis StartFraction t Over tau EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript beta Baseline right bracket
StartFractio
n
 u
p per I Subscript upper D upper S Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis Over upper I Subscript upper D upper S Baseline left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis EndFraction equals exp left bracket minus 2 left parenthesis StartFraction t Over tau EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript beta Baseline right bracket
S
tar
tFraction upper I Subscript upper D upper S Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis Over upper I Subscript upper D upper S Baseline left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis EndFraction equals exp left bracket minus 2 left parenthesis StartFraction t Over tau EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript beta Baseline right bracket
where τ is relaxation time, which deﬁnes the charge carrier trapping time and β is 
stretched exponential factor indicating the involved trap distribution width (Bharti 
et al. 2016). 
Moreover, the operating speed of organic TFTs is much lower compared to inor-
ganic transistors due to various factors including low μ values and higher overlap 
areas causing parasitic capacitances. Speed can be estimated through the transit 
frequency ( f T), the maximum frequency at which device can operate, is given by 
the following equation (Klauk 2018):

11
Contact and Interconnect Considerations for Organic and Flexible …
191
f S u
bscript normal upper T Baseline equals StartFraction mu Subscript e f f Baseline upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline Over 2 pi upper L left parenthesis upper L plus upper L Subscript o v comma upper G upper S Baseline plus upper L Subscript o v comma upper G upper D Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction
f Subsc ript norm al upper T
 Baseline equals StartFraction mu Subscript e f f Baseline upper V Subscript upper D upper S Baseline Over 2 pi upper L left parenthesis upper L plus upper L Subscript o v comma upper G upper S Baseline plus upper L Subscript o v comma upper G upper D Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction
where μeff is effective carrier mobility, L is length of the channel, and LOV, GS, LOV, GD 
are the gate to source and gate to drain overlaps respectively. High mobility is a 
prerequisite to operating the device at a high switching speed. Other parameters 
including supply voltage, channel length, and gate overlapping area should be taken 
care of for overall speed enhancement. Channel length and the overlapping area 
must be minimized to obtain high-speed transistor. This reduced dimension can only 
be achieved by patterning the contacts with the help of lithography which is not 
possible for top contact structures where solvent used in lithography can damage 
the property of organic semiconductors. Generally, for the ﬂexible TFT devices, 
demonstrated in laboratories, a common unpatterned bottom gate is used, which is 
entirely overlapped the drain and source region lowering the speed signiﬁcantly. As 
these devices suffer from injection issues, the extracted mobility is often lowered 
by the actual mobility values in the channel. Moreover, upon scaling the devices to 
lower L, the contact effects become more dominant affecting the effective mobility 
values to much lower levels (Tiwari et al. 2009). Hence contact resistance extraction 
and elimination methods are very important. These aspects are discussed in the next 
section of the chapter. 
Contact Resistance 
Contact resistance (Rc) arises primarily from the Schottky barrier of source-drain 
metal to semiconductor contact. The total voltage dropped across the channel (V DS) 
is a combination of dropped across source (/V S), drain (/V D), and channel (/V Ch). 
The various resistances associated with any device are illustrated in Fig. 11.4a, 
showing the resistance between source to semiconductor (RS), drain to semiconductor 
(RD), and channel resistance (RCh) (Lamport et al.  2018). The contact resistance is 
contributed by two crucial factors: injection barriers between metal contacts and 
semiconductor (RC,int), and the charge transported from electrode interface to channel 
(RC,bulk). For a reduced value of RC,int, proper alignment of metal work function and 
semiconductor HOMO/LUMO levels is desired. RC,bulk caused by the thickness and 
surface morphology of OSCs (Matsumoto et al. 2013) can be reduced through good 
device structure. Controlling charge injection in TFTs while limiting contact effects 
is a challenging task, and various strategies have been applied to address this issue 
(Tiwari et al.  2010). In analysis, this barrier is treated as additional resistance to the 
channel resistance as shown in Fig. 11.4, which schematically represents the varia-
tion of channel length and the impact on the resistances of the device between source 
and drain electrodes. As it can be seen, the ratio of the contact resistance to channel 
resistance is higher for lower channel devices.

192
G. Konwar and S. P. Tiwari
Fig. 11.4 a Illustration of various resistances present in between source and drain of a TFT; demon-
stration of the impact of contact resistance for increased value of channel length b–e. As it can be 
seen, the ratio of the contact resistance to channel resistance is higher for lower channel devices 
Contact Resistance Extraction 
Measuring contact resistance (RC) is crucial to overcome the underestimation of 
extracted μ value. Several techniques including direct and indirect methods were 
introduced to evaluate RC (Lamport et al. 2018). One of the most commonly used 
indirect methods is gated transmission line method (TLM), which has been used as 
a simple method to extract from electrical characteristics of devices with varying L. 
It assumes uniform and isotropic semiconductor where RCh varies linearly with L 
(Gundlach et al. 2006; Kim et al. 2015; Natali et al. 2016). Figure 11.4 b-e represents 
the devices in ascending order of L (L1 < L2 < L3 < L4). In TLM, total device 
resistance (Ron) is extracted in a linear regime transfer curve for a particular V GS, by  
V DS divided IDS when V DS right arrow0. Further, it is repeated for devices with different L. 
Ron is sum of RC, and RCh, where RCh is directly proportional to L as given below. 
uppe r R Subscript o n Baseline equals upper R Subscript upper C h Baseline left parenthesis upper L right parenthesis plus upper R Subscript normal upper C
equals
 upper R Subscript upper S h Baseline StartFraction upper L Over upper W EndFraction plus upper R Subscript normal upper C
eq uals upper R Subscript upper S h Baseline StartFraction upper L Over upper W EndFraction plus upper R Subscript normal upper C
upper  R Subsc ript 
o n Baseline upper W equals upper R Subscript s h Baseline upper L plus upper R Subscript normal upper C Baseline upper W
where RSh is sheet resistance. The width normalized contact resistance RCW be 
estimated by extrapolating RonW to L = 0, using the y-intercept of plots of RonW 
versus L, similar to a line equation y = m.x + C, where y corresponds to RonW, x

11
Contact and Interconnect Considerations for Organic and Flexible …
193
corresponds to L, and C corresponds to RCW. RCW can be extracted for multiple V GS 
values. These plots will show the decreasing RCW upon increasing V GS. As shown  in  
Fig. 11.4 b–e, it can be observed that as the channel length increases from L1 to L4, 
the value of RCh is also increased; however, value of RC is independent and consistent 
for all structures. For a TFT to function properly, RC should be negligible compared 
to RCh. In a short-channel device, for L1, both RC and RCh values are almost similar, 
and the impact of RC is very dominant. The RC extraction is graphically represented 
in Fig. 11.5. 
Fig. 11.5 a Schematic of RonW versus L plots for various VGS values. The y-intercepts of this 
plot denote RCW values. b Plot of RCW values with increasing VGS. As it can be observed, RCW 
decreases with increasing VGS values 
Fig. 11.6 Contact resistance 
reduction approach 
a selective doping under 
source/drain contacts for top 
contacts, and 
b self-assembled monolayer 
for bottom contact-based 
TFTs

194
G. Konwar and S. P. Tiwari
Approaches to Reduce Contact Resistance 
Signiﬁcant efforts have been made by the researchers to mitigate the RC,int with 
the help of various approaches such as contact doping (Hou et al. 2016; Tiwari  
et al. 2010), buffer or self-assembled monolayers (Stoliar et al. 2007), metal oxide 
interlayer, etc. 
Among all these, for top contact devices, selective doping under source/drain is 
one of the promising techniques to change the Schottky barrier to a graded or ohmic 
contact. Co-evaporation of host and dopant materials has been done beneath the 
source/drain electrodes for contact doping in organic devices (Tiwari et al. 2010). 
These techniques have resulted in complete elimination of contact barriers from 
devices. Figure 11.6a shows a structure of a contact doped device. Further, Ante et al. 
have reported organic TFTs with channel length of 100 nm with this approach (Ante 
et al. 2011). The selective doping forms a hole rich regime near the contacts, which is 
placed only at the selective area to prevent channel leakage. Though these techniques 
require thermal evaporation, which is not suitable for solution processing methods, 
the doping strategies can be explored for solution processing also with suitable mixing 
of materials. For bottom contact devices, the treatment of metal electrodes with 
suitable self-assembled monolayers (SAM) enhances the charge injection properties. 
Au electrodes are invariably treated with SAM layer of octane-1-thiol or other thiols 
to reduce the contact resistance and enhance the charge injection (Casalini et al. 
2012). This technique modiﬁes the morphology of semiconductors and assists to 
grow semiconductor ﬁlms with higher crystallinity. In addition, SAMs signiﬁcantly 
decrease the charge injection barrier of the semiconductor–metal electrode interface 
in favor of TFT operation (Youn et al. 2012). 
Flexible and Stretchable Interconnects 
High ﬂexibility and stretchability of the electrical interconnects are very important for 
interconnects for ﬂexible and stretchable electronic systems. These properties can 
be achieved through engineered shapes or using stretchable rubber-like materials. 
Figure 11.7 represents two types of interconnects, one which has been convention-
ally used across the technologies, i.e., use for straight metal lines with a suitable 
cross-sectional area depending on the length of the interconnect. The cross-sectional 
areas of the interconnect lines control the conductivity and overall resistance of 
the interconnect. Moreover, aspect ratios of these lines can be tuned to have lower 
parasitic capacitances caused by overlaps. However, we will focus on the ﬂexibility 
and stretchability aspects here. For any straight conventional metal line, as shown 
in Fig. 11.7a, any stretching will cause the breaking of the interconnect which will 
lead to failure of the circuit or systems where this interconnect is used. Figure 11.7b 
represents a potential method for designing a reliable interconnect with maximum 
possible elongation for ﬂexible, large area, and stretchable applications.

11
Contact and Interconnect Considerations for Organic and Flexible …
195
Fig. 11.7 a A typical interconnect design for conventional rigid technology or ﬂexible electronics. 
b An engineered interconnect design with 2D or 3D helical structure to induce stretchability. The 
shapes of this design can vary as per the requirement 
Extended versions of this engineered geometry, i.e., various types of helical wires 
in different shapes have been used for stretchable interconnects for ﬂexible elec-
tronics with organic and inorganic semiconductors (Dang et al. 2017; Yu et al.  2017). 
Helical conductive interconnect design is simple as it resembles the design of a two 
or three-dimensional spring. This shape induces the stretchability or expandability 
in the interconnect. The stretchable interconnects have been very useful in the design 
of skin-like electronic systems. Conductive thread-based clothing has been used in 
stretchable wearable electronics such as an electronic patch for monitoring strain, 
pressure, sweat, and other parameters (Ge et al. 2016; Terse-Thakoor et al. 2020). 
Even with engineered designs, conventional metals still face issues of breaking and 
failure. To address this, various solution-processed metal inks and nanocomposites 
are demonstrated in recent years to offer better suitability for ﬂexible, printable, and 
stretchable electronics (Kumar et al. 2022; Nair et al.  2021a; Widdascheck et al. 
2021). Owing to their ﬂexibility, stretchability, conductivity, sensitivity, polymeric 
nanocomposites with conductive ﬁllers have been recently demonstrated for appli-
cations in bioelectronics and wearable devices (Kumar et al. 2022). Silver nanowire-
based printable electrothermochromic inks are demonstrated for applications like 
ﬂexible touch-displays (Nair et al. 2021b). 
Toward Green and Biodegradable Electronics 
Nowadays, the growing demand for advanced technology has continuously short-
ened the lifespan of devices and the use of non-sustainable components resulting in a 
signiﬁcant increase in electronics-waste (e-waste) issues. The negative impact of e-
waste on the environment has led the research community to think of eco-sustainable

196
G. Konwar and S. P. Tiwari
alternatives for materials used for producing these electronic systems. To address 
this, various biodegradable and nature-inspired materials are proposed to be inte-
grated into the manufacturing processes for these technologies. This integration will 
lead to lower technology footprints on environment after the lifespan of devices. In 
recent years, various biocompatible, biodegradable materials like natural proteins 
have been used for fabrication of high-performance ﬂexible TFT devices. Paper is 
considered to be one of the most abundantly available biodegradable substrates which 
offers inherent advantages of low cost, lightweight and renewable natures with ﬂex-
ibility, foldability, and recyclability functionalities. In this perspective, developing 
paper-based devices is very exciting as it could be further extrapolated into high-
efﬁciency printing technologies for large-area applications. Till date, TFTs were 
successfully developed on a variety of paper substrates including commercial pack-
aging paper, photo paper, starch paper, and bank notes (Casula et al. 2020; Lee  
et al. 2019; Li et al.  2012; Raghuwanshi et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2017). Similar 
application have been studied for other biodegradable and biocompatible synthetic 
polymers, including poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB), polycaprolactone (PCL), poly 
3-hydroxyoctanoate, poly(4-hydroxybutyrate), poly(l-lactide), poly(glycolic acid), 
poly(glycolide-co-caprolactone), poly(lactide-co-e-caprolactone), and poly(glycerol 
sebacate) (PGS), etc. (Irimia-Vladu 2014a). Some of the natural proteins used 
as gate dielectric for high-performance TFTs are silk ﬁbroin, chicken albumen, cross-
linked DNA, collagen, etc. (Chang et al. 2011; Hsieh et al. 2013; Kim et al. 2010; 
Ko et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2018; Tsai et al.  2013; Wang et al. 2011; Zhu et al. 2016). 
Among these materials, gelatin has been the most widely researched low-cost natural 
protein used for multi-functional and high-performance TFT devices (Konwar et al. 
2022a, b). Devices with gelatin were used to sense stimuli like human breath suitable 
for real-time breath rate monitoring along with sensing environmental parameters 
like humidity, UV, and visible light, along with suitability to circuit applications. 
There are other potential biodegradable materials for these applications. Some of 
these matrials are derived from edible sources, for example, polylactide is obtained 
from natural plant sugars and its derivatives are used as ﬂexible substrates and/or 
dielectrics (Bettinger and Bao 2010). 
The edible property of biopolymers have helped to increase the applicability of 
these eco-friendly devices in emerging biomedical ingestible and edible electronics, 
where the majority of device material components remained inactive or degraded 
into non-toxic and environmentally friendly byproducts via enzymes, environmental 
factors, or water after a certain amount of time (Konwar et al. 2022a, b; Sharova 
et al. 2021). Silk ﬁbroin is one of the strongest ﬁbers and has a very high dielectric 
constant, which is needed for high-performance low voltage TFTs. Other nature-
inspired diverse organic materials also have the potential to be used in eco-friendly 
devices such as ecoﬂex, caramelized glucose, and hard gelatin capsule as substrates, 
adenine, guanine, glucose, lactose, sucrose, and caffeine for dielectrics, while beta 
(β)-carotene, indigo, vat orange 3, and perylene diimide as organic semiconductors 
(Irimia-Vladu et al. 2010). A typical TFT device fabricated on a paper substrate is

11
Contact and Interconnect Considerations for Organic and Flexible …
197
Fig. 11.8 Chemical structures of some nature-inspired edible and biodegradable organic materials 
for fabrication of electronic devices, and thin-ﬁlm transistors on paper substrate 
shown in Fig. 11.8. In addition, some of the chemical structures for edible organic 
materials are also shown here. The use of nature-inspired materials in fabrication of 
ﬂexible devices will help in developing eco-sustainable ﬂexible electronic products. 
Summary 
In this chapter, ﬁrstly, the topic of ﬂexible electronics is comprehensively intro-
duced in the introduction section. A historical review of the development of ﬂexible 
electronics in last four decades is summarized starting from the demonstration of 
ﬁrst ﬂexible TFT and conducting polymer to the current state of the art devices 
where multi-functionality in these devices with low voltage operation. Further, the 
advantages and applications of ﬂexible devices are discussed. In the next section, 
structure and operation of ﬂexible organic TFTs are discussed in detail. Performance 
parameters along with extraction methods are explained with fundamental aspects. 
Issues like speed and contact resistance are highlighted and mathematically analyzed. 
Further, the origin of the contact resistance and extraction methods along with reduc-
tion methods are discussed. Moreover, the challenges at system level in designing 
interconnects for ﬂexible and stretchable electronics are highlighted and possible 
solutions are presented. Finally, materials and devices for the biodegradable, edible, 
and green electronics are brieﬂy discussed. 
In summary, this chapter discusses performance and challenges for ﬂexible 
devices, speciﬁcally for circuit and system applications including contact and 
interconnect considerations for organic and ﬂexible electronics, and suitability for 
biodegradable and green electronics.

198
G. Konwar and S. P. Tiwari
References 
Ante F, Kälblein D, Zschieschang U, Canzler TW, Werner A, Takimiya K, Ikeda M, Sekitani T, 
Someya T, Klauk H (2011) Contact doping and ultrathin gate dielectrics for nanoscale organic 
thin-ﬁlm transistors. Small 7(9): 1186–1191. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201002254 
Bettinger CJ, Bao Z (2010) Organic thin-ﬁlm transistors fabricated on resorbable biomaterial 
substrates. Adv Mater 22(5):651–655. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200902322 
Bharti D, Raghuwanshi V, Varun I, Mahato AK, Tiwari SP (2016) High performance and electro-
mechanical stability in small molecule: polymer blend ﬂexible organic ﬁeld-effect transistors. 
IEEE Electron Device Lett 37(9):1215–1218. https://doi.org/10.1109/led.2016.2592943 
Bisoyi S, Zschieschang U, Kang MJ, Takimiya K, Klauk H, Tiwari SP (2014) Bias-stress stability of 
low-voltage p-channel and n-channel organic thin-ﬁlm transistors on ﬂexible plastic substrates. 
Org Electron 15(11):3173–3182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgel.2014.08.057 
Brody TP (1969) Letters: paper transistors [letter]. Radio and Electronic Engineer 38(6):326–327. 
https://doi.org/10.1049/ree.1969.0120 
Burroughes JH, Bradley DDC, Brown AR, Marks RN, Mackay K, Friend RH, Burns PL, Holmes 
AB (1990) Light-emitting diodes based on conjugated polymers. Nature 347(6293): 539–541. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/347539a0 
Casalini S, Shehu A, Destri S, Porzio W, Pasini MC, Vignali F, Borgatti F, Albonetti C, Leonardi 
F, Biscarini F (2012) Organic ﬁeld-effect transistors as new paradigm for large-area molecular 
junctions. Organ Electron 13(5): 789–795. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgel.2012.01.020 
Casula G, Lai S, Matino L, Santoro F, Bonﬁglio A, Cosseddu P (2020) Printed, low-voltage, all-
organic transistors and complementary circuits on paper substrate. Adv Electron Mater 6(5), 
Article 1901027. https://doi.org/10.1002/aelm.201901027 
Chang J-W, Wang C-G, Huang C-Y, Tsai T-D, Guo T-F, Wen T-C (2011) Chicken albumen dielectrics 
in organic ﬁeld-effect transistors. Adv Mater 23(35):4077–4081. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma. 
201102124 
Chen Y, Ye P, Zhu ZG, Wang X, Yang L, Xu X, Wu X, Dong T, Zhang H, Hou J, Liu F (2017) 
Achieving high-performance ternary organic solar cells through tuning acceptor alloy. Adv 
Mater 29(6):1603154. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201603154 
Chiang CK, Fincher Jr, CR, Park YW, Heeger AJ, Shirakawa H, Louis EJ, Gau SC, MacDiarmid 
AG (1977) Electrical conductivity in doped polyacetylene. Phys Rev Lett 39(17):1098. https:// 
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.39.1098 
Crabb RL, Treble FC (1967) Thin silicon solar cells for large ﬂexible arrays. Nature 
213(5082):1223–1224. https://doi.org/10.1038/2131223a0 
Dang W, Vinciguerra V, Lorenzelli L, Dahiya R (2017) Printable stretchable interconnects. Flexible 
Printed Electron 2(1), Article 013003. https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-8585/aa5ab2 
Di CA, Zhang F, Zhu D (2013) Multi-functional integration of organic ﬁeld-effect transistors 
(OFETs): advances and perspectives. Adv Mater 25(3):313–330. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma. 
201201502 
Ebisawa F, Kurokawa T, Nara S (1983) Electrical properties of polyacetylene/polysiloxane interface. 
J Appl Phys 54(6):3255–3259. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.332488 
Gaal M, Gadermaier C, Plank H, Moderegger E, Pogantsch A, Leising G, List EJW (2003) 
Imprinted conjugated polymer laser. Adv Mater 15(14):1165–1167. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.200305047 
Garnier F, Horowitz G, Peng X, Fichou D (1990) An all-organic “soft” thin ﬁlm transistor with very 
high carrier mobility. Adv Mater 2(12):592–594. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.19900021207 
Ge J, Sun L, Zhang FR, Zhang Y, Shi LA, Zhao HY, Zhu HW, Jiang HL, Yu SH (2016) A stretchable 
electronic fabric artiﬁcial skin with pressure-, lateral strain-, and ﬂexion-sensitive properties. 
Adv Mater 28(4): 722–728.https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201504239 
Geiger M, Lingstädt R, Wollandt T, Deuschle J, Zschieschang U, Letzkus F, Burghartz JN, van 
Aken PA, Weitz RT, Klauk H (2022) Subthreshold swing of 59 mV decade−1 in nanoscale

11
Contact and Interconnect Considerations for Organic and Flexible …
199
ﬂexible ultralow-voltage organic transistors. Adv Electron Mater https://doi.org/10.1002/aelm. 
202101215 
Gundlach DJ, Zhou L, Nichols JA, Jackson TN, Necliudov PV, Shur MS (2006) An experimental 
study of contact effects in organic thin ﬁlm transistors. J Appl Phys 100(2), Article 024509. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2215132 
Han WB, Lee JH, Shin JW, Hwang SW (2020) Advanced materials and systems for biodegradable 
transient electronics. Adv Mater 32(51):e2002211. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202002211 
Held M, Schießl SP, Miehler D, Gannott F, Zaumseil J (2015) Polymer/metal oxide hybrid dielectrics 
for low voltage ﬁeld-effect transistors with solution-processed, high-mobility semiconductors. 
Appl Phys Lett 107(8). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4929461 
Hou J-L, Kasemann D, Widmer J, Günther AA, Lüssem B, Leo K (2016) Reduced contact resis-
tance in top-contact organic ﬁeld-effect transistors by interface contact doping. Appl Phys Lett 
108(10). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4943646 
Hsieh C-Y, Hwang J-C, Chang T-H, Li J-Y, Chen S-H, Mao L-K, Tsai LS, Chueh YL, Lyu PC, Hsu 
SSH (2013) Enhanced mobility of organic thin ﬁlm transistors by water absorption of collagen 
hydrolysate gate dielectric. Appl Phys Lett 103(2): 023303. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4813075 
Irimia-Vladu M (2014a) Green” electronics: biodegradable and biocompatible materials and devices 
for sustainable future. Chem Soc Rev 43(2):588–610. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3cs60235d 
Irimia-Vladu M (2014b) Green” electronics: biodegradable and biocompatible materials and devices 
for sustainable future. Chem Soc Rev 43(2):588–610. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3cs60235d 
Irimia-Vladu M, Troshin PA, Reisinger M, Shmygleva L, Kanbur Y, Schwabegger G, Bodea M, 
Schwödiauer R, Mumyatov A, Fergus JW, Razumov VF, Bauer S (2010) Biocompatible and 
biodegradable materials for organic ﬁeld-effect transistors. Adv Funct Mater 20(23): 4069– 
4076.https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201001031 
Khim D, Han H, Baeg KJ, Kim J, Kwak SW, Kim DY, Noh YY (2013) Simple bar-coating process 
for large-area, high-performance organic ﬁeld-effect transistors and ambipolar complementary 
integrated circuits. Adv Mater 25(31):4302–4308. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201205330 
Kim CH, Hlaing H, Hong JA, Kim JH, Park Y, Payne MM, Anthony JE, Bonnassieux Y, Horowitz 
G, Kymissis I (2015) Decoupling the effects of self-assembled monolayers on gold, silver, and 
copper organic transistor contacts. Adv Mater Interfaces 2(2), Article 1400384. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/admi.201400384 
Kim H, Kang T-H, Ahn  J,  Han H, Park S, Kim  SJ, Park MC,  Paik  SH, Hwang  DK,  Yi  H,  
Lim JA (2020) Spirally wrapped carbon nanotube microelectrodes for ﬁber optoelectronic 
devices beyond geometrical limitations toward smart wearable E-textile applications. ACS Nano 
14(12):17213–17223. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.0c07143 
Kim YS, Jung KH, Lee UR, Kim KH, Hoang MH, Jin J-I, Choi DH (2010) High-mobility bio-
organic ﬁeld effect transistors with photoreactive DNAs as gate insulators. Appl Phys Lett 
96(10):103307. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3299022 
Klauk H (2018) Will we see gigahertz organic transistors? Adv Electron Mater 4(10). https://doi. 
org/10.1002/aelm.201700474 
Ko J, Nguyen LTH, Surendran A, Tan BY, Ng KW, Leong WL (2017) Human hair keratin for biocom-
patible ﬂexible and transient electronic devices. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 9(49):43004–43012. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b16330 
Koezuka H, Tsumura A, Ando T (1987) Field-effect transistor with polythiophene thin ﬁlm. Synth 
Met 18(1–3):699–704. https://doi.org/10.1016/0379-6779(87)90964-7 
Konwar G, Saxena P, Raghuwanshi V, Rahi S, Tiwari SP (2022a) Multifunctional ﬂexible organic 
transistors with high-k/natural protein bilayer gate dielectric for circuit and sensing applications. 
ACS Appl Electron Mater, 4(5):2525-2533. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaelm.2c00303 
Konwar G, Saxena P, Rahi S, Tiwari SP (2022b) Edible dielectric composite for the enhancement 
of performance and electromechanical stability of eco-friendly ﬂexible organic transistors. ACS 
Appl Electron Mater 4(10):5055–5064. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaelm.2c01082

200
G. Konwar and S. P. Tiwari
Kumar A, Shaikh MO, Kumar RKR, Dutt K, Pan CT, Chuang CH (2022) Highly sensitive, ﬂex-
ible and biocompatible temperature sensor utilizing ultra-long Au@AgNW-based polymeric 
nanocomposites. Nanoscale 14(5):1742–1754. https://doi.org/10.1039/d1nr05068k 
Kumaresan Y, Ozioko O, Dahiya R (2021) Multifunctional electronic skin with a stack of temper-
ature and pressure sensor arrays. IEEE Sens J 21(23):26243–26251. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
JSEN.2021.3055458 
Lamport ZA, Barth KJ, Lee H, Gann E, Engmann S, Chen H, Guthold M, McCulloch I, Anthony 
JE, Richter LJ, DeLongchamp DM, Jurchescu OD (2018) A simple and robust approach to 
reducing contact resistance in organic transistors. Nat Commun 9(1): 5130.https://doi.org/10. 
1038/s41467-018-07388-3 
Lamport ZA, Haneef HF, Anand S, Waldrip M, Jurchescu OD (2018) Tutorial: organic ﬁeld-effect 
transistors: materials, structure and operation. J Appl Phys 124(7). https://doi.org/10.1063/1. 
5042255 
Lamprecht B, Thünauer R, Ostermann M, Jakopic G, Leising G (2005) Organic photodiodes on 
newspaper. Physica Status Solidi (A), 202(5):R50–R52 
Lee CJ, Chang YC, Wang LW, Wang YH (2019) Biodegradable materials for organic ﬁeld-effect 
transistors on a paper substrate. IEEE Electron Dev Lett 40(2): 236–239, Article 8598734. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/LED.2018.2890618 
Lee JH, Kwak HW, Park MH, Hwang J, Kim JW, Jang HW, Jin HJ, Lee WH (2018) Understanding 
hydroscopic properties of silk ﬁbroin and its use as a gate-dielectric in organic ﬁeld-effect 
transistors. Organ Electron 59: 213–219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgel.2018.05.012 
Leise J, Pruefer J, Darbandy G, Nikolaou A, Giorgio M, Caironi M, Zschieschang U, Klauk H, 
Kloes A, Iñiguez B, Borchert JW (2021) Flexible megahertz organic transistors and the critical 
role of the device geometry on their dynamic performance. J Appl Phys 130(12), Article 125501. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0062146 
Li M, Mangalore DK, Zhao J, Carpenter JH, Yan H, Ade H, Yan H, Müllen K, Blom PW, Pisula W, 
De Leeuw DM (2018) Integrated circuits based on conjugated polymer monolayer. Nat Commun 
9(1): 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02805-5 
Li M, Wu Y, Zhang L, Wo H, Huang S, Li W, Zeng X, Ye Q, Xu T, Luo J, Dong S, Wang X (2019) 
Liquid metal-based electrical interconnects and interfaces with excellent stability and reliability 
for ﬂexible electronics. Nanoscale 11(12): 5441–5449.https://doi.org/10.1039/c8nr09503e 
Li Y, Liu C, Xu Y, Minari T, Darmawan P, Tsukagoshi K (2012) Solution-processed organic crys-
tals for ﬁeld-effect transistor arrays with smooth semiconductor/dielectric interface on paper 
substrates. Org Electron 13(5):815–819. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgel.2012.01.021 
Liu J, Chen S, Qian D, Gautam B, Yang G, Zhao J, Bergqvist J, Zhang F, Ma W, Ade H, Inganäs O, 
Ade H (2016) Fast charge separation in a non-fullerene organic solar cell with a small driving 
force. Nat Energy 1(7):1–7. https://doi.org/10.1038/nenergy.2016.89 
Liu K, Ouyang B, Guo X, Guo Y, Liu Y (2022) Advances in ﬂexible organic ﬁeld-effect transistors 
and their applications for ﬂexible electronics. NPJ Flexible Electron 6(1). https://doi.org/10. 
1038/s41528-022-00133-3 
Liu Q, Wang Y, Arunagiri L, Khatib M, Manzhos S, Feron K, Bottle SE, Haick H, Yan H, Michinobu 
T, Sonar P (2020) Versatile nature of anthanthrone based polymers as active multifunctional 
semiconductors for various organic electronic devices. Adv Mater 1(9): 3428–3438. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/d0ma00728e 
Ma S, Kumaresan Y, Dahiya AS, Lorenzelli L, Dahiya R (2022) Flexible tactile sensors using 
AlN and MOSFETs based ultra-thin chips. IEEE Sens J. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2022. 
3140651 
Maddirala G, Searle T, Wang X, Alici G, Sencadas V (2022) Multifunctional skin-compliant wear-
able sensors for monitoring human condition applications. Appl Mater Today 26, Article 101361. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmt.2021.101361 
Mannsfeld SCB, Tee BCK, Stoltenberg RM, Chen CVHH, Barman S, Muir BVO, Sokolov AN, 
Reese C, Bao Z (2010) Highly sensitive ﬂexible pressure sensors with microstructured rubber 
dielectric layers. Nat Mater 9(10): 859–864.https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2834

11
Contact and Interconnect Considerations for Organic and Flexible …
201
Matsumoto T, Ou-Yang W, Miyake K, Uemura T, Takeya J (2013) Study of contact resistance of 
high-mobility organic transistors through comparisons. Org Electron 14(10):2590–2595. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.orgel.2013.06.032 
Meager I, Nikolka M, Schroeder BC, Nielsen CB, Planells M, Bronstein H, Rumer JW, James 
DI, Ashraf RS, Sadhanala A, Hayoz P Sadhanala A (2014) Thieno [3, 2-b] thiophene ﬂanked 
isoindigo polymers for high performance ambipolar OFET applications. Adv Funct Mater 
24(45):7109–7115. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201402307 
Nair NM, Jahanara MM, Ray D, Swaminathan P (2021a) Photoresponse of a printed transparent 
silver nanowire-zinc oxide nanocomposite. Flexible Printed Electron 6(4), Article 045004. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-8585/ac2e48 
Nair NM, Khanra I, Ray D, Swaminathan P (2021b) Silver nanowire-based printable elec-
trothermochromic ink for ﬂexible touch-display applications. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
13(29):34550–34560. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c09115 
Natali D, Chen J, Maddalena F, García Ferré F, Di Fonzo F, Caironi M (2016) Injection length 
in staggered organic thin ﬁlm transistors: assessment and implications for device downscaling. 
Adv Electron Mater 2(8), Article 1600097. https://doi.org/10.1002/aelm.201600097 
Ng TN, Wong WS, Chabinyc ML, Sambandan S, Street RA (2008) Flexible image sensor array with 
bulk heterojunction organic photodiode. Appl Phys Lett 92(21):191. https://doi.org/10.1063/1. 
2937018 
Okaniwa H, Nakatani K, Asano M, Yano M, Hamakawa Y (1982a) Production and properties of 
a-Si: H solar cell on organic polymer ﬁlm substrate. In: 16th Photovoltaic specialists conference 
Okaniwa H, Nakatani K, Yano M, Asano M, Suzuki KJJJOAP (1982b) Preparation and properties 
of a-Si: H solar cells on organic polymer ﬁlm substrate 21(S2): 239 
Ortiz RP, Facchetti A, Marks TJ (2010) High-k organic, inorganic, and hybrid dielectrics for low-
voltage organic ﬁeld-effect transistors. Chem Rev 110(1):205–239. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr9 
001275 
Park SB, Han JW, Kim JH, Wibowo AF, Prameswati A, Park J, Lee J, Moon MW, Kim MS, Kim 
YH (2021) Multifunctional stretchable organic–inorganic hybrid electronics with transparent 
conductive silver nanowire/biopolymer hybrid ﬁlms. Adv Opt Mater 9(14). https://doi.org/10. 
1002/adom.202002041 
Petritz A, Wolfberger A, Fian A, Irimia-Vladu M, Haase A, Gold H, Rothländer T, Grießer T, 
Stadlober B (2013) Cellulose as biodegradable high-k dielectric layer in organic complementary 
inverters. Appl Phys Lett 103(15). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4824701 
Raghuwanshi V, Bharti D, Mahato AK, Varun I, Tiwari SP (2019) Solution-processed organic ﬁeld-
effect transistors with high performance and stability on paper substrates. ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces 11(8):8357–8364. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b21404 
Rahi S, Raghuwanshi V, Saxena P, Konwar G, Tiwari SP (2022) High performance ﬂexible transis-
tors with polyelectrolyte/polymer bilayer dielectric. IEEE Trans Electron Dev 1–7. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/ted.2022.3148700 
Rahmanudin A, Tate DJ, Marcial-Hernandez R, Bull N, Garlapati SK, Zamhuri A, Khan RU, Faraji 
S, Gollu SR, Persaud KC, Turner ML (2020) Robust high-capacitance polymer gate dielectrics 
for stable low-voltage organic ﬁeld-effect transistor sensors. Adv Electron Mater 6(3). https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/aelm.201901127 
Rauch T, Böberl M, Tedde SF, Fürst J, Kovalenko MV, Hesser G, Lemmer U, Heiss W, Hayden 
O (2009) Near-infrared imaging with quantum-dot-sensitized organic photodiodes. Nat Photon 
3(6):332. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2009.72 
Ray KA (1967) Flexible solar cell arrays for increased space power. IEEE Trans Aerospace Electron 
Syst, AES 3(1): 107–115. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAES.1967.5408720 
Shang X, Song I, Jung GY, Choi W, Ohtsu H, Lee JH, Ahn J, Koo JY, Kawano M, Kwak SK, 
Oh JH (2021) Micro-/nano-sized multifunctional heterochiral metal–organic frameworks for 
high-performance visible–blind UV photodetectors. J Mater Chem C 9(23):7310–7318. https:// 
doi.org/10.1039/D1TC01333E

202
G. Konwar and S. P. Tiwari
Sharova AS, Melloni F, Lanzani G, Bettinger CJ, Caironi M (2021) Edible electronics: the vision 
and the challenge. Adv Mater Technol 6(2):2000757. https://doi.org/10.1002/admt.202000757 
Shi W, Guo Y, Liu Y (2020) When ﬂexible organic ﬁeld-effect transistors meet biomimetics: a 
prospective view of the Internet of Things. Adv Mater 32(15):1901493. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.201901493 
Shirakawa H, Louis EJ, MacDiarmid AG, Chiang CK, Heeger AJ (1977) Synthesis of electrically 
conducting organic polymers: halogen derivatives of polyacetylene,(CH) x. J Chem Soc, Chem 
Commun (16):578–580. https://doi.org/10.1039/C39770000578 
Singh R, Singh E, Nalwa HS (2017) Inkjet printed nanomaterial based ﬂexible radio frequency 
identiﬁcation (RFID) tag sensors for the internet of nano things. RSC Adv 7(77):48597–48630. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ra07191d 
Sirringhaus H (2014) 25th anniversary article: organic ﬁeld-effect transistors: the path beyond 
amorphous silicon. Adv Mater 26(9):1319–1335. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201304346 
Stoliar P, Kshirsagar R, Massi M, Annibale P, Albonetti C, de Leeuw DM, Biscarini F (2007) Charge 
injection across self-assembly monolayers in organic ﬁeld-effect transistors: odd−even effects. 
J Am Chem Soc 129(20):6477–6484. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja069235m 
Terse-Thakoor T, Punjiya M, Matharu Z, Lyu B, Ahmad M, Giles GE, Owyeung R, Alaimo F, 
Shojaei Baghini M, Brunyé TT, Sonkusale S (2020) Thread-based multiplexed sensor patch for 
real-time sweat monitoring. NPJ Flexible Electron 4(1), Article 18. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41 
528-020-00081-w 
Tiwari SP, Potscavage WJ, Sajoto T, Barlow S, Marder SR, Kippelen B (2010) Pentacene organic 
ﬁeld-effect transistors with doped electrode-semiconductor contacts. Organ Electron 11(5): 860– 
863. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgel.2010.01.029 
Tiwari SP, Zhang XH, Potscavage WJ, Kippelen B (2009) Study of electrical performance and 
stability of solution-processed n -channel organic ﬁeld-effect transistors. J Appl Phys 106(5), 
Article 054504. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3204655 
Tsai L-S, Hwang J-C, Lee C-Y, Lin Y-T, Tsai C-L, Chang T-H, Chueh YL, Meng H-F (2013) 
Solution-based silk ﬁbroin dielectric in n-type C60 organic ﬁeld-effect transistors: mobility 
enhancement by the pentacene interlayer. Appl Phys Lett 103(23): 233304. https://doi.org/10. 
1063/1.4841595 
Tsumura A, Koezuka H, Ando T (1988) Polythiophene ﬁeld-effect transistor: its characteristics and 
operation mechanism. Synth Met 25(1):11–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/0379-6779(88)90318-9 
Wang C-H, Hsieh C-Y, Hwang J-C (2011) Flexible organic thin-ﬁlm transistors with silk ﬁbroin as 
the gate dielectric. Adv Mater 23(14):1630–1634. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201004071 
Wang CY, Fuentes-Hernandez C, Chou WF, Kippelen B (2017) Top-gate organic ﬁeld-effect tran-
sistors fabricated on paper with high operational stability. Org Electron 41:340–344. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.orgel.2016.11.026 
Widdascheck F, Bischof D, Witte G (2021) Engineering of printable and air-stable silver electrodes 
with high work function using contact primer layer: from organometallic interphases to sharp 
interfaces. Adv Funct Mater 31(49), Article 2106687. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202106687 
Youn J, Dholakia GR, Huang H, Hennek JW, Facchetti A, Marks TJ (2012) Inﬂuence of thiol 
self-assembled monolayer processing on bottom-contact thin-ﬁlm transistors based on n-type 
organic semiconductors. Adv Func Mater 22(9):1856–1869. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201 
102312 
Yu KJ, Yan Z, Han M, Rogers JA (2017) Inorganic semiconducting materials for ﬂexible and 
stretchable electronics. NPJ Flexible Electron 1(1), Article 4. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41528-
017-0003-z 
Zhao Y, Zhou W, Shi Y, Yang X, Bai Y, Li L, Feng S, Zhang T (2022) Superelastic alloy based 
electrical interconnects for highly stretchable electronics. NPJ Flexible Electron 6(1). https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/s41528-022-00142-2 
Zhu B, Wang H, Leow WR, Cai Y, Loh XJ, Han M-Y, Chen X (2016) Silk ﬁbroin for ﬂexible 
electronic devices. Adv Mater 28(22):4250–4265. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201504276

Chapter 12 
Stretchable Interconnects: Materials, 
Geometry, Fabrication, and Applications 
Vivek Kumar, Malvika, Yash Agrawal, and Kavicharan Mummaneni 
Abstract In recent days, stretchable devices gained utmost importance due to their 
stretchable, bendable, ﬂexible characteristics and also their comfort toward human 
skin. Stretchable materials are undeniable compared to conventional materials due 
to its ability to adjust to the curvilinear surface of human skin. When stress or strain 
is applied it maintains its electrical functionality which is useful for stretchable elec-
tronics devices. Stretchable interconnect plays a vital role in these modern stretchable 
devices by providing an extra degree of stretchability. This survey chapter presents an 
overview of stretchable interconnect geometries, fabrication techniques, and mate-
rials used to fabricate substrate materials. In addition, a wide range of applications 
are discussed such as strain sensor, temperature sensor, and energy harvesters. The 
key developments of stretchable interconnects have been highlighted in the domains 
of healthcare monitoring and energy storage devices. 
Keywords Stretchable interconnects · Strain sensor · PDMS · Microfabrication ·
Substrate materials · e-skin
V. Kumar envelope symbol · Malvika · K. Mummaneni 
Electronics and Communication Enggineering Department, National Institute of Technology, 
Silchar, Assam, India 
e-mail: mail.kumar.vivek@gmail.com 
K. Mummaneni 
e-mail: kavicharan@ece.nits.ac.in 
Y. Agrawal 
VLSI and Embedded Systems Research Group, Dhirubhai Ambani Institute of Information and 
Communication Technology, Gandhinagar, Gujarat 382 007, India 
e-mail: yash_agrawal@daiict.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_12 
203

204
V. Kumar et al.
Introduction 
In recent days, stretchable electronics gained utmost importance due to their advan-
tages like ﬂexibility and comfortableness. Stretchable electronics has various appli-
cations in the ﬁelds like medical and consumer applications and provides multiple 
features like bending, twisting, folding, and stretching. In general, electronic devices 
cannot support stretching applications due to the components used in them are rigid. 
There are two ways to make the devices stretchable: (i) by utilizing the multi-
layer stretchable components (stretchable conductor, stretchable semiconductor, and 
stretchable dielectrics), also known as the fully stretchable system, and (ii) by parti-
tioning the device into simple blocks termed as rigid islands and joining them with 
the stretchable interconnects known as the semi-stretchable system. With the help of 
stretchable interconnects, if any strain is applied to the system, the systems expand 
without any stress on rigid blocks and any breaks in the system (Dahiya and Valle 
2013) (Fig. 12.1). 
While designing the semi-stretchable devices, the whole system can be embedded 
on a stretchable and elastic substrate to give mechanical stability to the system from 
the outside environment when it is subjected to stretching. In general, traditional 
interconnects like copper, silver, and gold had limited stretchability (Lacour et al. 
2005; Hess-Dunning et al. 2013) since their Young’s modulus is in the range of 
a few hundred Giga pascal. However, stretchable materials like polyaniline (PANi) 
(Stoyanov et al. 2013), poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene): poly(4-styrene sulfonate) 
(PEDOT: PSS) (Lipomi et al. 2012), and PDMS (Jeong et al. 2016) (Polydimethyl-
siloxane) exhibit Young’s modulus below one mega pascal’s. To design stretchable 
interconnects, various factors like selection of suitable substrate material, the geom-
etry of the interconnect structure and materials, etc., have to be taken into consid-
eration (Plovie et al. n.d.; Embedded and in Thermoplastic Polymers 2017; Jinno 
et al. n.d.; Takimiya and Someya 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Johnston et al. 2014; 
Blau et al. 2011; Salvatore et al. 2017; Tybrandt et al. 2018). Such design can 
be realized by computer-aided tools with minimum design cost and time. There-
fore, a precise ﬂexible-electronic computer-simulation environment is presented in 
Fig. 12.2. In contrast with rigid electronic-system design, the ﬂexible-electronic 
design platform must co-simulate both mechanical as well as electronic aspects to 
consider the design of stretchable interconnects, stretchable electronic circuits, and 
stretchable circuit-layout wiring.
Fig. 12.1 Silicon die with functional blocks (left), Stretchable segmented silicon system (right) 

12
Stretchable Interconnects: Materials, Geometry, Fabrication …
205
Fig. 12.2 
Stretchable-interconnect 
research design ﬂowchart 
Substrate Materials 
The electronic systems that are stretched using elastic polymers commonly use 
various polymers such as polyimide, polyester, and Parylene as substrate mate-
rials. The most widely used substrate material is PDMS, which is also known as 
polydimethylsiloxane. In addition, PBAT (Polybutylene adipate terephthalate) also 
known as Ecoﬂex is commonly used stretchable substrate. PBAT (Carlson et al. 
2012) had compostable features and is used in biodegradable electronics. Stretch-
ability of PBAT is more than PDMS material, PBAT can be stretched up to 650%, 
whereas PDMS has 150% stretchability (Dong et al. 2018). Although polyurethane 
has good mechanical properties, it is not compatible with many organic solvents such 
as ethanol. In addition, its properties are not as strong as those of other polyurethanes. 
Parylene can be used in the form of a liquid or solid base material for wearable 
electronic applications. It is a highly versatile material that can be used in various 
industries such as textiles. This material is mainly used for the design of ﬂexible 
printed circuit board. Its high-quality and robust properties make it a good choice 
for the various applications when compared to other polymers the stretchability of 
parylene is less. Polyimide is the popularly used material for design of ﬂexible PCB 
substrate (Vroman and Tighzert 2009). It is a high strength material and its Young’s 
modulus lies in the range of all the polymeric substrates only. A comparison between 
the various substrate materials is shown in Table 12.1. Among the various substrate 
materials, the polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) has more advantages than the other 
polymers. This is mainly due to its chemical stability and biocompatible properties.

206
V. Kumar et al.
Table 12.1 Comparison of typical parameters of various substrate materials 
Substrate 
materials 
PDMS
PBAT 
(Ecoﬂex) 
Polyurethane
SEBS
Parylene
Polyimide
Polyethylene 
naphthalate 
Polyethylene 
terephthalate 
Young’s 
modulus 
1–7 MPa Dang 
et al. (2017a, b) 
22 kPa Case 
et al. (2015) 
1.1 MPa Case 
et al.(2015) 
10–100 MPa 
Zhai and 
McKenna 
(2014), 
Koerner et al. 
(2005) 
1.3–3.5 GPa 
Weiss et al. 
n.d.) 
2.84 
GPa Metzen 
and Stieglitz 
(2013) 
5 GPa (Chang 
et al. (2015) 
2–2.7 GPa 
Kahouli et al. 
(2009) 
Stretchability
150% 
Huang et al. 
(2014) 
650% Huang 
et al. (2014) 
200% 
Du et al. (2011) 
700% 
Zhai and 
McKenna 
(2014), 
Koerner et al. 
(2005) 
18% 
[67] 
19% 
Metzen and 
Stieglitz 
(2013) 
145% 
Chang et al. 
(2015) 
150% 
Kahouli et al. 
(2009) 
Dielectric 
constant (at 
1 kHz)  
2.32–2.4 
Jeong et al. 
(2016) 
2.1 
Case et al. 
(2015) 
5.68 
Case et al. 
(2015) 
2.45 
Koerner et al. 
2005) 
3.1 
Grigorescu 
et al. (2016) 
3.1–3.4 
Ranjan and 
Mertig (2008) 
3.0 
Chang et al. 
(2015) 
3.4 
Kahouli et al. 
(2009)

12
Stretchable Interconnects: Materials, Geometry, Fabrication …
207
Fig. 12.3 Mesh-shaped 
interconnect geometry 
Geometry of Stretchable Interconnect Structures 
Interconnects can be made stretchable by making the substrate and wiring stretchable. 
In stretchable interconnects nanomaterials and composite materials are being used as 
conductive materials compared to conventional bulk metals, such as silver and copper, 
whose elastic deformation is bounded to very small range. To use these bulk metals, 
patterning strategies are being utilized (2011). There are several types of stretchable 
interconnect geometries such as mesh geometry, spiral geometry, meander geometry, 
and horseshoe geometry. 
Mesh Geometry 
The mesh geometry consists of a series of metal beams that are in a repeated pattern. 
The geometries may be different such as rectangular, diamond, or honeycomb, but 
the effect of applied tensile strains across it remains the same. The shape of the 
element changes as strains are applied. Strain resulting in plane is accommodated by 
rotation in plane. These types of interconnects offer advantages such as it maintains 
its electrical conductivity, if some parts are damaged. Nevertheless, the number of 
interconnects is limited due to its size in a given area. This type of interconnects 
best suits for unsupported interconnects compared to supporting silicon since the 
maximum elongation that can be achieved using metals is reduced. Therefore, it offers 
advantage of its strong nature, but it also has disadvantage with its size (Abdelhalim 
et al. 2011) (Fig. 12.3). 
Spiral Geometry 
A spiral geometry consists of two parallel spiral planes that are connected at the center 
as shown in Fig. 12.4. When the system gets stretched, the two spiral planes move in 
opposite directions and support the system’s stretching (Kaiju et al. 2010; Kolahchi 
et al. 2015). Island is connected with spiral springs or at the center of the two spirals. 
It can also be fabricated as in the case of the mesh geometry. The island acts as a 
connector and holds the functionality between two spirals and a signiﬁcant amount 
of stretchability is provided by the spiral interconnect during the deformation and

208
V. Kumar et al.
Fig. 12.4 Spiral-shaped 
interconnect geometry 
stretching. Therefore, these islands work as buffer and stretchability is maintained. 
To unfurl the structure the spiral geometry rotates. The unfurling capacity is restricted 
if patterning strategies are used. As a supporting silicon structure, the arms width 
must be small to uncoil it to a straight line (Abdelhalim et al. 2011). 
Meander Geometry 
Meander-shaped geometry consists of series of half-circles and vertical segments, as 
shown in Fig. 12.5. There is a curvature between the curved and vertical segments. 
These vertical segments allow more signiﬁcant deformations and also reduce the 
stress concentration on the geometry. 
Meander-shaped interconnect geometry can be stretched into a straight line 
if its material is ductile; thus, it gives higher stretchability. The disadvantage of 
this structure is that it occupies more area. Meander geometry is also commonly 
referred to as self-serpentine structure. Figure 12.6 shows the second-order serpen-
tine design (Abdelhalim et al. 2011; Ri Yim and Park et al. 2021), and it provides 
large extensions. These interconnects gained utmost importance because of their 
scalability.
Fig. 12.5 Meander-shaped interconnect geometry 

12
Stretchable Interconnects: Materials, Geometry, Fabrication …
209
Fig. 12.6 Second-order meander-shaped interconnect geometry 
Horseshoe Geometry 
Horseshoe-shaped geometry shown in Fig. 12.7 is the most widely used stretch-
able interconnect geometry, which supports sizeable longitudinal deformation due 
to the angle of the pivot segment (Abdelhalim et al. 2011). It comprises a series 
of half-circles, which reduces the stress concentration and allow more signiﬁcant 
deformations. Geometry-wise it is similar to meander-shaped geometry except there 
are no vertical segments. Compared to meander geometry, horseshoe interconnect 
geometry occupies less area. 
Fabrication Techniques 
There are several techniques for fabrication of stretchable interconnects, stretchable 
substrates, and each process has its own advantages and disadvantages (Vroman 
and Tighzert 2009). The selection of fabricating material plays an important role 
to achieve multiple features like bending, twisting, folding, and stretching, and the 
discussion on choosing various materials is already presented in the previous section. 
Based on the resolution requirement, processed material, and the material used for the 
fabrication of the substrate, a unique fabrication technique can be chosen. Sometimes 
two or more techniques are also used in combination to get optimized structure and
Fig. 12.7 Horseshoe-shaped interconnect geometry 

210
V. Kumar et al.
performance (Gonzalez et al. 2008, 2018; Qu et al.  2018; Qin et al. 2006; García 
Núñez et al. 2018; Núñez et al. 2018; Fan et al. 2008; Abdelhalim et al. 2013; Béduer 
et al. 2012). 
Microfabrication 
Figure 12.8a depicts the Microfabrication process. It is an industrial-level process, 
and it has advantages like scalability and compatibility. It consists of several steps, 
viz. cleaning, spin coating, baking, ion-implantation, deposition, photolithography, 
and etching, etc. For the fabrication of stretchable interconnect, the signiﬁcant steps 
involved are spin coating, photolithography, and etching. Microfabrication tech-
nology has several limitations due to unavoidable solvents, acid, and base solutions. 
These materials react with substrate materials and affect the quality and resolution of 
the interconnect structures. This technology is advantageous in terms of its scalability 
and compatibility with contemporary silicon device fabrication technique. Neverthe-
less, the scope of this technology is the limited material availability, compatible only 
to planar substrates and unavoidable to solvent, acid, and base solutions. Owing to 
these restrictions, many researchers merged this method with other printing technolo-
gies for the fabrication of the stretchable electronic systems (Vroman and Tighzert 
2009). 
Fig. 12.8 Interconnect fabrication techniques a Microfabrication b Transfer printing c Contact/ 
Stamp printing d Spray Printing e Inkjet printing f Screen Printing (Vroman and Tighzert 2009)

12
Stretchable Interconnects: Materials, Geometry, Fabrication …
211
Transfer Printing Technology 
Figure 12.8b depicts the Transfer printing process. It consists of two substrates (I) 
Donor substrate (II) Receiver substrate. This technique describes the process in which 
the donor substrate and the receiver substrate comes in contact with each other. It 
eliminates the need for the use of a separate substrate for fabrication. High tempera-
tures and organic solvents are often used to produce nanowires. These are typically 
fabricated on a silicon substrate and then printed on a desired ﬂexible substrate. 
Applications of this printing include transfer and alignment of the nano-structures 
(e.g., nanowires, nanoribbons, etc.) from the donor substrate to the receiver (e.g., 
polymeric) substrate. The transfer process, which is shown in Fig. 12.8b, can avoid 
incompatibility issues arising in polymeric substrate to some fabrication processes. 
This printing technology also assists to align the nanowires in a particular direction 
to the receiver substrate. 
Contact Printing 
Figure 12.8c depicts the process of contact printing. It is a type of printing tech-
nology, which consists of a pre-fabricated stamp that contact with a speciﬁc substrate. 
Numerous fabrication technologies such as photolithography, micromachining, and 
nano-imprinting are used to realize the stamp (Vroman and Tighzert 2009). This 
process is usually done by printing a ﬁlm using conductive ink. The ﬁlm’s resolution 
depends on several factors, such as the ink’s viscosity and the substrate’s surface 
energy. The range of resolution varies from nano-meter to micro-meter. This tech-
nology helps the ink bond more strongly to the substrate. More the surface energy 
more strongly is the bond. It is also used to develop higher resolution printing. 
Spray Coating Technology 
Figure 12.8d depicts the process of spray coating. This technology is very famous 
because of high efﬁciency. It is a widely used technique to deposit various materials 
on a substrate. It works by using air pressure and an electrical ﬁeld to spray the 
materials through a nozzle. Normally it is used for whole substrate coating along 
with other techniques of printing, viz. transfer printing or contact printing. Despite 
its high efﬁciency, it has a poor resolution (Vroman and Tighzert 2009).

212
V. Kumar et al.
Inkjet Printing Technology 
By using this printing technology, more versatile designs can be made. The process 
is depicted in Fig. 12.8e. The required geometry format is imported into the software 
in the form of graphical designs. This is an advanced version of conventional ink 
printer. 
Moreover, it is similar to the technology based on dot-matrix printer, which 
comprises the patterns of tiny dots. An electronic circuit activates the piezoelec-
trical crystals, which drive these dots. The resolution of the inkjet printing depends 
on the ink and the diameter of the nozzle. In fabricating LEDs and solar cells (Vroman 
and Tighzert 2009; Khan et al. 2016), inkjet printing technology is the most widely 
used. 
Screen Printing Technology 
Figure 12.8f depicts Screen printing technology. It is a simple printing technology 
that uses a stencil over which predeﬁned patterns can be available. These patterns 
allow the manufacturing material to pass through it. The major disadvantage of 
this printing technology is its resolution, and also the quality of the printing, which 
depends on various factors like solution viscosity, type of the substrate, angle, and 
the distance between stencil and substrate, etc. (Khan et al. 2015a, b; Singh et al. 
2010; Dang et al. 2015). The highest resolution of this printing technology is about 
50 µm (Table 12.2). 
Table 12.2 Comparison of various printing technologies 
Spray coating
Screen printing
Inkjet printing 
Thickness of printed 
ﬁlm (µm) 
0.012–50 (Verilhac 
et al. 2010; Gans and  
Schubert 2003; Pham  
et al. 2005) 
>0.5 (industry) (Zhao 
et al. 2019) 
0.109 ± 0.004 
5–10 (Rogers 2014) 
Viscosity of inks 
(mPa.s) 
5–440 (Verilhac et al. 
2010) 
500–50,000 (Girotto 
et al. 2009) 
1–40 (Girotto et al. 
2009) 
Resolution (µm)
–
50–500 (Singh et al. 
2010) 
20–50 (Rogers 2014; 
Zhao et al. 2019) 
Accuracy (µm)
–
±25 (Zhao et al. 2019) ±0.5–25 (Moonen 
et al. 2012)

12
Stretchable Interconnects: Materials, Geometry, Fabrication …
213
Applications of Stretchable Interconnects 
The various applications of stretchable interconnects are shown in Fig. 12.9 (Vroman 
and Tighzert 2009). Due to their ﬂexibility, these devices can be used in diverse 
applications such as sensors and electronic systems. A stretchable interconnect-based 
smart prosthetic hand which is equipped with artiﬁcial skin can detect various signals 
such as temperature, humidity, and pressure. This makes it an ideal tool for medical 
procedures. 
For instance, a balloon catheter, which is used in surgery to remove blood 
blockage, requires around 130% stretching when inﬂated. In Fig. 12.9, a complete 
stretchable device is shown that allows users to analyze bioﬂuids like sweat. It can 
also be stretched using the device’s ﬂexible interface. For consumer electronic appli-
cations, the ﬂexible displays used in these devices are connected to ILEDs and 
non-coplanar stretchable connectors. The data transmission and ampliﬁer circuits 
are used to create a ﬂexible network which collects the data. This network is robust 
and can be used against various types of movement. In addition to the collection of 
data, this network can also be used to detect and transmit weak electrophysiological 
signals. 
The stretchable interconnects can also be utilized for the electronic skin (e-skin) 
for robotics since it has been vastly adopted in many ﬁelds, like precise manu-
facturing and agriculture. Although the robotics are programmed and accurately 
controlled through computers with precise and infallible programming instructions 
yet they lack the real-time sensing (e.g., proximity or chemical sensing) from the 
working environment, restricting them to provide exact dynamic response. Hence,
Fig. 12.9 Various applications of stretchable interconnects (b)–(h) (Vroman and Tighzert 2009) 

214
V. Kumar et al.
to get exact sensing information, the idea of “e-skin” was proposed, as it can with-
stand up to certain deformation and perform some complex movements in contrast to 
conventional rigid electronics, to integrate sensors with robotics. Healthcare moni-
toring system is one of the key areas which is gaining more attention from stretchable 
electronics point of view owing to propinquity between human body and electronic 
devices. The accuracy and faithfulness of the non-invasive physiological parameters, 
viz. blood pressure, respiration rate, electrolyte concentration, heart rate, and skin 
temperature of the body, are more with stretchable devices. As it is easy to use, 
these non-invasive health monitoring systems gaining more popularity, especially in 
chronic illness (Vroman and Tighzert 2009). The electrical feedback provided by 
stretchable interconnects helps to improve the performance of a medical device by 
giving surgeons feedback on the quality of the operation. For instance, if a temper-
ature sensor is placed on the human skin, it can collect data about the temperature 
within 24 h. Electrodes for precise monitoring and surgery are developed for use in 
stretchable neural electrodes. These are also being used in wearable electronics, such 
as motion detection devices. Because of their ﬂexible nature, these devices can be 
integrated into various types of clothing, such as gloves and bandages. 
The rapid development of stretchable interconnects has led to the creation of 
wearable and skin-mountable electronic devices. One of the most important features 
of these devices is their ability to monitor the environment and physical status. Strain 
sensors made with these devices and interconnects can be used to monitor various 
environmental and chemical conditions. A strain caused by the AgNWs-elastomer 
can lead to the disconnection of the connecting wires between the different types of 
conductors. This resulted in an increase in the resistivity of the sensor. Due to the 
high stretchability of the 1D conductive nanoﬁllers, this type of sensor can be used 
for various applications. One of the most important factors that can be considered 
when it comes to the performance of a strain sensor is its linearity. Unlike other types 
of strain sensors, which have poor linearity, the type of strain sensor known as the 
capacitance type exhibits good linearity. This type of sensor is made up of a layer 
of ﬂexible dielectric which is sandwiched between two stretchable electrodes. The 
device was able to detect various human motions, such as blinking and clenching, 
which are commonly used in medical procedures. Its sensitivity is also enough to 
identify target motion. This technology can be useful in monitoring the blood ﬂow 
rate in order to check the condition of patients with high blood pressure. Another 
performance parameter that can be measured is the increased sensitivity. One of the 
strategies that can be used to improve the sensitivity of the device Is by using low-
density networks of conductive materials. This can help to minimize the strain on the 
junction points of the devices. Another strategy is to treat nanostructured materials 
by exposing them to intense light, which increases the gauge factor. Aside from the 
physical properties of the device, other factors such as its biocompatibility and low 
power consumption are also taken into account to achieve high performance. 
Energy harvesting devices can be developed using stretchable interconnects. The 
creation of energy harvesting technology is a progress in the direction of eco-friendly 
society. Researchers have spent the last ten years working on energy harvesting 
devices, which are developing with stretchable electronics. Many ﬂexible energy

12
Stretchable Interconnects: Materials, Geometry, Fabrication …
215
harvesters function with a low strain ratio (0.1%) before adopting stretchable conduc-
tors. Therefore, by utilizing the various techniques, materials, structural arrangement, 
integration strategy, different stretchable and ﬂexible energy harvesting devices can 
be investigated. Energy harvesting devices have been designed according to their 
unique promising applications, primarily in wearable and stretchable electronics. 
These devices primarily use triboelectricity and piezoelectricity, commonly known 
as nanogenerators, to transform mechanical energy to electrical energy. Moreover, 
shape-adaptive triboelectric nanogenerator (saTENG) has numerous applications in 
day-to-day life. 
Figure 12.10a–c depicts the various applications of saTENG as energy harvester 
from human walking where foot motion being monitored. As shown in Fig. 12.10a, a 
saTENG has been mounted beneath shoe pad and for electrolyte, tap water (conduc-
tivity: 0.248 mS/cm) is used. Human body is used as ground and tap water being 
used as electrolyte for wearable saTENGs. The foot motion, shown in Fig. 12.10b, is 
visualized by two sets of LEDs having reversed polarity. The up and down motions 
of foot are reﬂected in the LEDs sets lighting alternatively. For the up motion of 
foot, the electric potential of water electrode decreases and the electrons ﬂow from 
water to ground causing upper set of LEDs to glow. In downward pressing of foot 
reverse happens, i.e., electrons ﬂow from ground to water electrode and hence lower 
set of LEDs glow which is shown in Fig. 12.10c. In the ﬁeld of robotics this type of 
saTENG plays a crucial role. Figure 12.10d shows a saTENG looped over a subject’s 
arm to act as a self-powered arm motion sensor and collect energy from pressing 
action. For a cycle of tapping, more than 80 LEDs can be driven demonstrating 
its effectiveness. The generated electricity through this saTENG can be rectiﬁed 
and stored in batteries or capacitors as shown in Fig. 12.10e, i.e., capacitor voltage 
rises quickly while tapping and becomes zero when tapping ceases. Figure 12.10f 
shows the application of saTENG in the shape of bracelet as wearable power source. 
The bracelet is worn around arm and it detects the biceps bending angle. With the 
bending of elbow, the biceps volume increases, and vice versa, thereby changing 
arm circumference. Due to this, the contact area between arm and saTENG changes. 
This alteration of contact area causes electrons to ﬂow between water electrode of 
saTENG and ground and again between ground and water electrode. The rate of 
transfer of electrons and hence current is proportional to bending angle which is 
depicted in Fig. 12.10f (Susanna et al. 2011).
It was reported that, a hyper-stretchable elastic-composite generator (SEG) made 
of extremely long Ag nanowires (VAgNWs), stretchable electrodes had a great 
stretchability and the output was seven times more than that of piezo-generators 
(Tobjörk and Österbacka 2011). The fabrication of a shape-adaptive triboelec-
tric nanogenerator (saTENG) comprising conductive liquid enclosed in a polymer 
cover was developed as a scaling technique for extremely ﬂexible and stretchable 
energy harvesters and self-powered sensors. It is also possible to design a stretchy 
energy harvester by combining nanomaterials. IS-TENG exhibits high transparency, 
extremely long uniaxial strain, and good self-healing capability that can regain its 
performance after 300 full bifurcation cycles. In addition, Piezoresistive sensors are

216
V. Kumar et al.
Fig. 12.10 Energy harvesting-based stretchable devices. a saTENG attached to shoe b Equivalent 
LED circuit diagram c LED motion illustration d Bracelet like saTENG demonstration e storing 
energy with bracelet saTENG f saTENG worn on arm g output of arm saTENG at various bend 
angle (Susanna et al. 2011)
frequently employed to measure the movement of speciﬁc joints or muscles in wire-
less wearable devices for human movement analysis (Yi et al. 2016; Corzo et al. 
2020; Doo  Ri  Yim  2021; Zhao et al. 2022). Analyzing the gathered data precisely 
might be challenging if the connection resistance that transmits the sensor signal is 
likewise sensitive to human movement. 
Conclusion 
In this chapter, an overview of different interconnect substrate materials, geometric 
structures, and the fabrication techniques of stretchable interconnects for elastic 
electronic surface structures have been discussed. Various fabrication techniques for 
stretchable interconnects and its comparison also have been discussed. The appli-
cations of these stretchable electronics, viz. electronic skin, healthcare monitoring 
system, and energy storage for consumer have been discussed. The ability to conform 
to the shape of a human body, healthcare monitoring devices have been widely used

12
Stretchable Interconnects: Materials, Geometry, Fabrication …
217
for this purpose to collect various physiological data. The wide range of applications 
that stretchable interconnects can play in electronics has shifted the paradigm in the 
health care and consumer electronics industry. 
References 
Abdelhalim A, Abdellah A, Scarpa G, Lugli P (2013) Fabrication of carbon nanotube thin ﬁlms on 
ﬂexible substrates by spray deposition and transfer printing. Carbon n. y. 61:72–79 
Béduer A, Seichepine F, Flahaut E, Vieu C (2012) A simple and versatile micro contact printing 
method for generating carbon nanotubes patterns on various substrates. Microelectron Eng 
97:301–305 
Blau A, Murr A, Wolff S, Sernagor E, Medini P, Iurilli G, Ziegler C, Benfenati F (2011) Flexible, 
all-polymer microelectrode arrays for the capture of cardiac and neuronal signals. Biomaterials 
32(7):1778–1786 
Carlson A, Bowen AM, Huang Y, Nuzzo RG, Rogers JA (2012) Transfer printing techniques for 
materials assembly and micro/nanodevice fabrication. Adv Mater 24(39):5284–5318 
Case JC, White EL, Kramer RK (2015) Soft material characterization for robotic applications. Soft 
Robot 2(2):80–87 
Chang Y, Chiu T, Yang Y, Tseng Y, Chen X, Huang P, Rd C (2015) Fatigue response of polyimide 
thin ﬁlm under cyclic loading. In: International microsystem, packaging, assembly and circuits 
technology conference, pp 233–236 
Corzo D, Tostado-Blázquez G, Baran D (2020) Flexible electronics: status, challenges and 
opportunities. Front Electron 1:594003 
Dahiya RS, Valle M (2013) Robotic tactile sensing—technologies and system. Springer, Dordrecht 
Dang W, Vinciguerra V, Lorenzelli L, Dahiya R (2017a) Printable stretchable interconnects. Flexible 
Printed Electron 2(1):013003 
Dang W, Khan S, Lorenzelli L, Vinciguerra V, Dahiya R (2015) Stretchable interconnects using 
screen printed nanocomposites of MWCNTs with PDMS and P(VDF-TrFE). Conference PhD 
Res. in Microelec. Elec. (PRIME), UK, pp 247–250 
Dang W, Vinciguerra V, Lorenzelli L, Dahiya R (2017b) Printable stretchable interconnects. Flex 
Print Electron 2:013003 
De Gans BJ, Schubert US (2003) Inkjet printing of polymer micro-arrays and libraries: instrumen-
tation, requirements, and perspectives. Macromol Rapid Commun 24(11):659–666 
Dong Z, Duan B, Li J, Yang Y (2018) A stretchable ﬂexible electronic platform for mechanical and 
electrical collaborative design. Sci China Inf Sci 61 060418:1–060418:15 
Du P, Lin X, Zhang X (2011) Dielectric constants of PDMS nanocomposites using conducting 
polymer nanowires. IEEE Transducers, 645–648 
Fan Z, Ho JC, Jacobson ZA, Yerushalmi R, Alley RL, Razavi H, Javey A (2008) Wafer-scale 
assembly of highly ordered semiconductor nanowire arrays by contact printing. Nano Lett 
8(1):20–25 
García Núñez C, Liu F, Navaraj WT, Christou A, Shakthivel D, Dahiya R (2018) Heterogeneous 
integration of contact-printed semiconductor nanowires for high performance devices on large 
areas. Microsystems Nanoeng 4(1):22 
Girotto C, Rand BP, Genoe J, Heremans P (2009) Exploring spray coating as a deposition technique 
for the fabrication of solution-processed solar cells. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells 93(4):454–458 
Gonzalez M, Axisa F, Vanden Bulcke M, Brosteaux D, Vandevelde B, Vanﬂeteren J (2008)Design 
of metal interconnects for stretchable electronic circuits. Microelectron Reliab 48(6):825–832 
Grigorescu RM, Ciuprina F, Ghioca P, Ghiurea M, Iancu L, Spurcaciu B, Panaitescu DM (2016) 
Mechanical and dielectric properties of SEBS modiﬁed by graphite inclusion and composite 
interface. J Phys Chem Solids 89:97–106

218
V. Kumar et al.
Hess-Dunning AE, Tyler DJ, Zorman CA (2013) Stretchable thin-ﬁlm metal structures on a stimuli-
responsive polymer nanocomposite for mechanically-dynamic microsystems. In Transducers 
2013, Barcelona, pp 2229–2232 
Huang Y, Wang Y, Xiao L, Liu H, Dong W, Yin Z (2014) Microﬂuidic serpentine antennas with 
designed mechanical tunability. Lab Chip 14(21):4205–4212 
Jeong SH, Zhang S, Hjort K, Hilborn J, Wu Z (2016) PDMS-based elastomer tuned soft, stretchable, 
and sticky for epidermal electronics. Adv Mater 28:5830–5836 
Jinno H, Fukuda K, Xu X, Park S, Suzuki Y, Koizumi M, Yokota T, Osaka I, Takimiya K, Someya 
T (2017) Stretchable and waterproof elastomer-coated organic photovoltaics for washable 
electronic textile applications. Nat Energy 2(10):780–785 
Johnston ID, McCluskey DK, Tan CKL, Tracey MC (2014) Mechanical characterization of bulk 
Sylgard 184 for microﬂuidics and microengineering. J Micromechan Microeng 24(3):0350117 
(1–7) 
Kahouli A, Sylvestre A, Ortega L, Jomni F, Yangui B, Maillard M, Berge B, Robert JC, Legrand J 
(2009) Structural and dielectric study of parylene C thin ﬁlms. Appl Phys Lett 94(15):152901 
Kaiju H, Basheer N, Kondo K, Ishibashi A (2010) Surface roughness and magnetic properties of 
Ni and Ni78Fe22 thin ﬁlms on polyethylene naphthalate organic substrates. IEEE Trans Magn 
46:1356–1359 
Khan S, Yogeswaran N, Taube W, Lorenzelli L, Dahiya R (2015a) Flexible FETs using ultrathin 
Si microwires embedded in solution processed dielectric and metal layers. J Micromechan 
Microeng 25(12):125019 
Khan S, Tinku S, Lorenzelli L, Dahiya RS (2015b) Flexible tactile sensors using screen-printed 
P(VDF-TrFE) and MWCNT/PDMS composites. IEEE Sens J 15(6):3146–3155 
Khan S, Member LL, Dahiya R, Member S (2016) Flexible MISFET devices from transfer printed 
Si microwires and spray coating. J Electron Devices Soc. 4(4):189–196 
Koerner H, Liu W, Alexander M, Mirau P, Dowty H, Vaia RA (2005) Deformation–morphology 
correlations in electrically conductive carbon nanotube— thermoplastic polyurethane nanocom-
posites. Polymer (Guildf) 46(12):4405–4420 
Kolahchi AR, Ajji A, Carreau PJ (2015) Improvement of PET surface hydrophilicity and roughness 
through blending In: AIP Conference proceedings (ed. Sadhan C. Jana) 030001 (AIP Publishing, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA, 2015) 
Lacour SP, Jones J, Wagner S, Li T, Suo Z (2005) Stretchable interconnects for elastic electronic 
surfaces. Proc IEEE 93(8):1459–1467 
Lipomi DJ, Lee JA, Vosgueritchian M, Tee BC-K, Bolander JA, Bao Z (2012) electronic properties of 
transparent conductive ﬁlms of PEDOT: PSS on stretchable substrates. Chem Mater 24(2):373– 
382 
Moonen PF, Yakimets I, Huskens J (2012) Fabrication of transistors on ﬂexible substrates: from 
mass-printing to high-resolution alternative lithography strategies. Adv Mater 24(41):5526– 
5541 
Núñez CG, Liu F, Xu S, Dahiya R (2018) Integration techniques for micro/nanostructure-based 
large-area electronics (Elements in Flexible and Large-Area Electronics). Cambridge University 
Press 
Pham NP, Burghartz JN, Sarro PM (2005) Spray coating of photoresist for pattern transfer on high 
topography surfaces. J. Micromech Microeng 15(4):691–697 
Plovie BB, Yang Y, Guillaume J, Dunphy S, Dhaenens K, Van Put S, Vervust T, Bossuyt F, 
Vanﬂeteren J, Arbitrarily shaped 2.5D circuits using stretchable interconnects embedded in 
thermoplastic polymers. Adv Eng Mater 19(8):1700032 (1–8) 
Qin JJ, Chung TS, Cao Y (2006) Solvent selection for manufacture of ﬂuorinated polyimide 
composite membranes. Desalination 193:8–13 
Qu Y, Nguyen-Dang T, Page AG, Yan W, Das Gupta T, Rotaru GM, Rossi RM, Favrod VD, 
Bartolomei N, Sorin F (2018) Superelastic Multimaterial electronic and photonic ﬁbers and 
devices via thermal drawing. Adv Mater 30(27):1707251 (1–8)

12
Stretchable Interconnects: Materials, Geometry, Fabrication …
219
Ranjan N, Mertig M (2008) Dielectrophoretically assembled carbon nanotube-metal hybrid 
structures with reduced contact resistance. Phys Status Solidi Basic Res 245(10):2311–2314 
Ri Yim D, Park CW (2021) Hybrid-type stretchable interconnects with double-layered liquid metal-
on-polyimide serpentine structure. ETRI J 44:147–154 
Rogers JA (2014) Materials for semiconductor devices that can bend, fold, twist, and stretch. MRS 
Buletinl 39:549–556 
Salvatore GA, Sülzle J, Valle FD, Cantarella G, Robotti F, Jokic P, Knobelspies S, Daus A, Büthe 
L, Petti L, Kirchgessner N, Hopf R, Magno M, Tröster G (2017) Biodegradable and highly 
deformable temperature sensors for the internet of things. Adv Funct Mater 27(35):1702390 
(1–10) 
Singh M, Haverinen HM, Dhagat P, Jabbour GE (2010) Inkjet printing-process and its applications. 
Adv Mater 22(6):673–685 
Sosin S (2011) Interconnect schemes for stretchable array-type microsystems. Mater Sci [Online: 
repository.tudelft.nl] 
Stoyanov H, Kollosche M, Risse S, Waché R, Kofod G (2013) Soft conductive elastomer materials 
for stretchable electronics and voltage controlled artiﬁcial muscles. Adv Mater 25(4):578–583 
Susanna G, Salamandra L, Brown TM, Di Carlo A, Brunetti F, Reale A (2011) Airbrush spray-
coating of polymer bulk-heterojunction solar cells. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells 95(7):1775–1778 
Tobjörk D, Österbacka R (2011) Paper electronics. Adv Mater 23:1935–1961 
Tybrandt K, Khodagholy D, Dielacher B, Stauffer F, Renz AF, Buzsáki G, Vörös J (2018) High-
density stretchable electrode grids for chronic neural recording. Adv Mater 30(15):1706520 
(1–7) 
Verilhac JM, Benwadih M, Seiler AL, Jacob S, Bory C, Bablet J, Heitzman M, Tallal J, Barbut L, 
Frère P, Sicard G, Gwoziecki R, Chartier I, Coppard R, Serbutoviez C (2010) Step toward robust 
and reliable amorphous polymer ﬁeld-effect transistors and logic functions made by the use of 
roll to roll compatible printing processes. Org Electron Phys Mater Appl 11(3):456–462 
Von Metzen RP, Stieglitz T (2013) The effects of annealing on mechanical, chemical, and physical 
properties and structural stability of Parylene C. Biomed Microdevices 15(5):727–735 
Vroman I, Tighzert L (2009) Biodegradable polymers. Materials 2(2):307–344 
Wang S, Xu J, Wang W, Wang G-, Rastak R, Molina-Lopez F, Chung JW, Niu S, Feig VR, Lopez 
J, Lei T, Kwon S-K, Kim Y, Foudeh AM, Ehrlich A, Gasperini A, Yun Y, Murmann B, Tok JB, 
Bao Z (2018) Skin electronics from scalable fabrication of an intrinsically stretchable transistor 
array. Nature 555:83–88 
Weiss RA, Sen A, Pottick LA, Willis CL, Block copolymer ionomers: 2. Viscoelastic and 
mechanical properties of sulphonated poly(styreneethylene/butylene-styrene). Polymer (Guildf) 
32(15):2785–2792, 199 
Yang F, Wang Y, Kuang X, Nie Y, Xia W (2018) Design and analysis of self-similar serpentine 
interconnects for stretchable electronics. Inter Conf Electro Packaging Tech (ICEPT), 1741– 
1743 
Yi F, Wang X, Niu S, Li S, Yin Y, Dai K, Zhang G, Lin L, Wen Z, Guo H, Wang J (2016) A 
highly shape-adaptive, stretchable design based on conductive liquid for energy harvesting and 
self-powered biomechanical monitoring. Sci Adv 2(6):e1501624 
Yim DR, Park CW (2022) Hybrid-type stretchable interconnects with double-layered liquid metal-
on-polyimide serpentine structure. ETRI J 44:147–154. https://doi.org/10.4218/etrij.2021-0188 
Zhai M, McKenna GB (2014) Elastic modulus and surface tension of a polyurethane rubber in 
nanometer thick ﬁlms. Polym. (United Kingdom) 55(11):2725–2733 
Zhao Y, Kim A, Wan G, Tee BCK (2019) Design and application of stretchable and self-healable 
conductors for soft electronics. Nano Convergence 6(1):1–22 
Zhao Y, Zhou W, Shi Y et al. (2022) Superelastic alloy based electrical interconnects for highly 
stretchable electronics. npj Flex Electron 6, 8 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41528-022-001 
42-2

Chapter 13 
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review 
Gulafsha Bhatti, Yash Agrawal, Vinay Palaparthy, 
Mummaneni Kavicharan, and Meenu Agrawal 
Abstract Progressive changes are occurring at an unprecedented rate in the ﬁeld 
of electronics, science, and technology. The conviction and evolutionary develop-
ment of ﬂexible electronics have been incredibly witnessed in recent years. Flex-
ible electronics or ﬂex circuits refer to technology that can be mounted onto the 
adaptable substrate. Flexible electronics comprises varying splendid properties such 
as ﬂexibility, bending, rolling, folding, and stretching without losing its function-
ality. These characteristics are not fulﬁlled by present conventional electronic-based 
systems. Flexible electronics is highly beneﬁcial in varying applications and used 
in several upcoming devices such as wearable gadgets, medical and industrial prod-
ucts, ﬂexible sensors, and displays. Evolvement of ﬂexible electronics has led to 
extensive research and development in ﬂexible substrates and stretchable intercon-
nects. Flexible substrate holds the ﬂexible electronics. The substrate materials can be 
conductive polymers, organic semiconductors, graphene derivatives, and amorphous 
silicon. Further, to withstand large deformation, stretchable interconnects provide 
the overall ﬂexibility to the electronic system. The interconnects are the connection 
between various components to transmit and receive signals. The foremost challenge 
in developing ﬂexible electronics is not to lose electrical functionality of the stretch-
able interconnect along with providing good mechanical stability. The purpose of
G. Bhatti envelope symbol · Y. Agrawal · V. Palaparthy 
Dhirubhai Ambani Institute of Information and Communication Technology, Gandhinagar, 
Gujarat, India 
e-mail: 202021005@daiict.ac.in 
Y. Agrawal 
e-mail: mr.yashagrawal@gmail.com 
V. Palaparthy 
e-mail: vinay_shrinivas@daiict.ac.in 
M. Kavicharan 
Department of ECE, National Institute of Technology, Silchar, Assam, India 
e-mail: kavicharan.mummaneni@gmail.com 
M. Agrawal 
Mechanical Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, Telangana, India 
e-mail: meenu13796@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_13 
221

222
G. Bhatti et al.
this chapter is to review and address various ﬂexible electronics modules such as 
components required, relevant materials, interconnect geometries, its electrical and 
mechanical properties, printing techniques along with its promising applications. 
Finally, the market growth and potential future research directions have also been 
discussed in the chapter. 
Keywords Flexible electronics (FE) · Interconnects · Polymers · Stretchability ·
Substrate 
Introduction 
Today’s modern era is highly progressed and dependent on electronic devices and 
systems. The major breakthrough in the electronic industry started with the invention 
of transistor by John Bardeen and Walter Brattain in April 1950 (Brinkman et al. 
1997). Subsequently in 1956, Jack Kilby from Texas Instruments developed the ﬁrst 
integrated circuit (IC) using a mesa transistor. It was an elementary device formed 
using discrete wire connections of one transistor, a capacitor, and a resistor on a single 
silicon layer. Thereafter, it took almost a decade to get all these different discrete 
components in place to start driving the planar process toward making IC (Brinkman 
et al. 1997). In 1960s, Gorden Moore predicted that the number of transistors on a 
single chip would grow exponentially with time which is now popularly referred to 
as Moore’s law (Rabaey et al. 2017). Following Moore’s law, the number of tran-
sistors increased in different processors with year. This is shown in Fig. 13.1. In  
1960s, the ﬁrst metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS) logic was introduced. After two 
years, the ﬁrst logic family was launched, which had the advantage of offering higher 
integration density. This trend continued to take off entirely in the early 1970s. The 
second age revolution of the digital IC was pioneered with the introduction of the ﬁrst 
microprocessors by Intel in 1972. Since then, the growth of electronics in communi-
cation, infotainment, and computation has amazingly driven. The patronizing areas 
such as optoelectronics, radio frequency, bioelectronics, organic light emitting diode 
(OLED)-based displays, manufacturing, and fabrications still use crystalline mate-
rials. However, the rigidity of electronic circuit boards restricts the ﬂexibility of 
the device. Most of today’s electronic systems are made on hard substrates. These 
systems lack the ﬂexibility to bend or elongate. To mitigate this issue, ﬂexible elec-
tronics (FE) technology is emerging. In FE technology, the electronic system can be 
folded, bended, and elongated. FE are built using ﬂexible or elastic substrates and 
stretchable interconnects.
The concept of FE has existed for several decades and has a long history. The 
idea took strike when the solar cells of semiconductor-based silicon wafers used in 
satellites were thinned to permit a certain degree of bending. This led to the launch of 
the ﬁrst single-crystalline ﬂexible silicon solar cell of thickness around 100 μm and 
assembling them on a plastic substrate to provide the property of ﬂexibility in 1960s 
(Crabb and Treble 1967; Ray  1967). The semiconductors are at the heart from ancient

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
223
Fig. 13.1 Number of 
transistors per chip with 
increase in years following 
Moore’s prediction (Intel® 
Products 2023)
to modern living that is utilized to build electronic devices such as resistors, diodes, 
MOS ﬁeld-effect transistors (MOSFETs), and ICs. Among the most widely used 
semiconductor materials are silicon, germanium, and gallium arsenide. In which, 
silicon usage is eminent and high due to its availability in abundance. 
Silicon has remained the main steer in developing nanoscale technology to reduce 
its cost and elongate its reliability. But the rigidity of the material limits its ductility 
in ﬂexible and stretchable electronics applications. These are the strong motivations 
for a ubiquitous search for prospective materials with higher potential which can 
replace and overcome the conventional silicon technology. 
As found by the researchers, the foremost emerging materials, such as graphene 
nanoribbon (GNR) and carbon nanotube (CNT), show outstanding properties in terms 
of elasticity, thermal capability, reliability, and mechanical strength, when compared 
to conventional silicon. Afterward, in the following decades, there was a giant stride in 
the development of different materials such as hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si: 
H), conductive polymers, organic semiconductors, transition-metal dichalcogenide 
(TMD), and boron nitride (BN). These gave good base strength to the FE devices 
that require twisting, bending, rolling which is not satisﬁed by the conventional 
electronics. The evolution of substrate materials from rigid to ﬂexible is described 
in Fig. 13.2. The novel FE holds huge applications in future technologies such as 
environment monitoring, healthcare, sensor, e-textile, and wearable devices.
This review chapter explores the recent, intensive, and trendy development of FE. 
The components, characteristics, properties, geometries, applications, and market 
growth of FE are detailed in this chapter. The present chapter is organized into 
ﬁve sections. The current ﬁrst section discusses the evolution of electronics era

224
G. Bhatti et al.
Fig. 13.2 Evolution of electronics from rigid to soft materials (Chae and Lee 2014)
and brief introduction of FE. Section “Components of Flexible Electronics” details 
about the different components and properties those are used for building FE. In 
Sect. “Printing Technologies for Fabrication of FE”, the latest and most effective 
printing techniques used for the fabrication of FE are discussed. Next, Sect. “Market 
Growth and Applications” covers the wide progressive applications of FE and its 
market growth. Finally, the chapter concludes in Sect. Conclusion with highlighting 
profound research direction paths toward developing a new era in the world of FE. 
Components of Flexible Electronics 
The FE comprises four major components as (a) substrate, (b) device, (c) intercon-
nect, and (d) encapsulation. Each of these components must comply to bend and 
stretch keeping their functionality intact. This section brieﬂy discusses each of the 
core components. Further, the materials and their properties are also deﬁned. 
Substrate 
Substrate is a medium that provides foundation for building components over it. A 
ﬂexible substrate refers to a thin material that should be mechanically robust and have 
high tolerance to repeated bendability. The factors such as low cost, low mechanical 
stiffness, high conductivity, simplicity in manufacturing, ease of reparability are the 
desired features for selecting ﬂexible materials. Silicon has been a foremost essential 
material used as a substrate in electronics circuits. Thickness of silicon is generally

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
225
Table 13.1 Properties and applications of different types of substrate materials (Sankir 2005) 
Property
Unit
Metal
Organic polymers/plastic
Thin/ 
ﬂexible 
glass 
Example
Stainless 
steel (430) 
Plastics (PEN, PI, PET)
Glass 
(1737) 
Thickness
μm
100
100
100 
Safe bending radius
cm
4
4
40 
Maximum process 
temperature 
ºC
1000
180, 300
600 
Coefﬁcient of thermal 
expansion (CTE) 
ppm/ºC
10
16
4 
Elastic modulus
GPa
200
5
70 
Electrical conductivity
u
High
None
None 
Thermal conductivity
W/mºC
16
0.1–0.2
1 
Deform after device 
fabrication 
–
No
Yes
No 
Application
–
OLED
Adhesives, coatings, potting 
compounds, and sealants 
Flat panel 
display 
100 μm and therefore to make this rigid layer ﬂexible, the substrate thickness is 
required to be lesser than 50 μm so that the chip can be bent without getting cracks. 
However, reducing the thickness of silicon can make it brittle and non-conductive. 
Some of the major types of substrate materials preferred for FE applications are 
metals, organic polymers/plastics, and thin/ﬂexible glass (Sankir 2005). The proper-
ties and applications of each type of these substrate materials are listed in Table 13.1. 
The examples for different types of materials are discussed in the table such as stain-
less steel (430) is an example of metal, polyethylene naphthalate (PEN), poly-imide 
(PI), and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) are examples of organic polymers/plastic, 
and glass (1737) is an example for thin/ﬂexible glass. The properties such as thickness 
of the material, safe bending radius, maximum process temperature, coefﬁcient of 
thermal expansion (CTE), elastic modulus, electrical conductivity, thermal conduc-
tivity, deform after device fabrication, and applications are discussed in Table 13.1. It  
can be inferred from the table that the polymeric materials show the highest ﬂexibility 
and conductivity and hence preferable choice in many FE applications. 
Device 
Device refers to passive and active components that can be used to build the elec-
tronic system. The passive electronic devices comprise resistors, capacitors, and 
inductors, whereas the active electronic devices are thyristors and transistors which

226
G. Bhatti et al.
control the voltage-current characteristics in the circuit. There are different types of 
transistors such as bipolar junction transistors (BJTs), insulated-gate bipolar tran-
sistors (IGBTs), ﬁeld-effect transistors (FETs) those can be used as switch/power 
device in the circuit. One of the commonly used FETs is MOSFET. The primary use 
of MOSFET is to control the ﬂow of electric current between its source and drain 
terminals based on the voltage supply at its gate terminal. MOSFETs are used to 
build conventional electronic systems that cannot be stretched or ﬂexed. Therefore, 
to build the FE system, thin ﬁlm transistors (TFTs) are majorly used. The TFT is an 
improved version over MOSFET switch. The fundamental difference between the 
MOSFETs and TFTs is their supporting substrate. For manufacturing MOSFETs, 
silicon wafer is commonly used as a substrate while glass/polymers are preferably 
used for making TFTs. 
TFT is a transistor whose fabrication is done by depositing thin ﬁlms of active 
semiconductor, dielectric and metallic layers on base of ﬂexible substrate. This can 
be bent up to 1/16 radius, cut into two halves and still remain functional (Itoh et al. 
2016). The fabrication of TFTs is relatively lesser complex and are compatible with 
wrapping products. In terms of historical point of view, the interest and development 
of TFTs and FE are traced back to 1960 by Paul Weimer, who showed application 
of inorganic TFT which turned out into the directed path for the development of 
novel devices (Weimer 1962). Then gradually, in 1968, Brody and team made a TFT 
of tellurium on a thin strip of paper. They applied it in forming display matrices 
further adding up more TFTs on a ﬂexible substrate in enough scale which includes 
mylar, polyethylene, and anodized aluminum folding foils (Sakuma 2022). TFTs 
have been extensively used in industries for developing different products such as 
display, nanotechnology-based bioFET, sensors, IOT devices, RFID, memory, and 
e-paper. This subsection summarizes the basic structure of assembling TFT, their 
types, and materials for deformable TFT devices. 
The basic structure of TFT comprises following essential elements as (a) substrate, 
(b) insulator, layer, (c) thin ﬁlm semiconductor, and (d) three electrodes namely 
gate, source, and drain. According to the arrangement of these elements, TFT can 
be divided into staggered (S) and coplanar (C) structure. Further each type of these 
structures is subdivided into top-gate (TG) and bottom-gate (BG) type. The schematic 
of each of these structures is illustrated in Fig. 13.3 (Shang et al. 2019). The ﬁrst 
layer of TFT is made of ﬂexible substrate. As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the 
source and drain regions are separated by the semiconductor ﬁlm. Whereas the gate 
and semiconductor ﬁlm are separated by the insulating layer to avoid the electrical 
shorting. The work of gate electrode is to provide signal to the semiconductor layer 
which develops the contact channel between the source and drain electrodes. The 
selection of semiconductor material is based on certain criteria. First is that the 
gate terminal can control semiconductor and still remain separated by an insulating 
dielectric layer. Second is to provide carrier injection to the conducting contacts. The 
basic working principle of TFTs is opposite to that of MOSFETs. When a negative 
gate voltage Vg greater than threshold voltage VT is applied at gate terminal, the holes 
get accumulated at the semiconductor-dielectric interface. This interface behaves as 
a capacitor and thus provides a conducting channel. The holes at interface drift from

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
227
Fig. 13.3 Generalized TFT structures a staggered top-gate (S-TG) b staggered bottom-gate (S-BG) 
c coplanar top-gate (C-TG) d coplanar bottom-gate (C-BG) (Shang et al. 2019) 
source toward drain terminal and generate drain current ID (Sankir 2005). Whereas in 
TFTs there is no p–n junction in the source and drain regions. In TFT, the modulation 
is achieved by an accumulation layer, whereas in MOSFETs the inversion region has 
to be formed to achieve modulation. Thus, TFT operates in accumulation region, 
unlikely as MOSFET operates in inversion region. Moreover, the manufacturing 
temperature of MOSFETs and TFTs are also different. 
In S-TG and S-BG structures, the contact of source/drain electrodes are on oppo-
site sides of insulating layer. Whereas in case of C-TG and C-BG structures, source/ 
drain electrodes and insulating layer are in direct contact with each other. In S struc-
ture conﬁguration, current ﬂows in two planes, ﬁrst is vertically along the channel 
and second is horizontally from source to drain electrode. Whereas, in C structure, 
current ﬂows in a single horizontal plane. 
The arrangement of each element has strong inﬂuence on advantages/ 
disadvantages, device performance, and manufacturing materials of TFTs. The TG 
structure is preferable when the semiconductor materials requirement is to have 
high-quality crystal structure, a ﬂat and continuous ﬁlm and high processing temper-
ature. The TG structure protects the semiconductor from external damage; hence it 
may act as a passivation layer. TG structure is not suitable for LCD applications, 
as it cannot block the backlight unit from reaching the semiconductor layer. On the 
other hand, the fabrication of BG structure is simpler and has enhanced electrical 
properties. Therefore, the structure is preferable for light sensitive semiconductor 
materials. The gate electrode of BG structure blocks the backlight unit effects from 
reaching the semiconductor materials. Therefore, this is widely used for applications 
in LCDs. Furthermore, in BG structure the semiconductor layer is directly exposed 
to air, due to which it becomes simpler to modify its properties. But the exposure can 
also lead to instability as a result the back-channel surfaces can suffer damage during 
annealing or plasma treatment processes (Fortunato et al. 2012; Lu et al.  2018).

228
G. Bhatti et al.
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 13.4 a Structure of an individual pentacene molecule comprising of ﬁve linear benzene rings 
b pentacene-based TFT (Lin et al. 1997) 
The semiconductor active channel layer in TFT can be fabricated using different 
materials such as zinc oxide, organic semiconductors, and CNTs. For instance, two 
prominent materials for TFTs are organic semiconductors-based pentacene and CNT 
which are discussed next in this section. 
Pentacene based TFTs: Pentacene is vastly researched as an organic semicon-
ductor due to its large carrier mobility values that is greater than 10 cm2/Vs on 
alumina dielectric (Ausanio et al. 2006; Qaiser et al.  2017). Figure 13.4a shows  the  
organic small molecule of pentacene (C22H14) which comprises ﬁve linear benzene 
rings. This molecule exhibits the semiconductive properties because of the pres-
ence of π-conjugated system in the benzene ring with alternating single and double 
carbon–carbon bond. The main governing component is molecule–substrate weak 
Van-der-waal’s electrostatic interaction force allows charge transport to occur linearly 
across the molecule (Hussain and El-Atab 2022; Lin et al. 1997). 
The p-type pentacene bottom-gate staggered TFT structure is shown in Fig. 13.4b. 
In order to generate electric ﬁeld, a negative or positive gate voltage is applied to 
the p-type or n-type semiconductor respectively. As a result, p/n type voltage attract 
either electrons or holes to the dielectric-semiconductor interface surface. Thus, 
on providing required biasing on source-drain terminals, a conducting channel is 
produced at this interface which leads to current conduction (Lin et al. 1997). Due 
to having high mobility, pentacene is widely used for OFET applications. 
CNT-based TFTs: CNT can exist in three different structures such as armchair, 
zigzag, and chiral. These are shown in Fig. 13.5. CNT is the strongest material in 
terms of tensile strength and stiffest materials in terms of elastic modulus. CNT 
exhibits extraordinary electrical, thermal, and mechanical performance due to its 
intrinsic molecular structure which makes it the most promising material for future 
FE applications (Kumar et al. 2016; Pathade et al. 2021). A schematic architecture of 
fully printed CNT TFT on elastomeric substrate is shown in Fig. 13.6. It comprises 
a bilayer high-k dielectric layers of 30 nm MgO and 30 nm of Al2O3. These layers 
are deposited via e-beam evaporation and atomic layer deposition (ALD) which 
act as dielectric medium. The PET is utilized as a ﬂexible substrate. Above PET 
substrate, an adhesive layer of silicon dioxide is ﬁctionized. The bilayer structure

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
229
enables to achieve higher conduction even at lower temperature of 120 °C. These 
fully printed CNT TFT devices withstand stretching with tensile strain exceeding 
50% while showing no signiﬁcant electrical degradation (Yu et al. 2018). CNT TFTs 
are observed to be better than polycrystalline silicon-based TFTs in terms of low 
cost. Also, it is better than amorphous silicon and organic semiconductor transistors 
in terms of mobility. Thus, CNT TFTs have acquired wide place in application 
of ﬂexible displays such as active matrix (AM) for liquid crystal displays (LCD), 
OLEDs, and radio frequency where it shows highly improvised performance.
The afore discussed structures, their types, and materials when assembled result 
in a thin sheet array of TFT that can be utilized for numerous novel applications 
in FE. Figure 13.7 shows the optical image of TFT array on thin ﬂexible ﬁlm of 
PET. In addition to the devices presented, a comparison table of a few latest state-
of-the-art TFTs is also discussed which is shown in Table 13.2. In the table, the 
parameters those are considered for comparison of TFTs are channel material, type 
of substrate material, gate dielectric along with their thickness, channel deposition 
process, ﬂexibility, effective mobility, ON current, and cost. In the table, M refers to 
the medium cost and H denotes the high cost of TFTs.
 Armchair  
Zigzag  
Chiral 
Fig. 13.5 Schematic representing different CNT structures (Singh et al. 2017) 
Fig. 13.6 Schematic of the 
ﬂexible n-type CNT TFT (Yu 
et al. 2018) 

230
G. Bhatti et al.
Fig. 13.7 Optical image of 
n-type TFT arrays on a thin 
sheet of PET (Li et al. 2015) 
Table 13.2 Characteristics of varying TFTs (Hussain and El-Atab 2022) 
Channel 
material 
Substrate 
Gate dielectric 
(Thickness) 
Channel 
deposition 
process 
Flexible 
Effective 
mobility 
cm2-Vs 
ION (μA/ 
mm) 
Cost 
s-CNT
Si
SiO2 (90 nm)
Aerosol Jet 
Print 
No
6.7
102
M 
s-CNT
PEN
Al2O3 (40 nm)
CVD 
Transfer 
Yes
20
17
M 
s-CNT
Si
SiO2 (500 nm)
Inkjet
No
1.6–4.2
0.11
M 
ZnO
PI
ZrO2 (20 nm)
CAD
Yes
4.5
30
M-H 
IGZO
PI
HfLaO (40 nm)
Sputter
Yes
13
128
H 
In2O3
PI
Al2O3 (100 nm) 
Spray 
pyrolysis 
Yes
1.25
320
M 
IGZO
PI
ZrAlOx (35 nm) 
Spin coat
Yes
8.58
2560
M 
Pentacene 
Paper
Paralene-C 
(340 nm) 
Thermal 
evaporation 
Yes
0.1
13
H 
Interconnect 
Interconnect refers to the connection between various devices and components on 
system. With the miniaturization in technology, interconnects itself have become one 
of the major limiting factors in attainment of high performance of the system. The 
advanced technology nodes enable embedding more transistors on the same silicon 
chip. These lead to corresponding increase in number of interconnects and higher 
parasitics (Agrawal and Chandel 2015; Agrawal et al. 2016). High speed interconnect 
channels face issues such as signal degradation, electromagnetic interference (EMI), 
skin effect, and coupling between interconnects if not modeled efﬁciently. Therefore,

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
231
in order to attain advancing progress in future electronic technologies, the modeling 
of interconnect is crucial in both rigid and FE system designs. 
FE systems which can undergo large deformation need stretchable interconnects. 
Complete FE system is achieved when the module can sustain large and stretch-
able deformation. Therefore, the characterization needs to be done by critically 
focusing on impedance and conductivity of the interconnect. The primary formation 
of interconnect can be done by combination of two approaches. First approach is by 
employing deformable materials and second is by tailoring the interconnect geom-
etry designs. Additionally, several approaches have been manifested in (Ausanio 
et al. 2006; El-Tantawy 2005), which include realization of stretchable intercon-
nects making blend of conductive polymers and “ﬁlled” elastomers for forming 
interconnects between rigid components or blending metal particles. 
This subsection briefs about the extraction of parasitic parameters of stretch-
able interconnect and simultaneously its correlation with the mechanical proper-
ties. Secondly, the various geometry structures such as development from straight 
to meandering, arch-shaped, pre-stretched substrate to fractal/self-similar designs, 
serpentines designs, horseshoe structure, wavy ribbon, and spiral designs are 
discussed. 
It is likely that while applying stress/strain, stretching, folding, or bending, the 
electrical properties can get affected. Therefore, the characterization between the 
electrical and mechanical properties of stretchable interconnect is a great challenge. 
The parasitic resistance (R), inductance (L), and capacitance (C) have numerous 
effects on the behavior of the circuit and its reliability. For instance, if these rise, 
it leads to increase in propagation delay, energy dissipation and power dissipation, 
noise which tends to degrade device performance. The parasitics of the conductor 
can be extracted by many ways as through single test access port known as two test 
points, time domain reﬂectometry, two port measurement such as Kelvin test (Qaiser 
et al. 2017) and mathematical method by analytical modeling. In the present chapter, 
R, L, and C parameters are extracted using analytical modeling method as (Dong 
et al. 2017). 
Resistance: At high frequencies, the resistance of wire increases and skin effect 
issues get aggravated. In skin effect, the current can pass only through surface periph-
eral of the conductor which leads to signal degradation. Figure 13.8 depicts the 
structure of stretchable interconnect. The interconnect can be modeled by equiva-
lent circuit model as shown in Fig. 13.9. The cross section of wire is assumed as 
rectangular. In Fig. 13.8, parameters Rd and r are the radius of bigger and smaller 
semi-circle respectively, le is the effective length, and lwire is the actual length of 
wire. The material of the conductor that are considered are Cu and PI. Typically, the 
resistance of conducting wire can be given as 
upper R equals StartFraction rho l Over upper A EndFraction a n d upper A equals w t
up per R equa
ls StartFraction rho l Over upper A EndFraction a n d upper A equals w t
where A is the cross-sectional area of wire, w is the width, t is the thickness of 
conducting wire. The modiﬁed resistance (upper R prime) expression under the skin-depth effect

232
G. Bhatti et al.
Fig. 13.8 Structure of stretchable interconnects (Agrawal and Chandel 2015) 
Fig. 13.9 π equivalent 
circuit model of stretchable 
interconnect (Agrawal and 
Chandel 2015) 
+ 
+ 
Rst 
Cst 
Lst  
Cst 
V1
V2
- 
I1
I2 
consideration can be given as 
up p
er R prime equals StartFraction rho l Subscript w i r e Baseline Over w t minus left parenthesis w minus 2 delta right parenthesis left parenthesis t minus 2 delta right parenthesis EndFraction
upper R prime equals S
tartFraction rho l Subscript w i r e Baseline Over w t minus left parenthesis w minus 2 delta right parenthesis left parenthesis t minus 2 delta right parenthesis EndFraction
Thereafter, resistance of the serpentine stretchable interconnect (i.e., Rst) for  the  
structure as shown in Fig. 13.8 can be derived as (Dong et al. 2017): 
uppe r
 R Subscript s t Baseline equals StartStartFraction rho pi upper N StartFraction upper R Subscript d Baseline plus r Over 2 EndFraction OverOver w t minus left parenthesis w minus 2 delta right parenthesis left parenthesis t minus 2 delta right parenthesis EndEndFraction
upper R Subscript s t Baseline equals StartStartFraction rho pi upper N StartFraction upper R Subscript d Baseline plus r Over 2 EndFraction OverOver w t minus left parenthesis w minus 2 delta right parenthesis left parenthesis t minus 2 delta right parenthesis EndEndFraction
upper R Subscript s t 
Baseline equals StartStartFraction rho pi upper N StartFraction upper R Subscript d Baseline plus r Over 2 EndFraction OverOver w t minus left parenthesis w minus 2 delta right parenthesis left parenthesis t minus 2 delta right parenthesis EndEndFraction
where, de l
ta equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot f pi mu sigma EndRoot EndFraction
√delta equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot f pi mu sigma EndRoot EndFraction is the skin depth, rho is the resistivity of the material, mu is 
the magnetic permeability of the conductor, and N is the number of considered 
semicircles. 
Inductance: At high frequencies, the inductive effects crop up signiﬁcantly that 
affect the performance of system. The generalized expression to obtain inductance 
(L) can be derived using Neumann’s method as (Agrawal and Chandel 2015): 
uppe r L equals StartFraction mu Over 4 pi EndFraction contour integral contour integral StartFraction ModifyingAbove d l prime With right arrow dot ModifyingAbove d l With right arrow Over StartAbsoluteValue r minus r prime EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction
up
p e r 
L e q ual
s StartFraction mu Over 4 pi EndFraction contour integral contour integral StartFraction ModifyingAbove d l prime With right arrow dot ModifyingAbove d l With right arrow Over StartAbsoluteValue r minus r prime EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction
upper L 
equals StartFraction mu Over 4 pi EndFraction contour integral contour integral StartFraction ModifyingAbove d l prime With right arrow dot ModifyingAbove d l With right arrow Over StartAbsoluteValue r minus r prime EndAbsoluteValue EndFraction
For considered stretchable interconnect structure as shown in Fig. 13.8, (13.5) is  
solved to get the ﬁnal expression as

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
233
uppe r L Subscript s t Baseline equals StartFraction mu left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis Over 2 pi EndFraction times left bracket StartFraction 2 left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis Over w plus t EndFraction plus 0.5 plus 0.22 StartFraction w plus t Over left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket
up
p
er L Subscript s t Baseline equals StartFraction mu left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis Over 2 pi EndFraction times left bracket StartFraction 2 left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis Over w plus t EndFraction plus 0.5 plus 0.22 StartFraction w plus t Over left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket
upper 
L Subs cript s  t Baseline equals StartFraction mu left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis Over 2 pi EndFraction times left bracket StartFraction 2 left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis Over w plus t EndFraction plus 0.5 plus 0.22 StartFraction w plus t Over left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket
upper L 
S
ubscript s t Baseline equals StartFraction mu left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis Over 2 pi EndFraction times left bracket StartFraction 2 left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis Over w plus t EndFraction plus 0.5 plus 0.22 StartFraction w plus t Over left parenthesis l Subscript e Baseline plus x right parenthesis EndFraction right bracket
where x is the change in length after stretching the interconnect. From (13.5), it is 
observed that as interconnect is stretched, the length of wire increases and hence 
inductance. 
Capacitance: The interconnect capacitance leads to coupling effect and crosstalk 
which results in slowing down of the device and noise generation in the system. The 
basic expression for capacitance per unit length (p.u.l.) of the wire can be obtained 
as 
upper C equals StartFraction mu epsilon Over upper L Subscript d Baseline EndFraction
upp
er C equals StartFraction mu epsilon Over upper L Subscript d Baseline EndFraction
where ε is dielectric constant, upper L Subscript d is the inductance p.u.l. For the considered stretch-
able interconnect structure as present in Fig. 13.8, using (13.6) the total capacitance 
is derived as 
uppe r C Subscript s t Baseline equals upper C pi upper N StartFraction upper R Subscript d Baseline plus r Over 2 EndFraction
up
per C Subscript s t Baseline equals upper C pi upper N StartFraction upper R Subscript d Baseline plus r Over 2 EndFraction
From (13.7), it is observed that with stretching of wire, capacitance increases as 
the variation in capacitance depends upon cross section of wire. 
Along with electrical properties consideration, mechanical properties in FE are 
also equally important. Parameters such as strength and stiffness are the important 
measure of mechanical property in FE. To measure the strength and stiffness of 
material, the fundamental parameters are stress and strain. The stress refers to the 
force per unit area within the material. The stress within the material is the sum of 
the measure of internal/residual and external/applied stress. The stress (σ s) can be 
given as 
sig ma  Subscript s Baseline equals StartFraction upper F Over upper A EndFraction
si
gma Subscript s Baseline equals StartFraction upper F Over upper A EndFraction
The tensile or compressive strain is deﬁned as the ratio of ﬁnal change in length 
(ΔL) to the original length (L0). The mathematical expression representing the tensile 
or compressive strain (e), can be given as 
e l ement of equals StartFraction normal upper Delta upper L Over upper L 0 EndFraction
ele
ment of equals StartFraction normal upper Delta upper L Over upper L 0 EndFraction
The critical parameter that is based on the measurement of stress and strain of the 
material is Young’s modulus. Young’s modulus represents mechanical property that 
measures the elasticity of a material. It is calculated by obtaining the relationship 
between stress and strain of a material. The modulus of elasticity or Young’s modulus 
(E) can be given as

234
G. Bhatti et al.
Fig. 13.10 Schematic representing Young’s modulus: Stress–strain relationship (Budynas et al. 
2021) 
upper E equals StartFraction sigma Subscript s Baseline Over element of EndFraction
u
pper E equals StartFraction sigma Subscript s Baseline Over element of EndFraction
Figure 13.10 shows Young’s modulus graph which represents the material 
behavior for a particular slope of stress versus strain. Material that can sustain higher 
sustainability of strain shows high elasticity. Therefore, the lowest value of Young’s 
modulus depicts the highest elasticity of the material. 
The geometry and type of material signiﬁcantly impacts the elasticity of the 
stretchable interconnects. Generally, geometry of stretchable systems can be obtained 
in two ways as (a) engineered shapes and (b) rubber-like shape that are intrinsically 
stretchable. Figures 13.11 and 13.12 show the different shapes and geometries of 
stretchable interconnects. Each interconnect geometry and applications are discussed 
brieﬂy here in this subsection.
Figure 13.11a: The geometry of stretchable interconnect is net or beehive shape. 
This is realized by implementing the mini-valleys on the surface of pre-strained 
elastic substrate along with conductive material allocation over it. The advantage of 
this technique assists toward development of other techniques such as metal-coated 
net ﬁlms, 1D metal ribbons, or 2D membrane. 
Figure 13.11b–d: Twisted cable, e-textile, and helical coil are another set of 
geometric designs of stretchable interconnects. In these structures, the winding coils 
are of large diameter, which limits extension of scalability. Helical coil wires are 
used in various applications such as in connecting telephones in wired technology. 
With advent of wireless technology, the approach of stretchable wires has found new 
applications such as in tactile sensing and e-textile. E-textile, such as conductive 
thread and stretchable fabrics, has been used in wearable electronics and stretchable

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
235
Fig. 13.11 Geometries designs of various stretchable interconnects with respect to their scalability 
(Dang et al. 2017) 
Fig. 13.12 a Horseshoe-based interconnect design (Yang et al. 2015) b examples of fractal/self-
similar designs (Zhang et al. 2014)
tactile sensing-based applications. The failure strain of this geometry structure can 
be increased up to 100%, however it will lead to increase in resistance by 70%. 
Figure 13.11e, h: Next conductive interconnect geometries are surface modiﬁca-
tion and nano-accordion which are stretchable and bendable. In surface modiﬁcation 
geometry, the deformable interconnects that are made on ﬂexible substrate can be 
modiﬁed into the surface that need expansion out of the plane. The nano-accordion

236
G. Bhatti et al.
structure is made up of Al-doped ZnO which is highly conductive and optically 
transparent. This structure can hold the strain of up to 53% of elongation. However, 
this also leads to change in its resistance signiﬁcantly. 
Figure 13.11f, g: Next geometry is the conductive wavy structure or serpentine 
that can be reversely stretched without cracks or fractures. The geometry of inplane 
and outplane wavy designs are also known as buckled ﬁlm that can be easily scaled 
down to the microscale as compared to the restricted scalability of helical coil. The 
wavy structure can be applied on the pre-stretched ﬂexible substrates to improve its 
stretchability. The wavy geometry can sustain high stretchability of up to 100% and 
radius bending of up to 1.20 mm with least inﬂuence of electrical properties (Dang 
et al. 2017). The geometric designs and interconnects acquire place in application of 
systems such as implantable medical technology and smart clothes. 
Figure 13.11i: Another geometry for stretchable interconnect is honeycomb lattice 
structure or conductive sponge-like architecture. These are commercially available 
as polyurethane (PU) sponge or carbon nanotube sponge. Though there is a great 
research interest on multilayer graphene sponge, the concept of its application as a 
stretchable interconnect has limitations due to its restricted scalability. The consistent 
integration and soldering are difﬁcult due to pores in sponge-based interconnect. 
Figure 13.11j: The nano-mesh structure can create very ﬁne structure of inter-
connect. This nano-mesh structure can withstand strain up to 160%. However, the 
abrupt change in resistance is observed after 1000 test cycles. Further, some inter-
connect structures such as serpentine and fractal/self-similar geometries which are 
more often used in stretchable interconnect applications are shown in Fig. 13.12. 
Figure 13.12a, b: The horseshoe shape geometry can accommodate large defor-
mation under mechanical stress and preserve the electrical properties. These 
interconnect-based geometries when coupled with conductive yarns can improve 
the robustness in e-textiles circuits. The next exceptional level structure is the fractal 
geometry-based fractal/self-similar-based interconnects which enables stretchability 
up to 300%. When the order of fractal is increased, the elasticity of interconnect 
increases more than double. This is relatively thick interconnect structure which 
demands applications of low resistance. This structure ﬁnds application in stretchable 
batteries, photovoltaic modules, and super capacitors. 
There are numerous geometries, polymeric, and elastic materials used in FE as 
a stretchable interconnect which does not lose functionality even on repeat bend-
ability. The elastic modulus and electrical conductivity of different materials that 
are used for stretchable interconnect are listed in Table 13.3. The PU, PDMS, and 
PET are some of the most commonly used polymers in FE as these possess high 
elasticity and show moderate conductivity. The conductivity of these materials can 
be increased by using carbon or metal-based ﬁllers. In the recent research work, a 
novel composite material such as poly-3,4-ethyl-enedioxythiophene: poly-styrene 
sulfonic acid (PEDOT: PSS), poly-vinyl alcohol (PVA), phosphoric acid (H3PO4), 
polymer blend, and silver micron sized ﬂakes have been explored which show both 
good electrical and mechanical properties.

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
237
Table 13.3 Elastic modulus and electrical conductivity of materials for stretchable interconnects 
(Dang et al. 2017) 
Material
Elastic modulus (GPa)
Electrical conductivity (S/m) 
Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET)
0.0239
1.0 × 10–20 
Polypropylene (PP)
0.2553
1.0 × 10–13 
Polystyrene (PS)
0.9523
1.0 × 10–12 
Gold (Au)
83.000
4.9 × 10+07 
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
0.0025
1.0 × 10–12 
PEDOT: PSS
0.0004
1.0 × 10+03 
Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA)
0.3855
1.0 × 10–19 
Silicon rubber
0.0026
6.6 × 10+7 
Polyurethene (PU)
0.0095
1.0 × 10–10 
Graphite
130.00
1.5 × 10+05 
Silver (Ag)
81.000
6.6 × 10+07 
Copper (Cu)
110.00
6.4 × 10+07 
Carbon nanotube (CNT)
250.00
1.0 × 10+08 
Encapsulation 
To enhance the mechanical and electrical stability of system, each module or compo-
nent such as substrate, dielectric, interconnect should be able to sustain process 
variation effects. In order to achieve protection from extrinsic effects, encapsulation 
layer techniques are applied. The encapsulation is the process where the modules/ 
components are enclosed by protecting materials. The encapsulation layer comprises 
thermally stable and high mobility organic semiconductors which provides the eleva-
tion to the substrate temperature up to 150 °C or higher. Conventional encapsulation 
techniques are no more feasible for FE due to its inherent rigidity. The absence 
of encapsulation layer will create obstacle to the stability and materials high cost 
while using printing technologies on FE. Therefore, to ensure protection of the 
ﬂexible devices, organic/inorganic hybrid thin-ﬁlm encapsulation (TFE) is usually 
considered. 
The encapsulation techniques such as single-layer metallic barrier coatings 
followed by single-layer transparent barrier coatings, multilayer composite (oxide 
or nitride/polymer) barrier coatings have been developed. These techniques improve 
bending, twisting, stretching, and resist from direct chemical exposer to the atmo-
sphere. Furthermore, when the interconnects are encapsulated with layer of PDMS, 
it is observed that the mechanical bendability is raised (Verplancke et al. 2011). The 
encapsulation material is extremely important as it can dominate the properties of FE 
systems. A perfect thin layer of inorganic materials such as SiO2, SiNx, and Al2O3 
are highly impermeable to atmospheric gases that can drastically reduce the granular 
ﬁlm growth, dust particle, and gas permeation hence good for encapsulation process 
in FE. These are beneﬁcial in long-term implantable devices, in medical apparatus

238
G. Bhatti et al.
Fig. 13.13 Schematic representing an organic TFT covered with a ﬂexible encapsulation layer 
(Walsh and Genzer 2012) 
as a sensor to detect tumors, swelling, and cancer. Figure 13.13 shows schematic of 
an organic self-assembled monolayer (SAM) TFT covered with the encapsulation 
layer. The organic semiconductor dinaphtho-thieno-thiophene (DNTT) and metal 
composite ﬁlms are chosen as the heat resistant materials. This ﬁlm is utilized to 
encapsulate after the complete manufacturing of SAM transistor. The encapsulation 
layer improves the thermal stability, substantial deterioration and therefore electronic 
characteristic does not change even after dipping the transistor in boiling water (Walsh 
and Genzer 2012). 
Printing Technologies for Fabrication of FE 
The development of printed electronics to produce devices, components, electronic 
circuits (e.g., resistors, capacitors, transistors, antennas, and alike) in form of wide 
array on stretchable thin like paper substrate, plastic, or textiles is very inter-
esting. This can be obtained and fabricated by existing highly efﬁcient printing 
technologies. The printing FE is based on additive process method, whereas the 
silicon semiconductor-based conventional electronic manufacturing is based on 
subtractive-based photolithography method. The overall complexity of the manufac-
turing process of printed electronics is comparatively lesser, therefore, the printed 
electronics have the potential for low-cost production whereas the conventional elec-
tronics incorporates high production cost. This subsection elaborates on various 
printing technologies available to fabricate FE. 
The classiﬁcation of various printing technologies is shown in Fig. 13.14. The  
printing technologies can be classiﬁed into two types as contact and non-contact 
printing. In contact printing technology, there is a main medium that incorporates the 
circuit information during printing process. In this, the circuit information is obtained

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
239
Printing technologies 
Screen-printing 
Flexograph 
Soft lithography 
Gravure printing 
Laser direct writing 
(LDW) 
Aerosol printing 
Inkjet printing 
Non-Contact printing  
Contact printing  
Fig. 13.14 Classiﬁcation of printing technologies (Cruz et al. 2018)
on the substrate via direct contact or by partial transfer of printing ink. Whereas, in 
case of non-contact printing there is no such main medium carrying circuit informa-
tion. Additionally, as the name depicts there is no direct physical contact between 
the substrate and the printing apparatus. The desired master layout can be laid with 
different information to print on the ﬂexible substrate. Technologies such as screen 
printing, ﬂexography, soft lithography, and gravure printing fall under the contact 
printing methods. The technologies under non-contact printing are laser direct writing 
(LDW), aerosol printing, and inkjet printing. The schematic of the various printing 
technologies is provided in Fig. 13.15a–g. Each technology has different poten-
tial, speciﬁcations, and limitations to print ﬂexible substrate. Tables 13.4 and 13.5 
present a detail comparison of various contact and non-contact printing technolo-
gies respectively. The comparison is made in terms of mechanism and feature, image 
resolution, viscosity of ink, ﬁlm thickness, printing speed, and challenges (Cruz et al. 
2018; Walsh and Genzer 2012). 
Along with printing technologies, materials for conductive ink to print stretchable 
interconnects are also very important. These play a vital role in wearable devices, 
mechanics of human skin consideration for ﬂexible near ﬁeld communication (NFC) 
tags, etc. Moreover, the stable contact between ink and substrate is extremely desir-
able. Table 13.6 gives the comparative conductivity description in descending order 
of various conductive ink materials. These ink materials are available in market and 
can be employed by multiple printing fabrication technologies to print FE.
Market Growth and Applications 
Market Growth 
The beneﬁts of FE such as low cost, portability, energy efﬁciency, and durability 
make the previous impossible technical applications possible. These are the concrete 
reasons why the FE is ﬁnding a huge place in development of the latest electronic 
gadgets. The development of FE products has drastically increased the market growth

240
G. Bhatti et al.
 (a)                                                        (b)                                             (c) 
(d) 
    e)
f) 
                      g) 
(iv) solvent assisted micro-
molding (SAMIM) 
(iii) micro-molding in   
capillaries (MIMIC) 
(ii) micro transference 
molding (µTM) 
(i) replica molding 
(REM) 
R2 
Fig. 13.15 Schematic of contact and non-contact printing technologies. a screen printing b ﬂexog-
raphy printing c gravure printing d soft lithography e laser direct writing f aerosol printing g inkjet 
printing (Cruz et al. 2018)
rate and is seen to be increasing exponentially. Figure 13.16a, b shows the graph of 
the FE market growth from 2019 increase up to year 2030. Figure 13.16a shows  
the growth rate for global ﬂexible display. The presented statistics is developed 
by Next Move strategy consultancy (Flexible display market size, share n.d.). It is a 
premier market research and management consulting ﬁrm which provide strategically 
analytics report of the data. From the ﬁgure, it can be inferred that there is an increase 
of market in the ﬂexible display applications integrated with smart wearable devices 
to be around $250 billion by 2030.
The second graph shown in Fig. 13.16b is the market report forecasted by 
IDTechEx analysts for FE in healthcare devices (IDTechEx 2020). It shows the 
market growth for healthcare products valuation to be over $8.3 billion by the year 
2030. There is a signiﬁcant market trend seen toward utilizing technologies for health-
care as was perceived during the COVID-19 pandemic. Thereafter, there was prompt 
switch from actual services to remote telehealth services in wearable and e-textile 
form. It is expected that FE will create a huge scope of research and opportunities in 
numerous ﬁelds in the near future.

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
241
Table 13.4 Characteristics of varying contact printing technologies (Cruz et al. 2018; Hussain and 
El-Atab 2022) 
Printing 
technologies 
Mechanism 
and features 
Resolution 
(lines/cm) 
Ink 
viscosity 
(Pa. s) 
Film 
thickness 
(μm) 
Printing speed 
(m/min) 
Challenges 
Screen 
printing 
• Planar  or  
R2R system 
• Versatile 
50
>1–50
up to 12
10 to 15
• Hard  to  
clean 
• Solvents 
deteriorate 
mask 
patterns 
• High  
resolution 
of uniform 
line 
patterns is 
not 
possible 
under 
30 μm 
• Unfeasible 
use of low 
viscosity 
inks to 
prevent 
spreading 
and bleed 
out 
• Material 
wastage 
Flexography • Low-cost  
patterns 
plate 
• High  
ﬂexibility 
and 
low-pressure 
printing 
• Better  
vertical and 
horizontal 
pattern 
quality 
compared to 
gravure 
60
0.05–0.5 
1–2.5
100–500
• Halo effect 
(patterns 
with 
excess of 
ink) due to 
printing 
plate 
compres-
sion to the 
substrate, 
despite the 
applied 
low 
pressure 
• Marbling  
effect 
• Complex 
multi-
layers 
alignment
(continued)

242
G. Bhatti et al.
Table 13.4 (continued)
Printing
technologies
Mechanism
and features
Resolution
(lines/cm)
Ink
viscosity
(Pa. s)
Film
thickness
(μm)
Printing speed
(m/min)
Challenges
Soft 
lithography 
• 
Encompasses 
several 
printing 
techniques 
(μCP, REM, 
μTM, 
MIMIC, 
AMIM) 
• Fabrication 
of micro-and 
nanostruc-
tures of high 
quality 
• Convenient, 
effective 
method 
• Mostly used 
by the 
biological 
science area 
30–80
0.01–0.1 
0.17–8
Nano-structure 
device printing 
• Require 
proper 
adjustment 
of the 
surface 
energies 
for 
efﬁcient 
transfer to 
the 
substrate 
• Common 
swelling of 
transfer-
ring 
materials, 
results in 
increased 
features 
size 
• Pattern  
reproduc-
tion and 
resolution 
is a 
challenge 
due to the 
used 
forces on 
stamp 
• Costly  
solution 
Gravure 
printing 
• High-quality 
patterns in a 
cost-
effective 
manner 
• High speed 
• Low  
viscosity 
inks 
100
0.05–0.2 
<0.1–5
100–1000
• Cylinder 
life and 
high cost 
• 
Demanding 
and careful 
optimiza-
tion of the 
process 
• A major 
obstacle is 
where high 
resolution 
is required 
(e.g., PE)

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
243
Table 13.5 Characteristics of varying non-contact printing technologies (Cruz et al. 2018; Hussain 
and El-Atab 2022) 
Printing 
technologies 
Mechanism and 
features 
Resolution 
(lines/cm) 
Ink 
viscosity 
(Pa.s) 
Film 
thickness 
(μm) 
Printing 
speed 
(m/min) 
Challenges 
Laser direct 
printing 
(LDW) 
• 1D  to  3D  
structures 
• nm  to  mm  
magnitude 
• No  mask  
• Three writing 
techniques 
(LDW+ , 
LDW−, 
LDWM) 
0.7
–
>10
8–12
• High-cost 
equipment 
• Not possible 
to deposit 
organic 
substrates, 
printing only 
on ﬂat 
substrates, 
parallel to 
the substrate 
Aerosol
• Complex design 
could be printed 
• Complex 
conformal 
surfaces 
• Many materials 
and substrates 
• Non-planar 
• Low-
temperature 
processing 
• Local sintering 
0.001–1
>0.1
10–250
1.5
• Droplet 
carrier 
creates a 
cloud of 
powder in 
surrounding 
printed area 
• Sheath gas 
creates a 
localized 
crystalliza-
tion/ 
solidiﬁcation 
phase at the 
trace pattern 
which 
reduces the 
quality of 
the localized 
bonding 
layer 
Inkjet 
printing 
transfer 
(IPT) 
• Low viscosity 
• Deposition of 
many types of 
droplets 
• Droplets 
ejection through 
different 
actuation 
phenomena 
• All type of 
substrates 
• Low  material  
wastage 
• Environmentally 
friendly 
0.002–0.1
0.01–0.5 
15–100
15–500
• Printing  
speed is slow 
as compared 
to other 
techniques 
• Nozzle 
clogging

244
G. Bhatti et al.
Table 13.6 Conductivity of 
different ink materials for FE 
(Reportlinker 2018) 
Ink
Conductivity (×107(S/m)) 
Gold (Au)
6.28 
Copper (Cu)
6.01 
Silver (Ag)
4.26 
Aluminum (Al)
3.77 
Platinum (Pt)
0.944 
Carbon (C)
0.0002
(a) 
 (b) 
Fig. 13.16 a Growth prediction in global ﬂexible display market b market growth in ﬂexible 
electronics healthcare devices (IDTechEx 2020; Flexible display market size, share, xxxx)
Applications 
The next-generation FE based on advanced materials and mechanical features have 
ability to immediately integrate components with dynamic surface. As compared 
to the conventional electronics, the FE are low cost, thin, lightweight, and stretch-
able that do not require high computational power to operate. FE shows remark-
able progress in applications such as wearable electronics, consumer electronics, 
electronic skin (E-skin), health care, e-textile, robotics, optoelectronics, solar cells, 
display units, LCD, and OLED. Most of the exciting FE products such as smart-
phone, smartwatch, and IOT-based devices have been already launched in the market. 
The stretchability of tactile skin on robotics applications improve adaptability on its 
curved parts. The FE ﬁnds wide application in optoelectronics as well such as in 
solar cells, LCD, and OLEDs. The FE-based smart wearable devices are useful to 
monitor daily human activity, and stretchable sensors are used to record plant health. 
The wide range of endless applications of FE in versatile domains are summarized 
and shown in Fig. 13.17. The ﬁeld of FE has been vastly researched in terms of 
advanced materials, fabrication of novel devices, TFTs, interconnect geometries, 
and corresponding applications. Therefore, the research and development for FE 
are exponentially increasing and it shows a breathtaking advancement in world of 
electronic, science, and research.

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
245
Fig. 13.17 Applications of ﬂexible electronics in versatile domains (Osaka Prefecture University 
2020; Lee et al. 2021; Butt et al.  2022; Chang and Lin 2020; Flagship 2016; India 2015; Kim et al. 
2019; Nokia phones US. 2023; Grainger Engineering Ofﬁce 2023; Oliveira 2021; Raphelson 2014; 
Temporary tattoo offers needle-free way to monitor glucose levels. 2023; Wicaksono et al. 2020; 
Yokota et al. 2016) 
Conclusion 
This chapter presents an overview of the various components of FE, materials, 
printing technologies, applications, and market growth. The interesting evolution 
from history of VLSI to advanced FE have been brieﬂy presented. Components are 
the basic building blocks for the formation of FE. The work precisely discusses about 
the substrate, device, interconnect, and encapsulation methods. In addition, types and 
materials utilized for different components are reviewed and discussed. 
In a process to obtain ﬂexible system, it is found that the conventional electronics 
based on silicon substrate gets cracked when the device is twisted, folded, or bended. 
This has been the strong motivation to have research prospective to discover new 
materials that can overcome the conventional rigidity of device. Moreover, it has 
been observed that performance can be improved and the cost can also be reduced 
using the new materials. Materials utilized for the manufacturing of FE are critically 
important as these are the major foundation for providing ﬂexibility to the FE system. 
With involvement of intrinsic and stretchable materials such as ﬁller–polymer matrix, 
organic semiconductor, and rubber-like nanocomposite, it has been observed that the 
strain of electronic system can be lifted up to 200%. Materials such as organic 
polymers, CNT-based TFTs, graphene can give high electrical performance even 
under mechanical stress. Therefore, these have found a great attention in research 
prospective.

246
G. Bhatti et al.
The devices in FE play a vital role. The details of TFTs and their different struc-
tures are studied. Stretchable interconnects are another important component in FE. 
Different stretchable interconnect structures have been explored. Also, RLC para-
sitics of serpentine-based stretchable interconnect have been formulated. Thereafter 
importance of encapsulation layer and its various materials have also been discussed 
in the chapter. 
In addition to the electrical and mechanical properties of the substrate, device, 
interconnect, and encapsulation, assembling of these materials is required. For this 
printing technologies are used. Printing technologies can vary based on their opera-
tion and features. FE has the utilization in wide range of applications such as sensors, 
wearable technology, e-textile, OLED display, ﬂexible batteries, health care, pros-
thetics, and implantable medical devices. Advancement of FE will lead to the ground-
breaking new production of lightweight ﬂexible technologies. However, a wide scope 
of research is still awaiting for potential researchers in quest of getting the sustainable 
ﬂexibility along with higher electrical performance. The market growth in FE is huge 
and can lead to production of various new gadgets and products. From the present 
chapter, it can be postulated that FE holds huge applications in today’s tech-era and 
is the “Technology of Tomorrow”. 
References 
Agrawal Y, Chandel R (2015) Crosstalk analysis of current-mode signalling-coupled rlc intercon-
nects using FDTD technique. IETE Tech Rev 33(2):148–159. https://doi.org/10.1080/02564602. 
2015.1056258 
Agrawal Y, Kumar MG, Chandel R (2016) Comprehensive model for high-speed current-mode 
signaling in next generation MWCNT bundle interconnect using FDTD technique. IEEE Trans 
Nanotechnol 15(4):590–598. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnano.2016.2558475 
Ausanio G, Barone AC, Campana C, Iannotti V, Luponio C, Pepe GP, Lanotte L (2006) Giant 
resistivity change induced by strain in a composite of conducting particles in an elastomer 
matrix. Sens Actuators, A 127(1):56–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2005.12.002 
Brinkman WF, Haggan DE, Troutman WW (1997) A history of the invention of the transistor and 
where it will lead US. IEEE J Solid-State Circuits 32(12):1858–1865. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
4.643644 
Budynas RG, Nisbett JK, Tangchaichit K, Tangchaichit K, Shigley JE (2021) Shigley’s Mechanical 
Engineering Design. McGraw-Hill 
Butt MA, Kazanskiy NL, Khonina SN (2022) Revolution in ﬂexible wearable electronics for temper-
ature and pressure monitoring—a review. Electronics 11(5):716. https://doi.org/10.3390/electr 
onics11050716 
Chae SH, Lee YH (2014) Carbon nanotubes and graphene towards soft electronics. Nano 
Convergence 1(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40580-014-0015-5 
Chang MC, Lin WC (2020) Flexible ﬁngerprint sensor driver IC and bendable evaluation. Int J 
Circuit Theory Appl 48(12):2190–2201. https://doi.org/10.1002/cta.2874 
Crabb RL, Treble FC (1967) Thin silicon solar cells for large ﬂexible arrays. Nature 
213(5082):1223–1224. https://doi.org/10.1038/2131223a0 
Cruz SM, Rocha LA, Viana JC (2018) Printing Technologies on ﬂexible substrates for printed 
electronics. Flexible Electron.https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.76161

13
Flexible Electronics: A Critical Review
247
Dang W, Vinciguerra V, Lorenzelli L, Dahiya R (2017) Printable stretchable interconnects. Flexible 
Printed Electron 2(1):013003. https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-8585/aa5ab2 
Dong Z, Duan B, Cao Z, Yang Y (2017) Electromechanical modeling of stretchable interconnects. 
J Comput Electron 16(1):202–209. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10825-016-0946-7 
El-Tantawy F (2005) Development of novel functional conducting elastomer blends containing 
butyl rubber and low-density polyethylene for current switching, temperature sensor, and EMI 
shielding effectiveness applications. J Appl Polym Sci 97(3):1125–1138. https://doi.org/10. 
1002/app.21778 
Graphene Flagship (2016) Graphene technology enables fully ﬂexible NFC antennas. ScienceDaily. 
Retrieved February 23, 2023, from https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/11/161129084 
229.htm 
Flexible display market size, share, Trends & Forecast 2022–2027. Market Research Company, 
market research reports and consulting services. Retrieved February 3, 2023, from https://www. 
imarcgroup.com/ﬂexible-display-market 
Fortunato E, Barquinha P, Martins R (2012) Oxide Semiconductor thin-ﬁlm transistors: a review of 
recent advances. Adv Mater 24(22):2945–2986. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201103228 
Grainger Engineering Ofﬁce of Marketing and Communications. Stretchable battery for ﬂexible 
circuits. Materials Research Laboratory | UIUC. Retrieved February 23, 2023, from https://mrl. 
illinois.edu/news/stretchable-battery-ﬂexible-circuits 
Hussain MM, El-Atab N (2022) Handbook of ﬂexible and stretchable electronics. CRC Press, 
Taylor & Francis Group 
IDTechEx (2020) Flexible electronics are the future in wearable health monitoring. Flex-
ible electronics are the future in wearable health monitoring. Retrieved February 3, 
2023, from https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/ﬂexible-electronics-are-the-future-in-
wearable-health-monitoring-301049589.html 
India PT (2015) Soon, ﬂexible and paper-thin displays with LE-Ofets technology: Study. Gadgets 
360. Retrieved February 23, 2023, from https://www.gadgets360.com/laptops/news/soon-ﬂe 
xible-and-paper-thin-displays-with-le-ofets-technology-study-654352 
Intel® Products: Processors, Intel® NUC, memory and storage, chipsets. Intel. Retrieved February 
3, 2023, from https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/products/overview.html 
Itoh T, Kobayashi A, Ueno K, Ohta J, Fujioka H (2016) Fabrication of InGaN thin-ﬁlm transistors 
using pulsed sputtering deposition. Scientiﬁc Reports 6(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep29500 
Kim YS, Mahmood M, Lee Y, Kim NK, Kwon S, Herbert R, Kim D, Cho HC, Yeo WH (2019) All-in-
one, wireless, stretchable hybrid electronics for smart, connected, and ambulatory physiological 
monitoring. Advanced Science 6(17):1900939. https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.201900939 
Kumar MG, Agrawal Y, Chandel R (2016) Carbon nanotube interconnects—a promising solution 
for VLSI circuits. IETE J Educ 57(2):46–64. https://doi.org/10.1080/09747338.2016.1158129 
Lee Y, Chung JW, Lee GH, Kang H, Kim J-Y, Bae C, Yoo H, Jeong S, Cho H, Kang S-G, Jung JY, Lee 
D-W, Gam S, Hahm SG, Kuzumoto Y, Kim SJ, Bao Z, Hong Y, Yun Y, Kim S (2021) Standalone 
real-time health monitoring patch based on a stretchable organic optoelectronic system. Sci Adv 
7(23). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abg9180 
Li G, Li Q, Jin Y, Zhao Y, Xiao X, Jiang K, Wang J, Fan S (2015) Fabrication of air-stable N-type 
carbon nanotube thin-ﬁlm transistors on ﬂexible substrates using bilayer dielectrics. Nanoscale 
7(42):17693–17701. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5nr05036g 
Lin Y-Y, Gundlach DI, Nelson SF, Jackson TN (1997) Pentacene-based organic thin-ﬁlm transistors. 
IEEE Trans Electron Dev 44(8):1325–1331. https://doi.org/10.1109/16.605476 
Lu N, Jiang W, Wu Q, Geng D, Li L, Liu M (2018) A review for compact model of thin-ﬁlm 
transistors (TFTs). Micromachines 9(11):599. https://doi.org/10.3390/mi9110599 
Nokia phones US. The latest Nokia phones and accessories. Retrieved February 23, 2023, from 
https://www.nokia.com/phones/en_us/ 
Oliveira C (2021) Advanced materials and technological evolution. AstroPT. Retrieved February 
23, 2023, from https://www.astropt.org/2021/07/04/os-materiais-avancados-e-a-evolucao-tec 
nologica/

248
G. Bhatti et al.
Osaka Prefecture University (2020) Plant Health Management by ﬂexible electronics. Retrieved 
February 3, 2023, from https://phys.org/news/2020-08-health-ﬂexible-electronics.pdf 
Pathade T, Agrawal Y, Parekh R, Kumar MG (2021) Structure fortiﬁcation of mixed CNT bundle 
interconnects for nano integrated circuits using constraint-based particle swarm optimization. 
IEEE Trans Nanotechnol 20:194–204. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnano.2021.3058760 
Qaiser N, Khan SM, Nour M, Rehman MU, Rojas JP, Hussain MM (2017) Mechanical response 
of spiral interconnect arrays for highly stretchable electronics. Appl Phys Lett 111(21):214102. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5007111 
Rabaey JM, Chandrakasan AP, Nikoli´c Borivoje (2017) Digital integrated circuits: a design 
perspective. Pearson Education 
Raphelson S (2014) The prosthetics industry gets a human touch, NPR. NPR. Available at: https:// 
www.npr.org/2014/11/11/358048818/the-prosthetics-industry-gets-a-human-touch. 
Accessed 
November 15, 2022 
Ray KA (1967) Flexible solar cell arrays for increased space power. IEEE Trans Aerosp Electron 
Syst AES-3(1):107–115. https://doi.org/10.1109/taes.1967.5408720 
Reportlinker (2018) Conductive ink markets 2012–2018 silver and copper inks and pastes and 
beyond. Conductive Ink Markets 2012–2018 Silver and Copper Inks and Pastes and Beyond. 
Retrieved February 3, 2023, from https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/conductive-ink-
markets-2012-2018-silver-and-copper-inks-and-pastes-and-beyond-166091036.html 
Sakuma KATSUYUKI (2022) Flexible, wearable, and Stretchable Electronics. CRC Press 
Sankir ND (2005) Flexible electronics: Materials and device fabrication 
Shang Z-W, Hsu H-H, Zheng Z-W, Cheng C-H (2019) Progress and challenges in P-type oxide-
based thin ﬁlm transistors. Nanotechnol Rev 8(1):422–443. https://doi.org/10.1515/ntrev-2019-
0038 
Singh E, Srivastava R, Kumar U, Katheria A (2017) Carbon nanotube: a review on introduction, 
fabrication techniques and optical applications. J Nanosci Nanotechnol 4:120–126. https://doi. 
org/10.12691/nnr-4-4-1 
Temporary tattoo offers needle-free way to monitor glucose levels. Today. Retrieved February 
23, 2023, from https://today.ucsd.edu/story/temporary_tattoo_offers_needle_free_way_to_mon 
itor_glucose_levels 
Verplancke R, Bossuyt F, Cuypers D, Vanﬂeteren J (2011) Thin-ﬁlm stretchable electronics tech-
nology based on meandering interconnections: fabrication and mechanical performance. J 
Micromech Microeng 22(1):015002. https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/22/1/015002 
Walsh KMN, Genzer P (2012) The world’s ﬁrst sterilizable ﬂexible organic transistor. Brookhaven 
National Laboratory. Retrieved February 3, 2023, from https://www.bnl.gov/newsroom/news. 
php?a=111396 
Weimer P (1962) The TFT a new thin-ﬁlm transistor. Proc IRE 50(6):1462–1469. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/jrproc.1962.288190 
Wicaksono I, Tucker CI, Sun T, Guerrero CA, Liu C, Woo WM, Pence EJ, Dagdeviren C (2020) A 
tailored, electronic textile conformable suit for large-scale spatiotemporal physiological sensing 
in vivo. Npj Flexible Electron 4(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41528-020-0068-y 
Yang S, Ng E, Lu N (2015) Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) serpentine ribbons on soft substrates stretched 
beyond 100%. Extreme Mech Lett 2:37–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eml.2015.01.010 
Yokota T, Zalar P, Kaltenbrunner M, Jinno H, Matsuhisa N, Kitanosako H, Tachibana Y, Yukita W, 
Koizumi M, Someya T (2016) Ultraﬂexible organic photonic skin. Sci Adv 2(4). https://doi.org/ 
10.1126/sciadv.1501856 
Yu M, Wan H, Cai L, Miao J, Zhang S, Wang C (2018) Fully printed ﬂexible dual-gate carbon 
nanotube thin-ﬁlm transistors with tunable ambipolar characteristics for complementary logic 
circuits. ACS Nano 12(11):11572–11578. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.8b06748 
Zhang Y, Fu H, Xu S, Fan JA, Hwang K, Jiang J, Rogers JA, Huang Y (2014) A hierarchical 
computational model for stretchable interconnects with fractal-inspired designs. J Mech Phys 
Solids 72:115–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2014.07.011

Chapter 14 
Delay Analysis of Different Stretchable 
Interconnect Structures 
Kavicharan Mummaneni, Vivek Kumar, Malvika, and Yash Agrawal 
Abstract Stretchable electronic systems are needed in realizing a wide range of 
applications, such as wearable healthcare monitoring, where stretching movements 
are present. Current electronics and sensors are rigid and non-stretchable. However, 
after integrating with stretchable interconnects, the overall system is able to withstand 
a certain degree of bending, stretching, and twisting. In this chapter, extraction of 
the parasitic parameters of a wire and an analytical model is developed based on the 
skin effect of stretchable interconnects. Analytical models are employed to estimate 
the delay of various stretchable interconnects and the results are found to be in good 
accuracy with the simulation results. Finally, the proposed model is employed for 
comparing the simulation results of circular, rectangular, triangular, and horseshoe 
stretchable interconnects over a wide frequency range up to 10 GHz. 
Keywords Stretchable Interconnects · Healthcare monitoring · ANSYS ·
Substrate materials · Skin depth 
Introduction 
Electronic circuits those are ﬂexible and stretchable are a new evolving concept 
that aims to improve the comfort of consumers. This technology can be used in 
various applications, such as medical devices that require the circuit to behave as the 
tissue itself. Currently, traditional power and signal transmission lines are typically 
placed on rigid or ﬂexible materials. These lines limit the commercial applications
K. Mummaneni envelope symbol · V. Kumar · Malvika 
Electronics and Communication Engineering Department, National Institute of Technology, 
Silchar, Assam, India 
e-mail: kavicharan@ece.nits.ac.in 
Y. Agrawal envelope symbol
VLSI and Embedded Systems Research Group, Dhirubhai Ambani Institute of Information and 
Communication Technology, Gandhinagar 382007, Gujarat, India 
e-mail: mr.yashagrawal@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_14 
249

250
K. Mummaneni et al.
of these components due to their size and stiffness. With the use of stretchable elec-
tronic circuits, different components can be integrated onto a single ﬂexible surface 
(Dang 2018). One of the main challenges in the development of stretchable elec-
tronic circuits is the reliability of their elastic interconnections (Dong et al. 2017). 
This is because these components are typically subjected to high mechanical loads. 
For instance, if a component is placed on a ﬂexible surface, it can potentially bend or 
even get deformed. In-plane patterned metal conductors, intrinsic conductive poly-
mers, and pre-stressed metal conductors have been proposed as possible solution 
levels of performance and cost to realize. In this work, we present a method that 
uses the ﬁnite element analysis (FEA) to optimize the shape of metal interconnec-
tions. This process allows to create a two-dimensional spring by connecting two 
points along a periodic metal track. Because of high stretchability and low elastic 
modulus, polydimethylsiloxanes (PDMS) (Lacour et al. 2005) are widely used in 
various electronic and medical devices. The ﬁrst step in this process is to perform 
3D FEM simulations to identify the ideal shapes for the various components of the 
circuit. The results of these simulations were then used to identify the promising 
structures that could be used to improve the performance of the circuit. The results 
of mechanical modeling are then used to calculate the integrity of a circuit when it 
is ﬂexed or stretched. 
Conventional electronic products are typically rigid and non-ﬂexible. Due to their 
high rigidity, semiconductor circuit boards are not ideal for protecting integrated 
electronic devices. In the past few years, the use of ﬂexible electronics has been widely 
used in various ﬁelds, such as medical devices, sensors, and energy collection (Hess-
Dunning et al. 2013; Zhao et al. 2019). Due to the increasing number of achievements 
in the ﬁeld of ﬂexible electronics, the market for this technology is expected to 
grow signiﬁcantly. There are two main types of ﬂexible electronic circuits: organic 
and inorganic. The former uses organic materials such as ﬂexible semiconductors, 
while the latter utilizes mature inorganic semiconductor processes. Despite the rapid 
development of organic electronics, the electrical properties of these materials remain 
far apart from those of their mature counterparts. To bridge this gap, ﬂexible materials 
(Gao et al. 2017; Vroman and Tighzert 2009; Case et al.  2015; Khan et al. 2015) can 
be used as the interface materials for silicon device modules (Stoyanov et al. 2013). 
This design concept allows ﬂexible electronic devices to be more robust and ﬂexible 
than their non-ﬂexible counterparts. Polymers can be used as a replacement for silicon 
bodies in ﬂexible electronic devices, which are more cost-effective than traditional 
ones. Due to their properties, ﬂexible electronic devices are expected to have a wide 
range of applications in various ﬁelds. In the past, research on the design of ﬂexible 
interconnects has been focused on improving their ductility (Lipomi et al. 2012; 
Jeong et al. 2016). This article presents an analytical model that takes into account 
the electrical and skin-depth effects of stretchable interconnects. The model takes 
into account the various factors that affect the inductance and skin-depth effect of the 
wire (Plovie et al. 2017; Salvatore et al. 2017; Jinno et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018; 
Johnston et al. 2014; Blau et al. 2011; Tybrandt et al. 2018; Carlson et al. 2012). An 
analytical model of a stretchable interconnect equivalent circuit is then established. 
A ﬂexible electronic design platform is also proposed to study the various aspects

14
Delay Analysis of Different Stretchable Interconnect Structures
251
of the design of ﬂexible electronic devices. Through the use of Ansys simulation 
software, the model can be used to analyze the electrical properties of a stretched 
wire. 
The accuracy of the proposed stretchable interconnect model is veriﬁed through 
this platform. The parameters of the ﬂexible interconnect are extracted from the model 
to help the user choose a wire that is ideal for their electronic circuit. In addition, 
the parasitic parameters of the ﬂexible interconnect can be analyzed to improve the 
signal integrity of the electronic circuit. Due to the nature of the ﬂexible interconnects, 
it is necessary to analyze their electrical properties when subjected to mechanical 
deformation. This is beneﬁcial for the development of wearable electronics and other 
ﬂexible electronic devices. Besides being used in medical and military applications, 
stretchable electronics can also be used in ﬂexible displays and sensors. One of the 
most common structures that are ideal for the development of stretchable electronic 
devices is the island-bridge structure. This type of structure is made up of metal lines 
that are connected to ﬂexible islands on an elastomeric surface. The metal lines can be 
conﬁgured in various shapes to accommodate different mechanical stresses. Several 
types of metal lines have been presented in recent years, such as the horseshoe shape, 
the circular shape, the rectangular shape, and the zigzag shape (Sosin 2011). These 
are characterized by their unique properties, which allow them to endure multi-axial 
loads. A combination of these designs can be used to create self-similar structures, 
which can be easily integrated into a unit cell. Despite the advantages of these types 
of structures, their design is still a challenge for stretchable interconnects. 
Apart from their physical properties, these also have a couple of issues that can 
affect their reliability. One of these is the formation of metal lines, which can cause 
adhesive fracture between the stretchable substrate and the metal lines. Various 
studies have been conducted on the formation of metal lines in stretchable intercon-
nects. One of these studies focused on the stress distribution of these structures. In 
order to understand the delamination behavior of the horseshoe shape (Sosin 2011), 
a ﬁnite element model was developed based on the zone method. However, this 
method can be very challenging to implement due to the various convergent prob-
lems. In recent times, the selection of substrate materials, fabrication techniques 
of stretchable interconnect structures, and different geometric structures along with 
modeling methods have been investigated (Dong et al. 2017; Lacour et al. 2005). 
Also the equivalent models of stretchable interconnect in order to ﬁnd out the delay 
of interconnect structures are reported in Li et al. (2018). 
Modeling Methodology of Stretchable Interconnects 
Figure 14.1 shows the stretchable interconnect structures of effective length 450 µm. 
At ﬁrst interconnect structure has to be designed in the ANSYS geometry or else it 
can be imported from other design tools like ANSYS Q3d, FreeCAD, Autodesk, etc. 
In ANSYS workbench, static structural will be used for the analysis of stretchable 
interconnect structures, by which the parameters like strain, stress, and displacement

252
K. Mummaneni et al.
can be calculated. Once stretching is performed with the interconnect structure, 
mechanical model can be extracted. The extracted model then needs to be imported 
into the Q3D extractor to extract the resistance, inductance, and capacitance values. 
Once the RLC values were extracted, delay offered by the interconnect structures 
can be estimated using delay models for different stretching, different widths, and 
also for different frequencies.
Exploration of Stretchable Interconnects 
The design platform for electronic devices is used to perform delay analysis on 
the structure and ﬂow of stretchable interconnects. This step involves extracting the 
associated deformation model from the simulation. The model is then imported into 
the Q3D Extractor, which allows the user to extract the parameters of the deformation 
model. The simulation is then performed in the Advanced Design System to get the 
delay of stretchable interconnects. 
Equivalent Circuit 
The basic equivalent model for an electronic component is the network model. For 
a single stretchable interconnect, the proposed circuit model is shown in Fig. 14.2. 
However, since the model excludes the effects of electromagnetic ﬁelds on the wire, 
it is not applicable to high frequencies.
The inﬂuence of the signal and the electromagnetic ﬁeld on the wire is mainly 
reﬂected in the Rf and Lself of the proposed circuit model. In addition, the deformation 
of the wire will affect its parasitic parameters. This is an unavoidable problem in 
ﬂexible circuit design. 
Delay Calculation 
From the equivalent circuit, the transfer function can be obtained as 
normal
 upper H left parenthesis normal upper S right parenthesis equals StartFraction 1 Over 1 plus b 1 upper S plus b 2 upper S squared EndFraction
no rmal u pper H 
left parenthesis normal upper S right parenthesis equals StartFraction 1 Over 1 plus b 1 upper S plus b 2 upper S squared EndFraction
where 
b 1  equal s uppe r R up er C S
ubscript c plus upper R upper C Subscript upper L plus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper C Subscript c Baseline plus upper R Subscript upper S Baseline upper C Subscript upper L

14
Delay Analysis of Different Stretchable Interconnect Structures
253
Fig. 14.1 Stretchable interconnect structures in Q3D Extractor a Circular, b Rectangular, c Trian-
gular and d Horseshoe

254
K. Mummaneni et al.
Fig. 14.2 Equivalent circuit a RLC network model b model including driver and load
b 2  equal s upp
er L upper C Subscript c Baseline plus upper L upper C Subscript upper L
The delay of the equivalent circuit is measured by applying step response as input 
and the Laplace transform of step response is analyzed as 
uper U Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis equals StartFraction upper V Subscript i Baseline Over upper S EndFraction
up
per U Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis equals StartFraction upper V Subscript i Baseline Over upper S EndFraction
Then, the output response of the system will be evaluated as 
upper U
 Subscript o Baseline left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis equals StartFraction upper V Subscript i Baseline Over upper S left parenthesis 1 plus b 1 upper S plus b 2 upper S squared right parenthesis EndFraction
uppe r U Su bscript 
o Baseline left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis equals StartFraction upper V Subscript i Baseline Over upper S left parenthesis 1 plus b 1 upper S plus b 2 upper S squared right parenthesis EndFraction
Finally, the time domain response of the above equation is obtained and given as 
u 0 left p
a
re nthe
sis t right parenthesis equals upper V Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis 1 minus e Superscript StartFraction minus alpha t StartRoot alpha squared plus beta squared EndRoot Over beta EndFraction sine beta t plus rho Baseline right parenthesis√
u 0 left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals upper V Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis 1 minus e Superscript StartFraction minus alpha t StartRoot alpha squared plus beta squared EndRoot Over beta EndFraction sine beta t plus rho Baseline right parenthesis
u
 0 l eft 
p
arenthesis t right parenthesis equals upper V Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis 1 minus e Superscript StartFraction minus alpha t StartRoot alpha squared plus beta squared EndRoot Over beta EndFraction sine beta t plus rho Baseline right parenthesis
where, 
alph a equals StartFraction b 1 Over 2 b 2 EndFraction comma beta equals StartFraction StartRoot 4 b 2 minus b 1 squared EndRoot Over 2 b 2 EndFraction rho equals tangent Superscript negative 1 Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction alpha Over beta EndFraction right parenthesis
alph
a  equals StartFraction b 1 Over 2 b 2 EndFraction comma beta equals StartFraction StartRoot 4 b 2 minus b 1 squared EndRoot Over 2 b 2 EndFraction rho equals tangent Superscript negative 1 Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction alpha Over beta EndFraction right parenthesis
/
alph a equ
als StartFraction b 1 Over 2 b 2 EndFraction comma beta equals StartFraction StartRoot 4 b 2 minus b 1 squared EndRoot Over 2 b 2 EndFraction rho equals tangent Superscript negative 1 Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction alpha Over beta EndFraction right parenthesis
alph
a equals 
StartFraction b 1 Over 2 b 2 EndFraction comma beta equals StartFraction StartRoot 4 b 2 minus b 1 squared EndRoot Over 2 b 2 EndFraction rho equals tangent Superscript negative 1 Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction alpha Over beta EndFraction right parenthesis
a
l
pha equals StartFraction b 1 Over 2 b 2 EndFraction comma beta equals StartFraction StartRoot 4 b 2 minus b 1 squared EndRoot Over 2 b 2 EndFraction rho equals tangent Superscript negative 1 Baseline left parenthesis StartFraction alpha Over beta EndFraction right parenthesis
Results and Discussion 
The interconnect structure is designed in the ANSYS tool, in which static structural 
are used for the analysis of stretchable interconnect structures. Later, the parameters 
like strain, stress, and displacement are calculated. Once stretching is performed 
with the interconnect structure, mechanical model is extracted. The extracted model 
is then imported into the Q3D extractor to extract the resistance, inductance, and

14
Delay Analysis of Different Stretchable Interconnect Structures
255
capacitance values. Once the RLC values are extracted, the delay model is used 
to estimate the delay offered by the interconnect structure for different stretching, 
different widths, and also for different frequencies. 
Tables 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, and 14.4 show the variation of resistance, inductance, 
and capacitance with respect to the different stretching percentages of various inter-
connect structures. At low frequencies, the conductor’s exterior and interior contain 
electromagnetic energy and current conduction. However, at higher frequencies the 
current ﬂow is primarily focused close to the conductor’s surface. The magnetic ﬁeld 
is hence limited to the area outside the conductor. The skin-depth effect thus begins 
to show at high frequency. Very less current ﬂows in the core of the wire as all ﬁelds 
are minimal at a deep enough depth. As a result, the effective cross-section of the 
conductor gets smaller as the frequency rises. The resistance of the wire becomes 
frequency dependent as the skin depth falls with increasing frequency. Consequently, 
the resistance of wire rises with frequency. Hence, the variation in the resistance is 
more due to the effect of skin depth at higher frequencies. 
The magnetic ﬁeld surrounding the interconnect changes as its shape does. A 
straight wire of the same length produces stronger magnetic ﬁelds than a stretchable 
interconnect. The inductance, as is widely known, is the quantity of ﬁeld line rings 
around a conductor for each amp of current passing through it. As a result, a stretch-
able interconnect has a higher inductance than a straight wire of the same length. In
Table 14.1 Variation in RLC parameters with w = 5 um wide for circular stretchable interconnect 
structure 
Circular interconnect
Resistance (ml)
Inductance (pH)
Capacitance (fF) 
0% stretched
545.986
579.996757
6.923595 
50% stretched
546.442
679.828540
7.522967 
100% stretched
551.845
796.759518
8.302950 
Table 14.2 Variation in RLC parameters with w = 5 um wide for rectangular stretchable 
interconnect structure 
Rectangular interconnect
Resistance (ml)
Inductance (pH)
Capacitance (fF) 
0% stretched
525.016
568.24
7.01 
50% stretched
532.562
625.71
7.87 
100% stretched
548.265
701.27
8.26 
Table 14.3 Variation in RLC parameters with w = 5 um wide for triangular stretchable interconnect 
structure 
Triangular interconnect
Resistance (ml)
Inductance (pH)
Capacitance (fF) 
0% stretched
544.347
623.965481
7.172989 
50% stretched
550.659
757.299361
7.972990 
100% stretched
555.258
933.304827
9.291157

256
K. Mummaneni et al.
Table 14.4 Variation in RLC parameters with w = 5 um wide for horseshoe stretchable interconnect 
structure 
Horseshoe interconnect
Resistance (ml)
Inductance (pH)
Capacitance (fF) 
0% stretched
540.246
569.17
7.43 
50% stretched
542.452
635.40
7.87 
100% stretched
550.645
801.28
8.25
other words, as stretchable interconnect is stretched, its inductance rises. Similarly, 
the capacitance of a stretchable interconnect has a higher capacitance than a straight 
wire of the same length. 
Tables 14.5, 14.6, 14.7, and 14.8 show the delay values of circular, rectangular, 
triangular, and horseshoe structures for different widths, stretching percentages, 
and at various frequencies. It has been observed that, as stretching and frequency 
increases, delay increases due to the effect of skin depth. Stretching the interconnect 
has a minimal impact on the signal when the signal frequency is small, that is, when 
the signal period is relatively large. However, when the signal frequency is high, 
that is, when the signal period is relatively small, the effect of delay on the signal 
increases. The tables denote the delays of a stretchable interconnect with stretchy 
interconnects at 1 GHz, 5 GHz, and 10 GHz under various applied stresses. The trans-
mission performance of the stretchy connection declines as applied strain causes the 
impedance of the conductor to rise. When applied stresses of 0% to 100% are taken 
into account, it is observed that the delay in interconnect gets worse at 10 GHz 
frequency. As the phase shift is worse, correspondingly the delay gets longer. This 
behavior thus demonstrates how, as applied strain grows, a stretchable interconnects 
impedance rises and its transmission performance degrades. 
Table 14.5 Comparison of delay of Circular interconnect structure operating at different widths 
and operating frequency 
Circular interconnect 
F = 10 GHz 
Initial 100% Stretched 
F = 5 GHz 
Initial 100% Stretched 
F = 1 GHz 
Initial 100% Stretched 
W = 5 um
51.50 ps 89.10 ps
49.20 ps 84.58 ps
48.10 ps 81.84 ps 
W = 10 um
45.52 ps 82.61 ps
43.62 ps 78.70 ps
42.83 ps 76.70 ps 
W = 15 um
41.30 ps 75.98 ps
39.74 ps 72.74 ps
31.15 ps 71.20 ps 
Table 14.6 Comparison of delay of Rectangular interconnect structure operating at different widths 
and operating frequency 
Rectangular 
interconnect 
F = 10 GHz 
Initial 100% Stretched 
F = 5 GHz 
Initial 100% Stretched 
F = 1 GHz 
Initial 100% Stretched 
W = 5 um
49.12 ps 74.56 ps
48.94 ps 70.01 ps
46.21 ps 69.95 ps 
W = 10 um
45.56 ps 65.17 ps
43.27 ps 62.26 ps
41.42 ps 61.23 ps 
W = 15 um
40.31 ps 60.39 ps
38.25 ps 59.45 ps
38.03 ps 57.15 ps

14
Delay Analysis of Different Stretchable Interconnect Structures
257
Table 14.7 Comparison of delay of Triangular interconnect structure operating at different widths 
and operating frequency 
Triangular 
interconnect 
F = 10 GHz 
Initial 100% Stretched 
F = 5 GHz 
Initial 100% Stretched 
F = 1 GHz 
Initial 100% Stretched 
W = 5 um
46.97 ps 71.01 ps
44.94 ps 67.85 ps
43.90 ps 66.15 ps 
W = 10 um
41.35 ps 62.22 ps
39.63 ps 59.56 ps
38.92 ps 58.85 ps 
W = 15 um
37.38 ps 57.35 ps
35.95 ps 55.45 ps
35.39 ps 54.65 ps 
Table 14.8 Comparison of delay of Horseshoe interconnect structure operating at different widths 
and operating frequency 
Horseshoe interconnect F = 10 GHz 
initial 100% stretched 
F = 5 GHz 
initial 100% Stretched 
F = 1 GHz 
initial 100% Stretched 
W = 5 um
54.26 ps 92.34 ps
51.81 ps 87.46 ps
49.90 ps 83.25 ps 
W = 10 um
48.35 ps 85.42 ps
45.54 ps 81.21 ps
44.12 ps 78.82 ps 
W = 15 um
44.19 ps 78.75 ps
41.95 ps 73.24 ps
40.87 ps 71.25 ps 
Conclusions 
A new analytical model for stretchable interconnects is created taking into account the 
skin-depth effect. Using a ﬂexible electronics design platform, a model for the delay 
analysis of stretchable interconnects for various extensions is presented. The analysis 
of parasitic extraction for stretchable interconnects is established. It is analyzed that if 
the interconnect structure is stretched, then resistance remains almost constant while 
inductance and capacitance values increase, which leads to increase in delay. In this 
chapter, the parasitic comparison of various interconnect structures with different 
stretching percentages and frequencies is presented. Due to the changes in RLC 
values, it is investigated that delay decreases as width increases. The parasitic values 
depend on the frequency at which stretchable device operates. It is observed that 
as the frequency of operation increases, the delay of the stretchable interconnects 
increases due to skin effect. As a future scope, this work can be extended to the 
analysis of crosstalk for different stretchable interconnect structures. 
References 
Blau A, Murr A, Wolff S, Sernagor E, Medini P, Iurilli G, Ziegler C, Benfenati F (2011) Flexible, 
all-polymer microelectrode arrays for the capture of cardiac and neuronal signals. Biomaterials 
32(7):1778–1786 
Carlson A, Bowen AM, Huang Y, Nuzzo RG, Rogers JA (2012) Transfer printing techniques for 
materials assembly and micro/nanodevice fabrication. Adv Mater 24(39):5284–5318 
Case JC, White EL, Kramer RK (2015) Soft material characterization for robotic applications. Soft 
Robot 2(2):80–87

258
K. Mummaneni et al.
Dang W (2018) Stretchable interconnects for smart integration of sensors in wearable and robotic 
applications 
Dong Z, Duan B, Boxing C, Zhen Y, Yintang (2017) Electromechanical modeling of stretchable 
interconnects. J Comput Electron., 16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10825-016-0946-7 
Gao Y, Ota H, Schaler EW, Chen K, Zhao A, Gao W, Fahad HM, Leng Y, Zheng A, Xiong F, Zhang, 
Tai L-C, Zhao P, Fearing RS, Javey A (2017) Wearable microﬂuidic diaphragm pressure sensor 
for health and tactile touch monitoring. Adv Mater 29(39):(1–8) 1701985 
Hess-Dunning AE, Tyler DJ, Zorman CA (2013) Stretchable thin-ﬁlm metal structures on a stimuli-
responsive polymer nanocomposite for mechanically-dynamic microsystems. Transducers 2013, 
Barcelona, SPAIN, pp 2229–2232 
Jeong SH, Zhang S, Hjort K, Hilborn J, Wu Z (2016) PDMS-based elastomer tuned soft, stretchable, 
and sticky for epidermal electronics. Adv Mater 28:5830–5836 
Jinno H, Fukuda K, Xu X, Park S, Suzuki Y, Koizumi M, Yokota T, Osaka I, Takimiya K, Someya 
T (2017) Stretchable and waterproof elastomer-coated organic photovoltaics for washable 
electronic textile applications. Nat Energy 2(10):780–785 
Johnston ID, McCluskey DK, Tan CKL, Tracey MC (2014) Mechanical characterization of 
bulk Sylgard 184 for microﬂuidics and microengineering. J Micromechanics Microeng 24(3): 
0350117 (1–7) 
Khan S, Yogeswaran N, Taube W, Lorenzelli L, Dahiya R (2015) Flexible FETs using ultrathin 
Si microwires embedded in solution processed dielectric and metal layers. J Micromechan 
Microeng 25(12):125019 
Lacour SP, Jones J, Wagner S, Li T, Suo Z (2005) Stretchable interconnects for elastic electronic 
surfaces. Proc IEEE 93(8):1459–1467 
Li J, Duan B, Dong Z, Yang Y (2018) Analysis of delay from step response based on stretchable 
ﬂexible interconnects. Sci China Inf Sci 61(10):1–3 
Lipomi DJ, Lee JA, Vosgueritchian M, Tee BC-K, Bolander JA, Bao Z (2012) Electronic prop-
erties of transparent conductive ﬁlms of PEDOT: PSS on stretchable substrates. Chem Mater 
24(2):373–382 
Plovie BB, Yang Y, Guillaume J, Dunphy S, Dhaenens K, Van Put S, Vervust T, Bossuyt F, 
Vanﬂeteren J (2017) Arbitrarily shaped 2.5D circuits using stretchable interconnects embedded 
in thermoplastic polymers. Adv Eng Mater 19(8):1700032 (1–8) 
Salvatore GA, Sülzle J, Valle FD, Cantarella G, Robotti F, Jokic P, Knobelspies S, Daus A, Büthe 
L, Petti L, Kirchgessner N, Hopf R, Magno M, Tröster G (2017) Biodegradable and highly 
deformable temperature sensors for the internet of things. Adv Funct Mater 27(35):1702390 
(1–10) 
Sosin S (2011) Interconnect schemes for stretchable array-type microsystems 
Stoyanov H, Kollosche M, Risse S, Waché R, Kofod G (2013) Soft conductive elastomer materials 
for stretchable electronics and voltage controlled artiﬁcial muscles. Adv Mater 25(4):578–583 
Tybrandt K, Khodagholy D, Dielacher B, Stauffer F, Renz AF, Buzsáki G, Vörös J (2018) High-
density stretchable electrode grids for chronic neural recording. Adv Mater 30(15):1706520 
(1–7) 
Vroman I, Tighzert L (2009) Biodegradable polymers. Materials (basel) 2(2):307–344 
Wang S, Xu J, Wang W, Wang G-JN, Rastak R, Molina-Lopez F, Chung JW, Niu S, Feig VR, Lopez 
J, Lei T, Kwon S-K, Kim Y, Foudeh AM, Ehrlich A, Gasperini A, Yun Y, Murmann B, Tok 
JB-H, Bao Z (2018) Skin electronics from scalable fabrication of an intrinsically stretchable 
transistor array. Nature 555:83–88 
Zhao Y, Kim A, Wan G, Tee BCK (2019) Design and application of stretchable and self-healable 
conductors for soft electronics. Nano Convergence 6(1):1–22

Chapter 15 
Flexible Sensors for Plant Disease 
Monitoring 
Kamlesh S. Patle, Priyanka Khaparde, Gulafsha Bhatti, Yash Agrawal, 
and Vinay S. Palaparthy 
Abstract Advancement in the ﬂexible substrate led to the sensor fabrication, which 
offers light weight and low-cost sensors. Such sensors are very important to monitor 
the plant health on regular intervals and describe the germination of the plant micro-
bial diseases. Numerous climatic and soil characteristics, including rainfall, soil 
moisture, leaf wetness duration, ambient temperature, and ambient humidity, are 
used to monitor plant disease. In this paper, we described the reported work for 
sensing the aforementioned parameters on the ﬂexible substrates. The emphasis has 
been given on the fabrication of these sensors and their sensor transfer function such 
as sensitivity, response time, stability, and hysteresis. 
Keywords Plant disease · Flexible sensors · Leaf wetness · Soil and ambient 
temperature · Humidity · Rainfall 
Introduction 
The world population has been increased by 2 billion people by the year 2019— 
a huge rise of around 25% (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs 2019). The Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) research estimates 
that an additional 70–90% more food will be needed to feed this population. About 
34% of the total crop damaged in the agriculture due to weeds, whereas animal pest 
contributes around 18%. Further, nearly 16% of the world’s total agricultural crop 
production has been damaged by microbial diseases. An enormous proportion of 
crop productivity is lost each year due to weed infestations, pest problems, and plant 
diseases (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs 2019; Iqbal
K. S. Patle · P. Khaparde · G. Bhatti · Y. Agrawal · V. S. Palaparthy envelope symbol
System Design Lab, Department of Information and Communication Technology, DAIICT, 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat 382007, India 
e-mail: vinay_shrinivas@daiict.ac.in 
Y. Agrawal 
e-mail: yash_agrawal@daiict.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_15 
259

260
K. S. Patle et al.
et al. 2018; Jain et al.  2019; Chouhan et al. 2018; Fang and Ramasamy 2015). Such 
losses have a signiﬁcant negative impact on both the country’s economy and the 
farmer’s way of life in nations where farming is the main source of income for a 
large portion of the population. Crop losses are caused by agriculture’s sporadic use 
of technology methods. For the effective crop growth, it is important to monitor the 
germination of plant disease, attack of the animal pest, plant transpiration, monitoring 
drought-like situation in plants, etc. However, this work focuses on the sensors for 
the plant disease monitoring factors affecting it. 
Germination of the plant microbial disease is based on a variety of environ-
mental and meteorological factors that affect a pathogen’s ability to survive. When 
a pathogen gets into contact with a vulnerable host, it has the potential to infect 
and seriously harm agricultural production. Plant disease lead to a decrease in both 
the amount and quality of agricultural production (Iqbal et al. 2018). Fungi, which 
can be found in plant leaves, is one of the most common diseases. Over 70–80% of 
plant diseases are caused by fungi a major plant pathogen found in the plants (Jain 
et al. 2019). Disease and disorder are the two main elements that have an impact 
on crops and their output. The biotic factors that cause disease are either fungi, 
bacteria, or algae while the abiotic variables that promote disorder are the atmo-
spheric conditions (soil and ambient temperature, rainfall, soil moisture, ambient 
humidity, and leaf wetness duration (LWD)) (Chouhan et al. 2018). The produc-
tion could be drastically reduced if these contagious crop illnesses are not promptly 
treated, endangering the security of the global food supply. There is a necessity for 
better disease detection to stop crop damage in order to reduce the spread of illnesses, 
increase productivity, and ensure agricultural sustainability. As a result, experts are 
keen for early plant predication and provide the instant control measures. Farmers 
can be assisted in preserving their crops via early disease identiﬁcation and provi-
sion of management methods. These precautions include techniques for diagnosing 
diseases directly or indirectly. Laboratory-based techniques include the majority of 
direct detection techniques, while optical sensors are used in indirect detection tech-
niques such hyperspectral imaging, ﬂuorescence imaging, and thermography (Fang 
and Ramasamy 2015; Golhani et al. 2018; Kumar et al. 2021). The intricacy of the 
data gathered and the volume of data collected are the limitations of different optical 
sensing systems. These strategies demand expensive setup and computing costs as 
well as expertise in data analytics and statistical methodologies, to be used effec-
tively. For this purpose, sensor technology has a potential role to play in plant disease 
monitoring which is important to monitor soil and ambient temperature, rainfall, soil 
moisture, ambient humidity, and leaf wetness duration. 
The existing sensors-based techniques to monitor the aforementioned environ-
mental and soil parameters have been mounted on the printed circuit board tech-
nology (PCB). The PCB-based sensor technology is cost effective and offers high 
reliability, but the major drawback with this technology is that the fabricated sensor’s 
weight is in grams (typically more than 100 gm). Due to this when such sensors are 
mounted on the leaf tends to bend the leaf. Additionally, another drawback with the 
PCB-based sensors is that when these sensors are mounted on the leaf canopy, it 
does not take the shape of the leaf due to uneven surface of the leaf. As a result, there

15
Flexible Sensors for Plant Disease Monitoring
261
is reduced contact resistance between the sensor and leaf, which tends to produce 
incorrect results. Thus, there is dearth of sensors to be fabricated on the ﬂexible 
substrates, which offer more contact between the sensor and leaf and also light in 
weight (Patle et al. 2022, 2021a, b). In further subsequent sections, we will discuss 
on the fabrication of the ﬂexible humidity, temperature, leaf wetness sensors, rainfall 
sensor, which is used to monitor the plant microbial disease. 
Flexible Humidity Sensors 
Sensor Fabrication and Experimental Set-Up 
An illustration of the construction of humidity sensors made on a Polyethylene tereph-
thalate (PET) substrate is shown in Fig. 15.1 (Su and Wang 2007).  A PET  ﬁlm was  
used to manufacture the interdigitated gold electrodes using a low-temperature sput-
tering process. On an alumina substrate, the same interdigitated gold electrodes are 
created. The following steps were taken in order to prepare the MMA/MAPTAC 
precursor solution: A highly homogenized solution was created by combining 
MAPTAC (0.1 ml, 50% solution, Aldrich), MMA (1 ml, 99%, Merck), and azobi-
sisobutyronitrile (AIBN, 0.01 g) and to create a thoroughly homogenized solution, 
ethanol (0.6 ml) was added after that. Following heating at 90 °C for 1 h in the air 
to cause co-polymerization to occur, the mixed solution was deposited on the PET 
substrate using the dip-coating comprising two interdigitated gold electrodes, and 
the ﬁlm thickness obtained was around 3.5 mm. This led to the creation of a ﬂexible 
resistive-type humidity sensor as depicted in Fig. 15.1. 
Fig. 15.1 a Humidity sensors mounted on a PET substrate, b ﬂexible humidity sensor

262
K. S. Patle et al.
A test box was used to assess a sensor’s complex impedance as a function of 
relative humidity (RH) with the help of LCR meter. Figure 15.1a A picture of the 
humidity sensors on a PET substrate. Fabricated humidity sensor on the ﬂexible 
PET substrates is shown in Fig. 15.1b. By using mass ﬂow controls (Hastings), dry 
and wet air is combined. A standard hygrometer (that had already been calibrated 
in the humidity lab of the National Measurement Laboratory (NML)) was used to 
calibrate the setting humidity and temperature points. At 15, 25, and 35 °C, the 
humidity ranged from 10 to 90%RH and the frequency for impedance varied from 1 
to 100 kHz. 
Sensor Transfers Function 
Figure 15.2a displays sensor response (sensitivity) where excitation frequency in the 
LCR is kept at 1 V, and the impedance vs ﬂexible RH sensors has been studied (Su 
and Wang 2007). For both devices, the frequency is applied from frequency range 
of 1–100 kHz and effect of impedance with respect to RH is studied. Further from 
Fig. 15.2a, it can be referred that sensor impedance decreases with an increase in the 
RH for all the frequencies (Su and Wang 2007).
Further, Fig. 15.2b illustrates that the hysteresis is studied, where it was found 
that the fabricated sensor offers hysteresis of about 6% RH. Figure 15.2c depicts 
the ﬂexible humidity sensor’s response and recovery characteristics. Response time 
ranged between 45 and 150 s for desiccation from 73 to 5% RH and 45 to 150 s 
for humidiﬁcation from 7 to 78% RH. The sensor’s reaction and recovery times 
took the equilibration period for the water vapor inside the testing chamber. As a 
result, the ﬂexible humidity sensor’s actual response and recovery durations ought 
to be substantially lower. Figure 15.2d depicts the impact of long-term stability. 
For at least 120 days, the impedance of the ﬂexible humidity sensor did not differ 
signiﬁcantly for the testing points of 10%, 30%, 60%, and 90% RH (Su and Wang 
2007). 
Flexible Temperature Sensors 
Sensor Fabrication and Experimental Set-Up 
A fully printable approach is used to create the proposed temperature sensor [12]. 
Printing has many beneﬁts such as a simple manufacturing method, including low 
cost, simple patterning, and good precision in device performance. An Ag electrode 
further PEN substrate, temperature layer and followed by CYTOP encapsulation 
layer is incorporated to construct the temperature sensor’s structure, depicted in 
Fig. 15.3a. According to Fig. 15.3b, the temperature sensing layer is created using

15
Flexible Sensors for Plant Disease Monitoring
263
Fig. 15.2 a Sensor impedance decreases with increasing RH at all frequencies, b observed 
hysteresis for the fabricated sensor (10–90% RH), c response and recovery time of the ﬂexible 
humidity sensor, d effect of long-term stability on the fabricated sensor (min 120 days)
PEDOT:PSS, GOPS as a crosslinker, and Triton X-100 (TX-100). The fabricated 
temperature sensor fabrication ﬂow is shown in Fig. 15.3c. Initially, Ag electrode 
with thickness of 100 nm and subsequently with the help of the AgNP ink (50 m PEN 
ﬁlm), IDEs patterns are achieved. In this process PEDOT:PSS is used as the sensing 
layer for the thermal and the dispenser is used to print the CYTOP encapsulation. A 
photograph of a printed temperature sensor adhered to skin is shown in Fig. 15.3d.
Sensor Transfers Function 
Under various humidity circumstances, the resistance variations of fabricated sensors 
were evaluated in order to analyze the temperature-dependent study. The resistance 
of the sensor is studied and characteristics remained essentially unchanged when the 
humidity varied from 30% RH to 80% RH, as illustrated in Fig. 15.4a. The time vs 
resistance changes have been examined for various humidity and temperature condi-
tions as shown in Fig. 15.4b. The small change in the sensor resistance w.r.t humidity

264
K. S. Patle et al.
Fig. 15.3 Fabrication ﬂow for the proposed ﬂexible temperature sensors
has proved the potential of the fabricated sensor. Excellent stability was attained in 
addition to humidity stability. The repeatability was studied for temperatures ranging 
from 30 to 45 °C as shown  in  Fig.  15.4c. The little variations indicated that the perfor-
mance of sensor is consistent in various temperature cycle testing. The temperature-
resistance curves of 10 devices were used to characterize the repeatability of the 
printed sensors. The good repeatability of our printed sensors was demonstrated with 
small variation in TCR as shown in Fig. 15.4d. The printed electrode’s ﬂexibility and 
the sensing ﬁlm’s PEDOT:PSS foundation also gave the sensor excellent mechanical 
stability. Figure 15.4e displayed the printed sensor’s resistance variation at different 
bending radii (from 10 to 2 mm). At the aforementioned bending radii, there was 
just a 1% increase in resistance over ﬂat circumstances. Furthermore, experiments 
including repeated cyclic bending under 10,000 cycles at a 5 mm bending radius 
were also carried out. Gradually increasing the bending cycle had no discernible 
impact on resistance or sensor performance Fig. 15.4f (Wang 2020).
Flexible Leaf Wetness Sensors 
Sensor Fabrication and Experimental Set-Up 
The fabrication method of micro leaf wetness sensor on the PET ﬂexible substrate 
is depicted in Fig. 15.5a (Patle et al. 2021b). Initially, IDE patterns were created 
in the Corel Draw. Next, a ﬂexible polyimide substrate was purchased, as depicted 
in Fig. 15.5a, and then a layer of aluminum (Al) was put where the electron beam 
evaporation method is used, as depicted in Fig. 15.5b. Additionally, patterning of 
the interdigitated electrodes (IDEs) are achieved with the help of laser ablation as

15
Flexible Sensors for Plant Disease Monitoring
265
Fig. 15.4 a Ambient humidity rising from 30% RH to 80% RH, the temperature-resistance parame-
ters remained essentially same, b stability of a relative humidity sensors, c temperature repeatability 
test results for the range of 30 to 45 °C, d Excellent mechanical stability of sensors, e change in 
sensor resistance at various bending radii, which is between 2 and 10 mm, f effect on resistance or 
sensor with repetitive cyclic bending under 10,000 cycles at a 5 mm bending radius
indicated in Fig. 15.5c. The constructed IDEs are displayed on the ﬂexible substrates 
in Fig. 15.5d. The structures were achieved using a 1.06 m Yb ﬁber laser, and the 
IDEs were designed to ﬁt on the tulsi leaves. The constructed sensor is mounted 
using silver epoxy on the PCB to create electrical contact, as illustrated in Fig. 15.5d 
(Patle et al. 2021b).
The constructed sensor is also coupled to LCR meter, which measures how the 
capacitance of the sensor changes in response to exposure to moisture as shown in 
Fig. 15.5c. All of the trials have been completed at a constant room temperature 
(25 °C) with a relative humidity of about 50% RH. Throughout the tests, the LCR 
meter’s excitation voltage is held constant at 1 Vpp. These leaf wetness sensors can 
also be used as the rain sensors (Patle et al. 2021b). 
Sensor Transfers Function 
The sensor is examined in a lab setting to investigate the fabrication’s ﬂexible 
LWS properties, such as response time, sensitivity, accuracy, and hysteresis. For 
this purpose, the sensing area on the IDEs is separated into various areas to obtain

266
K. S. Patle et al.
Fig. 15.5 Fabrication of the Al IDEs of the PET substrate
the benchmarking and constructed LWS transfer characteristics. For the measure-
ments, spraying of the water molecule on the constructed LWS is done as depicted 
in Fig. 15.6. An LCR meter is connected to the sensor and ﬁrst the sensor’s proper-
ties w.r.t to frequency response is investigated for various sensing areas as shown in 
Fig. 15.6. Using an LCR meter, constructed LWS capacitance is measured, as seen 
in Fig. 15.6a. It is clear from Fig. 15.6a beyond 10 kHz, LWS capacitance remains 
unaltered. The change in the LWS capacitance with respect to the water molecules 
covering various sensing areas is depicted in Fig. 15.6b, where it is observed that 
when number of water molecules covering various sensing areas grows then sensor 
capacitance grows monotonically. Further, sensor response has been studied (/C/ 
C) as represented in Fig. 15.6c. In addition, the hysteresis is studied for the manu-
factured LWS as shown in Fig. 15.6d. In order to accomplish this, spraying of water 
is done on sensor, and the LWS capacitance is examined by varying the amount of 
the detecting area that the water covers as depicted in Fig. 15.4d. The sensor exhibits 
approximately 5% hysteresis, as seen in Fig. 15.6d (Patle et al. 2021b).
Figure 15.6e represents the response and recovery time, which is studied at 1 kHz. 
When water was sprayed evenly across the whole surface area of the constructed 
LWS, the sensor capacitance was then measured and displayed in Fig. 15.6e. 
According to Fig. 15.6e, the sensor’s response time is around 5 s. The impact of 
temperature on the ﬂexible LWS has also been studied, which is another important 
issue in the operating exposure of the LWS. In order to achieve this, the sensor is 
placed in a hot air oven and the temperature is adjusted between 20 and 65 °C, 
taking into account the in situ agricultural conditions in India. When the temperature 
changes from 20 to 65 °C, it is clear from Fig. 15.6f that the ﬂexible LWS’s sensor 
capacitance varies by just 6% (Patle et al. 2021b).

15
Flexible Sensors for Plant Disease Monitoring
267
Fig. 15.6 a Variation of the sensor with increase in the frequency for dry situation, b variation in 
the sensor capacitance versus increase in the sensing area exposed to wetness, c observed response 
versus increase in the sensing area exposed to wetness, d hysteresis observed for the fabricated 
LWS, e time-dependent study of the sensor, f temperature study on the developed LWS sensor
Conclusion 
Ambient temperature, ambient humidity, leaf wetness, and rain sensors are the 
primary parameters, which has to be considered for the early plant disease predictions. 
Considering the affordability for the poor farmers, there is need to develop low-cost 
sensors and achieve the higher stability and accuracy of detection. This paper provides 
a review on the fabrication of the sensors to measure ambient temperature, ambient 
humidity, leaf wetness, and rain, which are widely used in integrated plant disease 
management which are the basic important parameters for agricultural applications. 
Additionally, ﬂexible sensors have a potential over the conventional PCB sensors 
mainly due to their lightweight which further provide the excellent contact between 
the sensor and the leaf canopy that ensures the more accurate measurements. 
References 
Chouhan SS, Kaul A, Singh UP, Jain S (2018) Bacterial foraging optimization based radial basis 
function neural network (BRBFNN) for identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of plant leaf diseases: 
an automatic approach towards plant pathology. IEEE Access 6:8852–8863 
Fang Y, Ramasamy RP (2015) Current and prospective methods for plant disease detection. 
Biosensors 4:537–561. www.mdpi.com/journal/biosensors/ 
Golhani K, Balasundram SK, Vadamalai G, Pradhan B (2018) A review of neural networks in plant 
disease detection using hyperspectral data. INFORM

268
K. S. Patle et al.
Iqbal Z et al (2018) An automated detection and classiﬁcation of citrus plant diseases using image 
processing techniques: a review. Comput Electron Agric 153:12–32 
Jain A, Sarsaiya S, Wu Q, Lu Y, Shi J (2019) A review of plant leaf fungal diseases and its 
environment speciation. Bioengineered 409–424 
Kumar M, Kumar A, Palaparthy VS (2021) Soil sensors based prediction system for plant diseases 
using exploratory data analysis and machine learning. IEEE Sens J 21(16):17455–17468 
Patle KS, Saini R, Kumar A, Palaparthy VS (2021a) Field evaluation of smart sensor system for 
plant disease prediction using LSTM network. IEEE Sens J 22(4):3715–3725 
Patle KS, Saini R, Kumar A, Surya SG, Palaparthy VS, Salama KN (2021b) IoT enabled, leaf 
wetness sensor on the ﬂexible substrates for in-situ plant disease management. IEEE Sens J 
21(17):19481–19491 
Patle KS, Dehingia B, Kalita H, Palaparthy VS (2022) Highly sensitive graphene oxide leaf wetness 
sensor for disease supervision on medicinal plants. Elsevier Comput Electron Agric 200:107225 
Su P-G, Wang C-S (2007) Novel ﬂexible resistive-type humidity sensor. Sens Actuators, B Chem 
123(2):1071–1076 
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2019) World 
population prospects 2019: highlights (ST/ESA/SER.A/423) 
Wang YF, et al. (2020) Fully printed PEDOT: PSS-based temperature sensor with high humidity 
stability for wireless healthcare monitoring. Sci Rep 10(1):2467

Chapter 16 
GaitTracker: A Digital Platform 
for Measuring, Detecting and Analyzing 
Gait Changes 
Aniruddh Jayant Muley, Kalyan Sasidhar, and Ronak Dhokai 
Abstract Gait is an essential bio-marker for long-term health. Traditionally, Gait 
analysis depends on vision-based or expensive pressure mats where patients are 
instructed to walk or perform standard limb movements. Early monitoring and detec-
tion of gait changes could prevent severe conditions. However, such tests happen late 
in the onset of the problem. Despite a plethora of wearable devices, such as ﬁtness 
bands and health trackers, no single device monitors gait and provides an early diag-
nosis. This work presents a proof-of-concept of our in-house developed wearable 
inertial measurement unit (IMU) for extracting gait patterns. In addition, the results 
presented in this work detect changes in gait patterns. The device was tested with 
ten volunteers (six males and four females, 25 +/− 1.8 years, 163 +/− 8.8 cm) 
who provided data for both normal and abnormal walking resulting in around 700 
gait samples. The results show that sudden changes in gait can be detected with an 
affordable and portable wearable device. 
Keywords Wearable device · Accelerometer · Gait analysis 
Introduction 
Gait refers to a walking pattern and is unique to every individual (Gafurov et al. 2007). 
A typical gait pattern consists of multiple events occurring with alternate movement 
of the limbs. Gait of a person can change due to various reasons including body 
weight, injuries, age-related cognitive impairments and neurological dysfunctions 
(Cimolinn et al. 2011). Moreover, gait could change suddenly and if left unnoticed/ 
ignored for a prolonged time, can lead to abnormal gait such as antalgic gait (limping
A. J. Muley · K. Sasidhar envelope symbol · R. Dhokai 
Dhirubhai Ambani Institute of Information and Communication Technology Gandhinagar, 
Gujarat 382007, India 
e-mail: kalyan_sasidhar@daiict.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 
Y.  Agrawal et al.  (eds.),  Interconnect Technologies for Integrated Circuits and Flexible 
Electronics, Springer Tracts in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-4476-7_16 
269

270
A. J. Muley et al.
on one leg leading to a bend on one side of the body).1 Various attempts have been 
made to detect this form of abnormal gait (Kozlow et al. 2018). However, as revealed 
by orthopedics, in most cases, individuals realize their abnormalities very late in 
their lives due to the lack of early assessment or diagnostic facilities and hence resort 
to kneecaps, medications, and exercises. Still, the gait patterns remain unchanged 
and abnormal gaits are becoming one of the contributors to knee problems (Gait and 
Knee Problems 2023) and lower back pains (da Fonseca et al. 2009). The sudden 
gait changes, if unnoticed, could persist for a longer time, resulting in abnormal gait. 
With the evolution of wearable sensing systems, portable ﬁtness bands and smart-
watches have already proliferated in the consumer market. However, none of these 
gadgets is capable of monitoring one’s walking and detecting changes or abnor-
malities in gait patterns. In other words, these devices do not record or extract gait 
patterns and detect gait changes. This highlights the necessity to encourage regular 
gait measurement periodically, similar to measuring blood pressure, sugar levels and 
even oxygen saturation levels at regular intervals. Various survey articles have been 
published discussing the use of wearable sensing systems for gait analysis (Yang and 
Hsu 2010; Bhosale et al. 2015). The gap in the literature includes a dedicated device 
for long-term gait monitoring. To accomplish continuous monitoring and detection, 
an individual’s gait must be stored in a database for which a digital platform is 
required. 
To analyze the importance of the problem, this work conducted a survey across a 
pool of 30 doctors and physiotherapists. The responses were the following:
. 80% believe that preventive health care is the need of the hour.
. 83.34% believe that a portable device measuring gait parameters with analysis 
can be useful.
. 86.67% denied when asked if there is any similar device in the market.
. 90% would test and recommend such a device to their patients, if given to them. 
Backed by survey responses, we designed and developed a wearable device that 
can detect gait changes in an individual and store the data in a database. In a natural 
world setting, analyzing gait abnormalities is limited to a handful of hospitals. The 
patients have to visit the hospitals for a facility like a Motion Capture system (Estévez-
García et al. 2015). This is often an expensive affair and beyond the reach of a majority 
of the population. With digital health on the rise, there is a pressing need to create 
a digital repository of individual health data. In a country like India, having a vast 
population base, there is a need to have arrangements for a huge healthcare database. 
This is where our affordable device can contribute. Our proposed device can be 
used to create a gait database that can provide a historical perspective for various 
stakeholders, including orthopedics, and physiotherapists, who can analyze the data 
through our algorithms and provide early diagnoses to patients about gait changes.
1 Auerbach N, Tadi P. Antalgic Gait in Adults. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): 
StatPearls Publishing; 2022 January. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK 
559243. 

16
GaitTracker: A Digital Platform for Measuring, Detecting …
271
These changes could be subtle, but, if they persist for a long time, could lead to 
potentially serious medical conditions. 
The following are our contributions:
. The wearable device is in itself a novel attempt to provide personalized healthcare 
diagnostics.
. For the ﬁrst time in India, the abnormal gait detection system paired with a 
smartphone application is implemented. Till now, no such work has been observed.
. The differences in gait parameters between normal and abnormal walking within 
a user are identiﬁed.
. We show how changes in walking are identiﬁed, detected and presented to the 
concerned personnel. 
Related Work 
Analysis of gait is commonly performed by measuring speed, length of rhythm and 
pitch while moving. The most common approaches are using camera-based systems 
to extract the gait parameters during locomotion. However, this approach requires 
a complex set up which is bulky, and incurs infrastructure cost. Such facilities in 
India are available only in multi-specialty hospitals which are beyond the reach of 
the general population. 
Gait analysis using external sensors has been conducted by placing an accelerom-
eter sensor on the hip, ankles and foot. A wearable body-worn sensing system for 
analyzing gait and classifying between normal and abnormal has been proposed by 
Sant’Anna et al. (2012). The gait of subjects with lower back pains is measured and 
it explores the correlation between improper gait and back pain in Chan et al. (2013). 
In Cheng et al. (2013), researchers developed GaitTrack, a smartphone app that 
computes the walking or gait speed of patients and provides a correlation between gait 
speed and patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). Activity 
recognition, i.e., recognizing walking, running, taking the stairs or sitting still, is an 
application which has used inertial sensors such as the accelerometer to a great extent. 
Various research works have proposed unique algorithms for activity recognition 
(Kwapisz et al. 2011; Sun et al. 2010; Yang 2009; Zhong et al. 2010). 
A personalized wearable system that enables the movement of persons with 
Parkinson’s disease is developed by Mazilu et al. (2014). The system detected 
freezing episodes or abrupt stops in walking using ankle-mounted motion sensors and 
responded by playing a rhythmic auditory sound that adapted to the patient’s regular 
gait speed, alerting the person to move, and used a smartphone as a Processing Unit. 
Godfrey et al. validated a low-cost body sensor unit to quantify gait characteristics in 
a large group of young and older adults (Godfrey 2015). Authors in (Pepa et al. 2015) 
extract step length using the data collected from a smartphone accelerometer to assess 
gait of an individual. Perez performed a gait analysis to assess the balance and risk of 
patients falling with walking difﬁculties (Perez and Labrador 2016). Miniature-sized

272
A. J. Muley et al.
accelerometers and gyroscope sensors (Roy et al. 2016) embedded in smartphones 
have tremendous application usage. 
Works speciﬁc to gait analysis through smartphones have been attempted in Chan 
et al. (2013), Zhong et al. (2010), Pepa et al. (2015), Nishiguchi et al. (2012), Sasidhar 
and Satyajeet (2017). 
We conclude that most of the existing work consists of
. Validating the use of accelerometers in sensing gait parameters.
. Performing kinetic analysis using wearable sensors and understanding gait.
. Identifying the correlation between gait patterns and walking speeds with 
symptoms of various diseases that have been shown to affect gait.
. Performing classiﬁcation of different sets of gait samples into multiple classes. 
In contrast to the existing work, we propose a system that aims to do the following: 
a) monitor gait, b) store periodic gait data for identifying and detecting gait changes, 
c) calculate the extent of the change in gait and d) provide diagnostic information to 
stakeholders such as physiotherapists and orthopedics. 
Methodology 
Data Collection 
Ten participants, all graduate students residing on the campus of our institute, volun-
teered to wear the device and provide data. The demographics of the subjects is 
presented in Table 16.1. 
The instruction is given to each user to walk a 10 m path. Users walked with their 
body posture and pace similar for each walk. However, to induce sudden changes in 
their walk pattern, a video of antalgic gait has been shown to the users. Under the
Table 16.1 Participating 
users in experiment
User
Gender
Height (cm)
Age 
User 1
Male
171.2
29 
User 2
Male
173
24 
User 3
Female
154
25 
User 4
Male
160
25 
User 5
Female
150
24 
User 6
Female
155.5
24 
User 7
Female
160
26 
User 8
Male
170
25 
User 9
Male
165
25 
User 10
Male
176
23 

16
GaitTracker: A Digital Platform for Measuring, Detecting …
273
supervision of the physiotherapist, each user mimicked the action to bring a change 
in the walking pattern. We obtained a total of 70 gait data sets (50 normal walking 
and 20 abnormal walking data sets) per user, resulting in a database of 700 gait data 
sets across ten users. 
Measurement Platform 
The system was designed and developed in-house using an ARM Cortex M3 core 
ultra-low power micro-controller with Bluetooth version 2.0, an MPU 6050 3-axis 
accelerometer and a 3.74 V Lithium polymer (LiPo) battery with a voltage regulator 
for power supply. The accelerometer consists of microstructures whose capacitance 
changes due to external forces. This capacitance change is converted to voltage values 
(Roy et al. 2016). The sensor has a pair of three 16-bit ADCs for digitizing the output. 
The sensor has a minimum full-scale range of ±2 g and a maximum full-scale range 
of ±16 g. 
The sensed data is transmitted via UART from the micro-controller to the Blue-
tooth module HC-05 V2.0. This module is further paired to a smartphone, where all 
the computation is performed through a mobile application. Figure 16.1 shows the 
architecture of the system. 
The proof of concept of the device and how it is worn is depicted in Fig. 16.2.
In the next section, the explanation of how the sensor data was preprocessed, how 
the human walking was recorded and how gait features were extracted is provided.
Fig. 16.1 Architecture of ﬂow of the application 

274
A. J. Muley et al.
Fig. 16.2 a The sensor along with the micro-controller unit is shown on the right and the Bluetooth 
IC on the left. b The device ﬁxed to a band and wrapped around the ankles
Data Processing 
The data from the wearable device was sampled at 50 Hz. The data was sent to a 
cloud database through a smartphone which was later converted and downloaded 
in CSV format for analysis in MATLAB (version 2022a). Basic ﬁltering techniques 
were applied to smoothen the raw data. The data from each user was named UserID 
day1 normal and UserID day1 Abnormal to preserve anonymity. All data was sent to 
MongoDB, where the data is stored and can be exported in CSV format. Figure 16.3 
shows the screenshot of the sample data. 
Figure 16.4a illustrates the smoothed accelerometer data captured from one indi-
vidual who wore the device and walked a distance of 10 m, and the corresponding
Fig. 16.3 The accelerometer (acc x, acc y and acc z) data across 3 axes are stored along with the 
timestamp 

16
GaitTracker: A Digital Platform for Measuring, Detecting …
275
Fig. 16.4 a The gait cycle starts at heel strike and ends at heel off. The stance phase is from heel 
strike to toe-off and the swing phase is from toe-off to heel strike of the other leg. b The various 
gait phases are identiﬁed in the smoothed accelerometer data 
gait phases are shown in Fig. 16.4b. The device placement was suggested by an 
orthopedic and sports bio-mechanics expert who tested the device in the lab them-
selves. The location of the device (Fig. 16.2) assists in capturing the force exerted 
while walking. 
Figure 16.5 compares normal gait and limping gait patterns of a volunteer.
Detection of Gait Changes 
With the proposed device, user’s gait can be stored and analyzed for sudden changes 
so as to diagnose potential chronic ailments early. Let us look at intra-subject differ-
ences in stride times between normal and abnormal walking samples. Figure 16.6 
provides a statistical comparison of stride duration for both walking patterns of six

276
A. J. Muley et al.
Magnitude of acceleration (m/s2)
Magnitude of acceleration (m/s 2) 
25 
30 
20 
25 
20 
15 
15 
10 
10 
5 
0 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Time (s) 
5 
0 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Time (s) 
20 
30 
25 
15 
20 
15 
10 
10 
5 
5 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Time (s) 
20 
0 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Time (s) 
50 
40 
15 
30 
10 
20 
5 
10 
0 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Time (s) 
0 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Time (s) 
Magnitude of acceleration (m/s 2)
Magnitude of acceleration (m/s 2)
Magnitude of acceleration (m/s 2) 
Magnitude of acceleration (m/s 2) 
Fig. 16.5 One cycle of gait starts at heel strike and ends at heel off. Stride Length is the distance 
between successive parts of heel contact of the same foot, and stride time is the corresponding time 
taken for one stride length. To calculate the stride length, two consecutive heel strikes are considered 
as the start and end of a stride because when the heel hits the ground, a transient intense force is 
exerted, resulting in a peak acceleration

16
GaitTracker: A Digital Platform for Measuring, Detecting …
277
Stride time(ms) 
40 
550
120
1000 
60
500 
35 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
Normal 
User 1 
Abnormal 
500 
450 
400 
350 
300 
250 
200 
150 
1000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
Normal 
Abnormal 
User 2 
800 
50 
40 
600 
30 
400 
20 
200 
10 
0
0 
340 
80 
320 
70 
300 
60 
50 
280 
40 
260 
30 
240 
20 
220 
10 
Normal 
Abnormal 
User 3 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
500 
450 
400 
350 
300 
250 
200 
150 
0
0
0 
Normal 
Abnormal 
User 1 
Normal 
Abnormal 
User 5 
200 
0 
Normal 
Abnormal 
User 6 
100 
Stride time(ms)
Stride time (ms) 
Stride time(ms)
Stride time (ms) 
Stride time(ms) 
Fig. 16.6 Stride time variations of volunteers: For each box plot, the median and inter-quartile 
values are in different ranges, conﬁrming that there were signiﬁcant individual variations in walking 
between normal and limping 
volunteers. This difference clearly provides a quantitative comparison and indication 
of one’s gait changes. 
The novelty of this work is to facilitate a personalized classiﬁcation or identiﬁca-
tion of abnormality in gait. In other words, classifying a person’s gait as normal or 
abnormal from a pool of gait samples belonging to different persons does not help 
in analyzing the degree of change in gait. Instead, performing an intra-volunteer gait 
pattern comparison will help to observe how one’s gait patterns change over a period 
of time. 
For instance, the heel strike and heel off features of one user are identiﬁed, the 
stride length is extracted and the stride time is computed. Further, the average change 
in stride times over each day is computed and changes are observed as shown in 
Fig. 16.7.
A smartphone app has been designed as explained in section “Measurement Plat-
form”. The interface of the app is shown in Fig. 16.8. The interface is self-explanatory. 
The stakeholder (orthopedic, physiotherapist) has given a list of his patients post log 
into the app. Once a particular patient is selected, his/her historical gait parameters 
are available. Further options include visualizing the sensor data along with the gait 
parameters extracted by the algorithm at the server.

278
A. J. Muley et al.
Fig. 16.7 As we can see, most of the deviations are negligible but due to limping the stride times 
increased. This can be observed between days 25–33. Such sudden but slow changes in stride time 
could indicate difﬁculty in walking which if noticed earlier could assist in an early diagnosis by the 
medical personnel
Fig. 16.8 Flow of the screen interface of GaitTracker, the mobile application

16
GaitTracker: A Digital Platform for Measuring, Detecting …
279
Conclusions 
This work presented a device that can provide personalized gait monitoring and 
detect sudden changes. The novelty of the work lies in packaging together a solution 
that is inexpensive, portable and easily usable. The device can be used at a clinic for 
regular checkups, where the digital records of each patient’s gait patterns are stored 
for diagnosis. The work is currently looking at predicting when and how much one’s 
gait could change if the current trend of abnormality is observed. With healthcare 
prediction being a positive trend, this device can play a vital role in the pre-diagnosis 
and diagnosis of gait irregularities. In future, this work can be extended to the device 
being worn on both the legs and the gait patterns being measured simultaneously so 
as to cover a broader scope of gait patterns. 
Acknowledgements We thank Abhi Ratnam, Arvind Jayanthi and Prakhar Agarwal for working 
on the development of the in-house wearable device used for the experiment. We also express our 
gratitude to Dr. Vivek Trivedi, the physio-therapist under whose supervision the experiment was 
carried out and the observations were studied. This work is funded by DA-IICT SEED fund under 
the project titled “WalkSense: Design and Development of a wearable device for abnormal gait 
detection”. 
References 
Bhosale T, Kudale H, Kumthekar V, Garude S, Dhumal P (2015) Gait analysis using wearable 
sensors. In: 2015 international conference on energy systems and applications, Oct 2015 
Chan H, Zheng H, Wang H, Sterritt R, Newell D (2013) Smart mobile phone based gait assessment of 
patients with low back pain. In: Ninth international conference on natural computation (ICNC), 
July 2013 
Cheng Q, Juen J, Li Y, Prieto-Centurion V, Krishnan JA, Schatz BR (2013) Gaittrack: health moni-
toring of body motion from spatio-temporal parameters of simple smart phones. In: Proceed-
ings of the international conference on bioinformatics, computational biology and biomedical 
informatics 
Cimolin V et al (2011) Effects of obesity and chronic low back pain on gait. J Neuro Eng Rehabil 
da Fonseca et al (2009) Laboratory gait analysis in patients with low back pain before and after a 
Pilates intervention. J Sport Rehabil 
Estévez-García R, Martín-Gutiérrez J, Mendoza SM, Marante JR, Chinea-Martín P, Soto-Martín O, 
Lodeiro-Santiago M (2015) Open data motion capture: Mocapull database. Procedia Comput 
Sci 75:316–326 
Gafurov D, Snekkenes E, Bours P (2007) Gait authentication and identiﬁcation using wear-
able accelerometer sensor. In: 2007 IEEE workshop on automatic identiﬁcation advanced 
technologies, June 2007 
Gait and knee problems (2023). http://www.sciencealert.com/gaits-reveal-knee-problems 
Godfrey A (2015) Instrumenting gait with an accelerometer: a system and algorithm examination. 
Med Eng Phys 37(4):400–407 
Kozlow P, Abid N, Yanushkevich S (2018) Gait type analysis using dynamic Bayesian networks. 
Sensors (Basel) 18(10) 
Kwapisz JR, Weiss GM, Moore SA (2011) Activity recognition using cell phone accelerometers. 
ACM SIGKDD Explor Newsl 12(2)

280
A. J. Muley et al.
Mazilu S et al (2014) Gaitassist: a wearable assistant for gait training and rehabilitation in 
Parkinson’s disease. In: IEEE international conference on pervasive computing and commu-
nication workshops (PERCOM WORKSHOPS), March 2014 
Nishiguchi S et al (2012) Reliability and validity of gait analysis by android-based smartphone. 
Telemed J e-health: Off J Am Telemed Assoc 18 
Pepa L, Verdini F, Spalazzi L (2015) Experimental evaluation of a smartphone based step length 
estimation. In: 37th annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine and 
biology society (EMBC), Aug 2015 
Perez AA, Labrador MA (2016) A smartphone-based system for clinical gait assessment. In: IEEE 
international conference on smart computing (SMARTCOMP) 
Roy S, Mandal S, Hanumaiah N (2016) Mems accelerometer: from engineering to medicine. IEEE 
Potentials 35(2):30–33 
Sasidhar K, Satyajeet S (2017) iknow how you walk—a smart- phone based personalized gait diag-
nosing system. In: 2017 international conference on advances in computing, communications 
and informatics (ICACCI). IEEE, pp 2063–2068 
Sant’Anna A, Wickstro¨ m N, Eklund H, Tranberg R (2012) A wearable gait analysis system using 
inertial sensors part II: Evaluation in a clinical setting. In: BIOSIGNALS 
Sun L, Zhang D, Li B, Guo B, Li S (2010) Activity recognition on an accelerometer embedded 
mobile phone with varying positions and orientations. In: Proceedings of the 7th international 
conference on ubiquitous intelligence and computing 
Yang J (2009) Toward physical activity diary: Motion recognition using simple acceleration features 
with mobile phones. In: ACM proceedings of the 1st international workshop on interactive 
multimedia for consumer electronics 
Yang C-C, Hsu Y-L (2010) A review of accelerometry-based wear-able motion detectors for physical 
activity monitoring. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) 
Zhong S, Wang L, Bernardos AM, Song M (2010) An accurate and adaptive pedometer integrated 
in mobile health application. In: IET international conference on wireless sensor network (iET-
WSN), Nov 2010

