172
Dirac Notation
As Dirac showed in his paper of 1928, the operators or matrices have the math-
ematical properties that γ 2
μ = 1 and, for μ ̸= ν, γμγν + γνγμ = 0. In fact, it
were these relations that led him to the equation. Dirac had not originally thought of
 spin, but discovered that his equation was able to account for the electron’s mag-
netic moment, hence its spin. When it turned out that the equation provided a full
explanation of the hydrogen spectrum ( spectroscopy), including the ﬁne-structure
components, it was quickly accepted by the physics community as the fundamental
equation for the electron and presumably also the proton. Only after World War II,
with the discovery of the Lamb shift, was it shown that the predictions from Dirac’s
theory disagree slightly with the measured spectrum.
Dirac’s relativistic equation led to serious conceptual difﬁculties, principally be-
cause the wave function has four components rather than the two corresponding to
the electron’s spin states. Its solutions seemingly referred to electrons with negative
energy – entities with no physical meaning. The so-called “±-difﬁculty” was turned
into a success with Dirac’s theory of the anti-electron (and other anti-particles)
which he developed 1929–31. According to Dirac’s theory of 1931, two of the four
components of the  wave function referred to an electron with positive electrical
charge, soon to be known as a positron. When the positron was detected in cosmic-
ray experiments 1932–33, it was considered a great triumph of the Dirac equation.
In 1995 a plaque was unveiled in Westminster Abbey, commemorating Dirac. It
contains a version of the Dirac wave equation in the compact form iγ · ∂ψ = mψ.
Primary Literature
1. P. A. M. Dirac: The Quantum Theory of the Electron. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London A 117, 610–624; A 118, 351–361 (1928)
2. P. A. M. Dirac: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Clarendon, Oxford 1930)
Secondary Literature
3. H. Kragh: Dirac. A Scientiﬁc Biography (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1990)
4. J. Mehra, H. Rechenberg: The Historical Development of Quantum Theory. (Springer, New York
2000, Vol. 6, Part 1)
Dirac Notation
Roderich Tumulka
The “bra”-and-“ket” notation (introduced by Dirac) uses the symbols |ψ⟩and ⟨ψ|
for vectors in and linear forms on  Hilbert space.

Dirac Notation
173
D
In this notation, if ψ is a vector in Hilbert space H then |ψ⟩is just another
notation for ψ, and ⟨ψ| means the mapping φ →⟨ψ|φ⟩, a linear form H →C
deﬁned using the scalar product ⟨·|·⟩of H . Turning |ψ⟩into ⟨ψ| is a conjugate-
linear operation: ⟨φ + ψ| = ⟨φ| + ⟨ψ| and ⟨zψ| = z∗⟨ψ| for z ∈C.
Linear forms are also called co-vectors, and the set of all linear forms is called
the dual space. Thus, ⟨ψ| is the co-vector naturally associated with the vector ψ.
The difference between vectors and co-vectors is basically the same as the differ-
ence between a column and a row in matrix theory (linear algebra), or between the
contravariant components uμ and the covariant components uμ of a 4-vector in rel-
ativity theory. The Riesz lemma of functional analysis implies that every continuous
linear form H →C (only the continuous ones are usually considered) is of the
form φ →⟨ψ|φ⟩for a suitable ψ ∈H ; as a consequence, there is a one-to-one
correspondence between vectors and (continuous) co-vectors, and H is, up to com-
plex conjugation, its own continuous dual space.
As the notation suggests, the scalar product ⟨φ|ψ⟩is the same as the linear form
⟨φ| applied to the vector |ψ⟩. That is why Dirac called ⟨φ| a “bra” vector and |ψ⟩
a “ket” vector: bra + ket = bracket; that is, when written one after the other, they
form the scalar product. When written in the opposite order, |ψ⟩⟨φ|, they form not
a number but an operator |χ⟩→|ψ⟩⟨φ|χ⟩. In particular, if ∥ψ∥= 1 then |ψ⟩⟨ψ|
is the projection to the 1-dimensional subspace spanned by ψ. Moreover, if T is an
operator then ⟨φ|T |ψ⟩means the same as ⟨φ|T ψ⟩or ⟨T ∗φ|ψ⟩.
The Dirac notation has another advantage: If some vectors ψn are indexed by
some index n then one can write |n⟩instead of |ψn⟩, provided there is no dan-
ger of misunderstanding. For example, an  orthonormal basis can be denoted
|1⟩, |2⟩, |3⟩, . . ., so that the matrix elements of an operator T can be written as
Tnm = ⟨n|T |m⟩, the identity operator as
I =

n
|n⟩⟨n| ,
(1)
and the orthonormality relation as
⟨n|m⟩= δnm .
(2)
An extension of the  Dirac equation concerns generalized orthonormal bases
(such as the position basis in quantum mechanics), which consist of a unitary iso-
morphism H →L2() and thus permits us to write every vector ψ ∈H as a
square-integrable function ψ(q) on some set  (such as  = R3N), whereas an
 orthonormal basis in the ordinary sense permits us to write a vector ψ ∈H as a
sequence ⟨1|ψ⟩, ⟨2|ψ⟩, . . . of numbers, the components of ψ. The extended  Dirac
notation introduces the symbol |q⟩as if the generalized basis was an ordinary basis,
and to treat this symbol as if it denoted a vector in H . (In quantum mechanics, in
fact, |q⟩of the position basis represents the Dirac delta function δ(· −q), which is
not a square-integrable function and thus does not belong to H ; similarly, the kets
of the momentum basis |k⟩represent the non-normalizable functions x →eikx.)

174
Double-Slit Experiment (or Two-Slit Experiment)
Thus, one writes
ψ(q) = ⟨q|ψ⟩,
(3)
while the orthonormality relation can be expressed as
⟨q|q′⟩= δ(q −q′) ,
(4)
and the identity operator as
I =

|q⟩⟨q| dq .
(5)
See also the contributions on  Rigged Hilbert Spaces.
Double-Slit Experiment (or Two-Slit
Experiment)
Gregg Jaeger
The phenomenon of interference arises in both classical and quantum physics. In
everyday life, more general interference effects can be seen, for example, patterns
formed on the surface of a body of water when the wakes of two passing ships
merge and pass through each other. Mathematically, this effect is due to the addi-
tion of corresponding physical quantities, such as wave height in the case of surface
waves on water, to produce modulated patterns. These patterns can be made to ex-
hibit clear regularities, particularly in simple situations. This effect has most often
been studied by passing light through a pair of slits in a diaphragm, due in particular
to an inﬂuential experiment in the early nineteenth century performed by Thomas
Young [4] in which a double-slitted screen was used to produce an interference pat-
tern. This pattern was readily explained in terms of classical light beams as waves
traveling in the classical electromagnetic ﬁeld. However, there are important differ-
ences between quantum interference and the more familiar effect of interference in
classical physics. In particular, in quantum mechanical situations there are complex
amplitudes, which therefore mathematically involve a phase contribution, that add,
giving rise to characteristically quantum behavior, rather than real-valued intensi-
ties which are sometimes also referred to as amplitudes which add as in the case
of water waves. It is important, from the ontological perspective, to recognize that
quantum mechanical quantities do not directly describe substances, unlike in the
classical ether theory of Christiaan Huygens, for example.
At the time of its appearance, the double-slit experiment of Young was under-
stood to resolve a long-running debate regarding the nature of light as to whether
light is best understood as composed of waves or composed of particles. Robert
Hooke, in his book Micrographia [1] of 1665, had initially suggested that light

