Wave-Particle Duality: A Modern View
835
W
Primary Literature
1. Aristotle: De anima, 418–419
2. I. Newton: Opticks. A brief preliminary version (Moxon, London 1670) caused so much ran-
corous contention with Robert Hooke that Newton withheld publication to (Smith and Walford,
London 1704) after Hooke’s death. With important later additions, the prime source is the 4th
edn. of 1730 readily available (Dover, New York 1979)
3. Th. Young: Bakerian lecture: Experiments and calculations relative to physical optics. Royal
Society of London Philosophical Transactions 94, 1–16 (1804)
4. Th. Young: Course of lectures on natural philosophy (Johnson, London 1807, Vol. 1, on hydro-
dynamics p. 290; on sound pp. 389–96; on light pp. 464ff; the double-slit is plate XX, ﬁgure
267). The remarkable Baconian encyclopaedic approach of the man can be divined merely by
reading his short introduction and analytical table of contents
5. A. Fresnel: Oeuvres completes (ed. Verdet Paris: Imp. imp., 1866 vol. 1, 9–33; 89–122*; 129–
170). *This appeared in Annales de chemie et physique 1, 239–81 (1816); all were published
in the Comptes rendus of the Academie, but not until after Fresnel was elected a member in
1823, four years before his death from tuberculosis
Secondary Literature
6. S. Bofﬁ, M. D’Anna: Le radici del dualismo onda-corpuscolo (Bibliopolis, Napoli 1999)
7. R. McCormmach: J. J. Thomson and the structure of light. British Journal of the History of
Science 3, 362–387 (1967)
8. J. C. Poggendorff: ¨Uber den relativen Werth der beiden Lichttheorien. Ann Pk, 28, 381–383
(1833). Footnote to article by Brewster
9. P. Rowland: Waves versus corpuscles – The revolution that never was (PD, Liverpool 1992)
10. B. R. Wheaton: The tiger and the shark – Empirical roots of wave-particle dualism (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 1983) An extensive literature exists on history of optics and light
by inter alia: Buchwald, Cantor, Lindberg, Ronchi, Sabra, Shapiro
Wave-Particle Duality: A Modern View
Bruce R. Wheaton
Our understanding of light is the result of dispute since the scientiﬁc revolution of
the 17th century. Students of physics today are taught “wave-particle duality”: belief
based on otherwise conﬂicting experiments that electromagnetic radiation is a peri-
odic wave that, at high frequencies, exhibits increasingly localized concentration of
energy. It is a wave with particle characteristics: something akin to energy that under
some circumstances exhibits interference like periodic waves, and under others acts
like a stream of bullets.

836
Wave-Particle Duality: A Modern View
In optics, Newton’s corpuscular theory (CT) of light was later challenged by a
purely periodic undulatory theory (UT) espoused by Young and Fresnel. With the
discovery in 1895 of  x-rays, the then accepted UT came under new attack, particu-
larly in their now-measurable electrical effect on gases. J. J. Thomson, was alarmed
that light, like x-rays, seemed to ionize precious few of the atoms it encountered.
Were either a UT product propagating spherically, more atoms should be ionized
than he could ﬁnd. He suggested light itself might be “directed radiation” sometimes
called “needle rays,” and began to wonder around 1909 whether very weak light
would still show classical  double-slit experiment. The experiment, performed by
Geoffrey Taylor with yellow light of such low intensity the photographic exposure
took a week, nonetheless produced the classic pattern of fringes.
It seemed that only evidence for interference of x-rays would clear up the mat-
ter and decide in favor of the UT, but it was not to be. Walther Friedrich & Paul
Knipping’s claim to ﬁnd x-ray crystal interference in 1912 coincided with the aban-
donment of the last classical attempt to explain the optical  photoelectric effect.
On the one hand 1912 brought the UT into greater coherence with x-rays. On the
other it forced acceptance of the new quantum transformation relation (QTR) on the
absorption of light by metals; that is, of Einstein’s widely-rejected  light-quantum
from 1905.
It was one thing to claim that light is emitted in quantum units, but an entirely
different matter to understand how it could possibly be absorbed only in quanta.
How does an atom ‘know’ that it has absorbed enough UT light? It seemed impos-
sible, but Einstein might be right that light is in some way corpuscular. What tipped
the balance in the early 1920s also came from  x-rays. When they ionize a gas,
 electrons are released. But two paradoxes had been found in this process. ( Er-
rors and paradoxes in quantum mechanics). If x-rays are spherically propagating
electromagnetic effects, they spread their effect over increasingly larger spherical
shells centered on their point of production. If there is enough energy at any point
in a shell to ionize an atom, all atoms at that distance should be ionized, yet too few
electrons were being found: a paradox of “quantity.” The ones released should only
receive 1/4πd3 the total energy in the shell at distance d, yet those few electrons
had far too much kinetic energy: a paradox of “quality.”
Clearly the  light-quantum could no longer be ignored. The most inﬂuential
experiments were done on generalized x-ray scattering results in the U.S. by Arthur
Compton ( Compton effect), on the x-ray  photoeffect in France by Maurice de
Broglie, and on similar γ -ray phenomena in Britain by Charles Drummond Ellis
(1895–1980). In all cases the corpuscular behavior of electromagnetic radiation
prevailed: see  matter waves.
In 1928 Werner Heisenberg reconciled and codiﬁed the incommensurability in-
herent in the new quantum mechanics in the form of his “indeterminacy principle”
 Heisenberg uncertainty relations. Although he formulated it to rationalize the
non-commuting properties necessitated by his  matrix mechanics, in its most
fundamental form regarding position and momentum it speaks directly to wave-
particle duality. To be monochromatic, a wave must extend to inﬁnity. When
interpreted as a probability, such a  wave function spreads the likelihood of ﬁnding

Wave-Particle Duality: A Modern View
837
W
the associated particle also over inﬁnite dimension. Correspondingly, if the position
of, say, an electron is precisely ﬁxed by experiment, its  wave packet is con-
strained to a small spatial dimension, and the Fourier expansion of such a small
‘wavelet’ leaves its frequency indeterminate. L. De Broglie’s  matter-wave me-
chanics relationship λ = h/p ﬁxes the momentum of the electron to that frequency,
so xp ∼h as Heisenberg’s principle requires.
These considerations were most troubling to atom-architect Niels Bohr, whose
adherence to classical principles was as rock beneath his physics. He rationalized
the wave-particle divide in a tribute to Volta in 1927 as characteristic of different,
co-existing physical systems that “complement” one another at their intersection.
Others, like Einstein, would not go even that far and rejected the anti-deterministic
consequences required by the new quantum mechanics. A series of objections
followed over the years:  Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox; Bohm’s qualitative
 hidden variables; L. de Broglie’s theory of the double-solution; all intended
(without success) to show that determinism persists, perhaps only hidden to human
perception, and that wave-particle duality is a chimera. In 1964 John Bell quantiﬁed
Bohm’s hidden variable hypothesis, showing that were measurement of the state of
one particle formerly entangled with that of another to ﬁx that of the other before
its measurement, certain Bell inequalities, must hold. ( Bell’s theorem). Careful
experiments on correlated  spin determinations of parts of former molecules, and
on locations of formerly associated photons ( light quantum) failed to exhibit those
inequalities, hence corroborating the orthodox quantum mechanical view.
The latter prescient example is double-slit interference, like Young showed to be
true for light. (See part 1 supra.) If it were possible, without disturbing the interfer-
ence pattern, simultaneously to determine through which slit the “particle” traveled,
the thrust of Heisenberg’s principle could be parried. Einstein proposed a double-slit
thought experiment in which the recoil of the slits themselves might signal which
was penetrated, and it was promptly challenged by Bohr, acting to defend what
came to be called the “Copenhagen interpretation.”  Born rule; Consistent His-
tories; Metaphysics in Quantum Mechanics; Nonlocality; Orthodox Interpretation;
Schr¨odinger’s Cat; Transactional Interpretation.
From the 1927–8 electron crystal scattering results by Davisson (USA) and G.
Thomson (UK) right up to the 1960s, classical double-slit interference of electrons
remained in the “Gedankenexperiment” realm. Then J¨onsson in T¨ubingen found a
clever means to produce slit masks of unprecedented minuteness (ca 1 μ). Figure 1
shows the result for double-slit interference of an electron beam, the ﬁrst direct
corroboration that the Young result still obtains.
These considerations have led more recently to attempts to determine which aper-
ture an electron has passed through without disturbing the wave interference pattern
that results. Bohr had argued persuasively that, according to his  correspondence
principle, this was not possible, even after Einstein posited his recoiling slit thought
experiment to do so. However with recent development of micromasers, a proposal
(Scully et al. 1991) to detect “which way” (which slit) an excited rubidium atom
(85Rb) passes through a system of micromaser cavities might answer: one of the two
masers will detect an emitted microwave photon and leave which-way information,

838
Wave-Particle Duality: A Modern View
Fig. 1 Electron-optical
two-slit interference. Source:
Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 155
(1959), 427–74
see Fig. 2. ( Which-way experiments). On this view, the non-interference pattern
expected by Bohr is the  superposition of two identical interference patterns 180◦
(λ/2) apart in phase: one due to photons whose “which way” slit is determined,
the other caused by those whose “which way” information is not determined. Ac-
cording to the experimenters it is due to ‘the correlation of the centre-of-mass wave
function to the photon degrees of freedom in the cavities that is responsible for the
loss of interference.’ [10, p. 114]
More recently, reﬁned experiments resulted in a curious inversion of the Braggs’
classic 1913 research program to determine material crystal structure using inci-
dent x-rays. In 1998 excited rubidium atoms were projected onto a “lattice” of
standing-beam light-waves. [4] When a second quantum system was added to the
microwave interferometer it was able to store pathway information in the atom beam
with the result that the interference pattern disappeared. While the effect appeared
to be below the Heisenberg threshold, the conclusion was that it was due to cor-
relations (an environmental form of  “entanglement”) between the microwave
detector and quantum-kinetic motion within the rubidium beam itself. These possi-
bilities have naturally led to controversy, raising the interesting question of whether
 complementarity trumps indeterminacy ( Heisenberg’s uncertainty relation),
and ﬁnal conclusions remain, if at all, in the future.

Wave-Particle Duality: A Modern View
839
W
collimators
micromasers
cavity 1
shutters
detector
wall
cavity 2
laser
beam
plane
atom
wave
R
screen with
eraser
photon?
no
yes
without
interference fringes
a
b
Fig. 2 Quantum erasure conﬁguration. Source: Nature 351(1991), 115. Reprinted by permission
of Nature Magazine
Primary Literature
1. N. Bohr: Das Quantenpostulat und die neuere Entwicklung der Atomistik. Die Naturwis-
senschaften 16, 245–57 (1928)
2. M. de Broglie: La relation hν = ε dans les ph´enom`enes photo´electriques. Atomes et ´electrons
(Gauthier, Paris 1923, 80–100)
3. L. de Broglie: Th`eses. Recherches sur la th´eorie des quanta (Masson, Paris 1924)
4. S. D¨urr, T. Nonn, G. Rempe: Origin of quantum-mechanical complementarity probed by
‘which-way’ experiment in an atom interferometer. Nature 395, 33–7 (1998)
5. C. J¨onsson: Elektroneninterferenzen an mehreren k¨unstlich herstellten Feinspalten. Zeitschrift
f¨ur Physik 161, 454–74 (1961); English translation in part in Am. Jl physics, 42, 4–11 (1974)
Secondary Literature
6. S. Bofﬁ, M. D’Anna: Le radici del dualismo onda-corpuscolo (Bibliopolis, Napoli 1999)
7. H. Carmichael: Quantum ﬂuctuations of light: A modern perspective on wave/particle duality.
J. Evans, A. Thorndike, eds.: Quantum mechanics at the crossroads (Springer, Heidelberg 2006,
183–212)
8. W. Heisenberg: Die Entwicklung der Quantentheorie, 1918–1928. Die Naturwissenschaften
17, 490–6 (1929)
9. M. Klein: Einstein and the wave-particle duality. Natural philosopher 3, 3–49 (1964)
10. M. Scully, B. Englert, H. Walther: Quantum optical tests of complementarity. Nature 351,
111–6 (1991)
11. B. R. Wheaton: The Tiger and the Shark – Empirical roots of wave-particle dualism (Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge 1983)

840
Weak Value and Weak Measurements
12. B. R. Wheaton: Atomic waves in private practice. J. Evans, A. Thorndike, eds.: Quantum
mechanics at the crossroads (Springer, Heidelberg 2006, 39–71)
13. B. Falkenburg: Wave-particle duality, in B. Falkenburg: Particle metaphysics: A critical account
of subatomic reality (Springer, Berlin 2007, 265–316)
Weak Value and Weak Measurements
Lev Vaidman
The weak value of a variable O is a description of an effective interaction with that
variable in the limit of weak coupling. For a pre- and post-selected system described
at time t by the two-state vector ⟨| |⟩[1], the weak value is [2]:
Ow ≡⟨|O|⟩
⟨|⟩.
(1)
Contrary to classical physics, variables in quantum mechanics might not have
deﬁnite values at a given time. In the complete description of a usual (pre-selected)
quantum system, the state |⟩yields probabilities pi for various outcomes oi of (an
ideal) measurement of the variable O. Numerous measurements on an  ensemble
of identical systems yield an average – expectation value of O:
 pioi. Since
pi = |⟨O = oi |⟩|2, the expectation value can be expressed as ⟨|O|⟩. If the
coupling to the measuring device is very small, this expression is related directly
to the response of the measuring device, and the measurement does not reveal the
eigenvalues oi and their probabilities pi. Speciﬁcally, ⟨|O|⟩is the shift of the
quantum state of the pointer variable of the measuring device, which, otherwise, is
not distorted signiﬁcantly due to the measurement interaction.
For pre- and post-selected quantum system, the response of the measuring device
or any other system coupled weakly to the variable O, is the shift of the quantum
state by the weak value (1). The coupling can be modeled by the von Neumann
measurement interaction
H = g(t)PO,
(2)
where g(t) deﬁnes the time of the interaction,

g(t) = 1, and P is conjugate
to the pointer variable Q. The weakness of the interaction is achieved by choos-
ing the  wave function of the measuring device so that P is small. Small value
of P requires also a small uncertainty in P, and thus a large uncertainty of the
pointer variable Q in the initial state and consequently, a large uncertainty in the
measurement. Therefore, usually, we need a large ensemble of identical pre- and
post-selected quantum systems in order to measure the weak value.
For rare post-selection, when |⟨|⟩| ≪1, the weak value (1) might be far
away from the range of the eigenvalues of O, so it clearly has no statistical meaning

