394
Modal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
Modal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
Meir Hemmo
Modal interpretations seek to solve the measurement problem within no collapse
quantum mechanics and to account for the nonlocal  correlations in quantum me-
chanics in EPR- and Bell-type scenarios in a way that might be compatible with
special relativity. Various modal interpretations have been proposed, from the mid
1970s onwards, by Van Fraassen [1, 2], Kochen [3], Healey [4], Dieks [5], Bub [6],
and others. These versions are quite different from each other. We present below
some of their main, and in some cases shared, features.
Consider the scheme of a generic measurement of the z-spin of a spin half parti-
cle. Suppose that the composite system, particle plus pointer, is initially prepared at
t = 0 in the state
|0⟩=
%
α|−z⟩+ β|+z⟩
&
⊗|ψ0⟩,
(1)
where |α|2 + |β|2 = 1 and we assume that α ̸= β. Here the |±z⟩are the z-spin
eigenstates and |ψ0⟩is the ready state of the pointer. Suppose that the interaction
correlates, respectively, the |±z⟩states with the eigenstates |ψ±⟩of the pointer
observable. We assume that the time evolution is described by the  Schr¨odinger
equation alone, i. e. there is no collapse of the state, as modal interpretations require.
This means that the interaction maps the initial state at t = 0 to the superposition at
the ﬁnal time t = 1:
|1⟩= α|+z⟩⊗|ψ+⟩+ β|−z⟩⊗|ψ−⟩,
(2)
in which there is a one-to-one correlation between the  spin states |±z⟩and the
pointer states |ψ±⟩. But due to the entanglement in (2) one can only assign reduced
states to the particle and to the pointer which are quantum mechanically mixed:
ρ1 = α2|+z⟩⟨+z| + β2|−z⟩⟨−z|
ρ2 = α2|ψ+⟩⟨ψ+| + β2|ψ−⟩⟨ψ−|.
(3)
This is the scenario in which the measurement problem (or  Schr¨odinger’s cat
paradox) arises in standard quantum mechanics. See also  Bohmian mechanics;
Measurement theory; Metaphysics in Quantum Mechanics; Objectiﬁcation; Pro-
jection Postulate. On the standard theory, an observable is assigned one of its
eigenvalues if and only if the system is in the corresponding eigenstate (this is some-
times called the eigenstate-eigenvalue link). And so, if (2) were the ﬁnal state after
the measurement, the pointer observable (and also the z-spin) would have no deﬁ-
nite value, and so the measurement would have no deﬁnite outcome. To solve this
problem, the so-called  projection postulate or the collapse of the state in measure-
ment is introduced in the standard theory: that is, the state (2) collapses onto one of

Modal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
395
M
its components |+z⟩⊗|ψ+⟩or |−z⟩⊗|ψ−⟩with respective probabilities |α|2 or |β|2
as given by the  Born rule.
Assuming that quantum states don’t collapse in measurement, how could we
understand the state (2) and the quantum mechanical probabilities for collapses in a
way that is consistent with our experience of deﬁnite pointer readings? Van Fraassen
[1, 2] observed that any decomposition of the  mixed state of, say, the pointer in
the post-measurement state (2) can be interpreted as describing a set of what he
calls possible value states of the pointer. The quantum mechanical (Born) proba-
bility can then be understood, not as describing the effects of collapses as in the
standard theory, but rather as describing our ignorance with respect to the actual
value state of the pointer when it is in the mixed state (3) generated by (2). By this
Van Fraassen in fact rejects the standard interpretation of quantum states via the
eigenstate-eigenvalue link (in fact, only its ‘only if’ direction). On his proposal, the
quantum state doesn’t ﬁx (with probability one) the value state of the pointer, nor
does it completely determine the set of the possible value states. The quantum state
has a dynamical role (and is called dynamical state) in generating the probabilities
over the possible value states and in restricting the possible sets of values states (in
future interactions). But of course this latter restriction is not enough since a mixed
state is not uniquely decomposable as a mixture of pure states ( states, pure and
mixed) (with an ignorance interpretation of the probabilities) and moreover not all
decompositions of, say the pointer’s mixed state can be possible at the same time,
on pain of a Kochen-Specker contradiction. And so the question in Van Fraassen’s
approach is which amongst all the possible sets of value states allowed by the quan-
tum state correspond to the actual circumstances in our world (this is the origin of
the term modal interpretation.) Van Fraassen’s proposes various conditions to this
effect in what he calls the Copenhagen Variant of the modal interpretation (see [2]).
Kochen [3] proposed an interpretation which can be seen as a more restric-
tive modal interpretation than Van Fraassen’s (Kochen doesn’t refer to his view as
modal). On his proposal the sets of the possible properties of the particle and of the
pointer in our example are determined by the quantum state (2) as follows. Accord-
ing to the biorthogonal decomposition theorem (for proof see [7,8]), the expansion
in which the state (2) is written in terms of the biorthogonal bases states, |±z⟩and
|ψ±⟩on the factor spaces, always exists and is unique whenever the coefﬁcients
are not equal. So we can consider the biorthogonal expansion in (2) as depicting
uniquely the sets of the possible properties (or value states) of the pointer and of the
particle together with the quantum mechanical probability distribution over these
properties. (Degenerate cases of equal probabilities might be treated as unphysical
having ‘measure zero’.) And as in Van Fraassen’s approach we can interpret the
quantum probabilities as reﬂecting ignorance about the values actually possessed
by the particle and the pointer without collapsing the state (2). Kochen developed a
relational view which is meant to justify the choice of the biorthogonal expansion
of (2) as somehow preferred by relying on the symmetry of this expansion. He calls
this symmetric relation witnessing.
The idea that the biorthogonal expansion of states like (2) has a distinguished
physical role in depicting the actual value states of quantum systems has been

396
Modal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
developed in great detail with an explicit realistic interpretation of quantum me-
chanics by Healey [4] and Dieks [5] (with interesting insights and differences). In
Healey’s approach the biorthogonal expansion plays an important role in assign-
ing properties that are in general holistic (i.e. properties that are not inherited from
the properties of the subsystems; see below) to composite systems. For example,
if we add the description of the pointer’s interaction with the environment in our
measurement scheme above, the ﬁnal state will be:
|2⟩= α|+z⟩⊗|ψ+⟩⊗|E+⟩+ β|−z⟩⊗|ψ−⟩⊗|E−⟩,
(4)
where the environment states |E±⟩relative to the pointer states |ψ±⟩become very
quickly approximately orthogonal for almost any initial state of the environment
(this is one feature of environmental  decoherence, see [9]). And now Healey
assigns properties via Kochen’s prescription to any bi-partition of the three subsys-
tems, e. g. particle + pointer and environment, pointer and particle + environment,
etc., where the holistic properties of composite systems are assigned to the
composites independently of the properties of the subsystems that make them up.
For example, in the state (4) the composite properties of, say the particle + pointer
turn out to be close (in inner product) to the products of the properties of the particle
and of the pointer alone (this is due to the decoherence of the pointer), whereas the
property of the total system particle+pointer+environmentwhich is just their quan-
tum state isn’t even nearly a product property. In Healey’s approach such properties
play an essential role in accounting for EPR- and Bell-type  nonlocality.
Vermaas and Dieks [10] generalised Kochen’s prescription by adopting a rule
that prefers the spectral (or diagonal) decomposition of the reduced density opera-
tors corresponding to quantum mechanically mixed states. The spectral resolution
of a  density operator always exists and is unique by the spectral theorem (because
density operators are self-adjoint; see any textbook on functional analysis). And this
means that every system can be assigned value states directly via its quantum state,
so that one need not rely on the quite restrictive bi-partition form of the biorthogonal
expansion. And moreover, Kochen’s prescription turns out to be a special case of the
spectral theorem for a composite of two systems in a pure state. This can be seen
in our example above, where the reduced states in (3) of the pointer and of the par-
ticle are already written in their spectral form. But the Vermaas–Dieks prescription
can be applied also in the triple case above in state (4) in order to assign properties
directly to the three subsystems. Under certain idealized assumptions about the in-
teraction with the environment, the properties assigned to the pointer via the spectral
resolution of its reduced state will be close to the pointer states in (3) in correspon-
dence with our experience. And in this sense the Vermaas–Dieks prescription (as
well as Kochen’s) turns out to be empirically adequate. But again, this is not the
most general case (see below).
In standard quantum mechanics spectral and biorthogonal decompositions don’t
seem to have the special role assigned to them in modal approaches (as ‘markers’
of properties). And so it is natural to ask in this context what is special from a
physical point of view about these choices. Of course, as we just mentioned, the

Modal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
397
M
question might turn out to bear on empirical considerations, and indeed we shall
come back to it shortly. (For various attempts to justify these rules, see Baccia-
galuppi [8], Dieks and Vermaas [11], Healey and Hellman [12], Bub [6], Vermaas
[13] Ruetsche [14] and Bub and Clifton [15], and references therein.) But it is impor-
tant to note that what characterises modal approaches is not some particular choice
of value states but rather that some such choice is made (sometimes under certain
conditions), and that the quantum mechanical probability distribution has nothing
to do with collapses but rather expresses ignorance about the actual value states. In-
deed, there are other modal approaches with entirely different ways of deﬁning the
value states. For example, in Bub’s approach [6] the value states are assigned only
to macroscopic systems that interact with their environment, and they correspond
to  observables that commute with the decoherence Hamiltonian. In our exam-
ple above, this means that only the pointer is assigned extra value states, and these
will be, by construction, the |ψ±⟩(since the pointer observable commutes with the
decoherence Hamiltonian). This idea has been also developed by Hemmo [16,17]
and applied to the  consistent histories approach. In yet other versions the value
states are selected by entropy minimisation (Spekkens and Sipe [18]), or in various
relational ways (Bene and Dieks [19], Berkovitz and Hemmo [20]).
It is clear that modal interpretations solve the measurement problem for ideal
measurements which have ﬁnal states like (2), since for example, the reduced state
of the pointer (taken by partial tracing) is diagonal in the pointer basis as can be seen
from (3). However, the measurement problem immediately re-appears if we relax
idealizations and allow for imperfect correlations and disturbances in the measure-
ment interaction. It has been noticed by Albert and Loewer [21] that for nearly
degenerate initial states (e. g. states in which α and β in (1) are almost equal) slight
imperfections in the measurement are enough to make the ﬁnal state of the pointer
not even nearly diagonal in the pointer basis. And this just means in modal inter-
pretations that the measurement has no determinate pointer readings. Bacciagaluppi
and Hemmo [22] showed that the problem might be avoided if one takes into account
the decoherence interaction of the pointer with the environment as in (4), but, again,
only under certain idealizations, this time on the decoherence interaction. It has been
shown by Bacciagaluppi [23] that in continuous models of decoherence (with posi-
tion being the pointer observable) it is the continuous nature of the interaction with
the environment itself which seems to result in extreme near  degeneracy. And
under these circumstances the modal recipe seems to break down, since it picks out
delocalised  wave functions for the pointer. Obviously, this result strongly under-
mines modal interpretations in the versions sketched above. For more details on this
problem, see Bacciagaluppi [8], Hemmo [16], Bub [6], Dieks and Vermaas [11],
Healey and Hellman [12] and Vermaas [13] and references therein. Similar prob-
lems arise in the attempts to generalise these versions to quantum ﬁeld theory (see
Dieks [24], Butterﬁeld and Halvorson [25] and for criticism Earman and Reutche
[26]). Other versions of the modal interpretation, for example, versions relying on
decoherence (Bub [6], Hemmo [17]) and the relational versions (Bene and Dieks
[19], Berkovitz and Hemmo [20]) are unaffected by this problem.

398
Modal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
Another consequence of modal interpretations is that composite systems do
not inherit their properties from their subsystems (this is sometimes called fail-
ure of property composition). Although, as we said, for macroscopic systems in
decoherence situations (as in (4)) property composition can be recovered, in general
the properties assigned to a composite system are not products of the properties of
its subsystems, in fact they do not generally have the form of product properties at
all. It has been shown by Bacciagaluppi [27] and Clifton [28] that the introduction
of property composition (together with the fact that the  Hilbert space of com-
posite systems can be factorised into factor spaces in many different ways) leads
to a Kochen-Specker contradiction. Therefore, properties in different factorisations
cannot be pasted together (see also Butterﬁeld and Halvorson [25]). This problem
prompted the so-called atomic modal interpretation (Bacciagaluppi and Dickson
[29]) in which the above rules are applied only to a class of fundamental atomic
systems, whereas composites of atomic systems inherit their properties from their
subsystems by composition.
We saw up to now that in modal interpretations the complete physical state of a
system is given by a pair of states at each time: the generally mixed quantum state
and the actual value state of the system. The time evolution of the quantum state of
a system is ﬁxed deterministically by the Schr¨odinger evolution of the state of the
total system. And this evolution is supposed to generate an ignorance probability
distribution over the value states at all times. But, there seems to be no connection
between the evolution of the quantum state of the system and the value states that
actually obtain at a time. The problem arises already in our simple example above.
The particle has a spin + value in some direction at t = 0 in state (1), and by the
modal recipe, it has a +z or −z value at t = 1 in state (2). We know that state (1)
evolves to state (2) by the Schr¨odinger equation. But this evolution doesn’t explain
what is it that brings about the +z or −z value at t = 1. In standard quantum me-
chanics the connection between the quantum state and the outcomes we observe is
made by the collapse postulate and the Born rule. But here we don’t know whether
and how the value state at t = 1 depends on the value state at t = 0. It seems that
in the modal recipe some connection of this sort is missing. And obviously the fact
that the probability distribution over the value states is given by the quantum proba-
bilities is in equal need of explanation: given that the probabilities reﬂect ignorance,
why are they distributed in accordance with Born’s rule?
Following Bell’s [30] stochastic dynamics for hidden variable theories, Baccia-
galuppi and Dickson [29] proposed a class of general dynamics for the value states
that answers these questions. According to their proposal modal interpretations are
in fact hidden variable theories where the dynamics of the value states is in general
stochastic, and it yields the quantum probability distribution over the value states
at any given time, just as desired. Bacciagaluppi, Donald and Vermaas [31] have
further shown that the evolution of value states can be naturally deﬁned to follow
a continuous path in Hilbert space. These two results have more or less solved the
problem of dynamics for modal interpretations in the spectral resolution versions.
An alternative view which relies on sets of decoherent histories and their probabil-
ities has been proposed by Hemmo [17]. An explicitly nonlocal dynamics which

Modal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
399
M
depends on the measure of  entanglement of the state of a system has been pro-
posed by Berkovitz and Hemmo [20] in the context of relativity theory.
Modal interpretations reproduce the quantum mechanical correlations in EPR
and Bell-type experiments, and so they are nonlocal in Bell’s sense, just like stan-
dard quantum mechanics. But are they consistent with relativity theory, in the sense
that they satisfy relativistic (Lorentz) invariance? In this context no-go theorems
have been proved by Dickson and Clifton [32], Arntzenius [33] and Myrvold [34]
given some locality conditions on the dynamics of the properties and certain mesh-
ing conditions on their assignment by all Lorentz frames. Dickson and Clifton
require local properties of spacelike separated systems in Bell-type situations to
evolve under local dynamical laws. If no measurements are carried out, a condition
they call stability requires the properties to evolve deterministically. If measure-
ments are carried out the local transition probabilities are determined by the local
reduced state of each system, such that all Lorentz frames agree on the local tran-
sition probabilities (this is called invariant transition probabilities). They show that
modal interpretations with such local dynamics are committed to Bell-type inequal-
ities, and therefore cannot reproduce the quantum mechanical predictions.
Myrvold arrived at a similar result by considering four intersecting hyperplanes
in Minkowsky spacetime, also in a Bell-type situation. The joint probabilities of
the properties of spatially separated systems at the regions of intersection of the
hyperplanes are just the Born probabilities, as determined by the quantum state
on each hyperplane. Myrvold then argues that relativistic invariance requires that
these joint probabilities be mutually consistent. And he shows, on the assumption
that the dynamics of the properties satisﬁes a certain locality condition (roughly,
that local properties remain invariant under transformations that leave the reduced
state of the system unchanged), that this is impossible for some quantum states and
evolutions. This is again, a Bell-type scenario: given a locality condition (on the dy-
namics), there is no joint probability distribution over the properties, which yields
as marginals the quantum mechanical predictions on all hyperplanes.
The dynamics by Bacciagaluppi and Dickson [29] is local in the above sense, and
therefore seems to be ruled out by the no-go theorems. Berokovitz and Hemmo [20]
proposed a nonlocal dynamics which gets around the no-go theorems, but in which
the value states and the transition probabilities turn out to be hyperplane-dependent.
Versions in which properties are assigned to systems only under certain decoher-
ence conditions also seem to get around these theorems (see e. g. Dieks [35]). But
the crucial and persisting and still open question is whether these or other modal
interpretations can be extended to a genuine relativistic theory.
Literature
1. B. Van Fraassen: Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View (Clarendon Press, Oxford 1991,
Chap. 9)
2. B. Van Fraassen: The Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox. Synthese 29, 291–309 (1974)

400
Modal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
3. S. Kochen: A New Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. In Symposium on the Foundations
of Modern Physics, ed. by P. Lahti, and P. Mittelstaedt (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 1985,
151–69)
4. R. Healey. The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics: An Interactive Interpretation (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 1989)
5. D. Dieks: Resolution of the Measurement Problem Through Decoherence of the Quantum State.
Phys. Lett. A 142, 439–46 (1989)
6. J. Bub: Interpreting the Quantum World (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1997)
7. E. Schr¨odinger: Discussion of Probability Relations Between Separated Systems. Proc. Cam.
Philol. Soc. 31, 555–563 (1936)
8. G. Bacciagaluppi: Topics in the Modal Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge
University, PhD thesis, 1996)
9. E. Joos, H.D. Zeh, C. Kiefer, D. Giulini, J. Kupsch, I.-O. Stamatescu: Decoherence and the
Appearance of a Classical World in Quantum Theory (Springer, Berlin 2003)
10. P. Vermaas, D. Dieks: The Modal Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics and Its Generalization
to Density Operators. Found. Phys. 25, 145–58 (1995)
11. D. Dieks, P. Vermaas (eds.): The Modal Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (Kluwer,
Dordrecht 1998)
12. R. Healey, G. Hellman (eds.): Quantum Measurement, Decoherence and Modal Interpreta-
tions: Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 17 (University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis 1998)
13. P. Vermaas: A Philosopher’s Look at Quantum Mechanics: Possibilities and Impossibilities of
a Modal Interpretation (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1999)
14. L. Ruetsche: On the Verge of Collapse: Modal Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (Univer-
sity of Pittsburgh, PhD thesis, 1995)
15. J. Bub, R. Clifton: A Uniqueness Theorem for ‘No Collapse’ Interpretations of Quantum Me-
chanics. Stud. Hist. Philos. Mod. Phys. 27, 181–219 (1996)
16. M. Hemmo: Quantum Mechanics Without Collapse: Modal Interpretations, Histories and
Many Worlds (Cambridge University, PhD thesis, 1996)
17. M. Hemmo: Quantum Histories in the Modal Interpretation. In Dieks and Vermaas [11],
253–77 (1998)
18. R. Spekkens, J. Sipe: A Modal Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics Based on a Principle of
Entropy Minimization. Found. Phys. 31, 1431–64 (2001)
19. G. Bene, D. Dieks: A Perspectival Version of the Modal Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
and the Origin of Macroscopic Behavior. Found. Phys. 32, 645–71 (2002)
20. J. Berkovitz, M. Hemmo: Can Modal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics Be Reconciled
with Relativity. Philos. Sci. 72, 789–801 (2005)
21. D. Albert, B. Loewer: Wanted Dead Or Alive: Two Attempts to Solve Schr¨odinger’s Paradox.
In A Fine, M. Forbes, L. Wessels (eds.), PSA 1990, vol 1, 277–85 (East Lansing, Michigan,
1990)
22. G. Bacciagaluppi, M. Hemmo: Modal Interpretations, Decoherence and Measurements. Stud.
Hist. Philos. Mod. Phys. 27, 239–77 (1996)
23. G. Bacciagaluppi: Delocalised Properties in the Modal Interpreration of a Continuous Model
of Decoherence. Found. Phys. 30, 1431–1444 (2000)
24. D. Dieks: Events and Covariance in the Interpretation of Quantum Field Theory. In Ontolog-
ical Aspects of Quantum Field Theory, ed. by M. Kuhlmann, H. Lyre and A. Wayne (World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore 2002, Chap. 11)
25. J. Butterﬁeld, H. Halvorson (eds.): Quantum Entanglement: Selected Papers, by Rob Clifton
(Clarendon Press, Oxford 2004)
26. J. Earman and L. Ruetsche: Relativistic Invariance and Nodal Interpretations. Philos. Sci. 72
(4), 557–83 (2005)
27. G. Bacciagaluppi: A Kochen-Specker Theorem in the Modal Interpretation of Quantum Me-
chanics. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 34, 1205–16 (1995)
28. R. Clifton: Why Modal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics Must Abandon Classical Rea-
soning About the Values of Observables. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 34, 1302–12 (1995)

Modal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
401
M
29. G. Bacciagaluppi, M. Dickson: Dynamics for Modal Interpretations. Found. Phys. 29,
1165–201 (1999)
30. J. S. Bell: Beables for Quantum Field Theory. Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Me-
chanics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1987, pp. 173–80)
31. G. Bacciagaluppi, M. Donald, P. Vermaas: Continuity and Discontinuity of Deﬁnite Properties
in the Modal Interpretation. Helv. Phys. Acta 68, 679–704 (1995)
32. M. Dickson, R. Clifton: Lorentz-Invariance in Modal Interpretations. In Dieks and Vermaas
[11] 9–48 (1998)
33. F. Arntzenius: Curiouser and Curiouser: A Personal Evaluation of Modal Interpretations. In
Dieks and Vermaas [11], 337–77 (1998)
34. W. Myrvold: Modal Interpretations and Relativity. Found. Phys. 32, 1773–84 (2002)
35. D. Dieks: Consistent Histories and Relativistic Invariance in the Modal Interpretation of Quan-
tum Mechanics, Phys. Lett. A 265, 317–325 (2000)

