H
Hamiltonian Operator
Christopher Witte
Hamiltonian operator, a term used in a quantum theory for the linear operator on a
complex  Hilbert space associated with the generator of the dynamics of a given
quantum system. Under most circumstances this operator is assumed to be self-
adjoint, thus having real spectrum. The spectral values are in such a case interpreted
as possible resulting values of an energy measurement performed on the system. The
Hamiltonian operator can then be seen as synonymous with the energy operator,
which serves as a model for the energy observable of the quantum system.
In these two aspects of (a) generating the dynamics and (b) representing the en-
ergy observable, the Hamiltonian operator in quantum theory plays a rˆole very
much analogous to that of the Hamiltonian function in classical theories. His-
torically this fact became obvious as soon as modern quantum mechanics was
constituted by Heisenberg, Schr¨odinger, Dirac and others. Schr¨odinger himself used
a term for this mathematical object that translates to “the wave operator anal-
ogous to the Hamiltonian function” [5] in comparing his  wave mechanics to
Heisenberg’s  matrix mechanics. Due to this obvious similarity to the Hamilto-
nian function of classical mechanics the symbol H and the names energy operator
or Hamiltonian operator came into use (see, e.g., [1] for a relatively early example).
The concept of a Hamiltonian operator is useful in almost any quantum theory, be
it quantum mechanics or a quantum ﬁeld theory. Nevertheless, since quantum ﬁeld
theories are usually considered in a relativistic setting, the meaning of dynamics
is more complicated due to the lack of an absolute time parameter. This problem
can be dealt with in an elegant way by an algebraic approach to such theories (see,
e.g., [4]). In much the same way the measurement process and the concept of energy
of the system need reﬁnement. Especially in approaches to a theory of quantum
gravity the signiﬁcance of the Hamiltonian operator becomes much different, since
such an operator should rather be seen as a constraint operator than a generator of
dynamics. The concept of an energy operator fails completely to be applicable [6].
To avoid these complications in this encyclopedic overview, we will restrict the
detailed description to the realm of non-relativistic quantum mechanics.
Generator of dynamics. The most simple quantum mechanical systems are
closed, conservative systems. For such systems the homogeneity of time suggests
that their dynamics is induced by a symmetry of the system [2]. By Wigner’s the-
orem such a symmetry can be either a unitary or an anti-unitary operation on
the underlying Hilbert space H. Since the effects of the dynamics should tend
to identity in a measurement context when time steps become small, the oper-
ations must form a weakly continuous one-parameter-group of unitary operators
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
271
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

272
Hamiltonian Operator
U : R →U(H), t →U(t), where U(H) denotes the group of  unitary opera-
tors on H. The unitary operators U(t) are called evolution operators, since they
describe evolution of a pure state at time t0 to the state at time t1 by ψ(t0) →
ψ(t1) = U(t1 −t0)ψ(t0). The term “one-parameter-group” actually means, that
the mapping U is a group homomorphism, such that U(t1)U(t0) = U(t0 + t1) and
U(t)−1 = U(−t). The notion of “weak continuity” refers to the claim that the map-
ping t →⟨φ, U(t)ψ⟩for arbitrary φ, ψ ∈H be continuous. This kind of continuity
ensures that statistical distributions of arbitrary measurements (more speciﬁcally
their moments) vary continuously with time. Stone’s theorem (see, e.g., [7]) states
that such one-parameter-groups are exactly those, which are generated by a  self-
adjoint operator. Explicitly, there is a self-adjoint operator H, the Hamiltonian
operator such that U(t) = exp(−it H /ℏ) for all t ∈R (exp denoting the operator
exponential function). The Hamiltonian operator can be found from the evolution
operator by differentiation
⟨φ, H ψ⟩= iℏd
dt ⟨φ, U(t)ψ⟩|t=0.
This equation deﬁnes the self-adjoint operator H on its domain D(H), which is dense
in, but generally not equal to the Hilbert space H. The domain of the Hamiltonian
is invariant under the action of the evolution operators and the equation above de-
scribes the derivative of the curve ψ(t) = U(t)ψ(0), which a pure quantum state
passes in time:
iℏd
dt ψ(t) = H ψ(t).
This equation, which describes the inﬁnitesimal generation of the quantum dynam-
ics, is the famous  Schr¨odinger equation. The dynamics of mixed states follows
according to the deﬁnition of mixing directly from the dynamics of pure states:
ρ(t) = U(t)ρ(0)U∗(t). By differentiation this leads to
iℏd
dt ρ(t) = [H, ρ(t)],
an equation usually called von Neumann equation. Sometimes this equation is also
called quantum Liouville equation, in analogy to the dynamical equation for density
distributions in classical Hamiltonian mechanics.
The  Heisenberg picture of a quantum system models the dynamics in a differ-
ent but equivalent way to the above seen so called  Schr¨odinger picture. States
are seen as time-independent in the Heisenberg picture, whereas  observables
carry the time dependence of the system. Since the statistical outcome of any mea-
surement performed on the system must not depend on the picture chosen, one
must have for any observable A the identity Tr(ρ(t)A) = Tr(ρ(0)AH(t)) and thus
AH(t) = U∗(t)AU(t) for the time dependent observable in the Heisenberg picture.
From this dynamics one gets the differential equation of motion
iℏd
dt AH(t) = [AH(t), H]

Hamiltonian Operator
273
H
for observables, which is correspondingly called the von Neumann equation in the
Heisenberg picture.
The dynamics of nonconservative systems is more complicated in general. In
some important cases the dynamics of the system is still unitary, but the evolution
operators do not form a one parameter group. Instead the more general case is that
of a two-parameter-groupoid U : R × R →U(H), t →U(t1, t2) with properties
U(t3, t2)U(t2, t1) = U(t3, t1) and U(t2, t1)−1 = U(t1, t2). Such systems with a
time dependent Hamiltonian can be seen as analogous to holonomic-rheonomous
classical systems. The inﬁnitesimal generator of such a groupoid is a time dependent
self-adjoint operator H(t) and can be calculated by
⟨φ, H(t)ψ⟩= iℏd
d˜t ⟨φ, U(˜t, t)ψ⟩|˜t=t.
Nevertheless integration of a time dependent Hamiltonian operator to get back the
evolution operators is non-trivial and must not be done by simply taking the operator
exponential function.
The dynamics of general open quantum systems cannot be modeled in the same
way as seen above. The dynamical mapping ρ(t0) →ρ(t1) = V (t1, t0)(ρ(t0)) can
only be given in the  mixed state context, or equivalently as a quantum stochastical
process of pure states, since time evolution doesn’t conserve purity of states (details
can be found, e.g., in [3]).
Energy operator: In classical mechanics the generator of the dynamical group
of a holonomic-scleronomous system is the generator of a symmetry operation. By
Noether’s theorem the generator of such a symmetry is a constant of motion with
the physical interpretation of the total energy of the system. In much the same way
the time-independent Hamiltonian operator of a conservative quantum system can
be seen as a constant of motion, as the statistical distribution of the observable H
is constant, i.e., for any natural number n the expectation value of Hn is constant
in time: iℏd
dt Tr(ρ(t) Hn) = Tr([H, ρ(t)] Hn) = 0. By analogy it is justiﬁed to
call this observable energy, and the spectrum of H is to be interpreted as possi-
ble outcomes of an energy measurement. Eigenstates of this observable correspond
to preparations of the system with sharp energy values. They are solutions to the
eigenvalue equation Eψ = H ψ, where E is a certain discrete spectral value. This
equation is sometimes called the time-independent Schr¨odinger equation, and its
solutions show an especially simple time dependence: ψ(t) = ψ(0) exp(iEt/ℏ),
i.e., only a time dependent phase factor is changed. These states are called station-
ary, since statistical distributions of (time-independent) observables in such states
are invariant in time. For energy values E in the continuous spectrum there are no
solutions to the time-independent Schr¨odinger equation in Hilbert space. Neverthe-
less, in the context of  rigged Hilbert space one can ﬁnd weak solutions called
improper eigenstates. These have a physical interpretation as scattering states and
are stationary as well.
The spectrum of the Hamiltonian operator is usually bounded from below, i.e.,
there is a lower limit for the energy of the system. This condition is a necessity

274
Hamiltonian Operator
for systems, which can in principle interact with the environment, for otherwise
such systems could act as an inﬁnite source of energy, since they do not admit a
ground state. Also, no thermodynamical equilibrium is possible for systems with
Hamiltonian operator not bounded from below, since the usual expression for the
equilibrium state ρβ = exp(−β H)/ Tr(exp(−β H)) would in that case not yield a
well-deﬁned operator for any inverse temperature β > 0.
The analogy to the classical energy function becomes most obvious, if one
chooses the Schr¨odinger representation for the Hilbert space H = L2(R3n) ⊗Hint,
where R3n is the n-particle position space and Hint the space of internal degrees
of freedom (usually  spin). For systems without internal degrees of freedom the
Hamiltonian operator takes the form of a certain kind of partial differential operator,
called Schr¨odinger operator [8]:
H =

k
+
1
2mk
ℏ
i ∇k −qkA(xk)
2,
+ V ,
with functions A(x) (exterior magnetic vector potential) and V (x1, . . . , xn) (com-
mon potential) of suitable integrability and differentiability. Since pk = ℏ
i ∇k is the
momentum operator of the k-th particle, this can be seen as the formal translation
of the classical Hamiltonian function of n charged particles with magnetic terms.
Some important special cases of Schr¨odinger operators will be listed below.
(a) For a single particle in the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld, one gets the standard
Hamiltonian operator
H = −ℏ2
2m + V ,
with Laplace operator  and single particle potential V (x).
(b) A single electron in an electromagnetic ﬁeld, taking spin into account, can be
described by a Hamiltonian of the form
H = 1
2m(ℏ
i ∇+ eA)2 −eφ + e
mS · B,
where the electromagnetic potentials φ and A as well as the magnetic ﬁeld B
are functions of position x and possibly time t. This operator acts on the Hilbert
space H = L2(R3) ⊗C2, where the space of internal degrees of freedom of
the spin-1/2 electron can be taken to be C2. The formal scalar product S · B
of a matrix-valued vector and a vector-valued function yields a matrix-valued
function, which admits a natural action as an operator on the tensor product
Hilbert space.
(c) The Hamiltonian operator of an ion or atom of N electrons and a nucleus of
atomic number Z is given by
H =
N

k=1
+
−ℏ2
2mk −
Ze2
4πϵ0|xk|
,
+

k< l
e2
4πϵ0|xk −xl|,
with nucleus located in the origin of the co-ordinate system.

Hardy Paradox
275
H
(d) The Hamiltonian operator of an electron in an atom, using the central-ﬁeld
model, but taking into account the spin-orbit coupling, reads
H = −ℏ2
2m + V (|x|) +
1
2m2c2|x|
d
d|x|V (|x|) L · S
where V is some effective potential.
Primary Literature
1. J. von Neumann: Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik. Springer, Berlin (1932)
2. J.M. Jauch: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Addison-Wesley, Reading (1968)
3. H.P. Breuer, F. Petruccione, The Theory of Open Quantum Systems. Oxford University Press,
Oxford (2002)
4. O. Bratteli, D.W. Robinson: Operator Algebras and Quantum Statistical Mechanics 1. Springer,
New York (1979)
Secondary Literature
5. E. Schr¨odinger: ¨Uber das Verh¨altnis der Heisenberg-Born-Jordanschen Quantenmechanik zu
der meinen. Annalen der Physik (4), 79, 734–56 (1926)
6. T. Thiemann: Lectures on Loop Quantum Gravity. Lecture Notes in Physics 631, 41–135, (2003)
arXiv:gr-qc/0210094v1
7. S. Reed, B. Simon: Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics. Volume 1: Functional Analysis.
Academic, New York (1972)
8. H.L. Cycon et al.: Schr¨odinger Operators. Springer, Berlin (1987)
Hardy Paradox
Antonio Ac´ın
Since the seminal work by Bell [1], it is known that the results obtained when mea-
suring a quantum state in space separated regions can display some counter-intuitive
form of correlations, often named as quantum  nonlocality. The standard Bell sce-
nario consists of a source emitting a pair of particles to two distant observers, Alice
and Bob, who can choose between m different measurements of n possible out-
comes. The choice of the measurement by Alice and Bob is denoted by x and y,
while a and b label the corresponding measurement outcome, see Fig. 1. By measur-
ing the particles, the parties can estimate the correlations between the measurement

