M
Magentenos, Leo
▶Leo Magentenos
Mair, John
▶John Mair
Manuel Chrysoloras
GEORGE ARABATZIS
Research Centre on Greek Philosophy
Academy of Athens
Athens
Greece
Abstract
Manuel Chrysoloras (c. 1350–1415) was a Byzantine
writer and scholar better known as professor of Greek
language in Florence after 1397, the ﬁrst one to hold public
teaching ofﬁce of Greek in Italy. His audience included
famous Italian humanists like Guarino da Verona (his
most loyal pupil), Jacopo Angeli da Scarperia, Coluccio
Salutati, Roberto Rossi, Niccolo` Niccoli, Leonardo Bruni,
Carlo
Marsuppini,
Pier
Paolo
Vergerio,
Uberto
Decembrio, Poggio Bracciolini, and others. After 1400,
Chrysoloras left his teaching position and carried out
mainly diplomatic missions in the service of the Byzantine
emperor Manuel II Palaiologos. He converted to Cathol-
icism and died in 1415 in Constance, Switzerland, while
attending the Synod in an effort to convince the West-
erners to save Byzantium from the Ottoman threat. He
used a personal method of teaching that consisted in part
in the discussion between the students of the translation of
Greek works. He translated Plato’s Republic with the help
of his student Uberto Decembrio and his son Pier
Candido and he authored a Greek Grammar that had
a wide circulation as textbook. His teaching inﬂuenced
the art criticism of Renaissance by relating art works to
literary works and by insisting on the importance of the
artist as the efﬁcient cause of Art and the public as the
intelligent agent. As to his ideology, this scholar who is
said that his teaching had a strong political motive, in his
work on the Comparison of the Old and the New Rome, he
insisted on Constantinople’s lineage to Ancient Rome. His
posthumous fame was somehow limited because the Ital-
ian humanists’ scholarly activity to which he had greatly
contributed had grown strong autonomously.
Biography
The Byzantine author, professor, and scholar Manuel
Chrysoloras was born in Constantinople around 1350 in
a noble family. Very little is known about the ﬁrst half of
his life until he came to Venice in 1390–1391 with
a diplomatic mission. Later he was invited to teach
Greek in Florence where he started professing in 1397
with a contract of 5 years. But he was not to spend all
this time in Florence because in 1400 he left his position
probably in order to join the emperor Manuel II
Palaiologos who came to the West seeking help to save
the Byzantine Empire from the Ottoman threat. For the
rest of his life, Chrysoloras will carry out mainly diplo-
matic missions, traveling in the service of his country, and
only secondarily will assume scholarly and teaching work.
In late 1405 or in 1406 he will ask the papal permission to
be converted to the Latin dogma and perform the Latin
rite; the permission was granted but Chrysoloras never
undertook any priestly duties. He died in 1415 while
attending the Council of Constance in Switzerland in
a last effort to convince the Westerners to help Byzantium.
His fame rests principally on his teaching activity in
Florence as the ﬁrst Greek to hold public teaching ofﬁce in
Italy. Neither Barlaam the Calabrian nor Leonzio Pilato,
who preceded him and taught Petrarch and Boccaccio,
could equal him in importance and fame. As it has been
noted, ‘‘from at least the eighteenth century, when
scholars ﬁrst began to discuss the ‘Italian Renaissance’ as
a cultural phenomenon, the importance of Manuel
Chrysoloras, the ﬁrst notable professor of Greek in
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

western Europe, has been widely recognized. Writers such
as Carlo Rosmini, Jacob Burckhardt, John Addington
Symonds, and Remigio Sabbadini have given him,
deservedly,
honorable
mention
as
the
teacher
of
a number of inﬂuential humanists’’ (Thomson 1966:63).
But it was a monograph by Cammelli published in 1941
that permitted the modern evaluation and scholarly
appreciation of his life and activity. Chrysoloras’ coming
to Italy marks the real beginning of Greek studies in Italy.
Thanks to him, the Italian humanists of various scholarly
interests were able to focus on the rich classical tradition of
Byzantium. Among his famous pupils and those attending
his lessons we can name Guarino da Verona, Jacopo Angeli
da Scarperia, Coluccio Salutati, Roberto Rossi, Niccolo`
Niccoli, Leonardo Bruni, Carlo Marsuppini, Pier Paolo
Vergerio, Uberto Decembrio, Poggio Bracciolini et al.
Jacopo Angeli da Scarperia described Chrysoloras as
‘‘eruditissimus (et) suavissimus literarum Graecarum. . .
praeceptor.’’
It has been said that the teaching activity of
Chrysoloras was auxiliary to his principal mission and
that it had a political motive. His very ﬁrst voyage to
Italy was of diplomatic nature and his invitation to
a teaching position may have been a response to a need
for a more profound rapprochement than the establish-
ment of good diplomatic relations between the East and
the West. As professor of Greek he was always related to
inﬂuential people and his subsequent career was clearly
that of a diplomat. His conversion to Catholicism must
also be seen as part of the Byzantine politics of reconcili-
ation with the West. In Andrea Giuliano’s funeral oration
on Chrysoloras we read that his true task was rather ‘‘to
save his country from danger than give delight to Italy’’
(Thomson 1966:81).
Thought and Works
It seems that Chrysoloras had a natural charisma for
communicating and a friendly and warm character. His
reputation was not based solely on his teaching ability but
also on his methodology, and furthermore on his ideas on
education. His approach marked a rupture with the tra-
dition of medieval education; as Paolo Vergerio’s De
ingenuis moribus (1404) shows, Chrysoloras has given
the learned men in the West a vigorous inspiration as to
the ideals of Greek education while Leonardo Bruni’s De
studiis et litteris (c. 1425) gives a detailed exposition of the
pedagogic technique that Chrysoloras had brought from
Constantinople. The technique stressed accurate pronun-
ciation, the use of mnemonics, constant and regular revi-
sion of each lesson’s topics and the preparation of copious
notes under the headings of methodice (grammar, syntax,
and vocabulary) and historice (what we should call ‘‘back-
ground material’’) (Thomson 1966:66–67). Chrysoloras
insisted that for the students to discuss the subject of
every lesson was part of a learning technique; he also
insisted on the pedagogical value of translating from
Greek into Latin. He criticized the literary, word by
word, translation as well as the free translation that
betrayed the original; he promoted a midway between
these two practices, a mean that would accomplish the
comprehension of an author’s spirit and its rendering to
another language (transferre ad sententiam).
His work as an author has been less valued, but this
view is beginning to change. His writings are not many but
they give insight to the proﬁle of a scholar that was more
than the right man at the right place for the right job. His
most known work is a Greek Grammar, the ﬁrst in the
western world, which under the title Eroˆteˆmata had a very
wide circulation as a manuscript and later was repeatedly
published in numerous editions. He translated Plato’s
Republic with the help of one of his pupils, Uberto
Decembrio (and this one’s son Pier Candido), since
Chrysoloras’ use of Latin was rather moderate. The rest
of his work consisted mainly of letters, some extensive,
that give an image of his philosophical, literary, and edu-
cational ideas. Chrysoloras appears to have inﬂuenced the
art criticism of the Renaissance mainly through his pupil
Guarino da Verona. We see in him the idea of the visual
arts’
inferiority
as
to
the
written
word
through
a transposition of the Byzantine ekphrasis (rhetorical
description of works of art). Although the rhetoricism of
ekphrasis does not help the establishment of critical cate-
gories about the ﬁne arts, it nevertheless facilitates the
connection between visual representations and the literary
universe. Furthermore, Chrysoloras wrote that ‘‘the rep-
resentations are praised in proportion to the degree in
which they seem to resemble their originals. . .[but they]
rather do indicate a certain nobility in the intellect that
admires them;’’ what he is actually saying is not proper to
Byzantine icons’ aesthetics and although the frame is
traditional, Chrysoloras’ conclusions are related neither
to commonplaces of Byzantine Aristotelianism nor to the
views of the Iconophiles (the supporters of the icons) of
Byzantium. It is the artistic sensibility, the efﬁcient cause
of art, that takes, thus, priority over the subject matter,
a turn that conforms perfectly to the highly valued role of
the
artist
in
the
Renaissance
Art
(Baxandall
1965:198–199).
Regarding the content of Chrysoloras’ ‘‘philosophy,’’ it
has been said that he belonged to the Palaiologian revival
of letters in Byzantium, which nonetheless covered more
than one ideological tendency and thus Chrysoloras’
710 M
Manuel Chrysoloras

position has to be further elucidated. He was close to
Demetrios Kydones, a key ﬁgure in the Latinophile Party
of Constantinople, who translated Thomas Aquinas in
Greek; Kydones had escorted Chrysoloras to his ﬁrst trip
in the West. Chrysoloras’ work Synkrisis teˆs palaias kai
neas Romeˆs (a letter known by the title De comparatione
veteris et novae Romae = On the Comparison Between Rome
and Constantinople) that was designed to foster good
relations
between
the
East
and
the
West
shows
Chrysoloras’ position. He wrote on the Graeco-Roman
origins of Byzantium: ‘‘two were the most powerful and
wise nations. . . Romans and Greeks who by joining up
they made Constantinople’’; he was translating in these
terms Manuel Palaiologos’ politics of reconciliation with
the West. His recently published Discourse Addressed to the
Emperor Manuel II Palaiologos is more revealing as to
Chrysoloras’ philosophy of education: he states there his
faith in the value of Greek Paideia, its great importance if
the Byzantines were to ensure the safety and the well-being
of their country and his conﬁdence in his homeland’s
autarky as to the quality of its scholars. In the same
discourse, he develops the idea of natural virtue to which
the education is complementary.
Although Chrysoloras’ impact on the Italian intellec-
tual scene is certain and most of his pupils were ready to
acknowledge his inﬂuence, only Guarino da Verona
showed a life-long devotion to him. The later praise of
Chrysoloras by the Humanists never reached the enthusi-
asm and this is due to the fact that in the meantime the
Italian scholars discovered the value of Latinity and were
progressively feeling more assured as to their knowledge of
Greek Letters.
See also: ▶Demetrios Kydones
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Crisolora Manuele (2000) Confronto tra l’Antica e la Nuova Roma. In:
Cristina B (ed) Medioevo Greco, numero ‘zero,’ pp 1–26
Crisolora Manuele (2000) Roma parte del cielo. Confronto tra l’ Antica e
la Nuova Roma (intro: Maltese V; trans and note: Cortassa G), UTET,
Torino
Patrinelis CG, Soﬁanos DZ (intro and ed) (2001) Manuel Chrysoloras and
his
discourse addressed to the emperor Manuel II Palaeologous.
Research Center for Medieval and Modern Hellenism, Academy of
Athens, Athens
Secondary Sources
Baxandall M (1965) Guarino, Pisanello and Manuel Chrysoloras.
J Warburg Courtauld Inst 28:183–204
Cammelli G (1941) I dotti bizantini e le origini dell’umanesimo. I.
Manuele Crisolora. Le Monnier, Firenze
Thomson I (1966) Manuel Chrysoloras and the early Italian Renaissance.
GRBS 7:63–82
Thorn-Wickert L (2066) Manuel Chrysoloras (ca. 1350–1415). Peter
Lang, Bonner Romanistische Arbeiten, Frankfurt am Main, Band 92
Marsilius of Inghen
MAARTEN J. F. M. HOENEN
Philosophisches Seminar
Universita¨t Freiburg
Freiburg im Breisgau
Germany
Abstract
Marsilius of Inghen belonged with William of Ockham
and John Buridan to those thinkers who substantially
shaped late-medieval Nominalism. He taught in Paris
and Heidelberg and left behind a signiﬁcant number of
writings that were used as set texts at many universities in
the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries, especially in the
German Empire. Characteristic was his rejection of real
universals outside the human mind (Realism) and his
distinction between the approaches of natural reason
and faith. He was also known for his dismissal of the
notion of ‘‘suppositio simplex,’’ his defense of an eleventh
category, and his criticism of the Aristotelian theory of
motion. His thought was appreciated by Humanists and
Spanish Scholastics.
Biography
Marsilius of Inghen, born in or around Nijmegen
(Netherlands) in the 1340s, was one the most inﬂuential
thinkers of the late-medieval period. His lectures drew
large audiences and his writings were read at many uni-
versities. He received his philosophical education at the
University of Paris, where he became active as a Master of
Arts in 1362, purportedly remarkably young of age.
Nicolas Prowin, in his funeral speech, highlighted that
Marsilius was not yet 20 when he earned his Master’s
degree. As a Master, he had many students, especially
from the region around Nijmegen, who went on to
become teachers at local schools. It was perhaps for this
reason that the City of Nijmegen honored him with
a copious banquet in 1382. Marsilius was rector of the
University of Paris in 1367 and in 1371, and procurator of
the so-called ‘‘natio anglicana’’ from 1373 to 1375. He also
represented the University at the Papal Court in Avignon
in 1377–1378. Most likely due to troubles related to the
Marsilius of Inghen M
711
M

Great Schism, he left Paris for an unknown destination
following his visit to Avignon. In 1386, he became the ﬁrst
rector of the University of Heidelberg, which he shaped
substantially, serving as rector nine times in 1386–1392
and 1396. In Heidelberg, he was a Master of Arts and
student of theology, the study of which he had begun in
Paris around 1366. He obtained his theological degree in
1395–1396, being the ﬁrst theologian to earn a doctorate
in Heidelberg. Soon afterwards, on August 20, 1396, the
day of Saint Bernhard, he died and was buried in the
Church of Saint Peter in the choir before the main altar.
Regrettably, his grave no longer exists; however, both
a small square next to the University and a Centre for
Advanced Study carry his name.
Soon after his death in 1396 he was labeled
a ‘‘Nominalist’’ and bracketed together with William of
Ockham and John Buridan. To be sure, however, he him-
self never used this nor any other label to characterize his
thought. At points he was even critical of Ockham and
Buridan, although he shared their conviction that univer-
sals were only names or concepts and that the object of
knowledge was not the thing but the proposition that
referred
to
the
thing,
hallmarks
of
late-medieval
Nominalism.
Since the early sixteenth century, historiography has
considered Marsilius to be a pupil of Buridan, induced
from the fact that Marsilius often referred to Buridan as
his master, and even once remarked that he may have been
guided by a passionate predisposition towards the latter.
Modern research, however, seriously questions whether
Marsilius was a pupil of Buridan, since the two belonged
to different nations at the University of Paris. It appears
that Marsilius was not educated by Buridan, even though
he admired his teachings or writings. His teacher was in
fact William Buser of Heusden, who, like Marsilius,
belonged to the ‘‘natio anglicana.’’ That he referred to
Buridan as his master, therefore, must be considered
a mark of honor, as was not unusual at the time.
Writings
Marsilius’ writings were the product of a medieval aca-
demic. Most important are (1) a collection of small logical
treatises that deal with the properties of terms such
as supposition and ampliation, and which later were
referred to under the general title of Parva logicalia
Marsilii; (2) several commentaries in various forms on
the Logica vetus and the Logica nova; (3) commentaries
on Aristotle’s physical treatises, such as the Physica,
De caelo, De generatione et corruptione, De anima, and
the Parva naturalia; (4) a commentary on Aristotle’s
Ethica Nicomachea; (5) a commentary on Aristotle’s
Metaphysica; (6) commentaries on two books from the
Scriptures, namely, Daniel and Matthew; and ﬁnally
(7) a commentary on Peter Lombard’s Sentences.
All of these works arose out of his teaching, which is to
say, his reading of the works of Aristotle, Peter Lombard,
and the Scriptures in the classroom. Notably, his com-
mentaries on Aristotle were structured in a manner very
similar to those of John Buridan and Nicholas Oresme.
Even the titles of the many questions addressed were
similar, although the solutions differed. As a rule, these
questions followed the text of Aristotle sequentially,
though not all parts were discussed. Marsilius followed
the same structure in his commentary on Lombard’s
Sentences, although the arguments in it were much more
elaborate, and referred to a wide array of sources.
Only a small number of his writings are available in
a modern critical edition. Several of his treatises were
printed in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries. Approxi-
mately thirty-ﬁve modern libraries contain manuscript
copies of his works, particularly libraries in Erfurt,
Krakow, Munich, and Vienna. The strict format of his
writings may create the impression that their content is
uniform and formalistic; however, this is not the case.
Marsilius imbued his writings with a personal outlook
through the sharpness of his mind and his individual
approach to a number of problems.
Main Thoughts
Universals and Supposition Theory
A clear theme throughout Marsilius’ works is the convic-
tion that there are no real universals. Reality consists only
of individuals, which can be signiﬁed by written or spoken
words or by concepts in the human mind. Things that are
similar can be signiﬁed and made known by the same
name or concept. This is, for example, the case with the
concept of ‘‘tree,’’ which refers both to an oak and to
a beach. Universality, therefore, is a property of names
and concepts that refer to like individuals. These names
and concepts are themselves individual: each human being
has his own concept of ‘‘tree’’ even if this concept signiﬁes
the same tree as that of another human being.
This theory, which he shared with William of Ockham,
John Buridan, and many other contemporaries, had
a direct impact on his theory of logic. In his treatise, On
supposition, for example, he maintains that older logicians
(like Peter of Spain) used a special kind of supposition,
namely, suppositio simplex, to refer to the use of a term or
concept that stands for a universal thing. Since, to Marsil-
ius, there are no universal things, this type of supposition
was senseless and should be abolished, since it confused
712 M
Marsilius of Inghen

students. To refer to the universal use of a term or concept
in phrases such as ‘‘Tree is a genus,’’ another traditional
type of supposition, namely, suppositio materialis, would
sufﬁce, as this kind of supposition takes the term or
concept as referring to itself. In the above phrase, it is the
term or concept ‘‘tree’’ itself which signiﬁes universally
and therefore is a genus, and not something in the trees
outside in the yard.
In this connection, Marsilius explicitly criticized some
of his contemporaries (he may have been thinking of
Albert of Saxony), who, even if they did not accept the
existence of real universals, still wished to retain the notion
of suppositio simplex. They would say, like the old logi-
cians, that the word or concept of ‘‘tree’’ in the given
example has suppositio simplex, rather than suppositio
materialis. Marsilius, however, saw no need to retain the
vocabulary of the old logicians. The use of the term
suppositio simplex was entirely arbitrary, he argued. There-
fore, there was no reason not to replace it with suppositio
materialis, which was moreover preferable, in that it
avoided confusion.
This celebrated passage has important historical sig-
niﬁcance, as here Marsilius linked the acceptance of real
universals with the old logicians (antiqui) and their denial
with the modern logicians (moderni). However, though
tempting, his remarks cannot be regarded as an early
example of the ﬁfteenth-century ‘‘Wegestreit’’ between
Antiqui and Moderni. The antiqui of whom Marsilius
spoke were no contemporary Realists, but rather logicians
from earlier generations, as evinced by the fact that he
referred to them also by the term antiquitus, that is, from
ancient times. Nevertheless, this passage reveals why the
Realists of the ﬁfteenth century who based themselves on
these older logicians were labeled as Antiqui, even if they
themselves were not from the old days.
Aristotle, Natural Reason, Faith
A second feature the reader will encounter at several
points in Marsilius’ works, and which also foreshadows
the ‘‘Wegestreit,’’ is the sharp distinction between faith and
natural reason. This occurs not only in his theological
works, but also and especially in his commentaries on
Aristotle. At several places in these commentaries, Marsil-
ius juxtaposes two different answers to one and the same
problem, the one according to Aristotle and natural rea-
son, and the other according to truth and faith. He leaves
no doubt that for him truth and faith gives the right
answer and should judge Aristotle and natural reason,
not only in theology, but also in philosophy. Yet this
does not prevent him from carefully setting out what
should, according to natural reason, be regarded as
possible or impossible in each particular case, even if this
is in opposition to faith. Nor is his approach to these two
views in his commentaries on Aristotle always the same. In
some cases both views are dealt with extensively, in others
he merely comments that according to faith things are
different, but that he would not enter into the view of
faith, as that was not the task of the philosopher, but of the
theologian.
For Marsilius, natural reason is human thought based
solely on sense-perception (experientia) and on self-
evident principles (principia per se nota). To him this is
essentially identical to what Aristotle said in his writings,
for example, that nothing can come from nothing. Only
very rarely are there instances in which he criticizes
Aristotle for saying something not in agreement with
sense-perception or self-evident principles  most
prominently, in the case of the theory of movement, as
we will see below.
The juxtaposition of the views of natural reason
(Aristotle) and of faith occurs so frequently, both in his
philosophical and theological writings, that it indeed
seems programmatic. This is most clearly observed in
his Abbreviationes librorum physicorum, which were writ-
ten in Paris (as can be deduced from examples in which
he repeatedly referred to the towers of Notre Dame and of
St. Genevie`ve). In this treatise, both views are often
presented in different sets of statements intended to
make clear what their presuppositions are and under
which conditions they could be accepted. A good case
in point is the discussion of the eternity of the world.
Here, Marsilius begins with a number of statements
accepted both by Aristotle and by the believer. He then
continues with statements held by Aristotle and rejected
by the believer, such as that the movement of the heavens
is eternal. At the end of this list, he remarks that although
these statements must be accepted by all who use only the
senses, nonetheless, the opposite is in fact true, as faith
maintains.
Marsilius also follows this procedure in his discussion
of other topics in the Abbreviationes librorum physicorum.
For example, he argues that for Aristotle and natural
reason (1) creation from nothing is impossible, (2) the
ﬁrst principle cannot act on earth without the assistance of
the heavens, (3) an imaginary space outside of the heavens
must be inﬁnite, (4) the existence of a vacuum cannot be
accepted, (5) the heavens cannot move faster than they
actually do, (6) the ﬁrst principle has no inﬁnite power,
and (7) the ﬁrst principle is not everywhere. On all of these
points he explains that faith, since it accepts divine omnip-
otence, asserts a differing or opposite position. Remark-
ably, for Marsilius, natural reason alone is not able to
Marsilius of Inghen M
713
M

accept the position of faith. It must indeed reject all of
those views that would presuppose the existence of some-
thing beyond sense perception and self-evident principles.
To be sure, Marsilius did not defend the theory of
double truth. For him there is only one truth, namely,
that of faith, which partially, but not completely, covers
the claims of natural reason. However, and this is crucial,
natural reason cannot judge on its own whether that
which it necessarily has to accept according to its own
principles is also true. To do this, natural reason requires
faith. Marsilius therefore maintained a position which was
very different from that, for example, of Thomas Aquinas.
According to Thomas, regarding any tenet of faith what-
soever, natural reason can at least show that it is not
impossible. For Marsilius, natural reason cannot do this.
On the contrary, at crucial points it leads human reason in
the opposite direction.
In his commentaries on Aristotle, Marsilius does not
discuss the background of this radical view. His commen-
tary on the Sentences, however, provides a clue. As
a consequence of the Fall, human reason is bound to the
senses and can no longer by itself give a sound judgment of
what is true. Its evidence is evidence of the bodily, fallen
man, not that of the spiritual man assisted by divine grace.
Marsilius defended his reading of Aristotle not only in
Paris, but also in Heidelberg, as can be judged from his
commentaries on the Metaphysics and the Sentences, both
of which were composed in Heidelberg. Testifying to his
inﬂuence as rector there, this interpretation of Aristotle
found its way into the vows the masters were required to
take at their inception. At most other universities, the
master was obligated to refute, to the best of his ability,
those of Aristotle’s opinions that were contrary to faith.
However, in Heidelberg the situation was different. There,
the master was required to tell students that in such cases,
the position of Aristotle was based solely on natural reason
and therefore was deﬁcient, although his position could
not be refuted, since using sense-perception and self-
evident principles one must necessarily reach the same
conclusion as Aristotle.
This way of dealing with Aristotle was to become
typical of late-medieval Nominalism, for which Marsilius
was one of the main sources of inspiration. It provoked
harsh criticism especially from the Thomists, who were of
the opinion that, principally, there were no points on
which Aristotle was against faith, provided that he was
understood correctly  which is to say, in the manner of
Thomas Aquinas. Herein is rooted the historiographical
myth that Nominalism destroyed medieval Scholasticism
by questioning the harmony of faith and natural reason
(Aristotle).
Categories, Motion, Univocity of Substantial
and Accidental Being
There are also other striking views put forth by Marsilius
in his commentaries on Aristotle. For example, com-
menting on the Logica vetus, he argues that alongside the
ten traditional categories, an additional eleventh must be
accepted, namely, the category of signs. This view was
much discussed in the late Middle Ages. Some thinkers
saw it as rooted in the works of John Duns Scotus,
although there was general agreement that Marsilius was
the inventor of the eleventh category. Among its main
defenders, next to Marsilius, was the Nominalist Johannes
Parreut, who discussed the problems attached to this view
elaborately in his Exercitata veteris artis, with reference to
Marsilius. Realist authors, however, saw in it a deviation
from Aristotle, and accordingly rejected the view as
completely absurd.
In his commentary on the Physics, Marsilius follows
Buridan in asserting that the motion of a projectile is not
caused by air being pressed away from the top of the
projectile and then pushing the projectile from behind,
as Aristotle had thought. According to Marsilius, this runs
counter to the observation that a projectile hitting the
ground bounces upwards, even though, on the ground,
there is no air to push the projectile from behind. Its
motion therefore needs to be explained otherwise, namely,
by assuming that the mover transfers to the projectile
a certain quality, which in turn causes the motion 
a quality which some, he adds, call ‘‘impetus’’. At the
same time, Marsilius was fully aware that this theory too
had its difﬁculties, although it was the better alternative.
Also noteworthy is a passage from his commentary on
the Metaphysics, in which he argues that there is no univ-
ocal concept of substance and accident. In itself, this
theory was unexceptional and quite in accordance with
the traditional interpretation of Aristotle. However, in this
case, things are more complicated. Marsilius writes that on
this point he disagrees with Buridan, who had followed the
common view held by many theologians. According to
this common view, it is possible to have a univocal concept
of substance and accident if transubstantiation is taken
into consideration, as is the case with faith. During tran-
substantiation, the accidents of the substances of bread
and wine (their shape, taste, and color) remain for a short
moment without a bearer, as the substances are replaced
by the substance of Christ. These accidents do, therefore,
rightly exist by themselves, just as do substances by nature.
Therefore, it is possible to have a univocal concept of both,
notwithstanding the fact that accidents cannot exist natu-
rally without a bearer. However, Marsilius does not agree
with this view. When commenting on the Metaphysics,
714 M
Marsilius of Inghen

he claims, one must argue according to natural reason and
not according to faith. Applying the principles of natural
reason to the concept of being, therefore, one must con-
clude that it cannot be univocally said of substance and
accidents, since both have a different kind of being. Mar-
silius thus contrasts the common view with what he calls
the ‘‘metaphysical’’ view. However, he makes clear that
neither of these can be proven demonstratively, but are
only probable. Nevertheless, the fact that he argues for the
second view shows that in his mind the philosopher
should not be distracted by the miracles of faith when
there is no immediate necessity to do so. Indeed, whereas
the eternity of the world and the limited power of God
stand in direct opposition to the wording of the Creed,
with the statement that there is no univocal concept of
substances and accidents, this was not the case. For, as
Marsilius states in his commentary on De generatione et
corruptione, even if God miraculously changes substances,
by virtue of his divine power he could do this in a such a
way that the accidents would not remain without a bearer.
Commentary on the Sentences, Multiple
Sources, Eternity of the World
When reading Marsilius of Inghen’s commentaries on Aris-
totle, his personal views are not always clear. This is espe-
cially the case when Marsilius applies both the solution of
faith, which he calls the truth, and that according to natural
reason, adding that the solution of faith should not bother
the natural philosopher or metaphysician. Does this mean
that, as a natural philosopher and metaphysician, Marsilius
asserted solutions which he knew were not true? However it
may be, in his theological works, and in particular in his
commentary on the Sentences, things were different. Here
we ﬁnd the most elaborate exposition of his ideas, both
philosophical and theological. Even if his commentary on
the Sentences was a theological work, he discusses in it
a whole range of philosophical issues also dealt with in his
other works, including the eternity of the world and God’s
inﬁnite power. In this work, Marsilius attributes a crucial
role to natural reason in explaining matters of faith, but
thinks that its role is only partial, since it uses principles
different from those of faith. Only if natural reason accepts
the principles of faith  for example, that things can be
created from nothing  can it clarify issues of faith.
The commentary on the Sentences is an enormous
work that discusses all four books of Lombard’s original
work and covers more than a thousand narrowly-printed
pages in the edition of 1501. Marsilius most likely began
preparation for this work in Paris in the late 1360s and
early 1370s, leaving the work unﬁnished when he died in
Heidelberg. Striking is the wide range of sources he used to
construct his arguments. He not only quoted William of
Ockham, Adam Wodeham, Robert Holcot, and Gregory of
Rimini  authors considered to be forerunners of later-
medieval Nominalism, but also Bonaventure, Thomas
Aquinas, Giles of Rome and Thomas of Strasbourg, the
principal authorities of the Realists. The modern reader
may be confused by the fact that an alleged Nominalist
author quoted so many Realist authorities. However,
Nominalist authors prided themselves on using all impor-
tant authors who had contributed to the solution of the
problem, even those used by their adversaries  some-
thing which they claimed Realists were unwilling to do.
Due to the immense number of problems addressed,
the work may be considered an encyclopedia of late-
medieval knowledge. The themes addressed range from
the divine nature and problems related to the creation of
angels and human beings, to Christological issues, the
sacraments, and the ﬁnal judgment. Marsilius shows
a strong awareness of scientiﬁc methodology and applies
logical tools throughout the book, despite remarking that
one should not overvalue the use of logic in theology. It is
difﬁcult to distinguish one particular theological line of
theological reasoning, since he builds upon very different
traditions, even Neoplatonic ones, as in his discussion of
the theory of divine ideas. However, here too, as in the
commentaries on Aristotle, the reader is struck by the
careful distinction made at certain points between faith
and natural reason. According to Marsilius, it is possible to
prove that the heavens are not coeternal with God, pro-
vided one accepts that God is omnipotent, as does faith.
The concepts of ‘‘heaven’’ or ‘‘creature’’ and ‘‘coeternal
with God’’ exclude each other as much as those of
‘‘horse’’ and ‘‘bullock,’’ Marsilius writes. This is notewor-
thy, since in his commentaries on Aristotle he gave one to
understand that, for the unaided natural reason, the con-
cepts of ‘‘heaven’’ and ‘‘coeternal with God’’ are necessarily
linked. From this, it once more becomes clear how differ-
ent his approach was from that of Thomas Aquinas, even
though he regularly quoted the Angelic Doctor on other
occasions. According to Thomas Aquinas, whether illumi-
nated by faith or not, human reason has to admit that both
statements are possible, namely, that P ‘‘The heavens are
coeternal with God’’ and – P ‘‘The heavens are not
coeternal with God.’’ But for Marsilius, this is not the
case. If natural reason is illuminated by faith, it must
admit that – P is impossible. If, on the other hand, it
does not accept faith, it must hold the opposite, namely
than P is possible, even necessary. If Luther, in his famous
Disputatio theologica of 1539, rebuked Parisian theolo-
gians for claiming that the same thing was true in theology
which was also true in philosophy, he may have been
Marsilius of Inghen M
715
M

thinking of authors like Thomas Aquinas, but surely not
Marsilius of Inghen.
Influence
Marsilius had a substantial impact on the late-medieval
and early-modern period. His works were read at many
universities with a Nominalist signature, or where Nom-
inalism was taught next to Realism. In Vienna and Frei-
burg, his Parva logicalia were compulsory. On the title
page of the Modernorum summulae of Florentius Diel,
printed in Mainz about 1490, he was mentioned in one
breath with Aristotle, Augustine, and Boethius. Not even
Ockham, Albert of Saxony, or Buridan were mentioned in
this prominent place. Marsilius’ commentaries on Aris-
totle were used in classrooms of Heidelberg, Vienna, Frei-
burg, and Prague, as can be concluded from the colophons
in the manuscripts and the protocols of the Arts faculties.
His commentary on the Sentences, edited by Jacob
Wympfeling and printed by Martinus Flach in 1501, was
quoted by Spanish theologians like Domino de Soto, Luis
de Molina, and Francisco Sua´rez. Exemplary of Marsilius’
strong inﬂuence is a booklet published in 1499 by Peter
Friedberg in Mainz, commemorating his birthday. This
booklet is notable for containing a ﬁctitious speech
of Marsilius defending Nominalism and answering
the attacks of Realism. One of the main points was
a quotation from John Gerson, saying that the Council
of Constance had condemned the thesis that there are real
universals in the extramental world. Noteworthy was the
humanist form of the treatise. It contained more than ﬁfty
epigrams by students and masters singing the praises of
their divine Master Marsilius. Obviously, the humanists in
Heidelberg and Mainz advocated the Nominalism coined
by Marsilius even a century after his death.
See also: ▶Albert of Saxony ▶Aristotle, Arabic: Physics
▶De
generatione
et
corruptione,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s ▶Impetus ▶John Buridan ▶Natural Philoso-
phy ▶Parva naturalia, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
▶Realism ▶Supposition Theory ▶Thomas Aquinas
▶Universals ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1499) Ad illustrissimum Bavariae ducem Philippum comitem Rheni
Palatinum et ad nobilissimos ﬁlios epistola. Peter Friedberg, Mainz
Marsilius
de
Inghen
(1501)
Quaestiones
super
quattuor
libros
Sententiarum. Martinus Flach, Strasbourg (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt
Main, 1966)
Marsilius de Inghen (1505) Quaestiones in libros De generatione et
corruptione. Gregorius de Gregoriis, Venice (repr. Minerva, Frank-
furt Main, 1970)
Marsilius
de
Inghen
(1516)
Quaestiones
super
libros
Priorum
analyticorum. s.n. Venice (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt Main, 1968)
Marsilius de Inghen (1521) Abbreviationes super octo libros Physicorum
Aristotelis. Octavianus Scotus, Venice
Marsilius de Inghen (1983) Treatises on the properties of terms. In: Bos EP
(ed) A ﬁrst critical edition of the Suppositiones, Ampliationes,
Appelationes, Restrictiones, and Alienationes. Reidel, Dordrecht
Marsilius de Inghen (2000a) In: Santos Noya M (ed) Quaestiones super
quattuor libros Sententiarum, vol 1 (Super primum, Quaestiones
1–7). Brill, Leiden
Marsilius de Inghen (2000b) In: Santos Noya M (ed) Quaestiones super
quattuor libros Sententiarum, vol 2 (Super primum, Quaestiones
8–21). Brill, Leiden
Marsilius de Inghen (2008) Gedenkschrift 1499 zum einhundertsten
Todestag des Gru¨ndungsrektors der Universita¨t Heidelberg. Mattes,
Heidelberg
Secondary Sources
Bakker PJJM (2001) Aristotelian metaphysics and eucharistic theology:
John Buridan and Marsilius of Inghen on the ontological status
of accidental being. In: Thijssen JMMH, Zupko J (eds) The meta-
physics and natural philosophy of John Buridan. Brill, Leiden, pp
247–264
Bakker PJJM (2002) Inhe´rence, univocite´ et se´parabilite´ des accidents
eucharistiques. In: Sole`re JL, Kaluza Z (eds) La servante et la
consolatrice. La philosophie dans des rapports avec la the´ologie au
Moyen Aˆ ge. Vrin, Paris, pp 193–245 (contains partial editions of
works of Buridan and Marsilius)
Braakhuis HAG (1997) John Buridan and the ‘Parisian School’ on the
possibility of returning as numerically the same. A note on a chapter
in the history of the relationship between faith and natural science.
In: Caroti S, Souffrin P (eds) La nouvelle physique du XIVe sie`cle.
Olschki, Florenz, pp 111–140
Braakhuis HAG, Hoenen MJFM (eds) (1992) Marsilius of Inghen.
Ingenium, Nijmegen (contains partial editions of works of Marsilius)
Hoenen MJFM (1989–1990) Marsilius von Inghen: Bibliographie. Bulle-
tin de Philosophie Me´die´vale 31–21, 150–167, 191–195
Hoenen MJFM (1993) Marsilius of Inghen. Divine knowledge in late
medieval thought. Brill, Leiden
Hoenen MJFM (2002) The commentary on the Sentences of Marsilius of
Inghen. In: Evans GR (ed) Mediaeval commentaries on the Sentences
of Peter Lombard. Brill, Leiden, pp 465–506
Hoenen MJFM, Bakker PJJM (eds) (2002) Philosophie und Theologie des
ausgehenden Mittelalters. Marsilius von Inghen und das Denken
seiner Zeit. Brill, Leiden (contains partial editions of works of
Marsilius)
Markowski M (1988) Katalog dziel Marsyliusza z Inghen z ewidencja
rekopisow. Studia Mediewistyczne 25:39–132
Marshall
P
(1983)
Parisian
psychology
in
the
mid-fourteenth
century. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen Age
50:101–193
Mo¨hler W (1949) Die Trinita¨tslehre des Marsilius von Inghen. Ein
Beitrag zur Geschichte der Theologie des Spa¨tmittelalters. Lahn,
Limburg
Reina ME (1994) Comprehensio veritatis. Una questione di Marsilio di
Inghen sulla Metaﬁsica. In: Bianchi L (ed) Filosoﬁa e teologia nel
trecento.
Studi
in
ricordo
di
Eugenio
Randi.
Fe´de´ration
Internationale des Instituts d’E´tudes Me´die´vales, Louvain-la-Neuve,
pp 283–335
Reina ME (2002) Hoc hic et nunc. Buridano, Marsilio di Inghen e la
conoscenza del singolare. Olschki, Firenze
716 M
Marsilius of Inghen

Ritter G (1921) Studien zur Spa¨tscholastik I: Marsilius von Inghen und
die okkamistische Schule in Deutschland. Winter, Heidelberg
Wielgus S (ed) (1993) Marsilius von Inghen. Werk und Wirkung. Akten
des
Zweiten
Internationalen
Marsilius-von-Inghen-Kongresses.
Wydawn KUL, Lublin (contains partial editions of works of
Marsilius)
Marsilius of Padua
VASILEIOS SYROS
The Martin Marty Center for the Advanced
Study of Religion
The University of Chicago
Chicago, IL
USA
Abstract
Marsilius of Padua (1270/1290–1342) was a seminal late
medieval political thinker. In 1313 Marsilius went to Paris
to study medicine. During his stay in the French capital, he
befriended John of Jandun, a leading commentator of
Aristotle and adherent of many of Averroes’ positions. In
1324 Marsilius published his magnum opus, the Defensor
pacis (Defender of the Peace), a work containing a ﬁerce
attack on papal interference in temporal affairs. In 1326,
Marsilius and John, who was considered the coauthor of
the Defensor pacis, ﬂed to Louis of Bavaria’s court. In 1327
John XXII issued the bull Licet iuxta doctrinam, in which
he condemned Marsilius and John for heresy. In the same
year, Marsilius and John joined Louis’ expedition to Italy.
After the failure of the expedition, Marsilius returned to
Germany, where he spent the remainder of his life at
Louis’ court. Marsilius’ professed goal in the Defensor
pacis is to reveal a singular cause of civil strife, that is,
the papacy’s involvement in temporal affairs. The ﬁrst part
is to a large extent a patchwork of quotations from
Aristotle’s works, in particular the Politics. Marsilius artic-
ulates there a scheme of political organization with ulti-
mate power for making laws and appointing the
government residing with the ‘‘legislator humanus,’’ that
is, the entire body of the citizens or its ‘‘weightier’’ part
(‘‘pars valentior’’). In the second part of the treatise
Marsilius argues for the community of the faithful being
the highest authority within the Church and possessing
the power to appoint and monitor the clerics and to
interpret Scripture. In the thorny issue of papal-imperial
relations, Marsilius is an advocate of the pope’s and
the general council’s, being subject to the emperor.
Marsilius takes up a number of these issues in the Defensor
minor (c. 1342), a large portion of which deals with ques-
tions of excommunication and the plenitudo potestatis.
Biography
Marsilius de’ Mainardini (1270/1290–1342) was born in
a family with a tradition in the legal profession in the
Northern Italian city of Padua (Miethke 2000, Pincin
1967). Information about Marsilius’ youth is scarce and
derives from a poem that Albertino Mussato (1261–1329),
the famous Paduan poet and historian, dedicated to him.
Mussato relates there in a jocular tone Marsilius’ dilemma
whether to study medicine or law and how the latter
sought Mussato’s advice concerning his future studies.
Marsilius went to Paris to study arts and medicine prob-
ably after a period of studying in his home town with Peter
of Abano (1257-c. 1316), one of the major ﬁgures in the
history of medieval natural philosophy and medicine and
professor at Paris and since 1307 in Padua. In December
1312, Marsilius was elected rector of the University of
Paris for a period of 3 months. As a holder of that ofﬁce,
he had access to the French royal council as well as to the
papal curia in Avignon. The most signiﬁcant event in
Marsilius’ stay in Paris was his association with John of
Jandun (between 1285 and 1289–1328), a foremost com-
mentator on Aristotle and Master of Arts at the Colle`ge de
Navarre, who has been considered one of the leading
ﬁgures of Latin Averroism (Brenet 2003; MacClintock
1956). Between 1316 and 1318 Marsilius was promised
by John XXII a beneﬁce in Padua, but this was not
realized. In 1319, he was sent as the emissary of Matteo
Visconti and Cangrande della Scalla I, the signori of Milan
and Verona, respectively, to Charles de la Marche (the
future Charles IV of France), soliciting for the latter’s
support against Robert of Naples and offering him the
captaincy of the Ghibelline league. The negotiations bore
no fruit and Marsilius returned to Paris.
In 1324 Marsilius completed his chef-d’æuvre, the
Defensor pacis (Defender of Peace), which he dedicated to
Louis IV of Bavaria. The Defensor pacis contains a ﬁerce
attack on papal power and was regarded as a joint work of
Marsilius and John of Jandun. Despite its polemical
intent, it did not provoke immediate reactions on the
side of the papacy and Marsilius and John lived
undisturbed in the French capital for a certain period
after its publication: Marsilius borrowed money and
announced courses in 1326, and John signed a lifetime
lease on a house. In the summer of 1326, Marsilius and
John ﬂed to the court of Louis of Bavaria, in Nuremberg,
which would host a galaxy of eminent excommunicated
Franciscans, such as Michael of Cesena, Bonagratia of
Bergamo, William of Ockham, and Francis of Marchia.
Marsilius of Padua M
717
M

In 1327 John XXII issued the bull Licet iuxta doctrinam, in
which he condemned Marsilius and John, as the authors of
the Defensor pacis, for heresy. As noted before, John was
considered both in the Middle Ages as well as in earlier
modern scholarship coauthor of the Defensor pacis (Valois
1906). However, between the political teaching of the
Defensor pacis and John’s political ideas, as pieced together
from his commentaries on Aristotle, there exist crucial
differences with regard to, for example, the purpose and
the unity of the political community and the notions of
the lawgiver, natural law, world monarchy, and natural
slavery (Syros 2007; Gewirth 1948, 1951).
In 1327, Marsilius and John joined Ludwig’s expedi-
tion in Italy. Marsilius was appointed iudex clericorum et
amministrator archiepiscopatus Mediolani in temporalibus
pro regia maiestate in Milan. It is possible that he had
a hand in organizing Louis coronation in Rome in 1328,
the deposing of John XXII, and his replacement by the
Friar Minor, Peter of Corbara, who was elected pope as
Nicholas V. In 1328, Louis and his army returned to
Germany. Marsilius spent the remainder of his life at
Ludwig’s court in Munich. Around 1342 he wrote the
Defensor minor as well as a memorandum dealing with
the
legitimacy
of
the
marriage
between
Margaret
Maultasch, countess of Tyrol and Carinthia, and Louis
son, Louis of Brandenburg. In 1342 Pope Clement VI
mentioned that Marsilius was dead. The Defensor pacis
was also intensively used during the Great Schism. Its
editio princeps appeared in 1522 in Basel (Piaia 1977). In
1535 Thomas Cromwell sponsored its translation into
English, although the English version exhibits a number
of excisions (Simonetta 2000).
Political Ideas
The Defensor pacis is divided into three parts: in the ﬁrst
part Marsilius expounds the chief principles of his polit-
ical thought by drawing on various treatises of Aristotle,
most notably the Politics, and inquires into the origins and
the nature of a well-ordered political community. In the
second part, which is about four times longer than the
ﬁrst, he discusses and refutes a number of claims in favor
of the church’s possessing temporal authority. The third
part contains a summary of the main arguments of the
entire work in the form of forty-two conclusions. As short
as the ﬁrst part of the Defensor pacis may be, its interpre-
tation poses several difﬁculties. Marsilius’ intensive use of
the Politics has led to the conclusion that he chose the
Politics as an authoritative basis for articulating his own
ideas (Sternberger 1985). Yet, a closer comparison
between the political ideas of Marsilius and of his Greek
predecessor reveals marked differences (Syros 2007;
Nederman 1995a; Miethke 1989; Gewirth 1951).
Marsilius’ declared purpose in the Defensor pacis is to
lay bare the singular cause of strife and dissension that
afﬂicted the cities of Italy in his own time, that is, the
papacy’s attempt to involve itself in and controls temporal
affairs. The quest for the efﬁcient cause of political phe-
nomena assumes a normative importance in Marsilius’
thought. For instance, he identiﬁes the efﬁcient cause of
the political community, its laws and its government.
Following Cicero, rather than Aristotle, Marsilius ascribes
the creation of human communities to the human need
for self-preservation and mutual assistance. Departing
from Aristotle, Marsilius does not depict the establish-
ment of the community as the work of a single individual;
under the inﬂuence of Cicero’s views on the civic
function of rhetoric, he presents it as the fruit of the
collective will of the ﬁrst ‘‘patresfamilias,’’ who were sum-
moned and persuaded by prudent individuals to band
together into human associations (Nederman 1992). Fam-
ilies were administered according to the will of the father
and villages were governed according to the judgment of
their eldest members. The creation of a perfect commu-
nity, on the other hand, presupposes the diversity of its
constituent parts, which generates inner discord and strife.
Its maintenance depends, thus, on the existence of laws
and of a government with the task of regulating the rela-
tions among its members. Along these lines, peace is
deﬁned by Marsilius as the orderly function of the parts
of the political community, as is the case with a well-
formed living organism: whereas Aristotle looks upon
strife as originating from the conﬂict between rich and
poor, for Marsilius strife is the result of the attempts of the
church to gain control over temporal affairs.
Human acts are classiﬁed by Marsilius into two cate-
gories: transient, that is, those that can beneﬁt or harm
someone other than the agent, and immanent, that is,
those whose impact concerns solely the agent himself.
This classiﬁcation serves Marsilius as a starting point for
the demarcation of the spheres of human and divine law:
human law is concerned with transient acts, divine law
with the immanent acts, although these two spheres may
overlap. On the basis of the aforementioned distinction of
human acts, Marsilius illustrates the raison d’eˆtre and the
function of the various parts of the political community,
that is, to moderate the acts and passions of its members.
The principal six parts of the political community are the
agricultural, artisan, ﬁnancial, military, judicial or delib-
erative, and the sacerdotal. In allowing for the possibility
that farmers, artisans, and mechanics are an integral
718 M
Marsilius of Padua

component of the political community, Marsilius deviates
from Aristotle, according to whom farmers and craftsmen
are to be excluded from any healthy form of constitution.
In his classiﬁcation of constitutions, Marsilius adopts the
Aristotelian criteria of the number of those governing and
of the extent to which a constitution takes into account and
advances the common good. To these he adds a third one,
that is, the degree to which a constitution comes into being
and exists in accordance with the consent of the citizens and
the laws. Marsilius takes this criterion as a key condition for
the legitimacy and longevity of any sort of government, and
gives it primacy over the other two. In keeping with this,
Marsilius, in his account of the different types of kingship,
looks on elective kingship as the best one, and makes
a strong case for the limitation of royal authority. In this
regard, he departs from Aristotle’s notion of the absolute
ruler who exceeds the other members of the political com-
munity in virtue and political capacity and governs
according to his will without laws.
Marsilius’ notion of justice approximates Aristotle’s
concept of corrective justice, whose task is to correct poten-
tial excesses in the acts of the citizens and to bring them
into equality. Consequently, Marsilius depicts the ruler as
judge, whose function consists in repressing excesses and
guaranteeing the due proportion of the acts of the citizens
in conformity with the laws. Laws are not the product of
a single lawgiver a` l’Aristotle, such as Lycurgus or Solon,
but of the collective prudence and experience of a number
of people or even generations. The legislator humanus is
the entire body of the citizens or the weightier part (pars
valentior) that has to represent them. Marsilius draws on
Aristotle’s doctrine of the collective wisdom of the multi-
tude, according to which many people coming together
can make better judgments than a small group of experts
or wise men. Yet, although Aristotle’s theory applies to the
appointment and correction of ofﬁce holders, Marsilius
extends its validity to legislation and regards the entire
body of the citizens as the sole legitimate source of legis-
lative and governmental authority within the political
community. This model exhibits certain afﬁnities to the
organization of the city-states of medieval Italy, in which
ultimate authority resided with the council of the citizens
and the appointment of the podesta` and the other ofﬁce
holders and the preparation of drafts of laws was entrusted
to committees that acted on its behalf.
The Marsilian view of the exemplary prince is pre-
mised on the medieval notion of the ruler as judge and
guarantor of justice. In enumerating the ruler’s virtues and
attributes, Marsilius relies on Aristotle’s account of the
qualiﬁcations requisite in the possessors of the highest
ofﬁces of the government. The prince should epitomize
prudence and justice, virtues that are indispensable for the
administration of justice, and equity, which enables the
him to make decisions in case the laws exhibit gaps (con-
trary to Aristotle, Marsilius does not deﬁne equity as the
modiﬁcation of deﬁcient laws). Moreover, the would-be
prince should be motivated by love for the existing
constitution. Further, he needs coercive force (Aristotle
speaks of the great capacity for running the affairs of the
political community, but due to a mistake in William of
Moerbeke’s translation of the Politics, Marsilius interprets
this as military force), in order to be able to enforce his
decisions and to punish transgressors of the laws.
In illustrating the relationship between the legislator
humanus and the government or the ruler, Marsilius
employs Neoplatonic motifs: the legislator humanus is
the primary cause and the government the secondary.
Moreover, in terms of Aristotle’s biology, Marsilius sees
the function of the legislator humanus as analogous to
that of the soul during the creation of a living organism;
the legislator humanus appoints the government as the
counterpart of the heart, which is in charge of setting up,
differentiating and sustaining the other parts of the political
community just as the heart is in charge of creating of the
other parts and organs of a living organism. Marsilius differs
from the majority of medieval thinkers in being rather
indifferent to the question of the best form of government,
although he does mention in passing that kingship might be
the best one. His aim is rather to provide the outlines of
a universal model that would be applicable to various polit-
ical realities. In this sense, Marsilius makes the unity of the
political community contingent not on the existence of
a single ruler but on the proper and harmonious function-
ing of its parts under a single government.
The ﬁrst part of the Defensor pacis provides much of the
basis for Marsilius’ teachings about the organization of the
church in the second part, although there are a number of
discrepancies between them. The community of the faithful
constitutes the highest authority within the church and
possesses the power to nominate and appoint the clerics
and to monitor them in the performance of their duties. It
also has the right to decide and determine the interpreta-
tion of Scripture. The latter is the task of a general council,
in which the faithful or their delegates voice and discuss
their opinions and vote. Marsilius views the priesthood as
an integral part of the political community that performs,
like the rest, a civic function. Marsilius denies the pope the
right to issue decrees of coercive character and reserves for
him solely the power to call an ecumenical council and to
reinforce the decisions and interpretations of the latter.
Marsilius of Padua M
719
M

With regard to the relations between the emperor and the
pope, Marsilius argues that the pope and the general coun-
cil are subject to the power of the emperor that the sover-
eign pontiff receives power over other men only with the
permission of the emperor. Marsilius expatiates on these
issues in the Defensor minor, which is a sort of epitome of
the chief principles of Marsilius’ political theory, as set
forth in Defensor pacis. At the outset of that work, Marsil-
ius explicates the term iurisdictio and, afterwards, denies
the coercive power of the clergy. Large portions of this
work deal with questions of excommunication and the
plenitudo potestatis.
Marsilius’ ideas on the precedence of temporal over
spiritual power animated scholarly debates on the repub-
lican or imperialist interpretation of Marsilius’ political
thought. Marsilius’ views on the superiority of emperor to
the pope served to underpin an ‘‘imperialist’’ reading of
the Defensor pacis, which found its strongest advocate in
Quillet 1970. A number of scholars, on the other hand, saw
Marsilius as an ardent apologist of republican ideas and
have related his political theory to the political realities
that prevailed in late medieval Italy (Gewirth 1951/56,
1979; Skinner 1978; Syros 2007; cf. also the discussion in
Nederman, 1995b).
See also: ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d
(Averroes) ▶John of Jandun ▶Political Aristotelianism
▶Political Philosophy ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Marsiglio of Padua (1993) In: Nederman CJ (ed) Writings on the Empire:
Defensor minor and De translatione imperii. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Marsile de Padoue (1979) Œuvres mineures: Defensor minor, De
translatione imperii, texte e´tabli, trad. et annote´ par C. Jeudy and
J. Quillet. CNRS, Paris
Marsilius of Padua (2005) In: Brett A (ed and trans) The Defender of the
Peace. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Marsilius von Padua (1932) In: Scholz R (ed) Defensor pacis. 2 vols
(= Monumenta Germaniae historica: Fontes iuris Germanici antiqui
in usum scholarum separatim editi; 7) Hahn, Hannover
Secondary Sources
Brenet JB (2003) Transferts du sujet. La noe´tique d’Averroe`s selon Jean de
Jandun. Libraire Philosophique Vrin, Paris
Gewirth A (1948) John of Jandun and the Defensor Pacis. Speculum
23:267–272
Gewirth A (1951, 1956) Marsilius of Padua and Medieval Political
Philosophy, 2nd edn. Columbia University Press, New York
Gewirth A (1979) Republicanism and Absolutism in the Thought of
Marsilius of Padua. Medioevo 5:23–48
MacClintock S (1956) Perversity and Error: Studies on the ‘‘Averroist’’
John of Jandun. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Miethke J (1989) Marsilius von Padua, Die politische Theorie eines
lateinischen Aristotelikers des 14. Jahrhunderts. In: Boockmann H,
Moeller B, Stackmann K (eds) Lebenslehren und Weltentwu¨rfe im
U¨ bergang vom Mittelalter zur Neuzeit, Politik – Bildung –
Naturkunde
–
Theologie.
Verlag
Vandenhoeck
&
Ruprecht,
Go¨ttingen, pp 52–76
Miethke J (2000) De potestate papae. Die pa¨pstliche Amtskompetenz im
Widerstreit der politischen Theorie von Thomas von Aquin bis
Wilhelm von Ockham. Mohr Siebeck, Tu¨bingen
Nederman CJ (1992) The Union of Wisdom and Eloquence before the
Renaissance: the Ciceronian orator in medieval thought. J Mediev
Hist 18:75–95
Nederman CJ (1995a) Community and Consent: the Secular Political
Theory of Marsiglio of Padua’s defensor pacis. Rowman & Littleﬁeld,
Lanham
Nederman CJ (1995b) From Defensor pacis to Defensor minor: the
Problem of Empire in Marsiglio of Padua. Hist Polit Thought
16:313–329
Piaia G (1977) Marsilio da Padova nella Riforma e nella Controriforma.
Fortuna e interpretazione. Antenore, Padua
Pincin C (1967) Marsilio. Giappichelli, Turin
Quillet J (1970) La philosophie politique de Marsile de Padoue. Vrin, Paris
Simonetta S (2000) Marsilio in Inghilterra. Stato e Chiesa nel pensiero
politico inglese fra XIV e XVII secolo. LED, Milan
Skinner Q (1978) The Foundations of Modern Political Thought vol 1: the
Renaissance. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Sternberger D (1985) Die Stadt und das Reich in der Verfassungslehre des
Marsilius von Padua, Die Stadt als Urbild: sieben politische Beitra¨ge.
Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main
Syros V (2007) Die Rezeption der aristotelischen politischen Philosophie
bei Marsilius von Padua: Eine Untersuchung zur ersten Diktion des
Defensor pacis. Brill, Leiden
Valois N (1906) Jean de Jandun et Marsile de Padoue, auteurs du Defensor
Pacis. HLF 33:528–623
Marston, Roger
▶Roger Marston
Martin Luther, Political Thought
HARRO HO¨ PFL
Essex Business School
University of Essex
Colchester
UK
Abstract
Martin Luther (1483–1546) was a German Reformer,
theologian, translator of the Bible into German, priest,
theology professor (from 1512) at the university of
720 M
Marston, Roger

Wittenberg in Electoral Saxony, preacher and pastor, pro-
liﬁc author in both German and Latin, former Augustin-
ian monk, and excommunicated by the papacy in 1521.
His best known political doctrines are the Zwei Reiche/
Regimente Lehre (Two Kingdoms and/or Two Govern-
ments); political obedience and hostility to rebellion
and millennialism; endorsement of princely ‘‘absolutism’’;
the
territorial
‘‘prince’s
church’’
(landesherrliches
Kirchenregiment). Slightly less well known are his opposi-
tion to usury, his anti-Jewish attitudes, his very ‘‘secular’’
interpretation of marriage and divorce, his doctrine of the
three estates (the military, economic, and ecclesiastical),
his ‘‘congregational’’ tendencies in church government,
and his belief that his was the ‘‘end-time’’ when Satan
and Anti-Christ ruled the world. His principal political
doctrines were not unfamiliar; they resemble Augustine’s
conception of the two civitates, the medieval ‘‘two swords’’
controversy, and conventional doctrines of obedience and
good order of his time. Luther, moreover, set out his
political ideas in pamphlets prompted by speciﬁc emer-
gencies, and never consolidated them in a deﬁnitive text.
Some interpreters see them as an expression of ‘‘social
conservatism’’ rather than as inferences from his theology.
Luther’s personal and pastoral concerns from the ﬁrst
centered on the right understanding of how the Christian
is saved (or ‘‘justiﬁed,’’ accounted or rendered just). They
gained a Europe-wide reception from 1517 in the contro-
versy over indulgences, a practice that for Luther symbol-
ized the pernicious misrepresentations of true doctrine
afﬂicting Christianity. The main themes of his theology
were salvation by God’s grace alone, experienced in faith
(sola ﬁde), and rejection of what he regarded as the
received doctrine of the ‘‘sophists’’ (the scholastic theolo-
gians) that salvation was a reward ‘‘merited’’ (earned) by
‘‘good works.’’ For Luther, good works, which to be truly
good must be done freely and not out of self-interest or
fear, are the product and not the cause of justiﬁcation (On
Good Works, 1520). A right understanding of Scripture
thus frees Christians from trying to achieve salvation by
their own efforts, an impossible burden imposed by the
‘‘tyranny’’ of Rome. Even God’s law is no longer a coercive,
external imposition for Christians but is obeyed freely and
willingly. All this Luther summarized as ‘‘Christian lib-
erty.’’ He regarded Scripture alone (sola scriptura) as the
source for these teachings, especially its ‘‘core,’’ the Pauline
Epistles, St John’s Gospel and the First Letter of St Peter. Its
authority is unconditional, irrespective of traditions and
popes, although Luther acknowledged the value of the
church fathers, especially Augustine, and works such as
Tauler’s
Theologia
Deutsch.
The
Christian
must
continually ‘‘search’’ Scripture for him/herself. Luther
rejected any distinction in spiritual dignity between
a ‘‘higher’’ spiritual estate, bound by duties of ‘‘perfec-
tion,’’ and a lower lay estate of which less was demanded
(his ‘‘priesthood of all believers,’’ that is, their equality). He
acknowledged that every community (Gemeinde, with
Reich or Land his nearest approximation to ‘‘state’’) must
have an ecclesiastical ‘‘estate,’’ along with a ruling
(protecting) and an ‘‘economic’’ (nourishing) estate. But
ecclesiastics merely occupy a distinct ofﬁce (Beruf, Amt),
not a higher spiritual status. Duties previously incumbent
only on those in ‘‘holy orders’’ vowed to spiritual perfec-
tion, therefore, now bound every Christian, or ceased to
enjoy esteem, such as celibacy.
These doctrines undermined the authority of the
established ecclesiastico-political order and its personnel.
Given the hostility of the papacy and its supporters to the
fundamental reform of the whole of Christendom that
Luther came to demand, only territorial ‘‘Protestant’’ or
‘‘evangelical’’ churches could be established (‘‘evangelical’’
meaning gospel or good news, ‘‘Protestant’’ alluding to the
princes and estates that protested against the second Diet
of Speyer’s (1529) decision to ban any further reforma-
tion). Luther became increasingly convinced that the
opposition of the pope and his theologians to reformation
demonstrated that the pope was the Antichrist. Provi-
sional remedies such as territorial churches were therefore
appropriate in this ‘‘end-time.’’ Evangelical churches
depended on rulers for political support, and for protec-
tion against the papacy and Catholic princes bent on
eradicating ‘‘heresy,’’ but also against those who wanted
to advance reformation by violence and iconoclasm. The
most serious occurrences of this sort were the religio-
political ‘‘Peasant Wars’’ of 1524–1525 and millennialist
Mu¨nster between 1534 and 1535. The ‘‘Romanists’’
blamed them on the ‘‘heresiarch’’ Luther. Princely protec-
tion was, however, often neither unconditional nor disin-
terested. Luther had no intention of replacing ‘‘Romanist
tyranny’’ with that of territorial overlords. His attitude to
secular rulers was distinctly ambiguous. In his Appeal to
the German Nobility (1520) he called on the rulers of the
Holy Roman Empire to use their authority to advance
reformation, since as rulers they had the right and as
Christians the duty to do so. But in On Secular Authority
(1523), prompted by rulers banning his German transla-
tion
of
the
New
Testament
(published
1522),
he
condemned secular rulers generally (‘‘a good prince is
a rare bird in heaven’’), and attempted to safeguard true
faith and doctrine by contending that the Christian
inhabits two realms (Reiche), each with its own govern-
ment (Regiment), the spiritual and the secular or
Martin Luther, Political Thought M
721
M

‘‘worldly’’ (weltlich). The two have entirely distinct com-
petences and instruments of rule. The spiritual Reich is the
invisible community of all true Christians, governed by God
through Christ and the Word alone. Its members neither
need nor use the protection of law or the sword (Luther’s
symbol for coercive, secular government) for themselves,
since they do not resist evil and expect no advantage or
protection from rulers. The worldly or temporal Reich is
composed of those not justiﬁed in the sight of God. They
would tear each other apart, but for the fact that secular
government coerces them into behaving in a purely ‘‘exter-
nally just’’ manner by means of laws and punishments.
Insofar as no Christian is a perfect Christian in this life,
they too require the law and secular government. Secular
government is thus a divine institution, which also protects
true Christians, since they voluntarily do what is right –
Luther assumed that legal and moral obligations were much
the same – and are therefore obedient subjects. Christians
may also exercise temporal authority themselves, out of
love for their neighbor, even if that love means extreme
harshness. This was the case when Luther subsequently
exhorted rulers to show no mercy to the rebellious peasants
in his Against the Murderous, Thieving Hordes of Peasants
of 1525. However, when rulers command what is incom-
patible with the will of God, Christians may not obey but
may not rebel either: they must disobey and suffer. How-
ever, the Lutheran justiﬁcation of political resistance in the
Magdeburg Confession of 1550 has a basis in some highly
circumstantial concessions in terms of the right of self-
defense by Luther himself (Warning to His Dear German
People, 1531). He had little regard for secular laws, less for
lawyers, none at all for canon law. Even though the Refor-
mation was mainly urban, he had no interest in republican
institutions or questions of the best political form; his
instincts were monarchical and he normally simply
equated secular authority and ‘‘princes’’ (Fu¨rsten). His
theology of spirit versus letter tended to minimize the
signiﬁcance of ‘‘externals’’ and ‘‘forms’’ in general.
The ‘‘true church’’ cannot be a this-worldly institu-
tion, since the true Christians that alone compose it can-
not be known. All the same, Luther treated it as a template
for the ‘‘physical’’ or ‘‘external’’ church (i.e., the institu-
tional church) as a voluntary association of believers
governed only by Christ, Scripture, and the moral author-
ity of pastors which it chose itself, complete with schools
and provision for the poor (see Right and Power of
a Christian Assembly, 1523). Secular rulers have (according
to this version) no role whatever in bringing men to true
justice or true faith, contrary to what he taught in his
Appeal and subsequently. In practice he endorsed an eccle-
siastical order in which political subjection and religious
allegiance are coterminous. He never resiled from his
position that true faith could not be coerced, and indeed
that coercion was counter-productive in dealing with
‘‘weak’’ Christians. Large sections of his On Secular
Authority were later reprinted verbatim in justiﬁcations
for religious toleration. Equally, however, he discerned
dangers to souls from bad laws, institutions and practices,
and urged their forcible abolition or prevention, either out
of ‘‘charity’’ to neighbors, or as matters of ‘‘natural law’’
which he regarded as, for example, prohibiting ‘‘blas-
phemy,’’ which covered many ‘‘Romanist’’ practices.
Luther tended to posit apparently mutually exclusive
antitheses (spiritual/worldly, spirit/letter, external/internal,
freedom/law, gospel/traditions of men). His mode of expres-
sion was often confrontational, vituperative, and in his ver-
nacular writings scatological. Disagreements with humanists
like Erasmus over free will, and with other nonsectarian
reformers, for example, Zwingli, over the sacrament of the
Lord’s Supper, proved irresolvable, since the mere fact of
disagreement despite the supposedly plain meaning of Scrip-
ture itself compromised the reformers’ authority. Luther’s
intention had, however, never been to found a new church,
still less a denomination, but to reform the old one.
See also: ▶Jesuit Political Thought ▶John Calvin,
Political Thought
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ho¨pﬂHarro M (trans and ed) (1991) Luther and Calvin on secular
authority. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Luther
Martin
(1883)
D.
Martin
Luthers
Werke,
Kritische
Gesammtausgabe. Herman Bo¨hlaus Nachfolger, Weimar
Luther Martin (1990) Ausgewa¨hlte Schriften, 6 vols, ed. Bornkamm K,
Ebeling G. Insel Verlag, Frankfurt a. M
Luther Martin (2002) Luther’s works. In: Pelikan J, Lehmann HT (eds)
Concordia, 1955–1986; available on CD-ROM. Fortress/Concordia,
Philadelphia
Secondary Sources
Cargill Thompson WDJ (1984) The political thought of Martin Luther.
Barnes and Noble, Totowa
Kaufmann T (2006) Martin Luther. C.H. Beck, Mu¨nchen
Lohse B (1999) Martin Luther’s theology: its historical and systematic
development, Harrisville RA (ed and trans). Augsburg, Philadelphia
Marius R (1999) Martin Luther: the Christian between God and death.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge
McGrath AE (1985) Luther’s theology of the cross. Blackwell, Oxford
Skinner Q (1978) The foundations of modern political thought, vol II.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Suda MJ (2006) Die Ethik Martin Luthers. Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht,
Go¨ttingen
Whitford DM (2001) Tyranny and resistance: the Magdeburg confession
and the Lutheran tradition. Concordia, St Louis
722 M
Martin Luther, Political Thought

Martin of Dacia
LIDIA LANZA
Fribourg
Switzerland
Abstract
Martin of Dacia, Danish Master of Arts and theologian of
the last quarter of the thirteenth century, attempted to
establish a new grammar that could be considered as an
autonomous science. This grammar would be universal
and grounded on ontological reality, its aim being the
study of the properties of language.
Martin of Dacia was a Danish Master of Arts and theology
at the University of Paris. What is known about his life and
intellectual activity can be summarized as follows: he was
active as a university teacher and wrote his works before
1287–1288, when he became Chancellor to the Danish
King Erik VI Menved, whom he served for the rest of his
life. A canon ﬁrst in Paris, he obtained the same ofﬁce at
Roskilde, Lund, and Slevig, as a reward for services
rendered to the King. He died in 1304.
Martin is the author of a grammatical work and logical
commentaries. The former, the De modis signiﬁcandi,
includes two parts, of which the ﬁrst, on the parts of
discourse (Etymologia), leads on to the second part, on
syntactic analysis (Dyasynthetica). In this work Martin
leaves aside two other sections, the Orthographia and the
Prosodya, which deal with accents and syllables. These two
sections, which were part of the traditional writings on
grammar, were usually placed before the sections of
Etymologia
and
Dyasynthetica.
Martin’s
De
modis
signiﬁcandi was very well known and inﬂuential, judging
by the number of manuscripts in which it survives and the
many references to it by later grammarians. It became so
important that several authors wrote commentaries on it
in the following decades. As for Martin’s logical work, it
consists of a set of questions on the old logic (logica vetus),
that is Aristotle’s Categories and De interpretatione, the
Isagoge of Porphyry, Gilbert of Poitiers’ Liber sex
principiorum, and Boethius’ commentary on Aristotle’s
Topics. His logical work is extant in only one manuscript
(Erlangen, Universita¨tsbibliothek 213, ff. 102ra–129vb),
which suggests that it was much less widely distributed
than the De modis signiﬁcandi. Scholarship has paid little
attention to this part of Martin’s production; exceptions
are the studies on some questions on Aristotle’s Categories
and De interpretatione (Marmo 1994).
His prominence as a medieval philosopher relies
almost entirely on his De modis signiﬁcandi. If we assume
as certain Martin’s chronological priority over Boethius of
Dacia, as scholarship tends to do (see Marmo 1994), this
work is the ﬁrst systematic treatment of the logical aspects
of language. Along with Boethius of Dacia, Martin was one
of the outstanding exponents of the ﬁrst generation of the
‘‘speculative grammarians’’ or modistae.
Martin’s project was to establish a new grammar
departing from the existing descriptive approach and the
reading of classical authors that had constituted the disci-
pline’s traditional curriculum. For Martin, as for Boethius
of Dacia, grammar should no longer be considered as
a mere introduction to the other domains of the Trivium
(such as rhetoric and logic) and the Quadrivium, but as an
autonomous ﬁeld of research. To this end, he developed
a theory of the formal aspects of language concerned solely
with the correctness of propositions and concepts and,
unlike logic, not with their truth or applicability to reality.
In this way he attributed a scientiﬁc status to grammar,
considering it an autonomous science with its own subject
matter. This autonomy had been endorsed as early as the
eleventh century, but it gained further consistency under
the inﬂuence of Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, as this work
deﬁned the criteria for any possible science: the subject
matter has to be necessary and universal.
As far as the criterion of necessity is concerned, Martin
shares with Boethius of Dacia the view that grammar is
a science even though its principles are not absolute at the
same level of the principles of other sciences, such as
metaphysics. As for the criterion of universality, it is
assured by establishing as its object ‘‘modes of signifying’’
(modi signiﬁcandi), that is, ways in which a lexical notion,
in addition to its essential reference, can express different
values, just as the verb dolere and the noun dolor or the
noun donum and the participle datum refer to different
aspects of the same notion. In other words, the same idea
can be signiﬁed through various parts of speech as long as
its ‘‘modes of signifying’’ are not in contrast with that idea,
or, again, the lexeme (dictio) is suitable to receive the form
of a noun, pronoun, verb, participle, or adverb. By means
of this form or ‘‘mode of signifying’’ it is possible to
express categories belonging to extra-linguistic domains,
as in the case of verbs or participles and nouns or pro-
nouns, which express the metaphysical categories of
change and permanence, respectively.
To establish the ‘‘modes of signifying’’, as the object of
grammar strengthens further the universality of gram-
mar, as these modes are considered to be linguistic uni-
versals. Thus this science focuses on a universal grammar,
valid for all languages, on which the grammars of each
Martin of Dacia M
723
M

particular language are grounded. The difference between
the diverse languages consists in the different way through
which each language forms its vocal expression (vox). This
ﬁts into the domain of the accident and thus involves
a devaluation of the level of vocal expression; yet, because
the vox is a sign of the thing which must be signiﬁed, and
given that is more proper (habilius signum) than other
signs such as a nod or a glance, grammar includes it,
though only as an accident, as it falls more properly
under the realm of natural philosophy. This view was
followed by John of Dacia, but not by other modistae,
such as Boethius of Dacia.
A further reason to assert grammar’s universality,
which allows an understanding of the underlying connec-
tion between the grammatical–logical level and the
epistemological–ontological one, is that ‘‘modes of signi-
fying’’ reﬂect corresponding ‘‘modes of being’’ (modi
essendi) of some existing entity through the mediation of
an intellectual act, which understands and conceptualizes
it, giving rise to the corresponding ‘‘modes of understand-
ing’’ (modi intelligendi). This, along with the Aristotelian
characterization of the intellect in the act of knowing as
a passive faculty, justiﬁes the claim of grammar to be
a science by rooting its object in reality: each thing has
its properties or ‘‘modes of being’’ that determine the
corresponding modes in which it can be understood
(modi intelligendi), while the ways in which the intellect
conceptualizes it determine the modes of signifying (modi
signiﬁcandi). Martin is clear on how this process is
achieved, though he left some unresolved problems for
the succeeding modistae: the ‘‘modes of signifying’’ derive
from the ‘‘modes of understanding’’ as from their imme-
diate cause and from the properties of things, the ‘‘modes
of being’’, as from an indirect cause, as this is made
through the mediation of the intellect. This narrow deriv-
ative chain provides a grammar well anchored in reality,
which avoids the risk of setting up intellectual ﬁctions or
attributing arbitrariness to the object; yet it raises further
problems, as in the case of empty or privative names such
as ‘‘nothing’’ or ‘‘blindness’’, or in the case of names of
ﬁctitious beings, such as ‘‘chimera’’. If the relationship
between the three kinds of modes is conceived as
a narrow chain, there is no answer to the question as to
the derivation from ‘‘modes of being’’ in the case of an
object that does not exist in reality or without the prop-
erties denoted by its ‘‘modes of signifying’’. This is one of
the main points that Boethius of Dacia and the succeeding
modistae attempted to solve (see the entry on Radulphus
Brito in this volume). Their solutions are varied, but they
all departed from Martin by rendering more complex the
process of derivation of the ‘‘modes of signifying’’ from the
‘‘modes of being’’. In fact, later authors broadened the ways
in which the ‘‘modes of signifying’’ can be attributed, as in
the case of their attribution to other objects – whether
existing or ﬁctitious – by reason of supposed similarities
of the ‘‘modes of signifying’’ with existing objects.
Modistae of later generations inherited a further diver-
gence between Martin and Boethius on the relationship
between the three modes. While Boethius argued for
a relationship of similarity between the modes – they
cannot be one and the same thing, otherwise each
property or ‘‘mode of being’’ of a thing would have
a corresponding ‘‘mode of signifying’’ – Martin rejected
the notion that one mode can signify another: the three
modes are, in his view, completely one and the same thing,
being only accidentally different, just as Socrates remains
one and the same person regardless of the places where he
might be. Each mode cannot be a sign for the other two
modes, because it would be a sign of something equal to
itself, and nothing can be a sign of itself.
For Martin, the ‘‘modes of signifying’’ reside in the vox
as in a sign, though they inhere in the signiﬁed thing like
accidents in a substance. In this case too, Martin’s solu-
tion, in contrast to that of Boethius, is probably carried
out
–
as
Marmo
(1994)
suggests
–
to
prevent
a hypostatization of the ‘‘modes of signifying’’: in the act
of giving a name, the intellect does not create anything really
existent to be added to the substance of the vox; the ‘‘modes
of signifying’’, as well as the ‘‘modes of understanding,’’
reside in external things, and only in a weaker sense do
they reside in the intellect and in the vox. In the ontological
frame each kind of mode has its peculiarity and autonomy,
making possible an autonomous inquiry of each kind, and
this tripartite structure does not involve the production of
something new when an act of intellection or signiﬁcation
occurs.
See also: ▶Boethius of Dacia ▶Modistae ▶Radulphus
Brito
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Martin of Dacia (1961) Opera, ed. Roos H. Corpus Philosophorum
Danicorum Medii Aevi, 11. G.E.C. Gad, Copenhagen (this volume
consists of Martin’s De modi signiﬁcandi and his Questions on the
works of the Logica vetus)
Secondary Sources
Bursill-Hall GL (1971) Speculative grammars of the Middle Ages. The
doctrine of ‘partes orationis’ of the modistae. Mouton, The Hague/
Paris
724 M
Martin of Dacia

Kelly LG (2002) The mirror of grammar. Theology, philosophy and the
‘modistae’. John Benjamins, Amsterdam
Lamacchia A (1969) I modi signiﬁcandi di Martino di Dacia. In: Arts
libe´raux et philosophie au Moyen Aˆ ge. Actes du Quatrie`me Congre`s
International de Philosophie Me´die´vale, Universite´ de Montre´al,
Canada, 27 aouˆt – 2 septembre 1967. Institut d’E´tudes Me´die´vales/
J. Vrin, Montre´al/Paris, pp 913–921
Maieru` A (1986) La grammatica speculativa. In: Leonardi C, Orlandi
G (eds) Aspetti della letteratura latina nel secolo XIII. Atti del
primo Convegno Internazionale di studi dell’Associazione per il
Medioevo e l’Umanesimo Latini (AMUL), Perugia, 3–5 ottobre
1983.
Regione
dell’Umbria/La
Nuova
Italia,
Perugia/Firenze,
pp 147–168
Marmo C (1992) La teoria delle relazioni nei commenti alle Categorie da
Gentile da Cingoli a Matteo da Gubbio. In: Buzzetti D, Ferriani M,
Tabarroni A (eds) L’insegnamento della logica a Bologna nel XIV
secolo. Istituto per la Storia dell’Universita` di Bologna, Bologna,
pp 353–391
Marmo C (1994) Semiotica e linguaggio nella Scolastica: Parigi, Bologna,
Erfurt 1270–1330. La semiotica dei Modisti. Istituto storico italiano
per il Medio Evo, Roma
Pinborg J (1967) Die Entwicklung der Sprachtheorie im Mittelalter.
BGPTM = Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie
des Mittelalters, 42/2. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster West, pp 67–77
Roos H (1952) Die modi signiﬁcandi des Martinus de Dacia. Forschungen
zur Geschichte der Sprachlogik im Mittelalter. BGPTM = Beitra¨ge
zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des Mittelalters, 37/2.
Aschendorffsche/A. Frost-Hansen, Mu¨nster West/Copenhagen
Rosier I (1983) La grammaire spe´culative des Modistes. Presses
Universitaires de Lille, Lille
Rosier I (1994) La parole comme acte. Sur la grammaire et la se´mantique
du XIIIe sie`cle. Vrin, Paris
Mathematics and Philosophy in
the Arab World
ANTONELLA STRAFACE
Facolta` di Lingue e Letterature Straniere
Universita` degli Studi di Napoli L’Orientale
Napoli
Italy
Abstract
In the Arab world, the real cultivation of science and
philosophy in the form of academic disciplines began in
the second/eight century, after the period of the great
conquests, as a result of the translation movement that was
fostered by the ʿAbba¯sids of Baghdad. The ‘‘translation’’ into
Arabic of the scientiﬁc and philosophical knowledge of the
Ancients (Greeks, Persians, and Indians) was not uncriti-
cal, as the necessity (for religious reasons) of synthesizing
this cultural heritage and the Islamic religious thought led
to the foundation of a gnoseological itinerary, the ﬁnal
aim of which was God. It was on the basis of this purpose
that the recovery of the ancient knowledge and the study
of all disciplines, both philosophical and scientiﬁc, were
justiﬁed.
Arab scholars generally used to present science as
a branch of philosophy, since the process of inquiry into
the nature of science was the same as that used to inquire
into the nature of philosophical knowledge. In turn, sci-
ence was generally distinguished into two main groups:
mathematical sciences and natural sciences.
Mathematical sciences included arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, and music. Regarding mathematics, it seems
that there were two different systems of thought in the
school of Baghdad. One system was inﬂuenced by the
classical heritage and tried to recover the Greek and
Mesopotamic
knowledge.
The
other
system,
more
practical, was inﬂuenced by Indian sources, which had
its champion in the beginner of algebra, Muh:ammad
b. Mu¯sa¯ al-Khwarizmı¯.
As for philosophy, it played a fundamental role not
only in the process of absorption and synthesis of ‘‘for-
eign’’ sciences and the formation of the Islamic ones, but
also in the cultivation and the development of sciences in
general, to the extent that this process would have been
impossible without the contribution of the falsafa or
h:ikma (wisdom).
As for the role of science and its relationship with
theology, the Arabs maintained that science, in its general
meaning, was useful in order to understand and imple-
ment the divine law.
The Arab contribution to the development of science and
philosophy has been remarkable. After the period of the
great conquests, the Arabs showed a particular interest
in other cultures and civilizations they came in contact
with and whose intellectual outcome they wanted to
assimilate through the translation movement. Started
under the Umayyads (661–750) of Damascus, the transla-
tion movement reached its apex during the ﬁrst centuries
of the long history of the ʿAbba¯sids (750–1258) of Bagh-
dad who fostered this process, which was not only
a cultural one.
The main reasons for supporting this kind of ‘‘dia-
chronic encounter’’ between the Arabs and the Ancients
were due to both political and social changes and the
development of a new ideology that took place in the
ʿAbba¯sids period. In a social and political climate such as
that of the ʿAbba¯sid Baghdad, the need for theoretical
sciences became more and more pressing. On the other
Mathematics and Philosophy in the Arab World M
725
M

hand, the necessity (for religious reasons) of synthesizing
the heritage of the Ancients and the Islamic religious
thought led to the foundation of a gnoseological itinerary,
the ﬁnal aim of which was God.
It was on the basis of this purpose that the recovery of
the ancient knowledge and the study of all disciplines,
both philosophical and scientiﬁc, were justiﬁed. In this
regard, it is worth noting that the ‘‘curriculum’’ of the
school of Baghdad was inspired by Greek sources,
although it also included Islamic sciences such as law
(ﬁqh) and theology (kala¯m).
With regard to scientiﬁc disciplines, the Arab scholars
generally used to present science as a branch of philoso-
phy, so that al-Kindı¯ (801–873), in deﬁning the epistemic
position of science within the philosophical knowledge,
maintained that the process of inquiry into the nature of
science was the same as that which is used to inquire into
the nature of philosophical knowledge.
In turn, science was generally distinguished into
two
main
groups:
mathematical
sciences
(al-‘ulu¯m
al-riya¯d˙iyya) and natural sciences (al-‘ulu¯m al-t:abı¯ʿiyya).
Mathematical sciences included arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, and music.
Like the other disciplines studied by the Arabs, also the
mathematical sciences, which developed in Baghdad
around the third/ninth century, experienced remarkable
progress, thanks to the translations of Greek texts into
Arabic; the translation of Euclid’s Elements by al-H˙ ajja¯j
seems to go back to the ﬁfth ʿAbba¯sids Caliph Ha¯run
al-Rashı¯d (786–809), who encouraged this kind of trans-
lations. His son, al-Ma’mu¯n (809–833), who succeeded to
him in the caliphate, encouraged learning even more
strongly than his father. To this aim, he founded in Bagh-
dad a centre for translation and research: the House of
Wisdom (Bayt al-h:ikma).
The most important Greek mathematical texts that
were translated are Euclid’s works, including, besides
Elements, the Data, the Optics, the Phaenomena, and On
Divisions. As far Archimedes, although among his works
only two texts seem to have been translated, that is, Sphere
and Cylinder and Measurement of the Circle, their inﬂuence
was remarkable, since they stimulated original researches.
Instead, almost all of Apollonius’ works were translated, as
well as Diophantus’ Arithmetica and Menelaus’ Sphaerica.
The development of mathematics was also encouraged by
the necessity of respecting religious prescriptions: the duty
of observing the holy days, and the related ritual practices,
represented a stimulus for the study of astronomy. On the
other hand, the need of applying the Islamic law to some
situations concerning problems of inheritance, dowry, or
tithe (zaka¯t), for example, required the development of
algebra, an Arabic invention.
Regarding mathematics, it seems that there were two
different systems of thought in the school of Baghdad.
One system was inﬂuenced by the classical heritage, and
tried to recover the Greek and Mesopotamic knowledge.
The other system, more practical, was inﬂuenced by
Indian sources which had its champion in the beginner
of algebra, Muh:ammad ibn Mu¯sa¯ al-Khwarizmı¯ (d. 850),
as he wrote a treatise on the Indian numbers, preserved
only in its Latin version, De numero Indorum.
The name of al-Khwarizmı¯, however, is linked to
his famous treatise H˙ isa¯b al-jabr wa-l-muqa¯bala, later
translated into Latin by Robert of Chester and Gerard of
Cremona (Liber algebrae et almucabalae). Here he turned
the Greek concept of mathematics, which was essentially
geometric, in a revolutionary way. In fact, the Greeks, as
they felt the impossibility of conceiving in an analytical
way the idea of the irrational numbers, gave geometry the
function of studying ‘‘immeasurable’’ greatness. From this
standpoint, the Arabs went over the Greeks and, in apply-
ing the same procedures of the rational numbers to the
irrational ones, contributed to the progress of mathemat-
ics in a remarkable way.
The Arab mathematicians Tha¯bit ibn Qurra and
‘Umar Khayya¯m were inﬂuenced by the Greek mathemat-
ical heritage. Tha¯bit ibn Qurra (826–901), one of the most
important translators from Syriac and Greek, did not only
translate the major Greek mathematicians (Euclides,
Archimedes, Apollonius, and Ptolemy) but also wrote
a mathematical treatise on the solution of problems of
algebra through geometric demonstration. He was also
inﬂuenced by the Neoplatonic doctrines and recovered
their ideas, as showed by his translations of Proclus and
Nicomacus of Gerasa (Introduction to Arithmetica). As for
‘Umar Khayya¯m (1050–1122), although he is considered
one of the major Persian poets, he was also a scientist. He
also wrote a Kita¯b al-jabr in which, unlike al-Khwarizmı¯,
he dealt with cubic equations.
Although the Arab mathematicians are famous for
their
works
on
algebra,
number
theory,
number
systems, geometry, and trigonometry, they also gave
their contributions to astronomy. In this respect, the
translation of Ptolemy’s Almagest provided important
astronomical material.
As a result of the study and the practice of astronomy,
during this period two observatories were founded in
Baghdad and in Damascus: here the astronomers,
entrusted by the Caliph himself, carried out a program
of astronomic observations. The aim of this program was
726 M
Mathematics and Philosophy in the Arab World

to verify the theories explained by Ptolemy in his Almagest
and to improve the astronomical tools. Historical sources
also report of private observatories. Particular attention
deserves the private observatory of the Banu¯ Mu¯sa¯ who,
besides being important translators in the Bayt al-H˙ ikma,
completed, from 840 to 869, some studies about the sun
and the ﬁxed stars. The Shı¯ʿite Persian dynasty of the
Buyids, too, encouraged several astronomical projects in
Persia where they founded permanent observatories
equipped with sophisticated instruments. From one of
these observatories, the astronomer ‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n
al-Su¯fı¯ (903–986), the author of The Book of the Fixed
Stars, began the measurement of the ecliptic in the
presence of several astronomers, as referred by the versatile
scholar al-Biru¯nı¯ (973–1048). The Buyid ‘Ad˙u¯d al-Dawla
(936–983), when he became the governor of Baghdad,
founded in the garden of his house a building, which Ibn
al-Qift˙ı¯ (1172–1248) called Bayt al-ras:ad (the house of the
astronomical observation), to promote a program of
observation of the planets.
As for philosophy, it played a fundamental role not
only in the process of absorption and synthesis of
‘‘foreign’’ sciences and the formation of the Islamic ones,
but also in the cultivation and the development of sciences
in general, to the extent that this process would have been
impossible without the contribution of the falsafa or
h:ikma. As a matter of fact, the term h:akı¯m was used to
denote a physician, a scientist, as well as a philosopher.
With regard to its deﬁnition, the Arabs used two terms
to translate the Greek word ‘‘philosophy’’: falsafa and
h:ikma. Falsafa, a calque from Greek, was understood
according to its original meaning, which the Arabs per-
fectly knew, of h:ubb al-maʿrifa (love for knowledge). As for
its function, al-Kindı¯, one of the ﬁrst philosophers of the
Arab world (and of Arab origin), interpreted philosophy
as the knowledge of the reality of things according to
human possibility. Since this kind of knowledge is both
theoretical and practical, falsafa has a double aim: to reach
the truth and to behave in accordance with this truth.
Starting from this deﬁnition, some philosophers like al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (870–950) drew a distinction between falsafa
yaqı¯niyya and falsafa maz˙nu¯na; the ﬁrst was based on
demonstration (burha¯n) while the second, deriving from
opinion, was based on dialectics.
On the other hand, h:ikma, a Qurʾa¯nic term that occurs
20 times in the Sacred Book and appears in the H˙ adı¯th
literature too, had several meanings. The majority of
Muslim authorities, who debated its exact meaning in
the Qurʾa¯n as well as in the Tradition, identiﬁed it
with theology (kala¯m), as well as with the ‘‘intellectual
sciences’’ (al-‘ulu¯m al-‘aqliyya) or with ‘‘traditional
philosophy’’ or, even with the so-called h:ikma ila¯hiyya,
literally ‘‘theosophia.’’ H˙ ikma may imply a connection
between knowledge and practice of knowledge, through
which man can realize his happiness and bring his being to
perfection, as was stated not only by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ but also by
another eminent faylasu¯f, Ibn Sı¯na¯ (known as Avicenna,
980–1037) and the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ (The Brethren of
Purity, fourth/tenth century). With the Ishra¯qı¯ school
represented by Suhrawardı¯ (1155–1191), h:ikma combined
the formal religious sciences and the essence of pure
gnosis: in this way, it acquired the connotation of both
theoretical knowledge and spiritual vision.
In the Shı¯ʿite circles, h:ikma, being connected with the
‘‘cycle of initiation’’ that follows the ‘‘cycle of prophecy,’’
would be identiﬁed with the esoteric dimension of
religion, as stated by the Isma¯‘ı¯liyya. In this way, h:ikma
had a soteriological aim insofar as it involved not only
theoretical knowledge but also the direct vision of the
Truth that implied the salvation of man’s soul.
Regarding the development of philosophy and its
diffusion in the Arab world, it should be noted that
although it goes back to the translation movement, phil-
osophical schools existed in the East long before the
appearance of the Arabs in the history of the world.
After the advent of the Islam and thanks to the trans-
lations from Greek, the Arabs, after having assimilated
the classical heritage, developed their personal and inde-
pendent system of thought in which, because of religious
conditioning, Aristotelian theories were interpreted in
a Neoplatonic way. One of the main reasons of this
‘‘misinterpretation’’ is linked to the works that intro-
duced Neoplatonism in the Arab world; in this regard,
it is worth noting that the diffusion of Neoplatonism was
due not to Plotinus’ Enneades but to some of its later and
adulterated versions, among which was the so-called
Theology of Aristotle. This was an epitome of Plotinus’
Enneades akin to another pseudo-Aristotelian treatise
based on Proclus’ Element of Theology, which, in turn,
was known in the Arab world with the title of Kita¯b al-
ı¯d˙a¯h: fı¯ khayr al-mah:d˙ (The Book of the Absolute Goodness).
A further reason for Neoplatonic tendencies in Aristote-
lian theories was religious inﬂuence. From this standpoint,
the recovery of Greek philosophy, especially of Neoplato-
nism, was functional to a cosmological and gnoseological
system hierarchically structured, at the top of which there
was God.
With the historical development of Islam, the real
nature of falsafa changed from a system of rational
thought to a kind of wisdom that played a pivotal role in
Mathematics and Philosophy in the Arab World M
727
M

theology; nevertheless,
philosophy, although it was
interpreted as theosophy sometimes connected to illumi-
nation or gnosis, did not disdain the use of rational
thought. So, philosophy in the Arab world, even when
interpreted as ‘‘Greek philosophy,’’ did not concern
Greek doctrines only, insofar as it developed a system of
rational thought which made use of analysis, logic, and
rational inquiry. If these philosophical tools were adopted
and developed by different Islamic sciences (grammar,
rhetoric, classiﬁcation of tradition, geometry, arithmetic,
etc.), on the other hand, philosophy would also give the
Arabs the appropriate intellectual background, which
enabled them to encounter other civilizations and cultures
and to integrate the Arabic (Islamic) heritage into the new
ideas they came in contact with.
A paradigm of this is the emanatistic solution proposed
by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Ibn Sı¯na¯ who, establishing also the onto-
logical foundations of science, inﬂuenced the subsequent
history of Islamic sciences and philosophy.
Regarding the role of science and its relationship with
philosophy–theology, it is worth noting that jurists as
well as theologians generally maintained that science, in
its general acceptance, was useful in order to understand
and implement the divine law. As for mathematical
sciences, the theologian al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1005–1111), to men-
tion the most representative thinker, did not attribute
to them any function in spiritual and metaphysical mat-
ters. On the other hand, the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ praised
Pythagoras not only because he was considered ‘‘a wise
man’’ but also because the Pythagorean doctrine, unlike
other doctrines on number, considered existing things as
ruled by the nature of numbers, the knowledge of which
here implies the knowledge of their origin. On this
assumption, the authors of the most ancient encyclope-
dia of the Arab world known so far, the Rasa¯’il Ikhwa¯n
al-S˙afa¯’wa-Khulla¯n al-Wafa¯’ (The Epistles of the Brethren of
Purity and the Loyal Friends), made the arithmetic a part of
the propaedeutic disciplines; for this reason they started
their Rasa¯’il with the epistle on number. In particular, in
two of the 52 epistles of the Rasa¯’il (namely the 32nd and
the 33rd, which belong to the third section of the encyclo-
pedia), they argued that the knowledge of numbers equals
the knowledge of God, since the origin of numbers from
the ‘‘one’’ represented a way to prove the origin of the
universe from God. Moreover, echoing the Pythagorean
doctrine, the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ compared the number one to
God; just as the number one is not similar to the other
numbers, although it is the origin of numbers, God is not
similar to His creatures although He is the Creator of the
universe. In this respect, Pythagoras could be considered
a ‘‘monotheist.’’ Finally, the way in which numbers come
from the one may be compared with the way in which
created beings come from God. This assumption involves
a kind of symmetry between the numerical progression
from the number one and the emanation (fayd˙) of the
universe from God, according to the following correspon-
dences: 1 = God; 2 = Intellect; 3 = Soul; 4 = matter; 5 =
nature; 6 = body; 7 = stars; 8 = elements; 9 = generated
beings.
The use of mathematical sciences, in particular of
arithmetic, as a metaphorical reading of Neoplatonism is
also found in the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s, who adopted numbers in
their metaphorical interpretation (ta’wı¯l) of the Scripture.
In particular, they recovered the so-called sı¯mı¯ya¯’ (or
‘‘esoteric science of the letters’’) which drew upon the
Pythagorean tradition for its symbolic numerology, just
as they used the Neoplatonic tradition as a framework of
their cosmology. The result of the application of this
particular science is a kind of exegesis of the Soul, achieved
through a process of transmutation of the words and
letters into numbers thanks to a variety of techniques
such as, and ﬁrst of all, the h:isa¯b al-jummal (i.e., the
calculation made by giving to each letter of the Arabic
alphabet a numerical value). Thus, the application of the
sı¯mı¯ya¯’ and the recovery of numerological techniques
become a ‘‘sign’’ (one of the literally meanings for sı¯mı¯ya¯’)
not only of the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ da‘wa (propaganda) but also of
the intrinsic unity of all levels of reality (cosmological,
epistemological, and imamic), recognized within the
Isma¯ʿı¯liyya.
By the end of the ﬁfth/eleventh century, philosophy
was attacked and criticized by the most important cham-
pion of the orthodoxy, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯. If his polemical treatise
Taha¯fut al-Fala¯sifa (The Incoherence of the Philosophers)
has been considered as a mortal blow for philosophy, on
the other hand, it provoked a very interesting reaction, like
the one that took place in the western lands through the
main philosophers of the Andalusian school: Ibn Ba¯jja
(known as Avempace, d. 1138) and, especially, Ibn Rushd
(known as Averroes, 1126–1198), the great commentator
of Aristotle, who undertook the defense of philosophy
with his Taha¯fut al-taha¯fut (The Incoherence of the Inco-
herence), a polemical answer to al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s attack. With the
death of Ibn Rushd and the subsequent power shift from
Muslim to Christian, the philosophical activity in western
Islamic countries came down.
In eastern Islamic countries, after the fall of the
ʿAbba¯sid caliphate (1258) and the subsequent end of
the symbolic political unity of the Islamic world, philos-
ophy was dominated, in general, by the heritage of Ibn
Sı¯na¯ and Suhrawardı¯. Their ideas and inﬂuences stimu-
lated the rise of several philosophical schools such as that
728 M
Mathematics and Philosophy in the Arab World

of Sadr al-Dı¯n al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯ (d. 1640) known as Mulla¯ Sadra¯,
the founder of the so-called ‘‘transcendent theosophy’’
(h:ikma mutaʿa¯liyya). His idea of an ‘‘existence preceding
essence,’’ which goes back to Ibn Sı¯na¯ and Suhrawardı¯,
made the transition from essentialism to the existential-
ism possible. Moreover, in dividing the way to knowledge
into four parts (metaphysics, physics, theology, and psy-
chology), he gave a further demonstration of the intrinsic
unity between philosophy and science in general.
See also: ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Essence and Existence
▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
Abu¯
Nas˙r
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
Abu¯
H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad
▶Ibn
Ba¯jja,
Abu¯
Bakr
ibn
al-Sa¯ʾig˙
(Avempace) ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad
al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
▶Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ, Encyclopedia of ▶Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Philosoph-
ical Tradition ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q
▶Medicine and Philosophy ▶Plato, Arabic ▶Tha¯bit
ibn Qurra ▶Translations from Greek into Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Translations
This selected bibliography includes only the works that deal, in particular,
with the relationship between mathematics and philosophy. For
detailed references to speciﬁc aspects of both mathematics and
philosophy, see Index Islamicus, ed. Bleany CH, Sinclair S. Brill,
Leiden 1966, under their respective sections
Secondary Sources
Studies and Sources
Bakar O (1991) Tawhı¯d and science: essays on the history and philosophy
of Islamic science. Secretariat for Islamic Philosophy and Science,
Kuala Lumpur/Penang
Bakar O (1992) Classiﬁcation of knowledge in Islam: a study of Islamic
philosophies of science. Secretariat for Islamic Philosophy and
Science, Kuala Lumpur
Burnett C (2002) Arabic science and philosophy. Bull Philos Me´die´v
44:19–22
Djebbar A (2005) Mathe´matiques et philosophie en pays d’Islam. Miroirs
of Heritage (Ayene-ye Miras) – Ayin-i Mirath 3 i /28:187–212
Endress G (2003) Mathematics and philosophy in medieval Islam. The
enterprise of science in Islam: new perspectives, ed. Hogendijk JP,
Sabra AI. MIT Press, Massachusetts, pp 121–176
Hourani GF (ed) (1975) Essays on Islamic philosophy and science. State
university of New York Press, Albany, New York
Montserrat A, Souto JA (coord) (2006) Ciencia y religion en el Islam. Ilu:
Revista de Ciencias de las Religiones, Aneyos 16. Publicaciones
Universidad Compultense de Madrid, Madrid
Matter
▶Form and Matter
Matthew of Aquasparta
MIKKO YRJO¨ NSUURI
Department of Social Sciences and Philosophy
University of Jyva¨skyla¨
Jyva¨skyla¨
Finland
Abstract
Matthew of Aquasparta (c. 1237–1302) was a theologian
who made a considerable career in the Franciscan order.
In his theory of the human soul, he accepted the plurality
of forms and opposed the conception of the unity to the
soul and its powers. Among epistemological issues, he
developed the elements of the theory of intuitive knowl-
edge which became important in the thought of John
Duns Scotus and William Ockham. Matthew pointed
out that Augustine refuted the ancient skeptics by the
soul’s certain knowledge of its own existence. He also
defended the Augustinian theory of illumination in his
epistemology and the freedom of the will over the intellect.
Matthew of Aquasparta was born of the noble Bentivenghi
family and made a strong ecclesiastical career in the Fran-
ciscan order. He entered the order as a child in Umbria but
moved to Paris for university studies at about 1268,
becoming a student of Bonaventure and John Peckham.
He taught at Bologna, Paris and the Papal Curia. In the
year 1287, he became the minister general of the order.
Matthew’s university studies were no doubt inﬂuenced
by the doctrinal quarrels between Thomas Aquinas and
other Aristotelian thinkers on the one hand, and the
Bonaventure and other Augustinians on the other. While
Matthew of Aquasparta was not really a highly original
mind, he was a clear and acute Franciscan thinker con-
tinuing on the lines set by Bonaventure. In his theory of
the human soul, he accepted the plurality of forms
and thereby opposed attributing strong unity to the
soul and its powers. Among epistemological issues,
Matthew defended the capability of human intellect to
directly perceive individuals. He divided intellectual
knowledge into three classes: acquaintance by sign (per
ratiocinationem), by direct apprehension (per inspectivam
contuitionem; per intuitionem), and by understanding the
essence (per quidditatis speculationem), and thus devel-
oped the theory of intuitive knowledge that became very
important in the accounts of intellectual knowledge of
singulars by later Franciscans John Duns Scotus and
William
Ockham.
Matthew
also
pointed
out
that
Matthew of Aquasparta M
729
M

Augustine refuted the ancient skeptics by the soul’s certain
knowledge of its own existence. He defended the Augus-
tinian theory of illumination in his epistemology, and
defended the freedom of the will over the intellect.
See also: ▶Consciousness ▶Intuitive and Abstractive
Cognition ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Will ▶William of
Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Matthew of Aquasparta (1956) Quaestiones disputatae de productione
rerum et de providentia, ed. Ga´l G. Bibliotheca Franciscana
Scholastica Medii Aevi, 17. Quaracchi
Matthew of Aquasparta (1957) Quaestiones disputatae de ﬁde et
cognitione, 2 vols. Bibliotheca Franciscana Scholastica Medii Aevi,
I. Quaracchi
Matthew of Aquasparta (1959) Quaestiones disputatae de anima
separata, de anima beata, de ieiunio et de legibus, ed. Piana C, Ga´l
G, Emmen A. Bibliotheca Franciscana Scholastica Medii Aevi, 18.
Quaracchi
Secondary Sources
Marrone P (1983) Matthew of Aquasparta, Henry of Ghent and
Augustinian
Epistemology
after
Bonaventure.
Franzisk
Stud
65:252–290
Putallaz F-X (1991) La connaissance de soi au xiiie sie`cle. De Matthieu
d’Aquasparta a` Thierry de Freiberg, E´tudes de philosphie me´die´vale,
67. Vrin, Paris
Maximos Planoudes
GEORGE ZOGRAFIDIS
Department of Philosophy
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Thessaloniki
Greece
Abstract
Maximos Planoudes (1255–1305) was a Byzantine scholar
and writer, an inﬂuential teacher, learned in many ﬁelds,
a copyist and ‘‘editor’’ of numerous Greek texts, and
a translator of Latin works. His efforts have enriched the
manuscript tradition of a considerable part of Greek liter-
ary and scientiﬁc production. He was the most eminent
scholar of his time and probably the most productive
Byzantine classical scholar. Planoudes was the ﬁrst Byzan-
tine with sufﬁcient knowledge of Latin and of Latin cul-
ture. He translated systematically theological and secular
Latin works (among them Augustine’s On the Trinity and
Boethius’ The Consolation of Philosophy) and made possi-
ble, after a long time, the communication of Greek- and
Latin-speaking worlds. Planoudes is one of the leading
ﬁgures of the Early Palaiologan Renaissance.
Biographical Information
Nikomedeia 1255 – Constantinople 1305. Byzantine
scholar with impressive range of interests, grammarian,
productive ‘‘editor’’ of Greek texts and translator of Latin
works, monk, representative of the intellectual movement
in the Early Palaiologan Renaissance (mid-thirteenth- mid
fourteenth-century), and the most outstanding Latin
scholar in the East. Manuel Planoudes was born in Asia
Minor and settled in Constantinople where he completed
his higher education and learned Latin.
Quite young (c. 1280) Manuel entered the Imperial
Court as a state ofﬁcial and began to teach, perhaps in the
imperial Chora Monastery. He abandoned a promising
career in the civil service, became a monk (1283/1292) and
changed his name to Maximos. He devoted himself to the
monastic life of a scholar. Through his teaching activity,
within the monasteries of the capital, he became famous
and attracted many scions of noble families. Among his
pupils were scholars like Manuel Moschopoulos, Georgios
Lekapenos, Demetrios Triklinios, the Zarides brothers, and
Ioannes Zacharias. Except philosophy, he taught grammar,
poetry, and rhetoric (trivium) but from late 1280s he
started to teach astronomy, mathematics, and geography
(quadrivium). His teaching was based on the best ancient
sources available to each ﬁeld: Plato and Aristotle, Strabo,
Pausanias, Diophantus, Cleomedes, Euclid, Nicomachus,
Ptolemy, and many others. Planoudes was an outstanding
member of a wide circle of well-educated Byzantines like
George of Cyprus, Nikephoros Choumnos, Manuel
Bryennios, and many other future Patriarchs and state
ofﬁcials. As many Byzantine thinkers and scholars,
Planoudes had close relations to the imperial court and
even to the emperor himself, Andronikos II.
At ﬁrst Planoudes supported the pro-union policy of
the emperor Michael VIII and within the West-friendly
atmosphere that followed the unionist Council of Lyon
(1274) he showed his enthusiasm for the Latin culture and
started to translate works of Latin theology and literature.
Later
on
he
supported
the
anti-union
policy
of
Andronikos II and, ﬁnally, he decided not to participate
into state and ecclesiastical missions and to avoid his
involvement into theological questions. So he preferred
to conﬁne himself to activities such as the teaching and the
editing of ancient Greek texts. He entered the Monastery
of Akataleptos where he taught from 1299 until his early
death in 1305.
730 M
Maximos Planoudes

Planoudes was really a man of books, a devoted reader
of the entire corpus of Greek literary and scientiﬁc texts, an
owner of many codices, and a systematic copyist of numer-
ous works with a constant concern to provide appropriate
texts for himself and for his students. His scholarly achieve-
ments cannot be underestimated though he was not an
editor exactly in the modern sense. The main bulk of his
writings were done for didactic purposes. He wrote gram-
mar and syntax manuals and translated a Latin grammar.
He edited and/or commented on Greek poetry, tragedy and
comedy, and historiography. He reintroduced nine plays of
Euripides, started an edition of Moralia of his favorite
writer Plutarch (that was completed after his death),
accomplished
the
voluminous
Anthologia
Planudea
(1299, a version of the Greek Anthology), and compiled
collections of various Greek texts. Planoudes’ extensive
work contains also a corpus on rhetoric, encomia, canons,
hymns, scientiﬁc writings, and translations of Latin texts.
His extensive letter-writing (1292–1300) is a valuable
source for the political and intellectual events of this
period as well as for Planoudes’ life and personality.
Thought
During the Early Palaiologan period, a decisive (re)turn to
the ancient Greek tradition took place, not for the ﬁrst time
in Byzantium. In spite of the economic and military decay
of the empire, the Byzantines developed a vivid intellectual
life. Many scholars seemed to ﬁnd relief from the calamities
of the present and from the uncertainty for the future by
turning to what they considered as their glorious past and
their natural heritage, that is, ancient Greek civilization.
Without repudiating their Christian identity they were
lovers of (pagan) antiquity that they had to rediscover for
themselves. It was also the military and trade presence of the
Catholic Westerns in the Orthodox East, and the possibility
of the Church union, that made the Byzantines to realize
the necessity to learn more about Latin/western civilization.
In this context we can understand Planoudes’ project (a) to
preserve as many ancient texts as he could, to write com-
mentaries on them and treatises on all the sectors of higher
education, and (b) to translate Latin works and offer, for the
ﬁrst time, a reliable access to the otherwise unknown intel-
lectual Latin world.
Planoudes probably taught philosophy but he did not
write anything on Aristotle; he could use the textbooks on
the Organon written by his contemporaries, George
Pachymeres, Maximos Holobolos and John Pediasimos.
As for Plato, he included excerpts of Platonic works in
one of his collections and collaborated in the copying of
a manuscript of Plato. Planoudes’ preferences are perhaps
to be found in his choice to translate Cicero’s The Dream of
Scipio and Macrobius’ commentary. In the Dream there
are views acceptable for Christians, as the omnipotence of
God and the immortality of human souls, together with
political thoughts about the love of justice and the ideal of
devoting one’s life to the service of one’s state that were
suitable for a Byzantine emperor like Andronikos II. The
reminiscences of Plato are evident throughout both Latin
texts. The same can be said for another choice of Planoudes,
namely, his translation (before 1296) of Boethius’ Consola-
tion of Philosophy, where the Christian confrontation to
impending death resorted to non-Christian sources.
Byzantine scholars’ interest in Greek scientiﬁc writings
went together with their interest in Greek philosophy and
literature. Planoudes’ interests and teaching activity cov-
ered also the sciences of the quadrivium. Around 1292/93
Planoudes was interested in mathematics and speciﬁcally
in Diophantus, whose work Pachymeres had already used
in his Quadrivium. He made a manuscript of Diophantus’
Arithmetic (with comments) and it is thanks to Planoudes
that the work of Diophantus survived in the history of
mathematics. He also wrote the Calculation according to
the Indians (1292/3), preserved in forty-one manuscripts. It
is an important work that shows the diffusion of Hindu
arithmetic in the Byzantine world and contains the ﬁrst use
of zero as a place holder at the right of the other symbols.
For his teaching Planoudes prepared scholia on Euclides’
Elements and he edited Aratus’ Phenomena (c. 1290) and
the circular theory of the Stars of Cleomedes. He was
interested also in the geography of Ptolemy (1295) and
music or harmonics; he wrote a book on harmonics and
collected nearly all the relevant works (1294).
Planoudes proved to be a pioneer in the eastern Chris-
tendom and with his systematic translations of both profane
and Christian Latin authors he contributed to the restora-
tion of the contact between the two parts of Christendom
that their ways had parted long ago. Except the philosophical
works, he translated the anonymous’ On the Misdeeds of the
Age, Ovid, Caesar and grammatical works, as well as many
others. The quality of his translations is generally more
than satisfactory. In this activity Planoudes is probably
unique in Byzantium and, though appreciated, he found
no imitators until Demetrios Kydones (1324–1397/98).
Planoudes was the ﬁrst Byzantine to study Augustine
and his major achievement was the rendering into Greek
of On the Trinity (completed before 1282). That was
a thoughtful choice, because the western conception of
Trinity, a much debated issue between East and West,
derived mainly from Augustine. Thus, Augustine after
centuries of ignorance was put on the map of Byzantine
theology with Planoudes’ widespread translation. And the
Augustinian text had signiﬁcant inﬂuence on Byzantine
Maximos Planoudes M
731
M

theologians; for instance, the hesychast Gregory Palamas
made use of Planoudes’ translation. Few years after this
translation Planoudes wrote two anti-Latin treatises about
the procession of the Holy Spirit and then he decided to
withdraw from such debates considering himself as
a classical scholar and not as a theologian.
Planoudes’ ethical-political views are conventional and
they are expressed in his epistolography and in the On King
that was addressed both to the young emperor Michael IX
Palaiologan, few days after his coronation in 1294, and to
his father Andronikos II. It is an idealized portrait of the
emperor who should have all the classical virtues.
Planoudes declared that their race (genos) is a ‘‘Roman’’
(Rhomaios) and exhibits a kind of patriotism common to
the Byzantines after their liberation from the Latins and
under the threat of the Ottomans. It is interesting that the
monk Maximos is against paciﬁsm when he considers the
circumstances of his country. He justiﬁes the war insofar
as it is a liberating war of the pious against the impious
who threatened the homeland and the faith of Rhomaioi.
Planoudes gained his reputation as a teacher and
a scholar. His work inﬂuenced Byzantine philosophers and
thinkers like Metochites, Demetrius Kydones, Joseph
Bryennios, and cardinal Bessarion. His teaching and his
writings covered nearly every aspect of Byzantine learning
and played a signiﬁcant role during the Early Palaiologan
Renaissance. Planoudes’ manuals were used for a long time
and, translated into Latin, were used even by Italian human-
ists. His meticulous efforts in ﬁnding, copying, and editing
ancient texts facilitated their use and helped the re-
appreciation and the recovery of the Greek heritage by the
Byzantines. Finally, his translations broadened the horizon
of Byzantine thought through the approach of the Latin
culture – a path that only few followed in the Orthodox East.
See also: ▶Augustine ▶George Pachymeres ▶Philoso-
phy, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
On King
Westerink Leendert Gerrit (1966/1967/1968) Le Basilikos de Maxime
Planude. Byzantinoslavica 27:98–103/28:54–67/29:34–50
Scholia on Boethius’ Consolation
Papathomopoulos Manolis (ed) (1999) Scholia on Boethius’ Consolation.
In: Boethius (1999) 109–116 – Megas Anastasios (ed) (1996) 357–378
Calculation According to the Indians
Allard Andre (ed) (1981) Maxime Planude: Le grand calcul selon les
Indiens. L’Universite´ Catholique de Louvain, Louvain
Commentary on Diophantus of Alexandria
Tannery Paul (ed) (1974) Diophanti Alexandrini Opera omnia: cum
graecis commentariis, 2. Teubner, Stuttgart
Grammatical Works
Bachmann Ludwig (1828) Anecdota Graeca, 2. Leipzing, pp 2–166
(repr. 1965)
Letters
Treu Maximilian (ed) (1890) Maximi Monachi Planudis Epistulae.
Ko¨bner, Breslau (repr. 1960); Leone PLM (ed) (1991) Maximi
Monachi Planudis Epistulae. Hakkert, Amsterdam
Translations
Augustine (1995) In: Papathomopoulos M, Tsavari I, Rigotti G (eds) On
the Trinity. Academy of Athens, Athens
Boethius (1999) In: Papathomopoulos M (ed) The consolation of philos-
ophy. Academy of Athens, Athens; Megas A (ed) (1996) Thessaloniki
Cicero (1992) In: Pavano A (ed) The dream of Scipio. Gruppo Editoriale
Internazionale, Rome.
Macrobius (1995) In: Megas A (ed) Commentary on the dream of Scipio.
Thessaloniki
Sayings of Cato (1992) In: Ortoleva V (ed) Disticha Catonis in graecum
translata. Ateneo, Rome
For a complete list of Planoudes’ translations see: On the Trinity,
cxxxvi–clvi
Secondary Sources
Constantinides CN (1982) Higher education in Byzantium in the thir-
teenth and early fourteenth centuries (1204–1310). Cyprus Research
Centre, Nicosia, pp 66–89
Fryde E (2000) The early Palaeologan Renaissance (1261–c.1360). Brill,
Leiden, pp 226–267
Kugeas S (1909) Analecta Planudea. BZ 18:106–146
Lo¨ssl J (2000) Augustine in Byzantium. J Ecclesiast Hist 53:267–295
Mergiali S (1996) L’enseignement et les lettre´s pendant l’e´poque des
Pale´ologues,
1261–1453.
Centre d’Etudes
Byzantines,
Athens,
pp 34–42
Rigotti G (1994) Massimo Planude traduttore del De Trinitate di S.
Agostino. In: Moreschini C, Menestrina G (eds) La traduzione dei
testi religiosi. Morcelliana, Brescia, pp 185–196
Schmitt W (1968) Lateinische Literatur in Byzanz: Die Ubersetzugen des
Maximos Planudes und die moderne Forschung. JO¨ B 17:127–147
Wendel C (1940) Planudea. BZ 40:406–445
Wendel C (1950) Maximus Planudes. RE der klassischen Altertumswis-
senschaft 20/2:2202–2253
Wilson
N
(1983)
Scholars
of
Byzantium.
Duckworth,
London,
pp 230–241
Maximus the Confessor
MATTHEW J. PEREIRA
Department of Religion
Columbia University
New York, NY
USA
Abstract
Maximus the Confessor (c. 580–662) was one of the most
signiﬁcant ascetic theologians of the early medieval
732 M
Maximus the Confessor

period. Maximus was a master synthesizer, who inter-
weaved a wide range of philosophy and theology into
a dynamic articulation of the divine mystery of Jesus
Christ. Maximus’ theology, cosmology, ontology, and
anthropology are all interpreted in the light of Jesus Christ
and the Trinity. The Trinitarian relations provide the basis
for
an
ontological
movement
that
makes
human
divinization possible. Further, humanity acts as the medi-
ator between this world and God on the basis of the
hypostatic union in Jesus Christ. Creation becomes deiﬁed
through participation; the cosmos receives through grace
what belongs to God by nature. This present article begins
with a brief summary of Maximus’ life and literary works.
After the biographical account, this essay examines how
Maximus recapitulates traditional concepts, such as
hypostasis, idiomatum communicatio, and perichoresis in
order to explicate a doctrine of Christ, which signiﬁcantly
shapes his anthropology and theology of creation.
The Life of Maximus the Confessor
There are two Lives of Maximus the Confessor (c. 580–
662). In the 1970s, Sebastian Brock published the Syriac
Life of Maximus, which was written by Maximus’ contem-
porary George of Reshaina. This Syriac Life offers an
unﬂattering portrayal of Maximus. In this account,
Maximus was conceived in an adulterous relationship
between a Samaritan man and a Persian slave girl.
On the contrary, the Greek Life of Saint Maximus, written
in the tenth century by the Studite monk, Michael
Exaboulites, asserts that Maximus was born into a noble
family and received a good education. According to the
Greek Life, Maximus became head of the Imperial Chan-
cery
under
Emperor
Heraclius.
However,
by
614,
Maximus renounced his civil position and entered the
monastery at Chrysopolis. Between 624/625, Maximus
relocated to the monastery of Saint George at Cyzicus.
During the Persian invasion of 626, Maximus left Saint
George and ﬂed south where he eventually settled at
a Greek monastery in Carthage around 630.
The monastery in Carthage served as the venue for the
debate between Maximus and Pyrrhus, the exiled patri-
arch of Constantinople. The debate, which occurred in
654, centered on the Monothelite proposition that
subverted the Two Nature Christology of the Council of
Chalcedon (451). Maximus opposed the Monothelite
position because he supposed this proposition would
imply that Christ was less than fully human. Before
long, the debate extended beyond the monastery as eccle-
sial
and
political
authorities
declared
their
theo-
logical positions. Several African synods condemned
Monothelitism.
In
October
649,
Pope
Martin
anathematized Monothelitism at the Lateran Council. In
contrast to this Neo-Chalcedonian contingency, Emperor
Constans II reafﬁrmed his commitment to imperial
Monothelitism by editing a Typos written by Paul II (patri-
arch of Constantinople) in 647.
The debate with Pyrrhus compelled Maximus to vigor-
ously afﬁrm the Chalcedonian formula, which held Christ
has two natures. Maximus’ theological position did not go
unchallenged. Constans II demanded a recantation from
Maximus. Maximus’ ensuing refusal to accept imperial
Monothelitism brought serious consequences. Initially,
Maximus was exiled. Thereafter, Maximus was tortured
after two more refusals during imperial summons in 658
and 661. On account of his faithfulness to Orthodoxy,
tradition holds that Maximus’ right hand and his tongue
were cut off. Consequently, Maximus has earned the title of
Confessor. Maximus died in Georgia on August 16, 662.
The Literary Works of Maximus
Maximus’ expansive literary corpus addresses a variety of
topics from a wide range of contexts. His writings consist
of theological commentaries (The Ambigua, Quaestiones to
Thalassium, Quaestiones to Theopemptum, Quaestiones et
dubia and Exposition of Psalm 59), ascetical writings (The
Ascetic Life, Two Centuries on Knowledge and Four Centu-
ries on Love), and liturgical writings (Mystagogia and
Exposition of the Lord’s Prayer). Also, there are several
extant epistles of Maximus (Epistle to Abbot Thalassius,
Epistle to Anastasius, and Second Epistle to Thomas). One
of Maximus’ favorite literary forms was the ‘‘centuries’’
(hekatontas), which consisted of one hundred ‘‘chapters’’
typically the length of a paragraph. Maximus has four
Centuries on Love, and two Centuries on Theology and the
Incarnation. Also, Maximus preferred the traditional intel-
lectual method of progressing in understanding through
questions
and
responses,
known
as
eroˆtapokriseis.
Maximus’ Ascetic Life is an example of this intellectual
technique.
Maximus’ Synthesis
Maximus’ philosophical theology synthesizes a wide and
diverse range of intellectual sources. Throughout his writ-
ings, Maximus interweaves philosophical concepts in
order to address particular issues within various contexts.
Maximus’ originality is evident in his recasting of various
traditions into an ascetic spiritual theology. Maximus
advanced a mystical vision that synthesized dogmatics
and the spiritual life in order to explain how humanity
moves into closer communion with God. Maximus’ intel-
lectual sources reach back from Plato to his contempo-
raries, such as Leontius of Byzantium.
Maximus the Confessor M
733
M

Maximus was thoroughly inﬂuenced by Neoplatonic
thought. However, Maximus’ relationship to Origen of
Alexandria remains an open question (Sherwood 1955;
Balthasar 2003). Maximus developed his theology during
the so-called Origenist controversy, which was escalating
after Emperor Justinian’s condemnations against Origen.
However, Maximus’ attitude toward Origen remains
opaque.
Maximus’
work
has
been
interpreted
as
a synthesis of Origen’s theology, but the degree of interre-
latedness is difﬁcult to assess. Maximus’ doctrines often
move beyond Origen and Neoplatonism. For example,
Maximus’ concept of the eternal state of humanity
involves an ongoing restful movement, whereas Origen
stresses an absolute rest.
Beyond Origen, Maximus was heavily inﬂuenced by
the ‘‘scholastic’’ Aristotelianism of the seventh century.
Leontius of Byzantium and Sophronius (patriarch of Jeru-
salem) signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced Maximus’ intellectual life.
Furthermore,
Maximus’
work
is
preoccupied
with
afﬁrming the Councils (Nicea, Chalcedon, and Chalcedon
II). Maximus’ Christology is articulated within the impe-
rial philosophical circles of the late sixth and the seventh
century. Maximus’ employment of philosophical terms,
his mode of discourse, and the overall complexity of his
thought are derived from this Neo-Chalcedonian intellec-
tual environment.
Maximus’ Christology
While Origen inﬂuenced Maximus’ early thought on the
Logos, Neo-Chalcedonian Christology was the starting
point for his mature thought. In step with the Ecumenical
Councils
(Ephesus
431;
Chalcedon
451),
Maximus
afﬁrmed the Incarnation as a hypostatic union, where
the human and divine natures coexist in the God–Man.
The term hypostasis was one of the most controversial
terms during the christological debates, which dominated
Maximus’ life. For Maximus, the christological question
was not merely an academic concern. Rather, Maximus as
an ascetic understood that Christology impacted the spir-
itual life and the entire cosmos. Christ’s hypostatic union
provides the primordial synthesis that makes the deiﬁca-
tion of humanity possible. The person of Christ is the
foundation and goal for all creation, which is moving
toward perfection through participation.
One of Maximus’ greatest achievements was his
appropriation of philosophical terminology (such as
hypostasis, communicatio idiomatum, and perichoresis),
in order to advance a dynamic Christology, which
reﬂected the Neo-Chalcedonian position. Maximus’ expli-
cation
of
Christ’s
hypostasis
begins
by
drawing
a parallelism within the human composite of body and
soul. For Maximus, the nature of the union between the
soul and body is a pivotal concept. Maximus insists that
the whole is nothing else but its parts and that there is no
other existence without these uniﬁed parts (Opuscula, PG
91, col. 117D). Further, it is the totality of the parts in their
mutual indwelling that has prominence over all divergence
(Opuscula, PG 91, col. 521BC). The whole, in the sense of
their person and their existence, is the hypostatic unity
(Ambigua, PG 91, col. 1044D). Following this course of
reasoning, the human nature of Christ, on account of
having being in the Logos, consequently derives personal-
ity and existence from the Logos (Epistles 11, PG 91, col.
468AB). In other writings, Maximus further explicates
Christ’s hypostasis through the concepts of communicatio
idiomatum and perichoresis.
Maximus appears to be the ﬁrst theologian to
employ perichoresis in order to express the communicatio
idiomatum
of
Christ’s
divine
and
human
nature
(Thunberg 1995). According to the Scholies to Ps.-Denis,
Gregory Nazianzen’s Letter to Cledonius (Letter 101)
inﬂuenced
Maximus’
concept
of
perichoresis.
For
Maximus, perichoresis conveyed a double penetration
where the divine penetrates humanity (Quaestiones ad
Thalassium 59, CCSG 22, p. 51 ff) and humanity pene-
trates into the life of God (Ambigua 5m PG 91, col. 1053
B).
Maximus’
doctrine
of
perichoresis
provides
a foundation for all activity, whereby the unity of the
human and divine within Christ provides a redemptive
framework for humanity. The Incarnation makes dynamic
‘‘modes of existence’’ possible, where true human nature
becomes open to relationship with God. This mode of
participation leads to deiﬁcation through Christ, who is
the perfection of humanity and the world.
The Chalcedonian Christological deﬁnition, which
states the two natures of Christ are without confusion,
change, division and separation while in mutual commu-
nication, directly informs Maximus’ cosmology. While
Maximus does not offer a precise theology of creation,
the opening section of The Centuries on Charity (Book 4),
gives the fullest discussion. Thunberg delineates eight
elements in Maximus’ cosmology: (1) creatio ex nihilo,
(2) creation because of God’s will, (3) creation because
of God’s benevolence, (4) creation by the Word, (5) crea-
tion because of God’s prudence, (6) creation as divine
condescension
introducing
an
element
of
motion,
(7) every creature composite of substance and accident,
and (8) creation, not of qualities but of qualiﬁed sub-
stances, which need divine providence (Thunberg 1995).
Maximus maintains that the primary principle in all cre-
ation is synthesis, which is expressed in the hypostasis of
Christ. The Incarnate One is reconciling all polarities
734 M
Maximus the Confessor

between God and the world. All nature ﬁnds fulﬁllment in
God, where the Logos brings unity out of diversity
through movements of contraction and expansion.
Maximus lived in a highly intellectual milieu, which
may be characterized as ‘‘scholastic.’’ However, Maximus
was neither rationalistic nor systematic; rather, he offers
a mystical vision of the world as relating to the person of
Jesus Christ. Maximus’ opaque spiritual theology points
towards the mystery of the Incarnation. Maximus contin-
ually pushed the boundaries of articulation outward into
the darkness of mystery (Balthasar 2003).
See also: ▶Philosophical Theology, Byzantine ▶Philoso-
phy, Byzantine ▶Trinitarian Logic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Maximus the Confessor (1865) Complete works in Greek are located in
Patrologia Graeca, vols 90–91. J.P. Migne, Paris
Critical Editions of Maximus the Confessor
Corpus Christianorum, Series Graeca
(1990) Maximi Confessoris Quaestiones ad Thalassium II, Quaestiones
LVI–LXV, una cum latina interpretatione Ioannis Scotae Eriugenae
iuxta posita. Leuven University Press/Brepols,Turnhout (CCSG 22)
Declerck Jose´ H (ed) (1990) Maximi Confessoris Quaestiones et Dubia.
Leuven University Press/Brepols,Turnhout (CCSG 10)
Laga Carl, Steel Carlos (eds) (1980) Quaestiones ad Thalassium I–IV.
Maximi Confessoris Questiones ad Thalassium I, Quaestiones I–LV,
unam cum latina interpretatione Ioannis Scotae Eriugenae iuxta
posita. Leuven University Press/Brepols,Turnhout (CCSG 7)
van Deun Peter (ed) (1991) Maximi Confessoris Opuscula exegetica duo.
Leuven University Press/Brepols, Turnhout (CCSG 23)
Other Series
Ceresa-Gastaldo A (ed) (1963) Capituli sulla carita`, editi criticamente con
introduzione, versione e note (Verba Seniorum, N.S. 3). Rome, (CSC)
Select Translations
English
Berthold George C (trans and notes) (1985) Maximus Confessor: select
writings. SPCK, London
Dom Julian Stead (trans with commentary) (1982) The church, the
liturgy and the soul of man: the mystagogia of St. Maximus Confes-
sor. St. Bede’s, Still River
Saint Maximus the Confessor (1955) The ascetic life. The four centuries
on charity (trans and annot: Sherwood P). Longmans, Green, Lon-
don (ACW)
French
Maxime le Confesseur (1943) Centuries sur la charite´. Introduction et
traduction de Joseph Pegon, Paris-Editions de Labeille. E´ditions du
Cerf, Lyon
Saint Maxime le Confesseur (1992) Questions a` Thalassios (intro: Larchet
J-C et trans and notes: Ponsoye E). Les E´ditions de l’Ancre, Sursenes
Saint Maxime le Confesseur (1994) Ambigua (intro: Larchet J-C, preface,
trans: Ponsoye E, comments: Staniloae D). Les E´ditions, Paris-
Suresnes
German
Maximus
der
Bekenner
(1961a)
All-eins
in
Christus.
Auswahl,
Uebertragung, Einleitung von Endre von Iva´nka. Johannes, Einsiedeln
Maximus der Bekenner (1961b) Die Mystagogie. In: von Balthasar HU
Kosmische Liturgie. Das Weltbild Maximus des Bekenners. Zweite
vo¨llig vera¨nderte Auﬂage. Johannes, Einsiedeln, pp 409–481
Italian
Massimo il Confessore (1979) Umanita` e divinita` di Cristo (trans, intro,
and notes: Ceresa-Gastaldo A). Collana di testi patristici, no, 19.
Rome
Massimo il Confessore (1980) Il Dio-uomo. Duenceto pensieri sulla
cognoscenza di Dio e sull’ incarnazione di Cristo (trans, intro, and
notes: Ceresa-Gastaldo A). Gia` e non ancora, no. 66. Milan
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Balthasar H (2003) Cosmic liturgy: the universe according to Maximus
the Confessor (trans: Daley BE). Ignatius Press, San Francisco
Gatti ML (1987) Massimo il Confessore. Saggio di bibliograﬁca generale
ragionata e contribute per una riconstruzione scientiﬁca del suo
pensiero metaﬁsico e religioso. Vita e pensiero, Milan
Larchet JC (1996) La divinisation de l’homme selon Saint Maxime le
Confesseur. E´ditions du Cerf, Paris
Louth A (1996) Maximus the Confessor. Routledge, New York
Sherwood P (1955) The earlier Ambigua of St. Maximus the Confessor
and his refutation of Origenism. Herder, Rome
Thunberg L (1995) Microcosm and mediator: the theological anthropol-
ogy of Maximus the Confessor. Open Court, Chicago
Collections
Heinzer F, Scho¨nborn C (eds) (1982) Maximus Confessor: Actes du
Symposium sur Maxime le Confesseur. Editions Universitaires Fri-
bourg Suisse, Saint-Paul Fribourg, Suisse
Medicine and Philosophy
JOEL CHANDELIER
Universite´ de Paris 8
Paris
France
Abstract
The question of the connection between philosophy and
medicine raised in Antiquity remains a serious bone of
contention in the Middle Ages. The problem, which stems
from the acceptance of the Galenic synthesis as the foun-
dation of medicine in late Antiquity, is the discrepancy
between the concrete, empirical foundations of medieval
medical practice and the cosmological model that is sup-
posed to integrate it. While the ﬁrst authors are circum-
spect, the eminent Arabic doctors and philosophers
Avicenna and Averroes propose solutions, one through
a strictly instrumental view of medicine, the other through
a drastic limitation of its ﬁeld of experience. Translated
into Latin in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, these
developments lead scholastic doctors to construct a more
Medicine and Philosophy M
735
M

autonomous medical discipline that distinguishes itself
more neatly from natural philosophy and delineates its
own goals and methods. Thus, at the birth of the Renais-
sance, medicine loses its ambition of being a ‘‘second
philosophy’’ but secures greater independence.
From the time of Hippocrates, the proper relation between
medicine and philosophy has been the subject of great
debate. In simple terms, the central problem is whether
medicine must appeal to philosophical principles to deter-
mine the model of human nature that grounds the condi-
tions of its practice, or whether it must be wholly
autonomous and draw its knowledge solely from its exper-
imental resources. In the ﬁrst case, philosophy provides
information on the elements that constitute human beings
and thus situates them in a cosmology; in the second,
doctors settle for perceptible information gathered empir-
ically. In the Hippocratic corpus, we ﬁnd two opposite
answers: Ancient Medicine or Nature of Man states that the
doctor does not need to rely on the principles of natural
philosophy to establish its art, while for the treatise Regi-
men (I.10), human beings are said to be ‘‘a copy of the
whole.’’ Galen’s answer, in the second century CE, sets the
context for subsequent medieval discussions. Indeed, he
asserts in his That the Best Physician is Also a Philosopher
that ‘‘if, then, philosophy is necessary to doctors with
regard both to preliminary learning and to subsequent
training, clearly all true doctors must be philosophers.’’
Galen insists, moreover, on the necessity, for the practi-
tioner, of mastering the three parts of philosophy deﬁned
by the Stoics, namely, logic, physics, and ethics: the ﬁrst to
understand the science of demonstration, the second to
have an understanding of nature in general, and ﬁnally the
third to instill a contempt for wealth and the love of work.
However, the links that Galen highlights between medi-
cine and philosophy do not lead him to adopt a precise
cosmology: on the contrary, he borrows as much from
Plato as from Aristotle, for instance for the division of
matter in four elements, and does not hesitate to contra-
dict these authors on many important points. The result is
a balanced synthesis, however fragile, between the most
important ancient philosophers.
Alexandrine Teaching and the Ancient
Heritage
This heritage is adopted and systematized by the authors
of late Antiquity, and in particular by those active around
the school of Alexandria, chief center for the teaching of
traditional ancient Greek philosophy. One of the charac-
teristics of this school is that medicine and philosophy are
frequently, if not systematically, associated during the
sixth and the seventh century. In this school is born
a ﬁgure destined to remain in the Arab and Byzantine
world, the iatrosophist, a doctor-philosopher capable of
providing care as well as mastering grammar and dialectic.
The thought of Galen is linked by the Alexandrians more
strictly, and often more inaccurately, to the great philo-
sophical systems of Antiquity. To justify their reasoning,
the iatrosophists rely on the statements of Aristotle, who
insists in his On Sense and Sensible Objects on the necessary
link existing between the philosophy of nature and med-
icine: ‘‘Most natural philosophers, and those physicians
who take a scientiﬁc interest in their art, have this in
common: the former end by studying medicine, and
the latter base their medical theories on the principles of
natural science’’ (On Sense and Sensible Objects, I, 436a19–
436b2). The Alexandrians go even further, attributing to
Aristotle many deﬁnitions that depict medicine as
a ‘‘philosophy of the body’’ or the ‘‘sister of philosophy.’’
The echo of these Alexandrine’s conceptions is found in
the encyclopedist Isidore of Seville (d. in 636). In his
Etymologiae (IV, XIII 5), he asserts that medicine deals
with the whole human body, and therefore is rightly called
a ‘‘second philosophy,’’ in the image of the ﬁrst, which
pertains to the soul. Though the Latin medicine of the
time is in full intellectual decline, this mention reveals the
inﬂuence of conceptions developed by the last heirs of
ancient philosophical teachings. However, integrating the
two domains of knowledge in a single system is not with-
out important difﬁculties. On many points, Galen and
Aristotle are in clear opposition. The most famous exam-
ple of these conﬂicts involves the organic origin of the
functions of the soul. For Aristotle, the heart is their
unique seat; but Galen, thanks to vivisections, notices
that brain or nerve lesions can cause paralysis, and logi-
cally places the seat of sensation in the brain. Thus, Galen
favors a return to the platonic conception of the tripartite
soul, whose functions are placed in the heart, the brain,
and the liver. Another famous case is the role attributed to
the woman in generation: for Aristotle, she has the passive
role of providing matter, while Galen credits her also, as he
does the man, with the active role of giving the embryo’s
form. Embarrassed by these contradictions, Alexandrian
thinkers prefer to sidestep these problems or to approach
them indirectly. Thus, on the question of the existence of
a neutral state between health and sickness, stated by
Galen at the beginning of Medical Art and contradicted
by Aristotle who afﬁrms in the Categories that these
two terms are an example of contraries that admit no
intermediate, Agnellus of Ravenna (sixth century) avoids
citing explicitly Aristotle but answers objections from
anonymous critics – plainly Aristotelian – by relying on
736 M
Medicine and Philosophy

other passages from the Stagirite. Stephanus of Athens,
iatrosophist from the sixth century, is equally cautious in
his commentary on Hippocrates’ Prognostics when he
addresses the question of the origin of sensation: enumer-
ating the reasons that lead some to place it in the brain,
and those that lead others to place it in the heart, he
concludes his presentation of opposing arguments by
a simple sentence: ‘‘The question remains unresolved up
until now, whether the governing principle is situated
in the brain or heart.’’ In this way, the authors of late
Antiquity had provided a framework to the relation
between philosophy and medicine, but without answering
the essential problems the relation raises.
By conquering the principal intellectual centers of Late
Antiquity, like Alexandria, the Arabs integrated a large
part of Greek science, in particular through translations
carried out in the eighth and ninth centuries. Hence, it is
not surprising that we ﬁnd, in the ﬁrst medical texts
written in the language of the Qurʾa¯n, the same categories
and the same problems, than those that had preoccupied
the iatrosophists. Thus, Yuh:anna ibn Masawayh (l. 777–
857), in the eighth aphorism of his Medical Axioms,
declares that ‘‘when Galen and Aristotle agree upon some-
thing, it is true; when they are in disagreement, it is
exceedingly difﬁcult for the mind to determine the truth
of the matter.’’ Al-Maju¯sı¯ (d. at the end of the tenth
century) represents the synthesis of these Alexandrine
teachings revisited by the Arabic authors. In his al-Kita¯b
al-Malakı¯ (Royal Book), he takes up again the distinction
between theory and practice, by specifying that the ﬁrst is
a science, that is, a true knowledge necessary for action.
This science divides, in turn, into things that are natural,
those that are nonnatural and those that are against
nature. Though al-Maju¯sı¯ does not point it out, he is
certain that this scientiﬁc part of medicine must tackle
the problems posed by the correspondence between the
two disciplines. For the rest, when he treats certain ques-
tions concerning the connection between medicine and
philosophy, he prefers to suspend judgment: thus, when
he wonders if the soul that we ﬁnd in the brain is the soul
itself or if it is merely its instrument, since the soul is not
a body, he prefers not to argue the point stating that it
‘‘belongs to philosophy more than to medical art.’’
The Systems of Arabic Authors
The Instrumentalism of Avicenna
However, from the tenth century, conﬂicts between Arabic
philosophers and doctors intensify, and this attitude of
avoidance seems no longer tenable. Certain scholars, often
philosophers, devote themselves to ﬁnding a general
solution to the problem, in order to provide a general
principle to mediate conﬂicts between the two disciplines.
The ﬁrst to propose a solution of this kind is the philos-
opher al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (872–950). His comments come down to
an attack against the philosophical pretensions of the
doctors, especially Galen’s. For al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Aristotle, who
draws on logical reasoning, prevails against Galen and his
empirical observations. This clear choice for Aristotelian-
ism leads al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ to place medicine among the practical
arts, with agriculture or cooking, and to divide it in seven
parts, of which the ﬁrst three (knowledge of the organs,
health, and diseases) are totally or partially common to
natural philosophy and medicine, while the next four
(symptomatology, nutrition and medication, hygiene
and dietetics, and therapeutics) are part only of the
second.
Still, this solution does not resolve the problem
completely, since it has no answer to an essential question:
how must the doctor act in a controversial case? Must he,
despite their incorrect theoretical origin, apply against his
better judgment all the treatment methods that Galen
heartily recommends? Faced with this difﬁculty, Avicenna
(980–1037) goes further than al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and proposes an
original solution, developed in particular in the Canon of
Medicine. Avicenna gives ﬁrst a deﬁnition of medicine that
reduces neatly his ambition, since for him medicine is
concerned with the human body solely qua healthy or
sick, and not, as does natural philosophy, in itself. From
this model follows logically another way of looking at the
relation between the two subjects. Avicenna explains often
that ‘‘the physician does not need to proceed following
a demonstrative argument that will lead him from this
disagreement to the truth, nor qua physician will he see the
path to this, nor does this impede him in his investigations
and actions.’’ Avicenna’s position is simple: the doctor
must not take an interest in the causes of phenomena
and search for the principles of natural mechanisms,
since this search is within the purview of the philosopher
alone; he must be content to take an interest in the rem-
edies that he uses against illness without wondering about
their ﬁrst causes: only the immediate causes are for him
relevant, and if they seem to contradict the claims of
natural philosophy, he is not authorized to search for
a reconciliation that only the philosopher is able to
achieve. However, Avicenna takes care to specify that the
doctor’s actions, that is, his concrete activities as
a therapist, must not be changed according to debates
that arise in another discipline.
This attitude is called ‘‘instrumentalism’’ (McVaugh),
because it regards medical theories as adequate instru-
ments for predicting and evaluating phenomena, but
Medicine and Philosophy M
737
M

ill-suited for attaining truth. Instrumentalism, in the work
of Avicenna, goes hand in hand with a model of the doctor
that conﬁne him to the restoration of health without
exploring the true nature of things, and merely studying
sensible and manifest entities on which he can act. It is
interesting to note that this position does not forbid
doctors from being philosophers as well, like Avicenna
was himself, because the important element is the expres-
sion ‘‘as a doctor’’: in reality, a doctor can, as philosopher,
ask himself questions concerning the true nature of things;
but he must then refrain from basing himself on medical
empirical observation and, thus, to conduct himself as
a doctor. We see that Avicenna establishes a neat distinc-
tion between philosophy and medicine, each having its
proper objectives and methods. Such a conclusion might
seem to subordinate medicine to natural philosophy; in
reality, we must instead insist on the great autonomy
conferred on a medical discipline that, while on a more
restricted domain, can henceforth develop with fewer
restrictions.
Averroes and the Subordination of Medicine to
Philosophy
Averroes (1126–1198) pushes even further the distinction
between medicine and natural philosophy. In his Colliget,
one of his rare medical works, he deﬁnes the discipline
thus: ‘‘Medicine is an effective art, based on true principles
and concerned with preserving man’s health and abating
disease, as far as possible’’ (Colliget, I, 1). Comparing
medicine with navigation or military affairs, he states
explicitly that the ‘‘true principles’’ on which it must be
established are those of natural philosophy. The two
domains of knowledge are thus completely separate and
placed in a clear and restrictive hierarchical relationship,
since the doctor must, according to Averroes, deduce from
the principles expounded by the philosopher the practical
applications that he carries out. Where Avicenna afﬁrms
clearly the autonomy of medicine as a science, Averroes,
who returns partially to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s solution by radicaliz-
ing it, makes medicine into a simple practical application
of philosophical theories.
So, as a faithful Aristotelian, Averroes attacks Galen
repeatedly, not hesitating to renounce established treat-
ments for their theoretical incompatibility with natural
philosophy, all the while trying to justify certain biological
claims of the Stagirite. If we consider Avicenna’s an instru-
mentalist position, we can rightly call Averroes’ own
a realist position insofar as it insists on the coherence
between philosophical theories and their concrete medical
applications; the deﬁnition of the Colliget emphasizes the
fact that medicine cannot even aim for complete recovery
but only try to do what is possible to help nature take its
course. In this way, Averroes reinforces the importance of
the prognostic art and of the pure practical art of the
doctor, and limits drastically its theoretical pretensions.
It is tempting to compare Averroes’ position on medicine
to the one he adopts in his commentary on De caelo
concerning Ptolemy’s theories; in fact, he does not hesitate
to reject them despite their usefulness, as they seem to
him not to comply with the Aristotelian philosophy that
predicts uniquely circular movements for stars, when
the Ptolemaic system, to save appearances, introduces
a complex system of epicycles and eccentrics. In astron-
omy as in medicine, Averroes’ object is to make all knowl-
edge coherent with Aristotelian philosophy, which is the
only one to be authorized to research and expound truth.
The Salernitan Masters and the Physica
The texts of Avicenna and Averroes are not known in the
West before the thirteenth century. However, the Latin
scholars have access, before this date, to some of the
thoughts of Greek and Arabic authors, notably due to
the translations of Constantine the African in the eleventh
century. These translations, mostly of medical texts, push
Latin doctors of the following century to take a closer look
at philosophy, especially since the texts then available
make medicine a part of natural philosophy. For the rest,
it is the thought of the twelfth century on the whole that
aims to replace the study of the human body, and so its
diseases, in a global analysis of Creation. This tendency,
which develops at a moment where most of the Aristote-
lian corpus is still unknown, is most prevalent among the
doctors of Salerno. The texts studied in this great center of
teaching are of Greek or Arabic origin: for example, The
Isagoge by Johannitius, the Aphorisms, Prognostics et Reg-
imen of Acute Diseases by Hippocrates, the Medical Art by
Galen, or the Pantegni by Constantin, adapted from the
al-Kita¯b al-Malakı¯ by al-Maju¯sı¯.
In their commentaries on The Isagoge, the Salernitan
masters strive to situate medicine in the general organiza-
tion of knowledge, while it belongs neither to the trivium
nor to the quadrivium. Contra Hughes of Saint-Victor,
who around 1120 makes medicine a purely mechanical
art, the Salernitan authors divide all knowledge into
three branches, logic, ethics, and physics, and place
medicine in the latter, with physics and meteorology.
Medicine is then considered a full-ﬂedged science,
divided itself into theory and practice on the Arabic
model.
In this way appears in the West the idea that medicine
includes a theoretical part, which is grounded in natural
philosophy.
The
deﬁnition
of
medicine
given
by
738 M
Medicine and Philosophy

Bartholomew of Salerno (twelfth century) is in this regard
emblematic:
"
The science of medicine deals with the actions and pas-
sions of the elements in mixed bodies. Although it has
been invented for the human body, it considers every
thing that can change it, as the nature of animals, herbs,
trees, spices, metals, stones, because all of them can
change the human body.
Medicine has, thus, for most Salernitans, a universal reach,
which expresses itself in particular by the use of the term
physicus, which designates the doctor-philosopher at
Salerno.
But the relation between medicine and philosophy
goes even further than this connection established
between medicine and natural philosophy. Indeed, the
Salernitan and the authors of the twelfth century, such as
William of Conches, could not know the zoological works
of Aristotle, which had not yet been translated; so they
strive, from available texts such as the Physics, On Gener-
ation and Corruption but also from the commentary of
Plato’s Timeus by Calcidius, to reconstitute a natural phi-
losophy coherent with medical data, in a process that
reverses the trend that had until then dominated. This
trend ends with doctor Urso of Salerno, who dies around
1200. The latter strives to connect, in one systematic theory,
the contributions of medicine and natural philosophy. His
thought develops around the question of the elements: Urso
triesto showhowelementsshapedby the Creatorfromprime
matter combine to form the ‘‘elementata’’ in bodies. These
‘‘elementata,’’ which can transform under the effect of the
interactions between the essential and accidental qualities
of the elements that compose them, are at the base of all
natural phenomena, in the human body (through the
intermediaries of complexions) as in the sublunary
world in general. Through his detailed study of the theory
of elements, Urso aims to provide a single explanation for
natural phenomena that come under medicine or philos-
ophy; his goal is to be an inventor, that is, a founder like
Hippocrates was for medicine, to whom the qualiﬁer was
traditionally attributed, and to found a new discipline
synthesizing contributions of doctors and philosophers.
This discipline constitutes, for Urso, the Physica, whose
ambition largely exceeds medicine in the strict sense, since
its investigations spread to all things in nature.
However, this ambitious project has no immediate
sequels in the West for two main reasons: ﬁrst, the arrival
of new translations, notably of Aristotle, Avicenna, and
Galen, modify clearly from the beginning of the thirteenth
century the idea of the relation between medicine and
philosophy; second, the decline of the Salerno school
does not permit the pursuit of the intellectual tradition
established in the city. Of course, the Salernitan’s works are
not completely forgotten and continue to be studied, but
the reception of the great philosophical systems provokes
important reconsiderations in the West. Many debates on
the relation between medicine and philosophy then repeat
the terms of the question that Arabic authors had already
tried to resolve; but the new conditions of the practice of
medicine, and especially its teaching in universities, are
eventually going to modify radically this perspective.
Scholastic Teaching and the Synthesis of
Greek and Arabic Contributions
The Search for an Agreement
For Latin authors, the problem was always the same:
harmonize Aristotle’s physiological and biological infor-
mation with Galen’s, all the while according, as much as
possible, the philosophical systems of the two scholars.
However, the question presents itself in a new light, since
at the same time were translated the Arabic interpreta-
tions, notably those of Avicenna (Canon, translated in the
twelfth century by Gerard of Cremona), of ‘Alı¯ ibn Ridwa¯n
(commentary of Tegni translated by Gerard of Cremona)
and of Averroes (Colliget translated in 1285 by Bonacosa in
Padua). The assimilation of all these works in the ﬁrst half
of the thirteenth century leads to a period of important
debates between 1270 and 1320, a period that has been
called the ‘‘times of controversies’’ (Jacquart and Micheau
1990). The two most debated questions are the primacy of
the heart as a ﬁrst principle of the body, and the existence
of a feminine seed. Contrary to what is often claimed,
these debates are not limited to a simple controversy
with the ‘‘doctors’’ on one side and the ‘‘philosophers’’
on the other. The double quality of many authors, notably
in Italy, prevents us from a too cut-and-dried opposition
between the followers of the two disciplines. Thus, Pietro
Torrigiano, medical doctor active in Paris in the ﬁrst
decades of the fourteenth century, defends the Aristotelian
position that makes the movements of the heart a simple
physical process, while the majority of doctors of the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries go along with
Aristotle’s denial of the existence of a female seed. How-
ever, beyond the diversity of views, it is possible to ﬁnd
a certain number of constants, particularly in some centers
of teaching. In Italy, the problem is more acute because
medicine and philosophy are often taught in the same
faculty, and by the same person, as in the case of Iacopo
da Forlı` (d. 1404) who teaches natural philosophy from
1384 to 1386, moral philosophy and medicine in 1392–
1393 and 1395–1396, and ﬁnally logical and natural
Medicine and Philosophy M
739
M

philosophy in 1398–1399. The Conciliator of Pietro
d’Abano, written between 1303 and 1310, must be consid-
ered an attempt to bring solutions to these debates that
then stimulate the medical community. The acuity of
these questions, as institutional as intellectual, doubtlessly
explain in part the success obtained in Italy by the Canon,
which becomes over the course of the fourteenth century
the almost unique source of all medical teaching: it was the
only one to give a solution allowing to conserve the ben-
eﬁts of Galenism and the great principles of philosophy. It
is therefore not surprising that the Averroist doctor and
philosopher Antonio da Parma proposes, in the ﬁrst years
of the fourteenth century, a solution to the problem based
on Avicennian instrumentalism, by distinguishing, in
accordance with Aristotle, two types of arguments: the
ﬁrst one, the dialectic argumentation, is the philosophers’,
and is true and necessary; the second one is the rhetorical
argumentation, which is ‘‘much less probably’’ (comm.
Canon, I.1.6.2.): it is the doctors’.
In the following generation, Gentile da Foligno (d. 1348)
deepens this distinction by trying to show, for each of the
controversial questions, that the contradiction between the
discourse of philosophers and doctors does not prevent
the latter from acting to maintain health. He concludes that
the physicians can content themselves with the assumptions
of their discipline, even if they appear false. We must note,
however, that Avicennian instrumentalism does not lead
these authors to abandon the debates between Galen and
Aristotle.Onthecontrary,thedistinctionbetweenthedoctor
acting ‘‘as a doctor’’ and the doctor reﬂecting ‘‘as a philoso-
pher’’ allows them to engage these questions without confus-
ing the two disciplines, and without substantially modifying
the modes of treatments left by the Galenic tradition: the
theoretical questions still remain, in the ﬁrst half of the
fourteenth century, an essential part of medical education.
The Influence of Averroes and the Decline of
Philosophy in Medicine
The introduction of Averroes’ Colliget in the West has
a determining role in the subsequent evolution. While
the position of the Andalusian doctor and philosopher
can seem totally opposed to Avicennian instrumentalism,
the Latin authors succeed in integrating it to a coherent
global vision. Averroes considers, as we have seen, that all
medicine is practical, and that theoretical aspects come
under another discipline, superior to it, that is, natural
philosophy. Such a presentation goes against the stated
willingness of Latin authors of bestowing on their disci-
pline the status of a science, and, in Italy, against the
separation, in the medical curriculum, of theoretical and
practical medicine. However, the integration of medicine
as a university discipline at the end of the thirteenth
century, as well as the progressively more important
place granted to the doctor in society, permits authors to
cast a critical eye on accepted deﬁnitions, and in particular
on the distinction between theory and practice. Wonder-
ing about the legitimacy of this distinction, Gentile da
Foligno maintains that medicine can be divided in this
way, but the theoretical part then coincides with a part of
natural philosophy, since medicine is ‘‘a science made up
of numerous other sciences’’ (comm. Canon, I.1.1.1.).
For him, medicine is composed of a theoretical part,
which corresponds to natural philosophy, and a practical
part of its own; contra Avicenna, he abandons the exis-
tence of a distinct and speciﬁc medical theory. The conse-
quence of such a presentation is evident: the medical
theory no longer constitutes a proper part of medicine,
and while the doctor must know it, he must not learn it as
a science that forms an integral part of his discipline.
The inﬂuence of Averroes on the relation between phi-
losophy and medicine appears to be even more evident in
Paris and Montpellier, probably because the two disciplines
are more distinct in these particular universities. During the
trial of the empiricist Jean de Dompre´mi (1423–1427), the
masters of the faculty of Medicine in Paris declare ‘‘ubi
desinit phisicus incipit medicus’’ (‘‘where the philosopher
ends, the doctor begins’’), while in the preceding century
E´vrard de Conty uses a similar formula in his Livre des
eschez amoureux moralise´s: ‘‘ou philosophie ﬁne, medicine
commence.’’ Jacques Despars, in the ﬁrst half of the ﬁfteenth
century, comes to a synthesis between the Avicennian instru-
mentalism and the Averroist deﬁnition slightly different
from those of contemporary Italian authors: he tends to
insist on the practical character of medicine, to distinguish
it from theoretical questions that must come under natural
philosophy, and thus must not inﬂuence recommended
modes of treatments. For Despars, as claims Arnaud de
Villeneuve in Montpellier at the beginning of the fourteenth
century, the doctor is foremost a sensibilis artifex, whose
explanations are hypothetical constructions founded on
sensible experience, necessary for practice but only approx-
imating truth without ever corresponding to it perfectly.
So, in most of the Latin world, Avicennian instrumen-
talism is adopted to resolve difﬁculties connected to the
relation between medicine and philosophy, since it permits
the conservation of the advanced therapeutic ideas of the
ﬁrst while it respects the truth expounded by the second;
however, we must note that the precise interpretations vary
from one place to another, in that they integrate more or
less the restrictive deﬁnition of medicine given by Averroes
in his Colliget. It seems reasonable to relate, in this case,
these differences to institutional conditions then prevalent
740 M
Medicine and Philosophy

in universities: strong connections between the disciplines
in Italy, more distant links in the rest of Europe. Anyway, it
must be said that the originality of western thinkers is that
they propose a synthesis of the different solutions that
have been advanced before them.
The end of the Middle Ages is traditionally considered
a period during which the philosophical side of medicine
is gradually neglected, to the beneﬁt of a renewed interest
in practical observations, experimenta and other mirabilia.
In reality, theoretical discussions lose their keenness, and
are no longer treated, even in Italian universities, as rou-
tine questions. Signiﬁcantly, the most famous Paduan
doctors of the second half of the ﬁfteenth century abandon
their theoretical chairs to occupy those in pratica. Medical
theory then becomes a simple foundation course for ﬁrst-
year students, one that coincides largely with natural phi-
losophy, while the renewed interest for observation and
experimentation paves the way for the important devel-
opments of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. If the
social and cultural conditions had an important role to
play in these changes, it is certain that the synthesis real-
ized by the Latin masters from the Colliget and the Canon
contributed to, if not presided over, this tendency. In this
way, we can say that the construction of the philosophical
and medical models of the Middle Ages played an essential
role in the progress of experimentation and observation
that characterize the beginnings of Renaissance science.
See also: ▶Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Medicine
▶Alexandrian
Tradition
into
Arabic:
Philosophy
▶Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Translation of
▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translation of ▶Aris-
totle, Arabic ▶Arnaldus de Villanova ▶Constantine the
African ▶Epistemology ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Galen,
Arabic ▶Gerard of Cremona ▶Ibn Rushd (Averroes),
Latin Translations of ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn
Ah˙mad
al-H˙ afı¯d
(Averroes)
▶Ibn
Sı¯na¯,
Abu¯
ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of
▶Medicine, Byzantine ▶Medicine in the Arab World
▶Natural
Philosophy
▶Natural
Philosophy,
Arabic
▶Philosophy, Arabic ▶Schools in the Twelfth Century
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Angellus of Ravenna (1981) Commentaria in librum de sectis Galeni, ed.
and English trans. Westerink LG et al. Arethusa, New York/Buffalo
Aristotle (forthcoming) De sensu et sensato. In: Aristoteles Latinus XIII.1,
ed. Peeters L. Brepols, Turnhout
Arnaldus de Villanova (2000) De intentione medicorum, ed. McVaugh
MR. Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona
Averroes (1987) Kita¯b al-Kullı¯ya¯t fı¯ t˙-t˙ibb, ed. Forneas Besteiro JM,
Alvarez de Morales C. Consejo superior de investigaciones cientiﬁcas,
Madrid; Latin translation: Venice, 1482; Catalan translation: Va´squez
de Benito M (2003). Trotta, Madrid
Avicenna (1877) al-Qa¯nu¯n ﬁat˙-t˙ibb. Bulaq, Cairo; Latin translation:
Milan, 1473; English translation: Book I. O. C. Gruber, London, 1930
Bartholomaeus of Salerno (1856) Practica, ed. De Renzi S. In:
Collectio salernitana, vol IV. Tipograﬁa del Filiatre-Sebezio, Naples,
pp 321–406; Italian translation: A. Caparoni, Rome, 1960
d’Abano Pietro (1565) Conciliato controveriarum, quae inter Philosophos
et Medicos versantur. Giunta, Venise (repr Antenore, Padua, 1985)
Galen (2007) Que l’excellent me´decin est aussi philosophe, ed. and French
trans. Boudon-Millot V. Les Belles Lettres, Paris
Gentile da Foligno (1520–1522) comm. Avicenna Canon, 4 vols. apud
heredes O. Scoti, Venice
Hippocrates (1923) Ancient medicine, ed. and English trans. Jones WHS.
Harvard University Press-W.Heinemann, Cambridge Mass.-London.
Loeb, I
Hippocrates (1931a) Nature of man, ed. and English trans. Jones WHS.
Harvard University Press-W.Heinemann, Cambridge Mass.-London.
Loeb, IV
Hippocrates (1931b) Regimen, ed. and English trans. Jones WHS. Harvard
University Press-W.Heinemann, Cambridge Mass.-London. Loeb, IV
Ibn Masawayh Yuh:anna (1980) Kita¯b al-Nawa¯dir al-t˙ibbiyya (Medical
axioms), ed., Latin version and French trans. Jacquart D, Troupeau
G. Droz, Geneva
al-Maju¯sı¯ ‘Alı¯ ibn al-Abba¯s (1877) al-Kita¯b al-Malakı¯. Bulaq, Cairo
Urso of Salerno (1976) De commixtionibus elementorum libellus, ed.
Stu¨rner W. Stuttgarter Beitrage zur Geschichte und Politik. Ernst
Klett, Stuttgart
Secondary Sources
Agrimi J, Crisciani C (1988) ‘Edocere medicos’. Medicina scolastica nei
secoli XIII-XV. Guerini, Milano/Napoli
Cadden J (1996) Western medicine and natural philosophy. In:
Bullough VL, Brundage JA (eds) Handbook of medieval sexuality.
Garland, New York, pp 51–80
Crisciani C (2007–2008) Medicina e ﬁlosoﬁa nel Medioevo: aspetti e fasi
di un rapporto discusso. I Castelli di Yale – Quaderni di ﬁlosoﬁa,
pp 9–35
Edelstein L (1952) The relation of ancient philosophy to medicine. Bull
Hist Med 26:299–316
Grmek MD (1998) Western medical thought from Antiquity to the
Middle Ages. Harvard University Press, Harvard
Jacquart D (1998) La me´decine me´die´vale dans le cadre parisien. Fayard,
Paris
Jacquart D (2004) Me´decine et philosophie naturelle a` Salerne au XIIe
sie`cle. In: Delogu P, Peduto P (eds) Salerno nel XII secolo: Istituzioni,
societa`, cultura. Atti del convegno internazionale, Raito di Vietri sul
Mare, Auditorium di Villa Guariglia, 16–20 giugno 1999. Incisivo
Industrie Graphice s.r.l., Salerno, pp 399–407
Jacquart D, Micheau F (1990) La me´decine arabe et l’Occident medieval.
Maisonneuve et Larose, Paris
Jordan MD (1987) Medicine as science in the early commentaries on
‘Johannitius’. Traditio 43:121–145
Jordan MD (1990) The construction of a philosophical medicine: exegesis
and argument in Salernitan teaching on the soul. In: McVaugh M-R,
Siraisi NG (eds) Renaissance medical learning. Osiris, II s., 6, pp 42–61
Kristeller PO (1978) Philosophy and medicine in medieval and Renais-
sance Italy. In: Spicker SF (ed) Organism, medicine, and metaphysics.
Reidel, Dordrecht, pp 29–40
Kristeller PO (1986) Studi sulla Scuola medica salernitana. Istituto
Italiano per gli studi ﬁlosoﬁci, Naples
Medicine and Philosophy M
741
M

McKeon R (1961) Medicine and philosophy in the eleventh and twelfth
century: the problem of elements. Thomist 24:211–256
McVaugh MR (2000) Introduction to Arnaldus de Villanova, De
intentione medicorum. AVOMO, vol 1. Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelone, pp 127–197
McVaugh MR, Siraisi NG (eds) (1990) Renaissance medical learning.
Osiris, II s., 6
O’Boyle C (1998) The art of medicine. Medical teaching at the University
of Paris, 1250–1400. Brill, Leiden
Ottosson P-G (1984) Scholastic medicine and philosophy. A study of
commentaries on Galen’s Tegni (ca. 1300–1450). Bibliopolis, Naples,
p 322
Palmieri N (1997) La the´orie de la me´decine des Alexandrins aux Arabes.
In: Jacquart D (ed) Les voies de la science grecque. Etudes sur la
transmission des textes de l’Antiquite´ au dix-neuvie`me sie`cle. Droz,
Gene`ve, pp 33–133
Siraisi NG (1981) Taddeo Alderotti and his pupils: two generations of
Italian medical learning. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Temkin O (1973) Galenism. Rise and decline of a medical philosophy.
Cornelle University Press, Ithaca/Londres
Van Der Eijk PJ (2005) Medicine and philosophy in classical antiquity.
Doctors and philosophers on nature, soul, health and disease.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Westerink LG (1964) Philosophy and medicine in Late Antiquity. Janus
51:168–177
Medicine in the Arab World
HANS HINRICH BIESTERFELDT
Seminar fu¨r Orientalistik
Bochum University
Bochum
Germany
Abstract
Medicine in the classical Islamic world was basically
shaped
by
three
different
traditions,
sometimes
interacting with each other: pre-Islamic Bedouin folklore;
the so-called Prophetic medicine, the diagnosis and ther-
apy of which was informed by the alleged practice of the
Prophet Muh:ammad; and Hellenistic medicine. Prophetic
medicine must have enjoyed a considerable share in every-
day life, since a large number of compilations, all of them
by traditionists, jurists, historians, rather than physicians,
is extant in numerous manuscripts (and continues to be
reprinted until today). However, far more productive and
representative of medicine in Islam is the Hellenistic
tradition, as it was standardized mainly by Galen (d.
c. 216 CE), translated from Greek into Arabic and devel-
oped from the ninth century onwards. Arabic medical
compendia which reﬂect this tradition in structure and
contents are Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯’s Comprehensive Book on
Medicine, al-Maju¯sı¯’s Complete Book on the Medical Art,
and Avicenna’s Canon of Medicine that by its comprehen-
siveness and sophisticated organization dominated the
ﬁeld for centuries and gave rise to a long series of com-
mentaries and adaptations. Apart from general handbooks
such as these, there is a rich and, to a degree, innovative
literature on special disciplines, notably ophthalmology,
materia medica, and general surgery – although highly
invasive operations would seem to have been performed
comparably rarely. Actual medical attendance may be
witnessed in larger towns, preferably political centers,
which offered doctors to have an ofﬁce of their own, to
visit the patient in his own house, to perform their services
in public places – this activity was ideally controlled by the
municipal authorities – or, most honorably, to be part of
a team in a hospital which constituted the center of public
medical welfare, medical instruction, and research. The
ideals of professional ethics are represented in a consider-
able number of works on the history, state, and demands of
the medical art, on examinations, and on the business of
quacks and charlatans; they reﬂect discussions of late Antiq-
uity on the relation between medicine and philosophy.
Treatises on ‘‘Prophetic medicine’’ emerged in the ninth
century, ﬂourished in the period of Sunni anti-Hellenistic
traditionalism, the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries,
and are quite popular today, as can be seen from numer-
ous modern printings. Their authors were religious
scholars rather than physicians. One of the earliest speci-
mens of Prophetic medicine is the ninth-century Medicine
of the Imams by al-H˙ usayn b. Bist:a¯m b. Sa¯bu¯r and his
brother, writing in Iran, which collects medical advice of
the Prophet and of Shı¯ʿite religious authorities, magical
expedients,
and
prescriptions
of
compound
drugs.
Another example is the contemporaneous Summary
on Medicine by the Andalusian Ibn H˙ abı¯b (d. around
853). From the heyday of this type of compilations, we
have the works of the scholars of H˙ anbalı¯ jurisprudence,
Ibn al-Jawzı¯ (d. 1200), Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya (d. 1351),
and of al-Suyu¯t:ı¯ (d. 1505). The Medicine of the Prophet by
the Damascene historian and Sha¯ﬁʿite traditionist al-
Dhahabı¯ (d. 1348) again compiles medical sayings from
religious authorities, but also from Greek medical authors
such as Hippocrates, Galen, and Dioscurides along with
Arabic authors in this tradition, for example, al-Ra¯zı¯ and
Avicenna. The peculiar fusion of this tradition and that of
al-t:ibb al-nabawı¯ (Prophetic medicine) is evident in
a passage in the beginning of this work, which presupposes
the Galenic deﬁnition of health as the right balance (Greek
eukrasia, Arabic iʿtida¯l) of the four humors and then goes
on to attribute the progressively perfect balance to, ﬁrst,
742 M
Medicine in the Arab World

man among the animals, then to the believers among the
humans, the prophets, and so on, and ﬁnally the most
perfect balance to the Prophet Muh:ammad. It is difﬁcult
to determine the exact share of Prophetic medicine in the
medical care of the medieval Islamic world and to know
the names of its practitioners, but, apart from the Helle-
nistic admixtures that one notes not only in al-Dhahabı¯’s
book, the sheer bulk of works of this type, multiplied by
a great number of manuscripts (and in modern times,
printings), attests to the fact that Prophetic medicine
coexisted with the Hellenistic tradition – as did popular
magical medicine whose evidence consists not only of
texts but also of amulets, talismans, magic squares, and
magic-medicinal bowls. The pious fringe of Prophetic
medicine, however, maintained that all human medical
measures are to be considered as an impairment of God’s
omnipotence and that care and cure should be limited to
a healthy diet, simple medicines, prominently honey, and
recitations and prayer.
Far more productive and prestigious than Prophetic
medicine, and clearly better to evaluate in modern schol-
arship, were Hellenistic medicine and pharmacology,
translated and appropriated from the early days of the
ʿAbba¯sid empire by the middle of the ninth century.
It can safely be said that the whole of Greek medicine
was translated into Arabic and was to dominate Islamic
medicine – as well as long centuries of the Latin medical
tradition. (For the translation movement, the role of the
Alexandrian tradition in shaping the medical curriculum
and the principal genres of medical literature, and the
impact of ‘‘Galenism,’’ see the entry on Alexandrian Tra-
dition into Arabic: Medicine in this volume.) One of the
most obvious features of medical literature both in Late
Antiquity and in classical Islam is the compendium, or
encyclopedia, endeavoring to present all medical knowl-
edge in systematic order. Two early specimens of such
compendia are ʿAlı¯ b. Sahl Rabban al-T˙abarı¯’s (ﬂ. c. 850)
The Paradise of Wisdom, which predominantly uses
Greek authors such as Hippocrates, Galen, Aristotle,
Dioscurides, but appends an exposition of the system of
Indian medicine (available through Persian and Arabic
translations) and displays a characteristic mix of informa-
tion also on natural philosophy, climate, astronomy/
astrology, magic, the human soul, and popular customs,
and Abu¯ Bakr Muh:ammad b. Zakariyya¯’ al-Ra¯zı¯’s (d. 925,
or 935?) Comprehensive Book on Medicine (in medieval
Latin translations Continens or Comprehensor), a large
collection (compiled and roughly ordered a capite ad
calcem posthumously by his students) of quotations
from Galen and other authors and observations of his
own. Another compendium by al-Ra¯zı¯, more systematized
than the former, is his Book for al-Mans:u¯r, dedicated to the
Sa¯ma¯nid ruler Abu¯ S˙a¯lih: al-Mans:u¯r b. Ish:a¯q in Rayy
(south
of
today’s
Tehran),
where
al-Ra¯zı¯ directed
a hospital. The two most famous medical encyclopedias
in medieval Islam are ʿAlı¯ b. al-ʿAbba¯s al-Maju¯sı¯’s (around
980) Complete Book on the Medical Art (Latin: Liber regius,
after another version of the Arabic title, Royal Book) and
Avicenna’s (Ibn Sı¯na¯, d. 1037) Canon of Medicine
(Latin: Liber canonis). In accordance with the ancient
classiﬁcation, al-Maju¯sı¯ divides medicine into theory
(part 1) and practice (part 2); the ﬁrst part dealing with
the fundamental concepts of elements, humors, natures,
faculties, anatomy, the natural and non-natural causes
inﬂuencing the human body and soul, the doctrines of
symptoms and diagnosis, pathology, the second part with
hygienics and therapy. In his introduction, the author
interestingly evaluates at length the works of his predeces-
sors, duly praising Hippocrates and Galen, but critically
noting the former’s terseness and the latter’s prolixity, and
pointing out omission of entire medical disciplines and
lack of systematic order in other Greek and Arabic works.
The most famous medical encyclopedia in Arabic is cer-
tainly Avicenna’s Canon of Medicine, whose rigorous and
sophisticated arrangement of material shows the author’s
mastery of logic and philosophy in general and helped to
dominate the medical theories in the Islamic world and
later in Latin Europe. The Canon consists of ﬁve ‘‘books’’;
the ﬁrst covers much of what al-Maju¯sı¯’s Complete Book
treats in its ﬁrst part, the second book treats the simple
medicinal substances (in alphabetical order), the third and
fourth books basically deal with illnesses concerning only
one part of the body and more than a single organ
(like fevers), respectively, and the ﬁfth book contains
a formulary of compound substances. The systematic
rigor of the Canon has necessitated various forms of
vulgarization. Already the author himself published an
epitome of its core material in didactic rhyme, and the
list of subsequent commentaries, supra-commentaries,
and summaries is indeed long. Perhaps the most inﬂuential
commentator and epitomator of the Canon is Ibn al-Nafı¯s
(d. 1288) who, in the section on the anatomy of the
heart, famously asserted, against Galen’s prevalent doc-
trine of a passage connecting the ventricles of the heart,
that there is no such connection, visible or invisible, and
that the blood in the right ventricle must arrive at the left
one by way of the lungs – thus intimating, though
not precisely formulating and proving, the model of the
so-called ‘‘lesser’’ circulation. In the Islamic West,
a noteworthy medical encyclopedia was compiled by
Abu¯ l-Qa¯sim al-Zahra¯wı¯ (d. soon after 1009), putting
medical knowledge at the disposal of those unable to
Medicine in the Arab World M
743
M

compile it for themselves. Besides chapters 1 and 2 on
physiology and pathology, this compilation’s most extensive,
and most famous and inﬂuential, part is the last chapter 30
on surgery, an art which, the author says, was largely
obliterated on its way from Antiquity to Arabic medicine
and is in need of a new anatomical foundation and
accurate descriptions of operations such as cauterization,
section, extraction, amputation, and the therapy of
fractures and luxations. This chapter in particular had
a considerable inﬂuence, through its translation by Gerard
of Cremona, on anatomical and surgical literature of the
Latin West down to the eighteenth century, as well as on
early Ottoman medicine. Another interesting feature of
this chapter is its abundant illustration with drawings of
surgical instruments.
Notwithstanding the extensiveness and long afterlife
of al-Zahra¯wı¯’s exposition (and some of his colleagues’
books, prominently the Foundation of the Art of Medicine
by a student of Ibn al-Nafı¯s, the Damascene Christian
physician Ibn al-Quff, who died in 1286), it is a matter
of debate whether the numerous and detailed surgical
procedures described in the literature reﬂect real practice.
From the lack of actual descriptions or realistic illustra-
tions one may surmise that highly invasive operations, like
surgically treating abdominal wounds or amputation,
were performed very rarely, and the Caesarian section,
during parturition or post-mortem, never. Surgical
measures that are attested included – apart from minor
measures such as bloodletting and cauterization, the latter
used to seal bleeding wounds, but also to treat a great
variety of complaints, including mental ones – removal
of tumors and growths, treatment of wounds, such as
extraction of arrows, excision of cysts, ligation, or sclero-
tization of hemorrhoids, and of course circumcision.
A surgical discipline of remarkable variety and
innovation was developed in ophthalmology; in fact, the
works on the anatomy of the eye and the therapy of eye
diseases can be seen as a distinct branch of Arabic medical
literature. Already in the ninth century the famous trans-
lator from Greek into Arabic and medical author in his
own right, H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q, and his teacher Ibn Ma¯sawayh
wrote inﬂuential ophthalmological works, advancing
beyond their Greek forerunners (Galen, Oribasius, Paul
of Aegina, et al.). ʿAlı¯ b. ʿI¯sa¯ (d. after 1010) is the author of
a highly regarded Memorandum for Oculists, which sys-
tematically treats 130 eye diseases with their symptoms,
causes, and therapies. A close contemporary of his was
ʿAmma¯r al-Maws:ilı¯ whose Book of Selection on the Treat-
ment of Eye Diseases was dedicated to the Fatimid sultan
al-H˙ a¯kim and presents less than half of ʿAlı¯’s inventory of
disorders, but contains a number of original observations
and measures, for example, actual reports on six opera-
tions on a cataract, including his invention of a metallic
hollow needle used to suck the cataract from the eye, and
on the examination of the pupil’s reaction to light
incidence before operating a cataract. Other authors
describe an operation to treat corneal vascularization,
a complication of trachoma, which is called peritomy
today and which involved the use of hooks to keep the
eye open during surgery and of a thin scalpel for excision.
Another ﬂourishing ﬁeld of Arabic medical literature
and practice was pharmacology. As for Arabic authors
Galen was the chief authority in general medicine, so was
Dioscurides (d. around 90) the leading author on materia
medica, whose work was translated into Syriac and Arabic
at a very early stage and was repeatedly commented upon
by authors such as Ibn Juljul (d. after 994) and Ibn al-
Bayt:a¯r (d. 1248). The latter composed also a work on
‘‘simple’’ drugs and their use against illnesses a capite ad
calcem, and thirdly, the most famous compilation of phar-
macognosy and dietetics, based on his own observations
and excerpts from over 250 works and describing, in
alphabetical order, more than 1400 medicaments, the
Comprehensive Book on Simple Drugs and Foodstuffs. In
pharmacology, one may say that Arabic writers excelled
over their Greek forerunners, because their wider geo-
graphical horizons introduced them to a vast variety of
new plants and drugs, and because of their descriptive
sophistication and not least their keen interest in linguistic
and terminological matters.
Medical attendance in the medieval Arab and Iranian
world depended, like any other public service, on the
economic and political situation in a given place and
period. Urban settlements were privileged over rural
areas, and political centers offered more opportunity to
claim and dispense medical treatment than provincial
towns. Principally, doctors could operate in their own
ofﬁce, or visiting the patient in his own house, or in the
streets and on the markets, or in a hospital. Administering
treatment in a public place was the business of popular
practitioners – bone-setters, cuppers, quacks pretending
to heal eye and tooth complaints, and often was the
object of control by the ofﬁcial inspector of the
market (muh:tasib). Hospitals, on the other hand, are
a manifestation of a continuous respectable concern of
Muslim society with public welfare. Generally, the foun-
dation of hospitals was due to the initiative of the ruler
and the high ofﬁcials surrounding him and was part of
their aim – often in the initial phases of new dynasties
which wanted to manifest their proﬁle and splendor – to
further the public weal by establishing religious and
secular institutions – in addition to hospitals, schools,
744 M
Medicine in the Arab World

libraries, fountains, rest houses for travelers, etc. The
origin of hospitals in the Islamic realm is not quite clear;
the hospital in seventh-century Sasanian Gonde¯sha¯pu¯r
was already famous in the seventh century, and the Chris-
tian Bokhtı¯shu¯ʿ family of physicians, summoned from
there by the ʿAbba¯sid Caliph al-Mans:u¯r (d. 775) to the
court in Baghdad, may have been instrumental in
importing this institution (the term bı¯ma¯rista¯n is of Per-
sian origin) and, generally, a Christian concern for public
charity. At any rate, in the classical period of Islam every
major city had one or more hospitals: Baghdad (since the
ﬁrst half of the tenth century, prominently the ʿAd˙udı¯
hospital, founded in 982), Damascus (the Nu¯rı¯ hospital
around 1150), Cairo (the Mans:u¯rı¯ hospital, founded in
1284), as well as in Iran and al-Andalus. A full-ﬂedged
hospital consisted of an outpatient clinic and an inﬁrmary
and housed departments for the specialists – surgeons,
oculists, pharmacists –, an asylum for the insane, a home
for elderly patients without a family, and a lecture yard
and library for medical education.
Despite the fact that medicine and its practitioners
enjoyed such a high status in Muslim societies – to be
judged by the social eminence and high salary of the top-
rank physicians and the impressive endowment of the
large hospitals – we have numerous examples of invectives
against the professional failings of the physician as an
individual and against the pretensions of medicine as
a discipline. The rich deontological branch of Arabic
medical literature, basing itself on the professional ethics
and example of Hippocrates and on the programmatic
treatise by Galen, ‘‘That the Best Physician is Also
a Philosopher,’’ is full of lamentations over the present
state of the art. Physicians are blamed as arrogant, incom-
petent, and, more often than not, greedy for money.
A small essay by one ʿAbdalwadu¯d (late eleventh/early
twelfth century) on ‘‘The Blameworthiness of Making
Money by the Craft of Medicine’’ presents a number of
examples of the decline of medicine: prescription of, and
trade with, expensive drugs regardless of the speciﬁc
climate and humoral disposition of the patient, conﬂict
between worldly power and the physician’s professional
ethics, lack of cooperation between colleagues, where
a complex diagnosis would call for more than one special-
ist,
and
plain
practical
and
theoretical
ignorance.
ʿAbdalwadu¯d’s main argument is that incompetence and
love of money are two sides of the same coin and that
practicing medicine merely with regard to making money
perverts the idea of this noble art. Other noteworthy works
on the physician’s professional ethics are Ish:a¯q b. ʿAlı¯ al-
Ruha¯wı¯’s (probably working in the second half of the
ninth century) The Ethics (Arabic adab) of the Physician,
ʿAlı¯ b. Rid˙wa¯n’s (d. 1068) treatises The Useful Book on How
to Teach the Art of Medicine, On the Path to Happiness by
Medicine, and The High Rank/Dignity (Arabic sharaf ) of
Medicine, and S˙a¯ʿid b. al-H˙ asan’s (writing in 1072)
Arousing the Desire for Medicine. These programmatic
monographs are complemented by handbooks for the
examination of the student of medicine (al-Ra¯zı¯’s On
Examining and Appointing the Physician contains several
quotations from Galen’s corresponding work) and for the
control of the physician practicing in public by the muh:tasib,
and by polemical treatises exposing the tricks of medical
charlatans, as contained in al-Jawbarı¯’s (around 1240)
Book of Selection on Disclosing Secrets and Lifting Veils.
Both the claims of medicine to constitute a ‘‘noble art,’’
founded on philosophical authority, and the lamentations
over its shortcomings and present decline have their roots
in Late Antiquity. In its Athenian phase, philosophy had
enjoyed the eminent status of a religion for intellectuals
and in Alexandrian scholarship a central position as art
(Greek techne¯) and as science (episte¯me¯), which furnishes
the other sciences with their principles (medicine,
according to Ammonius son of Hermias, receiving from
philosophy its system of elements). In later Alexandrian
scholarship, beginning with the ﬁfth century, philosophy
as an academic career lost its basis; whereas rhetors, gram-
marians, particularly physicians after their examination
found a ﬂourishing job market, philosophy graduates
had to look for openings in rhetoric, teaching grammar,
and not least in medicine: many of the sixth and seventh-
century Alexandrian commentators on Aristotle’s works
worked as doctors – a lucrative profession, which drew the
jealousy of the few advocates of ‘‘pure’’ philosophy and
which, in turn, explains the remarkable self-image of
medicine as a philosophical discipline. In Arabic medi-
cine, this characteristic persisted: all medical encyclope-
dias and many monographs on special subjects display
their theoretical basis at length and organize their subject
matter in strict hierarchy; even the ‘‘practical part’’ of these
works obeys the – highly speculative – theory of humoral
pathology, and references to Aristotelian logic and natural
science and Galenic ethics are ubiquitous. As in Alexan-
dria (and in Byzantium) the philosopher-physician was
a prominent ﬁgure in Islam: al-Ra¯zı¯, Ibn al-T˙ayyib
(a commentator on works by Aristotle, Hippocrates, and
Galen, who was a physician at the ʿAd˙udiyya hospital in
Baghdad and d. in 1043), Avicenna, and Ibn Rushd
(Averroes, d. 1198) are well-known examples. On the
other hand, representatives of ‘‘pure’’ philosophy have
disputed the philosophical aspirations of medicine.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (d. 950), a scholar working in Baghdad and
disdaining any ﬁnancial gain from a non-philosophical
Medicine in the Arab World M
745
M

practice and refusing any public position, did not include
medicine in his Enumeration of the Sciences, doubted
Galen’s competence in logic, and granted only a limited
validity to the generalia of medicine, the doctrine of the
human organism, and the theory of health and illness as
subjects of the natural sciences. In his preface to
a short Epistle on Medicine, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ deﬁned medicine as
a ‘‘productive craft, which is not concerned with treating
its objects as intelligibilia for the soul, as in (philosophical)
reﬂection, but to produce effects on the objects and to
provide them with qualities and other accidentia.’’
Medicine is, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ implies, not concerned with the
human soul and is not a science (Arabic ʿilm, Greek
episte¯me¯). Comparable to the ﬁelds of agriculture or
rhetoric, medicine is concerned with the particular and
the contingent, not the general and logically demonstra-
ble, and it leads to ‘‘opinions,’’ not to ‘‘certainty.’’
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ
(Rhazes) ▶Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Medicine
▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Galen, Arabic
▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn al-T˙ayyib ▶Med-
icine and Philosophy ▶Translations from Greek into
Arabic
Bibliography
Secondary Sources
Biesterfeldt HH (1984) Some opinions on the physician’s remuneration in
medieval Islam. Bull Hist Med 38:48–75
Endress G (1992) Medizin. In: Fischer W (ed) Grundriss der Arabischen
Philologie, vol III: Supplement. Ludwig Reichert, Wiesbaden,
pp 116–138
Klein-Franke F (1982) Vorlesungen u¨ber die Medizin im Islam. Sudhoffs
Archiv, Beihefte 23. Franz Steiner, Wiesbaden
Pormann PE, Savage-Smith E (2007) Medieval Islamic medicine, The
New Edinburgh Islamic Surveys Series. University Press, Edinburgh
Rosenthal F (1969) The defense of medicine in the medieval Muslim
world. Bull Hist Med 43:519–532 (repr. Rosenthal F (1990) Science
and medicine in Islam. A collection of essays, VIII. Variorum,
Aldershot)
Savage-Smith E (2000) T˙ ibb. In: The Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition,
vol X. Brill, Leiden, pp 452–460
Sezgin F (1970) Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums. Vol III: Medizin –
Pharmazie – Zoologie – Tierheilkunde. Brill, Leiden
Todd RB (1984) Philosophy and medicine in John Philoponus’ commen-
tary on Aristotle’s De anima. In: Scarborough J (ed) Symposium on
Byzantine medicine, Dumbarton Oaks Papers 38, pp 103–110
Ullmann M (1970) Die Medizin im Islam, Handbuch der Orientalistik.
Erste Abteilung, Erga¨nzungsband 6, Erster Abschnitt. Brill, Leiden/
Ko¨ln
Ullmann M (1978) Islamic medicine, Islamic surveys 11. University Press,
Edinburgh
Westerink LG (1964) Philosophy and medicine in Late Antiquity. Janus
51:169–177 (repr.
Westerink LG (1980) Texts and studies in
Neoplatonism and Byzantine literature (Collected papers). Adolf
M. Hakkert, Amsterdam, pp 83–91)
Zimmermann FW (1976) Al-Farabi und die philosophische Kritik an
Galen von Alexander zu Averroes. In Dietrich A (ed) Akten des VII.
Kongresses fu¨r Arabistik und Islamwissenschaft, Go¨ttingen, 15. bis
22. August 1974. Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in
Go¨ttingen, Phil.-Hist. Kl., Dritte Folge, Nr. 98. Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht, Go¨ttingen, pp 401–414
Medicine, Byzantine
BARBARA ZIPSER
Department of History
Royal Holloway
University of London
Egham
UK
Abstract
The Byzantine period saw a massive rise in the production
of medical encyclopedias. These were mostly based on
earlier models, mainly Galen. Only in few cases these
models were criticized. The language of these texts was
mainly learned Byzantine Greek; the vernacular was rarely
used. Overall, there was a certain tendency toward the
practical
application
of
medicine
rather
than
a development of new models.
Medical practice centered around hospitals. Some of
these institutions also had the facilities to offer a specialized
treatment, for instance for gynecological problems.
The medical history of the Byzantine age (roughly speak-
ing fourth to mid-ﬁfteenth century CE) is not easily
described. If one understands ‘‘Byzantine’’ as being part
of the eponymous empire, one has to bear in mind that
this same empire changed its geographical boundaries
over the centuries. If, on the other hand, one assumes
that Greek language was the main characteristic of Byzan-
tine culture, this raises the problem that the geographical
extension of the Byzantine empire never coincided with
the area in which Greek was spoken, as the vernacular in
everyday life, or as the lingua franca of learned academic
discourse. In the case of medical writings it is often impos-
sible to decide from where the text originated, or where it
was revised, and beyond doubt there was an exchange
between the different parts of the Greek speaking world.
A variety of sources give us insight into the medical
practice of the Byzantine period. Archaeological sites
allow us to understand the structure and capacity of
746 M
Medicine, Byzantine

hospitals; numerous written accounts tell us about the
date of their foundation and their history. Other literary
sources describe the role of medicine in the society, per-
ceptions of illness, death, and medical treatment. Some
hospitals issued their own manuals; these texts were cus-
tom made to suit their speciﬁc needs. Apart from texts like
these, other popular genres of medical literature were
ﬂorilegia of ancient sources, medical encyclopedias and
collections of recipes. Byzantium also saw a ﬂourishing
book production, which led to a number of revisions or
editions of texts. The sheer amount of text involved in this
process is tremendous and very little of it has, as yet, been
made accessible in printed editions. The fall of Constanti-
nople was not the end of Byzantine medicine – genres as
the iatrosophion lived on, and later medical authors used
medieval sources for their works.
Health care was widely available in the Byzantine
empire, and usually centered around hospitals, of which
a large number are accounted for, founded between as
early as the ﬁfth century and the fourteenth century.
They had their roots in charitable institutions, which
offered shelter to the poor and homeless, or pilgrims.
The most detailed information we have is on the
Pantocrator hospital in Constantinople. Apart from the
actual building, the statutes (typikon in Greek) have sur-
vived, along with copies of the medical books which were
either held or produced there. The hospital had several
wards, offering amongst other services specialist treatment
for eye diseases. A woman physician attended to gyneco-
logical problems. The surgical instruments from the
period
bear
strong
resemblance
to
the
classical
instrumentarium. The same applies to pharmaceutical
ingredients. However, in both cases a certain simpliﬁca-
tion can be noted, with a tendency toward the practical
and ordinary rather than the sophisticated.
Throughout the Byzantine period medicine kept
a strong interest in earlier writings, either by preserving
them in a copy or by transforming and adapting them to
the needs of their audience. Oreibasius (fourth century
CE) epitomized Galen’s works. Aetius of Amida (sixth
century CE) compiled an extensive medical encyclopedia
on pharmacology, diseases, and dietetics. Although his
work is, strictly speaking, an amalgamation of diverse
excerpts, it forms a readable and well-balanced corpus.
Paul of Aegina (seventh century CE) wrote a shorter yet
comprehensive medical handbook that is partly based on
excerpts, but does also contain original material. It covers
all common diseases along with an extensive chapter on
surgery. Similar in length and style is the Therapeutics by
Alexander of Tralles (sixth century CE). The main charac-
teristic of this author is an especially humane and careful
way in dealing with the patients. Other works attributed to
Alexander are texts on ophthalmology, fevers, and intes-
tinal worms. Paul of Nicaea (date not entirely clear) wrote
a handbook in form of an erotapokrisis (or ‘‘question and
answer’’style). All of these texts suitable as reference books
for an educated medic.
Another group of texts has a similar aim but differs
from the aforementioned in a crucial point: their authors
remain obscure, and we only have a vague idea about the
date and the history of these texts. The shortest and most
learned is Leo’s Synopsis, deﬁnitely written before the tenth
century, which shares a large amount of content with an
encyclopedia by Theophanes Chrysobalantes. From this
text, or a cluster of material with a similar content, the
Therapeutics of John the Physician was derived. John’s
work was then translated into the vernacular and
a commentary was added. Later on, probably in Constan-
tinople, an unknown reviser attempted to translate the
text back into the learned idiom.
Some parts of these works coincide with the so-called
xenonika, medical texts associated with hospitals; also
their scope is similar. Theory is disappearing or taken for
granted and these texts are largely focusing on therapy.
This means that an author might mention phlegm or bile
and offer a treatment, but does not explicitly refer to the
theoretical background of the humoral pathology, or in
any other way explain why he chose this very remedy.
One of the typical genres of the Byzantine period is
that of the so-called iatrosophion; these are compilations
which can be based on earlier or contemporary authors or
both, and can either ﬁll an entire volume or just a few
pages. The iatrosophia usually have a thematic structure
(although this might not be apparent at ﬁrst sight) and are
personalized to the extreme: from what was available to
him, the compiler selected anything he believed to be
useful and organized it in a way that made sense to him.
At the other end of the spectrum, we might rank some
highly sophisticated writings produced in the mid to late
Byzantine period. Theophilos Protospatharios (probably
ninth or tenth century CE) wrote a Christian interpreta-
tion of human anatomy mainly based on Galen’s de usu
partium. Meletius, probably a contemporary, also wrote
on anatomy, but with a more strongly teleological
approach. His work contains numerous quotes from lit-
erary sources. Nicolaos Myrepsos (thirteenth century AD)
and Symeon Seth (eleventh century) wrote on antidotes.
Stephanus of Athens (sixth century CE) is the most prom-
inent commentator of the time. He wrote on Hippocrates
and Galen. Ioannes Zacharias Actuarius (fourteenth cen-
tury CE) is commonly regarded as the most intellectually
reﬁned medical author of the period. His works deal with
Medicine, Byzantine M
747
M

urine diagnosis and therapeutics. Ioannes Actuarius and
Alexander of Tralles sometimes question earlier models.
On the whole, medical history of Byzantium bears
strong characteristics of the continuation of earlier
models, with emphasis on practice. Medical education
and publishing were highly developed and had an impact
on medicine in the entire western world. Throughout the
time of the Byzantine empire, medicine was inﬂuenced by
foreign, mainly eastern writings, which even led to Arabic
works being translated into Greek; a prominent example is
the treatise on small-pox and measles by Rhazes, which
was incorporated into a canon of medical texts together
with Alexander of Tralles and Artemidorus.
See also: ▶Medicine and Philosophy ▶Medicine in the
Arab World
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ermerins FZ (ed) (1840) Anecdota medica Graeca. Lugduni Batavorum/
Luchtmans
Greenhill Guilielmus Alexander (ed) (1842) Theophilus Protospatharius
de corporis humani fabrica libri V. Oxonii, E Typographeo
Academico
Heiberg IL (ed) (1921–1924) Paulus Aegineta (CMG IX 1–2). In aedibus
B.G. Teubneri, Lipsiae/Berolini
Ideler JL (ed) (1841–1842) Physici et medici Graeci minores. Reimeri,
Berolini
Ieraci Bio AM (ed) (1996) Paolo di Nicea. Manuale medico. Bibliopolis,
Napoli
Olivieri A (ed) (1935–1950) Aetii Amideni Libri medicinales I–VIII
(CMG VIII 1–2). In aedibus B.G. Teubneri, Lipsiae/Berolini
Puschmann Theodor (ed) (1963) Nachtra¨ge zu Alexander Trallianus.
Fragmente aus Philumenus und Philagrius, nebst einer bisher noch
ungedruckten
Abhandlung
u¨ber
Augenkrankheiten.
Hakkert,
Amsterdam
Renehan R (ed) (1969) Leo the physician. Epitome on the nature of man
(CMG X4). Akademie, Berlin
Steph Bernard IO (ed) (1794–1795) Theophanis Nonni Epitome de
cvratione morborvm. Gothae, apvd C.W. Ettinger
Theodor Puschmann (ed), von Tralles Alexander (1963) Hakkert,
Amsterdam (reprint)
Zipser B (ed) (2009) John the physician’s therapeutics. A medical hand-
book in vernacular Greek. Brill, Leiden
Secondary Sources
Bennett D (2003) Xenonika. Medical texts associated with xenones in the
late Byzantine period. Dissertation. London
Bliquez L (1999) The Surgical instrumentarium of Leon Iatrosophista.
Med nei Sec 11:291–322
Congourdeau M-H (1996) Le traducteur grec du traite´ de Rhaze`s sur
a variole. In: Garzya A (ed) Histoire et ecdotique des textes me´dicaux
grecs. Storia e ecdotica dei testi medici greci. Atti del II Convegno
Internazionale Parigi 24–28 maggio 1994. D’ Auria, Napoli
Constantelos D (1999) Medicine and social welfare in the Byzantine
empire. Med nei Sec 11:337–355
Horden P (1982) Saints and doctors in the early Byzantine empire: the
case of Theodore of Sykeon. Stud Church Hist 19:1–13
Hunger H (1978) Die hochsprachliche profane Literatur der Byzantiner, 2
vols. Beck, Munich
Miller T (1997) The birth of the hospital in the Byzantine empire. Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore/London
Nutton V (1988) Archiatri and the medical profession in antiquity. In:
From Democedes to Harvey: studies in the history of medicine from
the Greeks to the Renaissance. Variorum Reprint, London, pp
191–226
Nutton V (2007) Galen in Byzantium. In: Gru¨nbart M, Kislinger E,
Muthesius A, Stathakopoulos D (eds) Material culture and well-
being in Byzantium (400–1453). Verlag der oesterreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Vienna, pp 171–176
Zipser B (2005) Die Therapeutica des Alexander Trallianus: Ein
medizinisches Handbuch und seine U¨ berlieferung. In: Piccione R-
M, Perkams M (eds) Selecta Colligere, II. Beitra¨ge zur Methodik des
Sammelns von Texten in der Spa¨tantike und in Byzanz (Collana
Hellenika). Edizioni dell’Orso, Alessandria pp 211–234
Meister Eckhart
ALESSANDRO PALAZZO
Department of Filosoﬁa, Storia e Beni Culturali
Universita` degli Studi di Trento
Trento
Italy
Abstract
Eckhart of Hochheim (c. 1260–1328), a leading ﬁgure
within the Dominican order, was a professional theologian
and as such he performed all the three duties related to his
profession, lecturing on the Bible and on the Sentences,
disputing questions, and preaching sermons. He was twice
appointed as theology professor at the University of Paris.
Eckhart’s reputation is conﬁrmed by the several senior
posts he held in the administration of his order.
One original characteristic of Eckhart’s work lies in
the fact that he carried out a large part of his literary
activity in Middle High German by reframing for wider
audiences the issues discussed during disputations in
class and the themes explored in his specialist lectures
on the Bible. In so doing, he contributed to the creation
of a German technical philosophical vocabulary. Eckhart’s
effort to present the arduous contents of scholastic specu-
lation to common people seems to have been a crucial
factor in the proceedings for heresy to which he was
subjected towards the end of his life and which led to
a posthumous condemnation of some propositions drawn
from his works.
748 M
Meister Eckhart

Eckhart of Hochheim (c. 1260–1328) was born into
a family of the lower aristocracy in Tambach, a town
south of Gotha in Thuringia. It is not known when he
entered the Dominicans; the earliest evidence indicates
that in 1293–1294 he acted as Bachelor of the Sentences
(lector sententiarum) in Paris. From 1294 through 1298 he
served simultaneously as prior of the Dominican convent
at Erfurt and as vicar of Thuringia. In 1302–1303 he was
called to Paris to teach theology as magister actu regens.
In 1303 he was elected ﬁrst provincial of the newly
created province of Saxonia, to which he added the ofﬁce
of vicar-general for Bohemia in 1307. The 1310 provincial
chapter held in Speyer elected him provincial of Teutonia,
but Master General Eymerich of Piacenza did not conﬁrm
the election. In 1311 Eckhart was sent to Paris as theology
professor for a second time, an honor which only Aquinas
among Dominicans had received before him and which
shows how distinguished his reputation was during his
lifetime. Eckhart remained in Paris until 1313, thereafter
returning to Germany.
The widespread assumption that between 1314 and
1322 Eckhart resided in Strasbourg with the special
ofﬁce of spiritual counselor and preacher to convents of
Dominican nuns and houses of Beguines lacks evidence.
In fact, this idea is due to the misinterpretation of three
documents which attest Eckhart’s presence in or near
Strasbourg at three different times (1314, 1316, 1322),
but from which nothing can be inferred regarding
Eckhart’s alleged ofﬁcial appointment as responsible for
the so-called cura monialium (see Sturlese, in Quero-
Sa´nchez and Steer 2008).
In 1324 Eckhart was certainly in Cologne, where he has
long been conjectured to have carried out the ofﬁce of
lecturer at the Studium generale. In 1326, following the
accusations of two of his brethren, inquisitional proceed-
ings for heresy against him were started by the Archbishop
of Cologne, Henry II of Virneburg. The trial, which con-
tinued at the Papal Court in Avignon after Eckhart’s
appeal to the Holy See in 1327, would eventually lead to
the bull ‘‘In agro dominico’’ by Pope John XXII (1329),
condemning 28 excerpts from Eckhart’s works. In the
meantime, Eckhart had already died (1328). Despite the
condemnation, his thought did not cease to be inﬂuential
and themes characteristic of his teaching found their way
into the writings of John Tauler, Henry Suso, and Berthold
of Moosburg.
The idea that man, in the deepest ground of his soul, is
intimately conversant with God lies at the heart of
Eckhart’s thought. The human intellect is an image of
God and therefore stands in a relationship of coessential
univocity with Him, from Whom it goes forth and to
Whom it comes back in a timeless movement and in
a dialectic of identity and difference. In his writings Eck-
hart explores the metaphysical, anthropological, ethical,
and religious aspects and implications of this privileged
connection God-ground of the soul, a connection which
constitutes an exception to the general rule of analogy
predominant in the God-creatures relation. Moreover,
since people usually live plunged in the dimension of
creatureliness and estranged from their authentic self,
Eckhart’s preaching aims at making them become con-
scious of their inner union with God.
Recent scholarship has shed light on the dependence
of Eckhart’s speculation about the nobility of the soul on
the noetics and the anthropology of Albert the Great,
whose name appeared in Eckhart’s ﬁrst work, the Sermo
Pasqualis, and whose teachings set the intellectual back-
ground in Germany from the mid-thirteenth to the mid-
fourteenth century. It has also been rightly emphasized
how relevant some teachings of Dietrich of Freiberg (e.g.,
the doctrine of image), with whom Eckhart was personally
acquainted (between 1294 and 1298 Eckhart was the vicar
of Dietrich, provincial of the Dominican province of
Teutonia), were for his thought.
Works
An Easter sermon in Latin (Sermo Pasqualis: LW V,
136–148) and the Collatio in Libros Sententiarum (LW V,
17–26), which depends in some ways on the Collatio of the
Franciscan Richard Rufus of Cornwall, are all that remain
of Eckhart’s early teaching activity as Bachelor of the
Sentences in Paris (1293–1294). Both texts are noteworthy
for the large number of references to philosophical
and
scientiﬁc
literature:
Avicenna’s
De
animalibus
and
De
anima,
the
pseudo-Hermetic
Liber
XXIV
philosophorum,
Ptolemy’s
Almagestus,
al-Farg˙a¯nı¯’s
Rudimenta astronomica, Maimonides’ Dux neutrorum,
Aristotle’s Physica, Boethius’ Philosophiae consolatio, etc.,
are quoted, either implicitly or explicitly. The use of al-
Farg˙a¯nı¯ and Maimonides is very unusual in the context of
a Collatio, a lecture serving as a prologue to Eckhart’s
commentary upon Lombard’s Sentences.
Even this early in his career, Eckhart showed himself
fully aware of the exegetical value of philosophical
authorities and also persuaded that there is substantial
harmony between the Holy Scriptures and the Fathers,
on the one hand, and philosophical learning, on
the other.
The Talks (Die Rede, DW V, 185–309; the more com-
mon title Die rede der underscheidunge is not original), are
the result of table-talks given by Eckhart to the novices of
the convent at Erfurt. They are the earliest evidence of
Meister Eckhart M
749
M

Eckhart’s literary activity in German, dating from when he
served as prior in Erfurt (1294–1298).
Formerly these were often disregarded as examples of
devotional literature without speculative ambitions, but
recently The Talks have been given increasing scholarly
attention. Eckhart offered a new and philosophically
based interpretation of the traditional monastic virtues.
Obedience, the foremost virtue, does not mean only
subordination to the superior, but implies an existential
breakthrough which consists of forsaking oneself, anni-
hilating oneself’s will, giving up what is one’s own; in
a word, detachment (abegescheidenheit). The denial of self
is strictly related to the possibility of establishing a more
intimate relationship with God because a man able to
reach detachment will necessarily enjoy the presence of
God in himself and will be transformed by it. So
portrayed, obedience looks like an attitude of openness
towards God rather than to other men, an attitude whose
adoption requires considerable and continued hard
effort.
The Talks also present a few other points on which
Eckhart was later to expand further: the ethics of intention
(the idea that sanctity does not lie in works but in the
perfect and righteous will of human agents); the related
conviction that what counts for Christian life is inner self-
denial rather than external practices of asceticism; the
view that to the human intellect God is by nature very
close and present.
Very little is still extant from the period of Eckhart’s
theological mastership in Paris: three disputations plus
a sermon on St. Augustine date probably from his ﬁrst
period as theology professor (1302–1303), and another
two disputations probably from the second period
(1311–1313). The ﬁrst two disputations focus on the rela-
tionship between intellect and being, in God as well as in
angels, and provide valuable insights into Eckhart’s teach-
ing on intellect.
In the ﬁrst disputation (Utrum in deo sit idem esse et
intelligere, LW V, 37–48) – actually, it postdates the second
one – Eckhart departs radically from Aquinas’ doctrine.
After having reported Aquinas’ arguments in favor of the
identity of intellect and being in God, Eckhart claims that
God exists because He understands, and not the converse
– that He understands because He exists. Such a claim is
tantamount to saying that God is intellect and under-
standing and that understanding is superior to being.
Being qualiﬁes the mode of existence of creatures, which
are all formally (formaliter) beings, and therefore does not
apply to God the creator. Yet, though not formally, being is
in God as in its cause (sicut in causa), for God causes with
his science everything. In other words, God is puritas
essendi since He, as intellect, pre-contains everything in
purity, plenitude, and perfection.
The otherness of intellect from being is clearly
established in the second disputation (Utrum intelligere
angeli, ut dicit actionem, sit suum esse, LW V, 49–54), where
Eckhart expands further on the concept of intellect as
intellect (intellectus, in quantum intellectus), on which
Albert the Great and Dietrich of Freiberg had already
worked. Being pertains to those substances which exist
in space and time and are determined according to genus
and species. Intellect can also be taken as a being, namely
as a natural power of the soul which is a principle eliciting
single acts of intellection. However, if considered in its
proper nature, intellect is something which escapes any
kind of determination, whether by time or by space or by
genus and species, and is therefore radically different from
all other substances which are given a being localized in
space and time and restricted to one genus and species.
Probably around 1304, or even earlier, Eckhart started
working on an original theological summa, the Opus
tripartitum (the Three-Part Work), which, however, he
left unﬁnished. According to the original project, the
work would have had three parts: the Work of General
Propositions (Opus generalium propositionum), the Work
of Questions (Opus quaestionum), and the Work of Exposi-
tions (Opus expositionum). The ﬁrst part would have
contained a thousand or more propositions concerning
the transcendental terms (Being, Unity, Truth, and Good-
ness) and other metaphysical concepts. The Work of Ques-
tions was to solve some of the questions discussed in the
Summa theologiae of Aquinas. The Work of Expositions was
subdivided into two parts, one consisting of an exegetical
commentary on the authorities (auctoritates) contained in
the books of the two Testaments, and the other of a series
of sermons (Opus sermonum).
To Eckhart’s mind, the general propositions were
clearly to provide the fundamental philosophical princi-
ples according to which a theologian should both solve
disputed questions and interpret Sacred Scriptures. In the
General
Prologue
(LW
I,
148–165)
Eckhart
offers
a concrete example of his way of proceeding in the Opus
tripartitum: he ﬁrst formulates the general proposition
‘‘Being is God’’ (Esse est Deus); then, on this basis, he
goes on to answer the question ‘‘Whether God is’’
(Utrum Deus sit) and elucidate the meaning of Genesis
1,1 (In principio creavit deus caelum et terram).
Of the original project Eckhart accomplished, besides
the prologues (a General Prologue, a prologue to the Opus
propositionum, and two different prologues to the Opus
expositionum), only some of the third part (Work of Expo-
sitions): commentaries on a few books of the Bible (two on
750 M
Meister Eckhart

Genesis, one on Exodus, on Wisdom, on Canticle – of
which only a fragment is preserved – and on the Gospel of
St. John), two lectures, two sermons on Chapter 24 of the
Book of Sirach, and some 50 model Latin sermons.
Eckhart worked on the Three-Part Work for several
years and at least three different redactional stages are
documented in the manuscript tradition. This means
that the surviving parts were composed at different times.
The two lectures and two sermons on Chapter 24 of
the Book of Sirach (LW II, 231–300), for example, date
more or less from the same time of the ﬁrst three Parisian
questions. These texts seem to have had a programmatic
value because Eckhart gave the lectures and the sermons in
front of the German intellectual elite of the order on the
occasions of two provincial chapters.
The second lecture is one of the places where Eckhart
sets forth his original teaching on analogy. Analogates,
Eckhart maintains, have nothing positively rooted in
themselves of the form according to which they are in
a relation of analogy. Being and all other general perfec-
tions (One, True, Good, Light, Justice, etc.) are predicated
in an analogical way of God and creatures. Therefore, each
creature has its being, its being true, its being good, etc. not
in itself, but in and from God alone. Eckhart goes so far as
to say that all creatures, insofar as they are outside God, are
nothing in themselves, for God only is Being. Eckhart’s
doctrine of analogy serves thus to show that creatures
stand in a relationship of total dependence on God.
Apparently the doctrine of analogy, to which Eckhart
was to keep throughout the course of his life, runs counter
to the views he had put forward shortly before in the ﬁrst
two Parisian questions, where he had maintained that
creatures are beings, while God is not being but intellect.
As a matter of fact, the contradiction can be explained
away as a shift from a ‘‘physical’’ to a ‘‘metaphysical’’
perspective: in both the disputations and the lecture on
the Book of Sirach Eckhart is concerned with stressing the
radical difference between God and creatures, but whereas
in the disputations by ‘‘being’’ Eckhart means the imper-
fect mode of existence of creatures (which are localized in
space and time and determined according to genus and
species), in the lectures on Sirach he takes Being as one of
the general perfections which properly belong only to God
but are participated in also by creatures.
In the Commentary on the Gospel of St. John (LW III),
one of the latest sections of the Opus, Eckhart expresses in
a programmatic fashion how he conceives of his exegetical
work by pointing out that in his scriptural commentaries
his purpose is to explain on the basis of the natural reasons
of the philosophers what Christian Faith and the Bible
teach. Such a view of exegesis was the obvious result of the
conviction about the unity of Truth: Moses, Christ, and
Aristotle, Eckhart maintains, teach the very same things,
the only difference being in the way they do it.
The second commentary on Genesis (one of the last
parts, if not the very last, of the Opus tripartitum to have
been written) marks a substantial change in the original
project of the Opus because, unlike the ﬁrst commentary,
it focuses only on the explanation of the parables – hence
the title Liber parabolarum Genesis (LW I,1, 447–702). One
scholar has claimed that the commentary could be the ﬁrst
book of an entirely new project: the Liber de parabolis
rerum naturalium (The Book of the Parables of Natural
Things) (see Sturlese 2007).
The Liber Benedictus, consisting of the Book of Divine
Consolation (Daz buoch der go¨tlıˆchen troestunge, DW V, 8–
61) and a sermon On the Nobleman (Von dem edeln
Menschen, DW V, 109–119), is generally dated after 1318.
It is more difﬁcult to date the German sermons,
because Eckhart had always with him a ‘‘book’’ of his
sermons, composed at different times, on which he con-
tinually kept working by adding, revising, etc. Some of
them seem to have been composed quite early (e.g., those
forming the so-called Gottesgeburt cycle [sermons 101–
104] seem to date back to the time of the Rede [1294–
1298]).
Those
belonging
to
the
Paradisus
animae
intelligentis collection may date from the time of his
provincialate (1303–1311).
It is generally assumed that Eckhart’s vernacular
preaching should be seen in light of the movement of
female piety and Beguine spirituality ﬂourishing at that
time in Germany; Eckhart’s sermons, in other words,
would have been an attempt to face the challenge
represented by various forms of Beguine mysticism and
to reconcile them with the orthodoxy. Whatever may be
the nature of his relationship with the Beguine move-
ment, it is certain that in his German treatises and
sermons Eckhart discusses and analyses the same con-
tents and motifs as in his Latin scholastic writings. From
what Pope John XXII states in the bull ‘‘In agro
dominico’’ it can be argued that one of the chief reasons
for Eckhart’s legal misfortunes was that he had preached
highly speculative concepts in front of an audience of
simple people, thereby confounding the true faith in
their hearts. Even before the proceedings took place,
Eckhart seems to have been reproached for writing or
preaching such ideas to the untaught. At the end of the
Book of Divine Consolation, he replied that the untaught
were exactly the people needing instruction with a view to
making them become learned, and that he could not
worry about being misunderstood because he was aware
that what he had said or written was true. Given these
Meister Eckhart M
751
M

reactions, it is no surprise that the two lists on which the
accusation against Eckhart was based contained many
excerpts from the Liber Benedictus and from the German
sermons.
Among other doctrines censored is that of the spiritual
perfections (Goodness, Justice, Wisdom, etc.), a doctrine
which is dealt with in great detail in the Liber Benedictus.
Between Goodness and the good man exists a relationship
of univocal causality, or reciprocal relationality: Good-
ness, which is neither created nor made nor begotten,
begets the good man, who is neither created nor made
but is the son born and begotten of Goodness. Goodness
and the good man, in other words, are identical and the
action of begetting of the former is one with the latter’s
being begotten, the only difference between them being
that the former begets and the latter is begotten. Whatever
pertains to the good man, he has in and from Goodness.
This doctrine is a radical transformation of Aristotelian
metaphysics: it is not a quality (goodness) that lies in and
is supported by an underlying subject (i.e., the good man),
but the subject that is in the spiritual perfection. Insofar as
he is good, namely, insofar as he abandons the dimension
of creatureliness, the good man is nothing but pure and
simple Goodness.
The two most characteristic and interrelated issues of
the vernacular sermons are detachment and the birth of
the Word or Son in the soul. Detachment, as has been said,
is the way man has to go in order to recover consciousness
of his inner union with God. The origin of this crucial
concept of Eckhart’s thought has been traced back to the
philosophical tradition, notably to the Anaxagorean-
Aristotelian view of the intellect as something separable,
pure from all admixture, simple, having nothing in com-
mon with anything else.
The birth of the Word in the soul is an idea which
Eckhart could ﬁnd in the Christian tradition, but which he
modiﬁed in an original fashion. Indeed, he conceived of
the generation of the Word in the soul as a timeless pro-
cess: the Father is always bearing the Son in the soul,
provided the soul realizes that its ground is identical
with God’s ground.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Dietrich of Freiberg ▶Peter
Lombard
▶Richard
Rufus
of
Cornwall
▶Thomas
Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1936–) Die deutschen Werke (DW) ed. Quint J, Steer G. Die deutschen
und
lateinischen
Werke,
hrsg.
im
Auftrage
der
Deutschen
Forschungsgemeinschaft, 5 vols. Kohlhammer, Stuttgart
(1936–) Die lateinischen Werke (LW) ed. Benz E, Christ K, Decker B,
Fischer H, Geyer B, Koch J, Seeberg E, Sturlese L, Weiss K, Zimmer-
mann A. Die deutschen und lateinischen Werke, hrsg. im Auftrage
der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft, 5 vols. Kohlhammer,
Stuttgart
Secondary Sources (Most Recent Publications)
Monographs
Bu¨chner C (2007) Die Transformation des Einheitsdenkens Meister
Eckharts bei Heinrich Seuse und Johannes Tauler (Meister-Eckhart-
Jahrbuch Beihefte: Heft 1). Kohlhammer, Stuttgart
Flasch K (2006) Meister Eckhart: die Geburt der ‘‘Deutschen Mystik’’ aus
dem Geist der arabischen Philosophie. Beck, Mu¨nchen
Mieth D (2004) Meister Eckhart. Mystik und Lebenskunst. Patmos,
Du¨sseldorf
Collections
Enders M (2008) Gelassenheit und Abgeschiedenheit. Studien zur
deutschen Mystik. Boethiana. Forschungsergebnisse zur Philosophie
82. Verlag Dr. Kovacˇ, Hamburg
Hasse DN, Weigand R (eds) (2009) Meister-Eckhart-Jahrbuch, 3.
Kohlhammer, Stuttgart
Ku¨hn R, Laoureux S (eds) (2008) Meister Eckhart – Erkenntnis und
Mystik des Lebens. Forschungsbeitra¨ge der Lebenspha¨nomenologie
Seele, Existenz, Leben. Band 6. Karl Alber, Freiburg/Mu¨nchen
Leppin V, Schiewer H-J (eds) (2007) Meister-Eckhart-Jahrbuch, 1.
Kohlhammer, Stuttgart
Quero-Sa´nchez A, Steer G (eds) (2008) Meister-Eckhart-Jahrbuch, 2.
Kohlhammer, Stuttgart
Speer A, Wegener L (eds) (2005) Meister Eckhart in Erfurt. Miscellanea
Mediaevalia 32. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York
Steer G, Sturlese L (eds) (2003) Lectura Eckhardi II. Predigten Meister
Eckharts von Fachgelehrten gelesen und gedeutet. Kohlhammer,
Stuttgart
Steer G, Sturlese L (eds) (2009) Lectura Eckhardi III. Predigten Meister
Eckharts von Fachgelehrten gelesen und gedeutet. Kohlhammer,
Stuttgart
Sturlese L (2007) Homo divinus. Philosophische Projekte in Deutschland
zwischen Meister Eckhart und Heinrich Seuse. Kohlhammer,
Stuttgart
Sturlese L (ed) (2008) Studi sulle fonti di Meister Eckhart. I. Aristoteles –
Augustinus – Avicenna – Dionysius – Liber de Causis – Proclus –
Seneca. Dokimion 34. Academic Press, Fribourg
Vannier M-A (ed) (2006) La naissance de Dieu dans l’aˆme chez Eckhart et
Nicolas de Cues. Patrimoines – Christianisme. Les E`ditions du Cerf,
Paris
Journal Articles
Sturlese L (2006) Dietrich di Freiberg lettore di Eckhart? Giornale critico
della ﬁlosoﬁa italiana 85(87):437–453
Web Sites
http://www.meister-eckhart-gesellschaft.de/ – which informs about the
activities of the Meister-Eckhart-Gesellschaft, including its annual
conferences, and presents a continually updated bibliography
starting from 1997 onward
http://german.berkeley.edu/people/ﬁles/nlargier/meb/mebmai05.html –
which is based on Largier N (1989) Bibliographie zu Meister Eckhart.
Universita¨tsverlag, Freiburg and records Eckhart bibliography up to
1989
http://www.eckhartsociety.org/ – which accounts for the initiatives of The
Eckhart Society, including its annual conferences
http://www.eckhart.de/ – which is very rich in information concerning
Eckhart’s life and works and Eckhart scholarship
752 M
Meister Eckhart

Mental Language
PEKKA KA¨RKKA¨INEN
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
William of Ockham has been considered the ﬁrst thinker
to develop a theory of mental language with grammatical
structures. Ockham’s early views built upon Augustine’s
and Boethius’ two-fold concept of a mental word: a con-
cept common to all people and a resemblance of words to
actual spoken and written languages. Ockham understood
mental language to be identical with thinking. The spoken
and written words are subordinated to their mental coun-
terparts and therefore share their signiﬁcation. According
to Ockham, mental language does not contain ﬁgurative
speech, grammatical genders, synonyms, or equivoca-
tions, but does contain most other features of external
languages, including suppositions of terms and certain
fallacies related to the suppositions. John Buridan
diverged from Ockham’s view at this point and used the
notion of modes of thinking to discuss related problems.
Gregory of Rimini modiﬁed the view of mental language
in several respects. He considered the major part of mental
language to consist of a mentalized conventional language,
with only the act of assenting to a mental proposition,
which he considered to be the mental proposition itself,
being independent of conventional languages. Peter of
Ailly further developed Gregory’s and Ockham’s ideas. In
Italy, Peter of Mantua and Paul of Venice discussed the
problems of word order and mental language that William
of Heytesbury had raised earlier. The former was mainly
critical of Heytesbury, while the latter for the most part
shared Heytesbury’s views. Several later ﬁfteenth- and
sixteenth-century logicians continued the discussions.
William of Ockham’s starting point in developing a theory
of mental language was the traditional notion of mental
word. In particular, he adopted the idea, developed in
diverse ways by Aristotle, Augustine, and Boethius, that
some phenomena of the human mind are closely related to
the words in conventional languages, yet are common to
all people despite their diverse spoken and written lan-
guages. Ockham’s claims about the nature and function of
mental speech having an idiosyncratic grammatical struc-
ture, however, justify the oft-repeated statement that he
was the ﬁrst to present a comprehensive theory of mental
language. In addition to human mental language, Ockham
also discussed the problems
his theory poses for the
language of angels (Rep. II.20; Quodl. I.6). On the devel-
opment of different views of mental words and concepts
before Ockham, see the entry Mental Word/Concepts.
Ockham began to develop his view of mental language
in his early writings by adopting Augustine’s distinction
between two types of mental words: those that are the
same for all human beings and those that are mental
renderings of actual spoken words (Ord. I.27.2). He con-
sidered the ﬁrst type to be mental words in a proper sense,
whereas he considered latter to be mental words only in an
improper sense. The ﬁrst type of mental word had several
characteristics of Ockham’s later, mature concept of
a syncategorematic mental word: such word was unam-
biguous and could be the subject or the predicate of
a mental proposition. Ockham conceived of these words
as being produced by intuitive cognition, and, according
to him, as concepts they were proper objects of the acts of
knowledge. The formation of a mental sentence with the
help of this type of mental word seems to imply
a nonlinear rather than a discursive act of understanding,
where the conceptual ﬁcta of subject and predicate are
combined by a syncategorematic act. During this stage
Ockham seems to have excluded syncategorematic and
connotative concepts from the group of proper mental
words, considering such terms as belonging to the second
type of mental words, those derived directly from spoken
and written languages (Ord. I.2.8). Walter Chatton criti-
cized this view, since according to him syncategorematic
concepts are not conventional, as mental words of the
second type were supposed to be. Rather they are pro-
duced naturally, as are the categorematic concepts.
At the heart of Ockham’s mature concept of mental
language, outlined in his Summa logicae, was the priority
of mental terms vis-a`-vis written and spoken terms in
regards to signiﬁcation. The terms of conventional
languages derive their signiﬁcation from the terms of
mental language. Ockham conceived of signiﬁcation in
a speciﬁcally propositional context. A term signiﬁes
when it directs the mind’s attention to the external objects
and at the same time stands for those objects in
a proposition. Accordingly, Ockham conceived mental
terms as signs in addition to written and vocal terms.
With such a primary logical notion, Ockham began
to construct a view of mental language by eliminating
certain features of the conventional spoken and written
languages that were not essential for signiﬁcation. These
included metaphorical expressions and genders, but not
such features as numbers, cases, declensions, and so on.
Mental Language M
753
M

Ockham also raised the question of whether participles
and pronouns are needed in Mentalese.
Generally it seems to hold that, according to Ockham,
there are no synonymous or equivocal terms in mental
language. However, according to Ockham, there are falla-
cies, which also occur in mental language. These include
some fallacies that he classiﬁed as equivocations, such as
those arising from a confusion between simple and
personal supposition. However, most mental language
fallacies are fallacies of accident, some sort of logical
mistakes.
The explanation of synonyms elucidates how Ockham
understood the relationship between mental language
and conventional languages in general. Synonymous
terms in conventional languages correspond generally
only to one term in the mental language. The synony-
mous terms share the signiﬁcation of the corresponding
mental term, and their signiﬁcation is asymmetrically
dependent on the signiﬁcation of the latter. This is what
Ockham meant when he stated that conventional terms
are subordinated to mental terms. Ockham did not
believe, as did Walter Burley and John Buridan, that
terms
of
conventional
languages
signify
their
corresponding mental terms, but rather the spoken and
written terms share the extension of the mental terms and
signify the objects immediately.
Against the representatives of modist or speculative
grammar, Ockham argued that signiﬁcation is a linguistic
phenomenon restricted to mental and conventional lan-
guages, and therefore the modes of signiﬁcation do not
reﬂect the constitution of the extramental world. In
Ockham’s view, the structures of spoken and mental lan-
guages are clearly distinguished from the structures of
external reality. This line of argument is consonant with
and closely connected to Ockham’s program of ontologi-
cal parsimony, and it marked a line that was still visible in
ﬁfteenth-century disagreements between modists and
nominalists.
There has been longstanding debate among scholars on
whether there are or should be connotative terms in the
mental language according to Ockham’s theory. One of the
main problems in admitting connotative terms into
a mental language has been that it seems to contradict
the rule that there is no synonymity in a mental language.
The possible coexistence of connotative terms and their
complex nominal deﬁnitions seem to violate this basic
rule, which many scholars have considered an essential
feature of Ockham’s idea of mental language. Claude
Panaccio has argued that Ockham considered connotative
terms a natural part of the mental language. According to
Panaccio, Ockham did not consider connotative terms and
theirnominaldeﬁnitionstobesynonymous(forarguments
for and against this view, see Panaccio 2004).
Ockham believed that the categorematic terms of
a mental language are passively acquired through the
psychological processes of sense perception, abstraction,
and intellectual cognition rather than being either innate
or learned. According to Ockham’s mature theory, the
syncategorematic terms are not passively acquired as are
the categorematic ones. Rather they are caused by the
innate capabilities of the rational soul.
A particular problem that led to wide discussion con-
cerns the structure of mental propositions. Ockham noted
that there are propositions that do not have the same
truth-values, although they consist of the same terms,
but in different order. Since the terms of a mental sentence
are simultaneous acts that take place in an unextended
mind, they cannot be ordered either temporally or spa-
tially. As a solution, Ockham proposed that a mental
proposition is either one cognitive act, which is equivalent
to an ordered combination of terms, or that it is composed
of parts, which are not identical to individual spoken and
written words. A similar problem was also raised by Wil-
liam of Heytesbury. He concluded that whereas spoken
and written propositions are distinguished by their con-
stituent words and their order, mental propositions may
be distinguished by cognitive acts that do not correspond
exactly to individual words in the written sentences.
A categorical proposition must have at least two mental
concepts of things and one that composes or divides the
concepts, but there can be more acts that link the concepts
together in different ways.
In fourteenth-century Oxford, Ockham’s theory was
immediately criticized by Dominican thinkers. Hugh Law-
ton objected to the very idea that there are propositions in
the mind and consequently held that, properly speaking,
propositions exist only in written and spoken languages.
Lawton argued that it can be shown that at least some
propositions of external languages do not have mental
counterparts, that external speech and the operations of
the mind are generally incommensurable, that there is no
way to account for the formation of mental propositions,
and that mental similitudes cannot serve the linguistic
functions necessary for a proper language.
Lawton’s
fellow
Dominican,
William
Crathorn,
launched similar criticism against the idea of a mental
language based on natural similitudes of things. However,
unlike Lawton, Crathorn developed the notion of
a mental language that is composed of the mental simili-
tudes of the words in the spoken and written languages.
Another Oxford Dominican, Robert Holcot, responded to
Crathorn’s criticism and defended Ockham’s position.
754 M
Mental Language

In Paris, Ockham’s theory was received in various
ways. Buridan never developed a fully elaborated theory
of mental language as did Ockham, but the idea of mental
language was nevertheless an integral part of his thinking.
Buridan’s view of mental language largely resembles
Ockham’s mature theory, but there are also signiﬁcant
differences. According to Buridan, mental terms have per-
sonal rather than material suppositions, even when they
refer to other mental concepts. Only vocal and written
terms have a material supposition, which is the case when
they refer merely to mental concepts rather than objects of
the external world. Buridan distinguished diverse modes
of thinking (modi intelligendi), which correspond to dif-
ferent suppositions of the conventional languages on the
mental level.
Unlike Ockham, Buridan did not believe that there are
fallacies of equivocation in the mental language, and con-
sequently, he opposed to Ockham’s broad deﬁnition of
equivocation, which included the confusion between
simple and personal supposition. Buridan discussed
the problem of differing word order discussed by Ockham
and Heytesbury by referring to differing modes of think-
ing about mental concepts, which result in diverse word
orders and consequently diverse suppositions of the terms
in written and spoken propositions. Like Heytesbury,
Buridan considered compositive and divisive acts of the
mind to correspond to positive and negative copulas in the
spoken and written categorical propositions. Buridan
called them ‘‘complexive concepts,’’ distinguishing them
from ‘‘simple’’ concepts such as subject and predicate.
According to Buridan, the principal parts of a categorical
proposition included a copula.
Gregory of Rimini recognized the problem of consid-
ering the mental proposition as one compositional act in
a proper sense. For him such a view did not sufﬁciently
address the problems of word order that Ockham and
Heytesbury had discussed. Therefore, he concluded that
the mental proposition must be one undivided mental act,
which he identiﬁed with the act of assenting to the mental
proposition. Based on Ockham’s view of lying, Gregory
also argued that there are no insoluble paradoxes in the
mental language, since no proper mental sentence is self-
referential.
Gregory revived Augustine’s view of the dual nature of
mental words. According to Gregory, a major part of
thinking consists of mental language, which is based on
spoken and written languages. Only the act of assenting to
or dissenting from a proposition belongs to the mental
language common to all people. Similarly, Peter of Ailly
followed Ockham’s early views in distinguishing mental
language in the proper and improper senses. Peter also
developed Gregory’s view of insolubles and adopted his
view of the mental proposition as one undivided act. Like
Buridan, Peter considered the personal supposition the
only option for mental terms (Peter of Ailly, Concepts
and Insolubles: 67–68).
In Italy, the discussion proceeded in a slightly different
manner. Peter of Mantua construed a view where each
written term of a proposition, be it categorematic, syncat-
egorematic, absolute, or connotative, was subordinated to
a single, noncomplex term in the mental language. Thus,
‘‘is’’ in the proposition ‘‘man is not an animal’’ corre-
sponds to an act that links the subject with the predicate,
but does not afﬁrm the latter of the former, whereas ‘‘not’’
corresponds to an act that denies that the predicate inheres
in the subject. As Gaetano of Thiene did later, Peter
directed many of his critical comments against the views
of William of Heytesbury.
In contrast, Paul of Venice espoused the view that was
close to Heytesbury’s in several points. Aware of the prob-
lems of transferring the word order of external sentences
to their mental counterparts, Paul stated that there must
be an order of mental acts in a mental proposition
that
are
metaphysically
understood
as
possessing
a discrete quantity and that do not contradict the mind’s
non-extensionality, which is only incompatible with con-
tinuous quantity. The order can be a temporal succession,
but the intellect is also capable of thinking of one or
more propositions simultaneously. Unlike Gregory of
Rimini, Paul considered a mental proposition to be
a compositional whole. Similar views are also found in
Blasius Parmensis. In discussing the word order of mental
propositions, Paul noted on modal terms that in proposi-
tions taken in a compound sense, the modal term comes
ﬁrst in the mental proposition, even though it stands at the
end of the corresponding written or spoken sentence.
Many
ﬁfteenth-
and
sixteenth-century
logicians
carried on lively discussions of several themes concerning
mental language and commented on positions repre-
sented by authors such as Ockham, Paul of Venice, and
Gregory of Rimini. At the beginning of the sixteenth
century, Gregory of Rimini’s view of the mental proposi-
tion as one undivided act was adopted by very few
authors, but later during the same century it gained
many supporters, including Domingo de Soto and many
Spanish Jesuit philosophers, to the point that the view
eventually became the dominant one.
See also: ▶Augustine ▶Boethius ▶Gregory of Rimini
▶Insolubles ▶John Buridan ▶Logic ▶Mental Represen-
tation ▶Mental Word/Concepts ▶Modistae ▶Paul of
Venice
▶Philosophical
Psychology
▶Sophisms
Mental Language M
755
M

▶Supposition
Theory
▶Syncategoremata
▶Terms,
Properties of ▶Walter Burley ▶Walter Chatton ▶Wil-
liam Crathorn ▶William Heytesbury ▶William of
Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Peter of Ailly (1980) Concepts and insolubles (trans: Spade PV). Reidel,
Dordrecht
William
of
Ockham
(1967–1979)
Scriptum
in
librum
primum
Sententiarum (Ordinatio). In: Ga´l G, Brown S, Etzkorn GI, Kelley
FE (eds) OT, vols 1–4. Franciscan Institute of St. Bonaventure Uni-
versity, St. Bonaventure
William of Ockham (1974) Summa logicae. In: Boehner Ph, Ga´l G,
Brown S (eds) OP, vol 1. Franciscan Institute of St. Bonaventure
University, St. Bonaventure
William of Ockham (1980) Quodlibeta septem. In: Wey JC (ed) OT, vol 9.
Franciscan Institute of St. Bonaventure University, St. Bonaventure
William
of
Ockham
(1982)
Quaestiones
in
librum
secundum
Sententiarum (Reportatio). In: Ga´l G, Wood R (eds) OT, vol 5.
Franciscan Institute of St. Bonaventure University, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Ashworth EJ (1981) Mental language and the unity of propositions:
a semantic problem discussed by early sixteenth century logicians.
Francisc Stud 41:61–96
Ashworth EJ (1982) The structure of mental language: some problems
discussed by early sixteenth century logicians. Vivarium 20:59–83
Biard J (ed) (2009) Le langage mental de l’Antiquite´ a` l’Aˆ ge classique.
Peeters, Paris/Bruxelles
Brown DJ (1996) The puzzle of names in Ockham’s theory of mental
language. Rev Metaphys 50:79–99
Gelber HG (1984) I cannot tell a lie. Hugh Lawton’s critique of Ockham
on mental language. Francisc Stud 44:141–179
Lenz M (2003) Mentale Sa¨tze. Wilhelm von Ockhams Thesen zur
Sprachlichkeit des Denkens. Franz Steiner, Stuttgart
Maieru` A (2004) Mental language and Italian Scholasticism in the four-
teenth and ﬁfteenth centuries. In: Friedman RL, Ebbesen S (eds) John
Buridan and beyond: topics in the language sciences, 1300–1700.
The Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters, Copenhagen,
pp 33–67
Meier-Oeser S (2004) Mental language and mental representation in late
Scholastic logic. In: Friedman RL, Ebbesen S (eds) John Buridan and
beyond: topics in the language sciences, 1300–1700. The Royal Dan-
ish Academy of Sciences and Letters, Copenhagen, pp 237–265
Normore CG (1990) Ockham on mental language. In: Smith JC (ed)
Historical foundations of cognitive science. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp
53–70
Panaccio C (1999) Le discours inte´rieur de Platon a` Guillaume d’Ockham.
Seuil, Paris
Panaccio C (2004) Ockham on concepts. Ashgate, Aldershot
Perler D (1997) Crathorn on mental language. In: Marmo C (ed) Vestigia,
imagines, verba. Semiotics and logic in medieval theological texts
(XIIth–XIVth century). Acts of the 11th symposium on medieval
logic and semantics, San Marino, 24–28 May 1994. Brepols,
Trunhout, pp 337–354
van der Lecq R (2009) Mental language: a key to the understanding of
Buridan’s Semantics. Retrieved from http://www.phil.uu.nl/lecq/.
Accessed Jan 2009
Mental Representation
HENRIK LAGERLUND
Department of Philosophy
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON
Canada
Abstract
The concept of mental representation played an important
role in late medieval cognitive theories. It was primarily
introduced in the Latin translation of Avicenna and
became a central concept by the mid-thirteenth century.
It was developed in several ways and all the features we
now attribute to this concept were more or less already
present in the Middle Ages.
The Ancient Background and the Formation
of the Concept
The English words ‘‘representation’’ and ‘‘to represent’’
derive via Old French from the Latinwords ‘‘repraesentatio’’
and ‘‘repraesentare,’’ but these are by no means commonly
used words in classical Latin. In late Ancient thought it is
foremost Quintillian and Tertullian that uses the terms in
a philosophically interesting way. It is not until the twelfth
century Latin translation of Avicenna’s De anima that
these terms become frequently used in connection with
cognition and the mind (see Lagerlund 2007).
Early
logic
works
like
Garlandus
Compotista’s
Dialectica (17) and Abelard’s Dialectica (II, 188) discussed
a distinction between a word’s signiﬁcation by imposition
and representation. A denominative term such as ‘‘white’’
signiﬁes by imposition a substance that is white, but it
signiﬁes by representation the whiteness inhering in the
substance. The white thing stands in for or is an instanti-
ation of whiteness – white is re-presented in the object.
Garlandus mentions the example of a traveler (viator) who
can be said to represent a road (via). The term ‘‘traveler’’
signiﬁes by imposition the human being who is a traveler,
but also represents the road the traveler travels on. It is
exactly this usage of representation applied to mental signs
that becomes important with Ockham and Buridan.
Thomas Aquinas and the Conformality View
The most inﬂuential theory of thought in the thirteenth
century goes back to Aristotle and has its foremost medi-
eval defender in Thomas Aquinas. It rests on viewing
mental representations or intelligible species, as Aquinas
calls them, as sameness in form. The explanation for why
756 M
Mental Representation

thoughts are about something, exhibit intentionality, or
represent is that the form of the object thought about is in
the mind of the thinker.
On Aquinas’ view, the mind is nothing before it thinks
of something. The active intellect abstracts the intelligible
form from the particular sensitive form in the internal
senses and places it in the potential intellect. The form
placed there by the active intellect hence actualizes the
potential intellect. The thought is also always universal
on this view since it is immaterial and matter is the
individuating principle, according to Aquinas. The imma-
terial intelligible species in the potential intellect consti-
tutes the thought.
There are many problems associated with this view of
mental representation. A famous problem is: why do the
daffodils outside my soul not represent my thought about
the daffodils? The forms inside and outside my mind are
the same, suggesting that mental representation is sym-
metrical. Aquinas has a famous answer to this problem,
which is that the daffodils in the garden do not represent
my thought because of the mode of the form’s presence in
them. The forms in the daffodils are really present whereas
in my mind the universal form is spiritually or intention-
ally present.
The distinction between forms being really or spiritu-
ally present is central to Aquinas’ physics and natural
philosophy. A form may be present somewhere without
literally making whatever substance it informs into some-
thing else. Colors in the air, for example, do not make the
air really colored: we see colors in the objects around us
but not in the intervening air, although they must be there
spiritually if sensation is to be a causal process. This
means, of course, that the air must also represent the
color, which entails that intentionality is not a mark of
the mental for Aquinas. The air is not in itself a mind (for
discussion, see Pasnau 1997, Chap. 2).
Peter John Olivi and the Rejection of the
Conformality View
One of the ﬁrst to criticize the conformality or species
theory of cognition, in the late thirteenth century, was
Peter John Olivi. He argued, contrary to Aristotle and
Aquinas, that the mind is active in its cognition of the
world; it attends to the object, and it is this move on his
part that puts the species theory of cognition in
a completely different light. In fact, there seems little
point in postulating a species through which the object is
cognized. He argues:
"
Third, because the attention will tend toward the species
either in such a way that it would not pass beyond so as to
attend to the object, or in such a way that it would pass
beyond. If in the first way, then the thing will not be seen
in itself but only its image will be seen as if it were the
thing itself. That is the role of a memory species, not
a visual one. If in the second way, then after the inspection
of the species it will inspect the object in itself. In this way
it will cognize the object in two ways, first through the
species and second in itself. It will indeed be like when
someone sees an intervening space and then beyond that
sees the fixed object. (Peter John Olivi, Quaestiones in
secundum librum Sententiarum, III, q. 74, 123.)
In this passage, it seems clear that for Olivi the species is
a thing in itself and that there really are three things
involved in the cognition of an object: the object, the
species, and the cognizer. The species is on his view a re-
presentation, namely a thing that stands in for the object
in the mind. The main problem he sees with the theory is
hence epistemological. How can we be sure we are cogniz-
ing the object and not the species. Ockham will later repeat
this objection (see Toivanen 2009, Chap. 4). Olivi hence
argues that this third representing thing is not needed and
that the mind can attend to the object directly.
Henry of Ghent and John Duns Scotus and
the Introduction of Mental Content
For various reasons, the late thirteenth century saw an
increased interest in epistemology. One of the reasons for
this were certain developments of new theories of mental
representations and intentionality. Some of these devel-
opments were due to problematic features of, on the one
hand, Aquinas’ view of mental representation and on the
other, of Henry of Ghent’s interpretation of Augustine’s
view of divine cognition. Aquinas seems to have held that
the intelligible species is supposed to play a dual role both
as a universal common to all of us thinking it and as my
individual thought. One and the same entity seems not to
be able to fulﬁll both these roles. Henry on the other hand
reinterprets Augustine’s doctrine of divine ideas and intro-
duces a distinction between the ideas and the divine
nature. The ideas are possibilia or the natures of possible
things to be created (de Rijk 2005:81–84). Both of these
views contribute to the introduction of a distinction
between the vehicle and the content of a representation.
The distinction developed by Henry in relation to the
divine nature was almost immediately taken up into the
debates about human cognition. It was applied to
Aquinas’ theory of mental representation, taking the
conformality
view
a
step
further
by
introducing
a distinction between the thing representing and the
thing represented. John Duns Scotus was instrumental in
Mental Representation M
757
M

adapting
this
view
to
human
cognition.
Scotus’
implemented Henry’s distinction and treated the thing
that does the representing as a mental act or concept,
which ontologically speaking is an accident of the mind,
and the thing represented as the form of the object
thought about (which is why this is still a conformality
account of mental representation).
Scotus claimed that the accident or mental act is sub-
jectively in the soul, whereas the object being represented
is present objectively, or has objective being in the mind.
He also said that the object exists sub ratione cognoscibilis
seu repraesentanti or ‘‘in keeping with the nature of some-
thing cognizable or represented’’ (Ord. I, d. 3, pars 3, q. 1,
n. 382) to express the content side of the mental represen-
tation. Scotus thus had a clear way of expressing what
Brentano later called intentionality, that is, the way the
object of thought exists in the mind. It has objective
existence in the mind on his view, which later came to be
regarded as the mark of the mental (see Normore 1986;
Pasnau 2003; King 2007).
Although the advantages of this approach over
Aquinas’ are clear, problems remained concerning the
ontological status of these mental contents. The medieval
debate here is famous and features a wide variety of opin-
ions (for a survey, see Tachau 1988). Scotus himself says
that thought objects have a diminished kind of being,
which is supposed to be a state between real being and
no being at all. Ockham would later subject this view to
much criticism.
William of Ockham and Mental Language
Foremost William of Ockham developed the theory of
mental language in the fourteenth century. It rests on
a theory of mental representation that combined the
notions of cause and signiﬁcation. A concept or a mental
term on this view represents because it was caused efﬁ-
ciently by a thing in the world. It signiﬁes that thing also
because of the causal relation between them. The object
and the concept are said to covary. On Ockham’s view,
a mental representation or concept is caused by an intui-
tive cognition:
"
Intuitive cognition is the proper cognition of a singular not
because of its greater likeness to one thing more than
another but because it is naturally caused by one thing
and not by another; nor can it be caused by another. If you
object that it can be caused by God alone, I reply that this
is true: such a visual apprehension is always apt to be
caused by one created object and not by another; and if
it is caused naturally, it is caused by one thing and not by
another, and it is not able to be caused by another.
(Quodlibeta septem 1.13)
According to Ockham’s metaphysics there are only individ-
uals in the world so that when an individual causes a concept
to exist in the mind, it causes an individual concept and
hence a singular conception of itself. Nothing else can cause
that concept (except perhaps God). The singular concept
functions as the word of the object that caused it in our
language of thought. It is an atomic constituent that can then
be combined to form more complexconcepts or sentences in
the language. In this way, one can say that Ockham develops
a kind of medieval functionalism, since the determinate
content of a concept is fully speciﬁed by the input (covari-
ance) and the output (linguistic role) (see King 2007).
Ockham’s notion of concept acquisition and mental
representation is developed as part of a very sophisticated
theory of thought involving not only a theory of signiﬁ-
cation, but also a whole range of logico-semantic proper-
ties such as connotation and supposition. It explains how
concepts, which in turn are the direct objects of belief and
knowledge, are assembled into mental sentences describ-
ing the world (for the details, see Panaccio 2004).
John Buridan and Vague Concept
Ockham and John Buridan’s accounts of thought are on
the one hand very similar, but on the other hand there are
fundamental differences between them. This is particu-
larly true when it comes to their view of mental represen-
tation. A case in point is their views of singular thought. It
starts out from the same idea, that is, that thinking some-
thing singularly is having a singular concept in mind, but
they disagree fundamentally on what a singular concept
looks like and foremost on how it manages to latch onto
the world. On Ockham’s account, as mentioned, a concept
is singular because its cause was proper, as he calls it, and
proper causes are necessarily tied to one object. But on
Buridan’s account, a singular concept is singular because
of its complexity. It has a descriptive content that enables
it to narrow down its signiﬁcation to only one thing.
Buridan thinks that we always cognize or conceive of
something ﬁrst as singular, but this also means that we ﬁrst
conceive of it as this or that, that is, we conceive of it as
something. For him, this also means that our concepts are
from the very beginning loaded with some content and
a proper singular concept picks out whatever it is of or
represent in all circumstances. Such a concept is not vague,
since it applies to only one thing, but it is also not what we
ﬁrst acquire. The ﬁrst singular concepts we acquire are the
so-called vague singulars. A vague concept is singular
because it is about only one thing, but it is not determined
what thing that is; examples of such concepts are ‘‘this
human,’’ ‘‘this cup,’’ hence the name ‘‘vague singulars.’’
It is from these we arrive at determinate singular concepts
758 M
Mental Representation

by adding content and to universal concepts by abstracting
away from singularizing circumstances.
To explain how the process he is advocating works, he
uses an example that, after him, became a standard exam-
ple used to explain singular cognition. In the example,
Socrates approaches from afar. At ﬁrst, I cannot tell exactly
what I see approaching; something (a substance) is com-
ing closer and closer to me. After a while, I see that it is an
animal of some sort, but I cannot tell exactly what kind of
animal it is. As it comes closer, I realize that it is a human
being, and, ﬁnally, when he is close enough, I recognize
Socrates. Although this example seems to have had a long
tradition, nowhere else did it play as important a role as it
does for Buridan and some of his followers. Cognition, it
shows, is always in the ﬁrst instance about ‘‘that thing,’’
‘‘that animal,’’ ‘‘that human being,’’ and ﬁnally about
‘‘Socrates.’’ Hence, it is always about a singular thing in
the ﬁrst instance. The example can be found in John
Buridan, Nicholas Oresme, Marsilius of Inghen, Peter of
Ailly, Gabriel Biel, and later authors, and all these authors
used it in virtually the same way. The example can thus be
said to reform the theory of thought developed by Ock-
ham (see Lagerlund 2006, forthcoming).
See also: ▶Garlandus the Computist ▶Henry of Ghent
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Intentionality ▶John
Buridan ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Mental Language ▶Peter
Abelard ▶Peter John Olivi ▶Species, Sensible and Intel-
ligible ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard (1956) Dialectica, ed. de Rijk LM. van Gorcum, Assen
Avicenna (1968–1972) Avicenna latinus: Liber de anima, ed. van Riet S and
with an intro. Verbeke G. Brill, Leiden
Duns Scotus John (1950–) Iohannis Duns Scoti Doctoris Subtilis et
Mariani opera omnia, ed. Carolus Balic P et al. Typis Polyglottis
Vaticanae, Rome
Garlandus Compotista (1959) Dialectica, ed. de Rijk LM. Van Gorcum,
Assen
Quintilian (1921) Institutio oratoria, trans. Butler HE. Harvard Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge
Tertullian (1947) De anima, ed. Waszink JH. J.M. Meulenhoff,
Amsterdam
William
of
Ockham
(1967–1989)
Guillelmi
de
Ockham
Opera
Philosophica et Theologica ad ﬁdem codicum manuscriptorum
edita. impressa Ad Claras Aquas (Italia), St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
de Rijk LM (1962–1967) Logica Modernorum: a contribution to the
history of early terminist logic, vols 1–2. Van Gorcum, Assen
de Rijk LM (2005) Giraldus Odonis, De intentionibus, critical edition
with a study on the medieval intentionality debate up to ca. 1350.
Brill, Leiden
King P (2007) Rethinking representation in the Middle Ages: a vade-
mecum to mediaeval theories of mental representation. In:
Lagerlund H (ed) Representation and objects of thought in medieval
philosophy. Ashgate, Aldershot
Lagerlund H (2006) What is singular thought? Ockham and Buridan on
singular terms in the language of thought. In: Hirvonen Vet al (eds)
Mind and modality: studies in the history of philosophy in honour of
Simo Knuuttila. Brill, Leiden
Lagerlund H (2007) The terminological and conceptual roots of repre-
sentation in the soul in late ancient and medieval philosophy. In:
Lagerlund H (ed) Representation and objects of thought in medieval
philosophy. Ashgate, Aldershot
Lagerlund H (forthcoming) Singular terms and vague concepts in late
medieval mental language theory or the decline and fall of mental
language. In: Klima G (ed) Intentionality, cognition and representa-
tion in the Middle Ages. Fordham University Press, New York
Normore C (1986) Meaning and objective being: Descartes and his
sources. In: Rorty AO (ed) Essays on Descartes’ Meditations. Uni-
versity of California Press, Berkeley, pp 223–241
Panaccio C (2004) Ockham on concepts. Ashgate, Aldershot
Pasnau R (1997) Theories of cognition in the later Middle Ages. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Pasnau R (2003) Cognition. In: Williams T (ed) The Cambridge com-
panion to Duns Scotus. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 285–311
Perler D (ed) (2001) Ancient and medieval theories of intentionality. Brill,
Leiden
Perler D (2002) Theorien der Intentionalita¨t im Mittelalter. Vittorio
Klostermann, Frankfurt
Tachau KH (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham: optics,
epistemology and the foundation of semantics 1250–1345. Brill,
Leiden
Toivanen J (2009) Animal consciousness: Peter Olivi on cognitive
functions of the sensitive soul, Ph.D Dissertation, University of
Jyvaskyla
Tweedale M (1990) Mental representations in later medieval scholasti-
cism. In: Smith J-C (ed) Historical foundations of cognitive science.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 35–51
Tweedale M (2007) Representation in scholastic epistemology. In:
Lagerlund H (ed) Representation and objects of thought in medieval
philosophy. Ashgate, Aldershot
Mental Word/Concepts
TOIVO J. HOLOPAINEN
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
The medieval thinkers did not have any one agreed-upon
term for concept as a mental entity, but it was generally
assumed that there are some such units and they were
Mental Word/Concepts M
759
M

often viewed as mental words of some kind. In contrast to
the words of spoken languages, which vary from nation to
nation, the concepts were taken to be the same for all
people. Issues related to concepts or mental words were
discussed in several ﬁelds of inquiry, including logic, the-
ology, and philosophical psychology. In logic, concepts
were traditionally called ‘‘understandings’’ (intellectus),
and they were supposed to have a mediating role between
words and things in signiﬁcation. This view goes back to
Aristotle’s De interpretatione and Boethius’ commentaries
on it. In theology, the mental word (verbum) was
a prominent theme because Augustine had elaborated an
analogy between the human interior word and the Word,
that is, the second person of the Trinitarian God. In the
tradition of philosophical psychology starting from
Aristotle’s De anima, the acquisition of concepts was
a central theme. These and other inﬂuences led to intricate
discussions in the medieval universities about what kind
of entities in the mind relating to concepts one should
postulate and how they should be described. Thomas
Aquinas developed a model that includes a distinction
between the intelligible species, the act of understanding,
and the concept proper. There was extensive dispute about
issues related to concepts in the late thirteenth and early
fourteenth century, and much of it revolved around ideas
presented by Aquinas. William of Ockham developed an
alternative to the De anima-based approach on the basis of
his nominalist philosophy. The concept or mental word,
identiﬁed as an act of understanding, became the basic
unit in the theory of mental language that Ockham
advocated.
An important source for the medieval understanding of
concepts was the opening passage of Aristotle’s De
interpretatione (16a3–9). The text was available in the
Latin translation that Boethius had prepared at the begin-
ning of the ﬁfth century, and in medieval logic courses, it
was usually read together with Boethius’ two commentar-
ies on the treatise. Following Boethius’ translation, the
pertinent lines can be rendered as follows:
"
What are spoken (ea quae sunt in voce) are symbols (notae)
of the affections in the soul (passiones animae), and what
are written [are symbols] of those that are spoken. And just
as there are not the same written letters for everyone, so
there are not the same spoken sounds (voces). But the
primary things of which these are signs – the affections
of the soul – are the same for all; and those of which they
[the affections] are likenesses (similitudines) – things (res) –
are also the same (English translation from Marenbon
1987:99 slightly adapted).
Aristotle here speaks of concepts as ‘‘affections in the
soul,’’ but Boethius’ preferred terms for concept are
‘‘understanding’’ (intellectus) and, less frequently, ‘‘con-
ception of the soul’’ (conceptio animae). Boethius’ discus-
sion of the passage contains a number of ideas about
concepts that would be inﬂuential in the Middle Ages.
(1) There are concepts in the human mind that corre-
spond to the words (in particular, nouns) of spoken lan-
guage. (2) The concepts are natural in the sense that they
are the same for all people. In contrast, the spoken words
are conventional and vary from nation to nation. Speakers
of different languages use different words to express the
same concepts. (3) Semantically, the concepts mediate
between words and things. Boethius explains that spoken
words primarily signify concepts and only secondarily the
things
in
the
world.
(4)
Concepts
are
likenesses
(similitudines, sing. similitudo) of things. To explain this
idea, Boethius discusses the example of a geometrical ﬁg-
ure and its image in the mind. (5) Referring to earlier
commentators, Boethius maintains that there is a kind of
inner speech which makes use of concepts, but he does not
develop the idea.
Boethius did not use the word verbum to refer to concepts.
He reserved that expression for another use: verbum in the
meaning ‘‘verb’’ is one of the basic terms discussed in De
interpretatione. There were other sources where verbum
was used of words in general and of mental words in
particular. The most inﬂuential of these was Augustine’s
theological treatise De trinitate, where the author develops
an analogy between the human interior word (verbum
interior) and the Divine Word (Verbum), that is, the
second person of the Trinitarian God (see De trinitate
XV:10–16).
The analogy about the word is part of a more extensive
analogy between the three powers in the rational mind and
the three persons in God. The three powers in question are
memory (memoria), intelligence (intelligentia), and will
(voluntas). The memory is a treasure-house of latent
knowledge, whether it is innate or based on reasoning,
sense perception or testimonies of others. The intelligence
is the power that brings pieces of knowledge into the focus
of actual attention. The distinction between memory and
intelligence is the context for the analogy between the
interior word and the Word. The human interior word is
an act of intelligence born from a piece of knowledge in
the memory, and in the same way the Word (the Son) is
born from the Memory (the Father). According to this
analogy, then, there is a verbum only when something
known is actually uttered in the mind. Augustine
declares that the interior words do not belong to any
particular language and are the same for all people. He
760 M
Mental Word/Concepts

also characterizes the act of intelligence as a kind of intel-
lectual seeing.
Aristotle’s De interpretatione and Boethius’ commen-
taries on it were widely used at least since the eleventh
century. They were the main source for discussions about
concepts within the early medieval ‘‘old logic.’’ Peter
Abelard’s Tractatus de intellectibus (A Treatise on Under-
standings) offers an innovative treatment of concepts
within this framework, but it did not have any notable
inﬂuence on the later scholastic discussions.
Already before Abelard, Anselm of Canterbury had
commented on mental words in the treatise Monologion.
This is a theological treatise that draws much of its inspi-
ration from Augustine’s De trinitate, but Anselm was also
familiar with the sources of logic and his treatment of
mental word brings together Augustinian and Boethian
ideas. In Monologion 10, Anselm distinguishes three kinds
of words (verba) and three kinds of speaking of a thing.
First, we can speak of a thing by uttering a word of a spoken
language, for example, ‘‘man.’’ Second, we can speak of a
thing by uttering the word of a spoken language (e.g.,
‘‘man’’) silently within our mind. Third, we can inwardly
utter the thing itself either by imagining the image of its
body (imago corporis) or by understanding the thing’s
‘‘reason’’ (ratio), for example, by imagining the perceptible
shape of man or by thinking of the universal essence of
man as ‘‘rational, mortal animal,’’ respectively. Anselm says
of the words of the third type that they are natural and the
same for all nations and he characterizes them as likenesses
of things. Anselm’s synthesis affected the way in which
Augustine’s remarks about the interior word were construed
in later discussion. The connection between one kind of
mental word and the deﬁnition of the thing is noteworthy.
The tradition of philosophical psychology starting
from Aristotle’s De anima entered the Latin discussions
gradually during the latter half of the twelfth century and
the ﬁrst half of the thirteenth century. It became the
dominant framework for the discussions about concepts
until Ockham. In addition to De anima itself, the basic
sources included a work by Avicenna, also known as De
anima, as well as Averroes’ Long Commentary on
Aristotle’s De anima.
In the De anima model, the intellectual cognition of an
external object, for example, a horse, is based on the
presence of the object’s form in the intellect. The intellect
can think of a horse because it becomes actualized by the
same form that makes the horse into a horse. There was
a complex story to be told about how the form of the
object gets into the intellect.
A standard account of concept acquisition in the latter
half
of
the
thirteenth
century
would
begin
with
a description of how the forms are transmitted through
the medium (e.g., air) to the organs of external senses
(e.g., sight or hearing) and are received in these organs
as sensible species (species sensibilis). The species received
will be further processed by the internal senses – a group of
cognitive faculties that Avicenna had described, including
common sense, imagination, and (sensory) memory. One
of the tasks of the internal senses is to store the sensory
information as phantasms, which are sensory likenesses or
representations of things.
For Augustine or Anselm, a mental image of a man
would count as a verbum. The Aristotelian model in De
anima puts more stringent conditions on what qualiﬁes as
a concept. An image in the mind is a phantasm, and the
phantasms are not concepts but the raw material for
concepts. The phantasms are in the internal senses,
which belong to the sensitive part of the soul, whereas
the concepts are in its intellective part. The phantasms also
differ from concepts in that they are about particular
things, real or imagined, whereas concepts are universal.
The internal senses make use of a material organ,
whereas the intellect is immaterial. It was assumed that
the material cannot affect the immaterial, and hence the
emergence of concepts in the intellectual soul could not be
explained in terms of plain reception. To circumvent this,
the Aristotelian model assumed a mechanism involving
two intellectual powers, the active intellect and the possi-
ble intellect. The same mechanism explained how the
concepts are universal even though the phantasms are
particular.
The distinction between the active intellect and the
possible intellect goes back to a not particularly clear
passage in Aristotle’s De anima III, 5 (430a10–25). There
had been considerable discussion about the nature and
function of these two powers in the Greek and Arabic
commenting tradition. For example, Avicenna held that
the active intellect (or agent intellect) is a separate sub-
stance from which the forms of the things emanate into
the human soul when it has intellectual cognition. The
usual thirteenth-century Latin position was to take both
the possible intellect and the active intellect as powers
within the individual human mind. What happens in
concept formation is that the active intellect illuminates
the phantasms in the internal senses and abstracts the
intelligible content in them by stripping them of their
accidental features. The universal forms thus abstracted
will be imprinted in the possible intellect as intelligible
species (species intelligibilis), and the intellect can then use
them in intellectual operations.
The preceding paragraphs describe the late thirteenth-
century standard view about how the forms of the things
Mental Word/Concepts M
761
M

are acquired in the possible intellect, which is the power of
intellectual thinking in humans. When we move on to
consider what takes place within the (possible) intellect,
the picture will get complicated. There were competing
views about what kinds of entities in the mind relating to
concepts one should postulate and how they should be
described. The psychological De anima tradition provided
the main framework for the discussions, but other inﬂu-
ences were also involved. Importantly, attempts were
made to relate the De anima-based model to the theolog-
ically oriented doctrine of the interior word (verbum).
The intelligible species are universal representations of
objects in the intellect, and some scholastic thinkers iden-
tiﬁed them as concepts. However, the standard view in the
late thirteenth and early fourteenth century was to con-
sider the intelligible species and the concept as two distinct
entities. The writings of Thomas Aquinas were instrumen-
tal in the development of this view, even though the details
of his account vary from one work to another. In some
important passages, he distinguishes (1) the intelligible
species, (2) the act of understanding, and (3) the concept
(see, e.g., De potentia, q. 8, a. 1, co.). Here, the intelligible
species precedes the act of understanding and makes it
possible, whereas the concept (conceptio intellectus) is seen
as the end product of the act. Aquinas identiﬁes the con-
cept as the verbum, and it is the likeness and representa-
tion that mediates in signiﬁcation between the spoken
word and the extramental thing.
There was extensive dispute about issues related to
concepts in the late thirteenth and early fourteenth cen-
tury. Much of the argument revolved around Aquinas’
ideas, but there were also some highly original contribu-
tions. Peter John Olivi was among the early critics of
Aquinas’ views. He identiﬁed the act of understanding as
the concept and denied that there are either intelligible
species preceding such acts or some end products termi-
nating them. Other critics of the intelligible species
included Henry of Ghent and Godfrey of Fontaines.
Against these criticisms, John Duns Scotus defended
the necessity of postulating intelligible species that
are distinct from concepts and precede the acts of under-
standing. Scotus and some others discussed the mode
of existence that concepts, as end products or objects of
acts of understanding, have. It was assumed that concepts
have a special mode of being: they exist ‘‘objectively’’ or
‘‘intentionally’’
by
being
objects
of
understanding,
whereas the intelligible species are forms inhering in the
intellect.
The thought of William of Ockham opens a new phase
in the medieval discussion about concepts. He developed
an alternative to the De anima-based approach on the
basis of his nominalist ontology. Ockham rejected the
idea that intellectual cognition requires the presence of
the object’s form in the intellect, and he rejected the
doctrine of species in its all forms, including intelligible
species. In his mature thought, he also rejected the idea
that concepts are objects of thought having merely
objective or intentional existence. (Ockham referred to
such objects as ﬁcta. In earlier phases of his career, he
considered the ﬁctum-theory of concepts a genuine
option.)
For Ockham, concepts are acts of understanding.
More precisely, concepts are abstractive acts of under-
standing, as opposed to intuitive acts. An intuitive act of
understanding is about a present particular object as
existing, whereas the abstractive act of understanding
does not require the presence of the object and is universal
in the sense that it is applicable to many objects (say, to all
the members of a species). In Ockham’s view, the human
mind is so constructed that it is capable of forming con-
cepts of the things it encounters under suitable conditions.
When a person sees a horse for the ﬁrst time, he or she will
have an intuitive act of understanding about the particular
horse as existing, and this intuitive act will automatically
be followed by an abstractive act of understanding, which
is applicable to all horses. Ontologically, concepts are
qualities: they are states in which the intellect can be. In
addition to concepts or abstractive acts of understanding,
there are also habits related to them. These habits are also
qualities in the intellect.
In Ockham’s approach, there is a strong emphasis on
the viewpoint of logic and semantics. He developed
a theory of mental language, and concepts or mental
words are among the basic units of that language: they
are terms of the mental language. As terms of a language,
the concepts are signs, and they have the kind of semantic
properties that terms have. In fact, the concepts are the
primary signs, and the words of spoken language signify
because they are subordinated to concepts. Ockham
maintains that this is what Aristotle had meant in the
opening passage of De intepretatione. He also follows
Aristotle in saying that concepts are likenesses of things,
but he is not explicit about what kind of likenesses
they are.
See also: ▶Anselm of Canterbury ▶Augustine ▶Boethius
▶Epistemology
▶Intentionality
▶Internal
Senses
▶Intuitive and Abstractive Cognition ▶Mental Language
▶Mental Representation ▶Peter Abelard ▶Peter John
Olivi ▶Sense Perception, Theories of ▶Species, Sensible
and Intelligible ▶Terms, Properties of ▶Thomas Aquinas
▶William of Ockham
762 M
Mental Word/Concepts

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1994) Tractatus de intellectibus, ed. Morin P. Vrin, Paris
Anselm of Canterbury (1946) Monologion, ed. Schmitt FS. Opera omnia,
vol 1. Nelson, Edinburgh
Aquinas Thomas (1949) De potentia, ed. Pession PM. Quaestiones
disputatae, vol 2. Marietti, Turin
Aristotle (1965) De interpretatione vel Periermenias. Translatio Boethii,
ed. Minio-Paluello L. Aristoteles Latinus 2.1. Descle´e De Brouwer,
Bruges/Paris
Augustine (1968) De trinitate, ed. Mountain WJ. Corpus Christianorum,
Series Latina 50–50A. Brepols, Turnhout
Averroes (1953) Commentarium Magnum in Aristotelis de Anima libros,
ed. Crawford FS. Corpus Commentariorum Averrois in Aristotelem,
Versionum Latinarum Volumen VI, 1. Medieval Academy of Amer-
ica, Cambridge
Avicenna (1968/1972) Liber de anima seu sextus de naturalibus, 2 vols, ed.
Van Riet S. Avicenna Latinus. Brill, Leiden
Boethius (1877/1880) In librum Aristotelis Peri ermeneias commentarii,
Prima editio & Secunda editio, ed. Meiser C. Teubner, Leipzig
Duns Scotus John (1950–1963) Ordinatio, I, ed. Commissio Scotistica.
Opera omnia, vols 1–6. Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis, Vatican
Godfrey of Fontaines (1904–1937) Quodlibeta, ed. De Wulf M et al.
Philosophes Belges, vol 2–5, 14. Institut Supe´rieur de Philosophie,
Louvain
Henry of Ghent (1520) Summa quaestionum ordinariarum, ed. Badius J.
Paris (repr. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure, 1953)
Olivi Peter John (1922–1926) Quaestiones in secundum librum
Sententiarum, ed. Jansen B. Bibliotheca Franciscana Scholastica,
vols 4–6. Collegium S. Bonaventurae, Quaracchi
William of Ockham (1974) Summa Logicae, ed. Boehner Ph et al. Opera
philosophica, vol 1. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Kenny A (1993) Aquinas on mind. Routledge, London
King P (2007) Abelard on mental. Am Cathol Philos Quart 81:169–187
Lagerlund H (ed) (2007) Representation and objects of thought in medi-
eval philosophy. Ashgate, Aldershot
Magee J (1989) Boethius on signiﬁcation and mind. Brill, Leiden
Marenbon J (1987) Later medieval philosophy (1150–1350). An intro-
duction. Routledge, London
Paissac H (1951) The´ologie du Verbe. Saint Augustin et saint Thomas.
Cerf, Paris
Panaccio C (1999) Le discours inte´rieur. De Platon a` Guillaume d’Ock-
ham. Seuil, Paris
Panaccio C (2004) Ockham on concepts. Ashgate, Aldershot
Pasnau R (1997) Theories of cognition in the later middle ages. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Pasnau R (2002a) Thomas Aquinas on human nature. A philosophical
study of Summa theologiae Ia 75–89. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Pasnau R (ed) (2002b) The Cambridge translations of medieval philo-
sophical texts, vol III: Mind and knowledge. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Perler D (2002) Theorien der Intentionalita¨t im Mittelalter. Vittorio
Klostermann, Frankfurt am Main
Pini G (1999) Species, concept, and thing: theories of signiﬁcation in
the second half of the thirteenth century. Mediev Philos Theol
8:21–52
Spruit L (1994) Species intelligibilis. From perception to knowledge. Brill,
Leiden
Tachau K (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham. Epistemol-
ogy and the foundations of semantics 1250–1345. Brill, Leiden
Mereology
ANDREW W. ARLIG
Department of Philosophy
Brooklyn College of The City University of New York
Brooklyn, NY
USA
Abstract
This article is a survey of medieval treatments of parts and
wholes. The ﬁrst section covers the medieval taxonomy of
parts and wholes. The second section examines some of
the ways that medieval philosophers distinguish one class
of parts and wholes from another class. The rest of the
article focuses upon metaphysical issues concerning parts
and wholes. The third section examines the common
medieval supposition that the whole depends upon its
parts and considers two ramiﬁcations of this supposition.
First, it seems that if the whole depends upon its parts, the
whole cannot persist through changes in parts. Second,
the fact that a whole depends upon its parts entails that
God must be absolutely simple. The ﬁnal section examines
the question whether an integral whole is identical to
its parts.
Introduction
The concepts of part and whole are two of our most basic
and prevalent concepts. We reason with these concepts all
the time and in many different contexts. When we step back
and reﬂect on the logical and metaphysical nature of parts
and wholes, we are engaged in mereology. Critical reﬂec-
tion on parts and wholes has a long history. (For a way into
this history, see the survey by Burkhardt and Dufour
(1991), the collection of essays edited by Mann and Varzi
(2006), and Harte’s (2002) study of Plato.) Medieval phi-
losophers used the concepts of part and whole liberally.
But there is also a medieval tradition of mereology.
Types of Parts and Wholes
A theory of parts and wholes should tell us what items can
be parts. Since something is a part only if it is a part of
a whole, a mereology will tell us what items can be wholes.
Essentially, the medieval answer is that a part is either
anything that is the product of a division or anything
Mereology M
763
M

that composes something else. Accordingly, a whole is
either anything that is divisible or anything that is
composite.
Medieval Aristotelian treatments of parts and wholes
tend to start by distinguishing between different types of
whole. The source of these distinctions ultimately comes
from Aristotle’s Metaphysics (V, 26). The proximate source
for the medieval version of the division of ‘‘whole’’ is
Boethius’ De divisione where he proclaims that a whole
can be a continuous thing (such as a body or a line),
a discrete thing (such as a crowd or pile), a universal, or
a thing that consists of ‘‘powers of some kind’’ (such as
a soul) (887d–888a). Boethius’ treatment of the division of
‘‘whole’’ is reﬁned by subsequent medieval philosophers
into a standard threefold division (Compendium logicae
Porretanum III.12, 72–79):
"
Among wholes, some are universal, some are integral, and
some are potential. An example of a universal whole is
Animal. An example of an integral whole is a house. An
example of a potential whole is a soul. And among integral
wholes, some are aggregated out of their parts – for
example, a tree – while some are disaggregated – for
example, a flock. And among the aggregated wholes, (a)
some are continuous – for example, a stone – (b) some are
contiguous – for example, a fence – and (c) some are
successive – for example, a time.
Almost without exception, medieval philosophers
divide ‘‘whole’’ into these three classes: the universal
whole, the potential whole, and the integral whole.
Some, like the author of the Compendium, provide
a further elaboration of the integral whole. The better
medieval philosophers tend to endorse something like
the Compendium’s thoroughly articulated division of
wholes.
Different parts correspond to these different wholes.
Again, the sources are ultimately Aristotle’s Metaphysics
(V, 25) and Boethius’ De divisione (888a–c). Anyone who
examines medieval treatments of parts will quickly ﬁnd
that there are some differences in terminology. But at root,
the framework is essentially the same. According to this
framework, there are three basic types of whole and at least
three basic types of part:
1. Subjective parts of universal wholes
2. Potential parts of potential wholes
3. Integral parts of integral wholes
A wide variety of objects can be integral wholes. Piles,
ﬂocks, artifacts, and substances are all integral wholes.
Aquinas even argues that the virtue of prudence and the
act of penance have integral parts (Summa theologiae II–II,
q. 48, and III, q. 90, articles 1–3, respectively), and Ock-
ham thinks that complex mental acts (such as ‘‘Every man
is animal’’) are composed of parts (namely, ‘‘every,’’
‘‘man,’’ ‘‘is,’’ and ‘‘animal’’) (Quaestiones in physicam q. 6
[Opera
philosophica
VI,
407–410];
In
De
int.
I,
prooemium, 6 [Opera philosophica II, 354–358]). This
prompts later authors to distinguish between a number
of types of integral part, including most often what we will
call substantial parts (substantial form and matter), func-
tional parts (such as ﬁngers, skin, and hearts), and mate-
rial parts (such as the stones that compose a pile or the
geese that constitute a ﬂock).
There is some disagreement among medieval philoso-
phers whether substantial parts are really integral parts.
Aquinas, in some passages, suggests that substantial parts
are a type of integral part (Summa theologiae I, q. 8, a. 2, ad
3; III, q. 90, a. 2). But Aquinas seems ambivalent about the
status of form and matter, for in other passages he calls
matter and form ‘‘parts of an essence’’ and he distinguishes
these ‘‘parts of an essence’’ both from parts of a quantity
and from parts of a potential whole (Summa theologiae I,
q. 76, art. 8). If parts of a quantity are integral parts, then it
seems that Aquinas is saying that form and matter are not
integral parts. Other philosophers take a less ambiguous
position. They insist that only parts that constitute some
quantity or other can be integral parts (Lambert of
Auxerre Logica 126, Peter of Spain Tractatus V, 14:64;
Walter Burley De toto et parte, 302; Albert of Saxony
Sophismata 45, 25rb–26vb). These latter philosophers
believe that substantial parts are a different species of
part, not a type of integral part.
Functional parts and material parts are generally
accepted to be integral parts. They differ, however, with
respect to their ontological status. Functional parts are
deﬁned by the role that they perform for the whole. This
role, in turn, is deﬁned by the form of the whole. For this
reason, medieval philosophers sometimes call functional
parts ‘‘parts secundum formam,’’ or parts with respect to
the form (Walter Burley De toto et parte, 301). For exam-
ple, this thing is a hand because it belongs to a thing that is
imbued by the form of a human. It follows from this fact
that if the form of the whole is removed, the part ceases to
exist. This part of a corpse, even though it looks like
a hand, is not a hand, for it no longer performs the
functions of a hand.
Some functional parts and some material parts are
heterogeneous parts – that is, they are not divisible into
parts belonging to the same type. For example, a hand is
not divided into hands. But other functional parts and
other material parts are homogeneous parts. Divide up
a quantity of blood and you still have bits of blood; divide
764 M
Mereology

up the bronze of the statue and you still have bits of
bronze.
No matter how medieval philosophers divide up the
types of parts, there is all but universal agreement that
each different kind of part is speciﬁc to a type of whole.
Subjective parts are only parts of a universal whole. Inte-
gral parts are only parts of an integral whole. Socrates can
be an integral part of a crowd in the Agora, and he is
a subjective part of the species Human Being. But Socrates
cannot be an integral part of Human Being. Moreover, it is
generally agreed that these three basic parts are irreduc-
ible. Integral parts cannot be reduced to subjective parts.
Potential parts are irreducible to either subjective parts or
integral parts.
The only philosophers who take exception to the thesis
that types of parts are irreducible are the collectio theorists,
who explicitly argue that a universal is a kind of integral
whole and that subjective parts are reducible to integral
parts (Pseudo-Joscelin De generibus et speciebus }} 85–143
[=Cousin 1836:524–537]). But very few medieval philos-
ophers are collectio theorists, especially after Abelard
famously critiques the theory (Freddoso 1978; Henry
1984, }4.5).
We ﬁnd the threefold distinction between integral
wholes,
universal
wholes,
and
potential
wholes
throughout the medieval period and in both logical
and metaphysical treatments of parts and wholes. In
addition to these three basic types of parts and wholes,
later medieval logicians offered a different taxonomy
of parts and wholes (Peter of Spain Tractatus V.11–18:
63–67; Radulphus Brito Commentary on De differentiis
topicis II, q. 9; Lambert of Auxerre Logica:126–127;
Buridan Summulae 6.4.2):
(a) The universal whole
(b) The integral whole
(c) The whole in quantity
(d) The whole in a respect (in modo)
(e) The whole in place (in loco)
(f) The whole in time
One of the notable features of the logician’s taxonomy is
the absence of the potential whole. This may be because
a potential whole is of little interest to the logician. Or it
may be that the logical behavior of a potential whole is
reducible to one of the other types of whole (cf. Lambert of
Auxerre Logica:130).
The wholes that correspond to items (c) through (f)
reﬂect the medieval realization that the adjective ‘‘whole’’
(totus/-a/-um) can have a distributive function. Hence, the
whole in quantity is the sense of ‘‘whole’’ that acts as
a quantiﬁer ranging over individuals, as for example
when I say that ‘‘humans as a whole are rational.’’ Likewise,
the whole in a respect is the sense of ‘‘whole’’ found in such
propositions as ‘‘the whole surface of the ball is white,’’
which means that every part of the ball’s surface is white.
The whole with respect to place is the sense of ‘‘whole’’
that is found in such propositions as ‘‘Lucy is occupying
the whole seat,’’ which means that every part of the seat is
occupied by Lucy. And the whole with respect to time is
the sense of ‘‘whole’’ that is found in such propositions as
‘‘God is present for the whole of time,’’ which means that
God is present at every moment of time.
It was recognized that the adjective ‘‘whole’’ has
a distributive sense at least as early as the middle of the
twelfth century (Henry 1985:66–68; Zupko 2003:152). In
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, medieval logi-
cians
reﬁned
this
understanding
by
distinguishing
between two senses in which the adjective ‘‘whole’’ can
be distributive. Consider two examples: ‘‘the whole
human is rational’’ (totus homo est rationalis) should be
interpreted as ‘‘the whole of human is rational.’’ That is,
each human is rational. But when I say ‘‘Socrates as
a whole’’ (Socrates totus) I am referring to Socrates in so
far as he is composed of parts. These two senses of ‘‘whole’’
are labeled, respectively, the syncategorematic sense of
‘‘whole’’
and
the
categorematic
sense
of
‘‘whole’’
(Kretzmann 1982). It is crucial to distinguish between
these senses when considering a claim such as ‘‘the whole
Socrates is less than Socrates’’ (Walter Burley De puritate
artis logicae tractatus brevior 256.9–13; Albert of Saxony
Sophismata 45, 24vb–25va).
Differences Between the Different Types
of Parts and Wholes
According to medieval philosophers, at least some classes
of parts and wholes are not reducible to other classes of
parts and wholes. Medieval philosophers offer several ways
of distinguishing between the various types of part.
One method that medieval philosophers use is the
predicative criterion (Boethius In Cic. top. 289.11–16;
Abelard Dialectica 546.24–547.5; Buridan Summulae
8.1.4).
According
to
this
criterion,
the
mark
of
a subjective part is that its whole is entirely attributable
to it. An integral whole, on the other hand, is not predi-
cable in its entirety of its part. The integral whole can only
be predicated of the parts when they are taken together all
at once. For example, Socrates is a subjective part of the
species Human Being. Hence, Socrates is a human being.
Socrates’ hand is an integral part of Socrates. A hand is not
Socrates. Socrates is only predicable of the hand, when the
hand is taken together with all the other parts, so that this
collection of parts (including the hand) is Socrates.
Mereology M
765
M

Some medieval philosophers seem to suggest that the
predicative relationship that obtains between a part and its
whole is itself merely a sign that some deeper relation
obtains between the two items. Aquinas, for example,
suggests some deeper relations that explain what it is to
be an integral part of something, what it is to be a potential
part of something, and what it is to be a subjective part of
something (Summa theologiae I, q. 77, art. 1; and III, q. 90,
art. 3, responsio):
1. x is a subjective part of y because the total essence and
power of y is present to x.
2. x is a potential part of y because the total essence of y
applies to x, but the total power of y does not.
3. x is an integral part of y because neither the total
essence, nor the total power of y is present in x taken
singularly.
Aquinas implies that the relations spelled out in (1)–(3)
ground the various predicative relations that obtain
between parts and wholes. Aquinas’ characterization of
the differences between the types of wholes and parts
also attempts to account for the peculiar behavior of
potential wholes. Potential wholes are predicable of their
potential parts – that is, the rational soul and the vegeta-
tive soul are both soul – but the potential parts do not
belong to the same species. The rational power of the soul
has a different deﬁnition than the vegetative power. Other
philosophers who appeal to the predicative criterion omit
mention of the potential whole.
A second criterion that medieval philosophers some-
times offer is this: an integral whole always ‘‘draws
together,’’ or ‘‘embraces’’ (comprehendere), some quantity,
whereas a universal whole does not embrace a quantity
(Abelard Dialectica 546.21–27). Notice that this criterion
does not require that the parts themselves possess any
quantity. For example, an angel is immaterial, and hence,
does not possess a quantity. Nonetheless, one can make an
integral whole out of two angels, since that whole has
a quantity, namely, a number.
A third way to distinguish between the universal whole
and the integral whole is by determining whether the parts
actually compose the whole (see William of Ockham
Expositio in librum Porphyrii 2.16 [Opera philosophica II,
54]; John Buridan Summulae 6.4.4). On this view, the
parts of a universal do not strictly speaking compose the
whole, whereas the parts of an integral whole do literally
compose the whole. That is, in order to construct an
integral whole, one needs to ﬁrst ﬁnd some parts.
A universal is not a construction out of particulars. One
does not need to ﬁrst gather together some particular
humans in order to make the universal Human Being.
Given that the parts compose the integral whole, it
may seem that an integral whole depends upon its parts,
whereas a universal whole does not require the existence of
its subjective parts in order to exist. In his De divisione,
Boethius uses differences of priority to distinguish
between the genus and the whole (879b–c). The genus is
prior to its species, whereas a whole is posterior to – that
is, depends upon – its parts. In later treatments of parts
and wholes, the universal whole – which Boethius lumps
together with integral and potential wholes – is distin-
guished from the integral wholes by appealing to relations
of priority. Often these relations of priority are encapsu-
lated in the maxims associated with the various topics
(loci). (On the medieval understanding of the topics see
Green-Pedersen 1984 and Stump 1982.) For example, the
maximal proposition that corresponds to the topic from
the integral part is the following
"
If the integral part is removed, the integral whole is also
removed.
In the next section, the reader will see that there is
signiﬁcant disagreement over how to interpret this maxi-
mal proposition.
When discussing these criteria for distinguishing
between types of wholes and parts, many philosophers
make no mention of potential wholes. Again, this may be
because potential wholes are thought to be reducible to
either integral wholes or universal wholes. Or it may be
that the philosophers who propose these criteria for
distinguishing between integral wholes and universal
wholes do not think that potential wholes are true wholes.
For example, such a philosopher might think that the soul
is mereologically simple (i.e., has no parts), and that
mereological language, when applied to the soul, is ﬁgu-
rative. The nature of the potential whole is not well under-
stood. Much more research is needed in this area.
Dependence and Persistence
One of the proposed hallmarks of an integral whole is that
it is actually composed out of its parts. This thought
naturally implies that the whole depends upon its parts
for its existence. In On the Trinity Boethius tells us that the
composite ‘‘gets its being from those things which com-
pose it’’ (De trin. II). In one sense, this claim is not
controversial, for in the case of a composite being, some
parts are required to bring the composite into existence.
Many medieval philosophers would also concede that
in order for a composite to exist at some time, the
right sort of parts must exist at that time. For example,
in order for a human to exist at time t, there must be
a substantial human form and the right sort of matter at t.
766 M
Mereology

But some medieval philosophers consider an even stron-
ger reading, namely, that in order for this whole to exist at
t, these parts (and no others) must exist at t. Boethius
suggests this stronger thesis in his treatments of parts and
wholes (De divisione 879c):
"
If a part of the whole perishes the whole, whose one part is
destroyed, will not exist. But if the whole perishes the
parts, although scattered, remain.
Boethius reiterates his claim that the removal of a part
removes the whole in his treatments of the topics (In
Ciceronis topica III, 331.23–29 and I, 289.35–39). Taken
at his word, the thesis is remarkable, for it suggests that if
Socrates’ ﬁngernail is a part of Socrates, then the removal
of the ﬁngernail removes Socrates.
There is an innocent way to interpret Boethius’ maxim
that the removal of the part entails the removal of the
whole. In his Metaphysics, Aristotle notes that one sense of
‘‘x is whole’’ is that x is complete (V, 26, 1023b26–27).
Accordingly, if one were to remove y from the whole of
which it is a part, the whole consisting of y and some other
parts is removed. For example, if I cut off Socrates’ ﬁnger,
the whole that consists of Socrates’ ﬁnger as well as all of
his other parts is compromised. But this just means that
Socrates has been ‘‘mutilated’’ (cf. Aristotle Metaphysics V,
27). The removal of Socrates’ ﬁnger does not entail the
destruction of Socrates. Radulphus Brito seems to have
this interpretation of Boethius’ maxim in mind. He claims
that in the case of heterogeneous wholes, if one part of the
whole is destroyed, the whole itself is not destroyed, but
the ‘‘shape of the whole’’ is (Commentary on Boethius’ ‘‘De
differentiis topicis’’ II q. 9:45).
Other philosophers insist that Boethius’ rule must be
restricted in some manner. Most commonly, the rule is
restricted in this way: the whole is removed only if one
removes a ‘‘principal’’ part. If one were to amputate Soc-
rates’ right hand, Socrates would not cease to exist. He
would merely lack a hand. Hence, a hand is a ‘‘secondary
part.’’ Yet, if someone were to remove Socrates’ heart or
brain, Socrates will be destroyed. Thus, hearts and brains
are ‘‘principal parts.’’ The distinction between principal
and secondary parts is in place by the middle of the twelfth
century (Pseudo-Joscelin De generibus }} 6–10 [=Cousin
1836:507–508]; anonymous Introductiones maiores Mon-
tane 71va–72rb). The restriction of the Boethian maxim to
principal parts is common throughout later Scholastic
treatments of mereology (cf. Buridan Summulae 6.4.4;
Joachim Jungius Logica Hambergensis XI, }} 16–18).
What often underwrites this distinction between prin-
cipal and secondary parts is a metaphysical commitment
to forms that are not dependent upon their matter.
If a form is independent of its matter, it can be the
metaphysical glue that holds an object together as it
changes material components. For example, Walter Burley
draws a distinction between the whole secundum formam
and the material whole. The formal whole persists so long
as the form persists (De toto et parte, 301). Most common-
sense objects are identiﬁed with a whole secundum
formam, not a material whole. Hence, Socrates is not
substantially compromised by material changes.
However, there are a few medieval philosophers who
argue that the removal of any part entails the removal of
the whole. Peter Abelard insists that every integral whole is
composed by a unique set of integral parts. This house
must be composed out of these nails, these boards, and
this cement (Dialectica 551.4–9). If I use other nails or
other boards, I could make a house, but not this very
house. Given that each whole is composed by a unique
set of parts, if any part is removed, that whole is destroyed.
Another whole similar to the original might exist after the
mereological change takes place, but strictly speaking the
two wholes are not identical (cf. Henry 1972:118–129,
1991:92–151; Arlig 2007).
Buridan and Albert of Saxony also ﬂirt with the notion
that any mereological change brings about the destruction
of the whole (Buridan Quaestiones in physicam I, q. 10;
Albert of Saxony Quaestiones in Aristotelis physicam I, q. 8;
cf. King 1994; Pluta 2001). There are three senses of
numerical sameness: there is a proper sense, a less proper
sense, and an improper sense. Something is properly the
same in number if all its parts remain the same and it
neither acquires nor loses any parts. In this strictest of
senses, no corruptible thing persists through mereological
change. Something is less properly the same in number if
its ‘‘most principal part’’ remains numerically the same.
This is the sense that allows us to claim that Socrates is
numerically the same man now as that man ten years ago,
since Socrates’ intellective soul persists through the change
(Buridan In Metaphysicen VII, q. 12, 48va). Finally, some-
thing is improperly the same in number if there is
a continuous succession of beings that maintain a similar
shape, disposition, and form. This improper mode of
numerical sameness allows us to claim that the Nile
River here today is numerically the same river as the Nile
back in Caesar’s time. The reason why these philosophers
ﬂirt with an extreme notion of persistence is this: Albert
claims that plants and animals can only be numerically the
same in the third, improper sense, for these creatures do
not have the sort of soul that can act as a guarantor of less
proper identity (Quaes. in phys. I, q. 8:131). Oddly,
Buridan does not discuss nonhuman substances. It may
be that the substantial form of the horse is sufﬁcient to
Mereology M
767
M

preserve the persistence of the object through change,
provided that the substantial form of the horse can
play the role of a principal part, for in his Summulae
Buridan endorses the distinction between principal and
secondary parts (6.4.4). Or it could be that Buridan fol-
lows Albert of Saxony’s line when it comes to nonhuman
substances.
The extreme view of persistence held by Abelard and
Albert of Saxony (and perhaps Buridan) threatens the
Aristotelian distinction between substantial and acciden-
tal change. Strictly speaking, we do not have one sub-
stance, but rather a succession of substances loosely
uniﬁed by three facts: these successive beings have some
of the same parts, this line of succession is continuous, and
each member in the line of succession belongs to the same
species of substance.
Abelard and Albert of Saxony resort to some interest-
ing antirealist strategies to maintain at the least the
appearance of Aristotelian orthodoxy. First, all three phi-
losophers make an exception for human beings. Personal
identity is guaranteed by the persistence of the intellective
soul (Abelard Dialectica 552.36–37; Albert Quaes. in phys.
I, q. 8:125, and p. 130). When it comes to other objects,
such as houses and horses, Abelard suggests that these
items are convenient ﬁctions, that is, conceptual items
constructed from ephemeral things. They are analogous
to days and utterances, which strictly speaking do not exist
since their putative parts do not exist all at once (Arlig
2007:esp. 217–223). Albert denies that his analysis entails
that every mereological change entails substantial change,
but he does so by reinterpreting substantial change. Sub-
stantial change occurs only in those cases where the spe-
ciﬁc substantial name is changed (op. cit.:128). So long as
one can apply the name and deﬁnition of ‘‘horse’’ to the
whole in question, no substantial change has occurred.
Given that most medieval philosophers do not
endorse an unrestricted reading of the claim that the
whole is posterior to its parts, it is interesting to note
that they appeal to this very principle in order to demon-
strate the absolute simplicity of God (Anselm Monologion
17; Anselm Proslogion 18; Aquinas Summa theologiae I,
q. 3, a. 7; Maimonides Guide of the Perplexed II, prop. 21
and II, 1). These philosophers argue that if something is
complex, then that thing has parts. But if something has
parts, then that thing is posterior to and depends upon its
parts. Hence, if God is complex, then God has parts and
God depends upon these parts. If God depends upon any
x, then x is a higher form of being than God is. So, if God is
complex, then God is not the highest form of being. But
God is the supreme being. Therefore, God cannot possess
any parts whatsoever. God is absolutely simple. Medieval
philosophers typically take this to mean that God is not
divisible in any respect. God is not a composite of
hylomorphic parts, He is not a composite of subject and
accident, He is not a composite of genus and differentia,
and He is not a composite of being and essence. He is
utterly noncomposite (Summa theologiae I q. 3, art. 7).
The thesis that God is absolutely simple has interesting
metaphysical and theological implications. For example, if
God is absolutely simple then God cannot occupy space or
time, since occupying space and time divides the occupant
into parts (Anselm Monologion 21).
God’s simplicity also entails that anything that is iden-
tical to God’s essence is identical to the whole of God’s
essence (Anselm Monologion 17; cf. Boethius De trin. IV).
In particular, God is traditionally identiﬁed with the Good
itself, Justice itself, and Being itself. But since God has no
parts, the Good, Justice, and Being cannot be parts of
God’s essence. Since identity is transitive, the Good is
identical to Justice, Justice is identical to Being, and
Being is identical to the Good. Many medieval philoso-
phers are willing to accept and defend this odd result
rather than deny that God is absolutely simple. Those
who deny that God’s Goodness and Justice are identical
do not in turn think that God has parts. Rather, they insist
that names such as ‘‘Good’’ and ‘‘Just’’ do not name the
essence of God. The best way to describe God’s essence is
to say what God is not (Maimonides Guide I 58). In other
words, the so-called negative way is motivated by an
unwavering commitment to the absolute simplicity of
God, which is in turn founded on the principle that
a whole depends upon its parts.
Identity and the Problem of the Many
It is sometimes assumed that the extreme view of persis-
tence espoused by Abelard and Albert of Saxony is
founded on the principle that a whole is identical to
the sum of its parts. If that were so, an easy way to avoid
the conclusion that a change in parts entails a change in
the whole would be to deny that the whole is ever identical
to the sum of its parts (Brown 2005:esp. 150–155).
An orthodox Aristotelian will readily assert that an
integral whole is not always identical to its parts. Some
integral wholes are weakly bound together. For example,
a crowd is a very loose and weak unity: it is a combination
of substances and an accidental form (Aquinas In
Metaphys. expositio V, lectio 21, sections 1102–1104;
Summa theologiae III, q. 90, art. 3, ad 3; Buridan
Summulae 8.1.4–5). For this reason, its parts might be
identical to the whole, and a removal of one part might
compromise
the
existence
of
that
whole.
But
a combination of a substantial form and matter yields
768 M
Mereology

the truest sort of unity one ﬁnds in the sublunar world
(Aquinas Summa theologiae I, q. 76, art. 8). In the case of
substances, the whole is clearly not the sum of its integral
parts. First, a substance is not identical to the elements
that make it up, since when the substance exists, its parts
exist only in potentiality. As for the functional parts,
which exist in act only when the whole exists, the sum of
these is not identical to the whole, since the whole consists
of all the parts plus something that is not a part, but rather
a principle, namely the soul (Aquinas In Metaphys.
expositio VII, lectio 17, sections 1674–1680).
It would also be wrong to suppose that Abelard or
Albert of Saxony think that an integral whole is identical to
its parts. Abelard presents the clearest illustration of this
point. Abelard admits that it is not always sufﬁcient to
gather together the parts in order to create a whole. Some
wholes require the imposition of structure in order to
bring
about
the
existence
of
the
whole
(Logica
ingredientibus II, 171.14–17; Dialectica 550.36–551.4).
A house, for example, is a collection of boards, nails, and
bricks that have the right arrangement. While this
arrangement is not a part, it is a difference maker. Abelard
claims that a house and the parts that compose it are the
‘‘same in being (essentia) and in number,’’ but they are
‘‘distinct in property’’ (Theologia Christiana III, }}
139–154: 247–253; cf. Brower 2004; King 2004:85–92;
Arlig 2005:165–194). Essentially, certain characteristics
are true of, or can be predicated of the thing, which are
not true of its matter, and vice versa. But this fact does not
entail that the matter and the thing are numerically dis-
tinct entities, for x is the same in being as y if and only if
every part of x is a part of y and every part of y is a part of x.
If x is the same in being as y, then x is numerically the same
as y. Therefore, the house is numerically the same as its
parts, even though the house is not identical to its parts.
The claim that the whole is something over and above its
parts is, in Abelard’s view, too unreﬁned to capture the
relations that obtain between a thing and its parts.
Several medieval authors consider a speciﬁc puzzle
that is generated by the identiﬁcation of a whole with its
parts, namely the Problem of the Many (Abelard Theologia
Christiana III, } 153: 252; Pseudo-Joscelin De generibus }}
22–25 [=Cousin 1836:511–513]; Albert of Saxony Quaes.
in Arist. physicam I qq. 7–8, and Sophismata 46, 25va–vb).
Contemporary philosophers perhaps best know this puz-
zle as Peter Geach’s puzzle concerning Tibs and Tibbles
(Geach 1980:215). Assume that Socrates’ body is perfectly
intact: he has all his limbs, and their parts. Now consider
every part of Socrates’ body except one ﬁnger. Call this
whole W. W is not numerically the same as Socrates, so it
appears that Wand Socrates must be numerically distinct.
Socrates’ whole body is imbued with the soul of a man.
But it also happens that W is imbued with the soul of
a man. So, there are now two numerically distinct men
where it initially appeared there was one. But it gets worse.
Considering the body apart from one ﬁnger was only one
of an indeﬁnite number of such considerations. And by
the
same
reasoning,
these other
bracketed
wholes
composed from Socrates’ body are also men. Hence, it is
easy to generate an indeﬁnite number of numerically
distinct men where commonsense tells us that there is
only one.
Most medieval philosophers who consider the Prob-
lem of the Many reject the premise that while W is a part,
W is a human. If W is a part of a per se being (i.e., an
Aristotelian primary substance), then W itself cannot be
a per se being. There cannot be many per se beings occu-
pying the same location at the same time. Therefore, there
are not innumerably many men. There is only one man
consisting of innumerably many parts (Albert of Saxony
Sophismata 46, 25vb).
Even Abelard resolves the Problem of the Many in
roughly this manner. If x and y are the same in being,
then x and y are numerically the same. But, according to
Abelard, it does not follow that if x and y are different in
being, x and y are numerically distinct. This is because if
even one part is not shared by x and y, x and y are different
in being, but in order to be numerically distinct, x and y
cannot share any parts. This characterization of numerical
sameness
and
difference
leaves
logical
space
for
overlapping objects, which are neither numerically the
same nor numerically distinct. Thus, according to Abelard
it is true that W is not numerically the same as Socrates.
But it does not follow from this fact that W is numerically
distinct from Socrates. Hence, there is not an indeﬁnite
number of numerically different men. But if one asks
Abelard to pinpoint which of these overlapping men
is Socrates, Abelard might reply that Socrates is that
sum of parts that is viviﬁed by Socrates’ soul (Theologia
Christiana III, } 153). In other words, Socrates is to be
identiﬁed with the maximal sum of integral parts that is
viviﬁed by Socrates’ soul.
Conclusion
Medieval philosophers have a sophisticated understand-
ing of parts and wholes, and they make use of these
mereological principles when reﬂecting on metaphysical
questions concerning persistence, dependence, and iden-
tity. Some of these reﬂections, as the reader has seen, are of
the ﬁrst rank. Students of logic and metaphysics should be
richly rewarded if they continue to explore this important
body of work.
Mereology M
769
M

See also: ▶Albert of Saxony ▶Boethius ▶Boethius’ De
topicis differentiis, Commentaries on ▶Form and Matter
▶John Buridan ▶Logic ▶Metaphysics ▶Peter Abelard
▶Peter of Spain ▶Sophisms ▶Substance, Accident
and
Modes
▶Syncategoremata
▶Thomas
Aquinas
▶Trinitarian Logic ▶Universals ▶Walter Burley ▶Wil-
liam of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1919) Logica ‘ingredientibus’, pt 1: Glossae super
Porphyrium. In: Geyer B (ed) Peter Abaelards Philosophische
Schriften. I. Die Logica ‘Ingredientibus. 1: die Glossen zu Porphyrius.
Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, vol 21, pt 1.
Aschendorffshen Buchhandlung, Mu¨nster
Abelard Peter (1921) Logica ‘ingredientibus’, pt 2: Glossae super
Praedicamenta Aristotelis. In: Geyer B (ed) Peter Abaelards
Philosophische Schriften. I. Die Logica ‘Ingredientibus’. 2: die
Glossen zu den Kategorien, Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie
des Mittelalters 21, pt 2. Aschendorffshen Buchhandlung, Mu¨nster
Abelard Peter (1933) Logica ‘nostrorum petitioni sociorum’: glossula
super Porphyrium. In: Geyer B (ed) Peter Abaelards Philosophische
Schriften. II. Die Logica ‘nostrorum petitioni sociorum: die Glossen
zu Porphyrius. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie und
Theologie
des
Mittelalters,
vol
21,
no
4.
Aschendorffshen
Buchhandlung, Mu¨nster
Abelard Peter (1954) De divisionibus incipit. In: Dal Pra M (ed) Scritti
ﬁlosoﬁci. Fratelli Bocco, Milan
Abelard Peter (1969) Theologia Christiana. In: Buytaert EM (ed) Corpus
Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis, vol 12. Brepols, Turnhout
Abelard Peter (1970) In: de Rijk LM (ed) Dialectica, 2nd edn. Van
Gorcum, Assen
Albert of Saxony (1490) Sophismata. George Vuolf, Paris
Albert of Saxony (1999) In: Patar B (ed) Expositio et quaestiones in
Aristotelis Physicam ad Albertum de Saxonia attributae, vol II:
quaestiones, books I–III. E´ditions Peeters, Louvain-Paris
Anonymous (1983) In: Ebbesen S, Fredborg KM, Nielsen LO (eds) Com-
pendium Logicae Porretanum; Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-age
Grec et Latin 46:1–93
Anonymous
(n.d.)
Introductiones
Montanae
maiores.
MS
Paris,
Bibliothe`que Nationale cod. lat.15141
Anselm (1946) In: Schmidt FS (ed) Opera omnia. Thomas Nelson,
Edinburgh
Aquinas (1888–1906) Summa theologiae. In: Opera omnia. Iussu
impensaque Leonis XIII, P.M. edita, vols 4–12, Leonine edn. Vatican
Polyglot, Vatican
Aquinas (1968) In: Robb JH (ed) Quaestiones de anima. Pontiﬁcal Insti-
tute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Aquinas (1971) In: Cathala M-R, Spiazzi RM (eds) In duodecim libros
metaphysicorum Aristotelis expositio, 2nd edn. Marietti, Turin/
Rome
Boethius (1833) In Topica Ciceronis commentaria. In: Orelli JC (ed)
Cicero Opera Omnia, vol 5, pt 1. Orelli, Fuesslini, Turin
Boethius (1990) De topicis differentiis. In: Nikitas DZ (ed) De topicis
differentiis und die byzantinische Rezeption dieses Werkes: Anhang,
Eine Pachymeres-Weiterbearbeitung der Holobolos-U¨ bersetzung.
Corpus Philosophorum Medii Aevi Philosophi Byzantini, vol 5.
The Academy of Athens/Librairie J. Vrin, Athens/Paris
Boethius (1998) De divisione liber: Critical edition, translation, prole-
gomena, and commentary (ed and trans: Magee J). E. J. Brill, Leiden
Boethius (2000) De trinitate. In: Moreschini C (ed) De consolatione
philosophiae/Opscula theologica. Saur, Munich and Leipzig
Brito Radulphus (1978) In: Green-Pedersen NJ (ed) Commentary on
Boethius’ De differentiis topicis; Cahiers du l’Institut du Moyen-
age Grec et Latin 26:1–92
Buridan John (1509) Quaestiones super octo libros physicorum libros
Aristotelis. Paris. (Repr. Minerva, Frankfurt a. M., 1968)
Buridan John (1518) In Metaphysicen Aristotelis quaestiones. Paris.
(Repr. Minerva, Frankfurt a. M, 1964)
Buridan John (2001) Summulae de dialectica. In: Hubien H (ed)
Unpublished MSS (English trans: Klima G). Yale University Press,
New Haven
Burley Walter (1955) In: Boehner Ph (ed) De puritate artis logicae
tractatus longior, with a revised edition of the Tractatus Brevior.
The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Burley Walter (1966) In: Shapiro H, Scott F (eds) De toto et parte;
Archives
d’Histoire
doctrinale
et
Litteraire
du
Moyen
Age
33:299–303
Jungius Joachim (1957) In: Meyer RW (ed) Logica Hambergensis [1638].
J. J. Augustin, Hamburg
Lambert of Auxerre (1971) In: Alessio F (ed) Logica (Summa Lamberti).
La Nuova Italia Editrice, Firenze
Maimonides (1963) The guide of the perplexed (trans: Pines S). Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, Chicago
Peter of Spain (1972) In: de Rijk LM (ed) Tractatus [=Summule logicales].
Van Gorcum and Company, Assen
Pseudo-Joscelin (1836) De generibus et speciebus. In: King P (ed)
(forthcoming); Older editions can be found in King Peter
(1982) Peter Abailard and the problem of universals, 2 vols,
unpublished PhD dissertation, Princeton University, vol 2, pp 143–
185; Cousin V (ed) Ouvrages inedits d’Abe´lard. Imprimerie Royale,
Paris, pp 507–550
William of Ockham (1974–1988) In: Boehner Ph et al (eds) Opera
philosophica, 7 vols. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Arlig A (2005) A study in early medieval mereology: Boethius, Abelard,
and Pseudo-Joscelin. PhD dissertation, The Ohio State University
Arlig A (2007) Abelard’s assault on everyday objects. Am Cathol Philos
Quart 81:209–227
Brower J (2004) Trinity. In: Brower J, Guilfoy K (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Abelard. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 223–257
Brown C (2005) Aquinas and the ship of Theseus: solving puzzles about
material objects. Continuum, London/New York
Burkhardt H, Dufour CA (1991) Part/whole I: history. In: Burkhardt H,
Smith B (eds) Handbook of metaphysics and ontology, vol 2, L–Z.
Philosophia, Munich, pp 663–673
Freddoso A (1978) Abailard on collective realism. J Philos 75:527–538
Geach PT (1980) Reference and generality, 3rd edn. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca
Green-Pedersen NJ (1984) The tradition of the topics in the Middle Ages:
the commentaries on Aristotle’s and Boethius’ topics. Philosophia,
Munich/Vienna
Harte V (2002) Plato on parts and wholes. Clarendon, Oxford
Henry DP (1972) Medieval logic and metaphysics. Hutchinson, London
Henry DP (1984) That most subtle question (Quaestio subtilissima): the
metaphysical bearing of medieval and contemporary linguistic dis-
ciplines. Manchester University Press, Manchester
770 M
Mereology

Henry DP (1985) Abelard’s mereological terminology. In: Bos EP (ed)
Mediaeval semantics and metaphysics: studies dedicated to L. M. De
Rijk. Ingenium, Nijmegen, pp 65–92
Henry
DP
(1991)
Medieval
mereology.
Bochumer
Studien
zur
Philosophie, vol 16. B. R. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
King P (1994) John Buridan’s theory of individuation. In: Gracia JE (ed)
Individuation in scholasticism: the later Middle Ages and the coun-
ter-reformation, 1150–1650. SUNY, Binghamton, pp 397–430
King P (2004) Metaphysics. In: Brower J, Guilfoy K (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Abelard. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 65–125
Kretzmann N (1982) Syncategoremata, exponibilia, sophismata. In:
Kretzmann N et al (eds) The Cambridge history of later medieval
philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 211–245
Mann W, Varzi AC (eds) (2006) Special issue: parts and wholes. J Philos
103(12):593–754
Pluta O (2001) Buridan’s theory of identity. In: Thijssen JMMH,
Zupko J (eds) Metaphysics and natural philosophy of John Buridan.
E. J. Brill, Leiden, pp 49–64
Stump E (1982) Topics: their development and absorption into conse-
quences. In: Kretzmann N et al (eds) The Cambridge history of later
medieval philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 273–299
Zupko J (2003) John Buridan: portrait of a fourteenth-century arts
master. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Metaphysics
ANDREW W. ARLIG
Department of Philosophy
Brooklyn College of The City University
of New York
Brooklyn, NY
USA
Abstract
This article surveys some of the major issues in medieval
metaphysics. It examines at length medieval positions on
the nature and scope of metaphysics, especially in relation
to theology. This article then brieﬂy surveys some of the
major topics that exercised the minds of medieval
thinkers, including the transcendentals, the categories,
existence, universals, ontological reduction, individua-
tion, material constitution, identity, persistence, and
modality.
In the collection of books known as the Metaphysics,
Aristotle provided several characterizations of this science.
In book I (A), Aristotle claimed that the fruit of the highest
philosophical investigation is a ‘‘wisdom’’ concerning the
ﬁrst causes and principles of things. In book IV (G),
Aristotle claimed that metaphysics is the study of being
in so far as it is being (chap. 1), but given that all beings
ultimately depend upon substance for their existence,
metaphysics is primarily a study of substance (chap. 2).
Finally, in book VI (Ε), Aristotle itemized the subject
matters of the three theoretical sciences, which are marked
off from the practical and productive sciences in virtue of
the fact that the former are pursued for their own sake.
The theoretical sciences are divided into natural science
(‘‘physics’’), mathematics, and the ‘‘divine’’ science, or
theology. Physics considered things insofar as they are
changeable and inseparable from matter. Mathematics
considered things, which are actually inseparable from
matter, in abstraction from their matter and from change.
Theology, however, considered things that exist separately
from matter and are not subject to change. Aristotle noted
that, if there were only natural things, physics would be the
ﬁrst philosophical science. But given that there are eternal,
immaterial substances, there must be a higher science that
studies these. Hence, metaphysics comes after the study of
physics. For the Aristotelian, one does not have complete
knowledge of a science until one knows the causes and
principles of the subjects of that science. In this sense,
metaphysics is prior to physics. For these reasons, meta-
physics is the ﬁrst philosophical science.
While medieval philosophers were more than happy to
parrot these Aristotelian formulae, there was considerable
debate over the proper ‘‘subject’’ of metaphysics. For it is
one thing to consider the x’s in a science, it is another
matter for the science to have the x’s as its primary object
of study. For example, one may have to consider substance
in physics, but substance as such is not the subject matter
of physics.
The Subject Matter of Metaphysics
The tradition that medieval thinkers received presented
them with three plausible candidates for the subject matter
of metaphysics: being as such (which included the study of
the ﬁrst principles and causes of beings), substance, and
God. In practice, it seems that the main struggle was
between the conception of metaphysics as the study of
being qua being, which was associated with Avicenna,
and the conception of metaphysics as the study of eternal
substances, which was often attributed to Averroes.
Duns Scotus, like many of his contemporaries, sided
with Avicenna. Avicenna’s understanding of the subject
matter of metaphysics was not without precedent (com-
pare al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, The Aims of Aristotle’s Metaphysics, in
McGinnis and Reisman 2007:78–81, but see Fakhry
1984). But it was Avicenna’s particular formulation of
the claim that metaphysics is the study of being inasmuch
Metaphysics M
771
M

as it is being which was to be extremely inﬂuential in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
Avicenna observed that metaphysics could not be
solely about God or about substance. The subject of meta-
physics cannot be God, because the subject of any science
is something whose existence has been postulated at the
outset of the investigation; a science only studies the states
and properties of its subject. But the existence of God
cannot be postulated at the outset of metaphysical study
(for no other science has established His existence); rather,
the existence of God is something that is sought in meta-
physics (Avicenna, The Metaphysics of al-Shifa¯’ (The
Healing), I, 1). Likewise, the subject of metaphysics cannot
be the ﬁrst principles and causes of substances. They too
are the things that the science seeks after, not what it has
already postulated. Finally, if metaphysics were solely
about substance, then metaphysics would fail to be fully
general. It would only study being under one of its aspects,
namely, substance, and not being in general. Metaphysics
would not be the highest science; it would be a science that
is subordinate to some yet unspeciﬁed science that studies
being in general.
Avicenna concluded that subject of metaphysics is
being inasmuch as it is being: some of the science will
study the causes of being, some of it will study the acci-
dents, some of it the First Cause, and some of it the
starting points of the other sciences, all of which also
study
being
but
under
one
aspect
or
another
(Metaphysics, I, 2).
Avicenna’s conception of metaphysics was very inﬂu-
ential, but it did not go unchallenged. Averroes, for exam-
ple, attacked Avicenna’s reason for rejecting the notion
that God is the subject matter of metaphysics (In I Phys.,
com. 83 [Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois commentariis, IV,
47v]). Avicenna is mistaken, for the demonstration of the
existence of the separate substance, which Averroes iden-
tiﬁed with the ﬁrst form and the ﬁnal cause of everything
else, has already occurred by the end of the study of physics
(cf. Aristotle, Physics VIII). Accordingly, Averroes seems to
have endorsed the opposing claim that the proper and
primary subject of metaphysics is the separate substance,
or God.
Aquinas agreed with Avicenna that the subject matter
of metaphysics was being qua being, or ‘‘being in general’’
(ens commune) (In Metaphys., Proem.). But Aquinas
refused to admit that God is included in the subject matter
of metaphysics. God and angels are examined in meta-
physics, but only indirectly as the principles and causes of
being qua being (In De trinitate, q. 5, a. 4; cf. Wippel
2000:15–22). Divine things may be studied in and of
themselves, and not merely as principles of other things,
but this can only happen insofar as their existence has been
revealed to humans in a nonphilosophical way. Hence,
Aquinas draws a distinction between philosophical theol-
ogy (metaphysics) and revealed theology (‘‘sacred doc-
trine’’) (In De trinitate q. 5, a. 4; cf. Wippel 2000:17–18).
Aquinas thought that philosophical theology was a part of,
and indeed, the culmination of philosophy. Revealed the-
ology studied God and divine things as its proper subject,
but its basis must be handed down in Holy Scripture.
Since sacred doctrine is known by something that is supe-
rior to the natural light of reason, it is superior to meta-
physics (cf. Summa theologiae I, q., a. 1).
Being and Its Necessary Concomitants
Start with the notion that metaphysics is the study of being
qua being. There are at least two components to the study
of beings, namely, determining how or the manner in
which a being exists and determining what that being is.
We will return to the former after a few sections touching
upon the latter.
In the broadest terms, we determine what something is
by locating it among the types of beings. This avenue leads
to the discussion of the categories (see next section). But it
was also felt that there were some properties of a being,
which are predicable of that being merely because it is
a being. The most common among these ‘‘transcenden-
tals’’ – so named because these predicates applied across
the categories and, in some sense, were prior to the differ-
entiation of being into one of the general kinds of being –
were ‘‘good’’ (bonum), ‘‘one’’ (unum), and ‘‘true’’ (verum).
But there were several other candidates for transcendentals
mentioned in the literature. Saint Bonaventure, for exam-
ple, added ‘‘beauty’’ (pulchrum), and Aquinas added
‘‘thing’’ (res) and ‘‘something’’ (aliquid).
The medieval discussion of the transcendentals is by
and large conﬁned to the Latin Scholastic period, but there
were some notable predecessors among the Arabs and in
the writings of Boethius (see, especially, his Quomodo
substantiae). (For an overview of the study of transcen-
dentals, see Gracia 1992, and the other articles in Topoi, vol
11, pt 2.) No Scholastic philosopher assumed prima facie
that the discussion of the transcendentals was merely
a discussion about the status of words or concepts, and
many assumed that the transcendentals had some sort of
ontological status.
The transcendentals were widely believed to be ‘‘con-
vertible’’ – that is, x is one only insofar as x is true, and
only insofar as x is good, and only insofar as x is a being.
It was a matter of debate whether the transcendentals
were merely co-extensional, or whether they were in
reality one and the same thing (idem secundum rem).
772 M
Metaphysics

(Rationality and being capable of laughter are co-exten-
sional, but different secundum rem.) But while there was
disagreement over whether the transcendentals were the
same secundum rem, there was near unanimous assent that
the intensions of the transcendentals were not equivalent.
The transcendentals had a special appeal to Scholas-
tics. It did not escape their notice, for example, that the
transcendentals corresponded to some of the fundamental
names of God. The transcendentals and their status also
had clear implications for other theological and philo-
sophical topics. For example, there was the problem of
the metaphysical status of evil. For if x is a being only to
the extent that x is good, then it seems that evil (or at least
pure evil) is unreal.
It was often felt that there was an ordering among
the transcendentals, and that ‘‘being’’ (ens) was ﬁrst in
the hierarchy. In general, however, medieval thinkers
were careful not to treat ens as the highest kind, for they
were mindful of the Aristotelian doctrine that being is not
a genus. According to the orthodox Aristotelian line, the
range of ways that something could be a being was too
diverse for all beings to share some real element in com-
mon. Moreover, there was one being who, for both phil-
osophical and theological reasons, could not have
anything in common with all other beings. This transcen-
dent being was God. This consensus and the weight of the
authorities behind it should be noted in order to fully
appreciate John Duns Scotus’ idiosyncratic and contro-
versial doctrine of the univocity of ens.
Scotus took the unusual step of asserting that meta-
physics was the study of a univocal conception of being
(Ordinatio I, d. 3, q. 3; translation in Scotus 1987:5–8). In
particular, Scotus asserted that there is one notion of being
underlying both the notion of inﬁnite being (i.e., God)
and ﬁnite being (i.e., creation). Most of Scotus’ contem-
poraries asserted the absolute transcendence of God.
There was not one notion of being, but rather two: one
proper to God and one proper to creatures. But Scotus
thought that this doctrine entailed intractable epistemo-
logical difﬁculties. God could not be naturally known by
us unless being were univocal with respect to both the
uncreated and the created. Scotus’ predecessors tried to
avoid the conclusion that being is an equivocal concept
and, hence, the epistemological difﬁculties that Scotus
identiﬁed by asserting some form of the doctrine of anal-
ogy. The notion of being proper to creatures is secondary
to and derived from the notion of being proper to God.
Scotus thought that the analogical account of being was
incoherent; it either resolved into a commitment to
equivocity or into a commitment to a univocal, common
conception of being.
To many of his contemporaries, Scotus seemed to be
asserting that being was a genus and, even worse, denying
the transcendence of God. It seems that Scotus did not
fully convince even his own followers, for they tended to
divide into those who accepted that there was some sort of
real community between God and creatures and those
who thought that the unity of the concept of being that
was applicable to both God and creatures was merely
logical and not real (Dumont 1992:140–146).
The Categories
A being insofar as it is a being has a number of necessary
concomitant properties. But this being will also belong to
one of the kinds of being. First of all, it will either be
a substance or an accident – that is, a dependent property
of a substance. If it is an accident, it will fall under one of
the nine classes of accidents that Aristotle laid out in his
Categories.
The Categories traditionally stands at the beginning of
Aristotle’s Organon, or logical corpus. Considered as
a logical work, the Categories appears to be about the
nature and classiﬁcation of simple terms. Nevertheless,
almost
from
the
beginning,
interpreters
wondered
whether the Categories was about more than the study of
simple terms. Scattered remarks in the Categories as well as
other parts of Aristotle’s corpus implied that beings were
divided into the ten basic categories. It is natural, then,
that medieval philosophers would be tempted to read the
Categories as a treatise about the classiﬁcation of beings.
As soon as one takes the Categories to be about the
classiﬁcation of beings, a number of issues quickly arise.
First, it appears that Aristotle is committed to the exis-
tence of universal things, and not merely universal terms
(see below). Second, one might wonder whether each
category term picks out a discrete, nonoverlapping collec-
tion of entities. (For example, do ‘‘Substance’’ and ‘‘Quan-
tity’’ pick out distinct sets of things?) Third, there is the
question whether the ten categories exhaust the basic
kinds of beings.
Medieval philosophers answered the second and third
of these questions in a variety of ways. Many medieval
philosophers thought that there were exactly ten catego-
ries and that these categories uniquely picked out
nonoverlapping classes of beings. Some even thought
that they could ‘‘prove’’ that there were exactly ten cate-
gories (Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas, the later Walter
Burley). John Duns Scotus expressed skepticism about the
possibility of proving the sufﬁciency of the categories,
although he believed that there were ten and only ten
categories and that each of these categories corresponded
to a class of things.
Metaphysics M
773
M

Other philosophers attempted to reduce the categories
in one fashion or another. Henry of Ghent observed that
there are some accidents where it is not contradictory to
conceive of them as existing without their subjects
(namely, qualities and quantities), but that for most acci-
dents it would be a contradiction to conceive of them as
separate from their subjects (namely, those accidents
belonging to the remaining seven categories). The ﬁrst
three categories (Substance, Quantity, and Quality) had
not only their own proper mode of being, but also their
own proper reality. The remaining categories had their
own proper mode of being, but they were not distinct
things from the ﬁrst three kinds of beings (Pini
2005:71–73). Peter of John Olivi took this reductivist
program one step further and determined that the cate-
gories do not pick out distinct kinds of things (res), but
only distinct ways of describing the same things. The
categories, hence, were mind-dependent classiﬁcations
(idem, 74–75).
William of Ockham’s reduction of the categories was
also quite radical. He reduced the real categories to two:
substance and quality. In a series of arguments, Ockham
attempted to demonstrate that entities belonging to one
of the other eight categories were either not needed in
order to explain semantic phenomena, or the positing
of the existence of entities in some category led to
a contradiction (for his arguments against quantity and
relations, see Adams 1987, vol I, chaps. 6 and 7 respec-
tively). Terms corresponding to the latter eight categories
were merely indirect ways of speaking of the two kinds of
items that are real, individual substances and individual
qualities. It is a curious fact that Ockham did not apply the
same reductivist strategy to qualities as well. Adams has
suggested some philosophical reasons why quality might
be irreducible (1987:277–285). Spade has argued that
Ockham never explicitly employs the strategies suggested
by Adams. The real motivation behind Ockham’s refusal
to reduce away qualities seems to be theological (Spade
1999:105–106).
Medieval thinkers not only worried about whether
there were no fewer than ten categories, they also were
aware that the categories may not exhaust all of reality.
Many noticed that the ten categories did not have an
obvious place for a number of important entities.
For example, where do matter and the substantial differ-
entiae fall in the categorial scheme? And what about
God? In his commentary on the Categories, Boethius
espoused a view, which traces back to at least Porphyry,
that the Categories is restricted to composites of matter
and form. It is not a scheme that can classify matter alone,
or form alone, let alone simple, immaterial substances (in
Cat. 183D–184B). In his treatise on the Trinity, Boethius
endorsed Saint Augustine’s assertion that God is ‘‘beyond
substance’’ (ultra substantiam) (De trin. IV).
Grades and Modes of Existence
A being not only has properties and (with some excep-
tions) belongs to one of the ten greatest kinds, it also, and
most importantly, has existence (esse). Medieval philoso-
phers have a rich understanding of the nature of existence
and its interplay with the features that make a being what
it is (i.e., the being’s essence). We can only mention some
of the general features of this rich tradition.
Many medieval thinkers felt the need to distinguish
between the mode of existence that a concrete individual
has and the mode of existence that this individual’s con-
stituents and ingredients has. One motivation seems to be
this. If the constituents of an individual possessed the
same mode of existence as the individual itself, then
these constituents would exist in their own right – that
is, they would be per se beings. But Aristotle claimed that
no substance is composed of substances, which many
medieval philosophers interpreted as the claim that no
per se being is a composite of actual per se beings. A per
se being is something that is truly one and capable of
independent existence. But how could something be inde-
pendent and truly one if its parts themselves are also
independent and truly one? It appeared, then, that if x is
composed of per se beings, then x is merely one in a weaker
or accidental sense – it is an aggregate of substances, not
itself a substance.
One strategy was to distinguish between actual exis-
tence and potential existence. A human body is made out
of the four elements, but when the human body actually
exists, these ingredients only potentially exist in the body.
They exist in potentiality, since upon death the body is
resolved back into the four elements. Hence, in one sense,
the elements are not parts of the body.
But some of the items that play a role in the creation of
an individual must continue to be present in the individ-
ual, when the individual exists. In particular, the nature or
essence of the individual must exist in the individual when
it exists. Otherwise, the individual would not be what it
essentially is. One strategy, which is very old, is to distin-
guish between the mode of existence that the nature has in
itself and the mode that it has in the material world.
Boethius, for example, claimed that natures in themselves
merely ‘‘subsist,’’ whereas concrete instances of the nature
‘‘substand.’’ It is only when something substands that it
can be the subject for accidental properties – that is, to be
an individual, material substance. The details of Boethius’
theory are a bit obscure, but it appears that he was
774 M
Metaphysics

espousing a Neoplatonic theory of individuals. The nature
itself is a separately existing Form. This Form is then
copied in matter. These chunks of matter imprinted with
the copy of the Form are those things that substand. The
matter and the copy of the Form are parts of the concrete
individual, and indeed they are essential parts of the indi-
vidual, but they are not themselves per se beings. The
matter needs the copy of the Form to be something, and
this copy of the Form needs to be enmattered in order to
be a copy of the Form.
The dominance of Aristotelian philosophy in the
Scholastic period meant that most philosophers rejected
the Platonic conception of separately existing essences.
Essences were only found in the mind or in individual
beings. Given that the essence contributed to the existence
of the individual, there was still the need to distinguish
between the mode of existence of the essence as such and
the individual. The Avicennian answer was to distinguish
between the essence in itself and the essence in an existent.
The essence considered in itself did not exist. It only had
existence in so far as it was an essence in the mind or an
essence in this individual.
Avicenna, nonetheless, allowed for the essence to have
some measure of mind-independent reality, for in itself it
was indifferent with respect to this individual or that one.
Avicenna’s position did not sit well with Scholastic thinkers,
for in their view, if the essence itself had some sort of mind-
independent reality, then in effect it has a minor form of
existence. And if it has a minor form of existence, then the
essence should have a minor form of unity. Generally
speaking, there were two solutions to this dilemma: either
deny that that essence in itself had any existence at all, or
accept that the essence had a minor form of being, and
hence a minor form of real unity. Aquinas chose the former
strategy; Duns Scotus chose the latter strategy.
Universals
The generality of the discussions of being, the transcen-
dentals, and the categories, strongly suggested to medieval
thinkers that there are things that are both independent of
the mind and really common to many individuals. The
majority of medieval philosophers were ‘‘realists,’’ where
this means that they thought that there was some sense in
which there are mind-independent features (but not nec-
essarily things) that are common to many. A small but
inﬂuential group of philosophers rejected the thesis that
there were any things or aspects that existed universally
and mind independently. These philosophers are typically
labeled as ‘‘nominalists,’’ since they generally argued that
universality is a property of names (nomina) or concepts
only. However, it should be stressed that no medieval
believed that there were no properties or abstract objects
(a position that is nowadays occasionally associated with
the term ‘‘nominalism’’).
Some realists argued that universals were things that
literally were a part of an individual composite thing. The
version prevalent in the later eleventh and early part of the
twelfth centuries has been called ‘‘material essence’’ real-
ism (Tweedale 1976:95–111). Peter Abelard attributes
such a view to his master William of Champaeux and, as
Abelard reports matters, he publicly demolished the view
early on in his career (see Log. Ingr. I, 10–13 [Spade
1994:29–33]). Whether Abelard personally brought an
end to material essence realism is not absolutely certain.
What is clear is that no thirteenth-century philosopher of
note embraced material essence realism. However, a more
sophisticated version of material essence realism seems to
be the considered later position of Walter Burley and his
followers.
The most popular versions of realism in the Scholastic
Period were forms of what scholars describe as ‘‘moderate
realism.’’ Moderate realists argued that a nature or essence
is only really universal when it is in the mind. In the mind-
independent world, the nature is somehow individualized,
so that the nature that is in Socrates is not numerically the
same as the nature in Plato.
Like
Abelard
before
him,
William
of
Ockham
embarked on a systematic attack of all the forms of realism
current in his day. He concluded from this exercise that
universals had no reality outside of the mind.
Peter Abelard, William of Ockham, and other nomi-
nalists tended to point out the metaphysical difﬁculties
that plagued the various forms of realism. They proposed
instead that all things are fundamentally particular.
Universality is restricted to the realm of concepts or lan-
guage. But while realists were plagued by metaphysical
difﬁculties – especially difﬁculties that centered around
identity and difference – the nominalists were plagued by
epistemological difﬁculties. Predicating a universal of
an individual can only be legitimate if there is some real
basis for the predication. Otherwise, as Boethius famously
pointed out, predications are ‘‘empty’’ – that is, they
convey nothing truthful about reality as such. But by
banishing universals to the realm of the mind and lan-
guage, the nominalists appeared to undermine the foun-
dations of science.
Nominalism and Ontological Reduction
The nominalists’ denial that universals are things and
Ockham’s reduction of the categories to substance and
quality were both attempts to reduce the number of
types of things. (Although it should be noted that the
Metaphysics M
775
M

reduction of the categories and antirealism about univer-
sals are, and in the Middle Ages were sometimes taken to
be, logically independent).
Ockham’s reductivist program is often associated with
his principle of parsimony (‘‘Ockham’s Razor’’). But Ock-
ham did not invent this principle (indeed, one can ﬁnd
versions of the principle in Aristotle), nor was he the only
philosopher in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries
who made use of the principle. Moreover, the importance
of the principle of parsimony is often overestimated. As
one commentator observes, no one advocated the postu-
lation of unnecessary entities (Spade 1999:102). The real
dispute was over precisely what entities were necessary.
Much like contemporary forms of antirealism, medi-
eval antirealists tried to determine what words actually
pick out things and what words only appear to pick out
things (cf. Normore 1985). Sentences that only appeared
to commit someone to a certain kind thing were
paraphrased into statements that did not commit one to
things of this type. So, for example, sentences that seemed
to commit one to quantities were transformed into
sentences about substances and qualities existing in this
or that way.
But some commentators have wondered whether
medieval antirealists actually achieved ontological econ-
omy. Ockham, for example, seems to have substituted an
ontology of modes for one of things. Even if that accusa-
tion does not stick (see Adams 1987:306–310), it still
appears that Ockham’s program cannot reduce away
objective temporal, spatial, and causal ordering. Yet, Ock-
ham insists that these features of reality are not things
(Spade 1999:106–111). Abelard had a similar problem.
He insisted that no thing is a universal, and yet universality
is grounded in objective ‘‘agreements’’ between individual
things (cf. Tweedale 1976:204–209). Hence, in practice,
those with antirealist tendencies often tacitly employed
a ‘‘two-tiered’’ ontology (Spade, op cit.).
Individuals and Individuation
The corollary of any theory of universals is an account of
particulars, or individuals. A full account of individuals
would answer a number of questions about the extension
and intension of ‘‘individual.’’ It would also include an
account of what makes something an individual. Medieval
philosophers were not always aware of the need to account
for the extension and intension of ‘‘individual,’’ but many
of them embarked upon sophisticated investigations of
the cause, or principle, of individuation.
The source of the search for a principle of individua-
tion was often a theological controversy. Boethius, for
example, considered the question of individuation as an
aside to his discussions of the Trinity and the Incarnation.
Other philosophers considered individuation in the con-
text of the problem of individuating angels (e.g., Duns
Scotus, Ord. II, d. 3, part 1).
In his On the Trinity, Boethius attempted to demon-
strate that the Persons of the Trinity are not numerically
distinct from one another (De trin. I). Boethius proposed
that numerical distinctness is brought about by the inher-
ence of accidents in a substance. Given that God has no
accidents, and given that each of the Persons is God, it
cannot be the case that the Persons are numerically dis-
tinct from one another.
The idea that accidental forms, either the whole set of
them or some subset of them (such as spatiotemporal
properties), make some thing an individual became part
of what one scholar has called ‘‘the Standard Theory of
Individuality’’ (Gracia 1984, 1994:26–28). According to
the Standard Theory, (1) individuality is conceived in
terms of difference or distinction, (2) the extension of
the term ‘‘individual’’ is restricted to Aristotelian primary
substances, and (3) the principle of individuation is either
due to one or more accidents or to the collection of all
properties (including non-accidental ones) belonging to
the substance. The Standard Theory dominated much of
the thinking of the early Middle Ages, although there were
some notable exceptions, such as Peter Abelard and Gil-
bert of Poitiers.
Other medieval thinkers looked for the principle of
individuation in either a substantial or a non-categorial
component of individuals. A common candidate for
a principle of individuation was the individual’s matter.
This theory is commonly associated with Aquinas
(although see Father Owen’s addendum in Gracia
1994:188). In the same vein, some medieval thinkers pro-
posed that the matter together with the substantial form of
the
individual was
the
principle
of
individuation.
A notable proponent of this view was Bonaventure (Gracia
1994:141–172).
Sometimes the substantial form alone was considered
to be the principle of individuation. For this solution to
work, the form itself would have to already be individual.
One intriguing version of the notion that an individual-
ized substantial form is the principle of individuation was
hinted at by a remark in Boethius’ greater commentary on
De interpretatione (in De int. 2nd edn., II, 137.3–137.16).
There Boethius suggested that Socrates is individuated by
a personal form, his ‘‘Socrateity.’’ It is not clear what the
status of these personal forms is or whether Boethius really
thought that these forms were the metaphysical cause of
individuality, but it was interpreted this way by some later
medieval thinkers.
776 M
Metaphysics

Duns Scotus held that an individual differentia,
or haecceity, is the cause of a thing being the very
thing it is (Gracia 1994:284–291). Given that this haecceity
does not affect or alter the formal content of the
things nature, it is a non-categorial principle (King
2000:177–179).
Finally, philosophers such as Peter Abelard, William of
Ockham, and John Buridan argued that there is no prin-
ciple or cause of individuation (Gracia 1994:373–376 and
397–430; King 2000:180–183, and King 2004). Everything
that exists is already individual. Hence, there is no need to
ﬁnd a cause for their individuality.
Composition, Identity, and Emergence
Another cluster of metaphysical problems focused on the
relation at a time between a thing and those items that
compose the thing. One such problem was whether the
whole is identical to the sum of its parts. Medieval answers
to this question were often informed by the Aristotelian
principle that there are degrees of unity. Material compos-
ites were typically divided into three classes: aggregates,
accidental unities, and substances. Aggregates were the
weakest sort of unity, since they exist when some things
are present in one location. A thing with a greater degree of
unity exists when there are some things in one location
and these things are arranged in the right way. These
arrangements are due either to accidental forms, or to
substantial forms. Composites of some things and an
accidental form are accidental unities; composites of
some things and a substantial form are substances.
Among material composites, substances were thought to
have the greatest degree of unity.
Medieval philosophers generally agreed that an aggre-
gate is identical to the sum of its parts, but there was
considerable disagreement when they turned to accidental
unities and substances.
Most medieval philosophers thought that artifacts –
even complicated ones such as houses – were accidental
unities. They disagreed about whether an artifact was
identical to the sum of its parts, due in some measure to
a disagreement over the ontological status of relations.
Those who thought that relations were things could
answer that the artifact is not identical to the material
out of which it is composed, for the composite has an
additional part, the relation, which the sum of the material
parts lacks. Those who thought that relations were not
things could not make this claim, though there was still
a feeling among some that it was improper to reduce the
artifact to being merely the sum of its parts. Abelard, for
example, thought that arrangements were not things, and
hence they could not be parts of things. However, this does
not imply that an artifact is identical in every respect to the
sum of its parts. An artifact and the parts that compose
it are the ‘‘same in essentia and in number,’’ but they are
‘‘distinct in property,’’ because there is something true of
the latter, which is not true of the former, and vice
versa (cf. Theologia Christiana III, } 140:247–248; King
2004:89–92).
There were also differences of opinion about the rela-
tion of a substance to its substantial parts. Some thought
that a material substance is not a sum of two actual,
ontologically independent objects (Aquinas In Metaphys.
VII, lec. 13, n. 1588; cf. Normore 2006:740–741). Yet,
others believed that the substantial form and the matter
were in some sense independent things, and hence, they
had to determine whether the composite is identical to the
sum of these two things. Those who answered in the
afﬁrmative were in effect offering a reductionistic account
of material substance; those who answered in the negative
were antireductionists. Antireductionists, such as Duns
Scotus,
asserted
that a
numerically distinct
object
comes to be when the substantial form combines with
matter (Cross 1995). Otherwise, he argued, material sub-
stances would be nothing more than aggregates or acci-
dental unities. Ockham and Buridan thought that the
material substance is nothing more than the sum of its
substantial parts, but that this reductionistic account of
material substance did not imply that substances are
aggregates or accidental unities (Normore 2006:744–747).
In more general terms, medieval philosophers felt that
there were some items that were numerically or really the
same thing, yet not entirely identical. This led to an explo-
sion of senses of the terms ‘‘same’’ (idem) and ‘‘different’’
(differens, or diversum) (the preferred terms for medieval
discussions of identity). Many of these senses of sameness
and difference corresponded to distinctions in the order of
things. Hence, Duns Scotus’ famous ‘‘formal’’ and
‘‘modal’’ distinctions were both in the broad sense, real
distinctions, even though he reserved the term ‘‘real’’ for
a case where x and y could, at least in principle, exist
separately in reality.
The formal and modal distinctions had a number of
applications in philosophy and theology. The formal dis-
tinction was employed to explain how the essence in itself
and the essence in Socrates were related to one another.
The modal distinction had applications in Trinitarian
theology. Indeed, the utility of these nonconceptual
modes of distinction in theological applications was the
primary reason that even ardent critics of the formal and
modal distinction, such as Ockham, often conceded that
the distinction was useful when trying to come up with
a rational account of the Trinity.
Metaphysics M
777
M

Dependence and Persistence
Most medieval philosophers paid lip service to the maxim
that the whole is ontologically posterior to its parts
(cf. Boethius, De div. 879C). Although most, then, duly,
restricted this claim to cover only some parts – the essen-
tial or principal parts. Very few medieval philosophers
ﬂirted with forms of mereological essentialism.
But the occasional philosopher did seem to endorse
the thesis that a whole depends upon each one of its parts.
Abelard, for example, insisted that every integral whole is
composed of a unique set of integral parts (Henry
1991:92–151). This house must be composed out of
these nails, these boards, and this cement. Given that
each whole is composed of a unique set of parts, if any
part is removed, that whole is destroyed. Another whole
similar to the original might exist after the mereological
change takes place, but strictly speaking the two wholes
would not be identical. Some later medieval nominalists,
such as Ockham and Buridan, also argued that even
minute mereological changes bring about the destruction
of most integral wholes, including nonrational animals
(Normore 2006:751–753). According to these nominalists
there are three senses of numerical sameness: there is
a proper sense, a less proper sense, and an improper
sense. Something is properly the same in number if all its
parts remain the same and it neither acquires nor loses any
parts. In this strictest of senses, no corruptible thing per-
sists through a change of a material part. Something is less
properly the same in number if its ‘‘most principal part’’
remains numerically the same. This is the sense that allows
us to claim that Socrates is numerically the same man now
as that man ten years ago, since Socrates’ intellective soul
persists through the change (Buridan, In Metaphys. VII,
q. 12, 48va). Finally, something is improperly the same in
number if there is a continuous succession of beings that
maintain a similar shape, disposition, and form. This
improper mode of numerical sameness allows us to
claim that the Nile River here today is numerically the
same river as the Nile back in Caesar’s time. The nominal-
ists claimed that plants and animals can only be numeri-
cally the same in the third, improper sense, for these
creatures do not have the sort of soul that can act as
a guarantor of less proper identity.
Time and Necessity
Many of the topics that seemed to most excite medieval
thinkers, such as the relation of Providence and Divine
Omniscience to human freedom or demonstrations of the
existence of God, involved modal notions. Often in the
preliminaries of such discussions, one can ﬁnd rich dis-
cussions of the nature of possibility and necessity.
One prevalent conception of modality was closely
aligned to a qualiﬁed commitment to the so-called Prin-
ciple of Plenitude – that is, that no real possibility remains
unactualized. Medieval thinkers qualiﬁed their assump-
tion of the Principle because it was felt that an unrestricted
version of the Principle would constrain God’s power and
will. Nonetheless, in the natural order of things, it was
often assumed that the Principle held. If A is a real possi-
bility, then there was, is, or will be some time at which A is
true. On this conception of modality, modal notions were
effectively reduced to extensional terms that were merely
means of classifying what happens in the one and only
world at different moments of time (Knuuttila 1981:169).
A is possible if and only if there is some time at which A
obtains. A is impossible if and only if A never obtains. A is
necessary if and only if A always obtains.
While prevalent, especially in the thirteenth century,
this ‘‘statistical’’ model of possibility and necessity was not
the only model countenanced by medieval thinkers.
Anselm, for example, developed a conception of possibil-
ity based upon inherent capacity; necessity properly sig-
niﬁed external constraint (Serene 1981). There are some
passages in Abelard, which suggest that he did not whole-
heartedly embrace the statistical model (cf. Log. ingr. II,
272–274). Abelard’s followers, the so-called nominales,
seem to have consciously rejected the statistical model.
Duns Scotus was deeply critical of the statistical model
of modality, and in its place, he developed a ‘‘synchronic’’
model of modality. On the statistical model, it was hard to
avoid the consequence that every present thing or state-of-
affairs was necessary. This followed from the fact that
actualizing a potentiality takes time. If a is actually F at t,
then in order to make it so that a is not F, a’s potentiality to
become not F must be actualized. But if a potentiality
takes time to actualize, it follows that given that a is F at
t, a cannot be not F at t. Scotus, on the other hand, argued
that even though a is actually F at t, a could be not F at t.
Scotus’ position was not without precedent. The
twelfth-century philosopher Gilbert of Poitiers, for exam-
ple, also thought that there were synchronic alternative
possibilities (Knuuttila 1993:75–82). Yet, Scotus presented
a distinctively sophisticated articulation and forceful
defense of the doctrine of that the present could have been
different than it in fact is. His synchronic picture of modal-
ity had a tremendous inﬂuence on the development of
theories of modality in the fourteenth century and onward.
Scotus is sometimes credited with anticipating the
notion of a possible world, either in the sense that Leibniz
had or in the late-twentieth-century sense of the notion.
While Scotus does not use the term ‘‘possible world’’ or
any equivalent, he does defend the idea that God considers
778 M
Metaphysics

all compossible combinations of things and contingently
wills that one of these maximally consistent composites of
things be made true. However, Scotus did not believe, as
Leibniz did, that objects mirror their whole universe, nor
did he have the contemporary notion of ‘‘truth in a world’’
(Normore 2003:155).
Scotus’synchronic conception of modality should per-
haps be described as the doctrine of ‘‘the contingency of
what has not passed into the past’’ (Normore 2003:135),
for like many medieval thinkers, Scotus accepted the claim
that the past is necessary. This latter proposition, however,
was not left unchallenged. In the twelfth century, Peter
Damian famously defended the claim that God’s will is
absolutely unconstrained. This meant that God could even
change the past. But given that Damian started with
a statistical understanding of modality, his position
implied that God could violate the laws of logic.
A popular solution to this dilemma was that God could
not do impossible things; to be able to do the impossible
would be a sign of impotency, not power. Peter Abelard,
notoriously, argued that God could not do anything
more or other than what He in fact does (Theologia
‘‘Scholarium’’ III, }} 27–60:511–526).
More generally, medieval thinkers tried to strike the
right balance between God’s power, God’s will, and human
freedom. God must be the necessary, ﬁrst cause of all
creations, but the manner in which God’s creative activity
is necessary cannot be such that it either compromises
God’s very own freedom or human freedom.
Conclusion
Medieval metaphysicians were preoccupied with a variety
of issues, many of which are still of interest to contempo-
rary philosophers. This survey can only hint at the rich-
ness and sophistication of this tradition.
There are some current focal points of debate that have
no direct medieval correlate. For example, medieval meta-
physicians would not have been in a position to appreciate
the debate between advocates of A- and B-theories of time.
In general, medieval thinkers were realists about relations
between causes and their effects – although, there were
some who were skeptical of the necessary connection
between
cause
and
effect
(most
notably,
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯
and the Ashʿarite mutakallimu¯n in the Arabic speaking
world, and Nicholas of Autrecourt in fourteenth-century
Europe). And no medieval philosopher was a thorough-
going materialist or opponent of abstract objects.
This article did not dwell upon medieval discussions of
time, space, and to some degree change, because these
topics lied outside the scope of metaphysics as it was tradi-
tionally conceived. Nevertheless, this should not suggest
that medieval philosophers had nothing to contribute to
the study of these topics. It should also be emphasized that
many medieval treatments of what we now consider to be
metaphysical subjects can be found in not only the physical
treatises but also in logic and doctrinal discussions (such as
treatments of the Eucharist and the Trinity).
See also: ▶Boethius ▶Bonaventure ▶Categories ▶Form
and Matter ▶Future Contingents ▶Henry of Ghent
▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John Duns Scotus
▶Mereology
▶Natural Philosophy ▶Peter
Abelard
▶Peter John Olivi ▶Platonism ▶Proofs of the Existence
of God ▶Realism ▶Substance, Accident and Mode
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Time ▶Trinity ▶Universals
Bibliography
Below is a very limited bibliography. For further resources, the reader
should consult the bibliographies both in the secondary sources, many of
which were selected because they are good entry points into a vast liter-
ature, and in cross-referenced Encyclopedia articles.
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1919) Logica ‘ingredientibus’, pt. 1: Glossae super
Porphyrium. In: Geyer B (ed) Peter Abaelards Philosophische
Schriften. I. Die Logica ‘Ingredientibus. 1: die Glossen zu Porphyrius.
Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters 21, pt 1.
Aschendorffshen Buchhandlung, Mu¨nster
Abelard Peter (1921) Logica ‘ingredientibus’, pt. 2: Glossae super
Praedicamenta Aristotelis. In: Geyer B (ed) Peter Abaelards
Philosophische Schriften. I. Die Logica ‘Ingredientibus’. 2: die
Glossen zu den Kategorien, Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie
des Mittelalters 21, pt 2. Aschendorffshen Buchhandlung, Mu¨nster
Abelard Peter (1969) Theologia Christiana. In: Buytaert EM (ed) Petri
Abaelardi Opera theologica II. Corpus Christianorum Continuatio
Mediaevalis 12. Brepols, Turnhout
Abelard Peter (1987) Theologia ‘‘Scholarium.’’ In: Buytaert EM, Mews CJ
(eds) Petri Abaelardi Opera theologica III. Corpus Christianorum
Continuatio Mediaevalis 13. Brepols, Turnhout
Anselm (1946) In: Schmidt FS (ed) Opera Omnia. Thomas Nelson,
Edinburgh
Aquinas Thomas (1971) In: Cathala M-R, Spiazzi RM (eds) In duodecim
libros metaphysicorum Aristotelis expositio, 2nd edn. Marietti,
Turin/Rome. English translation: Aquinas Thomas (1961) Commen-
tary on the metaphysics of Aristotle (trans: Rowan JP), 2 vols. Henry
Regnery, Chicago
Aquinas Thomas (1882) Opera omnia. Iussu impensaque LeonisXIII, P.
M. edita, Leonine edition. Vatican Polyglot Press, Vatican
Averroes (1562–1574) Latin translations of his commentaries in
Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois commentariis, apud Junctas, Venice
(repr. Minerva, Frankfurt a.Main, 1962)
Averroes (1938–1952) In: Bouyges M (ed) Tafsir ma ba‘d at-tabi‘iyat,
3 vols. Imprimerie Catholique, Beirut. English translation of the
commentary on Book XII (L): Genequand Charles (1986) Ibn
Rushd’s metaphysics: a translation with introduction of Averroes’s
commentary on Aristotle’s metaphysics, Book Lam. Brill, Leiden
Avicenna (1977/1980) In: Van Riet S (ed) Liber de philosophia prima sive
scientia divina (Latin translation of the metaphysics of ‘‘the
healing’’), 2 vols. Peeters/Brill, Louvain/Leiden
Metaphysics M
779
M

Avicenna (2005) In: Marmura ME (ed and trans) The metaphysics of ‘‘the
healing’’ (Arabic text with English translation). Brigham Young Uni-
versity Press, Provo
Boethius (1877/1880) In: Meiser C (ed) Commentarii in librum
Aristotelis Peri Hermeneias. Teubner, Leipzig
Boethius (1891) In Categorias Aristotelis libri quatuor, In: Migne JP et al
(eds) Opera. Patrologiae cursus completas, series latina, vol 64.
Migne, Paris
Boethius (1998) In: Magee J (ed and trans) De divisione liber: critical
edition, translation, prolegomena, and commentary. Brill, Leiden
Boethius (2000) In: Moreschini C (ed) De consolatione philosophiae/
Opscula theologica. Saur, Munich/Leipzig
Buridan John (1518) In Metaphysicen Aristotelis quaestiones. Paris. (repr.
Minerva, Frankfurt a. Main, 1964)
Damian Peter (1972) De divina omnipotentia. In: Cantin A (ed and trans)
Lettre sur la Toute-Puissance Divine. Sources Chre´tiennes 191. Les
E´ditions du Cerf, Paris
Duns Scotus John (1966) Tractatus de primo principio. In: Wolter AB (ed
and trans) A treatise on God as ﬁrst principle. Franciscan Herald
Press, Chicago
Duns Scotus John (1987) Philosophical writings (trans: Wolter A).
Hackett, Indianapolis
Duns Scotus John (1997) Quaestiones super libros metaphysicorum
Aristotelis, Books I–IX, B. Ioannis Duns Scoti Opera philosophica,
vols 3/4. Catholic University of America Press, Washington
McGinnis John, Reisman David C (eds and trans) (2007) Classical Arabic
philosophy: an anthology of sources. Hackett, Indianapolis
Spade Paul V (ed and trans) (1994) Five texts on the mediaeval problem of
universals. Hackett, Indianapolis
William of Ockham (1967–1986) In: Ga´l G et al (eds) Opera theologica.
Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
William of Ockham (1974–1988) In: Ga´l G et al (eds) Opera philosophica.
Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Adams MM (1987) William Ockham, 2 vols. University of Notre Dame
Press, Notre Dame
Cross R (1995) Duns Scotus’s anti-reductionistic account of material
substance. Vivarium 33:137–70
Dumont SD (1992) Transcendental being: Scotus and Scotists (Topos: the
transcendentals in the Middle Ages, Gracia JJE (ed)). Topoi
11:135–48
Fakhry M (1984) The subject-matter of metaphysics: Aristotle and Ibn
Sina (Avicenna). In: Marmura ME (ed) Islamic theology and philos-
ophy: studies in honor of George F. Hourani. State University of New
York Press, Albany, pp 137–147
Gracia JJE (1984) Introduction to the problem of individuation in the
early Middle Ages. Philosophia, Munich
Gracia JJE (1992) The transcendentals in the Middle Ages: an introduc-
tion (Topos: the transcendentals in the Middle Ages, Gracia JJE (ed)).
Topoi 11:113–120
Gracia JJE (ed) (1994) Individuation in Scholasticism: the later Middle
Ages and the counter-reformation, 1150–1650. State University of
New York Press, Albany
Henry
DP
(1991)
Medieval
mereology,
Bochumer
Studien
zur
Philosophie, vol 16. B.R. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
King P (2000) The problem of individuation in the Middle Ages. Theoria
66:159–184
King P (2004) Metaphysics. In: Brower J, Guilfoy K (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Abelard. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 65–125
Knuuttila S (1981) Time and modality in Scholasticism. In Knuuttila
S (ed) Reforging the great chain of being: studies of the history of
modal theories. Reidel, Dordrecht/Boston, pp 163–257
Knuuttila S (1993) Modalities in medieval philosophy. Routledge,
London
Normore C (1985) Buridan’s ontology. In: Bogen J, McGuire JF (eds) How
things are: studies in predication and the history of philosophy and
science. Reidel, Dordrecht/Boston, pp 189–203
Normore C (2003) Duns Scotus’s modal theory. In: Williams T (ed) The
Cambridge companion to Duns Scotus. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 129–160
Normore C (2006) Ockham’s metaphysics of parts. J Philos 103:737–754
Pini G (2005) Scotus’s realist conception of the categories: his legacy to the
late medieval debates. Vivarium 43:63–110
Serene E (1981) Anselm’s modal conceptions. In: Knuuttila S (ed)
Reforging the great chain of being: studies of the history of modal
theories. Reidel, Dordrecht/Boston, pp 117–162
Spade PV (1999) Ockham’s nominalist metaphysics: some main themes.
In: Spade PV (ed) The Cambridge companion to Ockham. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 100–117
Tweedale M (1976) Abailard on universals. North-Holland, Amsterdam
Wippel JF (2000) The metaphysical thought of Thomas Aquinas: from
ﬁnite being to uncreated being. Catholic University of America Press,
Washington
Metaphysics, Byzantine
JOHN A. DEMETRACOPOULOS
Department of Education
University of Patras
Patras
Greece
Abstract
There is no agreement on whether metaphysics proper did
exist in Byzantium or, if so, in what it consists. Religion
and theology covered ofﬁcially the realm previously occu-
pied by philosophy. Still, some room was available for
discussing some special questions, the principal among
them being the ontological status of ‘‘universals,’’ the
structure of the divine being and the way the sensible
beings derive their existence and qualities from the ﬁrst
principle. Many Byzantines from the eleventh to ﬁfteenth
centuries, posing themselves in the Platonic tradition,
seem to elaborate Ammonius’ doctrine of ‘‘universals,’’
whereas few subscribed to a less ‘‘realist’’ theory. An
extra-realist theory was propounded in the ﬁrst half of
the fourteenth century by Gregory Palamas, who projected
the multiplicity of the created beings to an inferior divine
level, that is, to God’s ‘‘energies’’ construed as naturally
emanating from God’s transcendental ‘‘essence.’’ Palamites
780 M
Metaphysics, Byzantine

in the latter half of the fourteenth century polished the
harshness of this distinction by qualifying that it is ‘‘con-
ceptual,’’ that is, points just to different aspects of a single
being, whereas anti-Palamites argued against any sort of
real distinction between God’s essence and acts. In the ﬁrst
half of the ﬁfteenth century, a metaphysical quarrel
between
Scholarios’
Thomism
and
Plethon’s
anti-
Christian Platonism focused on whether things derive
hierarchically from each other (Plethon) or each is created
directly from God and used by Him as a ‘‘causa proxima’’
of this or that fact. To get a better picture of metaphysics in
Byzantium, a lot of work has still to be done.
Byzantine Metaphysics: Ens Reale or Fictum?
If by ‘‘metaphysics’’ we mean the systematic ‘‘investigation
into the nature of reality’’ or the rational attempt to
‘‘uncover what is ultimately real,’’ it may be argued that
metaphysics did not exist in Byzantium. Indeed, since
almost all Byzantine thinkers were ofﬁcially Christians
and produced more theological than philosophical writ-
ings, their quest for the ultimate source of reality came full
circle from its very beginning. For, in their minds, the
ancient Greek (and Roman) ‘‘reasoned knowledge’’
(episteˆmeˆ) and ‘‘wisdom’’ (sophia), accessible through
‘‘reason’’ (logos) or, at least, not without it, was substituted
by ‘‘religious faith’’ (pistis) in Revelation (apokalypsis) and,
as a result, metaphysics and philosophy in general was
substituted by theology, that is the theoretical elaboration
of Christian religion. (This reservation is often kept for the
philosophical character of Christian thought in its
entirety.)
Further, it has been argued that Byzantine thought
failed to do even what its western counterpart is, by
some (e.g., E´. Gilson) optimistically, supposed to have
achieved, that is, to produce some philosophical ideas
(such as those by Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure, and
Duns Scotus) stimulated by the philosophically unquali-
ﬁed yet potentially fruitful content of Christian Revela-
tion. This seems to a large extent true. Indeed, in the
context of these two roughly contemporary Christian civ-
ilizations, speculative thought has emerged and developed
in different ways. In Europe, Medieval intellectual life
succeeded a state of decline bordering on collapse (ﬁfth
to seventh centuries) and went on by constantly being
stirred up by waves (ninth
to thirteenth centuries) of
acquaintance with several previously unknown individual
pieces or bulks of philosophical, scientiﬁc, and theological
literature through Latin translations (Greek Patristic
authors, parts of the corpus Aristotelicum accompanied
by some ancient Greek and Latin as well as Byzantine
commentaries
on
them,
Arabic
treatises
and
commentaries on Aristotle, works by Jewish authors, Neo-
platonic texts), which provoked Christians to deal with
them as well as with the way other Christians were dealing
with them. Byzantium, on the contrary, exhibits strong
marks of continuity with the intellectual life of Late Antiq-
uity (even though, admittedly, not with its highest
ﬁgures), and the development of its own intellectual
life enjoyed a relative stability, which was nominally and
positively called ‘‘tradition’’ and usually resulted in
repetition.
Further, most of the Greek Fathers of the Church,
whose thought was normative for most of the Byzantine
intellectuals, though well acquainted with most aspects of
Middle Platonism and some strands of Neoplatonism, had
a predilection for the ‘‘apophatic’’ aspect of these trends.
And, in contrast with them, where this aspect acquired
metaphysical sense in terms of its being the result of
a philosophical investigation where ‘‘reason’’ normally
played a central role (though tending to show a way of
superseding itself), Greek Patristic thought integrated
apophaticism into the context of the Christian belief in
the Biblical God whose personal way of act cut off any
possibility of constructing a metaphysical concept of Him.
Notwithstanding this discouraging context, however,
some texts of Byzantine philosophy do testify to the raise
of some speciﬁc metaphysical questions, whose funda-
mental character (philosophy or theology?) still remains
to be patiently detected and soberly assessed.
Special Topics of Byzantine Metaphysics
The Ontological Status of ‘‘Universals’’
Byzantines inherited from the opening paragraph of
a famous text of Late Antiquity, Porphyry’s Isagoge (late
third century), and from the ancient Greek Neoplatonic
commentaries on it (by Ammonius, Elias, and David; ﬁfth
to sixth centuries) as well as on Aristotle’s Categories (by
John Philoponus; sixth century) and from the Prolegom-
ena (by Olympiodorus; sixth century), a question that
later on proved of paramount importance for many phi-
losophers in the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth cen-
turies in Europe, that is, the question of the ontological
status of the ‘‘universals.’’ Do ‘‘universals’’ exist in
extramental reality or are they just concepts (epinoiai) in
our minds? And, if the former, are they corporeal or
incorporeal? And, if the latter, do they exist independently
from the sensible beings or just inhere in them? In the
ninth century, when Byzantine philosophy proper begins,
Photios, Patriarch of Constantinople, subscribes to
a conceptualist stand, which is very close to (if not iden-
tical with) the Stoic doctrine, by explicitly stating that the
Metaphysics, Byzantine M
781
M

universals are ‘‘bodies’’ or ‘‘corporeal’’ (Amphilochia, 77).
Photios argues against the Platonic ‘‘ideas’’ by using
Aristotle’s famous ‘‘third man’’ argument as well as the
argument that an intelligible reality, such as a Platonic
‘‘idea,’’ is by nature unable to account for the identity of
two or more sensible realities. True, Photios describes the
Platonic ‘‘ideas’’ as a threat to God’s omnipotence, con-
ceived as His freedom to create the world according to His
own will only, without any constraint by this or that
‘‘exemplary form’’ potentially existent independently
from His will. Further, his arguments are not original.
Still, it is Photios himself who distinguishes the philosoph-
ical arguments against the Platonic ‘‘ideas’’ from the theo-
logical ones; and he seems to have investigated the
question at stake in depth, insofar as he not only under-
stood Aristotle’s disagreement with Plato but also detected
from some indirect sources what the Stoics held on the
question and voted for it.
In the second half of the eleventh century, John Italos
and Eustratius of Nicaea, in the context of the revival of
the Platonic tradition by Michael Psellos, seem to have
been interested in the problem of the ontological status of
universals and elaborated some version of Ammonius’ and
Proclus’ relevant doctrines. It is not, however, quite clear
whether they did adhere to some metaphysical tenets or,
following Psellos’ policy, they just discussed the problem
in the context of their teaching activity for learning pur-
poses. Further, it is not quite clear if their application of
some ancient doctrines of the ‘‘universals’’ on some strictly
theological (Christological and Trinitarian) matters allows
for extracting from this context some lines of argument,
taking them at their face value, and drawing the conclu-
sion that Italos and Eustratios held this or that metaphys-
ical doctrine.
In late thirteenth century, a ﬁerce attack on the ‘‘uni-
versals’’ was launched by Nikephoros Choumnos, who
rejected not only Plato’s ‘‘ideas’’ but also Aristotle’s imma-
nent ‘‘forms’’ (On Matter and Forms, 242–316). True,
Choumnos’ purpose was to exalt God’s power as the
absolutely sufﬁcient cause of the world’s existence and
form; still, his description of the way God’s power acts is
very close to that offered by Plotinus in Ennead II, 2, 1–2.
Likewise, in the second half of the fourteenth century,
Nicholas Kabasilas, being a strict Aristotelian with no
Neoplatonic afﬁnities, claimed that no being whatsoever
can be regarded as a model of any other than itself; in so
stating, he cut off any metaphysical tie between God and
the created beings.
Yet, cases like that of Photios, Choumnos, and
Kabasilas were exceptions; during the second Byzantine
revival of Platonism (second half of thirteenth century to
middle ﬁfteenth century), Ammonius’ doctrine of ‘‘uni-
versals’’ as existing ‘‘before the many,’’ ‘‘in the many,’’ and
‘‘after the many’’ was typical, even though thinkers like
Nikephoros Blemmydes, George Pachymeres (fourteenth
century), Theodore Metochites (thirteenth to fourteenth
centuries), Nikephoros Gregoras, Barlaam of Calabria,
and Gregory Palamas (fourteenth century) added each
of their own epistemological nuances.
The Structure of the Divine Being
A question closely connected with that of the ‘‘universals’’
was how to explain the production of a multiplicity by the
highest level of unity, which is God. Most of the above-
mentioned thinkers placed the ‘‘universals before the
many’’ in God’s mind (an idea traced back to Middle
Platonism, if not to ancient Stoicism). This solution, how-
ever, explains the multiplicity of the created beings away
just by transposing multiplicity to the realm of God. In the
ﬁrst half of the fourteenth century (either in connection
with the history of the Byzantine treatments of the ques-
tion of the ‘‘universals’’ or not), Gregory Palamas,
a monastic ﬁgure well trained in ancient Greek philoso-
phy, formulated (probably inspired by Proclus) a peculiar
doctrine of God as consisting of two levels, that is, essence
(ousia), which is absolutely simple and totally unknown,
and His eternal ‘‘energy’’ (energeia), which is participated
by the created beings, the difference between these levels
being not only more real than the merely conceptual rank
of a logical relation but also no less than ‘‘inﬁnite’’ (Triads
III, 2, 8). Arguing that these levels are discernible not only
in God but in every being, as well as that for all the real
difference between these levels, God’s being is nevertheless
‘‘one,’’ Palamas believed that his doctrine did not clash
with God’s simplicity. He also distinguished between the
various ‘‘acts’’ themselves and identiﬁed God’s ‘‘eternal
and without beginning acts’’ with the ‘‘reasons of beings,’’
which preexist eternally in God’s mind and according to
which the world was created (Triads III, 2, 24). Palamas’
opponents, such as Gregoras, who was inspired by
Christian and pagan Neoplatonism, as well as John
Kyparissiotes, Demetrios Kydones, Prochoros Kydones,
and Manuel Kalekas, who were inspired by Thomas
Aquinas and Boethius, too, rejected any sort of distinctio
realis in God. Palamas’ adherents, such as Neilos Kabasilas,
Philotheos Kokkinos, Theophanes of Nicaea (second half
of fourteenth century), and Markos Eugenikos (ﬁrst half
of ﬁfteenth century), restated Palamas’ doctrine by
describing his distinctions as drawn by the human mind
(kat’ epinoian), that is as not implying any sort of
782 M
Metaphysics, Byzantine

separation between God’s ‘‘essence’’ and ‘‘energy.’’ And
John VI Kantakouzenos (middle fourteenth century),
inﬂuenced by Thomas Aquinas, regarded them as true
only ex parte subjecti, that is, in the sense that our mind,
since it is composite in this life, cannot help grasping the
absolutely simple God in terms of multiplicity. Yet, all
Palamites insisted, like Palamas himself (e.g., Triads III,
1, 24), that all beings, whether created or uncreated, con-
sist not only of essence but also of act.
In the ﬁrst half of the ﬁfteenth century, George
Scholarios – Gennadios II – subscribed to John Duns
Scotus’ distinctio formalis (archetypal distinction between
God’s various properties, notwithstanding their absolute
unity), which he found to be very close to that of
Palamas.
Palamas’ thought is also characterized by a peculiar
doctrine of ‘‘light,’’ which may be deemed metaphysical.
According to him, the stuff of the ‘‘rational beings,’’ that is,
of God, angels, and the human mind, is ‘‘light’’ or, at least,
beings of this sort manifest themselves and are perceived
as light (Triads I, 3, 8).
In Late Byzantium, Augustine’s doctrine (De trinitate
V-VII) of the inapplicability of Aristotle’s Categories on
God found a place in the thought of authors such as
Barlaam of Calabria and Gregory Palamas. It is not clear,
however, if this testiﬁes to an interest in metaphysical
matters proper or forms part of a principally theological
discussion.
Mediated Versus Direct Derivation of Beings
from the First Principle (Plethon Versus
Scholarios)
In the middle ﬁfteenth century, a strong quarrel between
George Gemistos (or, as he called himself, ‘‘Plethon’’), the
only pagan Byzantine thinker, who adhered to Platonism
and rejected the idea that Aristotle can be reconciled with
Plato, and George Scholarios – Gennadios II – who
defended Christianity in terms of his professed Thomism,
took place. Plethon accused Aristotle of having an ‘‘athe-
istic’’ conception of nature. He rejected Aristotle’s doc-
trine
of
‘‘entelechy’’
as
the
metaphysical
principle
immanently present in everything, causing the transition
from ‘‘potentiality’’ to ‘‘actuality’’ and bringing about the
perfect ‘‘form’’ of any particular being. In his own meta-
physics, he postulates a hierarchy of beings, each of them
responsible for the existence and the qualities of its infe-
rior. Instead, therefore, of Aristotle’s supposed self-
actualization (energeia in the sense of ‘‘entelechy,’’ that is
being energeˆs) of a being, Plethon spoke of energia as the
productive action of every being, that is as its being
‘‘efﬁcacious’’ (energon) and bringing about its proximate
being. Scholarios, for his own part, replied by setting
forth Aquinas’ doctrine of causa remota and causae
proximae, each of the latter ones being directly dependent
on the former and producing not beings, as in Plethon’s
system, but just effects in virtue of their nature as created
and ‘‘predestinated’’ by God. To Scholarios, Aristotle’s
metaphysics of ‘‘forms’’ ﬁtted better with Christianity,
because of Aristotle’s idea that each ‘‘form’’ is an autono-
mous cause (even though they all depend on the ‘‘ﬁrst
mover’’ or ‘‘ﬁrst cause,’’ God). A peculiar feature of
Plethon’s metaphysics, which contrasts both with Chris-
tianity and ancient Platonism, is that it is absolutely
‘‘cataphatic.’’
A Metaphysics of Icons?
Byzantine metaphysics has sometimes been sought for in
a ﬁeld principally theological, that is, the quarrel between
adorers and enemies of the holy icons (eight to ninth
centuries). It has been argued that the idea of the
defenders of the icons, such as John of Damascus and
Theodore Studites, that a material being such as an icon
can reﬂect the high qualities of a divine being, that is, Jesus
Christ, implies a close and positive relation between God
as the archetypal being and the sensible world as the realm
of derivative beings, in contrast with what is the case in the
Platonic bipolar ontology, where the sensible world is just
a dull reﬂection of the real one, that is, the intelligible,
whence it derives. This interpretation, apart from the fact
that it does not take into account the monistic aspect of
Neoplatonism, which, in virtue of its ramiﬁcation of
things, brings images close to realities, argues for the
similarity of the sensible with the intelligible realm not
from the qualities of the former itself but from a speciﬁc
sort of sensible beings, that is, the artiﬁcial objects, and,
more speciﬁcally, the religious ones. Thus, it fails to
show that a metaphysical doctrine really lies there,
since the similarity spoken of by the adorers of the icons
does not regard the material aspect of icons but their
content, which is Incarnation and its effects, and hence
has no natural relation or necessary links with the intelli-
gible realm.
Another topic of Byzantine metaphysics, which
remains unexplored, has to do with the question of the
priority of ‘‘one’’ over ‘‘being’’ or vice versa in the divine
realm. This question was posed, for example, by Michael
Psellos (Philosophica minora, 7), in the context of his
predilection for Platonism and by Demetrios Kydones in
the context of his subscription to Thomas Aquinas’ doc-
trine of the four ‘‘transcendentals.’’
Metaphysics, Byzantine M
783
M

Further discussion on Byzantine metaphysics would
probably endanger going far away from what research has
as yet established.
See also: ▶Eustratios of Nicaea ▶George Gemistos
Plethon ▶George Scholarios (Gennadios II) ▶Gregory
Palamas ▶John Italos ▶Michael Psellos ▶Nikephoros
Choumnos ▶Photios of Constantinople
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Chrestou Panaghiotes K et al (1962–1992) Gregoriou tou Palama
syggrammata, vols I–V. Thessaloniki, Kyromanos
Duffy JM (ed) (1992) Michaelis Pselli Philosophica minora. Vol I:
Opuscula logica, physica, allegorica, alia (‘‘Teubner’’). Stuttgart/
Leipzig
Ioannou Perikles (ed) (1956) Ioannes Italos. Quaestiones quodlibetales
(Aporiai kai lyseis). Editio princes. Studia Patristica et Byzantina, 4.
Buch-Kunstverlag, Ettal
Laourdas Vassilios, Westerink Leendert Gerrit (eds) (1986) Photii
patriarchae Constantinopolitani Epistulae et Amphilochia. Vol IV:
Amphilochiorum pars prima (‘‘Teubner’’). Leipzig
Petit Louis, Sideride`s Xenophon A, Jugie Martin (eds) (1930) Œuvres
comple`tes de Gennade Scholarios, vol III. Maison de la Bonne Presse,
Paris
Secondary Sources
Benakis LG (2002) Texts and studies on Byzantine philosophy. Athens
(39 studies; see esp. No A6; B17; B18; B24)
Fyrigos A (2007) Introduzione alla ﬁlosoﬁa patristica e bizantina: dalle
origini dell’era cristiana alle lotte iconoclastiche. Edizione terza
interamente
rielaborata
ed
aumentata.
Pontiﬁcia
Universitas
Gregoriana, Roma
Ierodiakonou K (2005) Metaphysics in the Byzantine tradition: Eustratios
of Nicaea on Universals. Quaestio 5:67–82
Ierodiakonou K (2007) John Italos on Universals. Documenti e Studi
Sulla Tradizione Filosoﬁca Medievale 18:231–247
Kapriev G (2002) Gibt es eine byzantinische Philosophie? O¨ stkirchliche
Studien 51(1):3–28
Kapriev G (2005) Philosophie in Byzanz. Wu¨rzburg
Oehler K (1969) Die Kontinuita¨t in der Philosophie der Griechen biz zum
Untergang
des byzantinisches Reiches. In: Oehler K Antike
Philosophie und byzantinisches Mittelalter. Mu¨nchen, pp 15–37
Podskalsky G (1977) Theologie und Philosophie in Byzanz. Mu¨nchen
Tatakis BN (1949) La philosophie byzantine (fascicule supple´mentaire No
II of E´. Bre´hier’s Histoire de la philosophie). Paris (21959; trans:
Moutafakis NJ, Indianapolis, 2003)
Trizio M (2007) Byzantine philosophy as a contemporary historiograph-
ical project. Rech The´ol Philos Me´die´v 74(1):247–294
Metochites, Theodore
▶Theodore Metochites
Michael of Ephesus
KATERINA IERODIAKONOU
Department of Philosophy and History of Science
University of Athens
Athens
Greece
Abstract
Michael of Ephesus most probably belonged to the twelfth
century intellectual circle around Anna Komnene and
took part in her project to produce commentaries on
Aristotle’s works. His work on Aristotle’s ethics, logic,
metaphysics, and biology was instrumental in the revival
of Aristotelian studies in Byzantium, but also in the trans-
mission and rediscovery of Aristotelian thought in the
Latin West.
Biography
We know next to nothing about Michael of Ephesus’ life.
His dates have been disputed, but at least we can now say
with conﬁdence, thanks to Browning’s and Ebbesen’s
research, that he lived not in the eleventh century, as
Praechter had argued, but in the twelfth century, and
moreover that he most probably, together with Eustratios
of Nicaea, belonged to Anna Komnene’s circle of intellec-
tuals, which had the task to produce commentaries on
Aristotle’s works. According to a twelfth century source,
he is said to have complained that his eyesight was spoiled
because he had to work through the night to comply with
Anna Komnene’s wishes. It still remains unsettled, how-
ever, whether he wrote his commentaries only while he
was working under Anna, or whether he commented on
Aristotle’s treatises also before and after this period.
Thought
Michael’s breadth as an Aristotelian commentator is
remarkable. He could justiﬁably be compared to Alexan-
der of Aphrodisias both in respect of his mode of exposi-
tion and in respect of his method of interpretation;
besides, some of his comments were initially edited
under Alexander’s name. He wrote commentaries on the
ﬁfth, ninth, and tenth book of the Nicomachean Ethics; in
fact, it has been plausibly suggested that it was he who
compiled this commentary, bringing together the com-
ments of Aspasius, Eustratios, and two anonymous com-
mentators. He also commented on Metaphysics 7–14 and
on the Sophistical Refutations (both wrongly attributed to
Alexander), on the Parva naturalia, on the Generation of
784 M
Metochites, Theodore

Animals (wrongly attributed to Philoponus), on the Parts
of Animals, on the Movement of Animals, and on the
Progression of Animals. Finally, he wrote comments on
the pseudo-Aristotelian treatise De coloribus, which are
still unedited, and on the Politics, which have only partly
survived. His commentaries seem to have been widely
read, since his very words often appear in Byzantine com-
mentaries and paraphrases from the thirteenth to the
ﬁfteenth century. Moreover, his comments on the
Nicomachean Ethics were translated in 1246/1247 by
Robert Grosseteste and became very inﬂuential in the
West through the agency of Albert the Great.
Michael’s commentaries are of historical interest,
because they contain remarks about the contemporary
political situation; for instance, there are sometimes crit-
ical remarks about the emperor as well as discussions of
the contemporary educational system. Most importantly,
though, his comments, especially those on Aristotelian
treatises for which no other commentary has survived,
are treasures of information for the history of philosophy,
even if the interpretations suggested were not his own.
Zervos has pointed out the Platonic inﬂuences on
Michael, Praechter has contrasted Michael of Ephesos,
the Aristotelian, with Michael Psellos, the Platonist,
Preus has claimed that Michael tries to stay as close as
possible to the spirit of Aristotle, Mercken has suggested
that Michael’s Aristotelianism is never a militant one. It
seems, therefore, that modern scholars have moved from
regarding Michael as a Platonist to regarding him as an
Aristotelian, even if not a militant one. But perhaps it is
rather difﬁcult to put a speciﬁc label to Michael. He is
a commentator of Aristotle and thinks that Aristotle’s
work is signiﬁcant, so when he ventures to explain it he
stays close to Aristotle’s spirit. This does not mean, how-
ever, that he agrees with Aristotle in everything; he often
follows Plato, Plotinus, and the Neoplatonists, or other
ancient thinkers, like for instance Galen.
Besides, as a Christian commentator, it seems impor-
tant to him at places not to adhere uncritically to an
Aristotelian, Platonic, or other ancient viewpoint. For
example, the way he discusses the notion of eudaimonia
indicates that his reading of Aristotle’s text is not close to
Aristotle’s spirit, but is rather an interpretation inﬂuenced
by different traditions; Neoplatonism is certainly one, but
Christianity is also present. According to Michael, there
are two kinds of eudaimonia, namely the theoretical
eudaimonia and the political or practical eudaimonia; the
person who has the ethical or practical or political virtues
achieves political eudaimonia, whereas the person who has
both the political and the theoretical virtues achieves
theoretical
eudaimonia.
In
other
words,
political
eudaimonia is an imperfect kind of eudaimonia, whereas
theoretical eudaimonia is the only perfect eudaimonia the
virtuous person can have. But to this Platonist account of
eudaimonia, and in particular to the notion of theoretical
eudaimonia, Michael adds a further feature; he claims that,
apart from being perfect, the most pleasant, continuous,
chosen for itself, and self-sufﬁcient, a feature of theoretical
eudaimonia is that there is no need for regret and repen-
tance (metameleia/metanoia) in this state. Aristotle does
not characterize the life of contemplation in these terms,
nor do the Platonists stress such a characteristic of
eudaimonia; on the other hand, both the notion of regret
and that of repentance are very much part of the Christian
outlook.
See also: ▶Eustratios of Nicaea
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Hayduck Michael (ed) (1891) Alexandri Aphrodisiensis in Aristotelis
Metaphysica commentaria [Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 1].
Reimer, Berlin
Hayduck Michael (ed) (1901) Michaelis Ephesii in librum quantum
Ethicorum Nicomacheorum commentarium [Commentaria in
Aristotelem Graeca 22.3]. Reimer, Berlin
Hayduck Michael (ed) (1903) Ioannis Philoponi (Michaelis Ephesii) in
libros De generatione animalium commentaria [Commentaria in
Aristotelem Graeca 14.3]. Reimer, Berlin
Hayduck Michael (ed) (1904) Michaelis Ephesii in libros De partibus
animalium,
De
animalium
motione,
De
animalium
incessu
commentaria [Commantaria in Aristotelem Graeca 22.2]. Reimer,
Berlin
Heylbut Gustav (ed) (1892) Eustratii et Michaelis et anonyma in Ethica
Nicomachea commentaria [Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 20].
Reimer, Berlin
Immisch Otto (ed) (1929) Aristoteles, Politica. Leipzig, pp xvii–xxi;
293–327
Wallies Maximilian (ed) (1898) Alexandri quod fertur in Aristotelis
Sophisticos elenchus commentarium [Commentaria in Aristotelem
Graeca 2.3]. Reimer, Berlin
Wendland Paul (ed) (1903) Michaelis Ephesii in Parva naturalia
commentaria [Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 22.1]. Reimer,
Berlin
Secondary Sources
Arabatzis G (2006) Paideia kai Episteme ston Michael Ephesio. In De
partibus animalium Α 1,3–2,10. Academy of Athens, Athens
Browning R (1962) An unpublished funeral oration on Anna Comnena.
In: Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological Society (n.s. 8).
pp 1–12. Reprinted in Sorabji R (ed) (1990) Aristotle transformed.
Duckworth, London, pp 393–406
Ebbesen S (1981) Commentators and commentaries on Aristotle’s
Sophistici elenchi: a study of post-Aristotelian ancient and medieval
writings on fallacies, vol I. Brill, Leiden, pp 262–285
Ierodiakonou K (2005) Byzantine commentators on the epistemic status
of ethics. In: Adamson P. Baltussen H, Stone MWF (eds) Philosophy,
Michael of Ephesus M
785
M

science and exegesis in Greek, Arabic, and Latin commentaries,
suppl. Bulletin of the Institute for Classical Studies, London,
pp 221–238
O’Meara DJ (2008) Spa¨tanike und Byzanz: Neuplatonische Rezeption –
Michael von Ephesos. In: Horn C, Neschke-Hentschke A (eds)
Politischer Aristotelismus. Die Rezeption der aristotelischen Politik
von der Antike bis zum 19. Jahrhundert. Stuttgart, pp 42–52
Praechter K (1906) Review of Michael Ephesii In libros De partibus
animalium commentaria. Go¨ttingische gelehrte Anzeigen 168:
861–907
Praechter K (1931) Michael von Ephesos und Psellos. Byzantinische
Zeitschrift 31:1–12
Preus A (1981) Aristotle and Michael of Ephesus on the movement and
progression of animals. Georg Olms, Hildesheim/New York
Zervos Chr (1920) Un philosophie neoplatonicien du XIe sie`cle. Michel
Psellos. Laroux, Paris
Michael of Massa
RUSSELL L. FRIEDMAN
Institute of Philosophy
De Wulf-Mansion Centre for Ancient, Medieval and
Renaissance Philosophy
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Leuven
Belgium
Abstract
Michael of Massa (d. 1337) was an Augustinian Hermit
active in Paris (and elsewhere) in the 1320s and 1330s. His
voluminous philosophical writings are nearly totally
unpublished, but the studies of his thought to date show
a keen mind and a characteristic approach to philosoph-
ical and theological challenges. In the domain of divine
foreknowledge and future contingents, Michael passed on
to Gregory of Rimini the criticism leveled by Francis of
Marchia at Peter Auriol. If this example is representative,
then Michael had an important role in the development of
Parisian thought in the second quarter of the fourteenth
century.
Michael of Massa is something of an enigma, and in
several ways. He is certainly an enigma when it comes to
his biography. We know that he was born in the region
near Siena in Italy. He joined the Augustinian Hermits and
was deﬁnitor at the Augustinian General Chapter held in
Venice in 1332; he died, probably in Paris, in 1337. He
never obtained the master’s degree, but recent research
supports the position that he held lectures on the Sentences
at Paris in the early 1330s (although they could have taken
place anywhere from 1326–1337), while arguing that
Michael’s extant commentary on I Sentences may date
from c. 1324 (Courtenay 1995:204; Schabel 1998:168–
171; Schabel and Courtenay 2007:567), and at least the
parts of the extant commentary on II Sentences that con-
tain explicit criticism of William Ockham’s ontological
and physical ideas date from the mid- to late 1330s, on
the cusp of a heated discussion at Paris of aspects of
Ockham’s thought (Courtenay 1995). This is basically
all we know or can surmise about Michael’s curriculum
vitae.
Michael is an enigma in a second way: although he
has received high marks for his intelligence and impor-
tance from the few scholars who have studied his work –
Albert Lang (1930:130) called Michael ‘‘an extremely
gifted and proliﬁc theologian’’ (ein a¨ußerst begabter
und fruchtreicher Theologe) and William J. Courtenay
(1995:191) has written that Michael’s ‘‘Quaestiones in Sen-
tentias remains one of the richest unedited and, for the
most part, unstudied texts of the fourteenth century’’ –
nevertheless we continue to know very little about his
ideas. This is in part because his most important philo-
sophical and theological work, his commentaries on the
ﬁrst and the second books of Peter Lombard’s Sentences
are enormous (some 900 folio pages) and nearly totally
unedited. Parts of Michael’s commentary on I Sentences
survive
in
three
manuscripts
(Bologna,
Biblioteca
universitaria 2214 = Prol.-d.38,q.2; Bologna, Collegio di
Spagna 40 = Prol.-d.1,q.9 and d.27,q.3-d. 38,q.2; Napoli,
Biblioteca nazionale VII.C.1 = Prol.-d.8); the work was
abbreviated twice in the ﬁfteenth century, these two abbre-
viations each existing in two manuscripts (Andrea de
Mediolano’s in Firenze, Biblioteca Nazionale C. 8. 794
and Oxford, Bodleian, Canonici Misc. 276; Johannes de
Marliano’s in Bergamo, G 3. 21 and Pavia, Universita` 226).
Michael’s II Sentences is found in a single manuscript
(Vatican, Vat. lat. 1087), where it is anonymous; the text
is clearly a composite made up of several large treatments
of predominately philosophical issues (e.g., creation, the
instant, duration, time, eternity, the continuum, cognitive
species) added to a truncated but more traditional com-
mentary on dd. 1–2 of the Sentences, which Damasus
Trapp dubbed the Opus ordinarium (for a list of the
questions found in Michael’s I and II Sentences, see
Trapp 1965). In a section of his II Sentences dealing with
motion, Michael makes what is probably the earliest ref-
erence at Paris to ‘‘Ockhamists’’ (Occamistae) who were
teaching that motion is merely a description of the thing
that is said to move, having no reality of its own; Michael,
approaching the question from the point of view of phys-
ics and not of semantics, rejects the Ockhamists’ position
786 M
Michael of Massa

(Courtenay 2003). In addition, in his II Sentences Michael
appears to attack William Ockham by name in the process
of rejecting several aspects of Ockham’s programme of
ontological parsimony, like the elimination of an indepen-
dent category of quantity (Ho¨dl 1975:245–252).
Michael is an enigma in yet a third way, and this stems
almost directly from the fact that we know so little about
his thought: we have as yet no clear view of where he ﬁts
into later medieval intellectual history. The modern pio-
neer in the study of the thought of the Augustinian Her-
mits, Damasus Trapp, believed (Trapp 1956:163–175) that
Michael was a representative of a dying intellectual move-
ment in the Augustinian order, that of the ‘‘ultra-
Aegedianists,’’ theologians who took the ideas of the
Order’s teaching doctor, Giles of Rome, to extraordinary
lengths. Ultra-Aegidians like Michael, according to Trapp,
were opposed by more traditional Aegidians among the
Augustinian Hermits, men like Gerard of Siena and
Thomas of Strasbourg. For Trapp, the victorious tradi-
tional Aegidians denied Michael the doctorate and effec-
tively buried his thought and even his name. More recent
research has begun to modify this view in signiﬁcant ways.
First, Schabel’s and Courtenay’s suggestion that Michael
read the Sentences in the early 1330s has the effect of
removing anything suspicious about the fact that Michael
never received the doctorate: it was quite common for
Augustinian Hermits to wait many years between ﬁnishing
their Sentences lectures at Paris and being awarded the
doctorate, and Michael simply died before that long
waiting period was up. Second, in the few recent studies
of Michael’s thought (Friedman forthcoming-a; Schabel
1998:168; Schabel 2002:251–252) no trace is found of
ultra-Aegidianism (however that might be deﬁned), and
indeed faithfulness to Giles’ doctrine does not seem to be
a major issue. Michael rejects, for example, Giles’ famous
position concerning the real distinction between essence
and existence, opting instead for a purely psychological
distinction based on conceiving the same thing in two
different ways, statically (per modum stantis = as essence)
or ‘‘ﬂowingly’’ (per modum ﬂuentis = as existence) (Ho¨dl
1975:240–245).
A new picture of Michael’s place in later medieval
thought is emerging from the area upon which he has
been studied most intensely: future contingents and divine
foreknowledge. Schabel (1998, 2000:esp. 214–220) has
shown that Michael expands upon and clariﬁes not only
the criticism that the Franciscan Francis of Marchia had
made of the ideas of Peter Auriol but also Francis’ own
view, even though Michael does not mention that Francis
is the source of much of his position. Michael follows
Francis in his rejection of Auriol’s views that propositions
about the future are neither true nor false and that, strictly
speaking, God does not know the future as future. Auriol
postulated both of these views in order to preserve human
free will from any sort of determinism. As part of his
response to Auriol’s views, Michael accepts Francis’ posi-
tion that the natural world is, strictly speaking, fully deter-
mined: the only sources of contingency in the world are
God and human beings. Moreover, Michael accepts from
Francis the distinction between two types of ‘‘indetermi-
nation’’: an indetermination about the possible (de
possibili) and an indetermination about what inheres in
reality (de inesse). The former is the innate indetermina-
tion of the human will by which the will is fully free and
contingent; the latter is a lack of determination with
respect to bringing some particular thing or action
about. For both Francis and Michael, a determination
toward bringing some particular action about (i.e.,
a determinatio de inesse) is fully compatible with the abso-
lute freedom of the will (i.e., the will’s indeterminatio de
possibili), and in fact that type of determination is required
in order for the will to bring about any particular action at
all. Thus, in order for our will to bring about a particular
action, it must be both fully contingent and qualiﬁedly
determined toward that action. In adopting this position,
Michael of Massa was Francis of Marchia’s ‘‘truest follower
on
the
subject
of
divine
foreknowledge’’
(Schabel
2000:214). With that said, Michael’s treatment is both
longer and at times more clear than Francis’. Moreover,
parts of Michael’s treatment of these issues are signiﬁ-
cantly different from Francis’ treatment, and based on
these differences a compelling argument can be made
that Michael’s treatment inﬂuenced Gregory of Rimini’s
rejection of Auriol as well as Gregory’s own positive the-
ory. The picture of Michael of Massa’s historical signiﬁ-
cance that emerges from this example is that he served as
a link between Francis of Marchia’s innovative response to
Peter Auriol’s ideas, on the one hand, and Gregory of
Rimini’s, on the other, and in so doing Michael ‘‘may be
a key ﬁgure in the Augustinian movement away from
Dominican-oriented theology and toward the Francis-
cans’’ (Schabel 2000:220). It should be noted that also in
the area of trinitarian theology Michael clearly adopted
some of Francis of Marchia’s ideas, although deﬁnitely not
slavishly so. Here, as elsewhere, Michael exhibits his own
theological and philosophical ‘‘style’’ (Friedman forth-
coming-b: Chap. 12, Sect. 3).
Another area of Michael’s philosophical thought that
has received some attention is his views on human intel-
lectual cognition. Michael accepts the important later
medieval distinction between intuitive and abstractive
cognition, adding to that basic division a further type
Michael of Massa M
787
M

that he calls ‘‘deductive’’ cognition (Tachau 1988:321–322,
332–333; Friedman forthcoming-c). Further, Michael
holds that the intellect’s ﬁrst object in terms of generation,
i.e., what ﬁrst moves the intellect to its act, is the
extramental singular. In arguing for this view, Michael
employs a basic parallelism between the senses and the
intellect, claiming that what ﬁrst moves the senses must
also ﬁrst move the intellect, and speciﬁcally arguing that
singular accidents – e.g., this white patch – are what ﬁrst
move our intellect. The intellectual knowledge we get on
this basis is as imperfect as it can be, it is completely
unprocessed, and it requires the power of the agent intel-
lect through a process of ‘‘abstraction’’ to reﬁne this
initial intellectual knowledge, categorizing it and making
it useful in further intellectual activity (Friedman forth-
coming-a). This view of Michael’s appears to be a part of
a conceptualistic tendency to emphasize the singular in
both ontology and epistemology, since the singular as
singular is the foundation of all our knowledge, although,
as mentioned, Michael rejects the parsimonious ontology
often associated with ‘‘nominalism’’ that denies motion
some reality of its own and eliminates quantity as
a separate category.
As the above indicates, Michael critically discussed the
views of a good number of later medieval university
thinkers, principal among them being Gerard of Siena,
Peter Auriol, John Duns Scotus, Henry of Ghent, and
Thomas Aquinas. Michael’s use of Francis of Marchia’s
ideas without acknowledging his source shows that further
research may uncover other inﬂuences on Michael. That
Michael’s thought had an impact on his contemporaries is
shown by the example of Gregory of Rimini (who also
cited Michael in other contexts) as well as by that of the
Augustinian Hermit Alphonsus Vargas of Toledo who in
his own Sentences commentary mentioned Michael no
fewer than 15 times (Trapp 1956:221). Further, the exis-
tence of two separate ﬁfteenth-century abbreviations of
Michael’s I Sentences shows that he was being read into the
next century. But, again as the example of Gregory of
Rimini shows, we will only have a full reckoning of
Michael of Massa’s inﬂuence when we have made available
in print and have studied much more of his work, in the
process determining his role in the intellectual develop-
ment of his religious order and of the fourteenth century
as a whole. It seems likely that his role will have been an
important one.
See also: ▶Francis of Marchia ▶Giles of Rome, Political
Thought ▶Gregory of Rimini ▶Peter Auriol ▶William
of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Nearly all of Michael’s works are unedited (see the main text on the
manuscripts containing the works). For published editions of parts
of Michael’s Sentences commentaries, see Courtenay 2003, Friedman
forthcoming-a, Friedman forthcoming-c, and Schabel 1998. On
Michael’s Vita Christi, see Baier 1994; for references to further exe-
getical works and sermons, see Trapp 1956, 163 n. 11, and Trapp
1965, 58 and 131–133.
Secondary Sources
Baier W (1994) Michael von Massa OESA ({1337) – Autor einer Vita
Christi. Kritik der Diskussion u¨ber ihre Zuordnung zur Vita Christi
des Karta¨users Ludolf von Sachsen ({1378). In: Zumkeller A,
Kru¨mmel A (eds) Traditio Augustiniana. Studien u¨ber Augustinus
und seine Rezeption. Wu¨rzburg, pp 495–524
Courtenay WJ (1995) The Quaestiones in Sententias of Michael de Massa,
OESA: a redating. Augustiniana 45:191–207
Courtenay WJ (2003) The categories, Michael de Massa, and natural
philosophy at Paris, 1335–1340. In: Biard J, Rosier-Catach I (eds)
La tradition me´die´vale des cate´gories (XIIe-XVe sie`cles). Actes du
XIIIe Symposium europe´en de logique et de se´mantique me´die´vales
(Avignon, 6–10 juin 2000). Peeters, Louvain-la-Neuven/Louvain/
Paris, pp 243–259 (with edition of question from Michael’s II Sent.
‘‘Utrum motus sit realiter ipsummet mobile quod movetur’’)
Friedman RL (forthcoming-a) How ‘Augustinian’ were the Augustinian
Hermits regarding intellectual cognition? Gerard of Siena, Michael of
Massa, and the object of the human intellect. In: Courtenay WJ,
Emery K Jr (eds) Philosophy and theology in the studia of the
religious orders and at the papal court. (Brepols,Turnhout, forth-
coming). (with edition of Michael’s response to the question ‘‘Utrum
obiectum primum occurrens intellectui nostro sit Deus’’ (= I Sent.,
d. 3, q. 1))
Friedman RL (forthcoming-b) Intellectual traditions in the medieval
university: the use of philosophical psychology in Trinitarian theol-
ogy among the Franciscans and Dominicans, 1250–1350. Brill,
Leiden
Friedman RL (forthcoming-c) Michael of Massa on intuitive and abstrac-
tive cognition (with edition of Michael’s Prologue, q. 1 = ‘‘Utrum
scientia proprie dicta et a priori possit sub lumine ﬁdei de divina
natura communicari alicui viatori’’)
Ho¨dl L (1975) Studien zum nominalistischen Scho¨pfungsbegriff in der
spa¨tscholastischen Theologie des Michael de Massa O.E.S.A.
({ 1337). In: Mayer CP, Eckermann W (eds) Scientia Augustiniana.
Studien
u¨ber
Augustinus,
den
Augustinismus
und
den
Augustinerorden. Festschrift Adolar Zumkeller OSA zum 60.
Geburtstag. Augustinus-Verlag, Wu¨rzburg, pp 234–256
Lang A (1930) Die Wege der Glaubensbegru¨ndung bei den Scholastikern
des 14. Jahrhunderts. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster i. W
Schabel C (1998) Questions on future contingents by Michael of Massa,
OESA. Augustiniana 48:165–229 (with edition of I Sent., d. 35, d. 36,
d. 38)
Schabel C (2000) Theology at Paris, 1316–1345. Peter Auriol and the
problem of divine foreknowledge and future contingents. Ashgate,
Aldershot
Schabel C (2002) Parisian commentaries from Peter Auriol to Gregory of
Rimini and the problem of predestination. In: Evans GR (ed) Medi-
aeval commentaries on the Sentences of Peter Lombard. Brill, Leiden,
pp 221–265
788 M
Michael of Massa

Schabel C, Courtenay WJ (2007) Augustinian Quodlibeta after Giles of
Rome. In: Schabel C (ed) Theological Quodlibeta in the middle ages.
The fourteenth century, vol 2. Brill, Leiden, pp 545–568
Tachau KH (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham: optics,
epistemology and the foundation of semantics, 1250–1345. Brill,
Leiden
Trapp D (1956) Augustinian theology of the 14th century. Notes on
editions,
Marginalia,
Opinions
and
Book-Lore.
Augustiniana
6:146–274
Trapp D (1965) Notes on some manuscripts of the Augustinian Michael
de Massa ({1337). Augustinianum 5:58–133 (with question list from
Michael’s I-II Sent.)
Michael Psellos
KATERINA IERODIAKONOU
Department of Philosophy and History of Science
University of Athens
Athens
Greece
Abstract
Michael Psellos was one of the most erudite and proliﬁc
thinkers of the Byzantine Middle Ages. His works include
historical writings, philosophical treatises and commen-
taries, theological writings, poems, speeches, legal, geo-
graphical, military, and medical works as well as works on
music. Psellos taught all branches of philosophy, by closely
reading and commenting on the works of ancient philos-
ophers, and especially on Aristotle’s logical treatises. At the
same time he had a strong preference for Plato and the
Neoplatonists, and especially for Proclus, whom he con-
sidered as an authority among ancient authors. Psellos
may not have been an innovator, but he systematically
tried to reconcile the Christian dogma with the ancient
philosophical traditions. In his attempts to advance
philosophical learning he was often attacked concerning
his theological orthodoxy, so that he often had to be
careful to distance himself from heretical doctrines.
Biography
Psellos’ baptismal name was Constantine, but he is better
known by his monastic name Michael. He was born in
Constantinople in 1018 and died sometime after 1081. He
studied under John Mauropous and among his fellow
students were the future patriarchs John Xiphilinos and
Constantine III Leichoudes as well as the later emperor
Constantine X Doukas. Psellos worked in civil adminis-
tration under Constantine IX Monomachos (1042–1055),
and was given the honorary title ‘‘Consul of the Philoso-
phers’’ as the head of the school of philosophy in Con-
stantinople. In 1054 he had to resign for political reasons
and took the monastic habit at the Olympus monastery at
Bithynia. He soon returned to Constantinople, but he
never again played an important role in politics, though
he remained most of his life as a court intellectual. There is
no reliable information about his later years.
Psellos was a polymath and extremely proliﬁc. His
works include: historical writings, of which the most
important is the Chronographia, a history of the years
976–1078, which places more emphasis on portraits of
characters than on political events; he also wrote another
shorter historical text in the form of a world chronicle,
Historia syntomos; philosophical treatises and commen-
taries, theological writings, poems, legal, geographical,
military, and medical works as well as works on music;
his speeches are famous as examples of rhetorical style
(his best known panegyrics are on John Xiphilinos and
on his own mother); ﬁnally, a collection of about ﬁve
hundred letters is also extant.
Thought
Psellos taught all branches of philosophy (i.e., logic, nat-
ural philosophy, and metaphysics). He was undoubtedly
among the most prominent scholars of the eleventh and
twelfth centuries and greatly contributed to the revival of
philosophical studies in Byzantium. In particular, he pro-
vided philosophical instructions by closely reading and
commenting on the works of ancient philosophers, and
especially on Aristotle’s logical treatises, which he thought
should be given a propaedeutic role as a necessary prepa-
ration for dealing with more philosophical issues, but also
as an intellectual exercise which enables one to dispose
off heretical views. Thus, Psellos commented on and
paraphrased treatises from the Aristotelian Organon
(Categories, De interpretatione, Prior Analytics). The com-
mentary on Aristotle’s Physics attributed to him in some
manuscripts has recently been argued to be the work of
George Pachymeres. Moreover, Psellos wrote a large num-
ber of short treatises discussing particular philosophical
issues raised, in part at least, by his pupils, such as, for
instance, the distinction between homonyms and syno-
nyms, the characteristic of substance as self-existent, the
Platonic Forms, the unity of the soul and the body, the
problem of evil, and dreams. He also compiled a short
encyclopedia with the title De omnifaria doctrina, a set of
brief outlines of various notions in philosophy, science,
and theology. Many of the works attributed to him are
spurious, for example the so-called De daemonibus.
Michael Psellos M
789
M

Although the amount of attention he paid on
Aristotle’s treatises was signiﬁcant, there is no doubt that
Psellos had a strong preference for Plato and the Neopla-
tonists. His works show that he carefully read Plotinus,
Porphyry, Iamblichus, and especially Proclus, whom he
considered as an authority among ancient authors. He also
had a close familiarity with most of the Greek commen-
tators, whom he treated as helpful guides to the works of
Plato and Aristotle, and drew extensively from them,
for instance Alexander of Aphrodisias, Ammonius,
Philoponus, and Olympiodorus. In general, Psellos was
well acquainted with the whole corpus of Greek philoso-
phy, which at the time was somewhat larger than it is now,
since he read and used some works which have since
disappeared; for example, Proclus’ Commentary on
Plotinus, his Commentary on the Chaldaean Oracles,
Iamblichus’ On Pythagoreanism V–VII, and most proba-
bly other works which have not yet been identiﬁed.
In his philosophical views Psellos may not have been
an innovator, but he systematically tried to reconcile the
Christian dogma with the ancient philosophical tradi-
tions. This at times required some independent thinking
on his part, in the form of a slightly different argument
from those found in the ancient texts or some interesting
additions to already established views. But there is cer-
tainly little evidence to support the view that he was
a revolutionary or a cultural extremist in renouncing
Christianity in favor of Hellenism. It is true, though,
that in his attempts to advance philosophical learning
he was often attacked concerning his theological ortho-
doxy, so that he often had to be careful to distance
himself from heretical doctrines, as for example in his
writings on the Chaldaean Oracles. Thus, Psellos was
instrumental in the revival of the serious study of ancient
philosophy, but at the same time he was able to clear
himself of the charge of heresy, in contrast to his student
John Italos.
Psellos strongly believed that the philosopher should
be a man of comprehensive learning and he often stressed
on the importance of polymatheia, that is to say of
a boundless curiosity and wide knowledge, which he
invoked in order to defend the study of the pagan texts
of antiquity. There are many passages in Psellos’ writings
in which he underlines the importance of rational
philosophical thinking, logical syllogisms, and especially
demonstrations, as something which essentially character-
izes human beings and helps them in their attempt to
understand reality, and in particular nature. Moreover,
Psellos explicitly argued that logical reasoning does not
bring one into conﬂict with Christian doctrine; on the
contrary, the use of logical syllogisms is said to be
an indispensable instrument in our pursuit of truth.
At the same time, however, Psellos juxtaposed the kind
of knowledge we derive from logical reasoning to another
kind, namely wisdom or dialectic, which can be acquired
neither through demonstration nor through inductive
reasoning. For there are things, according to Psellos,
which cannot be understood by rational thought, ineffable
things which are beyond demonstration.
Indeed, Psellos, invoking Plato’s authority, claimed
that wondering about the ineffable and the supernatural
constitutes the ultimate task of philosophy. He, therefore,
adhered to the view that the human mind is capable of
grasping the truth both through reason and through illu-
mination; that is to say, there are things which can be
known by reason, while others, namely the ultimate prin-
ciples of reality, can be known only by illumination. Dif-
ﬁcult though it may be to draw the line between the things
known by reason and those known by illumination, at
least Psellos in many of his writings gives us some idea of
how he understands the notion of illumination; he
describes it as the state which presupposes the end of all
rational thinking and the prevalence of silence after a great
deal of turmoil. In this, Psellos clearly followed the Neo-
platonists, and in particular Proclus, with the difference
that in Proclus the soul’s illumination comes from the
intellect, whereas in Psellos the Neoplatonic intellect is
replaced by the Christian God.
See also: ▶John Italos ▶Logic, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Gautier Paul (1980) Le De daemonibus du Pseudo-Psellos. REB 38:105–194
Moore Paul (2005) Iter Psellianum. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval
Studies, Toronto
Psellos
Michael
(1876)
Miscellanea,
ed.
Sathas
KN.
Mesaionike
Bibliotheke, vol 5. Typois tou Chronou, Venice/Paris
Psellos Michael (1926–1928) Chronographie ou histoire d’un sie`cle de
Byzance (976–1077), 2 vols, ed. Renauld E´. Belles Lettres, Paris (repr.
Paris, 1967); Psellos Michael (1984) Imperatori di Bisanzio
(Chronograﬁa), 2 vols, ed. Impellizzeli S. A Mondadori, Vicenza
Psellos Michael (1936–1941) Scripta minora, 2 vols, ed. Kurtz E, Drexl F.
Societa` editrice ‘‘Vita e pensiero’’, Milan
Psellos Michael (1948) De omnifaria doctrina, ed. Westerink LG.
JL Beijers, Utrecht
Psellos Michael (1983) Orazione in memoria di Constantino Lichudi, ed.
Criscuolo U. Edizioni Dott A. Sfameni, Messina
Psellos Michael (1984) Oratoria minora, ed. Littlewood AR. Teubner,
Leipzig
Psellos Michael (1989) Encomio per la madre, ed. Criscuolo U.
Bibliopolis, Naples
Psellos Michael (1989) Philosophica minora, 2. Opuscula psychologica,
theologica, daemonologica, ed. O’Meara DJ. Teubner, Leipzig
Psellos Michael (1989) Theologica I, ed. Gautier P. Teubner, Leipzig
790 M
Michael Psellos

Psellos Michael (1990) Epistola a Giovanni Xiﬁlino, ed. Criscuolo U.
Bibliopolis, Naples
Psellos Michael (1990) Epistola a Michele Kerulario, ed. Criscuolo U.
Bibliopolis, Naples
Psellos Michael (1990) Historia syntomos, ed. Aerts WJ. W. de Gruyter,
Berlin/New York
Psellos Michael (1992) Philosophica minora, 1. Opuscula logica, physica,
allegorica, alia, ed. Duffy J. Teubner, Stuttgart
Psellos Michael (1992) Poemata, ed. Westerink LG. Teubner, Stuttgart/
Leipzig
Psellos Michael (1994) Orationes hagiographicae, ed. Fisher EA. Teubner,
Stuttgart/Leipzig
Psellos Michael (1994) Orationes panegyricae, ed. G. T. Dennis. Teubner,
Stuttgart/Leipzig
Psellos Michael (2002) Theologica II, ed. Westerink LG, Duffy JM.
Teubner, Munich/Leipzig
Psellos Michael (2008) Kommentar zur Physik des Aristoteles, ed.
Benakis LG. Corpus Philosophorum Medii Aevi. Commentaria in
Aristotelem Byzantina. The Academy of Athens, Athens
Tardieu Michel (1980) Un texte ne´glige´ de Psellus sur les Oracles
Chaldaı¨ques. Byzantinische Zeitschrift 73:12–13
Secondary Sources
Athanassiadi P (2002) Byzantine commentators on the Chaldaean Ora-
cles: Psellos and Plethon. In: Ierodiakonou K (ed) Byzantine philos-
ophy and its ancient sources. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp 237–252
Barber Ch, Jenkins D (eds) (2006) Reading Michael Psellos. Brill, Leiden
Browning R (1975) Enlightment and repression in Byzantium in the
eleventh and twelfth centuries. Past Present 69:3–23
des Places E (1988) Quelques progre`s recents des e´tudes sur Michel Psellus
en relation surtout avec les Oracles Chaldaı¨ques. Orpheus, n.s.
9:344–348
Duffy J (2002) Hellenic philosophy in Byzantium and the lonely mission
of Michael Psellos. In: Ierodiakonou K (ed) Byzantine philosophy
and its ancient sources. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 139–156
Golitsis P (2007) Un commentaire perpe´tuel de Georges Pachyme`re a` la
Physique
d’Aristote,
faussement
attribue´
a`
Michel
Psellos.
Byzantinische Zeitschrift 100:637–676
Ierodiakonou
K
(2002)
Psellos’
paraphrasis
on
Aristotle’s
De
interpretatione. In: Ierodiakonou K (ed) Byzantine philosophy and
its ancient sources. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 157–181
Ierodiakonou K (2007) Rationality and revelation in eleventh and twelfth
century Byzantium. In: Homann E, Kru¨ger A (eds) De usu rationis.
Vernunft and Offenbarung im Mittelalter. Ko¨nigshausen & Neu-
mann, Wu¨rzburg, pp 19–31
Joannou P (1956) Christliche metaphysik in Byzanz. I. Die Illumina-
tionslehre des Michael Psellos und Joannes Italos. Studia Patristica
et Byzantina 3. Buch-Kunstverlag Ettal, Ettal
Kaldellis A (1999) The argument of Psellos’ chronographia. Brill, Leiden
Kaldellis A (2007) Hellenism in Byzantium: the transformations of Greek
identity and the reception of the classical tradition. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
O’Meara D (1998) Aspects du travail philosophique de Michel Psellus. In:
Dissertatiunculae criticae. Festschrift fu¨r Gu¨nter Christian Hansen.
Ko¨nigshausen & Neumann, Wu¨rzburg, pp 431–439
Papaioannou S (2000) Michael Psellos’s rhetorical gender. Byzantine Mod
Greek 24:133–146
Podskalsky G (1977) Theologie und Philosophie in Byzanz. Beck, Munich
Wolska-Conus W (1979) Les e´coles de Psellos et de Xiphilin sous
Constantin IX Monomaque. Travaux et Me´moires 7:223–243
Michael Scot
▶Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Translations of
▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of
Mirrors for Princes
ROBERTO LAMBERTINI
Dipartimento di Scienze Storiche, Documentarie,
Artistiche e del Territorio
Universita` di Macerata
Macerata
Italy
Abstract
‘‘Mirrors for Princes’’ designates a literary genre in
which political ideas are expressed in the form of advice
to a ruler. This genre has its roots in Antiquity and espe-
cially in Late Antiquity. The ﬁrst medieval ﬂourishing of
works of this kind dates back to the so-called Carolingian
Renaissance, when the image of the ideal ruler is strongly
inﬂuenced by the monastic background of most authors
writing on this topic. After a long decline, John of
Salisbury gave a renewed impulse to the genre, exerting
a long-lasting inﬂuence with his Policraticus. In the cul-
tural context of the twelfth century, Mirrors for Princes
opened not only to the patristic heritage, but also to
classical authors. Many mirrors date back to the second
half of the twelfth and to the ﬁrst half of the thirteenth
century, when they mostly took the form of compilations.
In the following period, great thinkers such as Aquinas
and Giles of Rome tried to insert the newly rediscovered
Aristotelian ethical and political language into the mirrors
tradition. Giles’ De regimine principum was the most
successful and inﬂuential result of such effort. The rise of
De potestate papae treatises in the ﬁrst half of the four-
teenth century reduced the role of Mirrors for Princes
as carriers of political ideas but could not completely
supersede them. On the contrary, when the heyday of
De potestate papae was over, mirrors regained at least in
part their function. The present article does not cover the
Quattrocento: it is well known, however, that the tradition
of the Mirrors continued in the Renaissance and in the
following centuries.
The use of the expression ‘‘Mirrors for Princes’’ to desig-
nate a literary genre goes back to German scholarship that
Mirrors for Princes M
791
M

refers with the term Fu¨rstenspiegel to writings dealing with
the virtues of the ideal ruler, with his duties and his
behavior in general. The counterparts of Fu¨rstenspiegel in
other European languages, such as Miroir de princes,
Specchio dei principi (and the Latin specula principum,
although it is attested much later than the ﬁrst examples
of the genre) have also established themselves in present
day scholarship. These terms can be used in a rather loose
sense, referring to a very wide range of sources, even
narrative or iconographic ones, or parts thereof, carrying
notions concerning rulership, or in a stricter sense, limited
to independent works explicitly aiming at instructing
kings and lesser rulers about the virtues they should cul-
tivate, their lifestyle, their duties, the philosophical and
theological meaning of their ofﬁce. Mirrors for Princes can
therefore be used as a source for many purposes, from the
reception of classical literary texts to the history of men-
tality. They usually follow standard conventions so that
their teachings about royal justice, princely virtues, and
the like tend to give the impression of a continuous rep-
etition of commonplaces. This notwithstanding the genre
undergoes interesting changes during the Middle Ages.
This article will focus on the aspects that can be brought
to bear on the history of ethics and political philosophy.
Roots in Late Antiquity and in the Earliest
Medieval Centuries
It is well beyond doubt that the genre is indebted to
classical works and to patristic literature as well, although
there is still lively discussion among specialists about the
extent and relevance of such inﬂuence. Seneca and Cicero
played a very important role, but also Ambrose (De divinis
ofﬁciis) and Augustine, whose chap. 24 in Book V of his
City of God have been regarded as examples of Christian
Mirror for Princes, obviously in a very loose sense of the
expression. Martin of Braga’s Formula vitae honestae,
(570–579), mediated a virtue ethics strongly inﬂuenced
by Cicero and Seneca, and in the Middle Ages was often
referred to as a work of the latter. The discussion about De
duodecim abusivis (or abusionibus) saeculi, falsely attrib-
uted to Cyprian, but now dated to the seventh century, is
still open among scholars. It seems ascertained beyond
doubt, however, that this work of Irish origin inﬂuenced,
especially with its treatment of the sixth abusio (dominus
sine virtute) and of the ninth (rex iniquus), later Carolin-
gian Mirrors for Princes.
Carolingian Mirrors for Princes
Although some writings by Alcuin during the reign of
Charles the Great already bear some essential features of
the Mirrors for Princes, the ﬁrst ﬂourishing of the genre is
usually dated to the ninth century, in the context of Car-
olingian courts. Scholars have rightly pointed out that
some authors of this century draw on previous works,
such as the already mentioned De duodecim abusivis seculi.
Nevertheless, Smaragd of Saint Mihiel’s Via regia (813),
Jonas of Orle´ans’ De institutione regia (831), Sedulius
Scottus’ De rectoribus christianis (855–859), together
with some works by Hincmar of Reims’ (806–882) build
up the ﬁrst noteworthy body of texts explicitly devoted to
the moral instruction of the ruler. A common feature of
such treatises is the focus on the personal Christian virtues
of the sovereign. They represent therefore an important
source for the history of virtue ethics in the early Middle
Ages, since authors such as Smaragd are persuaded that
the ruler should possess the same virtues as other Chris-
tians, obviously at the highest level. A striking feature of
Smaragd’s mirror, is that it overlaps in part the Diadema
monachorum (a sort of manual for monks) of the same
author. From this point of view, Carolingian Mirrors for
Princes can be regarded as a source for the ethical doc-
trines of the period, which are in turn heavily inﬂuenced
by the monastic background of their authors.
From the point of view of the history of political
thought, such ‘‘mirrors’’ share the implicit assumption
that the well-being of the kingdom depends almost exclu-
sively on the moral righteousness of the ruler. As far as the
relationship between the secular rulers and religious
authority is concerned, the authors of such ‘‘mirrors’’
consider the king or the emperor as the highest authority
of a community that is temporal and spiritual at the same
time. Sacerdotium and regnum are conceived of as integral
parts
of
a whole.
Sedulius Scottus (De
rectoribus
christianis) deﬁnes the temporal ruler as God’s vicar in
his church. Notwithstanding this, as Ju¨rgen Miethke has
pointed out, authors such as Jonas of Orle´ans, writing in
the troubled period of Louis the Pious’ empire, try to draw
at least some boundaries dividing the sphere belonging to
the spiritual power (mainly understood as the power of
bishops) from temporal jurisdiction, without excluding
however, the possibility of interference. In case of neces-
sity, for example, the temporal ruler is allowed to have
recourse to church goods, but on the other hand, he
should submit to the judgment of the bishop when he
fails to fulﬁll his duties.
Twelfth Century
Between 1148 and 1153, Bernard of Clairvaux wrote
a treatise addressed to Pope Eugenius III, the De
consideratione, enlightening him not only about the duties
and perils of the most important ofﬁce in Christianity, but
792 M
Mirrors for Princes

also about his view of the role of the pope in the church.
Many scholars emphasize the similarities of this work to
the Mirrors for Princes, describing it as a speculum
paparum (mirror for popes). Bernard in fact devotes
large sections of his treatise to the virtues of a good pope
(the four cardinal virtues that are according to him nec-
essarily connected), to the vices he should avoid in himself
and correct in the faithful, and to the advisers he should
choose, on the governance of the papal household. In
addressing his advice to the pope, Bernard also expresses
his ecclesiological views: on one hand, he stresses the
fullness of power of the supreme pontiff, on the other, he
claims that the exercise of this power should result in
a service (ministerium) to the church and not in
a dominion over it. In particular, the pope is morally
bound to respect the rights of the local churches.
Written by a cleric who had attended the French
schools at the eve of the age of universities and had
personal experience of life at lay and ecclesiastical courts
alike, John of Salisbury’s Policraticus, even though it is not
only a speculum principis in the strict sense, gave a renewed
impulse to the genre, as Wilhelm Berges noted in his
ground breaking survey, which accordingly begins its
detailed analysis with this work. Deeply indebted to the
interest in the classical heritage that is peculiar to the so-
called twelfth century Renaissance, John draws not only on
biblical texts, such as Deut. 17 (which was to become an
almost topical reference for this literary genre) but also on
authors from Antiquity. The Institutio Traiani that John
attributes to Plutarch and inserts in his Policraticus is
a fake, but it adds a distinct classical ﬂavor to John’s
political organicism, which conceived of the realm as
a body. The hierarchical functionalism that is implicit in
the detailed parallelism between limbs of the body and the
parts of the regnum was also to exert a long lasting inﬂu-
ence on later specula. Historians of political thought have
also taken great interest in John’s attitude toward unjust
rulers, because he does not limit himself to contrasting the
ideal ruler with the tyrant but supports the right to resist
the tyrant, and even to kill him. According to some inter-
preters this right is, in John’s mind, also a duty. John of
Salisbury’s impact is particularly noticeable in Helinand of
Froidmont’s work, completed before 1210. This former
troubadour converted to the Cistercian Order devoted
a chapter of his huge Cronica in 49 books to the issue De
bono regimine principis, drawing on the Institutio Traiani
and its organicism, but also on John’s conviction that the
just king should rule according to the law. In turn,
Helinand contributed to the diffusion of John of
Salisbury’s views, thanks to the fact that his De bono
regimine principis was excerpted in the following century
by Vincent of Beauvais and inserted in his well-known and
widely read Speculum historiale.
Writing on the ridge between the twelfth and thir-
teenth centuries, Gerald of Wales combined in his De
principis instructione a detailed virtue ethics enriched
with exempla from classical writers (ﬁrst distinctio) with
reports about the life of contemporary rulers (second and
third distinctiones) that is an important source for histor-
ical events as well.
Thirteenth Century: From Compilation to the
Reception of Aristotle
To Vincent of Beauvais and the team working under his
guidance we owe a large number of works based on
a compilational method, that is, on the collection of
authoritative short texts (called in medieval Latin
auctoritates) interspersed with remarks by the authors
who also shape the overall structure of the work. Wilhelm
Berges pointed to the parts of Vincent’s works that could
be seen as Mirrors of Princes. Berges’ hypothetical recon-
struction of the original, although not completed, plan of
Vincent’s work devoted to the prince was not conﬁrmed
by subsequent research. The rest of his remarks remain
valid even after the recent critical edition of De morali
principis institutione. In this treatise, together with the
usual description of the just ruler contrasted with the
tyrant and the stock-in-trade advice concerning life at
court, one ﬁnds an interesting account of the origins of
power among human beings. According to a long-lasting
theological tradition, the establishment of one human
being’s power over others is ﬁrst and foremost an act of
violence, triggered by the perversity of mankind corrupted
by sin. Only afterward can power, so to speak, redeem
itself by fulﬁlling the function of compelling and
punishing evildoers. The method adopted by Guillaume
Peraldi’s De eruditione principum (later falsely attributed
to Aquinas) is very similar to Vincent’s: together with the
substantial identity of many of their views, this had led
Berges to think that they belonged to the same, unﬁnished
encyclopedic work about Christian kingship.
To the same period belongs Guibert of Tournai’s
Eruditio regum et principum (1259): the Franciscan friar
explains the function of secular power with the necessity
of compelling those who cannot be persuaded by spiritual
means. Strongly inﬂuenced by the corpus of treatises
attributed to Dionysius the Areopagite, Guibert conceives
of the duties of princes according to the pattern of angelic
hierarchies,
thereby
attributing
to
secular
powers
a mediating role between God and mankind. According
to Jenny Swanson, John of Wales’ Breviloquium de
Virtutibus, written most probably in the mid 1260s, can
Mirrors for Princes M
793
M

be numbered among the Mirrors for Princes. In fact, the
treatise penned by this proliﬁc Franciscan author shows
the features of a mirror centered around a virtue ethics
(more
indebted
to
texts
such
as
Morale
dogma
philosophorum than to Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics)
designed especially for the ruler. Inserting in his text
many exempla, John of Wales was deemed to exert
a durable inﬂuence on the literary genre, if for no other
reason than as an easily accessible collection of edifying
anecdotes, mainly from classical Antiquity.
Comparison of Vincent of Beauvais’ views concerning
the origins of power with those maintained only a few
years later by his confre´re Thomas Aquinas offers a telling
example of the changes brought about by the reception of
Aristotelian practical philosophy. In the only extant part
of his De regno (shortly after 1270), Aquinas offers an
account of the origin of the political community that is
strongly inﬂuenced by the Aristotelian pattern of the nat-
ural, teleological development of the city from the smallest
social community, the family. In Aquinas’ account of the
establishment of power relations among human beings,
the Fall does not play the role it played in Vincent. More-
over, Aquinas describes different types of constitution.
Monarchy is not the only possibility anymore, so that
Aquinas, unlike Vincent, feels a need to argue in favor of
the monarchical constitution as reﬂecting in the best way
the order of nature and the universe. It is still controversial
whether Aquinas, in deﬁning the duties of the ruler also
toward God, suggests that regnum should be subordinated
to sacerdotium.
Innovative as it might have been, Aquinas’ De regno
remained but a fragment. With his De regimine principum
(most probably around 1279) Giles of Rome fulﬁlled the
task of writing a Mirror for Princes that exploited the
opportunities offered by the reception of Aristotle’s
Nicomachean Ethics and Politics. The ﬁrst book of the De
regimine consists, in fact, in a description of the virtues of
the ruler that is much indebted to Aquinas’ reception
of the Nicomachean Ethics. At least for its ﬁrst part, the
third book relies heavily on Aristotle’s Politics. According
to the traditional subdivision of practical philosophy
into
individual
ethics,
doctrine
of
the
household
(oeconomica), and politics, Giles, still lacking a Latin trans-
lation of the pseudo-Aristotelian Oeconomica, draws on
the Nicomachean Ethics, the Rhetoric, and the last two
books of the Politics, especially as regards the upbringing
of children. The De regimine principum presented itself as
a mirror that meets the expectations of an audience inter-
ested in the newly discovered Aristotelian practical philos-
ophy. At ﬁrst glance, it could seem that Giles limited
himself to summarizing Aristotle’s relevant works. On
the contrary, he did not only draw on the reception of
Aristotle through Aquinas (there are many tacit references
to the Sententia libri ethicorum, to the fragmentary Sen-
tentia libri politicorum, to De regno, and even to the
Summa theologiae of the great Dominican master), but
also very often succeeded in bending the Aristotelian texts
he quoted in his treatise to an apology for hereditary
monarchy (presented as the best form of government
according to Aristotle), where the king is above positive
law and subordinate only to natural law. Giles of Rome
also succeeded, however, in setting a standard, so that his
Mirror for Princes enjoyed an enormous success, partly
because it was used as a handbook of Aristotelian practical
philosophy. The De regimine principum was also translated
into many vernaculars. Some of these versions, however,
were not literal, but rather free arrangements that inserted
remarks by the translator and also used other sources, such
as the Bible, that Giles had neglected in favor of Aristotle,
in order to offer an almost purely philosophical Mirror for
Princes. Among such modiﬁed versions one can count, for
different reasons, the so-called Glossa castellana to the Re
regimine principum (ﬁrst half of the fourteenth century)
and John Trevisa’s rendering in Middle English. Writing
a philosophical, that is, in his opinion, an Aristotelian
Mirror for Princes, was also the intention inspiring,
Engelbert of Admont, whose De regimine principum
(shortly after 1300) had, however, almost no diffusion in
the Middle Ages. This work is nevertheless of great inter-
est, since Engelbert develops a virtue ethics that distin-
guishes between the four cardinal virtues, that are
necessary to anybody, and the virtuous habits that are
required in kings and emperors. Only the latter, in fact,
need what Engelbert calls virtutes regales, using an expres-
sion that most probably derives from the Secretum
secretorum, a spurious Aristotelian work whose ﬁrst part
was sometimes referred to as the De regimine principum
written by the Stagirite. Engelbert also provides the reader
with a quite original discussion of the forms of govern-
ment, in which he takes into consideration not only simple
constitutions, but also mixed ones. Surprisingly enough
for a supporter of the imperium, Engelbert admits that
monarchy in its simple form is extremely rare, because of
the rarity of virtues among rulers. Therefore, according to
the most recent interpretation by Karl Ubl, he gives his
preference to a blend of monarchy, aristocracy, and
democracy.
Examples from the Fourteenth Century
Already at the beginning of the fourteenth century, the
literary genre of the Mirrors for Princes begins losing
ground as a carrier of political theories, in favor of other
794 M
Mirrors for Princes

genres, such as the de potestate papae treatises, especially in
the ﬁrst half of the century, or the somnia literature,
toward the end of the same century. This does not imply,
however, that the production of specula principum ceases
abruptly. On the contrary, political authors continued to
recur to this genre to express their views during the
Renaissance and well into modern times, even after
Machiavelli and often against him. An overview of such
development would exceed the scope of an article devoted
to medieval Mirrors. It seems reasonable to conclude with
some examples from the fourteenth century, before the
inﬂuence of Humanism introduces a new shift in the
Quattrocento.
For example, at the beginning of the 1330s, William of
Pagula uses the literary form of the speculum, to protest
against the institution of royal purveyance in the English
kingdom. He does not limit himself to a moral complaint
but argues in defense of a sort of ‘‘basic economic rights’’
that the king himself is not allowed to infringe. Interest-
ingly, William supports his claim by arguing that the
English realm is a ﬁef of the pope, so that the sovereign
does not possess the same fullness of power that an
emperor or a pope can legitimately claim.
Some years later, Guido Vernani of Rimini dedicates
to the Malatesta, most probably Malatesta and Galeotto,
a Liber de virtutibus, that is an abridged version of Aris-
totelian virtue ethics mediated through Aquinas’ doctrine
of happiness attainable in the present life. Guido had
criticized Dante’s Monarchia and supported a hierocratic
theory of power. Here he develops his own ethics for
an Italian signore whose territory
is
inscribed in
the boundaries of the ‘‘state’’ claimed by the Roman
church.
In 1340–1344, the Portuguese Franciscan friar Alvaro
Pais dedicated to Alfonso XI of Castiglia a Speculum
Regum that not only puts a strong emphasis on princely
virtues but also defends the superiority of monarchy over
other constitutions and supports the supremacy of the
spiritual over the temporal. His account of the origins of
power is, as usual in many Franciscan authors, especially
after John Duns Scotus, clearly not Aristotelian. He prefers
tracing back the origins of subordination among men to
pride and other vices. However corrupted the intention of
the ﬁrst rulers could have been, they still played a role in
preserving social order. For this reason, God tolerates such
a state of affairs, although it does not correspond to his
original plan for mankind.
Wilhelm Berges numbered Francesc Eiximenis’ Regi-
ment de la cosa publica (1383) among Mirrors for Princes.
More recent studies have emphasized that the scope of this
work exceeds the traditional limits of a mirror, developing
an overall theory of monarchy. His views about monarchy
are not only inspired by the principle that Christian faith
must be the unifying element of every political commu-
nity but are also guided by the peculiar experience of the
kingdom of Aragon, where this Catalan Franciscan friar
spent most of his life. As a result, Eiximenis supports the
idea of a monarchy that is bound by covenants to its
subjects
and
shares
its
power
with
parliamentary
institutions.
See also: ▶Bernard of Clairvaux ▶Carolingian Renais-
sance ▶Giles of Rome, Political Thought ▶John of
Salisbury ▶Thomas Aquinas, Political Thought
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1979) De regno ad regem Cypri. In: Opera omnia iussu
Leonis XIII edita, vol 42. Editori di San Tommaso, Roma
Beneyto Pe´rez J (ed) (1947) Glosa Castellana al ‘‘regimiento de Prı´ncipes’’
de Egidio Romano. Centro de estudios politicos y constitucionales,
reprint Madrid (20052)
Bernard of Clairvaux (1963) In: Leclercq J, Rochais H (eds) Apud
Bartolomaeum Zannettum, De consideratione. Opera III. Editiones
Cistercienses, Romae
Eiximenis Francesc (1927/1980) In: Molins de Rei PD (ed) Regiment de la
cosa pu´blica. Barcino (Sanchis Guarner M (ed) L’Estel, Valencia,
1972)
Engelbert of Admont (1725) In: Huffnagl JGT (ed) De regimine
principum. Peez, Regensburg
Giles of Rome (1607) In: Samaritanius H (ed) De regimine principum
libri tres. Apud Bartolomaeum Zannettum, Romae
Giraldus
Cambrensis
(1891)
In:
Warner
GF
(ed)
De
principis
instructione. Id. Opera. H.M.S.O., London
Guibertus de Tornaco (1914) In: De Poorter A (ed) Eruditio regum et
principum. Inst. Supe´rieur de Philos. de l’Univ., Louvain
Guillelmus Peraldus (1980) De eruditione principum. In: Busa R (ed)
S. Thomae Aquinatis Opera omnia ut sunt in indice thomistico,
vol 7. Frommann - Holzboog, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt, pp 89–121
Helinand of Froidmont (1855) De bono regimine principis. Patrologia
Latina 212:735–746
Hincmar of Reims (1998) In: Nachtmann D (ed) De cavendis vitiis et
virtutibus exercendis. MGH: Quellen zur Geistesgeschichte des
Mittelalters, 16. Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Mu¨nchen
John of Salisbury (1909) In: Webb CCI (ed) Policratici sive De nugis
curialium et vestigiis philosophorum libri VIII. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, London
John of Trevisa (1997) Governance of kings and princes. In: Fowler D-C,
Briggs C-F, Remley PG (eds) John Trevisa’s Middle English transla-
tion of the De Regimine principum of Aegidius Romanus. Garland,
New York/London
Jonas of Orle´ans (1995) In: Dubreucq A (ed) De institutione regia. E´d. du
Cerf, Paris
Martin of Braga (1950) Formula Vitae Honestae. In: Barlow CW (ed)
Opera Omnia. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven, pp 204–258
Pais Alvaro (1955/1963) Speculum regum. In: Pinto de Meneses M (ed)
Espelho dos Reis. Centro de Estudos de Psicologia e de Histo´ria da
Filosoﬁa, Lisboa, (1955, I vol; 1963, II vols)
Mirrors for Princes M
795
M

Ps. Cyprian (1909) In: Hellmann S (ed) De duodecim abusivis saeculi.
Hinrichs, Leipzig
Sedulius Scottus (1906) Liber de rectoribus christianis. In: Hellmann
S (ed) Sedulius Scottus. Beck, Mu¨nchen
Steele R (ed) (1920) Secretum secretorum cum glossis et notulis. Opera
hactenus inedita Rogeri Baconi, vol 5. Clarendon, Oxford
Vincent of Beauvais (1995) In: Schneider RJ (ed) De morali principis
institutione.
Corpus
Christianorum.
Continuatio
Mediaevalis,
vol 137. Brepols, Turnhout
William of Pagula (1891) In: Moisant J (ed) De Speculo Regis Edwardi III,
seu Tractatus quem de mala regni administratione conscripsit Simon
Islip. Picard, Paris
Secondary Sources
Anton
HH
(1968)
Fu¨rstenspiegel
und
Herrscherethos
in
der
Karolingerzeit. Ro¨hrscheid, Bonn
Anton HH (1982) Pseudo-cyprian, De duodecim abusivis saeculi und
sein Einﬂuß auf den Kontinent, insbesondere auf die karolingischen
Fu¨rstenspiegel. In: Lo¨we H (ed) Die Iren und Europa im fru¨heren
Mittelalter. Klett-Cotta, Stuttgart, pp 568–617
Anton HH (1999a) Fu¨rstenspiegel, A. Lateinisches Mittelalter. In: Lexikon
des Mittelalters, IV. Mu¨nchen-Zu¨rich, pp 1040–1049
Anton HH (1999b) Gesellschaftsspiegel und Gesellschaftstheorie in
Westfranken/Frankreich. Speziﬁk, Kontinuita¨ten und Wandlungen.
In: De Benedictis A, Pisapia A (eds) Specula principum. Vittorio
Klostermann, Frankfurt/Main, pp 51–120
Bartlett R (1982) Gerald of Wales 1146–1223. Clarendon, Oxford
Berges W (1938) Die Fu¨rstenspiegel des hohen und spa¨ten Mittelalters.
Hiersemann, Stuttgart
Bizzarri HO (1991) Secreto de los Secretos (ms. BNM 9428). Secrit,
Buenos Aires
Briggs Ch F (1999) Giles of Rome’s De regimine principum. Reading and
writing politics at court and university, c. 1275–c. 1525. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Cova L (2006) Felicita` e beatitudine nella Sententia Libri Ethicorum di
Guido Vernani da Rimini. Documenti e studi sulla tradizione
ﬁlosoﬁa medievale XVII:363–404
De Benedictis A, Pisapia A (eds) (1999) Specula principum. Vittorio
Klostermann, Frankfurt/Main
Del Punta F, Luna C (1993) Catalogo dei manoscritti, De regimine
principum (Citta` del Vaticano- Italia). Olschki, Firenze
Dolcini C (1988) Guido Vernani e Dante. Note sul testo del De
reprobatione Monarchie, now in Id., Crisi di poteri e politologia
in crisi. Pa`tron, Da Sinibaldo Fieschi a Guglielmo d’Ockham,
pp 439–444
Eberhardt O (1977) Via Regia. Der Fu¨rstenspiegel Smaragds von St.
Mihiel und seine literarische Gattung. Fink, Mu¨nchen
Evangelisti P (2002) I ‘pauperes Christi’ e i linguaggi dominativi.
I
francescani
come
protagonisti
della
testualita`
politica
e dell’organizzazione del consenso nel bassomedioevo (Gilbert de
Tournai, Paolino da Venezia, Francesco Eiximenis). In: La propa-
ganda politica. Atti del XXXVIII Convegno storico internazionale.
Todi, 14–17 ottobre 2001, CISAM, Spoleto, pp 315–392
Evangelisti P (2006) I Francescani e la costruzione di uno Stato. Linguaggi
politici, valori identitari, progetti di governo in area catalano-arago-
nese. Editrici Francescane, Padova
Frigeni R (2008) Assumere iam probatos, non probare iam assumptos.
Dinamiche semantiche della ﬁducia in alcuni specula principum
tardomedievali. In: Prodi P (ed) La ﬁducia secondo i linguaggi del
potere. Il Mulino, Bologna, pp 113–130
Hadot P (1972) Fu¨rstenspiegel. In: Reallexikon fu¨r Antike und
Christentum 8. Stuttgart, pp 555–632
Jo´nsson EM (2006) Les miroirs aux princes sont-ils un genre litte´raire?
Me´die´vales 51. http://medievales.revues.org/document1461.html
Kerner M (1976) Zur Entstehungsgeschichte der Institutio Traiani.
Vittorio Klostermann, Deutsches Archiv 32:558–571
Kleineke W (1937) Englische Fu¨rstenspiegel vom Policraticus Johanns
von Salisbury bis zum Basilikon Doron Ko¨nig Jakobs I. Niemeyer,
Halle/Saale
Krynen J (1993) L’empire du roi. Ide´es et croyances politiques en France
(XIIIe-XVe sie`cle). Gallimard, Paris
Krynen J (1999) Du bon usage des ‘‘Leges’’. Le droit savant dans le De
bono regimine principis d’He´linand de Froidmont (1210). In: De
Benedictis
A,
Pisapia
A
(eds)
Specula
principum.
Vittorio
Klostermann, Frankfurt/Main, pp 159–170
Lachaud F, Scordia L (eds) (2007) Le Prince au miroir de la litte´rature
politique de l’Antiquite´ aux Lumie`res. des Universites de Rouen et du
Havre, Mont-Saint-Aignan
Lambertini R (1992) Tra etica e politica: la prudentia del principe nel De
regimine di Egidio Romano. Documenti e Studi sulla tradizione
ﬁlosoﬁca medievale III:77–144
Lusignan S, Paulmier-Foucart M (eds) (1997) ‘Lector et compilator’.
Vincent de Beauvais, fre`re preˆcheur. Un intellectuel et son milieu
au XIIIe sie`cle. Ed. Cre´aphis, Graˆne
Marocco Stuardi D (1999) Alcuino di York nella tradizione degli Specula
principis. Franco Angeli, Milano
Miethke J (2000) De potestate papae. Die pa¨pstliche Amtskompetenz im
Widerstreit der politischen Theorie von Thomas von Aquin bis
Wilhelm von Ockham. Mohr Siebeck, Tu¨bingen
Morais Barbosa J (1972) La teoria polı´tica de Alvaro Pais no ‘Speculum
Regum’. Lisboa
Morrison KF (1988) Hermeneutics and Enigma: Bernard of Clairvaux’s
‘‘De consideratione.’’ Viator 19:129–151
Nederman CJ (2001) The monarch and the marketplace: economic policy
and royal ﬁnance in William of Pagula’s Speculum regis Edwardi III.
Hist Polit Econ 33:51–69
Nederman CJ (2002) Political thought in fourteenth-century England:
treatises by Walter of Milemete, William of Pagula, and William of
Ockham. Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies in
collaboration with BREPOLS, Tempe
Nederman CJ (2005) Beyond stoicism and Aristotelianism: John of
Salisbury’s scepticism and twelfth-century moral philosophy. In:
Bejczy IP, Newhauser RG (eds) Virtue and ethics in the twelfth
century. Brill, Leiden-Boston
Nederman CJ, Langdon Forhan K (eds) (1993) Medieval political theory –
a reader. The quest for the body politic, 1100–1400. Routledge,
London/New York
Nieto Soria JM (1999) Les Miroirs des princes dans l’historiographie
espagnole (Couronne de Castille, XIIIe-XVe sie`cles): Tendances de
la recherches. In: De Benedictis A, Pisapia A (eds) Specula
principum. Vittorio Klostermann, Frankfurt/Main, pp 193–207
Paulmier-Foucart M, Lusignan S, Nadeau A (eds) (1990) Vincent de
Beauvais: intentions et re´ceptions d’une oeuvre encyclope´dique au
Moyen Age. Actes du XIVe Colloque de l’Institut d’e´tudes
me´die´vales,
organise´
conjointement
par
l’Atelier
Vincent
de
Beauvais. . . et l’Institut d’e´tudes me´die´vales. . . 27–30 avril 1988.
Maison Bellarmin [u.a.], Saint-Laurent, Paris
Quaglioni D (1999) ‘‘Regimen regis’’ e ‘‘ius regis’’ nell’esegesi di I Sam, 8,
11–17 e negli specula principum del tardo Medioevo. In: De
Benedictis
A,
Pisapia
A
(eds)
Specula
principum.
Vittorio
Klostermann, Frankfurt/Main, pp 211–242
796 M
Mirrors for Princes

Richter M (1999) Fu¨rstenspiegel, B. Volksprachliche Literaturen. In:
Lexikon des Mittelalters, IV. Mu¨nchen-Zu¨rich, pp 1049–1053
Rochais H (1951) Le Liber de virtutibus et vitiis d’Alcuin. Note pour
l’e´tude des sources. Revue Mabillon 41:77–86
Rubio F (1960–1961) De regimine principum de Egidio Romano en la
literatura castellana de la Edad Media, siglo XV. La Ciudad de Dios
173:32–71 and 174:645–667
Senellart M (1995) Les arts de gouverner. Du regimen me´die´vale au
concept de gouvernement. Seuil, Paris
Swanson J (1989) John of Wales. A study of the works and ideas of
a thirteenth century friar. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Ubl K (1999) Zur Entstehung der Fu¨rstenspiegel Engelberts von Admont
(þ1331). Deutsches Archiv 55:499–548
Ubl K (2000) Engelbert von Admont. Ein Gelehrter im Spannungsfeld
von Aristotelismus und christlicher U¨ berlieferung. Oldenbourg,
Wien-Mu¨nchen
Williams SJ (2003) The secret of secrets. The scholarly career of a pseudo-
Aristotelian text in the Latin Middle Ages. The University of Mich-
igan Press, Ann Arbor
Zerbi P (1984) ‘‘Introduzione al De consideratione’’ di san Bernardo. In:
Gastaldelli F (ed) Opere di San Bernardo, I. Trattati, Milano, pp
727–759. Republished in Ecclesia in hoc mundo posita. Studi di
storia e di storiograﬁa medioevale, Milano, 1993, 411–453
Miskawayh, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯
ELVIRA WAKELNIG
Department of Classics and Ancient History
Warwick University
Coventry
UK
Abstract
Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ Ah˙mad ibn Muh˙ammad ibn Yaʿqu¯b Miskawayh
was a prominent ﬁgure in the intellectual milieu and at
different courts of the Arab-Islamic world throughout the
tenth and at the beginning of the eleventh century. Besides
having held various positions in the service of a number of
rulers he occupied himself with many sciences, such as
philosophy, history, adab, alchemy, medicine, and even
cooking. Although Miskawayh is said to have composed
works in most of these ﬁelds, the writings extant today
mainly cover the ﬁrst two mentioned. His universal his-
tory The Experiences of the Nations (Taja¯rib al-umam)
outlines the time from Noah to his own lifetime, the
Buyid reign. His genuine philosophical writings, among
which The Reﬁnement of Character (Tahdhı¯b al-akhla¯q wa-
tathı¯r al-aʿra¯q) and The Smaller Book of Triumph (al-Fawz
al-as˙g˙ar) are the best known today, display a main
interest in ethics and how to reach ultimate happiness.
Miskawayh’s
philosophical
doctrines
are
deeply
inﬂuenced by Aristotle as well as by Neoplatonism and
ﬁrmly rooted in the tradition of al-Kindı¯.
Biographical Information
Miskawayh is said to have been born around 325/936 in
Rayy and died in 412/1030 in Isfahan aged 100 years.
Nowadays the allegation that he himself converted from
Zoroastrism to Islam is no longer upheld, but is trans-
ferred to his forefathers.
According to the Muntakhab S˙iwa¯n al-h˙ikma which
contains information about the lives and doctrines of
philosophers of the Greek and the Arabic-Islamic world,
Miskawayh was consecutively in the service of the viziers
Abu¯ Muh˙ammad al-Muhallabı¯, Abu¯ l-Fad˙l ibn al-ʿAmı¯d
and the latter’s son Abu¯ l-Fath˙ Dhu¯ l-Kifa¯yatayn, the
monarchs ʿAd˙ud al-Dawla and S˙ams˙a¯m al-Dawla, and
then served at the court in Rayy under several patrons
mainly as librarian, secretary, boon companion, and emis-
sary. Furthermore he had contact with a number of
well-known philosophers of his time, namely Abu¯
Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant˙iqı¯, al-H˙ asan ibn Suwa¯r ibn
al-Khamma¯r, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Ibn Sı¯na¯, and Abu¯
H˙ ayya¯n
al-Tawh˙ı¯dı¯,
with
whom
he
engaged
in
a philosophical exchange which is preserved in the Book
of Rambling (Questions) and Comprehensive (Answers)
(Kita¯b al-Hawa¯mil wa-l-Shawa¯mil) and a Treatise on
Justice (Risa¯la fı¯ l-ma¯hiyyat al-ʿadl).
Thought/Philosophy
Miskawayh’s extant philosophical writings comprise two
lengthy books, namely The Reﬁnement of Character
(Tahdhı¯b al-akhla¯q wa-tathı¯r al-aʿra¯q) and The Smaller
Book of Triumph (al-Fawz al-as˙g˙ar) and a number of
minor treatises and fragments. A quite striking feature of
Miskawayh’s style of writing is that he is frequently quot-
ing himself, i.e., there often occur literal parallels between
two or more of his works. The Smaller Book of Triumph
presents the most remarkable example of this practice as it
seems to have existed in at least two versions or recensions,
which may both well go back to Miskawayh himself. The
standard version is claimed to have been written at the
request of an emir who wanted to have three issues dealt
with which comprise all knowledge, namely the existence
of God, the soul and its conditions, and prophethood. The
alternative version is only preserved in fragments which
present about half of the material of the standard version
in a completely different arrangement and order appar-
ently focusing on other questions, namely the hierarchy of
being, man as microcosm, human soul, the attainment of
happiness, and the classiﬁcation of knowledge. The last
two issues do not occur in the standard version of the
Miskawayh, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ M
797
M

Smaller Book of Triumph, but are also dealt with in
Miskawayh’s Kita¯b al-Saʿa¯da (Book on Happiness).
The question of the classiﬁcation of knowledge is, in
fact, quite a prominent topic in Miskawayh’s extant writ-
ings. The most basic division is the one between theoret-
ical and practical knowledge or philosophy. In the Smaller
Book of Triumph, Miskawayh recommends to start one’s
search for truth with mathematics and logic, then turn to
natural philosophy and metaphysics before dealing with
practical philosophy. In the alternative version of the
Smaller Book of Triumph, mathematics are said to com-
prise geometry, arithmetic, astrology/astronomy, and
music, and the natural sciences are divided according to
an eightfold Aristotelian division, which is also applied by
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ in his Ih˙s˙a¯’ al-ʿulu¯m. In the Book on Happiness,
Miskawayh classiﬁes philosophy entirely according to
Aristotle’s writings.
Miskawayh’s world view is set within the framework of
a Neoplatonic hierarchy of being, which is characterized
by the sequence of the following levels of existence: God,
Intellect, Soul, Sphere which corresponds to Universal
Nature, and the bodily beings. Establishing the existence
of God, the Creator, is the main intent of the ﬁrst of the
three parts of the Smaller Book of Triumph, where
Miskawayh thus demonstrates Him to be one, single,
eternal, incorporeal, the ﬁrst unmoved mover and the
cause of all other existents, which He has created ex nihilo.
Knowledge of God may only be reached and expressed by
negation.
The ﬁrst created existent is the Universal Intellect.
Whether Miskawayh indeed pictured the level of intellect
as encompassing ten intelligences which cause one
another and the celestial spheres must remain doubtful.
This Farabian doctrine is expounded in the Treatise on the
Intellect and the Intelligible (Risa¯la fı¯ l-ʿaql wa-l-maʿqu¯l)
which has been ascribed to Miskawayh. However, his
authorship is questionable and no tenet expressed in the
treatise seems to be genuinely characteristic of his
philosophy.
In any case, Miskawayh’s main concern is not with
universal hypostases, but with intellect and soul as present
in human beings and, in fact, with granting immortality to
them. Three Platonic proofs are cited in the second part of
the Smaller Book of Triumph, the part on the soul and its
conditions, in order to establish the soul as life-giving, as
containing no badness or evil, and as self-moving and
therefore being an immortal, spiritual substance. Conse-
quently, man must not fear death, as Miskawayh explicitly
sets out to show in the short Treatise on the Fear of Death
(Risa¯la fı¯ l-khawf min al-mawt) and in a passage on the
same topic preserved in the entry on Miskawayh in the
Muntakhab S˙iwa¯n al-h˙ikma. On the contrary, one should
die willingly, i.e., abandon the sensible world, the bodily
pleasures and desires and turn toward the intellect and the
intelligibles, before one dies naturally. The rational human
soul is potentially intellectual and by intelligizing the
intelligibles it becomes actualized, and is an intellect.
Intellect, in turn, is one and the same as its intelligibles
and its intellection, and furthermore possesses self-knowl-
edge. It does not derive all its knowledge from sense
perception, rather, as the senses may err, intellect is able
to judge sense data through the ﬁrst principles which it
ﬁnds in its own substance.
Miskawayh distinguished three kinds of happiness:
happiness of the soul, which is true knowledge and acting
accordingly; happiness of the body, which is health, pro-
portionality, and beauty of the body’s limbs; and happi-
ness resulting from things outside the body, e.g., wealth,
honor, family, and friends. The two latter ones are not
ends in themselves, but only means by which to reach the
happiness of the soul, which is the ultimate happiness,
end, and perfection of the human being. As Miskawayh
points out explicitly, man cannot attain perfection on his
own, but being a social animal, he needs the company of
his fellow men. Therefore hermitism has to be renounced.
Furthermore, it is important that the four cardinal virtues,
i.e., wisdom, temperance, courage, and justice, which are
depicted each as a middle between two extreme vices, are
extended beyond the virtuous person toward others who
should thus beneﬁt from these virtues and become virtu-
ous themselves.
In order to spread wisdom, i.e., theoretical and prac-
tical wisdom, among the people, God has sent the proph-
ets who are the doctors of the soul.
As to Miskawayh’s historical works, The Experiences of
the Nations (Taja¯rib al-umam), which starts with the
occurrence of the ﬂood in the days of Noah and ends in
980 when the Buyids were still in power, presents past
events to serve as examples to the rulers of the present.
Much of what was going on during the Buyid reign
Miskawayh
describes
by
personal
experience
and
therefore often takes a subjective point of view. He stresses
the value of eyewitnessing compared to retelling hearsay
accounts. A different kind of historical interest, namely an
interest in the history of learning, wisdom, and philosophy
becomes apparent in Miskawayh’s Eternal Wisdom (al-
H˙ ikma al-kha¯lida) in which he gathers wise sayings of
the Persians, Indians, Arabs, and Greeks to show the
unity which prevails in human thought throughout time
and place.
798 M
Miskawayh, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯

See also: ▶al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan ▶Aristotle, Arabic
▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn
Ish:a¯q ▶Plato, Arabic ▶Proclus, Arabic ▶al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯,
Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n
Bibliography
Primary Sources
ArkounMohammad(1961–1962) Deuxe´pıˆtresde Miskawayh.BEO 17:7–74
(Contains the R. fı¯ l-ladhdha¯t wa-l-a¯la¯m and the R. fı¯ l-nafs wa-l-ʿaql)
Arkoun Mohammad (1963) Textes ine´dits de Miskawayh (m. 421). AI
5:181–205
Arkoun Mohammad (1964) Notes et documents. Miskawayh: de l’Intel-
lect et de l’intelligible (Fı¯ l-ʿaql wa-l-maʿqu¯l). Arabica 11(1):80–87
Cuvelier G (French trans) (1989) Les Textes ine´dits attribue´s a` Miskawayh:
Pre´sentation et traduction. Rev Philos Louvain 87:215–234
Marcotte R (English trans) The Risa¯lah fı¯ al-‘Aql wa al-Ma‘qu¯l of
Ibn Miskawayh: an epistle on the intellect and the intelligible. IC
70(2):1–17
Miskawayh Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (1379/2000) Kita¯b al-Saʿa¯da or Tartı¯b al-Saʿa¯da¯t wa-
mana¯zil al-ʿulu¯m. In: Awjabı¯ A (ed) Ganjı¯na-yi Baha¯rista¯n. Tihra¯n
Kita¯bkhana Muza wa-Markaz-i Asnad-i Majlis-i Shu¯ra¯-yi Isla¯mı¯,
Teheran, 99–127
Miskawayh Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (1964) In: Khan MS (ed with English trans) Risa¯la fı¯
ma¯hiyat al-ʿadl. Brill, Leiden
Miskawayh Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (1966) In: Zurayk Q (ed) Tahdhı¯b al-Akhla¯q. al-
Ja¯miʿa l-amı¯rikiyya, Beirut (English trans: 1968)
Miskawayh Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (1987) In: ʿUd˙ayma S˙ (ed) al-Fawz al-as˙g˙ar (French
trans: Arnaldez R). al-Da¯r al-ʿArabiyya li-l-kita¯b, Tunis
Miskawayh Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (1980) In: Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) al-H˙ ikma al-Kha¯lida –
Ja¯wı¯da¯n Khirad. Da¯r al-Andalus, Beirut
Miskawayh Abu¯ ʿAlı¯(2001) In: Kasrawı¯S (ed) al-Hawamı¯l wa-l-shawa¯mil.
Manshu¯ra¯t Muh˙ammad ʿAlı¯ Bydu¯n, Beirut
Miskawayh Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (2007) In: Isbir AM (ed) Risa¯la fı¯ l-khawf mina l-
mawt. Bida¯ya¯t li-l-t˙iba¯ʿa wa-l-nashr wa-l-tawzı¯ʿ, Damascus
Secondary Sources
Adamson P (2007) Miskawayh’s psychology. In: Adamson P (ed) Classical
Arabic philosophy: sources and reception. Warburg Institute, Lon-
don, pp 39–54
Arkoun M (1982) L’humanisme arabe au IVe/Xe sie`cle, 2nd edn. Vrin,
Paris
Dunlop DM (1979) The Muntakhab S˙iwa¯n al-H˙ ikma of Abu¯ Sulaima¯n as-
Sijista¯nı¯. Mouton, Hague
Gutas D (1983) Paul the Persian on the classiﬁcation of the parts of
Aristotle’s philosophy: a milestone between Alexandria and Bag˙daˆd.
Islam 60:231–267
Hasnawi A (1997) Deux textes en arabe sur les preuves platoniciennes de
l’immortalite´ de l’aˆme. Medioevo 23:395–408
Kraemer J (1992) Humanism in the renaissance of Islam. The cultural
revival during the Buyid Age, 2nd edn. Brill, Leiden/Ko¨ln
Rosenthal F (1940) On the knowledge of Plato’s philosophy in the Islamic
World. IC 14:387–422
Wakelnig E (2009) A new version of Miskawayh’s Book of Triumph:
an alternative recension of al-al-Fawz al-as˙ghar or the lost Fawz
al-akbar? ASP 19:83–119
Walzer R (1962) Some aspects of Miskawaih’s Tahdhı¯b al-Akhla¯q. In:
Walzer R (ed) Greek into Arabic. Essays on Islamic philosophy.
Bruno Cassirer, Oxford, pp 220–235
Modal Theories and Modal Logic
SIMO KNUUTTILA
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Early medieval thinkers were acquainted with ancient
modal theories through Boethius’ commentaries on De
interpretatione, which dealt with Aristotelian and other
ancient modal paradigms extensively. Modal syllogistic
was brought into the discussion by the recovery of
Aristotle’s Prior Analytics in the twelfth century. Medieval
considerations were also inﬂuenced by Augustine’s ideas,
which deviated from philosophical paradigms, particu-
larly his conception of God as acting by choice between
simultaneous alternative possibilities There were analo-
gous discussions of philosophical and theological modal-
ities
in
Arabic
philosophy.
Arabic
modal
theories
inﬂuenced Latin discussions mainly through the transla-
tions of Averroes’ works.
Apart from ancient philosophical conceptions, the
new idea of associating modal terms with simultaneous
alternatives was discussed by Abelard and some other early
medieval thinkers. While these innovations were used to
some extent in thirteenth-century theology, they were not
often discussed in philosophical contexts. The increasing
reception of Aristotle’s philosophy in the thirteenth cen-
tury gave support to traditional modal paradigms, as is
seen in Robert Kilwardby’s inﬂuential commentary on
Aristotle’s Prior Analytics, where modal syllogistics is
treated as an essentialist theory of the structures of being.
Things became different when John Duns Scotus com-
bined the various elements of the conception of modality
as alternativeness into a detailed theory. A logically possi-
ble state of affairs is something to which to be is not
repugnant, though it may not be compossible with other
possibilities. Scotus’ modal semantics inﬂuenced early
fourteenth-century philosophy and theology in many
ways. The new modal logic which was developed by Wil-
liam Ockham, John Buridan, and others was based on the
new modal semantics. Thirteenth-century essentialist
assumptions were largely dropped from modal syllogistics,
the Aristotelian version of which was regarded as
a fragmentary theory without a sufﬁcient explication of
the various ﬁne structures of modal propositions.
Modal Theories and Modal Logic M
799
M

There are four originally Aristotelian ways of understand-
ing the meaning of modal terms in ancient philosophy: the
‘‘statistical’’ or ‘‘temporal frequency’’ interpretation of
modality, which is found in the discussions of eternal
beings, the natures of things, and the types of events and
which implies that what is possible is sometimes actual
(the so-called Principle of Plenitude), the conception of
possibility as a potency, which was associated with the
assumption that no natural potency type remains eternally
frustrated, the conception of antecedent necessities and
possibilities with respect to a certain moment of time
(diachronic modalities), and the idea of possibility as
non-contradictoriness.
None
of
these
conceptions
includes the view that the meaning of modal terms should
be spelled out by considering simultaneous alternative
states of affairs. On the contrary, ancient modal thinking
is characterized by the assumption of the necessity of the
present and the necessity of unchanging states of affairs in
general.
An example of the statistical approach in the Boethian
tradition is found in Thomas Aquinas’ commentary on
Chapter 9 of Aristotle’s De interpretatione, where various
types of proposition are classiﬁed on the basis of their
‘‘matter’’:
"
In necessary matter all affirmative propositions are deter-
minately true; this holds for propositions in the future
tense as well as in the past and present tenses; and neg-
ative ones are false. In impossible matter the contrary is
the case. In contingent matter, however, universal propo-
sitions are false and particular propositions are true. This is
the case in future tense propositions as well as those in the
past and present tenses. In indefinite ones, both are at
once true in the future tense propositions as well as those
in the past and present tenses (In Peri herm, I.13).
The matter of a proposition is associated with the
habitude of a predicate to a subject and is explained as
follows:
"
If the predicate is per se in the subject, it will be said to be
a proposition in necessary or natural matter, for example
‘Man is an animal’ and ‘Man is risible’. If the predicate is per
se repugnant to the subject, as in a way excluding the
notion of it, it is said to be a proposition in impossible or
remote matter, for example ‘Man is an ass’. If the predicate
is related to the subject in a way midway between these
two, being neither per se repugnant to the subject nor per
se in it, the proposition is said to be in possible or contin-
gent matter (Ibid).
The ancient theory of the matter of propositions was often
associated with the rules of contraries, subcontraries, and
contradictories in the traditional square of opposition.
While these rules deﬁned how the members of various
opposed pairs were related to truth and falsity, it was
thought that they could be further speciﬁed by classifying
propositions on the basis of their matter. A typical feature
of Aquinas’ account of the contingent matter is that uni-
versal afﬁrmative and negative propositions are false and
particular afﬁrmative and negative propositions are true.
Comparing this with what is said about propositions in
other matters, modal differences can be characterized as
corresponding to a descending order in the frequency of
true cases: the predicate is not truly said of any subject in
impossible matter, it is truly said of some subjects in
contingent matter and of all subjects in necessary matter.
Boethius’ discussion of the necessity of the present
shows how this principle was understood in ancient
modal thought. In dealing with Chapter 9 of Aristotle’s
De interpretatione, Boethius argues that:
1. It is not possible that p obtains at t and not-p obtains
at t.
This implies that
2. It is not the case that p obtains at t and it is possible at t
that not-p obtains at t.
This move is natural only when possibilities refer to one
and the same history without simultaneous alternatives.
(2) was generally accepted in ancient philosophy, and it is
equivalent to the principle of the necessity of the present:
3. If p obtains at t then it is necessary at t that p obtains
at t.
Boethius thought that the temporal necessity of p is qual-
iﬁed by the possibility of being otherwise at another time.
One might wonder how the alleged necessity of Socrates’
sitting at a certain moment of time is qualiﬁed by what he
does at other times. According to Boethius, this shows that
sitting as such does not inhere in Socrates by necessity.
Qualifying the necessity of the present by a ‘‘statistical’’
conception of possibility remained a popular idea in the
Boethian tradition.
Boethius was eager to argue that the necessity of an
event at a certain time does not imply that it was anteced-
ently necessary. The idea of diachronic modalities was
considered important in the later Aristotelian tradition,
which stressed against Stoic determinism, that there are
genuine future alternatives which remain open until the
moment of time to which they refer. Even the Stoics spoke
about alternative prospective possibilities which were not
yet ﬁxed at the level of known causes, but they also
regarded fate as an active potency which ultimately
800 M
Modal Theories and Modal Logic

necessitates everything. Boethius follows the Aristotelian
tradition of diachronic possibilities: there are transient
individual alternative possibilities, but those which will
not be realized disappear. There are no unrealized possi-
bilities which might remain intact even when their dia-
chronic counterparts have vanished.
In dealing with possibilities based on potencies Boe-
thius writes that some potencies are never unrealized, their
nature being such that they are always actual and as such
necessarily so. There are no contrary potencies in these
cases,
Boethius
says,
because
they
would
remain
unrealized forever and the constitution of nature cannot
include elements which are in vain. The potencies of non-
necessary features of beings do not exclude contrary
potencies. They are not always and universally actualized,
but as potency-types even these must be sometimes actu-
alized. This is in agreement with the ‘‘statistical’’ model of
modality.
Aristotle’s theory of active and passive potencies was
originally meant to explain how and why a singular change
takes place. This background made it a cumbersome
model for singular possibilities. While it allowed Aristotle
and his medieval followers to speak about unrealized pos-
sibilities in the sense of partial possibilities, that is, as the
correlates of active or passive potencies, full singular pos-
sibilities were actualized when they could be actualized.
Natural passive potencies could not be actualized without
an active power and were necessarily actualized when an
active power activated them and there was no external
hindrance (Aristotle, Met. IX.5). While the conceptions
of power and potentiality were widely regarded as impor-
tant elements in understanding modality, Anselm of Can-
terbury attempted to base the whole of modal semantics
on these notions. The problems in his theory show that the
notion of potency is too narrow a basis for this purpose.
In De caelo I.12 Aristotle supposes, per impossibile, that
a thing has contrary potencies, one of which is always
actualized. He argues that the unactualized potency can-
not be real, because one cannot assume it to be realized
at any time without contradiction. Aristotle applies
the model of possibility as non-contradictoriness which
is deﬁned in Prior Analytics I.13 as follows: when
a possibility is assumed to be realized, it results in
nothing impossible. In speaking about the assumed
noncontradictory actualization of a possibility, Aristotle
thinks that it is realized in our one and only history. In
some places he suggests that for the purposes of argument
one can assume counterfactual states of affairs in thought
even though they are not realizable in the world. Assump-
tions of this kind were not uncommon in late ancient
philosophy; they were called impossible hypotheses.
Averroes and Aquinas tried to explain these by using the
idea of abstract possibilities. The possibilities of a thing
can be dealt with at various levels which correspond to
Porphyrian predicables. Something which is possible for
a thing as a member of a genus may be impossible for it as
a member of a species. The same holds of it as a member of
a species and an individuated thing. While counterfactual
abstract possibilities are counterpossible in the sense that
they cannot be actualized, they are understandable meta-
physical ﬁctions which can be used in indirect proofs.
Augustine’s doctrine of God’s eternal free choice of the
content of creation, which inﬂuenced early medieval theo-
logical discussions of divine omnipotence and omni-
science, involved an intuitive idea of modality as
alternativeness. Some authors regarded this as a special
theological matter which did not affect the use of tradi-
tional ideas in other disciplines, an attitude supported by
the general reception of Aristotle’s philosophy in the thir-
teenth century, but there were some twelfth-century
thinkers who realized the philosophical signiﬁcance of
this new modal conception.
Abelard made use of traditional modal conceptions,
but he also developed new ideas. Assuming that what is
actual is temporally necessary at a certain point of time as
no longer avoidable, he adds that unrealized counterfac-
tual alternatives are possible at the same time in the sense
that they could have happened at that time. There are also
merely imaginable alternatives, such as Socrates’ being
a bishop, which never had a real basis in things.
Gilbert of Poitiers stressed the idea that natural regu-
larities which are called natural necessities are not abso-
lute, since they are freely chosen by God and can be
overridden by divine power. This basically Augustinian
conception had become a widespread theological view in
the twelfth century. In explaining Plato’s ‘‘Platonitas,’’
Gilbert says that this includes all that Plato was, is and
will be, as well as what he could be but never is. The modal
element of the individual concept was probably needed in
order to speak about Plato in alternative possible histories
or, as Abelard did, about Socrates as a bishop. Gilbert
seems to have been the ﬁrst to formulate an individual
concept in this way. A signiﬁcant early thirteenth-century
analysis of the modal aspects of the Augustinian theolog-
ical modalities was put forward by Robert Grosseteste.
A third context of the systematic interest in simulta-
neous alternatives was the new twelfth-century theory that
declarative singular propositions should be primarily
treated as temporally deﬁnite and as having an unchang-
ing truth-value. This approach was developed by twelfth-
century authors, later called nominales, one of whose
theses was that ‘‘What is once true is always true.’’
Modal Theories and Modal Logic M
801
M

It was argued that while tensed statements about tempo-
rally deﬁnite singular events have a changing truth-value,
the corresponding non-tensed propositions are unchang-
ingly true or false, without being necessarily true or false
for this reason. This was in agreement with Abelard’s view
that future contingent propositions are true or false. The
actuality of a contingent state of affairs at a speciﬁed future
time does not exclude the nontemporal possibility of
simultaneous
alternatives,
nor
does
the
truth
of
a proposition about this state of affairs make it necessary.
While medieval commentators usually followed Boethius
in assuming that in Aristotle’s view future contingent
propositions are not true or false, their own position was
closer to that of Abelard who in fact ascribed it to Aristotle
as well.
Modifying Boethius’ systematization of Aristotle’s
remarks in De interpretatione 12 and 13, twelfth- and
thirteenth-century logicians often presented the equipol-
lences between modal terms and opposed relations
between modal propositions with the help of the following
diagram:
The square could be taken to refer to modals de dicto
or singular modals de re (see below). Abelard tried to
deﬁne the opposed relations between quantiﬁed de re
modals as well. He thought that these were the same as
those between singular modal propositions, which is
completely wrong. This question was not much discussed
before its satisfactory solution in the new fourteenth-
century modal semantics presented in Buridan’s famous
modal octagon (see below).
The anonymous Dialectica Monacensis (c. 1200)
involves the analysis of modal propositions which is
inﬂuenced by Abelard and is found in many medieval
logical treatises. In discussing the quantity (universal,
particular, and singular) and quality (afﬁrmative and
negative) of the modals, the author states that modal
terms may be adverbial or nominal. The modal adverb
qualiﬁes the copula, and the structure of adverbial modal
propositions without negation is:
4. Quantity/subject/modalized
copula/predicate
(e.g.,
Every A is-necessarily B).
In this form, the negation may be located in different
places, either
5. Quantity/subject/copula modalized by a negated
mode/predicate (e.g., Every A is-not-necessarily B).
or
6. Quantity/subject/modalized negative copula/predi-
cate (e.g., Every A is-necessarily-not B).
If modal propositions with a negation are read in accor-
dance with (5), then the mode is denied; if they are read in
accordance with (6), the modal adverb qualiﬁes a negated
predication. Modal propositions with the structure of (4)–
(6) are also called de re or divided modalities. Modal
propositions with nominal modes can be taken to mean
the same as corresponding adverbial modal propositions
or can be taken to mean that what is expressed by a non-
modalized proposition is necessary, possible, or impossi-
ble. Propositions with non-adverbial nominal modes are
singular, their form being
7. Subject/copula/mode (e.g., That every A is B is
necessary).
Modal propositions of this structure are called de dicto or
compound modalities. Modalities de dicto are said to be
dealt with in Aristotle’s De interpretatione and modalities
de re in the Prior Analytics.
These distinctions were often mentioned in discus-
sions of the composition-division ambiguity in fallacies
– this was their historical background. The compound
interpretation of ‘‘A standing man can sit’’ was usually
taken to be ‘‘It is possible that a man sits and stands at
the
same
time.’’
Many
authors
formulated
the
corresponding
divided
interpretation
as
involving
a reference to a later or earlier time. The reference to
another time was based on the Boethian assumption that
the necessity of the present prevents the acceptance of
8. p (now) & it is possible that not-p (now).
The authors who regarded (8) as false did not operate with
counterfactual
alternatives,
thinking
that
if
an
unactualized present possibility is assumed to be actual-
ized, something impossible follows.
As for the logic of unanalyzed modal propositions,
Aristotle mentioned its basic inference rules without
Modal Theories and Modal Logic. Fig. 1 The square of
opposition for modal propositions.
802 M
Modal Theories and Modal Logic

a further development in Prior Analytics I.15. These were
dealt with in later ancient discussions and generally
accepted in medieval logic as follows: if the antecedent of
a good consequence is necessary/possible, the consequent
is necessary/possible. However, the main interest was in
the modal syllogistics and modalized syllogistic premises,
the logic of which was more complicated.
Avicenna wrote a brief summary of Aristotle’s modal
syllogistics, but his own theory was different, being
based on the assumptions that the subject terms and
the predicate terms of assertoric and modal propositions
stand for all possible applications and the truth-
conditions of assertoric propositions and corresponding
possibility propositions are the same. It follows that
syllogisms with assertoric and necessity premises coin-
cide with syllogisms with possibility and necessity pre-
mises and syllogisms with assertoric and possibility
premises or with assertoric premises with uniform pos-
sibility syllogisms.
While Averroes’ commentaries on the Prior Analytics
followed the main lines of Aristotle’s text, his separate
treatise on modality involved new systematic ideas, mainly
the theory of accidental and per se necessary terms and the
interpretation of syllogistic necessity premises as per se
necessary predications with per se necessary terms. Both
ideas were inspired by Aristotle’s remarks in the Posterior
Analytics I.4; the syllogistic applications were Averroes’
own inventions. Since Averroes takes modal premises to
be of the divided type, assertoric premises in Aristotelian
mixed necessity-assertoric syllogisms must have a predi-
cate term which in fact is necessary. The same applies to
the subject term of the ﬁrst premise in mixed assertoric-
necessity syllogisms. This is a speculative explanation
of Aristotle’s asymmetric treatment of mixed necessity-
assertoric syllogisms and mixed assertoric-necessity syllo-
gisms. Analogous essentialist ideas were developed in
thirteenth-century Latin discussions.
The ﬁrst known Latin commentary on Prior Analytics
is an anonymous late twelfth-century treatise which
involves detailed discussions of modal conversion and
modal syllogisms as well as many problems dealt with in
ancient commentaries. A concise summary of Aristotle’s
modal syllogistics is also provided in the Dialectica
Monacensis, and the elements of modal syllogistics were
discussed in logic courses in Paris in the ﬁrst part of the
thirteenth
century.
Robert
Kilwardby’s
commentary
(c. 1240) became an authoritative thirteenth-century
work on the Prior Analytics, from which the discussions
of modal syllogistics in Albert the Great’s commentary
(c. 1250) were also largely derived. The conversion infer-
ence rules played an important role in Aristotle’s
deduction proofs of syllogisms. While the conversion of
assertoric propositions (‘‘Every A is B’’ implies ‘‘Some B is
A,’’ ‘‘Some A is B’’ is equivalent to ‘‘Some B is A’’ as well as
‘‘No A is B’’ to ‘‘No B is A’’) was frequently discussed in
early medieval logic, the modal conversions were not often
dealt with before the Prior Analytics began to be used in
logic teaching in the thirteenth century. According to
Aristotle (An. pr. I.3), necessity propositions are converted
in the same way as the corresponding assertoric proposi-
tions; negative contingency propositions are converted to
afﬁrmative contingency propositions of the same quantity
and these by the conversion of terms to particular contin-
gency propositions. While these rules are not problematic
with respect to modals in the compound (de dicto) sense,
Aristotle employed them in proving modal syllogisms,
some of which seem to be acceptable only when the pre-
mises are necessity propositions in the divided (de re)
sense. However, reading these conversion rules in the
divided sense raises questions, since the actuality of
a subject changes into necessity when the subject becomes
the predicate and similarly with possibility and actuality.
Many historians think that Aristotle’s modal syllogistic
included various modal insights which did not form
a coherent theory. This was not the view of mid-thir-
teenth-century logicians, who believed that Aristotle’s the-
ory was perfect. In discussing the conversion rules and
syllogistic moods, they hardly paid attention to the dis-
tinction between compound and divided modalities,
although some kind of divided reading was the underlying
assumption. Many logicians discussed the same alleged
counter-examples to the universal conversability of neces-
sity propositions, such as
9. Everything healthy (or awake) is necessarily an animal.
Robert Kilwardby’s explanation is based on the view that
convertible necessity premises in modal syllogistics are
necessity propositions per se and not per accidens, like
(9), which are not convertible. In afﬁrmative necessity
propositions per se, the subject is per se connected to
the predicate. In negative necessity propositions per se,
the subject is per se incompatible with the predicate. The
terms in per se inherences or incompatibilities are essential
and necessarily stand for the things they signify. The
historical background to Kilwardby’s interpretation is
not clear, but it does show close similarities to Averroes’
discussions and may have been inﬂuenced by them.
As for the conversion of contingency propositions
(neither necessary nor impossible), Kilwardby notes
that while the converted propositions of indeﬁnite
(utrumlibet) contingency propositions are of the same
type of contingency, the conversion of natural contingency
Modal Theories and Modal Logic M
803
M

propositions (possible in most cases) results in contin-
gency propositions when contingency means possibility
proper (not impossible). There were extensive discussions
of the kinds of contingency based on various philosophical
ideas of contingency in the commentaries by Kilwardby
and Albert the Great and in other treatises by their
contemporaries.
Following Aristotle’s remark according to which
‘‘A contingently belongs to B’’ may mean either ‘‘to that
to which B belongs’’ or ‘‘to that to which B contingently
belongs,’’ Kilwardby argues that the subject terms in con-
tingency syllogisms are read in the second way, having the
ampliated form ‘‘Everything/something that is contin-
gently B is contingently A,’’ if syllogistic relations do not
demand restriction. In explaining the difference in this
respect between necessity propositions and contingency
propositions, Kilwardby argues that since the terms in per
se necessity propositions are necessary, ‘‘Every A is neces-
sarily B’’ and ‘‘Whatever is necessarily A is necessarily B’’
mean the same. Contingency propositions which are
ampliated do not mean the same as those which are not
so ampliated, although both are convertible.
According to Kilwardby, the modal character of the
predication in the conclusion of perfect ﬁrst ﬁgure
syllogisms follows that of the ﬁrst premise, which
involves the whole syllogism in accordance with the dici
de omni et nullo. The premises and the conclusion in
uniform necessity syllogisms are necessary per se. In
mixed ﬁrst-ﬁgure syllogisms with a major necessity pre-
mise and a minor assertoric premise, the non-modalized
premise should be simpliciter assertoric, that is, a neces-
sarily true per se predication. Similarly, in mixed ﬁrst-
ﬁgure syllogisms with contingent major and assertoric
minor premises, the assertoric premise must be simpliciter
assertoric, but this time the criteria are that the predicate
belongs to the subject per se, invariably or by natural
contingency.
Kilwardby explains the various readings of assertoric
premises of mixed syllogisms by stating that a ﬁrst-ﬁgure
major necessity premise ‘‘appropriates’’ to itself a minor
which is necessary per se. No such appropriation occurs in
ﬁrst-ﬁgure mixed assertoric-necessity syllogisms. In the
second ﬁgure, while the universal negative necessity pre-
mise
appropriates
a
necessary
premise
to
itself,
a
particular
necessity
premise
cannot
appropriate
a universal necessary premise to itself, nor an afﬁrmative
a negative. There are similar appropriation rules for third-
ﬁgure
moods.
In
a
mixed
ﬁrst-ﬁgure
necessity-
contingency
mood
the
ﬁrst
premise
appropriates
a natural contingency minor to itself. While the major
premise of a mixed ﬁrst-ﬁgure assertoric contingency
syllogism does not appropriate a minor premise of any
special contingency, the major premise of a mixed ﬁrst-
ﬁgure contingency-assertoric syllogism demands a simply
assertoric minor premise which is true in most cases, if not
necessary.
Kilwardby and his followers considered Aristotle’s
modal syllogistics as the correct theory of modalities, the
explication of which demanded metaphysical consider-
ations. Restricting the modal conversion of necessity
propositions into those involving necessary terms and
the discussions of the kinds of contingency are examples
of this approach as well as the various appropriation rules.
Kilwardby assumed that propositions of the same form
had different interpretations, depending on how they were
related to other propositions in a syllogism. From the
logical point of view, the rules pertaining to this variation
have an ad hoc character.
Late medieval discussions of necessity and possibility
were strongly inﬂuenced by the modal theory of John
Duns Scotus, who took as an obvious fact that there are
contingent states of affairs which could be otherwise at
that very moment of time at which they are actual. This
idea of simultaneous alternatives played an important role
in Scotus’ proofs for the existence of a necessary ﬁrst being
which acts as the free ﬁrst cause of the contingent world.
Augustine had already argued that the eternal and immu-
table creative act of divine will is free only if it is a choice
between alternatives and could be other than it is. This
conception was developed in much more detail in Scotus’
metaphysics. God’s omniscience involves all possibilities,
which as objects of God’s knowledge receive an intelligible
or objective being. Some of these are included in God’s
providential plan of creation and will receive actual being.
The description of a possible state of affairs at a certain
moment consists of compossible possibilities. Although
possibilities necessarily are what they are, the actualiza-
tions of non-necessary possibilities are not necessary but
contingent. Since all ﬁnite things are contingently actual
when they are actual, they are associated with alternative
possibilities with respect to the same time, though these
are not compossible with what is actual. Impossibilities are
incompossibilities between possible components, such as
Socrates’ sitting at a certain time and Socrates’ not sitting
at that same time.
One of Scotus’ new ideas was the domain of possibility
as a nonexistent objective precondition of all being and
thinking. This was well known in the seventeenth century
as well through Sua´rez’s works. In his discussion of eternal
truths, Descartes criticized the classical view of the onto-
logical foundation of modality as well as the Scotist theory
of modality and conceivability. He thought that necessities
804 M
Modal Theories and Modal Logic

and possibilities as such are freely established by God and
that they could therefore be different from what they are.
This was criticized by Leibniz, whose modal views were
inﬂuenced by the Scotist conception of alternativeness,
although he developed it in a different way. Another
inﬂuential idea was the systematic distinction between
logical and natural necessities and possibilities; this called
for new explanations of what was meant by the necessities
of natural philosophy, the denials of which were not log-
ically inconsistent.
One important branch of medieval logic developed in
treatises called De obligationibus dealt, roughly speaking,
with how an increasing set of true and false propositions
accepted in a disputation might remain coherent.
According to thirteenth-century rules, false present-tense
statements could be accepted as expressing possible posi-
tions only if they were taken to refer to a moment of time
different from the actual one. Scotus deleted this rule,
which was based on the thesis of the necessity of the
present, and later theories accepted the Scotist revision.
Obligations logic could now be regarded as a theory of
how to deal with logically possible states of affairs and
their mutual relationships. These discussions were related
to the interest in counterfactual reasoning. As mentioned
above, Averroes and Aquinas developed a theory of
abstract possibilities for dealing with counterfactual
assumptions without the theoretical idea of simultaneous
alternatives. John Buridan heavily criticized this approach
from the point of view of the new modal theory. Investi-
gating possibilities is to think about them as actualized in
a coherent context of compossibilities. If the abstract
possibilities in Averroes and Aquinas cannot be treated
in this way, calling them possibilities is based on
a conceptual confusion.
William Ockham, John Buridan, and some other four-
teenth-century logicians took the new notion of logical
possibility as the starting-point of their modal logic, which
largely
dropped
the
thirteenth-century
essentialist
assumptions and consequently became much more com-
plete and satisfactory. Questions of modal logic were
discussed separately with respect to modal propositions
de dicto and de re; modal propositions de re were further
divided into two groups depending on whether the subject
terms referred to actual or possible beings. It was thought
that logicians should also analyze the relationships
between these readings and, furthermore, the conse-
quences with various types of modal propositions as
their parts. Richard of Campsall played an interesting
role in the development of medieval modal syllogistics.
He introduced the habit of treating the de dicto and de re
moods separately, but he was also dependent on
Kilwardby’s interpretation. The new modal logic of Wil-
liam Ockham, John Buridan, and Pseudo-Scotus was
among the most remarkable achievements of medieval
logic. Aristotle’s modal syllogistics was now regarded as
a fragmentary theory in which the distinctions between
different types of ﬁne structures were not explicated.
These authors did not try to reconstruct it as such into a
uniform system, believing, like some modern commenta-
tors, that such a reconstruction is not possible. Buridan’s
modal logic, dominant in late medieval times, was
embraced by such inﬂuential authors as Marsilius of
Inghen, Albert of Saxony, and Jodocus Trutfetter. The rise
of the new modal logic was accompanied by theories of
epistemic logic and deontic logic which also belong among
the remarkable achievements of late medieval philosophy.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Anselm of Canterbury
▶Augustine ▶Boethius ▶Gilbert of Poitiers ▶Ibn
Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶John Buridan ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Logic ▶Logic in
the Arab and Islamic World ▶Peter Abelard ▶Prior Ana-
lytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Robert Grosseteste
▶Robert Kilwardby ▶Syllogism, Theories of ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert
the
Great
(1890)
Commentarius
in
librum
I
priorum
analyticorum, ed. Borgnet A. Opera omnia, vol 1. Vive`s, Paris
Anonymus (1967) Dialectica Monacensis. In: de Rijk LM, Logica
modernorum. A contribution to the history of early Terminist logic
II.1–2: The origin and early development of the theory of supposi-
tion. Wijsgerige teksten en studies, vol 6. van Gorgum, Assen
Aquinas Thomas (1989) Expositio libri Peryermenias, cura et studio
Fratrum Praedicatorum. Commissio Leonina, Rome/Vrin, Paris;
Thomas A (1962) On interpretation (trans: Oesterle JT). Marquette
University Press, Milwaukee
Boethius (1877–1880) Commentarii in librum Aristotelis Perihermeneias
I–II, ed. Meiser C. Teubner, Lipzig
Buridan John (1976) Tractatus de consequentiis, ed. Hubien H.
Philosophes me´die´vaux 16. Publications Universitaires, Louvain;
Vander-Oyez, Paris
Buridan
John
(2001)
Dialectica
(an
annotated
translation
with
a philosophical introduction by Klima G). Yale, New Haven
Duns Scotus John (1963) Opera omnia, vol 6, ed. Balic´ C et al. Typis
Polyglottis Vaticanis, Vatican City
Kilwardby Robert (1516) In libros priorum analyticorum expositio
(under the name of Giles of Rome). Venice (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt
am Main, 1968)
Ockham William (1974) Summa logicae, ed. Boehner Ph, Ga´l G, Brown S.
Guillelmi de Ockham Opera philosophica, vol 1. St. Bonaventure
University, St. Bonaventure
Peter Abelard (1919–1927) Philosophische Schriften I. Die Logica
‘Ingredientibus’, ed. Geyer B. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie
und Theologie des Mittelalters XXI. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster, pp 1–3
Modal Theories and Modal Logic M
805
M

Peter Abelard (1958) Super Periermenias XII–XIV, ed. Minio-Paluello L.
Twelfth century logic: texts and studies II: Abaelardiana inedita.
Edizioni di Storia e Leteratura, Rome
Richard of Campsall (1968) Quaestiones super librum priorum
analyticorum, ed. Synan EA, The works of Richard Campsall, vol 1.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Secondary Sources
Boh I (1993) Epistemic logic in the later middle ages. Routledge, London/
New York
Ebbesen S (1981) Analyzing syllogisms or Anonymus Aurelianensis III –
the (Pesumably) earliest Latin commentary on the prior analytics,
and its Greek model. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Aˆ ge Grec et
Latin 37:1–20
Knuuttila S (1993) Modalities in medieval philosophy. Routledge, Lon-
don/New York
Knuuttila S (2004) Anselm on modality. In: Davies B, Leftow B (eds) The
Cambridge companion to Anselm. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 111–131
Knuuttila S (2008) Medieval modal theories and modal logic. In: Woods J,
Gabbay DM (eds) Handbook of the history of logic II. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp 505–78
Knuuttila S, Hallamaa O (1995) Roger Roseth and medieval deontic logic.
Log Anal 149:75–87
Kukkonen T (2000) Possible worlds in the Tahaˆfut al-tahaˆfut: Averroes on
plenitude and possibility. J Hist Philos 38:329–347
Lagerlund H (2000) Modal syllogistics in the middle ages. Studien und
Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 70. Brill, Leiden
Martin C (1999) Thinking the impossible: non-reductive arguments from
impossible hypotheses in Boethius and Philoponus. Oxf Stud
Ancient Philos 19:279–302
Normore C (2003) Duns Scotus’s modal theory. In: Williams T (ed) The
Cambridge companion to Duns Scotus. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 129–60
Street T (2004) Arabic logic. In: Woods J, Gabbay DM (eds) Handbook of
the history of logic I. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 471–556
Thom P (2003) Medieval modal systems: problems and concepts. Ashgate
studies in medieval philosophy. Ashgate, Aldershot
Thom P (2007) Logic and ontology in the syllogistic of Robert Kilwardby.
Brill, Leiden
Yrjo¨nsuuri M (ed) (2001) Medieval formal logic: obligations, insolubles
and consequences. The New Synthese Historical Library 49. Kluwer,
Dordrecht
Modistae
RIAVAN DER LECQ
History of Philosophy
Utrecht University
Utrecht
The Netherlands
Abstract
‘‘Modistae’’ is the name of a group of Parisian grammar-
ians and philosophers who lived in the period between
1270 and 1300, the most important names being Martin of
Dacia, Radulphus Brito, and Thomas of Erfurt. Their
work on grammar and logic is characterized by the inten-
tion to situate these former liberal arts within the medieval
system of sciences. In order to achieve this goal they
had to ﬁnd universal objects for these new sciences.
The result was the introduction of the concept of
‘‘modes of signifying’’ (modi signiﬁcandi) in grammar,
denoting the general meanings of words that constitute
grammatical categories. In logic, they shared the opinion
of other intentionalists of their time that the proper sub-
ject of logic is the second intention. In grammar as well as
in logic they assumed a complete interdependence
between the structure of reality and the operations of the
mind. To warrant the foundation of our mental and lin-
guistic operations in reality, they argued that every
extramental object has various modes of being (modi
essendi) which serve as the ontological counterpart of the
modes of signifying and the second intentions.
The term Modistae is used to denote the, mostly Parisian,
masters of the late thirteenth and early fourteenth century
who wrote on grammar, logic, and metaphysics. They
worked within a tradition that had its origin in ancient
Latin grammar, but had undergone considerable change
under the inﬂuence of the work of scholars such as Robert
Grosseteste, Peter Helias, Robert Kilwardby, and many
anonymous commentators on Priscian. The ﬁrst repre-
sentatives of the modist school were the Danish grammar-
ians Boethius and Martin of Dacia (c. 1270), but the most
important author seems to be Radulphus Brito (c. 1290).
The last signiﬁcant member of the group was Thomas of
Erfurt (c. 1300), whose work Grammatica speculativa is
considered the most complete modistic treatment of
grammatical theory available.
In the early Middle Ages grammar was the art of
speaking well, vocal expressions being its object. It was
after the recovery of Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, how-
ever, that the ideas about grammar changed: grammarians
now wanted to make grammar a science. This scientiﬁc
approach to grammar was called ‘‘speculative grammar.’’
Taking Aristotle’s requirements for the construction of
a scientiﬁc theory seriously, the Modistae were looking for
universal and immutable objects that could function as
the foundation of their science. Since speech differs from
one language to another, vocal expressions could no
longer constitute the immutable objects of a universal
grammar. Thus, grammarians became philosophers, spec-
ulating about the universal features of language, in partic-
ular the construction of linguistic expressions. The
Modistae were interested in the meanings of words in so
806 M
Modistae

far as these meanings constitute grammatical categories,
such as nouns, verbs, cases, or tenses, the so-called modes
of signifying (modi signiﬁcandi). The modes of signifying
were the principles of grammar.
According to modistic analysis, words acquire their
meaning by a deliberate act of imposition (impositio).
In a ﬁrst imposition, a sound (vox) is connected with
a referent. The relation between sound and referent is
called the ratio signiﬁcandi. The result of this coupling of
expression and meaning is a so-called dictio, which is not
yet a word or term in the logical sense, but rather a lexeme
(Pinborg, 1982). This lexeme can become a term and part
of speech when it has received, as a result of a secondary
imposition, a number of modes of signifying. The follow-
ing example may help to make this clearer. The English
word ‘‘drink’’ would be a manifestation of the lexeme
drink,∗which includes all occurrences of the word
‘‘drink,’’ ‘‘drinker,’’ ‘‘drinking,’’ etc. For this lexeme to
become a particular term or part of speech, as in ‘‘drinks
are served at the bar,’’ several modes of signifying are
necessary, in this case the modes of noun, plural, and
nominative case. It is clear, then, that the object referred
to by the lexeme is not a particular thing, but a more or
less abstract content not yet determined in a category.
Now the modes of signifying prepare the lexeme for var-
ious syntactical functions. Each lexeme has one essential
mode of signifying and various other modes. The essential
mode determines to which fundamental grammatical cat-
egory it will belong, for example, noun or verb, whereas
other modes provide it with less basic grammatical fea-
tures, such as tense, case, or number.
As a result of their philosophical background, the
Modistae believed that there is a structural parallel
between language, thought, and reality, but unlike logi-
cians, they were not interested in truth conditions of
sentences, but in the construction of linguistic expres-
sions. Such a construction is a union of two parts of speech
(partes orationis), for example, a noun and a verb, or
a noun and an adjective. Each part has its own modes of
signifying. A construction is well formed if the modes of
one part of speech are compatible with the modes of the
other part, for example, a part of speech with the modes of
signifying of noun, plural, and accusative case would in
many cases be compatible with another part of speech with
the modes of participle, and present tense, as in the
expression ‘‘selling books.’’
Although the aim of speculative grammar was to
describe relationships between linguistic elements, the
Modistae had to take the structure of reality into account.
To ensure the scientiﬁc status of their doctrine, they
needed an ontological foundation (fundamentum in re)
of the modes of signifying. Being moderate realists, the
Modistae assumed that the structure of reality is mirrored
in cognition and in language. As the necessary ontological
counterparts of the modes of signifying they introduced
the modes of being (modi essendi), which they considered
to be accidental properties of the extramental objects, as
distinct from their substantial form. Furthermore, since
modes of being cannot be signiﬁed without being under-
stood, a mental counterpart was needed: the modes of
understanding (modi intelligendi). The modes of signify-
ing correspond with the modes of understanding (our
concepts) and through these they ﬁnd their ontological
foundation in the modes of being. This modistic triangle
of modes is in accordance with the traditional interpreta-
tion of Aristotle’s De interpretatione ch. 1, according to
which words signify concepts and concepts are natural
likenesses of extramental objects. Later philosophers crit-
icized the modists for confusing linguistic distinctions
with real ones, but this confusion was a consequence of
their Aristotelian conception of science.
The grammatical theory of the modes of signifying
also determined the modistic outlook on logic. The
Modistae were interested in metalogical questions about
the status of logical concepts. In their view, logic should be
considered not as an art, as in the tradition of the liberal
arts, but as a science, and what holds for grammar also
holds for logic: if it is to be a science, its object must be
immutable and eternal. In the case of logic, this object
appeared to be the second intention. Second intentions are
concepts of a certain kind, which are supposed to be
universal and objective and to have a foundation in reality
(fundamentum in re), for example, ‘‘genus,’’ ‘‘species,’’
‘‘proposition,’’ and ‘‘syllogism.’’
Thomas Aquinas and other intentionalists in the Mid-
dle Ages considered second intentions as second order
concepts (concepts of concepts) and ﬁrst intentions as
concepts of extramental things. The Modistae, however,
were of the opinion that second intentions are only sec-
ondary in the sense that they presuppose ﬁrst intentions.
Both ﬁrst and second intentions are ﬁrst-order concepts,
in their view. Moreover, an intention is a concept as well as
the foundation of its content; it can be every extramental
object as far as it is known, for example, a man as con-
ceived. This reﬂects the epistemological view that the
human intellect grasps extramental objects through con-
cepts that designate these things including the ways in
which they are conceived.
First and second intentions result from the operations
of the intellect in the following way (Pinborg, 1975). The
act of apprehension produces ﬁrst intentions like man and
animal and second intentions like genus and species; the
Modistae M
807
M

act of judgment generates ﬁrst intentions like man is an
animal and second intentions like conclusion and propo-
sition and the act of reasoning brings about ﬁrst intentions
like every man runs, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates
runs and second intentions like syllogism. The second
intentions are the proper objects of logic, according to
the Modistae, but the most interesting question is: how
do they see the extramental foundation of these concepts?
Here, the modes of being appear to be useful again.
Both ﬁrst and second intentions are drawn from the
modes of being (modi essendi) of extramental objects: ﬁrst
intentions from the proper modes of being and second
intentions from the common modes of being. Second
intentions conceive and signify extramental objects
under a common mode of being. In this process the
intellect and the object cooperate, for example, the
extramental object man has a proper mode of being
from which the ﬁrst intention ‘‘man’’ can be drawn and
a common mode of being, which is the foundation of the
second intention ‘‘universal.’’ The accidental properties
(of being) of the extramental object man are the founda-
tion of the concepts ‘‘man’’ and ‘‘universal.’’ Logicians
consider things according to their common modes
of being. Second intentions are their primary object of
study.
The theory of second intentions sketched above is the
version of this theory that can be found in the work of
Radulphus Brito. In his view, all second intentions have
a relation to the real world, although it is less clear how
this works in the case of conclusions and syllogisms, which
seem to be examples of mental constructions. Anyhow, the
modists’ views on grammar and logic are formed by the
same intention: to make sciences out of these liberal arts.
In both cases, their inspiration was Aristotle’s conception
of science. Their opinions were severely criticized by later
philosophers, but their foundation of logic and grammar
in reality was an expression of the intellectual climate of
the end of the thirteenth century.
See also: ▶Being ▶Boethius of Dacia ▶Intention,
Primary and Secondary ▶Peter Helias ▶Radulphus
Brito ▶Robert Grosseteste ▶Robert Kilwardby ▶Simon
of Faversham ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Brito Radulphus (1980) Quaestiones super Priscianum minore, ed.
Enders H W, Pinborg J. Frommann-Holzboog, Stuttgart-Bad
Cannstatt
Thomas of Erfurt (1972) Grammatica speculativa (an edition with trans
and commentary: Bursill-Hall GL). Longman, London
Secondary Sources
Bursill-Hall GL (1971) Speculative grammar in the Middle Ages. The
doctrine of Partes orationis of the Modistae. Mouton, The Hague/
Paris
Covington MA (1984) Syntactic theory in the high Middle Ages. Modistic
models
of
sentence
structure.
Cambridge
University
Press,
Cambridge
de Rijk LM (2005) Giraldus Odonis OFM, Opera philosophica, vol II: De
intentionibus. Critical edition with a study on the medieval inten-
tionality debate up to ca. 1350. Brill, Leiden
Ebbesen S et al (1984) Simon of Faversham, Quaestiones super libro
elenchorum. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Pinborg J (1972) Logik und Semantik im Mittelalter. Ein U¨ berblick.
Frommann-Holzboog, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt
Pinborg J (1975) Radulphus Brito’s sophism on second intentions. Vivar-
ium XIII:119–152
Pinborg J (1982) Speculative grammar. In: Kretzmann N, Kenny A,
Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 254–269
Rosier I (1983) La grammaire spe´culative des Modistes. Presses
universitaires de Lille, Lille
Rosier I (1994) La parole comme acte. Sur la grammaire et la se´mantique
au XIIIe sie`cle. Vrin, Paris
Moral Philosophy, Arabic
▶Ethics, Arabic
Moses Maimonides
HOWARD KREISEL
The Goldstein-Goren Department of Jewish Thought
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer Sheva
Israel
Abstract
The article deals with the leading Jewish philosopher of the
Middle Ages, Moses Maimonides. It provides an overview
of the topics he deals with in his treatise, The Guide of the
Perplexed. These topics include the nature of God, the
creation of the world, miracles and prophecy, the problem
of evil, providence, and human perfection.
Biographical Information
Moses Maimonides (b. 1138, Cordoba; d. 1204, Cairo) was
not only the most important Jewish philosopher of the
Middle Ages, but one of the greatest scholars of Jewish Law
808 M
Moral Philosophy, Arabic

of all ages, and a leading physician in his period. He also
served as head of the Jewish community in Egypt. Mai-
monides’ philosophy ﬁnds expression not only in his
treatise, The Guide of the Perplexed, but also in his legal
writings, most notably the opening chapters of the
Mishneh Torah and in some sections of his Commentary
on the Mishnah, in some of his medical writings, such as
Medical Aphorisms, and in some of his epistles, such as
Treatise on Resurrection. In this article I will conﬁne myself
to Maimonides’ thought as it emerges from the Guide.
Philosophy
The Guide of the Perplexed: An Overview
Maimonides’
The
Guide
of
the
Perplexed
is
not
a philosophical work in the strict sense of the term. His
primary intent in writing this treatise is not in order to
expand the borders of philosophical knowledge or to
explore topics on the basis of reason alone. It is closer in
spirit to theology, deﬁning and rationally defending basic
religious tenets. Yet it is far different from the classic works
belonging to this genre, such as Thomas Aquinas’ Summa
theologica which is far more systematic in its presentation.
The Guide devotes as much attention to the interpretation
of Scriptural verses and passages from rabbinic texts as to
rational argumentation and the rationale behind the order
in which it presents its topics and the manner in which
they are presented is not always evident.
In the introduction to his treatise Maimonides indi-
cates that he wrote it for the individual who was steeped in
Jewish tradition and went on to study philosophy, becom-
ing in the process perplexed by the seeming contradictions
between these two areas. Such an individual often feels
that he is faced with an either/or choice – either to remain
loyal to religious tradition at the expense of human reason
or to abandon tradition in deference to reason. Maimon-
ides sets out to show that there is another alternative – the
reinterpretation of traditional texts in light of reason.
Tradition hides certain profound truths from the masses
by presenting them in a ﬁgurative manner in accordance
with their limited capacities. Maimonides is very much
inﬂuenced in this matter by the Platonic political tradi-
tion, particularly as developed by the Islamic philosopher
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. Most people are not prepared to appreciate the
bright light of the truth and are blinded by it instead. Only
with the attainment of wisdom does one begin to appre-
ciate the truths underlying the Bible and rabbinic writings
and understands that not all their words should be
interpreted literally. Certain terms have ﬁgurative mean-
ings and the prophets often speak in allegories. The cor-
poreal descriptions of God, for example, are meant to
uphold the masses’ belief in God, since they can only
accept the existence of corporeal entities. In truth, how-
ever, all these descriptions should be interpreted in
a ﬁgurative manner. Maimonides feels that the time was
ripe to reveal the truth of God’s incorporeality to all the
adherents of Judaism and insist that they uphold this
belief. Many other topics, however, must continue to be
presented in a veiled manner – for example, the Account of
Creation at the beginning of the book of Genesis and the
Account of the Chariot at the beginning of the book of
Ezekiel – in order not to disturb the faith of the masses.
Maimonides explicitly indicates that while he will
attempt to further enlighten his readers on the true mean-
ing of traditional texts dealing with the most profound
topics pertaining to Jewish thought, he will at the same
time uphold the spirit of the prohibition not to present
these truths explicitly but only hint at them. One of the
techniques he employs is that of purposeful contradictions
in his treatise in order to hide what he regards as the true
view. Another is the diffusion of remarks hinting to his
true view on a given topic in the context of his discussion
of a different topic. Thus, to reconstruct Maimonides’
position on a given topic, it is important not only to pay
close attention to the manner he presents his positions and
the premises underlying them, but also to study the trea-
tise in its entirety and not only the chapters pertaining to
the topic in question. Maimonides assumes that the aver-
age reader is an inattentive reader who will not pick up on
his hints. His writing technique, however, has resulted
through the centuries in far different interpretations of
the views he presents in his treatise.
From Maimonides’ introduction it is tempting to con-
clude that he sees the esoteric level of the traditional texts
of Jewish tradition as being in essential agreement with the
Aristotelian philosophical conception of the world, while
on their exoteric level they appear to contradict the world-
view of the philosophers. Otherwise why would he go to
such extremes to hide his true views? This indeed has been
the thrust of one important school of interpretation of the
treatise throughout the ages, whose most famous modern
exponent has been Leo Strauss. Yet in the Guide itself
much of the most signiﬁcant philosophical argumentation
goes to proving that the philosophers accepted doctrines
not demonstrably proven by reason and the traditional
doctrines are in fact more in harmony with the dictates of
reason. This is particularly true of Maimonides’discussion
of the creation of the world, which will be discussed in
more detail below.
Maimonides divides his treatise in three sections.
Many
of
the
chapters
of
the
ﬁrst
section
form
a philosophical lexicon, for the most part devoted to
Moses Maimonides M
809
M

showing how terms connoting God’s corporeality or the
corporeality of the angels should be interpreted ﬁgura-
tively. He also deals with the problems involved in
attaining philosophical knowledge and the limits of
human reason. Beginning with chap. 50 of the ﬁrst part
he enters into a detailed discussion of divine attributes and
the names of God. He also presents his view of God’s
relation to the world. All the positions he presents are in
harmony with the Neoplatonized version of Aristotelian
philosophy prevalent in his period. Maimonides con-
cludes the ﬁrst part by expounding in detail the proofs
for the existence, unity, and incorporeality of God as
presented in Moslem theology, the kala¯m, after depicting
its fundamental premises. While he displays an exception-
ally critical approach to this theology, particularly the
premises upon which it is based, for the most part regard-
ing them as false, he nevertheless ascribes to it an impor-
tant role in proving God’s existence. The theologians
prove God by ﬁrst proving that the world is created.
Maimonides argues that their proofs for creation are not
demonstrative, resulting in their proofs for the existence
of God being non-demonstrative. The Aristotelian philo-
sophic proofs for the existence of God, on the other hand,
are based on the premise that the world is without begin-
ning. This too in Maimonides’ view has not been ade-
quately demonstrated. We have then two sets of proofs for
God based on contradictory propositions – that is, the
world is created and the world is without beginning.
Neither set provides us with a demonstrative proof for
God’s existence. Yet if we combine both sets we have
a demonstrative proof, since the world must be either
created or without beginning, there is no third alternative.
If we assume that the proofs for the creation of the world
are correct, then the kala¯m has provided us with
a demonstrative proof for the existence of God. If we
assume that the proofs for eternity a parte ante of the
world are correct, then the Aristotelian philosophers
have provided us with a demonstrative proof.
Interestingly, Maimonides analyzes the philosophic
proofs and the 26 premises upon which they are based at
the beginning of the second part of the treatise, rather than
at the end of the ﬁrst. As opposed to his approach to the
kala¯m he expresses full agreement with all the philosophic
premises with the crucial exception of one – that time and
movement are eternal and always existed in actu. In the
following chapters of this part (chaps. 2–12) Maimonides
proceeds to express his agreement also with the Aristote-
lian view how God governs the world through the order of
nature and shows how Scripture should be interpreted
accordingly. All physical changes in the world result from
the ﬁxed motion of the living spheres, each standing in
relation to a Separate Intellect, with God serving as the
First Cause and the Unmoved Mover on the pinnacle of
the hierarchy of existence. The one point on which Mai-
monides breaks with the view of the philosophers is on the
question of creation. The philosophers claim that the
world with its ﬁxed order always existed, God serving as
the eternal First Cause of an eternal world eternally ema-
nating from Him. Maimonides claims that God created
the world and its order ex nihilo. Chapters 13–31 are
devoted to negating the philosophic arguments for the
eternity of the world and providing philosophic and reli-
gious arguments for its creation. Maimonides also dis-
cusses the question whether the world is eternal a parte
post and presents his philosophic exegesis of the Account
of Creation. In the context of this discussion he deals with
the problem of miracles (chap. 29). He concludes the
second part of the Guide with an analysis of the phenom-
enon of prophecy (chaps. 32–48), drawing a sharp distinc-
tion between this phenomenon, for the most part treated
by him as a natural one, and two other phenomena which
he treats as supernatural – the prophecy of Moses and the
Revelation at Sinai. One can see that the acceptance of the
doctrine of creation allows Maimonides to break with the
Aristotelian philosophers, at least according to his explicit
views, on the issue of purposeful exceptions to the natural
order. Only the God of creation can also be the God of
history, though Maimonides attempts to limit the occur-
rence of miracles and God’s immediate involvement in
human affairs.
The third part of the Guide opens with a philosophical
exegesis of the Account of the Chariot (chaps. 1–7),
treating Ezekiel’s vision of the heavenly world as essentially
presenting the order of the spheres and their Movers and
their inﬂuence on the four sublunar elements – that is to
say the scientiﬁc picture of the world – in an allegorical
manner. The next topics that Maimonides discusses
are the problems of evil, personal providence, and God’s
knowledge of particulars. He also presents a philosophical
analysis of the Book of Job (chaps. 8–24). He continues
with a lengthy excursus of the reasons for the divine
commandments presented in the Pentateuch (chaps.
25–50), and concludes the Guide with a discussion of
human perfection (chaps. 51–54).
God
In his discussion of God’s essence Maimonides combines
Neoplatonic and Aristotelian ideas. Maimonides’ God is
the absolute One from whom all positive attributes must
be negated. These not only include attributes belonging to
the Aristotelian categories pertaining to material beings,
such as quantity, quality, place, time, relation etc., but even
810 M
Moses Maimonides

such attributes as living and powerful. Anything that
entails change or multiplicity in God cannot be ascribed
to Him. For Maimonides all corporeal descriptions of God
in Scripture should be interpreted ﬁguratively and all
positive attributes attributed to God should be under-
stood as either negative attributes or attributes of action.
When Scripture says, for example, that God is alive and
powerful, the intent is not to attribute the attributes of life
and power to God but to indicate that God is not dead or
powerless. Descriptions of God as merciful or vengeful are
not meant to ascribe to Him these human emotions but to
describe the divine actions which when translated into the
human sphere are most often seen as stemming from such
emotion. Hence, war and famine are ascribed to divine
wrath, while plentiful crops are traced to divine mercy.
Numerous and even contradictory actions, Maimonides
argues, can stem from a single essence without entailing
multiplicity, just as ﬁre by virtue of a single quality
blackens, bleaches, cooks, burns, melts, and hardens.
Together with the doctrine of negative attributes Mai-
monides appears to maintain the view that God lives,
knows, and is powerful in some positive sense. His solu-
tion to the problems raised by this position is to argue that
God lives, but not through life; knows, but not through
knowledge, etc. That is to say, in reference to God these are
not attributes superadded to the divine essence but all are
one with the essence. God’s knowledge, thus, is totally
different from our knowledge, having nothing in common
with it, and hence completely incomprehensible to us.
Maimonides’ God is also Avicenna’s Necessary Exis-
tent. Like Avicenna, Maimonides treats existence as an
attribute superadded to essence. God is the one existent
whose essence necessitates existence. All other existents
attain their existence from an external cause; hence, their
existence is only possible by nature. If their cause did not
bring them into existence they would not exist.
In addition to viewing God as the absolute One who
possesses no positive attributes and whose essence is
unfathomable, as well as the Necessary Existent, Maimon-
ides continues to uphold the Aristotelian view of God as
Self-intellecting intellect, thereby treating God’s essence as
intellect. According to Maimonides, God’s self-intellection
encompasses all existence in a single thought, since God is
the cause of all existence. The transcendent deity is at the
same time the ultimate efﬁcient, ﬁnal, and formal cause of
the world, the world being regarded by him as a single
organism. Maimonides insists that while the world’s exis-
tence is completely dependent upon God – the world
could not exist even for a ﬂeeting second without God
existing – God’s existence is in no manner dependent
upon the world. All apparent contradictions entailed by
these diverse views of God are reconciled by God’s abso-
lute, unfathomable ‘‘otherness.’’
Creation
At the outset of the discussion Maimonides presents three
fundamentally different views on this issue: the traditional
view treating the world in its entirety as created ex nihilo;
the Platonic view that the world is created from eternal
matter since creation ex nihilo is regarded as absolutely
impossible; the Aristotelian view that the world existed
without beginning with God as its source. Since the Pla-
tonists, like the Aristotelians, posit some form of eternal
state to the world, Maimonides feels that it is sufﬁcient to
tackle the more rigorous arguments of the Aristotelians on
this question and ignore the Platonic approach. Maimon-
ides maintains that while the Aristotelians have presented
many arguments in support of their view, none of them is
demonstrative. He summarizes and critiques the known
philosophic arguments for eternity showing that each
suffers from a major ﬂaw. The philosophic proofs are
either predicated on the laws of physics, such as every
motion must be preceded by a motion, hence motion is
without beginning, or on theological premises, such as
creation entails a change in God, while it has been dem-
onstrated that God is not subject to any form of change.
Against the former set of proofs Maimonides argues that
physical laws came into being with the creation of the
world and do not reﬂect the state of affairs prior to
creation. In other words, they are natural laws, and not
logical ones, which God introduced when creating the
world. The theological proofs for eternity are regarded
by Maimonides as more compelling since they are based
on the nature of the Deity. He argues that the act of
creation does not entail the movement from potentiality
to actuality, nor does the act of willing after not willing
entail a change of essence since this is the essence of will –
that is to say, to will or not will. Only if we posit external
factors inﬂuencing the divine will would this entail
a change in God. The argument that just as God’s wisdom,
which mandated the creation of the world is eternal so
must the world be eternal is dismissed by Maimonides on
the grounds that we do not fathom the divine wisdom
which may have mandated the creation of a non-eternal
world.
Maimonides concedes that his critique of the philo-
sophic arguments does not in itself constitute a proof for
creation, it only shows that creation is possible from
a philosophic perspective. Maimonides presents one dia-
lectical argument for creation which he ﬁnds rationally
compelling, one based on the notion of ‘‘particulariza-
tion’’ – that is to say, the peculiarities exhibited by the
Moses Maimonides M
811
M

heavenly order which indicate that they are a product of
design. While the Aristotelians, according to Maimonides,
can provide a true explanation for the lack of uniformity
in the entities of the earth, they have no convincing expla-
nation for the lack of uniformity in the size of the planets
or the differences in their motion. Since these particulars
cannot result from natural necessity – the matter of which
the heavenly bodies are composed is completely uniform –
they must be the product of one who particularized them
in this manner. This in turn entails their creation. Mai-
monides is aware that one can still argue that God may
have particularized them in this manner from eternity. His
rejoinder is that the eternity of the world entails necessity,
eternal creation being an oxymoron, and only by positing
the world’s creation from a state of absolute nonexistence,
can one explain those particularities of the heavenly order
that reﬂect divine purpose and will.
A version of this argument was already brought by
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ in his Incoherence of the Philosophers with
a critical difference. Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ tries to show that there are
aspects of the heavens that reﬂect the workings of absolute
will that can choose between alternatives that are
completely alike from the perspective of reason. This
proves the existence of a divine will which has in its
power the creation of a world when it wills, though there
is no rational reason why it chose to create it when it did as
opposed to any other possible moment. Maimonides
treats the creation of the world with all its peculiarities
not only the result of will but also purpose and wisdom.
There is for him a rational reason for all the particularities
of the heavenly order and they are not the product of will
alone. According to Maimonides, the eternity, hence the
necessity, of the world does not leave room for the design-
ing of a heavenly world in which all its non-standardized
particulars are the product of wisdom.
To the philosophic arguments in favor of creation
Maimonides also brings a list of theological arguments.
Creation is in harmony with the literal meaning of the
Torah, which should be maintained when there is no
demonstrative argument against the literal reading. More-
over, only by positing creation can we explain why God
granted certain individuals prophecy and why He gave a
certain nation the divine law and why He legislated certain
prohibitions. A world governed by natural necessity pro-
vides no answers to these questions – in short, it leaves no
room for revelatory religion.
The God of Nature Versus the God of History:
Miracles and Prophecy
While the doctrine of creation leaves open the possibility
of miracles, Maimonides takes pains to argue their limited
occurrence. God created a perfect natural order; hence,
there can be no permanent changes in nature. Nature, and
not miracles, is regarded by Maimonides as the true
expression of divine wisdom. Miracles are rare, temporary
disruptions in nature. Moreover, Maimonides suggests
that miracles are in some manner implanted in nature at
creation, God experiencing no change of will after the
creation of the world. This view entails that nature is
created also to meet certain historical exigencies.
Prophecy is treated by Maimonides as a completely
natural phenomenon. Only the person who possesses
a perfect intellect and imagination can receive prophecy.
Maimonides does introduce an element of divine will in
dealing with this phenomenon by maintaining that God
can intervene and withhold prophecy from one who is
worthy, just as the case with miracles in general, which
disrupt the natural functioning of the order. Yet God,
Maimonides, argues, never bestows prophecy to one who
does not possess all the necessary qualiﬁcations. Whether
Maimonides, in fact, believed that God ever intervened in
the process, or whether he added this point to mask his
complete agreement with the Aristotelian position, is
a subject of debate among his interpreters.
Prophecy itself is not deﬁned as a message from God
but rather an emanation from God to the Active Intellect
and from there to the rational faculty of the individual and
to the imagination, resulting in seeing theoretical truths in
ﬁgurative form, or learning principles of governance, or
viewing the future. Maimonides’ account appears to
allude to the view that God does not bestow a particular
vision on the individual but the emanation strengthens
the individual’s own rational and imaginative faculties,
thereby providing the person with a vision regarding mat-
ters that he was thinking about. This interpretation is
strengthened by the fact that Maimonides in his discus-
sion of prophecy speaks also of an emanation from the
Active Intellect to the rational faculty alone due to the
weakness of the imagination which results in the person
becoming a philosopher, and the emanation to the imag-
ination alone, characterizing politicians and diviners.
Prophecy thus appears to be a completely natural
phenomenon, just as the other phenomena are. Even the
prophetic mission is explained by Maimonides in terms
of an emanation that is so strong that the prophet feels
compelled to extend his perfection to others. Maimonides
notes that a similar phenomenon occurs by philosophers,
leading them to write books and teach others. The
prophetic mission for Maimonides essentially is the
result of internal compulsion as a result of the prophetic
experience rather than an explicit command from the
Deity.
812 M
Moses Maimonides

The two phenomena most closely associated with the
revelation of the Divine Law, however, are removed from
the category of normative prophecy. Maimonides treats
both the Revelation at Sinai and the prophecy to Moses as
sui generis. His discussion suggests that Moses received his
prophecy directly from God. Whether Maimonides’ God
is a deity who, in fact, acts directly in history, even if only
on exceptionally rare occasions, has been a subject of
debate among his interpreters through the ages. It is
clear at any rate that Maimonides felt it crucial to preserve
this conception of God in order to preserve the nation’s
faith in the notion of God as the immediate author of the
Divine Law.
The Problem of Evil, Providence, and Human
Perfection
In its classic formulation the problem raised regarding the
existence of evil is: Why does a good, all-powerful and all-
knowing deity create evil or even allow evil to occur –
whether the evil consists of natural disasters, disease, or
the evils humans perpetrate against each other. In other
words, why are the innocent allowed by God to suffer
while we often see the evil ﬂourish. Maimonides addresses
this problem but he is much more interested in
reformulating it. Rather than a problem that questions
God’s goodness or power, it is a problem Maimonides
transforms into a call for action on the part of human
beings to recognize the true nature of the evils that affect
them and adopt a course of action to limit these evils as
much as possible.
The problem of why God creates evil is solved by
Maimonides by considering all evils as privations of the
good, that is to say, privations in that which exists rather
than something existent in its own right. They indicate
a lack of a quality, such as blindness is a lack of sight or
death is a lack of life, and are not something positive. What
does not exist cannot be said to be created; hence, God
does not create evil but creates entities lacking certain
qualities. This argument appears to be begging the ques-
tion, for then the problem arises why God does not create
a world without privation, a world without ﬂoods and
earthquakes, diseases and deformities, etc. Maimonides
indicates that the essence of earthly matter is characterized
by privations and change which allows for the world’s
continuity. His answer suggests that anyone who asks
why God does not create a world without natural evils or
even human evils is asking why God created the world at
all, for such evils inevitably characterize earthly matter.
Underlying this answer appears to be a view of divine
plenitude. A world which is characterized by all possible
levels of existence – form without matter (Separate
Intellects), form with changeless matter except for motion
(the spheres), and form with matter in a state of constant
generation and corruption (the existents on the earth) – is
more complete or perfect than a world lacking one of these
levels. A perfect world then inevitably contains evils con-
sequent upon earthly matter.
The real problem thus becomes what humans can do
given this state of affairs. The answer is that they can
recognize the nature of the hierarchy of existence and
their place in it. More important they can recognize the
nature of true human perfection and strive to attain it, in
the process avoiding many of the evils that normally affect
them. Maimonides points out that there are three types of
evils affecting human beings. The ﬁrst and least prevalent
from Maimonides’ standpoint are natural evils, such as
natural disasters or the death of infants. Maimonides’
earlier discussion of the phenomenon of prophecy sug-
gests that even many of these evils may be avoided by
advanced knowledge of the future. For example, knowing
in advance when a ﬂood will occur allows for saving
oneself from the ﬂood. Far more prevalent than this type
of evil are the evils humans perpetrate against each other.
Given the fact that these evils result from human choice, it
is clear that it is in our hands to avoid practicing them.
The most prevalent type of evil, however, is neither of
these two, but the evils the individual perpetrates against
himself. For Maimonides, any action that brings the indi-
vidual a step away from perfection is an evil; every action
bringing one closer to perfection is good. Human perfec-
tion lies in putting an end to our greatest privation, the
privation of knowledge, speciﬁcally knowledge of God and
the manner of divine governance of the world. It lies in
adopting a life of moral virtue in order to free oneself from
the slavery of one’s passions and live a life of intellect. In
short, we practice evils against ourselves and others
because of a lack of knowledge, which in turn leads to
our maintaining a false value system by which we allow
ourselves to be ruled by a craving for physical pleasures,
jealousy, feelings of honor, etc. without realizing that all
these goals are essentially meaningless and distance us
from true perfection. Aworld united in the desire to attain
knowledge of the one God, according to Maimonides, is
one in which people will no longer practice so much evil
against others and against themselves. The problem of evil,
thus, is one that demands of us to stop asking why God
does not do more to create a better world for human
beings, but what we should be doing in order to create
such a world and achieve true human perfection.
On the issue of divine providence Maimonides at ﬁrst
glance adopts a radical interventionist view of God’s activ-
ity in the world. Nothing, either good or bad, happens to
Moses Maimonides M
813
M

human beings that does not constitute their just deserts in
consequence of their freely willed actions. He rejects the
view of the Epicurians who maintain that everything in the
world happens by chance as well as the view of the Moslem
theologians belonging to the Ashʿariyya who maintain
that everything that happens in the world, including all
human actions, result from divine decree. The view of the
Muʿtazilite theologians that God exercises providence over
all beings, not only humans, but human beings enjoy some
limited form of free will is also rejected. The same is the
case with the Aristotelian view that God exercises provi-
dence only over the species – by the instruments he gives
to each to preserve one’s life and to propagate the species –
and not over individuals of the species, whose circum-
stances are governed by chance. Maimonides’ own posi-
tion is closest to the Aristotelian view with the critical
proviso that in the case of human beings, as opposed to
all other species, God exercises providence over all indi-
viduals and nothing happening to them should be attrib-
uted to chance. His view that the ‘‘otherness’’ of God’s
knowledge allows the Deity to know all particulars
through all time without this knowledge necessitating
change or plurality in God on one hand, nor human
determinism on the other, serves to bolster this view of
providence.
Maimonides’ approach to divine providence, however,
undergoes a subtle and radical change as his discussion
unfolds, essentially moving him even closer to the Aristo-
telian position. He maintains that the degree of provi-
dence that humans enjoy is in direct proportion to the
perfection of the intellect. One who does not develop one’s
intellect is in fact subject to the vicissitudes of chance, just
as the case of the individuals of all other species, and
enjoys no special protection. His view suggests that the
intellect itself is the basic instrument of divine providence.
A person who perfects the intellect adopts a lifestyle which
minimizes the evils that befall human beings since this
person does not indulge the appetites leading to physical
and psychological maladies, is satisﬁed with little and
maintains a moral equilibrium. The individual attaining
perfection may also acquire prophecy allowing him or her
to foresee impending evils that others wish to perpetrate,
or impending natural disasters, allowing the individual to
take the proper precautions for avoiding them. Most
important, one of perfect intellect realizes that all evils
connected to corporeal being – whether they affect his
possessions, family, or body – have no real signiﬁcance,
hence the individual should not feel psychologically
affected by them. Thus, the evils that befall the imperfect
individual by chance may be said to be this person’s ‘‘just
deserts’’ for not striving to attain perfection. This
interpretation of Maimonides’ position is reinforced by
his discussion of the book of Job which he treats as
a philosophical parable. Satan represents the evils associ-
ated with matter that cannot affect the immortal soul of
the individual. Job ﬁnally attains enlightenment on the
nature of the world order, realizing that all the evils affect-
ing him are inevitable aspects of God’s wondrous created
order. It is left to the individual to view these evils in
the proper perspective and pursue what truly has lasting
value – the true understanding of God and the world.
Maimonides concludes his treatise reiterating his phil-
osophic approach to human perfection. He also alludes to
the philosophic view that only those who attain the per-
fection of the intellect attain immortality, their intellect
existing in its state of contemplation of the eternal truths
through eternity. The ending of the Guide introduces an
additional aspect of human perfection. Those attaining
intellectual human perfection should also engage in
extending their perfection to improving the surrounding
society, just as God’s perfection emanates to all existents
by ordering their circumstances in an ideal manner,
thereby extending the divine goodness to all that exists.
Imitatio Dei lies in living simultaneously a life of active
contemplation and one of governing others in accordance
with the perfection one has attained.
See also: ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Divine Law ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad ▶Ibn
Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Natural Philosophy, Jewish
▶Philosophical Theology, Jewish ▶Political Philosophy,
Arabic ▶Political Philosophy, Jewish ▶Proofs of the Exis-
tence of God ▶Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab
World ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Maimonides Moses (1963) The guide of the perplexed (trans: Pines S).
University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Secondary Sources
The list of secondary sources dealing with aspects of Maimonides’
thought is exceptionally large. The last few years in particular have
witnessed the appearance of numerous ﬁne articles and collections of
articles in wake of the 800th anniversary of his death.
The most comprehensive bibliographical list of articles published in
recent years is available in the Rambi web catalogue: http://jnul.huji.ac.
il/rambi/ (subject: Maimonides).
For the most serious recent studies of Maimonides’ biography and literary
corpus see:
Davidson H (2005) Moses Maimonides: The man and his works. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Kraemer J (2008) Maimonides: The life and world of one of civilization’s
greatest minds. Doubleday, New York
814 M
Moses Maimonides

For an excellent collection of essays providing an in-depth treatment of
many aspects of Maimonides’ philosophy see:
Seeskin K (ed) (2005) The Cambridge Companion to Maimonides.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik
EMILY J. COTTRELL
Department for Religious Studies
Leiden University
Leiden
The Netherlands
Abstract
Al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik was a scholar and patron of the
Fatimid court in Cairo in the middle of the eleventh
century. He studied medicine, astronomy, and history,
and composed a lost History of the Fatimid Caliph
al-Mustans:ir (r. 1036–1094). His only book to have sur-
vived, The Choicest Maxims and Best Sayings (Kita¯b
mukhta¯r al-h:ikam wa-mah:asin al-kalim or al-kilam),
gives 20 biographies of some of the main Semitic, Greek,
and Egyptian ﬁgures of wisdom and prophecy (including
the monotheized Alexander the Great). An important part
of the biographical and gnomological materials may be
compared with similar fragments attested in Greek litera-
ture. The Choicest Maxims was a medieval success, trans-
lated in at least four European languages from the
thirteenth to the ﬁfteenth centuries.
‘Abu¯ l-Wafa¯’ Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik (d.480/1087?) is said to
have been originally from Damascus and of Syrian
descent. He was close to the Fatimid court during the
reigns of the Fatimid Caliphs al-Z˙ a¯hir (r. 411–427/1021–
1036) and al-Mustans:ir (r. 427–487/1036–1094) and
would have married there a woman issued of the nobility
(he himself belonged to the arba¯b of the court, according
to Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a). According to Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ and to
Gerard of Cremona (who used the chapter on Ptolemy
to compose an introduction to his translation of the
Almagest), he had the title of prince (Arabic: al-amı¯r)
and received further the honoriﬁc title of Praised by the
State (Mah:mu¯d al-Dawla). He was probably an Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯, as
the Fatimid court was then at the peak of its proselyte
activity. Mubashshir may have been related to ʿAzı¯z al-
Dawla Fa¯tik al-Qa¯’id, the ﬁrst Syrian governor on behalf of
the Fatimids appointed by al-H˙ a¯kim on Aleppo in 1017.
Ibn Taymiyya, writing in the second part of the thirteenth
century, mentions that Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik was close to
Ibn al-Haytham and was a member of the court of the
Caliph al-H˙ a¯kim (r. 386–411/996–1021). Although we
have no knowledge of the date of Mubashshir’s birth, it
seems unlikely that he ever encountered al-H˙ a¯kim except
as a child. His association with the Fatimid court was
probably a sufﬁcient reason in the eyes of Ibn Taymiyya
for condemning him as a bat:ı¯nı¯ (Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Shı¯ʿite) (see Ibn
Taymiyya, al-Fata¯wa¯ al-kubra¯, vol 3, p 496).
In Cairo, Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik studied mathematics
and astronomy with Ibn al-Haytham (d. c. 430/1039)
whose Kita¯b al-Mana¯z˙ir (Book of Optics) was a major
revolution in optics after Ptolemy’s Almagest. Mubashshir
also studied with the astronomer, physician, and philoso-
pher Ibn Rid˙wa¯n (d. 461/1068), one of the main scientists
of the Fatimid court. Ibn Rid˙wa¯n authored commentaries
on Hippocrates, Aristotle, and Galen, and had access to
some of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s books (see the lengthy bibliography
given by Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a, in his T˙abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯᾽).
The edition of The Choicest Maxims was completed by
‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n Badawı¯ in Madrid in 1958. He gave the
book the Spanish title ‘‘Bocados de Oro,’’ which he took
from the medieval translation realized in 1257 for Alfonso
the Wise (Alfonso X of Castile, r. 1252–1284). Rosenthal
felt offended that Badawı¯ had double-crossed him in
achieving the edition and wrote a bitter review (see
Rosenthal 1960–1961). In the Arab world, the book was
rarely available in libraries, as it had been published in
Franco’s Spain and not diffused properly. These are among
the reasons that have left The Choicest Maxims little-
studied to this day.
To the references given by Rosenthal (1960–1961) in
what remains a fundamental article for the study of
Mubashshir’s works, Ibn al-Qift:ı¯, Akhba¯r al-h:ukama¯’
[269 f. Mu¨ller-Lippert]; Ya¯qu¯t, Irsha¯d 6.241 Margoliouth
[= vol 5, p 227, n 934, ‘Abba¯s]; Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a T˙abaqa¯t
al-at:ibba¯ [2.98–99 Mu¨ller, Wiedemann 1906:176], one
should add Isma¯ʿı¯l Basha¯ al-Ba¯ba¯nı¯ (or Isma¯ʿı¯l al-Bagh-
da¯dı¯), the seventeenth-century author of the Hadiyat
al-ʿa¯rifı¯n, a Continuation (Dhayl) to H˙ ajji Khalı¯fa’s Kashf
al-z˙unu¯n, who lists twice as many titles as Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a
and gives 480/1087 as the date of Mubashshir’s death. Ibn
Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a quotes the following titles: Kita¯b al-was:a¯ya¯
wa-l-amtha¯l wa-l-mu᾽jaz min muh:kam al-aqwa¯l; Kita¯b
mukhta¯r al-h:ikam wa-mah:asin al-kilam; Kita¯b al-bida¯ya
fı¯ l-mant:iq, and Kita¯b fı¯ l-t:ibb. Al-Ba¯ba¯nı¯, in the Hadiyat
al-ʿa¯rifı¯n, mentions the same titles (with a variant for the
last one, which he quotes as the Asra¯r al-t:ibb) and adds the
following works: al-Is:t:ila¯h:a¯t al-t:ibbiyya; al-Tanbı¯h wa-l-
tabyı¯n li-mas:a¯lih: al-dunya¯ wa-l-dı¯n; Sharh: al-ʿUnwa¯n;
Sharh: kita¯b al-adwiyya al-murakabba li-Ja¯linu¯s; Sharh:
mufrada¯t
Diyusqu¯rı¯dis;
Kita¯b
al-niha¯ya
fı¯
l-h:ikma;
al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik M
815
M

Mufrada¯t al-adwiyya; and other epistles. To these, Ya¯qu¯t
adds the Sı¯rat al-Mustans:ir, in three volumes.
The looting of the Fatimids’ library by the Turks dur-
ing a revolt in 1068–1069, and later on its dismantlement
and destruction at the express will of the (Sunni) Ayyubid
ruler Saladin (r. 1171–1193), may have led to the nearly
complete disappearance of Mubashshir’s works. Neverthe-
less, Ya¯qu¯t notes that Mubashshir collected an innumera-
ble number of books, which, Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a adds, he was
later able to peruse while working at the Ayyubid court in
Cairo. He complains that many of these had been damaged
after Mubashshir’s widow and some neighbors had
thrown them into a basin to take revenge for her husband’s
passion for books and scholarship. Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a says
he saw many of Mubashshir’s books ‘‘on the Ancients’’
(i.e., philosophy, medicine, the sciences of the quadriv-
ium, and probably some history) in autograph copies.
Only one of Ibn Fa¯tik’s works has survived, and it is
therefore impossible to give a comprehensive evaluation of
his thinking. The composition of The Choicest Maxims, in
440/1048–1049, may have been part of a proselytizing
attempt, following a general tendency in Fatimid policy.
In the aftermath of the Druze schism, The Choicest
Maxims explores some of the ways to conciliate the theory
of the theios aner with a monotheistic religion: asceticism,
encratism, and Hermetism. In conciliating apophatic the-
ology with the necessity of a spiritual master or guide, Ibn
Fa¯tik does not depart from the doctrine ofﬁcially taught in
his time at the Fatimid court.
The Sages advocate as examples by Ibn Fa¯tik, whose
lives and sayings ought to be reﬂected upon, Seth, the
three Hermeses, Tat, Asclepius, Solon, Zeno, Pythagoras,
Hippocrates, Socrates, Plato, Diogenes, Aristotle, Alexan-
der the Great, Galen, Ptolemy, Saint Basil, Saint Gregory
(of Nyssa and Nazianzus seem to have been confused into
one ﬁgure), and ﬁnally the Coranic Luqma¯n and the little-
known Mahadarjis (seemingly an Indo–Persian ﬁgure
who has recently been identiﬁed with a Zoroastrian
sixth-century priest). The biographies are integrated
within a general frame imitated from the classical genres
of the ‘‘literature of inventions’’ and ‘‘successions.’’ Melt-
ing Neoplatonic and Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ traditions, Mubashshir uses
these models of wisdom as exempla of conduct, which the
believer should follow to ascend the ladder leading to
prophetic perfection.
The chapters of The Choicest Maxims are organized by
Mubashshir according to a unique pattern, unless he could
not ﬁnd such information in his sources: biography,
doxography, sayings, and more rarely some elements of
bibliography. If the sapiential genre had been in use for
millenniums in the ancient literacy of Near East, and the
apophthegms in particular were still favored in Egyptian
Christian literature, the scheme, here, is reminiscent of
Diogenes Laertius’ Lives of the Philosophers, which ‘Abd
al-Rah:ma¯n Badawı¯ considered was one of the sources used
by Ibn Fa¯tik. Recent research on the Diogenes chapter led
Oliver Overwien (2005) to suggest that Mubashshir rather
draws on sources that were also used by Diogenes Laertius.
A trace of the use of late-antique Greek literature is the
frequent use of epistolary novels (as in the Solon, Hippoc-
rates, Aristotle, Alexander, and Galen chapters) (see
Cottrell 2004–2005).
Moritz Steinschneider (1893:28–29), noted that Ibn
Fa¯tik has used directly or indirectly a lost work by H˙ unayn
ibn Ish:a¯q, the A¯da¯b al-fala¯sifa, also known as Nawa¯dir al-
fala¯sifa (Wise Sayings of the Philosophers), of which
a Hebrew and a Spanish translation were known in his
time, as well as two Arabic manuscripts then unpublished.
Steinschneider also remarked that the thirteenth-century
physician Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a used Mubashshir (whom he
explicitly quotes from) for his chapters on Hippocrates,
Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Rosenthal
(1960–1961:145–147) gave a complete concordance table
of these parallels in his article on The Choicest Maxims.
Rosenthal also minimized the use of H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯q by
Ibn Fa¯tik, rather unconvincingly (see Rosenthal 1960–
1961:135). Badawı¯ did follow Steinschneider on that
point in his introduction to his edition of The Choicest
Maxims, where he also emphasized the importance of
the Alexander Novel for the success of the medieval
translations.
The Alexander Novel is among the most extensive
pieces of the books, spread out in the chapters related to
Alexander the Great, Aristotle and Diogenes chapters. It
offers quite striking parallels with the Pseudo-Callisthe-
nes’ hellenistic novel, but does not preserve the Egyptian
features of Pseudo-Callisthenes’ work. On the contrary, it
gives to the Persian king Darius the role of a romantic hero
betrayed by his own people, a man who put all his trust in
Alexander, to whom he gives his daughter Roxane as
a bride. Mubashshir’s Alexander Novel does not share the
features of the known Syriac versions, but a Syriac inter-
mediary is not to be excluded. The translation method is
that of the calque, including for some of the names
(Ruqiyya – the Semitic root ∗RQY designates the idea of
ascension and elevation – is given as the name of Alexan-
der’s mother, instead of Olympias). The precise relation of
The Choicest Maxims’ extracts of both the Alexander Novel
and the Alexander Letters with H˙ unayn’s A¯da¯b al-fala¯sifa’s
use of similar extracts remains to be investigated.
A
manuscript
of
Mubashshir
ibn
Fa¯tik’s
The
Choicest Maxims reached the court of Alfonso the Wise
816 M
al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik

(r. 1252–1284), where it was translated into Spanish in
1257. Through his mother, the king belonged to the
Hohenstaufen family and shared with his famous cousin
Frederick II a wide intellectual curiosity. On the Spanish
version, a Latin translation was realized, of which two
recensions have been discovered by Franceschini (see
further Anawati 1959–1961 and Rosenthal 1960–1961).
Franceschini accepted Knust’s thesis according to which
the Spanish Bocados de Oro had been translated from
Arabic and not from Latin, as had been supposed
earlier. Only one of the manuscripts of the Latin Liber
philosophorum attributes the translation to John de
Procida (ital. Giovanni da Procida, d. 1298, another mem-
ber of the Hohenstaufen court), and as a consequence this
attribution has been questioned since the end of the nine-
teenth century (see Rosenthal 1960–1961:133).
If The Choicest Maxims had lost the name of its author
in the medieval translations, the prince Abu¯ l-Wafa¯᾽
(Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik) is known to Gerard of Cremona
(d. 1187) who transcribes it as Albuguefe (for *Abu al-
Guefe=al-Wafa¯’?) and correctly translates the Arabic title
into
Latin
as
Scienciarum
electionem
et
verborum
pulcritudinem, nearly a century before the Spanish trans-
lation. Gerard was able to use the chapter on Ptolemy’s life
and sayings for the introduction to his translation of the
Almagest (see Kunitzsch 1974:98s). Rosenthal ﬁrst dem-
onstrated that Gerard had at his disposal the Arabic text,
and did not depend on a translation (see Rosenthal 1960–
1961:150).
Before 1402, the Latin version was translated into
French by Guillaume of Tignonville (d. 1414). It quickly
became a success, and numerous
manuscripts are
known (see Anawati 1959–1961 and Rosenthal 1960–
1961, who both mention a number of early modern
printed editions as well). The ﬁrst critical edition of the
text was given by Roder Eder in 1915. A Provenc¸al
translation is also known and has been partly published,
but its date has not been established (see Brunel 1939).
Because of this success, the French translation was
rapidly translated into English. The ﬁrst translation, made
in 1450 by Stephen Scrope, was later on corrected by
William of Worcester, who added some extra materials to
the Socrates and Ptolemy chapters (see Schoﬁeld 1936:31).
A second and better translation was realized by the Earl
Ryvers, between 1474 and 1477. The book was printed in
England on November 18, 1477, by William Caxton,
among the ﬁrst books ever printed on English soil with
a print which he had brought back with him from Brugges.
Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik was honored with an early and
thorough diffusion, comparable in his time only to the
Bible and the Alexander Novel. The very fact that an
Alexander Novel constitutes the core of The Choicest
Maxims gives one of the reasons of its success. In the
East too, important authors such as Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a and
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ made a thorough use of the text, assuring
Ibn Fa¯tik a popularity which led the book to be known as
far as Iran and India (through al-Shahrazu¯rı¯’s anonymous
lengthy quotations in his Kita¯b nuzhat al-arwa¯h:, which
was further on translated into Persian). In the eastern
Christian realm as well the book enjoyed some fame, as
can be witnessed from the incomplete Berlin Manuscript
(MS Or. quart. 785) showing two bilingual seals (Syriac/
Arabic), possibly originating from the Mar Mattai mon-
astery in Mossul. This universal diffusion was the very
object of the book, showing the ultimate journeys of
wisdom through time and ages.
See also: ▶Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic ▶Galen, Arabic
▶Hermes Trismegistus ▶Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Philosophical Tradition
▶Mirrors for Princes ▶al-Shahrazu¯rı¯, Muh:ammad ibn
Mah:mu¯d Shams al-Dı¯n
Bibliography
Primary Sources
H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q (1406/1985) A¯da¯b al-fala¯sifa, ikhtas:arahu Muh:ammad b.
ʿAlı¯ b. Ibra¯hı¯m b. Ah:mad b. Muh:ammad al-Ans:arı¯, ed. ʿAbd
al-Rah:ma¯n al-Badawı¯. Maʿhad al-makht:u¯t:a¯t al-ʿarabiyya, Koweit
City
H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q (1896a) Sefer Musra Haphilosophim (‘Sinnspru¨che der
Philosophen’) aus dem Arabischen H˙ onein ibn Ishaˆk ins Hebra¨ische
u¨bersetzt von Jehuda ben Salomo Alcharisi, ed. Loewenthal A.
J. Kauffmann, Frankfurt-am-Main
H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q (1896b) Sinnspru¨che der Philosophen nach der
hebra¨ischen U¨ bersetzung Charisi’s ins Deutsche u¨bertragen und
erla¨utert (intr. and trans.) Loewenthal A. S. Calvary, Berlin
H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q (1971) ed. Sturm H. The Libro de los buenos proverbios.
A critical edition, PhD dissertation, University of North Carolina,
Lexington
Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ (1903) Ikhba¯r al-ʿulama¯’ ﬁakhba¯r al-h:ukama¯’, ed. Mu¨ller A,
Lippert J. Dieterich’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Leipzig
Ibn Taymiyya (1408/1987) Al-Fatawı¯a¯ al-kubra¯ (kita¯b al-h:udu¯d, 754–
108), vol 3, ed. Muh:ammad ʿAbd al-Qa¯dir ʿAt:a¯῾, Mus:t:afa¯ ʿAbd al-
Qa¯dir ʿAt:a¯᾽. Da¯r al-kutub al-ʿilmiyya, Beirut
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Basha¯ al-Ba¯ba¯nı¯ (also: Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Pasha Bag˙da¯dı¯) (1945–1947) I¯d˙a¯h:
al-maknu¯n fı¯ l-dhayl ʿala¯ Kashf al-z˙unu¯n ʿan asa¯mı¯ al-kutub
wa-l-funu¯n. Istanbul
Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik (1877) The dictes and sayings of the philosophers.
A facsimile reproduction of the ﬁrst book printed by William Caxton
in 1477. Elliot Stock, London (repr. Diploma Press, 1974)
Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik (1936) ed. Schoﬁeld ME. The dicts and sayings of
the philosophers : a middle English version by Stephen Scrope. PhD
dissertation (containing the critical edition of Scrope’s version),
University of Philadelphia
Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik (1941) ed. Bu¨hler CF. The dicts and sayings of the
philosophers : the translation (from French), made by Stephen
Scrope, William Worcester and an anonymous translator. Londen
(Early English text society. original series n211)
al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik M
817
M

Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik (1958) Los Bocados de Oro (Mujta¯r al-h:ikam)
(critical edition of the Arabic original) ed. ʿAbd al-Rah:ma¯n al-
Badawı¯. Instituto Egypcio de Estudios Islamicos, Madrid
Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik (1971) ed. Crombach M. Bocados de Oro. PhD
dissertation (containing a critical edition of the Spanish text), Bonn
Wiedemann E (trans) (1906) Ibn al-Haitham, ein arabischer Gelehreter.
In: Festschrift J. Rosenthal. Leipzig, pp 147–178
Ya¯qu¯t al-Hamawı¯ (1993) Muʿjam al-udaba¯᾽(Irsha¯d al-alibba¯᾽ila¯ ma῾rifat
al-udaba¯᾽) ed. Ih:sa¯n ʿAbba¯s. Da¯r al-g˙arb al-isla¯mı¯, Beirut
Secondary Sources
Anawati G (1959–1961) Compte-rendu de ʿA. Badawı¯, Los Bocados de
Oro. MIDEO 6:253–259
Bonebakker SA (1960) Book-review of Mubashshir Ibn Fa¯tik, Los
Bocados de Oro. Bibl Orient 17 3–4:212b–214a
Brunel C (1939) Une traduction provenc¸ale des ‘Dits des philosophes’ de
Guillaume de Tignonville. Bibliothe`que de l’E´cole des chartes
100:309–328
Cottrell E (2004–2005) Le Kitaˆb Nuzhat al-Arwaˆh wa Rawdat al-Afraˆh de
Shams al-Dıˆn al-Shahrazuˆrıˆ l’Ishraˆqıˆ: composition et sources.
Annuaire de l’E´cole Pratique des Hautes E´tudes, Section des sciences
religieuses t. 113:383–387
Daftary F (1990) The Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s: their history and doctrine. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Douﬁkar-Aerts F (2003) Alexander Magnus Arabicus. Zeven eeuwen
Arabische Alexandertraditie: van Pseudo-Callisthenes tot S˙u¯rı¯. PhD
dissertation, Leiden University Press, Leiden
Franceschini E (1930) Il Liber Philosophorum moralium antiquorum. In:
Memorie
della
reale
accademia
nazionale
dei
Lincei,
Anno
CCCXXVII (1930), Serie VI, vol III, Fasc V, Venice, 354–399
Franceschini
E
(1931–1932)
Il
Liber
Philosophorum
moralium
antiquorum. Atti del Reale Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed
Arti. t. XCI. Venice, 2:393–597
Grand’Henry J (1979–1984) Le Livre de la Me´thode du me´decin, de ʿAlı¯ b.
Ridwa¯n (998–1067) (Publications de l’Institut Orientaliste, 20).
Universite´ Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve
Gutas D (1975) Greek wisdom literature in Arabic translation: a study of
the Graeco-Arabic gnomologia. American Oriental Society Series,
60. American Oriental Society, New Haven
Gutas D (1981) Classical arabic wisdom literature : nature and scope.
J Am Oriental Soc 101:49–86
Hamarneh S (1979) Medicine and pharmacology under the fatimids.
Hamdard Medicus 22:33–69
Khalil S (1998) Les versions arabes chre´tiennes du Roman d’Alexandre.
In: Finazzi RB, Valvo A (eds) La diffusione dell’eredita´ classica
nell’eta´
tardoantica e medievale. Il ‘Romanzo di Alessandro’
e altri scritti. Atti del Seminario internazionale di studio (Roma-
Napoli, 25–27 settembre 1997). Edizioni dell’Orso, Alessandria,
227–247
Kuentz Ch (1957) De la sagesse grecque a` la sagesse orientale [Book-
review of Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik, Los Bocados de Oro]. Revista del
Istituto egipcio de estudios islamicos 5:255–269
Kunitzsch P (1974) Die Syntaxis Mathematica des Claudius Ptolema¨us
in
arabisch-lateinischer
U¨ berlieferung.
Otto
Harassowitz,
Wiesbaden
Merkle K (1921) Die Sittenspru¨che der Philosophen ‘‘Kitaˆb Adaˆb al-
Fala¯sifa’’ von H˙ onein ibn Ish:aˆq in der u¨berarbeitung des Muh:ammad
ibn ʿAlıˆ al-Ans:aˆrıˆ (. . .). Inauguraldissertation, Philosophischen
Fakulta¨t. . . Mu¨nchen, 8. Juli 1910. G. Kreysing, Leipzig
Overwien O (2005) Die Spru¨che des Kynikers Diogenes in der
griechischen und arabischen U¨ berlieferung. Steiner, Stuttgart
Rosenthal F (1960–1961) Al-Mubashshir Ibn Fa¯tik: prolegomena to an
abortive edition. Oriens 13:132–158
Rosenthal F (1975) The classical heritage in Islam (Engl. trans. of Id. Das
Fortleben der Antike im Islam. Artemis, Zu¨rich 1965)
Steinschneider
M
(1893)
Zwo¨lftes
Beiheft
zum
Centralblatt
fu¨r
Bibliothekswesen. Otto Harrassowitz, Leipzig (ﬁrst published sepa-
rately under the title Die arabischen U¨ bersetzungen aus dem
Griechischen, and later reprinted with other studies under the same
title in Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt, Graz, 1960)
Strohmaier G (1970) Ethical sentences and anecdotes of Greek philoso-
phers in Arabic tradition. Corresp Orient 11:463–471
Music, Medieval
T. J. H. MCCARTHY
New College of Florida
Sarasota, FL
USA
Abstract
The philosophical background to music in the Middle Ages
was ultimately derived from Classical ideas about music,
its rudiments, and its place in society. The fact that early
medieval thinkers in the West looked in the ﬁrst place to
ancient learning to codify their newly emerging ecclesias-
tical song (which would ultimately become known as by
them as ‘‘Gregorian chant’’) led to a conﬂict between the
theory of ancient music and the reality of music in the
Middle Ages. The uneasy cohabitation of ancient philo-
sophical and cosmological thought with the new and
different practical music of the medieval West is an ever-
present feature of medieval theoretical literature on music.
The extent and importance of this conﬂict varies from
century to century and according to the aims of the the-
oretical literature in question.
Classical Sources
The complex epistemology of music in the Middle Ages is
due
initially
to
the
diverse
Classical
sources
that
inﬂuenced its history. Perhaps the most inﬂuential of the
Classical authors was Boethius (c. 480–c. 525), whose De
institutione
arithmetica
and
De
institutione
musica
(ed. Friedlein 1867) offered to medieval thinkers the
most detailed account of ancient thought on the closely
related disciplines of arithmetic and music. Both of these
treatises circulated widely from the ninth century onward,
while an extensive corpus of Carolingian glosses and com-
mentaries points to active engagement with these texts
(ed. Bernhard and Bower 1993, 1994, 1996). Music, for
818 M
Music, Medieval

Boethius, was a liberal discipline pertaining to ethics
as well as to reason: it was a body of immutable
knowledge requiring study for mastery. Consequently,
De institutione musica aimed to quantify music through
the study of ratios, proportions, intervals, and sound.
Boethius’ deﬁnition of the true musician – the scholar
who can criticize poetic compositions or instrumental
performance – is a function of the centrality of intellect
to his approach: the practice of music, with pejorative
connotations of manual activity characteristic of the igno-
ble, was perceived negatively because it lacked any sort of
rationality.
Boethius’ De institutione musica enjoyed a far wider
dissemination than did the six books of St Augustine’s De
musica (completed between 387 and 391; ed. Jacobsson
2002), which were concerned mainly with rhythm and
metrics. Far more inﬂuential were St Augustine’s many
remarks on music scattered throughout his other works:
they show both his endorsement of music for its ability to
uplift the spirit and his condemnation of it for its ability to
distract. Although medieval thinkers generally took St
Augustine’s positive comments to heart and ignored his
criticisms, many, such as St Thomas Aquinas, vacillated in
true Augustinian fashion.
More immediately important for the formation of
opinions on music were the encyclopedists Cassiodorus
(c. 487–c. 580) and Isidore of Seville (c. 560–c. 636). Their
works became standard reference works, transmitting
much information, as well as speculation, on ancient
music and its rudiments. A subtle shift from the Boethian
deﬁnition of music and its dismissal of practice is apparent
in
Cassiodorus
and
Isidore.
From
Cassiodorus’
Institutiones 2.3.21 (ed. Mynors 1937) came the inﬂuential
deﬁnition that whereas ‘‘mathematical science is that sci-
ence which considers abstract quantity,’’ music is the divi-
sion of it ‘‘that treats of numbers in relation to those things
that are found in sounds.’’ Although the introduction to
Isidore’s Etymologies (ed. Lindsay 1911) classiﬁes music as
a liberal discipline, other sections describe it in terms of
the varieties of chant, with the result that ﬁve of the nine
sections concerned with music are practical in their
approach. This surely hints that, by the time Isidore was
writing, scholars were already struggling to apply the
Classical view of music to the new liturgical music of the
post-Roman West.
The Greek philosophers Plato and Aristotle inﬂuenced
music in different very ways. Prior to the rediscovery of
Plato’s works in the twelfth century, only part of Timaeus
(17a–53b) was known. It was available in the translation
by Calcidius (c. 256–c. 357), whose accompanying com-
mentary incorporated various middle- and Neoplatonic
inﬂuences from the earlier commentaries of Iamblichus
and Porphyry (ed. Waszink 1975). Calcidius’ translation
and commentary was extremely popular in the Middle
Ages, but since Calcidius had omitted those sections
dealing with man, it was understood primarily as
a cosmological exposition of the origins and order of
the universe. Calcidius was not, however, the only inter-
mediary through which Platonic thought reached the
Middle Ages. Boethius had sought to harmonize the phi-
losophy of Plato and Aristotle, and while he was practically
the sole means of transmission for a selection of Aristotle’s
works until the late twelfth century, he simultaneously
perpetuated much of Plato’s teaching. The inﬂuence of
Plato is to be seen most vividly in Boethius’ Consolation of
Philosophy (ed. Moreschini 2005), which became one of
the medieval period’s best-known works of literature.
Plato was also behind much of De institutione arithmetica
and De institutione musica. To Calcidius and Boethius
should be added the late-Roman authors Macrobius and
Martianus Capella, who also contributed much to the
medieval reception of Plato. Macrobius’ Commentarius
in Somnium Scipionis (ed. Willis 1970) was very popular
in the early and central Middle Ages, while of the nine
books of Martianus Capella’s De nuptiis Philologiae et
Mercurii (ed. Willis 1983), books 7 and 9 were most
relevant for music. As with Boethius, the survival of
numerous ninth- and tenth-century gloss collections on
Macrobius and Martianus Capella points to Carolingian
scholars’ engagement with these authors (White 1981;
Teeuwen 2002).
Although a number of Aristotle’s logical works were
available to the early medieval West through the trans-
lations and commentaries of Boethius, it was not until the
end of the twelfth century that his remaining logical
works – as well as those on ethics, metaphysics, and the
natural sciences – became available in Latin translations.
The study of Aristotle thrived in the medieval univer-
sities, with Aristotelian methodology and terminology
appearing in music treatises from the thirteenth century
onward. Nevertheless, Aristotle did not offer to medieval
thinkers a useful philosophy of music and thus his inﬂu-
ence is visible primarily in the introduction of new
procedures of argumentation or his citation as a new
authority in support of one or other position.
The Early and Central Middle Ages
The music theory sources of the early and central Middle
Ages show that the main preoccupation of western
thinkers was with practical music, speciﬁcally music as
the vehicle for the liturgy of the Church. They were thus
at odds with Boethius’ approach to music. The shift in
Music, Medieval M
819
M

emphasis evident in Isidore’s Etymologies has already been
mentioned; it is even more apparent in his De ecclesiasticis
ofﬁciis (ed. Lawson 1989), which deals with music from
a liturgical point of view. Nevertheless, even though there
was a fundamental dichotomy between Boethian theory
and the requirements of the post-Roman West, Boethius
was to some extent assimilated by western Europe’s earli-
est post-Classical theorists in the Carolingian period, who
applied him to western plainchant: he provided the vocab-
ulary for music theory, while they provided the model for
its use. The music that Boethius described, however, had
nothing to do with church music. Until about the ninth
century there was no real modal organization in western
chant. It was the Carolingian thinker Aurelian of Re´oˆme
who, in his Musica disciplina of c. 840–c. 850, ﬁrst
described a modal organization of western plainchant in
writing (ed. Gushee 1975). Aurelian assumed that Boe-
thius was relevant to plainchant and adopted the names of
the ancient Greek tonoi for the new western modes. Others
followed his example, including the tenth-century author
of Alia musica (ed. Chailley 1968), who appropriated
Boethius’ table of octave-species for each tonos to furnish
names for his own modal octaves, in the process inverting
Boethius’ layout.
Carolingian music treatises focus above all on the
rudiments and classiﬁcation of ecclesiastical music (‘‘Gre-
gorian chant’’) and thus have limited scope for philosoph-
ical material. Where this does occur, it is largely peripheral
and draws mainly on sources such as Cassiodorus and
Isidore. At the same time as scholars were writing such
treatises,
others
were
commenting
upon
Boethius,
Macrobius, and Martianus Capella. Many of these com-
mentaries and glosses – which are now beginning to be
studied – deal with the cosmological aspects of the source
texts.
Perhaps the most sophisticated integration of philo-
sophical thought with practical music during the central
Middle Ages is to be found in the music treatises written by
a group of monks and clerks working in Salian Germany
(1024–1125): the ‘‘south-German circle’’ of music theo-
rists (McCarthy 2008). These scholars were among the
foremost intellectuals of their age, making valuable con-
tributions in disciplines such as theology, liturgy, history,
chronology, astronomy, and geometry, as well as fre-
quently playing leading roles in contemporary ecclesiasti-
cal politics. Abbot Bern of Reichenau (d. 1048) was the
founding father of this circle: his teaching was modiﬁed by
his
pupil
Herman
of
Reichenau
(1013–1054)
and
absorbed by ﬁgures such as William of Hirsau (d. 1091),
Aribo (ﬂ. 1070–1078), Frutolf of Michelsberg (d. 1103),
and Theoger of Metz (c. 1050–c. 1120).
For the south-German circle music was a reﬂexion of
natural order. Its theory was practical, growing out of the
emphasis placed upon proper regulation of the liturgy by
the
Gorze
monastic
reform
movement.
Frutolf
of
Michelsberg summed it up thus in his treatise entitled
Breviarium de musica: ‘‘music is the science of singing
well through long reﬂexion and constant practice’’
(ed. Vivell 1919). It is the science of commanding correctly
all the elements affecting the performance, analysis, and
composition of Gregorian chant, the primary vehicle of
the opus Dei and the liturgy of the Latin West. This deﬁ-
nition of music represents a subtle and important
reworking of Boethius, for whom only the criticism of
music was a worthwhile pursuit: the ideal musician was
now he who practised ﬂawlessly because he understood
completely. Thus Theoger of Metz was described as ‘‘excel-
lently skilled in all disciplines of the liberal arts, consum-
mate in music and outstanding in its performance’’
(Trithemius, Annales Hirsaugienses, 1511–1514). The cen-
tral importance of music to intellectual life required that it
be a true reﬂexion of God’s divinely ordained universe.
Thus, for the south-German circle, music’s cosmological
and philosophical aspects merged with its more practical
aspects.
Bern of Reichenau incorporated Neoplatonic thought
into music theory in his treatise Prologus in tonarium
(written between 1021 and 1036; ed. Rausch 1999). Bern
emphasized the signiﬁcance of the number four, which
was vital to the cosmological exposition of Timaeus, and
which validated the theory of the four modes having their
ﬁnal notes (D E F G) in the tetrachord of the ﬁnales
(D E F G). He wrote that ‘‘from its [the tetrachord of the
ﬁnales] four notes, the origin of all modes or tones can be
seen to proceed,’’ just as the fabric of the Platonic universe
proceeds from the four elements. This statement also hints
at the important Platonic concept of unity. Bern used
Macrobius (who had glossed Plato with the inﬂuential
comment that unity was the fount and origin of all num-
bers) to argue that the tetrachord of the ﬁnales was also the
fount and origin of the modes. His arguments, retaining
their Neoplatonic terminology, were developed by later
members of the south-German circle, notably William of
Hirsau and Theoger of Metz. They took care to situate the
Neoplatonic imagery in a Christian context, as they were
doubtless aware of the potential dangers of ‘‘pagan litera-
ture’’ (a contemporary topos of some inﬂuence).
The response of the south-German circle to the
Platonic inheritance also involved the conscious use of
Platonic metaphors. The idea of ‘‘generation’’ was partic-
ularly important, with the theorists using verbs like
generare and procreare to describe the natural origins of
820 M
Music, Medieval

musical phenomena: for example, Herman of Reichenau
declared that the two octaves of the monochord ‘‘are not
said to be born twice, but that those already born, in the
manner of the seven days of the week, are repeated or
renewed’’ (Musica 1; ed. Ellinwood 1936). Elsewhere,
Aribo criticized a faulty technical description of the
monochord as ‘‘perverse’’ because it confused the natural
order of the monochord ‘‘which never departs from her
own nature’’ (drawn from Timaeus 50bc), while praising
his own alternative description in avowedly Platonic terms
(ed. Smits van Waesberghe 1951). The use of such natural
imagery by these thinkers mirrors a wider contemporary
trend toward metaphors of generation and growth. It also
points to a growing expression of Platonic thought in
a Christian context and the personiﬁcation of natura.
A number of contemporary authors employ the idea of
an artiﬁcer behind creation: Bern of Reichenau describes
an artifex natura (Prologus in tonarium 4) and Theoger of
Metz a creatrix natura (Musica 8, ed. Lochner 1995), while
the widely read German author Honorius Augustodunensis
(c. 1080/1090–c. 1156) speaks of a similar artisan who made
the universe ‘‘like a great zither upon which he placed strings
to yield a variety of sounds’’ (Liber XII questionibus 2). The
south-German theorists, therefore, sought to combine the
practical and philosophical aspects of music because they
believed practice to be a reﬂexion of nature. This charac-
teristic distinguished them from other European thinkers.
The important Italian music theorist Guido of Arezzo, for
example, chose to ignore the philosophical aspects of
music in his treatises (Micrologus, Regule rithmice,
Prologus in antiphonarium, and Epistola ad Michahelem;
ed. Smits van Waesberghe 1955; Pesce 1999), commenting
that Boethius was useful to philosophers but not musi-
cians. Conversely, eleventh- and early twelfth-century
French scholars such as Bernard and Thierry of Chartres,
William of Conches, and Bernard Silvestris were more
exclusively cosmological in their discussions of the Neo-
platonic aspects of music: this is true of William of
Conches, for example, in his glosses on Timaeus
(ed. Jeauneau 2006). The distinguished teacher Hugh of
St Victor (c. 1096–c. 1141), in his Didascalison of c. 1130
(ed. Buttimer 1939) described music as a liberal art
encompassing both practical and intellectual aspects.
In doing this he was following the example of the
German
theorists
who
articulated
most
coherently
an understanding of music that must have been wide-
spread among the educated in the central Middle Ages.
Yet Hugh’s pupil, Richard of St Victor, reverted to the
exclusively impractical Boethian classiﬁcation of music
as a liberal art a few years later in his Liber exceptionum
(ed. Chaˆtillon 1958).
The High and Late Middle Ages
The tension between the practical and cosmological
aspects of music revealed itself in different ways with the
development and expansion of the European universities.
Some historians have looked to university statutes to
assess the place of music in the curriculum (Carpenter
1958). In Paris, the statutes offer little information on the
subjects taught, but other universities modeled on Paris –
notably German universities – speciﬁed musical studies in
their curricula. Anecdotal evidence from former university
students sometimes suggests that music was taught:
Johann von Jenzenstein, who studied at Paris from 1375
to 1376, attests to hearing lectures on music as a cosmo-
logical science. In Oxford, Boethius was a prescribed ele-
ment of the arts curriculum from at least 1431 until the
sixteenth century. Yet despite the persistence of music as
a formal curricular requirement, one cannot but form the
impression that it was not generally considered an impor-
tant discipline. Later evidence from Oxford and Cam-
bridge, both of which instituted degrees in music during
the ﬁfteenth century for which there were no residence
requirements, suggests that these degrees were seen as the
poor relation of degrees in ‘‘proper’’ academic subjects.
Nevertheless, the introduction and assimilation of
Aristotelian texts directed renewed attention to the nature
of music as a discipline. The second book of Aristotle’s
Physics, which deals with the classiﬁcation of astrology,
music, and optics was formative in inspiring opinions as
to the nature of music. Avicenna (Abu¯ ‘Alı¯ al-Husain ibn
‘Abdalla¯h ibn Sı¯na¯; 973/980–1037) and Averrores (Abu¯
l-Walı¯d Muhammad ibn Rushd; 1126–1192) were among
the ﬁrst scholars to comment on this matter; they
later were joined by Robert Grosseteste (Commentarios
in VIII libros physicorum Aristotelis), Albert the Great
(Physicorum
libri
VIII),
Thomas
Aquinas
(In
II
physicorum), and Duns Scotus (Quaestiones in octo libros
physicorum Aristotelis). Aquinas referred to the problem of
disciplines such as music, which seemed to confound
traditional categories, as the problem of the scientiae
mediae. A number of surviving university texts address
the speciﬁc problem of music – including Radulphus
Brito’s Questiones communes mathematice, the Questiones
mathematicales by Ralph the Breton, and questions 16 and
17 of Peter of Auvergne’s sixth Quodlibet (which relies on
Aristotle’s theories of the soul and judgment as outlined in
De anima and the Nichomachean Ethics).
Scholasticism undoubtedly inﬂuenced the literature
of music theory. An early example is the early twelfth-
century German treatise Quaestiones in musica (ed.
Steglich 1911), which anticipates the quaestiones genre
that would become so familiar in the later French schools
Music, Medieval M
821
M

and universities (on the quaestiones genre in the university
context see Duhamel 2007). The summa genre, which was
such a feature of thirteenth- and fourteenth-century scho-
lasticism, was also applied to music. The Speculum
doctrinale by the Dominican scholar Vincent of Beauvais
(c. 1190–c. 1264) brings together authors with very differ-
ent views of music such as Boethius, Isidore, Richard of St
Victor, and the Arab theorist al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (whose works were
by then available in Latin translations). In one sense,
summae responded to the concerns underlying such early
twelfth-century manuals as Honorius Augustodunensis’
De animae exsilio et patria or Hugh of St Victor’s
Didascalicon, which grappled with the fracture of the
accepted curriculum of the seven liberal arts on account
of new studies, such as theology or canon law.
Late medieval discussions about the philosophical and
cosmological natures of music occurred in tandem with
the production of more practical music treatises. New
technical preoccupations, such as the expansion of
polyphony and rhythm, required codiﬁcation and expla-
nation through theoretical literature. Although many of
these treatises were written outside the scholastic milieu,
a number of university-based scholars contributed valu-
able practical treatises. The challenge to determine the
time values of notes arising out of the development of
polyphony can be seen behind the treatise of Johannes de
Grocheo (ﬂ. c. 1300), who dismissed the arithmetical
speculations of Boethius in favour of an Aristotelian
empiricism. Yet de Grocheo was still concerned with the
nature of music, substituting a different division for Boe-
thius’ division and following Aristotle in discussing the
social uses of secular music. Jehan de Muris (c. 1290–c.
1351), who taught at Paris, reafﬁrmed on the authority of
Aristotle and Boethius the primacy of theoretical knowl-
edge over practical experience and gave mathematical
theorems for the measurement of rhythm in contempo-
rary mensural notation in his inﬂuential Notitia artis
musicae
of
c.
1321.
De
Muris
was
primarily
a philosopher and mathematician for whom music was
a secondary interest. This is reﬂected in his use of the
language of scholasticism, more familiar to university-
trained scholars than to practical musicians. Nevertheless,
the overtly scholastic technique of his writing did not
diminish its importance for contemporaries. Along with
Philippe de Vitry (1291–1361), de Muris sought to justify
the novelties behind the new musical art of the fourteenth
century – in this case from a scholastic point of view. In
a sense, de Muris was engaged in the same project as the
south-German circle two centuries earlier: the use of
ancient philosophical wisdom to demonstrate the validity
of
a
particular
musical
practice.
By contrast,
the
conservative commentator James of Lie`ge was appalled
by the musical practices of the ars nova: his vast Speculum
musicae (c. 1330) cites the relevant Greek and Roman
authorities to refute de Muris and de Vitry.
The disagreements over musical practice in the four-
teenth century highlight how, as the Middle Ages
progressed, music theory became more practical. Techni-
cal issues dominate to the exclusion of philosophical and
cosmological issues. All-round scholars comment upon
music more rarely. Where they do – such as Thomas
Aquinas, for example – their contribution offers little
beyond the rudimentary. Thus, although the members of
the south-German circle were able to make important
contributions to music theory because music was an
important part of their lives, later thinkers and philoso-
phers were not because music had become a specialization
in which certain practitioners were the experts. Scholars
such as Jehan de Muris, who could bridge this gap, must be
seen, therefore, as isolated examples. Although some phi-
losophers would continue to speculate on music as
a cosmological science, the greatest utility of ‘‘philosophy’’
would be in support of this or that technical practice.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Augustine ▶Boethius
▶Carolingian Renaissance ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Hugh
of St. Victor ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Isidore
of Seville ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Liberal Arts ▶Peter of
Auvergne
▶Platonism ▶Radulphus
Brito ▶Robert
Grosseteste
▶Thomas
Aquinas
▶Universities
and
Philosophy
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aribo (1951) De musica. In: Smits van Waesberghe J (ed) Aribonis De
musica. Corpus scriptorum de musica 2. American Institute of
Musicology, Rome
Augustine of Hippo (2002) De musica. In: Jacobsson M (ed) Aurelius
Augustinus De musica liber VI: a critical edition with a translation
and an introduction. Studia Latina Stockholmiensia 47. Almqvist &
Wiksell International, Stockholm
Aurelian of Re´oˆme (1975) Musica disciplina. In: Gushee L (ed) Aureliani
Reomensis Musica disciplina. Corpus scriptorum de musica 21.
American Institute of Musicology, Rome
Bern of Reichenau (1999) Prologus in tonarium. In: Rausch A (ed) Die
Musiktraktate des Abtes Bern von Reichenau. Edition und Interpreta-
tion. Musica mediaevalis Europae occidentalis 5. H. Schneider, Tutzing
Bernhard M, Bower CM (eds) (1993/1994/1996) Glossa maior in
institutionem musicam Boethii, 3 vols. Vero¨ffentlichungen der
Musikhistorischen Kommission 9–11. Bayerische Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Verlag der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaft,
Munich
Boethius (1867) De institutione arithmetica, De institutione musica. In:
Friedlein G (ed) Anicii Manlii Torquati Severini Boetii De
822 M
Music, Medieval

institutione arithmetica libri duo, De institutione musica libri
quinque. Accedit geometria quae fertur Boetii. Teubner; repr. 1966:
Minerva, Leipzig (repr. Frankfurt am Main, 1966)
Boethius (2005) In: Moreschini C (ed) De consolatione philosophiae,
2nd edn. K. G. Saur, Munich
Cassiodorus (1937) Institutiones. In: Mynors RAB (ed) Cassiodori
senatoris Institutiones. Oxford Clarendon Press, Oxford
Chailley J (ed) (1968) Alia musica (Traite´ de musique du IXe sie`cle).
Edition critique commente´e avec une introduction sur l’origine de la
nomenclature modale pseudo-grecque au Moyen-Age. Publications
de l’Institut de Musicologie de l’Universite´ de Paris 6. Centre de
Documentation Universitaire. et S. E. D. E. S., Paris
de Muris Jehan (1972) Notitia artis musicae. In: Michels U (ed) Corpus
scriptorum de musica 17. American Institute of Musicology, Rome
Frutolf of Michelsberg (1919) Breviarium de musica. In: Vivell C (ed)
Frutolﬁ
Breviarium
de
musica
et
Tonarius.
Akademie
der
Wissenschaften in Wien. Philosophische historische Klasse. In
Kommission bei A. Holder, Sitzungsberichte 188/2
Guido of Arezzo (1955) Micrologus. In: Smits van Waesberghe J (ed)
Micrologus Guidonis Aretini. Corpus scriptorum de musica 4.
American Institute of Musicology, Rome
Guido
of
Arezzo
(1999)
Epistola
ad
Michahelem,
Prologus
in
antiphonarium, Regule rithmice. In: Pesce D (ed and trans) Guido
d’Arezzo’s Regule rithmice, Prologus in antiphonarium and Epistola
ad Michahelem: a critical text and translation. Wissenschaftliche
Abhandlungen 73. Institute of Mediaeval Music, Ottawa
Herman of Reichenau (1936) Musica. In: Ellinwood L (ed and trans)
Musica Hermanni Contracti. Eastman School of Music, University
of Rochester, Rochester
Honorius Augustodunensis. De animae exsilio et patri, seu de artibus.
Patrologia Latina 172:1241–1246
Honorius Augustodunensis. Liber XII quaestionibus. PL 172:1177–1186
Hugh of St Victor (1939) Didascalicon. In: Buttimer CH (ed) Hugonis de
Sancto Victore Didascalicon de studio legendi: a critical text. The
Catholic University of America. Studies in medieval and renaissance
Latin 10. Catholic University of America Press, Washington
Isidore of Seville (1989) De ecclesiasticis ofﬁciis. In: Lawson CM (ed)
Sancti Isidori episcopi hispalensis De ecclesiasticis ofﬁciis. Brepols,
Turnhout
Isidore of Seville (1911) Etymologiae. In: Lindsay WM (ed) Isidori
Hispalensis episcopi Etymologiarum sive originum libri XX, 2 vols.
Oxford Clarendon Press, Oxford
Macrobius (1970) Commentarius in Somnium Scipionis. In: Willis J (ed)
Ambrosii Theodosii Macrobii. In Somnium Scipionis commentarios
selecta varietate lectionis ornavit Iacobus Willis, 2nd edn. Bibliotheca
scriptorum Graecorum et Romanorum Teubneriana. Teubner,
Leipzig (repr. 1994)
Martianus Capella (1983) De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii. In: Willis
J (ed) Martianus Capella opera. Teubner, Leipzig
Plato (1975) Timaeus. In: Waszink JH (ed) Timaeus a Calcidio translatus
commentarioque instructus, 2nd edn. Plato Latinus 4. Brill, London
Richard of St Victor (1958) Liber exceptionum. In: Chaˆtillon J (ed) Liber
exceptionum: texte critique avec introduction, notes et tables. Textes
philosophiques du Moyen Age 5. J. Vrin, Paris
Steglich R (ed) (1911) Quaestiones in musica. Die Quaestiones in musica.
Ein Choraltraktat des zentralen Mittelalters und ihr mutmaßlicher
Verfasser Rudolf von St. Trond (1070–1138). Breitkopf & Ha¨rtel; M.
Sa¨ndig, Leipzig (repr. 1971)
Theoger of Metz (1995) Musica. In: Lochner FC (ed and trans) Dietger
(Theogerus) of Metz and his ‘‘Musica’’. PhD dissertation, University
of Notre Dame
William of Conches (2006) Glosae super Platonem. In: Jeauneau E´ (ed)
Opera omnia 3. Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis
203. Brepols, Turnhout
Secondary Sources
Carpenter NC (1958) Music in the medieval and renaissance universities.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman
Duhamel P (2007) ‘L’enseignement de la musique a` l’Universite´ de Paris
d’apre`s le manuscrit BnF lat. 7378A. Acta Musicol 3–29
Gushee L (1973) Questions of genre in medieval treatises on music. In:
Arlt
W
(ed)
Gattungen
der
Musik
in
Einzeldarstellungen.
Gedenkschrift Leo Schrade. Francke, Bern, pp 365–433
Haas M (1997) Les sciences mathe´matiques comme parties de la
philosophie. In: L’enseignement de la philosophie au XIIIe sie`cle.
Autour du Guide de l’e´tudiant du ms.Ripoll 109. Turnhout, Brepols,
pp 89–108
Haines J, DeWitt P (2008) Johannes de Grocheio and Aristotelian natural
philosophy. Early Music Hist 27
Harrison FLl (1992) Music at Oxford before 1500. In: Catto JI, Evans TAR
(eds) Late medieval Oxford. History of the University of Oxford,
vol 2. Oxford Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp 347–371
Maıˆtre C (1997) La place d’Aristote dans l’enseignement de la musique
a` l’Universite´. In: L’enseignement des disciplines a` la Faculte´ des
arts (Paris et Oxford, XIIIe – XVe se`cles). Brepols, Turnhout, pp
217–233
McCarthy TJH (2008) Music, scholasticism and reform: Salian Germany
1024–1125. Manchester University Press, Manchester
Riethmu¨ller A (1990) Probleme der spekulativen Musiktheorie im
Mittelalter. In: Zaminer F (ed) Geschichte der Musiktheorie 3.
Rezeption des antiken Fachs im Mittelalter. Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt, pp 165–201
Teeuwen M (2002) Harmony and the music of the spheres: the ars musica
in ninth-century commentaries on Martianus Capella. Brill, Leiden
van Deusen N (1995) Theology and music at the early university: the case
of Robert Grosseteste and Anonymous IV. Brill, Leiden
White A (1981) Glosses composed before the twelfth century in manu-
scripts of Macrobius, Commentary on Cicero’s Somnium Scipionis.
DPhil thesis, University of Oxford
Yudkin J (1990) The inﬂuence of Aristotle on French university music
texts. In: Barbera A (ed) Music theory and its sources. University of
Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, pp 173–189
Music, Medieval M
823
M


