Review

Review

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUDIOLOGY IN  
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 
Review

Review

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUDIOLOGY IN  
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
 
 
 
 
 
BRADLEY MCPHERSON AND RON BROUILLETTE 
EDITORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
New York 
 
Review

 
Copyright © 2008 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or 
transmitted in any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical 
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the written permission of the Publisher. 
 
For permission to use material from this book please contact us: 
Telephone 631-231-7269; Fax 631-231-8175 
Web Site: http://www.novapublishers.com 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or 
implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No 
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of 
information contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, 
consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers’ use of, or 
reliance upon, this material. Any parts of this book based on government reports are so indicated 
and copyright is claimed for those parts to the extent applicable to compilations of such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in 
this book. In addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage 
to persons or property arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise 
contained in this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the 
subject matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not 
engaged in rendering legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert 
assistance is required, the services of a competent person should be sought. FROM A 
DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A COMMITTEE OF THE 
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A COMMITTEE OF PUBLISHERS. 
 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
 
(Available upon request.) 
 
 
ISBN 978-1-63484-666-0 (eBook) 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc.     New York 
 
Review

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
Preface 
 
vii 
Dedication 
 
ix 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1 
Bradley McPherson and Ron Brouillette 
Chapter 2 
Audiology: A Developing Country Context 
5 
Bradley McPherson 
Chapter 3 
Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
21 
Andrew W. Smith 
Chapter 4 
Education and Practice of Audiology Internationally: Affordable 
and Sustainable Education Models for Developing Countries 
51 
Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
Chapter 5 
Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
75 
Bradley McPherson, and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
Chapter 6 
Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services in Economically 
Challenged Regions 
107 
Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
Chapter 7 
Rehabilitation of Hearing Loss: Challenges and Opportunities  in 
Developing Countries 
141 
Ron Brouillette 
Chapter 8 
Hearing Aid Provision in Developing Countries: An Indian Case 
Study 
155 
Vijayalakshmi Basavaraj 
Chapter 9 
Educational Audiology  in Developing Countries 
167 
Susie Miles and Wendy McCracken 
Review

Contents 
vi 
Chapter 10 
Audiological Counseling in a Developing Country: A Journey 
through Guatemala 
181 
Patricia Castellanos de Muñoz and Sandra E. Sosa 
Chapter 11 
Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
189 
Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
Chapter 12 
Resources for Audiologists in Developing Countries 
223 
Bradley McPherson and Ron Brouillette 
Contributing Authors 
231 
Index 
 
233 
 
 
 
Review

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
In 1988, Sanford Gerber and I edited a book entitled “International Perspectives on 
Communication Disorders”.  The first chapter discussed the World Health Organization 
General Assembly resolution of 15 May 1985 pertaining to hearing problems, in which it was 
stated: “… that the attainment of health for all requires increased activity for the prevention of 
hearing impairment” and further, that, “… in developing countries most of the hearing 
impairment, which occurs in excessive prevalence in some communities, results from causes 
that can be prevented at the primary health level” or is “… reversible or remediable”.  That 
was twenty years ago! Since then much has been accomplished in documenting the incidence 
and prevalence of hearing impairment in both the developed and developing worlds, and in 
building hearing aids and drug therapy programs which can ease the economic, social and 
individual burdens resulting from hearing loss, especially in the developing world. 
Another of the key hearing health care advances of the past twenty years has been the 
introduction of universal systems for newborn hearing screening. We see such programs 
proliferating all over the developed world; but are those in the developing world any less 
needy? What is happening there?  
Of course, one of the most significant advances of the last twenty years is the growth, 
expansion and recognition of the profession of Audiology all over the world. With that 
change came an appreciation for the significant contribution audiology makes to improving 
hearing health care. We no longer hear questions about what an audiologist does. Now what 
we hear are complaints about the lack of audiologists and their services.  For most of the 
developing world the presence of a barely adequate number of fully trained audiologists is 
still a dream. The good news is that we now have service/clinical standards and a model 
curriculum for training. These were developed through the good work of the European 
Federation of Audiology Societies and the International Society of Audiology. The bad news 
is that there are insufficient funds, programs and fully trained audiologists to put those 
standards in place or to apply the model curriculum in many parts of the world. But there is 
hope! I am delighted to report membership in the International Society of Audiology is 
growing rapidly and now represents 70 nations and every continent, and that our student 
membership represents 10 nations as diverse as Australia, Iran, Mexico, Brazil, Sweden, 
China and the Philippines. I have no doubt that the next twenty years will continue to see 
major changes in service everywhere. 
Change is upon us, and yet it is slow in coming. Clearly the time has come when there is 
a tremendous need for a complete discussion and summary of “Audiology in Developing 
Review

George Mencher 
viii 
Countries”. Why? Because we need to know what we know, what we don’t know, what we 
are doing, what we are not doing, and what we should be doing to advance hearing health 
services in the developing world.  Bradley McPherson and Ron Brouillette have taken on the 
task of developing such a work, and have made a powerful effort to answer these significant 
questions. 
Andrew Smith has been leading efforts to collect reliable international demographic data 
on hearing impairment, within the Prevention of Blindness and Deafness program at the 
World Health Organization. Who better than him to discuss the demographics of hearing loss 
in developing countries? Further, Bola Olasanya (Nigeria), Jackie Clark (USA), Valerie 
Newton (UK), Wendy McCracken and Susie Miles (UK), Geoffrey Amedofu (Kenya), 
Adrian Fuente (Chile), Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi (Australia), Vijayalakshmi 
Basavaraj (India) and Patricia Castellanos and Sandra Sosa (Guatemala) are internationally 
renowned persons with significant expertise in their topic areas who represent 6 continents 
and 8 countries. Each brings a maturity and world-wide perspective to their chapters. All have 
extensive experience throughout the world as they have charted new courses, established 
programs or provided much needed services to emerging countries and regions.  This is a 
book which covers the theoretical, statistical, technical and practical aspects of Audiology in 
Developing Countries. I am delighted to invite you to enter its pages and to feel how far we 
have come in the past twenty years and to learn how far we need to go! 
 
George Mencher, PhD 
Assistant Secretary General, International Society of Audiology 
Professor of Audiology, Dalhousie University 
Director Emeritus, Nova Scotia Hearing and Speech Centres 
Halifax, Nova Scotia 
Canada 
 
Review

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEDICATION 
 
 
This book is dedicated to the memory of Christopher Adrian Holborow MD FRCS OBE, 
former Chairman of the Commonwealth Society for the Deaf. Christopher Holborow was a 
compassionate pioneer in the field of hearing health care in developing nations and a firm 
believer in the importance of good hearing for everyone, wherever they were found. He was 
an inspiring mentor for many audiologists who carry on his passion for better hearing in 
developing countries. We believe he would have been pleased to see how the seeds of his 
knowledge and vision have grown. 
 
‘Go in search of your people 
Love them 
Learn from them 
Plan with them 
Serve them 
Begin with what they have 
Build on what they know’ 
 
Ancient poem: From a Dispensary at Mansa Konko, The Gambia1 
                                                        
1 Holborow, C. (1991). Hearing aids: Their production, delivery systems and effective use. A hospital based model. 
In Hearing aids: Their production, delivery systems and effective use (pp. 17-18).  London: Royal National 
Institute for the Deaf. 
Review

Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
Bradley McPherson1,* and Ron Brouillette2,* 
1University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 
2Inclusive Education Consultant, Directorate of Primary and Mass Education, Bangladesh 
and "Affordable Hearing" and "Wings", Consultants for International Deafness and 
Development, United States of America 
 
 
Audiology is the study of hearing disorders and the non-medical, non-surgical 
rehabilitation of people with hearing loss. For over fifty years audiology has advanced as a 
clinical speciality in the developed world. The past two decades, in particular, have seen a 
rapid growth in the numbers of audiologists and in the sophistication of audiology assessment 
techniques and rehabilitation procedures. Nowadays in industrialized economies most 
individuals with hearing impairment have access to appropriate screening programs, 
audiological diagnostic assessment, hearing aid fitting and support with the rehabilitation 
process. In developing countries this is not the case. Many children still have undetected 
hearing loss; many adults with hearing disorders struggle to fulfil their social and economic 
roles without the benefits that appropriate amplification could bring. At least two-thirds of the 
278 million adults and children with significant hearing loss live in nations with less 
developed economies. Living in such countries, professional help may be scarce and often 
distant, and assessment equipment and hearing aids, or other amplification devices, 
unaffordable for most of the community. For example, it is estimated that only one million 
hearing aids are fitted in developing countries each year, when the actual need is for thirty 
million (Smith, 2007).  
However, there are many concerned individuals and organizations in both developed and 
developing countries who are now working to radically change this situation. Increasing 
attention is being paid to hearing loss in developing countries by international agencies such 
as the World Health Organization, Christian Blind Mission and Lions International. 
Professional organizations in the developed world, such as the American Academy of 
Audiology, now regularly acknowledge the humanitarian work of their members with awards 
                                                        
* Correspondence: dbmcpher@hkucc.hku.hk 
* Correspondence: ron_brouillette@yahoo.com 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Ron Brouillette 
2 
and grants. Governments, private agencies and individuals in developing nations have 
commenced programs to detect hearing loss (Olusanya et al., 2007) and initiatives to create 
affordable hearing devices are now ongoing (McPherson & Brouillette, 2004). This work is 
beginning to have a widespread impact. At the same time, more audiology professionals and 
technicians (local and expatriate) are working in developing countries. The increasing wealth 
generated in many ‘emerging economies’ (The Economist, 2006) should ensure that funding 
for hearing health care in general gains increased attention over the next decade. 
There are many special challenges and opportunities faced by audiologists working in 
developing countries. For most practitioners in developing countries, the training they have 
received has been either undertaken in a developed nation or delivered from the perspective 
an advanced health care context. Very little information with a developing country 
perspective is available to guide audiologists. This publication is a first attempt to showcase 
both what has been done and what still needs to be done to improve hearing health care in 
developing countries. The book is primarily addressed to audiologists, other hearing health 
care workers, and policymakers who work in developing countries or who have an interest in 
working in developing countries. The Editors hope that this and future editions of Audiology 
in Developing Countries will serve to support audiologists who work in developing countries 
and motivate others to become involved in this rewarding field. This book is a beginning and 
not an end-point. There are no definitive single solutions to the many barriers to hearing 
health care in developing countries. Developing countries are inherently diverse and 
multifaceted societies and audiologists who work in developing countries bring with them a 
wide range of ideas and skills—all of which may be needed to provide effective client care. 
Audiology in Developing Countries provides a rich, diverse set of chapters that cover a broad 
range of audiology’s scope of practice. The chapter authors have been given the freedom to 
explore their chosen areas in their own unique way. This book is not designed to provide a 
detailed, prescriptive guide for clinical practice. Nor was it intended to give a solely academic 
account of audiological issues in developing countries. We have intended, however, to raise 
questions and stimulate interest in a remarkably rewarding field through the writings of an 
international group of professionals who have all made a significant contribution to hearing 
health care in the developing world. This book could not have been written without the 
generous contributions of our chapter authors. We have been privileged to work towards our 
publication goal with such a global network of dedicated colleagues. Some authors, such as 
Helen Goulios, Robert Patuzzi and Andrew Smith have contributed solid data and analysis 
that enhances our still limited knowledge of basic service needs and resource parameters in 
the developing world. Other authors, like Geoffrey Amedofu, Jackie Clark, Adrian Fuente, 
Valerie Newton and Bola Olusanya have provide scholarly reviews that have been 
thoughtfully framed to meet the needs of those working in developing countries. 
Vijayalakshmi Basavaraj, Patricia Castellanos, Wendy McCracken, Susie Miles and Sandra 
Sosa bring detailed and often inspiring reports of professional challenges and achievements in 
developing countries they are highly familiar with. We feel that every chapter in this book 
contributes in a unique way to a greater understanding of the issues involved in audiology as 
it relates to developing nations. 
The Editors extend their sincere thanks and appreciation to Darren Bryant, Faculty of 
Education, the University of Hong Kong, for his careful proofreading and thoughtful advice 
on style and format. The support of the Centre for Communication Disorders, the University 
of Hong Kong has enabled us to publish this book. A generous grant from the Oticon 
Review

Introduction 
3
Foundation, Denmark, for the distribution of this book in developing countries is also very 
gratefully acknowledged. As mentioned above, Audiology in Developing Countries is best 
considered a working document that gives contemporary snapshots of issues that concern 
audiologists in developing countries and those who work with them. We welcome comments 
on this book and would value suggestions for future editions. 
REFERENCES 
 
Economist, The. (2006). The new titans. A survey of the world economy. The Economist, 
September 16, 2006. London: The Economist. 
McPherson, B., & Brouillette, R. (2004). A fair hearing for all: Providing appropriate 
amplification in developing countries. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 25, 219-223. 
Olusanya, B.O., Swanepoel, D.W., Chapchap, M.J., Castillo, S., Habib, H., Mukari, S.Z., 
Martinez, N.V., Lin, H-C., & McPherson, B. (2007). Progress towards early detection 
services for infants with hearing loss in developing countries. BMC Health Services 
Research, 7(14).  
Smith, A. (2007). Update on burden of hearing impairment, and progress of WHO/WWH 
hearing aids initiative. WHO/WWHearing Fifth Workshop on the Provision of Hearing 
Aids and Services for Developing Countries. November 8, 2007. Geneva: World Health 
Organization. 
 
Review

Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
AUDIOLOGY: A DEVELOPING COUNTRY CONTEXT 
 
 
Bradley McPherson* 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 
ABSTRACT 
This chapter provides a broad overview of the characteristics of developing nations 
that influence hearing health care. The varying ways that “development” can be defined 
are examined and listings of developing countries delineated by different criteria are 
provided. Developing nations have features that often make them unusual from a 
developed economy perspective. Such countries typically have a greater rural population, 
are less ethnically homogenous, are more linguistically diverse and have greater income 
inequality than populations in industrialized societies. Such factors impact on the abilities 
of societies and health agencies to provide services to many sectors of the community. 
Audiology arose in industrialized societies as a response to post-World War II hearing 
health issues and has not yet created models of service delivery that are entirely 
appropriate for developing nations in the 21st century. The costs generally associated 
with diagnostic and rehabilitative audiological services may be a barrier to all but the 
most privileged individuals in developing countries. This chapter discusses such barriers 
to service delivery and surveys possible options that could improve access to hearing 
health care in the developing world. The resources required to provide audiological 
services, such as personnel, diagnostic equipment and amplification devices, are related 
to the overall resources available in developing nations. Global efforts to improve hearing 
health, through institutions such as the World Health Organization and private agencies 
are outlined and future trends in funding for hearing health care envisaged.  
 
 
 
                                                        
* Correspondence: dbmcpher@hkucc.hku.hk 
Review

Bradley McPherson 
6 
INTRODUCTION 
 
We live in a world that is home to more than 6.5 billion people. The majority of these 
people, 5.3 billion, live in developing countries. Demographic projections suggest that, in the 
near future, the numbers of deaths will exceed the numbers of births in the world’s more 
developed countries. Already this trend of a declining population can be seen in developed 
economies such as Italy and Japan, with birth rates below 1.25 children per woman. A birth 
rate of 2.1 children per woman is considered necessary to avoid a long-term decline in 
population. Population growth estimates indicate that almost all future growth, perhaps 97% 
of net population increase (Todaro & Smith, 2006), will occur in the developing regions of 
Africa, Asia and Latin America. 
Along with population growth comes an increase in the number of children born with 
disabilities. In China, with 20% of the world’s population, it is estimated that one child is 
born every 40 seconds with significant handicap (Stratford & Ng, 2000). Of these children, at 
least 14% are born with hearing disorders. The World Health Organisation (WHO) has 
estimated that two-thirds of those with severe-profound hearing loss live in developing 
countries (Kumar, 2001). In the long term, global demographic changes will accentuate this 
pattern, further shifting the burden of hearing loss on to those living in developing nations. 
The burden is indeed a great one, as hearing handicap is very often a personal tragedy for 
individuals and their families. The educational, health care and social costs of hearing loss are 
also high. In the United States it has been estimated that the lifetime costs of severe to 
profound hearing loss average $297,0001 (Mohr et al., 2000), with 21% of these costs 
incurred in the provision of special education. Lifetime costs for those with severe to 
profound hearing loss of prelingual onset exceed $1 million. These figures indicate the high 
level of costs associated with reduced work productivity, hearing health care and education 
for persons with hearing loss in developed economies. These are costs that developing 
countries are ill-prepared to cope with. 
The vast majority of audiologists, and other professionals involved in hearing health care 
training, live and work in developed nations. They have been trained to prevent hearing loss 
and to assess, treat and rehabilitate persons with hearing loss – in the context of conditions 
found in industrialized countries. However, there can be deep economic, political, social, and 
health differences between developing countries and developed economies. All these 
contrasts may fundamentally impact on how an audiologist works –what she or he does in the 
clinic, in the school, in industry or in the community. 
Increasingly, hearing issues are gaining a place in the health care priorities of developing 
countries. Leadership from the World Health Organization and development agencies has 
given momentum to change and progress. More audiologists are now working in developing 
nations and establishing prevention, assessment and rehabilitation programs. Some 
developing nations, such as China (Zheng & McPherson, 2006), Columbia (Madriz, 2001), 
India (Karanth, 2002), the Philippines (Cheng, Olea & Marzan, 2002) and South Africa 
(Swanepoel, 2006), now have well-established professional training programs in audiology. 
The main objective of this chapter is to introduce the concepts of development and 
developing countries and summarize the key characteristics that distinguish developing 
                                                        
1 All dollar figures are in United States dollars unless otherwise noted. 
Review

Audiology: A Developing Country Context 
7
countries from those in the industrialized world. The chapter is divided into four main 
sections. The chapter initially discusses the various ways in which development level can be 
usefully viewed and quantified. Secondly, we consider the demographic, social and health 
factors that set developing countries apart from developed nations. The third section focuses 
on several specific audiology programs that have confronted development issues and their 
outcomes. Finally, the chapter summarizes the global initiatives that are underway and which 
may support the advancement of audiology services for the majority of adults and children – 
those who live in developing countries. 
WHAT ARE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES? 
Development in the present context was considered initially as an economic concept, 
equated to the process of industrialization. Developing countries have been defined as nations 
with low average annual income whose economies are mostly dependent on agriculture and 
primary resources and which do not have a strong industrial base. Typically, developing 
states are dependent on inflows of foreign capital and on international aid for their economic 
needs. For much necessary technology and expertise, developing countries depend on the 
industrialized world. “Less developed countries”, “emerging nations”, “the South” and 
“underdeveloped countries” are often used as synonyms for “developing countries”. 
Developing countries are found in Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Latin America and in the 
Pacific. According to certain criteria, some countries within Eastern Europe and the former 
Soviet Union are also classified as developing countries. 
There are many ways to attempt to quantify development and rank countries by level of 
development. The most common approaches have been to use income as a measure of 
development, or economic and social structure as a reflection of overall development, or to 
consider social or physical quality of life measures. Economic measures have the longest 
history of use and are the most widely reported, but all indices have their advocates and all 
are useful when considering an individual country’s level of development. By considering a 
range of measures a more sophisticated understanding of a country’s place in the world can 
be gained.  
 
 
Income Measures 
 
The oldest method of ranking nations for development is to compare their levels of per 
capita (per person) income. This is a straightforward measure and relative easy to calculate, as 
the required statistics are generally available. Per capita income can be measured in two ways. 
A country’s total income can be divided by its population and the resulting number for gross 
domestic product (GDP), nowadays usually termed gross national income (GNI), converted 
into an international reference currency (usually US dollars). This figure allows for ready 
comparison with GNI figures for other countries. However, it can be misleading (Sanford & 
Sandhu, 2003). No one can survive long-term on one dollar per day in an industrialized 
economy but many people do live on such an average income in developing countries. This is 
partly because the price of many locally-produced commodities is low in developing 
economies and also because significant income may be generated from the informal 
Review

Bradley McPherson 
8 
economy. On the other hand, a simple foreign exchange conversion GNI measure will give a 
good indication of the relative cost of imported goods and services. Hearing aids, assistive 
listening devices, and audiometric equipment are almost entirely imported from industrialized 
nations and comparing cost to local GNI will give a rough indication of affordability. A more 
complex measure of relative annual income seeks to compare the cost of the same standard 
basket of goods across nations. The purchasing power parity (PPP) method provides a more 
accurate comparison of relative standards of living. A person in a country with a PPP of 
$8,000 should have roughly the same standard of living as a person in the United States with 
an annual income of $8,000. There can be a wide disparity between GNI and PPP figures for 
the same nation, with India being a clear example. Rankings for 25 countries for both foreign 
exchange conversion GNI and PPP are shown in Table 1. The World Bank publishes foreign 
exchange conversion and purchasing power parity per capita income figures on an annual 
basis (World Bank, 2005). The World Bank uses GNI per capita to categorize states as low-
income ($825 or less); middle-income ($826 to $10,065; and high-income ($10,066 and 
above). A simple criterion for a developing country is where GDP per capita is below this 
high-income GNI level. However, this benchmark leads to a very wide grouping of states 
being labelled as “developing”, from states such as Burundi with a GNI of $90 per person to 
recent European Union member states such as the Czech Republic, with a GNI per person of 
$9,150. The World Bank further divides middle-income countries into upper-middle-income 
and lower-middle-income economies, with a GNI per capita of $3,255 boundary between the 
two groups. Alternatively, lower-middle-income and low-income states may be collectively 
deemed “developing countries”. 
 
 
Social and Political Measures 
 
Economic measures of development have been criticized for ignoring the goals of the 
development process, which is to improve the quality of life of individuals. Many authors 
have argued that factors other than income must be considered when ranking relative 
standards of living. Basic societal factors should also be considered, including literacy levels, 
infant mortality, and life expectancy. A widely used ranking is the Human Development 
Index (HDI), published on a yearly basis by the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP). The HDI combines economic and social factors: life expectancy at birth, adult 
literacy, total school enrolment and GNI (using a PPP measure). The resulting index is a 
number that may range from 0 to 1. HDI rankings for selected countries are listed in Table 4.1 
and show that quality of life is not always closely related to per capita income. Equatorial 
Guinea has a high GNI due to oil wealth ($19,780) but a relatively low HDI (0.655), in part 
related to poor life expectancy at birth (43 years). Cuba has a low GNI but has a 
comparatively high HDI (0.817), related to achievements in education and health care. The 
HDI is a relative index, and it is important to note that 50% of nations will always rank at the 
0.5 level or below (Sanford & Sandhu, 2003). The relative position in the HDI table is of 
more practical importance than the HDI figure itself. Countries with an HDI of 0.8 or more 
typically meet conventional expectations of a 'developed' country, and have achieved high 
levels of development, and those with an HDI between 0.5 and 0.8 (including many of the 
former Soviet and east European states) exhibit moderate development. Another common 
Review

Audiology: A Developing Country Context 
9
working definition of developing countries, in this case “countries with low human 
development”, includes all those with a HDI of less than 0.5.  
 
Table 1. Development Indices for Selected Countries 2007 
 
Country 
Gross 
National 
Income 
(GNI) per 
capita 
Purchasing 
Power 
Parity 
(PPP) per 
capita 
Gini Index 
Human 
Development 
Index (HDI) 
Quality-
of-life 
index 
ranking 
Switzerland 
48,230 
35,370 
0.13 
0.947 
2 
United States 
41,400 
39,710 
0.13 
0.944 
13 
Japan 
37,180 
30,040 
0.17 
0.943 
17 
Ireland 
34,280 
33,170 
0.11 
0.946 
1 
Spain 
21,210 
25,070 
0.31 
0.928 
10 
South Korea  
13,980 
20,400 
0.32 
0.901 
30 
Mexico 
6,770 
9,590 
0.34 
0.814 
32 
Poland 
6,090 
12,640 
0.19 
0.858 
48 
Latvia 
5,460 
11,850 
0.34 
0.836 
66 
Argentina 
3,720 
12,460 
0.22 
0.863 
40 
South Africa 
3,630 
10,960 
0.79 
0.658 
92 
Russian Federation 
3,410 
9,620 
0.14 
0.795 
105 
Thailand 
2,540 
8,020 
0.33 
0.778 
42 
Dominican Republic 
2,080 
6,750 
0.38 
0.749 
79 
China 
1,290 
5,530 
0.37 
0.755 
60 
Ukraine 
1,260 
6,250 
0.29 
0.766 
98 
Indonesia 
1,140 
3,460 
0.32 
0.697 
71 
Zimbabwe 
≤ 825# 
2,180 
0.30 
0.505 
111 
India 
620 
3,100 
0.56 
0.602 
73 
Yemen* 
570 
820 
0.73 
0.489 
not 
ranked 
Viet Nam 
550 
2,700 
0.28 
0.704 
61 
Tanzania 
330 
660 
0.41 
0.418 
109 
Cambodia* 
320 
2,180 
0.28 
0.571 
not 
ranked 
Uganda* 
270 
1,520 
0.50 
0.508 
101 
Ethiopia* 
110 
810 
0.83 
0.367 
not 
ranked 
* Least developed nations # estimate. 
 
Another measure of social well-being is the manner in which income is distributed within 
a country. One commonly quoted index is the Gini index of inequality, or Gini coefficient. 
This statistic ranges from 0 (income distributed with complete equality) to 1 (income 
distribution “perfectly unequal”). The Gini index may be similar for countries that have very 
different income levels (for example, Italy and Sri Lanka both have a Gini coefficient of 
0.23), indicating that there is no simple, direct relationship between GNI and income 
Review

Bradley McPherson 
10
distribution. For professionals in developing countries the Gini index is, however, useful. A 
high Gini coefficient in a country with a low GNI (for example, Nigeria with a Gini index of 
0.53 and a GNI of $390 per person) suggests that there will be a proportion of the population 
with the financial resources to access developed nation standards of hearing health care 
services, along with a majority of people for whom such access is not generally possible. The 
current Gini index for a sample of developed and developing countries is shown in Table 1. 
These rankings can be found in the UNDP Human Development Report (and at 
http://www.undp.org/) and are updated annually. 
Many other rankings have also been devised and published, based on factors such as 
economic freedom (Miles, Feulner & O’Grady, 2005), corruption (Transparency 
International, 2006), freedom of the press (Reporters Without Borders, 2006), environmental 
quality (included in the “General Progress Indicator”, The Australia Institute, 2006), health 
quality (such as infant and child mortality, and life expectancy indices; World Bank, 2005) 
and overall quality of life. The Economist quality-of-life index ranks 111 states based on nine 
factors (Kekic, 2004). These variables are material well-being, health, political stability and 
security, family life, community life, climate and geography, job security, political freedom 
and gender equality. Quality-of-life rankings for selected countries are shown in Table 1. 
  
Table 2. List of Least Developed Countries in 2006 
 
1 
Afghanistan  
26 
Madagascar 
2 
Angola 
27 
Malawi 
3 
Bangladesh 
28 
Maldives  
4 
Benin 
29 
Mali 
5 
Bhutan 
30 
Mauritania 
6 
Burkina Faso  
31 
Mozambique 
7 
Burundi 
32 
Myanmar 
8 
Cambodia 
33 
Nepal  
9 
Cape Verde 
34 
Niger  
10 
Central African Republic 
35 
Rwanda 
11 
Chad 
36 
Samoa  
12 
Comoros 
37 
São Tomé and Principe 
13 
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
38 
Senegal 
14 
Djibouti 
39 
Sierra Leone 
15 
Equatorial Guinea 
40 
Solomon Islands 
16 
Eritrea 
41 
Somalia 
17 
Ethiopia  
42 
Sudan 
18 
The Gambia 
43 
Timor-Lesté  
19 
Guinea 
44 
Togo 
20 
Guinea-Bissau  
45 
Tuvalu  
21 
Haiti  
46 
Uganda 
22 
Kiribati  
47 
United Republic of Tanzania 
23 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
48 
Vanuatu 
24 
Lesotho  
49 
Yemen 
25 
Liberia  
50 
Zambia 
Review

Audiology: A Developing Country Context 
11
Least Developed Countries 
 
Non-industrialized nations can also be categorized as least developed countries (LDCs), 
usually based on their rankings for GNI and certain other factors. These are countries that in 
no sense of the word can presently be regarded as “developing”. A widely used classification 
is that of the United Nations, which identifies LDCs using three criteria: (a) low income – 
under $750 GNI per capita; (b) human resource weakness index based on indicators of 
nutrition, health, education and adult literacy; and (c) economic vulnerability index, 
calculated from data on instability of agricultural production and exports, share of 
manufacturing and service industries in GNI, diversity of exports, size of the economy and 
the effects of natural disasters. A list of current LDCs according to UN criteria are shown in 
Table 2. This classification is a very important one as many aid agencies target funding to 
countries that are “least developed” as defined by the UN.  
It should be kept in mind that countries may “graduate” from LDC status. Botswana has 
already done so and it is expected that Equatorial Guinea, Kiribati, Tuvalu and Vanuatu may 
do so in the near future.  
IN WHAT WAYS ARE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES DIFFERENT? 
Developing nations may be defined in various ways but all criteria in some way 
acknowledge low national income as a key factor. Low GNI is an indicator of widespread 
poverty, inequality and unemployment/underemployment. Developing countries, particularly 
least-developed states, generally struggle to provide minimum levels of education, health, 
housing and food to their citizens. In the developing nations of sub-Saharan Africa, 75% of 
the population lives on less than $2 per day (World Bank, 2005). At times developing 
countries have serious problems in maintaining a cohesive, functioning nation-state. Poverty 
and the effects of poverty impact on every area of a society, including hearing health care. 
Often developing countries share features that are not common in industrialized societies, 
such as a highly diverse ethnic/linguistic composition, limited physical resources and large 
rural-based populations, that create issues that need careful consideration by audiologists and 
other professionals. Some of the major features that make developing countries different to 
the developed world are highlighted below.  
 
 
Agricultural Employment and Mainly Rural Populations  
 
At the start of the 20th century over 40% of workers in the United States were involved 
in agricultural occupations (Ruben, 2003). Today, less than 1% of American workers are 
directly employed in agriculture. This is an outcome of the industrialization-development 
process. However, developing countries are still often heavily dependent on agriculture for 
economic survival and the majority of workers and their families are based in rural areas. 
More than 65% of the population of LDCs is rural, compared to less than 27% in developed 
economies, and 58% of the workforce is agricultural (Todaro & Smith, 2006). Rural people 
are generally very much poorer than urban citizens, with an urban elite that derives a large 
Review

Bradley McPherson 
12
proportion of the national income. For example, in Ghana the incidence of poverty is 2% in 
the capital city, Accra, but 70% in the rural savannah (World Bank, 2005). 
 
 
Young, Rapidly Growing Populations 
 
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, many developed economies are now in 
transition to long-term population declines. The population of the European Union is 
projected to fall by 20 million by 2050. The population of Japan is predicted to decrease by 
18 million, or 14%, by the same date. The opposite trend is apparent in many, but not all, 
developing states. The Indian population is expected to increase by 55% by 2050, making 
India the world’s most populous nation (Population Reference Bureau, 2006). Yemen, a 
nation with least-developed status, is projected to increase its population by more than 30 
million– or 243%– by 2050. The population of sub-Saharan Africa will increase by perhaps 
300 million by 2020. All these demographic projections are based on average fertility rates– 
lifetime births per woman. Fertility rates change over time and not all the projections 
mentioned may be met. However, fertility levels declined rapidly in many countries in the 
1980s and 1990s and are at an average of 3.0 children per woman in developing countries. 
The rate of decline slows or stalls when nations reach lower fertility levels (Population 
Reference Bureau, 2006). Hence it is very likely that the developing world will have by far 
the largest share of the world’s children and young adults in the near future. Within 
developing countries populations are usually already skewed towards the young. Only 3% of 
West Africans are aged 65 years or more whereas 44% of the population is less than 15 years 
of age. In North America the percentages are 12% and 21%, respectively.  
 
 
Ethnic and Linguistic Diversity 
 
South Africa is a developing country with a population of 46 million people. Within 
South Africa there are eleven official languages, comprising English, Afrikaans and nine 
indigenous languages. This reflects the rich ethnic diversity found in many developing 
countries, where often a number of different tribal or religious groups may live in the same 
region or the same village. In many developing countries to be bilingual or trilingual is the 
norm (Kyiaga & Moores, 2003), unlike the majority of developed states where one national 
language prevails. Also, the “national” language in many developing economies may be a 
legacy of a previous colonial administration and only be used for communication by an 
educated elite in the society. Ethnic diversity may be a force for positive good within societies 
where majority and minority groups live a relatively harmonious existence. However, of the 
LDCs listed in Table 4.2, the majority are “fragile states” which have experienced serious 
ethnic conflict leading to political and social instability over the past twenty years. Such 
conflicts lead to lost opportunities for improved standards of living for the entire nation. 
Resolving competing needs and demands in a diverse society requires resources that are often 
lacking in developing states.  
 
 
Review

Audiology: A Developing Country Context 
13
Limited Access to Education 
 
Universal literacy is a long-established fact in the developed world. For nations with high 
and medium HDI rankings literacy rates are usually within the range of 80-90%. For 
developing countries literacy rates are typically much lower, particularly for women and for 
those living in rural areas. In Pakistan, 64% of urban boys complete primary school and only 
50% of urban girls. Forty-two percent of rural Pakistani males complete primary school and 
17% of rural females (World Bank, 2005). The overall literacy rate in Pakistan is 49% of 
those aged 15 years and older. Rates in some developing countries are far lower, with 38% of 
Gambian and 26% of Chadian citizens literate. Approximately 20% of the world’s children 
never experience any formal schooling (Grigorenko & O’Keefe, 2004). Children with 
disabilities compete for scarce educational resources with their able peers in developing 
nations. Statistics on the numbers of children with substantial degrees of hearing loss 
attending school in developing countries are lacking, although a number of excellent 
educational programs have been established (Moulton & Chinn, 2002). 
 
 
Heavy Burden of Disease 
 
One of the main consequences of low income in developing countries is poor health. Life 
expectancy, a key index of community health status, in low income developing countries still 
averages only 58 years, compared to 64 years among all developing nations and 78 years in 
industrialized countries (World Bank, 2005). Infant mortality rates (the number of children 
who die before their first birthday per 1,000 live births) also remain extremely high in many 
developing countries. The current life expectancy and infant mortality rates for selected 
countries are shown in Table 3. 
In addition to poor overall levels of health and health care, developing countries also 
must attempt to cope with diseases that are uncommon in the developed world and usually 
gain little international attention or resources. These include malaria, Chagas disease, 
lymphatic filiariasis, leprosy, and sleeping sickness (African trypanosomiasis). These tropical 
diseases cause especially high levels of physical and social impairment in developing 
countries, particularly amongst the poorest sectors in a community (WHO, 2005). 
The global tragedy of human immunodeficiency virus/ acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome (HIV/AIDS) has disproportionately affected the developing world. It is estimated 
that 39 million people now live with HIV infection (WHO, 2005). Of these people, over 90% 
live in developing countries (World Bank, 1997). AIDS is now the leading cause of death in 
sub-Saharan Africa and is prevalent at high rates in the Caribbean and some countries in the 
Asia-Pacific region. HIV/AIDS creates enormous strains on under-resourced health care 
systems and has profound social costs. In countries with very high HIV/AIDS prevalence 
rates, the number of orphans under 15 years of age can be as high as 17% of all children 
(WHO, 2005). Many of these children come from families affected by this pandemic, 12 
million children in sub-Saharan Africa alone (UNAIDS, 2006). 
 
 
 
 
Review

Bradley McPherson 
14
Table 3. Health Development Indices for Selected Countries 
 
Country 
Life 
expectancy 
at birth 
(years) 
Infant 
mortality 
(per 1000 
live births) 
Country 
Life 
expectancy 
at birth 
(years) 
Infant 
mortality 
(per 1000 
live births) 
Switzerland 
80.5 
4 
Dominican 
Republic 
67.2 
29 
United States 
77.4 
7 
China 
71.6 
30 
Japan 
82.0 
3 
Ukraine 
66.1 
15 
Ireland 
77.7 
6 
Indonesia 
66.8 
31 
Spain 
79.5 
4 
Zimbabwe 
36.9 
78 
South Korea  
77.0 
5 
India 
63.3 
63 
Mexico 
75.1 
23 
Yemen* 
60.6 
82 
Poland 
74.8 
6 
Viet Nam 
70.5 
19 
Latvia 
71.6 
10 
Tanzania 
46.0 
104 
Argentina 
74.5 
17 
Cambodia* 
56.2 
97 
South Africa 
48.4 
53 
Uganda* 
47.3 
81 
Russian 
Federation 
65.3 
16 
Ethiopia* 
47.6 
112 
Thailand 
70.0 
23 
 
 
 
* Least developed nations. 
AUDIOLOGY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
All of the factors mentioned in the previous section effect the ways that audiological 
services can be provided in developing economies. A division of hearing health care into four 
major activities is often made: preventive programs, screening programs, diagnostic services 
and rehabilitative hearing health care. Hearing health care providers need to consider many 
factors associated with work in developing countries, whatever type of work they are 
involved in. In this section two actual audiology programs in developing countries are 
discussed in relation to development issues.  
 
 
The Gambian Hearing Health Care Project 
 
The Gambia is a small West African nation of 1.5 million people. The country has LDC 
status with the United Nations and has a GNI of $290. The economy has for the past quarter 
century been based on agriculture (primarily peanut production) and tourism. Average life 
expectancy is 52 years for men and 55 years for women. Literacy levels are low, as were 
mentioned in the previous section. At present, the country is guided by a civilian constitution, 
reinstated in 1996 after two years of military rule. The economic infrastructure is poor. 
Banjul, the capital, experiences power cuts of up to 16 hours per day.  
Review

Audiology: A Developing Country Context 
15
In the early 1980s, The Commonwealth Society for the Deaf conducted a large scale 
survey of the prevalence of childhood hearing loss in The Gambia. The survey was completed 
over two years and involved population sampling in eight of the country’s local government 
districts (McPherson & Holborow, 1985). The project involved more than a simple count of 
hearing impairment. The survey team also attempted to discover the etiology of hearing loss 
in Gambian children, establish an ongoing audiology and primary ear health care clinic in the 
main government hospital, train local personnel in audiology and audiometry, and support a 
newly established school for the deaf near Banjul. The survey results found that the 
prevalence of severe to profound childhood hearing loss was double the rate of developed 
countries and provided new information on the causes of hearing loss in West Africa. 
Preventable infections such as meningococcal meningitis were found to be a major cause of 
childhood deafness and the project team advised a primarily preventive approach to reducing 
childhood hearing loss in The Gambia. The audiology clinic established during this time 
continued to function for a number of years, directed by Gambian personnel trained locally 
and in the United Kingdom. Equipment included otoscopes, audiometers and tympanometers. 
Some ongoing support was provided by the Commonwealth Society for the Deaf and 
Scandinavian aid agencies. The survey identified many children who later became some of 
the first student cohort at St John’s School for the Deaf, which was then under construction. 
The clinical infrastructure left by the project was not sustainable. Despite government 
support, in the form of salaries for the audiology and audiometry personnel, the hospital clinic 
had a fragile base. With only two trained staff, personnel transfers or resignations caused the 
clinic’s closure by the mid 1990s. This also reflects a global shortage of health care personnel 
that leads to further scarcity in developing countries. For example, another West African 
country, Ghana, saw over 3,000 nurses emigrate in the 1998 to 2003 period, while only 56% 
of these emigrants could be replaced by newly trained graduates (Munjanja, Kibuka & Dovlo, 
2005). Audiologists are equally likely to emigrate for economic reasons, as there is a shortage 
of trained hearing health care professionals in many developed countries.  
The main Gambian hospital still had an audiometer in 2004 (Garner, 2005) but it had 
remained uncalibrated for a long period. No calibration facilities exist in the country and 
audiological equipment is usually sent to Europe for repair and calibration. Costs involved are 
high by local standards, as are the costs of new equipment purchase. A new diagnostic 
audiometer may cost a multiple of 15 times average annual income. This makes clear that 
future resources must be carefully considered prior to setting up an audiological facility in a 
developing country. Often, unforeseen barriers to hearing health care development include 
high customs tariffs for imported medical equipment (Bate, Tren & Urbach, 2006). For 
example, India taxes non-local hearing aids at 15.3% of the import price.  
Long-term, the Gambian Hearing Health Care Project did leave a number of positive 
legacies, aside from its scientific contribution. The country’s only school for the deaf is still 
functioning and now educating 150 pupils (Garner, 2005). The project disseminated 
information concerning hearing loss and treatment for hearing disorders to thousands of 
Gambians. Many individuals were treated with simple medicines by project workers and later 
by hospital personnel (Holborow & McPherson, 1986). The methods used by the survey team 
to successfully visit isolated rural regions of The Gambia later helped to inspire the 
Commonwealth Society for the Deaf to develop mobile hearing assessment and treatment 
clinics which have since been used in four other developing African nations (Sound Seekers – 
The Commonwealth Society for the Deaf, 2006). 
Review

Bradley McPherson 
16
All Ears Cambodia 
 
Cambodia, like The Gambia, is an LDC with low life expectancy and high infant 
mortality rates (see Table 4.3). Cambodia has a GNI of $320 (Table 1) and more than two-
thirds of the population lives on less than $2 per day and one third lives on less than $1 per 
day (World Bank, 2005). This level of disadvantage is partly due to many years of political 
instability. One hospital in Cambodia, in the capital Phnom Penh, has an audiology unit 
capable of assessment and provision of hearing aids (Vaughan, 2005). All Ears Cambodia is a 
local non-governmental organization based in Phnom Penh that commenced in 2003. All Ears 
Cambodia seeks to help prevent hearing disorders within the country and to support treatment 
and rehabilitation activities. The organization has developed an independent, diagnostic and 
rehabilitative audiology clinic and supports the sole government audiology clinic through 
contributions of personnel and through training programs. This aid organization understands 
the need to reach rural as well as urban communities and has outreach programs in two 
provincial regions of Cambodia (Vaughan, 2005). Cambodia is a predominantly rural society; 
only about 18% of Cambodians live in urban areas. Health care and education workers in 
Cambodia are targeted for delivery of basic training in ear health care and in the effects of 
hearing loss. Adult literacy is comparatively high in Cambodia, at 74%, and programs that 
serve to increase an understanding of hearing health will have a wide audience. 
All Ears Cambodia also realises that to achieve sustainability the organization must 
generate income. It does this by charging fees for certain services, such as screening hearing 
in private schools and hearing aid prescription and fitting in the government hospital. In this 
way the organization may create a stable base for a long-term, positive role in Cambodia and 
improve the lives of many Cambodians with hearing disorders. 
GLOBAL DEVELOPMENTS – IMPLICATIONS FOR AUDIOLOGY 
Much of the discussion so far in this chapter has focused on the negative issues that 
surround developing countries. These certainly loom very large in the minds of those who 
work in or for hearing health care in developing countries. However, many positive trends can 
also be seen in general, and in health care specifically, in developing countries. Agencies such 
as All Ears Cambodia now exist in many countries, often promoted and sustained by 
individuals in developing nations with assistance from partners in the industrialized world. 
Projects such as the Gambian survey and service scheme are also to be found throughout the 
world. A wide range of funding agencies, foundations and individuals support the 
strengthening of hearing health care. Some of these are noted in Chapter 12 of this book. Two 
major, global developments that will impact on audiology in developing countries are 
discussed below.  
 
 
United Nations Millennium Development Goals 
 
In 2000, the member states of the United Nations made a commitment to eliminate 
extreme poverty and improve the health and social welfare of the world’s poorest people 
within 15 years. This commitment was known as the Millennium Declaration and from the 
Review

Audiology: A Developing Country Context 
17
declaration were developed eight time-linked goals (WHO, 2005). Achievement of many of 
these goals directly or indirectly will reduce the prevalence of hearing loss. Goal 4 aims to 
reduce child mortality and a key health indicator of success in achieving this goal is an 
increase in the proportion of children immunized against measles. Measles is a well-known 
cause of hearing loss in developing countries (Olusanya, 2006; Sharma, Dahal & Khadka, 
2004). Immunization is a highly cost-effective strategy to reduce infant mortality and 
childhood hearing loss (Edejer et al., 2005). Millennium Goal 5 also impacts on hearing 
impairment. This goal is to substantially improve maternal health and a key health indicator is 
to increase the proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel (doctors, nurses or 
midwives). Better maternal health care is likely to lead to a reduction in the numbers of 
neonates with anoxia or birth trauma and hence improve hearing health outcomes in infants. 
Maternal and perinatal disorders, including birth trauma and asphyxia, may cause up to 20% 
of prelingual hearing loss (Smith, 2001). Millennium Goal 6 calls on member states to 
combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other disease. Some developing countries have already 
achieved a reduction in their HIV/AIDS prevalence rates, including Kenya, Cambodia and 
Thailand (UNAIDS, 2006). Both HIV/AIDS (McNeilly, 2005; Newton, 2006) and malaria 
(Hinchcliffe & Prasansuk, 2006; Mackenzie, 2006) are responsible for many cases of hearing 
loss. Work by developing countries and the support of the developed world (through 
development assistance, debt relief, access to essential medicines and technology transfer) 
towards the Millennium Goals may lead to a significant reduction in the burden of hearing 
impairment in the developing world (WHO, 2004a). 
 
 
World Health Organization Initiatives 
 
In May 1995, the Forty-eighth World Health Assembly, passed resolution WHA 48.9. 
This resolution dealt with the needs of the many millions of adults and children with hearing 
loss. After stating that hearing loss was “largely preventable”, the preamble of the resolution 
went on to state that hearing loss was “a particularly serious obstacle to optimal development 
and education, including language acquisition” and noted “the persistent inadequacy of 
resources for hearing impairment prevention, despite the increasing commitment of 
international nongovernmental organizations”. 
The resolution (WHO, 1995) is important for audiologists because it urged member states 
to: 
 
(1) prepare national plans for the prevention and control of major causes of avoidable 
hearing loss, and for early detection in babies, toddlers, and children, as well as in the 
elderly, within the framework of primary health care; 
(2) take advantage of existing guidelines and regulations or to introduce appropriate 
legislation for the proper management of particularly important causes of deafness 
and hearing impairment, such as otitis media, use of ototoxic drugs and harmful 
exposure to noise, including noise in the work environment and loud music; 
(3) ensure the highest possible coverage of childhood immunization against the target 
diseases of the Expanded Programme on Immunization and against mumps, rubella 
and (meningococcal) meningitis whenever possible; 
Review

Bradley McPherson 
18
(4) consider the setting-up of mechanisms for collaboration with nongovernmental or 
other organizations for support and coordination of action to prevent hearing 
impairment at country level, including the detection of hereditary factors, by genetic 
counselling; 
(5) ensure appropriate public information and education for hearing protection and 
conservation in particularly vulnerable or exposed population groups. 
 
WHO, through this resolution, committed itself to fully supporting these goals. WHO has 
worked steadily since resolution WHA 48.9 to collect reliable data on the prevalence of 
hearing loss in developing countries and to develop strategies for the prevention of hearing 
impairment (Djelantik-Soejoto, 2004; Smith, 2001). Recently, WHO has also carefully 
considered the appropriate means to provide hearing aids in developing nations and 
developed guidelines for the provision of hearing technology (WHO, 2004b). Working in 
conjunction with the Christian Blind Mission, the WHO has supported the publication of high 
quality health education materials in the area of hearing loss and hearing handicap (WHO, 
2006) for village health workers. A new independent international agency, WWHearing - 
World Wide Hearing Care for Developing Countries, is also being fostered by WHO and the 
Christian Blind Mission. WWHearing now sponsors pilot projects in six developing countries 
that demonstrate a variety of service delivery models (Nemes, 2005). The project procedures 
call for measures of client satisfaction, the impact of the service on individual quality of life 
as well as cost effectiveness. After learning from pilot project outcomes, WWHearing plans 
to set up full scale service delivery centers, through local partnerships in developing countries 
(Garms & Smith, 2004).  
Throughout the developing world dedicated professionals are working to improve hearing 
health care services. Countries such as Angola, China, Dominican Republic, India, 
Mozambique, Viet Nam — to name a few — are benefiting from improved audiological 
clinics and expanded hearing aid fitting programs. Audiologists and other professionals now 
have access to funding from a variety of non-government agencies to support prevention, 
treatment and rehabilitation programs. With greater international focus on hearing 
impairment, the future for many children and adults with hearing loss in developing nations is 
more positive than it has ever been.  
REFERENCES 
 
Bate, R., Tren, R. & Urbach, J. (2006). Still taxed to death: An analysis of taxes and tariffs on 
medicines, vaccines and medical devices. Washington, DC: American Enterprise 
Institute-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies.  
Cheng, W.T., Olea, T.C.M. & Marzan, J.C.B. (2002). Speech-language pathology in the 
Philippines: Reflections on the past, perspectives for the future. Folia Phoniatrica et 
Logopaedica 54, 79-82. 
Djelantik-Soejoto, B. (2004). World Health Organization to address the problems of deafness 
and hearing impairment on a larger scale. In J.Suzuki, T. Kobayashi & K. Koga (eds.) 
Hearing Impairment. An Invisible Disability. How You Can Live With a Hearing 
Impairment, pp. 322-328. Tokyo: Springer-Verlag.  
Review

Audiology: A Developing Country Context 
19
Garms, C. & Smith, A. (2004). Alliance faces worldwide realities of hearing loss. Hearing 
Health 20 (2) http://www.drf.org/hearing_health/archive/2004/sum04_ 
alliancefacesrealities.htm  
Garner, M. (2005). Deaf children in the Gambia. ENT News, 14(5), 62-63.  
Grigorenko, E.L. & O’Keefe, P.A. (2004). What do children do when they cannot go to 
school? In R. J. Sternberg & E. L. Grigorenko (eds.) Culture and competence: Contexts 
of life success, pp. 23-53. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.  
Edejer, T.T., Aikens, M., Black, R., Wolfson, L., Hutubessy, R., & Evans, D.B. (2005). Cost 
effectiveness analysis of strategies for child health in developing countries. British 
Medical Journal, 331, 1177-1182. 
Hinchcliffe, R. & Prasansuk, S. (2006). Infectious diseases and hearing in the tropics. In 
Newton, V.E. & Vallely, P.J. (eds.) Infection and hearing impairment, pp. 217-237. 
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons 
Holborow, C. & McPherson, B. (1986). Simple treatment for the infected ear. Tropical 
Doctor, 16, 31-32.  
Karanth, P. (2002). Four decades of speech-language pathology in India: Changing 
perspectives and challenges of the future. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 54, 69-71. 
Kekic, L. (2004). The World in 2005, p. 86. London: The Economist Newspaper Limited. 
Kiyaga, N.B. & Moores, D.F. (2003). Deafness in sub-Saharan Africa. American Annals of 
the Deaf, 148(1), 18-24. 
Kumar, S. (2001). WHO tackles hearing disabilities in developing world. Lancet, 358(9277): 
219. 
Mackenzie, I.J. (2006). Malaria and deafness. Community Ear and Hearing Health, 3,14-15. 
Madriz, J.J. (2001). Audiology in Latin America: hearing impairment, resources and services. 
Scandinavian Audiology, 30 Suppl 53, 85-92. 
McNeilly, L.G. (2005). HIV and communication. Journal of Communication Disorders, 38, 
303-310. 
McPherson, B. & Holborow, C. (1985). A study of deafness in West Africa: The Gambian 
Hearing Health Project. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 10, 115-
135.  
Miles, M.A., Feulner, E.J. & O’Grady, M.A. (2005). 2005 Index of Economic Freedom. 
Washington, DC: Heritage Foundation and Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
Mohr, P.E., Feldman, J.J., Dunbar, J.L., McConkey-Robbins, A., Niparko, J.K., Rittenhouse, 
R.K. & Skinner, M.W. (2000). The societal costs of severe to profound hearing loss in 
the United States. International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care 16(4): 
1120-1135. 
Moulton, R. & Chinn, K. (2002). International deaf education teacher-training projects. 
Journal of International Special Needs Education, 5, 36-40. 
Munjanja, O.K., Kibuka, S., & Dovlo, D. (2005). The nursing workforce in sub-Saharan 
Africa. The Global Nursing Review Initiative, issue paper 7. Geneva: International 
Council of Nurses.  
Nemes, J. (2005). Some imagine a world where hearing care is available to all. Hearing 
Journal, 58(2), 19-25. 
Newton, P.J. (2006). The causes of hearing loss in HIV infection. Community Ear and 
Hearing Health, 3,11-14. 
Review

Bradley McPherson 
20
Olusanya, B. (2006). Measles, mumps and hearing loss in developing countries. Community 
Ear and Hearing Health, 3,7-9. 
Population Reference Bureau. (2006). http://www.prb.org/ 
Reporters Without Borders. (2006). Worldwide press freedom index 2005. http://www. 
rsf.org/rubrique.php3?id_rubrique=554 
Ruben, R.J. (2003). Valedictory—why pediatric otorhinolaryngology is important. 
International Congress Series, 1254, 69-80. 
Sanford, J.E. & Sandhu, A. (2003). Developing countries: definitions, concepts and 
comparisons. New York: Novinka Books. 
Sharma, B., Dahal, M.P. & Khadka, B. (2004). Hearing impairment in Nepal. In J.Suzuki, T. 
Kobayashi & K. Koga (eds.) Hearing Impairment. An Invisible Disability, pp. 70-77. 
Tokyo: Springer-Verlag.  
Smith, A.W. (2001). WHO activities for prevention of deafness and hearing impairment in 
children. Scandinavian Audiology, 30 Suppl 53, 93-1000. 
Sound Seekers – The Commonwealth Society for the Deaf. (2006). http://www.sound-
seekers.org.uk  
Swanepoel, D. (2006). Audiology in South Africa. International Journal of Audiology, 45, 
262-266. 
Stratford, B. & Ng, H. (2000). People with disabilities in China: changing outlook-new 
solutions-growing problems. International Journal of Disability, Development and 
Education, 47(1), 7-14. 
The Australia Institute. (2006). Genuine Progress Indicator. http://www.gpionline.net/index. 
htm 
Todaro, M.P. & Smith, S.C. (2006). Economic development. 9th ed. Boston: Pearson Addison 
Wesley. 
Transparency International. (2006). http://ww1.transparency.org/ 
UNAIDS. (2006). 2006 Report on the global AIDS epidemic. New York: Author. 
Vaughan, G. (2005). Audiology services in Cambodia. Community Ear and Hearing Health, 
2,9-11. 
World Bank. (1997). Confronting AIDS: Public priorities in a global epidemic. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
World Bank. (2005). World Development Report 2006. New York: Oxford University Press. 
World Health Organization. (1995). WHA48.9 Prevention of hearing impairment. 
http://www.who.int/pbd/publications/wha_eb/wha48_9/en/print.html 
World Health Organization. (2004a). WHO and the Millennium Development Goals. Geneva: 
WHO. 
World Health Organization. (2004b). Guidelines for hearing aids and services for developing 
countries. 2nd ed. Geneva: WHO, Prevention of Blindness and Deafness. 
World Health Organization. (2005). Health and the Millennium Development Goals. Geneva: 
WHO. 
World Health Organization. (2006). Primary Ear and Hearing Care Training Resource. 
Geneva: WHO. http://www.who.int/pbd/deafness/activities/hearing_care/en/index.html 
Zheng, V.W. & McPherson, B. (2005). Audiology in China: then and now, Audiology Now, 
21, 19-21. 
 
Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
 
 
 
DEMOGRAPHICS OF HEARING LOSS 
 IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
 
 
Andrew W. Smith* 
International Centre for Eye Health, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Health, 
London, United Kingdom 
ABSTRACT 
The burden of hearing impairment and disability is high and growing. Moderate or 
worse hearing impairment affects 278 million people in the world and adult onset hearing 
impairment ranks 3rd amongst contributors to Years lived with Disability, a component 
of the Global Burden of Disease. Hearing impairment and disability have profound 
individual, societal, and economic consequences. In high income countries, hearing 
impairment has been shown to have very large financial costs and these are also likely in 
low and middle income countries. Hearing impairment is a cause and consequence of 
poverty, especially in low and middle income countries.  
Despite the size and effects of the burden, there are widespread deficits in awareness, 
programmes and resources in relation to hearing impairment in developing countries. A 
key need for planning and raising awareness is the assessment of the existing situation 
including the collection of population-based data on prevalence, causes, and needs.  
This chapter will address the estimation of hearing impairment and disability in 
populations, and why this is important. It will describe the various methods in use and the 
difficulties in using them in developing countries. 
An overview of recent World Health Organization (WHO) estimates and why these 
are increasing will be followed by a review of available data in developing countries. The 
collection of data should never be an end in itself, so using the results of surveys will be 
demonstrated for the key tasks of raising awareness, and programme development. The 
value of accurate data for the construction of regional and global databases, and 
contribution to classification, burden estimates and economic analyses, especially from 
the point of view of WHO, will be emphasized.  
                                                        
* Correspondence: andrew.smith@lshtm.ac.uk 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
22
The final section will attempt to assess future needs and developments in this field. 
INTRODUCTION 
In this chapter, the term hearing loss, used by itself, denotes any or all levels of severity 
of hearing difficulty. These levels of hearing impairment comprise mild (26–40 decibel 
hearing level, dBHL), moderate (41–60 dBHL), severe (61–80 dBHL), and profound (81 
dBHL or greater). The term deafness denotes profound hearing impairment (World Health 
Organization (WHO), 1991, 1997). Disabling hearing impairment in adults is defined as “a 
permanent unaided hearing threshold level for the better ear of 41 dB or greater; for this 
purpose, the hearing threshold level is to be taken as the better ear average hearing threshold 
level for the four frequencies 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 kHz.” Disabling hearing impairment in children 
under the age of 15 years is defined as a permanent, unaided hearing threshold level for the 
better ear of 31 dB or greater; for this purpose, the hearing threshold level is to be taken as the 
better ear average hearing threshold level for the four frequencies 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 kHz (WHO, 
1997). 
This categorization of hearing impairment (Box 1) was originally developed for a speech-
based performance test where pure-tone audiometry was not available and the ISO dB 
equivalents were later included (WHO, 1986). This definition of disabling hearing 
impairment is currently used in WHO surveys1 and in the estimation of global deafness and 
hearing impairment for the global burden of disease rankings. 
 
Table 1. Main Causes of Hearing Loss, by Proportion of Total Burden 
 
High proportion 
Moderate proportion 
Low proportion 
Genetic causes 
Excessive noise 
Nutritionally related 
Otitis media 
Ototoxic drugs & chemicals 
Trauma-related 
Presbycusis 
Antenatal & perinatal problems 
Menière’s disease 
 
Infectious causes 
Tumors 
 
Wax and foreign bodies 
Cerebrovascular disease 
 
Hearing loss is grouped according to International Classification of Diseases and Related 
Health Problems, 10th revision, version for 2003 (ICD-10) (WHO, 2003) into conductive and 
sensorineural loss and other hearing loss, ICD-10 codes 90–91. The main causes are shown in 
table 1 according to the proportion that these contribute to the total burden (Cook et al., 2006; 
WHO, 1986). 
 
 
                                                        
1 In some surveys in the field and as recommended by the WHO Ear and Hearing Disorders Survey Protocol, testing 
was only done at 1,2 & 4 kHz but not at 0.5 kHz, because of the likelihood of false-positive results when 0.5 
kHz is included. 
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
23
Box 1. WHO Grades of hearing impairment 
 
GRADES OF HEARING IMPAIRMENT
Grade  0
25 dB or less
No/slight problems
None
Hears whispers
Grade  1     
26 - 40 dB
Hears/repeats words
Slight           
in normal voice at lm
Grade  2
Child 31 - 60 dB
Hears/repeats words
Moderate     Adult 41 - 60 dB
in raised voice at 1m
Grade  3
61 - 80 dB
Hears  words shout-
Severe
ed into better ear
Grade  4
81 dB or more
Cannot hear/under-
Profound
stand shouted voice
[Average 0.5, 1, 2, 4 kHz in better ear]
Disabling
hearing
impairment
 
1. ESTIMATION OF HEARING IMPAIRMENT  
AND DISABILITY IN POPULATIONS 
Why Is it Important? 
 
Hearing loss is a chronic and often lifelong disability that, depending on the severity and 
frequencies affected, can cause profound damage to the development of speech, language, 
and cognitive skills in children, especially if commencing prelingually. That damage, in turn, 
affects the child’s progress in school and, later, his or her ability to obtain, keep, and perform 
an occupation. For all ages and for both sexes, it causes difficulties with interpersonal 
communication and leads to significant individual social problems, especially isolation and 
stigmatization. All these difficulties are much magnified in developing countries, where there 
are generally limited services, few trained staff members, and little awareness about how to 
deal with these difficulties. 
In addition to its individual effects, hearing loss makes a large contribution to the burden 
of disease (see section 2, this chapter) and it substantially affects social and economic 
development in communities and countries. Ruben (2000), taking into account rehabilitation, 
special education, and loss of employment, estimated the cost to the U.S. economy in 1999 of 
communication disorders (hearing, voice, speech, and language disorders) at between 
US$176 billion and US$212 billion (2004 dollars; 2.5–3 percent of the gross national product 
of the United States in that year). Hearing loss accounted for about one-third of the 
prevalence of these communication disorders. A 2005 study in Australia showed that the real 
financial costs of hearing loss were approximately US$9.6 billion, (1.4% of gross domestic 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
24
product for the country). 57% of the costs were due to productivity loss (Access Economics, 
2006).  
Accurate measurement of the size of the problem of hearing loss in populations will 
enable comparison of the burden in the same population at different times or different 
populations at the same time, and hence help to assess the progression of the impairment and 
the effectiveness of interventions. These data are essential for the prioritization of 
interventions, selection of strategies for implementation, and monitoring of programmes both 
at national and global level. The information will also form the foundation of economic 
analysis studies which can show the huge costs, and perhaps more importantly compare the 
cost-effectiveness of different interventions against hearing impairment, and in comparison to 
interventions against other health conditions. Resources to act against hearing loss are much 
more likely to be allocated by Governments if the condition is shown to be a huge cost to 
society and for which there are comparatively cost-effective interventions. 
 
 
Methods  
 
To help to address this need for accurate data, especially from developing countries 
where there is little information available, WHO in 1999 published a protocol, developed by 
an expert group, for a standard method of conducting population-based, random sample 
surveys on the prevalence, causes and needs for ear and hearing disorders (WHO, 1999). The 
protocol comprises a section on survey methods, a questionnaire to record information on 
demographics, audiometry (by pure-tone audiometry and more recently by testing oto-
acoustic emissions, OAE, and auditory brain-stem response, ABR), ear examination, family 
history, diagnosis of ear diseases and cause of hearing impairment and actions needed, and a 
set of coding instructions to go with the questionnaire. The protocol recommends a cluster 
sampling method which may be multi stage, and stratified, with a minimum sample size of 
approximately 6,000 individuals randomly sampled from 30 clusters. Rigorous quality-
control methods are recommended. The method can be used at national or district level.  
It is strongly recommended that the data that are collected and the actual methods of 
collection, as set out in the ear examination form (part 2 of this protocol) and coding 
instructions (part 3), should not be changed independently by users of the protocol. If they 
were changed independently it would not be possible to use the data for inter-country or inter-
regional comparisons. If other data are thought to be essential, they could be collected in 
addition to the data required by the protocol. However, in order to avoid overloading the 
survey teams, only additional data on topics of immediate interest should be collected and the 
temptation to collect opportunistic data should be resisted. 
A survey needs multidisciplinary expertise and the survey investigators should comprise 
from the outset an epidemiologist and biostatistician as well as an audiologist and 
otolaryngology specialist. They should all plan the study together from the beginning. The 
WHO protocol should be adapted to make a specific local protocol with clear objectives since 
these will determine the type, size of the survey and personnel and other resources required. 
In any survey, it is essential to plan in detail and well in advance all aspects of study design, 
sample size, personnel required, training, remuneration, resources including vehicles, 
equipment and supplies, accommodation and subsistence. A smoothly run survey depends on 
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
25
detailed and properly worked-out timing of all its aspects, and a small pilot study may be 
needed to provide timing estimates.  
The protocol will continue to be developed and improved by a process of consultation 
and field testing, coordinated by WHO. 
 
 
Difficulties 
 
The data collected by these methods is often time consuming, expensive and sometimes 
difficult to collect but it is much superior to clinic or school-based data which do not give a 
true picture in the whole population, and hence are much less useful to health planners and 
governments. There are particular difficulties in developing countries, due to lack of adequate 
resources, equipment, and trained staff, and difficulties of access to remote areas. 
Sampling errors and quality control is one area that is often forgotten in survey work. 
Sampling error is the difference between the values derived from the sample population and 
the true values in the population. It is partly due to random sampling error which can only be 
minimised by increasing the sample size, and non-random errors which are potentially more 
serious and less easily quantifiable. Non-random errors can be grouped as follows: 
 
(1)  Coverage errors. These occur when population elements which are not part of the 
target population are sampled, or when those that should be part of the sample are not 
sampled. Non-response due to refusal or unavailability of the subject is also in this 
category. 
(2)  Observational errors. These are caused by errors in making and recording the 
observations and can be attributed to observer, respondent or instrument errors. Inter- 
and intra-observer error should be measured and corrected during the survey. 
(3)  Processing errors. These are mainly clerical errors that occur during coding, entering 
or analysing the data.  
 
Various quality-control measures can be taken to minimise non-random errors: 
 
1. Sampling units should be clearly defined at all levels within the survey. 
2. Clear and detailed training and operations manuals should be developed for each 
survey. 
3. All field staff should be carefully trained under actual field conditions, in all aspects 
of their duties, and all office staff in data coding and entry.  
4. Survey staff should sign each form and enter their survey staff number when they 
have finished completing the form. This encourages good work and makes checking 
of records much easier.  
5. Inter- and intra-observer variation should be measured and quantified. Thus at the 
beginning and at several points during the survey, the performance of team members 
should be assessed by comparing different team members testing the same subject, 
and comparing a particular team member testing the same subject on different 
occasions.  
6. Validation of the tests used, both audiometric and otoscopic, should be carried out 
and their sensitivity and specificity should be measured. This can be done by 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
26
comparing a number of subjects, with normal and abnormal hearing or otoscopic 
findings, with a gold standard. Sensitivity is the proportion of truly abnormal subjects 
who are found to be so by the survey test, and specificity is the proportion of true 
normals who are found to be so by the test.  
7. Supervisors should make daily checks of that day's mapping and enumeration, and of 
the completed forms and also make regular, announced and unannounced checks on 
performance of all survey procedures carried out by survey teams. 
8. A sub-sample of households should be re-checked by supervisors on a regular basis.  
9. Every effort should be made to find non-responders. There may be a higher 
prevalence of hearing loss amongst non-responders, and if they are not found the 
results of the survey could be biased. If subjects are not at home when the team 
makes its first visit, a second visit should be made at an appropriate, arranged time to 
find these subjects.  
10. Audiometric equipment should be regularly calibrated by a laboratory at the 
beginning and end of a study, and on a daily basis by team members using self-
calibration against their known hearing levels.  
11. Supervisors should provide field and office staff with regular feedback of their 
performance, and provide refresher training if necessary.  
12. Data should be double-entered into the computer programme used for entering and 
analysing the data.  
 
It is also important to consider ethical issues when conducting surveys. From the outset, 
good relations should be established with community leaders and other prominent people. 
They will help improve community relations and can often give valuable advice and 
assistance. Team members must always respect local customs, and schedule visits for the 
convenience of subjects if possible. 
For a successful survey it is essential that the community and its leaders understand why 
the survey is being conducted, what are the benefits for them, and that they give their fully-
informed consent. In addition, arrangements must be made for appropriate treatment or 
referral for survey subjects found to have survey-related or other diseases. The survey should 
not be started if this cannot be done. However, since the main purpose of the visit is to 
conduct the survey, there probably will not be time to provide full-scale clinical services at 
the time of the visit. In any case, such services can only be properly planned by using the full 
results of the survey. 
Surveys using the protocol have so far been conducted in the following countries (with 
prevalence of disabling hearing impairment in parentheses): Oman (2.1%); Indonesia (4.6%); 
Myanmar, Sri Lanka, India (5.9-8.8%); Nigeria (three states: Akwa Ibom 4.4%, Benue 6.1%, 
Katsina 7.6%); Viet Nam (three Northern provinces 7.8%, three Southern provinces 4.7%); 
southern Brazil (Canoas 6.8%); Madagascar (Antananarivo Province 6.9%); and four 
provinces in China (Jiangsu 6.4%, Sechuan 4.9%, Guizhou 6.1%, Jilin 4.5%). All the surveys 
included all ages, generally from 6 months of age upwards, except that the most recent 
surveys (Vietnam, Brazil, Madagascar, China) have used oto-acoustic emission testing to 
include infants younger than 6 months of age. 
In addition to measuring the burden and assessing the cost and benefits of prevention, this 
data will be useful to planners at national and regional level to raise awareness about the size 
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
27
of the problem, to predict needs, to determine programme priorities, to select targets and 
strategies for prevention, and to monitor and evaluate achievements.  
2. SIZE OF THE PROBLEM IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
Growing Size of the Problem Worldwide  
 
WHO estimates of the global number of persons with disabling hearing impairment has 
increased substantially in the last 15 years. This number was originally estimated at 42 
million in 1985, and then increased to 120 million in 1995 at the time of the last World Health 
Assembly Resolution on Prevention of Hearing Impairment (WHO, 1995). The most recent 
figure is 278 million in the year 2005 which is approximately 4.2% of the world’s population 
(Mathers, 2006). The increase in the WHO estimates since 1985 is most likely due to a 
combination of improved diagnosis, earlier detection, longer survival of elderly people who 
have the highest prevalence of deafness and hearing impairment and probably increased 
incidence due to causes such as noise-induced hearing loss and ototoxic drugs.  
Three-quarters of these people have adult-onset hearing loss2. 364 million persons have 
mild hearing loss, adult and child-onset (See table 2 which shows year 2005 estimates). 
At least ⅔ of the burden of hearing loss is found in developing countries (WHO, 2001b). 
This is proportionately slightly less than the proportion of the total population in the 
developing world and is probably accounted for by the larger numbers of elderly people in the 
developed world having deafness and hearing impairment. Eighty percent of the burden is 
found in low and middle income countries as defined by the World Bank (see Annex       
Table 3).  
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0-4
5-14
15-29
30-44
45-59
60-74
75+
ALL
Age in years
Prevalence (%)
India
Indonesia
Myanamar
Sri Lanka
 
Figure 1. Prevalence of disabling hearing impairment by age in surveys in 4 countries conducted 1998 – 
2000 using the WHO Ear and Hearing Disorders Survey Protocol. 
                                                        
2 Prevalence of adult onset hearing loss was estimated by subtracting from prevalences at ages 20 and over, the 
estimated prevalence of hearing loss for teenage children (15-19 years) or the nearest similar age group for 
which prevalences available. It is assumed that the incidence of adult-onset hearing loss associated with otitis 
media and other infectious and non-infectious causes included elsewhere in the GBD 2000 cause list is 
negligible compared to the incidence of adult-onset hearing loss associated with age-related hearing 
degeneration or noise-induced loss. (Smith, 2006).  
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
28
Table 2. Estimated global prevalence of hearing loss by sex and level of severity. Note 
that figures at each level include those in more severe levels (Mathers, 2006) 
 
Severity (dBHTL) 
 
Males 
Females 
Persons 
Mild or greater (26+) 
 
Prevalence (millions) 
 
Adult-onset
241  
220  
 461  
 
Child-onset
  92  
  90  
 181  
 
Total 
332  
310  
 642  
Moderate or greater 
(41+) 
 
 
 
 
 
Adult-onset
106  
104  
 210  
 
Child-onset
  33  
  34  
68  
 
Total 
140  
138  
 278  
Severe or greater 
(61+) 
 
 
 
 
 
Adult-onset
  24  
  28  
52  
 
Child-onset
 4  
 4  
  7  
 
Total 
  27  
  32  
59  
Profound (81+) 
 
 
 
 
 
Adult-onset
 4  
 5  
  9  
 
Child-onset
 3  
 3  
  6  
 
Total 
 7  
 8  
15  
 
 
 
Current Global, Regional and National Estimates 
 
Age 
Prevalence of disabling hearing impairment increases markedly with age (see figure 1) 
which is mainly related to the effect of presbyacusis.  
 
Geographical Burden 
The current shortage of data particularly in developing countries prevents accurate 
assessment of the distribution of the prevalence and causes geographically by region. This is 
being addressed by conduct of surveys using the WHO Ear and Hearing Disorders Survey 
Protocol, the compiled results from which will be made available soon. 
 
Gender Burden 
Burden by gender and WHO subregion is shown in Table 5 [Adult-onset hearing loss 
(41+ 
dBHTL): 
age-standardized 
incidence 
and 
prevalence 
estimates 
for 
WHO 
epidemiological subregions, 2000]. Male/female ratios of age-standardized adult-onset 
prevalence rates were found to be greater than 1 in most studies in all WHO regions, 
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
29
(Mathers, Smith, & Concha 2005; Mathers & Smith 2008). This may be related to 
occupational noise-induced hearing loss differentially affecting men. 
 
Mortality  
There is evidence that adults with post-lingual onset of deafness have higher mortality 
than non-deaf adults (Barnett & Franks, 1999). A ten year longitudinal analysis of the USA 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES I) survey participants aged 55-
74 years at baseline found that hearing loss predicts mortality: RR = 1.17 (Mui et al., 1998). 
Other studies have reported that after controlling by age the association disappears and, in any 
case, no relationship is large enough to show figures greater than 0 in WHO estimates of 
deaths by cause (WHO, 2004, Annex table 2) and by years of life lost (YLL; Mathers et al., 
2005) in any region.  
A very small number of deaths are recorded for otitis media, 6,000 globally in 2001, but 
these would be mainly due to infective complications, mostly not directly related to hearing 
loss. 
 
Prevalence of Child- and Adult-onset HL 
Estimates of the prevalence of childhood hearing loss up to age 15 years and adult-onset 
hearing loss from age 20 years (Mathers, et al., 2005) have recently been used to estimate the 
burden of this disability in adults, according to the 17 WHO sub-regions used in all WHO 
work on the Global Burden of Disease (see Annex tables 1 & 2). The sources of data on 
which these estimates are based are shown in table 3 (children) and table 4 (adults). All the 
surveys in these tables were population-based and used audiometric measurements, (there are 
relatively few surveys that fulfil these 2 criteria) generally using the WHO definition. Where 
non-WHO thresholds were used, the prevalence of hearing impairment at the WHO 
thresholds was interpolated assuming the log of the cumulative prevalence is linear with 
threshold. This relationship holds reasonably well in most studies. Prevalence rates of 
disabling hearing impairment were obtained for the 17 WHO subregions by means of a model 
based on the data from the countries listed in tables 3 & 4. Standardised prevalence rates from 
country level were used to calculate the sub regional prevalence rates. The prevalence rates 
from countries in the same WHO subregion were taken as representative data of the sub 
region. When there were several available data sources, average prevalence rates weighted on 
sample size were calculated and then used for the sub regional estimates. For sub regions 
where there were no population-based surveys available, the prevalence rates were estimated 
to be the same as for other sub regions with similar health level indices. Prevalence of adult 
onset hearing loss was estimated by subtracting from prevalences at ages 20 and over, the 
estimated prevalence of hearing loss for teenage children (15-19 years) or the nearest similar 
age group for which prevalences were available. 
This prevalence data for adults is shown in figure 2 and table 5. It should be noted that 
this work is still in an interim phase; as more accurate data becomes available, especially 
from developing countries, the estimates will be refined and updated. 
 
 
 
 
 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
30
Table 3. Prevalence studies for hearing impairment: children 
 
Country 
Study 
population 
Ref. 
Years 
Definition used 
Sample 
size 
Age range 
Prevalence 
% 
Developed 
Review 
Davidson 
1988 
Review 
41+ dBHL better ear 
 
Childhood 
0.05 – 0.23 
UK 
Trent 
region 
Fortnum 
1997 
1985-
1993 
40+ dBHL better ear at 
0.5, 1, 2, 4 kHz 
552,558 
0-9 
0.133 birth 
prevalence3 
USA 
Atlanta 
Van 
Naarden 
1999 
1991-93
40+ dBHL better ear at 
0.5, 1, 2 kHz 
255,742 
3-10 
0.11 
USA 
NHANES 
II and 
Hispanic 
HANES 
Lee 1996 
1982-
1984 
31+ dB HL better ear 
7,888 
6-19 
African-Am. 
Cuban Am. 
Mexican Am. 
White, non-H. 
 
0.78 
1.21 
0.60 
0.38 
USA 
NHANES 
III 
Niskar 1998 1988-94
16+, 26+ dB HL at 0.5, 
1, 2 kHz better ear 
6,166 
6-19 
0.7 (16+) 
0.4 (26+) 
Developing 
Review 
Davidson 
1988 
Review 
41+ dBHL better ear 
 
Childhood 
0.2-0.42 
Thailand 
Bangkok 
schools 
Rural 
schools 
Prasansuk 
2000 
? 
41+ dBHL better ear 
10,242 
2,153 
School age 
Children 
3.9 
6.1 
Sierra Leone Panguma 
Seely 1995 
1992 
26+, 41+, 61+ dBHL 
better ear 
2,015 
5-15 
2.58 (26-
40) 
0.65 (41-
60) 
0.50 (61+) 
Angola 
Luanda 
Bastos 1993 1981-82
31+ dBHL better ear at 
.5, 1, 2 kHz 
1,030 
Schoolchildren 
2.0 
Zimbabwe 
Primary 
schools, SE 
highlands 
Jones 1974 
1972 
31+ dBHL better ear 
885 
Schoolchildren 
3.2 
Kenya 
Kiambu 
district 
Hatcher 
1995 
1992 
31+ dBHL better ear at 
2 & 4 kHz 
5,368 
Primary school 
age 
2.2 
Tanzania 
Northern 
inland 
district 
Bastos 1995   
31+ dBHL either ear at 
.5, 1, 2 kHz 
Severe/profound 
854 
Primary school 
age 
3.0 
 
0.35 
South Africa Poor rural 
district in 
Western 
Cape 
Prescott 
1991 
1990? 
21+, 31+, 41+ dBHL 
better ear 
401 
6-13 
2.0 (31+) 
0.5 (41+) 
Swaziland 
1st year 
school-
children 
McPherson 
1997 
 
 
 
 
 
Saudi Arabia Riyadh 
Zakzouk 
2003 
1997 
20+dBHL, Air cond at 
.25-.8kHz & .5-4kHz 
bone cond, unilateral or 
better ear bilateral 
6421 
2m – 12y 
7.7  
 
                                                        
3 This figure refers to what the authors call “permanent childhood hearing impairment”– that is mainly sensorineural 
hearing loss and includes 16% who had post-natally acquired loss. The prevalence rate for congenital hearing 
impairments was 0.112%. The figures are not directly comparable with data from the WHO studies, which 
include all conductive loss. 
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
31
Table 4. Data sources for prevalence estimates of adult-onset hearing loss  
(Mathers et al., 2004) 
 
Country 
Study 
population 
Ref. 
Years 
Definition used 
Sample 
size 
Age range Prevalences 
available by 
UK 
Four cities 
Davis 1989, 
1994 
1980-86
25+, 45+, 65+ dBHL in 
better ear 
2,910 
17-80 
Age, sex 
Italy 
Milan, Padua, 
Florence, 
Bari, Palermo 
Quaranta  
1996 
1989 
25+, 45+, 65+, 90+ 
dBHL in the better ear 
2,170 
18+ 
Age 
Denmark 
Copenhagen - 
males 
Parving 1997 
1976 
25+dBHL in better ear 
0.5,1,2,4) 
300 
49-69 
Age 
Denmark 
Jutland (rural) Karlsmose  
1999 
Early 
1990s 
25+ dBHL 
35+ dBHL 
45+ dBHL,  
1,397 
31-50 
Age x sex 
Finland 
Northern 
Ostrobothnia 
Uimonen 
1999 
1997 
21+, 40+, 70+, 95+ 
dBHL in the better ear 
(0.5,1,2,4) 
5,400 
5-75 
Age 
USA 
Framingham 
Moscicki 1985
1979 
25+ dBHL (0.5,1,2,4 
kHz) in better ear 
2,293 
57-89 
 
USA 
Beaver Dam, 
Wisconsin 
Cruickshanks 
1998, 1998 
Dalston 1998 
1993-95
26+, 41+, >60 in 
WORSE ear (0.5,1,2,4 
kHz ) 
>25 dBHL in better ear 
(0.5,1,2,4) 
3,753 
48-92 
Age x sex 
(26+ only) 
USA 
Beaver Dam, 
Wisconsin 
Popelka 1998, 
2000 
1987-88
26+, 41+, >60 in 
WORSE ear (0.5,1,2,4 
kHz ) 
 
48-92 
 
USA 
NHANES 1 
national 
Reuben 1998, 
1999 
1971-75
25+ dBHL in the better 
ear (HFPTA scale 1,2,4 
kHz) 
2,506 
55-74 
Age x sex 
USA 
HHANES 
Hispanic 
Americans 
Lee 1991 
1982-84
26+, 41+ in WORSE 
ear (0.5,1,2 kHz ) 
2,751 
20-74 
Age x sex 
Brazil 
Residents of 
Canoas City, 
RS, Brazil 
Beria 2003 
2003 
26+,41+, 61+, 81+ 
dBHL or, better ear 
3,858 
All ages 
Age, sex 
Australia 
South 
Australia 
Wilson 1999 
1996? 
25+, 35+, 45+, 65+ 
dBHL in better 
ear0.5,1,2,4) 
9,027 
15+ 
Age x sex 
Oman 
National 
Khabori 1996 
1996-97
26+, 41+ dBHL (1,2,3 
kHz bilateral/better ear)
11,402 
All ages 
Age 
India  
Vellore, 
Taluk, Tamil 
Nadu 
WHO 
SEARO, 1997 
Joseph, 2003 
1997-98
26+,41+, 61+, 81+ 
dBHL or, better ear 
5,432 
All ages 
Age  
India  
Lucknow 
rural 
Singh 1980 
1975-76
15+, 30+, 60+ dBHL, 
bilateral deafness and 
unilateral deafness 
904 
All ages  
Age x sex 
(15+) 
Age 
(30+,60+) 
India  
Lucknow 
urban 
Pal 1974 
1970 
15+, 30+, 60+ dBHL, 
bilateral deafness and 
unilateral deafness 
904 
All ages  
Age x sex 
(15+) 
Age 
(30+,60+) 
Sri Lanka 
Kandy district WHO 
SEARO, 1997 
Joseph, 
2003 
1998-
2000? 
27+, 41+, 61+ 81+ 
dBHL, better ear (1,2,4 
kHz bilateral/better ear)
4,858 
All ages 
Age (41+ 
only) 
 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
32
Table 4. Continued 
 
Country 
Study 
population 
Ref. 
Years 
Definition used 
Sample 
size 
Age range Prevalences 
available by 
Nepal 
Two regions 
Little 1993 
1990? 
31, 51+, 81+ dBHL, 
better ear (1,2,4 kHz 
bilateral/better ear) 
15,845 
5+ years 
Age 
China 
Sichuan 
Liu 1993, Bu 
2002, 2003 
1986-87
27+, 56+, 91+ dBHL, 
better ear 
126,876 
All ages 
 
Age, sex  
(27+ only) 
Korea 
Community-
based and 
health clinics 
Kim 2000 
1994-97
27+, 41+, 56+, 71+ 
dBHL, both ears; 
presbycusis only 
39,004 
25+ 
Age x sex 
Age (56, 71) 
Thailand 
17 provinces 
Prasansuk 
2000 
1988-90
41 dBHL, better ear  
7,499 
 All ages 
 
Thailand 
Bangkok + 5 
provinces 
Prasansuk 
2000 
1986-87
41+, 61+, 81+ dBHL, 
better ear (0.5, 1, 2 kHz 
bilateral/better ear) 
1,797 
All ages 
Total only 
Indonesia 
Bandung 
municipality 
& district 
WHO 
SEARO, 1997 
Joseph, 2003 
1997-98
26+, 41+, 61+ 81+ 
dBHL, (1,2,4 kHz 
bilateral/better ear) 
5,604 
All ages 
Age (41+ 
only) 
Myanmar 
Yangon 
WHO 
SEARO, 1997 
Joseph, 2003 
1997-98
26+, 41+, 61+ 81+ 
dBHL, (1,2,4 kHz 
bilateral/better ear) 
5,604 
All ages 
Age (41+ 
only) 
Vietnam 
6 selected 
provinces (3 
north, 3 south) 
Dung 2003 
 
26+, 41+, 61+ 81+ 
dBHL, (1,2,4 kHz 
bilateral/better ear) 
13,120 
6 months 
and older 
Age x sex 
Nigeria 
3 states: Akua 
Ibom, Benue, 
Katsina 
Nwawolo 
2003 
2000-
2001 
26+, 41+, 61+ 81+ 
dBHL, (1,2,4 kHz 
bilateral/better ear) 
8,975 
All ages 
Age (41+ 
only) 
 
Table 5. Adult-onset hearing loss (41+ dBHTL): age-standardized incidence and 
prevalence estimates for WHO epidemiological subregions, 2000. For list of countries in 
each WHO subregion see Annex 1 
 
 
Age-std. Incidence/100,000 
Age-std. prevalence/100,000 
Subregion 
Males 
Females 
Males 
Females 
AFRO D 
213.8 
167.8 
3466.8 
2919.3 
AFRO E 
203.9 
169.2 
3451.1 
2976.7 
AMRO A 
323.1 
189.0 
4351.5 
2643.0 
AMRO B 
264.7 
150.1 
3500.9 
2119.8 
AMRO D 
260.3 
150.8 
3498.1 
2107.9 
EMRO B 
324.2 
281.3 
4829.5 
4200.5 
EMRO D 
322.8 
279.1 
4829.0 
4241.4 
EURO A 
234.9 
190.0 
3337.6 
2795.5 
EURO B1 
233.8 
189.7 
3301.7 
2803.7 
EURO B2 
273.0 
228.9 
4037.9 
3557.5 
EURO C 
274.8 
235.0 
4078.6 
3561.7 
SEARO B 
421.8 
336.7 
6390.3 
4901.9 
SEARO D 
363.2 
360.0 
5870.1 
5827.1 
WPRO A 
243.1 
187.7 
2859.6 
2685.9 
WPRO B1 
159.5 
127.4 
2567.5 
2056.6 
WPRO B2 
430.7 
346.4 
6352.3 
4506.2 
WPRO B3 
326.8 
278.1 
5081.0 
4163.0 
World 
271.5 
220.1 
4036.3 
3326.7 
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
33
Prevalence - Males
0
1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000 7,000
AFRO D  -  1
AFRO E  -  2
AMRO A  -  3
AMRO B  -  4
AMRO D  -  5
EMRO B  -  6
EMRO D  -  7
EURO A   -  8
EURO B1 -  9
EURO B2 -10
EURO C -11
SEARO B -12
SEARO D -13
WPRO A   -14
WPRO B1-15
WPRO B2-16
WPRO B3-17
Age-std prevalence/100,000
Prevalence - Females
0
1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000 7,000
AFRO D  -  1
AFRO E  -  2
AMRO A  -  3
AMRO B  -  4
AMRO D  -  5
EMRO B  -  6
EMRO D  -  7
EURO A   -  8
EURO B1 -  9
EURO B2 -10
EURO C -11
SEARO B -12
SEARO D -13
WPRO A   -14
WPRO B1-15
WPRO B2-16
WPRO B3-17
Age-std prevalence/100,000
Males
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
0-4
5-14
15-29 30-44 45-59 60-69 70-79
80+
Age groups
Prevalence/100,000
A Regions
AMRO BD
EURO BC
EMRO
SEARO
WPRO B
AFRO
Females
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
0-4
5-14
15-29 30-44 45-59 60-69 70-79
80+
Age groups
Prevalence/100,000
A Regions
AMRO BD
EURO BC
EMRO
SEARO
WPRO B
AFRO
 
Figure 2. Estimated adult-onset hearing loss prevalence rates, 41+ dBHTL, by region and sex, GBD 
2000 Version 2. For list of countries in each WHO subregion see Annex 1. 
 
 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
34
Impact on the Poor 
Little data is available to document this but it is evident that poor persons who also have 
hearing loss are doubly disadvantaged and could be called the "poorest of the poor". 
 
Box 2. Uses of data collected using tools such as the WHO Ear and Hearing Disorders 
Survey Protocol 
 
1. Accurate, population-based information on the population prevalence, main causes and 
interventions required in the country or part of the country where the survey is being 
conducted. 
2. Information to raise awareness among opinion leaders, decision makers and the general 
public on the size of the problem. 
3. Information for selecting and prioritizing strategies for prevention, and predicting 
needs programme planning and resource allocation. 
4. Linkages to infrastructure and health services surveys. 
5. Baseline data for comparison with subsequent similar surveys to measure changes in 
the problem and assess the effectiveness of interventions. 
6. Information for determination of costs of hearing impairment, costs and benefits of 
prevention, and comparisons of cost-effectiveness of interventions. 
7. Accurate, standardised information to compare prevalence and causes of hearing 
impairment between different countries and regions. This can only be done when a 
standard methodology is used, such as in the WHO protocol. 
8. Essential data for estimation of the burden of hearing impairment, as part of Global 
Burden of Disease work. 
3. USES OF THE DATA 
Despite the improvements in estimation of the burden of deafness and hearing 
impairment, there remains a widespread scarcity of appropriate data, particularly from 
developing countries. More, and more accurate, data is urgently needed in order to raise 
awareness, prioritize interventions, predict needs, monitor outcomes, and underpin credible 
economic analyses, such as in cost-of-illness and cost-effectiveness studies. The latter could 
be included in the menu of estimates of cost effectiveness of a wide range of health 
interventions that WHO is compiling which are intended to be used by governments to 
determine good investments for health. This is the WHO-CHOICE project (WHO, 2007a). 
The uses for this data are summarised in box 2 and are described in more detail in the 
following sections.  
 
 
Awareness  
 
A major problem in addressing this field is the general lack of awareness about issues 
related to deafness and hearing impairment in all parts of society. The population as a whole 
is generally not aware of the specific effects this problem has on individuals. They may not 
know about its huge cost to society or that there are good opportunities for intervention for 
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
35
prevention and management. Since the true size of the problem is not accurately known, there 
is a lack of political will to deal with it which leads to a lack of resources for programmes. 
The collection of accurate data will help to raise awareness amongst opinion leaders, decision 
makers, health planners, and the general public. 
 
 
Need for a Public Health Approach 
 
In order to prevent deafness and hearing impairment on a large scale and help hard of 
hearing people around the world, it is essential to develop a public health approach to this 
problem. Health professionals and health planners need to re-orientate their thinking and 
activities along a public health route to addressing the situation. We need to find ways to 
make a difference in the population in addition to treating people on an individual basis. 
Conditions should be selected for targeting on a massive scale according to whether they have 
at the same time a high prevalence in the population together with cost-effective means of 
prevention or control. Unfortunately, there is a shortage of appropriate and effective 
interventions in this field not only at the basic scientific level, but also in terms of programme 
implementation. Good data will be essential in determining the conditions that should be 
targeted and assessing the cost-effectiveness of new interventions. 
 
 
Construction of Regional and Global Databases 
 
The monitoring of the global trends of prevalence and causes of hearing impairment and 
the estimates of the current burden can be achieved only with recent and comparable 
epidemiological data. The WHO Programme for the Prevention of Blindness and Deafness 
and Hearing Impairment (PBD/PDH) has created a Data Bank of Hearing Impairment with 
the purpose of collecting and storing the available data and of determining the extent of the 
global and regional burden. WHO is preparing to use the data collected using the WHO Ear 
and Hearing Disorders Survey Protocol to make a major contribution to the Data Bank. As a 
first step there has been a systematic search of available epidemiological data from sources 
such as Medline (National Library of Medicine), LILACS (Latin American and Caribbean 
Center on Health Sciences Information), African Index Medicus, reports from ministries of 
health, doctoral dissertations, and other published and unpublished data available at the 
Programme for Prevention of Blindness and Deafness of the World Health Organization 
(WHO/PBD), including from surveys conducted. Studies were selected according to rigorous 
criteria, the foremost being that the studies have randomly selected samples, are population-
based and representative of a country or an area in a country. Only such data can allow 
accurate, up to date estimation of prevalence in the general population (see box 3 for further 
criteria). So far 51 studies from 31 countries from all WHO regions have been found to meet 
the selection criteria and tables for each WHO region, will report prevalence of slight and 
disabling hearing impairment and other details from the studies. The study will be published 
soon and details will be posted on the WHO PBD web site (http://www.who.int/PBD/ 
deafness/en/). 
A new edition of the WHO Ear and Hearing Disorders Survey protocol and software will 
be ready soon. 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
36
Economic Analysis 
As well as the assessment of the size of the problem, there is an urgent need to use this 
epidemiological data to help carry out economic analysis of deafness and hearing impairment, 
especially in developing countries. All the data on the costs and cost-effectiveness of 
interventions related to hearing loss (including school-age screening, treatment of COM, 
surgical interventions, hearing aids, and cochlear implants) come from developed countries. 
Although they can be summarized quite readily, it is not clear whether and how they relate to 
the costs that would be experienced in developing countries.  
WHO has recently completed a review of the evidence on the burden of both blindness 
and deafness and the available data on the cost effectiveness of various interventions. The 
next steps in this initiative will be to develop and test instruments for economic analysis in 
developing countries and then use them to measure the burden including health status and 
costs and evaluate cost effectiveness of various health interventions. These interventions can 
also be included in the list of estimates of cost effectiveness of various health interventions 
that WHO is compiling which will be useful for governments to determine good investments 
for health.  
 
 
Assessment of the Global Burden of Hearing Impairment and its 
Contribution to the Global Burden of Disease 
 
In 2005 WHO estimated that adult onset hearing loss accounted for 1.9% of total global 
burden of disease as measured by "Disability-Adjusted Life Years" (DALYs) and it ranked 
twelfth among leading causes of the global burden (see table 6).  
Since 2001, WHO has included adult-onset hearing loss in the tables of the global burden 
of disease (GBD) in the World Health Report (WHO, 2001a). The causes of the global burden 
of disease are assessed according to the percentage of total disability adjusted life years 
(DALYs) in the world attributable to each cause. DALYs are a measure of the years of 
healthy life lost due to premature mortality (YLL), and the years lived with disability (YLD), 
hence taking much more account of the burden of chronic conditions than was the case with 
previous indicators that focused only on mortality. One DALY can be thought of as one lost 
year of ‘healthy’ life and the burden of disease as a measurement of the gap between the 
current situation and an ideal situation where everyone lives up to the age of the standard life 
expectancy, free of disease and disability. YLL for hearing loss is assumed to be zero so all 
the DALY burden comes from YLD. The data required to estimate YLD are: disability 
incidence, disability duration, age of onset, and distribution by severity class, all of which 
must be disaggregated by age and sex. These in turn require estimates of incidence, 
remission, case-fatality rates or relative risks, by age and sex. A specific software tool, 
DisMod, has been produced to assist in the development of internally consistent estimates. 
The basic calculation for YLD is the product of the number of incident cases in the reference 
period, the disability weight and the average duration of disability in years. Disability weight 
reflects the severity of the disease or condition on a scale from 0 (perfect health) to 1 (death). 
It is planned to use results from the new World Health Survey (WHO, 2007b), currently being 
conducted, to comprehensively revise the disability weights.  
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
37
In general, the results of measurement surveys contribute more to YLD calculations than 
self-reported interview surveys; population-based epidemiological studies provide the most 
useful information (Mathers et al., 2004). The WHO Ear and Hearing Disorder Survey 
Protocol (WHO, 1999) was developed to encourage countries to fulfil these needs by 
conducting population-based, random cluster sample surveys. In the majority of cases, routine 
data on consultations by diagnosis is not helpful in estimating burden since this is almost 
always based on samples of the disability present in the community and does not give a true 
picture of the situation in the whole population. However it may be possible to use hospital 
data to measure some conditions where the coverage is good—those relevant to hearing loss 
may include perinatal conditions and meningitis (Mathers et al., 2004).  
Adult-onset hearing loss ranked 12th amongst the leading causes of the DALY burden in 
the year 2005 (see table 6), coming after perinatal conditions, lower respiratory infections, 
HIV/AIDS, unipolar depression, ischaemic heart disease, diarrhoeal disease, strokes, road 
accidents, tuberculosis, malaria, chronic lung disease, in that order of ranking (Mathers et al., 
2004). However on a regional basis these rankings vary considerably—thus in 2002 adult-
onset hearing loss ranked 6th, 10th and 11th in the WHO European, Western Pacific, and 
South-East Asian regions respectively. It does not rank at all in the first 15 places in the 
African region, which includes most sub-Saharan African countries, which are dominated by 
infectious diseases and trauma. 
 
Table 6. Leading global causes of disability (YLD) and burden of disease (DALYs), 2005 
 
    Ye ars live d w ith d isability  (YLD) 
 
    B urde n of dise ase (D ALYs) 
C ause 
P ercent 
of total 
Y LD  
 
C ause 
P ercent of 
total 
D A LY s 
1 
U nipolar depre ssive d isorders 
12.1 
1
P erinata l cond itions 
6.3%  
2 
O ther unintentio nal injurie s 
4.8 
2
Low er respiratory infectio ns 
5.7%  
3 
H earing loss, ad ult onset 
4.8 
3
H IV/A ID S 
5.5%  
4 
C ataracts 
4.7 
4
U nipolar depre ssive d isorders 
4.7%  
5 
A lco ho l depende nce 
3.3 
5
Ischaem ic heart disease 
4.1%  
6 
S chizop hrenia 
2.8 
6
D iarrhoe al disea ses 
4.0%  
7 
O steoarthritis 
2.7 
7
C erebrovascular disease 
3.4%  
8 
A ge-re lated visio n disorde rs 
2.6 
8
R oad traffic acc ide nts 
2.8%  
9 
B ipo la r affective disorder 
2.5 
9
T uberc ulosis 
2.4%  
10 C hro nic 
ob struc tive 
p ulm onary 
disea se 
2.0 
10 M alaria 
2.3%  
11 A sthm a 
2.0 
11 C hro nic obstructive p ulm onary 
disea se 
2.1%  
12 C erebrovascular disease 
2.0 
12 H earing loss, ad ult o nset 
1.9%  
 
 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
38
Table 7. Childhood and adult-onset hearing loss: YLD, YLL and DALY estimates by 
subregion and region, 2000 
 
Sequela: 
Deafness 
  
  
  
Seq No. 
 
 
 
  
YLD/ 
100,000 
YLD/ 
100,000 
YLL/ 
100,000 
YLL/ 
100,000 
Total 
YLD 
Total 
YLL 
Total  
DALYs 
  
Males 
Females Males 
Females ('000) ('000) ('000) 
% Total 
DALYs 
WHO 
region 
% total 
DALYs 
by 
WHO 
region 
R01 AFRO D 
807,7 
847,9 
0,0 
0,0 
2764 
0,0 
2764 
8,3 
AFR 
16,8 
R02 AFRO E 
825,9 
858,5 
0,0 
0,0 
2843 
0,0 
2843 
8,5 
  
  
R03 AMRO A 499,1 
379,7 
0,0 
0,0 
1357 
0,0 
1357 
4,1 
AMR  8,9 
R04 AMRO B 346,5 
288,7 
0,0 
0,0 
1404 
0,0 
1404 
4,2 
  
  
R05 AMRO D 303,8 
251,5 
0,0 
0,0 
198 
0,0 
198 
0,6 
  
  
R06 EMRO B 507,0 
459,2 
0,0 
0,0 
675 
0,0 
675 
2,0 
EMR  4,1 
R07 EMRO D 482,4 
498,0 
0,0 
0,0 
677 
0,0 
677 
2,0 
  
  
R08 EURO A 
470,0 
451,7 
0,0 
0,0 
1893 
0,0 
1893 
5,7 
EUR 12,1 
R09 EURO B1 354,6 
358,9 
0,0 
0,0 
592 
0,0 
592 
1,8 
  
  
R10 EURO B2 421,1 
448,5 
0,0 
0,0 
221 
0,0 
221 
0,7 
  
  
R11 EURO B3 509,8 
576,8 
0,0 
0,0 
1340 
0,0 
1340 
4,0 
  
  
R12 SEARO B 735,3 
598,9 
0,0 
0,0 
2631 
0,0 
2631 
7,9 
SEA  37,0 
R13 SEARO D 700,5 
738,5 
0,0 
0,0 
9694 
0,0 
9694 
29,1 
  
  
R14 WPRO A 354,7 
467,9 
0,0 
0,0 
616 
0,0 
616 
1,8 
WPR 21,2 
R15 WPRO B1 418,6 
379,0 
0,0 
0,0 
5423 
0,0 
5423 
16,3 
  
  
R16 WPRO B2 725,1 
644,3 
0,0 
0,0 
972 
0,0 
972 
2,9 
  
  
R17 WPRO B3 667,7 
604,3 
0,0 
0,0 
44 
0,0 
44 
0,1 
  
  
Total 
559,2 
543,9 
0,0 
0,0 
33344 0  
33344 
100,0 
  
100  
 
If mortality is excluded and disability considered alone using the assessment of years 
lived with disability (YLD), adult-onset hearing loss ranked third in 2005 at 4.8% of total 
YLD. Unipolar depressive disorders ranked first with 12.1% of the total (see table 6; Mathers 
et al., 2008).  
Preliminary estimates have recently been made to show the burden of childhood and 
adult onset combined for the 17 sub-regions and the proportions in the 6 regions (see table 7). 
These show that the total global burden in 2002 is 33.344 million DALYs with the largest 
proportions of this burden in the South East Asian and Western Pacific regions. These figures 
will be updated as more recent, accurate data becomes available and is assessed for inclusion.  
4. FUTURE NEEDS AND DEVELOPMENTS 
A large number of studies of the epidemiology of deafness and hearing impairment have 
been performed in many countries; however many of these have deficiencies in methodology 
that make the data unsuitable for insertion in databases. It is very important to improve data 
gathering methods because databases are essential for the assessment of the total burden of 
hearing loss and its contribution to burden of disease estimates. 
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
39
There is thus a huge need for more acceptable data, especially from developing countries. 
Data that would be acceptable for incorporation in the WHO data bank should be collected 
according to rigorous criteria (see box 3). 
Research needs to be done on identifying better methods for field testing in remote areas, 
especially on testing of young children, on eliminating the effects of background noise, and 
on better methods for ascertaining the cause(s) of hearing loss. This last need is a pre-
requisite for determining the individual burdens of the different causes of hearing loss. It 
would be very useful to devise rapid assessment methods for particular causes as has been 
done in studies estimating the burden of other conditions such as cataracts. 
 
Box 3. Criteria for conduct and selection of surveys for WHO Data Bank (Pascolini & 
Smith., 2008) 
 
 
• 
Data should be population-based and collected by random sampling with adequate 
sample size and quality control. 
• 
Hearing levels should be measured by audiometric testing or other objective test of 
hearing, before removal of wax but without the subject wearing a hearing aid. 
• 
Test instruments should be calibrated and background noise measured and controlled 
• 
Definitions of hearing impairment should be clearly stated and hearing levels and 
frequencies should be reported.  
• 
Data should be analysed by hearing loss in the better ear and not by individual ears.  
• 
Conformity to the provisions of the WHO Ear and Hearing Disorders Survey Protocol 
(WHO, 1999), which addresses all the above criteria in more detail. 
 
 
For WHO, there is a need for the burden of disease estimates on conditions with hearing 
loss sequelae to be disaggregated so as to indicate the contribution the hearing loss makes to 
the burden of that condition (e.g., various infectious causes such as measles, mumps, rubella 
and other perinatal infections, and other major causes such as congenital causes; Smith & 
Mathers, 2006). However this may not come about until more data is available and collected 
according to the criteria listed above.  
Better and more comprehensive epidemiologic data will also be needed in order to carry 
out economic analysis studies in developing countries, especially of costs of the burden of 
hearing impairment and the cost-effectiveness of different interventions against it. This will 
encourage, assist and justify the allocation of increased resources by more developing 
countries to this neglected field. 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
40
ANNEX TABLE 1. REGIONAL EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS 
CATEGORIES FOR GLOBAL BURDEN OF DISEASE 2000 PROJECT:  
GBD REGIONS AND 17 SUBREGIONS 
GBD 
region 
Mortality 
stratum 
Region 
code 
WHO Member States 
Reporting 
subregion
AFRO 
D 
1 
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape 
Verde, Chad, Comoros, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, 
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, 
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Niger, Nigeria, 
Sao Tome And Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra 
Leone, Togo,  
AFRO D 
 
 
 
Djibouti, Somalia, Sudan 
EMRO D
AFRO 
E 
2 
Botswana, Burundi, Central African Republic, Congo, 
Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic Of The Congo, Eritrea, 
Ethiopia, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, 
Rwanda, South Africa, Swaziland, Uganda, United 
Republic of Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
AFRO E 
AMRO 
A 
3 
Canada, United States Of America 
AMRO A
AMRO 
B 
4 
Antigua And Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, 
Belize, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, 
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Grenada, Guyana, 
Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Saint Kitts 
And Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent And The 
Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad And Tobago, Uruguay, 
Venezuela 
AMRO B
 
 
 
Cuba 
AMRO A
AMRO 
D 
5 
Bolivia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Nicaragua, Peru 
AMRO D
EMRO 
B 
6 
Bahrain, Cyprus, Iran (Islamic Republic Of), Jordan, 
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Oman, Qatar, 
Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab 
Emirates 
EMRO B
EMRO 
D  
7 
Egypt, Iraq, Morocco, Yemen 
EMRO D
EURO 
A 
8 
Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, 
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, 
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, San Marino, Slovenia, 
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom 
EURO A
EURO 
B1 
9 
Albania, Bosnia And Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Georgia, 
Poland, Romania, Slovakia, The Former Yugoslav 
Republic Of Macedonia, Turkey, Yugoslavia 
EURO B 
EURO 
B2 
10 
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, 
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan 
EURO B 
EURO 
C 
11 
Belarus, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania,  
Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Ukraine 
EURO C 
 
 
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
41
GBD 
region 
Mortality 
stratum 
Region 
code 
WHO Member States 
Reporting 
subregion
SEARO B 
12 
Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand 
SEARO 
B 
 
 
 
Malaysia, Philippines 
WPRO B
 
 
 
Brunei Darussalam, Singapore 
WPRO A
SEARO D 
13 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal 
SEARO 
D 
 
 
 
Afghanistan, Pakistan 
EMRO D
WPRO 
A 
14 
Australia, Japan, New Zealand 
WPRO A
WPRO 
B1 
15 
China, Mongolia, Republic Of Korea 
WPRO B
 
 
 
DPR Korea 
SEARO 
D 
WPRO 
B2 
16 
Cambodia, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Viet Nam 
WPRO B
 
 
 
Myanmar 
SEARO 
D 
WPRO 
B3 
17 
Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia 
(Federated States Of), Nauru, Niue, Palau, Papua New 
Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu 
WPRO B
ANNEX TABLE 2. DEFINITIONS OF MORTALITY STRATA USED TO 
DEFINE WHO SUBREGIONS FOR THE GBD2000 
Mortality 
stratum 
Child mortality 
Definition 
Adult mortality 
A 
Very low child mortality (1st quintile 
of 5q0) 
5q0 < 0.0122 
Low adult 
mortality 
B 
Low child mortality (2nd and 3rd 
quintile of 5q0) 
0.0122< 5q0 < 
0.062 
Low adult 
mortality 
C 
Low child mortality (2nd and 3rd 
quintile of 5q0) 
0.0122< 5q0 < 
0.062 
High adult 
mortality 
D 
High child mortality (4th and 5th 
quintile of 5q0) 
0.062< 5q0 
High adult 
mortality 
E 
High child mortality (4th and 5th 
quintile of 5q0) 
0.062< 5q0 
Very high adult 
mortality 
 
 
For geographic disaggregation of the global burden of disease, the six WHO regions of 
the world have been further divided into 14 subregions, based on levels of child (under five 
years) and adult (15-59 years) mortality for WHO Member States. The classification of WHO 
Member States into the mortality strata were carried out using population estimates for 1999 
(UN Population Division 1998) and estimates of 5q0 and 45q15 based on WHO analyses of 
mortality rates for 1999 (WHO, 2000). 
Review

 
ANNEX TABLE 3. COUNTRIES GROUPED BY REGION AND INCOME LEVEL ACCORDING TO THE WORLD 
BANK CLASSIFICATION 
Classification of Economies by Income and Region, 2000 [Web addresses at end of table] 
 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Asia 
Europe and Central Asia 
Middle East 
and North Africa 
Income 
groups 
Subgroups 
East 
and South 
Africa 
West 
Africa 
East 
Asia and 
Pacific 
South 
Asia 
Eastern 
Europe 
and Central Asia 
Rest of
Europe 
Middle 
East 
North
Africa 
America 
Low-income   
Angola 
Burundi 
Comoros 
Congo, Dem. Rep.  
Eritrea 
Ethiopia 
Kenya 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Mozambique 
Rwanda 
Somali 
Sudan 
Tanzania 
Uganda 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
Benin 
Burkina Faso 
Cameroon 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Congo, Rep. 
Cote d`Ivoire 
Gambia, The 
Ghana 
Guinea 
Guinea-Bissau 
Liberia 
Mali 
Mauritania 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Sao Tome and Principe 
Senegal 
Sierra Leone 
Togo 
Cambodia 
Indonesia 
Korea, Dem. Rep. 
Lao PDR 
Mongolia 
Myanmar 
Solomon Islands 
Vietnam 
Afghanistan 
Bangladesh 
Bhutan 
India 
Nepal 
Pakistan 
Armenia 
Azerbaijan 
Georgia 
Kyrgyz Republic 
Moldova 
Tajikistan 
Turkmenistan 
Ukraine 
Uzbekistan  
  
Yemen, Rep. 
  
Haiti 
Nicaragua 
Review

 
 
Lower 
Namibia 
Swaziland 
Cape Verde
Equatorial
Guinea  
China 
Fiji 
Kiribati 
Marshall Islands 
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Papua New Guinea 
Philippines 
Samoa 
Thailand 
Tonga 
Vanuatu 
Maldives
Sri Lanka 
Albania 
Belarus 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Bulgaria 
Kazakhstan 
Latvia 
Lithuania 
Macedonia, FYR (a) 
Romania 
Russian Federation 
Yugoslavia, Fed. Rep.(b) 
Turkey 
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Iraq 
Jordan 
Syrian Arab Rep.
West Bank and 
Gaza 
Algeria 
Djibouti 
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Morocco 
Tunisia 
Belize 
Bolivia 
Colombia 
Costa Rica 
Cuba 
Dominican Republic
Ecuador 
El Salvador 
Guatemala 
Guyana 
Honduras 
Jamaica 
Paraguay 
Peru 
St. Vincent and 
the Grenadines 
Suriname  
Middle-income 
Upper 
Botswana 
Mauritius 
Mayotte 
Seychelles 
South Africa 
Gabon 
American Samoa 
Malaysia 
Korea, Rep. 
Palau  
  
Croatia 
Czech Rep. 
Estonia  
Hungary 
Poland  
Slovak Rep. 
Isle of Man Bahrain 
Lebanon 
Oman 
Saudi Arabia 
Libya 
Malta  
Antigua and 
Barbuda 
Argentina 
Barbados 
Brazil 
Chile 
Dominica 
Grenada  
Mexico 
Panama  
Puerto Rico 
St. Kitts and 
Nevis 
St. Lucia 
Trinidad 
and Tobago 
Uruguay 
Venezuela, RB  
 
Review

 
ANNEX TABLE 3. CONTINUED 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Asia 
Europe and Central Asia 
Middle East 
and North Africa 
Income 
groups 
Subgroups 
East 
and South 
Africa 
West 
Africa 
East 
Asia and 
Pacific 
South 
Asia 
Eastern 
Europe 
and Central Asia 
Rest of 
Europe 
Middle 
East 
North 
Africa 
America 
OECD 
countries 
  
  
Australia 
Japan 
New Zealand 
  
  
Austria 
Belgium 
Denmark 
Finland 
France (c) 
Germany 
Greece 
Iceland 
Ireland 
Italy 
Luxembourg 
Netherlands 
Norway 
Portugal 
Spain 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
United Kingdom 
  
  
Canada 
United States
High-income 
Non-OECD 
countries 
  
  
Brunei 
French 
Polynesia 
Guam 
Hong Kong, 
China (d) 
Macao, 
China (e) 
New 
Caledonia 
N. Mariana 
Islands 
Singapore 
Taiwan, China 
  
 Slovenia 
Andorra 
Channel Islands 
Cyprus 
Faeroe Islands 
Greenland 
Liechtenstein 
Monaco 
Israel 
Kuwait 
Qatar 
United Arab Emirates
  
Aruba 
Bahamas, 
The 
Bermuda 
Cayman 
Islands 
Netherlands
Antilles 
Virgin 
Islands (U.S.)
Total 
207 
25 
23 
35 
8 
27 
27 
14 
7 
41 
Review

 
a. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. 
b. Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia/Montenegro). 
c. The French overseas departments French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, and Réunion are included in France. 
d. On 1 July 1997 China resumed its exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong. 
e. On 20 December 1999 China resumed its exercise of sovereignty over Macao. 
2000 table at: http://www.worldbank.org/depweb/english/beyond/global/classification.html 
Most recent classification at: http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/DATASTATISTICS/0,,contentMDK:20420458~menuPK:64133156~ 
pagePK:64133150~piPK:64133175~theSitePK:239419,00.html 
 
 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
46
 When these mortality strata are applied to the six WHO regions, they produce 14 
mortality subregions. These are listed in Annex Table 1, together with the WHO Member 
States in each subregion.  
For the purposes of burden of disease epidemiological analyses, 2 of these regions have 
been further subdivided: EURO B into EURO B1 and EURO B2 – the latter including the 
central Asian states; and WPRO B into WPRO B1 (mainly China), WPRO B2 (south east 
Asian countries) and WPRO B3 (Pacific Islands). Additionally, some Member States have 
been reclassified into subregions with similar epidemiological/geographic/ethnic patterns in 
order to maximise the epidemiological homogeneity of the subregions for the purposes of 
epidemiological analysis. These subregions are used for analysis in the GBD 2000, but the 
resulting estimates are mapped back to the 14 subregions defined in Annex Table 1 for all 
reporting purposes. 
REFERENCES 
Access Economics (2006). Listen, Hear! The Economic Impact and Cost of Hearing Loss 
in Australia. Melbourne: Access Economics. Accessed on 1 June 2007 at 
http://www.accesseconomics.com.au/publicationsreports/showreport.php?id=71 
Barnett, S., & Franks, P. (1999). Deafness and mortality: Analyses of linked data from 
the National Health Interview Survey and National Death Index. Public Health 
Reports, 114, 330–36. 
Bastos, I., Mallya J., Ingvarsson L., Reimer A., & Andreasson L. (1995). Middle ear 
disease and hearing impairment in northern Tanzania. A prevalence study of 
schoolchildren in the Moshi and Monduli districts. International Journal of Pediatric 
Otorhinolaryngology, 32, 1-12. 
Bastos, I., Reimer, Å., & Lundegren, K. (1993). Chronic otitis media and hearing loss in 
urban schoolchildren in Angola—a prevalence study. Journal of Audiological 
Medicine, 2, 129-140. 
Beria, J. (2003). Prevalence of deafness and hearing impairment: Preliminary results of a 
population—based study in southern Brazil. Informal Consultation on Epidemiology 
of Deafness and Hearing Impairment in Developing Countries and Update of the 
WHO Protocol, March 2003. Geneva: WHO. 
Bu, X. (2002). Report of the pilot study on WHO Ear and Hearing Disorders survey 
protocol, Jiangsu Province China: Report. Nanjing: Nanjing Medical University. 
Bu, X. (2003). The report of results from the pilot study on WHO Ear and Hearing 
Disorders Survey Protocol in Jiangsu Province, China. Informal Consultation on 
Epidemiology of Deafness and Hearing Impairment in Developing Countries and 
Update of the Who Protocol, March 2003. Geneva: WHO. 
Cook, J., Frick, K., Baltussen, R., Resnikoff, R., Smith, A., Mecaskey J., & Kilima, P. 
(2006). Loss of vision and hearing. In D.T. Jamison, J.G. Breman, A.R. Measham, G. 
Alleyne, M. Claeson, D.B. Evans, et al. (Eds.) Disease Control Priorities in 
Developing Countries. (pp. 953-962). Washington, DC: World Bank. 
Cruickshanks, K., Klein, R., Klein, B., Wiley, T., Nondahl, D., & Tweed, T. (1998a). 
Cigarette smoking and hearing loss: The Epidemiology of Hearing Loss Study. 
JAMA, 279, 1715-1719. 
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
47
Cruickshanks, K., Klein, R., Klein, B., Wiley, T., Nondahl, D., Tweed, T., et al. (1998b). 
Prevalence of hearing loss in older adults in Beaver Dam, Wisconsin: The 
Epidemiology of Hearing Loss Study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 148, 879-
86. 
Dalton, D., Cruickshanks, K., Klein, R., Klein, B., & Wiley, T. (1998). Association of 
NIDDM and hearing loss. Diabetes Care, 21, 1540-1544. 
Davidson, J., Hyde, M.L., & Alberti, P.W. (1988). Epidemiology of hearing impairment 
in childhood. Scandinavian Audiology, Supplementum 30,13-20. 
Davis., A. (1994). Hearing in Adults. The Prevalence and Distribution of Hearing 
Impairment and Reported Hearing Disability in the MRC Institute Of Hearing 
Research´s National Study of Hearing. London: NHMRC.  
Davis, A.C. (1989).The prevalence of hearing impairment and reported hearing disability 
among adults in Great Britain. International Journal of Epidemiology, 18, 911-917. 
Dung, T.T., Cio, P.T., Thuy, N.B., & Nguyen, B.T. (2003). Preliminary result of survey 
“Ear and Hearing Disorder” in Vietnam. Informal Consultation on Epidemiology of 
Deafness and Hearing Impairment in Developing Countries and Update of the Who 
Protocol, March 2003. Geneva: WHO.  
Fortnum, H., & Davis, A. (1997). Epidemiology of permanent childhood hearing 
impairment in Trent Region, 1985-1993. British Journal of Audiology, 31, 409-46. 
Hatcher, J., Smith, A., Mackenzie, I., Thompson, S., Bal, I., Macharia, I., et al. (1995). A 
prevalence study of ear problems in school children in Kiambu district, Kenya, May 
1992. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 33, 197-205. 
Pal, J., Bhatia, M.L., Prasad, B.G., Dayal, D., & Jain, P.C. (1974). Deafness among the 
urban community—An epidemiological survey at Lucknow (UP). Indian Journal of 
Medical Research, 62, 857-868. 
Jones, M.E. (1974). Auditory acuity in rural Africans: a selected study. Central African 
Journal of Medicine, 20, 221-6. 
Joseph, A. (2003). WHO-Sponsored Multicentric Study on Hearing Impairment. Informal 
Consultation on the Epidemiology of Deafness and Hearing Impairment in 
Developing Countries and Update of the WHO Protocol. Unpublished report. 
Geneva: WHO. 
Karlsmose, B., Lauritzen, T., & Parving, A. (1999). Prevalence of hearing impairment 
and subjective hearing problems in a rural Danish population aged 31-50 years. 
British Journal of Audiology, 33, 395-402. 
Khabori, M., Mohammed, A.J., Khandekar, R., & Prakesh, N. (1996). National survey for 
causes of deafness and common ear disorders in Oman. Oman Ear Study (OES '96) 
Survey Report. Geneva: Sultanate of Oman Ministry of Health; World Health 
Organization. 
Kim, H.N., Kim, S.G., Lee, H.K., Ohrr, H., Moon, S.K., Chi, J., et al. (2000). Incidence 
of presbycusis of Korean populations in Seoul, Kyunggi and Kangwon provinces. 
Journal of Korean Medical Science, 15, 580-584. 
Lee, D.J., Carlson, D.L., Lee, H.M., Ray, L.A., & Markides, K.S. (1991). Hearing loss 
and hearing aid use in Hispanic adults: results from the Hispanic Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey. American Journal of Public Health, 81, 1471-1474. 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
48
Lee, D.J., Gomez-Marin, O., & Lee, H.M. (1996). Prevalence of childhood hearing loss. 
The Hispanic Health and Nutrition Examination Survey and the National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey II. American Journal of Epidemiology, 144, 442-449. 
Little, P., Bridges, A., Guragain, R., Friedman, D., Prasad, R., & Weir, N. (1993). 
Hearing impairment and ear pathology in Nepal. Journal of Laryngology and 
Otology, 107, 395-400. 
Liu, X., Xu, L., Zhang, S., & Xu, Y. (1993). Prevalence and aetiology of profound 
deafness in the general population of Sichuan, China. Journal of Laryngology and 
Otology, 107, 990-993.  
Mathers, C., & Smith, A. (2008). Hearing loss: global prevalence and burden in the year 
2005. In preparation. Geneva: WHO. 
Mathers, C.D., Bernard, C., Iburg, K.M., Inoue, M., Fat, D.M., Shibuya, K., et al. (2004). 
Global Burden of Disease in 2002: data sources, methods and results. Global 
Programme on Evidence for Health Policy. Discussion Paper No. 54 (revised 2004). 
Geneva: WHO. Accessed on 1 December 2007 at http://www3.who.int/whosis/ 
burden/gbd2000docs/Dp54.zip 
Mathers, C., Smith, A., & Concha, M. (2005). Global burden of adult-onset hearing loss 
in the year 2000 (unpublished paper). Geneva: WHO. Accessed on 1 December 2007 
at http://www3.who.int/whosis/burden/gbd2000docs/Hearing%20loss.zip 
Mathers, C. (2006). Personal communication. 
McPherson B., & Swart S.M. (1997). Childhood hearing loss in sub-Saharan Africa: a 
review 
and 
recommendations. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Pediatric 
Otorhinolaryngology, 40, 1-18. 
Moscicki, E.K., Elkins, E.F., Baum, H.M., & McNamara, P.M. (1985). Hearing loss in 
the elderly: An epidemiologic study of the Framingham Heart Study Cohort. Ear and 
Hearing, 6, 184-190.  
Mui, S., Reuben, D., Damesyn, M., Greendale, G., & Moore, A. (1998). Sensory 
impairment as a predictor of 10-year mortality and functional impairment. Journal of 
the American Geriatric Society, 46, 19–20. 
Niskar, A.S., Kieszak, S.M., Holmes, A., Esteban, E., Rubin, C., & Brody, D.J. (1998). 
Prevalence of hearing loss among children 6 to 19 years of age: the Third National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. JAMA 279, 1071-1075. 
Nwawolo, C.C. (2003). The WHO Ear and Hearing Disorders Survey Protocol: Practical 
Challenges in its Use in a Developing Country (Nigeria).Informal Consultation on the 
Epidemiology of Deafness and Hearing Impairment in Developing Countries and 
Update of the WHO Protocol. Unpublished report. Geneva: WHO. 
Parving, A., Biering-Sorensen, M., Bech, B., Christensen, B., Sorensen, M.S. (1997). 
Hearing in the elderly greater than 80 years of age: Prevalence of problems and 
sensitivity. Scandinavian Audiology, 26, 99-106. 
Pascolini, D., & Smith, A. (2008). Available Data on Deafness and Hearing Impairment. 
In preparation. Geneva: WHO. 
Popelka, M., Cruickshanks, K., Wiley, T., Tweed, T., Klein, B., & Klein, R. (1998). Low 
prevalence of hearing aid use among older adults with hearing loss: The 
Epidemiology of Hearing Loss Study. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 
46, 1075-1078. 
Review

Demographics of Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
49
Popelka, M., Cruickshanks, K., Wiley, T., Tweed, T., Klein, B., Klein, R., & Nodahl, D. 
(2000). Moderate alcohol consumption and hearing loss: A protective effect. Journal 
of the American Geriatrics Society, 48, 1273-1278. 
Prasansuk, S. (2000). Incidence/prevalence of sensorineural hearing impairment in 
Thailand and Southeast Asia. Audiology, 39, 207-211. 
Prescott, C.A., Kibel, M.A. (1991). Ear and hearing disorders in rural grade 2 (Sub B) 
schoolchildren in the western Cape. South African Medical Journal, 79, 90-93. 
Quaranta, A., Assennato, G., & Sallustio, V. (1996). Epidemiology of hearing problems 
among adults in Italy. Scandinavian Audiology, Supplementum 42, 9-13. 
Reuben, D.B., Walsh, K., Moore, A.A., Damesyn, M., & Greendale, G.A. (1998). 
Hearing loss in community-dwelling older persons: National prevalence data and 
identification using simple questions. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 46, 
1008-1011. 
Reuben, D.B., Mui, S., Damesyn, M., Moore, A.A., & Greendale, G.A. (1999). 
Prognostic value of sensory impairment in older persons. Journal of the American 
Geriatrics Society, 47, 930-935. 
Ruben, R.J. (2000). Redefining the survival of the fittest: Communication disorders in the 
21st century. Laryngoscope 110, 241–245. 
Seely, D.R., Gloyd, S.S., Wright, A.D., & Norton, S.J. (1995). Hearing loss prevalence 
and risk factors among Sierra Leonean children. Archives of Otolaryngology—Head 
& Neck Surgery, 121, 853-8. 
Singh, A.P., Chandra, M.R., Daya,l D., Chandra, R., Bhushan, V. (1980). Prevalence of 
deafness in a rural population of Lucknow District. Indian Journal of Public Health, 
24, 23-51. 
Smith, A., & Mathers, C. (2006). Epidemiology of infection as a cause of hearing loss. In 
V.E. Newton & P.J.Vallely (Eds.), Infection and hearing impairment (pp. 31-66). 
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons. 
Uimonen, S., Huttunen, K., Jounio-Ervasti, K., & Sorri, M. (1999). Do we know the real 
need for hearing rehabilitation at the population level? Hearing impairments in the 5- 
to 75-year-old cross-sectional Finnish population. British Journal of Audiology, 33, 
53-9. 
Van Naarden, K., Decoufle, P., & Caldwell, K. (1999). Prevalence and characteristics of 
children with serious hearing impairment in metropolitan Atlanta, 1991-1993. 
Pediatrics, 103, 570-575. 
WHO (World Health Organization). (1986). Prevention of Deafness and Hearing 
Impairment: Report by the Director General. EB79/10. Geneva: WHO. 
WHO (World Health Organization). (1991). Report of the Informal Working Group on 
Prevention of Deafness and Hearing Impairment Program Planning. WHO/ 
PDH/91.1. Geneva: WHO. 
WHO (World Health Organization). (1995). Prevention of Hearing Impairment. 
Resolution of the 48th World Health Assembly, (12 May 1995), WHA48.9. Geneva: 
WHO. 
WHO (World Health Organization). (1997). Report of the First Informal Consultation on 
Future Program Developments for the Prevention of Deafness and Hearing 
Impairment. WHO/PDH/97.3. Geneva: WHO. 
Review

Andrew W. Smith 
50
WHO (World Health Organization). (1999). WHO Ear and Hearing Disorders Survey: 
Protocol and Software Package, WHO/PBD/PDH/99.8. Geneva: WHO. Available 
from PBD, CPM, World Health Organization, Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, 
Switzerland. (Email: hearing@who.int ). 
WHO (World Health Organization). (2003). International Statistical Classification of 
Diseases and Related Health Problems, 10th rev. Geneva: WHO. http://www3.who. 
int/icd/ vol1htm2003/fr-icd.htm. 
WHO (World Health Organization). (2004). Changing History: The World Health Report. 
Geneva: WHO. 
WHO (World Health Organization). (2007a). WHO-CHOICE: CHOICE = CHOosing 
Interventions that are Cost Effective. Geneva: WHO. http://www.who.int/choice/en/ 
Accessed 27 December 2007 
WHO (World Health Organization). (2007b). World Health Survey. Geneva: WHO. http:// 
www.who.int/healthinfo/survey/en/ Accessed 27 December 2007. 
WHO-Regional Office for South-East Asia. (1997). Multicentre Study on the Magnitude 
and Etiology of Hearing Impairment. Report of a Meeting of Principal Investigators. 
Colombo, Sri Lanka: WHO-Regional Office for South-East Asia. 
Wilson, D.H., Walsh, P.G., Sanchez, L., Davis, A.C., Taylor, A.W., Tucker, G., & 
Meagher, I. (1999). The epidemiology of hearing impairment in an Australian adult 
population. International Journal of Epidemiology, 28, 247-252. 
Zakzouk, S.M. (2003). Epidemiological study of childhood hearing impairment in Saudi 
Arabia. Informal Consultation on Epidemiology of Deafness and Hearing Impairment 
in Developing Countries and Update of the WHO Protocol, March 2003. Geneva: 
WHO. 
 
Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
 
 
 
EDUCATION AND PRACTICE OF AUDIOLOGY 
INTERNATIONALLY: AFFORDABLE AND SUSTAINABLE 
EDUCATION MODELS FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
 
 
Helen Goulios* and Robert Patuzzi 
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia 
ABSTRACT 
The recognition by societies of the problems caused by deafness and hearing 
impairment has led to a significant increase in the need for hearing health care 
worldwide. In developed countries, an ageing population and advances in hearing 
services have placed greater pressure on governments, academic institutions and 
professional associations to increase graduate numbers, and to broaden their knowledge 
and competencies. This has resulted in longer, more expensive education programs for 
hearing health care professionals. In developing countries, deafness and hearing 
impairment may not be seen as a high priority, and preventative and rehabilitative 
solutions to address hearing disorders are often unaffordable. Furthermore, the profession 
of audiology has evolved from many related areas of expertise resulting in diversity in the 
education of hearing health care professionals internationally. Yet despite these 
educational differences, there is significant overlap in the scope of practice of the many 
hearing health care workers. The differences in level and breadth of education involve 
wide-ranging costs in training of professionals which ultimately result in a variation in 
the cost-effectiveness of service provision. Collectively, increased demand, wide 
diversity, low cost-effectiveness and increasing globalization all highlight the need to 
evaluate current audiology education programs from an international perspective. This 
chapter profiles the profession of audiology, based on the results of a recent international 
survey of audiology education and practice of over 60 countries, representing 80% of the 
world’s population. It compares hearing health care professional resources, educational 
levels and scope of practice between countries. It also presents a conceptual model which 
describes the interactions between the main issues involved in the provision of hearing 
                                                        
* Correspondence: hgoulios@cyllene.uwa.edu.au 
Review

Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
 
52
services. The model can be used to make comparisons between countries and examine 
efficiencies for hearing health care education. It provides a first step in the development 
of affordable, cost-effective and sustainable hearing health care education models that 
can be adapted for local environments. 
INTRODUCTION 
Increasing awareness of the problems caused by deafness and hearing impairment has 
resulted in a rising need for hearing health care worldwide. The World Health Organization 
(WHO, 2006a) has estimated that there are 278 million people with bilateral moderate to 
profound hearing loss, with two-thirds of them in developing countries, and a half with a 
hearing loss that is avoidable. In developed countries, improvements in hearing technologies 
and service provision, and an ageing population have contributed to greater community 
demand for hearing services. As a consequence, there has been greater pressure placed on 
governments, academic institutions and professional associations to increase the number of 
students trained, and to broaden their knowledge and competencies.  
There are many different professionals that currently provide hearing health care services. 
Patients with active medical conditions may be seen by otolaryngologists, general medical 
practitioners and nurses, whereas the non-medical care of patients with hearing impairment is 
more often provided by other professionals, including audiologists, audiometric technicians, 
hearing aid acousticians, teachers of the deaf and speech pathologists. Audiologists are 
increasingly becoming the primary contact for the non-medical management of hearing, 
tinnitus and balance disorders (International Society of Audiology, 2004; European 
Federation of Audiological Societies, 2001; Bess and Humes, 2003). As the profession of 
audiology has evolved from many other related areas fields, including engineering, medicine, 
physiology, psychology, speech pathology and teaching (Burkhard, 2002; Bess and Humes, 
2003), there is a broad diversity in audiology education, both within countries and 
internationally. Furthermore, the issues around education of audiologists in developing 
countries are different from those in developed countries. 
In most developed countries with established audiology education programs, education of 
audiologists is at a tertiary level. However there is significant variability in the minimum 
entry level requirement for clinical audiologists. Depending on the country, training may 
involve a four-year undergraduate Bachelors degree (Brazil, South Africa, and United 
Kingdom), a two-year postgraduate Masters degree (Australia, Canada, and New Zealand) or 
a four-year postgraduate Doctorate in Audiology (USA) or, as in many European and some 
South American countries, a medical degree followed by postgraduate training in audiology. 
Despite these differences, there is considerable overlap in the scope of practice amongst the 
many hearing health care workers with different levels of training, suggesting a variation in 
the cost-effectiveness of service provision. This diversity in training has been acknowledged 
by the International Society of Audiology (ISA, 2004) and the European Federation of 
Audiology Societies (EFAS, 2001), with both organizations supporting a move to long-term 
international equivalency, while maintaining contributions by the many professions currently 
involved in audiology. Apart from curriculum diversity, there are other issues facing the 
education of audiologists. Closer examination of courses within countries highlights problems 
common across countries in providing appropriate and cost-effective programs. For example, 
Review

Education and Practice of Audiology Internationally 
 
53
Florian (2002) has highlighted the situation in the United States, where there were 123 
university level audiology programs producing an average of only six graduates per program 
per year. He concluded that having so many programs producing so few graduates has caused 
concern about the financial viability of courses and the quality of graduates.  
The issues in developing countries are different. Given the many other health priorities, 
deafness and hearing impairment may not always be seen as a significant problem, and 
preventative and rehabilitative solutions to address hearing disorders are generally thought to 
be unaffordable (WHO, 2004). Furthermore, the large manufacturers of hearing devices have 
increasingly focused on sophisticated products yielding high profit margins in the developed 
world, with little work on low-cost devices appropriate in developing countries. The WHO 
(2004) has reported recent hearing aid production to be one tenth of global need, with only 
one quarter of these aids being distributed to developing countries. Even if hearing aid issues 
were resolved, developing countries lack appropriately trained individuals to perform basic 
hearing assessment, device fitting and/or rehabilitation. In 1998 the WHO also found that in 
developing countries there were between 1 audiologist per 0.5 million people to 1 per 6.25 
million. In contrast, the number of audiologists in developed countries was reported to be 
closer to 1 per 20,000 people. This further highlights the need for a sustainable cost-effective 
model for education of audiologists. 
Additionally, increasing globalization links the problems in developing countries with 
those in the developed world, further supporting the need to view the education of 
audiologists from an international perspective. As Frenk et al. (2001) point out, health care is 
a “global good”, and an increase in the hearing health needs of industrialized countries has 
resulted in an inadequate supply of providers. There are already examples of international 
movements of audiologists and audiology services from country to country, with graduates 
from some developing countries in particular (including Brazil, South Africa, India and the 
Philippines) migrating to developed countries (including the United Kingdom, Canada and 
Australia) to seek better employment opportunities. The permanent relocation of audiologists 
to developed countries compounds the difficulties in providing hearing care for developing 
countries, who suffer the added burden of other major health problems and malnutrition.  
Increased demand for audiology services, a wide diversity and low cost-effectiveness of 
current education programs, and increased world globalisation have highlighted the need to 
evaluate established audiology education programs from an international perspective. This 
chapter profiles the profession of audiology, based on the results of a recent international 
survey of audiology education and practice of over 60 countries representing over 80 % of the 
world’s population (Goulios and Patuzzi, in press). It compares hearing health care 
professional resources, educational levels and scope of practice between countries. It also 
presents a conceptual model describing the interactions between the main issues in the 
provision of hearing services, and provides a basis for comparison and discussion of different 
countries and regions. The model is one step in the development of affordable, cost-effective 
and sustainable hearing health care education models that can be adapted for local 
environments. It is clear that the development of effective education models will need to 
consider the range of clinical services, the different hearing professionals required to provide 
these services, and the nature of the education systems needed to provide their training. 
Review

Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
 
54
41%
32%
10%
10%
5%
2%
0
10
20
30
40
50
Professional
Associations
Universities and
Research
Insititutes
Hospital
Departments of
Audiology and
Otolaryngology
Non-
government
organisations
and charities
Government
health and
education
departments
Private clinics
% Respondents
 
Figure 1. Types of organizations completing survey as a percentage of total returns. 
INTERNATIONAL SURVEY OF  
AUDIOLOGY EDUCATION AND PRACTICE 
Between February 2005 and May 2007 a survey aimed at obtaining quantitative and 
qualitative data on audiology education and practice was distributed worldwide (Goulios and 
Patuzzi, in press). The survey was designed in English and translated into five additional 
languages: Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish, and was sent to representatives of 
each country’s professional body for providers of hearing health care services. In countries 
where there was no known professional body for audiologists, the questionnaire was sent to 
organisations involved in education, practice or research in audiology. Every effort was made 
to obtain contact details for individuals working in hearing health care for as many countries 
as possible. In total, 63 countries completed and returned the questionnaire, representing 80% 
of the world’s population. Returned questionnaires were largely completed by individuals 
representing national professional bodies, or universities and research institutes (72%). Only 
3% of returns were from individuals working in private clinics. A breakdown of the 
proportion of various organisation types completing the questionnaire is shown in Figure 1. 
The reliability of the data was well supported, given the national standing and independence 
of the respondent organizations. 
 
 
Professional Hearing Health Care Resources 
 
Table 1 shows the distribution of hearing health care providers in respondent countries, 
with countries ordered from lowest to highest per capita Gross National Income (GNI) in 
International Dollars ($Int), as determined by the World Bank (World Bank, 2007). 
International Dollars are derived by dividing local currency units by an estimate of their 
Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) compared to the US Dollar, (i.e., the measure which 
minimizes the consequences of differences in price levels between countries, WHO, 2006b). 
Review

Education and Practice of Audiology Internationally 
 
55
Based on the World Bank classifications, countries have been grouped into low income, 
lower-middle income, higher-middle income and high income countries. Lower-middle 
income economies and low income countries are most often referred to as “developing 
countries”.  
The first two columns in Table 1 provide figures for each country's per capita GNI ($Int 
PPP) and population, so that country comparisons for hearing health care may be made. The 
following columns show the estimated numbers of professionals involved in hearing health 
care in each country, including the total number of audiologists and otolaryngologists, the 
number of audiologists and otolaryngologists per million people, and the total number of 
other hearing care providers. In some cases the respondents did not know the numbers, and 
this is indicated by “not available”. 
The lack of otolaryngologists was evident in many developing countries in Asia and 
Africa (including Bangladesh, Myanmar, Pakistan, Madagascar, Mali, Namibia and Nigeria), 
with several countries having less than one otolaryngologist per million people. These 
countries were also very poorly resourced with respect to all other hearing care professionals. 
The majority of countries classified as having low and lower-middle incomes reported having 
no audiologists, or less than 4 audiologists per million persons. Most respondent countries 
indicated having more otolaryngologists than audiologists per million persons, except for the 
English-speaking countries, Belgium and the countries with a combined audiology and speech 
pathology profession. 
The data shown in Table 1 are consistent with those reported earlier in several small 
studies in specific world regions. Madriz (2001) examined audiology resources and services 
in Latin America by surveying each country’s Ministries of Health, Education and Social 
Security, and official institutions and NGOs associated with hearing and deafness. The 
professional resources and training programs reported by Madriz closely matched numbers 
reported by the Latin American countries responding to this survey, after population increases 
between 2001 and 2006 were taken into account. Given the limited material and human 
resources, the scarcity of audiology services, and the high cost of technology by regional 
standards, Madriz concluded that hearing impairment was seen as a low priority by the 
national health systems of most Latin American countries.  
The data from Table 1 were also used to generate Figures 2A and 2B. Figure 2A shows 
the number of ear, nose and throat (ENT) surgeons per million people, as reported by 49 of 
the 63 respondents, plotted against per capita GNI ($Int) PPP. Figure 2B shows the number of 
audiologists per million people against per capita GNI ($Int) PPP, as reported by 39 
countries. One fifth of these countries, all of which had very low per capita GNI, reported 
having no audiologists. They included Bangladesh, Indonesia, Laos, Guatemala and Tonga. 
Most respondent countries indicated having more ENTs (Figure 2A) than audiologists (Figure 
2B), with the exceptions being the English-speaking countries, Belgium, and the countries 
with a combined audiology and speech pathology profession.  
Review

 
 
Table 1. Estimated numbers of Hearing Health Care Professionals for low, middle and high income countries 
 
Country 
GNI $Int 
Pop. 
Auds 
Auds/ 
ENTs 
ENTS/ 
Aud 
Aud 
H/A 
SLT 
TOD 
 
  
PPP 
(000s) 
  
Mil. Pop. 
  
Mil. Pop. 
Phys 
Tech 
Tech 
  
  
  
Madagascar 
950 
17404 
N/A 
N/A 
5 
0 
1 
2 
0 
0 
20 
 
Nigeria 
1050 
124009 
N/A 
N/A 
60 
0 
1 
50 
15 
N/A 
150 
 
Mali 
1130 
13007 
N/A 
N/A 
7 
1 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Myanmar 
1480 
49485 
N/A 
N/A 
50 
1 
N/A 
2 
N/A 
1 
N/A 
Low 
India 
1568 
1065462 
1000 
1 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
700 
N/A 
Income 
Laos 
2050 
5657 
0 
0 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Bangladesh 
2340 
146736 
0 
0 
275 
2 
2 
40 
18 
40 
100 
 
Pakistan 
2500 
153578 
7 
0.1 
200 
1 
7 
N/A 
30 
4 
105 
 
Cambodia 
2920 
14144 
N/A 
N/A 
50 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
  
Indonesia 
3950 
219883 
0 
0 
606 
3 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
1 
N/A 
 
Nicaragua 
4010 
5466 
3 
1 
20 
4 
0 
3 
6 
6 
6 
 
Libya 
4400 
5551 
2 
1 
40 
7 
2 
5 
2 
N/A 
N/A 
Lower 
Egypt 
4680 
71931 
110 
2 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Middle 
Guatemala 
4800 
12347 
0 
2 
50 
4 
0 
5 
7 
100 
50 
Income 
Philippines 
5980 
79999 
21 
0.3 
400 
5 
0 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Jordan 
6200 
5473 
10 
2 
130 
24 
3 
10 
10 
20 
1 
 
Belize 
6640 
256 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
10 
 
Colombia 
7620 
44222 
480 
11 
1000 
23 
N/A 
N/A 
20 
3000 
N/A 
 
Panama 
7680 
3120 
124* 
40 
71 
23 
N/A 
3 
N/A 
3 
1 
 
China 
7730 
1311709 
N/A 
N/A 
20000 
15 
200 
5000 
5000 
N/A 
10000 
 
Namibia 
8110 
1987 
7 
4 
3 
2 
N/A 
N/A 
2 
7 
40 
 
Dominican Rep. 
8290 
8745 
2 
0.2 
52 
6 
0 
2 
2 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Tonga 
8580 
104 
0 
0 
1 
10 
0 
0 
1 
0 
2 
  
Brazil 
8800 
178470 
25600* 
143 
6000 
34 
0 
0 
10 
1000 
27500 
 
Thailand 
9140 
62193 
50 
1 
750 
12 
10 
0 
10 
20 
400 
 
Romania 
9820 
22334 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
5 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Costa Rica 
10770 
4173 
N/A 
N/A 
75 
18 
N/A 
25 
15 
N/A 
120 
 
Taiwan 
10981 
22894 
150 
7 
N/A 
N/A 
5 
N/A 
20 
300 
50 
Upper 
Chile 
11260 
15806 
174* 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Middle 
Malaysia 
11300 
24425 
90 
4 
N/A 
N/A 
3 
N/A 
N/A 
120 
N/A 
Income 
Mexico 
11330 
103457 
400 
4 
4500 
43 
15 
150 
N/A 
3000 
1000 
 
Russia 
11670 
143246 
300 
2 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
South Africa 
11710 
45026 
1000* 
22 
N/A 
N/A 
0 
0 
1000 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Review

 
 
Botswana 
12240 
1785 
6 
3 
5 
3 
N/A 
3 
N/A 
3 
31 
 
Croatia 
13670 
4428 
40 
9 
220 
50 
40 
90 
7 
60 
40 
 
Poland 
14530 
38587 
N/A 
N/A 
1500 
39 
120 
1000 
  
250 
300 
 
Lithuania 
14930 
3444 
N/A 
N/A 
320 
93 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Argentina 
15390 
38428 
7000* 
182 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
  
Saudi Arabia 
16620 
24217 
104 
4 
460 
19 
8 
12 
78 
116 
285 
 
Slovak Rep. 
16910 
5402 
N/A 
N/A 
400 
74 
N/A 
40 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Portugal 
20850 
10061 
180 
18 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
140 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Slovenia 
23980 
1984 
N/A 
N/A 
70 
35 
N/A 
120 
15 
125 
50 
 
Israel 
25470 
6725 
600 
89 
1200 
178 
N/A 
N/A 
50 
800 
100 
 
New Zealand 
26470 
3875 
173 
45 
65 
17 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Spain 
28420 
41060 
N/A 
N/A 
2000 
49 
50 
300 
700 
2000 
1000 
 
Italy 
29840 
57423 
N/A 
N/A 
4500 
78 
650 
1200 
500 
300 
250 
 
Germany  
31280 
82476 
N/A 
N/A 
4000 
48 
300 
1500 
1000 
2000 
1000 
 
Australia 
31860 
19731 
1300 
66 
350 
18 
0 
N/A 
400 
6000 
300 
 
France 
32130 
60144 
N/A 
N/A 
2500 
42 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Japan 
33730 
127654 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
10000 
N/A 
 
Belgium 
34460 
10318 
500 
48 
500 
48 
N/A 
100 
500 
N/A 
N/A 
High 
Canada 
34610 
31510 
1100 
35 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Income 
Singapore 
34700 
4253 
20 
5 
50 
12 
N/A 
9 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Sweden 
34780 
9041 
750 
83 
542 
60 
N/A 
60 
45 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Austria 
35300 
8116 
N/A 
 N/A 
520 
65 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Netherlands 
35500 
16149 
60 
4 
350 
22 
0 
200 
400 
200 
100 
 
Ireland 
35540 
3956 
50 
13 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
50 
N/A 
N/A 
 
United Kingdom 
35690 
59251 
2250 
38 
520 
9 
40 
1700 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Denmark 
36110 
5364 
N/A 
N/A 
350 
65 
35 
200 
0 
500 
100 
 
Hong Kong 
38180 
6980 
70 
10 
118 
17 
N/A 
15 
N/A 
600 
25 
 
Switzerland 
40630 
7169 
N/A 
N/A 
230 
32 
40 
50 
250 
N/A 
N/A 
 
Norway 
43920 
4533 
N/A 
N/A 
300 
66 
0 
150 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
USA 
44260 
294043 
15000 
51 
12000 
41 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
130000 
N/A 
  
GNI $Int PPP:  Per Capita Gross National Income in international dollars; Pop. (000s): Population (000s); Auds: Total Audiologists;  
Auds/Mil. Pop:  Audiologists per million people; ENTs: Total ENT surgeons; ENTs/Mil. Pop: ENT surgeons per million people;  
Aud Phys:  
Audiological Physicians; Aud. Techs: Audiological Technicians; SLT: Speech-Language Therapists: TOD: Teachers of the Deaf; * indicates 
combined Speech-Language-Hearing qualification 
Review

Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
 
58
Countries fell into clusters in both Figures 2A and 2B which could be grouped according 
to low and high numbers of hearing health professionals and low and high per capita GNI. 
Four clusters of countries are seen in Figure 2A, and these are shown as Groups 1-4. Group 1 
is comprised almost entirely of developing countries with low per capita GNI and low 
numbers of ENTs per million people. Group 2 are developing countries with low per capita 
GNI but numbers of ENTs per million people similar to countries with a much higher per 
capita GNI. Group 2 countries (including Lithuania, the Slovak Republic, Croatia, Poland, 
Mexico and Brazil) tended to have health care systems that were government-funded to a 
greater extent than countries with higher per capita GNI. There was also a large variation in 
the numbers of ENTs in countries with higher per capita GNI. Countries clustered within 
Group 3 had greater numbers of otolaryngologists, and were mainly European countries with 
primarily government-funded health systems. Audiology in these countries tended to be a 
post-medical specialization in ENT. Group 4 countries were wealthier with fewer ENTs per 
million people, had more privately funded health insurance systems, and were supported by 
larger numbers of audiologists. 
A similar picture is seen in Figure 2B, although in this case Groups 1 and 2 fell into a 
single cluster, with all countries with low per capita GNI reporting low numbers of 
audiologists. Group 3 countries had higher per capita GNI and larger numbers of audiologists. 
The profile of audiology in all these countries was a university qualification that did not 
require prior medical training. Group 4 comprised countries with high per capita GNI and few 
audiologists. Most of these countries were also represented in Group 3 of Figure 3A, with 
higher numbers of ENTs, audiology as a post-medical specialization, and health care systems 
that were predominantly government-funded. Argentina, Brazil and Panama were omitted 
from Figure 3B because their audiology professionals had a combined audiology/speech and 
language qualification, and it was not possible to differentiate personnel or time devoted to 
audiology per se. Although South Africa also has a combined qualification, a separate value 
was provided for audiologists in the returned survey and so they are included in this figure. 
 
Namibia
Tonga
Thailand
 China
Botswana
Saudi Arabia
Madagascar
Nigeria
Mali
Myanmar
India
Bagladesh
Pakistan
Cambodia
Indinesia
Nicaragua
Libya
Guatemala
Philippines
Panama
Colombia
France
Italy
Sweden
Denmark
USA
Norway
Switzerland
Austria
Spain
Belgium
Germany
UK
Hong Kong
Netherlands
Singapore
Australia
New Zealand
Lithuania
Slovak Rep.
Slovenia
Croatia
Mexico
Poland
Brazil
Jordan
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
per capita GNI ($Int) PPP
Ents per million persons
Group 4
Group 3
Group 2
Group 1
 
Figure 2A. ENTs per million persons versus per capita GNI. 
Review

Education and Practice of Audiology Internationally 
 
59
Botswana
Russia
Mexico
Taiwan
Germany
Spain
South Africa
Portugal
Netherlands
USA
Singapore
UK
Switzerland
Ireland
Italy
Sweden
Norway
Israel
Australia
Belgium
Canada
New Zealand
Hong Kong
Chile
Croatia
Saudi Arabia
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
per capita GNI ($Int) PPP
Audiologists per million persons
Madagascar
Nigeria
Mali
Myanmar
India
Laos
Bangladesh
Pakistan
Cambodia
Indonesia
Nicaragua
Libya
Egypt
Guatemala
Philippines
Jordan
Namibia
Domincan Rep
Tonga
Thailand
Romania
Groups 1&2
Group 3
Group 4
 
Figure 2B. Audiologists per million persons versus per capita GNI ($Int) PPP. 
Table 2. Hearing health care professionals world-wide 
 
Audiological Physician (European countries) 
Audiological Scientist (United Kingdom and some Asian countries) 
Audiological Technician (European and South American countries) 
Audiologist (title used in many countries world-wide) 
Audioloog (Netherlands) 
Audiometrist (English speaking countries) 
Audio-Prothetist (France, Romania) 
BSc Audiometrist (Norway) 
ENT Technician (Mali) 
Hearing Aid Acoustician (European countries) 
Hearing Aid Dispenser (English speaking countries) 
Hearing Aid Technician (European and African countries) 
Hearing Therapist (United Kingdom, New Zealand and Scandinavian countries) 
Fonoaudiologo (Argentina, Panama) 
Phonoaudiologist (Brazil) 
Otorhinolaryngologist/Ear Nose and Throat Surgeon (world-wide) 
Speech Language Therapist/Pathologist (titles used in many countries world-wide) 
Surdologist (Russia) 
Teacher of the Deaf (title used in many countries world-wide) 
Technician in Audiometry (Costa Rica);  
Technolog Medico con Mencion en Otorrinolaringologia TMORL (Chile) 
 
 
Review

Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
 
60
Another difficulty in reporting the data is in the definition of the different hearing health 
care professionals in each country. In many cases there are similarities across countries. For 
example, the ENT surgeon was similarly described in all respondent countries, while large 
differences existed for audiologists. These differences between professionals across countries 
are discussed below. 
The gap in hearing care resources between developed and developing countries was most 
obvious in the numbers of hearing health professionals. European countries were best 
resourced with ENT surgeons, however few of these countries reported having university 
qualified graduates in audiology without prior medical training. The exception was the United 
Kingdom which reported 100,000 persons per ENT surgeon, who were also supported by 
audiological physicians and non-medically qualified audiologists. At the other extreme were 
the professional numbers found in most developing countries, mainly in the African and 
Asian regions, with between 0.5 and 3.4 million people per ENT surgeon. These countries 
had access to even smaller numbers of audiologists, and several (including Bangladesh, 
Indonesia and Laos) reported having no audiologists at all. These findings are consistent with 
earlier reports of limited numbers of hearing professionals in African countries (Olusanya, 
2000; Eleweke, 1997), Eastern Europe (Farkas and Ribari, 1997; Salmivalli and Sorri, 1997), 
Latin America (Madriz, 2001) and Asian countries (Alauddin and Joarde, 2004; Suwento, 
2004). 
 
Professionals Working in Hearing Health Care 
One of the difficulties in collating and reporting these results was the definition of the 
range of hearing health care professionals in different countries. Table 2 shows the various 
professional titles cited by respondents, and lists countries in which they are most commonly 
used. The survey asked respondents to list the professionals primarily responsible for hearing 
health care in their country, with responses not required to be exclusive. Most countries 
indicated a variety of providers, with over half of the countries surveyed indicating ENT 
surgeons (58%) and audiologists (52%) as their main providers of hearing care. ENT 
surgeons were present in all countries surveyed, although their scarcity (particularly in 
developing countries) necessitated contributions by other professionals. Audiologists were 
strongly represented in the Americas, Asia and the Pacific countries, in addition to all 
countries that had English as their national language. A combined qualification was obtained 
for speech-and-hearing professionals in several countries in Central and South America. 
These professionals were referred to as Fonoaudiologo in Argentina, Colombia and Panama, 
and phonoaudiologist in Brazil. In addition to having 26,500 phonaudiologists, Brazil also 
had 600 “certified audiologists” who specialised in hearing care. The dual university 
qualification in audiology/speech-pathology was also a requirement for audiologists educated 
and practising in South Africa. 
Mexico also reported audiologists as the primary hearing care professional, however in 
this instance the audiologist needed a general medical qualification, which was followed by a 
3-year (soon to become 4-year) specialisation in audiology. This qualification enabled 
professionals to diagnose and manage communication problems, whereas ENT referral was 
made for disorders requiring specialist medical treatment. The situation was different again in 
Costa Rica, with three profiles for the practice of audiology, including otolaryngologists, 
physicians in audiology and technicians in audiometry, with the survey respondent specifying 
that in answering the questions relating to audiology they were strictly referring to University 
Review

Education and Practice of Audiology Internationally 
 
61
educated technicians in audiometry. Professionals in Chile had a similar educational 
background, and used the title Technolog Medico con Mencion en Otorrinolaringologia 
(TMORL). 
Most African countries had very small numbers of ENTs relative to their populations, and 
these were supplemented by small numbers of hearing aid and audiometric technicians 
without tertiary qualifications. The exceptions were South Africa and Egypt with university-
educated audiologists. Asian countries (including China, India, Japan, Malaysia, Philippines 
and Thailand) generally had a wide range of hearing care professionals, although again their 
numbers were small relative to population. The exceptions were Hong Kong (surveyed 
separately from China) and Singapore who were serviced by a wide range of professionals, 
including ENT surgeons, audiologists and audiometric and hearing-aid technicians in 
relatively higher numbers. 
In most European countries audiology was a specialisation after professionals had 
completed their ENT training. This was the case in Austria, Croatia, Denmark, France, 
Germany, Italy, Norway, Poland, Slovak Republic, Slovenia and Switzerland. Although these 
countries used the term audiologist (and in Russia, the title surdologist), it was the 
otolaryngologists that was seen as the primary hearing care professional, and they were 
complemented by audiological physicians and audiological scientists. In addition, Belgium, 
Germany, Ireland, Portugal and Sweden were in various stages of adopting university-
educated audiologists without medical training. The title of Audioloog was used in the 
Netherlands, but this only applied to graduates with a Masters degree in Physics, followed by 
a 4-year post-specialisation in audiology. Larger numbers of other professionals undertaking a 
narrower range of clinical activities were also active in European countries, with their titles 
closely connected to their clinical practices. These professionals included ENT technicians 
and audiological technicians who supported otolaryngologists with audiometric assessment, 
hearing-aid acousticians and hearing-aid dispensers who selected and fitted hearing 
instruments, and audiometrists whose scope of practice have included a range of assessment 
and/or hearing-instrument fitting activities. Hearing therapists, speech-therapists/pathologists 
and/or teachers-of-the-deaf were largely responsible for managing aural rehabilitation 
programs. 
 
World-Wide Need for Audiologists 
In the past there have been numerous anecdotal reports regarding a shortage of 
audiologists worldwide, and this was confirmed in the international survey with 87% of 
respondent countries indicating they needed more audiologists, including countries from the 
lowest to the highest income groups. All countries that indicated they had sufficient numbers 
of audiologists (including Argentina, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Italy, The Netherlands 
and Poland) were in the upper-middle to high income groups. Three percent of countries were 
undecided. There were several reasons identified for the shortage of audiologists (and these 
were not exclusive), with the main reasons being: (i) a lack of government funding for 
hearing health care as a result of other health priorities (80%), (ii) a lack of awareness about 
the profession of audiology (76%), (iii) a lack of public awareness about deafness and hearing 
loss (60%), and (iv) a lack of audiology education programs (50%). Some countries reported 
that student intakes were small, and a related reason for low intakes was the difficulties 
programs had in obtaining suitable clinical placements for students. Half of the respondent 
countries also indicated poor pay and conditions as a major reason for the shortage. Some 
Review

Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
 
62
countries also gave poor workforce planning by governments as the reason for the resignation 
of audiologists, or for their tendency to seek better employment conditions overseas. 
Employment opportunities are closely linked to the level of audiology resources, and the 
survey asked about employment opportunities in each country. Figure 3 shows how countries 
reported the employment opportunity for audiologists. The results are consistent with the 
reported shortages, with 66% of countries describing local work opportunities as excellent or 
very good. Only 3% of countries indicated that opportunities were poor. 
The availability of professional resources can often be linked to work-place settings, and 
countries were asked to identify the work environments for their audiologists. Again the 
responses were not exclusive. Seven countries indicated the question was not applicable to 
their situation (including Austria, Cambodia, Guatemala, Mali, Romania and Tonga). 
Hospital settings were the most common environment (89% of countries), while other 
common work environments included private clinics (64%), universities (62%) and hearing-
aid manufacturers (53%). Government clinics (34%) and non-government organizations 
(26%) were less common. Specialist audiological centres, schools for deaf children, and other 
regular educational settings, occupational health settings, military and war veteran centres, 
and hearing aid dispensing clinics were also common. 
 
Education of Audiologists 
There are not only differences in the levels of audiological resources across countries, but 
a wide variation in education and scope-of-practice for audiologists across countries. Using 
the results from the international survey, the educational level of audiologists could be 
grouped into one of four clusters: (i) medically qualified practitioners who had completed 
specialisations in ENT and/or additional study in audiology; (ii) non-medically qualified 
university-educated practitioners who had completed a degree in Audiology; (iii) practitioners 
who had completed some formal studies in audiology, through a technical or vocational 
training college or school (but not at university level), or (iv) other practitioners, who had 
completed University studies in another non-medical field, and who undertook some hearing 
health care practice as part of their role. 
8%
3%
23%
39%
27%
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor
Not Applicable
Employment opportunity
% Countries
 
Figure 3. Employment opportunities for audiologists. 
Review

Education and Practice of Audiology Internationally 
 
63
3%
5%
5%
8%
13%
15%
24%
27%
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
University
Bachelors
Degree
University
Post-
graduate
Medicine
University
Bachelor
or Masters
University
Masters
Degree
Technical
College
University
Bachelor,
Master or
Doctorate
University
Master or
Doctorate
Other
% Countries
 
Figure 4. Educational level of audiologists across countries. 
Figure 4 highlights the degree to which the educational level varied in the 67% of 
respondent countries who reported having audiology programs. The majority of these 
countries were in the upper-middle and high income groups. Audiologists were educated at 
university level, with most (60%) having university degrees focussed on audiology, and in a 
small proportion of cases, qualifications in combination with speech, language and 
communication therapies. Combination qualifications were mostly offered in South American 
countries, but were also established in South Africa. Some countries had a single educational 
entry level for the practice of audiology. For example, a Bachelors degree was the minimum 
requirement in 27% of countries, and a Masters degree in 13% of countries with established 
programs. Twenty percent of countries with established courses had multiple entry level 
courses, including Bachelors, Masters and Doctorates. 
In most countries with established courses the entry level requirement for the practice of 
clinical audiology was a university-level Bachelors degree in audiology, whereas in 24% of 
countries with courses any clinical practice involved a medical degree and, in most instances, 
further qualifications in otolaryngology followed by various levels of a post-graduate 
specialisation in audiology. These countries also tended to have a wide range of other 
professionals with differing levels of technical training in specific tasks, including 
audiometric assessment and/or hearing aid fitting. In 8% of countries with formal audiology 
education programs, the minimum entry level was a technical college course, usually of two 
to three years duration. This varied from informal, on-the-job training, through to countries 
where a vocational or technical college diploma was required. 
Data on the level and number of programs in each country were also collected. Japan, 
Brazil and the United States of America offered the largest number of courses, but it was 
India that was the largest supplier of audiologists, with 1200 graduates per year. These 
graduates were at both Bachelor and Masters level, and it was estimated that 70% of the 
postgraduate audiologists emigrated from India within 2 years of graduation. At the time of 
the survey the United States reported producing a total of 550 graduates per year from a total 
of 90 programs. This suggested that the average number of graduates per course was 6.1 
annually. China, Brazil and South Africa, who produced between 50-60 graduates per year, 
had the largest programs. While most audiology classes had between 10-20 students, many 
courses (including courses outside the United States) had classes of only 5-6 students. 
Review

Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
 
64
At the other end of the spectrum were the 37% of respondent countries who reported no 
formal courses in audiology, and these are summarised in Table 3. Almost all of these were 
developing countries in the low to lower-middle income groups, and they often depended on 
support from non-government organisations for both direct provision of hearing health care 
services and for funding for training of local residents to undertake programs offered in other 
countries. The exceptions to this were Singapore and Switzerland, who had relatively higher 
per capita GNI, but depended on education of their audiologists through programs in other 
countries. These audiologists included both expatriates and local residents who had completed 
their training in other countries 
There were also countries that produced disproportionately small numbers of graduates 
given their population bases. These included Croatia, Ireland, China, Malaysia, The 
Philippines, Thailand and Egypt. 
 
Table 3. Countries without established audiology courses and their support agencies 
 
Country 
Support countries 
Funding sources 
Europe 
  
  
Lithuania 
Sweden 
Charity, Individual self-funding 
Slovak Republic 
Not available 
Not available 
Switzerland 
Germany 
Individual self-funding 
Asia/Middle East 
 
 
Bangladesh 
India, Thailand 
Charity, WHO 
Cambodia 
Not available 
Not available 
Indonesia 
Not available 
Not available 
Laos 
United Kingdom, Italy 
Sweden 
Libya 
United Kingdom, Italy 
Government 
Myanmar 
Thailand, India 
WHO, Government 
Pakistan 
United Kingdom, Australia 
Individual self-funding 
Singapore 
Malaysia, Australia, UK, USA 
Government 
Africa 
 
 
Botswana 
South Africa, USA 
Government 
Madagascar 
Norway, France 
Charity, Individual self-funding 
Mali 
Not available 
Not available 
Namibia 
Not available 
Not available 
Nigeria 
Not available 
Not available 
Americas 
 
 
Belize 
USA 
Charity 
Dominican Republic 
India, Thailand 
Charity, WHO 
Guatemala 
USA, Mexico, Colombia, Argentina 
Individual self-funding 
Nicaragua 
Colombia, Mexico, USA 
Charities and NGOs 
Aust/Pacific 
 
 
Tonga 
Not available 
Not available 
 
 
 
Review

Education and Practice of Audiology Internationally 
 
65
Table 4. Percentage countries in which professionals perform clinical activities listed 
 
Clinical Activity 
Audiologist 
ENT 
Audiological 
Physician 
Audio-
metrist 
Speech 
Therapist 
Other 
Professional 
Not 
Performed
Audiometry 
 48% 
 12% 
 0% 
 21% 
2% 
 13% 
 2% 
Tympanometry 
50 
10 
0 
21 
2 
11 
4 
Play Audiometry 
51 
5 
1 
11 
8 
13 
9 
Behavioural 
Observation 
59 
7 
2 
11 
8 
1 
11 
Visual 
Reinforcement 
54 
7 
2 
10 
7 
6 
13 
Hearing Aid 
(Adult) 
50 
11 
2 
24 
2 
7 
2 
Hearing Aid 
(Paed.) 
52 
10 
2 
21 
2 
8 
3 
Speech Tests 
46 
9 
0 
14 
3 
16 
10 
OAE 
50 
12 
3 
19 
0 
4 
12 
ABR 
51 
18 
4 
10 
0 
6 
8 
ECoG 
45 
19 
2 
4 
0 
3 
25 
47 
16 
3 
7 
0 
3 
21 
Other 
Electrophysiology 
Cochlear Implant 
Assess. 
51 
21 
2 
4 
3 
2 
16 
Cochlear Implant 
Rehab. 
37 
9 
1 
1 
18 
16 
16 
Rehabilitation 
41 
6 
0 
10 
20 
8 
11 
Tinnitus 
Assessment 
50 
30 
2 
7 
1 
2 
7 
Tinnitus 
Management 
45 
32 
2 
2 
2 
0 
15 
Impression 
44 
8 
0 
28 
2 
14 
2 
CAPD Assessment 43 
13 
2 
7 
4 
5 
24 
CAPD 
Management 
40 
14 
2 
2 
11 
3 
26 
Neonatal Screening 40 
10 
1 
9 
2 
19 
15 
Other Paed. 
Screening 
45 
11 
2 
11 
2 
15 
12 
Balance 
Assessment 
42 
27 
0 
11 
0 
3 
14 
Balance 
Management 
38 
22 
0 
2 
0 
13 
22 
Hearing 
Conservation 
42 
9 
2 
11 
0 
13 
21 
Noise Management 38 
8 
2 
5 
0 
19 
26 
Vibrotactile Aid 
36 
7 
2 
2 
3 
5 
43 
Educational 
Audiology 
35 
7 
0 
7 
8 
34 
7 
Mould make-up 
22 
5 
0 
27 
2 
34 
5 
Wax Management 
14 
76 
0 
2 
0 
6 
0 
Review

Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
 
66
Scope of Practice 
Despite the wide variation in educational levels, there was significant overlap in the 
scope of practice of audiologists educated in different countries. Countries were asked to 
indicate which professionals performed 30 pre-defined audiological clinical activities. 
Respondents were also given the opportunity to include other activities performed by 
audiologists in their country. These results (Table 5) show that there were primarily three 
professionals that undertook most activities, that there were many other professionals 
involved in some aspects of audiological practice, and that there was a significant proportion 
of countries (mainly developing) in which many of these activities were not performed. The 
three main professionals were (i) the audiologist (including all professionals with a non-
medical university qualification in audiology in addition to audioloogs, fonoaudiologists, 
phonoaudiologists and professionals with a combination audiology/speech language 
qualification), (ii) the ENT surgeon and (iii) the audiometrist (including audiological and 
ENT technicians and hearing-aid acousticians, and dispensers without a university 
qualification).  
 
Learning Pathways in Hearing Health Care Education 
It is evident from Table 4 that hearing health care is provided by a wide range of 
professionals, with a large overlap in their scope of practice. The time, complexity and costs 
involved in education and training of ENT surgeons, would suggest their time is best spent 
undertaking medical and surgical activities. Less time and money is required to train 
audiologists, and the focus of their work is the assessment and management of the non-
medical aspects of hearing impairment. Over the last 50 years, the ratio of audiologists to 
ENTs in Australia has grown from almost zero to over four audiologists per otolaryngologist. 
We suggest that this rise is an indicator of the maturation and improved cost-effectiveness of 
the Australian hearing health care system (although there are still problems). 
The complex interaction between issues makes it difficult to determine the optimal mix 
between highly trained audiologists and other hearing care providers with less training. 
Rapidly advancing technologies and some complex hearing disorders require complex 
diagnostic tests, and many aspects of audiological practice require highly skilled 
professionals. Other aspects of audiological work require a lower level of skill and training, 
and this survey highlights the many categories of hearing care professionals that undertake a 
narrower range of clinical activities and, most often, assessment of non-complex hearing 
disorders and the fitting of hearing aids in adults. However, in developed countries adult 
hearing aid cases are often the most profitable, leaving the more highly-trained audiologists to 
perform the most complex, the most time-consuming and least profitable tests (including 
electrodiagnosis and paediatric testing).  
It has been suggested that the shortage of highly trained audiologists in developed 
countries might be solved by “upskilling” other less trained hearing care workers. Assuming 
that such a move would be (financially) attractive to such workers, it is not clear whether it is 
possible. The concept of a “learning pathway” for hearing care professionals may seem 
attractive, but it assumes that students can progress from vocational training through to a 
university qualification. Universities all set their entry requirements to accept students with a 
proven ability and commitment to complete a course at a university level, whereas (in 
developed countries) students who undertake vocational or technical training often do so 
because they have not met the minimum university entry requirements. This can lead to a 
Review

Education and Practice of Audiology Internationally 
 
67
mismatch between students and courses in such an upgrade process. Consideration also needs 
to be given to the economics of implementing such a 'learning pathway', and its impact on the 
long-term sustainability of the highly specialized university programs required for more 
complex cases. 
 
Evolving Educational Requirements for Hearing Health Care 
According to the International Society of Audiology (ISA), “Audiology deals with the 
knowledge, protection and rehabilitation of human hearing”, although the profession of 
audiology in many countries also includes assessment and rehabilitation of balance and other 
related disorders. The European model of hearing health care has been traditionally based on 
medically qualified practitioners, and supplemented with non-medically qualified personnel 
and/or non-university personnel. However, there have been rapid development and expansion 
of audiology into scientific and clinical fields over the last few decades, and this was recently 
acknowledged by the European Federation of Audiological Societies (EFAS, 2001), which 
then proposed the model of a “General Audiologist” as the primary contact person for 
hearing-impaired people (supported by other professional groups already providing some 
audiological services). This model has also been accepted by the ISA (2004), which proposed 
a four-year undergraduate curriculum in audiology, primarily targeted at countries without 
established audiology programs. Both societies agreed that the “General Audiologist” model 
should produce graduates in audiology, while maintaining contributions by the many other 
related professions currently involved in the field. The model also recognised the 
considerable variation in the way audiology was organized within each country’s health 
system. Overall, the intention of the “General Audiologist” model was to provide a 
framework (including a curriculum outline) for countries without established programs, while 
understanding that the timeframe for implementation in many countries was likely to be 
gradual. However this model did not consider economic or operational issues associated with 
running a course or a health care system, and this may impede its acceptance by many 
countries. 
The design of audiology courses is complicated even further by relatively rapid changes 
in the profession, offering a moving target for planners. For example, even in countries with 
longstanding programs, audiology courses have evolved in recent years. The United States 
currently has the longest training program for audiologists without prior medical training. In 
the 1960’s the entry-level qualification for audiology in the US was a Masters degree, which 
varied from an 18-month to a two-year postgraduate program. The profession in the United 
States argued that the changing and widening scope of practice necessitated educational 
changes, and raised the minimum requirement to a four-year postgraduate professional 
doctorate (Harford, 2000). The objective was to address advancements in technology by 
upgrading to a four-year clinical doctorate; however, the viability of such courses has been 
questioned. The US already has the largest number of audiology courses in the world, with 
this survey reporting 90 programs producing a total of 550 graduates per year. This compares 
with Florian’s (2002) report of 123 university level programs producing an average of only 6 
graduates per program, which even then drew into question graduate quality and long term 
sustainability of the programs.  
The evolving educational requirements are different again in countries that offer 
combination audiology and speech-and-language pathology qualifications. There are also 
competing influences on course design. While advancing technologies and broadening scopes 
Review

Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
 
68
of practice in developed countries place pressures on educational institutions to specialize 
and/or lengthen programs, the community needs in developing countries place pressures in 
the opposite direction (with shorter courses and higher student output). Swanepoel (2006) 
outlined the recent changes in South Africa, which has a four-year combined program for 
both audiologists and speech-language therapists. Institutions have begun offering a choice of 
either audiology or speech-language therapy, but there has been resistance to this. As a 
developing country, South Africa has a primary health care system reliant on generalist 
professionals who are able to attend to a wide range of communication disorders. To 
encourage this, the public system in South Africa prefers to employ professionals with the 
combined qualification. The opposite is seen in the private sector, where the professions tend 
to be practised separately to keep up with increasingly specialised services. 
Swanepoel has also pointed out that to meet the audiology needs of the broader South 
African community, hearing care service delivery has moved towards preventative 
community-based models that provide basic care, rather than more specialized institution-
based services that are more common in developed countries. This highlights the problems 
faced by course designers and educational funding agencies in a single country, when they are 
expected to develop and fund a single course or service for multiple communities with 
different needs. This problem is not exclusive to developing countries, but also exists in many 
developed ones. 
 
Multiple Communities within Single Countries 
This chapter has largely focused on hearing health care practice and education for 
individual respondent countries, with each description presumed to be representative of the 
whole country. However, there are different communities within all countries, and the social 
and economic environments for hearing care are not homogenous within any country. For 
example, Swanepoel (2006) has pointed out that, for the majority of South Africans, there are 
insufficient audiologists. The audiologists are unequally distributed between the public and 
private sectors, and are more easily accessed by the more affluent minority who speak their 
language. There are similar situations in other developing countries, where a wealthy minority 
has access to the highest quality services, and the majority has little or no access to a poor 
service. Such disparities also exist in many developed countries, and in particular those where 
the indigenous populations have become the minority groups, with significantly poorer health 
and living standards. For example, the highest prevalence rates in the world for chronic otitis 
media are present among the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people of Australia, the 
Inuit people of Canada, and the Native Americans in the United States (WHO, 1996). Many 
of these communities are remote, economically disadvantaged, and have cultural and 
language differences with the majority. All of these factors compound their difficulties in 
accessing appropriate hearing services, and need to be taken into consideration in designing 
education models and hearing care services. Future strategies and programs tailored to groups 
of countries may also apply to sub-populations within any single country. 
 
A Conceptual Model for Hearing Health Care Education 
While the design of models for hearing health care services and education is already 
complicated by the 'simple' problem of multiple professions serving multiple communities, 
the 'design problem' is complicated even further by many other interacting issues. In order to 
open the discussion on the efficiencies of hearing health care education, we have developed a 
Review

Education and Practice of Audiology Internationally 
 
69
model of the hearing health care service provision and training, as shown in Figure 5. The 
model has education as its focus and refers to all levels of hearing health care education. The 
discussion below walks the reader through this model. 
Referring to Figure 5, education of hearing health care service providers produces local 
professionals able to provide appropriate hearing services. This pool of local professionals is 
built primarily by education programs, but can be changed by migration, and depends on an 
environment that provides competitive employment opportunities and conditions for 
graduates. Because of the need for intensive clinical teaching and the use of complex 
equipment, the education model needs to be built around and supported by the existing public 
and/or private health infrastructures (including NGOs). The foundation of the model is the 
economy of the country, itself shaped by its history and politics, which influence both the mix 
and complexion of the private and public economies. For this discussion we have shown the 
education system/s as separate from the public/private hearing health care infrastructures 
which themselves interact, with public seeding money building private systems, and private 
philanthropy feeding public systems. These in turn impact on the public and private 
infrastructures that support the country’s health system. 
 
 
Figure 5. Conceptual model of hearing health care. 
 
 
Review

Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
 
70
Again referring to Figure 5, once the public and private infrastructures are established, 
the efficiency of service provision (including prevention and rehabilitation) determines the 
disease burden of hearing impairment, and ultimately affects a country’s economy. At the 
same time, the prevalence of hearing loss, its recognition, and its diagnosis determine the 
“perceived need” for hearing health care services, and consequently the demand for hearing 
health care graduates. This places pressure on educational institutions to produce more or less 
professionals. The perceived need for services also contributes to the level of demand and 
resulting public pressure placed on governments, public services and/or private service 
provision. Education of professionals is also influenced by the level of public health 
awareness of the consequences of hearing impairment. This public awareness hopefully 
affects the provision of hearing services through non-professional personnel working in 
decentralized, community-based environments (possibly separate from the formal public and 
private infrastructures). The efficiency of such (informal) non-professional interventions also 
impacts on the burden of disease. 
The model presented in Figure 5 provides a simple basis for discussing the factors that 
may influence the provision of services, and the possible strategies for the developing 
appropriate education models. The model also formalizes the feedback loops which may 
affect the success of possible interventions within a given system. For example, tracing 
around the model of Figure 5, it is clear that an increased output of trained graduates should 
lead to increased service provision, and a drop in disease burden, and ultimately the number 
of graduates required. That is, one goal of a health care system is to ultimately put its 
graduates out of work by eradicating disease. In a rapidly expanding health care system, it is 
possible for the heath care workers to be so effective that their success either threatens their 
own job security, or requires a change in the nature and output of the education process. This 
is important in considering the sustainability and adaptability of a hearing health care service 
system and its associated education process. 
As another example of a feedback loop within the model of Figure 5, graduates need to 
be presented with a clear and sustainable career path. If either the public or private 
infrastructure is absent or underdeveloped, not only will effective service provision be 
reduced, but graduates are unlikely to stay within their country or region. The success of an 
education program requires concurrent development of infrastructure, and presumably 
hearing health care markets. In this context, the private sector is clearly a necessary 
component of the development of a hearing health care system, and alliances and synergies 
need to be developed in a timely way. 
As one final example of a feedback loop, a successful private sector leads to increased 
profits being re-invested in both infrastructure and education. Unless governments make 
private companies welcome and successful, no private infrastructure will prosper, and an 
important contribution to the overall hearing health care would be lost. In this context, the 
sizeable middle class in many developing countries or regions may serve as a nucleation site, 
allowing ultimate growth of, first, a private health care system, but later (or concurrently) a 
public system. 
The existence of feedback loops within a hearing health care system is also important in 
terms of the dynamics of change. For example, it may be that the production of many 
effective graduates may ultimately reduce ear disease, but the time required for such a 
feedback loop to produce secondary effects varies enormously between countries and regions. 
In China for instance, it will take many years with the present system to produce any 
Review

Education and Practice of Audiology Internationally 
 
71
significant impact on hearing health care. In Zhejiang province, with a population of 40 
million, there are 60 audiology graduates per year from one of China’s most successful 
programs. This graduation rate would require at least 40 years to produce a level of service 
provision approaching that in Australia. Conversely, in Australia, although doubling the 
number of audiology graduates from its courses would reduce shortages that presently exist, 
within a few years the hearing health care needs would be satiated, and a crisis in the 
profitability of audiology courses may emerge. The difference between China and Australia is 
not so much a difference in systems, but one of system size and system starting point. For 
example, a limiting factor in increasing the rate of graduate production is the availability of 
clinical placements within a community. This would be an even greater issue for countries 
without established programs and existing hearing health care infrastructure, and alternative 
mechanisms to supplement and/or replace traditional clinical practica would be needed. The 
development of cost-effective and sustainable audiology programs (hearing health care and 
education) will require due recognition of the existence and time scale of the feedback loops 
evident in Figure 5. 
 
Possible Solutions 
We hope that the data and the conceptual model we have provided in this report may help 
others in developing their own strategies. For the remainder of this paper we offer our view 
on possible solutions. 
The lack of public and professional awareness was one issue shared by both developed 
and developing countries, and it is perhaps the most easily addressed. It would be relatively 
simple and economical for professional societies to contribute both nationally and 
internationally through programs to increase public awareness of the impact of hearing 
impairment, and of the profession of audiology. 
In developed countries the issue of cost-effectiveness of audiology education programs 
was identified. This is primarily a result of the complexity of audiology, the high cost of 
equipment, and the low student-staff ratios. A possible solution would be for institutions to 
increase student fees and lengthen their courses, largely shifting the burden of an inefficient 
education process onto the students themselves. Although this may solve the problem in the 
short term, it seems unlikely to work in the longer term if the salary expectations of graduates 
are not met. At best, graduates would pass the cost of their education to clients. Inefficiencies 
in the education systems could be addressed if a small number of problems were overcome. 
For example, courses could enroll larger numbers of students in fewer programs to improve 
the student-staff ratios and reduce salary costs. However, there are at least three hurdles to 
overcome: (i) geographical isolation, requiring multiple courses across large countries; (ii) 
limits to increases in supervised clinical placements, especially during chronic shortages of 
and large workloads for existing audiologists; and (iii) an unwillingness of academic 
institutions to sacrifice courses that might be profitable or prestigious. Courses in developed 
countries will need to use more cost-effective teaching techniques, including national and 
international exchange of course material and resources, the development of less expensive 
teaching equipment, the use of new communication technologies to overcome problems in 
distance and time, and more inventive ways to provide high level clinical supervision to 
students. The issue of language barriers will need to be addressed, but the translation of 
international courses is probably a simpler problem to resolve than developing local courses 
de novo. 
Review

Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
 
72
Of particular importance to the initiation of courses in developing countries is the issue of 
clinical supervision. A solution of this same problem in developed countries may provide 
some help to new courses in developing countries. However, strategies for developing 
countries will also need to focus on a parallel development of hearing health care 
infrastructure. Given the other major health priorities of these countries, it is likely that 
funding will need to come from a mix of public and private sources, probably based on 
development of markets for the middle class. 
The issue of course equivalency also needs to be a high priority if there is any chance of 
pooling resources (including graduates) to address the international shortage of hearing care 
services and education. World globalization already affects hearing health care, most often as 
the permanent migration of professionals from developing countries to developed ones with 
better employment conditions. Perhaps programs could be designed to allow temporary 
movement of students or recent graduates to more developed systems where they could gain 
experience that they could bring back to their countries of origin. 
CONCLUSION 
It is clear that most countries need more audiologists, with these shortages greatest in 
developing countries. In future, the ageing population and more advances in technology are 
likely to place further pressures on hearing health care service provision. There is already 
evidence that wealthier countries try to fill their needs by attracting graduate audiologists 
from the developing world. This pattern of movement is likely to continue in the short term, 
and is consistent with increasing trends in health globalisation. It is also evident that the 
dominant reasons for these shortages are different for developing and developed countries, 
but there are some shared problems. For developed countries with established audiology 
programs, courses need to become more cost-effective by sharing resources, by adopting 
more inventive methods for course delivery, with less expensive equipment for teaching. 
Developing countries must initially concentrate on strategies that allow the initiation of 
education programs. As we have argued, this will depend on the establishment of strong 
alliances within and between countries involving governments, private industry, educational 
institutions, professional bodies and, wherever possible, consumer organizations. This chapter 
introduced a conceptual model that can be used to discuss the interactions between the main 
issues involved in the provision of hearing services, and subsequently examined the 
efficiencies of hearing health care education. It is one step in the development of affordable, 
cost-effective hearing health care education models that can be adapted for local 
environments, and produce graduate numbers to ensure a steady-state supply of services. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank Dr Andrew Smith from the World Health Organisation 
for his assistance with locating worldwide contacts for hearing health care organizations. The 
authors also convey their thanks to the following people for their time and contributions to the 
international survey: Ms. L. Abano, Ms. Anneli Ahlers-Cuadra, Prof. J. Attias, Mr. D. 
Akinyemi, Asociación Argentina de Logopedia Foniatria y Audiología (ASALFA), Prof. 
Review

Education and Practice of Audiology Internationally 
 
73
A.G. Mohamed Alhousseini, Prof. M. N. Amin, Dr. P. Berruecos, Dr. D. Bouccara, Mr. J. 
Brown, Dr. P. Castellanos, Dr. B. Christensen, Prof. Xingkuan Bu, Ms. D. Carkeet, Dr. Sheng 
Hwa Chen, Dr. Qasem Daraiseh, Prof. W.A. Dreschler, Dr. A.M. Dugdug, Ms. M. Escobar, 
Dr. C. Farfan-Reyes, Dr. U. Froeschl, Dr. V. Gladstone, Dr. P. Govaerts, Mr. S. Govil, Ms. 
M. Gunn, Dr. T. Gvelesiani, Dr. H. Hendarto, Assoc. Prof KM Holgers, Ms. C. Lalonde, Prof. 
E. Laukli, Prof.T. Lenarz, Mr. K.T. Ling, Dr B. McPherson, Dr J. Madriz, Dr. N.V. Martinez, 
Dr. H. Meister, Ms. O. Otto, Dr. T. Pitt, Mr. J. Parsons, Dr. S. Prasansuk, Prof. M. Profant, 
Dr. T. Randrianarisoa, Ms. M. Redzuan, Dr. D. Reed, Dr. L.C.P. Russo, Dr. Lei Saafi, Dr. E. 
Salesa, Dr. M. Serrano, Prof. M. Shiroma, Dr. I. Siddiqui, Dr. T. Spillmann, Dr. DeWet 
Swanepoel, Prof. S. Tawfik, Dr. T. Thepsomphon, Mr. Erlett Thomas, Dr. P.M. Towle, Dr. R. 
Trotic, Dr. G. Tejada, Prof. T. Tun, Dr. B. Walter, Prof. V. Uloza, Dr. J. Vatovec, Mr. G. 
Vaughan, Dr. K. Welzl-Mueller, Prof. Wieslaw, Prof S. Zakzouk and Dr D. Zanetti. 
REFERENCES 
Alauddin, M. & Joarde, A.H. (2004) Deafness in Bangladesh. In J. Suzuki, T. Kobayashi and 
K. Koga (Eds.), Hearing Impairment: An Invisible Handicap (pp. 64-69). Tokyo: 
Springer-Verlag. 
Bess F.H. & Humes L.E. (2003). Audiology: The fundamentals. (3rd Edition) Baltimore, MD: 
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins.  
Burkhard R (2002). Educating Audiologists: Diversity or homogeneity? American Journal of 
Audiology, 11, 4-7. 
Eleweke, C.J. (1997) Provision of audiological services in Nigeria: what future? 
Scandinavian Audiology Supplement, 45, 47-53. 
European Federation of Audiological Societies (2001). Audiology in Europe. The General 
Audiologist – A proposal for a model training program in general audiology for Europe. 
http://www.efas.ws/download/GA%20Revision%204.1.pdf retrieved 15 May, 2005. 
Farkas, Z. & Ribari, O. (1997). Some data on the audiological situation and ear care in 
Hungary and in some central and Eastern European countries. Scandinavian Audiology 
Supplement, 45, 55. 
Florian J (2002) The proliferation of AuD programs: Is it too much of a good thing? The 
Hearing Journal, 55 (2) 23-32. 
Frenk, J., Gomez-Dantes, O., Adams, O. & Gakidou, E.E. (2001). The Globalisation of 
Health Care. In M. McKee, P. Gamer, & R. Stott (Eds.). International Co-operation in 
Health (pp. 31-47). Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Goulios, H. & Patuzzi, R.B. (in press). Audiology education and practice from an 
international perspective. International Journal of Audiology. 
Harford E.R. (2000). Professional Education in Audiology. In H. Hosford-Dunn, R.J. Roesser 
& M. Valente M (Eds.). Audiology Practice Management (pp. 17-40). New York: 
Thieme. 
International Society of Audiology (2004). Curriculum in Audiology. The General 
Audiologist – A proposal for a model training program in general audiology. 
Madriz, J.J. (2001). Audiology In Latin America: hearing impairment, resources and services. 
Scandinavian Audiology, 30 (suppl. 53), 85-92. 
Review

Helen Goulios and Robert Patuzzi 
 
74
Olusanya, B.O. (2000). Hearing impairment prevention in developing countries: making 
things happen. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 55, 167-171. 
Salmivalli, A. & Sorri, M. (1997). Ear care programs for Estonia. Scandinavian Audiology 
Supplement, 45, 41-42. 
Suwento, R. (2004). Hearing health infrastructure in Indonesia. In J. Suzuki, T. Kobayashi 
and K. Koga (Eds.), Hearing Impairment: An Invisible Handicap (pp. 45-48). Tokyo: 
Springer-Verlag.  
Swanepoel, D. (2006.) Audiology in South Africa. International Journal of Audiology. 45, 
262-266. 
World 
Bank 
(2007). 
Country 
Classification 
Data. 
http://siteresources.worldbank. 
org/DATASTATISTICS/Resources/GNIPC.pdf. Retrieved 10 August 2007. 
World Health Organization. (1996). Prevention of hearing impairment from chronic otitis 
media. Report of a WHO/CBM Workshop. Geneva: World Health Organisation. 
http://www.who.int/pbd/deafness/en/chronic_otitis_media.pdf. Retrieved 20 August, 
2007. 
World Health Organization. (2004). Guidelines for hearing aids and services for developing 
countries. Second Edition. Geneva, World Health Organisation. http://www.who.int/ 
pbd/deafness/en/hearing_aid_guide_en.pdf. Retrieved 20 August, 2007. 
World Health Organization. (2006a). The World Health Report 2006: Working together for 
Health. Geneva: World Health Organization. (http://www.who.int/whr/2006/en) 
Retrieved 20 August, 2007. 
World Health Organization. (2006b). WHO Statistical Information Systems. http://www. 
who.int/whosis/whostat2006HealthFinancing.pdf. Retrieved 20 August, 2007. 
 
 
Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
 
 
 
SCREENING FOR HEARING LOSS 
 IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
 
 
Bradley McPherson1,* and Bolajoko O. Olusanya2 
1Centre for Communication Disorders, University of Hong Kong, China 
2Department of Community Health and Primary Care, University of Lagos, Nigeria 
ABSTRACT 
Hearing loss is often undetected in all age groups in developing nations as routine 
hearing screening is uncommon, especially for children. The limitations of current 
preventive programs make hearing screening activities a high priority component of a 
hearing health care program in some developing countries. Infant hearing screening 
allows for the prompt detection of congenital and early onset hearing loss, and is essential 
for timely intervention within the period most crucial for optimal speech and language 
development. This chapter considers the basic requirements for infant and other hearing 
screening programs in situations where personnel and financial resources are limited and 
describes programs that seek to overcome such obstacles. The ethical standards that 
should govern screening activities are described. Priority populations for screening are 
suggested and appropriate techniques for screening in developing countries are outlined. 
The use and examples of culturally appropriate screening strategies are discussed, 
particularly for environments where a significant proportion of births occur outside 
regular hospital facilities. Possible challenges and recommendations for effective 
screening programs are also highlighted. The value of preschool surveillance is discussed 
in view of the adverse impact of hearing loss on educational achievement. Primary school 
enrolments are expanding in many developing nations and schools provide an important 
and convenient venue for screening. School-based hearing screening, especially at school 
entry, is common for the identification of childhood hearing loss in many developing 
countries. Other hearing screening programs may consider adults, particularly for those 
groups at known risk of hearing impairment, such as workers exposed to industrial 
hazards that affect hearing and those with illness associated with hearing loss.  
                                                        
* Correspondence: dbmcpher@hkucc.hku.hk 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
76
INTRODUCTION 
Both children and adults in developing countries are often at high risk of undetected 
hearing loss. Current attempts to curtail the burden of this condition through primary 
prevention are inadequate and sometimes ineffective. This leads to a need to consider 
screening programs to identify individuals with hearing loss. The present chapter provides an 
overview of current issues in general screening audiometry relevant to the particular hearing 
health needs of people in developing nations. A number of present day screening programs in 
developing countries are then reviewed and possible future screening procedures discussed. 
About 50% of the burden of hearing loss is believed to be preventable or avoidable 
(Smith, 2003). Current activities aimed at preventing hearing loss include the promotion of 
immunization against known causes of hearing loss such as measles, mumps and rubella; 
improved care of mothers before and during child delivery; and education on the use or 
misuse of ototoxic drugs. However, the healthcare systems in many developing countries are 
unable to maintain these standards of care. Even if it were possible to attain these standards, 
the remaining 50% of the burden of hearing loss is unavoidable. This includes childhood 
hearing loss attributable to hereditary and genetic factors. For this reason it becomes 
necessary to identify cases of hearing loss promptly through “secondary” prevention in order 
to minimize its consequences. Screening is the best known secondary prevention process for 
hearing loss. 
DEFINITION AND PRINCIPLES OF SCREENING 
Screening for the early detection of health problems is an integral part of a public health 
care system (Reynolds, 1982). Screening has been defined by the World Health Organization 
(WHO, 1971, p. 10) as a “medical investigation that does not arise from a patient’s request 
for advice for specific complaints. The term covers all types of examinations and does not 
refer to their speed or accuracy”. This definition points to the routine, public health managed 
nature of the process in which an investigation is triggered by an administrative system and 
not a patient initiative. In this way “screening is a process by which individuals are identified 
who may have diseases or disorders that are otherwise undetected” (Harford, Bess, Bluestone, 
& Klein, 1978, p. 4), i.e., the “finding of asymptomatic cases” (Haggard & Hughes, 1991, p. 
235). Screening usually implies the examination of large population groups—“mass 
screening” is a commonly used term. Thorner and Remein (1982, p. 408) make this explicit 
when they state that the:  
 
“basic purpose of screening for disease detection is to separate from a large group of 
apparently well persons those who have a high probability of having the disease under study, 
so that they may be given a diagnostic workup and, if diseased, brought to treatment.”  
 
Within this statement is the implication that the main purpose of screening is to benefit 
the individuals being examined (Wald, 1994). 
Wilson and Jungner (1968) make explicit ten basic principles that screening programs 
should adhere to. These are: 
 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
77
1.  The condition to be screened for should be an important health problem. 
2.  There should be an accepted treatment for cases identified. 
3.  Facilities for diagnosis and treatment should be available. 
4.  There should be a recognizable latent (early, asymptomatic) stage in the condition. 
5.  There should be a suitable test to employ in screening. 
6.  The test should be acceptable to the population. 
7.  The natural history of the condition should be understood. 
8.  There should be an agreed policy on whom to treat as patients. 
9.  The cost of case-finding (including diagnosis and treatment of those diagnosed) 
should be non-wastefully balanced in relation to expenditure on medical care as a 
whole. 
10. Case-finding should be an ongoing process and not a ‘one-off’ project. 
 
Hearing screening programs, in industrialized societies and developing countries, should 
always be considered in relation to these ten principles, which encompass political, economic, 
social, and health issues as well as the technical characteristics of the screening test itself.  
ETHICS OF HEARING SCREENING 
In selecting an appropriate screening procedure, a logical approach is to initially consider 
those aspects of ear disorder and hearing loss in a community that impact on the application 
of Wilson and Jungner’s principles of screening (1968). These principles can be used as a 
basis to consider the ethics of a proposed program. Screening programs should only 
commence if they can provide satisfactory assurances that they can meet all these criteria. 
 
1. The condition to be screened for should be an important health problem. 
A case could be made that hearing loss caused by middle ear disorder in some 
parts of the developing world is a serious health concern. Otitis media with effusion 
is a major cause of hearing loss in some developing countries (Smith & Mathers, 
2006) and may lead to dangerous intratemporal complications such as chlolesteatoma 
or mastoiditis. Hearing loss in general also assumes importance when the associated 
long-term social, educational and economic disadvantages are considered from a 
public health perspective (Access Economics, 2006; Mohr et al., 2000). 
2. There should be an accepted treatment for cases identified. 
Effective medical, surgical or rehabilitative treatments are known to improve the 
thresholds of children with hearing loss. For example, there are “accepted treatment” 
protocols that can be used as a rationale for the detection of school children with 
hearing loss. Ethically, it is essential that appropriate treatment is available for 
children identified with hearing disorders. Controversy can exist over what is 
“acceptable” treatment in developing countries. Some audiologists may argue that 
this encompasses at least primary health care for ear disease and provision of hearing 
devices for those in need of amplification. Others, such as McPherson and Holborow 
(1988) argue that identification of hearing loss can be a positive event in the life of 
children, even if provision of hearing aids is not feasible. They consider that raising 
the awareness in teachers and parents of children’s disabilities may in itself improve 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
78
a child’s educational opportunities. This view was supported by Braveman and 
Tarimo (1994, p.101) in their recommendations for hearing screening in developing 
countries.  
3. Facilities for diagnosis and treatment should be available. 
There can be great disparities in health service delivery among different 
developing countries and among regions within developing countries. In particular, 
there are inadequacies of many rural health systems (World Bank, 2005). The exact 
nature of local services that can assist in the diagnosis and treatment of school 
children with hearing loss and ear disorder needs to be ascertained prior to 
establishing any identification program. This is especially important if medical 
treatment alone does not prevent the disorder and ongoing tertiary prevention of an 
audiological nature is required. Many audiologists consider no form of screening 
should be conducted unless facilities for diagnosis and treatment are available (Gell 
et al., 1992). Some professionals do, however, consider that screening with a primary 
focus on collecting information on the prevalence and nature of hearing disorders is 
also justifiable (Jauhiainen, 2001). However, such programs are better labeled as 
‘prevalence studies’ rather than screening programs. 
4. There should be a recognizable latent (early, asymptomatic) stage in the condition. 
If looked at from a holistic, developmental perspective, hearing screening can be 
justified as averting long-term social and academic handicap if carried out, for 
example, before or during periods of critical language acquisition or the early, 
formative years of primary school education. 
5. There should be a suitable test to employ in screening. 
This principle refers to the need for a screening test that is relatively simple to 
perform, and has sensitivity/specificity characteristics that minimize over-referral to 
diagnostic centers. There are well-established procedures for screening hearing, such 
as pure-tone audiometry, that may be appropriate in developing countries. 
6. The test should be acceptable to the population. 
In the context of hearing screening, this principle leads to the consideration of 
the cultural appropriateness of the screening procedures used. The appropriateness of 
a procedure may vary according to the population being served. For example, 
screening of school children at a community hospital may result in poor compliance 
in a community where hospitals are viewed as places only for the sick (Olusanya & 
Okolo, 2006). To be ethically sound, a test procedure used in screening should be 
acceptable to the target community.  
7. The natural history of the condition should be understood. 
The natural history of diseases associated with hearing loss has been 
scientifically studied for many years. Although gaps in our knowledge of some 
conditions’ pathogenesis and natural history are still apparent, there is usually 
adequate information on which to base screening programs. Exceptions might be 
where hearing loss is associated with new or emerging diseases such as Lassa fever 
(Hinchcliffe & Prasansuk, 2006). 
8.  There should be an agreed policy on whom to treat as patients. 
Clear pass/fail criteria need to be established and acted upon in a consistent 
manner for any hearing screening program to function effectively (WHO, 2004a).  
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
79
9.  The cost of case-finding (including diagnosis and treatment of those diagnosed) 
should be non-wastefully balanced in relation to expenditure on medical care as a 
whole.  
This is an economic and, ultimately, political question for health service 
managers. The sensitivity/specificity, speed and simplicity of a screening test, will 
contribute to the final decision on the procedure’s overall cost and possible 
introduction. However, complex decisions need to be made regarding the ability of 
the health care system to manage patients with hearing loss and the competing needs 
of other health care programs (Olusanya, McPherson et al., 2006 and White, 2006 
provide a highly relevant discussion of such issues). 
10. Case-finding should be an ongoing process and not a ‘one-off’ project.  
There is little point in creating the complex procedural system necessary to 
implement school hearing screening and referral, or to initiate the training of 
screening personnel, or purchase screening equipment, unless the program is to be of 
a significant duration. To be ethically sound, screening programs in developing 
countries should, at all times, be viable and make a long-term commitment to their 
community (Miles, 1984).  
INFANT HEARING SCREENING 
Significance of Prelingual Hearing Loss 
 
Hearing loss before or during the development of speech and language is referred to as 
prelingual hearing loss. It includes permanent congenital and early-onset hearing loss. 
Congenital hearing disorder could manifest postnatally as late-onset, progressive or acquired 
hearing loss, with varying degrees of severity. “Early-onset” refers to the first twenty-eight 
days of life.  
The ability to read and write is predicated on a solid foundation in language skills. The 
effect of hearing loss on language development is intricately linked to the sensory 
development of the infantile brain and nervous system (Hannon, 2003; Ruben & Schwartz, 
1999; Sininger, Doyle & Moore, 1999; Stockard-Pope, 2001). The human fetus can hear by 
27 weeks gestation and the auditory sensory mechanism of the human neonate is fully 
functional at birth. In addition newborns have been observed to demonstrate selective 
response to their mothers’ voices. The experience of listening to the same voice in-utero has 
been advanced as a possible reason for this observation. From the knowledge of neural 
plasticity it is understood that the compensatory and reorganizational possibilities of the brain 
are significantly greater in very early childhood than in later life. This is applicable to the 
auditory system as well as other structures of the central nervous system, which underpin 
cognitive development. In fact, infants less than 6 months of age are superior to adults in their 
ability to discriminate speech sounds from languages other than those to which their family is 
exposed. However, the second half of the first year of life reflects a preference for the sounds 
and pattern of their native language, signifying the beginning of cortical maturation. 
Similarly, it is suggested that the individual sensory organs only reach their full development 
or in the case of hearing loss, their maximum functional potential if they are intensively 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
80
stimulated before neural maturation. This has led to the concept of a sensitive or critical 
phase, which refers to the optimal period for the required sensory stimulation.  
The period from birth to five years is considered as the critical/sensitive phase for the 
development of language, while hearing during the first year of life is crucial for normal 
acquisition of language (Carney & Moeller, 1997). Studies have demonstrated that the 
detection of prelingual hearing loss and the provision of amplification within a family-
oriented intervention program in the first year of life are associated with favorable outcomes 
in speech and language development (Kennedy et al., 2006; Moeller, 2000; Yoshinaga-Itano, 
Sedley, Coulter & Mehl, 1998). In contrast, children not detected or detected late may never 
catch up with their normal-hearing peers in their academic, social and emotional development 
even with the best of rehabilitation. Hearing loss in infancy is considered as significant if the 
degree is such that it would interfere with normal speech and language development. 
Moderate-to-profound bilateral permanent hearing loss (>40 dBHL) in early childhood can 
impede speech, language and cognitive development (Ramkalawan & Davis, 1992; 
Robinshaw, 1996). Language delays resulting from hearing loss usually hinders development 
of literacy skills. Even children with mild or unilateral permanent hearing loss may 
experience difficulties with speech, language, educational and psycho-social development 
(Blair, Peterson & Viehweg, 1985; Culbertson & Gilbert, 1986; Keller & Bundy, 1980). 
Developmental delays in language therefore have adverse effects on social, emotional and 
academic development with a high cost to society (Bess, Dodd Murphy & Parker, 1998; 
Davis, Elfenbein, Schum & Bentler, 1986; Mohr et al., 2000; Schroeder et al., 2006).  
 
 
Prevalence of Hearing Loss in Early Childhood 
 
Epidemiological data on early childhood (0-5 years) hearing loss in developing countries 
is scarce or of limited value due to the lack of infant hearing screening programs. Available 
studies are predominantly among school-aged children in schools for the deaf or mainstream 
schools. In developed countries, the incidence of congenital hearing loss is 2 to 4 per 1000 
live births (White, 2004). If the poorer health and socio-economic conditions in developing 
countries and the significant proportion of births occurring outside hospitals were considered, 
the incidence of permanent congenital and early-onset hearing loss (or prelingual hearing 
loss) is likely to rise to at least 6 per 1000 live births in this region (Olusanya, Ruben & 
Parving, 2006). Of the 133 million annual live births in developing countries, about 798,000 
are likely to have permanent congenital and early-onset hearing loss based on the latest 
estimates by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF, 2005). These data demonstrate 
that prelingual hearing loss is perhaps an even more significant health problem in developing 
countries than in developed countries where newborn hearing screening is now a standard 
aspect of neonatal care. 
 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
81
The Significance of Early Detection 
 
Prior to the advent of objective hearing screening tests in developed countries, the median 
age of identification varied from 10.4 months to 43.2 months depending on the degree of 
hearing loss (Harrison, Roush & Wallace, 2003; Marttila & Karikoski, 1996; Parving, 1999; 
Watkin, Baldwin & McEnery, 1991). Parents were usually the first to suspect hearing loss but 
confirmation was always considerably delayed, sometimes by the physicians’ doubts about 
the possibility and efficacy of hearing screening in newborns and infants (Kittrell & Arjmand, 
1997). In developing countries parental suspicion prompted by a child’s inappropriate 
response, or lack of response, to sound is still the predominant mode of detection and occurs 
usually at a mean age of 22 months (Gopal, Hugo & Louw, 2001; Mukari, Vandort, Ahmad, 
Saim & Mohamed, 1999; Olusanya, Luxon & Wirz, 2005).  
The development of reliable screening instruments and higher prospects of 
mainstreaming severe-to profoundly hearing impaired children through improved 
amplification options in the last decade has stimulated the trend towards early detection and 
intervention through newborn or infant hearing screening. An ideal screening test would be 
simple to apply, safe and valid. It is valid if it detects the majority of subjects with the target 
disorder (high sensitivity) and excludes most subjects without the disorder (high specificity) 
and if a positive test indicates the presence of the disorder (high positive predictive value). 
Two objective screening tests currently available for detecting infants with hearing loss are 
otoacoustic emissions (OAE) and auditory brainstem response (ABR).  
Screening with OAE – either as transient evoked otoacoustic emissions (TEOAE) or 
distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAE) – is an electro-physiologic measure of the 
integrity of the outer hair cells in the cochlea. OAE, also known as cochlear echoes, are low 
intensity sounds originating from the outer hair cells and can be elicited in response to clicks 
presented to the ear through a light weight probe that houses both a transducer and 
microphone/receiver. The emissions are recorded and displayed in a waveform for 
interpretation in diagnostic instruments or simply produce a ‘pass’ or ‘fail’ result in OAE 
screeners. The test is relatively quick, non-invasive and does not require sleep or sedation, 
which makes it readily tolerable by babies and acceptable to parents. The recording often 
takes about one minute and can be administered without audiological expertise. The test has 
high sensitivity (>90%) and specificity (>96%) based on two stage screening (Davis et al., 
1997; JCIH, 2000) in developed countries. One disadvantage with this test is that it is 
sensitive to conductive hearing loss, which may result within the first day of life due to a 
vernix plug in the external ear canal. It is also sensitive to peripheral impairments but will not 
detect auditory neuropathy. The DPOAE differs from click stimulus TEOAE in that it is 
stimulated by two continuous pure tones introduced to the ear simultaneously and produces 
frequency-specific signals across the range 500 to 8,000 Hz. However, this advantage is not 
critical for screening newborns and young children. Besides, DPOAE may miss mild hearing 
loss due to the higher level of the stimulus signals.  
ABR is an electrophysiologic measure of the function of the eighth cranial nerve and the 
auditory pathway in the brainstem. The electrical response to auditory stimuli is recorded with 
three surface scalp electrodes and it is not state-dependent as recordings can be obtained when 
babies are sleeping or sedated. In addition, the response is significantly correlated with the 
degree of hearing loss. In general, the click-evoked threshold predicts behavioral audiometric 
threshold in the 1,000 to 4,000 Hz range within 10 to 15 dB HL. It is valuable as a 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
82
confirmatory test in infants. The automated ABR (AABR) is designed as a screener to simply 
produce a ‘pass’ or ‘fail’ result. It has high sensitivity (>90%), high specificity (>96%) and 
low positive predictive value (19%) (Vohr et al., 2001; Watkin, 2001). 
When only TEOAE is used for screening, babies with auditory neuropathy will be 
missed, while AABR may fail to detect babies with mild sensorineural or exclusively low 
frequency hearing loss. The combination of TEOAE and AABR tests in a two-stage screening 
has been found to have the most favorable combination of specificity, sensitivity, 
acceptability, and high coverage in hospitals with a wide range of birth rates (Kennedy, 
Kimm, Thornton & Davis, 2000; Vohr et al., 2001). Evidence from ongoing infant hearing 
screening programs has shown that these tests are acceptable to parents because they are non-
invasive, painless and quick to administer. They are currently employed in developed 
countries and in a growing number of developing countries. Since the screening tests can be 
conducted in newborns, screening of babies before hospital discharge is recommended. 
 
 
Hospital-based Hearing Screening 
 
Screening babies in hospitals before discharge is also desirable for at least two main 
reasons. First, it eliminates the need to ask mothers to return specifically to have their babies 
tested. Parents are likely to be less enthusiastic to seek detection of an invisible and non life-
threatening handicap in their apparently normal babies. Besides, taking an apparently well 
child to hospital for any “check-up” is viewed as socially and culturally inappropriate in many 
communities because of the notion that hospitals are established only to cater for the sick. 
Secondly, it helps healthcare professionals to satisfy an important ethical obligation of 
ensuring that babies have been examined and tested for a hidden abnormality prior to 
discharge.  
A common protocol is a two-stage screening, first with transient evoked otoacoustic 
emissions (TEOAE) followed by auditory brainstem response for those referred from the first 
stage (i.e., TEOAE) screen. This protocol is often associated with minimal false-positive rates 
(specificity >90%) without significant reduction in sensitivity (Hall, Smith & Popelka, 2004; 
Kennedy et al., 2000). Most screening instruments are simple to use, allowing screening to be 
conducted after a brief period of training by any person without prior audiological expertise. 
It is advisable to entrust the screening to a dedicated team because adding this responsibility 
to the workload of nurses could be counter-productive in many settings where such workers 
are likely to view this task as being less important compared to other routine clinical duties. 
Screening is often recommended to be performed as close to discharge as possible to 
minimize referral rates from vernix plugs. 
Hospital-based screening may pose some challenges in many settings. Given the low 
prevalence rates for congenital hearing impairment, the majority of babies are expected to 
pass the first-stage screen. Excessive ambient noise level at the screening site may unduly 
increase referral rates. Finding a suitable section within the ward may therefore be necessary 
to minimize false-referral rates. Where there is a long queue of babies awaiting screening, 
some mothers may be too impatient to wait thereby compromising optimal uptake of 
screening services. In addition, the widely promoted UNICEF baby friendly hospital initiative 
for exclusive breast-feeding—which prohibits the use of artificial milk or water for 
newborns—often makes it difficult to test babies who are unsettled because their mothers 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
83
have not yet established lactation. Moreover, hospital-based programs are inadequate where a 
significant proportion of births occur outside regular hospitals, which are typical in many 
developing countries (UNICEF, 2005). For instance in South Asia the proportion of births 
performed with skilled attendants (a proxy for hospital deliveries) varies from as low as 13% 
in Bangladesh to 43% in India, compared with about 99% in developed countries. 
Consequently, many babies in these regions will be missed by hospital-based programs. The 
obvious challenge then is to locate where the majority of babies are born within the 
communities and establish effective ways of attracting their caregivers to hearing screening 
services.  
 
 
Community-based Hearing Screening 
 
In many developing countries home births and deliveries at private maternity homes run 
by traditional birth attendants account for majority of babies born outside hospitals (WHO, 
2004). The rest are delivered in church premises or before arrival at hospitals. Contemplating 
newborn hearing screening programs at these various locations may be a logistical nightmare. 
However, the experiences in most of these countries show that mothers from all birthing 
locations take their babies to immunization clinics at designated community health centers. 
Routine childhood immunization is perhaps the most well-established public health program 
globally, due to the substantial technical/financial support it receives yearly from UNICEF, 
WHO and several donor agencies/partners. Its popularity is derived from its preventive value 
for most childhood killer diseases and because it is offered free to parents. Consequently, 
immunization clinics have been utilized as platforms for delivering new child health 
intervention packages, especially in the developing world (WHO, 2002). They equally offer a 
ready framework for introducing infant hearing screening (Olusanya & Okolo, 2006). 
However, community-based screening is not limited to immunization clinics and may be 
implemented during infant welfare clinics and other child health programs (Lin, Huang, Lin 
& Wu, 2004; Kapil, 2002; Bantock & Croxson, 1998). 
 
Table 1. Risk factors for hearing loss in newborns (JCIH, 2000) 
 
1.  Family history of sensorineural hearing loss. 
2.  In-utero infections such as rubella, cytomegalovirus, syphilis, toxoplasmosis and 
herpes. 
3.  Craniofacial anomalies. 
4.  Birth weight less than 1,500g (3.3lbs). 
5.  Hyperbilirubinemia at levels requiring exchange transfusion. 
6.  Bacterial meningitis. 
7.  Ototoxic medications. 
8.  Mechanical ventilation lasting five days or more. 
9.  Stigmata or other findings associated with a syndrome known to include a 
sensorineural and/or conductive hearing loss. 
10. Birth asphyxia with Apgar <5 at 1 minute or <6 at 5 minutes. 
 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
84
A typical national immunization schedule for developing countries offers a number of 
options within the first year of life for infant hearing screening. BCG immunization often 
records the highest uptake of all the vaccinations administered in the first year in many 
developing countries (UNICEF, 2005). However, the age at which babies are presented for 
various immunizations varies widely within and across communities. For instance, the age at 
presentation for BCG immunization in Nigeria typically ranges from 1 to 136 days 
(percentile: 75th – 24 days; 95th – 61 days). A similar variation has been reported in South 
Africa for the first DPT immunization at 6 weeks (Swanepoel, Hugo & Louw, 2006). This 
variation in age/timing has the advantage of facilitating early detection for a significant 
number of infants with progressive/delayed-onset congenital hearing impairment and those 
from acquired causes that would have been missed under hospital-based newborn hearing 
screening. These categories of hearing impairment are commonly associated with prevailing 
adverse perinatal conditions in many developing countries. In addition, this platform provides 
the chance to screen sick babies (now recovered) who could not be tested or immunized while 
admitted to hospital. Occasional hiccups may occur when routine immunization programs are 
interrupted because of vaccine shortages or some extraneous reasons. For instance, a recent 
controversy on polio vaccination in some Nigerian states would have disrupted any other 
adjunct programs, as would have occurred in some developed countries that were once 
engulfed in controversies on the safety of MMR vaccinations. However, the experiences in 
many countries suggest strongly that routine immunization programs are still the most 
effective platform for integrated child health intervention globally. Another major challenge 
arises when screening cannot be completed and babies would require follow-up visits outside 
scheduled immunization clinics. It may then be useful to ascertain any likely difficulties the 
affected parents may encounter in keeping follow-up appointments and offer appropriate 
support such as compensation or reimbursement for transportation fares. Moreover, a register 
of babies with incomplete screening tests may be maintained at subsequent immunization 
clinics for tracking purposes. 
 
 
Targeted or Universal Newborn Hearing Screening 
 
An important ethical requirement for infant hearing screening is the provision of 
equitable access to all babies. However, due to resource constraints in some settings, limiting 
screening to babies who exhibit some risk factors for hearing loss is often suggested. A 
typical list of risk factors is those recommended by JCIH (2000), which is shown in Table 1. 
Such targeted screening has been found to identify about 50% of babies with moderate to 
profound hearing loss (Vohr et al., 2000; Watkin et al., 1991). This is because not all babies 
with hearing loss exhibit at least one of the known risk factors. In addition, some of the risk 
factors may not be easily detectable at birth or shortly thereafter, especially those associated 
with genetic factors. Another major limitation arises from the fact that the causes of hearing 
loss may be unknown in up to half of the babies with hearing loss, especially in developing 
countries (Derekoy, 2000; Elango, Chand & Purohit, 1992; Gray, 1989; Holborow, Martinson 
& Anger, 1982; Minja, 1998; Sellars & Brighton, 1983). Notwithstanding, targeted screening 
could serve as a good take-off point for universal newborn screening and is certainly better 
than no screen. It may be useful to establish predominant risk factors in a given country or 
community initially through well-designed pilot studies of universal infant hearing screening, 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
85
to help devise a subsequently more effective and culturally-appropriate, targeted hearing 
screening program.  
 
 
Possible Challenges of Infant Hearing Screening 
 
The dearth of audiologists and speech pathologists in developing nations is one major 
challenge in many countries. While screening can be conducted by non-specialists with 
minimal training, the confirmatory tests and the provision of amplification are more complex 
and require the skills of qualified audiologists. Hearing aids are mostly manufactured in 
developed countries, where they are quite expensive to purchase and maintain. Moreover, the 
ability of government to provide routine and universal access to infant hearing as currently 
practiced in developed countries is doubtful in many developing countries. For these reasons 
some reservations about the propriety of introducing infant hearing screening in developing 
countries have been expressed even among ear care professionals (Mencher & Devoe, 2001; 
White, 2006). However, the rationale for withholding screening for prelingual hearing loss 
where resources are limited has been contested more recently in view of its especial 
significance (Olusanya, Luxon & Wirz, 2006). This is because the detection of prelingual 
hearing loss of congenital and early-onset is inevitable and is likely to occur late in the 
absence of newborn screening. Parents would prefer to know early enough that their 
apparently well-babies have hearing loss. Such knowledge will minimize uncertainties 
regarding the special needs of these children and reduce possible recourse to the unorthodox 
therapies which are prevalent in many traditional communities (de Andrade & Ross, 2005).  
In the last five years, several initiatives are evident that seek to reduce some of these 
constraints. For instance, WHO has issued guidelines for the development of audiological 
services to facilitate capacity building at different levels of healthcare delivery to address the 
current resource gap (WHO, 2004a). Recognizing the constraints due to high costs of hearing 
aids, WHO has also taken various steps to stimulate production of affordable hearing aids for 
developing countries. Private-sector initiatives to manufacture solar-powered hearing aids at 
affordable running costs (McPherson & Brouillette, 2004; Parving & Christensen, 2004) have 
also begun. Experiences from developed countries clearly demonstrate that services will 
develop more rapidly as the healthcare system is being taxed by unmet demands. 
Consequently, failure to screen due to current temporary shortages in service delivery may be 
counterproductive for requisite capacity building. It is pertinent to observe that health 
interventions and ancillary services are rarely provided free in many developing countries. In 
low income countries, governments contribute less than 40% of total health expenditure. Over 
90% of the 60% balance spent by the private sector comes from out-of-pocket spending by 
individuals. So the notion that government has to provide hearing services to make them 
justifiable for developing countries is at variance with the current realities in many countries. 
It would therefore be inappropriate to deny such vital, time-bound, intervention services to 
those who are in a position to afford them. 
  
 
 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
86
SCHOOL HEARING SCREENING 
Development of School Hearing Screening 
 
There is a long history in industrialized countries of school hearing screening. By the end 
of the 19th century there was a general trend within the medical profession to consider the 
preventive aspects of health care, including the prevention of disorders in those under the 
educational care of the State (Hatch, 1986). In 1890 the London School Board appointed a 
school medical officer and other English educational authorities soon followed. By 1907 the 
Education (Administrative Provisions) Act made it the duty of local education authorities to 
provide for the medical inspection of elementary school children. Similarly, groups within 
North American, Australian and European medical professions began to call for the regular 
health examination of school children. For example, school health services were introduced in 
Australia in the early years of the 20th century. In the United States formal school health 
examinations developed early in the 20th century and hearing screening programs were 
routinely implemented by 1927 (Northern & Downs, 2002, p.259). Such activities fulfilled 
the definition of screening programs in that they were involved in the large scale examination 
of a population that usually had not requested medical intervention for any particular 
complaint.   
Children with sensory disorders were a particular concern to the school health services 
from their inception. Henderson (1975) cites the Chief Medical Officer’s 1911 report to the 
British Board of Education which stated that: “Among the requirements of a satisfactory 
scheme of medical inspection is that of applying a hearing test to every child who is old 
enough to respond”. School medical services in many other industrialized nations also 
incorporated a hearing assessment component. By 1943, twenty American states had laws 
requiring school screening for hearing loss (Wall and Bührer, 1987). School screening is not 
confined to industrialized nations, with programs reported in many developing countries. 
Examples include Columbia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Nicaragua and Panama (Madriz, 2001); slum 
schools in Kenya (Macharia, 2003); secondary school children in Ghana (Amedofu, Awuah, 
Ocansey & Antwi, 2003); and in schools in Jamaica (Lyn et al., 1998).  
School screening audiometry has concentrated on the detection of possible disorders in 
primary (elementary) school children. This has been due to:  
(a) an underlying rationale for screening being that there is an advantage in the earliest 
possible treatment of the condition detected (Paradise & Smith, 1979);  
(b) the common finding that there are a number of children with previously undetected 
hearing losses entering the primary school system (Roeser & Clark, 2004). This may be 
particularly so in developing countries, in the absence of neonatal or infant screening 
programs (McPherson & Holborow, 1988);  
(c) the generally higher prevalence of otitis media with effusion related hearing loss in 
the earlier school grades. However, programs for secondary (high) school children have also 
been implemented in many areas (e.g., Hodges, 1983). 
School screening audiometry is also known by other terms at times. The American 
Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) publishes recommendations for identification 
audiometry procedures, with “identification” being used nowadays as a synonym for 
“screening” (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 1985; American Speech-
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
87
Language-Hearing Association, 1997). Chaiklin, Ventry, and Dixon (1982, p. 405) however, 
consider that there is some degree of difference between these two terms, with identification 
emphasizing “the principle that the primary goal of hearing screening tests is to find (i.e., 
identify) persons who have significant or potentially significant hearing problems” whereas in 
most health professions screening refers to “brief tests applied to large populations in an 
effort to locate individuals who may have specific disorders”. Chaiklin and colleagues appear 
to imply in this statement that identification reflects a more directly accurate procedure than 
does screening. If so, this is perhaps a dangerous definitional approach since school-based 
hearing tests are usually conducted under conditions that of necessity limit their accuracy. In 
this chapter screening audiometry and identification audiometry are regarded as synonymous 
terms and used interchangeably, with both referring to activities conventionally known as 
screening procedures. 
Research studies, particularly in the North American literature, also at times describe 
school screening programs as “school hearing conservation programs” (Wall & Bührer, 
1987). However, school hearing conservation programs are generally regarded as involving 
the education and counseling of children, parents and teachers and the habilitation of hearing 
impaired children in addition to the screening of audition (Alpiner, 1978). Hearing screening 
is a necessary first step for a school hearing conservation program (Roeser & Clark, 2004). 
More generally, hearing screening is often the prerequisite for any hearing health measures 
involving individual treatment or habilitation. 
 
 
Issues in School Hearing Screening in Developing Countries 
 
Screening audiometry is an established aspect of audiological practice. A number of 
present-day issues in hearing screening need to be discussed in this section, as they impact on 
the identification of hearing loss in school children in developing countries.  
 
Goals of Screening 
A screening program requires clear goals to be effective (Lescouflair, 1975). There has 
been a long debate among hearing health professionals, however, concerning the precise goals 
of school screening. Should hearing screening be concerned with the detection of ear 
pathology, auditory disability or both entities? In most school health programs throughout the 
developed world, the day-to-day administration of screening tasks soon devolved from 
medical personnel to nursing or paramedical staff with training, and was often limited to the 
application of formal screening protocols. Screening staff often do not have skills in ear 
examination that would enable them to identify ear pathology as such, other than through 
gross visual examination for disorders such as pinna abnormalities, discharge or impacted 
wax. In this situation screening for auditory disability, rather than ear disorder, became the 
paramount goal for school programs. With the advent of practical methods of acoustic 
immittance measurement in the 1970s, it became possible for trained screening staff to 
identify possible middle ear disorders in school children. Authors such as Brooks (1971; 
1977), Ferrer (1974) and Keith (1974) became early advocates of the use of immittance 
technology to screen primary school children for ear pathology. When immittance techniques 
are employed the goal of the screening process becomes that of “identification of ear disease 
that can be managed medically, surgically or though rehabilitation” (Johnson, 1984, p. 153) 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
88
rather than solely of auditory impairment. The absence of immittance testing in many school 
screening programs is an indication that the use of this procedure remains controversial 
(Johnson, 2002). Roush (1990) summarizes the history of debate in this area, and mentions 
the 1984 recommendation by a US expert panel that acoustic immittance screening should be 
limited to special populations known to be at high risk for complicated sequelae of otitis 
media. Later expert panel have also recommended against the general use of immittance 
procedures in a mass screening context (American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on 
School Health, 1987; Rosenfeld et al., 2004). 
Despite the Bluestone et al. (1986) and American Academy of Pediatrics (1987) 
recommendations, many suggested school screening protocols in industrialized nations have 
included an immittance testing component. Influential examples include the American 
Speech-Language-Hearing Association guidelines (1997) for screening for hearing 
impairment and middle ear disorders, the American Academy of Audiology (1997) 
recommended identification program, and the Johnson (2002) suggested screening program. 
In developing countries most screening programs have concentrated on auditory disability. 
Few programs are known to routinely include immittance techniques. Gell et al. (1992) advise 
that tympanometry is not appropriate in developing countries where the prevalence of chronic 
serous otitis media is high as (a) ear discharge can be better noted through a visual inspection 
of the ear, and (b) identification of moderate to severe hearing loss is a priority. Olusanya, 
Okolo and Adeosun (2004) suggested that routine otoscopy, rather than tympanometry, of 
primary school children and referral of those found to have impacted cerumen would 
effectively identify many children with conductive hearing loss.  
 
Hearing Loss Criteria 
Lescouflair (1975) made a strong case that many hearing screening programs in the 
developed world failed, at that time, to identify large numbers of children who have 
significant hearing loss. This was partly because screening intensity levels were set to 
standards of normalcy devised for the compensation of adults with industrial hearing loss. In 
Lescouflair’s view, children may well be disadvantaged by hearing loss at lower levels than 
the > 25 dB HL standard for “hearing loss” often set at that time. One primary rationale for 
not using this standard was the finding of Boothroyd (1970) that children require greater 
intensities in speech recognition tasks to achieve equivalency with adult scores. This is 
thought to be due to their lack of sophisticated strategies in speech recognition. More recent 
hearing screening procedures, such as the ASHA guidelines, have tended to use > 20 dB HL 
as a cut-off intensity (Roush, 1990). Haggard and Hughes (1991) point out that this cut-off 
criterion is often set on practical rather than purely audiological grounds. Ambient noise can 
often make testing below 20 dB HL impossible, particularly for low frequencies (Harrison, 
1971; Johnson, 1984). There is now a growing tendency for many audiologists, including 
those in developing countries, to consider that a “hearing loss” begins at > 15 dB HL, and an 
advocacy of screening criteria that reflect this point of view (Olusanya, 2004a). If the primary 
goal of a hearing screening program is “to screen out pupils with deviations in hearing that 
affect classroom communication” (Downs, Doster, & Weaver, 1965, p. 363) then the criteria 
set for such “deviations in hearing” needs to be carefully considered. The current WHO 
criterion for “priority for hearing aids” in children is an average hearing loss in the range 31 
to 80 dB HL in the better ear (WHO, 2004a). However, this does not preclude screening that 
also targets milder degrees of hearing loss, if there is a local capacity to provide appropriate 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
89
hearing health care. Even very basic intervention, such as preferential seating in classrooms, 
may improve educational outcomes for children with slight and mild hearing loss (McPherson 
& Holborow, 1985; Olusanya, Okolo & Adeosun, 2004).  
 
Referral Pathways in Screening Programs 
“The best screening program is useless without definitive criteria for referral” (Johnson, 
1984, p. 171). Programs are also inappropriate and, indeed, unethical (World Health 
Organization, 1971) if there is not a sufficiently well-developed medical, educational and 
audiological infrastructure to cope with the cases of hearing loss or ear disorder found. 
Lescouflair (1975) considered that the ineffectiveness of referral and follow-up procedures 
was one of the main factors contributing to the failure of many school screening programs in 
developed countries. A major part of this problem is the long time delay between failing a 
screening test and further diagnostic testing that is often experienced. This may adversely 
impact on the audiological habilitation process or may give rise, in the case of fluctuating 
hearing loss, to inconsistencies between screening and diagnostic results. Another aspect is 
the concentration of some programs on medical treatment rather than on the overall 
communicative needs of the child (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 1985). 
Effective programs must work actively to ensure prompt review of cases failing the screening 
and have in place a range of referral and case review options appropriate to the range of 
disabilities found (Amedofu, Opoku-Buabeng, Ose-Bagyina & Antwi, 2003).  
 
 
School Screening Audiometry Techniques in Developing Countries 
 
Nowadays, screening techniques used with school children in developed countries are 
almost exclusively based on combinations of pure tone audiometry and immittance 
audiometry. These techniques are also used in many school aged populations throughout the 
developing world. Despite their popularity, they do have disadvantages and other procedures 
may enable a greater number of disadvantaged children to been screened in a manner that 
meets Wilson and Jungner’s (1968) principles for effective screening. This section 
summarizes audiometric screening techniques that have been developed for school aged 
children and may be feasible in developing nations.  
All screening tests should be relatively simple to perform (Thorner & Remein, 1982), 
with “minimum preparation by the patient, depend on no special appointments, and be 
inexpensive” (Fletcher & Fletcher, 2005, p. 157). This is particularly the case in developing 
nations, where human and financial resources are scarce. 
 
Pure Tone Audiometry Screening 
In this procedure pure tone stimuli are presented at predetermined frequencies and at 
fixed intensity levels. The tested child is instructed to respond to a perceived signal by raising 
a hand, pressing a response button or in some other manner. For younger children, a 
conditioned play response is typically used, such as placing a peg in a board in response to 
each perceived sound. Earphones are the sound source and a practice tone is presented to the 
child at a level well above the test tones (often at 40 or 60 dB HL) to acquaint the child with 
the type of sound to be listened for. Test stimuli are presented first to one ear and then another 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
90
and the presence or absence of a child response is recorded for each tone. No attempt is 
usually made to find the hearing threshold for a signal if the child fails to respond (Roeser & 
Clark, 2004). Pure tone screening audiometry was found to accurately assess hearing status in 
children six years and older, when trained community health workers in a rural Bangladeshi 
village used a simple play response procedure (Berg, Papri, Ferdous, Khan & Durkin, 2006). 
All aspects of pure tone screening audiometry have been subject to investigation at some 
time, including the intensities and frequencies used, the pass/fail criteria chosen, the 
environment parameters required for testing, and the means of delivering the acoustic signal. 
Various intensity levels have been advocated for use in this form of audiometry, ranging from 
15 dB HL to 25 dB HL, and even higher intensities are in clinical use (Wall, Naples, Bührer 
& Capodanno, 1985). Intensity levels also sometimes vary according to the test tone 
presented (e.g., Mencher & Alfano, 2000; Swart, Lemmer, Parbhoo & Prescott, 1995) 
although this makes for a more complex test and is discouraged. Test frequencies also vary, 
with various combinations of 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, 6000 and 8000 Hz having been 
recommended. A general consensus is (a) 500 Hz should only be used in conditions of low 
ambient noise; (b) there is no advantage in using 3000 or 6000 Hz instead of, or in addition 
to, 4000 Hz (Katt & Sprague, 1981); (c) test-retest variability due to placement effects makes 
use of 6000 Hz inadvisable; and (d) 8000 Hz is not required if the goal of screening is to 
detect hearing loss that will interfere with speech communication. ASHA (1997) guidelines 
for screening audiometry recommend screening at 1000, 2000 and 4000 Hz, at 20 dB HL. It 
should be kept in mind that such recommendations were developed primarily with a view to 
the identification of children with sensorineural loss. They are not necessarily appropriate for 
children with otitis media related loss. For example, Silman, Silverman, and Arick (1994) 
found that 500 Hz was an important frequency for assessing the auditory impact of otitis 
media with effusion in children. This group found a 31% increase in the number of children 
with otitis media with effusion related loss who were identified when 500 Hz was included in 
their screening test protocol. However, background noise conditions in schools in developing 
countries can make screening at 500 Hz, or with low intensities at any pure tone frequency, 
impractical (Amedofu, Opoku-Buabeng et al., 2003; Berg et al., 2006; Gell et al., 1992) 
despite a WHO (1997) recommendation that this frequency be included in screening 
programs.  
Pass/fail criteria have also varied widely in audiometry screening programs. Wall et al. 
(1985), in a large survey of American professionals involved in school screening, found that 
failure to detect a signal at two frequencies was deemed a test failure for about one-third of 
respondents, others used one frequency (29%), more than two frequencies, two consecutive 
frequencies or a pure tone average greater than a predetermined level as a criterion for 
‘failure’. Pass/fail criteria will be influenced by the aims of the screening program and the 
conditions under which the program operates. As mentioned previously, a working definition 
of ‘hearing loss’ will be based partly on the philosophy underlying each program. For 
example, in a locality where chronic serous otitis media is common, children with a >15 dB 
HL loss in either ear may be targeted for referral (Olusanya, 2004b). However, in an area 
where middle ear disorder is rare and where hearing instruments are available for children 
with identified hearing loss, screening programs may wish to target according to WHO 
(2004a) recommendations for priority pediatric hearing aid candidates.  
Audiometry instrumentation will have some influence on the manner in which testing is 
carried out. The type of earphone used affects test parameters, with noise-excluding, 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
91
circumaural earphones (Berger & Killion, 1989; Poulsen, 1988; Wall & Tillis, 1977) or insert 
earphones (Sklare & Denenberg, 1987) enabling screening to take place in non-soundtreated 
rooms at lower intensity levels than would otherwise be possible. Screening programs in 
developing countries often make use of circumaural earphones (e.g., Mencher & Alfaro, 
2000; Olusanya, 2004b; Swart et al., 1995). These can provide attenuation of background 
noise, when properly fitted, of up to 44 dB (Westerberg et al., 2005). Since ambient noise 
levels in school rooms used for screening may be very high–43 dB SPL in classrooms in 
Ghana (Amedofu, Awuah et al., 2003) and up to 56 dB A in a study in rural India (Rao, 
Subramanyam, Nair & Rajashekhar, 2002)–noise-excluding earphones are advisable. Even 
background noise levels in isolated village or rainforest locations may exceed 40 dB A 
(Counter, 1986). Insert earphones are seldom used in developing countries due to the 
considerable expense of proprietary foam inserts and because the small diameter sound bore 
is easily occluded by wax or discharge, with a consequent loss of the test tone. One 
alternative, albeit costly, way to reduce background noise problems is to create a mobile 
hearing screening facility. An example of this is the use of large 4x4 vehicles in the HARK 
Project of South Africa (Ogilvy & Michelson, 2003). Such purpose-built vehicles incorporate 
a sound-treated environment for hearing screening and have also been successfully used in 
Lesotho and Uganda and will soon be used in The Gambia. A mobile facility is also used in 
school screening in Jamaica (Lyn et al., 1998). 
Low cost, hand-held screening audiometers have been designed, such as the Liverpool 
Field Audiometer (McPherson & Knox, 1992), the Welch-Allyn Audioscope™ (Frank & 
Peterson, 1987) or the Otoscreener™ (Alvord & Davenport, 1992). In such ‘miniature’ 
audiometers the earphone is directly coupled to the audiometer and the tester manually 
applies the device to the ear. These instruments are designed to provide sound output at 
selected frequencies and intensities only, making them simpler to operate and less expensive 
to manufacture than conventional audiometers. However, the utility in field conditions for 
such equipment needs to be carefully evaluated. For example, the Liverpool Field Audiometer 
was found to have high test-retest variability at 500 Hz, when a 30 dB HL screening intensity 
was used (McPherson & Knox, 1992), although variability was acceptable at higher test 
frequencies. Other hand held devices have been found to have unacceptably high false 
positive rates at low intensity levels (Bess et al., 1998).  
Pure tone audiometric screening cannot be reliably performed without quality operator 
training. Roeser and Clark (2004) noted that the success of any screening program depends on 
test personnel and recommended a minimum training program for ‘paraprofessionals’ of no 
less than five days. Berg et al. (2006) trained community health workers in Bangladesh over a 
two week period in pure tone screening audiometry, as well as in otoacoustic, tympanometric 
and questionnaire-based screening techniques. The WHO recommends an initial three-week 
training program (WHO, 2004a) for ‘primary ear health workers’, whose role could include 
hearing screening activities. However, it must be remembered that successful screening 
involves clear tester-child communication and a sophisticated understanding of pediatric 
behavioral responses–subtle skills that are not always easily attained.  
 
Immittance Audiometry Screening  
The most common immittance audiometry test used in screening programs in developed 
and developing countries has been tympanometry. Modern tympanometry testing can often be 
carried out in less than one minute per ear and provides important information on middle ear 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
92
status. However, it is not an accurate predictor of actual hearing loss in children, and as 
mentioned previously, its use is not advised for screening programs in developing countries. 
Although tympanometry is not recommended for routine use the technique has been 
employed as an adjunct to pure tone audiometry (Chadha, Agarwal, Gulati & Garg, 2006) and 
otoacoustic emission screening (Berg et al., 2006) in developing countries. 
 
Speech Audiometry Screening 
Speech audiometry is a fundamental part of the audiological diagnostic test battery and 
was at one time advocated as a pediatric screening technique. Several screening tests using 
speech material were developed, with the Verbal Auditory Screening Test (VASC Test) 
gaining popularity in the United States in the 1960s (Roeser & Northern, 1981). Evaluative 
research carried out on this test concluded that the use of speech stimuli should be avoided, as 
tests based on such stimuli were not sensitive to mild hearing loss or high frequency hearing 
loss (Mencher & McCullock, 1970). Very little research has been conducted on speech 
screening techniques in developing countries. In some environments a screening test that uses 
speech stimuli, in an appropriate local language, may be suitable. McPherson and Holborow 
(1988) describe a screening procedure that made use of simple auditory-only commands to 
gauge whether a child may be disadvantaged at school by hearing loss, for use in an area 
where audiometry and amplification devices were unavailable. Wirz and Winyard (1993) give 
advice to community based rehabilitation (CBR) workers on dealing with communication 
disorders in developing countries with limited resources. They suggest CBR workers 
systematically observe a child’s responses to speech as well as environmental sounds, to 
determine whether or not the child is likely to have hearing loss. World Health Organization 
(2006a,b) resources also give advice on informal behavioral observation techniques that can 
be used with children. However, such techniques have not been shown to be effective as part 
of a formal screening program.  
 
Questionnaire-based Screening  
Teacher identification of hearing loss, based on the use of questionnaires, has a long 
history in the screening of school children in developed countries. Early studies by Curry 
(1950) and Kodman (1956) in the United States found classroom teachers accurately 
identified, at best, 25% of the hearing impaired children in their classrooms. Kodman reported 
that teachers failed to identify the six most severe hearing loss cases in the group he studied. 
Nodar (1978), in a reevaluation of teacher identification, found improved teacher accuracy if 
teacher ratings were compared to testing that was carried out immediately following rating. 
Nevertheless, teachers still missed over 50% of the children who failed hearing screening, 
including 12% classified by Nodar as having a moderate or severe hearing loss. A 
consequence of these disappointing results was that few screening programs used teacher 
questionnaire techniques. Work in developing countries has usually had the same outcome. 
The Ten Questions Screen (Zaman et al., 1990; Table 2) for childhood disability has good 
utility with CBR workers as a rapid, low-cost screen for serious cognitive, motor and seizure 
disabilities, but not for vision or hearing disability (Durkin et al., 1994), despite four 
questions relating to hearing loss or its potential consequences. A study of South African pre-
school pupils (Chambers & Anderson, 1997) found that teachers accurately identified only 
one out of seven children who failed audiometric screening. For a number of reasons 
questionnaire-based teacher identification may prove difficult in developing nations. Class 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
93
sizes are often very large in developing countries–often 60 students or more in African urban 
areas and 100 students in some classes in Guatemala (ILO, 1996)–and teachers may have 
little opportunity for close observation of individual children. Families with few resources 
may withdraw their children from school on a regular basis, if they are unable to meet the 
costs of attendance, reducing opportunities for contact with teachers. Children (and teachers) 
may come to school with a variety of first language backgrounds and communication 
difficulties may be ascribed to language factors rather than hearing loss (Chambers & 
Anderson, 1997). Teachers may lack a solid foundation of professional training and be 
unaware of the normal developmental milestones associated with hearing.  
The studies mentioned above typically used a simple teacher yes/no response rating for 
hearing loss or a very limited number of questions. More sophisticated questionnaires, based 
on physical and behavioral characteristics common in hearing impaired children, may provide 
a better framework for teacher decision making and improve the accuracy of teacher 
identification, particularly if targeted to detecting children with greater degrees of hearing 
loss. An example of this approach is the Newton, Macharia, Mugwe, Ototo and Kan (2001) 
study of Kenyan preschool children. An eight item questionnaire (Table 3) was given to 
teachers of preschool children. The questionnaire had 100% sensitivity and 75% specificity in 
detecting bilateral hearing loss >40 dB HL. The authors noted that no single questionnaire 
item was positive for all cases of hearing loss. An Australian study of teacher identification of 
hearing loss in indigenous, rural, primary school children (McPherson, Preston, Canuto & 
Kimber, 1992) found teachers correctly identified 82% of children with an average hearing 
level >30 dB HL, using a detailed 12 item questionnaire. In situations where pupil numbers 
are reasonably low, classes have stable student cohorts and there is a regular class teacher, 
this method holds promise and deserves further study. Teacher questionnaire screening is 
relatively low-cost and has the additional benefit of raising teacher awareness of childhood 
hearing impairment and its consequences. Teacher training in the screening procedure can be 
linked with practical advice on how to support children with hearing loss in the classroom 
(such provided in WHO, 2006a,b). 
It should be noted that primary school attendance is not universal in developing countries. 
For example, 10% of Zimbabwean children have never attended or did not complete primary 
school (Westerberg et al., 2005). Globally, approximately 20% of children never attend 
school (Grigorenko & O’Keefe, 2004). This reality means that school hearing screening in 
many developing countries will not equate to a universal screening procedure. Inequality in 
access to education also means that children with more severe degrees of hearing loss are less 
likely to attend school because parents are less likely to invest scarce resources in children 
with disabilities. Also, some studies (e.g., Chadha et al., 2006, Rao et al., 2002) but not all 
(Olusanya, Okolo et al., 2004) note a correlation between lower socioeconomic class and 
higher prevalence of ear disorder and hearing loss. Poorer families are less likely to be able to 
send their children to school. Rural families are typically poorer than those in urban areas. 
Minja and Machemba (1996) noted almost a doubling in prevalence of sensorineural hearing 
loss among rural school children in Tanzania compared to their urban peers. 
Alternatives to teacher identification via a screening questionnaire do exist. Community 
health workers and/or parents can be targeted for a questionnaire-based approach to 
screening. The Ten Questions Screen discussed earlier is one example. This procedure was 
developed to alert community health workers to a range of disabling conditions and to 
facilitate appropriate referral. A recent Brazilian project (Gomes & Lichtig, 2005) used a 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
94
parental report questionnaire to detect hearing impairment in children aged 3 to 6 years. 
Results were disappointing as the 33 item questionnaire failed to differentiate between 
children with normal hearing and those with hearing loss. However, the study group was 
comprised of children with slight or mild hearing loss only. Further research that considers 
the utility of community health worker or parental questionnaires for children with more 
severe hearing loss is warranted in developing countries. 
 
Table 2. Ten Questions Screen for childhood disability (Zaman et al., 1990) 
 
The ten questions, which follow, require only a “yes” or “no” response 
1. Compared with other children, did the child have any serious delay in sitting, standing or 
walking? 
2. Compared with other children does the child have difficulty seeing, either in the daytime or 
at night? 
3. Does the child appear to have difficulty hearing? 
4. When you tell the child to do something, does he/she seem to understand what you are 
saying? 
5. Does the child have difficulty in walking or moving his/her arms or does he/she have 
weakness and/or stiffness in the arms or legs? 
6. Does the child sometimes have fits, become rigid, or lose consciousness? 
7. Does the child learn to do things like other children his/her age? 
8. Does the child speak at all (can he/she make himself/herself understood in words; can 
he/she say any recognizable words)? 
9. For three to nine-year-old children ask: Is the child’s speech in any way different from 
normal (not clear enough to be understood by people other than his/her immediate family)? 
For two-year-old children ask: Can he/she name at least one object (for example: an animal, 
a toy, a cup, a spoon)? 
10. Compared with other children of his/her age, does the child appear in any way mentally 
backward, dull or slow? 
 
Table 3. Hearing loss screening questionnaire for Kenyan preschool children  
 
1. 
Can the child hear a loud noise, e.g., a door banging? 
2. 
Does the child respond when his/her name is called? 
3. 
Do people have to shout for the child to hear? 
4. 
Can the child hear a dog barking? 
5. 
Does the child ask people to repeat what they have said? 
6. 
Does the child speak as well as other children of the same age? 
7. 
Does the child hear quiet sounds? 
8. 
Do you have to raise your voice to get the child’s attention? 
(Newton et al., 2001). 
 
Otoacoustic Emissions Screening  
Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) are a routine procedure in neonatal and infant hearing 
screening. The cost of hand-held OAE screening devices is reducing over time and both 
McPherson and Smyth (1997) and Nozza, Sabo and Mandel (1997) found that OAE screening 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
95
was feasible in the school environment in developing countries and well accepted by children. 
However, test results below 2000 Hz can be adversely affected by high levels of ambient 
noise in the school environment (Nozza, 2001) and, with current equipment, sensitivity and 
specificity for hearing loss is not as high as conventional pure tone audiometry. For primary 
school children the costs associated with OAE screening were found in one study to be 
slightly greater than those incurred using a conventional pure tone protocol (Driscoll, Kei & 
McPherson, 2000). OAE techniques may have a more important role in future in screening 
preschool children. In an important study, Berg et al. (2006) found that a combined OAE and 
tympanometry protocol was very effective in screening Bangladeshi children in the two to 
five-year-old age range. Only 8.9% of children in this age range could not be tested by 
community health workers using this protocol. Older children were more readily assessed 
using a conventional pure tone audiometric screen. In areas where there is a high prevalence 
of hearing loss associated with middle ear disorder OAE-based screening may also be worth 
consideration. OAE recordings are sensitive to middle-ear status as well as cochlear function. 
OAEs are only elicited if (a) a stimulus is of sufficient signal intensity to trigger cochlear 
activity, (b) cochlear function for the stimulus frequency is normal, and (c) the OAE activated 
in the cochlea is not attenuated by the middle ear to a level where it can no longer be 
measured by the OAE instrumentation. These characteristics cause OAE measures to be 
sensitive to middle ear disorder as well as cochlear hearing loss. Indigenous primary school 
children in Australia have very high prevalence rates of middle ear disorder. In this 
population, McPherson and Smyth (1997) found that OAE screening held promise as a tool to 
screen for conductive hearing loss related to middle ear disorder. OAE screening may also be 
appropriate for children studying in special schools, who are not developmentally able to 
perform pure tone audiometry (Driscoll, Kei, Bates & McPherson, 2002). It is worth 
remembering, however, that OAE screening suffers from similar disadvantages to immittance 
audiometry. OAE recording is not a test of hearing per se, but of middle and inner ear 
function, and in regions where children have high rates of impacted cerumen or aural 
discharge the probe tip is readily occluded and testing adversely affected.  
Other screening options include otoscopic examination to rule out impacted cerumen. 
Impacted cerumen is one of the commonest ear diseases and a frequent cause of hearing 
impairment, with prevalence rates between 7.4% - 63% (Rao et al, 2002; Lyn et al, 1998; 
Swart et al, 1995; Mourad, Farghaly & Mohammed, 1993) but its pathophysiology is still not 
well established. For instance, it has been suggested that the aggressive or improper use of 
cotton swabs or other objects to clean the external ear canal or to relieve itching increases an 
individual’s susceptibility to excessive/impacted cerumen (Macknin, Talo & Medendrop, 
1994). Given the high prevalence of impacted cerumen in many developing countries, the 
prompt detection of children with this disorder should lead to the identification of significant 
proportion of hearing impaired children. Identifying children with impacted cerumen 
routinely for audiometric evaluation may not require a great deal of expertise beyond basic 
training in otoscopy. It is useful, at least, to refer a child when no part of the tympanic 
membrane can be visualized due to occlusion of the external auditory meatus by cerumen 
during routine ear examination.  
The use of medical or audiology personnel in hearing screening is usually discouraged 
because it is an expensive option. Hearing screening is usually conducted by trained 
audiometrists, school health nurses, community health workers or other appropriate groups. 
However, a number of developing countries are microstates–often island nations–with very 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
96
small populations. Examples include Samoa, with a population of 177,000 and Sao Tome and 
Principe, with 193,000 inhabitants. In such nations it may be possible to use regular short-
term visits by overseas health personnel to meet hearing screening needs. If there is a 
commitment to regular screening, formal screening protocols and the availability of 
diagnostic assessment and follow-up rehabilitation, then such visits may meet ethical 
standards for screening programs. Similarly, if screening is targeted to a specific area and a 
stable, long-term program can be arranged that involves assistance from abroad, then such a 
program may be worthwhile. 
Screening programs in developing countries may also need to carefully consider their 
target populations. Although neonatal screening is optimal, in many countries it may not be 
possible to gain access to large cohorts of children soon after birth. In developing countries, 
only 59% of births are attended by a doctor, nurse or midwife (UNICEF, 2006). Many births 
occur at home and infants registered with authorities at a later date or not at all. However, 
Elahi, Elahi, Elahi & Elahi (1998) noted nearly universal immunization coverage in school-
age children in rural Pakistan. Programs that use immunization events as an opportunity for 
associated hearing screening of school age children may be considered. In some settings it 
may be very desirable to screen secondary school children, for example in areas that are 
recovering from the effects (including noise trauma) of civil warfare. An initial survey in 
Ghana that found hearing loss in 6% of secondary school students, with the majority having 
sensorineural hearing loss (Amedofu, Awuah et al., 2003). 
OTHER POTENTIAL SCREENING ACTIVITIES 
Most developing countries have a population structure that is skewed towards the young. 
Hearing health care services for children are often given priority in developing nations. Few 
studies are reported that have looked at the needs of the elderly with hearing impairment. 
Bunnag et al. (2002) found a 52.4% prevalence of hearing loss in elderly persons living in 
Bangkok, with 9.5% having a bilateral moderate to severe hearing loss. A Nigerian study 
(Ologe, Segun-Busari, Abdulraheem & Afolabi, 2005) found high rates of impacted cerumen, 
hearing loss and middle ear disorders in elderly hospital patients. Also in Nigeria, Olusanya 
(2004a) noted favorable rehabilitative outcomes following hearing aid fitting in adult, often 
elderly, clients. As hearing devices become more affordable in developing countries demand 
is likely to increase amongst elderly individuals. Screening programs that focus on elderly 
citizens may become an important means of delivering hearing health care. Adults exposed to 
noise or chemical causes of hearing disorder also require consideration for routine screening 
programs. Occupational hearing loss screening for developing countries is discussed in detail 
in Chapter 11.  
HIV/AIDS is widely prevalent in many developing countries and people living with 
HIV/AIDS need careful consideration for targeted hearing screening. Both adults and children 
with HIV/AIDS are at greatly increased risk of otitis media with effusion, associated with 
conductive hearing loss (van Hasselt, 2003). Sensorineural hearing loss due to direct HIV 
virus infection, ototoxic medication, opportunistic nervous system infections and cerebral 
atrophy has also been reported (Chidziva, 2003). In one study, conductive losses were noted 
in 50% of HIV-positive children and 5% had severe to profound sensorineural hearing loss 
(McNeilly, 2005). In particular, there is a need in developing countries for regular school “at 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
97
risk” screening that identifies hearing loss in children known to have HIV/AIDS, if no 
universal school screening program is in operation.  
CONCLUSION 
Permanent hearing loss is a significant health problem in the developing world. Current 
efforts aimed at primary prevention are inadequate and ineffective in addressing the major 
causes of hearing loss. A significant proportion of hearing loss is of unknown cause, making 
primary prevention unattainable for this sector of individuals with hearing loss. Screening at 
various levels of a healthcare delivery system as a secondary prevention strategy is necessary 
and efficacious. Evidence from on-going pilot programmes in developing nations 
demonstrates that infant hearing screening is feasible. The inability of governments to provide 
free screening services should not preclude efforts that can facilitate the systematic 
introduction of this vital healthcare service through public-private partnerships involving 
multilateral institutions such as WHO and relevant non-governmental organizations. Hearing 
screening of neonatal and/or school age populations can be provided ethically using 
conventional procedures in developing countries. There is also great scope for research into 
innovative, low cost hearing newborn and school-based screening procedures in developing 
regions. No ethical priorities are served by withholding hearing screening and time-bound 
intervention for potential beneficiaries, where resources can be gathered for a sustainable 
program.  
REFERENCES 
Access Economics. (2006). Listen Hear! The Economic Impact and Cost of Hearing Loss in 
Australia. Melbourne: Author. 
Alpiner, J. G. (1978). Public school hearing conservation. In D. Rose (Ed.), Audiological 
assessment (pp. 146-188). Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. 
Alvord, L. S., & Davenport, T. (1992). Reference equivalent threshold levels for the 
Handtronix, Oto-Screener™. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 91, 234-235. 
Amedofu, G.K., Awuah, P., Ocansey, G., & Antwi, B. (2003). Hearing impairment among 
secondary school students. Indian Journal of Clinical Practice (International Edition), 
4(4), 17-20. 
Amedofu, G.K., Opoku-Buabeng, J., Ose-Bagyina, A., & Antwi, B. (2003). Hearing loss 
among school children in Ghana. Ghana Medical Journal, 37, 148-152. 
American Academy of Audiology. (1997). Position statement: identification of hearing loss 
and middle ear dysfunction in preschool and school-age children. Audiology Today, 9(3), 
21-23. 
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on School Health. (1987). Impedance bridge 
(tympanometer) as a screening device in schools. Pediatrics, 79, 472. 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (ASHA) 
(1985). Guidelines for 
identification audiometry. Asha, 27(5), 49-52. 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (ASHA) (1997). Guidelines for audiologic 
screening. Rockville, MD: Author. 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
98
Bantock, H.M., & Croxson, S. (1998). Universal hearing screening using transient 
otoacoustic emissions in a community health clinic. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 
78, 249-252. 
Berg, A.L., Papri, H., Ferdous, S., Khan, N.Z., & Durkin, M.S. (2006). Screening methods for 
childhood impairment in rural Bangladesh. International Journal of Pediatric 
Otorhinolaryngology, 70, 107-114. 
Berger, E. H., & Killion, M. C. (1989). Comparison of the noise attenuation of three 
audiometric earphones, with additional data on masking near threshold. Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, 86, 1392-1403. 
Bess, F.H., Dodd Murphy, J., & Parker, R.A. (1998). Children with minimal sensorineural 
hearing: Prevalence, educational performance, and functional status. Ear and Hearing, 
19, 339-354. 
Blair, J., Peterson, M., & Viehweg, S. (1985). The effects of mild hearing loss on academic 
performance among young school children. Volta Review, 87, 87-94. 
Bluestone, C. D., Arjona, S. K., Schwartz, D. M., Downs, M. P., Jerger, J. F., & Kenworthy, 
O. T. (1986). Controversies in screening for middle ear disease and hearing loss in 
children. Pediatrics, 77, 57-70. 
Boothroyd, A. (1970). Developmental factors in speech recognition. International Audiology, 
9, 30-38. 
Braveman, P.A., & Tarimo, E. (1994). Screening in primary health care. Setting priorities 
with limited resources. Geneva: World Health Organization. 
Brooks, D. N. (1971). A new approach to identification audiometry. Audiology, 10, 334-339. 
Brooks, D. N. (1977). Auditory screening - time for reappraisal. Public Health, 91, 282-288. 
Bunnag, C., Prasansuk, S., Nakorn, A.N., Jareoncharsri, P., Atipas, S., Angsuwarangsee, T., 
et al. (2002). Ear diseases and hearing in the Thai elderly population. Part I. A 
comparative study of the accuracy of diagnosis and treatment by general practitioners vs 
ENT specialists. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand, 85, 521-531. 
Carney, A.E., & Moeller, M.P. (1997). Treatment efficacy: Hearing loss in children. Journal 
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, S61-S84. 
Chadha, S.K., Agarwal, A.K., Gulati, A., & Garg, A. (2005). A comparative evaluation of ear 
diseases in children of higher versus lower socioeconomic status. Journal of Laryngology 
& Otology, 120, 16-19. 
Chaiklin, J. B., Ventry, I., & Dixon, R. F. (1982). Identification (screening) audiometry. In J. 
B. Chaiklin, I. Ventry, & R. F. Dixon (Eds.), Hearing Measurement. A Book of Readings 
(pp. 405-407). Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. 
Chambers, N., & Anderson, I. (1997). Teacher accuracy in the identification of pre-school 
pupils with hearing loss. South African Journal of Communication Disorders, 44, 25-30. 
Chidziva, C. (2003). HIV and ear nose and throat service in Zimbabwe. ENT News, 12(2), 67-
70. 
Counter, S.A. (1986). Audiological screening of Amerindians of the Surinam rainforest. 
Scandinavian Audiology, 15, 57-64. 
Culbertson, J., & Gilbert, A.M. (1986). Children with unilateral sensorineural hearing loss: 
cognitive, academic, and social development. Ear and Hearing, 7, 38-42. 
Curry, E. T. (1950). The efficiency of teacher referrals in a school hearing testing program. 
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 15, 211-214. 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
99
Davis, A., Bamford, J., Wilson, I., Ramkalawan, T., Forshaw, M., & Wright, S. (1997). A 
critical review of the role of neonatal hearing screening in the detection of congenital 
hearing impairment. Health Technology Assessment, 1, 1-176. 
Davis, J.M., Elfenbein, J., Schum, R., & Bentler, R.A. (1986). Effects of mild and moderate 
hearing impairments on language, educational, and psychosocial behavior of children. 
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 51, 53-62. 
de Andrade, V., & Ross, E. (2005). Beliefs and practices of Black South African traditional 
healers regarding hearing impairment. International Journal of Audiology, 44, 489-499. 
Derekroy, F.S. (2000). Etiology of deafness in Afyon school for the deaf in Turkey. 
International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 55, 125-131. 
Downs, M. P., Doster, M. E., & Weaver, M. (1965). Dilemmas in identification audiometry. 
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 30, 360-364. 
Driscoll, C., Kei, J., Bates, D., & McPherson, B. (2002). Transient evoked otoacoustic 
emissions in children studying in special schools. International Journal of Pediatric 
Otorhinolaryngology, 64, 51-60. 
Driscoll, C., Kei, J., & McPherson, B. (2000). Cost comparison of hearing screening 
programs: transient evoked otoacoustic emissions in infant screening and screening at 
school entry. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Audiology, 22, 77-84. 
Durkin, M.S., Davidson, L.L., Desai, P., Hasan, Z.M., Khan, N., Shrout, P.E., Thorburn, M.J., 
Wang, W., & Zaman, S.S. (1994). Validity of the Ten Questions screen for childhood 
disability: Results from population-based studies in Bangladesh, Jamaica, and Pakistan. 
Epidemiology, 5, 283-289. 
Elahi, M.M., Elahi, F., Elahi, A., & Elahi, S.B. (1998). Paediatric hearing loss in rural 
Pakistan. Journal of Otolaryngology, 27, 348-353. 
Elango, S., Chand, R.P., & Purohit, G.N. (1992). Childhood deafness in Malaysia. 
International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 24, 11-17. 
Ferrer, H. P. (1974). Use of impedance audiometry in schoolchildren. Public Health, 88, 153-
163. 
Fletcher, R.H., & Fletcher, S. W. (2005). Clinical Epidemiology: the essentials. 4th. ed. 
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. 
Frank, T., & Peterson, D. R. (1987). Accuracy of a 40 dB HL Audioscope™ and audiometer 
screening for adults. Ear and Hearing, 8, 180-183. 
Gell, F.M., White, E.McC., Newell, K., Mackenzie, I., Smith, A., Thompson, S., & Hatcher, 
J. (1992). Practical screening priorities for hearing impairment among children in 
developing countries. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 70, 645-655. 
Gomes, M., & Lichtig, I. (2005). Evaluation of the use of a questionnaire by non-specialists 
to detect hearing loss in preschool Brazilian children. International Journal of 
Rehabilitation Research, 28, 171-174. 
Gopal, R. Hugo, S.R., & Louw, B. (2001). Identification and follow-up of children with 
hearing loss in Mauritius. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 57, 
99-113. 
Gray, R.F. (1989). Causes of deafness in schools for the deaf in Madras. International 
Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 18, 97-106. 
Grigorenko, E.L., & O’Keefe, P.A. (2004). What do children do when they cannot go to 
school? In R.J. Sternberg & E.L. Grigorenko (Eds.). Culture and competence: Contexts of 
life success. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
100 
Haggard, M., & Hughes, E. (1991). Screening Children's Hearing. London: HMSO. 
Hall, J.W., III., Smith, S.D., & Popelka, G.R. (2004). Newborn hearing screening with 
combined otoacoustic emissions and auditory brainstem responses. Journal of American 
Academy of Audiology, 15, 414-425. 
Hannon, P. (2003). Developmental neuroscience: implications for early childhood 
intervention and education. Current Pediatrics, 13, 58-63. 
Harford, E. R., Bess, F. H., Bluestone, C. D., & Klein, J. O. (Eds.). (1978). Impedance 
Screening for Middle Ear Disease in Children. New York: Grune and Stratton. 
Harrison, D. R. (1971). An investigation into the effects of ambient noise on pure tone 
screening tests of hearing in schools. Sound, 5, 94-96. 
Harrison, M., Roush,J., & Wallace, J. (2003). Trends in age of identification and intervention 
in infants with hearing loss. Ear and Hearing, 24, 89 -95. 
Hatch, J. (1986). The health of the school child. In J. Cule & T. Turner (Eds.), Child Care 
Through the Centuries (pp. 18-27). Cardiff: STS Publishing. 
Henderson, P. (1975). The School Health Service 1908-1974. London: HMSO. 
Hinchcliffe, R., & Prasansuk, S. (2006). Infectious diseases and hearing in the tropics. In V.E. 
Newton & P.J.Vallely (Eds.) Infection and hearing impairment, pp. 217-237. Chichester: 
John Wiley & Sons. 
Hodges, M. (1983). Screening secondary school children. Nursing Times, 35, 53-55. 
Holborow, C., Martinson, F., & Anger, N. (1982). A study of deafness in West Africa. 
International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 4, 107-132. 
International Labor Office (ILO) (1996). Impact of structural adjustment on the employment 
and training of teachers. Geneva: Sectoral Activities Programme, Author. 
Jauhiainen, T. (2001). Hearing impaired children in developing countries. Scandinavian 
Audiology 30, Suppl 53, 83-84. 
Johnson, C.D. (2002). Hearing and immittance screening. In J. Katz (Ed) Handbook of 
Clinical Audiology (5th ed.; pp. 481-494). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. 
Johnson, D. W. (1984). Screening, search and identification: Strategies for referral. In W. L. 
Meyerhoff (Ed.), Diagnosis and Management of Hearing Loss (pp. 153-171). 
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing (JCIH). (2000). Joint Committee on Infant Hearing Year 
2000 Position Statement: Principles and guidelines for early hearing detection and 
intervention programs. Pediatrics, 106, 798-817. 
Kapil, U. (2002). Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) scheme: a program for 
holistic development of children in India. Indian Journal of Pediatrics, 69, 597-601. 
Katt, D., & Sprague, H. (1981). Determining the pure tone frequencies to be used in 
identification audiometry. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 46, 433-436. 
Keith, R. W. (1974). Application of impedance audiometry with children. Hearing 
Instruments, 25(8), 18-19. 
Keller, W.D., & Bundy, R.S. (1980). Effects of unilateral hearing loss upon educational 
achievement. Child Health, 6, 93-100. 
Kennedy, C.R., McCann, D.C., Campbell, M.J., Law, C.M., Mullee, M., et al. (2006) 
Language ability after early detection of permanent childhood hearing impairment. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 354, 2131-2141. 
Kennedy, C., Kimm, L., Thornton, R., & Davis, A. (2000). False-positives in universal 
neonatal screening for hearing impairment. Lancet, 356, 1903-1904. 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
101
Kittrel, A.P., & Arjmand, E.M. (1997). The age of diagnosis of sensorineural hearing 
impairment in children. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 40, 97-
106. 
Kodman, F., Jr. (1956). Identification of hearing loss by the classroom teacher. 
Laryngoscope, 66, 1346-1349. 
Lescouflair, G. (1975). Critical view on audiometric screening in school. Archives of 
Otolaryngology, 101, 469-473. 
Lin, C.Y., Huang, C.Y., Lin, C.Y., Lin, Y.H., & Wu, J.L. (2004). Community-based newborn 
hearing 
screening 
program 
in 
Taiwan. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Pediatric 
Otorhinolaryngology, 68,185-189. 
Lyn, C, Jadusingh, W.A., Ashman, H., Chen, D., Abramson, A., & Soutar, I. (1998). Hearing 
screening in Jamaica: prevalence of otitis media with effusion. Laryngoscope, 108, 288-
290. 
Macharia, I.M. (2003). ENT services in Kenya. ENT News, 12(2), 42-45. 
Macknin ML, Talo H, & Medendrop SV. (1994). Effect of cotton-tipped swab use on earwax 
occlusion. Pediatric Clinics of Philadelphia, 33, 14-18. 
Madriz, J.J. (2001). Audiology in Latin America: hearing impairment, resources and services. 
Scandinavian Audiology, 30, Suppl 53, 85-92. 
Marttila, T.I., & Karikoski, J.O. (1996). Identification of childhood hearing impairment in 
Uusimaa County, Finland. International Journal Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 34, 45-
51. 
McNeilly, L.G. (2005). HIV and communication. Journal of Communication Disorders, 38, 
303-310. 
McPherson, B., & Brouillette, R. (2004). A fair hearing for all: providing appropriate 
amplification in developing countries. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 25, 219-
223. 
McPherson, B., & Holborow, C. (1985). Parent guidance in developing countries. Journal of 
the British Association of Teachers of the Deaf, 9(4), 81-83. 
McPherson, B., & Holborow, C. (1988). School screening for hearing loss in developing 
countries. Scandinavian Audiology, Suppl 28, 103-110. 
McPherson, B., & Knox, E. (1992). Test-retest variability using the Liverpool screening 
audiometer in a field environment. British Journal of Audiology, 26, 139-141. 
McPherson, B., Preston, G., Canuto, C., & Kimber, L. (1992). Teacher identification of 
hearing loss in Aboriginal children. Australian Journal of Audiology, 14, 41-48. 
McPherson, B., & Smyth, V. (1997). Hearing screening for school children with otitis media 
using otoacoustic emission measures. Asia Pacific Journal of Speech, Language and 
Hearing, 2, 69-82 
Mencher, G.T., & Alfaro, J.J.M. (2000). Prevalence of sensorineural hearing loss in children 
in Costa Rica. Audiology, 39, 278-283. 
Mencher, G.T.A., & Devoe, S.J. (2001). Universal newborn screening: a dream realized or a 
nightmare in the making? Scandinavian Audiology, 30:Suppl 53, 15-21. 
Mencher, G. T., & McCulloch, B. F. (1970). Auditory screening of kindergarten children 
using the VASC. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 35, 241-247. 
Miles, M. (1984). Deafness in rural Asia. Volta Review, 86, 274-281. 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
102 
Minja, B.M. (1998). Etiology of deafness among children in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. 
International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 42, 225-231. 
Minja, B.M., & Machemba, A. (1996). Prevalence of otitis media, hearing impairment and 
cerumen impaction among school children in rural and urban Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. 
International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 37, 29-34. 
Moeller, M.P. (2000). Early intervention and language development in children who are deaf 
and hard of hearing. Pediatrics, 106(3), E43. 
Mohr, P.E., Feldman, J.J., Dunbar, J.L., McConkey-Robbins, A., Niparko, J.K., Rittenhouse, 
R.K., & Skinner, M.W. (2000). The societal costs of severe to profound hearing loss in 
the United States. International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care, 16, 
1120-1135. 
Mourad, M.I., Farghaly, N.F., & Mohammed, H.G. (1993). Hearing impairment: is it a public 
health problem among school pupils in Alexandria? Journal of the Egyptian Public 
Health Association, 68(5/6), 703-723. 
Mukari, S.Z., Vandort, S., Ahmad, K., Saim, L., & Mohamed, A.S. (1999). Parents' 
awareness and knowledge of the special needs of their hearing-impaired child. Medical 
Journal of Malaysia. 54(1), 87-95. 
Newton, V.E., Macharia, I., Mugwe, P., Ototo, B., & Kan, S.W. (2001). Evaluation of the use 
of a questionnaire to detect hearing loss in Kenyan pre-school children. International 
Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 57, 229-234. 
Nodar, R. H. (1978). Teacher identification of elementary school children with hearing loss. 
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 9, 24-28. 
Northern, J. L., & Downs, M. P. (2002). Hearing in Children (5th ed). Baltimore: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins. 
Nozza, R.J. (2001). Screening with otoacoustic emissions beyond the newborn period. 
Seminars in Hearing, 22, 415-425. 
Nozza, R.J., Sabo, D.L., & Mandel, E.M. (1997). A role for otoacoustic emissions in 
screening for hearing impairment and middle ear disorders in school-age children. Ear 
and Hearing, 17, 227-239. 
 Ogilvy, D., & Michelson, L. (2003). HARK in South Africa. Community-based service 
provision for hearing impaired children in the Western and Eastern Cape. ENT News, 
12(2), 51-54. 
Ologe, F.E., Segun-Busari, S., Abdulraheem, I.S., & Afolabi, A.O. (2005). Ear diseases in 
elderly hospital patients in Nigeria. Journal of Gerontology Series A: Biological and 
Medical Sciences, 60, 404-406. 
Olusanya, B.O. (2004a). Self-reported outcomes of aural rehabilitation in a developing 
country. International Journal of Audiology, 43, 563-571. 
Olusanya, B.O. (2004b). Classification of childhood hearing impairment: implications for 
rehabilitation in developing countries. Disability and Rehabilitation, 26, 1221-1228. 
Olusanya, B.O., Luxon, L.M., & Wirz, S.L. (2006). Ethical issues in screening for hearing in 
newborns in developing countries. Journal of Medical Ethics, 32, 588-591. 
Olusanya, B.O., Luxon, L.M., & Wirz, S.L. (2005). Childhood deafness poses problems in 
developing countries. British Medical Journal, 330, 480-481. 
Olusanya, B., McPherson, B., Swanepoel, D.W., Shrivastav, R., & Chapchap, M. (2006). 
Globalization of infant hearing screening: the next challenge before JCIH? [Letter]. 
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 17, 293-295. 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
103
Olusanya, B.O., & Okolo, A.A. (2006). Early hearing detection at immunization clinics in 
developing countries. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 70, 1495-
1498. 
Olusanya, B.O., Okolo, A.A., & Adeosun, A.A. (2004). Predictors of hearing loss in school 
entrants in a developing country. Journal of Postgraduate Medicine, 50, 173-179. 
Olusanya, B.O., Ruben, R.J., & Parving, A. (2006). Reducing the burden of communication 
disorders in the developing world: an opportunity for the millennium development 
project. Journal of the American Medical Association, 296, 441-444. 
Paradise, J. L., & Smith, C. G. (1979). Impedance screening for preschool children. State of 
the art. Annals of Otology, Rhinology and Laryngology, 88, 56-65. 
Parving A, & Christensen B. (2004). Clinical trial of a low-cost, solar-powered hearing aid. 
Acta Otolaryngology, 124, 416-420. 
Parving, A. (1999). Hearing Screening – aspects of epidemiology and identification of 
hearing impaired children. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 49 
Supp 1, S287-S292. 
Poulsen, T. (1988). Sound attenuation of TDH-39 earphones in a standard headset and in a 
noise-excluding headset. Scandinavian Audiology, 17, 147-149. 
Ramkalawan, T.W., & Davis, A.C. (1992). The effects of hearing loss and age of intervention 
on some language metrics in young hearing-impaired children. British Journal of 
Audiology, 26, 97-107. 
Rao, R.S.P., Subramanyam, M.A., Nair, N.S., & Rajashekhar, B. (2002). Hearing impairment 
and ear diseases among children of school entry age in rural South India. International 
Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 64, 105-110. 
Reynolds, D. C. (1982). The validity of a screening test. American Journal of Optometry and 
Physiological Optics, 59, 67-71. 
Robinshaw, H.M. (1996). The pattern of development from non-communicative behavior to 
language by hearing impaired and hearing infants. British Journal of Audiology, 30, 177-
198. 
Roeser, R. J., & Clark, J. L. (2004). Screening for auditory disorders. In R. J. Roeser & M. P. 
Downs (Eds.), Auditory Disorders in School Children (4th ed.; pp. 96-123). New York: 
Thieme. 
Roeser, R. J., & Northern, J. L. (1981). Screening for hearing loss and middle ear disorders. 
In R. J. Roeser & M. P. Downs (Eds.), Auditory Disorders in School Children (pp. 120-
150). New York: Thieme-Stratton. 
Rosenfeld, R.M., Culpepper, L., Doyle, K.J., Grundfast, K.M., Hoberman, A., Kenna, M.A., 
et al. (2004). Clinical practice guideline: otitis media with effusion. Otolaryngology Head 
Neck Surgery, 130(5S), S95-118. 
Roush, J. (1990). Identification of hearing loss and middle ear disease in preschool and 
school-age children. Seminars in Hearing, 11, 357-371. 
Ruben, R.J., & Schwartz, R. (1999). Necessity versus sufficiency: the role of input in 
language acquisition. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 47, 137-
140.  
Schroeder, L., Petrou, S., Kennedy, C., McCann, D., Law, C., et al. (2006). The economic 
costs of congenital bilateral permanent childhood hearing impairment. Pediatrics, 117, 
1101-1112. 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Bolajoko O. Olusanya 
 
104 
Sellars, S., & Brighton, P. (1983). Childhood deafness in southern Africa. An etiological 
survey of 3064 deaf children. Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 97, 885-889. 
Silman, S., Silverman, C. A., & Arick, D. S. (1994). Pure-tone assessment and screening of 
children with middle-ear effusion. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 5, 
173-182. 
Sklare, D. A., & Denenberg, L. J. (1987). Interaural attenuation for Tubephone™ insert 
earphones. Ear and Hearing, 8, 298-300. 
Sininger, Y.S., Doyle, K.J., & Moore, J.K. (1999). Auditory system development, 
experimental auditory deprivation, and development of speech perception and hearing. 
Pediatric Clinics of North America, 46(1), 1-14. 
Smith, A. (2003). Preventing deafness – an achievable challenge. The WHO perspective. 
International Congress Series, 1240, 183-191. 
Smith, A., & Mathers, C. (2006). Epidemiology of infection as a cause of hearing loss. In 
V.E. Newton & P.J. Vallely (Eds.). Infection and hearing impairment (pp. 31-66). 
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons. 
Stockard-Pope, J.E. (2001). Auditory development and hearing evaluation in children. 
Advances in Pediatrics, 48, 273-299. 
Swanepoel, D.W., Hugo, R., & Louw, B. (2006). Infant hearing screening at immunization 
clinics in South Africa. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 70, 
1241-1249. 
Swart, S.M., Lemmer, R., Parbhoo, J.N., & Prescott, C.A.J. (1995). A survey of ear and 
hearing disorders amongst a representative sample of Grade 1 schoolchildren in 
Swaziland. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 32, 23-34. 
Thorner, R. M., & Remein, Q. R. (1982). Principles and procedures in the evaluation of 
screening for disease. In J. B. Chaiklin, I. Ventry, & R. F. Dixon (Eds.), Hearing 
Measurement. A Book of Readings (pp. 408-421). Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-
Wesley Publishing Co. 
United Nations Children’s Funds (UNICEF). (2006). Delivery Care. http://www.childinfo. 
org/areas/deliverycare/ accessed 1 August 2006. 
United Nations Children’s Funds (UNICEF). (2005). State of the world’s children 2006. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
van Hasselt, P. (2003). Otology in Botswana and Malawi. ENT News, 12(2), 46-48. 
Vohr, B.R., Oh, W., Stewart, E.J., Bentkover, J.D., Gabbard, S., Lemons, J. et al. (2001). 
Comparison of costs and referral rates of 3 universal newborn hearing screening 
protocols. Journal of Pediatrics, 139, 238-244. 
Vohr, B.R., Widen, J.E., Cone-Wesson, B., Sininger, Y.S., Gorga, M.P., Folsom, R., & 
Norton, S.J. (2000). Identification of neonatal hearing impairment: characteristics of 
infants in the neonatal intensive care unit and well-baby nursery. Ear and Hearing, 21, 
373-382. 
Wald, N. J. (1994). Guidance on terminology. Journal of Medical Screening, 1, 76. 
Wall, L. G., & Bührer, K. (1987). Hearing identification of the preschool child: A proposed 
training program. Folia Phoniatrica, 39, 145-152. 
Wall, L. G., Naples, G. M., Bührer, K., & Capodanno, C. (1985). A survey of audiological 
services within the school system. Asha, 27(1), 31-34. 
Review

Screening for Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
105
Wall, L. G., & Tillis, C. H. (1977). The value of noise–excluder shells in reducing 
overreferrals from a school audiometric screening program. Clinical Pediatrics, 16, 530–
532. 
Watkin, P.M. (2001). Neonatal screening for hearing impairment. Seminars in Neonatology, 
6, 501-509. 
Watkin, P.M., Baldwin, M., & McEnery, G. (1991). Neonatal at risk screening and the 
identification of deafness. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 66, 1130-1135. 
Westerberg, B.D., Skowronski, D.M., Stewart, I.F., Stewart, L., Bernauer, M., & Mudarikwa, 
L. (2005). Prevalence of hearing loss in primary school children in Zimbabwe. 
International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 69, 517-525. 
White, K.R. (2006). The role of the JCIH in the global expansion of newborn hearing 
screening [letter]. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 17, 295-296. 
White, K.R. (2004). Early hearing detection and intervention programs: opportunities for 
genetic services. American Journal of Medical Genetics, 130A, 29-36. 
Wilson, J. M. G., & Jungner, G. (1968). Principles and practice of screening for disease. 
Geneva: World Health Organization. 
Wirz, S., & Winyard, S. (1993). Hearing and Communication Disorders. A manual for CBR 
workers. London: Macmillan Press. 
World Bank. (2005). World Development Report 2006. New York: Oxford University Press. 
World Health Organization (WHO) (1971). Mass Health Examinations. Public Health Papers 
No. 45. Geneva: World Health Organization. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (1997). Report of the First Informal Consultation on 
Future Programme Developments for the Prevention of Deafness and Hearing 
Impairment. Geneva, 23-24 January 1997. Geneva: WHO, Prevention of Blindness and 
Deafness. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2002). State of the world’s vaccines and immunizations. 
Geneva: Author. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2004a). Guidelines for hearing aids and services for 
developing countries. 2nd ed. Geneva: Author. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2004b). Reproductive Health Strategy. Geneva: Author.  
World Health Organization (WHO). (2006a). Primary Ear and Hearing Care. Training 
Resource. Student’s Workbook. Intermediate Level. Geneva: Author. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2006b). Primary Ear and Hearing Care. Training 
Resource. Advanced Level. Geneva: Author. 
Yoshinaga-Itano, C., Sedey, A.L., Coulter, D.K., & Mehl, A.L. (1998). Language of early and 
later–identified children with hearing loss. Pediatrics, 102, 1161-1171. 
Zaman, S., Khan, N., Islam, S, Bsanu, S., Dixit, S., Shrout, P. et al. (1990). Validation of the 
‘ten questions’ for screening serious childhood disability: results from Bangladesh. 
International Journal of Epidemiology, 19, 613-620.  
 
Review

Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 
 
 
 
PROVIDING DIAGNOSTIC AUDIOLOGY SERVICES IN 
ECONOMICALLY CHALLENGED REGIONS 
 
 
Jackie L. Clark1,*and Valerie Newton2 
1University of Texas at Dallas, United States of America and University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa 
2University of Manchester, United Kingdom 
ABSTRACT 
Accurate diagnostic assessment is a prerequisite for providing appropriate treatment 
or effective management of a hearing impairment. In the context of developing countries, 
often the facilities for carrying out assessment may be limited due to a paucity or absence 
of technological assistance for equipment calibration and/or repair, limitation of stable 
and dependable electricity for equipment, and other factors. Yet, knowledge of basic 
audiological principles and methods involved can ensure optimal use of such resources 
that are available. This chapter examines the concept of diagnostic assessment and the 
importance of: 1) attention to the test environment and instrumentation used; 2) careful 
observation and history-taking; 3) appropriate selection and rigorous performance of test 
methodology; 4) determining the appropriate inclusion of physiologic measures; 5) 
sensitivity to the culture and language of those being served. In addition, this chapter will 
also incorporate current World Health Organization recommendations and guidelines 
with the purpose of seeking to raise awareness, support and training for professionals in 
developing countries.  
INTRODUCTION 
Though limited epidemiological data exists regarding the prevalence of hearing 
impairment in developing countries, the World Health Organization estimates that the burden 
of disabling hearing impairment in developing countries is potentially twice that of developed 
                                                        
* Correspondence: jclark@utdallas.edu 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
108 
countries (Smith, 2001). In fact, it is estimated that 80% of hearing impaired and deaf 
individuals in the world come from developing countries (World Health Organization, 2006). 
Developing countries are often faced with few, if any, skilled hearing health care workers 
and/or a meager budget on which to base an intervention program. Yet, hearing disability is 
one of the most common communication disorders. Initiation and implementation of 
programs to identify, remediate and prevent ear disease and hearing loss can easily tax even 
developed countries with a well-established infrastructure. It could be argued that a country 
would be best served to wait for infrastructures and for more critical/fatal health issues to be 
adequately addressed before beginning a hearing health assessment program. However, 
deferring audiological management and intervention programs until health conditions 
improve would  likely force many developing countries to wait indefinitely for infiltration of 
resources into their infrastructure to the detriment of many who are deaf and hearing 
impaired. 
A preferable approach is to utilize the resources currently available to increased 
effectiveness. This chapter is written for the experienced audiologist/hearing health care 
provider. Consequently, the reader desiring more theory and in-depth procedural explanations 
of diagnostic services than described within the confines of this chapter may find a number of 
academic textbooks that will facilitate that goal. This chapter instead focuses on the 
progression of audiological tasks to completion, with issues, suggestions, and considerations 
for a practicing clinician when performing diagnostic audiometric measures in developing 
countries (see Figure 1).  
In order to maximize those limited resources for equipment and training within a 
developing country, a great deal of attention should be focused within the context of five 
“A”s: affordable for the economics of the population; accessible to everyone regardless of 
language, background or economic status; acceptable to everyone needing services; 
appropriate for the culture while still helping the person with her/his problems; lastly and 
most importantly, service provision that raises awareness within the community. Raising 
awareness about hearing impairment and prevention within the general and medical 
community at a national, provincial and local level can be achieved while, at the same time, 
promoting overall public health. By increasing awareness on these multiple levels, there is a 
greater chance that those with hearing impairment will be encouraged to seek help for 
remediation of their disability and/or alternative modes of communication. Prior to 
implementing identification audiometry, there is a critical need to determine local cultures 
and attitudes about hearing loss. For instance in some regions, deafness is quite prevalent and 
not considered a disability and many community members communicate bilingually, in oral 
and sign languages. In such a community, there may be no immediate need for a remediation 
plan or intervention audiometry. 
WHO defines health as “a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and 
not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.” The audiological/hearing health care 
practitioner is equipped with a clear rationale for pursuing remediation of those non-fatal, yet 
disabling health problems. An understanding of the etiologies directly and indirectly resulting 
in hearing loss in a developing country becomes a critical component to the assessment phase. 
Knowledge of which etiologies, such as ototoxicity, neonatal infections, chronic otitis media, 
malaria, meningococcal meningitis, syphilis, measles, or genetic factors, are particularly 
prevalent in a specific region or country will facilitate in planning a feasible course of action.  
 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
109
 
Otoscopy 
Hearing tests 
Tympanometry 
Speech test 
Normal 
hearing 
Retrocochlear 
Sensorineural/mixed loss 
Tests for site of lesion 
Conductive  
loss 
Cochlear 
Case history 
 
Figure 1. Suggested order of presentation for diagnostic audiological evaluation. 
Implementation of an "identification audiometry" program  should encompass more than 
solely locating individuals with hearing impairment. As mentioned in a separate chapter 
within this book, hearing screenings can be viewed as the general process by which groups of 
people are separated into those who manifest some defined trait, or those who do not. A 
hearing screening becomes the entry point to identification of those with a defined disorder 
who would otherwise not be identified nor receive remediation or monitoring. When there is 
very little infrastructure or only limited audiological/otolaryngological services, it is wholly 
appropriate to have a designated primary health care worker trained to function as an 
audiology technician.  
PATIENT INTAKE 
Having failed a hearing screening, the patient will be seen for a full hearing assessment 
either immediately or on a subsequent day. It is important to appreciate that there will be 
some accompanying anxiety. To help allay this then, after a friendly greeting, an explanation 
should be given of the planned procedure. This will usually start with taking a clinical history 
and then performing otoscopy followed by the appropriate hearing test, tympanometry and 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
110
speech tests. The results of these tests will determine what other investigations to perform. If 
a hearing loss is found then tests which identify the site of lesion will be necessary in order to 
make the appropriate management decisions. 
 
 
History Taking 
 
Information gained from a careful history may provide an indication of the degree, type 
and likely cause of a hearing impairment. It is, therefore, important to take the time needed to 
ask questions of the client or—in the case of a child—the caregiver, and to keep a written 
record of the information obtained. Records are important and help to indicate any changes in 
hearing occurring over time. Questions need to be phrased in terms which can be understood 
by the person being questioned and should take into account cultural background. They 
should relate to the following areas: 
 
1. General information 
(a) Full name and address: Full names often include the family or tribal name which 
can be useful in detecting family connections and identifying an inherited 
hearing loss.  
(b) Age and sex: Some causes of a hearing impairment are more likely at some ages 
than others and more likely in one sex than the other. 
(c) Occupation: Certain occupations (e.g., those where there are high noise levels) 
can be associated with a hearing loss particularly affecting the higher 
frequencies. When a very noisy occupation is indicated then the length of time 
spent in that occupation is useful to know, as well as the availability of any 
devices to protect hearing. 
2. Information about hearing 
(a)  How long the problem has been noticed? 
(b)  One or both ears? If both, does it seem to be the same in both? 
(c)  Onset—sudden or gradual? 
(d)  Hearing loss stable, fluctuating or improved since onset? 
(e)  Any associated problems (e.g., tinnitus, balance disturbance, excessive loudness 
sensitivity)? 
(f)  Has there been any earache or aural discharge? 
(g)  Has there been any previous treatment? 
3. Information relating to causative factors: 
(a)  Family history indicating a permanent hearing impairment 
(b)  Birth history—was a child born early, very small, in need of special care?  
(c)  Maternal history during pregnancy—any significant illness and treatment? 
(d)  History of previous infections (e.g., meningitis, measles, mumps) 
(e)  History of head injury and its severity 
(f)  Exposure to loud noise—at work, leisure, exposure as a result of conflict?  
(g)  Previous medical conditions and their treatment. 
 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
111
Information from the case history may indicate that the audiologist should refer the 
patient to other professionals for further treatment or management. The WHO guidelines 
(1998) suggest referral when patients present the following “Red Flag” conditions: 
 
1. Pain not responding to treatment; 
2. Pus discharge not responding to treatment; 
3. Pain in discharging ear; 
4. Pain with or without pus discharge associated with a tender swelling; behind the ear 
(mastoiditis) 
5. Any symptoms or signs suggesting intracranial infection such as drowsiness, 
confusion or loss of consciousness, especially when there is neck stiffness and fever, 
vomiting or convulsions; 
6. Giddiness, dizziness (vertigo) with either vomiting or nausea; 
7. Lame face/facial nerve palsy; 
8. Sudden loss of hearing. 
 
A major question in defining the overall purpose of any program in the context of a 
developing country is deciding whether to attempt to identify only those with significant 
auditory impairment or to have an additional purpose of preventing auditory impairment and 
ear disease. Information from each case history can be important not only for the individual 
concerned, but as a step towards accumulating population data which is useful to inform 
health authorities of the size of the problem, resources needed and facilities necessary to 
monitor program effectiveness. However, patients need to have confidence that all health 
information provided will be held in utmost confidence. Consequently, the facility and key 
personnel conducting assessments must have a means of organizing and maintaining 
confidential audiological data. 
INFECTION CONTROL CONSIDERATIONS 
Communicable 
and 
infectious 
diseases 
when 
combined 
with 
malnutrition, 
overpopulation, and scarce health care access have become serious health issues. 
Unfortunately, most of those diagnosed with infectious diseases live in developing countries 
(Archibald & Reller, 2001). When considering that antimicrobial drug resistance pathogens 
are on an increase while infectious diseases are identified as the leading cause of death in 
many developing countries (Hart & Karuiku, 1998; Hinman, 1998), there is a greater call for 
hearing health professionals to implement infection control measures with their diagnostic 
measures. Physical contact of any instrument used with the patient in the audiological 
evaluation can result in the spread of infection and/or disease. Supra-aural and, especially, 
insert earphones must be cleaned and disinfected between patients. Response 
switches/buttons should also be given the same attention. As the clinician will come in 
physical contact with each patient during audiometric testing, hand washing should occur 
between patients.  
Transient bacterial skin flora that are most likely to colonize on the superficial layers of 
health-care worker’s skin are easily removed by routine hand washing (Boyce & Pittet, 2002). 
Transmission of pathogens by health-care workers (HCW) from one patient to another 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
112
requires the following sequence of events: bacterial skin flora present on the patient or shed 
onto inanimate objects in close proximity to the patient transfer to the hands of HCWs; 
pathogens that are capable of surviving for at least several minutes on the hands of personnel; 
inadequate or entirely omitted hand washing or hand antisepsis by the worker; inappropriate 
hand hygiene agent used.  
It is commonly accepted that cleaning hands is one successful means of reducing health-
care-transmission of contagions between patients. The U.S. Public Health Service established 
recommendations (Garner & Favero, 1985) for all health-care workers to wash their hands 
with soap and water for 1 – 2 minutes before and after patient contact. Making the decision 
about which antimicrobial, non-antimicrobial, and/or waterless antisepsis agents the HCW 
should use will be determined according to the known community health history and expected 
contact with each patient. In those regions where water may not be readily available for hand 
washing, the hearing health care professional should consider waterless antiseptic agents and 
wearing gloves for patient contact situations. Clearly, initiating overly cautious standards for 
patient contact will ensure the health of not only the community but also the health of the 
limited number of health care workers and hearing health care professionals available to serve 
in developing countries. 
OTOSCOPY 
A number of studies have shown that audiometric screening without benefit of otoscopic 
inspection will fail to detect about one-half of those with confirmed ear disease in a 
developed country. In developing countries, there is a much higher incidence of ear canal 
occlusion and/or chronic middle ear pathology found not only in children, but also in adults. 
Current findings show that in ears with 40% or more obstruction, thresholds can be 
negatively affected by 7.5 to 16.8 dBHL, depending on frequency (Roeser, Lai & Clark, 
2005). The anticipated prevalence of excessive cerumen within developed countries can be 
expected to be approximately 10% in children and 5 – 8% in adults (Bricco, 1985; Cooper, 
1985; Gleitman, Ballachand & Goldstein, 1992). It is unfortunate that the prevalence of 
excessive cerumen in developing countries cannot be discussed within the text of this chapter 
simply due to the paucity of demographic prevalence data. However, this also highlights the 
necessity of collaborative efforts to document such information. 
Another condition more prevalent in developing countries is aural cholesteatoma 
associated with chronic otitis media. Considered a major indiscriminant yet remediable health 
problem in many populations around the world, chronic otitis media appears to present widely 
ranging prevalence figures (WHO/CIBA, 1996). Incidence of chronic suppurative otitis media 
is significantly greater in developing than in developed countries. Amongst the highest 
prevalence figures are those found with the Inuit and Australian Aboriginals (with 12–46% 
and 12–25% respectively), followed by Native American, South Pacific Islander, and African 
populations (with 4–8%, 4–6%, and 3–6%, respectively), with the lowest prevalence values 
found in India, Saudi Arabia (2%, 1.4%), the United States and the United Kingdom (< 
0.1%). Complication rates from acute infections are significantly greater in developing 
countries (i.e., 60 per 1000 cases) than developed countries (1 per 1000 cases) (WHO, 1998), 
thereby creating an even greater need to monitor, and possibly prevent and remediate early 
infections. Proper otoscopic inspection of the ear canal prior to diagnostic audiometric testing 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
113
would identify occlusions and possible conditions that can adversely affect individual hearing 
status, thus affording a more effective and efficient assessment. 
HEARING TEST ENVIRONMENT 
In order to meet widely accepted assessment standards, testing should be performed in as 
quiet an environment as possible to ensure that a sound can be heard 50% of the time (i.e., the 
threshold of hearing). In some facilities, dependable electrical current is not readily available, 
and the examiner may depend upon battery-operated equipment. It is important for personnel 
in an assessment program to understand that calibration of some battery-operated units 
becomes questionable when battery reserves drop below a certain level. A simple listening 
check should be made prior to, and periodically during, assessment to ensure that the test 
results are accurate (especially when battery concerns surface). Obviously, during the 
listening check if it is difficult to perceive the test stimuli at a known suprathreshold level, 
then the environment most likely is not satisfactory, provided that the equipment is known to 
be in proper calibration.  
Much can be done to reduce the impact of noise upon the test environment. This includes 
where possible, selection of the building (clinic, house, school) where tests are performed. 
Preferably this should be away from noisy roads or other obvious sources of external noise, 
e.g., play areas for children. Within the building, the room selected should be as far away as 
possible from areas where people congregate (e.g., waiting areas in clinics, toilets, and rooms 
with loud telephones). If rooms have windows they may be closed to help reduce sound from 
outside and thick doors to rooms attenuate noise from adjacent rooms. If there is no such 
opportunity to limit noise exposure then choosing times to test when the building is not in use 
by others can be the answer. 
Ideally, testing would take place within a sound booth or a sound treated room. These test 
environments have the advantage of not only excluding or attenuating external noise but 
reducing the likelihood of standing waves interfering with soundfield testing of young 
children. The intensity level of sound in the testing room should not exceed 40 dB A (WHO, 
1999) as checked using a sound level meter. A room can receive sound treatment by using 
materials in the room which absorb sound. Covering the floor with any available carpeting or 
matting is helpful. Acoustic tiles on the walls or ceiling can be used if available, otherwise 
more readily accessible materials such as drapes on the walls can be used.  
Calibration is necessary to insure that the audiometer is consistently producing a pure 
tone at the specified frequency and intensity, that the stimulus is present only in the earphone 
to which it is directed, and that the stimulus is free from unwanted noise, interference, and 
distortion. Needless to say, the validity of audiometric test data is only as good as the 
equipment used to obtain them. A more in-depth monthly biological check can be completed 
by assessing the thresholds of three to five individuals. If all reflect a similar threshold shift in 
the same frequency, this would be a good indicator of equipment falling out of calibration. If 
there is access to a sound level meter and coupler, the monthly biological check can be 
replaced with an electroacoustic measurement of the audiometer output levels. The advantage 
of physical measurement is that if the outputs are found to be incorrect by more than 3 dB it 
may be possible to correct them by making correction factors notations on the audiometer by 
frequency and intensity. Due to expense, and weight, the highly sensitive and precise 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
114
industrial sound level meter may at times be an unrealistic luxury in a developing country. 
However, a less expensive, lightweight instrument with ample precision (~+/- 2 dB at 114 
dBSPL) and limited frequency range may be a much more viable option for assessing the test 
environment 
AUDIOMETRIC MEASURES 
Assessment of Hearing 
 
Screening is a pass/fail procedure in which the test sounds are presented at one intensity 
level, and those failing the screening are exhibiting signs of potential hearing loss. Thus the 
need to proceed onto the next stage of measuring the degree of hearing impairment requires 
documentation of pure tone thresholds, and potentially speech performance and other 
diagnostic testing. As detailed in the World Health Organization’s Guidelines for hearing 
aids and services for developing countries (2004), the term “hearing impairment” can denote 
any or all levels of severity or degree of hearing difficulty. It is worth noting, however, that 
“disabling hearing impairment” is defined as a permanent unaided hearing threshold level for 
the better ear of 41 dB or greater in adults, and 31 dB or greater in children under 15 years 
old, for the better ear averaged for four frequencies (500, 1000, 2000 and 4000 Hz). Detection 
of a hearing impairment is only the first step in a process of providing effective habilitation. It 
is recommended (WHO/CBM, 1998) that priority be given to infants and children with mild, 
moderate and severe hearing loss for provision of hearing aids, without regard to the type of 
hearing loss (i.e., conductive, sensorineural or mixed). Depending on resources, a clinician 
can make the determination of unilateral or bilateral amplification for patients. More 
information is necessary concerning the degree of hearing impairment and the type of hearing 
loss before decisions can be made regarding appropriate medical treatment and/or non-
hearing aid management required.  
 
Determining Degree of Hearing Impairment 
When no hearing loss is present, pure tone air and bone conduction thresholds will often 
likely be approximately 0 dB HL at all frequencies. In a very few cases, it is possible to find 
thresholds below 0 dB HL, which would suggest threshold sensitivity that is significantly 
better than the normal ear. Although 0 dB HL is the value representing “perfect”, normal 
hearing sensitivity, there is a range of intensities considered to be within normal limits (0-15 
dB HL for children and 0-25 dB HL for adults). Those with thresholds in this range should 
have minimal or little difficulty hearing normal conversational speech, unless other 
audiological manifestations are present. However, it should be remembered that any deviation 
from 0 dB represents a decrease of hearing from the norm; a 10 dB threshold is a loss of 10 
dB compared to the normal reference level. 
The amount of hearing loss shown on the pure tone audiogram is used to classify the 
amount of hearing impairment. Hearing impairment is determined by results from 
audiometric data, and is a function of the amount of abnormal or reduced audiological 
function. Hearing impairment is typically described by the degree of loss, and the results from 
pure tone tests are used as the primary means for classifying hearing impairment. No 
universal schemes are available for classifying the degree of hearing loss from pure tone tests. 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
115
For this reason, there is diversity from clinic to clinic in specifying the degree of loss. Table 1 
shows a comparison of the Northern & Downs (1991) degrees of hearing loss used in 
developed countries with the WHO definitions of varying grades of hearing impairment 
corresponding to dBHL values at 500, 1000, 2000 and 4000 Hz, averaged. Stating that a loss 
is mild, moderate, severe, grade 1, grade 2, etc., based on pure tone data provides assistance 
in describing the degree to which an individual will experience difficulty in communicating. 
Unfortunately, these simple terms do not detail the communicative, social, and emotional 
effects the loss may cause. In fact, it is impossible to predict the effects hearing loss will have 
on communicative and social function for an individual patient from pure tone data alone.  
 
 
Behavioural Tests 
 
These can be used for testing both children and adults and are applicable for both 
screening and diagnostic testing. The developmental ages at which the tests can be used are 
shown in Table 2. Whereas pure tone audiometry will be the test of choice for children of 
chronological age 3 years and older as well as adults, the behavioural tests applicable at a 
younger age can be used with older children and adults should pure tone audiometry prove to 
be too difficult.  
 
Visual Reinforcement Audiometry 
For this test an infant must be able to see and must be developmentally capable of turning 
its head. The test involves conditioning an infant or child to turn to a sound by simultaneously 
introducing a visual stimulus. When conditioning is achieved the sound is introduced alone 
via soundfield or earphones and the visual stimulus (reinforcer, reward) is presented only 
after a clear turning of the head has indicated that the sound has been heard. Soundfield 
presentation of stimuli is preferable with the two loudspeakers positioned to optimally elicit a 
clear head turning response from a child. Magnusson, Borjesson & Axelsson (1997) 
measuring real-ear sound pressure levels and actual soundfield conditions showed that 
mounting the loudspeakers at a distance of 50-70 cm from the child makes a generally 
appropriate arrangement for VRA, if loudspeakers are too close small head movements affect 
the test results. Warble tones are usually used as the test stimulus at 0.5, 1, 2, 4 kHz but 
narrow band noise can be useful where an infant is thought to be inhibiting a response to 
warble tones. Cultural factors should be taken into consideration when undertaking the VRA 
assessment protocol. For example, children throughout Asia associate warble tones with 
ghosts, due to their use in animated television soundtracks; such tones may induce anxiety in 
young children if chosen for use with VRA (McPherson, 2007). The disadvantage of the use 
of loudspeaker presentation is that only the threshold of the better ear is obtained although 
localization difficulties may indicate a significant threshold difference between the two ears.  
 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
116
Table 1. Grades of hearing impairment with corresponding audiometric values 
 
Grades of 
Hearing Impairment with 
ISO values (WHO, 1997) 
Degrees of 
Hearing Loss 
(Northern & 
Downs, 1991) 
Audiometric ISO 
value  
(avg. 500, 1000, 
2000, 4000 Hz) 
Grade of 
impairment 
Performance 
Recommendations 
0 – 25 dB HL 
25 dB or better 
 
(better ear) 
0 
None 
No or very slight 
hearing problems. 
Able to hear whisper
None 
26 – 40 dB HL 
Mild 
26 – 40 dB 
 
(better ear) 
1 
Slight 
Able to hear words 
spoken in normal 
voice at 1 m 
Counseling. Hearing 
aids may be needed 
41 – 55 dB HL 
Moderate 
41 – 60 
 
(better ear) 
2 
Moderate 
Able to hear and 
repeat words using 
raised voice at 1 m 
Hearing aids usually 
recommended 
56 – 70 dB HL 
Moderate-
Severe 
61 – 80 dB 
 
(better ear) 
3 
Severe 
Able to hear some 
words when shouted 
into better ear 
Hearing aids needed. If 
no hearing aids 
available, lip reading or 
sign needed 
71 – 90 dB HL 
Severe 
91+ dB HL 
Profound 
81 dB or greater 
 
(better ear) 
4 
Profound 
including 
deafness 
Unable to hear and 
understand even 
shouted voice 
Hearing aids may help 
understanding words. 
Additional 
rehabilitation needed 
From WHO (1997). 
 
Table 2. Developmental ages at which pediatric tests can be conducted 
 
Behavioral Tests of Hearing 
Age in Months 
Tests 
0 
6 
12 
18 
24 
36 
Distraction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Visual Reinforcement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pure Tone 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Visual reinforcers can be simply a toy in a box lit up by a bulb or, if available, DVDs or 
videos can be shown. They are usually mounted above the loudspeaker. Culpepper and 
Thompson (1994) suggested that audiologists may increase the amount of audiometric 
information obtained from children in the older age range for VRA by decreasing the length 
of their exposure to the visual reinforcer. 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
117
The sound stimulus may preferably be introduced through insert earphones. The latter has 
the advantage of enabling pure tones to be presented instead of warble tones and a masking 
noise can be introduced to obtain information from each ear separately. It is also possible to 
obtain threshold information in dB HL more easily. In young children thresholds at 1 kHz, 2 
kHz, 4 kHz and 0.5 kHz are usually obtained but it may be necessary for the infant to be seen 
on several occasions to obtain this information on both ears. At the first test session the aim 
would be to obtain air conduction thresholds at 1 kHz in each ear first before proceeding to 
other frequencies. Bone conduction thresholds may also be obtained in VRA. Figure 2 
illustrates one possible room arrangement for carrying out this test depending upon whether 
one or two rooms are available.  
A number of audiologists have reported successfully obtaining audiometric information 
on both ears of infants using insert earphones (Day, Bamford, Parry, Sheperd and Quigley, 
2000; Widen et al., 2000). Widen et al. (2000) described a large study of 3134 infants aged 8-
12 months who underwent hearing testing using VRA and  insert earphones at 1 kHz, 2 kHz 
and 4 kHz. In the study 95% completed 4 minimum threshold level responses. In the context 
of a developing country with severely restricted resources, insert earphones with disposable 
foam eartips may become financially and hygienically prohibitive. One possible substitute 
would be reusable olive-shaped immittance tips with special adapters for insert earphone use. 
 
Distraction Testing  
This test is applicable for infants who can see and are able to sit unsupported as they need 
to turn round to locate a sound signal. Additionally, this test involves one person (the 
distracter) controlling the infant’s attention while another person (the tester) introduces a 
sound stimulus outside the infant’s sight. The test arrangement can be seen in Figure 3. The 
infant is sat upon the knee of an adult and supported lightly at the waist. The sound stimuli 
can be warble tones, which have the advantage of being frequency specific, or more familiar 
sounds made which have their maximum frequency energy within low or high frequency 
bands. A high frequency rattle may be used or voiced sounds if warble tones are not available 
or to supplement them. Testing commences at the screening level of 35 dBA at one meter 
behind the infant, at the horizontal level of the ear and at an angle of about 45 degrees to 
avoid being seen if the infant’s head moves. If there is no response the sound level is raised 
until a response is obtained, or touching the child or providing a visual clue indicates a 
profound hearing loss or disinterest. A profoundly deaf infant will usually respond quickly 
when touched or on seeing the tester whereas one who can hear but is not interested and is 
inhibiting a response to sound may ignore other stimuli as well. 
As the intensity is increased it will be necessary to move to a position nearer the child in 
order for the sound stimuli presented to reach the eardrum at a louder level if needed. Stimuli, 
such as a high frequency rattle, when presented and measured at ear level would have a 
greater intensity (e.g., 70 dBA) 1 meter from the ear than a signal presented 25 cm away from 
the ear. At this closer position frequency specificity is maintained for a higher intensity. 
Coming closer allows for a higher intensity of some sounds (e.g., the voiced “s”) before loss 
of frequency specificity, and potentially would allow testing at levels as high as 55 dBA. 
 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
118
 
Figure 2. Visual reinforcement audiometry testing arrangement shown is for use when two visual 
reinforcers and an observation room are available. 
450 
Tester Position                     Tester Position
Distracter
Table
Parent + 
  infant 
1m
 
Figure 3. Distraction testing arrangement shown for parent and infant with tester positions. 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
119
Those audible sound s should be measured on a sound level meter and recorded. In the 
absence of a sound level meter at the time of testing a tester could estimate the level of sound 
if they had previously had access to a sound level meter. This would have involved measuring 
the level of the various test stimuli for testing at specific distances and recording the 
measurements. 
The distracter, whilst endeavoring to control the infant’s attention, perhaps by 
manipulating a toy, must beware of being too interesting otherwise the infant may be afraid to 
miss something by responding to the sound signal. On the other hand too dull a distraction 
will encourage an infant to check what is happening behind them and so see the tester. The 
distracter must also take care not to stare into the infant’s eyes or to give clues by glancing 
towards the tester. The tester has to beware of allowing the infant to predict their position by 
alternating the side from which the sound stimulus is presented and taking care not to move 
noisily. When coming close it is essential not to give olfactory clues through wearing strong 
perfumes or colognes. 
An advantage of this test is that it involves minimal equipment and some useful 
information can be gauged from these techniques using only voice if no equipment is 
available at all. The distraction test has the disadvantage of obtaining the threshold in the 
better ear only, though again localization difficulties can be indicative of a poorer threshold in 
the other ear. A further disadvantage is that sounds cannot be presented as loudly as they can 
be using VRA and insert earphones. There is evidence suggesting that VRA is more likely to 
elicit minimal response levels than distraction testing (Gliddon, Martin, & Green, 1999).  
 
Performance Test/Play Audiometry 
In order to perform this test the child must be at a developmental stage where they are 
able to wait whilst holding an object until a sound signal is given. A child who is unable to 
see can be conditioned to perform this test by appropriate selection of the activity to be 
performed, e.g., dropping an object in a bucket. 
As shown in Figure 4, the optimal testing arrangement will have the child sitting 
alongside the caregiver. A predetermined action has to be carried out by the child to be 
considered a response to a sound signal. This action may be putting a wooden ring on a stick, 
a peg in a board or tin, or another simple activity. It should not be an activity which requires 
the child to select a particular color toy or a particular size or shape as this distracts their 
attention from listening for a sound. 
The sound stimulus may be warble tones or voiced sounds (“Go” and “s”) can be used if 
electronically generated tones are not available. Warble tones have the advantage of being 
more frequency specific. Conditioning is performed from the front and involves giving an 
additional visual cue. This is important as it enables a profoundly deaf child to be 
conditioned. The frequencies tested using warble tones are 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz, usually 
starting at 1 kHz or 0.5 kHz. When using voice, conditioning is for “Go” at first and, when 
this test is completed, then conditioning for “s” follows. 
 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
120 
 
Tester Position
Table
Tester in  
position for 
conditioning 
Child 
Parent or 
caregiver 
1m
 
Figure 4. Performance testing arrangement shown with parent or caregiver beside the child and testers 
positions. 
Vignette 1 
 
A vivacious 5 year old, “Baby” (as mother called her), dressed in Sunday best leopard print 
skirt and chartreuse blouse arrived at the end of a very long day of a philanthropic, free hearing 
clinic program in Chicuque, Mozambique. Mother explained that Baby has never spoken 
meaningful words or sentences, but denies knowledge of major medical problems or other 
developmental delays. Subjective observation revealed a bright and compliant youngster, who 
did not vocalize and maximized her visual cues.  
Otoscopic examination was unremarkable for both ear canals. Though very task-oriented and 
well natured, Baby was unable to independently carry out the behavioral task of raising her 
hand when she heard the signals (as intense as 105 dB HL) across frequencies during the 
conditioning phase. A quick improvisation of individually wrapped alcohol swabs and an empty 
container for Play Audiometry resulted in the same inability to independently respond to the 
signals during the conditioning phase. Fortunately, the audiometer was equipped with a bone 
conduction oscillator, and Baby was found to be quite capable of independently and correctly 
responding to hand-held bone conduction stimulation after completing only three conditioning 
trials, even to very low intensity levels at varying frequencies, and of not responding in the 
absence of a signal. While standing approximately 5 feet behind Baby, her mother was coached 
to verbalize a variety of words and sounds both in conversational and much louder vocal levels. 
This clinician kept Baby’s attention forward during the various noise makings, and did not note 
any change in affect between presence or absence of sound. In addition, when changing test 
positions with mother, there were no changes noted in Baby’s affect even in the presence of 
loud stomping and clapping sounds.  
With the assistance of bone conduction stimuli, it was possible to determine that Baby’s lack 
of response to an acoustic signal was not a behavioral or cognitive deficit, but instead an 
auditory impairment. Pure tone audiometry coupled with voice test findings confirmed an 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
121
absence of measurable audition for Baby. While the techniques used might be considered quite 
antiquated in a developed region, they were found effective in yielding objective results. Baby’s 
mother was counseled on the severity of the hearing loss and the necessity for Baby to attend a 
nearby class for hearing impaired children in the province. With the mother participating in the 
voice test (both as observer and signal provider), she had a much better understanding of Baby’s 
hearing status. 
 
 
When the child is adequately conditioned to carry out the prescribed activity the test 
starts. The tester goes behind the child, staying quite close initially to see if the child responds 
to sound alone or can only do so when given an additional visual or tactile cue, indicating a 
very severe/profound hearing impairment. Then, moving back a metre from the child, a sound 
signal is presented at a quiet level of 35 dBA. If there is no response from the child then the 
level of the sound is raised until a response is obtained and this is then measured on a sound 
level meter and recorded. In the absence of a sound level meter an estimate of the sound 
intensity is made as described previously. The sound stimuli should not be presented at 
regular intervals as a child may predict its onset and give an affirmative response. 
The performance test provides information regarding the hearing thresholds of the better 
ear. The ability of the child to localize sound is not assessed in the test and needs to be 
examined separately for an indication of difference between the thresholds of the two ears. 
The performance test is a useful introduction to pure tone audiometry with a young child. 
 
Auropalpebal Reflex 
This reflex is present when a sound is around 80 dB above hearing threshold and involves 
an involuntary blink in response to a loud sound. Its presence indicates that there is some 
hearing. This may be normal but, on the other hand, normal hearing thresholds could be only 
in the lower frequency range. Seeing a reflex does not exclude a severe sensorineural hearing 
loss across all frequencies either because of the phenomenon of recruitment, an abnormal 
response to sound associated with cochlear hair cell damage. Absence of a reflex would be 
consistent with a severe or profound hearing loss but should only be interpreted as providing 
confirmation of hearing tests performed. 
 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
122 
Standard Behavioral Audiometry 
Standard behavioral audiometry typically can be easily conducted with individuals 
presenting a developmental ability to attend and volitionally respond to signal presentations 
over a 30-minute time period. Some children younger than 3 or 4 years of age may have 
reached such a maturity level to maintain attention, while some older children may not. A 
standard behavioral test would be conducted with the patient seated comfortably either with 
their back toward the examiner or with a barrier blocking visual cues from the control panel. 
The two response strategies to signal the perception of the stimuli that are most commonly 
used with the cooperative adult patient are a hand held switch/button and hand/finger raising. 
Instructing the patients to raise their hands/fingers on the side corresponding to the ear in 
which they perceive the test signal helps to confirm reliability of patient responses. Tapping 
with a stick on a board or tin can also be helpful. The tapping tends to get quieter as threshold 
approaches. 
Once the patient is conditioned to the agreed upon task (such as raising a hand or finger, 
etc.), a trial presentation at suprathreshold intensity levels will confirm that the patient is 
prepared to proceed with threshold seeking testing. 
 
Speech Audiometry Tests 
Speech tests are an invaluable part of an audiological assessment, providing information 
which can: 
 
9. Confirm the results of hearing tests; 
10. Demonstrate to a parent that a child does/does not have a hearing problem; 
11. Indicate site of lesion in the case of a retrocochlear hearing loss; 
12. Indicate a non-organic hearing loss; 
13. Be used to demonstrate and compare hearing aid performance. 
 
Speech discrimination tests are used to determine the percentage of speech sounds heard 
correctly at different intensity levels. Tests used for assessing speech discrimination can 
involve whole sentences, words, spondees (words such as ‘ice-cream’ and baseball’), 
nonsense sounds or pictures or toy items. The redundancy is greatest when using whole 
sentences, which are often easy for the testee to predict after hearing only a portion.  
Word lists are usually employed in the audiological assessment of adults, presented 
through headphones for diagnostic testing, or in the soundfield for rehabilitation purposes. 
Avoidance of visual clues is necessary when using soundfield presentation to ensure that 
lip/speech reading does not invalidate the test. Whenever there is a danger of crossover to the 
non-test ear while using headphones there will be a need to use a speech or white noise 
masking signal. Picture or toy tests are used with young children but older children are tested 
using word lists or sentences (Hickson, 2001). Presenting speech sounds in the presence of 
noise is being used increasingly and gives a better indication of function in a normal 
environment than tests performed in a quiet clinic setting (Nilsson, Soli & Sullivan, 1994). 
There are a number of recorded tests available in the English language and some tests in 
other languages, too (Hong, 1984; Kishon-Rabin & Rosenhouse, 2000; Wong & Soli, 2005). 
It is important to remember that tests cannot be simply transferred from one language and 
culture to another due to spectral qualities and frequency of use within the community for the 
speech stimuli. It is necessary to develop a speech test which is based upon the specific 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
123
language and culture for which it is intended. Words selected because they are common in 
one language and have a specific formulation (e.g., consonant-vowel-consonant) may not 
translate to a word with a similar configuration in another. Pictures and toys familiar to one 
community of children may be unknown to another. 
Defined as the intensity level at which the presence of a speech signal can be detected 
50% of the time, the Speech Detection Threshold is useful in confirming pure tone thresholds. 
Usually average pure tone thresholds at 0.5 kHz, 1 kHz and 2 kHz are used or the average of 
the best two out of the three, depending upon the steepness of the audiometric slope. 
Equivalence (within 10 dB) between the results of pure tone audiometry and the threshold for 
speech would suggest that the hearing test was indeed accurate. 
The speech discrimination scores obtained as a result of word tests can be plotted against 
the intensity level of presentation on a graph (Figure 5). A normal curve can be obtained 
using a group of normal hearing individuals and this will show a maximum discrimination 
score at a particular intensity. A test resulting in a maximum test score but at a higher than 
normal intensity would be consistent with a conductive hearing loss as the patient only 
requires sound to be louder to hear clearly. In a sensorineural hearing loss a normal maximum 
score will not be obtained if the hearing loss is severe and the score may diminish with 
greater intensities as a result of distortion due to recruitment. Speech tests which are poorer 
than would be expected for the audiogram can be a useful indicator of a retrocochlear hearing 
loss. A number of measures are used for comparison in addition to the maximum 
discrimination score (e.g., the 50% discrimination score). Some individuals may, for reasons 
of which they may or may not be aware, present with hearing levels which are above their 
hearing thresholds. The results of speech tests may indicate that hearing thresholds are better 
than would be possible if the audiogram was correct. 
Speech tests can be performed in the soundfield to demonstrate how well the patient can 
hear sound at different intensities, the intensities being measured using a sound level meter. 
The speech test results can be compared with and without additional visual clues. The tests 
can be performed comparing one hearing aid to another but care needs to be taken in 
designing the way this test is carried out to avoid biasing the results. 
 
Physiologic Measures 
An audiological evaluation should include pure tone and speech audiometry with the 
inclusion of tests of auditory function such as tympanometry, immittance and otoacoustic 
emissions. Prior to 1970, there were no practical means for confirming or dismissing ear 
disease findings during assessment other than through otoscopy. However, with the 
emergence of microprocessors and miniaturized electronic components, portable audiometric 
equipment that can provide objective tests of auditory physiology have become a feasible part 
of an assessment and monitoring program in developing countries. There is a greater need to 
include tests of function, such as tympanometry, in a developing country context because 
much of the literature suggests that hearing impairment is due to chronic suppurative otitis 
media in about 20/1000 children and this disorder is often remediable if detected 
(WHO/CBM, 1998).  
 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
124 
Speech discrimination 
 
100 
50 
 
0 
Speech discrimination score (%) 
   Decibel level (SPL) 
100 
25
50
75
A 
B 
C
D
E 
F
G 
Threshold of speech intelligibility 
 
Figure 5. Speech discrimination graph shows a normal curve “A”, a conductive loss “B” and 
sensorineural loss “C”. The difference between: D and E is an indication of the degree of conductive 
hearing loss; F and G is an indication of the degree of sensorineural hearing loss. Differences greater 
than 15 dB would need further investigation in case a retrocochlear hearing loss is present.  
Those tests of auditory physiology, (i.e., immittance, otoacoustic emission and auditory 
brainstem measures) are at the forefront of those most applicable in the context of developing 
countries. When behavioral audiometric tests cannot be used or are unreliable, valid 
information on middle ear function and hearing sensitivity can be obtained with physiologic 
measures including: immittance measures, otoacoustic emissions and auditory brainstem 
response (ABR). Physiologic measures not only assess hearing sensitivity, but also provide 
valuable data that can be used for diagnosis and treatment of hearing loss. An advantage of 
physiologic measures is that they can be applied to those who cannot be assessed with 
behavioral measures because they do not require a volitional response such as raising the 
hand or repeating words. Electrophysiological evaluation, vestibular function and auditory 
processing assessment should also be included where available and where the initial 
diagnostic audiometric results would suggest the value of these tests.  
 
 
Immittance Audiometry 
 
As a means of easily diagnosing and providing on-site treatment, the concept of “visiting 
‘Ear Camps’” was suggested during an international workshop on primary ear and hearing 
care (WHO, 1998). Such “Ear Camps” can easily incorporate immittance measures to validate 
findings and treatment decisions. From a theoretic point of view, few would argue that middle 
ear (immittance) measures provide invaluable replicable and objective information beyond 
behavioral responses to audiologists and other health professionals. In fact, over the past few 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
125
decades, measuring middle ear function has become a standard of audiological care in 
developed countries. Because little cooperation or behavioral conditioning is required, 
immittance tests can be performed quickly while yielding tympanic membrane mobility and 
function information. With the advent of miniaturized and more rugged immittance 
equipment such measures have become economically feasible as well as attainable in more 
programs in developing countries. 
The primary application of middle ear measures is to identify and classify architectural 
and functional defects within the auditory system that include the external auditory canal, 
tympanic membrane, middle ear space, and/or brain stem neural pathways. When used in 
conjunction with other diagnostic audiological procedures, immittance measures will help: 
identify and monitor tympanic membrane immobility associated with otitis media; assist in 
the diagnosis of auditory neuropathy; provide diagnostic information regarding facial nerve 
lesions; diagnose perforations of the tympanic membrane; and detect the presence of 
otosclerosis. Because little cooperation is required from the patient, tests of middle ear 
function become invaluable for those patients who may not be testable with behavioral 
procedures. Another clear advantage in developing countries is having the ability to pair 
immittance findings with air conduction thresholds (or minimal response levels in children) 
when bone conduction thresholds may not be obtainable due to limited equipment resources 
or patient compliance. When combining the two basic immittance procedures (tympanometry 
and acoustic reflex measures) with behavioral audiometry, the diagnostic interpretation is 
exponentially strengthened.  
 
Table 3. Tympanogram types and their description using the classical (A, B, and C) and 
absolute systems (reprint by permission; Clark & Roeser, 2007) 
 
Classical and Absolute Description of Tympanogram Types 
Tympanogram 
Type 
Compliance 
(ml) 
Static 
Admittance 
Peak 
Pressure 
(daPa) 
Clinical Audiological Findings 
Type A 
0.4 – 1.5 
.27 – 2.8 
+50 to -150 
Represents normal middle ear 
function. The peak (point of 
maximum compliance) occurs 
within normal static admittance 
limits and at pressures between +50 
to -150 mm/H20. 
Type As 
0.4 – 1.5 
< .27 
+50 to -150 
Represents abnormal stiffness in the 
middle ear system resulting in a 
fixation of the ossicular chain as in 
otosclerosis. Static admittance 
measures are abnormally low. 
Type Ad 
0.4 – 1.5 
> 2.8 
+50 to -150 
Represents a flaccid tympanic 
membrane resulting from scar tissue 
or a possible disarticulation of the 
middle ear ossicles. Compliance 
measures are abnormally high. 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
126 
Table 3. (Continued) 
 
Classical and Absolute Description of Tympanogram Types 
Tympanogram 
Type 
Compliance 
(ml) 
Static 
Admittance 
Peak 
Pressure 
(daPa) 
Clinical Audiological Findings 
Type B 
(perforation) 
> 1.5 
< .27 
no peak 
Represents some pathological 
condition exists in the middle ear. 
Static compliance (admittance) 
measures are abnormally low but 
initial compliance values are high. 
Type B 
(otitis media) 
< 0.4 
< .27 
no peak 
Represents restricted tympanic 
membrane mobility and would 
indicate that some pathological 
condition exists in the middle ear. 
Static compliance measures are 
abnormally low. 
Type C 
0.4 – 1.5 
.27 – 2.8 
-200 or 
worse 
Represents significant negative 
pressure in the middle ear cavity 
(considered significant for treatment 
when more negative than -200 mm/ 
H20). This may indicate a 
precursory or resolution of otitis 
media. Compliance measures are 
usually within normal limits. 
 
 
Admittance (compliance) 
+ 200
0
- 200 
Pressure (daPa) 
C 
A 
As 
Ad 
B 
 
Figure 6. The classical (descriptive) method of classifying tympanogram types, and is most often noted 
as the “A, B, C” classification method (see Table 3 for complete description of each type). 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
127
Tympanometry 
Regardless of the specific tympanometry classification system chosen, it is important to 
choose one that is consistently used within the country and region so that interpretation of 
results can be easily shared by those professionals reviewing the information. Several systems 
have been proposed to classify tympanograms, but the most clinically prevalent are the 
classical method and the absolute method. Described by Jerger (1970), the classical 
(descriptive) method is by far the most widely used system due to its simplicity, and is most 
often noted as the “A, B, C” classification (Figure 6). Although the classical method for 
describing tympanograms is easy to apply, it is subjective and not all tympanograms fall into 
the A, B, and C classifications. The absolute system is a method for quantifying 
tympanometric shapes and classification using static admittance (Peak Y) or tympanogram 
height, ear canal volume (Vea) tympanometric peak pressure (TPP), and tympanometric width 
(TW) or tympanometric gradient (GR), based on norms for objective interpretation. Table 3 
provides a summary of how the classical and absolute methods can effectively predict clinical 
audiological findings. For those who have little experience with the absolute system of 
classifying middle ear status, a brief description follows. 
Static admittance/compliance (Peak Y) or tympanogram height provides objective 
information on the height of the tympanogram by quantifying its peak relative to the tail value 
(obtained at +200 daPa) as well as providing data on the equivalent volume measure of the 
external and, possibly, middle ear. Ear canal volume or physical volume test (Vea) measures 
are diagnostically significant when equivalent ear canal volumes (ECV) exceed or are less 
than expected norms in the presence of a flat tympanogram. In such cases, the static 
admittance measure helps to detect eardrum perforation (in the case of large ECV), or detect 
an occlusion in the external ear canal (when ECV are significantly less than the expected). As 
mentioned earlier, there will likely be a higher incidence of perforated tympanic membrane in 
developing countries. Consequently, when testing an ear with a tympanic membrane 
perforation, the pressure may suddenly release when introducing a positive pressure into the 
external ear canal. This finding would indicate that the eustachian tube is functioning 
appropriately. TPP is a direct measure of the air pressure in the middle ear at which the peak 
of the tympanogram occurs. Negative TPP is indicative of the early stages of otitis media; 
positive TPP is found in early stages of acute otitis media. TW (or GR) describes the width 
(and slope) of the sides of the tympanogram surrounding the peak. TW is calculated by 
measuring the pressure range from the tympanogram corresponding to a percentage of 
reduction in static admittance from the maximum peak admittance. TW/GR measures appear 
to be sensitive to middle ear diseases that are not detected by other immittance measures or 
otoscopy (Fiellau-Nikolajsen, 1983; Nozza, Bluestone, Kardatzke & Bachman, 1994). It 
should be noted that when tympanograms are flat (Type B), the TW/ GR cannot be measured 
properly. 
Acoustic reflex measures: As supplied by the VIIth cranial nerve, the stapedius muscle 
normally contracts simultaneously in both ears when stimulated by a loud signal. The 
presence/absence of this reflex is an indicator of middle ear function as well as the integrity of 
the auditory and facial nerves involved in the reflex arc. In addition to assessing the function 
of neuronal structures bilaterally, the acoustic reflex has a great added value in providing an 
indirect gross estimation of hearing sensitivity of the patient in those instances that language 
or other barriers may negatively impact behavioral threshold results. It is important to realize 
that acoustic reflex measurements do not measure middle ear muscle contraction directly, but 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
128 
rather measure the effect of middle ear muscle contraction on tympanic membrane stiffening. 
This has an important implication in interpreting the clinical value of acoustic reflex results, 
because middle ear pathology will obliterate the identification of the middle ear contraction 
recorded with the immittance instrument. 
Contralateral and ipsilateral acoustic reflexes share common generators, yet their unique 
pathways can yield different measurement outcomes resulting from specific pathologies. 
Therefore, the acoustic reflex threshold obtained for a limited number of frequencies and 
intensities gives physiologic but not behavioral indicators of hearing. The presence of reflexes 
within normal limits at all frequencies is consistent with normal middle ear function; there is 
also a high probability that auditory sensitivity is within normal limits. However, acoustic 
reflexes may occur at expected intensities at all frequencies when mild or moderate-to-severe 
sensorineural hearing loss is present. For this reason, acoustic reflexes cannot be used to 
predict hearing threshold sensitivity with absolute assurance. 
Absent reflexes may also indicate some form of middle ear disease, a moderate-to-severe 
sensorineural hearing loss without recruitment, or a paralysis of the VIIth cranial nerve in the 
central auditory pathways. In the cases of bilateral middle ear pathologies, as often seen in 
developing countries, acoustic reflexes are typically absent ipsilaterally and contralaterally. 
Consequently, an acoustic reflex assessment can provide valuable insight and confirmation of 
other audiometric findings. Elevated reflexes are those that are present at a hearing level 
exceeding 100 dB HL. Partially present reflex is seen in only some (not all) frequencies tested 
and absent at others. Partial or elevated reflexes may indicate the presence of a hearing loss at 
those frequencies in which they are absent. If a conductive hearing loss exists, the 
contralateral acoustic reflex threshold will reflect the degree of conductive hearing loss for 
the affected ear. As mentioned earlier, elevated reflexes may exceed 100 dB HL. However, a 
clinician is well advised to avoid presenting stimuli in excess of 105 dB when assessing 
acoustic reflex thresholds to ensure that a temporary threshold shift is not triggered to 
negatively affect the behavioral threshold responses. 
 
Auditory Brainstem Response Audiometry 
Also termed brainstem evoked response audiometry, the auditory brainstem response 
(ABR) is a highly reliable and successful procedure to give objective information about the 
auditory system of those individuals that are unable to provide reliable behavioral audiometric 
responses. Fortunately, over the past few years, reduced cost and size of basic clinical 
instruments has improved access for many audiologists involved in providing clinical services 
in both developed and developing countries. Typically these commercial units are heavily 
dependent upon stable electrical sources without reduction or surges in electrical power. If the 
environment is conducive and the target population is appropriate within the context of a 
program within a particular developing country, any audiological data derived from an ABR 
will certainly provide valuable insight. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
129
Vignette 2 
 
In testing young children it is important to gain their confidence. This may be easy but 
with some children it takes time. Involving the mother in the test can make all the 
difference.  
It was an afternoon clinic in an African city. A solemn, wide-eyed little girl (‘N’) 
entered the room clutching her mother’s hand. Her mother sat down at the table and her 
daughter sat next to her but keeping as close as she could to her mother. The history was 
taken from the mother and indicated poor speech development as the main cause of 
concern. On the table were a set of colored pegs and a board but the little girl didn’t 
attempt to touch them and wouldn’t join in play. N was 4 years old and clearly shy. It was 
decided to try and condition her for a performance test rather than introduce headphones 
straight away for pure tone audiometry. She watched my face when I introduced a peg into 
her field of vision and drew her attention upwards by holding it next to my mouth. I said 
“GO” and then put the peg in the board. N drew back her hand rather than take hold of a 
peg I offered but held one when given it by her mother. She didn’t put it in the board when 
“GO” was signaled. Her mother was told how to help. She held her daughter’s hand and, 
whilst N watched my face, they put the peg in the board together in response to the signal 
on several occasions. After this N tentatively responded by herself, gradually becoming 
more confident. One headphone was then held just off the ear and a 500 Hz tone introduced 
at an intensity indicated by her responses to “GO” as likely to be audible. I put a peg in the 
board after the tone was introduced and she followed suit. After a few more signals to 
which she responded alone the headphone was brought near enough to touch the ear. A few 
more responses indicated that she was sufficiently confident for us to place the headphones 
on fully and perform pure tone audiometry. Three thresholds were obtained from each ear 
indicating that N had a moderate hearing loss. Otoscopic examination and tympanometry 
were straightforward as N was relaxed. They indicated that her hearing loss was 
sensorineural and the probable cause of the speech delay. 
 
Clinicians may establish an ABR threshold, considered the lowest intensity level in 
which a brainstem response is obtained and replicated, by using both click and tone burst 
stimuli in rapid secession presentation. However, since click-evoked ABR assesses the 
auditory system more rigorously in the high frequencies (from 1000 to 4000 Hz range), it is 
easy to rationalize the inclusion of tone burst stimuli when this is feasible. Tone burst stimuli 
produce frequency specific responses from the brainstem. Since responses generated by tone 
burst stimuli are more prone to physiological and electrical artifact, their interpretation can be 
challenging for even the more seasoned clinician. It is important to remember that ABR 
evaluates auditory sensitivity only, but it will not suggest how an individual uses "hearing" or 
interprets sounds (i.e., compared to a cognitive interpretation of sound such as required in 
speech audiometry tasks). 
 
Otoacoustic Emissions 
Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) are measured by coupling a small microphone to the 
external ear canal with a probe that is similar to the system used in immittance measures, but 
with a goal of assessing cochlear function. Clinical efficacy of OAE measures continues to 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
130 
broaden with the heightened awareness of auditory neuropathy, monitoring otoxicity in 
individuals, infant hearing screening programs as well as the addition of OAEs into the 
standard diagnostic auditory test battery. When used appropriately by trained personnel, there 
is a high correlation between OAE results and degree/type of hearing loss. 
Over the past few decades the literature has pointed to the medial olivary complex 
(MOC) as an important contributor for OAEs. When paired with the theory that all 
otoacoustic emissions arise from either reflection or distortion source mechanisms (Shera & 
Guinan, 1999), auditory science is recognizing that OAEs are a more complex phenomenon 
than initially believed. There are, in fact, two basic categories of OAEs: spontaneous 
otoacoustic emissions (SOAEs) and evoked (or stimulated) otoacoustic emissions (EOAEs). 
Implicit in name, SOAEs occur in the absence of stimulation to the ear. SOAEs are low 
intensity sounds that usually are inaudible to the individual and their presence is still not fully 
understood. EOAEs are recorded by introducing different types of stimuli to the ear. Stimulus 
type is the determinant for which of the three EOAEs will be recorded: transient evoked 
otoacoustic emissions (TEOAE), stimulus-frequency otoacoustic emissions (SFOAE), or 
distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAE). 
TEOAEs are produced after delivering a brief stimulus (click) to the ear. SFOAEs appear 
during the presentation of a tonal stimulus and occur at the frequency of the stimulus. 
DPOAEs are evoked by introducing two tonal stimuli simultaneously. DPOAEs occur at 
frequencies that are different from the stimulus frequencies and the observed response has a 
mathematical relationship to the frequencies of the primary stimuli. Current literature 
suggests that MOC activity affects outer hair cells of the cochlea differentially depending 
upon stimulus used (Guinan, Backus, Lilaonitku, & Aharonson, 2003). More specifically, 
activity increases according to the stimulus with the order of magnitude going from smallest 
to largest respectively: single tone, two tones (e.g., DPOAE primaries), repetitive tone pips, 
repetitive clicks and broadband noise. Clearly, TEOAEs and DPOAEs provide valuable 
information regarding cochlear integrity, but with differing methods. TEOAE instruments 
currently have better noise rejection and response validation abilities than DPOAE measures. 
Conversely, DPOAE instruments have greater dynamic range testing especially in higher 
frequencies that could be particularly applicable for monitoring noise or drug effects 
(Lonsbury-Martin & Martin, 2007). In recognizing that OAEs will continue to grow in 
importance in the audiological test battery, it is difficult to predict if one form (i.e., DPOAE 
or TEOAE) will ultimately yield the most valuable information. Until more evidence provides 
adequate insight, a clinician may conservatively choose instruments that can gather both 
forms of OAE measure. 
REDISCOVERING CLASSIC DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 
Many audiologic site of lesion tests, such as the Tuning Fork, the Alternate Binaural 
Loudness Balancing and Short Increment Sensitivity Index, have become historical footnotes 
over the past 20 years. This reduction in usage of many site of lesion tests are likely due to 
their 67–80% accuracy compared to the 90–100% accuracy in lesion identification with the 
more prevalent digitized radiographic imaging readily available in many urban hospitals in 
developed countries. In regions where an MRI, C-T or even X-ray may not be readily 
available, those classical tests for site of lesion can still provide valuable input. Despite their 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
131
ability to differentiate cochlear, conductive or retrocochlear pathology from an unaffected ear, 
some of the skills to initiate these audiological procedures have been put aside for decades. 
Most current commercially available audiometers no longer come equipped with options for 
these specialized tests. For those professionals working in developing regions and making 
purchase decisions there should be serious consideration of equipment that will allow 
utilization of some classic diagnostic site of lesion tests where appropriate.  
 
Table 4. Summary of three classic tuning fork tests 
 (reprint by permission; Clark & Roeser, 2007) 
 
Test 
Purpose 
Procedure 
Results 
Bing 
Assesses the 
presence of 
conductive 
hearing loss. 
Tuning fork base is 
placed on the patient’s 
mastoid while the 
earcanal is alternately 
opened and closed by 
depressing tragus. 
If louder when ear closed, the 
loss is sensorineural. 
If the same when the earcanal is 
open and closed, the loss is 
conductive. 
Rinne 
Compares air 
conduction to 
bone conduction 
sensitivity. 
Tuning fork is 
alternately held to the ear 
and then the base is 
placed on the mastoid 
process. 
If louder when held to the ear, the 
loss is sensorineural (Rinne 
Positive). 
If louder when base is placed on 
the mastoid process, the loss is 
conductive (Rinne Negative). 
Weber 
Used for patients 
reporting 
unilateral hearing 
loss. 
Tuning fork base is 
placed midline on the 
patient’s forehead. 
If lateralizes to the ear with loss, 
the loss is conductive. 
If lateralizes to the ear without 
loss, the loss is sensorineural or 
mixed. 
 
 
Tuning Fork Tests 
 
Because they provide preliminary diagnostic information, require no special equipment 
or electricity, and are easily administered, tuning forks should find their way to accepted 
practice in a developing country. Three commonly used tuning fork tests are: Bing, Rinne, 
and Weber. Results from tuning fork tests are determined by the presence or absence of an 
occlusion effect and consequently are dependent on low frequency tuning forks (256 or 512 
Hz). 
As shown in Table 4, the Bing test is used for patients who have either a bilateral 
conductive or sensorineural hearing loss. In this test, the tuning fork is set into vibration and 
the handle is placed on the mastoid process. With the tuning fork on the mastoid, the ear canal 
is alternately occluded and unoccluded by having the patient apply slight pressure on the 
tragus with his/her finger and report if loudness increases when the ear canal is occluded 
(Bing Positive) or no difference in the loudness occluded or unoccluded earcanal (Bing 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
132 
Negative). A Bing Positive result is consistent with normal hearing or sensorineural hearing 
loss. If a Bing Negative result occurs, it is suggestive of a conductive impairment.  
Wih the Rinne test, the tuning fork is set into vibration and held close to the patient's ear. 
The patient is then asked to report when he/she can no longer hear the sound produced by the 
tuning fork. Once the signal is no longer audible, the handle of the tuning fork is quickly 
placed against the patient's mastoid process and the patient is asked if he/she can again hear 
the tone. If the patient is able to hear the tone produced by the fork for a longer duration by 
bone conduction than by air conduction, the result is called a Rinne Negative, as is observed 
in patients with a conductive hearing loss. A Rinne Positive occurs when the patient hears the 
tone longer by air than by bone conduction, and is indicative of normal hearing or a 
sensorineural hearing loss. Care must be taken when interpreting results from the Rinne test, 
because if the non-test ear has better bone conduction sensitivity than the test ear, the signal 
from the mastoid could crossover to the non-test ear and provide an inaccurate diagnosis of 
conductive pathology. 
The Weber test is a test of lateralization used for patients who report unilateral hearing 
loss. After the tuning fork is set into vibration, the handle is placed on the forehead, and the 
patient is asked to report where the signal is heard. If the signal lateralizes to the ear with the 
hearing loss, a conductive hearing loss is indicated. If the signal lateralizes to the ear with 
better hearing, a sensorineural hearing loss is indicated and patients with normal hearing will 
report the sound in the midline position.  
Audiometric tuning fork tests can replace standard tuning fork by placing a bone 
conduction oscillator set at 35-40 dB HL on the patient’s forehead. The use of a bone 
conduction oscillator for the Bing or Weber tests provides greater intensity and frequency 
control over the stimulus, increasing the reliability and validity of findings. There is no 
argument that pure tone bone conduction testing is significantly more sophisticated than 
tuning fork tests. However, tuning fork tests can be used to provide a preliminary diagnosis or 
validate pure tone audiometric data. Pure tone bone conduction tests provide both quantitative 
and qualitative information.  
CLASSIC BEHAVIOURAL DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 
Differential audiological testing gained popularity when the phenomenon of recruitment 
was found to have an association with particular sites of lesion. Recruitment is defined as a 
rapid growth of loudness. Originally, recruitment was thought to be an abnormal finding, but 
research and clinical investigation has shown that recruitment is, in fact, a normal finding. 
The lack of recruitment is the abnormal finding (Sanders, 1979). A positive result on a test of 
recruitment is associated with cochlear pathology while an absent recruitment is associated 
with retrocochlear pathology. One pathophysiological hypothesis for the recruitment 
phenomenon suggests that a signal intensity increases above the already pathologically 
altered threshold while the sensory cells and neighboring neurons are maximally stimulated 
resulting in a subjective disproportionately rapid increase of sound sensitivity. Some of the 
following differential tests focus on identifying the presence and degree of recruitment for a 
patient. 
 
 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
133
Alternate Binaural Loudness Balancing  
 
Matching method procedures have been used extensively in psychoacoustics as a means 
of differentiating response performance between subjects. A classic matching procedure 
prevalently used in the past, Alternate Binaural Loudness Balancing (ABLB) has the listener 
compare loudness of the same frequency between the two ears, one with normal hearing and 
the other with hearing loss, as a means to detect abnormal loudness growth in a pathological 
ear (Fowler, 1936). Consequently, the ABLB became a sensitive test for loudness recruitment 
(i.e., a rapid growth of loudness). Loudness recruitment is observed in patients with cochlear 
pathology. Individuals with eighth nerve tumors may not experience loudness recruitment in 
the presence of hearing loss. 
Using the standard ABLB procedure, the intensity level is kept constant at 20 dB SL in 
the normal (reference) ear while intensity is adjusted in the other (variable) ear until the signal 
intensity is judged equivalent between ears. The listener is instructed to report whether the 
variable tone is “softer than”, “louder than”, or “equal” in loudness to the reference ear. After 
equal loudness is determined, the intensity is increased in 20 dB increments until the patient’s 
uncomfortable loudness level or maximum limits of the audiometer are reached. Those 
individuals with cochlear hearing loss will experience a narrower range of loudness than 
expected by those with normal hearing. Plotting loudness balance results (as shown in Figure 
7) can be accomplished with either a laddergram or graph. As noted in Figure 7, no 
recruitment is demonstrated when the listener reported equal loudness growth (i.e., +/- 10 dB) 
between the impaired and unimpaired ear. Conversely, the listener will report equal loudness 
at equal intensities (+/- 10 dB) when complete recruitment exists.  
 
 
Short Increment Sensitivity Index 
 
Based on the supposition that recruiting ears are able to detect small changes in 
suprathreshold signal intensities, the short increment sensitivity index (SISI) was devised 
(Jerger, Shedd & Harford, 1959). A listener’s perception of a change in intensity is 
recognized as a change in loudness (difference limen for intensity). Instead of measuring 
Difference Limen for Intensity (DLI), the SISI procedure tests the ability of a patient to detect 
the presence of 1 dB incremental changes in the presence of a carrier signal. Clinical 
experience with the DLI suggested that patients with cochlear disorders can detect small 
intensity changes in an otherwise steady-state signal at low intensities. Those with normal 
hearing and patients with disorders other than in the cochlea do not have this ability. The 
classical SISI procedure involves presenting twenty 1 dB increments simultaneously during a 
carrier tone of the same frequency at 20 dB SL. A percentage score for the 1 dB increments 
heard by the patient is then calculated as a small increment sensitivity index. A high SISI 
score (70–100%) would be characteristic of cochlear (sensory) hearing impairment and a low 
score (< 20%) indicative of non-cochlear or neural pathology (Cooper & Owen, 1976). 
Clearly, a diagnostic audiometer with a processor that has the capability of producing small 1 
dB incremental steps with a simultaneous carrier frequency is necessary to conduct the SISI 
testing.  
 
 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
134 
Threshold Tone Decay 
 
Auditory adaptation is the decline of perception of a stimulus as a result of “continuous” 
stimulation; auditory adaptation is a normal phenomenon. However, auditory fatigue (or 
threshold decay) is the diminishing response that continues to accumulate under sustained 
stimulation using a wide frequency and intensity range of pure tones (Carhart, 1957). In those 
patients presenting with progressive hearing loss, auditory fatigue is associated with 
retrocochlear lesions. A conventional pure tone audiometer can be used to assess the 
phenomenon of auditory adaptation through the threshold tone decay test (TTD). Owens 
Threshold Tone Decay (Owens, 1964) test incorporates a 20 second rest period between each 
stimulus presentation with each presentation beginning at 5 dB SL. If the patient does not 
perceive the tone, a 20 second rest period is followed by a 5 dB increase in intensity. 
Incremental increases in intensity continue until the patient perceives the tone for 60 seconds 
or until the 20 dB SL is reached. A retrocochlear lesion will cause rapid adaptation at all 
frequencies; cochlear lesions result in slower adaptation at one or two frequencies. Instead of 
5 dB SL starting level, the Olsen Noffsinger TTD will start at 20 dB SL. For more in-depth 
detail of the above-mentioned classic behavioral diagnostic tests, the reader can review a 
recent chapter written by Brunt (2002). 
 
 
Pseudohypoacusis or Nonorganic Hearing Loss 
 
On occasion, a patient may present unusually elevated “thresholds” in the absence of an 
anatomical or pathological condition. This would be described as “functional”, “non-
organic”, “pseudohypoacusis” or “psychogenic” hearing loss and may be due to conscious or 
sub-conscious factors. Children as young as six years old may present pseudohypoacusic 
hearing loss, but typically it is exhibited by an adolescent or adult. Conscious factors in an 
adult may be a desire for financial gain when compensation is involved. Sub-conscious 
factors in a child include a cry for help as a result of difficulties at school or at home. The 
hearing loss may be unilateral or bilateral. The audiogram obtained usually indicates a 
sensorineural type of hearing loss and is often flat in configuration.  
Underlying the raised thresholds may be normal hearing or a genuine hearing loss. It is 
unfortunate that in addition to a lack of objective data regarding prevalence of hearing loss, 
there is limited published data regarding incidence of pseudohypoacusis in various 
populations within developing countries. Clearly motivating factors for an individual to 
exhibit a non-organic hearing loss may differ in a developing country than a developed 
country. Research has indicated that in developed countries the degree of hearing loss claimed 
is related to the severity of the psychological factors involved (Aplin & Rowson, 1990). 
Individuals living in an economically deprived developing country may choose to exhibit a 
non-organic hearing loss for the purposes of obtaining an additional hearing aid for any 
number of reasons (e.g., a hearing aid would be considered a status symbol or desirable for 
resale at a profit). Detection of a non-organic hearing loss is important in order to avoid 
unnecessary investigations and treatment where resources are often quite limited. In addition, 
if emotional issues are identified as a causal factor then psychological help can be considered 
where needed.  
 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
135
O
O X
X
O
O
X
X
No Recruitment 
Recruitment
 
Figure 7. Air conduction results from ABLB testing indicating equivalent loudness growth in two ears 
at 1000 and 4000 Hz. Results from 1000 Hz demonstrate equal loudness report with a 40 dB SL signal 
in each ear; consistent with no recruitment. Results from 4000 Hz demonstrate presence of loudness 
recruitment with unequal loudness growth in the two ears. 
 
Voice Test 
Initial suspicions may be raised during the interview and before formal testing has taken 
place. A sudden hearing loss with no obvious causation is unusual in childhood. A history of 
school or family problems, exaggerated listening behaviour, or an accurate response to 
conversational speech without the aid of lip-reading may all indicate the possibility of a non-
organic hearing loss. One way of assessing this is to place the hand over the mouth when 
speaking or place the headphones from behind the patient and ask quietly if these are 
comfortable. The result may be an answer not possible from someone claiming a severe 
degree of bilateral hearing loss. 
Another non-technological, alternative method of assessing hearing, the three level 'voice 
test', has been developed, standardized and suggested for use in developing countries 
(Prescott, Omoding, Fermor, & Oglivy, 1999). The three levels of voicing for the ‘voice test’ 
included: a whispered voice equating with normal hearing; conversational voice with mild 
hearing loss; and a loud voice to moderate/severe hearing loss. When comparing the voice 
test with standard audiometry in the classrooms a specificity of 97.8% and a sensitivity of 
83.3% was reported. Prior to undertaking the voice test, an individual validation using a 
sound level meter held 1 meter from the signal’s origin in a quiet room is used, with an 
averaged whispered voice corresponding to 30–45 dBA; conversational voicing at 45–60 
dBA; and loud voicing at 60–80 dBA. With this degree of accuracy in detecting hearing 
impairment and its administration simplicity, the three level voice test could be of great utility 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
136 
not only for diagnostic evaluation, but also confirmation of audiometric testing when 
pseudohypoacusic hearing loss is suspected.  
 
Audiometric Tests 
Simple tests for non-organic hearing loss can be performed using a standard audiometer. 
One common hallmark seen is inconsistent thresholds and the absence of a shadow curve in 
the presence of a unilateral hearing loss. Another simple test for a unilateral non-organic 
hearing loss is placing the bone vibrator on the side of the “poor” ear. If the other ear is 
normally hearing, a normal bone conduction threshold should be obtained unless a non-
organic hearing loss is present. The Stenger test is another useful test and can be performed 
quite quickly. It is based upon the principle that if two tones of the same frequency are 
introduced at the same time, one into each ear, then only the louder one is perceived. If a tone 
is introduced 10 decibels above the threshold in the “good” ear and 10 decibels below the 
threshold in the “poor” ear and a response is obtained this suggests that the threshold was 
genuine in the “poorer” ear. No response would suggest a non-organic hearing loss (i.e., a 
positive Stenger was obtained).  
Behavioural tests for a non-organic hearing loss are based upon distracting the individual 
from the loudness of the tone being introduced. They include counting the number of signals 
given whilst varying the intensity of the signals presented; the which ear test—changing the 
ear in which the signal is presented and the intensity level of the tone—and the Yes/ No 
test—say “Yes” when you hear it and “No” when you don’t (Nolan & Tucker, 1981). In tests 
using word lists there may be a consistent tendency to respond with part of a word. The 
speech discrimination curve obtained may be better than the degree of hearing loss suggested 
by the audiogram. 
Many physiologic tests (as described earlier in this chapter) can be enlisted to confirm or 
deny the audiological diagnosis of pseudohypoacusis hearing loss in a patient. Auditory 
brainstem response (ABR) testing may help with indicating whether on not there is an 
underlying genuine hearing impairment. Unfortunately, a normal ABR threshold does not 
exclude a genuine hearing loss that may be cortical in origin. Cortical evoked responses 
would give a definitive result but are not always easy to obtain in children. Adults need to be 
given a task to keep them alert during the test. Some researchers have used otoacoustic 
emissions to indicate whether hearing is normal or not (Saravanappa, Mepham, & Bowler, 
2005). In the absence of middle ear dysfunction the presence of otoacoustic emissions would 
be consistent with normal hearing but the possibility of auditory neuropathy would have to be 
considered. 
EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION OF TEST RESULTS 
Presentation of the test results is a significant event for the patient or the parents 
involved, and should be carried out with due care. Having a hearing impairment or a child 
with a hearing impairment could have far reaching implications, and how the information is 
received is dependant upon the way in which it is delivered. The information given should 
never be hurried and there should be an opportunity for questions.  
When a group of parents within the United States were asked to rate priorities of topics 
dealing with the initial diagnosis of their child’s hearing loss those with the highest priority 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
137
were: causes of hearing loss; coping with the emotional aspects of hearing loss; understanding 
the audiogram; learning to listen and speak; and understanding the ear and hearing (Roush 
and Harrison, 2002). Yet, after some period of time, these parent’s priorities changed with the 
top two priorities being: learning to listen and speak; realistic timelines for learning to listen 
and speak. Professionals must be prepared to provide as much information to parents as 
possible, as well as direct parents to sources of information when requested. Clearly there are 
questionable parallels between parental concerns in a developing country and a developed 
country. However, it is important to keep in mind that families living in developing countries 
will have their own unique beliefs that may be the result of limited awareness of hearing loss 
as well as negative cultural values about disabilities and only vague knowledge of the options 
available for remediation (Stephens, Stephens, & Eisenhart-Rothe, 2000). For example, a 
study by Olusanya, Luxon and Wircz (2006) showed that almost 30% of mothers (in a cohort 
group of 101) in Nigeria, when asked, believed that hearing impaired children can still hear 
and speak or that babies could not be born with hearing loss. In addition, local folklore or 
poorly informed community leaders may suggest to the mother that her child’s hearing loss is 
due to some action or inaction on her part during pregnancy. 
Depending on the language and/or dialect expertise of the hearing health care 
professional, there may be a need to enlist an interpreter to provide test results and render an 
audiological diagnosis. This has many pitfalls. Unfortunately most “interpreters” are family 
members who are willing to “re-interpret meaning” and are not experienced in providing an 
exact translation. When seeking the help of a translator, words should be chosen carefully to 
avoid undue distress as well as allowing for a straightforward interpretation and translation in 
a particular language. Even when an interpreter is present it is important to look at, and to 
speak directly to the person concerned, and not the interpreter. It is essential to be truthful 
about what is known and what is still uncertain and the words chosen to describe the findings 
should be selected with sensitivity regarding their impact. 
A demonstration of a child’s degree of hearing loss can facilitate the counseling process 
and provide the family or caregivers a clearer idea of the extent of the problem. By having the 
parent or caregiver seated near the child when presenting signals in soundfield the first step of 
successful habilitation is more easily achieved. Conversely, being able to demonstrate that a 
non-speaking child has normal hearing may be an important step towards directing the 
parent’s attention to other disabilities causing the child’s lack of communication. 
Once the information is provided one individual may react with an expressive emotional 
outbreak, while another will display a quiet and stoic demeanor. It is the clinician’s skills and 
experience that will determine success in building rapport to address each family’s emotional 
and informational needs. It is an established fact that many do not fully comprehend the 
diagnosis information given during the initial counseling session. Information given may 
need to be repeated at that time and later. Where it is feasible, written information should be 
given, which can be taken and read at home. In addition to the degree of loss, a complete 
description of an individual's hearing impairment should include whether one ear (unilateral) 
or both ears (bilateral) are involved and the type of loss.  
Despite limited resources, there is still an onus on the professional to ensure that careful 
records about hearing loss are kept with standardized methods and techniques used. Through 
knowledge of the nature of the test, the test equipment, the test procedures and careful 
execution, an accurate assessment of the patient’s hearing status can be made. 
 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
138 
REFERENCES 
 
Aplin, A., & Rowson, V.R. (1990). Psychological characteristics of children with functional 
hearing loss. British Journal of Audiology, 24, 77-87. 
Archibald, L.K., & Reller, L.B. (2001). Clinical microbiology in developing countries. 
Emerging Infectious Diseases, 7, 302-305. 
Boyce, J.M., & Pittet, D. (2002). Guideline for hand hygiene in health care workers. CDC: 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 51(RR16),1-44. 
Bricco, E. (1985). Impacted cerumen as a reason for failure in hearing conservation programs. 
Journal of School Health, 55, 240-241. 
Brunt, M. (2002). Cochlear and retrocochlear behavioral tests. In J. Katz (Ed.), Handbook of 
Clinical Audiology, 5th ed. (pp. 111-123). New York: Lippincott,Williams & Wilkins.  
Carhart, R. (1957). Clinical determination of abnormal auditory adaptation. Archives of 
Otolaryngology, 65, 32-39. 
Clark, J.L. & Roeser, R.J. (2007). Middle Ear Measures. In R.J. Roeser, M. Valente, H. 
Hosford-Dunn (Eds.), Audiology: Diagnosis (pp. 372-391). New York: Thieme. 
Cooper, S.J. (1985). Relationship of hearing protector type and prevalence of external 
auditory canal pathology. Paper presented at the American Speech and Hearing 
Association Conference. Las Vegas, NV. 
Cooper, J.C., & Owen, J.H. (1976). In defense of SISIs: Short Increment Sensitivity Index. 
Archives of Otolaryngology, 102, 396-399. 
Culpepper, B., & Thompson, G. (1994). Effects of reinforcer duration on the response 
behavior of preterm 2-year-olds in visual reinforcement audiometry. Ear and Hearing, 
15, 161-167. 
Day, J., Bamford, J., Parry, G., Sheperd, M., & Quigley, A. (2000). Evidence on the efficacy 
of insert earphone and sound field VRA with young infants. British Journal of Audiology, 
34, 329-334. 
Fiellau-Nikolajsen, M. (1983). Tympanometry and secretory otitis media: Observations on 
diagnosis, epidemiology, treatment, and prevention in prospective cohort studies of three-
year old children. Acta Otolaryngology, (Suppl. 394), 1-73. 
Fowler, E.P. (1936). A method for the early detection of otosclerosis. Archives of 
Otolaryngology, 24, 731-741. 
Garner, J.S., & Favero, M.S. (1985). CDC guidelines for handwashing and hospital 
environmental control. Infection Control, 7, 231-243. 
Gleitman, R.M., Ballachand, B.B., & Goldstein, D.P. (1992). Incidence of cerumen impaction 
in the general adult population. Hearing Journal, 45(5), 28-32. 
 Gliddon, M.L., Martin, A.M., & Green, R. (1999). A comparison of some clinical features of 
visual reinforcement audiometry and the distraction test. British Journal of Audiology, 
33, 355-365. 
Guinan, J.J., Backus, B.C., Lilaonitku, W., & Aharonson, V. (2003). Medical olivocochlear 
efferent reflex in humans: otoacoustic emission (OAE) measurement issues and the 
advantages of stimulus frequency OAEs. Journal of the Association for Research in 
Otolaryngology, 4, 521-540. 
Review

Providing Diagnostic Audiology Services … 
 
139
Hart, A.R., & Karuiku, S. (1998). Antimicrobial resistance in developing countries. British 
Medical Journal, 317, 647-650.  
Hickson, F.S. (2001) Behavioural tests of hearing. In V.E Newton, (Ed.) Paediatric 
Audiological Medicine (pp. 91-112). Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons. 
Hinman, A.R. (1998). Global progress in infectious disease control. Vaccine, 16, 1116-1121. 
Hong, Y.K. (1984). Disyllabic Malay word lists for speech audiometry. Medical Journal of 
Malaysia, 39, 197-204. 
Jerger, J., Shedd, J.L., & Harford, R. (1959). On the detection of extremely small changes in 
sound intensity. Archives of Otolaryngology, 69, 200-211. 
Jerger, J. (1962). Hearing tests in otologic diagnosis. ASHA, 4, 139-145. 
Jerger, J. (1970). Clinical experience with impedance audiometry. Archives of 
Otolaryngology, 92, 311-324. 
Kishon-Rabin, L., & Rosenhouse, J. (2000). Speech perception test for Arabic-speaking 
children. Audiology, 39, 269-277. 
Lonsbury-Martin, B.L., & Martin, G.K. (2007). Otoacoustic Emissions. In R.F. Burkard, M. 
Don, & J.J. Eggermont (Eds.), Auditory Evoked Potentials (pp. 159-179). Baltimore, 
MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. 
Magnusson, L., Borjesson, E., & Axelsson, A.C. (1997). Visual reinforcement audiometry: 
Comparison of loudspeaker arrangements. Scandinavian Audiology, 26, 247-251. 
McPherson, Bradley (2007). Personal communication. 
Nilsson, M., Soli, S.D., & Sullivan, J.A. (1994). Development of the Hearing in Noise Test 
for the measurement of speech reception thresholds in quiet and in noise. Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, 95, 1085-1099. 
Nolan, M., & Tucker, I.G, (1981). Functional hearing loss in children. Journal of the British 
Association of the Deaf, 5, 2-10. 
Northern, J., & Downs, M. (1991). Hearing and hearing loss in children. In J. Butler (Ed.), 
Hearing in children (pp. 1-31). Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins.  
Nozza, R., Bluestone, C., Kardatzke, D., & Bachman, R. (1994). Identification of middle ear 
effusion by aural acoustic admittance and otoscopy. Ear and Hearing, 15, 310-323. 
Olusanya, B.M., Luxon, L.M., & Wircz, M.L. (2006). Maternal views on infant hearing loss 
in a developing country. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 70, 
619-623.  
Owens, E. (1964). Tone decay in VIIIth nerve and cochlear lesions. Journal of Speech and 
Hearing Disorders, 29, 14-22. 
Prescott, C.A., Omoding, S.S., Fermor, J., & Ogilvy, D. (1999). An evaluation of the ‘voice 
test’ as a method of assessing hearing in children with particular reference to the situation 
in developing countries. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 51, 
165-170. 
Roeser, R.J., Lai, L., & Clark, J.L. (2005). Effect of ear canal occlusion on pure tone 
threshold sensitivity. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 16, 740-746. 
Roush, J., & Harrison, M. (2002). What parents want to know at diagnosis and during the first 
year. The Hearing Journal, 53 (11), 56-60. 
Sanders, J.W. (1979). Recruitment. In W. Rintelman (Ed.). Hearing Assessment (pp 261–
280). Baltimore, MD: University Park Press. 
Review

Jackie L. Clark and Valerie Newton 
 
140 
Saravanappa, N., Mepham, G.A., & Bowler, D.A. (2005). Diagnostic tools in 
pseudohypacusis in children. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 
69,1235-1238. 
Shera, C.A., & Guinan, J.J. (1999). Evoked otoacoustic emissions arise by two fundamentally 
different mechanisms: a taxonomy for mammalian OAEs. Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America, 105, 782-798. 
Smith, A. (2001). WHO activities for prevention of deafness and hearing impairment in 
children. Scandinavian Audiology (Supp 53), 30, 93-100. 
Stephens, D., Stephens, R., & Eisenhart-Rothe, A. (2000). Attitudes toward hearing impaired 
children in less developed countries: a pilot study. Audiology, 39, 184-191. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (1997). Report of the first informal consultation on 
future programme development for the prevention of deafness and hearing impairment. 
Geneva: World Health Organization, Prevention of Blindness and Deafness. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (1998). Report of the International Primary Ear and 
Hearing Care Working Party. Cape Town, South Africa. Geneva: World Health 
Organization, Prevention of Blindness and Deafness. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (1999). WHO ear and hearing disorders survey protocol 
for Population-based survey of prevalence and causes of deafness and hearing 
impairment and other ear diseases. Geneva: World Health Organization, Prevention of 
Blindness and Deafness. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2004). Guidelines for hearing aids and services for 
developing countries. 2nd ed. Geneva: World Health Organization, Prevention of 
Blindness and Deafness. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2006). Fact sheet: Deafness and hearing impairment. 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs300/en. Accessed June 27, 2006. 
World Health Organization/Christian Blind Mission (WHO/CBM). (1998). Hearing aids 
services – needs and technology assessment for developing countries. Report of a 
WHO/CBM workshop. Bensheim, Germany: World Health Organization, Prevention of 
Blindness and Deafness. 
World Health Organization/CIBA (WHO/CIBA). (1996). Prevention of hearing impairment 
from chronic otitis media: Report of a WHO/CIBA Foundation workshop. London: World 
Health Organization, Prevention of Blindness and Deafness. 
Widen, J.E., Folson, R.C., Cone-Wesson, B., Carty, L., Dunnell, J.J., Koebsell, K., et al. 
(2000). Identification of neonatal hearing impairment and hearing status at 8 to 12 
months corrected age using a visual reinforcement audiometry protocol. Ear and 
Hearing, 21, 471-487. 
Wong, L.L.N., & Soli, S.D. (2005). Development of the Cantonese Hearing in Noise Test 
(CHINT). Ear and Hearing, 26, 276-289. 
Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 
 
 
 
REHABILITATION OF HEARING LOSS:  
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES  
IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
 
 
Ron Brouillette* 
Directorate of Primary and Mass Education, Dhaka, Bangladesh and ‘Wings’, 
Consultants for International Deafness and Development, United States of America 
ABSTRACT 
There are approximately 186 million people with hearing loss residing in developing 
countries. Their access to aural rehabilitation services that can significantly reduce the 
effects of hearing loss and improve communication is largely non-existent or very 
limited. Aural rehabilitation includes identification of hearing loss, assessment, 
counselling, hearing aid fitting, communications interventions and follow-up. Within the 
149 lower and lower middle income nations of the developing world necessity has 
spawned innovative aural rehabilitation alternatives to meet the growing demand for 
hearing health. This chapter, guided by the World Health Organization’s Guidelines for 
Hearing Aids and Services for Developing Countries describes the situation regarding 
hearing aid provision in developing nations and introduces a range of affordable and 
appropriate options that may potentially meet local needs. Due to the scarcity of 
information on audiological services in lower income nations, this chapter borrows 
largely from anecdotal evidence based on field reports and personal experiences. The 
topics covered include raising public awareness and acceptance of hearing aids and 
services, the hearing aid market in developing countries, barriers to successful hearing aid 
provision and ways to create effective services in developing regions.  
 
                                                        
* Correspondence: ron_brouillette@yahoo.com 
Review

Ron Brouillette 
 
142 
BACKGROUND 
Aural rehabilitation includes the counselling, device fitting, communication intervention 
and follow-up services that should take place after the accurate identification and assessment 
of hearing loss. The goal of aural rehabilitation is to facilitate adequate receptive and expres-
sive communication in individuals with hearing impairment (American Speech-Language-
Hearing Association, 1984). Aural rehabilitation is an essential component to any hearing 
health care process. Unfortunately, access to these services is extremely limited in many 
developing nations. 
Approximately 186 million people with hearing loss reside in developing countries 
(WHO, 2004a). Their access to aural rehabilitation services that can significantly reduce the 
effects of hearing loss and improve communication is largely non-existent or very limited. 
For example, the provision of hearing aids is fundamental to the rehabilitation process. Yet, 
of the estimated 35 million hearing aids required each year in developing countries, only one 
million hearing aids are distributed (Smith, 2007).  
The field of aural rehabilitation is vast, encompasses counselling, the provision of 
assistive devices such as telephone couplers, visual alarms, telecoil systems and personal FM 
systems, speechreading training among others. This chapter, however,  will focus narrowly on 
the provision of hearing aids in developing countries. Without the availability and 
affordability of this instrument very little worthwhile aural rehabilitation can be accomplished 
in any community. Increasing the access to hearing aids in developing countries has been 
addressed by many European organisations and individuals since the late 1960s and 1970s. In 
particular, the Commonwealth Society for the Deaf, a charitable organization based in the 
United Kingdom, conducted several international seminars on aural rehabilitation needs and 
reducing barriers to hearing aid provision, including the first such seminar in Africa 
(Commonwealth Society for the Deaf, 1968). Later, a European Initiative on Hearing 
Impairment in Developing Countries sought to delineate the issues involved in hearing aid 
provision and to devise ways to improve delivery systems in non-industrialized countries 
(Royal National Institute for the Deaf, 1991). More recently, the World Health Organization 
has taken a leadership role in highlighting the needs of those with hearing disability in 
developing countries (Kumar, 2001). An outcome of WHO’s activities has been the recent 
formation of WWHearing—World Wide Hearing Care for Developing Countries. This body 
of international experts advocates the development of models for affordable hearing health 
care systems, and particularly affordable hearing aids and delivery services, in developing 
countries (WWHearing, 2008). These philanthropic and inter-governmental organizations 
have drawn attention to the financial and technical difficulties inherent in the 
commercialization of hearing health care in low income countries and propose alternatives to 
overcome these difficulties. The outgrowth of their efforts and emerging shifts in delivering 
hearing aid services in developing countries are described in this chapter. 
Review

Rehabilitation of Hearing Loss 
 
143
BARRIERS TO EFFECTIVE REHABILITATION SERVICES 
Affordability—The High Cost of Hearing 
 
Those who seek amplification in developing countries are often shocked by the cost of 
hearing aids. Costs are prohibitively high for the vast majority of individuals in impoverished 
regions with hearing impaired communities (Alberti, 1999; McPherson & Holborow, 1985), 
where the majority of potential hearing aid users earn less than $2.00 per day (see Chapter 2 
for an overview). Hearing aid sales worldwide in 2005 were estimated to be 7 million units 
out of a needed 52 million units. Of these, however, only 3% were sold in developing nations 
where around 70% of people with hearing impairment reside (Smith, 2007). Uptake of 
hearing aids, even under ideal conditions meets a small fraction of need. In the United States 
for example, only 23% of those who need hearing aids can afford or will choose to wear them 
(Hearing Mojo, 2007). In 2004, the average cost of a hearing aid fitting in the United States 
was $2,300 (Allen, 2004). 
The WHO has established a guideline for ‘affordability’ as no more than 3% of gross 
national product per hearing aid (McPherson, 2007). This has the advantage of relating 
hearing aid cost in each country to average income. Table 1 lists examples of how the WHO 
guideline determines affordability in a range of developed and developing countries, using 
2006 gross national product statistics. 
However, in developing countries the average price of a basic hearing aid—available in 
mostly urban areas— is well over $US200. Hearing aids, depending on the level of technical 
sophistication, retail for between $250 and $1,500 in a developed Asian economy (Cheng & 
McPherson, 2000).  In typical developing Asian nations a body-worn hearing aid prescribed 
by an audiologist retails between $80 and $250, while a behind-the-ear (BTE) model will cost 
from $100 to more than $1,000 (Brouillette, 2001). Globally, the WHO estimates that the 
average cost of hearing aids is between $200 and $500 in developing countries (Kumar, 
2001). However, long-term affordability is often not improved when large numbers of ‘free’ 
hearing aids are provided by overseas charitable agencies. Anderson (2008) discusses the 
impact of ‘free’ hearing aids on the existing audiological service network in the Dominican 
Republic. Although well-intended, this kind of humanitarian activity may be 
counterproductive and unsustainable unless linked to the local audiology infrastructure’s 
resources and cultural knowledge. Additionally, field experience has demonstrated that the 
financial or in-kind participation of a hearing aid recipient (such as through purchase of an 
earmold or batteries) leads to a sense of ownership and responsibility. 
The cost of conventional hearing aid batteries, when they can be found, is another major 
constraint on affordability. A standard pack of six zinc-air hearing aid batteries, at an average 
cost of $4.50, will strain a family’s resources—especially in the 49 least-developed countries, 
where the majority of the population lives on less than $2 a day (UNCTAD, 2002). The 
annual cost of batteries—perhaps $36 or more —may be, after an average of four years of 
hearing aid use, equal to or greater than the initial cost of a hearing aid. Often, even if funds 
can be found to cover this cost, BTE hearing aid batteries are unavailable in local markets 
(McPherson & Brouillette, 2004). In most of the least developed nations, an alternative to 
expensive zinc-air cells for hearing aids that take size 675 batteries is the LH44 battery. This 
costs only 10% of the price of the 675 cell but has a shorter working life (normally one week 
Review

Ron Brouillette 
 
144 
to ten days). This battery fits nearly all later model 675-based hearing aids. There are 
anecdotal reports of users experiencing slighter greater gain in the high frequencies with this 
battery. For many hearing aid users this may be a welcomed distortion. While hearing aid 
manufacturers and most audiologists advise the use of zinc-air batteries, the substitution of 
LH44 cells will continue until there is affordable availability of other battery types including 
rechargeable batteries.  
 
Table 1. Gross national product and affordable hearing aid costs in US dollars 
 
Country 
 
GNP 
Target price 
Switzerland 
$48,230 
$1,450 
United States 
$41,400 
$1,250 
South Korea 
$13,980 
$420 
Thailand 
$2,540 
$80 
China 
$1,290 
$40 
Zimbabwe 
$825 
$25 
Viet Nam 
$550 
$20 
Uganda 
$270 
$10 
 
Hearing instruments are often classified as ‘medical appliances’ for the purposes of 
assigning import duties and sales tax in many nations. In developing countries, import tax 
regimes may be very high and be a very significant additional cost component of the retail 
price of medical goods (Bate, Tren & Urbach, 2006), including hearing aids. This is discussed 
in Chapter 2 of the present volume. There are local many factors in addition to import taxes, 
loss in transhipment and informal customs tariffs that contribute to the relatively high retail 
cost of hearing instruments. These include the commercial distribution system, the often low 
volumes of devices purchased by distributors from the manufacturer, the limited sales volume 
achieved, the expenses associated with a traditional audiology clinic, the cost of upgrade 
training of personnel and high profit margins established for wealthier urban clients in 
developing nations. In addition, the actual number of hearing aid manufacturers has dwindled 
significantly over the past two decades, reducing competive pricing. Seven manufacturers 
(often referred to as the ‘seven sisters’) now control the vast majority of the worldwide $2 
billion market for hearing aids (Hearing Mojo, 2007). The major manufacturers (GN 
Resound, Denmark; Oticon, Denmark; Phonak, Switzerland; Siemens, Germany; Sonic 
Innovations, U.S.A.; Starkey Laboratories, U.S.A.; Widex, Denmark) have a combined 
market share of nearly 90% of sales. All have high research and development, marketing and 
training costs associated with creating each new generation of sophisticated, digital, hearing 
aid product lines. The remaining market is shared by over 30 other companies, such as Rion 
(Japan) and Amplifon/Miracle Ear (USA).  
Three developing countries that are producing hearing instruments to any scale, but 
mostly for local or regional consumption, are China, India and Botswana. In India the major 
companies include Alps, Novax, Elkon and Arphi. Hearing aid provision in India is discussed 
in detail in Chapter 8. In China, the main producers—other than manufacturing units of the 
‘seven sisters’— are LiSound, Tianle, and Goldluck. In Botswana, Godisa produces a range 
of hearing aids from kits (see Vignette 1). For the most part, these companies offer less 
sophisticated products and hence prices for their hearing aids are more affordable for those 
Review

Rehabilitation of Hearing Loss 
 
145
living in developing countries. Basic hearing aid technology is neither complicated nor 
expensive. Like most transistor era hearing aids, the US$7 body worn hearing aid currently 
available from Tianle (2008) in China consists of a transducers (microphone and receiver—
which are often the most expensive components of a system), a small integrated circuit 
amplifier, a wheel volume control, a tone (bass cut) switch and casing. The unit is robust and 
can serve 7 years or more in normal conditions. The sound quality of a device such as the 
Tianle hearing aid may be limited compared to a unit with sophisticated signal processing and 
higher quality components, but a balance between quality and affordability may need to be 
made when providing hearing aids in developing countries. Several Danish studies have 
shown that the subjective and objective benefits derived from low cost BTEs may be similar 
to those gained from more sophisticated products (Parving, 2003; Parving & Christensen, 
2004; Parving, Christensen, Nielsen & Konradsson, 2005). The tested output values of this 
unit matches the manufacturers declared levels and meets basic WHO specifications (see 
Table 2). WHO specifications were developed to guide manufacturers in the mass production 
of low cost hearing aids using currently available technology (WHO, 2004a). The guidelines 
also include a recommended temperature operating range of 5 to 45°C and 0 to 80% 
humidity, to meet climatic conditions encountered in developing countries. Hearing aids, 
particularly in the harsh environments often found in developing countries, also often break 
down and require repair (Butler, 1991). Again, this is a cost burden to hearing aid provision 
that needs to be considered. 
 
Table 2. WHO minimum performance requirements (WHO, 2004a) 
 
Hearing aid parameter 
Minimum requirement 
Maximum OSPL (90) 
118 dB SPL +/- 4dB 
OSPL (90) at 1 kHz 
114 dB SPL +/- 4dB 
Maximum Full on acoustic gain 
45- 55 dB SPL +5/-0 dB 
Full-on acoustic gain at 1kHz 
42 dB SPL +5/-0 dB 
Basic frequency response 
200 Hz to 4500 Hz 
200 Hz to 2000 4500 Hz +/- 4dB SPL 
200 Hz to 4000 Hz +/- 6dB SPL 
on a nominal frequency response curve 
Total harmonic distortion at 70 dB SPL input 
500 Hz < 5% 
800 Hz < 5% 
1500 Hz < 2 
Equivalent input noise level 
< 25 dB SPL 
Battery Current 
< 1 mA 
 
Hearing instruments are systems that deliver amplified sound from the external 
environment to the ear canal. Well-made, custom earmolds are a necessity when using 
medium and high gain hearing aids (Nolan & Tucker, 1988). These require manufacture by a 
trained technician and are another significant cost burden in developing countries. The 
provision of proper fitting earmolds is crucial to hearing aid acceptance and use. There are 
typically three approaches to delivering earmolds: 1) stock earmolds such as ear canal tips 
that come with many hearing aids in developing countries; 2) custom made two-stage 
earmolds; and 3) custom made one-stage earmolds. 
Review

Ron Brouillette 
 
146 
Hearing aids typically are packaged with ‘L tubes’ that connect from the earhook and a 
two or three sizes of ear canal tips. Most audiologists in developed nations will use these 
canal tips for trial purposes only and replace them with a superior sounding custom fit mold. 
WHO guidelines (2004a) recommend that an earmold production laboratory should be 
established at the start of any hearing aid service to avoid reliance on stock earmolds that 
often offer a poor fit and cause acoustic feedback. The WHO guidelines also call for earmold 
production using a two stage process—an impression is taken and a ‘positive’ earmold is 
produced from this negative cast. The earmolds are typically made from either soft or hard 
acrylic or a soft silicone and require grinding and polishing to complete. This process often 
takes a full week of turn-around time and usually the final product requires fine adjustments 
when the hearing aid user returns for a fitting. A custom earmold is useable for around two 
years, but with older children the earmold should be changed every year. For children less 
than five years, who have a developing external ear, earmolds should ideally be renewed 
around every six months Northern & Downs, (2002; p. 325). Earmolds are a very significant 
cost factor in device fitting in developing countries.  
 
 
Limited Professional Support 
 
Audiological rehabilitation procedures, equipment and devices are global commodities. 
Hearing health professionals whether they are practicing in high or low income nations 
typically adhere to similar assessment, fitting and counseling protocols. There can be vast 
differences, however, on the types and quality of services offered in developing nations due to 
the lack of resources and access to trained specialists. Hearing aid provision depends on 
availability of support personnel who form an assessment, fitting and follow-up team. This 
team may be hospital-based, community-based, school-based or managed by a voluntary 
agency (Chalmers, 1991). The team typically includes at least an audiologist or audiology 
technician and an earmold / repair technician. The team and might also include an 
administrator, medical doctor (family physician or otorhinolaryngologist), community health 
worker, teacher of the deaf and speech therapist. As noted in Chapter 2, there are serious skill 
shortages in most developing countries of all the personnel required for quality hearing aid 
delivery and follow-up service. In particular, without the availability of appropriate follow-up 
personnel, “the process of fitting hearing aids is quite useless” (Miles, 1991). University 
trained audiologists are in demand by employers in most developed countries, who can offer 
attractive employment conditions. Many audiologists who receive training in developing 
countries such as India and South Africa emigrate to developed nations in large numbers. In 
the Indian context, audiology instructors report that more than 60% of all nationally trained 
audiologists are working abroad. Many audiologists from developing countries receive their 
training in Australia, Europe, and North America and prefer long-term employment in these  
‘lands of opportunity’ over their country of birth. 
 
 
Awareness and Stigma 
 
Two factors mitigate the popularity, uptake and sustained use of hearing aids: prohibitive 
cost and lack of an awareness of their benefit. The majority of cases of hearing impairment 
Review

Rehabilitation of Hearing Loss 
 
147
can be improved with correctly fitted hearing aids. However, many hearing impaired users in 
developing countries are unaware that their loss can be improved. Aural rehabilitation is 
founded on a personal awareness of one’s own hearing disability and an understanding of the 
ways it can be remediated. Personal awareness of the need for and benefits of amplification in 
developing countries is the result of public awareness campaigns utilizing the power of social 
marketing (see Vignette 2). 
OVERCOMING BARRIERS TO EFFECTIVE REHABILITATION 
Purchasing Hearing Devices in Quantity 
 
 Ordering large quantities of hearing aids from a manufacturer or distributor usually 
ensures a “quantity advantage”. Discounts can range from 5% to up to 40% or more 
depending on the quantities ordered. Most hearing aid distributors and retailers in lower-
income nations are likely to be quantity disadvantaged due to the limited numbers of hearing 
aids and accessories they normally import from industrialized nations. These minimum orders 
reflect several realities: 1) the turn-over volume per projected sales period; 2) the fear that the 
imported devices will be delayed in customs, attract substantial customs duty and unfair 
related costs; 3) concerns regarding loss in shipment; and 4) the importer’s available capital. 
Limited sales of higher priced hearing aids translate also into the need for a higher profit 
margin to make ends meet. However, the vicious cycle of exorbitant, unaffordable prices due 
to low volumes leading to lower uptake can be broken. Through networking on a cooperative 
basis, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in lower income nations can tap resources 
found within other developing nations to lower the cost of goods without greatly sacrificing 
the quality of hearing aids and other assistive devices. There are benefits in negotiating 
directly with the multinational manufacturers of hearing aids and assistive devices. There are 
good examples of NGOs successfully pooling resources for bulk purchasing—and a quantity 
price advantage—for both hearing aids and batteries. Some of these arrangements have been 
through cooperatives such as in the Philippines. However, these limited attempts at bulk 
purchasing have proven somewhat disappointing in some cases. Where quantity discounts are 
negotiated, manufacturers may demand unrealistically high volumes to be taken in one or two 
shipments. Even so, the purchase price relative to the manufacturer’s cost price may not show 
the anticipated reduction. In this situation, sourcing hearing aids from manufacturers based in 
developing countries such as China, India and Botswana may help reduce costs substantially. 
 
 
Developing Hearing Aid Assembly Units 
 
Another viable option is to develop small businesses to assemble hearing aids from kits. 
This has been successfully accomplished in places like India, Botswana, Viet Nam and the 
Philippines, and other assembly units are likely to start in Central America. Hearing aid kits 
can be sourced through manufacturers who might be convinced to participate in this 
arrangement if the quantities to be assembled are sufficient and the local assembly does not 
interfere with the manufacturers’ local and regional distribution system. Most countries have 
local distributors of the major brands of hearing aids. Manufacturers at times complain that it 
Review

Ron Brouillette 
 
148 
actually costs more to send kits because they often disassemble stock hearing aids to provide 
the kits. Potential customers of kits are also dissuaded by manufacturers citing quality control 
issues, especially when the hearing aids assembled from kits carry a manufacturer’s brand 
name. Manufacturers are likely to discourage local assembly using the argument that the cost 
difference between the kits and fully assembled devices is usually less that 5% to 10%. 
However, in countries with significant import duties on imported medical devices such as 
hearing aids, assembly in-country may be a very effective way to reduce purchase costs. 
Hearing aid kits can be purchased in two forms: semi knocked down (SKD) or 
completely knocked down (CKD). In places where import duties on hearing aids are 
exorbitant, importing SKD hearing aid kits is a viable option because the importation of parts 
is often free or costs are far less than for assembled items. SKD kits usually require only 
soldering the transducer(s) onto the printed circuit board and closing the unit with small 
screws. The savings in this process are often offset in part by the cost of the hearing aid 
analyzer necessary to test the finished product. CKD requires a higher degree of precision and 
technology. These kits provide a printed circuit board and all components and the device must 
be assembled under ideal conditions. In Botswana, Godisa employs highly skilled Deaf 
technicians who provide all the labour to assemble hearing aids and solar battery rechargers 
(McPherson & Brouillette, 2004). In Chapter 12, links to international manufacturers of 
hearing aids are given. Some of these companies allow local assembly of their products.  
 
 
Developing Global Solutions through Social Enterprise  
 
Meeting the challenge of equitable distribution of hearing aids in low income countries 
may not be an economic priority for large multinational manufacturers. Certainly, the massive 
quantities of assistive devices required for the world cannot be met by existing commercial 
enterprises nor can these be delivered by civil society alone though a charitable approach. A 
synergy of business and social conscience or social enterprise is required for this task. Social 
enterprise can be defined as any earned-income business or strategy undertaken by a non-
profit organization to generate revenue in support of its charitable mission. "Earned income" 
consists of payments received in direct exchange for a product, service or privilege (Social 
Enterprise Alliance, 2004). Social enterprise is necessary in order to make hearing aids 
affordable and accessible to people with limited incomes in developing nations. Bold strategic 
business plans need to be crafted and dedicated specialists and resource people need to be 
identified to implement these plans.  
 
Vignette 1 
Godisa — Technologies for a Developing World 
 
Background 
Godisa was formed from an initiative of the Camphill Communities Trust, a charitable 
organization with a longstanding commitment to children and adults with disabilities. One 
Camphill Community is located in Otse, a village located 24 miles from Gaborone, the capital 
of Botswana, southern Africa. In 1992 the Solar Aid Workshop was formed by the Otse 
Community, in collaboration with the Botswana Technology Centre, to manufacture solar 
rechargeable hearing aids that could be used in Africa and other parts of the developing world. 
Review

Rehabilitation of Hearing Loss 
 
149
The Solar Aid body-worn hearing aid used a fixed rechargeable cell with no user access. The 
body-worn hearing aid and recharger package won a South African Bureau of Standards 
“Design for Development Award” in 1998 for its innovative qualities. The body-worn hearing 
aid incorporated solar panels on the instrument itself. In 2002 Solar Aid was manufactured 
under an NGO trust called ‘Godisa’. Godisa means ‘to do something that is helping others to 
grow’ in Setswana, the national language of Botswana. The name change reflected the 
expansion of the product line and provision of related services to persons with hearing loss. The 
Godisa Technologies Trust is a charitable entity whose aim is to offer technologies and/or 
services for the relief of hearing disability in developing countries. Godisa chose to assemble 
hearing aids in Otse and employs local young people with severe or profound hearing loss in 
the manufacturing process. Fourteen local technicians, including 10 with disabilities, have been 
trained and employed in hearing aid assembly, repair or quality assurance procedures. The 
initial Solar Aid models and its design concepts generated keen interest in Godisa. The second 
generation of this model additionally incorporated a low tone cut control for more flexible 
fitting. However, the initial prototype hearing aids had limitations. The body-worn hearing aid 
was found to be unacceptable in many parts of Africa, where it was first marketed, due to its 
weight, size and visible receiver cord. The integrated charger unit was found to be not as robust 
as desired.   The body-worn hearing aid is currently being redesigned 
 
Present Products and Future Plans  
Godisa now produces a range of behind-the-ear hearing aids, including models that may 
use either zinc-air or rechargeable Ni-MH batteries. Recharging is supported with a newly 
redesigned solar power battery recharger and the first known size 13 and low-cost size 675 
rechargeable button-cell batteries. The latter can be charged up to 300 times over their two-year 
lifespan and sell for less than $US1.50. The hearing aids available are all BTEs and cover a 
wide range of hearing loss fitting requirements. Hearing aid models and their specifications can 
be viewed at the Godisa website (http://www.godisa.org/index.html). The electroacoustic 
characteristics of the hearing aids can be altered in the field by simple trim-pot adjustment. All 
hearing aids are produced and tropicalised at Godisa’s Otse assembly center and efforts are 
continually made to improve quality standards. The purchase price of the hearing aids is 
dependent on the model and the quantity ordered, but is in the target $35 to $99 range. Godisa 
is attempting to reduce costs further, in line with the WHO objectives. Field trials in a 
developed country, with prototype sample instruments, indicated that the Godisa low-gain 
hearing aid offered “substantial benefit” to persons with moderate to severe sensorineural 
hearing loss (Parving & Christensen, 2004). The field trial also provided valuable constructive 
criticism that led to improved hearing aid quality control. Improved production quality was 
noted in a subsequent evaluation of Godisa’s high-gain, compression hearing aid (Parving, 
Christensen, Nielsen & Konradsson, 2004). Feedback from users of hearing aids supplied to 
developing countries has been positive, although rigorous quantitative and qualitative 
evaluations are not yet completed.  
The Godisa solar battery charger has been designed to accept a variety of hearing aid cells. 
It is able to rapidly charge three sizes, AA, 675 or 13, of rechargeable Ni-MH battery using 
solar power with no operating costs. The recharger has been designed to be weather-resistant 
and shock-resistant.  
 
 
Review

Ron Brouillette 
 
150 
Appropriate Earmold Technology 
 
Earmolds should complement any hearing aid, be comfortable and avoid acoustic 
feedback problems. Custom-made earmolds while usually creating the best fit are not 
necessarily required. Low cost, stock earmolds can often be used as a custom substitute for 
low and medium gain hearing aids (Smith, Riley, Davis, Davies & Jeffs, 2008). Perhaps as 
many as 60% of hearing aid users in least developed countries use “temporary” plastic eartips 
rather than custom-made earmolds (Brouillette, 2001). In a developing nation, locally sourced 
materials for earmold manufacture typically cost approximately $1.50. The technician labor 
cost for 35 minutes per earmold is about 50 cents. The retail price on this earmold is typically 
$5 to $8. These costs are based on a two-stage technique with a pressure cooker and bicycle 
pump method—the cheapest but most labor intensive method. A low-cost appropriate 
technology two-stage kit has been developed by an Australian audiologist, David Pither. The 
kit, which includes air compressor or bicycle pump, pressure cooker, grinder, drill and drill 
components, is available for around $500 from Godisa. The purchase price and benefit of a 
locally produced earmold compared to the price and benefit of a stock eartip for moderate to 
severe hearing loss sways many new hearing aid users to make do with the noncustom eartip 
supplied with the hearing aid. There are several cases in the author’s experience where the 
user preferred the ‘temporary’ ear canal tip over a poorly made or hard and heavy full 
earmolds that are often produced in newly established low-cost laboratories. However, in the 
case of severe to profound hearing loss, the stock ear canal tip is usually not an option due to 
the acoustical feedback that occurs when one is used.  
One alternative to the higher cost two-stage earmold is the one-stage “instant” earmold 
that is most appropriate for large “ear camps” and other community-based settings. The 2004 
edition of the WHO guidelines suggests that a one-stage technique may be appropriate in 
these community settings, but adds the caveat that more research and development for this 
technique is needed. The advantages of the one-stage earmold are numerous. Okpojo (1992) 
suggests that the one-stage approach can reduce the usual two-stage problem of shrinkage of 
impression material in transit and on the benchtop, and reduce the loss of good fit that can 
occur in the polishing process. Newly created polymers are resulting in more versatile one-
stage earmolds. Silicon compounds are injected into the ear canal as if to make an impression. 
The material then cures in the ear and once removed can be immediately drilled to create a 
sound bore and any required vents. There are typically two types of one stage material: one 
that pre-packages the polymer and monomer into a syringeable cartridge and one that requires 
hand-mixing polymer silicon or acrylic with the monomer liquid. Hard acrylic earmolds are 
more suitable for pocket (body worn) hearing aids that require the installation of an “O” ring 
for the earphone receiver. One advantage of the self-mixing method is its flexibility. With the 
hand mixed material the technician can make a one stage BTE earmold by mixing a slightly 
wetter compound than is generally called for and wrapping the chewing gum-like compound 
evenly around the a preformed tube with wall thickness appropriate to the client’s hearing 
loss. The diameter thickness of the mixture depends on the size of the ear canal that is to be 
fitted. Most of the mixture remains at the outer end of the wrap that is spread into the concha. 
The mixture plus tube is carefully inserted into the canal beyond the fist bend with the help of 
the otolight and then spread into the concha. When the mixture cures, after five to seven 
minutes depending on mix and climate, the complete earmold is removed for polishing and 
removal of unwanted tubing. The same process may be used for a hard acrylic earmold for a 
Review

Rehabilitation of Hearing Loss 
 
151
body worn hearing aid. The “O” ring passes through the outside portion of the tubing and is 
carefully pressed into the curing acrylic. Addresses for earmold material suppliers are found 
in Chapter 12 of this book.  
 
Vignette 2 
Tips on Organizing a Hearing Health Awareness Campaign 
 
• 
Synchronize your campaign with one of the existing international or regional observances 
such as International Noise Awareness Day (3rd Wednesday in April) or Hearing 
Awareness Day in Asia (3 March [3 / 3]). 
• 
Consult with any national committee or organization on hearing health care and/ or national 
occupation health and safety agency and plan collaboratively. 
• 
Link awareness campaign to a large prevention of hearing impairment campaign. 
• 
Organize free hearing screening or examinations at popular public sites. 
• 
Encourage famous persons/celebrities who wear a hearing aid to be part of the campaign. 
• 
Offer promotions on affordable hearing aids. 
• 
Write press releases and hold news conferences. 
• 
An effective hearing health campaign should increase the uptake of hearing aids. Seek 
manufacturer and distributor support for your campaign. 
 
 
Raising Public Acceptance of Hearing Loss and Hearing Aids 
 
A local, regional or national hearing health awareness campaign that includes hearing 
assessment or “ear camps” can create a positive and receptive mind-set to hearing aids. One 
important requirement prior to organizing such an awareness campaign is to ensure an 
accessible supply of affordable hearing aids and related services in the geographical region of 
the campaign. An affective hearing health campaign can, in principle, increase the uptake of 
hearing aid. “Ear camps” may be organized in tandem with the more popular “eye camp” 
initiatives. 
 
 
Research and Evaluation of Hearing Aid Provision 
 
Only a small percentage of the world’s annual output of published health research relates 
to diseases of poverty (WHO, 2004b). Similarly, very little research has been published on 
the effectiveness of hearing health care services in developing nations. There is an urgent 
need for information that can guide audiologists, other health professionals and policy makers 
regarding effective intervention strategies in developing countries. Research on practical 
questions related to issues such as simplified earmold manufacture and the effects of humidity 
on hearing aid batteries need answers. Larger issues such as the economic costs of hearing aid 
provision under different health service paradigms require urgent attention. A newly 
established NGO, WWHearing (World Wide Hearing Care for Developing Countries) is now 
actively supporting hearing health care research projects in China, India and Brazil that 
evaluate hearing health care procedures and systems. This type of research should be 
encouraged globally. 
Review

Ron Brouillette 
 
152 
CONCLUSION 
There is a growing demand among many hearing health professionals, consumers and 
organizations working in developing countries for access to those basic rehabilitation tools 
and techniques found in more developed countries. Technical and financial support from 
major international bodies such as the World Health Organization, Lions Club International, 
CBM, Rotary International and the IMPACT Foundation, among others, can assist in 
reaching modern but appropriate standards of technology and service. Improved social 
marketing initiatives, such as the not-for-profit Godisa Technologies Trust, and focused 
applied research may fundamentally alter the quality of life of many individuals with hearing 
loss in the developing world. By making affordable, appropriate amplification devices and 
quality fitting services widely available, the benefits of aural rehabilitation will one day 
become a reality for the majority of the world’s people with hearing loss.  
REFERENCES 
Alberti, P.W. (1999). Pediatric ear nose throat services’ demands and resources: a global 
perspective. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 49 (Suppl. 1), S1-
S9. 
Allen, J. (2004). Hearing aids becoming easier & cheaper to buy. http://consumeraffairs. 
com/health/hearing/hearing_aids_01.html 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (1984). Definition of and competencies for 
aural rehabilitation. ASHA, 26 (May), 37–41.  
Anderson, M. (2008). Humanitarian Audiology. Days in La Republica Dominicana? 
Audiology Now, 32, 55,57. 
Bate, R., Tren, R. & Urbach, J. (2006). Still taxed to death: An analysis of taxes and tariffs on 
medicines, vaccines and medical devices. Washington, DC: American Enterprise 
Institute-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies.  
Brouillette, R. (2001). Hearing aids in developing countries: Problems and promises. In 
Proceedings of the WHO Informal Consultation on Hearing Aids for Developing 
Countries, July 11-12, 2001 (Document No. PBD/PDH/01.2). Geneva: World Health 
Organization. 
Butler, J.A. (1991). The whole question of repair. In Hearing aids. Their production, delivery 
systems and effective use, pp. 49-51. London: Royal National Institute for the Deaf. 
Chalmers, P. (1991). Personnel and equipment to access hearing loss, provide earmoulds and 
fit hearing aids. In Hearing aids. Their production, delivery systems and effective use, pp. 
29-31. London: Royal National Institute for the Deaf. 
Cheng, C.M., & McPherson, B. (2000). Over-the-counter hearing aids: Electroacoustic 
characteristics and possible target client groups. Audiology, 39,110-116.  
Commonwealth Society for the Deaf. (1968). Report on the first seminar on deafness to be 
held in Africa, 1968. London: Commonwealth Society for the Deaf.  
Hearing Mojo. (2007). Spotlight: Affordable hearing aids WHO. http://www.hearingmojo. 
com/blog-mt/blog-mt/hearing_aids/ 
Kumar, S. (2001). WHO tackles hearing disabilities in developing world. Lancet, 358(9277), 
219. 
Review

Rehabilitation of Hearing Loss 
 
153
McPherson, B. (2007).  Challenges to current practice: Ensuring equity of access and equity 
of outcome. Presentation at WHO/WWHearing Fifth Workshop on the Provision of 
Hearing Aids and Services for Developing Countries, 8-9 November 2007, Geneva. 
McPherson, B. & Brouillette, R. (2004). A fair hearing for all: Providing appropriate 
amplification in developing countries. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 25, 219-223. 
McPherson, B., & Holborow, C. (1985). Parent guidance in developing countries. Journal of 
the British Association of Teachers of the Deaf, 9, 81-83. 
Miles, S. (1991). Follow-up support for hearing aid users. In Hearing aids. Their production, 
delivery systems and effective use, pp. 37-39. London: Royal National Institute for the 
Deaf. 
Nolan, M., & Tucker, I. (1988). The hearing impaired child and the family. London: Souvenir 
Press. 
Northern, J.L., & Downs, M.P. (2002). Hearing in children. 5th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins.  
Okpojo, A. (1992). Advances in earmold technology: One-stage (direct) approach. Journal of 
the American Academy of Audiology, 3, 142-144.  
Parving, A. (2003). The hearing aid revolution: Fact or fiction? Acta Otolaryngologica, 123, 
245-248. 
Parving, A., & Christensen, B. (2004). Clinical trial of a low-cost, solar-powered hearing aid. 
Acta Otolaryngologica, 124, 416-420. 
Parving, A., Christensen, B., Nielsen, J., & Konradsson, K. (2005). Clinical trial of a low-
cost, high power compression hearing aid. Audiological Medicine, 3, 76-81.  
Royal National Institute for the Deaf. (1991). Hearing aids. Their production, delivery 
systems and effective use. London: Royal National Institute for the Deaf. 
Smith, A. (2007). Update on burden of hearing impairment, and progress of WHO/WWH 
hearing aids initiatives. Presentation at WHO/WWHearing Fifth Workshop on the 
Provision of Hearing Aids and Services for Developing Countries, 8-9 November 2007, 
Geneva. 
Smith, P., Riley, A., Davis, A., Davies, W. & Jeffs, E. (2008). Study finds compliant eartips 
can be used instead of custom earmolds. Hearing Journal, 61(2), 27-28,32,34,36.  
Social Enterprise Alliance (2004). http://www.se-alliance.org/ 
World Health Organization. (2004a). Guidelines for hearing aids and services for developing 
countries. 2nd edition. Geneva: World Health Organization. 
World Health Organization. (2004b). World Report on Knowledge for Better Health. 
Strengthening Health Systems. Summary. Geneva: World Health Organization.  
Tianle. (2008). http://www.tianle.com 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. (2002). The Least Developed 
Countries. Report 2002. New York: United Nations. 
WWHearing. (2008). http://www.wwhearing.org 
 
Review

Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 
 
 
 
HEARING AID PROVISION IN DEVELOPING 
COUNTRIES: AN INDIAN CASE STUDY 
 
 
Vijayalakshmi Basavaraj* 
All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore, India 
ABSTRACT 
Since the 1960s, India has worked against the forces of its massive and diverse 
population and low per capita income to distribute hearing aids to those in need. 
Developments in the area of hearing aid provision have been tremendous both in terms of 
manufacture of indigenous hearing aids as well as in the availability of international 
brands in the open market. However, the cost of hearing aids in the market is exorbitant 
for most Indians. Attempts have been made to develop cost effective indigenous hearing 
aids. The Government of India has introduced schemes for distribution of free or 
subsidized hearing aids to individuals with low incomes. However, the aids distributed 
are, by and large, of body level type. There is an acute shortage of hearing health care 
personnel such as audiologists, earmold technicians, and hearing aid repair technicians to 
serve those who require care. With the National Program for Prevention and Control of 
Deafness (NPPCD) being implemented throughout the country in 2008, it is expected that 
access to services for persons with hearing impairment will improve considerably. The 
country also intends to develop high quality, low cost hearing aids to serve the needy. 
INTRODUCTION 
India, with a population of over one billion, covers an area of 3.288 million km². It is a 
‘potpourri’ of all possible terrains spread across the 35 states and union territories—having 
snow clad mountains, deserts, coastlines, valleys and hill stations.  
 
 
                                                        
* Correspondence: vbasavaraj@hotmail.com 
Review

Vijayalakshmi Basavaraj 
 
156 
Services to diagnose hearing impairment and fit hearing aids have been available since 
the 1960s in a few cities in the country. However, there were no national estimates about the 
number of persons with hearing impairments until India participated in the observance of the 
International Year of the Disabled in 1980. The 1980 Indian census collected information on 
persons with disabilities, albeit insufficiently. A national sample survey of persons with 
disabilities was also instituted and implemented. Since then, prevalence data have been made 
available every ten years. Thus, India now has some estimates regarding persons with hearing 
impairment. 
The National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) reported in 2002 that there are over 3 
million persons with hearing impairment in the country, with the majority in rural areas. 
There were 300,000 children below 6 years age with hearing impairment in the year 2000. 
This is considered as a very rough estimate as the personnel involved in the survey did not 
have the skills or tools to identify hearing loss of less than moderate degree in one or both 
ears. In addition, it is estimated that one in every 750 live births will have severe to profound 
bilateral hearing loss and hence about 21,000 such children are born every year given the 
national birth rate of 22.69 per 1000 population.  
Government and non governmental organizations (NGOs) have attempted to estimate the 
number of persons with hearing impairment in the country through various small scale 
surveys. In 1996, a World Health Organization (WHO) project entitled “Prevention of 
Deafness and Communication Disorders” was undertaken by the All India Institute of Speech 
and Hearing (AIISH). It has now become an ongoing research project. The extrapolated 
estimates from the project data (1996 till 2007) put the incidence of hearing impairment in 
infants in the range of 3.29% to 7.67%, and in school children in the range of 9.07% to 
38.1%. 
Periodic studies of neonatal hearing screening programs are also underway. One such 
program undertaken by Ali Yavar Jung National Institute for the Hearing Handicapped 
(AYJNIHH) in collaboration with King Edward Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, reports that the 
incidence of hearing impairment in high risk neonates is 3.97% (Basavaraj & Nandurkar, 
2005). 
AVAILABLE INFRASTRUCTURE FOR SERVICE PROVISION 
There are about 20 government organizations which have ‘the state of art’ facilities for 
early identification, diagnosis and intervention of persons with hearing impairment. AIISH 
and AYJNIHH are among the leading service providers at the tertiary level. In addition to 
this, it is estimated that there are about 150 government organizations, 350 NGOs and about 
500 private clinics providing services. The Indian Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment 
set up about 130 District Disability Rehabilitation Centers (DDRC’s) covering all zones in the 
country in 2001. There are five Composite Rehabilitation Centers (CRCs) providing services 
to persons with all types of disabilities. It is envisaged that DDRCs will be established in 
more than 600 districts in India in the next 5 years.  
There are about 270 medical colleges in the country providing services at the tertiary 
level. The Medical Council of India (MCI) has made it mandatory for the medical colleges to 
have facilities for audiometry, hearing aid evaluation and dispensing.  
 
Review

Hearing Aid Provision in Developing Countries 
 
157
MANPOWER AVAILABLE FOR SERVICE PROVISION 
There has been a slow but steady attempt to develop manpower to serve persons with 
hearing impairment. Undergraduate and postgraduate programs began in 1967, albeit in only 
a few institutes. As of today, there are 30 training centers accredited by the Rehabilitation 
Council of India (RCI) offering 4-year undergraduate programs or 2-year postgraduate 
programs in Audiology and Speech Language Pathology. Several institutions are recognized 
to run PhD programs as well. About 2000 qualified Speech Language Pathologists and 
Audiologists have been trained in the country. However, over 50% of them have migrated to 
other countries with brighter job prospects. More postgraduates and PhDs are working as 
master trainers rather than as direct service providers. 
Since 1994, the Diploma in Hearing, Language & Speech Disorders (DHLS), which is 
recognized by RCI, has been offered. The entry level for enrollment is 12 years education in 
the science stream. The course is of 10 months duration. There are about 400 diploma holders 
in India. This program is now offered at 12 training centers across the country, awarding the 
diploma to about 180 persons every year. AIISH launched the DHLS program through 
distance mode in 2007. The institute has study centers in 4 major medical institutions in the 
country: Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi; Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate 
Medical Education and Research, Pondicherry; All India Institute of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, Mumbai; and Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, Imphal. The classes 
conducted in Mysore are received by the study centers through video conferencing with real 
time audio-video interaction. Clinical training is imparted at the respective study centers. 
AIISH plans to expand the program by setting up more study centers across the country. 
Diploma (of 2 years duration), graduate and postgraduate programs (of one year duration 
each) in special education are also available in the country. It is estimated that there are about 
20,000 trained special educators.  
The other potential manpower providers who can be included for hearing screening and 
assisting service delivery are the primary health care workers such as the anganwadi workers 
& multipurpose health workers. Anganwadi workers and helpers are those who work for the 
state-operated Integrated Child Development Services. These services focus on the health and 
preschool education needs of 0-6 year old children as also the health and nutrition needs of 
pregnant women, nursing mothers and adolescent girls. There are over 1 million anganwadi 
workers who are available in the ratio of one per 1000 population.  
THE STATUS OF HEARING AID PROVISION IN INDIA 
WHO (2005) estimates that at least 278 million persons in the world have disabling 
hearing impairment. Out of these, well over 30 million are in India (NSSO, 2002). The global 
production of hearing aids is reported to be very inadequate, meeting the needs of only 10% 
of the number of persons with hearing impairment. A very small portion of this number of 
amplification devices, estimated to be about 100,000 to 125,000, is manufactured in India. In 
addition to this, about 50-60,000 hearing aids are imported from other countries. Thus, there 
is a huge gap between the estimated need and production/import of hearing aids in India.  
 
 
Review

Vijayalakshmi Basavaraj 
 
158 
The Past to the Present Scenario 
 
Even though several opticians imported and dispensed hearing aids prior to the 1960s, 
Arphi hearing aids, manufactured in Bombay in 1962, were the first indigenous aids (Peston 
Jamas, 2003). Under an Indo-Danish project ‘Danaid’, hearing aids were available for 
distribution from the 1960s to the 1980s in a few central government institutes. Several other 
Indian makes came into the Indian market in the next decade or two. Each of them had 
several models of their own. Some of the manufacturers survived even though the market was 
small, but others closed down. The Indian Standards Institute (ISI, now known as Bureau of 
Indian Standards) standards for hearing aids were published in 1967 (IS: 4406 & 4482 – 
1967). With the availability of standards, researchers in the area of aural rehabilitation carried 
out studies to determine the quality of hearing aids available in the market. The results 
documented the quality of Indian hearing aids as rather poor (Kacker, Deka, Sharma, & 
Basavaraj, 1989; Kumar, Mahendru, Ojha, & Raturi, 1995; Pandaley & Murthy, 1972; 
Ravishankar, & Sashidhar, 1989; Sharma, Basavaraj, & Kacker, 1989). 
The process of venturing into design and production of newer and better indigenous 
makes and models continued. Under an Indo-US collaborative project dealing with selective 
amplification, Basavaraj et al. (1995) tested a wearable binaural digital amplification device 
developed in New Mexico, USA. The Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bangalore, 
produced research prototypes of FM hearing aids (Sneha, 1995), ITI, New Delhi, designed a 
body level hearing aid with a digital amplifier (Anand, 1994). Artificial Limbs Manufacturing 
Corporation of India (ALIMCO) has designed and manufactured body level hearing aids 
since 2001 and has procured BIS approval since 2002. Contralateral routing of signals 
(CROS) hearing aid research prototypes were developed by AYJNIHH (Sinha, 2002). The 
Center for Design of Advanced Computing (CDAC), of the Indian Ministry of Information 
and Technology, in collaboration with AIISH, has developed prototypes of low cost digital 
body level hearing aids, field trials of which are in progress. 
The leading manufacturers, such as Alps, Arphi, Elkon and Novax assemble behind-the-
ear (BTE), in-the-ear (ITE) and in-the-canal (ITC) aids and are marketing them under their 
own brand names. Further, with the liberalization of Indian import policies, the whole world 
market has been opened to Indian consumers. As a result, in the last five to ten years, several 
international brand hearing aids, including those offering digital completely-in-canal (CIC) 
hearing aids, have become available. Today, over 20 brands of hearing aids with their several 
hundred models are in the market. However, it is worth noting that they are available only to 
the urban elite and not for the majority of the population living in villages in the country. 
 
 
Cost of Hearing Aids 
 
The manufacturer’s recommended price for body level hearing aids vary anywhere 
between Rs. 500 to 10,000 (US$ 10 to 250) and that for BTEs and other styles range from Rs. 
2,500 to 80,000 (US$ 50 - 1600) for digital aids. It is estimated that the manufacturer’s 
recommended price of a hearing aid is never less than 10 times its manufacturing cost. The 
additional costs associated with the distribution network are alarmingly high, making the 
product cost exorbitant for many Indians.  
Review

Hearing Aid Provision in Developing Countries 
 
159
AYJNIHH and AIISH are dispensing hearing aids of all makes and models at a reduced 
cost. This has enabled the beneficiaries to obtain good quality hearing aids with a discount of 
25% to 50% on the manufacturer’s recommended price. It is estimated that more than 1000 
hearing aids are dispensed in this manner every year. 
 
 
Hearing Aid Recommendations and Procurement 
 
Persons with hearing impairment or their caregivers have various options to procure 
hearing aids. Some of them are as follows: 
 
1. Consult a general physician for the problem who in turn refers the patient to an 
otolaryngologist, audiologist or hearing aid dealer; 
2. Consult an otolaryngologist who may a) assess and dispense the hearing aid himself, 
b) assess and refer to a hearing aid dealer, or c) refer the patient to an audiologist; 
3. Consult a government or non-governmental specialist institution, a hospital or special 
school (in case of children), where the assessment is done by qualified or semi-
qualified professionals. The aid is dispensed or the client is referred to a hearing aid 
dealer after assessment; 
4. Consult an audiologist who assesses and dispenses the hearing aid; or, 
5. Go directly to a hearing aid dealer to procure a hearing aid. 
 
It is estimated that the leading hearing aid manufacturers have a network of about 300 
dealers each, spread across the country. However, the network in the northeastern states is 
reported to be very poor. Since the country does not have any registering or licensing policy 
for hearing aid dealers, ear, nose and throat specialists and pediatricians, audiologists and 
speech language pathologists, special educators (hearing impairment), opticians, pharmacists, 
and even grocers dispense hearing aids in various parts of the country. It is worth noting that 
hearing aid dealers play an important role in client procurement of hearing aids. 
 
 
Prescription of the Hearing Aids 
 
The procedure followed in prescribing a hearing aid depends on who prescribes the aid 
and in what type of organization they work. There are several training institutions where 
functional-gain and insertion-gain measurements are performed using standard equipment and 
procedures. Many dealers of digital hearing aids have the facility to prescribe and program 
digital hearing aids. However, by and large, the procedure followed for prescribing hearing 
aids is not satisfactory. It is very common to find clients who are prescribed hearing aids 
without even an audiological assessment.  
 
 
Hearing Aid Testing Facilities 
 
Some of the major referral centers include AIISH and AYJNIHH (Mumbai and its 
regional centers). Secunderabad, Delhi, and Kolkata have world-class facilities for testing 
Review

Vijayalakshmi Basavaraj 
 
160 
hearing aids. The aids selected for distribution under the Assistance to Disabled Persons 
(ADIP) Scheme are subjected to electroacoustic characteristics assessment as well as physical 
checks to ensure distribution of good quality hearing aids. 
 
 
The Assistance to Disabled Persons Scheme  
 
In 1981, the Indian Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment introduced the ADIP 
scheme for distributing free hearing aids or hearing aids at 50% of cost. Those whose family 
monthly income is less than Rs. 6500 (US$ 130) are eligible for free hearing aids and those 
whose monthly income is between Rs. 6501 to 10,000 (US$ 130 - 200) are eligible for a 50% 
concession. In the ADIP scheme, hearing aids and their accessories are selected under a bulk 
contract. Presently only body worn hearing aids are distributed through the scheme and their 
cost varies from Rs. 440 to 1,500 (US$ 10 - 35). There were 38 models from four to five 
manufacturers approved in the bulk contract in 2006. 
Along with the hearing aids, AA solar battery chargers (including two chargeable 
batteries) are also provided. The solar battery recharger costs about Rs. 214 (US$ 4.5). 
Provision to provide aids and appliances costing up to Rs. 8000 (US$ 160) for each ear is 
made under the ADIP scheme. Children studying up to 10th grade are given binaural hearing 
aids. They are eligible for new hearing aids every two years. It is estimated that about 90,000 
hearing aids manufactured in India are distributed through the ADIP scheme by about 200 
implementing agencies (both government and non-governmental organizations) spread across 
the country. 
 
 
Other Facilities under the ADIP Scheme 
 
The ADIP scheme also makes provision for the following: 
 
1. Free earmolds (by reimbursing the cost of the earmold to the implementing 
agencies); 
2. Traveling expenses for visiting the facility (under specified rules); 
3. Daily allowance for stay while attending the facility (under specified rules). 
 
 
ADIP Scheme Implementing Agencies 
 
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has opened the ADIP scheme for 
implementation by any agency which satisfies certain criteria. This was done to broaden the 
network of implementing agencies in the country to reach the unreached. About 200 
implementing agencies (governmental and non-governmental organizations combined) are 
presently serving individuals with hearing impairment. A project to study the feasibility of 
providing binaural BTEs under the ADIP scheme is underway. The project is expected to 
throw light on the cost effectiveness of providing binaural BTE hearing aids and the issues 
involved in their maintenance. 
Review

Hearing Aid Provision in Developing Countries 
 
161
The other sources of funds for the purchase of hearing aids are the Central Government 
Health Scheme (CGHS), which provides up to Rs. 60,000 (US$ 1200) for digital hearing aids, 
various Employees Scheme of Insurance (ESI) and charitable organizations.  
FACILITIES FOR PROMOTING USE AND MAINTENANCE  
OF HEARING AIDS 
Earmolds 
 
Custom made earmolds ensure the optimal use of the output of the hearing aid by 
securely coupling it to the ear. This is an essential component for satisfactory use of the 
hearing aid. Hard acrylic molds are commonly used in India. The cost of this type of mold is 
about only Rs. 67 (US $1.35). The facilities for making custom made earmolds need to be 
expanded. They are available only in major cities and big towns. It is estimated that not more 
than 500 centers have facilities for earmold making. These include about 150 government 
organizations (mentioned earlier), about 200 non-government organizations and about 150 
hearing aid dealers. Due to a lack of facilities that manufacture custom made earmolds, 
hearing aids are often used either with stock earmolds or eartips. 
Some of the major institutions in the country have tried cost effective methods of plaster 
casting the ear impression in diagnostic camps so that they can be brought to their 
laboratories for processing. The prepared molds are later mailed to the clients. Even though 
this strategy for service delivery is excellent, it cannot be sustained for long due to the costs 
involved. Renewing this strategy with better and more widely distributed facilities for 
impression taking, plaster casting and mailing would enable more people to have earmolds. 
Soft earmold facilities have been available since the 1990s. The estimated cost of a soft 
mold is about Rs. 350 (US $ 7). However they are sold with about 100 to 150% profit in the 
private sector and hence unaffordable by the majority of clients. The earmolds are not always 
made by trained personnel. Earmold modification to suit individual needs is rarely heard of. 
Given that very few earmold labs are available in the country and the lengthy processing 
time of conventional procedures, there is undue delay in fitting hearing aids to clients, even 
after the hearing assessment is completed. This presents a hurdle in utilizing the critical 
period of learning in young children with hearing impairment who are identified early. Only 
several dozen centers in the country have ultraviolet light curing facilities that enable faster 
preparation of molds. 
 
 
Batteries for Hearing Aids 
 
An estimated 70% of Indian hearing aid users use body level hearing aids with 1.5V AA 
batteries. These batteries are now available even in rural areas and cost Rs. 7 (US $ 0.20) 
onwards per piece. These batteries have a life of about 100 hours. 
Most of the BTE hearing aids take 675 size zinc-air batteries costing Rs. 25 to 30 (US$ 
0.75) or rechargeable AAA batteries costing Rs. 45.50 (US$ 1.10), both with a battery life of 
about 180 - 200 hours. Both types are becoming widely available throughout the country.  
Review

Vijayalakshmi Basavaraj 
 
162 
Spare Parts for Hearing Aids 
 
The spare parts required for hearing aids include cords, body cases, microphones, 
receivers, and switches. Except for the microphones and receivers, the leading local 
manufacturers are making these spare parts and hence they are available at a modest cost. 
Microphones, receivers and ear hooks (for BTE devices) are imported and hence are 
expensive. The quality of locally produced parts is likely to improve further if local 
manufacturers develop an international market. Defects in the spare parts mentioned above 
frequently contribute to the malfunctioning of hearing aids (Kacker et al., 1989). The 
availability of spare parts is, however, restricted to urban regions. 
 
 
Training of Personnel for Earmold Making and Hearing Aid Repairs 
 
Continued efforts are being made to train more earmold technicians and hearing aid 
repair technicians. Practical training in this area is given at the diploma, graduate and post 
graduate levels in audiology and speech language pathology courses, as well as in special 
education programs. Thus, the graduating students of these courses have the required skills to 
prepare earmolds and undertake hearing aid repair. AIISH is offering a one-year diploma 
program in earmold making and hearing aid repair which is recognized by the Rehabilitation 
Council of India. 
AIISH, AYJNIHH and its regional centers, and a few other major centers, conduct 
regular short-term training programs in these two areas for special educators, other staff of 
special schools, and ADIP implementing agencies. Attempts to train the adult deaf as ear 
mold technicians have also been made. In spite of these efforts, more earmold technicians and 
hearing aid repair technicians are needed in the country. 
OTHER FACILITIES AVAILABLE 
Assistive Listening Devices 
 
Assistive listening devices, such as alerting devices, induction loop systems, TV and 
telephone listening devices, are used more as exhibition items than as regularly prescribed 
devices for the hearing impaired. Since the present demand is low, the availability is also poor 
and the costs are high. Induction loop systems have been installed in railway booking 
counters, auditoria, reception areas in offices, and other locations to illustrate their use in 
promoting barrier-free environments for persons with hearing impairment. They cost about 
Rs. 8000 (US $160) and should be installed more widely. 
 
 
Correspondence/ Online Assistance regarding Hearing Aids 
 
AYJNIHH and a few other major institutions have facilities to reach out to the people 
through correspondence, e-mail and online assistance. These initiatives provide token 
Review

Hearing Aid Provision in Developing Countries 
 
163
assistance to those who cannot physically visit the centers and promote public awareness 
regarding hearing impairment. 
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has drafted a proposal to launch the ‘National 
Program of Prevention & Control of Deafness (NPPCD)’ in India’s 11th Five-Year Plan (with 
effect from April 2007). The pilot phase of the program was initiated in August 2006, 
implementing the planned strategy in 25 districts belonging to ten states and one union 
territory across the country. The overall objective of the program is to prevent hearing loss 
due to disease or injury, provide early diagnosis, treatment, and medical rehabilitation, 
strengthen linkages, create databases, and facilitate needs-based research. The long-term 
objective is to reduce the total disease burden from 6.3% to less than 3% prevalence of 
hearing loss in the designated areas by 2012. The planned strategies are: 
 
1. To strengthen service delivery including rehabilitation; 
2. To develop human resources for ear care; 
3. To promote outreach activities and public awareness through innovative and 
effective information, education and communication strategies with special emphasis 
on the prevention of deafness; 
4. To develop institutional capacity. 
 
In the preparatory phase of the program, it is envisaged to plan activities to train health 
workers; sensitize the state health community and State Medical College staff regarding the 
national program; fund the state health and district health communities for the procurement of 
equipment, aids and appliances. In the second phase, active manpower training and capacity 
building will be undertaken. Hearing screening at schools and camps will be conducted 
followed by rehabilitation of the identified population. The third phase would focus on 
monitoring and evaluation of manpower training, capacity building, service provision and 
information, education and communication activities. BTE hearing aids under bulk contract 
will be distributed free of cost. The project’s Hearing Aid Provision Scheme has incorporated 
the provision of hearing aid repair and maintenance services under the bulk contract. 
CONCLUSION: OUR NEEDS AND FUTURE PLANS 
1. Research and development in the area of hearing aids and earmolds: 
a. Action is required to further improve the quality of spare parts and components. 
This would improve the mechanical and electroacoustic quality of the devices. 
b. Dust and humidity resistant components need to be explored so that better 
quality, durable hearing aids are manufactured and assembled in India. 
c. The central and state governments may consider minimizing or exempting 
import duty, sales tax and local taxes on the components of the hearing aids and 
assistive listening devices, so that hearing aids become more affordable. 
Review

Vijayalakshmi Basavaraj 
 
164 
d. Cost effective assistive listening devices need to be designed and manufactured. 
More attention must be given to television and telephone listening aids as the 
geriatric population is on a steady increase and more and more elderly persons 
are living independently. 
 
2. The referral route has to be strengthened and followed up for better service delivery. 
 
3. Attempts must be made to empower and widen the existing hearing aid 
recommendation and procurement system. Some effective steps may be: 
a. Licensing of hearing aid dealerships. 
b. Training hearing aid dealers to dispense hearing aids professionally and equip 
them with: 
basic and user friendly literature about hearing aid use, care and 
maintenance; 
hearing aid repair and earmold facilities 
lists of referral centers. 
c. The network of governmental and non-governmental organizations needs to be 
further expanded. 
d. Strengthening of public awareness programs regarding the need for hearing 
assessment, hearing aid trial and custom made earmolds before purchasing 
hearing aids, utilizing primary and secondary level workers. 
e. Disseminate information in user-friendly mode regarding the facilities offered by 
the Government of India, so that the ‘Persons with Disability’ Act of 1995 can 
be implemented with full vigor. 
f. 
WHO guidelines (2001) which state that ‘Behind-the-ear hearing aids should be 
the preferred option but body-worn aids will still be required in some situations’ 
(WHO, PBD report, 2001) be considered for the ADIP Scheme. 
 
4. Ear mold manufacture needs to be improved and made more affordable. 
Centralized earmold laboratories need to be set up by governmental and non-
governmental organizations across the country in all the states so that mailed ear 
impressions are processed and returned to the beneficiaries. Associated costs should 
be borne under the ADIP Scheme. The Government of India should be approached to 
waive the mailing cost of aids and appliances used by the disabled population. 
Suitable earmold material for one stage processing should be explored, developed 
and tested so that custom made molds are provided at lower cost within a short 
period of time.  
Adult deaf persons may be trained as earmold technicians at the special schools for 
the deaf. This would serve the dual purpose of expanding the earmold facilities and 
of providing employment to individuals who are deaf.  
 
5. Radio mechanics, who are available in large numbers across the country, should be 
trained to repair hearing aids so that hearing aids are utilized adequately over their 
optimal working life. 
 
 
Review

Hearing Aid Provision in Developing Countries 
 
165
6. Solar battery chargers for 675 type batteries (used with BTE aids) should be 
developed to reduce considerably the maintenance cost of BTEs. 
REFERENCES 
Anand S. (1994). Personal communication. 
Basavaraj, V., Kacker, S.K., & Kaur, M. (1995). Digital master hearing aid (DMHA) and 
CUDLS – our experience. Journal of the Indian Speech and Hearing Association, 14, 41–
50. 
Basavaraj, V., & Nandurkar, A. (2005). Implications of hearing impairment in a child and 
neonatal hearing screening programs. Paper presented at the 7th course of Neuro-otology 
and Audiology. Hinduja Hopsital, Mumbai, October 2005. 
Indian Standard: 10775 – 1984 (Superceding IS: 4406 – 1967 and IS: 4482 – 1967). 
Specification for body level hearing aids. 
Indian Standard: 10776 (part 1) – 1984. Methods of measurement of the electroacoustical 
characteristics of hearing aids, part 1. General measurements for air conduction hearing 
aids. 
Indian Standard: 10776 (part 2) – 1984. Methods of measurement of the electroacoustical 
characteristics of hearing aids, part 2. Additional measurements for hearing aids with 
induction pick-up coil input. 
Indian Standard: 10776 (part 3) – 1984. Methods of measurement of the electroacoustical 
characteristics of hearing aids, Part 3. Additional measurements for hearing aids with 
automatic gain control circuits. 
Indian Standard: 10776 (part 4) – 1984. Methods of measurement of the electroacoustical 
Ccharacteristics of hearing aids, part 4. Hearing aids with bone vibrator. 
Indian Standard: 10781 – 1984. Specification for reference coupler for the measurement of 
hearing aids using earphones coupled to the ear by means of ear inserts. 
Kacker, S.K., Deka, R.C., Sharma, R., & Basavaraj, V. (1989). Common defects in hearing 
aids. Indian Journal of Otolaryngology, 41(1), 34-36. 
Kumar, S., Mahendru, A., Ojha, S., & Raturi, S. (1995). A study of the status of the use of 
hearing aids in school going children. Journal of the Indian Speech and Hearing 
Association,14, 78-83. 
National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO). (1991). National sample survey. New Delhi: 
Department of Statistics, Government of India. 
National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO). (2002). Disabled persons in India. Report 
No.485: 58th Round. New Delhi: Department of Statistics, Government of India. 
Pandaley, S.P.C., & Murthy, S.S. (1972). Performance characteristics of Indian hearing aids. 
Journal of the All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, 3, 108-113. 
Peston Jamas, P.A. (2003) Personal communication. 
Rangasayee, R. (1991). Photovoltaic battery charger for use with body level hearing aids. 
Unpublished manuscript submitted to S & T Mission Mode of Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment, Government of India. 
Ravishankar, K.C., & Shashidhar (1989). Electroacoustical performance of hearing aids. 
Journal of the Indian Speech and Hearing Association, 5-6, 26-33. 
Review

Vijayalakshmi Basavaraj 
 
166 
Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI). (1996). Report on manpower development. New Delhi: 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government of India. 
Sharma, R., Basavaraj, V., & Kacker, S.K. (1989). Physical and electroacoustical 
characteristics of hearing aids. In K.B.Sahay & R.K. Saxema (Eds.), Biomechanics (pp. 
20-205). New Delhi: Wiley Eastern Ltd. 
Sinha, A.K. (2002). Personal communication 
Sneha, V.B. (1995). Comparative study of subjects performance with FM system and their 
personal body level hearing aids. Journal of the Indian Speech and Hearing Association, 
14, 35-40. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (1995). Prevention of hearing impairment. Resolution of 
the 48th World Health Assembly, 12, May, 1995. WHA 48.9. Geneva: WHO.  
World Health Organization (WHO). (2001). Press release WHO/34. 11 July, 2001. Geneva: 
WHO. 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2001). Guidelines for provision of hearing aids and 
services for developing countries. WHO report No.PBD/PDH/01.1 July, 2001. Geneva: 
WHO.  
World Health Organization (WHO). (2005). World-wide Hearing Care for developing 
countries. WW Hearing Strategic Plan version 5.3. October 2007. Geneva: WHO.  
 
Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9 
 
 
 
EDUCATIONAL AUDIOLOGY 
 IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
 
 
Susie Miles* and Wendy McCracken 
University of Manchester, United Kingdom 
ABSTRACT 
School-based audiological services can deliver considerable benefits to deaf children 
and their families, especially in developing countries where audiology clinics may not yet 
have been established, or where they are only based in capital cities. In this chapter we 
explore the origins of ‘educational audiology’ and consider the advantages of locating 
hearing health care and hearing assessment services in schools for deaf children. In order 
to understand the challenges faced in setting up and maintaining such services, we 
identified a range of practitioners in developing countries and asked them a series of 
questions by email about their practice, their training needs and the challenges they faced. 
We used a purposive sample of practitioners identified through the Enabling Education 
Network and audiology graduates from the University of Manchester. We also wrote to 
audiologists based in the United Kingdom who have advised practitioners in various 
developing countries on the development of audiology services and who have provided 
audiological training to some of those practitioners. This chapter reviews the findings 
from this small survey, presents a set of case examples and considers the implications for 
the further development of educational and school-based audiology services in the most 
cost-effective and sustainable way. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
* Correspondence: susie.miles@manchester.ac.uk 
Review

Susie Miles and Wendy McCracken 
 
168 
INTRODUCTION 
This chapter looks in detail at some of the challenges in providing audiological support to 
deaf children in developing countries. We begin with a brief history of the development of 
educational audiology. We then go on to identify some of the advantages of locating 
audiological services in school settings, while appreciating the fact that most schools do not 
see themselves as centres of audiological expertise. We use real world examples from Africa, 
Asia and South America, provided by audiology graduates from the University of 
Manchester, Deaf Child Worldwide (formerly known as the International Deaf Children’s 
Society)1) and the Enabling Education Network2 (EENET), to explore the potential for 
developing more widely available community based services for deaf children. 
WHAT IS EDUCATIONAL AUDIOLOGY?  
The concept of educational audiology became a commonly used term during the 1970s. It 
is firmly rooted in Western countries as well as in China and Russia. Although medically-
based, clinical audiology services have much to offer, the importance of developing 
audiology skills in teachers of deaf children is also recognised. Teachers of deaf children are 
able to provide the following audiological services alongside their teaching commitments: 
 
1.  Responsibility for the day-to-day management of personal hearing aids and other 
audiological equipment; 
2.  Advice on acoustics in classrooms and the promotion of good listening 
environments;  
3.  Audiological advice to children and families, since teachers are more likely to have 
regular contact with families than medical practitioners; 
4.  Interpretation of hearing assessments for non-specialist teachers to help ensure the 
most appropriate teaching approaches are used;  
5.  Monitoring of developmental progress in the use of aids, allowing appropriate 
adjustments to be made to equipment.  
 
Over the past 30 years there have been major changes in audiology. This has included the 
development of post-aural (behind the ear) hearing aids; the introduction of FM radio systems 
(initially as body-worn aids but now as plug-ins to post aural aids); of classroom 
amplification; of paediatric cochlear implantation; and in some areas digital rather than 
analogue amplification. Methods of assessment have moved from using behavioural measures 
to implementing newborn hearing screening programmes; the use of a battery of objective 
tests; paediatric hearing aid fitting protocols; and real ear measurements for the verification of 
hearing aid fittings. Whilst basic audiological training has been part of the specialist 
qualification to teach deaf children, new knowledge and understanding of audiological issues 
                                                        
1 Deaf Child Worldwide is the international development wing of the UK’s National Deaf Children’s Society 
(NDCS), which is a parents’ organisation. It was set up in 2002 with the aim of supporting initiatives with deaf 
children and their families in developing countries. 
2 The Enabling Education Network supports and promotes the inclusion of marginalised groups of children in 
education worldwide by providing useful and relevant information. It is based in the University of Manchester. 
Review

Educational Audiology in Developing Countries 
 
169
make additional training important to ensure that deaf children and their families benefit from 
these developments. 
In the income-rich, industrialised ‘developed’ countries, responsibility for the education 
of deaf children tends to lie with specialist support services or special schools. These schools 
and services ensure that the children receive appropriate support, usually from a specially 
trained teacher of deaf children, in a variety of educational settings. In the United Kingdom, 
educational audiologists have traditionally come to the profession as trained and experienced 
teachers of deaf children. This is different in the United States, where educational 
audiologists typically have training in speech and hearing sciences. This ‘second tier’ 
approach to training was designed to be suitable to individuals who were already specialists in 
education, deaf education or communication difficulties. These professionals have an 
understanding of child development, developing communication skills, educational 
programmes and basic audiology. This knowledge provides an ideal foundation for a more 
specialised range of audiological knowledge and skills, typically including: anatomy and 
physiology of deafness; epidemiology and screening; assessment of hearing status; sensory 
aids, earmoulds, impression taking, manufacture and adjustment; fitting, verification and 
ongoing monitoring of amplification; measurement and management of room acoustics; 
acoustic phonetics and speech intelligibility testing; calibration and care of equipment. 
ADVANTAGES OF SCHOOL-BASED EDUCATIONAL AUDIOLOGY 
Schools for deaf children offer a real opportunity for the development of educational 
audiology services in southern countries, both to the deaf children within the school and also 
to those in both the immediate area and the wider region. Special schools have a potential 
wealth of experience and resources and so could become a base for a range of audiological 
services. They have the potential to: 
 
1. Test hearing and dispense hearing aids; 
2. Train mainstream teachers, families, community members in deaf awareness and 
deaf friendly schools, potentially improving the acoustic environment for all learners; 
3. Make earmoulds, supply batteries and repair hearing aids; 
4. Develop and deliver outreach services; 
5. Provide a venue for ‘earcamp’3 and other screening services offered by outside 
agencies. 
 
Schools offer some very real advantages over hospitals in providing audiology services 
and educational advice to families. Hospitals are commonly associated with sickness and 
disease, tend to be situated in major urban centres, and are often prohibitively expensive. 
Although many schools are also based in urban centres, schools can offer an alternative, less 
                                                        
3 Ear camps typically involve medical audiologists, audiologists and ENT staff who undertake short, focused 
assessments of audiological and otological needs, although the high rate of discharging ears makes this a 
difficult task. Advice is provided regarding aural hygiene and some minor surgery is conducted, such as 
mastoidectomies and myringoplasties. Professional time is donated, with the cost of equipment, travel and 
disposable items frequently met by charities, including the Red Cross and Red Crescent. Ear camps provide a 
service to the community serving all ages. 
Review

Susie Miles and Wendy McCracken 
 
170 
threatening setting, within a community. Services for deaf children were developed in a 
similar way in industrialised countries many years ago. Some of the most famous schools for 
deaf children were set up by philanthropists, for example Gallaudet University in the United 
States and Taralye in Australia. Many have gone on to become highly specialised centres that 
provide specialist training and outreach services as well as educational provision for 
specialised populations of deaf children.  
Many schools for deaf children do not see themselves as providing a wider service and 
limit the service they provide to a relatively small number of children, rather than offering a 
more comprehensive service to the community in which they are located (Miles, 1999). If a 
special school actively seeks to become a local and regional resource, services can be 
developed to suit local and regional needs. Ideally such services would complement hospital 
settings to avoid duplication, and maximise the use of these complementary resources. This 
would also offer the possibility of faster and more efficient referral services for those children 
requiring urgent medical care and local treatment, as well as advice for less urgent and non-
medical treatment. 
EDUCATIONAL AUDIOLOGY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
The highly resourced provision of educational audiology is an appropriate extension of a 
well developed system of health and educational services. In this context assessment, fitting 
and follow up services are readily available for those who face hearing health care problems. 
The cost of hearing aid provision and maintenance is either covered by the state or the 
individual. The place of such specialist resources in ‘developing’ countries is less clear, 
especially where primary health care services are poorly developed and education is neither 
free nor compulsory. Yet there is a need for accessible child and family-centred audiology 
services—even where hearing aids are not available. Where hearing aids are available, there 
is an urgent need for such services if deaf children are to have access to optimum ear care and 
make use of their aids and other amplification.  
Community based rehabilitation (CBR) programmes can play a major role, ideally in 
collaboration with schools for deaf children. Where specialist facilities exist in schools, they 
can become a major resource for CBR workers, deaf children and their families. 
Appropriately trained educational audiologists, based in schools for deaf children, could 
potentially develop a range of services for deaf children, their families, mainstream teachers 
and the wider community. A clear development plan is needed if such specialist services are 
to be developed, with itemised input from a range of agencies including national, regional and 
possibly international sources. Clear roles and responsibilities should be identified including 
achievable time lines. Developments will need to take into account local culture and beliefs 
and ensure that local communities understand the purpose, possible outcomes and benefits for 
the wider community. It is important, however, not to under-estimate the scale of the 
challenge of providing appropriate and affordable audiological services. 
 
 
 
Review

Educational Audiology in Developing Countries 
 
171
THE CHALLENGE IS ENORMOUS 
Statistics on school attendance and non-attendance in developing countries are 
notoriously difficult to collect. As the latest UNESCO Global Monitoring Report on 
Education for All states: “Calculating the number of children of primary school age who are 
not in school is not straightforward” (2007, pp. 27-28). The results—which tend to be widely 
quoted—thus need to be considered with caution. It is even more difficult to determine the 
prevalence of deafness in developing countries and of deaf children attending school. 
UNESCO estimates that only 10% of disabled children are in school and that one third of the 
77 million children currently not in school are disabled (UNESCO, 2007). Wirz & Lichtig 
(1998: 189) cite Helander’s estimate (1993) that the global prevalence of moderate and severe 
hearing loss was between 0.5% and 0.8%. However they point out that this does not account 
for the higher prevalence of meningitis, measles, mumps and other preventable diseases in 
some developing countries. Although there is considerable variation in these published 
estimates, it is clear that the majority of deaf children in developing countries do not have 
access to education or to audiological services, so the scale of the challenge of providing 
appropriate services is enormous. 
It is not possible to generalise from published estimates since the situation varies 
enormously between countries. A community-based epidemiological survey of hearing 
impairment and deafness, conducted in Swaziland in 1986, by the Liverpool School of 
Tropical Medicine, revealed that almost 50% of profoundly deaf children were being 
educated in the only school for deaf children in the country, but little was known about the 
estimated 4,000-6,000 children of school going age who had mild to moderate hearing losses, 
largely due to neglected otitis media (White, Newell & Gell, 1987). The population of 
Swaziland was less than one million people at the time. By contrast neighbouring 
Mozambique, with its population of 20 million, had only two relatively small schools for deaf 
children, and so it seems likely that the proportion of deaf children being educated was 
significantly smaller. 
Although the challenge of providing services is clearly enormous in most developing 
countries, schools for deaf children that work in collaboration with CBR programmes could 
have a much greater impact by reaching more children. Schools for deaf children are rich in 
knowledge, skills and equipment and have the potential to provide services to the large 
majority of deaf children who do not have access to medical or educational services.  
In this chapter we provide examples of some of the efforts made to overcome 
considerable financial, logistical and technical barriers to the development of sustainable 
audiological services. We do this through a series of short case studies from Brazil, India, 
Jordan, Namibia, Nigeria, South Africa and Vietnam. We recognise that there is a great deal 
of excellent work taking place in developing countries which has not been documented and so 
cannot be discussed here. The importance of sharing examples of promising and helpful 
practice between developing countries cannot be emphasised enough. Practitioners can learn a 
great deal from short, simply written case studies which illustrate a range of ways of 
overcoming barriers to the provision of services in developing countries, even across diverse 
cultural settings (Miles and Ahuja, 2007). 
 
 
Review

Susie Miles and Wendy McCracken 
 
172 
AUDIOLOGY FOR THE DEAF BY THE DEAF IN JORDAN 
An audiological service was set up many years ago at the Holy Land Institute for the 
Deaf in Salt, Jordan. This was a service not only for the deaf children at the school, but also 
for the wider community, including Palestinians living in refugee camps. However the 
hearing facilities were poorly managed and many of the deaf students at the school were 
suspicious of audiologists, fearing that they would discourage them from using sign language. 
In 1994, the Christian Blind Mission (CBM) supported the development of audiology services 
through the appointment of a British audiologist. Her first discovery was that many students’ 
ears were blocked with wax (Litzke, 2004). Although many of the 180 students had hearing 
aids, only one of them was using the aid effectively. The audiologist worked closely with a 
Deaf staff member and ex-pupil, who had responsibility for the earmould laboratory. This 
Deaf assistant became proficient in carrying out pure tone audiometry and began to better 
understand the importance of well-fitting ear moulds. The involvement of a Deaf person in 
the process of running an efficient educational audiology service had an extremely positive 
impact on the attitudes of the deaf students towards hearing aids. Families now realised that 
hearing aids were not a miracle cure, but that they could help improve communication.  
This short account demonstrates that the presence of audiological facilities in a school for 
deaf children is not in itself sufficient to ensure that services are well developed. It requires a 
coordinated team effort. It also demonstrates the way audiological expertise from outside can 
be used to nurture the development of insider expertise. In this example it was on-the-job 
training, not formal qualifications, that made the difference. Lichtig, Woll, Silvia Cárnio, 
Akiyama, & Gomes (2004) also found that the employment of deaf staff in a family centred 
educational audiology service for 3-6 year olds in Brazil improved the quality of service 
provision and parents’ confidence in those services. 
DEVELOPING AUDIOLOGY SKILLS IN NAMIBIA 
A British audiologist was recruited to work in 1996 at the Eluwa School for the Deaf in 
Northern Namibia, the second school to be established in the country (Roberts, 2001). 
Namibia is a very large country with a population of less than 2 million people. At that time 
there were only two audiologists working in government service, one in health and one in 
education. Both were based in the capital city, Windhoek, 650 kilometres south of Eluwa. 
Prior to the appointment of the British audiologist, the audiologist for the Ministry of 
Education visited the school three to four times a year to provide much needed educational 
audiology services – but this was clearly not a satisfactory arrangement. An ex-Eluwa student 
was sent for training in Botswana as an ear mould technician. On her return she was 
employed by a private company in the capital city, which provided an excellent service to 
Eluwa School. Over a period of three years, four Namibian teachers who had no specialist 
qualification in teaching deaf children were trained by the British audiologist to run the 
school-based service.  
A report of a brief visit to Namibia by a Deaf Child Worldwide staff member (Wilson, 
2005) reveals that the Ministry of Health and a national NGO provide hearing aids free of 
charge, but parents have to pay the equivalent of $US10 per ear mould. However, audiology 
posts in the two main government hospitals are currently vacant. This further reinforces the 
Review

Educational Audiology in Developing Countries 
 
173
importance of the development of audiological expertise in schools for deaf children and 
other community based centres, such as health clinics. Nurses have been trained by a British-
based organisation, Soundseekers (no date), in various countries, including Ghana, Guyana, 
India, Lesotho, Namibia, Sierra Leone, South Africa and Swaziland. The nurses identify and 
treat middle ear disease, and in some countries a mobile service is offered through the use of a 
specially designed and equipped vehicle, or Hearing Assessment Centre, known as a ‘HARK’ 
(EENET, 2002).  
MOBILE EAR CARE SERVICES IN NIGERIA 
The development of appropriate forms of training for community based educational 
audiologists is a more complicated challenge. It could be argued that educational audiology 
training in developed countries is inadequate for the particular challenges of developing such 
services ‘from scratch’ in the context of extreme poverty and poorly developed welfare 
services. The difference between the services available to urban populations and those 
available to rural areas is also stark, with rural areas being most neglected. Whether families 
are based in rural or urban areas, audiological services are likely to be unaffordable.  
The Mobile Ear Care Service (MECS) in Akwaibo State in rural Nigeria was started by a 
Nigerian Catholic sister at St Louise’s Special School (Ali, 2007). The Sister was trained as a 
teacher of the deaf in Manchester in 2000 and spent a further year receiving informal training 
in audiology in London. She is now the headteacher of the school, which caters for 200 deaf 
children and sixty additional children who have learning difficulties. As the only staff 
member with training in audiology, she spends three days per week during school time, and 
five days per week during school holidays, travelling around the local community with the 
MECS. An ear mould laboratory is run by one of the teachers after school hours and an ex-
pupil has been trained to make ear moulds. In-service training sessions are run over a nine 
month period for those who work with the MECS, but this has not yet been affiliated to a 
university. The trainees are able to give advice, but cannot provide any equipment. Children 
with hearing impairment are supported by the MECS in local schools through a cycle of three 
monthly visits. The service is funded by a combination of school fees and donations from 
CBM and the Daughters of Charity of St Vincent de Paul. The MECS faces some obvious 
challenges, such as the extreme heat and dust, poor roads and limited equipment. 
Unfortunately this low-cost provision of audiological services is seen as a threat by some 
private audiologists, many of whom have been trained in industrialised countries and who 
have returned to Nigeria to ‘sell’ their audiology services.  
Audiological investment in existing schools for deaf children in developing countries 
would go some way towards providing more comprehensive and equitable services. 
Investment should not be interpreted as being purely equipment based. Investment must 
include training of the staff who need to use the equipment and to cascade skills to others. 
This would help to promote greater awareness and knowledge about deafness, meet the 
audiological needs of deaf children within their local communities, and potentially enable 
greater numbers of deaf children to access educational opportunities. Ideally schools should 
be encouraged to work collaboratively with local and regional health services to meet the 
audiological needs of deaf children. In their article about the use of non-specialists in 
providing services for children with hearing impairments, Wirz and Lichtig (1998) discuss the 
Review

Susie Miles and Wendy McCracken 
 
174 
challenge of promoting collaborative working arrangements in developing countries between 
highly trained specialists who can dispense hearing aids and community workers who can 
mobilise communities and counsel deaf children and their families. We argue in this chapter 
that schools for deaf children have the potential to play a key role in promoting such 
collaboration. 
COMMUNITY BASED TRAINING IN INDIA 
The Irakgada Centre in Karnataka provided a four day training course and a one day field 
visit to three deaf children in their homes, following an analysis of the training needs of a 
small NGO, ‘Samuha Samarthya’ (Wilson, Miles, & Kaplan, 2008). The training included: 
 
1. Anatomy of the ear, causes of deafness and amplification;  
2. Communication, language and teaching methods—with role play; 
3. Making teaching aids; 
4. Working with children and parents; 
5. Evaluation of the training. 
 
During the training parents learned to make sense of audiograms and came to understand 
the value of wearing hearing aids. The CBR trainers felt confident that some participants 
would be able to become trainers themselves one day, initially working with the CBR team.  
This account demonstrates that well-planned and well-delivered basic training is often 
highly valued by non-specialists. Educational audiologists and teachers of deaf children are 
well placed to offer such training. Schools for deaf children have the potential to jointly 
develop training packages that could be delivered across a region or country. Support from 
NGOs and other civil society organisations in such an enterprise could help to ensure 
materials were catalogued and used in other settings. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF COORDINATING SERVICES 
Nhloso was seven when his teachers noticed he had difficulty in hearing (Wilson et al., 
2008). It is not unusual for deaf children to be identified late in childhood in developing 
countries. Visiting a hospital for a hearing assessment in South Africa involved a long and 
expensive journey and an overnight stay for the family. A hearing test was carried out, but no 
results were received as the person who did the test left their job at the hospital. Nhloso’s 
mother recounted the details of the assessment to school staff who requested support from a 
special school. A whole year later a new speech therapist was contacted and Nhloso’s hospital 
records were found. Nhloso had a severe to profound hearing loss, possibly associated with 
meningitis when he was quite young. He was referred to a specialist hospital and eventually, 
after a number of visits, earmoulds were made and hearing aids fitted, although initially the 
earmoulds did not fit well, causing a further delay in amplification. The special education 
services provided the school with a video with information about deafness, but there was no 
video player at the school so staff were unable to watch it. 
Review

Educational Audiology in Developing Countries 
 
175
Finally it was agreed that a school for the deaf would offer the best opportunities for 
Nhloso. A further delay arose when Nhloso’s family were unable to find his birth certificate 
because it had been eaten by termites. This prevented him from being enrolled at school. 
When a duplicate certificate was obtained, Nhloso was almost nine years old. He started 
attending a school for the deaf almost two years after the initial suspicion that he might be 
deaf.  
This vivid account provides some insight into the enormous challenges parents face in 
identifying appropriate audiological support. It also highlights the urgent need to ensure that 
children are identified as early as possible and that sensitive and efficient support services are 
made available. Specialist educational services are not always sufficient in themselves in 
making the most appropriate interventions. Services are more likely to work more efficiently 
when linked to CBR programmes, although CBR programmes do not always cater to the 
needs of deaf children (Miles, 1995). The publication, ‘Family Friendly’ (Wilson et al., 2008) 
provides innovative examples of CBR programmes which have made a difference to the 
quality of family support, sign language teaching and audiological services.  
TRADITIONAL UNDERSTANDING OF DEAFNESS 
In many countries misunderstandings about the nature and causes of deafness persist. 
Clinical experience in Swaziland revealed a range of traditional beliefs and responses to 
deafness (Miles, 1991). The sudden onset of deafness, for example, was sometimes 
interpreted as a sign that the person had been given special powers and should be encouraged 
to train as a traditional healer. Parents sometimes asked the ear, nose and throat (ENT) 
specialist to cut the child’s tongue as they thought the lack of speech meant the child was 
‘tongue-tied’. It was very common to hear of children and adults who had received traditional 
treatment involving a concoction of herbs poured into the ears, often causing sickness and 
dizziness, especially where the ear drum and the bones of the middle ear had been destroyed 
by neglected middle ear disease. Some were instructed to run up to the top of a termite mound 
and shout into it, in the belief that this would cure the deafness. Parents were left surprised 
and confused when these treatments were ineffective. Traditional healers command enormous 
respect in some cultures and are usually more numerous, more easily accessible and better 
trusted than hospital based services (de Andrade and Ross, 2005). In establishing the 
Swaziland Speech and Hearing Clinic Services in the mid-1980s (Miles, 1990), nurses, 
teachers and traditional healers were invited to engage in dialogue on the issue of hearing 
impairment, its causes and possible treatment. It made no sense to condemn traditional 
practices, since most of the people using the Speech and Hearing Clinic Services also 
consulted traditional healers. The only positive and productive way forward in order to 
develop greater understanding at community level about hearing loss was to work with 
traditional healers, rather than against them.  
In Vietnam some parents were convinced that the process of audiological assessment 
caused their child to be deaf (Maarse, Phouc, McCracken, & Nga, 2001). Any attempt to 
explain that children had a hearing loss prior to assessment was quickly dismissed. It was 
only through a community-based health care approach, which discussed the causes of 
deafness in the local context, that this belief could be addressed in a way that was acceptable 
to the parents. At the time of this review the ENT community in Vietnam did not have a 
Review

Susie Miles and Wendy McCracken 
 
176 
recognised position for an audiologist. Demands on ENT services were high and there was 
little expertise in paediatric audiology. In such a setting teachers of the deaf were trained to 
provide audiological management, including assessment and fitting of hearing aids. This 
training was funded by a non-governmental organization.  
HEARING SCREENING:  
THE ROLE OF EDUCATIONAL AUDIOLOGY SERVICES 
The identification of hearing loss in a child is a major trauma for families. This situation 
is exacerbated by lack of referral for treatment and a lack of services. The fact that the hearing 
screen reveals a major difficulty and a need for audiological support which cannot be met is 
of little relevance to the immediate experience of families dealing with the shock of having a 
deaf child. 
Hearing screening initiatives may be useful in convincing governments that services are 
needed. However it would be unethical to screen for hearing impairment and deafness if 
follow up services are not readily available, as McPherson and Olusanya point out in their 
chapter on screening in the present volume. The type, extent and quality of service available 
vary considerably across the developing and developed world. Small projects and piecemeal 
development of services, often established by NGOs and individual professionals, tend to be 
the only audiology services that exist, yet they offer considerable benefits to individual deaf 
children and their families. In order to effect lasting change, however, it is important to plan 
not only for immediate need, but also for medium and long term needs. Planning is most 
effective when placed within the context of national primary health care and educational 
services.  
Financial constraints can mean that clinical audiology services are unlikely to be 
developed, or if they do exist, that families cannot afford to use them. Wirz and Lichtig 
(1998) argue that the cost of specialised services in urban centres can be prohibitive; of 94 
children diagnosed as deaf (free of charge) in an audiology clinic in Sao Paulo, Brazil, only 
one child was able to purchase a hearing aid. In Burma (Myanmar) there is only one 
audiologist and two schools for deaf children serving a population of 48 million people 
(Vaughan, 2000). The planning and implementation of a national framework for ear care and 
audiology services is understandably not on the national health agenda.  
Given that many countries lack developed audiological services, educational audiologists 
have a role to play at a local and regional level in identifying deaf children through screening 
programmes, where they exist. This type of undertaking has major training and human 
resource implications. Educational audiologists could play a role in training personnel in 
screening so that they could then provide a regional service. Any referrals from the hearing 
screen would require onward referral to audiological services. There would also be the need 
to recognise that identification of hearing loss is a recursive process rather than a single 
assessment point. Furthermore such a screen would ideally require pre-school services and 
early childhood education opportunities to be made available to families.  
In a recent study Swanepoel, Louw and Hugo (2007) describe a model of infant hearing 
screening for developing countries, based on their work in South Africa. Since a significant 
number of births do not occur in hospitals (Olusanya, Luxon, & Wirz, 2004; Swanepoel, 
Review

Educational Audiology in Developing Countries 
 
177
Hugo, & Louw, 2006), this study suggests an integrated approach to immunisation and 
hearing screening. In the proposed model immunisation programmes act as a “platform” 
allowing hearing screening to be carried out at the same time. Follow up audiological 
assessments are also linked to multi-dose immunisation visits, usually occurring at 10 and 14 
weeks. This is a pragmatic approach that uses the system in place to add in a further screen 
without any further appointments or time demands on parents or professionals. For a country 
like South Africa that has a well-established immunisation programme the potential is clear. 
In other countries where such programmes are less well established it is more problematic. 
CONCLUSION 
The provision of hearing aids and other clinical audiology services, without adequate 
follow-up services, is highly unethical. It is unlikely that hearing aids will be used effectively 
or maintained, even in schools for deaf children, unless a sustainable and affordable 
educational audiology service has been established. Ideally this service would be based in a 
school, rather than in a hospital setting, and would work in close collaboration with health 
and rehabilitation services. Schools for deaf children are centres of expertise, which are rarely 
used for the benefit of the wider community. Yet if teachers of deaf children can be provided 
with basic audiological training, they would be able to provide a more comprehensive service 
to the children they serve, their families and community members who may have hearing 
problems. Where deaf school leavers have been trained to repair hearing aids and make ear 
moulds, they fulfil a dual role: the provision of audiological services and positive role models 
for deaf young people. Schools for deaf children could develop links with parent groups, 
associations of deaf people, and work closely with non-governmental organizations, in order 
to develop outreach audiological services.  
It is important that audiology practitioners and families have realistic expectations about 
the benefit of hearing aids. Families need opportunities to discuss the type and degree of 
hearing loss in a non-threatening environment. They need time to explore the implications of 
deafness and the possibilities of amplification and/or access to sign language teaching. The 
environment in which hearing screening and audiological assessment takes place can be 
critical to families’ further use of services. A medical environment, where there are heavy 
demands on staff time and on space, constraints in resources, together with a lack of 
experience and training in the needs of deaf children among hospital-based staff, may result 
in a very medical model of deafness being stressed. The provision of such audiology services, 
in isolation from educational and other community based interventions is, in any case, highly 
questionable. Screening and audiological service provision within educational settings, where 
staff have training and experience of deaf and hearing impaired children on the other hand, 
could offer a more child-centred approach.  
Hearing screening may initially focus on school entry, or on children already attending 
school, but could be extended to pre-school screening, if strong links are built with local 
communities. Community workers and teachers of deaf children could be trained to carry out 
hearing screening at a local level under the guidance of the regional school for the deaf. The 
introduction of hearing screening programmes, ear camps and community based rehabilitation 
programmes have the potential to help provide wider coverage and easier access to services 
for families of deaf children. Underpinning all developments in this area is the need for public 
Review

Susie Miles and Wendy McCracken 
 
178 
awareness campaigns that are locally developed and delivered. Parents of deaf children could 
be actively involved in such campaigns as they have relevant experience and expertise. 
REFERENCES 
Ali, M.E. (2007). Personal communication. 
de Andrade V., & Ross E. (2005). Beliefs and practices of Black South African traditional 
healers regarding hearing impairment. International Journal of Audiology, 44, 489-99. 
Enabling Education Network (2002, June). What does the South really want from the North? 
A report of a seminar co-organised by the Deaf Africa Fund and the Enabling Education 
Network (EENET). Birmingham, Manchester: EENET. Retrieved July 24, 2007, from 
http://www.eenet.org.uk/key_issues/deaf/deafness_report_2002.doc. 
Helander, E. (1993). Prejudice and Dignity: An introduction to Community-Based 
Rehabilitation. New York: United Nations Development Programme. 
Lichtig, I., Woll, B., Silvia Cárnio, M., Akiyama R., & Gomes, M. (2004). Deaf staff 
members’ participation in a Brazilian intervention programme for deaf children and their 
families: impacts and consequences. Deaf Worlds, 20, 281-297.  
Litzke, C. (2004). Audiology for the Deaf by the Deaf. London: International Deaf Children’s 
Society. 
Retrieved 
July 
24, 2007, 
from 
http://www.idcs.info/docs/Audiology_ 
for_the_Deaf_by_the_Deaf.pdf. 
Maarse A, Phouc N.T.M., McCracken W., & Nga, T.T.T. (2001). External Review: Project to 
support the development of Early Intervention for Hearing Impaired Children. 
Unpublished report, Netherlands: Committee Twee.  
Miles, S. (1990). Follow up Support for Hearing Aid Users. Paper presented to a ‘Conference 
on Hearing Aids in Developing Countries’. London: Royal National Institute for the 
Deaf.  
Miles, S. (1991), Unpublished case studies. Manchester: Enabling Education Network. 
Miles, S. (1995). The Deaf Dilemma. CBR News, 20. London: Appropriate Health Resources 
Technology Action Group. Retrieved July 24, 2007, from http://www.eenet.org.uk/ 
key_issues/deaf/deafdilm.shtml.  
Miles, S. (1999). Experience of working with the Deaf Community in Africa. Retrieved 
August 7, 2007, from http://www.idcs.info/resource_library/experience_of.html. 
Miles, S., & Ahuja, A. (2007). Learning from difference: sharing international experiences of 
developments in inclusive education. In L. Florian (Ed.), The Sage Handbook of Special 
Education (pp. 131-145). London: Sage.  
Olusanya, B.O., Luxon, L.M., & Wirz, S.L. (2004). Benefits and challenges of infant hearing 
screening for developing countries. International Journal Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 
68, 287-305. 
Roberts, N. (2001). Working with deaf children in Northern Namibia. In A. Callaway (Ed.), 
Deafness and Development. Learning from projects with deaf children and deaf adults in 
developing countries (pp 44-48). Bristol: Centre for Deaf Studies. 
Sound Seekers – The Commonwealth Society for the Deaf (no date). Projects. London: 
Sound Seekers. Retrieved July 24, 2007, from http://www.sound-seekers.org. 
uk/projects.html. 
Review

Educational Audiology in Developing Countries 
 
179
Swanepoel, D., Hugo, R., & Louw, B. (2006). Infant hearing screening at immunization 
clinics in South Africa. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 70, 
1241-1249. 
Swanepoel, D., Louw, B., & Hugo, S. R. (2007). A novel service delivery model for infant 
hearing screening in developing countries. International Journal of Audiology, 46, 321-
327. 
UNESCO (2007). EFA Global Monitoring Report. Strong Foundations: Early Childhood 
Care and Education. Paris: UNESCO. 
Vaughan, G. (2000). The hearing impaired children of Burma. British Society of Audiology 
News 31, 33-35.  
White, E., Newell, K., & Gell, F. (1987). The national sample study of the prevalence of 
hearing impairment in children in Swaziland. Unpublished report. Liverpool: Hearing 
Impairment Research Project, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine. 
Wilson, K. (2005). A summary of provision for deaf children in Namibia. London: 
International Deaf Children’s Society. Retrieved July 24, 2007, from http://www.idcs.i 
nfo/docs/Summary_of_provision_for_deaf_children_in_Namibia.pdf. 
Wilson, K., Miles, S., & Kaplan, I, (2008). Family Friendly: Working with deaf children and 
their families around the world. London: Deaf Child Worldwide. 
Wirz, S., & Lichtig, I. (1998). The use of non-specialist personnel in providing a service for 
children disabled by hearing impairment. Disability and Rehabilitation, 20, 189-194. 
 
Review

Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 10 
 
 
 
AUDIOLOGICAL COUNSELING  
IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY: 
A JOURNEY THROUGH GUATEMALA 
 
 
Patricia Castellanos de Muñoz* and Sandra E. Sosa 
Centro de Audición y Adiestramiento Fonético, Guatemala City, Guatemala 
ABSTRACT 
As in most developing countries, Guatemala faces many challenges. After 
considering the actual status of health and education services for the overall population, a 
starker reality arises when analyzing the situation for people with hearing loss. This 
chapter includes a description of the progress made in the audiological field and the 
efforts placed in providing quality client-family counseling to those in need, within a 
context affected by the constraints of socio-economic instability. Despite potential 
obstacles, proactive measures and preventive education have shown some success; 
realistic goal-setting for children and adults with hearing impairment has been 
accomplished, and changes have been implemented in order to address the needs 
observed among those seeking assistance 
There is much to be overcome. Services that provide culturally sensitive client-
family counseling are lacking as acknowledgement of cultural diversity and identity 
remain at an early stage of development. An authentic Guatemalan social conscience is 
still pending. In regards to community-based counseling, there is no significant evidence 
of growth. Although crucial, given the social, economic and cultural aspects of the 
country, few professionals willingly engage this field. Funding is also lacking. Despite 
many challenges, it is important to recognize the pioneering work that has taken place in 
both the audiological and counseling fields. Therefore, this chapter offers the reader a 
picture of the challenges Guatemala faces and the steps taken towards improved hearing 
health care.  
 
                                                        
* Correspondence: pdemunoz@cedaf.com.gt 
Review

Patricia Castellanos de Muñoz and Sandra E. Sosa 
 
182 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The development of specific skills in client or family-centered counseling is crucial, 
when it comes to achieving a breakthrough in audiology. In Guatemala, with a population of 
approximately thirteen million, three out of every one thousand births result in severe to 
profound hearing loss. In developing countries such as Guatemala there are certain issues of 
importance that have to be addressed. These include the constraints of poverty, cultural 
sensitivities, need for realistic goal-setting for children and adults with hearing impairment, 
and community-based counseling that includes village health providers and others.  
BACKGROUND RGARDING AUDIOLOGICAL AND EDUCATIONAL 
SERVICES FOR THE HEARING IMPAIRED IN GUATEMALA 
Before the 90s, audiology in Guatemala was far from reaching its position today. When 
in 1988 I (Patricia Castellanos) returned after completing my Masters in Education for the 
Deaf at Gallaudet University, audiology was hardly developed in the country. Some ear, nose 
and throat (ENT) doctors performed pure tone audiometry, a very few performed 
tympanometry, and three or four neurologists along with an otoneurologist and a psychologist 
conducted auditory brainstem evoked response audiometry. This added up to 5 or 6 city-based 
service centers for the whole country. 
In 1990, I, with the support of three ENTs, decided to establish Centro de Audición y 
Adiestramiento Fonético (CEDAF) as a private audiological and educational institution. This 
fusion may be unusual in other developing and first world countries, and is what makes our 
work unique. My personal educational background and, that of the staff that has accompanied 
me throughout the years, provide the rationale for this combination of services. We started 
with the best brands and technology available. It was my personal goal to introduce 
everything that we learned at conferences such as the American Academy of Audiology, 
International Hearing Society, the Instituto Mexicano de la Audición y el Lenguaje, and 
courses we enrolled in as part of a self-committed and self-funded process. On a personal 
level, that is what led me to pursue studies at McGill University, Canada, in pediatric 
audiology during 1990 and, fifteen years later, my audiology doctorate (Au.D.), at the 
University of Florida under the supervision of my mentor, and now colleague and friend, Fred 
Rahe, Au.D. I also worked part time at the Hospital of the National Committee for the Deaf 
and Blind, the only ear and eye hospital in Guatemala. Throughout this time, my specific 
interest remained in finding equivalent opportunities for the rest of my staff.  
Over the years CEDAF has grown and made much progress in providing hearing 
services. After 1996, as a result of constant effort, body worn and used hearing aids were no 
longer prescribed. By the year 2000, CEDAF was able to provide diagnosis at birth; dispense 
analog and digital hearing aids; offer speech and language therapy; open a full cochlear 
implant program; and participate in a variety of consultations. In 2007, we initiated a neonatal 
screening program, systematic training for parents and professionals, hearing health and 
conservation services, and frequency modulated personal listening systems. We are very 
pleased to offer our patients high end technology in hearing aids, available only through 
Review

Audiological Counseling in a Developing Country 
 
183
CEDAF and one other audiological clinic in our country. Other clinics provide hearing aids 
locally without professional or technical support; therefore they are more accessible in terms 
of pricing. It is fair to say that even though services are scarce—because there are very few 
professionals with the adequate training—some accomplishments have been made. We still 
are in need of trained audiologists not only to attend to the needs of those with hearing 
impairment, but also to allow the general public and our health care colleagues to gain 
familiarity with the audiological profession.  
CEDAF has been able to accomplish results in both the fields of audiology and education 
for the hearing impaired. Educationally, deaf and blind school children in Guatemala have 
been separated and specific programs for each population have been created; the educational 
system available for children with hearing impairment was evaluated and restructured; and 
educational programs for professionals and ongoing training by international speakers were 
instituted. In audiology, we acquired highly sensitive and specific modern equipment for 
diagnosis; began fitting new hearing aids as opposed to used ones; instituted preferential use 
of behind-the-ear hearing aids; and started the first neonatal hearing screening program. 
DEALING WITH THE CONSTRAINTS OF POVERTY 
When faced with such high levels of poverty and the constraints that come from such a 
limited way of living, health and educational services inevitably are discarded as priorities. 
Families face many significant challenges, without considering a child with special needs. 
Because of this, it is very difficult for parents and families, not only to detect initial signs of 
hearing loss, but also to be totally committed towards meeting the responsibilities that come 
along with a diagnosis of hearing impairment. Children in Guatemala were usually, until 
recent changes, diagnosed between the ages of three to six years. Consequently, early 
intervention is not always a feasible option. Due to the lack of knowledge and options, 
parents and families occasionally do not make informed decisions. Much valuable time is 
frequently wasted, not only during the ongoing grieving process, and this delays full 
engagement in the audiological and rehabilitation process.  
When parents and families finally come to terms with the hearing impairment, they are 
faced with many financial obstacles. At times, they hardly are able to gather the resources 
needed for the proper diagnosis, let alone purchase and maintain services involving hearing 
aid fitting or cochlear implantation. Partial aid is available through a very limited number of 
institutions. A significant few are able to gain access to the educational services available for 
preschool, grade school and junior high school students, even though these are in need of 
many improvements. At present the National Committee for the Deaf and Blind remains the 
only institution that offers all services regarding diagnosis, audiological management and 
education for the hearing impaired.  
Taking this context into perspective, CEDAF since its beginnings has striven to establish 
client-family counseling as part of the habilitation or rehabilitation process, addressing it 
through a variety of alternatives. First of all, our course of action is generally program-based, 
in order to cover a greater amount of the population at a much lower cost when compared to 
the traditional clinical approach. Thanks to the generous response from our personal contacts 
and fellow colleagues throughout the world, all screening or diagnostic events organized 
locally or by organizations from abroad, as well as all hearing aid donations, are accompanied 
Review

Patricia Castellanos de Muñoz and Sandra E. Sosa 
 
184 
by training courses for parents and for professionals (including doctors, regular and special 
education teachers, language therapists, and psychologists). These courses are also offered 
free of charge so that clients and families can learn the basics through practical instruction. 
All programs involve a multidisciplinary approach, in order to provide the proper counseling 
from accredited professionals in the areas of need. Second, all efforts are focused on short-
term as well as longer-term goals that are set according to each situation. That way people 
perceive prompt results, and are therefore more willing to get involved to a greater degree in 
the counselling and rehabilitation process. Finally, all attempts are directed towards 
prevention and proper intervention, so positive changes can gradually be achieved thanks to a 
greater awareness.  
DEALING WITH CULTURAL SENSITIVITIES 
Since Guatemala is a country of many cultures and languages, additional effort must be 
placed in developing courses of action related to hearing impairment. Forty percent of 
Guatemalans speak one of 22 Amerindian languages as their mother tongue and Guatemala is 
the least urbanized country in Latin America. These factors often adversely affect the 
outcome initially pursued because services are city-based, provided in Spanish, and very few 
interpreters are available or willing to provide ongoing support. Illiteracy rates are also high, 
making it harder to reach many Guatemalan families.  
Guatemalan society can be generally considered very conservative and patriarchal, 
leading to misconceptions and myths about disabilities and special needs. As a cultural trait, 
appearances should be maintained. This, added to the lack of proper education and 
knowledge, evolves into a significant resistance towards the acceptance of hearing 
impairment, the use of rehabilitation devices and the need to make necessary life adjustments. 
Another issue is the pressure to conform to cultural norms and the low standard of 
expectations present among many people, especially when it comes to women. This way of 
thinking predisposes people to discard the use of hearing aids or cochlear implants as 
meaningful resources to improve quality of life and provide better opportunities for them 
and/or their children. Finally, even when services are provided at a low cost or free of charge, 
people tend to not be fully aware of the value these represent and the responsibility implied in 
accepting services. For instance, it is common for people to sell donated hearing aids for 
personal short-term financial gain due to poverty. Thus some take advantage of free services 
creating conflict with, or skepticism among, those willing to offer services.  
In terms of the above, CEDAF has developed certain strategies that have been effective 
when it comes to audiological and educational services. Background checks are made among 
the population in order to determine where help will be more useful and where resources will 
be most wisely invested. The people that are sought out are clients and families that are 
committed to acknowledging what has been provided to them, and who are willing to attend 
follow-up services and to assume the responsibilities that come with the habilitation or 
rehabilitation process. Finally, CEDAF seeks out beforehand a local support system or 
network to become a valuable liaison between the people and those providing audiological 
and educational services. 
 
 
Review

Audiological Counseling in a Developing Country 
 
185
REALISTIC GOAL-SETTING FOR CHILDREN  
AND ADULTS WITH HEARING IMPAIRMENT 
One of the decisive factors involved in determining the amount of success obtained in 
client-family counseling, during the habilitation or rehabilitation process, is the goal-setting 
that takes place among all parties. During every step of the way, expectations should be 
grounded in reality and not from ideal or presupposed conditions. This transparency allows 
people to be more receptive and open to change, even though this is somewhat difficult for 
the average Guatemalan, due to their upbringing and culture. Professionals in this sense 
should be fully aware of how to manage each situation accordingly and the need to model by 
example the ethical standpoints that are involved. Unfortunately, it is not uncommon for 
people to be victims of deceit or scams, due to uninformed professionals and/or wrongful 
intentions. Therefore, building a trustworthy relationship is vital. 
Our experience when it comes to this aspect has shown us the need to follow certain 
guidelines. We started by building a sense of trust and credibility among patients, so they 
could rest assured that they are being treated by highly trained professionals and that the 
services and technology offered to them met the up-to-date standards set in developed 
countries. We have found it very useful to demonstrate that clients will receive the same type 
of benefits from our local services as those offered abroad.  
Something that we also consider important is assisting those who come to us over a 
period of time. No matter what service is involved, information is not provided on a one 
consultation basis. Sessions are programmed according to need and are addressed in terms of 
each patient’s life story, setting, needs and wants. We set ourselves at the same level as 
patients, so they can perceive with full clarity the benefits and goals that can be accomplished 
for each case and under what terms or conditions. A signed agreement form is used when 
needed.  
Finally, we also provide clients and their families with reliable contact people who are 
part of a greater support system, during the post-diagnosis grieving process, in making 
decisions, and throughout the habilitation or rehabilitation process. Expectations are discussed 
with the immediate family in order to make the necessary adjustments and also to assure a 
positive outcome. 
COUNSELING PROVIDED AT CEDAF 
Those who seek counseling in Guatemala face significant barriers. In general, counseling 
services are available only through private specialized institutions, making them unaffordable 
for the majority. Very few institutions offer services free of charge or at an accessible price, 
but even so, none of them are specialized in treating the needs of the hearing impaired. 
Another challenge is that counseling services are city-based and therefore in Spanish, leaving 
out those who live elsewhere or speak Amerindian languages.  
At this point, keep in mind that we are not professional counselors. Our background is in 
educational psychology and audiology. Therefore, the counseling we offer is very focused. In 
terms of audiology, we try to set realistic expectations, starting by offering orientation to the 
evaluations needed to obtain the proper diagnosis, and to the required monitoring and follow-
Review

Patricia Castellanos de Muñoz and Sandra E. Sosa 
 
186 
up. The same principles apply when it comes to making decisions on hearing aids or cochlear 
implants. Expectations are set according to each patient, their family, and their setting. 
Families are also trained in the use of the device of choice, as well as in the proper care and 
maintenance involved. 
In the field of education, we explain the limited options that are available regarding 
schools for the deaf and regular schools willing to enroll hearing impaired children. As 
addressed above, there are few choices in Guatemala when in comes to educational services 
for the hearing impaired. Consequently, we try to facilitate an adequate transition into certain 
schools. We also offer consultation services to regular schools that accept our patients. We 
train teachers and advise them on measures such as placement within the classroom and 
learning strategies.  
At an emotional level, we center our effort in assisting parents through the grieving 
process that follows diagnosis, while promoting in them the ability to make informed 
decisions, to manage discipline and behavior adequately, not only with their deaf child but 
with hearing siblings. We have also worked with a reliable group of psychotherapists, to 
whom we refer patients due to their experience with individuals with disabilities in general.  
COMMUNITY-BASED COUNSELING  
Another strategy we have found useful is working with village health providers, 
educators and others as an interdisciplinary team. This has allowed us to provide greater 
coverage and continuity of follow-up services, especially for people that live outside of 
Guatemala City. Gradually, we have been able to develop community-based programs that 
are under the care of people who have been adequately trained and are constantly supervised. 
Also, this has been a way to initiate networking among trustworthy professionals and 
institutions.  
Additional advantages that evolve from the team approach include: People are attended to 
locally; goals are set according to everyday living situations; costs are lowered for families; 
and points of referral are established. In a broader sense, this allows us to coordinate our 
efforts in an even more efficient manner and allows an ongoing assessment of needs in 
different areas of the country. Hence resources are administered in a way that allows us to 
keep growing in matters of coverage and outreach. 
CONCLUSION 
Although we have accomplished much in terms of our audiological journey through 
Guatemala, we have not performed tasks single-handed. We have had the help of many and 
the privilege of receiving many donations. Hearing aids have been made available on a 
regular basis, through the Ronald McDonald Foundation Guatemala and the Starkey 
Foundation. Others, like Healing the Children and Fred Rahe, Au.D., professor at University 
of Florida, have supported us with the acquisition of equipment, training and ongoing 
assistance. Training and technical support has been provided through all distributors and other 
highly respected colleagues we have met along the way. Therefore, it is fair to say, that the 
Review

Audiological Counseling in a Developing Country 
 
187
secret of our success has rested in authentic teamwork, perseverance and a true sense of 
commitment towards our country and the population we serve.  
 
 
Review

Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 11 
 
 
 
OCCUPATIONAL HEARING LOSS 
 IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
 
 
Geoffrey K. Amedofu1,* and Adrian Fuente2 
1Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana 
2 Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile 
ABSTRACT 
Modern industry brings many benefits to society. However, for workers, especially 
those in developing countries, industrialization does not only bring benefits. Many 
hazardous agents exist in work place environments. Noise has long been known to cause 
hearing loss. Noise is the commonest preventable cause of sensorineural hearing loss and 
is a great problem in developed as in developing countries. As industrialization spreads to 
developing countries, workers are often exposed to hazardous noise without taking 
measures to prevent auditory damage. Studies have shown that exposure to chemicals, 
such as organic solvents and pesticides, in the workplace is also related to increased risk 
of hearing loss. In industrial settings, exposure to organic solvents such as toluene, 
xylene, styrene and n-hexane is commonly accompanied by exposure to noise. In cases of 
combined exposures, the risk of hearing loss is substantially higher than in noise only and 
solvents only exposed populations. Agriculture in developing nations now makes greatly 
increased use of pesticides, herbicides, insecticides, fertilizers and specially treated seeds. 
This has brought chemical hazards into a sphere of work that is poorly equipped to deal 
with them. There are reports that pesticides, insecticides in particular, have an effect on 
the nervous and auditory systems. About 80% of chemicals produced are used in 
industrialized countries and the remaining 20% in developing countries. Thus, exposure 
to noise and chemicals has become a routine part of human life, sustaining human 
activities and increasing industry and agriculture in developing countries but with 
attendant health problems.  
In many developing countries, occupational health and safety standards are not 
enforced rigorously. However, audiologists have a professional responsibility to monitor 
                                                        
* Correspondence: amedofugk@yahoo.com 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
190 
industries, educate employers and help prevent hearing handicap. The intent of this 
chapter is to discuss noise-induced hearing loss in developing countries by examining 
historical perspectives of noise-induced hearing loss, the impact of noise on hearing and 
sources of noise in developing countries, especially in both the formal and informal 
sectors. Secondly, the chapter surveys the use of solvents and pesticides in developing 
countries and their adverse impact on the auditory system. The chapter also discusses 
prevention of noise-induced hearing loss, opportunities for hearing conservation 
programs and protective programs for chemical safety at the workplace in developing 
countries. 
NOISE AND IS EFFECTS 
Noise is any undesired sound and, by extension, any unwanted disturbance within a 
useful frequency band. Noise has physical, physiological and psychological connotations. 
Physically, it is a complex sound having little or no periodicity. However, it can be measured 
and its characteristics analysed. Physiologically, acoustically and electronically, noise is 
defined as a signal that bears no information and whose intensity varies randomly with time. 
Psychologically, noise is any sound irrespective of its waveform, which is unpleasant and 
unwanted. Like any sound, noise is defined in terms of its duration, frequency spectrum 
measured in Hertz (Hz) and often measured in terms of sound pressure level (SPL) expressed 
in decibels (dB). Noise may be continuous, intermittent, impulsive or explosive. An important 
classification of noise is impulse and impact noise. Impact noise is the acoustic phenomena 
produced by two hard objects ‘banging’ together. Impact noise is often described by its 
amplitude and duration. The amplitude of an impact noise is measured at the maximum 
amplitude peak and the duration is the time it takes for the wave to decay 20 dB from its peak 
level. Impulse noise, on the other hand, is the acoustic phenomenon associated with 
explosions. The wave-form of impulse noise is described by the amplitude of the initial 
overpressure and the duration of time required for decay of the peak pressure to ambient 
pressure level. 
Hearing loss due to noise probably dates from the Bronze Age. Man’s discovery of the 
use of metals, created first from bronze and later iron, came with the attendant noise of 
beating, hammering and forging these metals to fashion weapons and implements. Perhaps 
the use of metals was the first occasion in which human hearing was at risk for industrial 
noise exposure. This was followed by the use of gunpowder, which appeared about 1300AD 
in China. From before the start of the industrial revolution, to the development of railways 
and the internal combustion engine, power driven ships and aircraft to the highly 
technological world of today, man has recognised the hazards of noise pollution. The site and 
nature of the lesion in the ear produced by noise was first described through light microscopic 
observations as early as the turn of the 20th century. The organ of Corti, the sensory and 
supporting cells are the primary susceptible parts of the inner ear. Fowler (1939) first 
observed dips in the hearing thresholds of noise-exposed workers at 4 kHz, after the advent of 
pure-tone audiometry. Longitudinal audiometric data depicting classical high-frequency 
hearing loss acquired through exposure to hazardous noise was first described by Bunch 
(1937).  
 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
191
EFFECTS OF NOISE ON HEARING 
A noise is considered hazardous when employee noise exposures equal or exceed an 8-
hour time weighted average sound level (TWA) of 85 dBA measured on the slow response 
scale of a sound level meter. However, without noise measuring equipment the following rule 
of thumb can be adopted: If it is necessary to shout over noise, the level of sound is 
damaging. If ringing in the ears occurs after exposure or if a sense of fullness in the ears and 
loss of hearing is experienced after exposure, the level of the noise is damaging (May, 2000).  
The effects of noise on hearing may be grouped generally into three categories: 
Temporary threshold shift (TTS); permanent threshold shift (PTS) and acoustic trauma (AT) 
(Miller, 1971). Temporary threshold shift refers to an elevation in the threshold of hearing 
which recovers gradually following the noise exposure. Since the noise produces a transient 
shift in the threshold, it has become known as TTS. This shift can vary hearing sensitivity 
from a few dB in a narrow frequency range to changes that render the ear temporarily deaf. 
After the cessation of the noise, hearing sensitivity can return to pre-exposure levels. 
Structural changes associated with TTS have not been fully established, but may include 
subtle intracellular changes in the sensory hair cells and swelling of the auditory nerve 
endings. Other potentially reversible effects include vascular changes, chemical changes in 
the hair cells and a decrease in the stiffness of the stereocilia, which may recover (NIH, 
1990). Hearing conservation programs designed to provide evidence of the existence of 
permanent hearing loss must be wary of the possibility of a contaminating temporary 
component. This is especially true when obtaining valid pre-employment audiograms. 
Permanent threshold shift is found primarily among industrial workers who have been 
exposed repeatedly to high intensity noise for a relatively long period of employment. In this 
type of injury, cochlear blood flow may be impaired. Although most structures in the inner 
ear can be harmed by excessive sound exposure, the sensory hair cells are the most 
vulnerable. Gallo and Glorig (1964) reported that the magnitude of the PTS showed that the 
maximum loss was in the range between 4000 Hz to 6000 Hz with smaller losses occurring at 
the frequencies above and below this range. The symptoms of noise-induced hearing loss 
(NIHL) are subtle in the early stages. Hearing loss tends to occur first for high-pitched sounds 
only. Consequently, the volume of sound heard may be unchanged but its quality lessens. 
Speech may be heard but not completely understood. The presence of background noise can 
make speech hard to understand. Acoustic trauma refers to the effects of single exposures or 
relatively few exposures to a very high-level of sound (e.g., an explosion or gun fire). This 
may result in an immediate, severe and permanent hearing loss. In this case, virtually all of 
the structures of the ear can be damaged; in particular, the organ of Corti may be torn apart. 
AT may also result in ruptured eardrums and damaged ossicles (Hamernick, Turrentine & 
Roberto, 1986). Hearing loss from acoustic trauma is to a large degree permanent. The 
precipitating event is dramatic and pronounced in the memory of the person experiencing it. 
Noise can also cause tinnitus (ringing in the ears), which may occur in the presence or 
absence of hearing loss. Tinnitus can often be more annoying than the hearing loss itself. 
Although not as well documented as the auditory effects, studies in industrial settings and 
with laboratory animals have shown that exposure to noise may result in higher prevalence of 
heart disease, high blood pressure and high blood cholesterol levels. Other non-auditory 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
192 
effects may include interference with sleep, decrease of work performance, headache, mood 
changes and anxiety (Stansfeld & Matheson, 2003). 
NOISE-INDUCED HEARING LOSS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
Exposure to excessive noise is the major avoidable cause of permanent hearing 
impairment worldwide. In developed countries, it is at least partially the cause of hearing loss 
in more than one-third of cases and in many countries NIHL is the biggest compensable 
occupational hazard. Though noise-induced hearing loss is an established occupational health 
problem in industrialized countries, it must not be thought that developing countries are 
exempt. In 2004, the World Health Organization reported the fraction of adult-onset hearing 
loss attributable to occupational noise exposure. Also, the percentage of total disability 
adjusted life years (DALYs1) attributable to occupational noise were calculated for different 
world regions. The global analysis indicates that 16% of deafness is due to occupational 
noise, with a higher proportion in males (22%) than in females (11%) owing to differences in 
occupational categories, economic sectors of employment and working lifetime. 
Approximately 89% of the total burden is in the 15-59 years age group, with the remaining 
11% in people over 60 years of age. Overall, more than four million DALYs were lost to 
NIHL. Developing Asian countries accounted for more than half of the years of healthy life 
lost, as they have large populations with a relatively large proportion working in high-
exposure occupations. Figure 1 shows a world map with the distribution of DALYs around 
the world. Over 3.8 million DALYs come from developing countries, and only about 0.3 
million from developed countries (Nelson, Nelson, Concha-Barrientos & Fingerhut, 2005). 
Fifty percent of world-wide calculated DALYs came from Asian developing countries.  
INFORMAL INDUSTRIAL SECTOR 
Exposure to noise causing noise-induced hearing loss in developing countries occurs in 
both the formal and informal work environments. The informal sector typically operates with 
a low level of organized activities (Kelly, 2003). The definition of small enterprises may vary 
from country to country and depends on the size of the economy and level of development of 
a particular country. However, enterprises in the informal sector typically have five or fewer 
people per firm or business concern. Common types of occupations in the informal sector and 
among small enterprises in developing countries where workers are exposed to high levels of 
noise include building construction, textiles, brick making, carpentry, metal artisans, motor 
vehicle repairs, corn-mills and shoe making. Workers in developing countries are also 
exposed to noise in farm jobs where noisy equipment such as tractors (with and without cabs), 
chainsaws and grain crushers are used. Table 1 summarizes the main industries, formal and 
informal, in developing countries where workers are exposed to high levels of noise. 
                                                        
1 The causes of the global burden of disease are assessed according to the percentage of total disability adjusted life 
years (DALYs) in the world attributable to each cause. DALYs are a measure of the years of healthy life lost 
(YLL) due to premature mortality, and the years lived with disability (YLD). The utility of using DALYs as an 
indicator of disease burden is that it allows the health burden to be compared for different geographical areas 
and with the health burden from other risk factors (Ezzati, 2004). 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
193
An example of the informal sector is the textile industry in Botswana, where the textile 
industry is widely dispersed and activities are commonly carried out in private households. 
Due to a lack of adequate work space, machines are usually placed in garages or living rooms 
which function as production areas. Workers in these areas are exposed to hazardous noise 
and also there is risk of fire, because the materials used are easily ignitable (Regoeng, 2003).  
Another common informal industrial activity is grain milling. A study conducted by 
Boateng and Amedofu (2004) among corn-mill operators in Ghana revealed that noise levels 
in corn-mills exceeded 90 dBA. The locally made corn-mills produced more noise than 
imported equipment. The study showed that 23% of the 193 corn mill operators had the 
evidence of NIHL. Table 2 depicts noise levels in sawmills, corn mills and printing presses as 
reported by Boateng and Amedofu (2004).  
Yisa (2005) reported that noise levels at an operator’s ears in corn-mills in Nigeria also 
exceeded the recommended value of 85 dBA. The highest recorded noise level was 110.3 
dBA. In some of the corn-mills studied, communication was so hampered by the noise level 
that sign language became the mode of communication between the operator and the clients. 
Mbuligwe (2004) investigated levels of, and influencing factors on, noise pollution from 
small-scale industries in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Two sites for wood and metalwork 
industries were investigated. Both sites exhibited equivalent noise levels higher than 90 dBA, 
the permissible Tanzanian exposure level limit for occupational noise. Measures taken at the 
small-scale woodworks found that noise levels correlated well with machine use, wood feed 
and wood cut depth. 
 
 
Figure 1. DALYS attributable to occupational noise for different world regions (data from WHO, 
1997b). 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
194 
Table 1. Main industries in developing countries where workers are exposed to high 
levels of noise 
 
Informal sector 
Formal sector 
Motor vehicle repairers 
Textile factories 
Carpenters 
Cocoa-processing factories 
Metal artisans  
Mining and quarrying industries 
Sugar-cane crushers 
Construction workers 
Corn mills 
Petroleum and gas plants 
Brick making 
Pharmaceutical and printing industries 
Shoe making workers 
Military, police and aviation workers 
Farm jobs 
 
Textile industry 
 
 
Table 2. Noise Levels Measures on Corn-Mills at Six different Locations 
 
Factory 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
Total 
average 
dBA 
Type of 
machine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
imported 
corn-mill 
90-1-3 
95-99 
96-100 
94-105 
85-98 
89-98 
97 
 
locally made 
corn-mill 
100-104 
98-103 
98-109 
103-107 
94-106 
89-102 
101 
 
From: Boateng & Amedofu, African Journal of Health Sciences, 11, 55-60, 2004.  
FORMAL INDUSTRIAL SECTOR 
Over the past 50 years many developing countries embarked on industrial projects to 
process primary products for export and also to produce finished goods for both local 
consumption and export. Among the manufacturing industries in developing countries that 
may cause exposure to high levels of noise are textile factories in China, Ghana, Kenya, 
Nigeria, South Africa, India, Pakistan and many other countries; petroleum and gas plants, 
cocoa processing companies in Ghana, Nigeria and Brazil; pharmaceutical and printing 
industries in many developing countries; and mining and quarrying industries, as can be 
found in Ghana, South Africa, Swaziland, Zimbabwe and other countries. Every developing 
country has construction and other industry workers who are exposed to hazardous noise, as 
well as military, police, fire fighters and aviation workers. 
Many studies have focused on noise-induced hearing loss in developing countries. 
Kahema, Moynyo and Svedberg (1981) investigated textile mills in Tanzania and observed 
that machines in the weaving and spinning sections of the factories emitted high noise levels. 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
195
The risk of permanent injury to hearing increased with the length of exposure. Foo and 
Saarinen (1985) conducted a study of Asian workers exposed to hazardous noise and found 
that approximately 38 percent (Singapore), 42 percent (Hong Kong), 83 percent (Korea) and 
92 percent (Philippines) of workers were exposed to noise levels above 85 dBA in their work 
places. The study further revealed that 40 percent (Singapore), 15 percent (Hong Kong), 12 
percent (Korea) and 74 percent (Philippines) of workers exposed to hazardous noise had 
hearing loss above 30 dB HL. Many reports have shown similar results, including: a study of 
wood working industries in Ethiopia (Mulugeta, 1992); a survey of 173,300 workers who 
registered with Sindh Social Security in Karachi, Pakistan of which 12 percent out of the total 
had noise-induced hearing loss (Hassan and Beg, 1994); a report on 200 workers in an auto-
assembly plant in Nigeria (Oleru, Ijaduola & Sowho, 1993); studies of mine workers in 
Ghana (Amedofu, Brobby & Ocansey, 1998; Amedofu, 2002); and a study of 78 factories 
producing food, chemical, plastics, metals and paper mills (Alidrisi, Jamil, Jiffry, Jefri & 
Erturk, 1990). 
Further evidence that hearing loss is often produced by hazardous noise in developing 
countries has been provided in studies by: Kamal, Eldamati and Faris (1989) of road traffic 
policemen in Cairo, Egypt; Moselhi, El-Sadik and El-Dakhakhny (1979) of workers at a 
textile factory in Egypt; Evans and Ming (1982) of five industries, weaving, bottling, metal 
working, spinning and aviation in Hong Kong; Bhattacharya, Saiyed, Roy & Chatterjee 
(1981) of textile weavers in India; Raja and Ganguly (1983) in the weaving and engineering 
industry in India; Oleru (1980) of textile workers in five factories in Lagos, Nigeria; Shaikh 
(1996) of a polyester fibre plant in Pakistan; Tay (1996) in shipping, metal, manufacturing 
and quarrying industries in Singapore; Hessel and Sluis-Cremer (1987) of mining in 
Johannesburg, South Africa; Khogali (1970) of cotton ginning in Sudan; and Obiako (1979) 
in the copper mining industry in Zambia. As a typical example, noise levels in some common 
industrial plants in Pakistan are shown in Table 3. As can be seen, moulding machines and 
power tools produce the highest level of noise. 
EFFECTS OF SOLVENTS ON HEARING 
In recent years increasing attention has been given to a holistic approach to studying 
health in the workplace. A combination of physical, chemical, biological and organisational 
factors impact negatively on workers health and welfare. A holistic approach supports 
initiatives that investigate the combined effects of occupational exposure to noise and other 
factors on hearing. In particular, the potential interaction between noise and chemicals poses a 
new challenge to investigators and hearing conservationists. Many chemicals have been 
shown to be ototoxic, and, in the case of solvents, some will have synergistic effects when 
present in conjunction with noise. Currently, many industries, especially in developing 
countries, are involved in the use of solvents. Millions of workers are potentially exposed to 
these chemicals in developing countries. Table 4 summarizes the main industries where 
specific organic solvents are used.  
 
 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
196 
Table 3. Noise levels in some common industrial plants in Pakistan 
 
 Source 
Noise Levels dBA 
Power tools (pneumatic) 
90 – 115 
Moulding machines 
107-160 
Air blow-down devices (painting/cleaning) 
90 – 105 
Blowers (forced, induced, fan) 
80 – 100 
Air compressors 
95 – 100 
Combustion (furnaces) 
85 – 97 
Turbo generators (steam) 
80 – 90 
Industrial trucks 
80 
Transformers 
80 
From: Wahab and Zaidi (1997). 
 
 
Definition of a Solvent 
 
A solvent is a liquid used to dissolve other substances, but the most toxic solvents are 
extracted or manufactured for chemical use. Most solvents are colourless liquids at room 
temperature that volatize easily and have strong odours. These compounds may be referred to 
as volatile organic compounds in reference to their physiochemical properties. Solvents are 
most commonly inhaled in their volatized form and absorbed through the respiratory tract. 
 
Table 4. Main industrial uses of specific organic solvents 
 
Organic solvent 
Industrial uses 
 
Toluene 
Adhesive manufacture, electroplating, laboratory chemicals, 
machinery manufacture and repair, metal degreasing, paint 
manufacture, paint stripping, paper coating, pharmaceuticals 
manufacture, pesticide manufacture, printing, rubber 
manufacture, wood stains and varnishes, and footwear 
manufacture. 
Styrene 
Pulp and paper manufacture and in plastics, resins, coatings, and 
paints manufacture. 
Xylene 
Electroplating, laboratory chemicals, machinery manufacture 
and repair, paint manufacture, paint stripping, paper coating, 
pesticide manufacture, pharmaceuticals manufacture, printing, 
rubber manufacture, and in wood and varnishes. 
Trichloroethylene 
 
Electroplating, integrated iron and steel manufacture, machinery 
manufacture and repair, metal degreasing, pulp and paper 
manufacture, and semiconductor manufacture. 
Carbon disulphide 
Manufacture of regenerated cellulose rayon and cellophane. 
Protection of fresh fruit from insects and fungus during 
shipping. Vulcanization and manufacture of rubber and rubber 
accessories.  
 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
197
Table 5. Site of lesions induced by solvent exposure within the auditory system  
 
Solvent 
Site of lesion 
Carbon disulphide 
Auditory cortex 
Toluene 
Cochlea – auditory cortex 
Styrene 
Cochlea – auditory cortex 
Xylene 
Cochlea – auditory cortex 
n-hexane 
Auditory nerve 
 
Significant doses of solvents may occur through skin exposure and absorption. Most 
solvents dissolve in lipids but some are water soluble. A review of individual solvents yielded 
a list of both proven human neurotoxicants and probable neurotoxicants. Included in the list 
are five common solvents that have been shown to affect the auditory system, namely toluene, 
styrene, xylene, trichloroethylene and carbon disulphide (Morata, Dunn & Sieber, 1994). 
Solvents have been shown to have an effect on the auditory system of both animals and 
humans (see Table 5). Their effect can be observed independently to that caused by exposure 
to noise (Morata, Dunn, Kretschmer, Lemasters & Keith, 1993; Franks & Morata, 1996; 
Hirata, Ogawa, Okayama & Goto, 1992; Johnson & Nylén, 1995; Morata & Lemasters, 
1995). In animal studies there is strong evidence that solvent exposure produces cochlear 
lesions similar to that caused by noise exposure (Morata & Lemasters, 1995). A brief 
discussion of the previously mentioned solvents follows. 
 
 
Toluene 
 
Toluene (C6H5CH3) is a systemic toxicant that affects the liver, kidney and central 
nervous system (ATSDR, 2001), the latter being the main targeted organ (Byrne, Kirby, Zibin 
& Ensminger 1991). Data on toluene effects on hearing originate from animal studies and 
case reports of toluene abusers. The first report of possible ototoxic effects of toluene in rats 
was published in 1983 (Pryor, Dickson, Howd & Rebert, 1983). Subsequent studies showed a 
frequency-specific loss of auditory sensitivity after toluene exposure (Pryor, Dickinson, 
Feeney & Rebert, 1984; Rebert, Sovenson, Howd & Pryor, 1983), and that factors such as 
concentration, exposure time and duration of exposure influence the loss of auditory 
sensitivity in rats. Evidence suggests that toluene exposure causes permanent damage to the 
outer hair cells of the rat cochlea. The adverse effect of toluene exposure on the auditory 
system of workers has also been demonstrated by researchers in a study of effects of toluene 
on balance function of rotogravure printers. Hearing loss was observed in 11 of the 15 
workers who had vestibular impairment (Coscia et al., 1983). There is a paucity of research 
data on the effect of toluene on the auditory system of workers in developing countries even 
though many workers in the printing, petroleum and furniture industries are exposed to this 
solvent. Morata, Fiorini et al. (1997) explored the effects of occupational exposure to toluene 
on the hearing of rotogravure printing workers from São Paulo, Brazil. In this study, 
occupational exposure to toluene was shown to increase the probability of hearing loss. 
Mendoza-Cantú et al. (2006) performed a cross-sectional study with print industry workers in 
Mexico City. The study population consisted of 103 unrelated male print workers employed 
as flat or rotary printing press operators (24%), operator assistants (33%), ink handlers (22%), 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
198 
machine maintenance personnel (13%) and supervisors (8%). Workers in the industry were 
exposed to high concentrations of toluene. The geometric mean toluene concentration in the 
air was 52.80 ppm (see Table 6 for details of the permissible exposure level for toluene and 
other organic solvents) and 54% of the workers were exposed to toluene concentrations that 
exceeded the maximum permissible level. Hearing level was however not determined for the 
exposed workers. 
 
Table 6. Permissible exposure limits (PEL) to different organic solvents for the U.S.A., 
the U.K. and Brazil. Values are calculated for  
an exposure average (TWA) of 8 hours a day. 
 
 
Toluene 
Styrene 
Xylene 
Carbon 
disulphide 
Trichloroethylene 
Country/agency 
 
 
 
 
 
NIOSH 
100 ppm 
50 ppm 
100 ppm 
1 ppm 
25 ppm 
ACGIH 
50 ppm 
20 ppm 
100 ppm 
10 ppm 
50 ppm 
OSHA 
200 ppm 
100 ppm 
100 ppm 
20 ppm 
100 ppm 
COSHH 
100 ppm 
100 ppm 
100 ppm 
10 ppm 
100 ppm 
BRAZIL 
78 ppm 
78 ppm 
78 ppm  
16 ppm 
78 ppm 
PPM:  
parts per million. 
OSHA:  Occupational Safety and Health Administration (U.S.A). 
NIOSH:  National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (U.S.A). 
ACGIH:  American Conference of Industrial Hygienists (U.S.A). 
COSHH: Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (U.K). 
BRAZIL:Ministerio do Trabalho e Emprego. 
 
 
Styrene  
 
Styrene (C8 H8 or C6H5 CH=CH2) is a member of the alkyl-benzene family of aromatic 
hydrocarbons that consist of a single-benzene ring containing one or more aliphatic side-
chains. It is a colourless to yellow, oily liquid, with a sweet sharp odour. It is volatile with a 
low vapour pressure. A consequence of the volatility of styrene is that a major route of 
exposure is through the respiratory system. Once vapour enters the lungs, it diffuses across 
respiratory membranes and enters the blood stream (Engström, Astrand & Wigaeus, 1978). 
Liquid styrene is also rapidly absorbed through the skin (Limasset, Simon, Poirot, Subra & 
Grzebyk, 1999). Studies indicate that styrene exposure causes permanent and progressive 
damage to the auditory system of rats (Campo, Lataye, Loquet & Bonnet, 2001). Styrene 
induced hearing loss is species specific. While rats are sensitive to styrene, guinea pigs seem 
to resist adverse effects. Unfortunately, in humans styrene metabolism is closer to that of the 
rat. Another point to note is that mid-frequency hearing loss in the rat is most often observed. 
The outer hair cells are more susceptible to damage than the inner hair cells. The intoxication 
process may continue even after exposure is discontinued. These effects have been observed 
in short-term exposures to high concentrations and/or long-term exposures to lower 
concentrations. Workers exposed to low levels of styrene did not appear to have increased 
age-dependent hearing loss at high frequencies. However, a comparison within a group of 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
199
exposed workers between the least exposed and the most exposed revealed a statistically 
significant deterioration in hearing thresholds at high frequencies in the most exposed 
subgroup (Muijser, Hoogendijk & Hooisma, 1988; Sass-Kortsak, Corey & Robertson, 1995). 
The effect of styrene on hearing has been observed among workers in the fibre and plastic 
industries in developed countries. Since many developing countries also have such factories, 
it is to be expected that workers in these industries would definitely be at risk for styrene 
induced hearing loss. 
  
 
Xylene 
 
Xylene (C6H4CH3)2) is structurally closely related to toluene, and some exposures to 
mixed xylene compounds have caused pronounced hearing deficit in rats (Crofton, Lassiter & 
Rebert, 1994). Xylene has even been suggested to be more ototoxic in rats than toluene 
(Pryor, Rebert & Howd, 1987). Data on the effect of xylene alone in humans is sparse. 
However, it is known that the interaction of xylene and other solvents and noise has adverse 
effects on the hearing of workers in the yacht, ship, plastic, shoe, paint and lacquer industries 
(Sliwinska-Kowalska et al., 2000). Many workers in developing countries may be exposed to 
xylene in the industries mentioned. 
 
 
Carbon Disulphide 
 
Apart from being a general neurotoxicant, carbon disulphide (CS2) has been associated 
with hearing loss. In animal studies, effects on the latencies and amplitudes of ABR have 
been demonstrated (Rebert, Sorenson & Pryor, 1986). In a study carried out in a viscose 
rayon factory in Japan, workers exposed to CS2 were divided in three groups according to the 
length of exposure and compared with unexposed controls selected from workers in a nylon 
filament factory. Brain stem auditory evoked responses records suggested that chronic 
exposure to CS2 in humans has an effect on the auditory pathways in the brain stem (Hirata et 
al., 1992). Sulkowski (1979) conducted an investigation to determine the effect of carbon 
disulphide on workers’ health. Workers exposed to various levels of concentration of carbon 
disulphide were tested. The auditory and neurologic test results showed an increased 
incidence of pathological vestibular symptoms and sensorineural hearing loss compared with 
a group of textile workers with no carbon disulphide exposure. Although research on 
exposure to carbon disulphide and its effect on the auditory mechanism is scarce, it is 
expected that workers in many developing countries would be exposed and may have 
associated auditory disorders. 
 
 
Trychloroethylene (TCE) 
 
This solvent (CICH=CCI2)) is primarily used for degreasing in industry but is also used 
as a dry cleaning agent and paint remover. Ototoxic effects after exposure to TCE have been 
reported in rats (Jaspers, Muijser & Lammers, 1993; Rebert, Day, Matteuccie & Pryor, 1991). 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
200 
It appears at least 2000 ppm is needed to produce hearing loss in the mid frequencies as 
shown by ABR measurements or acoustic reflex response audiometry. TCE can cause hearing 
deficiency in humans, as has been demonstrated by audiometric measurements in workers 
exposed from one to 23 years. A case was reported of a 54 year old male dry cleaner with 10 
years of occupational inhalation of TCE. The worker voiced many health complaints and 
suffered from high frequency hearing impairment (Tomasini & Sartorelli, 1971). Sulzc-
Kuberska, Tronczynska & Latkowaki (1976) studied 40 workers exposed to TCE and found 
that 26 cases had hearing loss. The hearing loss was bilateral, sensorineural and affected the 
high frequencies. Workers in developing countries are often exposed to TCE in degreasing 
industries, dry cleaning and paint removing industries. 
OTOTOXIC EFFECTS OF SOLVENTS IN COMBINATION 
Occupational health research is generally characterised by the study of single agents as if 
they occurred alone in the environment. A wealth of information has been generated by this 
single-agent approach and as a result, many risks have been identified and are now controlled. 
However, the limitations of this approach are revealed by recent investigations of mixed 
exposures. Advances in research and statistical methods have facilitated an increase in the 
number of scientific studies on such combined or simultaneous exposures (Morata, 2003). 
Several non-additive interactions have been reported after combined exposures to 
solvents in animal and human studies. There is a controversy regarding the methods used to 
evaluate and describe interactions after combined exposures to solvents. Some investigators 
(Calabrese, 1991; Nylén & Hagman, 1994) proposed that the term antagonism should refer to 
the observation that the effect of the combined exposure is less than predicted by the 
individual effects. In addition, the term synergism is used to refer to the observation that the 
effects of the combined exposure are greater than predicted by the individual effects. A long-
term exposure study by Nylén, and colleagues (Nylén, Hagman & Johnson, 1994, 1995) in 
which rats were exposed to n-hexane, toluene or toluene with n-hexane revealed a synergistic 
enhancement of the loss of auditory sensitivity in the mixed exposure group. The researchers 
suggested that the demonstrated non-additive enhancement was caused by an interaction 
within the cochlea between toluene and n-hexane. Similar observations were made by other 
researchers who conducted animal experiments on the effect of combined exposure to 
solvents on the auditory system. 
There are few controlled studies of hearing impairment in humans exposed to solvents. 
Morata et al. (1993) and Sliwinska-Kowalska et al. (2001) demonstrated an increased risk of 
hearing loss in lacquer and paint industry workers exposed to a mixture of organic solvents 
comprising mainly toluene and xylene or xylene respectively. An increased risk of hearing 
loss was also demonstrated in employees of oil refineries who were exposed to a mixture of 
toluene, xylene, ethylbenzene and cyclohexane at relatively low concentrations below the 
currently admissible exposure limits (Morata, Engel et al., 1997). Similar findings were 
reported by Jacobsen, Hein, Suadicani, Parving and Gyntelberg (1993) in a study on 3,284 
subjects with a history of occupational exposure to different organic solvents. Data on the 
effect of a mixture of organic solvents on the hearing capabilities of workers in developing 
countries are scarce. In several developing countries, organic solvents are frequent 
atmospheric contaminants in paint and lacquer factories and dockyards, as well as in plants 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
201
manufacturing furniture, plastic, fibres, rubber tires, oil refineries, kerosene and many other 
products. Solvents such as paints, lacquers and kerosene are also used other than in 
occupational procedures, especially in households in many developing countries. It is 
expected that those who are exposed to solvent mixtures in developing countries would be as 
at risk for hearing loss as those exposed in developed countries. 
 
 
Ototoxic Effect after Combined Exposure to Solvents and Noise 
 
Hearing loss is often caused by several factors including age, heredity and exposure to 
ototoxic substances. Noise exposure, the most common external cause of hearing loss, 
damages the inner ear in both animals and humans. In the work setting where solvent 
exposure occurs, a high level of noise is also common. There is evidence which suggests that 
noise interacts synergistically with various drugs and chemicals (Boettcher, Henderson, 
Gratton, Danielson & Bryne, 1987). Additive or synergistic effects for solvents and noise 
have been demonstrated in animal studies (Johnson & Nylén, 1995; Lataye & Campo, 1997). 
In industrial settings, exposure to chemicals often coexists with an increased level of noise, 
the intensity of which is related to the specific technological processes involved. Barregard 
and Axelsson (1984), in a case study of four workers, were the first to describe hearing loss in 
individuals with a history of occupational exposure to a mixture of organic solvents and 
noise. Hearing loss as a result of combined exposure was more profound than after exposure 
to noise alone. In a 20-year longitudinal study of hearing sensitivity of 319 employees in a 
paper mill, it was observed that 23% of the workers from a chemical division showed 
pronounced hearing loss through exposure to lower noise levels (80-90dBA) as compared to 
workers solely exposed to higher noise levels (95-100 dBA) (Bergstrom & Nystrom, 1986). 
At a frequency of 4 kHz, hearing loss was more common in persons exposed to noise and 
solvents (32%) than in those who were exposed to only noise (22-23%). Chang, Chen, Lien 
and Sung (2006) conducted a study on workers exposed to toluene and noise in an adhesive 
materials manufacturing factory. Pure-tone audiometry (.5 to 6 kHz) was conducted in three 
groups of workers: noise and toluene exposed (n=58), noise exposed only (n=58) and non-
exposed to either (n=58). Results showed that the prevalence of hearing loss (hearing 
thresholds equal or worse than 25 dB HL at the frequencies tested) was much higher in the 
toluene and noise group (86.2%) in comparison to the noise only (44.8%), and control (5%) 
groups. The estimated risk for hearing loss among workers exposed to toluene and noise was 
10.9 times greater than the group of workers exposed only to noise. The researchers 
concluded that toluene exacerbates hearing loss in noisy environments, the lower frequencies 
being the most affected.  
Morata et al. (1993) and Morata, Engel et al. (1997) drew similar conclusions. In their 
first report, Morata et al. (1993) indicated that occupational exposure was associated with 4, 5 
and 11 fold increases in the risk of hearing loss in the case of noise-only, solvents-only, and 
noise and toluene among printing and manufacturing workers respectively. In the second 
report, Morata, Engel et al. (1997) found that sole exposure in petroleum refinery workers to a 
mixture of solvents (toluene, xylene, ethylbenzene and cyclohexane) was associated with a 
relatively low risk of hearing loss while in the solvents and noise group, this value was 
higher. Many subsequent studies have corroborated these results, including a large survey of 
yacht and plastic factory workers exposed to a mixture of noise and organic solvents having 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
202 
styrene as its main compound (Sliwinska-Kowalska et al., 2003). The reference group in this 
latter study included white collar workers exposed to neither solvents nor noise and metal 
factory workers exposed exclusively to noise. This study provided epidemiological evidence 
that occupational exposure to styrene is related to increased risk of hearing loss. Combined 
exposure to noise and styrene seemed to be more ototoxic than exposure to noise alone. The 
analysis of the worker audiograms showed the dominant effect of noise to be mainly at 
frequencies from 3 kHz to 6 kHz with an additional hearing loss at 8 kHz in the case of 
combined exposures to noise and styrene. The synergistic effect of combined exposures to 
noise and styrene on severity of hearing loss is supported by currently available experimental 
data in animals, as reported earlier. The damage caused by noise and styrene seems to result 
from two parallel mechanisms (chemical and mechanical). Noise-induced hearing loss is 
related to the mechanical injury of hair cell stereocilia whereas styrene induced hearing loss is 
related to the toxic damage to the hair cells. A synergistic effect on hearing was also reported 
by Sliwinska-Kowalska et al. (2004) among dockyard workers exposed to noise and a mixture 
of organic solvents. Contrary to these findings, Sass-Kortsak et al. (1995) reported that the 
relationship between noise exposure and hearing loss was significant, but there was no 
relationship between hearing loss and styrene exposure among workers in the fibre–
reinforced plastic manufacturing industry.  
The findings of this review have serious implications for developing countries. Many 
workers in developing countries are exposed to noise and/or solvents and it is expected that 
such exposure has serious effects on the hearing capabilities of the workers. In these 
countries, studies on combined exposure to noise and solvents are scarce. In most of these 
countries, occupational hearing loss has been recognised as a direct health effect of 
overexposure to noise, but exposure to solvents as a contributor to the development of 
hearing-impairment has not generally been considered. 
AGRICULTURAL USE OF PESTICIDES 
Available records indicate that over 60 percent of the economically active population in 
developing countries depend on agriculture (WHO/UNEP, 1989). The use of high chemical 
inputs in agriculture has become an important factor in these countries. Amongst the inputs 
encouraged by this form of intensified agriculture are potentially hazardous chemicals used 
widely to combat pests and to boost production but which also carry significant risks to 
human health and the environment. In addition, pesticides are used for public health purposes 
to control vector-born diseases, common in many developing countries, and for livestock and 
poultry rearing to control ectoparasites. 
According to a WHO/UNEP working group, developing countries consume between 20 
and 25 percent of the world’s pesticide production. The fastest growing markets are located in 
Africa, South and Central America, Asia and the eastern Mediterranean region. Large scale 
farms are the greatest consumers, but small scale farmers also have increasing access to 
agrochemical compounds, often through the development of projects (Murray, 1994), because 
the use of pesticides is a frequent requirement for bank credit even for small producers of 
crops grown for export. These crops, including cotton, bananas, coffee, rice, melons, flowers, 
decorative plants and vegetables, have a high pesticide consumption per hectare of cultivated 
land and hence consume large amounts of toxic compounds. A review of the literature 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
203
revealed that banana production in Costa Rica consumes 40-50 kg of active chemical 
compounds per hectare per year (Castillo, 1995). Pesticide application is also high in the 
cultivation of cotton and non-traditional crops in Central America while the production of 
snow peas for export in Guatemala required even more pesticides than banana and cotton 
(Murray, 1994). In Ecuador, potato farmers are perceived to overuse pesticides both in quality 
and quantity, with mixtures of chemicals, locally known as ‘cocktails’, being a favoured form 
of application (Crissman, Cole & Carpio, 1994). In Southern Africa, the use of pesticides is 
very common in the cultivation of new cash crops such as flowers and vegetables, in addition 
to traditional exports such as coffee, cotton, tea, and cashew nuts (Ngowi & London, 2006). 
The same is true for cocoa and vegetable production in the West African states of Ghana, 
Cote d’Ivoire and Nigeria. 
 
 
Toxicity of Pesticides  
 
The pattern and types of pesticides in use varies in countries over time. In some 
developing countries, trends follow those of the industrial world, where an increasing 
proportion of herbicides and fungicides are being consumed. Herbicides and fungicides are 
generally less acutely toxic. However, they pose greater carcinogenic and terratogenic risk 
(WHO/UNEP, 1989). Pesticides currently in use involve a wide variety of chemicals. 
Insecticides, which can be neurotoxic to humans, present the greatest proportion of pesticides 
used in developing countries because of their cheaper cost (Araki, Yokoyama & Murata, 
1997). 
A paper presented by many researchers from Asia, Africa, South America and the Middle 
East at a symposium in Ottawa on the ‘Impact of Pesticide Use on Health in Developing 
Countries’ listed commonly used hazardous chemicals (Table 7). A survey of three East 
African countries (Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania) reported frequent use of organochlorine 
compounds such as DDT, dieldrin, aldrin, lindane and camphechlor on food crops and 
livestock (Mbakaya et al., 1994) applications that are banned worldwide. In East Africa, 
externally funded projects such as the East African Pesticide Network Project (EAPNP) have 
been initiated to raise awareness of the health hazards posed by pesticides. This project 
revealed that in Tanzania pesticides were a health hazard in coffee and cotton producing areas 
(Ngowi, Meada, Partanen, Sanga & Mbise, 2001). Similar observations were made in Mexico 
(Albertson & Cross, 1993) and Kenya (Ohayo-Mikoto, 1997). Ngowi (2003) reported that 
about 96 active ingredients of pesticides in more than 124 permutations were found at flower 
farms in Northern Tanzania. 
There is no doubt the use of pesticides poses a health hazard to farmers in developing 
countries. Toxicological and epidemiological data on the pesticides are available from animal 
and human studies. There is evidence that farm families experience elevated levels of 
pesticide residues in their blood and urine. An investigation from an agricultural health study 
(Shealy, Barr, Ashley, Patterson, Camann & Bond, 1997) reported that USA agricultural 
families could receive an absorbed dose of pesticides after application by a member of the 
family. Additional preliminary results from the study revealed that elevated blood serum 
pesticide levels were detected in some families. The very potent pesticide dieldrin, which was 
banned in the USA in 1987, was found at significantly elevated levels in the blood of all 
members of one of the six farm families sampled. Additionally, exposures to 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
204 
organophosphate pesticide drift might result in quantifiable cholinesterase inhibition in 
residents living nearby application fields (Perry & May, 2005). 
AUDITORY EFFECTS OF EXPOSURE TO PESTICIDES 
There is evidence that low-level and long-term exposure to pesticides can cause diverse 
health effects (WHO/UNEP, 1990). The WHO/UNEP Working Group on the Public Health 
Impact of Pesticides Used in Agriculture estimated that 35,000 neuro-behavioural sequelae 
might occur each year worldwide. Studies on the auditory effects of exposure to pesticides are 
rare. However, some reports are available. It is known that organophosphates, and other 
organic compounds that are derived from phosphoric acid inhibit cholinesterase, producing an 
accumulation of acetylcholine, which affects the peripheral nervous system (Hawkes, 
Cavanagh & Fox, 1989) as well as the cognitive and sensory systems (Fornazzari, Wilkinson, 
Kapur & Carlen, 1983). 
An Indian study of two groups exposed to organophosphates with different levels of 
pseudocolinesterase activity reported peripheral neuropathies in the group with low values of 
pseudocolinesterase. Both groups had sensorineural hearing loss, ranging in severity from 
mild to moderate (Ernest, Thomas, Paulose, Rupa & Gnanamuthu, 1995). Profound bilateral 
sensorineural hearing loss associated with residual peripheral neuropathy in the extremities 
was reported for patients with acute poisoning from sprays containing a mixture of two 
organophosphates, 75% malathion and 15% metamidophos (Harell, Shea & Emmett, 1978). 
Peripheral auditory disorders were also observed in a group of 98 Brazilian farm workers free 
from noise exposure (with ages ranging from 15 to 59 years old). The hearing losses were 
found to be associated with combined exposure to organophosphates and pyrethroid 
insecticides. Audiometric screening revealed that 57.1% of those exposed had high frequency 
sensorineural hearing loss (Teixeira & Brandao, 1998). Beckett et al. (2000) performed a 
source apportionment analysis for hearing loss in a large, multiphasic health survey, the New 
York Farm Family Health and Hazard Survey. This survey of 185 workers found that hearing 
loss was associated with a history of spraying crops with insecticides including 
organophosphates and pyrethroid compounds. Other factors associated with hearing loss were 
age, gender, lack of high school education, firearms use, and a history of grain dryer 
operation. Teixeira Augusto, and Morata (2002) studied Brazilian pesticide applicators 
exposed to organophosphates and pyrethroids and non-exposed workers. Data on work 
history, medical history, current diseases, occupational and non-occupational exposure to 
noise or chemicals and lifestyle factors were obtained through interviews. Central auditory 
system functions were assessed through pitch pattern sequence and duration pattern sequence 
testing. Fifty six percent of the exposed workers had central hearing dysfunction and the 
relative risk for this was 7.58 for the group with exposure to insecticides (95% CI 2.9 – 19.8) 
when compared to the non-exposed group. The group exposed to insecticides and noise had a 
relative risk for central disorders of 6.5 (95% CI 2.2 – 20.0) when compared to the non-
exposed group and 9.8 (95% CI 1.4 – 64.5) when compared to the group exposed solely to 
noise. The authors surmised that exposure to organophosphates and pyrethroid products can 
induce damage to the central auditory system. Kimura et al. (2005) studied the effects of 
pesticides on the peripheral and central nervous system in tobacco farmers in Malaysia using 
nerve conduction velocity ABR and computerised posturography. After a careful 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
205
investigation, they concluded that nerve conduction velocities and postural sway seen to be 
sensitive indicators of the effects of pesticides on the central and peripheral system. 
In Brazil, Ferraz (1988) associated occupational exposure to maneb (manganese 
bisdithiocarbanate), a fungicide widely used in Latin America, with chronic neurological 
disease. Chinese investigators found disturbances in the peripheral nervous system among 
cotton workers exposed to various pyrethroid insecticides, but these changes were not 
persistent and full recovery took place within two days in all cases (Jeyaratnam, 1990) 
In summary, the deleterious effects of occupational noise on hearing have been well 
documented for many years. However, it was only recently that attention has shifted to the 
individual and synergistic ototraumatic effects of solvents and noise exposure combined. 
Evidence in this review supports the notion that solvents can injure the sensory cells and 
peripheral nerve endings of the cochlea. There is also the suggestion that because of the 
known solvent-related effects in the cortex retrocochlear disorders may also be expected 
(Fuente & McPherson, 2006). Organic solvents enhance the damaging effects of noise. A few 
recent studies have alluded to the ototraumatic effects of pesticides. The impact of solvents, 
solvents and noise combined, and pesticides pose a challenge to industrial workers, 
agriculture workers, occupational health workers and hearing conservationists in developing 
countries.  
 
Table 7. Most frequently used Pesticides in selected Asian Countries and their WHO 
Hazard Classification 
 
Pesticide 
Hazard Classification 
Carbaryl 
11 
Malathion 
III 
Methyl Paratheon 
Ia 
Dazinon 
II 
Monocrotophos 
Ib 
Endolsutan 
II 
Carbofuran 
Ia 
Oxydemeton-methyl 
Ib 
24D 
II 
BPMC 
II 
From: Wesseling et al., 1997. 
Ia 
= 
Extremely hazardous. 
 
 
Ib 
= 
Highly hazardous 
II 
= 
Moderately hazardous 
 
 
III = 
Slightly hazardous 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
206 
PREVENTION OF NOISE-INDUCED HEARING LOSS 
 IN DEVELOPING COUNTIRES 
Excessive noise causes permanent hearing loss. Virtually all such hearing loss is 
preventable. The primary motive for industrial noise control and related programs is that of 
protecting the health of the employees and reducing the legal liability of employers who may 
be held accountable for the impairments or disabilities incurred through employment. The 
major social value underlying protection from work place noise is that an employee should 
not have to risk material injury to earn a living. In specific employment settings such as the 
military or public safety, an additional motive may be that of avoiding deterioration of job 
performance because of reduced sensory ability. Here, the underlying social value is worker 
efficiency and effectiveness. A good hearing loss prevention program is good business in that 
it promotes positive labour relations. Employees enrolled in such a program know that 
management is concerned for their welfare and this awareness may translate into improved 
productivity. Studies of companies that have implemented hearing loss prevention programs 
often show reductions in accident rates, worker illnesses and lost time (Franks, Stephenson & 
Merry, 1996). Additionally, hearing loss prevention programs bestow enormous benefits on 
employees throughout life since the ability to communicate is critical in all of our 
interpersonal relationships. When good hearing is a prerequisite for a job, an effective hearing 
loss prevention program will enable employees to sustain their hearing ability and this 
continues to qualify them for jobs (including higher level positions) that have such 
requirements. Finally, these programs are used to identify “tender ears” (ears which already 
exhibit permanent threshold shift) or ears that exhibit a hearing disease that may be 
progressive. It is important for the employer to identify the latter group of hearing disorders, 
because potentially, the employer could become liable for hearing loss caused by disease that 
subsequently could not be differentiated from that caused by noise. It is therefore logical and 
reasonable for all companies to adopt a practical long-term approach to noise-induced hearing 
loss prevention. Figure 2 shows a pyramid of different levels of prevention that may be 
initiated in occupational hearing loss programs. 
 
Primary prevention 
Eliminate/reduce agents hazardous to 
hearing 
Secondary prevention 
Early detection of occupational hearing 
loss and action to avoid further loss. 
Tertiary prevention 
Minimize adverse effects of occupational 
hearing loss. Appropriate treatment and 
counseling for those with occupational 
hearing loss. 
 
Figure 2. Levels of prevention applied to occupational hearing loss.  
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
207
Vignette 1 
A case report of an effective Hearing Conservation Program in Ghana 
 
In 1999 a large gold mining company in Ghana embarked on a hearing conservation 
program (HCP). Activities included in the HCP involved the following: noise 
measurements; pure tone audiometry; poster displays and warning signals in specific areas 
in the company to alert workers; and worker education in the use of ear protectors. In order 
to judge the effectiveness of the HCP, the audiometric data compiled by the company were 
examined retrospectively. Data for the analysis consisted of audiograms of 200 workers 
from various departments in the company, namely pit, processing, geology, survey mining, 
and safety and health environments. At the start of the HCP in 1999, individual work 
histories were collected and noise levels in the different working conditions were 
measured. Those who were exposed to recreational or military noise were excluded. In all, 
200 base-line audiograms obtained in 1999 were compared with 200 audiograms obtained 
from the same workers in 2003 (OSHA, 1983). Shifts of 10 dB or greater at 2, 3 and/or 4 
kHz were classified as STS (standard threshold shift). In order to determine the 
effectiveness of the HCP, only the percentage of employees exceeding the STS criterion in 
a positive direction was used; less than 6 – 8% of workers should show additional hearing 
loss in an effective program (Royster & Royster, 1982). Only hearing level decrement was 
considered and age correction factors were not employed in the calculation of these shifts.  
Out of the two hundred audiograms which were examined, 11 (5.5%) showed an 
increase in thresholds of more than 10 dB in one or both ears. That is, hearing loss became 
worse in only 5.5% of cases. The HCP was considered effective, since less than 6% of 
workers had additional hearing loss over the four year period of the HCP. The management 
of this company has to be commended for protecting their workers. The occupational 
physician at the company was actively involved in all aspects of the HCP.  
 
 
Regulatory Action and Traditional Hearing Conservation Programs in 
Developing Countries 
 
In developed countries, there are increasing efforts to regulate noise and to administer 
hearing conservation programs. In these countries the awareness and acceptance of the reality 
of noise as an occupational hazard has increased. Indeed, there are laws in such countries that 
require employers in manufacturing and mining companies to protect employees against 
hazardous noise. In the United States of America for instance, the military established 
regulations to manage noise exposure as early as 1956 (USA Air Force, 1956) but noise limits 
for non-military occupational exposure were not suggested until 1969 by the modification of 
the Walsh–Healey Public Contracts Act (Office of the Federal Register, 1969). Later, the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) was established in 1970 and charged 
with the responsibility for promulgating and enforcing regulations established to protect the 
safety and health of American workers. In 1972, the National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health (NIOSH) published the first criteria for a recommended standard on 
occupational exposure to noise. The exposure limit recommended by NIOSH was an 8-hour 
time weighted average (TWA) of 85 dBA. In Europe, statutory controls in industry were in 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
208 
place since the 1970s and in Japan guidelines for the prevention of hearing loss were issued in 
1992.  
There are also laws in some developing countries which protect workers who are exposed 
to hazardous noise. In Ghana, the liability for hazardous noise exposure and noise-induced 
hearing loss is that imposed by the Workman’s Compensation Acts, both the Workman’s 
Compensation Act 174 of 1963 and the Factories, Offices and Shops Act of 1970. This is 
under review. Under these laws, noise levels of 85 dBA or more for an 8-hour exposure is 
considered potentially damaging. There were no laws protecting workers in mining 
companies against hazardous noise, although the potential danger of NIHL in this work 
setting has been recognised and an exposure level of more than 85 dBA for 8 hours is 
considered hazardous. In Pakistan, legislation was enacted against noise induced hearing loss 
in 1965 and 1969, but at present any impairment that is less than 100% of hearing loss is not 
compensated (WHO, 1997a). In Swaziland, the Factories, Machinery and Construction Works 
Regulations came into effect in 1974. To strengthen the enforcement of these legal 
instruments, Legal Notices were devised. For example, Legal Notice No. 11 of 1980 
stipulated the allowable level of noise in factories and other premises under the scope of 
existing legislation. It also defined the steps to be undertaken to reduce noise levels or to 
protect workers from excessive noise. Legal Notice No.91 of 1985 empowered the Inspector 
of Factories to issue notices in order to regulate working conditions and protect workers 
against hazardous noise (Shilla, 1994). Similar laws exist in other developing countries, some 
of which require employers to offer hearing protection to employees exposed to hazardous 
noise (Morata et al., 2001) including Brazil, Saudi Arabia (Ahmed et al., 2001), Kenya and 
India.  
Additionally, there are hearing conservation programs (HCPs) in some developing 
countries but not all of them incorporate all the interrelated program elements as advocated 
and practiced in developed countries. These interrelated elements (see Figure 3 for a summary 
of strategies) include monitoring noise exposure to characterise the hazard accurately and to 
identify at risk employees, implementing engineering and administrative control whenever 
possible to reduce the noise or removal of the worker from the noise, providing for periodic 
audiometric evaluation of noise exposed workers, using hearing protection devices when 
engineering controls are inadequate, educating and motivating both workers and management 
to champion hearing loss prevention, maintaining accurate records and establishing a 
consistent, ongoing approach for evaluating success of all aspects of a hearing conservation 
program (Franks et al., 1996). In Brazil, for example, employers are required to offer hearing 
protection devices (HPDs) and appropriate training for noise-exposed workers (Ministerio do 
Trabalho, 1997). In Ghana, Anglo-Gold Ashanti (a large underground mining company) has a 
hearing conservation program and workers are compensated for hearing loss attributable to 
excessive noise. A study conducted in one of the subsidiary companies of Anglo-Gold 
Ashanti, a surface gold mining company, indicated that the hearing conservation program was 
effective (Amedofu, in press). However, in general, hearing conservation laws in developing 
countries are rarely enforced. While there are laws in many developing countries to protect 
workers from hazardous noise, inconsistent compliance, spotty enforcement of governmental 
regulation and lack of HCPs in most industries are the cause of NIHL. It is true that some 
companies provide HPDs for their workers but often workers do not use them due to comfort 
issues, especially in hot and humid countries in Africa and Asia. In these countries, there is a 
general lack of a functioning occupational health system, at times combined with severe 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
209
repression of trade unions that would act to encourage the growth of HCPs. Additionally, 
employers in developing countries are reluctant to develop HCPs in their industries because it 
involves an extra cost to the company. Many of these companies may not operate at full 
capacity and are economically marginal. Again, due to high levels of unemployment, 
employees are reluctant to assert their rights for fear of being laid off.  
 
Engineering control
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                 If noise > 80 dBA TWA 
Administrative actions 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                              If noise >80 dBA TWA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aim: to diminish time that workers are 
exposed to noise. Strategies: use of 
shifts, change workers’ function. 
Aim: to diminish noise levels in the 
source. Strategies: replacement of old 
machinery, isolation, maintenance.  
Aim: To protect the inner ear when 
noise levels are still higher than 80 
dBA. Strategy: HPD according to noise 
characteristics. 
 
Figure 3. Strategies to reduce worker noise exposure. 
 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
210 
Another problem for implementing HCPs in developing countries is that the majority of 
workers in these countries work in the informal sector. It is estimated that over the past 
decade the informal sector created over 90 percent of all new jobs in Africa (Gërxhani, 2004). 
In Mali, Nepal and Pakistan the informal sector represents 70 percent of total employment. It 
is very difficult to provide hearing loss prevention programs to informal sector employees for 
various reasons: they work alone or in small groups; they are often employed temporarily; 
they may be itinerant; they may have more than one employer per year; and they may not be 
exposed to traditional manufacturing noise hazards. In addition, because informal sector 
workers tend to be unorganised, it is difficult to reach them through traditional routes such as 
trade unions, craft organisations or corporate structures. Such workers may come to accept 
noise exposure and hearing loss as part of the job. These types of workers are considered to 
be underserved (Franks et al., 1996) in developing countries. 
LOW COST METHODS OF NOISE REDUCTION  
IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
Given the conditions within both the informal and formal sectors in developing countries, 
consideration should be given to adopting other, low cost methods of noise control to 
supplement/replace the use of hearing protection devices. Kahkonen and Muchiri (1989) gave 
some practical suggestions that are economical to carry out in noisy environments, some of 
which can be utilized by industries in developing countries to supplement other efforts. The 
following low cost methods of noise control can be used in developing countries to protect 
workers from hazardous noise exposure.  
 
 
Location of Equipment 
 
The most important part of noise control planning is the layout both inside a plant and 
outside. An appropriate layout involves the use of distance to reduce noise level. Noise level 
falls rapidly as one moves away from the noise source. Outdoors in the acoustically free field, 
the sound pressure level can be reduced by as much as 6 dB for every doubling of distance. 
However, indoors the effect of reverberation may limit the degree of reduction. Also, noisy 
work operations can be grouped together in one area. This reduces the area requiring noise 
control measures and provides automatic control to the other employees by virtue of distance. 
Quiet areas like storerooms and holding areas can be used as buffer zones between noisy and 
quieter areas. 
 
 
Selection of Quieter Machines and Quiet Processes  
 
Careful selection of equipment may also be of help in reducing noise. It has gradually 
becoming easier to obtain noise data on machines and processes from vendors. Where the 
distributor cannot provide information, a visit to see the machinery in operation is informative 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
211
in regard to noise and other factors. The sound power data can be used as a starting point to 
predict the general noise level of the planned work area. 
 
 
Installation of Absorption Materials 
 
Reductions from 3 to 7 dB SPL can be achieved by installing acoustic absorption 
materials. Hard, smooth, impervious surfaces which reflect sound should be changed into 
soft, rough, porous surfaces which absorb sound. In hot, humid countries such as in Africa, 
open windows and doors can also be sometimes used to effectively absorb noise. 
 
 
Maintenance of Machines 
 
Increased noise or vibration of a machine is often an indication of the poor condition of 
the machine. It is important for employers to perform proper maintenance of their machines. 
The service department has an important role to play in keeping equipment in good low noise 
condition. 
 
 
Rotation of Jobs 
 
In some cases job rotation of employees can be used to reduce the effect of noise on 
workers. Transfer of those who work in noisy areas to quieter areas can ensure that workers 
intermittently perform noisy and quiet tasks. However, due to different labour skills and 
wages as well as worker resistance, this form of noise control may at times be difficult to 
implement.  
In the world today, democracy and globalisation bring about opportunities for developing 
countries to enhance work conditions, including reduced noise levels. This may be possible 
through the commitment from employers to pursue and enforce local legislations on noise 
exposure at the work place. Company sponsored programs should stress the importance of 
good hearing conservation practices on and off the job and inform employees about factors 
(e.g., diseases and recreational noise exposure) that may affect their hearing. Employers must 
bear in mind that even though special training sessions may be devoted specifically to the 
prevention of hearing loss, the hearing conservation program must be recognised as an 
essential element in the overall health and safety climate of the work place. High visibility 
media campaigns to develop public awareness of the effects of noise on hearing and means of 
self-protection should be promoted in developing countries. Self-education materials for 
adults should be readily available and need to be developed. The prevention of NIHL should 
be part of the health curricula in pre-university institutions in developing countries. There 
should be improved access to programs for training more audiologists, audiology technicians 
and otolaryngologists in developing countries to provide a professional base for preventive 
audiology. 
 
 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
212 
Vignette 2 
A study on the effectiveness of a hearing conservation program among noise-and 
solvent-exposed workers in a petrochemical plant in Colombia 
 
In the Ecopetrol petrochemical plant in Barrancabermeja, Colombia, a hearing 
conservation program has been conducted since 1972. In 1997, to evaluate the effectiveness 
of this program as well as to assess the risk of solvent-induced hearing loss among workers 
of the complex, a study on the prevalence of hearing loss (Londoño et al., 1997) was 
carried out. The company, in conjunction with experienced researchers from the National 
Public Health Faculty of the University of Antioquia, Colombia, carried out the study. A 
sample of 745 workers was selected (out of 2775 workers at the plant). Four different 
groups of workers were studied: those exposed to industrial noise only, those exposed to 
industrial solvents only, those exposed to both agents, and those exposed to neither. The 
aim of the study was to obtain the total number of workers with hearing loss in each 
subgroup and ultimately suggest preventive actions in order to avoid occupational hearing 
loss in workers.  
According to the hearing conservation program that operates in the complex, noise-
exposed workers must have a yearly audiometric test and non-exposed workers are 
assessed every five years. Periodic noise levels were obtained in the plant as well as 
measures of environmental solvent concentrations. Workers exposed to 85 dB(A) or greater 
levels of noise were required to wear hearing protectors. Workers from workstations where 
organic solvents were used wore respiratory masks.  
Files of each selected worker were analysed. Data regarding pure-tone thresholds, 
noise levels and environmental concentration of organic solvents were taken into 
consideration for the analysis. The prevalence of hearing loss (hearing thresholds equal or 
worse than 25 dBHL) varied between 8% and 13.5% among the four studied groups of 
workers. No significant differences were found among the groups. However, when hearing 
thresholds at 4 kHz were considered to be abnormal only at a level of 30 dBHL or higher, 
the overall prevalence of hearing loss diminished to 4%. This prevalence was much lower 
than the rate noted in two previous studies carried out in the same plant. The study revealed 
that low environmental solvent concentrations and the use of hearing protectors were key 
issues to successfully maintain a low prevalence of hearing loss among workers.  
Researchers concluded that controlling the sound emissions from the source as well as 
in the environment, periodic pure-tone audiometric controls, and the use of hearing 
protectors and respiratory protection for solvent exposure promoted the good hearing health 
conditions observed among the workers studied. The study showed that the hearing 
conservation program carried out in this petrochemical plant was successful.  
From this Colombian experience, it can be appreciated that unifying efforts between 
the private and public sectors, and/or between industry and research, can lead to positive 
results. Also, monitoring environmental solvent concentrations and supplying workers with 
the pertinent protective devices help to protect workers’ hearing health.  
 
 
 
 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
213
OPPORTUNITIES FOR PREVENTING CHEMICAL 
 INDUCED HEARING LOSS 
 
There is sufficient evidence to clearly show that exposure to chemicals such as solvents 
and pesticides can cause permanent damage to the auditory system. In industrial settings, 
solvents such as toluene, styrene, xylene, trichloroethylene and carbon disulphide have been 
shown to be ototoxic. Large worker populations in developing countries, in the desire to 
increase agriculture production and to control pests, are exposed to increasing amounts of 
pesticides which are also ototoxic. These chemicals are often actively produced in or 
introduced to developing countries so as to avoid the restrictions caused by often stringent 
legislation in industrialized countries, and to find new markets for the products outside the 
saturated industrialized economies. In industrialized countries, stringent legislation and 
control have slowed down the growth rate of chemical pollution, which has led to a decline in 
the incidence of occupationally determined acute and chronic intoxications such as peripheral 
nervous system injuries (Rantanen, 1993). In developing countries, however, poor agricultural 
practices by vulnerable farmers contribute to occupational health problems including hearing 
loss, a problem exacerbated by an ignorance of the dangers inherent in pesticides, illiteracy, 
inadequate legislation, lack of enforcement, lack of technical and laboratory capacity, 
inadequate pest control policies and under resourced research facilities. The easy availability 
of hazardous pesticides coupled with the close proximity of the living environment to the 
work place (London, 1998) leads to farm workers and their families being overexposed. Work 
is often performed in hot, humid climates that discourage the use of protective gear (Ngowi, 
Meada, Wesseling et al., 2001). Some farmers store pesticides inside their homes, sometimes 
with food or animal feed and within the reach of unauthorised persons like children (London, 
1998; Naidoo, White, London, Viera & Janulewicz, 2005). Thus, unlike those in developed 
countries, agricultural policies in third world countries have more markedly emphasized 
short-term economic gains at the expense of environmental sustainability and health. 
Seychelles is one of the few developing countries where, under stringent provisions, all 
pesticide handlers are medically examined annually and their food tested every six months, 
even before symptoms occur, in order to detect early chronic intoxication by pesticides 
(Adam, 1993). The Work and Health in South Africa (WAHSA) project on pesticides was an 
initiative by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) that focuses 
on developing skills and resources to manage the health and environmental impact of 
pesticides in the region (Ngowi & London, 2006). The East Africa Pesticide Network 
(EAPN) project was also established to assess the health hazards posed by pesticides (Ngowi, 
2003). 
 
 
Key Strategies for Chemical Safety in Developing Countries 
 
In order to recognise the hazards of ototoxic chemicals and to focus on preventive 
measures, risk assessment of chemicals and their registration is vital. Indeed, registration of 
solvents and pesticides is at the core of regulation issues because it determines whether a 
chemical (e.g., solvent or pesticide) can be used in a country. So far, it appears registration 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
214 
has usually failed as a strategy for risk management of pesticide use in many developing 
countries (Mbakaya et al., 1994). This is an important issue, which developing countries must 
address. The passage of a comprehensive Chemical Act to control usage in all sectors of the 
economy is required in many developing countries. In addition, there should be legislation on 
chemicals such as solvents and pesticides used in industry and agriculture which have been 
shown to be ototoxic, with associated regulatory bodies making pesticide management 
decisions in these countries. These bodies should best be set up at national and regional and 
community levels to make them more effective. The Food and Agricultural Organisation 
Code of Conduct advocates support to governments of developing countries in setting up 
regulatory bodies, but in most countries authorities in charge encounter overwhelming 
problems because of insufficient technical knowledge (FAO, 1990). There should be adequate 
technical and laboratory capacity capable of conducting analysis for solvents and pesticides 
and their residues at standards that meet good laboratory practice. It is vital to train more 
experts in the field of toxicology, health and control technology to implement policies and 
legislation. The main channels through which solvents and pesticides are absorbed are 
through the respiratory tract and through the skin. Therefore it is necessary to educate 
workers on self-protection by promoting use of more climate-friendly protective clothing and 
masks to prevent contact with these chemicals. 
CONCLUSION 
The hazardous effects of noise on hearing have been extensively recognised by clinicians, 
researchers and workers for many decades. However, occupational hearing loss is not due to 
noise exposure alone, but also due to compounds such as solvents and other chemicals. 
Certain chemicals, due to either oto- or neuro-toxicity or both, may induce auditory damage. 
Solvents in conjunction with noise have also been demonstrated to have an adverse 
synergistic effect on hearing. These findings present a new challenge for hearing health-care 
professionals, especially in the developing world where the level of awareness of 
occupational health and safety issues is low. It is the responsibility of audiologists, 
otolaryngologists, and occupational health and safety specialists to prevent hearing loss that is 
caused by occupational hazards. In many developing countries, the work place is still a 
hazardous environment with excessive risk levels.  
REFERENCES 
Adam, R. (1993). The work environment and health in Seychelles. African Newsletter on 
Occupational Health and Safety, 3, 44-47. 
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). (2000). Toxicological Profile 
for Toluene. Atlanta, GA: ATSDR. 
Ahmed, H.O., Dennis, J.H., Badran, O., Ismail, M., Ballal, S.G., Ashoor, A. et al. (2001). 
Occupational noise exposure and hearing loss of workers in two plants in eastern Saudi 
Arabia. Annals of Occupational Hygiene, 45, 371-380. 
Albertson, T.E., & Cross, C.E. (1993) Pesticides in the work place: a worldwide issue 
[editorial]. Archives of Environmental Health, 48, 364-365. 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
215
Alidrisi, M., Jamil, A.T.M., Jiffry, M.S.A., Jefri, M.A., & Erturk, F. (1990). Evaluation of 
noise stresses in Jeddah Industrial State. Journal of Environmental Science and Health, 
A25(8), 873-896. 
Amedofu, G.K. (2002). Hearing-impairment among workers in a surface gold mining 
company in Ghana. African Journal of Health Sciences, 9(1-2), 91-97. 
Amedofu, G.K. (in press). The effectiveness of the hearing conservation program at a surface 
gold mining company in Ghana. African Journal of Health Sciences, in press. 
Amedofu, G.K., Brobby G.W., & Ocansey, G. (1998). Occupational hearing loss among 
workers of a large gold mining company in Ghana. African Journal of Health Sciences, 
5(2), 1-3. 
Araki, S., Yokoyama, K., & Murata, K. (1997). Neurophysiological methods in occupational 
and environmental health: methodology and recent findings. Environmental Research, 
73, 42-51. 
Barregard, L., & Axelsson, A. (1984). Is there an ototraumatic interaction between noise and 
solvents? Scandinavian Audiology, 13, 151-155. 
Beckett, W.S., Chamberlain, D., Hallman, E., May, J., Hwang, S.A., Gomez, M. et al. (2000). 
Hearing conservation for farmers: source apportionment of occupational and 
environmental factors contributing to hearing loss. Journal of Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine, 42, 806-813. 
Bergstrom, B., & Nystrom, B. (1986). Development of hearing loss during long-term 
exposure to occupational noise. A 20-year follow-up study. Scandinavian Audiology, 15, 
227-234. 
Boateng, C.A., & Amedofu, G.K. (2004). Industrial noise pollution and its effects on the 
hearing capabilities of workers: A study from saw mills, printing presses and corn mills. 
African Journal of Health Sciences, 11, 55-60. 
Bhattacharya, S.K., Saiyed, H.N., Roy, A., & Chatterjee, S.K. (1981). Hearing acuity in 
weavers of a textile mill. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 74, 779-785. 
Boettcher, F.A., Henderson, D., Gratton, M.A., Danielson, R.W., & Byrne, C.D. (1987). 
Synergistic interactions of noise and other ototramatic agents. Ear and Hearing, 8, 192-
212. 
Bunch, C.C. (1937). The diagnosis of occupational or traumatic deafness. A historical and 
audiometric study. Laryngoscope, 47, 615-691. 
Byrne, A., Kirby, B., Zibin, T., & Ensminger, S. (1991). Psychiatric and neurological effects 
of chronic solvent abuse. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 36, 735-738. 
Calabrese, E.J. (1991) Multiple Chemical Interactions. Chelsea, M.I.: Lewis Publishers. 
Campo, P., Lataye, R., Loquet, G., & Bonnet, P. (2001). Styrene-induced hearing loss: a 
membrane insult. Hearing Research, 154, 170-180. 
Castillo, L.E. (1995). Sustainability requires a necessary change in the banana plantation 
industry. Proceedings of the Policy Forum on Crop Protection Policy. 13th International 
Plant Protection Convention, The Hague, The Netherlands, pp. 13-24. 
 Chang, S.J., Chen, C.J., Lien, C.H., & Sung F.C. (2006). Hearing loss in workers exposed to 
toluene and noise. Environmental Health Perspectives, 114, 1283-1286. 
Coscia, G.C., Tabaro, G., Albera, C., Tubino, L., Morra, B., Discalzi, G. et al. (1983). 
Alterazione vestibolari, nell esposizione a tolune. La Medicina del Lavoro, 74, 23-29. 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
216 
Crissman, G., Cole, D.C., & Carpio, F. (1994). Pesticide use and farm worker health in 
Ecuadorian potato production. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 76, 543-
547. 
Crofton, K.M., Lassiter, T.L., & Rebert, C.S. (1994). Solvent induced ototoxicity in rats: an 
atypical selective mid-frequency hearing deficit. Hearing Research, 80, 25-30. 
Engström, J., Astrand, I., & Wigaeus, E. (1978). Exposure to styrene in a polymerization 
plant. Uptake in the organism and concentration in subcutaneous adipose tissue. 
Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment and Health, 4, 324-329. 
Ernest, K., Thomas, M., Paulose, M., Rupa, V., & Gnanamuthu, C. (1995). Delayed effects of 
exposure to organophosphorus compounds. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 101, 81-
84. 
Evans, W.A., & Ming, H.Y. (1982). Industrial noise-induced hearing loss in Hong Kong – A 
comparative study. Annals of Occupational Hygiene, 25, 63-80. 
Ezzati, M. (2004). Comparative quantification of health risks: Global and regional burden of 
disease attributable to selected major risk factors. Geneva: WHO. 
Ferraz, H.B. (1988). Chronic exposure to the fungicide maneb may produce symptoms and 
signs of CNS manganese intoxication. Neurology, 38, 550-553. 
Foo, S.C., & Saarinen L. (1985). Occupational Hygiene. In J. Jeyaratnam (Ed.), Occupational 
health in developing countries, pp. 141-168. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO). (1990). International code of conduct on the 
distribution and use of pesticides. Rome: FAO.  
Fornazzari, L., Wilkinson, D.A., Kapur, B.M., & Carlen, P.L. (1983). Cerebellar, cortical and 
functional impairment in toluene abusers. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica, 67, 319-329. 
Fowler, E.P. (1939). The tests for hearing. In E.P. Fowler Jr. (Ed.), Medicine of the ear, pp. 
369-421. New York: Thomas Nelson & Sons.  
Franks, J.R., & Morata, T.C. (1996). Ototoxic effects of chemical alone or in concert with 
noise: A review of human studies. In: Axelsson, A., Borchgrevink, H.M., Hamernik, 
R.P., Hellstrom, P.A., Henderson, D., & Salvi, R.J. (Eds.), Scientific basis of noise-
induced hearing loss, pp 437-466. New York: Thieme. 
Franks, J.R., Stephenson, M.R., & Merry, C.J. (1996). Preventing hearing loss: a practical 
guide. Publication No. 96-110. NIOSH-DHHS. Cincinnati, OH: National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health. 
Fuente, A., & McPherson, B. (2006). Organic solvents and hearing loss: The challenge for 
audiology. International Journal of Audiology, 45, 367-381. 
Gallo, R., & Glorig, A (1964). Permanent threshold shift changes produced by noise exposure 
and aging. American Industrial Hygiene Association, 25, 237-245. 
Gërxhani, K. (2004). The informal sector in developing and less developed countries: A 
literature survey. Public Choice, 120, 267-300. 
Hamernik, R.P., Turrentine G., & Roberto, M. (1986). Mechanically induced morphological 
changes in the organ of Corti. In: Salvi, R.J., Henderson, D., Hamermik, R.P., & Collett, 
V. (Eds.), Basic and applied aspects of noise induced hearing loss (pp. 69-84). New 
York: Plenum Press. 
Harell, M., Shea, J.J., & Emmett, J.R. (1978). Bilateral sudden deafness following combined 
insecticide poisoning. Laryngoscope, 88, 1348-1351. 
Hassan, S., & Beg, M.H.A (1994). Noise-induced hearing loss in industrial workers of 
Karachi. Pakistan Journal of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, 10, 200-205. 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
217
Hawkes, C.H., Cavanagh, J.B., & Fox, A.J. (1989). Motoneuron disease: A disorder 
secondary to solvent exposure. The Lancet, 1, 73-76. 
Hessel, P.A., & Sluis-Cremer, G.K. (1987). Hearing loss in white South African gold miners. 
South African Medical Journal, 71, 364-367. 
Hirata, M. Ogawa, Y., Okayama, A., & Goto, S. (1992). A cross-sectional study on the brain 
stem auditory evoked potential among workers exposed to carbon disulfide. International 
Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health, 64, 321-324. 
Jacobsen, P., Hein, H.O., Suadicani, P., Parving, A., & Gyntelberg, F. (1993). Mixed solvent 
exposure and hearing impairment: an epidemiological study of 3284 men. The 
Copenhagen male study. Occupational Medicine, 43, 180-184. 
Jaspers, R.M., Muijser, H., & Lammers, J.H. (1993). Mid-frequency hearing loss and 
reduction of acoustic startle responding in rats following trichloroethylene exposure. 
Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 15, 407-412. 
Jeyaratnam, J. (1990). Acute pesticide poisoning: A major global health problem. World 
Health Statistics Quarterly, 43, 139-144. 
Johnson, A.C., & Nylén, P.R. (1995). Effects of industrial solvents on hearing. Occupational 
Medicine, 10, 623-640. 
Kahema, H., Moynyo, R.A., & Svedberg, U. (1981). Occupational noise measurement and 
control in Tanzanian textile mills. Journal of Occupational Health and Safety, 1, 12-15. 
Kahkonen, E., & Muchiri, F. K. (1989). Low-cost methods of noise control. East African 
Newsletter on Occupational Health and Safety, pp. 8-11. 
Kamal, A.A., Eldamati, S.E., & Faris, R. (1989). Hearing threshold of Cairo traffic 
policemen. International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health, 61, 543-
545. 
Kelly, T.F. (2003). Human Resource Development for Self-employment and Informal Sector. 
Paper presented at the Development Conference, 19th National and District Development 
Conference, Gaborone, Botswana. 
Khogali, M. (1970). Industrial health problems of developing countries. 1.Types of risk and 
their prevention. Journal of Tropical Medicine & Hygiene, 73, 269-274. 
Kimura, K., Yokoyama, K., Sato, H., Nordin, R.B., Naing, L., Kimura, S. et al. (2005). 
Effects of pesticides on the peripheral and central nervous system in tobacco farmers in 
Malaysia: studies on peripheral nerve conduction, brain-evoked potentials and 
computerized posturography. Industrial Health, 43, 285-294. 
Lataye, R., & Campo, P. (1997). Combined effects of a simultaneous exposure to noise and 
toluene on hearing function. Neuroroxicology and Teratology, 19, 373-382.  
Limasset, J.C., Simon, P., Poirot, P., Subra, I., & Grzebyk, M. (1999). 
Estimation of the percutaneous absorption of styrene in an industrial situation. International 
Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health, 72, 46-51. 
London, L. (1998). Occupational epidemiology in agriculture. A case study in the South 
African context. International Journal of Environmental and Occupational Health, 4, 
245-256. 
Londoño, J.L., Restrepo, H., Corrales, A.M., & Ortíz, J. (1997). Hipoacusia neurosensorial 
por ruido industrial y solventes orgánicos en la gerencia complejo Barrancabermeja, 
1977-1997. Revista Facultdad Nacional de Salud Pública, 15, 94-120. 
May, J.J. (2000). Occupational hearing loss. American Journal of Industrial Medicine, 37, 
112-120. 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
218 
Mbakaya CF, Ohayo-Mitoko GJ, Ngowi VA, Mbabazi R, Simwa JM, Maeda DN et al. 
(1994). The status of pesticide usage in East Africa. African Journal of Health Sciences, 
1, 37-41.  
Mbuligwe, S.E. (2004). Levels and influencing factors of noise pollution from small-scale 
industries (SSIs) in a developing country. Environmental management, 33, 830-839. 
Mendoza-Cantú, A., Castorena-Torres, F., Bermúdez de León, M, Cisneros, B., López-
Carrillo, L., Rojas-García, AE, et al. (2006). Occupational toluene exposure induces 
cytochrome P450 2E1 mRNA expression in peripheral lymphocytes. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 114, 494-499. 
Miller, J.D. (1971). Effects of noise on people. Report NTID 300.7. Washington, D.C.: 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
Ministerio do Trabalho. (1997). Manuais de legislacao Atlas. Seguranca e Medicina do 
trabalho 36 ed.v. 16. Sao Paulo: Atlas Brazil. 
Morata, T. (2003). Chemical exposure as a risk factor for hearing loss. Journal of 
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 45, 676-682. 
Morata, T., Dunn, D.E., Kretschmer, L.W., Lemasters, G.K., & Keith, R.W. (1993). Effect of 
occupational exposure to organic solvents and noise on hearing. Scandinavian Journal of 
Work, Environment & Health, 19, 245-254. 
Morata, T., Dunn, D.E., & Sieber, W.K. (1994). Occupational exposure to noise and ototoxic 
organic solvents. Archives of Environmental Health, 49, 359-365. 
Morata, T.C., Engel, T., Durão, A., Costa, T.R., Krieg, E.F., Dunn, D.E. et al. (1997). 
Hearing loss from combined exposures among petroleum refinery workers. Scandinavian 
Audiology, 26, 141-149. 
Morata, T.C., Fiorini, A.C., Fischer, F.M., Colacioppo, S. Wallingford, K.M., Krieg, E.F. et 
al. (1997). Toluene-induced hearing loss among rotogravure printing workers. 
Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment & Health, 23, 289-298. 
Morata, T.C., Fiorini, A.C., Fischer, F.M., Krieg, E.F., Gozzoli, L., Colacioppo, S. et al. 
(2001). Factors affecting the use of hearing protectors in a population of printing 
workers. Noise Health, 4(13), 25-32. 
Morata, T., & Lemasters, G.K. (1995). Epidemiologic considerations in the evaluation of 
occupational hearing loss. Occupational Medicine, 10, 641-656. 
Moselhi, M., El-Sadik, Y.M., & El-Dakhakhny, A.A. (1979). A six-year follow up study for 
evaluation of the 85 dBA safe criterion for noise exposure. American Industrial Hygiene 
Association Journal, 40, 424-426. 
Muijser, H., Hoogendijk, E.M., & Hooisma, J. (1988). The effects of occupational exposure 
to styrene in high-frequency thresholds. Toxicology, 49, 331-340. 
Mulugeta, S. (1992). Noise levels in Ethiopian wood working industries. African Newsletter 
on Occupational Health and Safety, 2(1), 14-17. 
Murray, D.L. (1994). Cultivating crisis: The human cost of pesticides in Latin America. 
Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. 
Naidoo, S., White, R., London, L., Viera, V., & Janulewicz, P. (2005). Pesticide exposure and 
child development in Kwazulu Natal: A pilot study. Epidemiology, 16, S117. 
National Institute of Health (NIH). (1990). Noise and hearing loss. NIH consensus 
development conference statement, 22-24 January 1990.  
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
219
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. (1972). Criteria for the recommended 
standard: Occupational exposure to noise. Publication HSM 73-11011. Cincinnati: 
NIOSH. 
Nelson, D.I., Nelson, R.Y., Concha-Barrientos, M., & Fingerhut, M. (2005). The global 
burden of occupational noise-induced hearing loss. American Journal of Industry, 48, 
446-458. 
Ngowi, A.V.F. (2003). Occupational exposure to pesticides at flower farms in Northern 
Tanzania. African Newsletter on Occupational Health and Safety, 13, 16-18. 
Ngowi, A.V.F, & London, L. (2006). Action on pesticides under the program on Work and 
Health in Southern Africa (WAHSA). African Newsletter on Occupational Health and 
Safety, 16, 15-19. 
Ngowi, A.V.F., Maeda, D.N., Partanen, T.J., Sanga, M.P., & Mbise, G. (2001). Acute health 
effects of organophosphorus pesticides on Tanzania small scale coffee growers. Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology, 11, 335-339. 
Ngowi, A.V., Meada, D.N., Wesseling, C., Partanen, T.J., Sanga, M.P., & Mbise, G. (2001). 
Pesticides handling practices in agriculture in Tanzania: Observational data from 27 
coffee and cotton farms. International Journal of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, 7, 326-332. 
Nylén, P., & Hagman, M. (1994). Function of the auditory and visual systems, and of 
peripheral nerve, in rats after long-term combined exposure to n-hexane and methylated 
benzene derivatives. II. Xylene. Pharmacology and Toxicology, 74, 124-129. 
Nylén, P., Hagman, M., & Johnson, A.C. (1994). Function of the auditory and visual systems, 
and of peripheral nerve, in rats after long-term combined exposure to n-hexane and 
methylated benzene derivatives. I. Toluene. Pharmacology and Toxicology, 74, 116-123. 
Nylén, P., Hagman, M., & Johnson, A.C. (1995). Function of the auditory system, the visual 
system, and peripheral nerve after long-term exposure to toluene and ethanol in rats. 
Pharmacology and Toxicology, 76, 107-111. 
Obiako, M.N. (1979). Deafness and the mining industry in Zambia. East African Medical 
Journal, 56(9), 445-449. 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). (1983). Occupational Noise 
Exposure: Hearing Conservation Amendment: Final Rule. Federal Register, 46, 9785. 
Office of the Federal Register. (1969). Code of Federal Regulations. Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Office.  
Oleru, U.G. (1980). Comparison of the hearing levels of Nigerian textile workers and a 
control group. American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal, 41, 283-287. 
Oleru, U.G., Ijaduola, G.T.A., & Sowho, E.E. (1993). Hearing thresholds in an auto-assembly 
plant: Prospects for hearing conservation in a Nigerian factory. African Newsletter on 
Occupational Health and Safety, 3(1), 7-9. 
Ohaya-Mitoko G. (1997). Occupational Pesticide Exposure among Kenyan Agricultural 
Workers. An Epidemiological and Public Health Perspective. PhD thesis, Wageningen 
University, Holland. 
Perry, M.J., & May, J.J. (2005). Noise and chemical induced hearing loss: Special 
considerations for farm youth. Journal of Agromedicine, 10, 49-55. 
Pryor, G.T., Dickinson, J., Feeney, E., & Rebert, C.S. (1984). Hearing loss in rats first 
exposed to toluene as weanlings or as young adults. Neurobehavioral Toxicology and 
Teratology, 6, 111-119. 
Review

Geoffrey K. Amedofu and Adrian Fuente 
 
220 
Pryor, G.T., Dickinson, J., Howd, R.A., & Rebert, C.S. (1983). Transient cognitive deficits 
and high-frequency hearing loss in weanling rats exposed to toluene. Neurobehavioral 
Toxicology and Teratology, 5, 53-57. 
Pryor, G.T., Rebert, C.S., & Howd, R.A. (1987). Hearing loss in rats caused by inhalation of 
mixed xylenes and styrene. Journal of Applied Toxicology, 7, 55-61. 
Raja, S., & Ganguly, T. (1983). Impact of exposure of noise on the hearing acuity of 
employees in a heavy engineering industry. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 78, 100-
113. 
Rantanen, J. (1993). Chemical safety – a key issue in occupational health. African Newsletter 
on Occupational Health and Safety, 3, 34-36. 
Rebert, C.S., Day, V.L., Matteucci, M.J., & Pryor, G.T. (1991). Sensory-evoked potentials in 
rats chronically exposed to trichloroethylene: Predominant auditory dysfunction. 
Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 13, 83-90. 
Rebert, C.S., Sorenson, S.S., Howd, R.A., & Pryor, G.T. (1983). Toluene-induced hearing 
loss in rats evidenced by brain stem auditory-evoked response. Neurobehavioral 
Toxicology and Teratology, 5, 59-62. 
Rebert, C.S., Sorenson, S.S., & Pryor G.T. (1986). Effects of intraperitoneal carbon disulfide 
on sensory-evoked potentials of Fischer-344 rats. Neurobehavioral Toxicology and 
Teratology, 8, 543-549. 
Regoeng, K.G. (2003). Safety and health in the informal sector and small-scale industries: the 
experience of Botswana. African Newsletter on Occupational Health and Safety, 13(1), 
10-12. 
Royster, L.H., & Royster, J.D. (1982). Methods of evaluating hearing conservation program 
audiometric data bases. In P.W. Alberti (Ed.), Personal hearing protection in industry, 
pp. 511-540. New York: Raven Press. 
Sass-Kortsak, A.M., Corey, P.N., & Robertson, J.M. (1995). An investigation of the 
association between exposure to styrene and hearing loss. Annals of Epidemiology, 5, 15-
24. 
Shaikh, G.H. (1996). Noise problem in a polyester fibre plant in Pakistan. Indian Health, 34, 
427-431. 
Shealy, D.B., Barr, J.R. Ashley, D.L., Patterson, D.G.Jr., Camann, D.E., & Bond, A.E. 
(1997). Correlation of environmental carbaryl measurements with serum and urinary 1-
naphthol measurements in a farmer applicator and his family. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 105, 510-513. 
Shilla, C.P.N. (1994). Improving work conditions in Swaziland. African Newsletter on 
Occupational Health and Safety, 4, 60-62. 
Sliwinska-Kowalska, M., Zamyslowska-Szmytke, E., Szymczak, W., Kotylo, P., Fiszer, M. et 
al. (2001). Occupational solvent exposure at moderate concentration increases the risk of 
hearing loss. Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment and Health, 27, 335-342. 
Sliwinska-Kowalska, M., Zamyslowska-Szmytke, E., Szymczak, W., Kotylo, P., Fiszer, M. et 
al. (2003). Ototoxic effects of occupational exposure to styrene and co-exposure to 
styrene and noise. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 45, 15-24. 
Sliwinska-Kowalska, M., Zamyslowska-Szmytke, E., Szymczak, W., Kotylo, P., Fiszer, M. et 
al. (2004). Effects of coexposure to noise and mixture of organic solvents on hearing in 
dockyard workers. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 46, 30-38. 
Review

Occupational Hearing Loss in Developing Countries 
 
 
221
Sliwinska-Kowalska, M.,Zamyslowska-Szmytke, E., Szymczak, W., Kotylo, P., Wesolowski, 
W., Dudarewicz, A. et al. (2000). Assessment of hearing impairment in workers exposed 
to mixtures of organic solvents in the paint and lacquer industry. Medycyna pracy, 51, 1-
10. 
Stansfeld, S.A., & Matheson, M.P. (2003). Noise pollution: non-auditory effects on health. 
British Medical Bulletin, 68, 243-257. 
Sulkowski, 
W.J. 
(1979). 
Badania 
and 
prxdatnoscia 
kliniczna 
audiometeri 
elektronystamografii w. diagnostyce przwleklych zatruc dwusiarcz wegla. Medycyna 
Pracy, 30, 135-145. 
Szulc-Kuberska, J., Tronczynska, J., & Latkowaki, B. (1976). Oto-neurological investigations 
of chronic trichloroethylene poisoning. Minerva Otorinolaringologica, 26, 108-112. 
Tay, P. (1996). Severe noise-induced deafness – A 10-year review of cases. Singapore 
Medical Journal, 37, 362-364. 
Teixeira, C.F., & Brandao, M.F.A. (1998). Effects of agro-chemicals on the auditory system 
in rural workers. Caderno informativo de Prevencao de Acidentes, 19, 218. 
Teixeira C.F, Augusto L.G, Morata  T.C. (2002). Occupational exposure to insecticides and 
their effects on the auditory system. Noise & Health, 4, 31-39. 
Tomasini, M., & Sartorelli, E. (1971). Intossicazione cronica da infalazione di trieleina 
commercial com compromissione dell’ vii palo de nervi cranici. Clinica del Lavoro, 62, 
277-280. 
U.S. Airforce (1956). Hazardous noise exposure. AF Regulation 160-3.Washington, D.C.: 
Office of the Surgeon-General. 
Wahib, U. & Zaidi, S.H. (1997). Noise induced hearing loss in Pakistan. Pakistan Journal of 
Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, 13, 75-78.  
World Health Organisation (WHO). (1997a). Prevention of noise-induced hearing loss. 
Report of an informal consultation. Geneva: WHO/Prevention of Blindness and 
Deafness.  
World Health Organisation (WHO). (1997b). Occupational noise: assessing the burden of 
disease from work-related hearing impairment at national and local levels. Geneva: 
WHO. 
World Health Organization/United Nations Environmental Programme (WHO/UNEP). 
(1989). Public health impact of pesticides used in agriculture. Geneva: WHO/UNEP. 
Wesseling, C., McConnell, R., Partanen, T., & Hogstedt, C. (1997). Agricultural pesticide use 
in developing countries: health effects and research needs. International Journal of 
Health Services, 27, 273-308. 
Yisa, M.G. (2005) Ergonomics in small-scale grain mills in Nigeria. African Newsletter on 
Occupational Health and Safety,15(1), 7-10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Review

Review

In: Audiology in Developing Countries 
ISBN 978-1-60456-945-2 
Editors: B. McPherson and R. Brouillette 
© 2008 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 12 
 
 
 
RESOURCES FOR AUDIOLOGISTS 
 IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
 
 
Bradley McPherson1 and Ron Brouillette2,* 
1University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 
2Inclusive Education Consultant, Directorate of Primary and Mass Education, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh and "Affordable Hearing" and "Wings", Consultants for International 
Deafness and Development, United States of America 
ABSTRACT 
This chapter is designed to give the reader an overview of the wealth of information 
now available for audiologists and other hearing health workers with an interest in 
developing country issues. The information is categorized into four sections, based on 
whether it relates to health/education policy, organizations involved in funding and 
appropriate technology, hearing health care information or private hearing health care 
companies. Most of the organizations listed in this section provide useful material that 
can be downloaded free-of-charge from their websites. Internet access in many 
developing countries is becoming more available as telecommunications costs decrease 
and networks expand. 
RESOURCES 
Health/education policy 
www.asha.org 
The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) has numerous documents that 
are of relevance to audiologists, including Guidelines for the Audiologic Assessment of 
Children, which are worth considering prior to implementing clinical procedures in 
developing countries. 
                                                        
* Correspondence: ron_brouillette@yahoo.com 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Ron Brouillette 
 
224 
www.audiology.org 
The American Academy of Audiology also has an informative series of position statements 
that advise on screening and diagnostic protocols, such as Preventing Noise-Induced 
Occupational Hearing Loss. 
 
www.ifhoh.org 
The International Federation of Hard of Hearing People (IFHOH) represents the interests of 
hard of hearing people and their national organizations. IFHOH publishes a regular 
journal. 
 
www.infanthearing.org  
National Center for Hearing Assessment and Management (NCHAM) is located at Utah State 
University. The Center’s aim is to ensure that all infants and toddlers with hearing loss 
are identified as early as possible and provided with timely and appropriate audiological, 
educational, and medical intervention. The NCHAM website has a a great deal of 
information on newborn hearing screening programs and intervention services for 
children with hearing impairment.  
 
www.isa-audiology.org 
The International Society of Audiology has developed important guidelines regarding a model 
audiology training curriculum and hosts a message board open to all. The society website 
gives links to documents and other websites useful for those working in developing 
countries. 
 
www.nhsp.info 
The National Health Service Neonatal Hearing Screening Programme provides information 
in English and other languages on the practical application of newborn hearing screening. 
 
www.unohrlls.org 
The United Nations Office of the High Representative for Least Developed Countries, 
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States provides up-to-
date lists of least-developed nations and statistics related to LDCs. 
 
www.who.int 
The World Health Organization publishes a huge range of resources for international health 
policy. In particular, the Prevention of and Blindness and Deafness section of WHO 
[www.who.int/pbd] maintains an essential library of documents that all audiologists 
working in less developed regions should access, including Guidelines for hearing aids 
and services for developing countries.  
 
www.worldbank.org 
The World Bank produces an extensive range of health care policy documents. A recent 
publication, Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, includes discussion of 
cost-effective prevention and treatment options. The World Bank also provides annual 
reports on the state of the world’s people in the Human Development Report, an 
important source of information on the status of people in developing countries. 
Review

Resources for Audiologists in Developing Countries 
 
 
225
Funding and appropriate technology 
www.audmed.org.uk 
The AUD-M-ED Trust is a British charity that focuses on providing resources to aid the 
prevention, detection and management of hearing impairment and deafness in developing 
countries. The Trust supports projects and sends trainers, equipment, training materials 
and scientific literature to developing countries.The Trust provides grants to professionals 
working in developing countries. 
 
www.cbmi.org 
The Christian Blind Mission (CBM) is a large, international organization, headquartered in 
Germany, which provides support to health care and education projects for children and 
adults with vision impairment and/or hearing loss throughout the developing world. 
 
www.comcareinternational.org 
A series of innovative body-worn solar powered hearing aids have been developed by 
ComCare International for use with children and adults in developing countries. 
ComCare provides hearing aids at reduced cost to many clinics, particularly in Latin 
America. 
 
www.deafchildworldwide.info 
Deaf Children Worldwide is the international development agency of the National Deaf 
Children's Society, a British based charitable organisation dedicated to enabling deaf 
children to overcome poverty and isolation. Deaf Child Worldwide works with partners 
in the countries where need is greatest throughout the world The agency at times offers 
small grant project funding and supports locally registered organisations working with 
deaf children in developing and transitional countries. 
 
www.earsinc.org 
EARS Inc. is an Australian charitable organization dedicated to the training and equipping of 
health workers in developing countries to provide rehabilitation services for individuals 
with hearing loss.  
 
www.godisa.org 
Godisa is a not-for-profit trust based in Otse, Botswana. Godisa assembles and distributes 
affordable hearing aids designed to be appropriate for use in developing countries. 
Godisa also distributes hearing health care equipment, such as ear mold manufacturing 
kits and audiometers for use in developing countries. 
 
www.impact.org.uk 
The IMPACT Foundation is a United Kingdom-based charity that sponsors many programs 
that benefit people with handicaps in developing countries. IMPACT’s activities include 
the development of a solar powered hearing aid battery charger and low cost hearing aids. 
 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Ron Brouillette 
 
226 
www.oticon.org 
The Oticon Foundation has a long-established mission to assist those working to alleviate 
hearing handicap. The organization regularly provides substantial funding to many 
charitable groups in developing countries.  
 
www.sotheworldmayhear.org 
The Starkey Foundation provides more than 20,000 hearing aids annually through more than 
100 hearing missions a year, mainly in developing nations The Foundation also promotes 
hearing health awareness while supporting research and education. 
 
www.sound-seekers.org.uk 
Soundseekers (the Commonwealth Society for the Deaf) is a British charity working to 
improve the lives of deaf children and children suffering from ear disease and hearing 
loss in the developing countries of the British Commonwealth. Soundseekers provide 
specialist equipment, training and support throughout the developing Commonwealth. 
 
www.wwhearing.org 
WWHearing (World-Wide Hearing Care for Developing Countries) is a recent initiative that 
seeks to promote better hearing by the provision of appropriate and affordable hearing 
aids and services. WWHearing at present sponsors pilot projects in various developing 
nations. The outcomes of these projects will inform the future introduction of large scale 
hearing aid assessment and fitting programs. 
 
Hearing health care information 
www.agbell.org 
The Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing helps families, 
health care providers and education professionals understand childhood hearing loss and 
the importance of early diagnosis and intervention. The website gives access to a rich 
store of information regarding hearing loss. 
 
www.allearscambodia.org 
All Ears Cambodia is a good example of an enterprising non-governmental organization 
helping to improve hearing health care in a developing country and providing an 
informative website to support its mission. 
 
Audiology journals on CD-ROM 
A wealth of professional research literature is available on CD-ROMs compiled by the 
Veterans’ Administration Auditory Research Laboratory. The complete set of disks 
includes back issues of the Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, Journal of the 
American Academy of Audiology, Journal of Audiological Medicine, British Journal of 
Audiology and many other titles. The disks are available, for the cost of shipping only, 
from: 
Dr Richard H. Wilson 
Senior Research Career Scientist 
Audiology – 126 
VA Medical Center 
Review

Resources for Audiologists in Developing Countries 
 
 
227
Mountain Home TN 37684 
USA 
e-mail: Richard.Wilson2@va.gov 
 
Audiology basic training manual 
Shah, S & Rupani, H. (2006). Practical audiology. Nairobi: IMPACT Foundation. This 
textbook can be obtained at low-cost from seema@snrhearing.co.uk  
 
www.healthinternetwork.net 
To allow health care research findings to reach those working in developing countries the 
WHO and the international biomedical publishing community established the Health 
InterNetwork: Access to Research Initiative (HINARI). Not-for-profit institutions that 
provide educational or clinical services in many developing countries are eligible to 
register with HINARI for free or very low-cost access to the world’s health research 
literature. 
 
www.healthlink.org.uk 
Healthlink Worldwide produces an informative newsletter, Disability Dialogue, which 
discusses community-based approaches to rehabilitation in developing nations. This 
newsletter at times features the needs of those with communication disorders  
 
www.hearf.org 
The Hearing Rehabilitation Foundation is a non-profit organization formed in 1996 to 
provide and promote speech communication training for children and adults with hearing 
loss. The Foundation offers a wide range of material suitable for use in aural 
rehabilitation programs with severely and profoundly deaf children and adults. 
 
www.hearinginternational.org 
Hearing International is a not-for-profit society that actively seeks to improve hearing health 
in developing regions throughout the world. HI publishes a regular and informative 
newsletter. 
 
www.hearingreview.com 
The Hearing Review is a high-circulation hearing health care trade journal published in the 
United States. The journal website features major articles from the journal and is a good 
source of up-to-date information about hearing devices. 
 
The Holy Land Institute for the Deaf, in Salt, Jordan, was produced a useful guide to planning 
hearing health care services in developing countries—Things to think about before 
starting hearing aid services in a developing country. This guide is available from 
hlid@go.com.jo 
 
www.icthesworldcare.com 
ICTHES World Care publishes Community Ear and Hearing Health, which is a very valuable 
source of information for understanding hearing health care issues in developing 
countries. 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Ron Brouillette 
 
228 
www.ifhohyp.org 
The Federation of Hard of Hearing Young People is an international non-governmental 
federation for national and regional youth organizations that are dedicated to hard of 
hearing young people throughout the world. IFHOHYP is comprised of organizations 
from mostly European countries. The major aim of IFHOHYP is to improve the quality 
of life of young persons with hearing impaired worldwide and promote equal rights for 
hard of hearing young people at all levels of society. The website lists a valuable range of 
hearing health care resources. 
 
www.jtc.org 
The John Tracey Clinic is a private, non-profit education center founded in 1942. Its mission 
is to offer “hope, guidance and encouragement to families of infants and preschool 
children with hearing losses” by providing parent-centered services worldwide. The John 
Tracey Clinic is especially well-known for its free parent distance education / 
correspondence courses for families of young deaf children ages birth to 5 years. A 
special course is available for parents of preschool deaf-blind children.  
 
www.lhh.org/index.html 
The League for the Hard of Hearing, New York was founded in 1910 and provides hearing 
rehabilitation and human services support for infants, children and adults who are hard of 
hearing, deaf and deaf-blind, and their families. The website gives access to a useful 
range of information, particular on hearing conservation.  
 
www.nad.org 
The National Association for the Deaf is a United States organization that offers extensive 
information on assistive listening devices, sign language, vocations for persons with 
hearing impairment, etc.  
 
www.pinpointmedical.com/ent_news/ent_home.html 
ENT News is a monthly publication that covers otolaryngology, audiology and related 
professions. ENT News often has information that is highly relevant to those working in 
developing countries. The July/August 2007 issue gives a list of 50 internet sites that may 
be useful to hearing health care workers. 
 
www.who.int/pdb 
In addition to policy documents, the World Health Organization has produced a collection of 
training manuals for primary health care workers—Primary Ear and Hearing Care 
Training Resource. These are important references for anyone considering a hearing 
health care training program in a developing region. 
 
Private hearing health care companies  
www.hearing.org 
The Hearing Aid Industries Association has a very convenient webpage that offers links to 
most major commercial hearing aid manufacturers’ websites. European. 
 
Review

Resources for Audiologists in Developing Countries 
 
 
229
www.audex.com  
Audex Assistive Listening Systems manufactures and markets infrared and magnetic induction 
wireless assistive listening devices, and hardwired assistive listening devices for hearing 
impaired people. USA.  
 
www.audiocontrole.com  
Audio Controle, Inc focuses on research, development, design, production, repair and 
distribution of hearing aid instruments and related products. Canada.  
 
www.audimed.com 
Audio Medical Devices Ltd manufactures a full range of digital and analog hearing systems, 
active noise protectors and tinnitus devices. UK.  
 
www.beltone.com  
Beltone Electronics Corp. is a large manufacturer of hearing instruments. USA.  
 
www.hansaton.de  
Hansaton Hearing Systems produces hearing aids, digital hearing systems, hearing instrument 
care and cleaning products, along with health information and research findings. 
Germany.  
 
www.instamold.com 
Insta-Mold Inc. is a company specializing in the development of ear impression silicones for 
the hearing health industry. The company focuses on one-stage impression/mold 
materials. USA. 
 
www.knowleselectronics.com  
Knowles Electronics, LLC is a leading manufacturer of miniature audio transducers, 
microphones, receivers, wax protection systems, acoustic dampers, and accessories for 
the hearing health industry. USA.  
 
www.earmolds.com  
Microsonic, Inc produces earmold materials, custom swim plugs, hearing protection molds, 
precision impression materials, and hearing health care accessories. USA.  
 
www.oticon.com  
Oticon Inc is a large manufacturer of digital hearing aid instruments and assistive listening 
devices. Denmark.  
 
www.phonak.com  
Phonak Hearing Systems specializes in the design, development, production and worldwide 
distribution of hearing instruments. A large scale manufacturer of hearing aids for 
children and adults, and assistive listening devices. Switzerland. 
 
Review

Bradley McPherson and Ron Brouillette 
 
230 
www.precisionweb.com  
Precision Laboratories, Inc is a manufacturer of custom earmolds, hearing protection, 
monitor earphones and communications. USA.  
 
www.siemens-hearing.com  
Siemens Hearing Instruments, Inc offers audiological software and a wide variety of 
equipment for hearing care professionals, as well as a range of hearing aids and assistive 
listening devices such as amplified telephones.  
 
www.tdi-online.org  
Telecommunications for the Deaf promotes the further distribution of telecommunications 
devices in the deaf community and publish an annual directory of TTY numbers. It is an 
active advocacy organization focusing on equal access issues in telecommunications and 
media for people who are deaf, hard-of-hearing, late-deafened, or deaf-blind. USA. 
 
www.unitedhearing.com  
United Hearing Systems is a manufacturer of digital hearing aid amplifiers, digital hearing 
aids, tinnitus maskers and bone conduction hearing aids. USA.  
 
www.warnertechcare.com 
Warner Tech-Care supplies impression materials, assistive listening devices, and hearing 
health care accessories. The company catalog is available on-line. USA.  
 
www.widex.com  
Widex International is a leading manufacturer of digital hearing aids. Denmark. 
 
www.williamssound.com 
Williams Sound Corp provides a wide range of assistive listening devices. Products include 
infrared listening systems, personal amplifiers and TV listening systems. USA. 
 
Review

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS 
 
 
Geoffrey K. Amedofu PhD. Associate Professor. Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and 
Technology. Kumasi, Ghana. amedofugk@yahoo.com. Chapter 11. 
Vijayalakshmi Basavaraj PhD. Director. All India Institute of Speech and Hearing. Mysore, 
India. vbasavaraj@hotmail.com. Chapter 8. 
Ron Brouillette PhD. Inclusive Education Consultant, Directorate of Primary and Mass 
Education, Bangladesh. and "Affordable Hearing" and "Wings", Consultants for 
International Deafness and Development.ron_brouillette@yahoo.com. Chapters 1,7 and 
12. 
Patricia Castellanos de Muñoz AuD. Centro de Audición y Adiestramiento Fonético 
(CEDAF). Guatemala City. Guatemala. cedaf@guate.net.gt. Chapter 10. 
Jackie L. Clark PhD. Clinical Assistant Professor. University of Texas at Dallas. Dallas, 
United States of America. jclark@utdallas.edu. Chapter 6. 
Adrian Fuente PhD. Centre for Communication Disorders. University of Hong Kong. Hong 
Kong, China. fuente@hkusua.hku.hk. Chapter 11. 
Helen Goulios PhD. Lecturer in Audiology. University of Western Australia. Perth, Australia. 
hgoulios@cyllene.uwa.edu.au. Chapter 4. 
Wendy McCracken MEd. Senior Lecturer in the Education of the Deaf. University of 
Manchester. Manchester, United Kingdom. wendy.mccracken@manchester.ac.uk. 
Chapter 19. 
Bradley McPherson PhD. Associate Professor. Centre for Communication Disorders. 
University of Hong Kong. Hong Kong, China. dbmcpher@hkucc.hku.hk. Chapters 1, 2, 
5 and 12. 
Susie Miles BA, Cert Deaf Ed.. Lecturer in the Education of the Deaf . University of 
Manchester. Manchester, United Kingdom. susie.miles@manchester.ac.uk. Chapter 9. 
Valerie Newton MD. Emeritus Professor in Audiological Medicine. University of 
Manchester. Manchester, United Kingdom. val_newton@lineone.net. Chapter 6. 
Bolajoko O. Olusanya MBBS, FMCPaed, FRCPCH. Institute of Child Health. University 
College London. London, United Kingdom, and . Institute of Child Health and Primary 
Care. University of Lagos. Lagos, Nigeria. boolusanya@aol.com. Chapter 5. 
Robert Patuzzi PhD. Director of Audiology. University of Western Australia. Perth, 
Australia. rpatuzzi@cyllene.uwa.edu.au. Chapter 3. 
Andrew W. Smith MBBS, MSc, FRCP . Medical Officer, Prevention of Blindness and 
Deafness,World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, smitha@who.int. Chapter 2 
Review

Contributing Authors 
 
232 
Sandra E. Sosa. Centro de Audición y Adiestramiento Fonético (CEDAF). Guatemala City. 
Guatemala. cedaf@guate.net.gt. Chapter 10. 
Review

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
A 
abnormalities, 87 
aboriginal, 68, 101 
absorption, 197, 211, 217 
academic, 2, 51, 52, 71, 78, 80, 98, 108 
academic performance, 98 
access, 1, 5, 10, 17, 18, 25, 60, 68, 84, 85, 93, 96, 
111, 113, 119, 128, 141, 142, 146, 148, 152, 153, 
155, 170, 171, 173, 177, 183, 202, 211, 223, 224, 
226, 227, 228, 230 
accidents, 37 
accommodation, 24 
accuracy, 76, 87, 92, 93, 98, 130, 135 
acetylcholine, 204 
achievement, 75, 100 
acid, 204 
acoustic, 24, 26, 87, 90, 120, 125, 127, 128, 139, 
145, 146, 150, 169, 190, 191, 200, 211, 217, 229 
acoustic emission, 24, 26 
acoustical, 150 
acute, 112, 127, 155, 204, 213 
acute infection, 112 
adaptability, 70 
adaptation, 134, 138 
adipose, 216 
adipose tissue, 216 
adjustment, 148, 169 
administration, 12, 87, 135 
administrative, 76, 208 
adult, 8, 11, 21, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 36, 37, 38, 41, 48, 
50, 66, 88, 96, 117, 122, 134, 138, 162, 192 
adult literacy, 8, 11 
adult population, 50, 138 
adults, 1, 7, 17, 18, 22, 29, 47, 49, 66, 75, 76, 79, 88, 
96, 99, 112, 114, 115, 122, 148, 175, 178, 181, 
182, 211, 225, 227, 228, 229 
advocacy, 88, 230 
aetiology, 48 
Afghanistan, 10, 41, 42 
Africa, 6, 7, 12, 13, 55, 64, 68, 104, 142, 148, 152, 
168, 177, 178, 194, 202, 203, 208, 210, 211, 213, 
218, 219 
Afrikaans, 12 
afternoon, 129 
age, 12, 13, 22, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 36, 48, 75, 79, 
81, 84, 94, 95, 96, 97, 100, 101, 102, 103, 115, 
116, 122, 140, 156, 171, 192, 198, 201, 204, 207 
ageing, 51, 52, 72, 216 
ageing population, 51, 52, 72 
agent, 112, 199, 200 
agents, 112, 189, 200, 212, 215 
agricultural, 11, 203, 213 
agriculture, 7, 11, 14, 189, 202, 205, 213, 214, 217, 
219, 221 
aid, 1, 7, 11, 15, 16, 18, 39, 47, 48, 52, 53, 61, 62, 
63, 66, 74, 90, 96, 103, 114, 122, 123, 134, 135, 
141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 150, 151, 
153, 155, 156, 158, 159, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 
168, 170, 172, 176, 183, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 
230 
AIDS, 13, 17, 20, 96 
air, 114, 117, 125, 127, 131, 132, 143, 148, 150, 161, 
165, 198 
aircraft, 190 
Albania, 40, 43 
alcohol, 49, 120 
alcohol consumption, 49 
aldrin, 203 
Algeria, 40, 43 
Alps, 144, 158 
alternative, 71, 91, 108, 135, 143, 150, 170 
alternatives, 141, 142, 183 
ambient pressure, 190 
American Academy of Pediatrics, 88, 97 
American Psychological Association, 19, 99 
amplitude, 190 
analog, 182, 229 
Review

Index 
 
234 
anatomy, 169 
Angola, 10, 18, 30, 40, 42, 46 
animal studies, 197, 199, 201 
animals, 191, 197, 201, 202 
anoxia, 17 
antagonism, 200 
antimicrobial, 111, 112 
anxiety, 109, 115, 192 
application, 77, 87, 125, 203, 224 
applied research, 152 
appropriate technology, 150, 223, 225 
Argentina, 9, 14, 40, 43, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 64, 72 
argument, 132, 148 
Armenia, 40, 42 
aromatic, 198 
aromatic hydrocarbons, 198 
artificial, 82 
Asia, 6, 7, 13, 42, 44, 50, 55, 60, 64, 101, 115, 151, 
168, 202, 203, 208 
Asian, 46, 59, 60, 61, 143, 192, 195, 205 
Asian countries, 46, 59, 60, 61, 192 
asphyxia, 17, 83 
assessment, 1, 6, 15, 16, 21, 28, 36, 38, 39, 53, 61, 
63, 66, 67, 86, 96, 97, 104, 107, 108, 109, 113, 
115, 122, 123, 124, 128, 137, 140, 141, 142, 146, 
151, 159, 160, 161, 164, 167, 168, 169, 170, 174, 
175, 176, 177, 186, 226 
assessment techniques, 1 
associations, 51, 52, 177 
asymptomatic, 76, 77, 78 
atlas, 218 
atrophy, 96 
attention, 1, 13, 94, 107, 108, 111, 117, 119, 120, 
122, 129, 137, 142, 151, 164, 195, 205 
attitudes, 108, 172 
atypical, 216 
audio, 157, 229 
audiology, vii, 1, 2, 6, 7, 14, 15, 16, 51, 52, 53, 54, 
55, 58, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 68, 71, 72, 73, 
95, 109, 143, 144, 146, 162, 167, 168, 169, 170, 
172, 173, 176, 177, 182, 183, 185, 211, 216, 224, 
227, 228 
audition, 87, 120 
auditory cortex, 197 
auditory evoked potential, 217 
auditory nerve, 191 
auditory stimuli, 81 
Australia, vii, viii, 10, 20, 23, 31, 41, 44, 46, 51, 52, 
53, 57, 64, 66, 68, 71, 86, 95, 97, 146, 170, 231 
Austria, 40, 44, 57, 61, 62 
availability, 62, 71, 96, 110, 142, 144, 146, 155, 158, 
162, 213 
aviation, 194, 195 
awareness, 21, 23, 26, 34, 52, 61, 70, 71, 77, 93, 102, 
107, 108, 130, 137, 146, 151, 169, 173, 178, 184, 
203, 206, 207, 214, 226 
Azerbaijan, 40, 42 
B 
babies, 17, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 137 
background noise, 39, 90, 91, 191 
bacterial, 111 
Bahrain, 40, 43 
bananas, 202 
Bangladesh, 1, 10, 41, 42, 55, 56, 60, 64, 73, 83, 91, 
98, 99, 105, 141, 223, 231 
Barbados, 40, 43 
barrier, 5, 122, 162 
barrier-free, 162 
barriers, 2, 5, 15, 127, 141, 142, 171, 185 
batteries, 143, 147, 148, 151, 160, 161, 165, 169 
battery, 92, 113, 130, 143, 148, 160, 161, 165, 168, 
225 
BCG immunization, 84 
beating, 190 
behavior, 99, 103, 138, 186 
behavior of children, 99 
Belarus, 40, 43 
Belgium, 40, 44, 55, 57, 61 
beliefs, 137, 170, 175 
benchmark, 8 
benefits, 1, 26, 34, 145, 147, 152, 167, 170, 176, 
185, 189, 206 
benzene, 198, 219 
Bhutan, 10, 41, 42 
bilateral, 30, 31, 32, 52, 80, 93, 96, 103, 114, 128, 
131, 134, 135, 137, 156, 200, 204 
bilingual, 12 
biological, 113, 195 
biomedical, 227 
birth, 6, 8, 14, 17, 30, 79, 80, 82, 83, 84, 96, 146, 
156, 175, 182, 228 
birth rate, 6, 82, 156 
birth rates, 6, 82 
births, 6, 12, 13, 14, 17, 75, 80, 83, 96, 156, 176, 182 
blindness, 36 
blog, 152 
blood, 191, 198, 203 
blood flow, 191 
blood stream, 198 
Bolivia, 40, 43 
bone, 30, 114, 120, 125, 131, 132, 136, 165, 230 
Bosnia, 40, 43 
Boston, 20 
Review

Index 
 
235
Botswana, 11, 40, 43, 57, 64, 104, 144, 147, 148, 
172, 193, 217, 220, 225 
boys, 13 
brain, 24, 79, 125, 199, 217, 220 
brain stem, 125, 199, 217, 220 
brainstem, 81, 82, 100, 124, 128, 129, 136, 182 
Brazil, vii, 26, 31, 40, 43, 46, 52, 53, 56, 58, 59, 60, 
63, 151, 171, 172, 176, 194, 197, 198, 205, 208, 
218 
Brazilian, 93, 99, 178, 204 
breakdown, 54 
breast, 82 
brick, 192 
British, 19, 47, 49, 86, 101, 102, 103, 138, 139, 153, 
172, 173, 179, 221, 225, 226 
broadband, 130 
buffer, 210 
Bulgaria, 40, 43 
Burkina Faso, 10, 40, 42 
Burma, 176, 179 
Burundi, 8, 10, 40, 42 
business, 148, 192, 206 
buttons, 111 
C 
calibration, 15, 26, 107, 113, 169 
Cambodia, 9, 10, 14, 16, 17, 20, 41, 42, 56, 62, 64, 
226 
Cambodians, 16 
Cameroon, 40, 42 
campaigns, 147, 178, 211 
Canada, viii, 40, 44, 52, 53, 57, 68, 182, 229 
canals, 120 
candidates, 90 
capacity, 85, 88, 163, 213, 214 
capacity building, 85, 163 
Cape Town, 140 
capital, 7, 12, 14, 16, 147, 148, 167, 172 
carbon, 196, 197, 198, 199, 213, 217, 220 
carcinogenic, 203 
caregiver, 110, 119, 120, 137 
caregivers, 83, 137, 159 
Caribbean, 13, 35 
carrier, 133 
case study, 201, 217 
cash crops, 203 
cast, 146 
casting, 161 
categorization, 22 
Catholic, 173 
causation, 135 
Cayman Islands, 44 
CDC, 138 
cell, 121, 143, 148, 202 
Central America, 147, 202 
Central Asia, 42, 44 
central nervous system, 79, 197, 204, 217 
certificate, 175 
Chad, 10, 40, 42 
Chagas disease, 13 
channels, 214 
charitable, 142, 143, 148, 161, 225, 226 
charitable organizations, 161 
charities, 169 
chemical, 96, 189, 190, 191, 195, 196, 201, 202, 203, 
213, 216, 219 
chemicals, 22, 189, 195, 196, 201, 202, 203, 204, 
213, 214, 221 
chewing, 150 
child development, 169, 218 
child mortality, 10, 17, 41 
childhood, 15, 17, 29, 30, 38, 47, 48, 50, 75, 76, 79, 
80, 83, 92, 93, 94, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 
105, 135, 174, 176, 226 
children, 1, 6, 7, 12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 
27, 29, 30, 39, 47, 48, 49, 62, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 
81, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 
98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 112, 113, 
114, 115, 116, 117, 120, 122, 123, 125, 129, 136, 
137, 138, 139, 140, 146, 148, 153, 156, 157, 159, 
161, 165, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 
175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186, 
213, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229 
Children’s Fund, 80, 104 
Chile, viii, 40, 43, 56, 59, 61, 189 
China, vii, 1, 5, 6, 9, 14, 18, 20, 26, 32, 41, 43, 44, 
45, 46, 48, 56, 61, 63, 64, 70, 75, 144, 147, 151, 
168, 190, 194, 223, 231 
Chinese, 54, 205 
cholinesterase, 204 
chronic, 23, 36, 37, 68, 71, 74, 88, 90, 108, 112, 123, 
140, 199, 205, 213, 215, 221 
Cincinnati, 216, 219 
circulation, 227 
citizens, 11, 13, 96 
civil society, 148, 174 
civil war, 96 
civilian, 14 
classes, 63, 93, 157 
classical, 125, 126, 127, 130, 133, 190 
classification, 11, 21, 41, 45, 126, 127, 190 
classified, 7, 55, 92, 144, 207 
classroom, 88, 92, 93, 101, 168, 186 
classroom teacher, 92, 101 
classroom teachers, 92 
Review

Index 
 
236 
classrooms, 89, 91, 92, 135, 168 
cleaning, 112, 196, 199, 229 
clients, 71, 96, 144, 159, 161, 184, 185, 193 
clinical, vii, 1, 2, 15, 26, 52, 53, 61, 63, 65, 66, 67, 
69, 71, 72, 82, 90, 109, 127, 128, 132, 138, 168, 
176, 177, 183, 223, 227 
clinical approach, 183 
clinician, 108, 111, 114, 120, 128, 129, 130 
clinicians, 214 
clinics, 15, 18, 54, 62, 83, 84, 103, 104, 113, 156, 
167, 179, 183, 225 
closure, 15 
cluster sampling, 24 
clusters, 24, 58, 62 
CNS, 216 
coatings, 196 
cochlea, 81, 95, 130, 133, 197, 200, 205 
cochlear implant, 36, 168, 182, 183, 184, 186 
cocoa, 194, 203 
codes, 22 
coding, 24, 25 
coffee, 202, 203, 219 
cognitive, 23, 79, 80, 92, 98, 120, 129, 204, 220 
cognitive deficit, 120, 220 
cognitive deficits, 220 
cognitive development, 79, 80 
cohort, 15, 137, 138 
coil, 165 
collaboration, 18, 148, 156, 158, 170, 171, 174, 177 
colleges, 156 
Colombia, 40, 43, 56, 60, 64, 212 
colonial, 12 
Columbia, 6, 86 
combat, 17, 202 
combined effect, 195 
commercial, 128, 144, 148, 221, 228 
commercialization, 142 
commodities, 7, 146 
communication, 12, 19, 23, 48, 60, 63, 68, 71, 88, 
90, 91, 92, 93, 101, 103, 108, 137, 139, 141, 142, 
163, 165, 166, 169, 172, 178, 193, 227 
communication skills, 169 
communication strategies, 163 
communication technologies, 71 
communities, vii, 16, 23, 68, 82, 83, 84, 85, 143, 
163, 170, 173, 177 
community, 1, 5, 6, 10, 13, 26, 37, 47, 49, 52, 68, 70, 
71, 77, 78, 79, 83, 84, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95, 98, 108, 
112, 122, 137, 142, 146, 150, 163, 168, 169, 170, 
171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177, 181, 182, 186, 214, 
227, 230 
community relations, 26 
community-based, 68, 70, 83, 146, 150, 171, 175, 
181, 182, 186, 227 
compensation, 84, 88, 134 
competence, 19, 99 
complement, 150, 170 
complementary, 170 
complexity, 66, 71 
compliance, 78, 125, 126, 127, 208 
complications, 29, 77 
components, 123, 145, 148, 150, 163 
composition, 11 
compounds, 53, 150, 196, 199, 202, 204, 214, 216 
compression, 148, 153 
computer, 26 
concentration, 89, 197, 199, 212, 216, 220 
conceptual model, 51, 53, 71, 72 
conditioning, 115, 119, 120, 125 
conduction, 114, 117, 120, 125, 131, 132, 135, 136, 
165, 205, 217, 230 
conductive, 22, 30, 81, 83, 88, 95, 96, 114, 123, 124, 
128, 131, 132 
conductive hearing loss, 81, 83, 88, 95, 96, 123, 124, 
128, 131, 132 
confidence, 111, 129, 172 
configuration, 123, 134 
conflict, 12, 110, 184 
confusion, 111 
consciousness, 94 
consensus, 90, 218 
conservation, 18, 87, 97, 138, 182, 190, 191, 207, 
208, 211, 212, 215, 219, 220, 228 
constraints, 84, 85, 176, 177, 181, 182, 183 
construction, 15, 21, 192, 194 
consumers, 152, 158, 202 
consumption, 144, 194, 202 
contaminants, 200 
continuity, 186 
contracts, 127 
control, 17, 24, 25, 35, 111, 119, 122, 132, 139, 144, 
145, 148, 165, 201, 202, 206, 208, 210, 211, 213, 
214, 217, 219 
control group, 219 
controlled, 39, 200 
controlled studies, 200 
conversion, 8 
Cook Islands, 41 
coordination, 18 
Copenhagen, 31, 217 
copper, 195 
corn, 192, 193, 194, 215 
correction factors, 113, 207 
correlation, 93, 130 
corruption, 10 
Review

Index 
 
237
cortex, 197, 205 
cortical, 79, 136, 216 
cost effectiveness, 18, 34, 36, 160 
Costa Rica, 40, 43, 56, 59, 60, 86, 101, 203 
cost-effective, 17, 24, 34, 35, 36, 39, 51, 52, 53, 66, 
71, 72, 167, 224 
costs, 5, 6, 15, 19, 21, 23, 24, 34, 36, 39, 51, 66, 71, 
85, 93, 95, 102, 103, 104, 143, 144, 147, 148, 
150, 151, 158, 160, 161, 162, 164, 186, 223 
cotton, 95, 101, 195, 202, 203, 205, 219 
counsel, 174 
counseling, 87, 137, 146, 181, 182, 183, 185 
coupling, 129, 161 
coverage, 17, 37, 82, 96, 177, 186 
covering, 156 
cranial nerve, 81, 127, 128 
credibility, 185 
credit, 202 
critical period, 161 
criticism, 148 
Croatia, 40, 43, 57, 58, 61, 64 
crops, 202, 203, 204 
cross-sectional, 49, 197, 217 
cross-sectional study, 197, 217 
Cuba, 8, 40, 43, 86 
cues, 120, 122 
cultivation, 203 
cultural, 68, 78, 110, 137, 143, 171, 181, 182, 184 
cultural norms, 184 
cultural values, 137 
culture, 107, 108, 122, 170, 185 
curing, 151, 161 
currency, 7, 54 
curriculum, vii, 52, 67, 224 
customers, 148 
cyclohexane, 200, 201 
Cyprus, 40, 44 
cytochrome, 218 
cytomegalovirus, 83 
Czech Republic, 8, 40 
D 
Dallas, 107, 231 
danger, 122, 208 
data base, 220 
data gathering, 38 
DDT, 203 
de novo, 71 
deafness, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 27, 29, 31, 34, 35, 
36, 38, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 52, 53, 55, 61, 74, 99, 
100, 102, 104, 105, 108, 116, 140, 152, 163, 169, 
171, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 192, 215, 216, 
221, 225 
death, 13, 18, 36, 111, 152 
deaths, 6, 29 
debt, 17 
decay, 134, 139, 190 
deceit, 185 
decentralized, 70 
decibel, 22 
decision makers, 34, 35 
decision making, 93 
decisions, 79, 110, 114, 124, 131, 183, 185, 186, 214 
defects, 125, 165 
defense, 138 
deficiency, 13, 200 
deficit, 199, 216 
deficits, 21 
definition, 9, 22, 29, 60, 76, 86, 90, 192 
degree, 52, 61, 62, 63, 67, 80, 81, 87, 110, 114, 124, 
128, 130, 132, 134, 135, 136, 137, 148, 156, 177, 
184, 191, 210 
delays, 80, 183 
delivery, ix, 5, 16, 18, 68, 72, 76, 78, 85, 97, 142, 
146, 152, 153, 157, 161, 163, 164, 179 
demand, 51, 52, 53, 70, 96, 141, 146, 147, 152, 162 
democracy, 211 
demographic, viii, 6, 7, 12, 112 
demographic change, 6 
demographic data, viii 
demographics, viii, 24 
Denmark, 3, 31, 40, 44, 57, 61, 144, 229, 230 
dependant, 136 
depression, 37 
depressive disorder, 38 
deprivation, 104 
derivatives, 219 
designers, 68 
desire, 134, 213 
detection, 3, 17, 18, 27, 75, 76, 77, 80, 81, 82, 84, 
85, 86, 87, 95, 99, 100, 103, 105, 138, 139, 225 
developed countries, 6, 7, 11, 15, 36, 51, 52, 53, 66, 
68, 71, 72, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 89, 92, 108, 
112, 115, 125, 130, 134, 140, 143, 146, 150, 152, 
173, 185, 192, 199, 201, 207, 208, 213, 216 
developed nations, 6, 7, 9, 14, 143, 146, 224 
development assistance, 17 
developmental delay, 120 
deviation, 114 
diabetes, 47 
diagnostic, 1, 5, 14, 15, 16, 66, 76, 78, 81, 89, 92, 96, 
107, 108, 109, 111, 112, 114, 115, 122, 124, 125, 
130, 131, 133, 134, 136, 161, 183, 224 
direct measure, 127 
Review

Index 
 
238 
disability, 21, 23, 29, 36, 37, 38, 47, 87, 88, 92, 94, 
99, 105, 108, 142, 147, 148, 192 
disabled, 164, 171, 179 
discipline, 186 
discounts, 147 
discrimination, 122, 123, 124 
diseases, 13, 17, 19, 24, 76, 78, 83, 95, 98, 100, 102, 
103, 111, 127, 151, 171, 211 
disorder, 77, 78, 79, 81, 87, 89, 90, 93, 95, 96, 109, 
123, 217 
distance education, 228 
distraction, 119, 138 
distress, 137 
distribution, 3, 10, 28, 36, 54, 144, 147, 148, 155, 
158, 160, 192, 216, 229, 230 
disulfide, 217, 220 
diversity, 11, 12, 51, 52, 53, 115, 181 
division, 14, 201 
dizziness, 111, 175 
doctor, 96, 146 
doctors, 17, 182, 184 
Dominican Republic, 9, 14, 18, 40, 43, 64, 143 
donations, 173, 183, 186 
donor, 83 
doors, 113, 211 
download, 73 
dream, vii, 101 
drowsiness, 111 
drug resistance, 111 
drug therapy, vii 
drugs, 22, 201 
dry, 199 
duplication, 170 
duration, 36, 63, 79, 132, 138, 157, 190, 197, 204 
dust, 173 
duties, 25, 82, 144, 148 
E 
ears, 32, 39, 110, 112, 115, 117, 121, 127, 133, 135, 
137, 156, 169, 172, 175, 191, 193, 206, 207 
East Asia, 37, 38, 42, 44, 50 
Eastern Europe, 7, 42, 44, 60, 73 
economic, vii, 1, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15, 21, 23, 24, 
34, 36, 39, 67, 68, 77, 79, 80, 103, 108, 148, 151, 
181, 192, 213 
economic development, 23 
economic disadvantage, 77 
economic status, 108 
economically disadvantaged, 68 
economics, 67, 108 
economies, 1, 6, 7, 11, 12, 14, 55, 69, 213 
economy, 3, 5, 7, 11, 14, 69, 70, 143, 192, 214 
ectoparasites, 202 
Ecuador, 40, 43, 203 
education, 1, 2, 6, 8, 11, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 51, 
52, 53, 54, 55, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69, 70, 71, 
72, 73, 76, 78, 86, 87, 93, 100, 141, 157, 163, 
167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 176, 178, 181, 182, 
183, 184, 186, 204, 207, 211, 223, 225, 226, 228, 
231 
Education for All, 171 
educational background, 61, 182 
educational institutions, 68, 70, 72 
educational programs, 13, 183 
educational psychology, 185 
educational services, 170, 171, 175, 176, 183, 184, 
186 
educational settings, 62, 169, 177 
educational system, 183 
educators, 157, 159, 162, 186 
efficacy, 81, 98, 129, 138 
effusion, 77, 86, 90, 96, 101, 103, 104, 139 
Egypt, 40, 43, 56, 61, 64, 195 
Egyptian, 102 
El Salvador, 40, 43 
elderly, 17, 27, 48, 96, 98, 102, 164 
elderly population, 98 
electrical, 81, 113, 128, 129 
electrical power, 128 
electricity, 107, 131 
electrodes, 81 
electronic, 123 
electrophysiologic, 81 
electroplating, 196 
elementary school, 86, 102 
email, 167 
emerging economies, 2 
emission, 92, 101, 124, 138 
emotional, 80, 115, 134, 137, 186 
employees, 200, 201, 206, 207, 208, 210, 211, 220 
employers, 146, 190, 206, 207, 208, 211 
employment, 23, 53, 62, 69, 72, 100, 146, 164, 172, 
191, 192, 206, 217 
empowered, 208 
encouragement, 228 
energy, 117 
engagement, 183 
engineering, 52, 195, 208, 220 
English, 12, 54, 55, 59, 60, 86, 122, 224 
enrollment, 157 
enterprise, 148, 174 
environment, 62, 69, 90, 91, 95, 101, 107, 113, 114, 
122, 128, 169, 177, 200, 202, 212, 214 
environmental, 10, 92, 138, 212, 213, 215, 220 
environmental control, 138 
Review

Index 
 
239
environmental factors, 215 
environmental impact, 213 
Environmental Protection Agency, 218 
environmental sustainability, 213 
epidemic, 20 
epidemiological, 28, 32, 35, 36, 37, 46, 47, 107, 171, 
202, 203, 217 
epidemiology, 38, 50, 103, 138, 169, 217 
equality, 9 
equating, 135 
Equatorial Guinea, 8, 10, 11, 40, 43 
equipment, 1, 5, 8, 15, 24, 25, 26, 69, 71, 72, 79, 91, 
95, 107, 108, 113, 119, 123, 125, 131, 137, 146, 
152, 159, 163, 168, 169, 171, 173, 183, 186, 191, 
192, 193, 210, 211, 225, 226, 230 
equity, 153 
Eritrea, 10, 40, 42 
estimating, 37, 39 
Estonia, 40, 43, 74 
ethanol, 219 
ethical, 26, 75, 82, 84, 96, 97, 185 
ethical issues, 26 
ethical standards, 75, 96 
ethics, 77 
Ethiopia, 9, 10, 14, 40, 42, 195 
Ethiopian, 218 
ethnic diversity, 12 
ethylbenzene, 200, 201 
etiology, 15 
Europe, 15, 42, 44, 64, 73, 146, 207 
European, vii, 8, 12, 37, 52, 58, 59, 60, 61, 67, 73, 
86, 142, 228 
European Union, 8, 12 
eustachian tube, 127 
evidence, 29, 36, 72, 119, 130, 141, 181, 191, 193, 
195, 197, 201, 202, 203, 204, 213 
evoked potential, 217, 220 
examinations, 76, 86, 151 
exchange transfusion, 83 
execution, 137 
exercise, 45 
expert, 24, 88 
expertise, viii, 7, 24, 51, 81, 82, 95, 137, 168, 172, 
173, 176, 177, 178 
experts, 142, 214 
explosions, 190 
explosive, 190 
exports, 11, 203 
exposure, 17, 110, 113, 116, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 
194, 195, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 204, 205, 
207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 
217, 218, 219, 220, 221 
external environment, 145 
extreme poverty, 16, 173 
eye, 151, 182 
eyes, 119 
F 
facial nerve, 111, 125, 127 
failure, 85, 89, 90, 138 
false, 22, 82, 91 
false positive, 91 
family, 10, 24, 79, 80, 94, 110, 135, 137, 146, 153, 
160, 170, 172, 174, 175, 181, 182, 183, 185, 186, 
198, 203, 220 
family history, 24 
family life, 10 
family members, 137 
family physician, 146 
family support, 175 
FAO, 214, 216 
farm, 192, 203, 204, 213, 216, 219 
farmers, 202, 203, 204, 213, 215, 217 
farms, 202, 203, 219 
fatality rates, 36 
fatigue, 134 
fear, 147, 209 
Federal Register, 207, 219 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, 45 
feedback, 26, 70, 146, 150 
feeding, 69, 82 
fees, 16, 71, 173 
feet, 120 
females, 13, 192 
fertility, 12 
fertility rate, 12 
fertilizers, 189 
fetus, 79 
fever, 111 
field trials, 158 
fighters, 194 
Fiji, 41, 43 
filament, 199 
financial resources, 10, 75, 89 
financial support, 83, 152 
Finland, 31, 40, 44, 101 
fire, 191, 193, 194 
firearms, 204 
first language, 93 
fixation, 125 
flexibility, 150 
flora, 111 
focusing, 230 
folklore, 137 
food, 11, 195, 203, 213 
Review

Index 
 
240 
footwear, 196 
foreign exchange, 8 
formal sector, 210 
France, 40, 44, 45, 57, 59, 61, 64 
freedom, 2, 10 
full capacity, 209 
funding, 2, 5, 11, 16, 18, 61, 64, 68, 72, 223, 225, 
226 
funds, vii, 143, 161 
fungicide, 205, 216 
fungicides, 203 
fungus, 196 
furnaces, 196 
furniture, 197, 201 
fusion, 182 
G 
Gabon, 40, 43 
gas, 194 
gauge, 92 
Gaza, 43 
GDP, 7 
GDP per capita, 8 
gender, 10, 28, 204 
gender equality, 10 
general practitioner, 98 
general practitioners, 98 
generation, 144 
generators, 128, 196 
genetic, 18, 76, 84, 105, 108 
genetic counselling, 18 
genetic factors, 76, 84, 108 
Geneva, 3, 19, 20, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 74, 98, 100, 
105, 140, 152, 153, 166, 216, 221, 231 
geography, 10 
geology, 207 
Georgia, 40, 42 
geriatric, 164 
Germany, 40, 44, 57, 61, 64, 140, 144, 225, 229 
gestation, 79 
girls, 13, 157 
global trends, 35 
globalization, 51, 53, 72, 102 
gloves, 112 
GNP, 144 
goals, 8, 17, 18, 87, 184, 185, 186 
goal-setting, 181, 182, 185 
God, 148 
gold, 26, 207, 208, 215, 217 
gold standard, 26 
goods and services, 8 
government, 15, 16, 18, 25, 34, 36, 51, 52, 58, 61, 
62, 64, 70, 72, 85, 97, 156, 158, 159, 160, 161, 
163, 172, 176, 214 
grades, 86, 115 
grain, 192, 193, 204, 221 
grants, 2, 225 
graph, 123, 124, 133 
Great Britain, 47 
Greece, 40, 44 
Greenland, 44 
Grenada, 40, 43 
gross domestic product, 7, 24 
gross national product, 23, 143 
grouping, 8 
groups, 8, 42, 44, 61, 63, 64, 67, 68, 75, 86, 95, 109, 
152, 168, 177, 199, 201, 204, 210, 212, 226 
growth, vii, 1, 6, 70, 132, 133, 135, 181, 209, 213 
growth rate, 213 
Guam, 44 
Guatemala, viii, 40, 43, 55, 56, 62, 64, 93, 181, 182, 
183, 184, 185, 186, 203, 231, 232 
guidance, 101, 153, 177, 228 
guidelines, 17, 18, 85, 88, 90, 100, 107, 111, 138, 
145, 146, 150, 164, 185, 208, 224 
Guinea, 10, 40, 42 
Guyana, 40, 43, 173 
H 
hair cells, 81, 130, 191, 197, 198, 202 
Haiti, 10, 40, 42 
handling, 219 
hands, 112, 122 
harmful, 17 
hazards, 75, 189, 190, 203, 210, 213, 214 
head, 110, 115, 117 
head injury, 110 
headache, 192 
health care, vii, ix, 2, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 
17, 18, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64, 
66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 72, 75, 77, 79, 86, 89, 96, 98, 
108, 109, 111, 112, 137, 138, 142, 151, 155, 157, 
167, 170, 175, 176, 181, 183, 223, 224, 225, 226, 
227, 228, 229, 230 
health care professionals, 15, 51, 59, 60, 112 
health care system, 13, 58, 66, 67, 68, 70, 79, 142 
health care workers, 2, 51, 52, 108, 112, 138, 157, 
228 
health clinics, 32, 173 
health education, 18 
health effects, 204, 219, 221 
health expenditure, 85 
health information, 111, 229 
Review

Index 
 
241
health insurance, 58 
health problems, 53, 76, 108, 189, 217 
health services, viii, 34, 86, 173 
health status, 13, 36 
healthcare, 76, 82, 85, 97 
heart, 48, 191 
heart disease, 191 
heat, 173 
height, 127 
herbicides, 189, 203 
herbs, 175 
heredity, 201 
herpes, 83 
hexane, 189, 197, 200, 219 
high blood cholesterol, 191 
high blood pressure, 191 
high risk, 76, 88, 156 
high school, 204 
higher quality, 145 
high-frequency, 190, 218, 220 
highlands, 30 
high-level, 191 
Hispanic, 30, 31, 47, 48 
HIV, 13, 17, 19, 37, 96, 98, 101 
HIV infection, 13, 19 
HIV/AIDS, 13, 17, 37, 96 
holistic, 78, 100, 195 
holistic approach, 195 
Holland, 219 
homes, 83, 174, 213 
homogeneity, 46, 73 
homogenous, 5, 68 
Honduras, 40, 43 
Hong Kong, 1, 2, 5, 44, 45, 57, 61, 75, 195, 216, 
223, 231 
hospital, ix, 15, 16, 37, 75, 78, 82, 83, 84, 96, 102, 
138, 146, 159, 170, 174, 175, 177, 182 
hospitals, 78, 80, 82, 83, 130, 169, 172, 176 
households, 26, 193, 201 
housing, 11 
human, 9, 11, 13, 55, 67, 79, 89, 163, 176, 189, 190, 
197, 200, 202, 203, 216, 218, 228 
human development, 9 
Human Development Index (HDI), 8, 9, 13 
Human Development Report, 10, 224 
human immunodeficiency virus, 13 
human resources, 55, 163 
humanitarian, 1, 143 
humans, 138, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 203 
humidity, 145, 151, 163 
Hungary, 40, 43, 73 
hygiene, 112, 138, 169 
hypothesis, 132 
I 
ice, 122 
identification, 49, 75, 77, 78, 81, 86, 87, 88, 90, 92, 
93, 95, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 
108, 109, 128, 130, 141, 142, 156, 176 
identity, 181 
illiteracy, 213 
ILO, 93, 100 
imaging, 130 
immunization, 17, 76, 83, 84, 96, 103, 104, 179 
impairments, 30, 49, 81, 156, 206 
implementation, 24, 35, 67, 108, 160, 176 
impulsive, 190 
in situ, 75 
in transition, 12 
incidence, vii, 12, 27, 28, 32, 36, 80, 112, 127, 134, 
156, 199, 213 
inclusion, 38, 107, 123, 129, 168 
income, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 15, 16, 21, 42, 43, 44, 55, 
56, 61, 63, 85, 141, 142, 143, 146, 147, 148, 160, 
169 
income distribution, 9 
income inequality, 5 
incomes, 148, 155 
independence, 54 
India, viii, 6, 8, 9, 12, 14, 15, 18, 19, 26, 31, 41, 42, 
53, 56, 61, 63, 64, 83, 91, 100, 103, 112, 144, 
146, 147, 151, 155, 156, 157, 158, 160, 161, 162, 
163, 164, 165, 166, 171, 173, 174, 194, 195, 208, 
231 
Indian, 12, 47, 49, 97, 100, 146, 155, 156, 158, 160, 
161, 165, 166, 204, 215, 216, 220 
Indians, 155, 158 
indication, 8, 88, 110, 121, 122, 124, 211 
indicators, 11, 36, 128, 205 
indices, 7, 10, 29 
indigenous, 12, 68, 93, 95, 155, 158 
Indonesia, 9, 14, 26, 32, 41, 42, 55, 56, 60, 64, 74 
induction, 162, 165, 229 
industrial, 7, 75, 88, 114, 189, 190, 191, 193, 194, 
195, 196, 201, 203, 205, 206, 212, 213, 216, 217 
industrial revolution, 190 
industrialization, 7, 11, 189 
industrialized countries, 6, 13, 53, 86, 142, 189, 192, 
213 
industrialized societies, 5, 11, 77 
industry, 6, 72, 189, 193, 194, 195, 197, 199, 200, 
202, 207, 212, 214, 215, 219, 220, 221, 229 
ineffectiveness, 89 
inequality, 9, 11 
infancy, 80 
infant mortality, 8, 13, 16, 17 
Review

Index 
 
242 
infant mortality rate, 13, 16 
infants, 3, 17, 26, 79, 81, 82, 84, 96, 100, 103, 104, 
114, 117, 138, 156, 224, 228 
infection, 49, 104, 111 
infections, 15, 37, 39, 83, 96, 108, 110, 112 
infectious, 27, 37, 39, 111, 139 
infectious disease, 37, 111, 139 
infectious diseases, 37, 111 
informal sector, 190, 192, 193, 210, 216, 220 
Information System, 74 
informed consent, 26 
infrared, 229, 230 
infrastructure, 14, 15, 34, 70, 71, 72, 74, 89, 108, 109 
inhalation, 200, 220 
inherited, 110 
inhibition, 204 
initiation, 72 
injuries, 213 
injury, 163, 191, 195, 202, 206 
inner ear, 95, 190, 191, 201 
insecticide, 216 
insecticides, 189, 204, 205, 221 
insects, 196 
insertion, 38, 159 
insight, 128, 130, 175 
inspection, 86, 88, 112 
instability, 11, 12, 181 
institutions, 5, 51, 52, 55, 71, 97, 157, 159, 161, 162, 
183, 185, 186, 211, 227 
instruction, 184 
instructors, 146 
instruments, 36, 39, 61, 81, 82, 90, 91, 128, 130, 
144, 145, 148, 208, 229 
integrity, 81, 127, 130 
intensity, 81, 88, 89, 90, 91, 95, 113, 114, 117, 120, 
121, 122, 123, 129, 130, 132, 133, 134, 136, 139, 
190, 191, 201 
intentions, 185 
interaction, 66, 157, 195, 199, 200, 215 
interactions, 51, 53, 72, 200, 215 
interdisciplinary, 186 
interference, 113, 192 
internal combustion, 190 
international, viii, 1, 2, 7, 13, 17, 18, 51, 52, 53, 57, 
61, 62, 71, 72, 73, 124, 142, 148, 151, 152, 155, 
158, 162, 168, 170, 178, 183, 224, 225, 227, 228 
International Classification of Diseases, 22 
internet, 223, 228 
interpersonal communication, 23 
interpersonal relations, 206 
interpersonal relationships, 206 
interpretation, 81, 125, 127, 129, 137 
intervention, 34, 75, 80, 81, 83, 84, 85, 86, 89, 97, 
100, 102, 103, 105, 108, 142, 151, 156, 178, 183, 
184, 224, 226 
intervention strategies, 151 
interview, 37, 135 
interviews, 204 
intoxication, 198, 213, 216 
intracranial, 111 
intraperitoneal, 220 
investment, 173 
ions, 152 
ipsilateral, 128 
Iran, vii, 40, 43 
Iraq, 40, 43 
Ireland, 9, 14, 40, 44, 57, 61, 64 
iron, 190, 196 
ischaemic heart disease, 37 
Islam, 105 
Islamic, 40, 43 
island, 95 
ISO, 22, 116 
isolation, 23, 71, 177, 225 
Israel, 40, 44, 57 
Italy, 6, 9, 31, 40, 44, 49, 57, 61, 64 
ITC, 158 
J 
JAMA, 46, 48 
Jamaica, 40, 43, 86, 91, 99, 101 
Japan, 6, 9, 12, 14, 41, 44, 57, 61, 63, 144, 199, 208 
job performance, 206 
jobs, 192, 194, 206, 210 
Jordan, 40, 43, 56, 171, 172, 227 
judge, 207 
junior high school, 183 
K 
Kazakhstan, 40, 43 
Kenya, viii, 17, 30, 40, 42, 47, 86, 101, 194, 203, 
208 
kerosene, 201 
kidney, 197 
kindergarten, 101 
kindergarten children, 101 
Kiribati, 10, 11, 41, 43 
Korea, 32, 41, 42, 43, 195 
Korean, 47 
Kuwait, 40, 44 
Kyrgyzstan, 40 
Review

Index 
 
243
L 
labour, 148, 150, 206, 211 
lactation, 83 
land, 202 
language, 12, 17, 18, 19, 23, 58, 60, 63, 66, 67, 68, 
71, 75, 78, 79, 80, 92, 93, 99, 102, 103, 107, 108, 
122, 127, 137, 148, 159, 162, 172, 174, 175, 177, 
182, 184, 193, 228 
language acquisition, 17, 78, 103 
language barrier, 71 
language development, 75, 79, 80, 102 
language skills, 79 
Laos, 55, 56, 60, 64 
Lassa fever, 78 
late-onset, 79 
later life, 79 
Latin America, 6, 7, 19, 35, 55, 60, 73, 101, 184, 
205, 218, 225 
Latin American countries, 55 
Latvia, 9, 14, 40, 43 
laws, 86, 207, 208 
lead, 12, 17, 66, 70, 77, 95, 212 
leadership, 142 
learners, 169 
learning, 18, 66, 137, 161, 173, 186 
learning difficulties, 173 
Least Developed Countries (LDCs), 10, 11, 12, 153, 
224 
Lebanon, 40, 43 
legislation, 17, 208, 213, 214 
leisure, 110 
leprosy, 13 
lesions, 125, 134, 139, 197 
liberalization, 158 
Liberia, 10, 40, 42 
Libya, 43, 56, 64 
licensing, 159 
life expectancy, 8, 10, 13, 14, 16, 36 
lifespan, 148 
lifestyle, 204 
life-threatening, 82 
lifetime, 6, 12, 192 
likelihood, 22, 113 
limitation, 84, 107 
limitations, 75, 148, 200 
lindane, 203 
linear, 29 
lingual, 29 
linguistic, 11 
linguistically, 5 
links, 53, 148, 177, 224, 228 
lipids, 197 
liquids, 196 
listening, 8, 79, 113, 119, 135, 162, 163, 164, 168, 
182, 228, 229, 230 
literacy, 8, 13, 16, 80 
literacy rates, 13 
literature, 87, 123, 130, 164, 202, 216, 225, 226, 227 
Lithuania, 40, 43, 57, 58, 64 
liver, 197 
livestock, 202, 203 
living environment, 213 
living standards, 68 
local community, 173 
local government, 15 
localization, 115, 119 
London, ix, 3, 19, 21, 47, 86, 100, 105, 140, 152, 
153, 173, 178, 179, 203, 213, 217, 218, 219, 231 
long period, 15, 191 
longitudinal study, 201 
long-term, 6, 7, 12, 16, 52, 67, 77, 78, 79, 96, 143, 
146, 163, 198, 200, 204, 206, 215, 219 
loss of consciousness, 111 
losses, 96, 191, 204 
low cost, 91, 150 
low risk, 201 
lower-income, 147 
low-income, 8 
low-level, 204 
lung disease, 37 
lungs, 198 
Luxembourg, 40, 44 
lymphatic, 13 
lymphocytes, 218 
M 
Macao, 44, 45 
Macedonia, 40, 43, 45 
machinery, 196, 210 
machines, 193, 194, 195, 196, 210, 211 
magnetic, 229 
mainstream, 80, 169, 170 
maintenance, 160, 161, 163, 164, 165, 170, 186, 198, 
211 
major cities, 161 
malaria, 13, 17, 37, 108 
Malathion, 205 
Malaysia, 41, 43, 56, 61, 64, 99, 102, 139, 204, 217 
males, 13, 31, 192 
malnutrition, 53, 111 
Malta, 40, 43 
management, 17, 35, 52, 66, 107, 108, 110, 111, 114, 
168, 169, 176, 183, 206, 207, 208, 214, 218, 225 
manganese, 205, 216 
Review

Index 
 
244 
manpower, 157, 163, 166 
manufacturer, 144, 147, 151, 229, 230 
manufacturing, 11, 144, 148, 158, 194, 195, 201, 
207, 210, 225 
mapping, 26 
Mariana Islands, 44 
market, 141, 144, 155, 158, 162 
market share, 144 
marketing, 144, 147, 152, 158 
markets, 70, 72, 143, 202, 213, 229 
Marshall Islands, 41, 43 
Martinique, 45 
masking, 98, 117, 122 
Massachusetts, 98, 104 
mastoid, 131, 132 
mastoiditis, 77, 111 
maternal, 17 
mathematical, 130 
maturation, 66, 79 
Mauritania, 10, 40, 42 
Mauritius, 40, 43, 99 
MCI, 156 
measles, 17, 39, 76, 108, 110, 171 
measurement, 24, 36, 37, 87, 113, 128, 138, 139, 
165, 169, 217 
measures, 7, 8, 18, 25, 87, 95, 101, 107, 108, 111, 
123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 129, 130, 168, 181, 186, 
189, 210, 212, 213 
mechanical, 163, 202 
mechanics, 164 
media, 22, 74, 77, 90, 112, 127, 211, 230 
median, 81 
medical care, 52, 77, 79, 170 
medical services, 86 
medication, 96 
medications, 83 
medicine, 52 
Mediterranean, 202 
Medline, 35 
melons, 202 
membership, vii 
membranes, 198 
memory, ix, 191 
men, 14, 29, 217 
meningitis, 15, 17, 37, 83, 108, 110, 171, 174 
mentor, ix, 182 
metabolism, 198 
metals, 190, 195 
Mexican, 30 
Mexico, vii, 9, 14, 40, 43, 56, 58, 60, 64, 197, 203 
Mexico City, 197 
Micronesia, 41, 43 
microprocessors, 123 
middle class, 70, 72 
Middle East, 7, 42, 44, 64, 203 
middle income, 21, 27, 55, 64, 141 
midwives, 17 
migration, 69, 72 
military, 14, 62, 194, 206, 207 
military occupation, 207 
milk, 82 
Millennium Development Goals, 16, 20 
mining, 194, 195, 207, 208, 215, 219 
Ministry of Education, 172 
minority, 12, 68 
minority groups, 12, 68 
misconceptions, 184 
misleading, 7 
missions, 226 
mixing, 150 
mobility, 125, 126 
models, 5, 18, 52, 53, 68, 70, 72, 142, 148, 158, 159, 
160, 177 
mold, 146, 161, 162, 164, 225, 229 
Moldova, 40, 42 
momentum, 6 
money, 66, 69 
Mongolia, 41, 42 
monomer, 150 
Montenegro, 45 
mood, 192 
mood change, 192 
Morocco, 40, 43 
morphological, 216 
mortality, 13, 14, 29, 36, 38, 41, 46, 48, 192 
mortality rate, 13, 41 
mother tongue, 184 
mothers, 76, 82, 83, 137, 157 
moulding, 195 
mountains, 155 
mouth, 129, 135 
movement, 72 
Mozambique, 10, 18, 40, 42, 120, 171 
MRI, 130 
mRNA, 218 
multidisciplinary, 24, 184 
multilateral, 97 
mumps, 17, 20, 39, 76, 110, 171 
muscle, 127 
muscle contraction, 127 
music, 17 
Myanmar, 10, 26, 32, 41, 42, 55, 56, 64, 176 
N 
Namibia, 40, 43, 55, 56, 64, 171, 172, 178, 179 
Review

Index 
 
245
nation, 2, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 150 
national, 7, 11, 12, 17, 24, 26, 31, 54, 55, 60, 71, 84, 
108, 143, 144, 148, 151, 156, 163, 170, 172, 176, 
179, 214, 221, 224, 228 
National Health Interview Survey, 46 
National Health Service, 224 
national income, 7, 11, 12 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health, 198, 207, 216, 219 
national product, 143, 144 
Native American, 68, 112 
Native Americans, 68 
natural, 11, 77, 78 
natural disasters, 11 
Nauru, 41 
nausea, 111 
neck, 111 
negotiating, 147 
neonatal, 80, 86, 94, 96, 97, 99, 100, 104, 108, 140, 
156, 165, 182, 183 
neonatal intensive care unit, 104 
neonate, 79 
neonates, 17, 156 
Nepal, 10, 20, 32, 41, 42, 48, 210 
nerve, 133, 139, 197, 204 
nerve conduction velocity, 204 
nervous system, 79, 96 
Netherlands, 40, 44, 57, 59, 61, 178, 215 
network, 2, 143, 158, 159, 160, 164, 184 
networking, 147, 186 
neurological disease, 205 
neurons, 132 
neuropathy, 81, 82, 125, 130, 136 
neuroscience, 100 
neurotoxic, 203 
New England, 100 
New Jersey, 97 
New Mexico, 158 
New York, 20, 73, 100, 103, 104, 105, 138, 153, 
178, 204, 216, 220, 228 
New Zealand, 41, 44, 52, 57, 59, 99 
Newton, viii, 2, 17, 19, 49, 93, 94, 100, 102, 104, 
139, 231 
Ni, 148 
Nicaragua, 40, 42, 56, 64, 86 
Nielsen, 145, 148, 153 
Niger, 10, 40, 42 
Nigeria, viii, 10, 26, 32, 40, 42, 48, 55, 56, 64, 73, 
75, 84, 96, 102, 137, 171, 173, 193, 194, 195, 
203, 221, 231 
NIH, 191, 218 
Niue, 41 
noise, 17, 22, 27, 29, 82, 88, 90, 94, 95, 96, 98, 100, 
103, 105, 110, 113, 115, 117, 120, 122, 130, 139, 
145, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 197, 199, 
201, 202, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 
212, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 229 
non-governmental organization(s) (NGOs), 17, 55, 
64, 69, 147, 148, 151, 156, 172, 174, 176 
non-infectious, 27 
non-invasive, 81, 82 
non-profit, 148, 227, 228 
non-random, 25 
normal, 26, 80, 82, 93, 94, 95, 114, 116, 121, 122, 
123, 124, 125, 126, 128, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 
137, 145 
normal conditions, 145 
normal curve, 123, 124 
normal development, 93 
norms, 127 
North Africa, 42, 44 
North America, 12, 86, 87, 104, 146 
Norway, 40, 44, 57, 59, 61, 64 
not-for-profit, 152, 225, 227 
nucleation, 70 
nurse, 96 
nurses, 15, 17, 52, 82, 95, 173, 175 
nursing, 19, 87, 157 
nutrition, 11, 157 
nuts, 203 
nylon, 199 
O 
objective tests, 123, 168 
obligation, 82 
observations, 25, 190, 200, 203 
obstruction, 112 
occlusion, 95, 101, 112, 127, 131, 139 
occupational, 29, 62, 189, 192, 193, 195, 197, 200, 
201, 202, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 212, 213, 214, 
215, 218, 219, 220 
occupational health, 62, 189, 192, 205, 208, 213, 
214, 220 
OECD, 44 
oil, 8, 200 
oil refineries, 200 
old age, 95 
older adults, 47, 48 
olfactory, 119 
olive, 117 
Oman, 26, 31, 40, 43, 47 
online, 162, 230 
on-the-job training, 63, 172 
operator, 91, 193, 197 
Review

Index 
 
246 
oral, 108 
organ, 190, 191, 197, 204, 216 
organic, 122, 134, 135, 136, 189, 195, 196, 198, 200, 
201, 204, 212, 218, 220, 221 
organic compounds, 196, 204 
organic solvent, 189, 195, 196, 198, 200, 201, 212, 
218, 220, 221 
organic solvents, 189, 195, 196, 198, 200, 201, 212, 
218, 220, 221 
organism, 216 
organization, 16, 142, 148, 151, 159, 176, 225, 226, 
227, 228, 230 
organizations, 1, 18, 52, 54, 62, 72, 97, 142, 147, 
152, 156, 160, 161, 164, 177, 183, 223, 224, 228 
organochlorine compounds, 203 
organophosphates, 204 
orientation, 185 
oscillator, 120, 132 
ossicles, 125, 191 
otitis media, 17, 27, 29, 46, 68, 74, 86, 88, 90, 96, 
101, 102, 103, 108, 112, 123, 125, 126, 127, 138, 
140, 171 
otoacoustic emissions, 81, 82, 98, 99, 100, 102, 123, 
124, 130, 136, 140 
otolaryngologist, 55, 66, 159 
otosclerosis, 125, 138 
ototoxic drugs, 17, 27, 76 
ototoxicity, 108, 216 
Ottawa, 203 
out-of-pocket, 85 
outreach programs, 16 
overpopulation, 111 
ownership, 143 
P 
Pacific, 7, 13, 37, 38, 42, 44, 46, 60, 64, 101 
paints, 196, 201 
Pakistan, 13, 41, 42, 55, 56, 64, 96, 99, 194, 195, 
196, 208, 210, 216, 220, 221 
Pakistani, 13 
Panama, 40, 43, 56, 58, 59, 60, 86 
pandemic, 13 
paper, 19, 48, 71, 138, 165, 178, 195, 196, 201, 203, 
217 
Papua New Guinea, 41, 43 
Paraguay, 40, 43 
paralysis, 128 
parameter, 145 
parents, 77, 81, 82, 83, 84, 87, 93, 136, 139, 172, 
174, 175, 177, 182, 183, 184, 186, 228 
Paris, 179 
partnerships, 18, 97 
pass/fail, 78, 90, 114 
pathogenesis, 78 
pathogens, 111 
pathologists, 52, 61, 85, 157, 159 
pathology, 18, 19, 48, 52, 55, 60, 67, 87, 112, 128, 
131, 132, 133, 138, 162 
pathophysiological, 132 
pathophysiology, 95 
pathways, 125, 128, 199 
patients, 52, 77, 78, 79, 96, 102, 111, 112, 114, 122, 
125, 131, 132, 133, 134, 182, 185, 186, 204 
pediatric, 20, 90, 91, 92, 116, 182 
peers, 13, 80, 93 
people living with HIV/AIDS, 96 
per capita, 7, 8, 9, 11, 54, 55, 58, 59, 64, 155 
per capita income, 8, 155 
percentile, 84 
perception, 122, 133, 134, 139 
perforation, 126, 127 
performance, 22, 25, 26, 98, 107, 114, 121, 122, 129, 
133, 145, 165, 166, 192 
perinatal, 17, 22, 37, 39, 84 
periodic, 208, 212 
periodicity, 190 
peripheral nerve, 205, 217, 219 
peripheral nervous system, 204, 205, 213 
peripheral neuropathy, 204 
perseverance, 187 
personal, 6, 141, 142, 147, 166, 168, 182, 183, 184, 
230 
persons with disabilities, 156 
Perth, 51, 231 
Peru, 40, 43 
pest control, 213 
pesticide, 196, 202, 203, 204, 213, 217, 218, 221 
pesticides, 189, 190, 202, 203, 204, 205, 213, 216, 
217, 218, 219, 221 
pests, 202, 213 
petrochemical, 212 
petroleum, 194, 197, 201, 218 
pharmaceutical, 194 
pharmaceuticals, 196 
pharmacists, 159 
Philadelphia, 100, 101 
philanthropic, 120, 142 
philanthropy, 69 
Philippines, vii, 6, 18, 41, 43, 53, 56, 61, 64, 147, 
195 
philosophy, 90 
phosphate, 204 
physicians, 57, 60, 61 
physiological, 129, 190 
physiology, 52, 123, 124, 169 
Review

Index 
 
247
pigs, 198 
pilot studies, 84 
pilot study, 25, 46, 140, 218 
pitch, 204 
planning, 21, 34, 62, 108, 176, 210, 227 
plants, 194, 195, 196, 200, 202, 214 
plastic, 150, 199, 201 
plasticity, 79 
plastics, 195, 196 
platforms, 83 
play, 89, 113, 129, 159, 170, 174, 176, 211 
plug-in, 168 
poisoning, 204, 216, 217, 221 
Poland, 9, 14, 40, 43, 57, 58, 61 
police, 194 
policy makers, 151 
policymakers, 2 
polio, 84 
political, 6, 10, 12, 16, 35, 77, 79 
political instability, 16 
political stability, 10 
politics, 69 
pollution, 190, 193, 213, 215, 218, 221 
polyester, 195, 220 
polymer, 150 
polymerization, 216 
polymers, 150 
Polynesia, 44 
poor, 8, 13, 14, 34, 61, 62, 68, 78, 129, 136, 146, 
158, 159, 162, 173, 211, 213 
poor health, 13 
population, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 18, 21, 24, 25, 
27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 37, 39, 41, 46, 47, 48, 
49, 51, 53, 54, 55, 61, 64, 71, 76, 77, 78, 86, 95, 
96, 99, 108, 111, 143, 155, 156, 157, 158, 163, 
164, 171, 172, 176, 181, 182, 183, 184, 187, 197, 
202, 218 
population group, 18, 76 
population growth, 6 
porous, 211 
Portugal, 40, 44, 57, 61 
potato, 203, 216 
poultry, 202 
poverty, 11, 12, 21, 151, 182, 183, 184, 225 
power, 8, 14, 147, 148, 153, 190, 195, 211 
powers, 175 
pragmatic, 177 
preference, 79 
pregnancy, 110, 137 
pregnant women, 157 
preparation,, 48, 89, 161 
presbycusis, 32, 47 
preschool, 75, 93, 94, 95, 97, 99, 103, 104, 157, 183, 
228 
preschool children, 93, 94, 95, 103, 228 
press freedom, 20 
pressure, 51, 52, 70, 115, 126, 127, 131, 150, 184, 
190, 198, 210 
prevention, vii, 6, 17, 18, 20, 26, 34, 35, 70, 74, 76, 
78, 86, 97, 108, 138, 140, 151, 163, 184, 190, 
206, 208, 210, 211, 217, 224, 225 
preventive, 14, 15, 75, 83, 86, 181, 211, 212, 213 
preventive approach, 15 
preventive programs, 14, 75 
prices, 144, 147 
primaries, 130 
primary products, 194 
primary school, 13, 78, 86, 87, 88, 93, 95, 105, 171 
printing, 193, 194, 196, 197, 201, 215, 218 
priorities, 6, 20, 27, 53, 61, 72, 97, 98, 99, 136, 183 
private, 2, 5, 16, 54, 62, 68, 69, 70, 72, 83, 85, 97, 
156, 161, 172, 173, 182, 185, 193, 212, 223, 228 
private sector, 68, 70, 85, 161 
proactive, 181 
probability, 76, 128, 197 
probable cause, 129 
probe, 81, 95, 129 
procedures, 1, 18, 26, 76, 78, 86, 88, 89, 97, 104, 
125, 131, 133, 146, 148, 151, 159, 161, 201, 223 
producers, 144, 202 
production, ix, 11, 14, 53, 70, 85, 145, 146, 148, 152, 
153, 157, 158, 193, 202, 213, 216, 229 
productivity, 6, 24, 206 
profession, vii, 51, 52, 53, 55, 61, 67, 71, 86, 169, 
183 
professions, 52, 67, 68, 86, 87, 228 
profit, 53, 134, 144, 147, 161, 227 
profit margin, 53, 144, 147 
profitability, 71 
profits, 70 
program, viii, 53, 67, 68, 70, 73, 75, 77, 78, 79, 80, 
83, 85, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 96, 97, 98, 100, 
101, 104, 105, 108, 109, 111, 113, 120, 123, 128, 
156, 157, 159, 162, 163, 182, 183, 206, 207, 208, 
211, 212, 215, 219, 220, 228 
progressive, 79, 84, 134, 198, 206 
proliferation, 73 
promote, 163, 173, 226, 227, 228 
propriety, 85 
protection, 18, 67, 206, 208, 210, 211, 212, 214, 220, 
229, 230 
protective clothing, 214 
protocol, 24, 25, 26, 34, 35, 46, 82, 90, 95, 115, 140 
protocols, 77, 87, 88, 96, 104, 146, 168, 224 
prototype, 148 
Review

Index 
 
248 
proxy, 83 
psychogenic, 134 
psychological, 134, 190 
psychologist, 182 
psychologists, 184 
psychology, 52 
psychosocial, 99 
psycho-social, 80 
public, 18, 34, 35, 61, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 76, 77, 83, 
97, 102, 108, 141, 147, 151, 163, 164, 178, 183, 
202, 206, 211, 212 
public awareness, 61, 70, 71, 141, 147, 163, 164, 
178, 211 
public health, 35, 70, 76, 77, 83, 102, 108, 202 
Public Health Service, 112 
public safety, 206 
public sector, 212 
public service, 70 
Puerto Rico, 43 
pulp, 196 
pupil, 93, 172, 173 
pupils, 15, 88, 92, 98, 102 
purchasing power, 8 
purchasing power parity (PPP), 8, 9, 54, 55, 56, 57, 
59 
pure tone audiogram, 114 
pus, 111 
pyrethroids, 204 
Q 
Qatar, 40, 44 
qualifications, 61, 63, 67, 172 
quality assurance, 148 
quality control, 25, 39, 148 
quality of life, 7, 8, 10, 18, 152, 184, 228 
quality of service, 146, 172, 176 
questionnaire, 24, 54, 91, 92, 93, 94, 99, 102 
questionnaires, 54, 92, 93, 94 
R 
radio, 168 
rainforest, 91, 98 
random, 24, 25, 37, 39 
random errors, 25 
range, 2, 7, 8, 13, 16, 30, 31, 32, 34, 53, 60, 61, 63, 
66, 68, 81, 82, 88, 89, 93, 95, 114, 116, 121, 127, 
129, 130, 133, 134, 141, 143, 144, 147, 148, 156, 
158, 167, 169, 170, 171, 175, 191, 224, 227, 228, 
229, 230 
rat, 197, 198 
ratings, 92 
rats, 197, 198, 199, 200, 216, 217, 219, 220 
reading, 116, 122, 135 
real time, 157 
reality, 93, 152, 181, 185, 207 
reception, 139, 162 
recognition, vii, 51, 70, 71, 88, 98 
recovery, 205 
recreational, 207, 211 
recruiting, 133 
Red Cross, 169 
reduction, 17, 82, 127, 128, 130, 147, 210, 217 
redundancy, 122 
refineries, 201 
reflection, 7, 130 
reflexes, 128 
refugee camps, 172 
regenerated cellulose, 196 
regional, 21, 24, 26, 29, 35, 37, 55, 144, 147, 151, 
159, 162, 170, 173, 176, 177, 214, 216, 228 
regular, 26, 62, 75, 83, 86, 93, 96, 121, 162, 168, 
184, 186, 224, 227 
regulation, 208, 213 
regulations, 17, 207 
regulatory bodies, 214 
rehabilitate, 6 
rehabilitation, 1, 6, 16, 18, 23, 49, 53, 61, 67, 70, 80, 
87, 92, 96, 102, 116, 122, 141, 142, 146, 147, 
152, 158, 163, 170, 177, 183, 184, 185, 225, 227, 
228 
Rehabilitation Center, 156 
Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI), 157, 166 
rehabilitation program, 6, 18, 61, 177, 227 
reimbursement, 84 
reinforcement, 118, 138, 139, 140 
reinforcers, 116, 118 
rejection, 130 
relationship, 9, 29, 130, 185, 202 
relevance, 176, 223 
reliability, 54, 122, 132 
religious groups, 12 
remediation, 108, 109, 137 
remission, 36 
repair, 15, 107, 145, 146, 148, 152, 155, 162, 163, 
164, 169, 177, 196, 229 
repression, 209 
Republic of the Congo, 10 
resale, 134 
research, 54, 92, 94, 97, 132, 144, 150, 151, 156, 
158, 163, 197, 199, 200, 212, 213, 221, 226, 227, 
229 
research and development, 144, 150 
researchers, 136, 158, 197, 200, 201, 203, 212, 214 
Review

Index 
 
249
reserves, 113 
residues, 203, 214 
resins, 196 
resistance, 68, 139, 184, 211 
resolution, vii, 17, 18, 126 
resource allocation, 34 
resources, 5, 7, 11, 12, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 24, 25, 35, 
39, 51, 53, 55, 60, 62, 71, 72, 73, 85, 92, 93, 97, 
98, 101, 107, 108, 111, 114, 117, 125, 134, 137, 
143, 146, 147, 152, 169, 170, 177, 183, 184, 186, 
213, 224, 225, 228 
respiratory, 37, 196, 198, 212, 214 
responsibilities, 170, 183, 184 
retail, 143, 144, 150 
returns, 54, 146 
revenue, 148 
rice, 202 
risk, 49, 75, 84, 96, 105, 189, 190, 192, 193, 195, 
199, 200, 201, 203, 204, 206, 208, 212, 213, 214, 
216, 217, 218, 220 
risk assessment, 213 
risk factors, 49, 84, 192, 216 
risk management, 214 
risks, 36, 200, 202, 216 
Romania, 40, 43, 56, 59, 62 
Rome, 216 
room temperature, 196 
routing, 158 
rubber, 196, 201 
rubella, 17, 39, 76, 83 
rural, 5, 11, 13, 15, 16, 30, 31, 47, 49, 78, 90, 91, 93, 
96, 98, 99, 101, 102, 103, 156, 161, 173, 221 
rural areas, 11, 13, 156, 161, 173 
rural population, 5, 49 
Russia, 56, 59, 61, 168 
Russian, 9, 14, 40, 43, 54 
Rwanda, 10, 40, 42 
S 
sacrifice, 71 
safety, 84, 151, 189, 207, 211, 214, 220 
salaries, 15 
salary, 71 
sales, 143, 144, 147, 163 
Samoa, 10, 41, 43, 96 
sample, 10, 24, 25, 26, 29, 37, 39, 104, 148, 156, 
165, 167, 179, 212 
sample survey, 24, 37, 156, 165 
sampling, 15, 25, 39 
sampling error, 25 
Sao Paulo, 176, 218 
satisfaction, 18 
Saudi Arabia, 30, 40, 43, 50, 57, 112, 208, 214 
savannah, 12 
savings, 148 
scalp, 81 
scams, 185 
scar tissue, 125 
scarce resources, 93 
scarcity, 15, 34, 55, 60, 141 
school, 6, 8, 13, 15, 16, 19, 23, 25, 30, 36, 47, 62, 75, 
77, 78, 79, 80, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95, 
96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 113, 
134, 135, 146, 156, 159, 162, 163, 164, 165, 167, 
168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 
183, 186 
schooling, 13 
science, 130, 157 
scientific, 15, 35, 67, 200, 225 
scientists, 61 
scores, 88 
screening programs, 1, 14, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 82, 
83, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 96, 99, 130, 156, 
165, 224 
search, ix, 35, 100 
second generation, 148 
secondary school students, 96, 97 
secret, 187 
Secretary General, viii 
security, 10, 70 
sedation, 81 
seeding, 69 
seeds, ix, 189 
seizure, 92 
selecting, 34, 77 
self, 102, 211, 217 
self-report, 37 
semiconductor, 196 
Senegal, 10, 40, 42 
sensitivity, 25, 48, 78, 79, 81, 82, 93, 95, 107, 110, 
114, 124, 127, 128, 129, 131, 132, 133, 135, 137, 
139, 191, 197, 200, 201 
sensorineural hearing loss, 30, 83, 93, 96, 98, 101, 
121, 123, 124, 128, 131, 132, 148, 189, 199, 204 
sensory systems, 204 
sentences, 120, 122 
sequelae, 39, 88, 204 
Serbia, 45 
series, 167, 171, 224, 225 
serum, 203, 220 
service provider, 69, 156, 157 
services, vii, viii, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 23, 
26, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 64, 67, 68, 69, 70, 72, 73, 
74, 78, 82, 83, 85, 96, 97, 101, 104, 105, 108, 
109, 114, 128, 140, 141, 142, 148, 151, 152, 153, 
Review

Index 
 
250 
155, 156, 157, 163, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 
172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 181, 182, 183, 184, 
185, 186, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228 
severity, 22, 23, 28, 36, 79, 110, 114, 120, 134, 202, 
204 
sex, 28, 31, 32, 33, 36, 110 
Seychelles, 40, 43, 213, 214 
shape, 119 
sharing, 72, 171, 178 
shipping, 195, 196, 226 
shock, 148, 176 
short period, 164 
shortage, 15, 28, 35, 61, 66, 72, 155 
short-term, 96, 162, 184, 198, 213 
shy, 129 
siblings, 186 
Siemens, 144, 230 
Sierra Leone, 10, 30, 40, 42, 49, 173 
sign, 25, 108, 116, 172, 175, 177, 193, 228 
signals, 81, 120, 129, 136, 137, 158, 207 
signs, 111, 114, 183, 216 
silicon, 150 
Singapore, 41, 44, 57, 61, 64, 195, 221 
sites, 132, 151, 193, 228 
skill shortages, 146 
skills, 2, 23, 80, 85, 87, 91, 131, 137, 156, 162, 168, 
169, 171, 173, 182, 211, 213 
skin, 111, 197, 198, 214 
sleep, 81, 192 
sleeping sickness, 13 
Slovakia, 40 
Slovenia, 40, 44, 57, 61 
smoking, 46 
social, vii, 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 16, 23, 68, 77, 78, 80, 
98, 108, 115, 147, 148, 152, 181, 206 
social costs, 6, 13 
social development, 98 
social factors, 8 
social impairment, 13 
social problems, 23 
Social Security, 55, 195 
social structure, 7 
social welfare, 16 
socially, 82 
society, 11, 12, 16, 24, 34, 80, 184, 189, 224, 227, 
228 
socioeconomic, 93, 98 
socioeconomic status, 98 
software, 35, 36, 230 
solar, 85, 103, 148, 153, 160, 225 
solar panels, 148 
Solomon Islands, 10, 41, 42 
solutions, 2, 20, 51, 53, 71 
solvent, 196, 197, 199, 201, 205, 212, 213, 215, 217, 
220 
solvents, 189, 190, 195, 196, 197, 199, 200, 201, 
202, 205, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217 
Somali, 42 
Somalia, 10, 40 
sounds, 79, 81, 92, 94, 114, 117, 119, 120, 122, 129, 
130, 191 
South Africa, 6, 9, 12, 14, 20, 30, 40, 42, 43, 44, 49, 
52, 53, 56, 58, 60, 61, 63, 64, 68, 74, 84, 91, 92, 
98, 99, 102, 104, 107, 140, 146, 148, 171, 173, 
174, 176, 178, 179, 194, 195, 213, 217 
South America, 52, 59, 60, 63, 168, 203 
South Asia, 42, 44, 83 
South Korea, 9, 14, 144 
South Pacific, 112 
Southeast Asia, 49 
sovereignty, 45 
Soviet Union, 7 
Spain, 9, 14, 40, 44, 57 
special education, 6, 23, 157, 162, 174, 184 
specialisation, 60, 61, 63 
specialists, 85, 98, 99, 146, 148, 159, 169, 173, 174, 
214 
specialization, 58 
species, 198 
specificity, 25, 78, 79, 81, 82, 93, 95, 117, 135 
spectrum, 64, 190 
speech, 19, 22, 23, 52, 55, 58, 60, 61, 63, 66, 67, 75, 
79, 80, 85, 88, 90, 92, 94, 98, 104, 110, 114, 122, 
123, 129, 135, 136, 139, 146, 159, 162, 169, 174, 
175, 182, 191, 227 
speech discrimination, 122, 123, 136 
speech discrimination score, 123 
speech perception, 104 
speech sounds, 79, 122 
speed, 76, 79 
Sri Lanka, 9, 26, 31, 41, 43, 50 
stages, 61, 127, 191 
standard of living, 8 
standards, vii, 8, 10, 12, 15, 55, 76, 88, 112, 113, 
148, 152, 158, 185, 189, 214 
statistics, 7, 143, 224 
statutory, 207 
steel, 196 
stiffness, 94, 111, 125, 191 
stigmatization, 23 
stimuli, 117 
stimulus, 81, 95, 113, 115, 117, 119, 130, 132, 134, 
138 
stock, 145, 146, 148, 150, 161 
strain, 143 
strains, 13 
Review

Index 
 
251
strategic, 148 
strategies, 18, 19, 24, 27, 34, 68, 70, 71, 72, 75, 88, 
122, 163, 184, 186, 208 
stress, 211 
strokes, 37 
structural adjustment, 100 
students, 52, 61, 63, 66, 71, 72, 93, 162, 172, 183 
styrene, 189, 197, 198, 202, 213, 216, 217, 218, 220 
subjective, 47, 127, 132, 145 
sub-Saharan Africa, 11, 12, 13, 19, 37, 42, 44, 48 
subsistence, 24 
substances, 196, 201 
substitution, 144 
Sudan, 10, 40, 42, 195 
suffering, 226 
supervision, 71, 72, 182 
supervisors, 26, 198 
suppliers, 151 
supply, 53, 72, 151, 169 
support services, 169, 175 
surgeons, 55, 57, 60, 61, 66 
surgery, 49, 103, 169, 216, 221 
surgical, 1, 36, 66, 77 
surgical intervention, 36 
surveillance, 75 
survival, 11, 27, 49 
surviving, 112 
susceptibility, 95 
sustainability, 16, 67, 70 
Sweden, vii, 40, 44, 57, 61, 64 
swelling, 111, 191 
Switzerland, 9, 14, 40, 44, 50, 57, 61, 64, 144, 229, 
231 
symptoms, 111, 191, 199, 213, 216 
syndrome, 13, 83 
synergistic, 195, 200, 201, 202, 205, 214 
synergistic effect, 195, 201, 202, 214 
syphilis, 83, 108 
systematic, 35, 97, 182 
systems, vii, ix, 53, 55, 58, 69, 71, 72, 76, 78, 125, 
127, 142, 145, 151, 152, 153, 162, 168, 182, 189, 
229, 230 
T 
Taiwan, 44, 56, 101 
Tajikistan, 40, 42 
Tanzania, 9, 10, 14, 30, 40, 42, 46, 93, 102, 193, 
194, 203, 219 
target population, 25, 96, 128 
target populations, 96 
targets, 27, 88 
tariffs, 15, 18, 144, 152 
taxes, 15, 18, 144, 152, 163 
taxonomy, 140 
tea, 203 
teachers, 52, 61, 77, 87, 92, 93, 100, 168, 169, 170, 
172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 184, 186 
teaching, 52, 69, 71, 72, 168, 172, 174, 175, 177 
team members, 25, 26 
technician, 109, 145, 146, 150, 172 
technicians, 2, 52, 60, 61, 66, 148, 155, 162, 164, 
211 
technological, 107, 135, 190, 201 
technology, 7, 17, 18, 55, 67, 72, 87, 140, 145, 148, 
152, 153, 182, 185, 214 
Technology Assessment, 19, 99, 102 
technology transfer, 17 
telecommunications, 223, 230 
telephone, 142, 162, 164 
television, 115, 164 
temperature, 145 
termites, 175 
territory, 163 
test data, 113 
test procedure, 78, 137 
Texas, 107, 218, 231 
textbooks, 108 
textile, 193, 194, 195, 199, 215, 217, 219 
textile industry, 193 
textiles, 192 
Thai, 98 
Thailand, 9, 14, 17, 30, 32, 41, 43, 49, 56, 61, 64, 98, 
144 
The Economist, 2, 3, 10, 19 
theoretical, viii 
theory, 108, 130 
therapists, 61, 68, 184 
therapy, 68, 182 
thinking, 35, 184 
threat, 173 
threatening, 170, 177 
threshold, 22, 29, 81, 90, 97, 98, 113, 114, 115, 117, 
119, 121, 122, 123, 127, 128, 129, 132, 134, 136, 
139, 191, 206, 207, 216, 217 
threshold level, 22, 97, 114, 117 
thresholds, 29, 77, 112, 113, 114, 117, 121, 123, 125, 
128, 129, 134, 136, 139, 190, 199, 201, 207, 212, 
218, 219 
throat, 55, 98, 152, 159, 175, 182 
time, vii, 2, 12, 15, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27, 35, 58, 63, 66, 
70, 71, 72, 85, 88, 89, 90, 92, 94, 97, 98, 108, 
110, 113, 119, 122, 123, 129, 136, 137, 146, 161, 
164, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 175, 177, 182, 183, 
185, 190, 191, 197, 203, 206, 207 
time consuming, 25 
Review

Index 
 
252 
timing, 25, 84 
tin, 119, 122 
tinnitus, 52, 110, 191, 229, 230 
title, 59, 61 
tobacco, 204, 217 
toddlers, 17, 224 
Togo, 10, 40, 42 
Tokyo, 18, 20, 73, 74 
toluene, 189, 197, 199, 200, 201, 213, 215, 216, 217, 
218, 219, 220 
Tonga, 41, 43, 55, 56, 62, 64 
total employment, 210 
tourism, 14 
toxic, 196, 202, 203 
toxicity, 214 
toxicology, 214 
toxoplasmosis, 83 
toys, 123 
tracking, 84 
trade, 209, 210, 227 
trade union, 209, 210 
traditional healers, 99, 175, 178 
traditional practices, 175 
traffic, 195, 217 
trainees, 173 
training, vii, 2, 6, 16, 19, 24, 25, 26, 51, 52, 53, 55, 
58, 60, 61, 63, 64, 66, 67, 69, 73, 79, 82, 85, 87, 
91, 93, 95, 100, 104, 107, 108, 142, 144, 146, 
157, 159, 162, 163, 167, 168, 169, 170, 172, 173, 
174, 176, 177, 182, 183, 184, 186, 208, 211, 224, 
225, 226, 227, 228 
training programs, 6, 16, 55, 162 
transducer, 81, 148 
transfer, 112 
transistor, 145 
transition, 186 
transitional countries, 225 
translation, 71, 137 
transmission, 112 
transparency, 20, 185 
transportation, 84 
trauma, 17, 37, 96, 176, 191 
travel, 169 
trend, 6, 12, 81, 86 
trial, 103, 122, 146, 148, 153, 164 
tribal, 12, 110 
trichloroethylene, 197, 213, 217, 220, 221 
Trinidad and Tobago, 43 
trucks, 196 
trust, 148, 185, 225 
trypanosomiasis, 13 
tuberculosis, 37 
tumors, 133 
Tunisia, 40, 43 
Turkey, 40, 43, 99 
Turkmenistan, 40, 42 
Tuvalu, 10, 11, 41 
tympanic membrane, 95, 125, 126, 127, 128 
tympanometry, 88, 91, 95, 109, 123, 125, 127, 129, 
182 
U 
U.S. economy, 23 
Uganda, 9, 10, 14, 40, 42, 91, 144, 203 
UK, viii, 30, 31, 64, 139, 229 
Ukraine, 9, 14, 40, 42 
ultraviolet, 161 
ultraviolet light, 161 
UN, 11, 41 
underemployment, 11 
undergraduate, 52, 67, 157 
unemployment, 11, 209 
UNEP, 202, 203, 204, 221 
UNESCO, 171, 179 
UNICEF, 80, 82, 83, 84, 96, 104 
unilateral, 30, 31, 80, 98, 100, 114, 131, 132, 134, 
136, 137 
United Arab Emirates, 40, 44 
United Kingdom, 15, 21, 40, 44, 52, 53, 57, 59, 60, 
64, 107, 112, 142, 167, 169, 225, 231 
United Nations, 8, 11, 14, 16, 80, 104, 153, 178, 221, 
224 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 
8, 10, 178 
United Nations Environmental Programme, 221 
United States, 1, 6, 8, 9, 11, 14, 19, 23, 40, 44, 53, 
63, 67, 68, 86, 92, 102, 107, 112, 136, 141, 143, 
144, 169, 170, 207, 223, 227, 228, 231 
universities, 54, 62 
urban, 11, 13, 16, 31, 46, 47, 93, 102, 130, 143, 144, 
158, 162, 169, 173, 176 
urban areas, 16, 93, 143, 173 
urban centres, 169, 176 
urban population, 173 
urbanized, 184 
urinary, 220 
urine, 203 
Uruguay, 40, 43 
US dollar, 7, 144 
users, 24, 143, 144, 147, 148, 150, 153, 161 
Utah, 224 
Uzbekistan, 40, 42 
Review

Index 
 
253
V 
vaccination, 84 
vaccinations, 84 
vaccine, 84 
vaccines, 18, 105, 152 
validation, 130, 135 
validity, 103, 113, 132 
values, 25, 112, 115, 116, 126, 145, 204 
Vanuatu, 10, 11, 41, 43 
variability, 52, 90, 91, 101 
variable, 133 
variables, 10 
variance, 85 
variation, 25, 51, 52, 58, 62, 66, 67, 84, 171 
vascular, 191 
vector, 202 
vegetables, 202 
vehicles, 24, 91 
Venezuela, 40, 43 
ventilation, 83 
venue, 75, 169 
vertigo, 111 
vibration, 131, 132, 211 
victims, 185 
video, 116, 157, 174 
Vietnam, 26, 32, 42, 47, 171, 175 
village, 12, 18, 90, 91, 148, 182, 186 
virus infection, 96 
viscose, 199 
visible, 148 
vision, ix, 46, 92, 129, 225 
visual, 87, 88, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 
122, 123, 138, 140, 142, 219 
visual stimulus, 115 
visual system, 219 
vocational, 62, 63, 66 
vocational training, 62, 66 
voice, 23, 79, 94, 116, 119, 120, 135, 139 
voicing, 135 
volatility, 198 
vomiting, 111 
VRA, 115, 116, 117, 119, 138 
vulnerability, 11 
W 
wages, 211 
walking, 94 
war, 62 
Washington, 18, 19, 46, 99, 152, 218, 219, 221 
water, 82, 112, 197 
weakness, 11, 94 
wealth, 2, 8, 169, 200, 223, 226 
weapons, 190 
wear, 143, 151, 212 
web, 35, 45 
websites, 223, 224, 228 
welfare, 83, 173, 195, 206 
well-being, 9, 10, 108 
West Africa, 12, 14, 15, 19, 42, 44, 100, 203 
West Bank, 43 
Western countries, 168 
windows, 113, 211 
wireless, 229 
Wisconsin, 31, 47 
women, 13, 14, 184 
wood, 193, 195, 196, 218 
work environment, 17, 62, 192, 214 
workers, 11, 15, 16, 18, 66, 70, 75, 82, 90, 91, 92, 
93, 95, 105, 111, 112, 157, 163, 164, 170, 174, 
177, 189, 190, 191, 192, 194, 195, 197, 199, 200, 
201, 202, 204, 205, 207, 208, 210, 211, 212, 213, 
214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 223, 225 
workforce, 11, 19, 62 
working conditions, 207, 208 
workload, 82 
workplace, 189, 190, 195 
World Bank, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 20, 27, 42, 46, 54, 
74, 78, 105, 224 
World Development Report, 20, 105 
World Health Organisation (WHO), vii, viii, 1, 3, 5, 
6, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 
46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 54, 64, 68, 72, 74, 76, 
78, 83, 85, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 97, 99, 104, 
105, 107, 108, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 123, 
124, 140, 141, 142, 143, 145, 146, 148, 150, 151, 
152, 153, 156, 157, 164, 166, 192, 193, 202, 203, 
204, 205, 208, 216, 221, 224, 227, 228, 231 
World War, 5 
X 
X-ray, 130 
xylene, 189, 197, 199, 200, 201, 213 
xylenes, 220 
Y 
Yemen, 9, 10, 12, 14, 40, 42 
yes/no, 93 
yield, 128, 130 
young adults, 12, 219 
Review

Index 
 
254 
younger children, 89 
Yugoslavia, 40, 43 
Z 
Zimbabwe, 9, 14, 30, 40, 42, 98, 105, 144, 194 
zinc, 143, 148, 161 
 
 
 
Review

