Projection Postulate
499
P
Literature
1. D. Werner: Funktionalanalysis (Springer, Berlin 1995, third edition 2000)
2. F. Riesz and B. Sz.-Nagy: Functional Analysis (Frederick Ungar Publishing, New York 1955;
reprint Dover Publications, Mineola 1991)
3. M. Reed and B. Simon: Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics I: Functional Analysis (Aca-
demic, New York 1972, second edition 1980)
4. G. Ludwig: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics I (Springer, New York 1983), Appendix IV
5. E. Prugoveˇcki: Quantum Mechanics in Hilbert Space (Academic, New York 1971, second edi-
tion 1981; reprint Dover Publications, Mineola 2006)
Projection Postulate
Sheldon Goldstein
In quantum mechanics, the state of a system is given by its  wave function, a
vector ψ in the  Hilbert space of the system. The behavior of the wave function is
governed by two dynamical laws [1, 2]: (1) When the system is closed, i.e., when
it does not interact with its environment, its wave function evolves according to
 Schr¨odinger’s equation
iℏ∂ψ/∂t = Hψ,
(1)
where H is the Hamiltonian of the system. (2) When a measurement is performed
on the system in state ψ, its wave function changes in a different way; it “collapses,”
ψ →Pψ/∥Pψ∥,
(2)
to its (normalized) projection onto the subspace of its Hilbert space associated with
the result of the measurement. Here P is the corresponding  projection operator,
and the denominator provides the normalization, with ∥· ∥the Hilbert space norm,
∥ψ∥2 = ⟨ψ|ψ⟩, given by the inner product ⟨· | · ⟩with which the Hilbert space is
equipped. This transition occurs with probability ∥Pψ∥2, the probability of the cor-
responding result. This rule is called the projection postulate; the associated change
of quantum state (2) is usually referred to as the  wave function collapse or as the
reduction of the state vector.
Strictly speaking, the projection postulate governs, not any measurement, but
only the most basic sort of measurement, called an ideal measurement, one which
changes the wave function as little as possible consistent with obtaining the rel-
evant information. In the simplest case, of an ideal measurement of a quantum
observable A – a self-adjoint operator on the Hilbert space of the system – with
non-degenerate spectrum λα and corresponding  orthonormal basis of eigenvec-
tors |A = λα⟩≡|λα⟩,
A |λα⟩= λα |λα⟩,
(3)

500
Projection Postulate
Cb
|Ψ>
|lb>
|la>
Ca
Fig. 1 Illustration of the Projection Postulate – the transition (4) from Cα|λα⟩+ Cβ|λβ⟩(with
Cα > 0 and Cβ > 0) to |λα⟩
we have that P = |λα⟩⟨λα|, so that (2) becomes
ψ →|λα⟩
(4)
(up to an irrelevant phase factor) when the result of the measurement is λα, and this
occurs with probability |⟨λα|ψ⟩|2 (Fig. 1). In other words, if
ψ =

cβ |λβ⟩
(with

|cβ|2 = 1),
(5)
then according to the projection postulate, an ideal measurement of A in the state ψ
will yield the result λα and wave function |λα⟩with probability |cα|2.
It should perhaps be stressed that what is intended by “result” in the projection
postulate is the ﬁne-grained result, corresponding to a single eigenvalue λα. For ex-
ample, if the measurement yields the result that A is in the interval (a, b) (and this
interval contains more than one eigenvalue λβ), the after-measurement wave func-
tion will of course not be given by (2) with P the projection operator corresponding
to (a, b),
P =

a<λβ<b
|λβ⟩⟨λβ|,
(6)
but rather will be the eigenstate |λα⟩belonging to the speciﬁc eigenvalue λα found
in the measurement – the ﬁne-grained result. Nonetheless, if instead of an ideal
measurement of A itself an ideal measurement or determination of whether or not
A is in (a, b) were performed, the use of (6) would indeed be appropriate.

Projection Postulate
501
P
In standard quantum theory, the projection postulate plays a crucial but contro-
versial role: crucial, because standard quantum theory makes contact with physics
and the results of experiments via the measurement axioms of quantum theory, the
most important of which is the projection postulate; and controversial, because the
projection postulate appears to conﬂict with Schr¨odinger’s equation. This appar-
ent conﬂict is the notorious measurement problem of quantum mechanics, or, what
amounts to the same thing, the paradox of  Schr¨odinger’s cat. See also  Bohmian
mechanics; Measurement theory; Metaphysics in Quantum Mechanics; Modal In-
terpretation; Objectiﬁcation.
A variety of proposals have been put forward for resolving the measurement
problem. For many of these, whether in fact they do solve the problem remains
highly controversial. Two proposals that clearly resolve the measurement problem
are the  GRW theory and the  pilot-wave formulation of quantum mechan-
ics ( Bohmian mechanics). In the former, collapse of the wave function during
measurement is achieved, and the projection postulate recovered, by a stochas-
tic modiﬁcation of the Schr¨odinger dynamics on the microscopic level [3]. (See
Consistent histories, Ignorance interpretation, Ithaca Interpretation, Many Worlds
Interpretation, Modal Interpretation, Orthodox Interpretation, Transactional Inter-
pretation).
The cleanest resolution is provided by Bohmian mechanics. In Bohmian mechan-
ics, arguably the simplest version of quantum mechanics, the projection postulate
emerges in a straightforward manner as a consequence of the measurement-like
interactions between system and apparatus that are present when an ideal measure-
ment occurs [4]. A critical ingredient in this derivation is the notion of the wave
function of a subsystem of a larger system, a notion made possible by the additional
structure, beyond the wave function, present in Bohmian mechanics, namely the
actual conﬁguration Q of the larger system.
Primary Literature
1. P. A. M. Dirac: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1930)
2. J. von Neumann: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer, Berlin 1932);
English translation by R. T. Beyer: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Prince-
ton University Press, Princeton 1955)
3. G. C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini, T. Weber: Uniﬁed Dynamics for Microscopic and Macroscopic Sys-
tems, Physical Review D 34, 470–491 (1986)
4. D. D¨urr, S. Goldstein, N. Zangh`ı: Quantum Equilibrium and the Role of Operators as
Observables in Quantum Theory, Journal of Statistical Physics 116, 959–1055 (2004), quant-
ph/0308038
Secondary Literature
5. D. J. Grifﬁths: Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (Benjamin Cummings, San Francisco 2004)
6. R. Shankar: Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Springer, Berlin 1994)

