220
Exclusion Principle (or Pauli Exclusion Principle)
16. Y. Aharonov and E. Gruss, eprint quant-ph/0507269 (2005); Aharonov and Rohrlich, op. cit.,
Sect. 18.3.
17. Y. Aharonov and L. Vaidman, On the two-state vector reformulation of quantum mechanics,
Phys. Scrip. T76, 85–92 (1998).
18. Aharonov and Rohrlich op. cit., p. 131.
Exclusion Principle (or Pauli Exclusion
Principle)
Michela Massimi
The exclusion principle, introduced by Wolfgang Pauli in 1925 [1], is a fundamental
scientiﬁc principle in quantum mechanics. It explains a wide range of phenomena,
from the stability of matter at the level of stars and galaxies to the inner constitution
of particles at the level of coloured quarks. The exclusion principle states that there
cannot be in nature two  electrons, or two protons, or two coloured quarks, or,
more in general, any two fermions (i.e. spin-1/2 particles obeying the  Fermi–Dirac
statistics) in the same dynamic state. Formally, this means that any system consisting
of two or more indistinguishable fermions is expressed by antisymmetric functions
as opposed to symmetric functions. Symmetric functions for two indistinguishable
particles are such that the state vector of the composite system does not change sign
under permutation of space and spin coordinates of the two particles, i.e.
13√
2
ar
1

⊗
as
2

+
as
1

⊗
ar
2

whereas in antisymmetric functions the state vector does change sign under permu-
tation of the space and spin coordinates of the two particles
13√
2
ar
1
 ⊗
as
2
 −
as
1
 ⊗
ar
2

The exclusion principle then prescribes the mathematical nature of quantum states
allowed for fermions: it excludes all classes of mathematically possible states dif-
ferent from the antisymmetric ones. To say that the state vector of the composite
system is antisymmetric is mathematically equivalent to saying that the dynamic
states of the two particles are different. Although the exclusion principle is nor-
mally associated with the above formulation in terms of antisymmetrization of the
state vector of a composite system, this was not Pauli’s original formulation of the
principle. In fact, the actual origins of the exclusion principle can be traced back to
the Bohr–Sommerfeld old  quantum theory before 1925.

Exclusion Principle (or Pauli Exclusion Principle)
221
E
The principle was indeed introduced by Pauli at the end of 1924 as an “ex-
tremely natural” empirical rule in the attempt to provide an explanation for some
spectroscopic anomalies that had vexed physicists such as Alfred Land´e (1888–
1976), Werner Heisenberg (1901–76), Niels Bohr (1885–1962) and Wolfgang Pauli
(1900–1958) in the early 1920s. According to the Bohr–Sommerfeld old quantum
theory, each bound electron in an atom should be characterised in terms of a set
of  quantum numbers describing the energy state, n, the angular momentum, l,
and the orientation with respect to a magnetic ﬁeld, ml, respectively  Spin; Stern–
Gerlach experiment; Vector model. The Bohr–Sommerfeld theory ( Bohr’s atomic
model) was used to explain the closure of electronic shells in atoms according to the
periodic table, as well as to account for atomic spectra. But by 1921 it became clear
that there were some serious problems with Bohr’s schema for the closure of elec-
tronic shells; nor were the quantum numbers sufﬁcient to account for the complex
spectral lines observed in some chemical elements, such as alkali metals and alkaline
earths, among others. Even more puzzling were some spectroscopic anomalies ob-
served when chemical elements were placed in a weak or strong external magnetic
ﬁeld: these spectroscopic anomalies were known as anomalous  Zeeman effect
and  Paschen–Back effect, respectively. An understanding of both spectroscopic
anomalies and closure of electronic shells required some drastic changes in the old
quantum theory, and between 1921 and 1924 Alfred Land´e, Werner Heisenberg,
Niels Bohr and Wolfgang Pauli all tried to tackle these problems and put forward
different theoretical proposals (see [4, 6]). A conclusive understanding came only
in 1924, when in his three-year long struggle to understand the anomalous Zee-
man effect, Pauli abandoned the previous theoretical models and came up with the
bold idea of introducing a fourth degree of freedom for electrons in atoms, which
he referred to as the electron’s Zweideutigkeit (the “twofold”, or, as is more fre-
quently translated, “two-valued” intrinsic angular momentum of electron). A year
later, Ralph Kronig (1904–1995) and, independently, George E. Uhlenbeck (1900–
1988) and S. Goudsmit (1902–78) reinterpreted this fourth degree of freedom as the
electron  spin, s. In conjunction with the introduction of a fourth degree of free-
dom for the electron, Pauli introduced also a new empirical rule for the closure of
electronic shells.
“I can trace back the closure of groups (. . .) to a single prescription that seems to me
extremely natural. I am thinking of a so strong magnetic ﬁeld that all electrons can be
characterised through the symbol nk1,m1,m2. Then it should be forbidden that more than
one electron with the same (equivalent) n belongs to the same values of the three quantum
numbers k1, m1, m2. When an electron corresponds to a given nk1,m1,m2–state, this state is
occupied.”1
Thus, the exclusion principle was born as an empirical rule for the closure of
electronic shells that Pauli called Ausschließungsregel or meine Ausschlußregel
1 Pauli’s letter to Alfred Land´e, 24 November 1924. In [3], p. 180. Note here that n refers to the
so-called principal quantum number deﬁning the energy state of the electron; k is the azimuthal
quantum number (in modern notation l) deﬁning the orbital angular momentum, and m1, m2 are
two magnetic quantum numbers representing the interaction energy with a strong magnetic ﬁeld.

222
Exclusion Principle (or Pauli Exclusion Principle)
(exclusion rule), while Heisenberg teasingly referred to it Pauli’s Verbot der
¨aquivalenten Bahnen (Pauli’s prohibition of equivalent orbits). Pauli admitted
that ‘we cannot give a closer foundation to this rule, yet it seems to present itself
in a very natural way’. [1, p. 776] There was a long way to go for this empiri-
cal rule to be promoted to the rank of a scientiﬁc principle in the new quantum
mechanics after 1925. The history of the exclusion principle is entwined with the
development of quantum mechanics after 1925 as a new theoretical framework
into which Pauli’s rule was built from the ground up. When ﬁfteen years later, in
1940, Pauli proved the  spin–statistics theorem [2], it became clear that not only
electrons but any half-integral spin particle obeyed the Fermi–Dirac statistics and
hence the exclusion principle. The impact of this result for subsequent scientiﬁc
developments is striking: for instance, when quarks were introduced in the 1960s,
they were automatically taken as particles obeying the exclusion principle, given
their half-integral spin and the consequent spin-statistics connection established
by Pauli’s theorem. This was the beginning of a research programme that led to
quarks (see  Color Charge Degree of Freedom in Particle Physics; Mixing and
Oscillations of Particles; Particle Physics; Parton Model; QCD; QFT) and hence to
 quantum chromodynamics (QCD).
The history of the exclusion principle raises an important philosophical issue:
why and how could Pauli’s empirical rule – tentatively introduced in the context of
the old quantum theory to solve some puzzling spectroscopic phenomena – become
a building-block of quantum mechanics? Answering this question means addressing
the challenging philosophical issue of what a scientiﬁc principle is, how it originates
and how it can possibly be experimentally tested and veriﬁed. For a philosophical
analysis of these questions in relation to the history of Pauli’s exclusion principle,
see [5].
Primary Literature
1. W. Pauli: ¨Uber den Zusammenhang des Abschlusses der Elektronengruppen im Atom mit der
Komplexstruktur der Spektren. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 31, 765–83 (1925)
2. W. Pauli: The Connection Between Spin and Statistics. Physical Review 58, 716–22 (1940)
3. W. Pauli: Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel mit Bohr, Einstein, Heisenberg u.a., Band 1: 1919–
1929, edited by A. Hermann, K. von Meyenn, V. F. Weisskopf (Berlin: Springer 1979)
Secondary Literature
4. J. L. Heilbron: The Origins of the Exclusion Principle. Historical Studies in the Physical Sci-
ences 13, 261–310 (1982)
5. M. Massimi: Pauli’s exclusion principle - The origin and validation of a scientiﬁc principle
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2005)
6. D. Serwer: Unmechanischer Zwang – Pauli, Heisenberg, and the Rejection of the Mechanical
Atom 1923–1925. Historical Studies in the Physical Science 8, 189–256 (1977)

