802
Two-State Vector Formalism
Secondary Literature
9. E. Merzbacher: Quantum Mechanics, 2nd ed. (Wiley, New York 1970)
10. S. Gasiorowicz: Quantum Physics (Wiley, New York 1996)
11. A. Sommerfeld: Lectures on Theoretical Physics, Optics (Academic, New York 1954, 27–28)
Two-State Vector Formalism
L. Vaidman
The two-state vector formalism (TSVF) [1] is a time-symmetric description of the
standard quantum mechanics originated in Aharonov, Bergmann and Lebowitz [2].
The TSVF describes a quantum system at a particular time by two quantum states:
the usual one, evolving forward in time, deﬁned by the results of a complete
measurement at the earlier time, and by the quantum state evolving backward in
time, deﬁned by the results of a complete measurement at a later time.
According to the standard quantum formalism, an ideal (von Neumann) measure-
ment at time t of a non-degenerate variable A tests for existence at this time of the
forward evolving state |A = a⟩(it yields the outcome A = a with certainty if this
was the state) and creates the state evolving towards the future:
|(t′)⟩= e−i
ℏ

 t′
t Hdt|A = a⟩,
t′ > t.
(1)
(In general, the Hamiltonians H(t) at different times do not commute and a time
ordering has to be performed.)
In the TSVF this ideal measurement also tests for backward evolving state
arriving from the future ⟨A = a| and creates the state evolving towards the past:
⟨(t′′)| = ⟨A = a|e
i
ℏ

 t′′
t
Hdt,
t′′ < t.
(2)
Apart from some differences (discussed below) following from the asymmetry
of the memory arrow of time, one can perform similar manipulations of the forward
and backward evolving states. In particular, neither can be cloned and both can be
teleported.
Given complete measurements, |A = a⟩at t1 and |B = b⟩at t2, the complete
description of a quantum system at time t, t1 < t < t2, is the two-state vector [3]:
⟨| |⟩,
(3)
where the states ⟨| and |⟩are obtained using (1, 2).

Two-State Vector Formalism
803
T
The two-state vector provides the maximal information regarding the way the
quantum system can affect at time t any other system. In particular, the two-state
vector describes the inﬂuence on a measuring device coupled with the system at
time t. An ideal measurement of a variable O yields an eigenvalue on with proba-
bility given by the Aharonov, Bergman, Lebowitz (ABL) rule:
Prob(on) =
|⟨|PO=on|⟩|2

j |⟨|PO=oj |⟩|2 .
(4)
This is, essentially, a conditional probability. We consider an ensemble ( ensem-
bles in quantum mechanics) of pre- and post-selected quantum systems with the
desired outcomes of the measurements at t1 and t2. Only those systems (and all
of them) are taken into account. Intermediate measurement (or the absence of it)
might change the probabilities of the outcomes of the post-selection measurement
at time t2, but this is irrelevant: it only changes the size of the pre- and post-selected
ensemble given the size of the pre-elected ensemble at t1.
Note that the ABL rule simpliﬁes the calculation of probabilities of the out-
come of intermediate measurements. In the standard approach we need to calculate
the time evolutions between time t and t2 of all states corresponding to all pos-
sible outcomes of the intermediate measurement, while in the TSVF we have to
calculate evolution of only one (backward evolving) state.
The pre- and post-selected quantum system (described by the two-state vector)
has very different features relative to the system described by a single, forward
evolving quantum state. The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle does not hold: non-
commuting  observables might be simultaneously well deﬁned, i.e. each observ-
able might have a dispersion-free value provided that it was the only one measured
at time t. As an example, consider a  spin- 1
2 particle in a ﬁeld free region. Assume
that σz was measured at t1, σx at t2 and both were found to be 1. When at time t,
an outcome of a measurement of a variable (if measured) is known with certainty,
it is named an element of reality [8]. Thus, in the above example, both σz = 1 and
σx = 1 are such elements of reality.
For pre- and post-selected systems there might be apparently contradicting ele-
ments of reality. Consider now a spin- 1
2 particle which can be located in two boxes,
A and B, which is described by the two-state vector:
⟨| |⟩= 1
3 (⟨A, ↑z| + ⟨A, ↓z| −⟨B, ↑z|)
(|A, ↑z⟩+ |A, ↓z⟩+ |B, ↑z⟩) , (5)
(where |A, ↑z⟩represents the particle in box A with spin ↑z). Then, there are two
elements of reality: “the particle in box A with spin up” and “the particle in box A
with spin down”. Indeed, the measurement of the projection PA↑has the outcome
PA↑= 1 with certainty, and the outcome of the other projection (if measured in-
stead) is also certain: PA↓= 1. This can be readily veriﬁed using the ABL rule or
the standard formalism.

804
Two-State Vector Formalism
Obviously, the measurement of the product of the projections is certain too:
PA↑PA↓= 0, so this example shows also the failure of the product rule: at time t
we know with certainty that if A is measured, the outcome is a, and if B is measured
instead, the outcome is b, but nevertheless, the measurement of AB is not ab. (The
product rule does hold for the standard, pre-selected quantum systems.)
This example is mathematically equivalent to the three-box paradox [4] in which
a single pre- and post-selected particle can be found with certainty both in box A if
searched there and in box B if searched there instead. These bizarre properties of
elements of reality generated much controversy about the counterfactual usage of
the ABL rule ( Counterfactuals in Quantum Mechanics). It should be stressed that
“elements of reality” should not be understood in the ontological sense, but only in
the operational sense, given by their deﬁnition.
The most important outcome of the TSVF is the discovery of weak values of
physical variables [5]. When at time t, another system couples weakly to a variable
O of a pre- and post-selected system ⟨| |⟩, the effective coupling is not to one
of the eigenvalues, but to the weak value:
Ow ≡⟨|O|⟩
⟨|⟩.
(6)
The weak value might be far away from the range of the eigenvalues, and this can
lead to numerous surprising effects, described in the entry  Weak Value and Weak
Measurement.
There is an important connection between weak and strong measurements. If the
outcome of a strong measurement O = oi is known with certainty, the weak mea-
surement has to yield the same value, Ow = oi. The inverse is true for dichotomic
variables: if the weak value is equal to one of the two eigenvalues, a strong mea-
surement should give this outcome with certainty.
In both strong and weak measurements, the outcome manifests via the shift of
the pointer variable. For strong measurements it might be random, but for weak
measurements it is always certain (and equals to the weak value). Sometimes it is
called “weak-measurement elements of reality” [9].
A generalization of the concept of the two-state vector (with natural general-
izations of the ABL rule and weak value) is a “superposition” of two-state vectors
which is called a generalized two-state vector [4]:

i
αi⟨i| |i⟩.
(7)
A quantum system described by a generalized two-state vector requires pre- and
post-selection of the system together with an ancilla which is not measured between
the pre- and post-selection.
Systems described by generalized two-states vectors might have more unusual
properties. The  Heisenberg uncertainty relation breaks down in even more
dramatic way: we can have a set of many non-commuting observables having

Two-State Vector Formalism
805
T
dispersion-free values and not just the trivial case of two, one observable deﬁned
by pre-selection and another by post-selection. An extensively analyzed example of
this kind is “the mean king problem” [6, 7] in which we have to know all observ-
ables of the set of the non-commuting observables for all possible outcomes of the
post-selection measurement.
Another natural multiple-time non-local generalization is to consider 2N-state
vector (or generalized 2N-state vector) which provides a complete description of
how a (composite) system can affect other systems coupled to it in N space-time
points. Preparing and testing such 2N-state vectors require multiple-time and
non-local measurements. (Note that causality puts some constrains on such mea-
surements [10].) An incomplete description in which we associate only one (forward
or backward) evolving state with some space-type points is also of interest. For ex-
ample, two spin- 1
2 particles in an entangled “state” which evolves forward in time
for one particle and backward for the other particle, can be completely correlated:
1
√
2
(|↑⟩A ⟨↑|B + |↓⟩A ⟨↓|B) .
(8)
Here, the measurements of the spin in components in any direction yield the same re-
sult for both particles. There is no pre-selected quantum system with such property.
The TSVF is a time symmetric approach. However, there are some differences
between forward and backward evolving quantum states: we can always create a
particular forward evolving quantum state, say |A = a⟩. We measure A, and if the
outcome is a different eigenvalue than a, we perform an appropriate transformation
to the desired state. We cannot, however, create with certainty a particular backward
evolving quantum state, since the correction has to be performed before we know the
outcome of the measurement. The difference follows from the time asymmetry of
the memory arrow of time. This asymmetry is not manifest in the ABL rule and the
weak value, because the outcome of measurement is the shift of the pointer during
the measurement interaction and this is invariant under changing the direction of
time evolution. The shift is between zero and the outcome of the measurement and
this is where the memory arrow of time introduces the asymmetry. The state “zero”
is always in the earlier time: we do not “remember” the future and thus we cannot
ﬁx the ﬁnal state of the measuring device to be zero.
The TSVF is equivalent to the standard quantum mechanics, but it is more
convenient for analyzing the pre- and post-selected systems. It helped to discover
numerous surprising quantum effects. The TSVF is compatible with almost all in-
terpretations of quantum mechanics but it ﬁts particularly well the  many-worlds
interpretation. The concepts of “elements of reality” and “weak-measurement ele-
ments of reality” obtain a clear meaning in worlds with particular post-selection,
while they have no ontological meaning in the scope of physical universe which in-
corporates all the worlds. Finally, the TSVF provides a framework for a modiﬁcation
of quantum mechanics [11] in which the backward evolving state is actually exists
now, and it is not just a useful tool for describing pre- and post-selected systems. In
this radical proposal there is no collapse and there are no multiple worlds.

806
Two-State Vector Formalism
Literature
1. Y. Aharonov and L. Vaidman, The Two-State Vector Formalism, an Updated Review, in Time
in Quantum Mechanics, Vol 1., Lect. Notes Phys. 734, 399 (2008).
2. Y. Aharonov, P. G. Bergmann and J. L. Lebowitz, Time Symmetry in the Quantum Process of
Measurement, Phys. Rev. B 134, 1410 (1964).
3. Y. Aharonov and L. Vaidman, Properties of a Quantum System During the Time Interval
Between Two Measurements, Phys. Rev. A 41, 11 (1990).
4. Y. Aharonov and L. Vaidman, Complete Description of a Quantum System at a Given Time,
J. Phys. A 24, 2315 (1991).
5. Y. Aharonov, D. Albert, and L. Vaidman, How the Result of Measurement of a Component of
the Spin of a Spin- 1
2 Particle Can Turn Out to Be 100? Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1351 (1988).
6. L. Vaidman, Y. Aharonov and D. Albert, How to ascertain the values of σx, σy, and σz of a
spin-1/2 particle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1385 (1987).
7. B.G. Englert and Y. Aharonov, The Mean King’s Problem: Prime Degrees of Freedom, Phys.
Lett. A, 284 (2001).
8. L. Vaidman, Lorentz-Invariant “Elements of Reality” and the Joint Measurability of Commut-
ing Observables, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 3369 (1993).
9. L. Vaidman, Weak-Measurement Elements of Reality, Found. Phys. 26, 895 (1996).
10. L. Vaidman and I. Nevo, Nonlocal Measurements in the Time-Symmetric Quantum Mechanics,
Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 20, 1528 (2006).
11. Y. Aharonov and E. Gruss, Two-time interpretation of quantum mechanics, quant-ph/0507269
(2005).

