B
Bell’s Theorem
A.J. Leggett
Bell’s theorem, ﬁrst proved by John Stewart Bell (1928–1990) [1] in 1964, is prob-
ably the most celebrated result in the whole of twentieth-century physics. Brieﬂy
stated, it demonstrates that a whole class of theories about the physical world (“ob-
jective local theories”, see below) deﬁned by the conjunction of three apparently
plausible general principles, must yield experimental predictions which under cer-
tain conditions are inconsistent with the predictions of quantum mechanics. Over
the last 35 years a series of experiments motivated by the theorem have shown that
under the relevant conditions the experimental properties of the world are consis-
tent with the predictions of quantum mechanics and thus, subject to certain caveats,
inconsistent with those of the alternative class of theories, so that the latter must
apparently be rejected.
Let’s ﬁrst deﬁne an idealized experimental arrangement which is useful for the
discussion of the theorem (see Fig. 1). A source emits pairs of particles (let us say
for deﬁniteness photons ( light quantum) as is usually the case in the real-life ex-
periments). The photons travel to two different experimental “stations” S1 and S2
which are distant not only from the source but from one another, so that the space-
time points at which they are detected at the stations are spacelike separated in the
sense of special relativity (i.e. there is no time for a light wave, or anything slower,
to pass between them). At (say) station 1 the relevant photon (1) encounters a ran-
domly activated switch which directs it into one of two “measurement devices”.
Each measurement device gives a binary output (“yes” or “no”), but to two different
“questions”. To put a little ﬂesh on this rather abstract formulation, let us imagine
(as is usually the case in practice) that the “measurement” is of photon polarization;
then one measurement device (call it Ma) would consist of a polarizer set to transmit
photons polarized along direction a in the plane orthogonal to its propagation direc-
tion and reﬂect photons with the orthogonal polarization, together with counters
[Ca(+) and Ca(−)] to detect both the transmitted and reﬂected photons. The second
measurement device, Ma′, is similar except that the polarizer now has a transmission
axis a′ which is different from a. A similar setup is constructed at station 2, with
the alternative polarizer axes now b and b′. It is important that the “events” not only
of the arrival of the photons at S1 and S2 but of the activation of the two switches,
i.e. of the “choice” of which of the two alternative measurements to make at each
station, be spacelike separated.
It is further assumed that we are able to identify precisely which photon 2
has been emitted in conjunction with a given photon 1 (e.g. by turning down the
source intensity to a sufﬁciently low value). The output of each of the counters is a
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
24
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

Bell’s Theorem
25
B
=
b
Ca
(−)
Ca
(+)
Polarizer with 
transmission axis a
Ma
Human 
observer 
a
Ma
Source 
of pairs 
RH
Switch 
Mb’
Mb
Space-like separation
Ma’
LH
Switch 
Fig. 1 Schematic setup of experimental arrangement. (a) The source and the two measurement
stations. (b) Details of the measurement apparatus Ma. The apparatuses Ma′, Mb, Mb′ are similarly
constructed
macroscopic event, e.g. an audible click; for complete idealization we may assume
that at each station the click is noted by a conscious human observer (who can later
report what he/she heard) and that the spacetime separation between the event of
random switching at station 1 and that of conscious observation at station 2, and be-
tween the conscious observations at 1 and 2 themselves, is itself spacelike. Needless
to say, real-life experiments do not fulﬁl all of the above requirements, particularly
the last, but I will assume them for the sake of a clean discussion.
It is useful to develop a vocabulary to describe the data obtained in such an exper-
imental setup. Consider a given pair of photons 1 and 2 which we are sure have been
emitted in conjunction. Let us suppose that on this particular occasion the switch at
station 1 has directed photon 1 into counter Ma. Then, if the design is ideal, one of
two things will happen: either counter Ca(+) will click while counter Ca(−) remains
silent, or vice versa. Let us deﬁne a dichotomic variable A so that the measured
value of A is by deﬁnition +1 in the former case and −1 in the latter.

26
Bell’s Theorem
Similarly, if we suppose that the switch at station 2 has directed photon 2 into
measurement apparatus Mb, we can deﬁne a quantity B so that the measured value of
B is by deﬁnition +1 if it is counter Mb(+) which clicks, and −1 if it is Mb(−). Now
let us consider a different pair of photons, for which (say) photon 2 is still switched
into Mb but photon 1 is now switched into Ma′. We can deﬁne B as previously, but
instead of A we must now deﬁne a quantity A′, which has the measured value A′ if
Ma′(+) clicks, etc. Note that for this second pair, the “measured value” of A is not
deﬁned (as was not that of A′ for the ﬁrst pair). A quantity B′ is introduced in the
obviously analogous way. Let us now deﬁne the correlation of A and B, ⟨AB⟩, by
the formula
⟨AB⟩= {N++ (ab) + N−−(ab) −N+−(ab) −N−+ (ab)}
{N++ (ab) + N−−(ab) + N+−(ab) + N−+ (ab)}
(1)
where N++(ab) means the number of occasions on which photon 1 was switched
into counter Ma and photon 2 into Mb, and A and B were both measured to be +1,
etc.; note that the denominator is simply the number of times that 1 was switched
into Ma and 2 into Mb, irrespective of the outcome of the measurements. Corre-
lations ⟨A′B⟩, ⟨AB′⟩, ⟨A′B′⟩are deﬁned analogously. With these deﬁnitions it is
clear that we can measure ⟨AB⟩on one subensemble of the total ensemble of photon
pairs, namely that consisting of those pairs for which photon 1 was switched into
Ma and photon 2 into Mb. Similarly, we can measure the correlation ⟨AB′⟩on a
different subensemble (1 switched into Ma, 2 into Mb′), and so on.
Let us next deﬁne the class of “objective local theories” (OLT’s) whose predic-
tions are to be compared with those of quantum mechanics and with experiment in
situations approximating the idealized one described above. While the details of the
deﬁnition as presented in the literature tend to vary from one author to another and
with Bell’s original one, one can summarize by saying that the class of OLT’s is de-
ﬁned by the conjunction of three independent general hypotheses about the physical
world, which for brevity I will refer to as (1)  locality (2) induction and (3) real-
ism. (As will be discussed below, some treatments in the literature do not explicitly
include (2)). I now discuss these three postulates in turn.
1. Locality (sometimes called  “Einstein locality”) is the postulate, central to
the special theory of relativity, that events which are spacelike separated can-
not causally inﬂuence one another. In the experimental arrangement described
above, this means that (for example) the outcome of a measurement at station 2
cannot depend on the setting of the switch at station 1.
2. Induction means basically our normal assumption about the “arrow of time”,
i.e. that physical  ensembles in quantum mechanics (the collections of systems
which possess reproducible statistical properties) existing at a time t > 0 are
deﬁned only by their past experience (e.g. by the initial conditions at time 0 and
forces acting between 0 and t), and not by anything which is going to happen
at a time later than t. In the relevant experiments this means that the statistical
properties of the subensemble consisting of those pairs of photons on which (say)

Bell’s Theorem
27
B
A and B are measured should be identical to those of the ensemble of photons
as a whole (in intuitive language, the photons cannot “know” in advance which
polarization components are to be measured on them).
In many papers on Bell’s theorem in the literature, postulate (2) is not included ex-
plicitly, probably because of a belief that it is subsumed under (1). This is a rather
delicate issue: within the context of special relativity without any additional con-
straints the belief is obviously correct, in the sense that if one considers three events
X,Y,Z such that X and Y are spacelike separated but both are in the past light cone
of Z, then violation of (2) would allow Z to inﬂuence Y, and we assume that X
inﬂuences Z in the usual way then X can inﬂuence Y, in violation of (1).
However, there is no obvious reason why a general OLT should not incorporate, for
example, the postulate that such “causal triangles” are forbidden to occur, so that it
is useful to incorporate postulate (2) explicitly in the deﬁnition of an objective local
theory.
3. Realism is probably the conceptually trickiest ingredient in the deﬁnition of the
class of OLT’s. In the simplest form (essentially that used by Bell in his original
paper) it is the statement that each individual particle (in the described experi-
ment, each individual photon of a given pair) possesses deﬁnite properties; for
example, each photon 1 carries with it information which determines both how it
will respond if directed by the switch into Ma, and how it will respond if directed
into Ma′. Let’s call this assumption the hypothesis of microscopic realism, and
denote it (3a). Note that while in his original paper Bell, whose original moti-
vation was the issue of the consistency of “hidden-variable” theories ( Hidden
Variables) with quantum mechanics, assumed that the response is deterministic
as in most theories of that type, this is not essential; one can perfectly well con-
sider models where there is intrinsic randomness in the outcome of the relevant
measurement, provided only that the statistics of the latter is completely deter-
mined by information carried by photon 1 alone.
A possible alternative formulation of postulate (3) (call it (3b)) eschews any
statement about the properties of microscopic objects (photons) in favor of state-
ments about (actual and possible) directly observed events at the macroscopic level
(clicks). Consider for example a case in which photon 1 is actually switched into
Ma′; then, of course, this particular photon cannot be measured by Ma, and conse-
quently the value of the quantity A is not deﬁned. Now imagine, contrary to fact, that
this particular photon had been switched into Ma. It is, of course, a (rather trivial)
“fact” about the world that under these (counterfactual) conditions either counter
Ca(+) would have clicked, giving A = +1, or counter Ca(−) would have clicked
(A = −1). In other words we can presumably agree, referring to the given counter-
factual conditions, that
(P1): It is a fact that either A would have been +1, or A would have been −1.
Now consider the subtly different assertion:
(P2): Either it is a fact that A would have been +1, or it is a fact that A would
have been −1.

28
Bell’s Theorem
The assertion of (P2) is called the hypothesis of macroscopic counterfactual def-
initeness (hereafter abbreviated MCFD  Counterfactuals in QM)). In contrast to
assertion 1, which makes as it were no particular metaphysical statement, assertion
(P2) claims that the outcome of an unperformed experiment is a ﬁxed property of
the world. It should be emphasized that the above formulation of the deﬁning pos-
tulates of the class of theories for which Bell’s theorem holds is only one of many
possible such formulations. The equivalence or not of these alternative formulations,
and the advantages and disadvantages of each, has been the subject of an extensive
literature.
With these preliminaries we are now in a position to state and prove Bell’s the-
orem. In the literature, the formulation tends to depend on whether the context is a
discussion of the conﬂict of the predictions of the class of “objective local theories”
with those of quantum mechanics, or rather of that with the experimental data; in the
latter case, an extension of Bell’s original theorem (the “CHSH theorem”) proved
by Clauser et al. [2] a few years after his paper tends to be more directly applica-
ble than the original version. Here I shall present the CHSH theorem, and treat the
original theorem proved by Bell as a special case of it.
The CHSH theorem states that, for any choice whatever of the settings a, b,
a′, b′, any theory of the OLT class must predict the inequality
K

a, b, a′, b′
≡⟨AB⟩+

AB′
+

A′B

−

A′B

⩽2
(2)
(and some related inequalities; in the interests of clarity I state only the ﬁrst, which
is the one most often used in experimental tests). Bell’s original inequality is the
special case of (2) which is obtained under the additional assumption that for A =
−B′ (which in the polarization case means that b′ is orthogonal to a′) the quantity
⟨A′B′⟩= +1, as predicted by quantum mechanics for certain states (see below).
Relabelling the various quantities so as to make closer contact with Bell’s original
notation, we ﬁnd in this case the inequality
⟨AB⟩−⟨CB⟩<= 1 + ⟨AC⟩
(3)
which is known as Bell’s inequality (or more precisely one of Bell’s inequalities;
again for clarity I give only one version). The inequalities (2) and (3) do not at ﬁrst
sight seem particularly dramatic, but the crucial point is that for certain states and
settings they are violated by the predictions of quantum mechanics. For example,
if we consider the pair of photons emitted in a so-called 0+(J = 0, + →J =
1, −→J = 0, +) atomic transition like that used in the experiments on Ca, we
ﬁnd that quantum mechanics unambiguously predicts, under ideal conditions, the
result
⟨AB⟩= cos (2θab)
(4)
where θab is the angle between the settings a and b. Setting a′= 0, b = 3π/8,
a = π/4 and b′ = 3π/8, we ﬁnd that the quantum mechanical prediction for this
choice of settings is
K = 23/2

Bell’s Theorem
29
B
which violates the CHSH inequality by a factor of 21/2. Similarly, for a 0−transi-
tion, for which quantum mechanics predicts ⟨AB⟩= sin (2θab), (hence ⟨AB⟩= +1
for a and b orthogonal as assumed by Bell, who actually treated explicitly the spin
singlet state of two spin-1/2 particles, which is isomorphic to the 0−photon pair)
the inequality (3) is violated by the quantum prediction over a range of settings
(this is most intuitively obvious when (e.g.) a and c are both close to zero and b
to π/4, since the LHS of (3) is then fairly obviously linear in θab while the RHS is
quadratic).
The proof of the CHSH theorem and hence of Bell’s theorem as a special case,
while conceptually subtle, requires only the most elementary algebra. For deﬁnite-
ness I will take the third postulate deﬁning an OLT as the assumption of MCFD; it
is straightforward to adapt the argument so as to substitute the assumption (3a) of
microscopic realism. Then a possible derivation of the inequality (3) (one of many!)
goes as follows:
1. By assumption (3b), the quantity A exists for each photon 1 and possesses a
deﬁnite value, independently of whether or not that photon was directed into Ma.
Similarly for A′, B, B′.
2. By postulate (1), the value of A for any particular photon 1 cannot depend on
the choice of what to measure at the distant station 2, nor on the outcome of that
measurement. Similarly for A′, B, B′.
3. Hence each of the quantities A, A′, B and B′ exists and takes a value +1 or −1
which is, in the case of A, independent of whether it is B or B′ which is measured
at the distant station, and vice versa. In other words, the value of A which occurs
in the product AB is identical to that occurring in AB′, etc.
4. It is then a matter of elementary algebra to show that for any given pair the
quantities AB, etc. must satisfy the inequality
AB + AB′ + A′B −A′B′ ⩽2
(5)
(Any reader who doubts the truth of this statement is invited simply to exhaust
the 16 possibilities!).
5. It then immediately follows that when taken on the whole ensemble of pairs (ir-
respective of which quantities were actually measured on them) the expectation
values ⟨AB⟩all etc. satisfy an inequality of the same structure as (5).
6. By postulate (2), the statistical properties of each subensemble are identical to
those of the complete ensemble. Hence, for example, the average of (AB) over the
whole ensemble may be legitimately identiﬁed with the measured quantity ⟨AB⟩,
which is of course strictly the average for the ab-ensemble only. Making this
identiﬁcation, we see that the measured correlations satisfy the CHSH inequality
(3), QED.
Over the last 35 years, starting with the work of Freedman and Clauser [3] in 1972,
a large number – probably hundreds – of experiments based on Bell’s theorem have
been performed. With a handful of exceptions, these experiments have all obtained
results which are consistent with the predictions of quantum mechanics, and prima

30
Bell’s Theorem
facie inconsistent with those of the whole class of objective local theories, in some
cases by hundreds of standard deviations. However, no existing experiment has con-
formed entirely to the idealized setup described above, and this gives rise to various
so-called “loopholes” in the refutation of OLT’s. Generally speaking, these loop-
holes arise because of doubts about whether the OLT postulates are adequately
satisﬁed by a given real-life experimental setup (for example, whether the relevant
“events” of realization are sufﬁciently separated that one can legitimately invoke the
locality assumption)  Loopholes in Experiments.
Apart from the question of whether or not the conditions to invoke the OLT
postulates have actually been satisﬁed in existing experiments, the implications of
Bell’s theorem are so disturbing that the theorem itself has been repeatedly chal-
lenged; that is, it has been argued that even if it turns out that even when (if?) all
the loopholes have been plugged the experimental data still conform to the quan-
tum mechanical predictions, this will not mean that we have to abandon the class
of OLT’s. In the present author’s opinion, all these challenges to Bell’s theorem as
such have been uniformly unsuccessful: at best they reduce to the claim that one or
other of the deﬁning assumptions of an OLT is less overwhelmingly plausible than
generally believed, while leaving the theorem itself intact.
If we assume that the loopholes will progressively be blocked and the data con-
tinue to conform to the quantum-mechanical predictions, so that we must conclude
that the class of OLT’s is ruled out, which of the three deﬁning assumptions should
we abandon? To abandon postulate (1) would be in prima facie conﬂict with the ba-
sic postulates of the special theory of relativity, and is therefore something that most
practising physicists (as distinct from most popular writers on the subject!) would be
extremely loath to do. Of course, we cannot rule out the possibility, which has been
advocated by some prominent physicists, that (for example) an ultimate theory of
 quantum gravity will reveal special relativity to be only an approximate descrip-
tion of reality, so that postulate (1) might fail, but at present no such theory seems
to be developed in a sufﬁciently concrete way to give us this escape-hatch. To chal-
lenge postulate (2) would be to abandon our conventional notions concerning the
“arrow of time”; again, it cannot be excluded that future theoretical developments
might force us to do just that, but the prospect is certainly not appealing; most of us
would not currently know how to do physics without this deeply ingrained assump-
tion. The weakest link would appear to be postulate (3), and that is probably what
most practising physicists would choose to sacriﬁce; that is, they would claim that
neither the assumption (3a) of microscopic realism nor that (3b) of MCFD is actu-
ally true of the real world. In the words of the late Asher Peres [4], “unperformed
experiments have no results”!
While this conclusion is in some sense in the spirit of the Copenhagen interpre-
tation of quantum mechanics, it is still a very surprising and, if one really takes it
seriously, alarming fact about the physical world.1 See also  Aspect experiment
and Section on Bell inequalities in  Wave function collapse.
1 This work was supported by the National Science Foundation through grant no.NSF-EIA-01-
21568.

Berry’s Phase
31
B
Primary Literature
1. J.S. Bell: On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Physics 1, 195 (1964)
2. J.F. Clauser, M.A. Horne, A. Shimony and R.A. Holt: Proposed experiment to test local hidden-
variable theories. Phys. Rev. Lett. 23, 880 (1969)
3. S.J. Freedman and J.F. Clauser: Experimental test of local hidden-variable theories. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 28, 934 (1972)
4. A. Peres: Unperformed experiments have no results. Am. J. Phys. 46, 745 (1978)
Secondary Literature
5. N. Herbert: Quantum Reality: beyond the new physics (Anchor Press, Garden City, NY 1985)
6. B. d’Espagnat: Conceptual foundations of quantum mechanics (Benjamin, Menlo Park,
CA 1971)
7. F. Selleri: Quantum mechanics versus local realism: the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox
(Plenum, New York 1988)
8. J. F. Clauser and A.Shimony: Bell’s theorem: experimental tests and implications. Reps. Prog.
Phys. 41, 1881 (1978)
Berry’s Phase
Daniel Rohrlich
Berry’s phase [1] is a quantum phase effect arising in systems that undergo a slow,
cyclic evolution. It is a remarkable correction to the quantum adiabatic theorem and
to the closely related Born–Oppenheimer approximation [2]. Berry’s elegant and
general analysis has found application to such diverse ﬁelds as atomic, condensed
matter, nuclear and elementary  particle physics, and optics. In this brief review,
we ﬁrst derive Berry’s phase in the context of the quantum adiabatic theorem and
then in the context of the Born–Oppenheimer approximation. We mention general-
izations of Berry’s phase and analyze its relation to the  Aharonov–Bohm effect.
Consider a Hamiltonian Hf (R) that depends on parameters R1, R2, . . . , RN,
components of a vector R. Let us assume that Hf (R) has at least one discrete and
nondegenerate eigenvalue Ei(R) with |Ψi(R)⟩its eigenstate; Ei(R) and |Ψi(R)⟩in-
herit their dependenceon R from H(R). If the vector R changes in time, then |Ψi(R)⟩
is not an exact solution to the time-dependent  Schr¨odinger equation. But if R
changes slowly enough, the system does not  quantum jump to another eigenstate.
Instead, it adjusts itself to the changing Hamiltonian. A heavy weight hanging on a
string illustrates such adiabaticity. Pull the string quickly – it snaps and the weight
falls. Pull the string slowly – the weight comes up with it.

