572
Quantum Hall Effect
13. C. Rovelli, Quantum Gravity (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004).
14. H. D. Zeh, The Physical Basis of the Direction of Time. Fifth Edition (Springer, Berlin, 2007).
See also http://www.time-direction.de.
15. B. Zwiebach, A First Course in String Theory (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004).
16. Review articles by various authors in the online journal Living Reviews in Relativity, see
http://relativity.livingreviews.org/
Collections of Essays on General and Special Topics
17. Quantum Theory of Gravity, edited by S. M. Christensen (Adam Hilger, Bristol, 1984).
18. Quantum Concepts in Space and Time, edited by R. Penrose and C. J. Isham (Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1986).
19. Conceptual Problems of Quantum Gravity, edited by A. Ashtekar and J. Stachel (Birkh¨auser,
Boston, 1991).
20. Quantum Gravity: From Theory to Experimental Search, edited by D. Giulini, C. Kiefer, and
C. L¨ammerzahl. Lecture Notes in Physics 631 (Springer, Berlin, 2003).
21. The Structural Foundations of Quantum Gravity, edited by D. Rickles, S. French, and J. T.
Saatsi (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2006).
22. Quantum Gravity: Mathematical Models and Experimental Bounds, edited by B. Fauser,
J. Tolksdorf, and E. Zeidler (Birkh¨auser, Basel, 2007).
Popular Books
23. J. B. Barbour, The End of Time (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2000).
24. B. Greene, The Elegant Universe (Vintage, London, 2005).
25. L. Smolin, Three Roads to Quantum Gravity (Perseus Books Group, 2002).
Quantum Hall Effect∗
Rolf R. Gerhardts, J¨urgen Weis, and Klaus von Klitzing
In 1980, Klaus von Klitzing made the unexpected discovery that, at sufﬁciently low
temperatures and high magnetic ﬁelds, the Hall resistance of a two-dimensional
electron system assumes quantized values, which turned out to depend only on fun-
damental constants and integer numbers. For this discovery, which nowadays is used
to reproduce the unit of the electrical resistance with an unprecedented accuracy, he
was honored in 1985 with the Nobel Prize in Physics. A coherent explanation of the
∗This contribution is based on an original German article by Klaus von Klitzing, Rolf Gerhardts,
Juergen Weis, ‘25 Jahre Quanten Hall-Effekt’, in Physik Journal (June 2005, pp. 37–44). It was
translated by Rolf Gerhardts and is reprinted by permission of the authors and Physik Journal.

Quantum Hall Effect
573
Q
fact that, independently of the material and the exact geometry of the Hall sample,
these quantized values can be reproduced with such high accuracy, has been found
only in recent years.
The Phenomenon and its Discovery
The quantized Hall effect (QHE) was discovered early in February 1980, when
Klaus von Klitzing performed a series of experiments at the high-ﬁeld magnet-
laboratories in Grenoble, France, in order to investigate the transport properties
of silicon based metal-oxide-semiconductor ﬁeld-effect-transistors (MOSFET’s),
which up to now form the basic building blocks of highest-integrated electrical
circuits. The aim was to improve on the mobility of charge carriers in these de-
vices. This requires to understand, which kind of scattering processes (caused by
surface roughness, interface charges, impurities, etc.) has the strongest effect on
the motion of the  electrons in the thin conducting layer at the interface be-
tween silicon and silicon-oxide, which is only a few nanometers thick. To this
end, G. Dorda (Siemens AG) and M. Pepper (Plessey Company) had provided spe-
cially prepared Si–MOSFET’s (Fig. 1), which allowed for four-point-measurements
on the conducting layer so that, in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic ﬁeld, its
usual (longitudinal) resistance Rxx = Ux/Ix and its Hall resistance Rxy = Uy/Ix
could be determined independently. The electron density in the conducting layer
could be changed by a suitable gate voltage. To suppress disturbing scattering pro-
cesses due to the electron–phonon interaction, the experiment was carried out at low
S
D
H,P
P
H
W
L
Uy
Ix
Ux
y
x
B
Fig. 1
Typical silicon-MOSFET for the measurement of the xx- and xy-components of the mag-
netoresistance tensor of the conducting layer underneath the gate. For a ﬁxed current between the
source (S) and drain (D) contacts, the potential differences between the contacts P–P and H–H are
directly proportional to the resistances Rxx and Rxy, respectively. A positive gate voltage increases
the charge carrier density underneath the gate

574
Quantum Hall Effect
5.2.1980
longitudinal resistance
at B= 0 T
at B= 19,8 T
Hall resistance
at B= 19,8 T 
electron density (~gate voltage)
Fig. 2
The ﬁrst experiment showing the quantized-Hall-effect, performed at liquid-He temper-
atures. Without magnetic ﬁeld the electric resistance of the Si–MOSFET (blue curve) decreases
monotonously with increasing gate voltage, since the electron density increases linearly with the
gate voltage. At a magnetic ﬁeld of 19.8 T, the Hall resistance (black) shows pronounced plateaus at
values of the gate voltage, for which the longitudinal resistance (red) vanishes. The marker points
to the quantized Hall plateau around ﬁlling factor ν = 4
temperatures (typically 4.2 K) and at high magnetic ﬁelds (several Tesla). As func-
tion of the electron density (gate voltage) the Hall resistance Rxy showed plateaus
while simultaneously the longitudinal resistance Rxx vanished (see Fig. 2). The
important discovery was that the plateau values did not depend on any speciﬁc pa-
rameters of the experiment, not on source-drain or gate voltage, not on the magnetic
ﬁeld or any geometry factors, and that they can be written as Rxy = h/(ie2), where
h is  Planck’s constant, e is the elementary charge, and i = 1, 2, 3, . . . is an
integer [1].
There have been many attempts to understand this result, and it is instructive to
compare it with the “classical” description of the Hall effect. It has been known
since 1966 that the electrons, forced by a positive gate voltage towards the inter-
face between the silicon crystal and an oxide layer, may form a two-dimensional
electron system (2DES) [2]. For these electrons the energy of motion perpendicular
to the interface is quantized and if, at sufﬁciently low temperature, only the lowest
quantum state is partially occupied and separated from the next quantized state by
an energy much larger than the thermal energy, then the motion perpendicular to the
interface is frozen out and only the free motion parallel to the interface is possible.
This is the situation of a 2DES. The knowledge about transport and optical proper-
ties of 2DES’s at the time of the discovery of the QHE has been reviewed by Ando,
Fowler, and Stern [24].

Quantum Hall Effect
575
Q
If one assumes that in the 2DES electric current density and ﬁeld distribution are
homogeneous between the voltage contacts, one obtains from the resistance values
the components
ϱxx = RxxW/L,
ϱxy = Rxy
(1)
of the magneto-resistivity tensor ⃗⃗ϱ, which relates the local current density j in the
2DES and the local electric ﬁeld E by E = ⃗⃗ϱ · j.
Classically, a high magnetic ﬁeld ⃗B = (0, 0, B) perpendicular to an ideal,
non-interacting 2DES forces the electrons to move uniformly on circular orbits (cy-
clotron motion). An additional homogeneous in-plane electric ﬁeld E = (Ex, 0, 0)
leads to a “Hall drift” with velocity ⃗vD
= E × ⃗B/B2 = (0, vD, 0), where
vD = −Ex/B. Multiplying with the surface density ns of the 2DES and with the
electron charge, we obtain the Hall current density j = −ens ⃗vD. Thus, if there
is no scattering of the electrons, the classical consideration yields ϱxx = 0 and
ϱxy = B/(ens). This indicates already that under the condition of the QHE the
conduction electrons move without being scattered.
Due to the Landau quantization, the periodic cyclotron motion is restricted to
discrete energy values. In the ideal case then the energy spectrum of the 2DES con-
sists of discrete energy levels with gaps, which are given by the cyclotron energy
and the  Zeeman spin-splitting, which both increase with increasing magnetic
ﬁeld. Also the degeneracy of the Landau levels increases with increasing magnetic
ﬁeld: the number of states per Landau level (and per spin direction) and per area is
nL = B/0, with the magnetic ﬂux density B (which usually is just called mag-
netic ﬁeld) and the magnetic ﬂux quantum 0 = h/e. In a homogeneous 2DES with
area density ns the ﬁlling factor of the discrete (Landau and spin) levels becomes
ν = ns/nL = (h/e)ns/B. For an ideal 2DES without scattering, the calculation of
the Hall resistivity is not affected by the Landau quantization, so that one obtains
ϱxy = B/(ens) = h/(νe2).
(2)
Thus, the plateau values of the QHE correspond to integer values of the ﬁlling
factor, ν = i, i.e. to a situation in which a certain number of the discrete but
macroscopically degenerate energy levels is completely occupied, while all other
levels are empty. In this situation the occupied states are separated from the empty
states by a ﬁnite energy gap, which at sufﬁciently low temperatures can not be
bridged by thermal excitations, i.e. no (quasi-elastic) scattering, and, as a conse-
quence, no damping or dissipation processes are possible in the 2DES.
Surprisingly these “integer-quantized” values ϱxy = h/(ie2) are observed as
values of the global Hall resistance RH = Rxy not only for the discrete values
of the ratio ns/B, which correspond to an integer ﬁlling factor of the 2DES, but in
wide intervals around these values, provided the temperature is low enough. Figure 2
shows the experimental curves with the characteristic plateaus in the Hall resistance
Rxy and the corresponding zeroes in the longitudinal resistance Rxx, which revealed
the quantized Hall effect [1].

576
Quantum Hall Effect
The fact, that the values of the resistances Rxx and Rxy are unchanged over ﬁ-
nite intervals of the gate voltage (in the plateau regions), led to the presumption,
that there the electrostatically induced electrons occupy “localized states”, which
do not contribute to the electronic transport. A large amount of work about localiza-
tion and other “reservoir models”, which assume that a part of the induced electrons
does not participate in the electronic transport, has been published in the past [25].
But these are interpretations of the QHE, which usually rely on additional assump-
tions, e.g. that the 2DES is essentially homogeneous and can be described by a
position-independent resistivity tensor. If this were correct, one should expect that
edge effects lead to a dependence of the measured resistance values on the sample
width. This is, however, not the case.
The plateau values of the Hall resistance do not depend on the presence or
absence of such localized states, and are with very high accuracy given by the
relation Rxy = h/(ie2) (i = 1, 2, 3, . . . ). They are independent of details of
the experimental setup, and especially of geometrical details. Since in the plateau
regime the longitudinal resistance vanishes, Rxx = 0, the exactly quantized value
is obtained for the Hall resistance, even if the Hall voltage is measured between
contacts on both sides of the sample, which are not located exactly opposite to each
other (see Fig. 1). The plateau values are even independent of the semiconductor ma-
terial, which contains the 2DES. For instance, in GaAs/(AlGa)As hetero-structures,
where the 2DES occupies states which result from the conduction-band minimum
of GaAs near the -point, and each Landau level splits into two levels with opposite
 spin, one observes the same values as in Si-MOSFET’s, where each Landau level
splits into four states, since in addition to the spin-splitting one has a valley-splitting.
[Whereas isotropic, unstressed silicon has six equivalent, degenerate conduction-
band minima, only two of them (those with heavy effective masses in the direction
perpendicular to the Si/SiO2 interface) contribute to the bound states occupied by
the 2DES, and the degeneracy of their energy levels is lifted, since the interface de-
stroys the inversion symmetry.] This lifted fourfold degeneracy of the Landau levels
has been identiﬁed in the experiment [1] shown in Fig. 2.
Nowadays the QHE discovered by K. von Klitzing in 1980 is usually called
the “Integer Quantum Hall Effect” (IQHE), in order to distinguish it from the
“Fractional Quantum Hall Effect” (FQHE), which was discovered in 1982 on
high-mobility GaAs/AlxGa1−xAs hetero-structures and shows plateaus of the Hall
resistance with values RH = h/(f e2), where f is a fraction of simple integer num-
bers with odd-integer denominator [3]. The most prominent examples are f = 1/3
and f = 2/3, but many others have been reported, too. [The high mobility was
achieved by “modulation doping”, a method which separates the donors, needed
to provide the electrons for the 2DES, by a spacer from the 2DES, in order to re-
duce the scattering of the electrons by the ionized-donor potentials.] The FQHE
was again an unexpected discovery. Whereas the IQHE was believed to be a single-
particle effect, for which the mutual Coulomb interactions between the electrons
of the 2DES are unimportant, the FQHE was attributed to such interactions, which
may at fractional ﬁlling of the Landau levels lead to collective ground-states with
strong correlations. For simple fractions such correlated ground-states have been

Quantum Hall Effect
577
Q
calculated [4] soon after the discovery of the FQHE. In 1998 Dan C. Tsui, Horst L.
St¨ormer and Robert B. Laughlin were awarded the Nobel Prize for the discovery of
the FQHE and its explanation.
In the subsequent years the number of publications containing the keyword
“quantum Hall effect” in the title or the abstract increased drastically, to about one
publication per day at present. In the meantime, the QHE is discussed not only
within solid state physics, but also in nearly all other areas of modern physics. The
spectrum of published papers extends from “Quantum Computing” in quantum-
Hall-systems to “Quantum-Hall-Quarks”, and even to a higher-dimensional QHE in
string-theory. Up to now more than ten books have been published on the Quantum-
Hall-Effect [26].
Quantized Hall Effect and Metrology
The most important equation in connection with the quantized Hall resistance,
UH = (h/ie2) · I, was conﬁrmed in the ﬁrst experiment with such a high accu-
racy, that even the ﬁnite input impedance (1 M) of the x-y-recorder, used for
the voltage measurement, had to be taken into account as a correction. An accu-
rately reproducible electric resistance, independent of the geometry of the device
and of microscopic details of its material, was, of course, of great importance
for metrological institutes as a new and universal resistance standard. Therefore,
this new quantum phenomenon (the occurrence of Planck’s constant h makes this
obvious) was submitted for publication under the title “Realization of a Resis-
tance Standard based on Fundamental Constants”. At that time, however, it seemed
more important to improve the value of Sommerfeld’s ﬁne-structure constant α,
given by α−1 = (h/e2)(2/μ0c) = 137.036 . . ., where the magnetic ﬁeld constant
μ0 = 4π10−7 N/A2 and the velocity of light in vacuum, c = 299 792 458 m/s, had
and have today ﬁxed values. Therefore the publication appeared under the title “New
Method for High-Accuracy Determination of the  Fine-Structure Constant based
on Quantized Hall Resistance” [1].
In the meantime the importance of the QHE as the basis of a resistance standard
has been fully appreciated [27]. Its applicability relies on the facts, that the plateaus
measured (at ﬁxed magnetic ﬁeld) as a function of the electron density (see Fig. 2),
or (at ﬁxed electron density) as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld (see Fig. 3), are
extremely ﬂat, and that the quantized Hall resistance (around ﬁlling factor ν = 1)
apparently has always the fundamental value h/e2 = 25 812.807 . . . . After the
discovery of this macroscopic quantum effect, the experiment has been repeated
in many metrological institutes with much higher accuracy as can be achieved in
a research lab. The effect proved to be extremely stable and reproducible. Obvi-
ously the remaining inaccuracy of resistance measurements results mainly from
the uncertainty in the reproduction of the SI ohm. Due to the internationally ac-
cepted deﬁnitions of the fundamental SI units second (s), meter (m), kilogram
(kg), and ampere (A), all mechanical and electric quantities are well deﬁned.

578
Quantum Hall Effect
magnetic field [Tesla]
0
5
10
0
1
2
3
i=4
i=5
0.2
0.4
i=6
Hall−resistance
i=1,2,3,...
.
= h
Rxy
i e 2
Rxy [kΩ]
Rxx [kΩ]
longitudinal resistance
Fig. 3 Typical traces of the Hall resistance Rxy and of the longitudinal resistance Rxx of a 2DES
as measured as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld B on samples of average quality. The zeros of Rxx
coincide with the plateaus of Rxy at the quantized values h/(i ·e2). At small B-values one observes
the classical Drude behavior: Rxy ∝B, Rxx = constant
However, the fundamental unit ampere can be reproduced only with a relatively
large error of the order of 10−6, if it is calculated, according to its deﬁnition, from
the force between two current-carrying wires. As a consequence, the derived unit
1  = 1 s−3 m2 kg A−2, which depends on all fundamental units, is available only
with an error, which is even larger than 10−6.
Nowadays the SI unit ohm is known with a smaller error than the fundamental
unit ampere, because a resistance can be realized as the ac-impedance |Z(ω)| =
1/(ωC) of a capacitance C. Since the capacitance C of a capacitor depends only
on its geometry (with vacuum as dielectric medium), the SI-ohm can be realized by
using only the fundamental units of time (to measure the frequency ω/2π) and of
length (to calculate C for a so called calculable Thompson–Lampard-capacitor[5]).
As these units are known with very high accuracy, also the SI-unit ohm can be
realized with an error as low as 10−7. Using this and the QHE, one can obtain the
ﬁne-structure constant with the same accuracy.
The quantized Hall resistance is, however, more stable and better reproducible
than any resistance that has been calibrated in SI-units. Therefore, the Comit´e
Consultatif d’Electricit´e suggested to take as value of the von-Klitzing constant
RK = h/e2 exactly 25 812.807 , with the notation RK−90. This value RK−90 =
25 812.807  has been accepted since 1. 1. 1990 as the reference value for resis-
tance calibrations, and is now denoted as conventional von-Klitzing constant [6].
Direct comparisons by different national institutes showed that the reference val-
ues deviated [7] by less than 2 · 10−9, provided the published rules for reliable

Quantum Hall Effect
579
Q
measurements had been obeyed [8]. Unfortunately this high reproducibility and
stability of the quantized Hall resistance can not be used immediately for a cor-
respondingly accurate determination of the ﬁne-structure constant, since the value
of the quantized Hall resistance in SI-units is not known so accurately. Only in
connection with other experiments, e.g. high-precision measurements (and calcu-
lations) of the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron, of the gyro-magnetic
ratio of the proton, or of the neutron mass, does one obtain a best ﬁt for the value
of the ﬁne-structure constant with an error of only 3.3 · 10−9. This leads to a
value RK = (25812.807449 ± 0.00086)  for the von-Klitzing constant (CODATA
2002) [27]. Very accurate values of fundamental constants (especially of α) are im-
portant in view of speculations about a possible time-dependence of some of the
fundamental constants. Experimental indications of a cosmic evolution of the ﬁne-
structure constant α are under dispute, but could not be conﬁrmed till now. The rate
of change |∂α/∂t| is – if non-zero at all – less than 10−16 per year.
A combination of quantized Hall effect and Josephson-effect (which allows to
express the electric voltage in units of h/e) makes it possible to relate the electric
power (which depends on Planck’s constant h) with the mechanical power (which
depends on the mass m). Measurements with a so called Watt balance yield the
best value for Planck’s constant [9], provided the mass is accurately known on the
basis of the “International Prototype Kilogram” (which is not stable in time). Al-
ternatively, one could ﬁx the value of Planck’s constant and thereby obtain a new
realization of the unit of mass (just as the ﬁxing of the velocity of light led to a
new realization of the unit of length). At present suggestions are under discussion,
to ﬁx exactly not only the Planck constant h, but also the elementary charge e (and,
thereby, the quantized Hall resistance). This would replace and allow to abandon the
deﬁnitions of the basic units “kilogram” and “ampere”, which have been valid up to
now, but are unstable in time (kg) and hard to realize with satisfactory precision (A).
Physics of the Integer-Quantized Hall Effect
Bulk Effects and Edge States
A particle with electric charge q (q = −e for electrons), moving with velocity ⃗v in
a homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld ⃗B, is subjected to the Lorentz force ⃗F = q(⃗v × ⃗B),
perpendicular to both ⃗v and ⃗B. In a current-carrying, three-dimensional, laterally
conﬁned conducting layer of thickness d in a perpendicular magnetic ﬁeld B this
leads to charge accumulation and depletion at opposite lateral boundaries and,
thereby, to a Hall voltage UH = RH(B) · I (named after Edwin Hall, who described
this effect in 1879 for the ﬁrst time). Within the Drude model, which describes the
charge carriers as a classical gas, the Hall resistance is given by
RH = −B/(qnqd),
(3)

580
Quantum Hall Effect
and reveals important properties of the conductor: the density nq of free charge
carriers and the sign of their charge (q = +e for holes and q = −e for electrons).
For a two-dimensional electron system the product nqd = ns reduces to the
area density and the Hall resistance simpliﬁes to RH = B/(ens). Indeed the Hall
resistance increases at small magnetic ﬁelds linearly with increasing B (see Fig. 3),
and its slope allows to determine the area density ns of the 2DES. Only at relatively
high magnetic ﬁelds do the plateaus with the quantized values RH = h/(νe2) occur,
where ν equals an integer number i = 1, 2, 3, . . . (or a fraction in the case of
the FQHE). Here we see a fundamental difference between the Hall resistance at
low and at high magnetic ﬁelds: while at low B-values RH depends on material
parameters like electron density ns, the quantized plateau values at high B-values
are absolutely independent of material properties.
A corresponding behavior is observed for the longitudinal resistivity. The clas-
sical Drude theory yields the B-independent value ϱxx = m⋆/(e2nsτ), which
depends, in addition to the electron density ns, on the effective mass m⋆of the
electrons and the momentum relaxation time τ, which describes the scattering
of electrons, at low temperatures predominantly by randomly distributed impuri-
ties. Indeed a B-independent resistance Rxx is observed in the experiment at low
B-values (see Fig. 3). At somewhat higher B-values Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) os-
cillations occur, with an amplitude, which increases with increasing B until the
minima of the SdH oscillations reach the value zero. At still higher B-values the
QHE sets in, and the plateau values of Rxy are accompanied by vanishing Rxx,
which no longer contains information about the material parameters m⋆, ns, and τ.
The vanishing of Rxx in the plateau regimes of the QHE means that the occur-
rence of the quantized Hall plateaus is accompanied by a dissipationless current ﬂow
along the Hall bar. This does, however, not mean that there is no dissipation at all in
the system. In fact the two-point resistance, which is measured by the voltage-drop
between the current-carrying contacts S (source) and D (drain), equals (in the regime
of the QHE) the Hall resistance, i.e. the electric power RHI 2 is dissipated. This Joule
heat is produced at opposite corners of the sample near the current-carrying contacts,
as could be visualized by means of the fountain effect with liquid helium [10].
The question remains, how can we understand the occurrence of plateaus in
the Hall resistance with the quantized values, and the simultaneous disappearance
of dissipation in the bulk of the sample? In the following we will concentrate on
the case of GaAs-based heterostructures, to avoid complications due to the multi-
valley conduction-band-structure of silicon. A homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld B in
z-direction, perpendicular to the plane of the 2DES, leads to Landau quantization
of the cyclotron motion, so that in the ideal case (neglecting collision broaden-
ing effects due to scattering) the electrons occupy Landau levels at discrete energy
eigenvalues
εn,± = (n + 1/2)ℏωc ± (g⋆/2)μBB,
(4)
with the cyclotron energy ℏωc = ℏeB/m⋆, the Landau level index n = 0, 1, 2, , . . . ,
the spin  quantum numbers ±1, the Bohr magneton μB = eℏ/(2me), and the

Quantum Hall Effect
581
Q
effective Land´e factor g⋆. Each of these energy levels is macroscopically degener-
ate, with nL = eB/h states per unit area. Since the  degeneracy of the levels,
as well as their distance, increases with increasing B, at constant density the elec-
trons will, with increasing B, be redistributed to lower Landau levels. This leads,
as a function of B, to a saw-tooth-like shape of the Fermi energy (i.e., at ﬁnite
temperature the chemical potential μch), which follows in the ideal case the en-
ergy of a partly occupied Landau level until this is totally depleted, then it jumps
to the next lower level and follows this with increasing B, and so on. If scattering
and level broadening effects, and also ﬁnite temperature, are taken into account,
the increasing parts of the function μch(B) are no longer strictly linear, but qual-
itatively the saw-tooth-behavior survives as long as the energy gaps between the
collision-broadened Landau levels are much larger than the thermal energy kBT , as
could be conﬁrmed experimentally by employing a metallic single-electron transis-
tor as local electrometer [11].
The chemical potential jumps from one Landau level to an adjacent one exactly
at those values of the magnetic ﬁeld B, at which the ﬁlling factor ν = ns/nL as-
sumes integer values, ν = i. At these values the occupied states are separated from
the empty states by an energy gap, which is much larger than kBT , so that, accord-
ing to the Pauli principle, no scattering processes are possible. In this situation any
reasonable quantum theory of magneto-transport in a 2DES yields [24]
Rxx = 0,
Rxy = h/(ie2),
(5)
i.e. the values of the free 2DES without any interactions. Does this (trivial) result
explain the IQHE? Certainly not! So far we have tacitly assumed a homogeneous
2DES, and then the result (5) applies only to isolated values of the magnetic ﬁeld.
The problem is to understand, why it applies with extreme accuracy to B-intervals
of ﬁnite width, the plateaus.
Theories, which try to explain the QHE as property of the resistivity tensor of an,
on the average, homogenous (and inﬁnite) sample (e.g. localization theories) have
already been mentioned. If, at a certain density, such a theory would yield the result
(5) in a certain B-interval, application to a sample of ﬁnite width W must take into
account that this result can not be valid in a depletion region (typically of width
δ ≳100 nm) near the sample edges, where the electron density drops to zero. Then
one has to expect to measure deviations from the quantized values, which are of the
order δ/W. This is for realistic values of W (≲1 mm) many orders of magnitude
larger than the accuracy with which the quantized values can be reproduced in ex-
periments. In addition to such theoretical arguments, there are many experimental
hints, that the assumption of a homogeneous sample is neither correct nor important
for the explanation of the QHE.
There are many experimental indications that, in the plateau regime of the IQHE,
the interior of the sample is not important: it can be partly removed or, by suitable
gates, tuned to another electron density, without changing the quantized value of the
measured Hall-resistance. Also the exact arrangement of the contacts plays a minor
role (see Fig. 4). This has been interpreted as indication that the relevant currents

582
Quantum Hall Effect
H
2DES
Gate
D
H
S
Edge
Fig. 4 The measured value of the quantized Hall resistance does not depend on variations of the
electron density in the interior of the sample, e.g. depletion or accumulation by a gate (provided the
gate does not reach from one edge to the opposite one). Even etching a hole through the sample has
no effect. Also the precise position of the voltage contacts (H) is irrelevant, provided the current
carrying contacts S and D are located between them
ﬂow near the sample edges. The edge channel picture of the IQHE, elaborated by
M. B¨uttiker [12] since 1988, proved to be very successful for the description of the
resistances measured on complicated samples with many gates and contacts, and
found its way into textbooks [28]. We will, however, focus on a somewhat differ-
ent microscopic picture of the IQHE, which evolved from more recent theoretical
and experimental investigations of the position dependence of electron and current
density in (narrow) Hall bars.
Compressible and Incompressible Regions
As already mentioned, for a long time it was general belief that Coulomb inter-
actions were unimportant for the understanding of the IQHE. However in 1992,
D.B. Chklovskii, B.I. Shklovskii, and L.I. Glazman [13] pointed out that, in a real
2DES with lateral conﬁnement, in which the electron density decreases from a ﬁnite
bulk value to zero near the edges, electronic screening effects become extremely
important in high magnetic ﬁelds, where the magnetic length ℓ= (ℏ/eB)1/2 =
(10 T/B)1/2 · 8.11 nm is much smaller than the lengths scale, on which electron
density and conﬁnement potential vary. About a decade later it turned out that im-
mediate consequences of these screening effects can be measured experimentally,
and open a new approach to the understanding of the QHE.
If one neglects screening effects under these conditions, the Landau bands show a
spatial dispersion given by the external conﬁnement potential, bending upwards near
the edges. If in the bulk of the sample several Landau levels are occupied, the den-
sity proﬁle drops like a step-function towards zero at the edges, with wide plateaus
(given by the separation of adjacent Landau bands at the Fermi level), which corre-
spond to the integer ﬁlling factor of the occupied bands and are separated by steep
steps of a width given by the extent of the Landau wavefunctions, which is of the
order ℓ. This is unrealistic, since this electron density proﬁle would change strongly
with changing magnetic ﬁeld, which would cost a lot of Coulomb energy.

Quantum Hall Effect
583
Q
In the idealized case of small collision broadening and low temperature, the
(thermodynamic) density of states (∂ns/∂μch) is extremely high, if the chemical
potential falls onto a Landau energy, and is nearly zero, if it falls into a gap between
such energies. In the ﬁrst case screening is nearly perfect, since it costs no energy to
change the position of electrons. In the second case no screening is possible since
occupied and empty electron states are separated by the large (as compared with
kBT ) energy gap. In an inhomogeneous sample with sufﬁciently high bulk density
one meets both situations. There are “compressible” regions in which screening is
nearly perfect, so that the total, screened potential (i.e. the sum of the external con-
ﬁnement potential and the Hartree potential produced by the spatial distribution of
the 2DES) is ﬂat and one of the Landau energy levels is “pinned” (within kBT ) to
the Fermi level (i.e. the electrochemical potential μ⋆
ch, which is constant, if the inho-
mogeneous 2DES is in thermal equilibrium). In addition there are “incompressible”
regions, in which μ⋆
ch falls between adjacent Landau bands, so that there no redis-
tribution of electrons is possible and the density is constant, since the ﬁlling factor
of the Landau levels there has a ﬁxed integer value.
In the case of idealized Hall bars (translation invariance in one direction) these
regions become parallel stripes. Compressible stripes, in which adjacent Landau
bands are pinned to μ⋆
ch, are usually separated by an incompressible stripe across
which the total potential varies by the amount of the energy difference between these
two bands. Chklovskii et al. [13] have evaluated these ideas for a 2DES in a half-
plane geometry for the idealized case of zero level broadening and zero temperature,
and under some simplifying assumptions (only in-plane charges, perfect screening
where ns(y) > 0), which allowed analytical calculations. For instance, for a 2DES
with bulk ﬁlling factor ν and metal gate at y < yedge the distance yν = |y −yedge|
of the (center of the) innermost incompressible stripe with ﬁlling factor int(ν) and
its width aν are given by
yν =
d0
1 −[int(ν)/ν]2 ,
aν = 4yν
ν
(
int(ν)a⋆
B
πd0
,
(6)
where the length d0 depends on the average electron density, a⋆
B is the effective
Bohr radius, and int(ν) is the integer part of ν. Experiments using single-electron
transistors as electrometer succeeded to make this stripe-structure in the depletion
regime of a 2DES visible [14, 15]. A schematic plot of such a stripe-structure is
shown in Fig. 5.
These calculations have soon been applied to a simpliﬁed Hall-bar geometry [16]
and generalized to a self-consistent thermodynamic equilibrium theory [17, 18], in
which the screened potential is calculated from the electron density by solution of
Poisson’s equation and the electron density is calculated from the total effective
potential V (y) in a Hartree-type approximation,
n(y) =
∞

n

s=±

dY
2πℓ2 |ψ(s)
n,Y (y)|2f

εn,s(Y) −μ⋆
ch

.
(7)

584
Quantum Hall Effect
ns
D(ε)
ε
μch
μch
ns
D(ε)
ε
x
x
ns
ns
y
y
y
2DES
y
B=0
B=0
incompressible
Fig. 5 Sketch of the density of states D(ε) without and with applied magnetic ﬁeld B, and of the
resulting relation between chemical potential and electron density, μch(ns), for a homogeneous
2DES (left half of the ﬁgure). Also shown are sketches of the density proﬁle near the sample edge
and, on the right side, the compressible regions (with states near the Fermi level) are indicated as
dark, incompressible regions as white stripes
Here εn,s(Y) are the energy eigenvalues with normalized wavefunctions (x, y) =
L−1/2
x
exp(ixkx)ψ(s)
n,Y (y) and Y = ℓ2kx, f (E) = 1/[1 + exp(E/kBT )] is the
Fermi-Dirac distribution function, and μ⋆
ch is the electrochemical potential, which
is constant in thermodynamic equilibrium. If the potential V (y) varies slowly on
the scale ℓ, one may neglect the spatial extent of the wavefunctions, |ψ(s)
n,Y (y)|2 ≈
δ(y −Y), and replace the energy eigenvalues by εn,±(Y) = εn,± + Vconf(Y), where
εn,± are the energy eigenvalues (4) of the homogeneous system without conﬁnement
potential. This leads to the often used Thomas-Fermi approximation
n(y) =

dε D(ε)f

ε −μch(y)

,
(8)
where D(ε) is the density of states (DOS) of the homogeneous 2DES (here the
Landau DOS), and μch(y) = μ⋆
ch −V (y) is the position-dependent chemical poten-
tial. This approach allowed to demonstrate how the incompressible stripes evolve
with decreasing temperature [17,18]. The possible relevance of the incompressible
stripes for the QHE was, however, still not clear.
A major breakthrough was achieved when a low-temperature scanning-force-
microscope was developed and employed to measure Hall-potential-proﬁles, i.e.
the change of the potential landscape due to a fed-in current Ix, as compared to
the thermodynamic equilibrium state (Ix = 0) [19, 20]. Figure 6 shows typical
Hall-potential-proﬁles measured on narrow samples of 10 to 15 μm width (because
of the restricted scanning area) for different magnetic ﬁelds (i.e. average ﬁlling
factors) in the regime of a quantized Hall plateau (QHP). The proﬁles show very
different position dependences: (a) For B-values well above a QHP the Hall poten-
tial drops linearly across the whole sample, i.e. the Hall electric ﬁeld is constant and

Quantum Hall Effect
585
Q
0
2
4
6
8
10
2.09
2.04
2.0
2.73
2.5
2.31
2.14
1.96
1.88
1.76
1.67
7
8
9
10
8
10
12
14
16
2.62.4 2.2
2
1.8
z
x
y
2DES
scanning force
microscope
magnetic field
Rxy [kΩ]
1,73
1,82
1,90
1,995
2,003
2,04
2,10
2,17
2,32
2,50
2,75
15
0
a
c,d
b
a
a
c,d
b
Theory
ν =
position y  [µm]
position y  [µm]
magnetic field [T]
normalized Hall−potential
filling factor ν
I
Fig. 6 Hall-potential proﬁles for several magnetic ﬁelds (characterized by ﬁlling factors ν), which
were measured across the narrow part of the sample sketched in the upper left part of the ﬁgure.
For comparison, the Hall resistance Rxy in this magnetic ﬁeld region is also shown, after [19,20].
The ν-dependent characteristics of the potential proﬁles are the following. Type (a): linear potential
variation; type (b): non-linear drop in the center, very close to integer ﬁlling factor; (c): potential
drop only cross incompressible stripes, constant Hall potential in the interior; (d): partial drop near
the edges and linear variation in the interior of the sample. Right panel: calculated Hall-potential
proﬁles for an idealized 15 μm wide sample (low current, linear response) after [21]
the current is spread over the whole sample (as one would expect from the Drude
theory). (b) As the magnetic ﬁeld is lowered and enters the upper edge of the QHP,
the Hall potential drops in a non-linear (and sometimes even non-monotonous)man-
ner in the center of the sample. Although in this region extremely small changes of
the magnetic ﬁeld may lead to considerable changes of the potential proﬁle, one
measures the quantized value for the Hall resistance. (c) At lower B-values well
inside the QHP the Hall potential is constant in the center of the sample and drops
only across two stripes, which move with decreasing B towards the sample edges
and become narrower. The current now ﬂows exclusively through these stripes. (d)
For B slightly below the lower edge of the QHP still some fraction of the Hall po-
tential drops near the edges, but a linear variation in the center region sets in. With

586
Quantum Hall Effect
4
6
8
10
12
6
5
4
3
2
0
1
2
3
filling factor
magnetic field   [T]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2
3
4
6
10
8
position y   [µm]
magnetic field   [T]
filling factor
position y   [µm]
Fig. 7
Color-coded plot of Hall-potential proﬁles, measured for a large interval of magnetic ﬁelds,
which covers several quantum-Hall plateaus. As can be seen in the magniﬁcation, the Hall voltage
drops at the positions of the innermost incompressible stripes, described by (6), after [19,20]
further decreasing B, the fraction dropping near the edges decreases to zero and
the linear behavior (a) is recovered, until the upper edge of the QHP with the next
higher integer ﬁlling factor is reached and behavior (b) sets in. This kind of behavior
repeats itself for each QHP, as is shown in Fig. 7. [19,20] But what is the reason for
these different types of Hall-potential-proﬁles?
The position and the B-dependence of the stripes observed in the case (c)
seemed to be in good agreement with the position and B-dependence predicted
for the incompressible stripes. This motivated model calculations of the current
distribution in narrow Hall-bars under high magnetic ﬁelds [21, 22]. An external
non-equilibrium current Ix =

dyjx(y) was applied to the idealized Hall-bar (with
translation invariance in x-direction). The resulting current density j and the “driv-
ing electric ﬁeld” E = ∇μ⋆
ch(x, y) were assumed to satisfy a local ohmic relation
E(y) = ⃗⃗ϱ(y) · j(y). The local resistivity tensor ⃗⃗ϱ(y) = [⃗⃗σ(y)]−1 was taken from a
calculation of the conductivity tensor for a homogeneous 2DES by replacing its ﬁll-
ing factor ν by the local value ν(y). The feedback of the applied current on the
selfconsistent electrostatic potential, which is measured in experiment, was cal-
culated under the assumption of local equilibrium [22]. These calculations, and a
critical examination of the validity of the Thomas-Fermi approximation [21], lead
to the following picture for an idealized Hall-bar with translation invariant, symmet-
ric external conﬁnement potential Vconf(y) = Vconf(−y).
At high temperatures (kBT ≳0.3 ℏωc) magnetic quantum effects are smeared
out and the Drude theory holds: the current is distributed over the whole sample, the
Hall electric ﬁeld is constant, i.e. the Hall potential varies linearly across the sam-
ple. At low temperatures (kBT ≲0.01 ℏωc) a strong dependence on the magnetic

Quantum Hall Effect
587
Q
ﬁeld B is found. If B is so high, that everywhere in the sample the ﬁlling factor
is less than one, ν(y) < 1, the 2DES is compressible, the current is distributed
over the whole sample and the Hall potential varies linearly across the sample (very
similar to the result of the Drude theory). As the magnetic ﬁeld is lowered, the ﬁll-
ing factor ν(y) = 1 is reached for a value B = B1 in the center y = 0 of the
sample. For B ≲B1 an incompressible stripe (IS) evolves in the center, which
broadens rapidly with decreasing B until it splits into two stripes, since a com-
pressible stripe occurs in the center. With further decreasing B the two IS’s move
towards the sample edges and become narrower. Their position and width is rea-
sonably well approximated by the analytical expressions (6) as long as they are
sufﬁciently wide. But at a B-value ˆB1 the width of the IS’s becomes zero, and in
the interval ˆB1 > B > B2 no IS’s exist, where B2 is the B-value at which an
IS with local ﬁlling factor ν(y) = 2 evolves in the middle of the sample. At still
lower B-values, this IS broadens, then splits into two IS’s, which shrink while mov-
ing towards the edges and vanish, before an IS with the next integer value of the
ﬁlling factor occurs, and so on. At sufﬁciently high temperature T , the longitudi-
nal resistivity, and as a consequence the current density, is ﬁnite everywhere in the
2DES. As T is lowered, at positions with integer values of the ﬁlling factor the lon-
gitudinal resistivity becomes small while the current density becomes large. This is
the situation (d) observed in the experiment: partial drop of the Hall voltage near
the edges and linear variation in the center. If, at sufﬁciently low temperature, IS’s
with integer ﬁlling factor evolve, the total applied current ﬂows in these stripes, so
that the longitudinal resistance Rxx of the sample vanishes. Since only IS’s with
the same value of the local ﬁlling factor exist, the Hall resistance Rxy assumes the
quantized value, with an error which becomes exponentially small in the limit of
low temperature [21].
This leads to a simple and consistent interpretation of the experimental results
[19, 20] on narrow etched Hall-bars, if one takes into account that the donor dis-
tribution, and as a consequence the conﬁnement potential, will exhibit ﬂuctuations
in both spatial directions [29]. Due to such ﬂuctuations, the IS’s will no longer be
parallel to the sample edges. They may be bended and their width may ﬂuctuate. If
one starts with situation (a) of Fig. 6 and lowers B, the upper edge of the QHP cor-
responding to ﬁlling factor ν = i will be reached if a percolating IS with this ﬁlling
factor occurs between source and drain contact, which is not necessarily at B = Bi.
Whereas for the idealized case at B ≲Bi a broad IS is calculated, in reality the cor-
responding incompressible region may contain compressible islands. These islands
will have a large effect on the effective potential in their immediate surroundings,
but they will not affect the measured value of the quantized Hall resistance. The
effect of such compressible islands is indicated schematically in Fig. 8.
The model calculations also revealed some other features, which are conﬁrmed
by the experiments on narrow samples. Since the high-B edge of a QHP is deter-
mined by a wide incompressible region in the center of the sample, while the low-B
edge is determined by narrow incompressible regions near the sample edges, the
latter are much more sensitive to perturbations. For example, with increasing tem-
perature the QHP’s melt from the low-B edge, while they are much more stable at

588
Quantum Hall Effect
B
Rxy
D
S
ν=i
2DES
edge
disorder
y
x
I
‘hot spot’
Fig. 8
Schematic sketch of the development of the compressible (grey) and of the innermost
incompressible (white) regions in a real, inhomogeneous 2DES during a sweep of the magnetic
ﬁeld over a quantized Hall plateau. Around the integer value of the (average) ﬁlling factor (close
to the high-B edge in narrow samples) the plateau is stabilized by disorder and inhomogeneities,
near the low-B edge it is stabilized by incompressible stripes near the sample edges
the high-B edge. Increasing the applied current beyond the linear response regime
leads to asymmetry of the two incompressible stripes [22], which depends on the
current direction. A corresponding asymmetry can be seen in the experimental volt-
age curves.
Summary
In the nearly three decades since its discovery many models have been developed
to explain the quantized Hall effect. The focus was put either on the sample edge
or on the bulk, but both regions are of importance for the QHE. As an electro-
chemical potential difference is applied between source (S) and drain (D) contact
(i.e. in x-direction), the potential of S is carried by a compressible region along
one edge, the potential of D is transferred by a compressible region along the other
edge. The electrochemical potential difference acts thus as Hall voltage across the
Hall bar (y-direction). If the interior of the sample between S and D consists of
a connected incompressible region with integer ﬁlling factor i, maybe interrupted
by local islands with another ﬁlling factor, the electric ﬁeld Ey(y) resulting from
the Hall voltage drives the Hall current dissipationless (perpendicular to the elec-
tric ﬁeld) through the incompressible region in the interior of the sample. Since the
Hall voltage drops only across incompressible regions with the same ﬁlling factor
i, one measures the quantized value RH = h/(ie2) for the Hall resistance. The

Quantum Hall Effect
589
Q
details of the voltage drop are not relevant. Inhomogeneities of the electron density
and, eventually, localization of electrons by potential ﬂuctuations, guarantee that,
for moderate changes of the average electron density (at ﬁxed magnetic ﬁeld) or
of the magnetic ﬁeld (at ﬁxed average electron density), a connected incompress-
ible region with this ﬁlling factor i remains present in the interior of the sample:
the quantized value of the Hall resistance occurs as a plateau. The current distri-
bution varies strongly during such changes, since the landscape of compressible
and incompressible regions changes strongly. The quantized value of the Hall re-
sistance, however, remains unchanged, as long as the compressible regions along
opposite sample edges are separated by incompressible regions and, therefore, their
electrochemical potentials remain constant. These incompressible regions hinder
the exchange of electrons between opposite edges of the sample, i.e. they suppress
“backscattering”. Between two contacts on the same sample edge no voltage drop
can be measured, i.e. Rxx = Ux/Ix = 0. This does not require that the whole in-
terior of the sample is incompressible. Well developed incompressible stripes near
the sample edges are sufﬁcient to suppress this backscattering and to keep the outer-
most compressible regions on their potentials. Then the total applied current ﬂows
through these incompressible stripes, while the compressible regions between these
stripes do not contribute to the current transmission. As a consequence, the potential
is constant in the interior and drops only across the incompressible stripes. This is
the situation near the low-B edges of the quantum Hall plateaus.
These ideas, stimulated by and explaining the scanning force-microscope ex-
periments, [19, 20] make it plausible why even on ﬁnite samples with impurities
the quantized values of the Hall resistance can be measured with extraordinary
precision: they occur when percolating incompressible regions exist. On these in-
compressible regions the quantized values of the resistivity are realized, and the
externally applied current is forced to ﬂow only through these regions (only then
the entropy production of the stationary non-equilibrium state is minimized) [29].
An extension of the model calculations to wider samples, and a more rigorous
justiﬁcation of its basic assumptions, seem desirable. Also the mechanisms lead-
ing to a breakdown of the quantized Hall effect above a critical current and, related
to that, heating effects in the quantized Hall regime [23], require additional work.
The actual research in the ﬁeld of quantized Hall effect, deals however mainly
with correlation effects, which become increasingly important with increasing qual-
ity (and mobility) of the two-dimensional electron systems, and lead to the discovery
of more and more incompressible many-electron states, visualized by new fractional
quantum Hall plateaus. Phenomena like  Bose–Einstein condensation, skyrmion-
type excitations, fractional charges, vanishing longitudinal resistance induced by
microwave radiation, as well as stripe- and bubble-like phase-textures in higher
Landau levels are surprising discoveries of recent years and indicate that also for
the future the quantized Hall effect will remain an actual and interesting ﬁeld of
research.

590
Quantum Hall Effect
Primary Literature
1. K. von Klitzing, G. Dorda, and M. Pepper: New Method for High-Accuracy Determination
of the Fine-Structure Constant Based on Quantized Hall Resistance, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 494
(1980).
2. A. B. Fowler, F. F. Fang, W. E. Howard, and P. J. Stiles: Magneto-Oscillatory Conductance in
Silicon Surfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett. 16, 901 (1966).
3. D. C. Tsui, H. L. St¨ormer, and A. C. Gossard: Two-Dimensional Magnetotransport in the Ex-
treme Quantum Limit, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1559 (1982).
4. R. B. Laughlin: Anomalous Quantum Hall Effect: An Incompressible Quantum Fluid with
Fractionally Charged Excitations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1395 (1983).
5. A. M. Thompson and D. G. Lampard: A New Theorem in Electrostatics and its Application to
Calculable Standards of Capacitance, Nature 177, 888 (1956).
6. T. J. Quinn: News from the BIPM, Metrologia 26, 69 (1989).
7. F. Delahaye, T. J. Witt, R. E. Elmquist, and R. F. Dziuba: Comparison of Quantum Hall Effect
Resistance Standards of the NIST and the BIPM, Metrologia 37, 173 (2000).
8. F. Delahaye and B. Jeckelmann: Revised Technical Guidelines for Reliable DC Measurements
of the Quantized Hall Resistance, Metrologia 40, 217 (2003).
9. E. R. Williams, R. L. Steiner, D. B. Nevell, and P. T. Olsen: Accurate Measurement of the
Planck Constant, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2404 (1998).
10. U. Klaß, W. Dietsche, K. von Klitzing, and K. Ploog: Imaging of the Dissipation in Quantum-
Hall-Effect Experiments, Z. Phys. B - Condensed Matter 82, 351 (1991).
11. Y. Y. Wei, J. Weis, K. v. Klitzing, and K. Eberl: Single-Electron Transistor as an Electrometer
Measuring Chemical Potential Variations, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 2514 (1997).
12. M. B¨uttiker: Absence of Backscattering in the Quantum Hall Effect in Multiprobe Conductors,
Phys. Rev. B 38, 9375 (1988).
13. D. B. Chklovskii, B. I. Shklovskii, and L. I. Glazman: Electrostatics of Edge States, Phys. Rev.
B 46, 4026 (1992).
14. Y. Y. Wei, J. Weis, K. v. Klitzing, and K. Eberl: Edge Strips in the Quantum Hall Regime
Imaged by a Single-Electron Transistor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1674 (1998).
15. J. Weis, Y. Y. Wei, and K. v. Klitzing: Single-Electron Transistor Probes Two-Dimensional
Electron System in High Magnetic Fields, Physica E 3, 23 (1998).
16. D. B. Chklovskii, K. A. Matveev, and B. I. Shklovskii: Ballistic Conductance of Interacting
Electrons in the Quantum Hall Regime, Phys. Rev. B 47, 12605 (1993).
17. K. Lier and R. R. Gerhardts: Self-Consistent Calculation of Edge Channels in Laterally Con-
ﬁned Two-Dimensional Electron Systems, Phys. Rev. B 50, 7757 (1994).
18. J. H. Oh and R. R. Gerhardts: Self-Consistent Thomas-Fermi Calculation of Potential and Cur-
rent Distributions in a Two-Dimensional Hall Bar Geometry, Phys. Rev. B 56, 13519 (1997).
19. E. Ahlswede, P. Weitz, J. Weis, K. von Klitzing, and K. Eberl: Hall Potential Proﬁles in the
Quantum Hall Regime Measured by a Scanning Force Microscope, Physica B 298, 562 (2001).
20. E. Ahlswede, J. Weis, K. von Klitzing, and K. Eberl: Hall Potential Distribution in the Quantum
Hall Regime in the Vicinity of a Potential Probe Contact, Physica E 12, 165 (2002).
21. A. Siddiki and R. R. Gerhardts: Incompressible Strips in Dissipative Hall Bars as Origin of
Quantized Hall Plateaus, Phys. Rev. B 70, 195335 (2004).
22. K. G¨uven and R. R. Gerhardts: Self-Consistent Local-Equilibrium Model for Density Proﬁle
and Distribution of Dissipative Currents in a Hall Bar Under Strong Magnetic Fields, Phys.
Rev. B 67, 115327 (2003).
23. S. Kanamaru, H. Suzuura, and H. Akera: Spatial Distribution of Electron Temperature in Quan-
tum Hall Systems with Compressible and Incompressible Strips, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 75, 064701
(2006).

Quantum Interrogation
591
Q
Secondary Literature
24. T. Ando, A. B. Fowler, and F. Stern: Electronic Properties of Two-Dimensional Systems, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 54, 437 (1982).
25. B. Kramer, S. Kettemann, and T. Ohtsuki: Localization in the Quantum Hall regime, Physica
E 20, 172 (2003).
26. Z. F. Ezawa, Quantum Hall Effects, Field Theoretical Approaches and Related Topics (World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2000); see also www.fkf.mpg.de/klitzing/.
27. H. Bachmair, E. O. G¨obel, G. Hein, J. Melcher, B. Schumacher, J. Schurr, L. Schweitzer,
and P. Warnecke: The von Klitzing resistance standard, Physica E 20, 14 (2003); for the
most recent CODATA-recommended values of fundamental constants see: http://physics.nist.
gov/cuu/constants/index.html.
28. S. Datta, Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1995).
29. R. R. Gerhardts: The Effect of Screening on Current Distribution and Conductance Quantisa-
tion in Narrow Quantum Hall Systems, phys. stat. sol. (b) 245, 378 (2008).
Quantum Interrogation
Paul G. Kwiat
The notion of a “negative-result” measurement was ﬁrst discussed by Renninger [1]
and later by Dicke [2]. As a simple example, consider a single photon incident on
a beamsplitter, with a 100% efﬁcient detector in the reﬂected port; if we somehow
know that the photon amplitude has already encountered the detector, and yet no
detection has taken place, then this non-detection certainly “collapses” the original
superposition of the photon  wave function solely into the transmitted path. Elitzur
and Vaidman (EV) [3] suggested a modiﬁed system in which a second beamsplit-
ter is used to recombine the two paths (see Fig. 1). In the absence of any object in
one arm of the interferometer, complete destructive interference of the two paths
leads to a zero probability that a detector at one of the ports ﬁres. On the other
hand, the presence of a non-transmitting object necessarily inhibits the destructive
interference (as there is then only one path by which the photon can reach the recom-
bining beamsplitter) so that sometimes this “dark” detector will ﬁre. This indicates
the presence of the object, even though the detected photon most certainly did not
travel the path containing the object, in essence an “interaction-free” measurement.1
( Interaction-free Measurement)
This simple scheme was experimentally veriﬁed using single photons ( light
quantum) (conditionally prepared via parametric down-conversion), achieving a
1 We prefer the more general term “quantum interrogation”, which allows for the possibility that
the photon does pass through the path with the object, e.g., if the object is semi-transparent or only
partially blocks the arm of the interferometer.

