Dominik Balg
Live and 
Let Live
A Critique of Intellectual Tolerance

Live and Let Live

Dominik Balg
Live and Let Live
A Critique of Intellectual Tolerance

Dominik Balg
Tübingen University
Tübingen, Baden-Württemberg, Germany
ISBN 978-3-662-64039-5
ISBN 978-3-662-64040-1
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-64040-1
This book is a translation of the original German edition „Leben und leben lassen“ by Balg, Dominik,
published by J.B. Metzler, an imprint of Springer-Verlag GmbH, DE in 2020. The translation was done
with the help of artiﬁcial intelligence (machine translation by the service DeepL.com). A subsequent
human revision was done primarily in terms of content, so that the book will read stylistically differently
from a conventional translation. Springer Nature works continuously to further the development of tools
for the production of books and on the related technologies to support the authors.
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the
material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting,
reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and
retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or
hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer-Verlag GmbH, DE part of Springer
Nature.
The registered company address is: Heidelberger Platz 3, 14197 Berlin, Germany

Foreword
Tolerance in matters of religion, politics, and lifestyle is presumably one of the great
civilising achievements of the Enlightenment and a basic prerequisite for the func-
tioning of modern open societies. Without tolerance, how would it be possible for
people with very different orientations to live together peacefully and freely? Former
President Joachim Gauck spelled out the matrix of a “combative” tolerance in his
book Toleranz—einfach schwer (Tolerance—simply difﬁcult), which is well worth
reading: We should respect others and struggle together with them to reach
compromises, as long as they accept democratic constitutional rights and behave
tolerantly themselves. Below the level of this practical tolerance, however, there is
now a deeper problem that has so far gone almost completely unnoticed in research,
although it is no less relevant for all of us: How should one actually behave towards
the opinions of others if they do not agree with one’s own opinion even after
prolonged discussions? One could simply cling dogmatically to one’s own point
of view, one could abstain from judgement because one cannot ultimately decide
who is right, or one could simply tolerate that the other holds to his own opinion
even if one does not give in oneself. This last attitude is what Dominik Balg calls the
position of intellectual tolerance—a tolerance that refers neither to people nor to
ways of life, but to opinions themselves. That one can nevertheless respect dissent-
ing opinions as legitimate, even though one believes them to be wrong, is an
immensely tempting notion that apparently also makes it possible to navigate
unimpeded between dogmatism and scepticism in the disagreements of the living
world. Dominik Balg’s study convincingly demonstrates that the demand for a
general intellectual tolerance, despite its initial appeal and despite its widespread
acceptance in everyday life, is, on closer inspection, neither reasonable nor useful on
the path to truth. According to Balg, we should not be tolerant but open-minded and
humble when we encounter persistent dissent. This ﬁnding of the study is surprising,
eye-opening, and highly relevant to the public and scholarly debates of our time. A
courageous, an important, a wonderfully easy-to-read book that I would recommend
to anyone interested in how to deal sensibly with disagreement.
Cologne, Germany
Thomas Grundmann
April 2020
v

Acknowledgements
During the work on this dissertation, I was supported by several persons, whom I
would like to thank at this point.
First of all, I would like to thank Prof. Dr. Thomas Grundmann not only for the
excellent supervision of my PhD, but moreover for the irreplaceable professional
support and encouragement throughout my studies. I could not have wished for a
better teacher.
Prof. Dr. Sven Bernecker, as my second supervisor, always gave me valuable
advice and contributed decisively to the completion of this thesis with helpful
feedback on individual chapters. I would like to thank Prof. Dr. Anne Burkard,
among others, for her careful review of the submitted manuscript, the results of
which were of great help, especially in revising it for publication. I would also like to
thank Prof. Dr. Sanford Goldberg for some important technical advice.
Finally, I would like to thank Jan Constantin, Steffen Koch, and Karolin Meinert,
but also Jan Kühl, Jakob Ohlhorst, Fabian Peter, Chris Ranalli, Carina Schleeweit,
Peer Schittenhelm, Tim Steeger, Marius Waldau, and Sven Wunderlich, for their
support in terms of content as well as personal support and their friendship. Without
them, my PhD time would have been much less enjoyable.
I would like to thank the German Research Foundation for funding my doctoral
project.
vii

Contents
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant? . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1
A Conception of Epistemic Tolerance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Why We Need a Conception of Epistemic Tolerance . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Tolerance and Relativism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.1
Truth Relativism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2
Epistemic Relativism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Should We Be Tolerant? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.1
Two Dimensions of Epistemic Adequacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5
General Tolerance Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
6
Tolerance, Open-Mindedness and Humility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
7
Final Evaluation and Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
ixix

Introduction
1
How should we respond to the conﬂicting beliefs of others? The answer to this
question is more urgent than ever in view of current social and world political
developments. Many people hope for a stabilization and expansion of democ-
racy—that is, a form of organization of social coexistence that seems to be funda-
mentally dependent on an adequate handling of a plurality of conﬂicting views: The
populist tendencies of recent years have clearly shown how easily an inappropriate
handling of dissenters can undermine and fundamentally weaken democratic
structures. At the same time, we live in a world characterised by increasing commu-
nicative networking: the internet and social networks allow direct access to an
incredible wealth of information as well as an almost limitless exchange of ideas
and opinions.
In the context of the question of how best to respond to conﬂicting beliefs, an idea
was developed during the Enlightenment that continues to be very popular.
According to this idea, at least under certain circumstances, it is most reasonable
to respond tolerantly to dissenting views. The inﬂuence that the ideal of tolerance
has had, at least in the Western world, and continues to have today, is difﬁcult to
overestimate: In a publication adopted at the 28th World Conference of UNESCO in
1995, member states declared themselves “determined to take all positive steps
necessary to spread the idea of tolerance in our societies [. . .]”.1 The same
declaration identiﬁed education for tolerance as one of the most urgent educational
goals and proclaimed 16 November as International Day for Tolerance. In 2011, the
Universal Tolerance Organization was created, a non-governmental organization
whose primary mission is to spread a tolerant attitude. The establishment of the idea
of tolerance as a social ideal, which is openly strived for in this way, is obviously
successful: in a study commissioned by DIE ZEIT and conducted by the infas
Institut für angewandte Sozialwissenschaft (infas Institute for Applied Social
1UNESCO 1995.
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
D. Balg, Live and Let Live, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-64040-1_1
1

Science) in 2017, more than half of the respondents stated: “You should always
tolerate opinions that you can’t actually agree with.”2
Given the popularity of the ideal of tolerance, it is also common for politicians to
go public with calls for more tolerance. Some recent examples of this would be
Angela Merkel, who in her speech on the 500th anniversary of the Reformation in
October 2017 called tolerance “the soul of Europe”,3 Barack Obama, who in his last
speech to the UN called for tolerance as an indispensable part of turning away from
fundamentalism and racism,4 or Pope Francis, who in a speech on the occasion of the
2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro expressed his hope for a world shaped by
tolerance.5
The desire behind demands for tolerance for a society of peaceful coexistence in
which everyone is free to decide, think and act according to their best conscience is
all too understandable. At the same time, however, it is also astonishing how little
controversy there is about demands for tolerance—after all, even a comparatively
superﬁcial reﬂection on the concept of tolerance raises some fundamental questions
that cannot be answered easily. Does tolerance imply rejection? Or is tolerance
merely the opposite of dogmatism? Must tolerance always be based on reciprocity?
And how does a tolerant attitude differ from an indifferent one? The ambiguities
increase when one takes a look at concrete demands for tolerance—for these
demands sometimes differ considerably from one another: demanding that conser-
vative Christians tolerate the building of a mosque is obviously something different
from demanding that an evolutionary biologist tolerate the inclusion of creationist
theories in ofﬁcial school curricula, which in turn is something quite different from
demanding that a concerned father tolerate his pubescent daughter’s new hairstyle.
Should we tolerate beliefs, actions, habits, personal preferences, or people? And
should we be tolerant on ethical, religious, aesthetic, or epistemological grounds?
Attempts to answer these and other questions can be found in philosophical
literature. Just as the modern concept of tolerance was signiﬁcantly developed by
philosophers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, it is still philosophers who
reﬂect on, interpret, criticize, and modify the concept of tolerance on a scientiﬁc
level. At the same time, there is a certain contrast between the importance attached to
the ideal of tolerance in public discourses and the degree of interest with which
academic philosophy approaches this topic—tolerance research is a comparatively
small ﬁeld of work within practical philosophy. In the present paper, I would like to
examine more closely an aspect or type of tolerance that has been largely neglected
by philosophical research, and which I will refer to as intellectual or epistemic
tolerance. Epistemic tolerance is a particular form of tolerance of disagreement,
that is, a speciﬁc stance one takes in the face of others’ contradictory beliefs.
2Kitz 2018.
3Bundesregierung (German Federal Government) 2017.
4Reilly 2016.
5Deutsche Presse-Agentur (German Press Agency) 2016.
2
1
Introduction

How exactly this attitude can be characterized, and to what extent it is actually a
separate form of tolerance, is a difﬁcult question that can only be answered in detail
in the course of the work. At this point I would like to clarify only with the help of an
example, about which kind of attitude it concerns me: Many people, who eat meat,
demand a tolerant attitude from vegetarian or vegan living people. What kind of
demand is this? First of all, it seems that a certain attitude towards speciﬁc beliefs is
demanded here—the attitude demanded is not an attitude towards the behaviour of
meat eaters, but towards their beliefs. For even though many vegetarians and vegans
would probably ultimately like to change the consumption patterns of meat eaters,
the attitude that meat eaters criticize is initially a purely intellectual attitude. Thus
meat eaters usually do not complain about the fact that vegetarians and vegans would
try to prevent them directly from their meat consumption. They would probably not
have the opportunity to do so anyway, since the consumption of meat is completely
legal and vegetarians and vegans are thus already legally forced to tolerate the
consumption of meat. Meat eaters, on the contrary, complain about being regularly
involved in discussions about the ethical legitimacy of their consumption and having
to constantly justify their conviction that the consumption of meat is ethically
justiﬁable. What is required, then, is a speciﬁc attitude towards views or beliefs.
The arguments that are now being put forward in support of this claim are
generally not moral arguments either, but epistemological ones: The idea is not
that it would be immoral to try to convince people of the moral reprehensibility of
eating meat, but rather that doing so would be inappropriate from an epistemologi-
cal perspective. After all, most meat eaters would probably accept that it is not
morally problematic in principle to try to change the beliefs of others—and this is
true even if they are very basic beliefs that are central to the person’s view of
themselves and the world. For example, presumably regardless of their eating habits,
most people would be willing to convince people with racial or sexist prejudices that
their views are wrong. Rather, the reason many meat eaters ﬁnd it inappropriate to
have to constantly justify their beliefs seems to be that they assume that there are
different, equally reasonable views on the question of the ethical legitimacy of meat
consumption.
The intolerance of which vegetarians and vegans are accused is thus an episte-
mological form of intolerance: the idea is that vegetarians and vegans inadmissibly
consider their own point of view to be the only valid one, ignoring the fact that there
are also other points of view that are justiﬁed in their turn. Even if one ﬁnds the
example of the intolerant vegan unconvincing in this context, such purely epistemo-
logical forms of intolerance are often criticized. Especially when it comes to politi-
cal, religious, world-view, or ethical issues, many people hold that there are a variety
of conﬂicting but equally justiﬁed views regarding these issues, and that the appro-
priate stance in the face of such pluralism is a tolerant one. The idea underlying this
consideration is that we should respect that other people may reasonably come to
different beliefs than we do, and that from an epistemological perspective we are not
justiﬁed in taking our own views as the only valid ones and imposing them on other
people.
1
Introduction
3

A tolerant attitude in precisely this sense, that is, in the sense of a genuinely
epistemically motivated attitude towards foreign beliefs, is the subject of the present
book. The question is whether and under what circumstances intellectual or episte-
mic tolerance in the sense just sketched can be an epistemically appropriate response
to disagreement. To answer this question, I will ﬁrst develop a more precise
characterization of epistemic tolerance in Chap. 2. In particular, three questions
will be considered: First, it will be clariﬁed what exactly it means to respond
epistemically tolerantly to a disagreement, and to what extent epistemic tolerance
is a genuinely intellectual or epistemic stance. Second, it will be examined whether
epistemic tolerance is indeed a form of tolerance in the literal sense, or whether this
designation should rather be understood in the ﬁgurative sense. And third, it will be
plausibilized that epistemic tolerance in the sense I understand it is in any case an
attitude that is of great importance for philosophical discourse as well as for our
everyday intellectual practice, and whose critical evaluation is thus also relevant
independently of whether it is indeed a tolerant attitude in the literal sense.
In Chap. 3, I will then elaborate on the connection between claims for epistemic
tolerance and relativist assumptions about truth and justiﬁcation. Just as in the case
of ethical tolerance, the presumption is that claims for epistemic tolerance only make
sense against the background of speciﬁc theoretical assumptions. I will argue,
however, that there are no problematic connections between claims for epistemic
tolerance and relativistic assumptions about truth and justiﬁcation, and that tolerance
claims in this sense are theoretically neutral.
In Chap. 4, an epistemically tolerant stance will then be subjected to a compre-
hensive critical evaluation. The guiding question behind this evaluation will be
whether, or under what circumstances, an epistemically tolerant stance is epistemi-
cally appropriate in response to a disagreement. To answer this question, I will ﬁrst
address what it means to say that an intellectual stance is epistemically appropriate
in the ﬁrst place. Speciﬁcally, I will argue that there are two independent dimensions
of rationality, epistemic rationality and instrumental rationality with respect to our
epistemic goals, that are equally relevant to the epistemic evaluation of intellectual
attitudes.
I will then begin by examining the epistemic rationality of intellectual tolerance in
more detail. More speciﬁcally, I will address the concern that a tolerant stance is
necessarily epistemically irrational due to inherent tensions. In doing so, I will
discuss and reject three different arguments for the epistemic irrationality of a
tolerant stance in turn. Accordingly, I will argue that an epistemically tolerant stance
is not necessarily epistemically irrational.
Finally, in the last section of Chap. 4, I will discuss the extent to which an
epistemically tolerant stance is instrumentally rational with respect to our epistemic
goals. Here I will argue for the fact that while an epistemically tolerant attitude
towards disagreement may well be epistemically beneﬁcial in some circumstances,
these circumstances seem at the same time to be highly speciﬁc.
In Chap. 5, I will then examine how plausible general tolerance claims are in
speciﬁc domains. In doing so, I will focus on the domain of science as an example. In
the philosophy of science, there are many authors who assume that in the domain of
4
1
Introduction

science it is in principle appropriate to be epistemically tolerant of disagreement.
This assumption will be discussed critically in light of the ﬁndings of the previous
chapter. In the course of this discussion, it will also become clear on a fundamental
level what questions need to be answered in order to be able to decide on the
plausibility of general tolerance claims.
Chapter 6 will then present and discuss alternatives to an epistemically tolerant
stance. Speciﬁcally, I will argue that with intellectual open-mindedness and intellec-
tual humility there are two attitudes, already extensively discussed in epistemologi-
cal research, which represent promising alternatives to an attitude of intellectual
tolerance, and which, in contrast to a tolerant attitude, can also be easily demanded
on a general level.
Finally, in Chap. 7, I will summarize the results of the preceding argumentation
and thus arrive at a concluding assessment of intellectual tolerance. Furthermore, I
will outline the implications of such an assessment for different areas of philosophi-
cal research and discuss possible points of contact.
1
Introduction
5

What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically
Tolerant?
2
In this chapter, I want to explore what exactly it means to respond epistemically
tolerant to disagreement. How can the attitude outlined at the outset be characterized
on a general level? A ﬁrst question relevant in this context is the extent to which
calling this attitude tolerant is appropriate at all. For tolerance, it seems, is not an
intellectual but rather an ethical or political attitude. The deep roots of the concept of
tolerance in practical areas of discourse become particularly clear when one
considers the history of the origins of the idea of tolerance.1 Thus, from the earliest
discussions of tolerance, the question of the possibility of peaceful coexistence
between different religions was clearly at the forefront. All the authors who can be
regarded as the founding fathers of the modern debate on tolerance, such as Baruch
de Spinoza, John Locke, Pierre Bayle, Charles de Montesquieu, Jean-Jacques
Rousseau and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, developed their ideas against the back-
ground of violent religious conﬂicts. And even John Stuart Mill, who was the ﬁrst to
break the restriction of the discourse on tolerance to the problem of religious
freedom, explicitly discusses the concept of tolerance from a purely ethical
perspective.2
Irrespective of the historical location of the concept of tolerance, some authors in
current tolerance research also explicitly assume that tolerance is a purely practical
1See for the following Forst 2017, section 3. For a more detailed account of the history of ideas of
tolerance, see for instance Bejan 2017; Forst 2003, ﬁrst part or Kaplan 2009.
2Thus, right at the beginning of his writing On Liberty, in which he develops his reﬂections on the
concept of tolerance, Mill makes it clear that the question of the appropriateness of tolerance is an
ethical question, and that he accordingly discusses this question on the basis of his utilitarian moral
theory. He writes: “It is proper to state that I forego any advantage which could be derived to my
argument from the idea of abstract right, as a thing independent of utility. I regard utility as the
ultimate appeal on all ethical questions [. . .].” (Mill 2015, 14). Accordingly, one of Mill’s main
arguments for the appropriateness of a tolerant attitude is also based on his utilitarian harm
principle, according to which persons may only be restricted in their actions insofar as harm is
thereby averted from other persons (Mill 2015, Chap. 1).
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
D. Balg, Live and Let Live, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-64040-1_2
7

attitude. For example, Achim Lohmar writes in his essay “Was ist eigentlich
Toleranz?” (What is actually tolerance?):
What is clear is that tolerance is in any case a morally signiﬁcant attitude, an attitude that is
amenable to moral judgment. Morally signiﬁcant in this sense, however, are also attitudes
such as envy and hatred. Tolerance is categorically different from these attitudes, insofar as
tolerance is not only a morally signiﬁcant attitude, but itself a moral attitude. Tolerance, this
means, must either be an attitude whose nature includes being morally motivated, or it must
be an attitude that is constitutively linked to a moral judgment. [. . .] That tolerance is not
only a morally signiﬁcant attitude, but also a moral attitude itself, makes it an object of
ethical inquiry3
If tolerance is indeed a genuinely practical attitude, this would be problematic insofar
as the attitude that is the subject of this book is explicitly supposed to be an
intellectual or epistemic attitude. However, the example chosen at the beginning of
this book, which was intended to plausibilize the possibility of purely intellectual
forms of tolerance, seems to have been chosen rather unhappily: For, of course, the
conﬂict between meat-eaters and vegans is not only a purely intellectual one, but
precisely also an ethical conﬂict, and thus not only a conﬂict of different convictions,
but also a conﬂict of different ways of acting. To focus on the intellectual dimensions
of this conﬂict in order to then point out that vegans and vegetarians are regularly
accused of intolerance is not a particularly convincing argument against the assump-
tion that tolerance is ultimately a purely practical attitude.
In fact, however, there are other examples that show that our everyday use of the
concept of tolerance certainly suggests the possibility of purely intellectual forms of
tolerance: Sometimes tolerance is called for even where ethical or political
considerations seem at ﬁrst to play no role at all. An example of this is the following
passage from Timothy Williamson’s book “Tetralogue”:
Sarah: [. . .] I completely reject Zac’s idea that insisting on the difference between truth and
falsity leads to dogmatism. Remember, truth isn’t certainty. Science insists on the difference
between truth and falsity, but the scientiﬁc spirit also makes us self-critical and tolerant of
contrary opinions, because we are all fallible. Whenever one asserts something, one should
be willing to add ‘but I may be wrong’. The person one is disagreeing with may be right after
all. In that sense I call myself a ‘fallibilist’. It’s the very importance of the distinction
between truth and falsity that should make us humble, and tolerant of others.4
This is a statement made in the course of a ﬁctional argument revolving around
relativistic assumptions in the theory of science and epistemology. Direct ethical or
political implications are thus unlikely—yet the use of the term tolerance does not
seem out of place or unusual. Another example would be the following excerpt from
Richard Feldman’s essay “Reasonable Religious Disagreements,” in which he
recounts an experience as a college lecturer:
3Lohmar 2010, 8.
4Williamson 2015, 71, my emphasis.
8
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

A few years ago I co-taught a course on ‘Rationality, Relativism, and Religion’ to
undergraduates majoring in either philosophy or religion. Many of the students, especially
the religion majors, displayed a pleasantly tolerant attitude. Although a wide variety of
different religious views were represented in the class and the students disagreed with one
another about many religious issues, almost all the students had a great deal of respect for the
views of the others. They ‘agreed to disagree’ and concluded that ‘reasonable people can
disagree’ about the issues under discussion.5
Again, Feldman seems to have a genuinely intellectual attitude in mind when he
uses the term tolerance, and again this use of the term does not seem unnatural. Our
everyday use of the term tolerance, then, is apparently not limited to ethical or
political contexts.
In the following, I will try to take the use of the concept of tolerance in
epistemological contexts seriously and develop a genuinely epistemic conception
of tolerance. In doing so, I will proceed in such a way that, in a ﬁrst step, I will
develop an abstract characterization of a tolerant attitude, in order to transfer this to
genuinely epistemic phenomena in a second step. The result will be a conception of
tolerance that singles out a speciﬁc intellectual attitude towards disagreement.
Subsequently, I will discuss how this is an attitude that is relevant for philosophical
discourse or our intellectual practice.
2.1
A Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
How can an epistemological conception of tolerance be developed? In view of a
closer look at the philosophical literature on the concept of tolerance, it is indeed
somewhat surprising that there are not yet any more precise epistemological
considerations on this topic. For even though philosophical research on tolerance
is clearly situated in the ﬁeld of practical philosophy, tolerance is often explicitly
understood here as a general phenomenon that may be of direct relevance to ethical
or political contexts, but is not by its nature genuinely practical. Thus, many authors
point out that tolerance is a comparatively abstract phenomenon that is relevant in
various contexts of normative evaluation. For example, Rainer Forst writes in his
book “Toleranz im Konﬂikt” (Tolerance in Conﬂict):
In view of the manifold and also conﬂicting understandings and uses of the concept of
tolerance [. . .] the assumption could arise that there is not one but many competing concepts
of tolerance [. . .]. However, this is a misleading assumption. For in order for these usages to
be meaningfully considered understandings of tolerance, they must have a common core of
meaning. [. . .] They differ, however, in the further elaboration of this core and thus form
different conceptions [. . .] of tolerance. [. . .] I therefore follow John Rawls’ [. . .] suggestion
to distinguish between concept and conception: The “concept” comprises the central
5Feldman 2007, 194, my emphasis.
2.1
A Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
9

meaning of a term, “conceptions” are speciﬁc interpretations of the components contained
therein.6
Thus, insofar as the considerations made in the research literature are not a priori
limited to ethical or political contexts, a link to epistemological dimensions should
be reasonably unproblematic. Or, to put it in Forst’s or Rawls’ terminology: It should
be possible to develop a genuinely epistemological conception of the abstract
concept of tolerance.
How can tolerance be characterized on an abstract level? One characterization,
referred to in the literature as the standard conception, is as follows: Tolerance
consists in condoning something that is both rejected and approved on normative
grounds.7 This characterization, while still somewhat vague in itself, already
provides a helpful approach to the phenomenon that is relevant to us. For insofar
as tolerance is a speciﬁc form of non-intervention for which an ambivalence of
approval and rejection is characteristic, we can already make initial distinctions from
related phenomena: For example, in a case where someone does not intervene in the
face of another person’s behavior, even though he or she condemns that behavior
and does not approve of it in any way, we would speak of endurance rather than
tolerance. Likewise, in a case where someone does not intervene because he
approves of the other person’s behavior and does not disapprove of it in any way,
we would probably speak of acceptance.
The simultaneous presence of rejection and approval thus seems essential for the
possibility of tolerance. Furthermore, both rejection and approval must be the result
of normative evaluation and not merely the expression of arbitrary evaluation. For
example, if I arrive at an ambivalent evaluation of rain because, while I accept that it
is important for farming, I am at the same time reluctant to get wet, then it would be
odd to speak of tolerating rain in this context. This is not because I cannot inﬂuence
the weather and thus have no choice but to tolerate rain—even then, if I were
basically able to abolish rain due to a special superpower, it would still be odd to
speak of tolerance. The reason is that rain is not a proper subject of normative
evaluation: Only what happens on the basis of reasons can be normatively evaluated.
It is true that there are reasons for the weather to be rainy. But this does not mean that
the weather has reasons to be rainy, but merely that there are causes for the rainy
weather. The relevant difference between reasons and causes is illustrated by John
Gibbons in his book “The Norm of Belief” using the example of an avalanche:
There’s an avalanche coming down the mountain, about to hit a ridge. If it goes to the left, it
will destroy the village. If it goes to the right, it won’t. It would be for the best if the
avalanche went to the right. But we don’t think the avalanche has a reason to go to the right.
[. . .] And we don’t think that it has an excuse when it goes to the left, even though it had no
way of knowing that going to the left would destroy the village. People, like other natural
6Forst 2003, 30 f.
7See for example Ibid, Forst 2017, King 1998. The designation as standard conception can be
found for example in Lohmar 2015.
10
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

disasters, are a source of consequences, and these consequences can be evaluated in a way
that is independent of their source. [. . .] But people have things that avalanches don’t. We
have reasons to do things, believe things, and care about things. Sometimes we have most
reason to do, believe, or care. So we are often required to do, believe, or care. Evaluative
notions apply straightforwardly to avalanches. But genuinely normative notions do not.8
A normative evaluation thus always revolves around the question of what should be
done or believed. The answer to this question depends on what reasons speak for or
against the action or belief in question. Accordingly, the possible subject area of
tolerance is already somewhat clearly delimited: For if only what happens on the
basis of reasons and is thus accessible to a normative evaluation can be tolerated,
then tolerance is limited to phenomena such as actions, behaviours or beliefs.
Some philosophers take the concept of tolerance even more narrowly, arguing
that it only makes sense to call an attitude tolerant if the underlying normative
evaluations are themselves based on good reasons. The background to this assump-
tion is the consideration that it would be inappropriate, for example, to call a racist
who condones the construction of a refugee shelter tolerant, since this would mean
that the racist’s prejudices would be accepted as well-founded judgments.9 In my
opinion, however, such reasoning is not particularly convincing. I think it is entirely
plausible to call the racist in this example tolerant. Rather than putting the presence
of good reasons a priori as a necessary condition in the notion of tolerance, there
should rather be the possibility of distinguishing between justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed
instances of tolerance. For the case of the racist does not seem to be a case of
intolerance, but rather a case of unjustiﬁed tolerance: The racist is tolerant, but
should not be, since the rejection of refugees that is constitutive of his tolerant
attitude is unjustiﬁed.
On an abstract level, then, tolerance can be characterized as follows: To tolerate
something is to condone it on the basis of an ambivalent normative evaluation. Now,
how can this characterization of tolerance be applied to the epistemological domain?
First of all, applying it to epistemological considerations implies an additional
narrowing of the relevant dimensions of normative evaluation: to tolerate something
epistemically means to tolerate it on the basis of an ambivalent epistemic evaluation.
Insofar as we speak of tolerance in a purely epistemological context, moral, political,
or aesthetic considerations no longer play a role. This also narrows down the
possible objects of an epistemically tolerant stance: Epistemically tolerated can
only be that which is amenable to epistemic evaluation. Since in the present context
we are concerned with epistemic tolerance as a possible reaction to disagreement and
thus as an attitude towards other people’s beliefs, the object domain can be narrowed
down even further: Epistemic tolerance in the sense relevant here denotes the
8Gibbons 2013, 133 f.
9See for example Forst 2003, Horton 1998.
2.1
A Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
11

condoning of another person’s belief that one both normatively rejects and norma-
tively approves from a purely epistemic perspective.10
What are the possibilities for normatively rejecting or approving a belief from an
epistemological perspective? The moral evaluation of an action usually revolves
around the question of which moral norms are fulﬁlled or violated by that action.
Similarly, what epistemic norms are met or violated by a belief should also be
relevant to its epistemic evaluation. But what epistemic norms apply to beliefs?11 In
recent epistemological research, three main candidates have been proposed. The ﬁrst
candidate is truth: one should form a belief only if it is true.12 The second candidate
is justiﬁcation: One should form a belief only if it is justiﬁed.13 The third candidate is
knowledge: One should form a belief only if it constitutes knowledge.14 What the
precise relationship is between these three norms, and whether there are any other
norms beyond them, is currently the subject of lively debate.15 For the present
context, however, all that is relevant is that there are three different prima facie
epistemological norms for the formation of beliefs. Even if it should turn out that
10In fact, the focus on beliefs in the context of dealing with tolerance as an intellectual stance
towards disagreement might turn out to be too restrictive. A possible problem arises in this context
especially with respect to disagreements with agnostics. Take, for example, a case in which I am
convinced that an unconditional basic income should be introduced in Germany, while my friend
suspends belief on this question. Apparently, there is a genuine disagreement in this case. However,
whether this disagreement exists because my friend and I have conﬂicting beliefs is, to say the least,
controversial.
It is true that there are some philosophers who understand suspension of judgment as a speciﬁc
belief—for example, as the belief that it is impossible to arrive at a justiﬁed answer to the
corresponding question, or that no ﬁnal judgment is yet permissible in view of the available
evidence (such a view can be found, for instance, in Bergmann 2005). However, there are also
philosophers who assume that suspension of judgment is an independent form of doxastic attitude,
and that an agnostic attitude accordingly does not simply consist of a speciﬁc higher-order belief
(for such a view, see Friedman 2017).
Now, if it turns out that an agnostic stance is in fact a sui generis stance and does not simply
consist in a speciﬁc belief, it would presumably be possible to respond tolerantly to a disagreement
without simultaneously tolerating a belief. In this case, it would be necessary to examine separately
what exactly it means to epistemically tolerate an agnostic attitude in the context of a disagreement,
and under what circumstances such toleration is appropriate. However, if it turns out that an
agnostic stance is merely a speciﬁc belief, the following considerations presumably apply without
restriction to disagreements with agnostics.
11To assume that there are speciﬁc norms for belief formation just as there are for the performance
of actions is in no way to assume that beliefs are actions. In fact, the idea that there are genuine
epistemic norms that are exclusively relevant to the formation of beliefs seems, on the contrary, to
argue rather for beliefs not being actions.
12David 2001, Wedgwood 2002.
13Adler 2002, Gibbons 2013.
14Pritchard 2007, Williamson 2002. Meanwhile, Pritchard no longer holds this position, see
Pritchard 2012.
15For suggestions of other norms, see, for example, Kvanvig 2003. For a detailed discussion of the
relationship between truth, justiﬁcation, and knowledge norms, see Gibbons 2013. For an argument
that there are no speciﬁc norms for belief formation at all, see Papineau 2013.
12
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

some of these norms are reducible to other norms, or that there are further norms of
belief formation, these three norms have a certain prima facie validity.
This can be illustrated particularly well by examples in which a belief satisﬁes
some but not all of these norms:16 Suppose Peter is at home and puts his bunch of
keys on the living room table. Immediately afterward, he goes to the kitchen. While
he is in the kitchen, his wife Mary takes the bunch of keys from the living room table.
Still in the kitchen, Peter now wonders where his bunch of keys is. He comes to the
conclusion that his bunch of keys is on the living room table. How would we
evaluate Peter’s conviction epistemologically? On the one hand, Peter cannot be
blamed—after all, he does not know anything about his wife having just taken the
key off the living room table, and he can remember perfectly well that he put the key
there just a few minutes ago. So, from that point of view, Peter should believe
exactly what he believes. Unless he has reason to believe that his keys are not on the
living room table, it would be downright crazy to believe that the keys are not on the
living room table. On the other hand, Peter’s belief is also obviously deﬁcient from
an epistemological perspective, because it is false. If Peter believes that his keys are
on the living room table, then he is mistaken, so his belief is false and does not
constitute knowledge. In a sense, Peter should accordingly not believe what he
believes, for he believes something false. Thus, Peter would also immediately
abandon his belief if he learned that his set of keys was not on the living room
table: The information that his belief is false thus constitutes a reason for Peter to
drop that belief.
A second example: Because he is very superstitious and it is Friday the 13th, Peter
is ﬁrmly convinced that something terrible would happen to him if he went to work.
Because of this belief, Peter decides to stay home. This decision is actually a good
one, because coincidentally, on this day, the building where his ofﬁce is located
completely burns down due to a short circuit in the basement. So something really
bad would have happened to Peter if he had gone to work, and accordingly his belief
in this regard is true. This is good from an epistemological perspective in that true
beliefs are better than false beliefs. On the other hand, Peter has formed his belief
only on the basis of his irrational superstition, and accordingly it is not justiﬁed. And
it is for this that he can be faulted: We should only believe what we have good
reasons for, and not simply form any beliefs based on superstition or prejudice.
One last case:17 Maria is in fake barn county and is convinced that she is standing
in front of a barn. This is true, Maria is indeed standing in front of a barn. Moreover,
she also has good reasons for her belief, after all, she sees a barn standing in front of
her. However, she does not know that in fake barn county there are quite a few fake
barns, and therefore she would also have believed that she was standing in front of a
barn if she had been standing a few meters away in front of a fake barn. So Mary’s
belief is true and justiﬁed—and this is very good from an epistemological perspec-
tive, because true and justiﬁed beliefs are better than false and unjustiﬁed beliefs.
16The following example is taken from Gibbons 2013.
17The fake barn case made famous in epistemology is originally found in Goldman 1976.
2.1
A Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
13

Still, Anna does not know that there is a barn in front of her, because truth and
justiﬁcation are not sufﬁcient for knowledge. And since Anna’s belief in this case
does not constitute knowledge, it is in some sense epistemically deﬁcient.18
These three examples are meant to plausibilize the fact that knowledge, truth, and
justiﬁcation are each epistemically valuable, but at the same time can also diverge in
certain cases, and that three independent prima facie norms for belief formation can
thus be formulated. Along these norms, a belief can now be epistemically evaluated.
If to be tolerant in the epistemic sense is to tolerate a belief that one both rejects and
approves from a purely epistemic perspective, then this means that one tolerates a
belief in the epistemic sense precisely when one tolerates it even though one has
come to the judgment that it satisﬁes some but not all of the norms of belief
formation. Accordingly, possible objects of epistemic tolerance would be beliefs
that are true and unjustiﬁed, false and justiﬁed, or true and justiﬁed, but not an
instance of knowledge.19
Insofar as we are now concerned here with tolerance as a possible reaction to a
difference of opinion, the next restriction can be made directly: For in the context of
a disagreement, one always evaluates the belief of the other side as false—against the
background of the three epistemic norms considered so far, the only possibility of an
ambivalent evaluation of the other’s belief in the context of a disagreement thus
consists in the evaluation of this belief as false and justiﬁed. Accordingly, the form
of epistemic tolerance relevant to the present context can be characterized as follows:
To epistemically tolerate a belief in the face of disagreement is to condone that belief
even though one thinks it false because one nevertheless thinks it justiﬁed.
This characterization immediately raises a number of different questions. In what
follows, I want to answer three questions that are particularly basic and central to a
18Just like many concrete Gettier cases, the fake barn case is controversial in that the intuition that
there is no knowledge in this case is not accepted by everyone. For example, a study conducted by
Joachim Horvath and Alex Wiegmann found that even many expert philosophers have the intuition
that knowledge is present in cases like the fake barn case (Horvath and Wiegmann 2016).
In fact, however, not much depends on the plausibility of concrete thought experiments at this
point: For regardless of concrete individual cases, it is widely accepted in contemporary epistemol-
ogy that truth and justiﬁcation are not sufﬁcient for knowledge, and that accordingly there are in
principle cases in which a belief is true and justiﬁed but does not constitute knowledge. Moreover, it
would even be in some sense irrelevant to the present context if it should turn out that truth and
justiﬁcation are sufﬁcient for knowledge. For in that case truth, justiﬁcation, and knowledge would
still fall apart insofar as a belief can be justiﬁed and not known, or true and not known, since
justiﬁcation and truth are presumably at least necessary for knowledge.
19Against the background of the three considered norms, there are only these three possibilities,
since knowledge implies truth and justiﬁcation. Thus, as soon as a belief violates the truth or
justiﬁcation norm, it also violates the knowledge norm. Moreover, the fact that there are these three
possibilities at all already depends on the plausibility of fallibilist conceptions of epistemic justiﬁ-
cation. According to infallibilist conceptions of epistemic justiﬁcation, it is impossible for there to
be cases of false justiﬁed beliefs. At ﬁrst sight, such a view seems somewhat curious, since there are
many cases in which a person holds a false belief, but intuitively we are nevertheless clearly inclined
to call that person’s belief justiﬁed. Accordingly, this is clearly a minority position in contemporary
epistemology. In what follows, fallibilism with respect to epistemic justiﬁcation is assumed.
14
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

thorough understanding of the proposed conception of epistemic toleration: What
does it mean to condone a belief? In the context of a tolerant stance, what is the
connection between the condoning component and the evaluation component? And
is any condoning of an ambivalently evaluated belief a form of tolerance, or must
there rather be a speciﬁc relationship between positive and negative evaluation?
Let us start with the ﬁrst question—what does it mean to condone a belief? First
of all, condoning denotes a speciﬁc form of allowing: to condone a thing means not
to take action against that thing. For example, a concerned father condones his
underage daughter’s drinking only if he genuinely does not try to stop her. To be
sure, different degrees of condoning, and thus perhaps different degrees of tolerance,
are conceivable, so that the more condoning a person is, the more tolerant he or she
is. In a strict sense, however, condoning is incompatible with all forms of interven-
tion. At the same time, mere non-intervention is not sufﬁcient for condoning. For
example, if our concerned father takes a liking to his daughter’s favorite music, and
thereupon begins to secretly listen to her records, we would not want to say that he is
condoning his daughter’s musical tastes—and this despite the fact that he makes no
attempt whatsoever to change his daughter’s musical tastes. Thus, in addition to the
interpersonal aspect of non-intervention, condoning also includes a genuinely intra-
personal component: This component consists in setting oneself apart from what is
condoned. The father only condones his daughter’s taste in music if he does not
make any attempts to dissuade her from it, but at the same time would never think of
listening to the same music himself.
It is also clear that condoning is an intentional act: If, for example, a thief robs my
neighbors’ apartment without my noticing, we would not say that I condoned the
robbery—and this despite the fact that I made no attempt whatsoever to prevent it
and, at the same time, would never think of robbing my neighbors’ apartment
myself. Thus, condoning in the sense relevant here is always based on a conscious
decision. Moreover, it seems that in the context of a tolerant attitude, this decision
requires a speciﬁc justiﬁcation. One is not tolerant as soon as one condones some-
thing: If, for example, 9-year-old Emma lets her little brother use her toy because her
mother has promised her an ice cream as a reward, then she condones her brother’s
behaviour but does not tolerate it. The reason seems to be that Emma’s decision to
condone her brother’s behavior is based solely on the prospect of reward.
The obvious assumption is that, in the context of a tolerant attitude, the decision
to condone has something to do with the ambivalent evaluation of the tolerated that
is characteristic of a tolerant attitude—tolerating something means condoning some-
thing on the basis of an ambivalent normative evaluation. But what exactly is meant
in this context by condoning something on the basis of an ambivalent normative
evaluation? Obviously, what is meant here is not merely that an ambivalent norma-
tive evaluation is the cause of condoning. Consider, for example, the following case:
the sniper Selma has targeted the bomber Bob, who is about to blow up a school.
Determined to save the students from the assassination, Selma is about to pull the
trigger. However, she then receives a notiﬁcation from her supervisor, who has
discovered through investigation that Bob actually has good intentions—namely,
Bob mistakenly believes that the school’s students are infected with a highly
2.1
A Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
15

contagious, deadly virus, and that killing them immediately is the only way to
prevent the outbreak of a pandemic. Faced with this information, Selma decides
not to intervene. Because if Bob is acting from noble motives, she reasons, then his
killing will almost certainly spark a controversial public debate that could prove
detrimental to Selma’s future career in law enforcement.
In this case, it would be odd to say that Selma tolerates Bob’s assassination. It is
true that she condones Bob’s actions, and furthermore that her decision to do so is in
a sense based on an ambivalent normative evaluation: after all, Selma condones
Bob’s assassination only because she suspects that, given his good intentions, killing
him might harm her career. The reason we would nevertheless not speak of tolerance
in this case seems to be that Selma chooses to refrain from intervening in the face of
Bob’s ambivalent normative evaluation out of purely selﬁsh interests. The underly-
ing idea is that one tolerates an act only if one considers it morally appropriate to
condone that act, given the ambivalent ethical evaluation of that act.
Speciﬁcally, the idea seems to be that speciﬁc moral evaluations from a moral
perspective rationalize speciﬁc responses. For example, if I morally evaluate another
person’s behavior and conclude that the behavior is morally reprehensible, then my
evaluation rationalizes a speciﬁc response at both the intrapersonal level and the
interpersonal level. At the intrapersonal level, it consists in my neither endorsing nor
adopting the other’s behavior. On the interpersonal level, it consists of an attempt to
modify the other’s behavior. Example: Yusuf learns that his friend Peter is a
vaccination skeptic and, accordingly, does not vaccinate his children because he
believes that vaccinations can cause autism. Yusuf believes this belief is not only
wrong, but also that the behavior based on it is morally highly problematic. For Peter
not to vaccinate his children not only poses an acute risk to their health, but also
encourages the spread of dangerous diseases. Now, what response is rational for
Yusuf given his evaluation of Peter’s behavior? The answer is relatively simple:
Yusuf should get his children—if he has any—vaccinated and try to get Peter to get
his children vaccinated as well. It seems downright obvious that we should not
perform actions that we think are morally wrong, and that we should discourage
other people from performing actions that we think are morally wrong.
The reasoning behind tolerant condoning is now that the reaction rationalized by
a negative normative evaluation is no longer rational if the negative evaluation is
contrasted with a positive evaluation. Again, an example helps: Peter ﬁnds it
problematic that Yusuf’s wife Arzu, as a devout Muslim, wears a hijab. Because
apart from the fact that as an atheist he rejects all religions, he considers the Islamic
regulation of wearing a hijab to be sexist. On the other hand, he also accepts that it is
important for Arzu to wear a hijab because it corresponds to her religious beliefs and
also gives her the opportunity to express her cultural identity. How should Peter
behave in the face of his ambivalent evaluation? In this situation, many would
probably consider tolerant condoning an appropriate response: Unlike the case of
Yusuf and Peter, the idea goes, here the attempt to modify the negatively evaluated
behavior is not rational because the negative evaluation is juxtaposed with a positive
evaluation. It is true that Peter should in some way distance himself from Arzu’s
behaviour because of his negative evaluation—he should not, for example, start
16
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

encouraging Arzu in her behaviour, and certainly not demand that his own wife wear
a hijab. But since he also sees the positive aspects of Arzu’s behavior, he should not
try to dissuade Arzu from wearing a hijab. At ﬁrst glance, then, it seems perfectly
reasonable to argue that Peter should behave tolerantly in this case, given his
ambivalent assessment.
These considerations can now be directly transferred to the epistemic realm:
insofar as there is to be such a thing as epistemic tolerance, quite analogously, the
idea here would also be that different epistemic evaluations rationalize speciﬁc
reactions from an epistemic perspective. Suppose I evaluate another person’s belief
as false. In this case, the idea goes, my evaluation of this belief as false gives me a
reason to modify that belief.20 The extent to which this assumption is plausible will
be discussed at length in the course of the critical evaluation of epistemic tolerance—
but at ﬁrst glance the reasoning behind it seems quite plausible: if, say, my doctor
notices that I am convinced that I have a cold, and he knows that I have a real ﬂu,
then he should try to modify my belief and explain to me why I have a real ﬂu and
not a cold. If a philosophy teacher ﬁnds that many students in her class think that
Hilary Putnam was a woman, then she should clarify that Hilary Putnam was a man.
And if over half of all Americans believe that the theory of evolution is false, then
biologists should try to make the reasons and reasoning that support the truth of the
theory of evolution more widely available. Just as in ethical contexts, then, so in
epistemological contexts we should seek to modify actions or beliefs that we
normatively reject.
Now, under certain circumstances, it could also be rational in epistemological
contexts to react tolerantly instead. This would be the case precisely when there is a
positive normative evaluation in addition to the negative normative evaluation. In
terms of our conception of epistemic tolerance, this means that in the case of a
disagreement, one should refrain from attempting to modify the other’s belief even
though one thinks it is wrong, insofar as one simultaneously assumes that this belief
is based on good grounds. In such cases, the idea goes, it is more reasonable to
condone the foreign belief. To tolerate here means to stick to one’s own opinion
because of the negative evaluation of the other person’s belief, but on the other hand,
in view of the positive evaluation, to refrain from modifying the other person’s belief
and thus to let the other person have his opinion.21 A question immediately follow-
ing these considerations is whether every evaluation of another person’s belief as
wrong and justiﬁed rationalizes a tolerant reaction, or whether a tolerant attitude is
only possible against the background of a special relation between positive and
negative evaluation. Indeed, at ﬁrst glance, it seems that the rationalization relation
between ambivalent evaluation and condoning that characterizes tolerance exists
20A hint of this idea can be found in two essays by Huw Price (Price 1998, 2003), where he argues
that discussions about the truth of a proposition are always an indication that one side has a false
belief about that proposition. The reasoning behind this seems to be that discussions about the truth
of a proposition are triggered by the fact that both sides believe that their counterpart’s belief in this
regard is false (Kölbel 2004a).
21For a very similar characterization of epistemically tolerant condoning, see Schafer 2011.
2.1
A Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
17

only if the ambivalent evaluation of the tolerated has a speciﬁc structure. In particu-
lar, this relation does not seem to hold as soon as there is simply some positive
normative evaluation to contrast with the negative evaluation. On the other hand, it
also does not seem to exist in cases where the positive evaluation far outweighs the
negative evaluation. So how exactly can the necessary relationship between rejection
and approval be spelled out? In his book “Toleranz im Konﬂikt” (Tolerance in
Conﬂict) Rainer Forst makes the following suggestion:
Besides the rejection component, tolerance [. . .] includes an acceptance component,
according to which the tolerated [. . .] practices are condemned as wrong or bad, but not as
wrong or bad to such an extent that there are not other, positive reasons for tolerating them.
The important point here is that the positive reasons must not cancel out the negative
reasons, but are juxtaposed with them, so that they trump [. . .] the negative reasons [. . .]
but leave the rejection in place in the process.22
According to the idea formulated in this passage, therefore, on the one hand, neither
of the two components may cancel out the other, since otherwise the ambivalence of
approval and rejection speciﬁc to tolerance would be lost. On the other hand, the
approval component should trump the rejection component.
What is meant by this can be well illustrated by an example: If Robin Hood takes
from the rich and gives to the poor, then—at least from a consequentialist perspec-
tive—there are both reasons to reject and reasons to approve his actions. For insofar
as taking from the rich creates suffering, his actions are to be rejected, and insofar as
giving to the poor prevents suffering, his actions are to be approved. In a sense, then,
an ambivalent moral evaluation is appropriate here. Accordingly, should we be
tolerant of Robin Hood’s actions? Insofar as the ambivalent evaluation of Robin
Hood’s actions is based merely on a moral weighing of their consequences, tolerance
does not seem to be an appropriate response. For if one assumes that Robin Hood’s
giving to the poor prevents far more suffering than it causes, then approval not only
outweighs disapproval, but rather cancels it out. This is because preventing and
causing suffering are commensurable, that is, they can be directly offset against each
other. If we want to know whether a particular action is to be rejected or approved in
terms of its suffering record, we can simply offset the suffering caused by that action
against the suffering prevented by that action and arrive at a deﬁnite result. Accord-
ingly, we would not want to call condoning Robin Hood’s actions tolerance,
provided that only the suffering balance of these actions is the standard of their
normative evaluation—even though such an evaluation would turn out to be ambiv-
alent in the sense that Robin Hood’s actions both prevent suffering and cause
suffering.
However, a slight modiﬁcation—according to the reasoning behind Forst’s
proposal—is enough to change that: Suppose Robin Hood acts not on the basis of
a strong sense of justice, but on the basis of pure acquisitiveness. Insofar as not only
the consequences but also the underlying intentions enter into the normative
22Forst 2003, 34.
18
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

evaluation of an action, tolerance might be a possible stance in this case if we assume
that the unintended good consequences outweigh the bad intentions. The reason why
tolerance might be a possible response here is that intentions and consequences of an
action are not commensurable, that is, they cannot be directly offset against each
other. It is conceivable that the good consequences of an action outweigh the bad
intentions behind it. Nevertheless, even in such a case, the action remains bad in
some respect, even if it is good in other respects. Thus, one can tolerate an action
only if one both approves and disapproves of it, in which case the approval must
outweigh but not override the disapproval. But this is only possible if the approval
and disapproval refer to different aspects and are thus incommensurable. If they refer
to the same respect, they can be set off against each other and a clear judgement can
be reached, whereby one of the two components is cancelled out.
What is to be made of Forst’s proposal? In my view, it is problematic in that, ﬁrst,
it cannot fully capture our pre-theoretical intuitions, and second, it cannot be readily
applied to all dimensions of normative evaluation. Why cannot it fully capture our
pre-theoretical intuitions? The fundamental problem against whose background
Forst argues was, after all, the following: Condoning something is a form of
tolerance only if it is rationalized by an ambivalent normative evaluation of what
is condoned. Now it seems that an ambivalent normative evaluation rationalizes a
tolerant response only under certain circumstances. Forst now succeeds to some
extent in specifying these circumstances in more detail: For instance, he quite
correctly observes that approval and rejection must refer to different respects,
since otherwise a simple offsetting is possible, which would cancel out the ambiva-
lence of the evaluation. Moreover, by introducing the condition that the positive
evaluation must trump the negative evaluation, it is possible to rule out cases in
which a substantial negative evaluation is contrasted with a very weak approval.
However, this condition is not sufﬁcient to exclude cases where a very strong
approval is matched by a comparatively weak rejection.
Nevertheless, it is important to exclude such cases as well. For in cases where
approval sufﬁciently outweighs disapproval, condoning does not seem to be a form
of tolerance, but rather a form of ignorance: Insofar as, for example, in cases where a
deviant action is clearly evaluated positively from a moral perspective, it would be
ignorant, given that evaluation, not to modify one’s own behavior accordingly out of
laziness or convenience, it would be equally ignorant merely to condone a positively
evaluated action as soon as there is any negative evaluation, however negligible, of
that action to contrast with the positive evaluation. Given this, one could now simply
add to Forst’s proposal: A condoning reaction is rationalized in the sense character-
istic of a tolerant attitude by an ambivalent evaluation only if approval and rejection
refer to different respects, and approval outweighs rejection to some extent. The
problem, however, is that—even granting that the speciﬁc degree to which approval
is said to outweigh rejection that is now required can be precisely identiﬁed—even
this modiﬁed proposal cannot be readily applied to all dimensions of normative
evaluation. Exactly where the difﬁculty lies here becomes clear when one tries to
apply Forst’s proposal to our conception of epistemic tolerance.
2.1
A Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
19

At ﬁrst sight, the formulated conception of epistemic tolerance seems compatible
with the conditions required by Forst. If the approval speciﬁc to the form of
epistemic tolerance relevant here aims at justiﬁcation, while rejection aims at the
truth of the tolerated belief, then approval and rejection refer to different respects and
thus cannot be directly set off against each other. Thus, there is no need to worry that
the negative evaluation of a belief as false is cancelled out by its positive evaluation
as justiﬁed. A problem arises, however, when one considers how, in the case of
epistemic tolerance, approval can outweigh rejection in the ﬁrst place. In the
practical example above, there was still no problem here: both bad intentions and
good consequences come in degrees—intentions can be more or less bad, and
consequences can be more or less good. So the fact that tolerance might be a rational
response in the modiﬁed case of Robin Hood, insofar as approval outweighs
disapproval, simply means that tolerance might be a rational response in this case
if the consequences are good to a greater degree than the intentions are bad.23 Now,
this reasoning cannot easily be transferred to the epistemic realm: the problem is that
in cases of epistemic tolerance, the tolerated belief is supposed to be rejected on the
basis of its falsity. Truth and falsity, however, are not gradual properties; a belief
cannot be more or less false. Accordingly, at ﬁrst sight it is not at all clear what it
could possibly mean in the case of epistemic tolerance that the approval must
outweigh the rejection.24
If, in epistemic tolerance, the approval component cannot outweigh the rejection
component in the sense that what is to be approved is present to a greater degree than
what is to be rejected, then perhaps one solution would be to think instead about the
relationship between the beliefs that constitute the ambivalent evaluation character-
istic of epistemic tolerance. For even if one cannot compare degrees of justiﬁcation
with degrees of truth, because there are no degrees of truth at all, one can still
23In a way, of course, one can also doubt that it is really clear what it means in the case of Robin
Hood that the good consequences outweigh the bad intentions. For even though both consequences
and intentions can be more or less good, it is not as if the moral goodness of consequences and
intentions can be measured in some kind of common unit of measurement that would then form the
basis of a comparison. In what follows, however, this difﬁculty will not be considered further, and
instead it will be conceded that a weighing of intentions and consequences is possible in principle.
24Not surprisingly, there are also some philosophers who believe that truth is indeed a gradual
property—for example, representatives of so-called fuzzy logic such as LotﬁZadeh or Richard
Bellman (see e.g., Zadeh 1975, Bellman and Zadeh 2011). If truth is indeed gradual, the ratio of
approval and rejection required for tolerance could presumably be spelled out in epistemic terms
analogous to the above considerations: To tolerate a dissenting belief would then simply mean to
condone that belief because one considers it justiﬁed to a greater degree than false.
The problem, however, is that the notion of gradual truth seems intuitively very strange. The way
we normally think and talk about truth, truth simply does not admit of degrees: Peter’s belief that his
keys are on the living room table is true if and only if Peter’s keys are on the living room table, and
false if and only if Peter’s keys are not on the living room table. It is not at all clear at ﬁrst what
might be meant by saying that Peter’s belief is more or less true. Accordingly, most philosophers
also assume that truth is not a gradual property. Likewise, in the remainder of the argument, I will
also assume that truth is not a gradual property, and develop my conception of epistemic tolerance
against the background of this assumption.
20
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

compare degrees of belief about justiﬁcation with degrees of belief about truth.
Finally, beliefs about non-degree properties can also have different degrees. While it
makes no sense to be convinced that a belief is more or less true—it does make sense
to be more or less convinced that a belief is true. The idea, then, would be that in the
case of epistemic tolerance, approval outweighs rejection in the sense that belief in
the justiﬁcation of the other person’s belief is stronger than belief in the falsity of the
that belief.
Alternatively, instead of strength of conviction, the degree of justiﬁcation of the
respective beliefs could be considered: The idea here would be that, in the context of
an epistemically tolerant attitude, approval must outweigh rejection in the sense that
belief in the justiﬁcation of the other person’s belief must be better justiﬁed than
belief in the falsity of that belief. One problem with these proposals, however, is that
they would severely narrow the notion of epistemic tolerance. Suppose, for instance,
that one would be tolerant in the face of a disagreement only if one were more
convinced that the other party’s belief is justiﬁed than that it is false. If so, in a
disagreement in which one is reasonably certain of one’s case, one could only be
tolerant if one is extremely certain that the opposing side is justiﬁed. This result could
be problematic in that demands for tolerance should not be limited to cases in which
the individuals involved are only weakly convinced of their position. After all,
demands for tolerance are encountered primarily in contexts where fundamental
questions about the truth of scientiﬁc, ideological, or religious views are at stake. But
it is precisely in such cases that many people have particularly strong and stable
convictions. A tolerant attitude would therefore only be possible here under more
difﬁcult conditions.
A similar problem arises if one assumes that one is tolerant in the face of
disagreement only if one has better reasons for believing that the other party’s belief
is justiﬁed than for believing that it is false. For if that were so, in many cases one
could presumably adopt a tolerant attitude toward the other party’s belief only after a
very careful evaluation of its justiﬁcatory status. Often enough, it will presumably be
difﬁcult to gather sufﬁcient evidence about the justiﬁcatory status of the other
person’s belief to arrive at a very well justiﬁed assessment. Now this would be
problematic insofar as it should not be excessively difﬁcult to be tolerant of
conﬂicting beliefs, since otherwise claims of tolerance would have very limited
scope.
A second and probably more serious problem with the two proposals, however, is
that they seem somewhat ad hoc. At the epistemological level, why should the
degrees of conviction or justiﬁcation associated with approval and rejection sud-
denly be relevant? After all, at the practical level, approval and rejection are also
accompanied by speciﬁc degrees of conviction and justiﬁcation. Their relation to
each other, however, seems irrelevant to the possibility of practical tolerance. Take,
for example, the modiﬁed example of Robin Hood: for the possibility of tolerance
here it is not at all relevant how strongly one is convinced of the bad intentions or the
good consequences, or how well one is justiﬁed in the respective convictions. All
that matters is that one is convinced of both, and thus both approves and disapproves
of Robin Hood’s actions. How strongly one is convinced that Robin Hood has bad
2.1
A Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
21

intentions, or to what extent one is justiﬁed in that belief, is irrelevant with respect to
the possibility of tolerance, as long as one is also still convinced that his actions have
good consequences that outweigh the bad intentions.25
Due to the special nature of the property of truth, then, an attempt to apply it to the
epistemological realm reveals a fundamental problem with the conditions formulated
by Forst. It is now crucial that this problem is not limited to epistemological
dimensions—quite analogously, it also emerges when tolerance is considered from
a purely practical perspective. For there are non-gradual normative evaluations in
ethical contexts as well. For example, in deontological approaches, whether or not an
action violates a moral duty is relevant to the ethical evaluation of that action.
However, the violation of a moral duty by an act, like the truth of a belief, is not a
gradual matter. Thus, insofar as Forst’s proposal wants to be theoretically neutral and
not exclude deontological approaches from the outset, the problem also arises on a
purely practical level that initially it is not at all clear what is meant by saying that
approval should outweigh, but not override, rejection. So the above considerations
do not show that the concept of tolerance cannot be transferred to the epistemologi-
cal realm, or that it can only be transferred to a limited extent—rather, they suggest
that, at a very fundamental level, it is not clear how exactly the relationship between
approval and rejection that is characteristic of a tolerant attitude should best be
interpreted.
Instead of looking directly for better possibilities of interpretation, it seems useful
at this point to take a step back and question whether and why such an interpretation
is necessary at all. The previous consideration in this regard was, after all, that it is
only an expression of tolerance to condone something on the basis of an ambivalent
normative evaluation if the underlying ambivalent evaluation is characterized by a
speciﬁc ratio of approval and rejection. Condoning on the basis of ambivalent
evaluations, where one evaluative component far outweighs the other, would accord-
ingly not, strictly speaking, be instances of tolerance at all, and for this reason a
precise speciﬁcation of the required ratio of approval and rejection is indispensable
for an adequate understanding of the concept of tolerance. Now, however, one may
ask how plausible one ﬁnds this consideration at all. Let us take the following
example: A young man commits a bank robbery, shoots two bank employees, and
in the ensuing chase three policemen are killed and several passers-by seriously
injured. But the bank robber is acting from noble motives: he needs the money to buy
his ﬁancée a trip to the Maldives and thus give her a treat.
In this case, would it be an expression of tolerance to condone the man’s behavior
because he killed several people in the course of his bank robbery, but at the same
25Of course, it may be that good reasons for believing that a person’s actions have good
consequences are at the same time good reasons against believing that this person has bad
intentions—for instance, because the actions of people with bad intentions usually also have bad
consequences. This does not mean, however, that in such cases approval is always better justiﬁed
than rejection, and approval outweighs rejection in this sense. It is easily possible to have equally
good reasons both for believing that a person’s actions have good consequences and for believing
that that person has bad intentions.
22
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

time wanted to please his ﬁancée? It should be indisputable that good intentions and
bad consequences are extremely disproportionate here, and for that very reason
many people would probably hesitate to call condoning his behavior tolerance.
Now, however, one could argue for the need to distinguish, again at this point,
between justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed forms of tolerance. Thus, it would indeed not be
justiﬁed in any case to condone the bank robber’s behaviour just because he acts out
of laudable intentions. But that does not mean that condoning his behaviour would
not be an expression of tolerance. Perhaps it is simply not true that condoning based
on an ambivalent normative evaluation constitutes tolerance only if the underlying
ambivalent evaluation is characterized by a speciﬁc ratio of rejection to approval. In
order to develop a conception of epistemic tolerance, it would then not be necessary
at all to specify a precise relation of approval and rejection—to be epistemically
tolerant would mean precisely nothing other than to tolerate another person’s
conviction because one considers it to be false, but at the same time also justiﬁed.
But even if this consideration is correct, one probably cannot avoid specifying a
more precise relation between rejection and approval: for even if it should turn out
that toleration of another person’s belief is an expression of epistemic tolerance as
soon as it is based on an ambivalent epistemic evaluation, it should still be indisput-
able that toleration of another person’s belief is not appropriate as soon as it is based
on an ambivalent epistemic evaluation. And it is the same with regard to practical
tolerance: even if toleration of an action is an expression of tolerance as soon as it is
based on an ambivalent ethical evaluation, it should be indisputable that toleration of
an action is not appropriate as soon as it is based on an ambivalent ethical evalua-
tion—this is shown by the above reﬂections on the case of the bank robber. Now a
substantial philosophical reﬂection on practical tolerance should not take its starting
point from a conception of tolerance that picks out an attitude that is quite obviously
inadequate in a great many cases. Many people ﬁnd it very plausible that condoning
an action is appropriate on the basis of an ambivalent ethical evaluation, provided
that there is a speciﬁc relationship between rejection and approval. Philosophical
research should now ﬁrst try to ﬁnd out what exactly this relation should be, and then
investigate whether condoning an action on the basis of an ambivalent ethical
evaluation is indeed adequate, provided that the appropriate relation between
approval and rejection is present.
The same is true of a philosophical reﬂection on epistemic tolerance: that
condoning another person’s belief on the basis of an ambivalent epistemic evaluation
is adequate in all cases seems obviously false. At the same time, however, many
people hold that such condoning is adequate insofar as there is a speciﬁc relationship
between rejection and approval. Now, a philosophically substantial conception of
epistemic toleration ought to pick out just this attitude, which many people think is
particularly commendable, and for this attitude a particular relation of rejection and
approval is now characteristic. It could be that such a conception picks out only one
speciﬁc form of epistemic tolerance—but then it still picks out exactly the form of
epistemic tolerance that is philosophically interesting and thus should be made
accessible to epistemic investigation.
2.1
A Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
23

What does this mean in concrete terms? Obviously, one should not tolerate every
belief that one judges to be false and justiﬁed. This becomes especially clear in cases
where one considers a another person’s justiﬁed belief to be much better justiﬁed
than one’s own belief. If, for example, due to acute back pain I am of the opinion that
I am suffering from a muscle strain, but my doctor, on the basis of a careful
examination of my back, is of the opinion that I have a blockage in the lumbar
region, then I must concede that my doctor has much better reasons for his judgment
and is accordingly better justiﬁed in his belief than I. In this case, to condone the
doctor’s belief because I think it is false but at the same time justiﬁed seems clearly
inadequate. Since my doctor has much better reasons for his judgment, I should
modify my belief and not continue to assume I suffer from a muscle strain. Whether
condoning the doctor’s belief in this case would even be an expression of tolerance is
unclear—perhaps it would be ignorance rather than tolerance. But even if it were an
expression of tolerance, it should be indisputable that it is an unjustiﬁed form of
tolerance. Because my doctor has much better reasons for his judgment than I do, I
should not simply tolerate his beliefs. Likewise, we should not tolerate beliefs as
soon as they have even the slightest degree of justiﬁcation: for example, if a primary
school pupil is convinced that 6  6 ¼ 28, then his maths teacher should not simply
tolerate this belief. For even if the primary school pupil arrived at his result on the
basis of honest arithmetical efforts and is thus justiﬁed in his conviction, at least to a
certain extent, his teacher has incomparably better reasons for knowing that his pupil
is wrong.
On the other hand, there are also cases in which condoning another person’s
belief on the basis of an evaluation of that belief as false and justiﬁed seems very
much to represent an adequate reaction: Marta is an atheist and believes that there is
no such thing as the Christian God. She was raised in a latently religious home, but
realized early on that she did not have much use for the idea of an omnipotent and
omniscient deity. During her studies she dealt with various philosophical arguments
for and against the existence of God, which conﬁrmed her in her atheism. Marta’s
boyfriend Ulf, on the other hand, is a theist and believes that God exists. His belief in
God is not the result of a strict religious upbringing, but is based on careful reﬂection.
Originally rather agnostic, Ulf had started to study theology out of curiosity after
high school. He eventually dropped out, but in the course of his study of fundamental
theological questions, he became more and more convinced that God does exist.
Marta and Ulf have had many detailed discussions about the existence of God. Both
value each other as honest and open-minded conversationalists, and both respect the
reasons each has for the other’s beliefs. Although they stand by their opinions, they
also let the other person have his or her convictions.
In contrast to the situation between me and my doctor or that between the primary
school pupil and his teacher, in the case of Marta and Ulf the mutual condoning of
their convictions seems absolutely adequate: the two consider the conviction of the
other to be wrong, but at the same time respect it as equally justiﬁed—their
condoning reaction seems to be an expression of desirable tolerance. Whether
toleration of another person’s belief on the basis of its evaluation as both false and
justiﬁed thus constitutes a justiﬁed form of tolerance, or a form of tolerance in the
24
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

ﬁrst place, obviously depends on the degree of justiﬁcation attributed to the other
person’s belief. Speciﬁcally, the idea behind epistemic tolerance seems to be that a
tolerant response to a dissenting belief is appropriate precisely when that belief is
equally justiﬁed.26
The assumption that there is a substantial connection between tolerating a thing
and evaluating that thing as in some sense equal or equivalent has a tradition in the
history of ideas about tolerance. An early, prominent execution of this idea is
represented by Lessing’s so-called Ring Parable: In his drama “Nathan der Weise”
(Nathan the Wise), the three Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam
are compared to three brothers who have each inherited a ring from their father.
Although all three rings are outwardly indistinguishable, only one of them possesses
a special magical power. As the parable continues, the argument is now made that,
given this constellation, it would be most reasonable for the three sons to behave
tolerantly: While each should ﬁrmly believe in being in possession of the magic ring,
on the other hand, they should also recognize each other’s corresponding claims as
equally legitimate. Indeed, even in contemporary philosophical scholarship, many
authors assume that a tolerant attitude requires granting a speciﬁc form of equiva-
lence to the tolerated. For example, Wendy Brown writes in her article “Reﬂections
on Tolerance in the Age of Identity.”
[. . .] Tolerance requires public assent to or respect for beliefs and values that are incompati-
ble with ours, for beliefs and values that we consider to be outright wrong [. . .]. [. . .]
Tolerance also requires that we either be hypocritical in our respect for others, pretending
to afﬁrm what we actually believe to be false [. . .] or become radical relativists, assuming
that our beliefs have no greater intrinsic value or credibility than the beliefs of others.27
Due to similar considerations, the connection postulated by Brown between the
possibility of tolerant behaviour and the plausibility of relativistic assumptions is
often accepted in the research literature. In this context, Rainer Forst speaks of the
so-called appreciation conception of tolerance, which he distinguishes from other
conceptions of tolerance.28 Characteristic of this conception of tolerance, according
to Forst, is a speciﬁc form of mutual recognition, which is ultimately due to value
pluralist assumptions, according to which there are various equally valuable but
mutually incompatible normative systems.
In epistemological contexts, then, it seems sensible to strive for a comparatively
sophisticated conception of tolerance, within the framework of which tolerated
beliefs must be evaluated as epistemically equivalent in crucial respects. For against
the background of such a conception, a tolerant attitude can be easily distinguished
from manifestly unjustiﬁed attitudes such as ignorant dogmatism or indifferent
26The idea that epistemic tolerance is characterized by an evaluation of the other’s belief as equally
justiﬁed can already be found in Grundmann 2015.
27Brown 2000, 271. For a very similar consideration, see Forst 2003, 18.
28See Forst 2003, 47 f.
2.1
A Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
25

“anything goes” pluralism.29 Accordingly, in an epistemic sense, one is not tolerant
in the face of dissent as soon as one condones a belief that one holds to be false and
justiﬁed—one is epistemically tolerant only when one condones a belief even though
one holds it to be false because one simultaneously holds that it is equally justiﬁed.
The reaction to a disagreement, which will be the subject of the remainder of this
book, can thus be characterized as follows:
[Epistemic Tolerance] Given a disagreement between subjects S and S' regarding proposi-
tion p, S epistemically tolerates S' belief M regarding p precisely if S tolerates M because S
considers M to be false but nevertheless equally justiﬁed in comparison to S' own belief
regarding p . . .
An epistemically tolerant attitude in precisely this sense will now be subjected to a
detailed, critical evaluation. Before doing so, however, I would like to discuss the
extent to which the attitude singled out by the conception just developed is a relevant
attitude, and whether it is indeed a tolerant attitude in the literal sense.
2.2
Why We Need a Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
The above considerations show that there is a genuine epistemic attitude that has
central features that many philosophers would call speciﬁc characteristics of toler-
ance. Indeed, the parallels between the attitude singled out by the developed
conception of epistemic tolerance and the attitude discussed under the concept of
tolerance in the context of practical philosophy are striking: both attitudes involve a
speciﬁc form of condoning rationalized by an ambivalent normative evaluation of
what is condoned. And in both attitudes, the same questions and problems arise
when one tries to specify the precise relationship of rejection and approval that
rationalizes this speciﬁc form of condoning. All of this suggests that toleration is
precisely not, as one might assume at ﬁrst glance, a genuinely political or ethical
stance, but rather an abstract stance that can be applied to quite different areas of
normative evaluation, and thus can also be applied to purely intellectual contexts.
But even if one accepts this result, the question arises to what extent it is a
relevant result at all. For even though there may be quite different forms of tolerance,
it might still turn out that some forms of tolerance are more signiﬁcant than others. A
simple explanation for the fact that philosophical research on tolerance is located in
the ﬁeld of practical philosophy would be, for instance, that practical forms of
tolerance are simply those forms of tolerance that are particularly relevant from an
academic and social perspective. Accordingly, an in-depth study of purely epistemic
forms of tolerance would perhaps be no more than a philosophical ﬁnger exercise, of
not too much relevance to other philosophical contexts. However, even if one is less
pessimistic about the relevance of epistemic tolerance, the question arises, given the
preceding considerations, as to what exactly this relevance consists in. In what
29See also Šešelja et al. 2015, 114 ff.
26
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

follows, I will argue that the stance singled out by the conception developed in the
previous section is one whose critical evaluation is of great importance both for
various philosophical discourses and for our intellectual practice.
According to the proposed conception, epistemic tolerance denotes the toleration
of a belief judged to be false but equally justiﬁed. Thus, this conception picks out an
attitude that is central to a wide variety of intellectual discourses and the subject of
lively controversy. Let us begin with an example. On October 22, 1996, the
New
York
Times
ran
the
headline,
“Indian
Tribes’
Creationists
Thwart
Archeologists.” The accompanying article was about a disagreement regarding the
origins of indigenous peoples in North America—while archaeologists believed that
the ﬁrst humans arrived in North America from Asia via the Bering Strait about
10,000 years ago, the Cheyenne River Sioux, for example, held that their ancestors
rose from the interior of the earth. What is remarkable now is the way both sides
reacted to this conﬂict. For example, Sebastian LeBeau, a representative of the
Cheyenne River Sioux, was quoted as saying:
We never asked science to make a determination as to our origins. We know where we came
from. We are the descendants of the Buffalo people. They came from inside the earth after
supernatural spirits prepared this world for humankind to live here. If non-Indians choose to
believe they evolved from an ape, so be it. I have yet to come across ﬁve Lakotas who
believe in science and in evolution.30
On the other hand, Roger Anyon, a British archaeologist, commented: “Science is
one of many ways of knowing the world. [The American Indian world view is] just
as valid as the archeological viewpoint of what prehistory is about.”31 In a very
similar vein, Larry Zimmerman, an anthropologist at the University of Iowa,
commented: “I personally do reject science as a privileged way of seeing the
world.”32
It seems that in this case both sides of the conﬂict have adopted an attitude that
corresponds to an epistemically tolerant stance in the sense relevant here: they stand
by their opinion, but respect the opinion of the respective opposing side as equally
valid and, in view of this, plead for a peaceful coexistence of both positions. The
author of the article, George Johnson, now explicitly points out that this example is
not an exceptional individual case, but rather a constellation as it can also be
regularly observed in disputes between Christian creationists and evolutionary
biologists. Johnson explains this against the backdrop of the inﬂuence of a postmod-
ern relativism: Indeed, against the backdrop of strong relativist assumptions about
morality, truth, and justiﬁcation, many postmodern thinkers have called for the very
attitude that I call epistemic tolerance. The idea behind these demands is that, given
the insight into the fundamental historical and cultural conditionality of all our
30Johnson 1996.
31Ibid.
32Ibid.
2.2
Why We Need a Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
27

beliefs, it would be unreasonable to be arrogant or lecturing to dissenters who,
relative to their cultural-historical context, are as justiﬁed in their views as we are.
Apart from the fact that these demands have met with broad resonance in large
parts of the humanities and cultural studies, they have recently gained unexpected
explosiveness above all through their political instrumentalization. The political
explosiveness is unexpected insofar as current attempts at such instrumentalization
come from an environment from which one would least have expected a proximity to
postmodern thought. At present, for example, more and more conservative or right-
wing politicians are trying to strengthen their positions by pointing out that the
conﬂicting convictions of socially accepted authorities represent only one of many
possible, equally valid points of view. A particularly spectacular outgrowth in this
context would perhaps be the postulation of alternative facts on the part of the
Trump administration—a more explicit example that has also attracted some public
attention is a situation that took place in the German Bundestag in November 2018:
After the German Federal Minister of Education and Research, Anja Karliczek, had
made critical statements in the media about the introduction of same-sex marriage
and adoption rights for homosexuals and, among other things, called for long-term
studies to be conducted on the well-being of children in rainbow families, she was
confronted in the Bundestag by the Green Party member of parliament, Kai Gehring,
with corresponding long-term studies that had already been conducted and that
clearly speak against any impairment of the well-being of children in rainbow
families. Karliczek’s reaction to this confrontation now consisted of a demand for
more tolerance: She emphasized that she had only presented her personal opinion
and was surprised that a party like the Greens, of all parties, for whose self-image the
value of tolerance seems to play a central role, reacted so intolerantly to this.
The kind of tolerance Karliczek is calling for here now clearly seems to be
epistemic in nature: for instance, she seems ﬁrst to be calling for a speciﬁc attitude
towards beliefs—Karliczek’s critics have presumably not primarily been bothered by
the fact that she has expressed a particular opinion, but rather by the fact that she has
a particular opinion in the ﬁrst place. Moreover, the criticism of Karliczek’s beliefs
seems clearly intellectually motivated. It is not based on the consideration that it
would be inconvenient to have that belief for any reason—but rather on the consid-
eration that that belief is not true.
But even independently of the radical and controversially received theories of
postmodern philosophy and their political instrumentalization, descriptions and
recommendations of an epistemically tolerant attitude are regularly found in many
other intellectual discourses. A good example of this is political philosophy: in
political philosophy, a whole series of authors deal with the question of the extent
to which the fact that people disagree on fundamental issues is relevant for political
theories of just social orders. For example, a considerable part of the work of John
Rawls revolves around the following problem: How can a political conception of
justice be formulated for a democratic society based on voluntary and fair coopera-
28
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

tion among free, equal, and politically autonomous citizens when there is fundamen-
tal dissent among these citizens on fundamental moral and philosophical issues?33
In discussing this problem, Rawls places great emphasis on the fact that the
problematic dissents are both stable and rational: That people disagree is not an
accidental circumstance due to the irrationality of individuals. Rather, it is a central
characteristic of any democratic society that different conﬂicting yet equally justiﬁed
views emerge. Rawls explains this by means of the concept of the so-called burdens
of judgment, which consist in imperfections of human reason. Because people weigh
evidence differently, interpret concepts differently, have private evidence, or have
different background beliefs, it is virtually inevitable that conﬂicting beliefs will
form in a society, not all of which may be true, but all of which may be equally
reasonable.34 Given this constellation, Rawls argues, reasonable individuals must
accept the equality of divergent beliefs, but at the same time they can stick to their
own beliefs. He writes:
We recognize that our own doctrine has, and can have, for people generally, no special
claims on them beyond their own view of its merits. Others who afﬁrm doctrines different
from ours are, we grant, reasonable also, and certainly not unreasonable. [. . .] When we take
the step beyond recognizing the reasonableness of a doctrine and afﬁrm our belief in it, we
are not being unreasonable. [. . .] Beyond this, reasonable persons will think it unreasonable
[. . .] to repress comprehensive views that are not unreasonable, though different from their
own.35
The attitude that Rawls here ascribes to reasonable members of a society now
actually seems to be nothing other than what I understand by epistemic tolerance:
they stick to their opinions, but at the same time refrain from modifying the
dissenting opinions of others, insofar as they recognize these opinions as equally
reasonable.
Rawls is far from alone in this consideration. Indeed, a critical examination of
epistemic tolerance is likely to be central to all liberalist theories that claim a
so-called public reason account of political legitimacy. This is a widely used and
much debated approach whose central idea is that the possibility of public justiﬁca-
tion is a necessary condition of political legitimacy. More speciﬁcally, the idea is that
a political measure or institution is legitimate only if it can be justiﬁed to members of
society in the sense that all members of society can justiﬁably accept that measure or
institution.36
33See for instance Rawls 2005, 22 f.
34Rawls 2001, 32 ff.
35Rawls 2005, 60.
36At least that is the basic idea. One obvious concern is that the possibility of justiﬁcation to all
members of society is too strong a condition. Thus, it could easily turn out that there are hardly any
measures or institutions that can be justiﬁed to all members of society—in which case a public
reason account of political legitimacy would have anarchistic consequences. In light of this,
libertarians typically formulate speciﬁc restrictions such that a measure or institution need not be
justiﬁable to all, but only to, say, all sufﬁciently rational members of a society in order to be
2.2
Why We Need a Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
29

Starting from this basic assumption, public reason theorists now assume that
while reasonable members of a society are justiﬁed as individuals in holding all sorts
of ideological, political, or ethical beliefs, they also accept that other members of
society are justiﬁed in holding conﬂicting beliefs, and that accordingly it would not
be legitimate to bring one’s own beliefs in this regard to bear on a political level that
goes beyond the realm of private persuasion.
Within the framework of liberalism, then, a stable pluralism of conﬂicting but
equally justiﬁed opinions is characteristic of modern societies with rational
members.37 Crucially now, by justiﬁcation in this context it seems that epistemic
justiﬁcation is actually meant. For example, Kevin Vallier writes in his article on
Public Justiﬁcation in the “Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy”:
A core assumption of public reason liberalism, the political theory associated with the idea of
public justiﬁcation, is that people’s reasons for action and belief can differ substantially. [. . .]
[Any] public reason liberal must accept that citizens can be rational to comply with reasons
that others systematically reject and so, in some way or another, different individuals must be
epistemically justiﬁed in afﬁrming very different reasons. Note that this does not mean that
members of the public must acknowledge the validity of a particular conception of justiﬁca-
tory reasons, rather that the public reason liberal theorist must accept an epistemology of
justiﬁcatory reasons that allows that different reasons can be epistemically justiﬁed for
different persons.38
The idea, then, is that reasonable members of a society are epistemically justiﬁed in
holding speciﬁc views, while accepting that other individuals hold conﬂicting views
that are also epistemically justiﬁed.39
To be sure, this does not directly mean that under liberalism reasonable members
are said to be epistemically tolerant: To begin with, liberalists merely assume that
reasonable members of a society accept conﬂicting beliefs of others as equally
justiﬁed, while justiﬁably holding to their own beliefs. In principle, such an attitude
is compatible with an intolerant response to disagreement, in which everyone tries to
convince dissenters that their views are wrong. On the other hand, however, it is
difﬁcult to see why a society whose members accept each other as equally justiﬁed,
but in which at the same time everyone tries to conform dissenting beliefs to their
own opinions, should be characterized by stable pluralism. Such a society would
presumably be more expected to tend toward a monistic structure in which the
majority succeeds in imposing its particular opinion.
Accordingly, it seems most natural at ﬁrst to assume that, within the framework of
liberalism, reasonable members of a society are ascribed a tolerant attitude in the
legitimate (Enoch 2017). For a discussion of the extent to which the formulation of such restrictions
is a legitimate strategy, see for instance Enoch 2015.
37Rawls 2005, xvii et seq; Vallier 2018, Section 1.
38Vallier 2018, para. 2.1, my emphasis.
39David Enoch, in his essay “Political Philosophy and Epistemology: The Case of Public Reason,”
discusses various ways of spelling out the understanding of epistemic justiﬁcation relevant in the
context of liberalism, as well as the epistemological implications involved (Enoch 2017).
30
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

sense relevant here: They stand by their opinions, but judge conﬂicting opinions of
others to be equally justiﬁed, and accordingly do not try to make these divergent
opinions conform to their own. Given this, it is readily understandable why societies
whose members are rational should be characterized by a stable pluralism of
conﬂicting but equally justiﬁed beliefs.
But even if it should turn out that liberalism does not ascribe to reasonable
members of a society an epistemically tolerant attitude in the strict sense, a critical
examination of epistemic tolerance would still be of some importance for liberalist
theories. For in any case, liberalists assume that reasonable members of a society
evaluate conﬂicting beliefs held by others as equally justiﬁed and, in the face of that
evaluation, hold to their beliefs anyway. This attitude obviously bears a strong
resemblance to an epistemically tolerant attitude. If it were to turn out that an
epistemically tolerant attitude is inappropriate because it is irrational to hold on to
one’s own conviction in the face of the evaluation of a conﬂicting conviction as
equally justiﬁed, then this result would also speak directly for the irrationality of the
very attitude that liberalists explicitly attribute to reasonable members of a society,
and thus fundamentally question the legitimacy of the desideratum of a stable
pluralism of conﬂicting but equally justiﬁed convictions.
Moreover, this connection will presumably not be limited to liberalist approaches:
Robert Audi, for example, in his contribution to the “Oxford Handbook of Political
Philosophy”, explicitly defends the view that political philosophy in general must
take into account a stable pluralism of conﬂicting but epistemically equivalent
convictions as a central desideratum of adequate theorizing—and makes it immedi-
ately clear that such pluralism, in his view, suggests a principle of tolerance as a
central principle of liberal-democratic social orders.40
Moreover, there are also various approaches in ethics for which the question of
the rationality of an epistemically tolerant stance will be of some importance. For
example, many neo-Aristotelian, intuitionist, and virtue ethics approaches implicitly
or explicitly assume that there can be disagreements on ethical issues in which both
sides are equally justiﬁed, and in which the mere occurrence of the disagreement also
does not generate rational pressure for belief modiﬁcation.41 And even in the realm
of theoretical philosophy there are discourses in which an epistemically tolerant
stance is explicitly promoted as desirable, or at least assumed to be unproblematic.
We will see, for instance, that in philosophy of science many authors assume that
scientiﬁc communities can beneﬁt from an epistemically tolerant behavior of their
members. A critical evaluation of this attitude is thus clearly of great importance for
various philosophical discourses.
Ultimately, however, the attitude I have called epistemic tolerance is relevant to
our everyday epistemic practice even apart from any philosophical discourse. To be
tolerant of beliefs one holds to be wrong but equally justiﬁed seems quite desirable
not only in the eyes of representatives of speciﬁc academic disciplines or
40Audi 2012.
41See for example Wiggins 1998, 209 f.
2.2
Why We Need a Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
31

approaches, but also in the eyes of many lay people. Earlier in the chapter, mention
was made of Richard Feldman, who has observed in many of his students a speciﬁc
intellectual attitude that he explicitly describes as tolerant. And indeed, Feldman
seems to be referring to the very attitude singled out by the conception of epistemic
tolerance developed here. He writes:
Thinking someone else has a false belief is consistent with having any of a number of other
favorable attitudes toward that person and that belief. You can think that the person is
reasonable, even if mistaken. And this seems to be what my students thought: while they had
their own beliefs, the others had reasonable beliefs as well. I think that the attitude that my
students displayed is widespread. It is not unusual for a public discussion of a controversial
issue to end with the parties to the dispute agreeing that this is a topic about which reasonable
people can disagree.42
The impression that an epistemically tolerant attitude is a widespread one should
come as little surprise. For, in fact, a tolerant response to disagreement is prima facie
quite commendable: it seems to allow for an attractive compromise between two
attitudes that clearly seem unattractive at ﬁrst sight. Thus, on the one hand, we do not
want to be dogmatic—we are aware of our epistemic weaknesses and do not want to
lightly discredit other views as inferior. On the other hand, we also want to avoid
skeptical consequences and be able to hold on to fundamental moral, philosophical,
religious, or political views, some of which are central to our identity—even if those
views are not shared by everyone. This is precisely why a tolerant attitude seems so
attractive: it allows us to take other views seriously and respect them without
requiring us to abandon our own convictions.
The conception of epistemic tolerance developed in this chapter thus picks out a
speciﬁc intellectual attitude towards disagreement, the critical evaluation of which
should be relevant for various reasons. Thus, on the one hand, it is an attitude that has
received some attention in various philosophical discourses and has been more or
less explicitly promoted as epistemically adequate by many authors. On the other
hand, it is an attitude that is also recommendable in the eyes of many people outside
of academic discourses and, accordingly, is also frequently encountered in our
everyday intellectual practice.
This means that a conception of epistemic tolerance is not only possible, but also
necessary: insofar as the attitude elaborated is such a relevant attitude, it even plays
only a subordinate role whether it is also a tolerant attitude in the literal sense. The
considerations made in this chapter have shown that there are indeed central
similarities between the intellectual attitude elaborated and a tolerant attitude in the
conventional, practical sense. Thus, it seems reasonable to assume that we already
have the conceptual resources to describe the attitude that is relevant to us, and that it
is indeed a particular form of tolerance in the literal sense. Ultimately, however, not
much depends on the correctness of this conjecture. If it should turn out that, despite
42Feldman 2007, 194 ff. Similar observations can also be found in Burkard 2017.
32
2
What Does It Mean to Be Epistemically Tolerant?

the superﬁcial similarity, the attitude elaborated is not a tolerant attitude in the literal
sense, a precise description and evaluation of this attitude would still be relevant.
Accordingly, in this case one could also argue for a modiﬁcation or extension of
the conventional concept of tolerance: Even if the concept of tolerance as we usually
use it only singles out politically or ethically motivated attitudes, it might still make
sense under certain circumstances to expand this concept of tolerance in such a way
that it also includes other attitudes that are neither politically nor ethically motivated,
but nevertheless bear a strong resemblance to the attitudes singled out by the
conventional concept of tolerance.43 Such an expansion of the concept of tolerance
would be an attractive option especially if, on the one hand, there is not yet a term
that singles out these attitudes in question, but, on the other hand, there are contexts
in which it is important to have an appropriate term—and both of these seem to apply
to the attitude described here. On the other hand, of course, one could simply
introduce a new term to have a label for the attitude in question. In what follows, I
will stick to the designation as epistemic tolerance. This designation, however, does
not necessarily presuppose that the attitude designated is actually a tolerant attitude
in the literal sense, and is equally compatible with the assumption that, strictly
speaking, it is a non-proper designation.
43In this context, one could also speak of a Carnapian explication of the concept of tolerance. In the
ﬁrst chapter of his book “Logical Foundations of Probability” Rudolf Carnap describes a speciﬁc
philosophical approach which he calls explication (Carnap 1971). Roughly speaking, an explication
consists in transforming an everyday concept (explicandum), which is more or less imprecise, into a
precisely deﬁned, scientiﬁcally usable concept (explicatum), or in replacing it by such a concept. In
the process, the term developed in the course of explication should, on the one hand, be more
fruitful or useful than the original term, but at the same time be as similar as possible to the
original term.
The concept of tolerance I propose would now be a successful explication of the everyday
concept of tolerance in that, on the one hand, it allows us to describe a variety of relevant political,
ethical, and epistemic phenomena, but on the other hand, it is still very similar to the conventional
concept of tolerance.
2.2
Why We Need a Conception of Epistemic Tolerance
33

Tolerance and Relativism
3
Before addressing the question of whether and under what circumstances it is
epistemically adequate to respond tolerantly to a disagreement, I would ﬁrst like to
address a somewhat different problem, that of the connection between tolerance and
relativism. Is there a connection between demands for tolerance and relativistic
assumptions?
This question is already widely discussed in relation to tolerance as an ethical
stance in practical philosophy.1 At ﬁrst sight, a positive answer seems quite plausi-
ble: Is it not characteristic of a tolerant attitude to respect deviant behaviours as in
some sense equal and thus to turn away from universalistic notions of right and
wrong? On the other hand, some authors have pointed to possible tensions between
tolerance claims and relativist assumptions. The basic idea here is that it is impossi-
ble to defend universal moral claims of tolerance against the background of moral
relativism, which seems to imply precisely the contextual conditionality of all moral
claims. Does an analogous problem arise with regard to epistemic tolerance?
In order to answer this question, it must ﬁrst be clariﬁed what kind of relativistic
assumptions are at stake at all. For moral relativism seems in some sense irrelevant to
claims for epistemic tolerance. After all, epistemic tolerance is not a moral but an
intellectual stance: demands for epistemic tolerance are thus ﬁrst and foremost
purely intellectual demands—they refer to tolerance as a stance to be recommended
from a purely epistemic perspective and are accordingly perfectly compatible with
the relativist assumption that there are no universally valid moral demands. At the
same time, however, they are also compatible with the universalist assumption that
there are absolutely valid moral demands.
On the other hand, there might be tensions between moral relativism and demands
for epistemic tolerance insofar as it might be problematic, under the presupposition
of moral relativism, to evaluate the divergent ethical beliefs of others as false—
which is precisely what an epistemically tolerant attitude demands, for which an
1See, for example, Graham 1998, Harrison 1976, Kim and Wreen 2003, Tilley 1994.
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
D. Balg, Live and Let Live, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-64040-1_3
35

evaluation of divergent beliefs as false is, after all, characteristic. At the same time, it
is easy to see that this is not a problem speciﬁc to moral relativism: more generally,
regardless of any speciﬁc domain, truth-relativist assumptions seem to militate
against simply evaluating the other side’s belief as false in the event of a disagree-
ment. Such an evaluation, the reasoning goes, already presupposes a non-relativistic
notion of truth, according to which beliefs are true or false in an absolute, subject-
independent sense. How convincing is this consideration?
3.1
Truth Relativism
Against the background of a relativistic understanding of truth, in the case of a
disagreement one side does not necessarily have to be wrong. If beliefs are only ever
true or false relative to, say, cultures, personal experiences, or accepted standards,
then in a disagreement both sides can just as easily be right. For example, if a
Christian believes that Jesus is the Son of God, while a Jew believes that Jesus is not
the Son of God, then against the background of an appropriate relativistic theory of
truth, both could have a true belief—for example, because both beliefs are true
relative to their respective cultural contexts. In this case, then, it would not be right to
judge the other person’s belief as false—but that is precisely what an epistemically
tolerant attitude requires of us.
However, this reasoning is problematic for several reasons. To understand this, it
is helpful to consider what exactly relativists claim about truth in the ﬁrst place. For
instance, there is ﬁrst a basic distinction between two different kinds of truth
relativist theories, namely the distinction between genuine and indexical truth
relativism.2 The basic idea behind indexical truth relativism is that utterances of
the form “x is F” express relativized propositions of the form [relative to the
parameter P is x F]. These relativized propositions themselves have absolute truth
conditions—the proposition [relative to the parameter P is x F] is true if and only if
relative to the parameter P is x F. Let us apply this model to our example: when the
Christian utters that Jesus is the Son of God, he thereby expresses the belief that
relative to the parameter he accepts, Jesus is the Son of God. Analogously, the Jew’s
utterance that Jesus is not the Son of God expresses the conviction that relative to the
parameter he accepts, Jesus is not the Son of God. The Christian’s utterance is now
true if and only if, relative to the parameter he accepts, Jesus is the Son of God, and
the Jew’s utterance is true if and only if, relative to the parameter he accepts, Jesus is
not the Son of God.3
2For a more detailed discussion of this distinction, see for instance Kölbel 2004b.
3At this point, the question immediately arises as to what exactly a parameter is, and what it means
to accept a parameter. However, this question cannot be answered in this generality, since different
relativistic theories spell out the term ‘parameter’ differently. Plausible examples of appropriate
parameters would include cultural norms, subjective preferences, personal experience, or standards
of correctness. Accordingly, to accept a parameter would mean to have been socialized in a certain
36
3
Tolerance and Relativism

The genuine truth relativist, on the other hand, has a somewhat different thesis.
According to genuine truth relativism, utterances of the form “x is F” express non-
relativized propositions of the form [x is F]. However, these non-relativized
propositions do not have absolute truth conditions, but relative truth conditions:
Thus, the utterance “x is F” is true if and only if, relative to a corresponding
parameter P, the proposition [x is F] is true. Let us also apply this model to our
example: when the Christian utters that Jesus is the Son of God, he thereby expresses
the belief that Jesus is the Son of God. Analogously, the Jew’s utterance that Jesus is
not the Son of God expresses the conviction that Jesus is not the Son of God. Now
the Christian’s conviction is true if and only if it is true, relative to the parameter he
accepts, that Jesus is the Son of God, and the Jew’s conviction is true if and only if it
is true, relative to the parameter he accepts, that Jesus is not the Son of God.
To what extent, are these two variants of truth relativism incompatible with the
evaluation of a dissenting belief as false, which is characteristic of a tolerant attitude?
The consideration was, after all, that against the background of a relativistic theory
of truth, in the case of a disagreement both sides can easily have a true belief.
However, at least against the background of indexical truth relativism, it is not at all
clear why this should be the case. For of course, against the background of indexical
relativism, it is possible for both the Jewish person and the Christian person to have a
true belief—this would be the case precisely if, relative to the parameter accepted by
the Christian person, Jesus is the Son of God, while, relative to the parameter
accepted by the Jewish person, Jesus is not the Son of God. At the same time,
however, it is questionable whether in such a situation there is still a difference of
opinion at all. For the fact that relative to the parameter accepted by the Christian
person Jesus is the Son of God is perfectly compatible with the fact that relative to
the parameter accepted by the Jewish person Jesus is not the Son of God.4
Accordingly, in this case, both sides could also simply adopt the belief of their
respective counterpart: the Christian can readily believe that, relative to the standard
accepted by the Jewish person, Jesus is not the Son of God, and the Jewish person
can readily believe that, relative to the standard accepted by the Christian, Jesus is
the Son of God. It seems, then, that against the background of indexical relativism,
one can evaluate another person’s belief as true only if there is no genuine disagree-
ment. This, however, is perfectly compatible with demands for an epistemically
tolerant stance, which, after all, only requires an evaluation of another person’s belief
as false in the case of genuine disagreement. If indexical relativism turns out to be
correct, this might indeed mean that one should not be epistemically tolerant—but
only insofar as there would then be no genuine disagreement to respond to tolerantly
at all, and not because a tolerant stance would not be an appropriate response to a
disagreement.
culture, to have certain preferences, to have had speciﬁc experiences, or to be convinced of speciﬁc
standards of correctness.
4That indexical relativism is incompatible with the possibility of genuine disagreement has already
been recognized by various authors, and has often been seen as a crucial weakness of this theory.
See for instance Ibid, Lasersohn 2005 or Wright 2001.
3.1
Truth Relativism
37

What about genuine truth relativism? Against the background of genuine truth
relativism, it is perfectly possible to evaluate the other person’s belief as true even in
the case of genuine disagreement. For example, the Christian person might accept
that the Jewish person’s belief is true because the proposition [Jesus is not the Son of
God] is true relative to the parameter accepted by the Jewish person. However, this
does not mean that there is no genuine disagreement: From the Christian person’s
point of view, the proposition [Jesus is not the Son of God] is still false, and for this
reason he could not simply adopt this belief without changing his mind. Neverthe-
less, there is no incompatibility between genuine truth relativism and demands for
epistemic tolerance. For just because, against the background of genuine truth
relativism, one can evaluate the other person’s belief as true even in the case of a
disagreement, this does not mean that one must always evaluate the other person’s
belief as true.
For instance, it should be possible to be mistaken about whether one’s beliefs are
true or false relative to the accepted parameter. For example, suppose a Christian
believes that Jesus is the Son of God, and a Baha’i believes that Jesus is not the Son
of God. In fact, however, it is true relative to both the Christian parameter and the
Baha’i parameter that Jesus is the Son of God—so the Baha’i erroneously assumes
that it is true relative to the Baha’i parameter that Jesus is not the Son of God. Now
insofar as the Christian knows that it is also true relative to the Bahaistic parameter
that Jesus is the Son of God, it would be legitimate from his perspective to evaluate
the Bahaistic person’s belief as false—and as false both relative to the parameter
accepted by the Bahaistic person and relative to the parameter accepted by himself.
Thus, even against the background of genuine truth relativism, it is possible to
evaluate the other person’s belief as false in the case of a disagreement.
More crucially, however, even in cases where the other person’s belief is judged
to be true relative to the parameter he or she accepts, that belief should still be judged
to be epistemically deﬁcient in crucial ways—and in precisely the ways that are
crucial to an epistemically tolerant stance. For example, if the Christian person holds
the belief that Jesus is the Son of God, and the Jewish person holds the belief that
Jesus is not the Son of God, and furthermore, the truth of beliefs depends on the
parameter each accepts, then both the Christian and the Jew should evaluate the
other’s belief as true. At the same time, however, both should evaluate the conviction
of the other as not corresponding to the facts: for either Jesus is the Son of God, or he
is not the Son of God. Against the background of genuine relativism, both beliefs
may be true—but that does not mean that both beliefs correctly represent reality. At
this point, the difference between genuine truth-relativist and fact-constructivist
theories becomes clear, whereas the fact-constructivist assumes that facts always
exist only relative to a speciﬁc, consciousness-dependent parameter, the genuine
38
3
Tolerance and Relativism

truth-relativist merely assumes that beliefs can always be true or false only relative to
such a parameter.5
Against the background of indexical relativism, such a distinction between truth-
relativist and fact-constructivist views was still not very plausible, since here quite
ordinary, absolute truth-conditions were supposed to apply to the respectively
expressed propositions. Together with the harmless assumption that at least some
of the propositions with relative truth-values are true, a corresponding fact-
constructivism thus follows directly from indexical relativism. But the analogous
is not true of genuine relativism—the basic idea of genuine relativism is, after all,
precisely to abandon the orthodox assumption that every proposition is either true or
false. Since the genuine truth relativist is thus in a position to explain the postulated
relative truth of propositions with the help of his relative concept of truth alone, he is
not—as the indexical relativist, who wants to explain the postulated relative truth of
propositions without abandoning the orthodox assumption—forced to locate the
relativity in question on the level of facts.6
This observation is now relevant to the question of the connection between
epistemic tolerance and genuine truth relativism because the evaluation of a
conﬂicting belief as false is characteristic of an intellectually tolerant attitude
towards disagreement only insofar as such an attitude is necessarily accompanied
by a negative epistemic evaluation of the conviction of the opposing side. To equate
this negative epistemic evaluation with an evaluation of the conﬂicting belief as false
is at ﬁrst sight obvious, but it might turn out to be implausible against the back-
ground of genuine truth relativism, since within the framework of this theory
conﬂicting beliefs may well be evaluated as true even in cases of genuine disagree-
ment. This does not mean, however, that against the background of genuine truth
relativism an epistemically tolerant attitude towards disagreement is inappropriate in
cases in which the other party’s belief is true relative to the standard it accepts, but
merely that in such cases the negative evaluation of that belief characteristic of the
tolerant attitude consists precisely not in an evaluation as false.
But even if it turns out that there is a fundamental connection between genuine
truth relativism and fact constructivism—for instance, because many truth relativists
also implicitly accept fact constructivism, or truth relativism plausibly presupposes
fact constructivism—there is presumably no incompatibility between truth relativ-
ism and claims for epistemic tolerance. Suppose, for instance, that both truth
relativism and fact constructivism are true, and consider again our example: in this
case, from the Jewish person’s point of view, the Christian person’s belief is not only
true relative to the parameter relevant to the Christian person, but it also corresponds
to the facts relative to that parameter. And conversely, from the perspective of the
Christian person, the Jewish person’s belief is not only true relative to the parameter
5A detailed explanation of the distinction between truth relativism and factual constructivism can be
found—but against the background of a somewhat different terminology—for instance in
Boghossian 2006.
6See for example, Kölbel 2004b, 310.
3.1
Truth Relativism
39

relevant to the Jewish person, but relative to that parameter it also corresponds to the
facts. In this case, it does indeed seem as if there is no longer any room for an
epistemically tolerant stance. For both the Jewish and the Christian person have
exactly the conviction that they should each have—thus it is not at all clear to what
extent a negative normative evaluation, which is after all characteristic of a tolerant
attitude, is still possible here at all from an epistemological perspective.
On the other hand, however, it is also not clear whether in this case there is still a
genuine disagreement. For the Jewish and the Christian person would only have a
disagreement in so far as both cannot adopt the conviction of the other without
changing one of their own beliefs. Such a constellation is, of course, a disagreement
in some sense—but the question is whether it is a disagreement in the sense that
many people usually presuppose when they talk about political, religious, or ethical
disputes and the role of a tolerant attitude in that context.7 After all, on the face of it,
it is quite plausible that there is a crucial difference between a genuine disagreement,
say between an atheist and a person of faith, and a situation in which two people each
hold a belief that the other side cannot readily adopt. Consider, for example, a case in
which two people agree in principle, but have different degrees of belief. For
example, the atheist thinks that he can roughly remember that the last tram leaves
at midnight, and the theist, who has checked the timetable again to be sure, is also of
this opinion—but is much more sure than the atheist.8
Of course, the atheist and the theist in this case have a disagreement in the sense
that they have different degrees of belief in the proposition that the last tram leaves at
midnight. Accordingly, neither can simply adopt the belief of the other without
modifying one of their own beliefs. Nevertheless, this is clearly not a disagreement
in the same sense that the two disagree about, say, the existence of God. The
difference now seems to be that the two do not simply disagree in some way about
the existence of God, but moreover that in this case they would regard each other’s
beliefs as epistemically deﬁcient in speciﬁc respects. This means that a speciﬁc
7In fact, there are some authors who have proposed the fact that two people cannot adopt the belief
of the respective other side without modifying one of their own beliefs as a suitable criterion for the
existence of a genuine disagreement. For a defense and discussion of this criterion, called non-
cotenability, see for instance Kölbel 2004b or MacFarlane 2009.
8A clearer but also more controversial example would be a situation where the atheist meets an
agnostic. Suppose, for example, that the atheist is a distinguished professor of philosophy of
religion who has spent his life arguing extensively against the existence of God. Insofar as the
agnostic is, say, a high school graduate who has only recently begun to think about the existence of
God, this need not be a genuine disagreement. Whether or not there is a genuine disagreement in
this case depends crucially on what exactly it means to have an agnostic attitude regarding the
existence of God. Insofar as such agnosticism is, for example, a higher-order belief - for instance,
the belief that the evidence available at any given time does not yet permit an unambiguous verdict -
it is not clear to what extent there is a genuine disagreement here. After all, the atheist might well
agree that the evidence available to the high school graduate does not permit an unambiguous
judgment, and at the same time hold to his atheistic conviction in the face of the evidence available
to him. Nevertheless, it is clear that neither the agnostic nor the atheist can simply adopt the other
side’s belief without modifying one of their own. However, as we have already seen, the question of
the nature of an agnostic stance is currently the subject of controversy.
40
3
Tolerance and Relativism

negative epistemic evaluation is not only a necessary condition for a tolerant stance,
but that the tendency towards such an evaluation is also already required for the
existence of a genuine disagreement. Accordingly, a conception that regards the
mere fact that two persons cannot adopt each other’s beliefs without modifying one
of their own beliefs as sufﬁcient for the existence of a disagreement cannot fully
capture the fundamental conﬂictual character of genuine dissent.
This means that genuine truth relativism, when combined with fact constructiv-
ism, excludes the possibility of genuine disagreement from the outset, and is thus in
no way incompatible with the view that an epistemically tolerant attitude is the
appropriate response to disagreement. Thus, a kind of dilemma arises: either the truth
relativist accepts a clear distinction between truth relativism and fact constructiv-
ism—in which case a negative epistemic evaluation of the other’s belief is still
possible even against the background of truth relativism in the context of a disagree-
ment. Or the truth relativist denies a clear distinction between truth relativism and
fact constructivism. In this case, against the background of truth relativism, it would
presumably be correct that one should never be epistemically tolerant—though
again, not because a tolerant attitude would be inappropriate in response to a
disagreement, but only because there would be no disagreement in the proper
sense at all.
A closer look, then, shows that there is no fundamental connection between
demands for epistemic tolerance and relativistic assumptions about truth. The
requirement that, in the context of a disagreement, the other party’s belief be judged
false is compatible with both relativist and non-relativist assumptions. Against the
background of non-relativistic assumptions, in the context of a disagreement at least
one side must have a false belief. Against the background of indexical relativism,
contradictory statements may turn out to be equally true at ﬁrst sight, but in such
cases there is no genuine disagreement. Only against the background of genuine
relativism can both sides have a true belief even in the context of a genuine
disagreement—namely, if both beliefs are true relative to different parameters in
each case. But apart from the fact that even in such cases both beliefs remain false at
least relative to the parameter accepted by the respective opposing side, there are also
cases, against the background of genuine relativism, in which a belief is false relative
to the parameters of both sides. Moreover, in the context of a genuine disagreement,
both beliefs do not correctly represent reality from the perspective of the respective
opposing side, which need not be accompanied by an evaluation as false in the
context of genuine relativism, but is in any case sufﬁcient for the negative epistemic
evaluation of the opposing side’s belief that is characteristic of a tolerant stance.
Ultimately, no coupling of truth relativism with factual constructivism helps either,
since against the background of such a combination the possibility of genuine
disagreement is again excluded from the outset.
3.1
Truth Relativism
41

3.2
Epistemic Relativism
Besides truth relativism, there is another relativistic theory that is of central impor-
tance in epistemological contexts. This is the so-called epistemic relativism. In
contrast to truth relativism, epistemic relativism does not refer to the truth value,
but to the justiﬁcatory status of beliefs. Just as the truth relativist assumes that truth is
a relative property, the epistemic relativist assumes that epistemic justiﬁcation is a
relative property. And indeed, the question of the relativity of epistemic justiﬁcation
seems directly relevant to the legitimacy of claims for epistemic tolerance. For in this
context, a problem looms that is quite analogous to the problem of the relation
between tolerance and relativism, described at the outset and already widely
discussed in practical contexts: on the one hand, demands for epistemic tolerance
seem to directly presuppose epistemic relativism. After all, it is characteristic of an
epistemically tolerant stance to evaluate both one’s own conviction and the convic-
tion of the other side as equally justiﬁed in the case of a disagreement. Does not such
an evaluation of conﬂicting beliefs as equally justiﬁed already presuppose that
epistemic justiﬁcation is a relative property? On the other hand, it is not clear
whether epistemic relativism can be at all compatible with general claims for
epistemic tolerance. For such claims are only possible against the background of
the assumption that, at least in some cases, it is generally justiﬁed simply to stick to
one’s conviction in the face of another person’s conﬂicting judgment. Under the
presupposition of epistemic relativism, however, such general judgments about what
response is justiﬁed in the face of disagreement seem impossible.
In order to be able to assess to what extent this is a serious problem, it is again
helpful to ﬁrst better understand what exactly epistemic relativism actually means.
According to a widely held view in epistemological research, epistemic relativism is
the thesis that a given belief can only ever be justiﬁed relative to speciﬁc epistemic
standards, and that it therefore also depends on the epistemic standards in question
whether a belief is justiﬁed or not. Thus, for instance, Duncan Pritchard writes in his
essay “Defusing Epistemic Relativism”:
So an epistemic relativism would hold that two parties to a dispute could be genuinely
disagreeing over some fact [. . .] but that the disagreement is nevertheless faultless, where the
faultlessness is to be construed in a speciﬁcally epistemic fashion. Continuing the idea of
framework-relative truth, the thought would be that relative to one epistemic framework
[. . .] your claim has a certain epistemic standing, while relative to another epistemic
framework [. . .] my counterclaim would have an epistemic standing of identical strength.
While only one of us is in fact right, the point remains that any epistemic criticism I make of
your claim will only have force relative to my framework and not relative to yours.9
This is also in line with the much-noted characterization of epistemic relativism
developed by Paul Boghossian in his book “Fear of Knowledge”.10 According to
9Pritchard 2009, 398.
10See for the following Boghossian 2006, Chap. 5.
42
3
Tolerance and Relativism

this characterization, epistemic relativism is a complex epistemological theory that
can be traced back to three main assumptions: the assumption of epistemic non-
absolutism, the assumption of epistemic relationism, and the assumption of episte-
mic pluralism. Epistemic non-absolutism states that there are no absolute facts about
which belief is justiﬁed given a particular set of evidence. Epistemic relationism says
that non-relational judgments of the form “Evidence E justiﬁes opinion M” are
strictly false, and must be understood as expressions of relational propositions of
the form [Relative to the epistemic system S, evidence E justiﬁes opinion M], if they
are to have any prospect of truth. Finally, epistemic pluralism says that there are in
fact different, mutually exclusive epistemic systems relative to which the justiﬁca-
tory status of beliefs can be evaluated, and that there are no facts on the basis of
which some of these systems would be better than others.
As a ﬁnal example of such an understanding of epistemic relativism, consider
Steven Luper, who in his essay “Epistemic Relativism” proposes a negative deﬁni-
tion and understands epistemic relativism simply as a rejection of epistemic absolut-
ism, where by epistemic absolutism is meant the assumption that there is precisely
one correct fundamental standard relative to which the justiﬁcatory status of beliefs
must be judged.11
Against the background of this widespread conception of epistemic relativism, it
quickly becomes clear why it initially seems plausible that the evaluation of another
person’s conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed, which is characteristic of a tolerant
attitude, depends on relativistic assumptions. For only against the background of
epistemic relativism can it be satisfactorily explained—it seems—how it can be at all
that two incompatible beliefs are equally justiﬁed: if beliefs are always justiﬁed or
unjustiﬁed only relative to certain epistemic standards or systems, and if at the same
time there are several different systems that are at least partially mutually exclusive,
then it is not surprising that there are cases in which incompatible beliefs are equally
justiﬁed—for these would then merely be cases in which one belief is justiﬁed
relative to one epistemic system, while another belief is justiﬁed relative to another
epistemic system. At the same time, since there should also be no facts on the basis
of which some epistemic systems would be better than others, it is also clear why the
two beliefs are not only each justiﬁed, but in fact equally justiﬁed. Accordingly,
within the framework of epistemic relativism, not only can it be very well-explained
why it is possible for both sides to be equally justiﬁed in the case of dissent, but
furthermore, epistemic relativism would also argue for such cases actually occurring
regularly and even frequently.
If the possibility of evaluating another person’s conﬂicting belief as equally
justiﬁed does indeed depend on the plausibility of epistemic relativism, however,
this would be somewhat problematic. For apart from the fact that it is not clear
whether epistemic relativism is at all compatible with general claims to tolerance,
epistemic relativism is a highly controversial thesis. Thus, there are very many
epistemologists who have been critical of relativistic theories—especially in
11See Luper 2004.
3.2
Epistemic Relativism
43

contemporary analytic philosophy, strongly relativistic theories of justiﬁcation are
extremely unpopular.12
In my view, however, the worry that evaluating another person’s conﬂicting
belief as equally justiﬁed already presupposes epistemic relativism is unfounded.
For instance, ﬁrst, in cases of differing evidence, it should be completely uncontro-
versial that different opinions can be equally justiﬁed. The consideration here is that,
regardless of any speciﬁc theory of epistemic justiﬁcation, it is plausible to assume
that whether a given belief is justiﬁed or not depends at least in part on the available
evidence. If so, however, it is relatively easy to see that in cases where different
people disagree, and where, moreover, the different people have different evidence
available to them, the occurrence of the disagreement can be attributed to the
differences in terms of available evidence alone, and so need not argue for one
side having an unjustiﬁed belief.
Let us take the example of the two bird researchers Anselm and Maike, who want
to determine the species of a bird. While Anselm recognizes bird species by their
song, Maike recognizes them by their plumage. Furthermore, let us assume that both
are about equally reliable in identifying bird species. Now Anselm and Maike come
to different conclusions: Anselm believes that the bird in question is a crow, whereas
Maike believes that it is a raven. Obviously, in this case, both may be justiﬁed in
their respective beliefs because they each started from different evidence. While
Anselm evaluates the bird’s song as evidence, Maike examines its plumage. Now
here it does not have to be the case that one of the two makes a mistake, and both
would have come to the same conclusion if they had correctly evaluated the evidence
available to them. After all, it is entirely possible that the bird’s song really does
suggest that the bird is a raven, while the bird’s plumage suggests that it is a crow. If
we assume that Maike can identify bird species by plumage as reliably as Anselm
can by song, then it seems entirely plausible to assume that both have a justiﬁed
belief. And that this is so can be readily explained with reference to the different
evidence available in each case, without resorting to epistemic relativism and
arguing for Anselm’s and Maike’s beliefs to be justiﬁed relative to different episte-
mic systems in each case.
That, at least in cases of differing evidence, two conﬂicting beliefs can be judged
as equally justiﬁed independently of any controversial assumptions about the struc-
ture of epistemic justiﬁcation seems to be indisputable. Accordingly, the evaluation
of another person’s conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed, which is characteristic of a
tolerant stance, does not necessarily presuppose epistemic relativism. Nor is this
12For example, a study surveyed in 2009 found that among philosophers who hold at least a PhD
and specialize in the ﬁeld of epistemology, only 1.8% accept relativism with respect to knowledge.
Since, at least against the background of the widely held view that truth and justiﬁcation are
necessary for knowledge, both truth relativism and justiﬁcation relativism imply knowledge
relativism, the proportion of justiﬁcation relativists is likely to be correspondingly smaller. For
this and other results of the study, see Bourget and Chalmers 2014. For a detailed critique of
epistemic relativism, see Boghossian 2006, Chap. 6. For a more extensive discussion, see, for
example, Boghossian 2007, Neta 2007, or Rosen 2007.
44
3
Tolerance and Relativism

merely a subtle observation irrelevant to our epistemic practice: for example, one
might initially think that the possibility of evaluating another person’s conﬂicting
belief as equally justiﬁed in cases of differing evidence is of little relevance insofar as
the evidence in question can simply be made public. A tolerant stance would
accordingly only be appropriate until the relevant evidence has been shared, and in
this sense notoriously unstable, insofar as only in cases of differing evidence is the
evaluation of an alien belief as equally justiﬁed unproblematic.
In fact, however, it is wrong to assume that the evidence underlying a belief can
always simply be shared. On the one hand, it is possible that evidence cannot be
shared due to contingent circumstances, such as limited time or cognitive resources.
On the other hand, it could also be the case that at least speciﬁc types of evidence are
not shareable in principle. For example, several authors have explicitly considered
the possibility of private evidence that cannot in principle be shared with others.13
Remarkably, the possibility of private evidence has been particularly suspected in
domains where claims of epistemic tolerance are also frequently encountered, such
as ethics or religion. Thus, the observation that in cases of differing evidence,
evaluating a divergent belief as equally justiﬁed can be completely unproblematic
is of some relevance to the study of an epistemically tolerant stance.
In what follows, moreover, I will now argue that even in cases of shared evidence,
the evaluation of another person’s conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed does not
necessarily presuppose epistemic relativism. More precisely, I will argue that the
much weaker and less controversial thesis of permissivism is sufﬁcient to accept the
possibility of conﬂicting, equally justiﬁed beliefs even in cases of shared evidence.
As the name suggests, permissivism says that evidence is permissive—what
speciﬁcally is meant by this? In a sense, permissivism is a thesis very similar to
epistemic relativism. Epistemic permissivism, like epistemic relativism, implies that
a given set of evidence alone does not necessarily determine precisely one belief that
is maximally justiﬁed given that set of evidence. Now the crucial difference is, ﬁrst,
that the permissivist, unlike the epistemic relativist, does not claim that which belief
is justiﬁed never depends on the available evidence alone—the permissivist merely
denies that this is necessarily so in all cases. Second, the permissivist is also not
committed to the idea that in those cases where which belief is justiﬁed depends not
only on the available evidence but on some further parameter in addition, the
relativizing parameter consists in an epistemic system. Epistemic permissivism
simply states that in these cases, whether or not a particular belief is justiﬁed depends
not only on the available evidence, but furthermore on some further parameter that is
independent of evidence. In this sense, epistemic permissivism is weaker than
epistemic relativism—it is merely the negation of the Uniqueness Thesis, according
to which, given a given set of evidence, there is always only exactly one doxastic
attitude that is maximally justiﬁed. Accordingly, epistemic permissivism is the thesis
that a given set of evidence does not necessarily determine exactly one doxastic
attitude that is justiﬁed given that set of evidence.
13See, for example, Feldman 2007, Rosen 2001, or van Inwagen 1996.
3.2
Epistemic Relativism
45

How plausible is epistemic permissivism? In contemporary epistemology, there is
a controversial debate between proponents of the Uniqueness Thesis and proponents
of epistemic permissivism. Arguments against epistemic permissivism have been
developed primarily by Roger White in his papers “Epistemic Permissiveness” and
“Evidence Cannot Be Permissive”; other proponents of the Uniqueness Thesis
would include David Christensen, Richard Feldman, and Ernest Sosa.14 Arguments
against the Uniqueness Thesis can be found in works by Christopher Meacham,
Miriam Schoenﬁeld, Anthony Brueckner and Alex Bundy, as well as Nathan
Ballantyne and EJ Coffman, among others.15 The respective argumentations here
are both relatively speciﬁc and closely related to each other, so that a reasonably
dense, isolated debate has developed. In what follows, I will attempt an argument for
epistemic permissivism that is independent of this. I will argue that the Uniqueness
Thesis is incompatible with various standard theories of epistemic justiﬁcation and is
therefore, unlike epistemic permissivism, an extremely controversial assumption.
The idea that the Uniqueness Thesis is incompatible with prominent theories of
epistemic justiﬁcation is anything but new. Igor Douven, for example, argues in his
essay “Uniqueness Revisited” that all currently available plausible theories of
epistemic justiﬁcation are incompatible with the Uniqueness Thesis.16 Miriam
Schoenﬁeld, in her essay “Permission to Believe,” attempts to show that coherence
theory and subjective Bayesianism are decidedly permissivist theories.17 And
Jochen Briesen, in his essay “Evidentielle Einzigkeit in klassischer und formaler
Erkenntnistheorie” (Evidential Uniqueness in Classical and Formal Epistemology),
argues that reliabilism and subject-sensitive invariantism imply the falsity of the
Uniqueness Thesis.18 Even Roger White, as one of the most prominent proponents
of the Uniqueness Thesis, assumes that many theories of epistemic justiﬁcation are
permissivist.19 I will now follow up on these considerations by arguing that the
Uniqueness Thesis is incompatible with at least three widely held theories of epistemic
justiﬁcation—reliabilism, Subject-Sensitive Invariantism, and coherentism.
Let us begin with reliabilism.20 Reliabilism represents a much respected theory of
epistemic justiﬁcation, originally developed by Alvin Goldman. Other important
14See Christensen 2007, Feldman 2007, Sosa 2010, White 2005, 2014. Feldman even explicitly
uses the Uniqueness Thesis to argue against an epistemically tolerant stance.
15See
Ballantyne
and
Coffman
2011,
Brueckner
and
Bundy
2012,
Meacham
2014,
Schoenﬁeld 2014.
16See Douven 2009.
17See Schoenﬁeld 2014.
18See Briesen 2017.
19White 2005.
20The following considerations on reliabilism and subject-sensitive invariantism can already be
found in an abbreviated form in Briesen 2017. A somewhat different argument for the incompati-
bility of reliabilism with the Uniqueness Thesis can be found in Grundmann 2013, where it is
argued for the possibility of cases in which two persons have conﬂicting beliefs on the basis of the
same evidence, which must be evaluated as equally justiﬁed against the background of reliabilism.
46
3
Tolerance and Relativism

proponents include William Alston, Hilary Kornblith, Michael Levin, and Jack
Lyons. The central idea of reliabilism is that the justiﬁcatory status of a belief
depends on the genesis of that belief—accordingly, reliabilist theories of justiﬁcation
are often referred to as historical theories. More speciﬁcally, reliabilism holds that
the justiﬁcatory status of a belief depends on the reliability of the underlying belief-
forming process. Roughly speaking, a belief is justiﬁed only if it was generated by a
reliable belief-forming process—that is, by a process that tends to generate more true
than false beliefs. Now such a theory is incompatible with the Uniqueness Thesis
because, in addition to the evidence available at any given time, it postulates yet
another parameter relevant to the justiﬁcatory status of a belief. Thus, within the
framework of reliabilism, whether the belief in question is justiﬁed or not depends
not only on the available evidence, but also on the process by which the evidence
was evaluated.
An example: Max and Peter are to solve a mathematical problem presented to
them. Both are about equally good mental calculators and, under normal conditions,
would also both have equally good chances of successfully solving the problem.
Unfortunately, however, the conditions are anything but normal, at least for Peter.
Moritz, a good friend of Max, wants Max to be better than Peter at all costs, and has
therefore secretly mixed a drug into Peter’s food, which causes him to no longer be
good at mental arithmetic. Peter does not notice any of this, to him everything feels
normal. But in fact, under the inﬂuence of the drug, he is no longer a good mental
arithmetician—in most cases in which he would now try to solve a mathematical
problem, he would come to the wrong result. But Peter is unexpectedly lucky: when
the two of them try to solve the problem presented to them, they both come up with
the right result. This is not because the drug hasn’t worked on Peter—Peter is under
the effect of the drug, as Moritz intended, and is a poor mental calculator because of
it. Rather, it is just that the drug cannot guarantee that Peter will arrive at the wrong
result, but merely makes it very likely.
Now what is interesting for us about this case is, ﬁrst, that Max and Peter have the
same belief in the face of the same evidence, and second, that under reliabilism Max
is justiﬁed in his belief, but Peter is not. That Peter and Max have the same belief has
simply been stipulated in this case. This stipulation is also not problematic in any
way—the drug, as I said, does not guarantee that Peter will come to the wrong
conclusion, it merely makes it very likely. So it is entirely possible that both will
come to the right conclusion. But how plausible is it that both have the same
evidence? To say exactly what evidence Max and Peter have, one would now
have to say more about what exactly evidence is in the ﬁrst place and how it is
individuated. Both questions, however, are not easily answered and are the subject of
lively debate in contemporary epistemology. In fact, however, in the case of Max
and Peter, even independently of any speciﬁc assumptions about the nature of
evidence, it is plausible to assume that both form their beliefs on the basis of the
same evidence.
The reason for this is that Peter does not notice the inﬂuence of the drug. From his
internal perspective, it looks as if he has solved a simple mathematical problem
under normal circumstances. However, it should be pre-theoretically plausible that
3.2
Epistemic Relativism
47

the evidence on the basis of which one forms a belief must be accessible to one in
principle. Peter and Max, however, now have access to exactly the same informa-
tion—the only difference between the two is that Peter frequently makes mistakes
without realizing it. But even if one does not accept the speciﬁc case of Max and
Peter as a plausible example of a case in which two people form the same belief in
the face of the same evidence, and yet only one is justiﬁed within the framework of
reliabilism because different reliable belief-forming processes are operative in each
case, then in general the possibility of such cases should nevertheless be accepted.
For in its most general formulation, reliabilism ﬁrst simply states that central to the
justiﬁcatory status of a belief is the reliability of the underlying belief-forming
process. To claim that this theory of justiﬁcation is compatible with the Uniqueness
Thesis, one would have to argue for the belief-forming process always being part of
the available evidence. For then it would be impossible a priori for two people who
formed the same belief as a result of different belief-forming processes to share the
same available evidence.
However, such a view is not particularly plausible. Even independently of a more
precise understanding of what evidence consists of or how one individuates pro-
cesses, it seems to be clear already in the context of a pre-theoretical description of
evidence and processes that at least in some cases we evaluate evidence available to
us with the help of speciﬁc cognitive processes, that the result of this evaluation is a
belief, and that the process with the help of which the evidence was evaluated is not
itself part of the evidence. While there may be processes of evidence selection
alongside processes of evidence evaluation, even such processes are precisely not
themselves part of the evidence. In fact, one of the main motivations of reliabilism is
to be able to reject sceptical arguments on the assumption that there can be justiﬁed
beliefs that are not evidence-based. Against the background of this assumption, it
becomes immediately clear that reliabilism and the Uniqueness Thesis are
incompatible.21
The second theory of epistemic justiﬁcation whose incompatibility with the
Uniqueness Thesis I want to argue for is Subject-Sensitive Invariantism. According
to Subject-Sensitive Invariantism, the justiﬁcatory status of a belief depends on the
practical interests of the person who holds that belief. This theory, currently held by
the likes of Jeremy Fantl and Matthew McGrath, is motivated by comparing cases in
which our attributions of epistemic justiﬁcation ﬂuctuate along with the practical
interests of the persons described.22 To better understand the motivation for Subject-
Sensitive Invariantism, consider a variant of the case of Peter and Max: Peter and
Max are faced with the task of solving a mathematical problem. It is not a particu-
larly difﬁcult problem, and they are both good mental calculators. To be on the safe
side, of course, a pen and paper solution would be best, but they are both good
enough at mental arithmetic to have a high probability of being correct even without
21Briesen 2017.
22Fantl and McGrath 2002. Subject-sensitive invariantists with respect to knowledge would be, for
example, John Hawthorne or Jason Stanley.
48
3
Tolerance and Relativism

written recalculation. While for Peter not much depends on the correct solution of the
problem, the situation is different for Max. His friend Moritz wants Max to solve the
problem correctly at all costs and has therefore promised him a large sum of money
in case he arrives at the correct result. As it happens, Max can make good use of the
money, because he has made an unfortunate speculation on the stock market and has
massive debts as a result. Although his entire ﬁnancial future depends on the result,
Max, like Peter, refrains from solving the mathematical problem in writing. Both
only calculate in their heads and fortunately both come to the correct result.
The intuition about this case is that Peter is justiﬁed in his belief, but Max is not.
And Subject-Sensitive Invariantism also directly provides an explanation for this
difference: whether a person is justiﬁed in a belief or not depends not only on what
evidence is available, but also on the practical interests of that person. Thus, in
particular, whether or not a person is justiﬁed in a belief depends on how much is at
stake for that person with respect to the truth of that belief. Accordingly, Peter is also
justiﬁed in his belief because the stakes for him are not particularly high—for Max,
however, the stakes are very high, which is why he is also not justiﬁed in his belief.
That such a theory of epistemic justiﬁcation is incompatible with the Uniqueness
Thesis seems relatively obvious. For if practical interests of the respective subject are
also relevant for epistemic justiﬁcation, then it does not depend only on the available
evidence whether a certain belief is justiﬁed or not. But this is exactly what the
Uniqueness Thesis says.
The ﬁnal theory I want to discuss here is coherentism. Coherentism is a theory
about the structure of epistemic justiﬁcation, originally formulated by British
idealists such as F.H. Bradley and then developed over the course of the twentieth
century by notable philosophers such as W.V.O. Quine, Keith Lehrer, Donald
Davidson, and Laurence BonJour. The basic idea of coherentism is that epistemic
justiﬁcation is not primarily the property of individual beliefs, but rather a holistic
property of larger belief systems. According to coherentism, an individual belief can
only be epistemically justiﬁed insofar as it is part of a coherent belief system.
Accordingly, the coherence relations of a belief to other beliefs are constitutive of
the justiﬁcation of that belief. Now, an obvious question that arises in light of this is
what exactly is meant by coherence in this context. Arguably, a necessary condition
for coherence should be consistency, that is, freedom from logical contradiction. At
the same time, consistency alone seems to be too weak—for instance, some
coherentists
have
argued
that
besides
mere
freedom
from
contradiction,
systematicity and inclusivity are also necessary for the coherence of a belief system,
with a belief system being the more systematic the more inferential support relations
exist between the individual beliefs, and the more inclusive the more comprehensive
it is.23
In fact, however, it is also largely irrelevant for the present context what exactly is
to be understood by coherence. For regardless of the details of a speciﬁc notion of
coherence, it becomes relatively quickly apparent why coherentism is incompatible
23See for example, Blanshard 2013, 264 ff.
3.2
Epistemic Relativism
49

with the Uniqueness Thesis. To be sure, coherence theory does not necessarily imply
that evidence is irrelevant to epistemic justiﬁcation—Laurence Bonjour, for
instance, as a coherentist, has argued extensively for the relevance of empirical
input to epistemic justiﬁcation.24 At the same time, however, it is also clear that,
within the framework of coherentism, coherence relations within the belief system of
the person forming the belief are constitutive of epistemic justiﬁcation, in addition to
the available evidence in each case. However, these coherence relations are, ﬁrst,
independent of the available evidence, and, second, vary from person to person. To
assume, in line with the Uniqueness Thesis, that available evidence alone determines
which belief is justiﬁed in light of that evidence, and that accordingly no two persons
can form different beliefs in light of the same evidence and still be equally justiﬁed,
is thus clearly at odds with the basic idea of coherentism.25
As the considerations on reliabilism, Subject-Sensitive Invariantism and
coherentism exemplarily show, the Uniqueness Thesis is a very strong assumption
and incompatible with many prominent theories of epistemic justiﬁcation. This does
not mean that it is false—at the same time, however, the burden of proof thus lies
squarely on the side of its proponents, rather than, say, on the side of the permissivist
who argues for a comparatively weak and seemingly uncontroversial thesis. Now,
for the connection between claims for epistemic tolerance and relativistic
assumptions, this dialectical situation is relevant insofar as, against the background
of permissivism, it is possible in principle to evaluate conﬂicting beliefs as equally
justiﬁed even in cases of shared evidence. This means that the evaluation of another
persons’s conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed, which is characteristic of a tolerant
stance, by no means presupposes epistemic relativism. At the same time,
permissivism is compatible in principle with the possibility of general judgments
about what response is justiﬁed in the face of a disagreement. Accordingly, tolerance
claims do not depend on any controversial relativist assumptions about epistemic
justiﬁcation, nor are they in any way self-contradictory.
On the whole, then, it can be said that the connections between demands for
tolerance and relativist theories of truth and justiﬁcation are reasonably unproblem-
atic. Neither the evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as false presupposes the falsity of
truth relativism nor the evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed
presupposes the truth of epistemic relativism. A possible tension arises only against
24See BonJour 1985, Chaps. 6 and 7.
25The second point in particular is relevant: Even if one argues that, within the framework of
coherentism, it is precisely the respective belief system and the coherence relations within this
system that are a constitutive part of the evidence (such an argumentation can be found, for instance,
in Brueckner and Bundy 2012), this would only be relevant to the present context to a limited
extent. If the respective belief system and the coherence relations within this system were a
constitutive part of the evidence, this would indeed mean that coherentism is not necessarily
incompatible with the Uniqueness Thesis—but on the other hand, there would then also be no
cases of shared evidence, because belief systems are clearly person-speciﬁc. Accordingly, the
evaluation of other persons’ conﬂicting beliefs as equally justiﬁed would be completely unprob-
lematic even against the background of the Uniqueness Thesis, since other persons’ beliefs would
always be formed on the basis of different evidence.
50
3
Tolerance and Relativism

the background of epistemic relativism, insofar as such relativism might be incom-
patible with general judgments about what response is justiﬁed in the face of a
disagreement. However, since epistemic relativism is a highly controversial theory,
this ﬁnding does not initially seem too problematic. With the concern that there
might be problematic connections between claims of intellectual tolerance and
relativistic assumptions about truth and justiﬁcation out of the way, we can now
turn to the question of whether, or under what circumstances, it is epistemically
adequate to respond tolerantly to a disagreement.
3.2
Epistemic Relativism
51

Should We Be Tolerant?
4
The aim of this chapter is to critically evaluate intellectual tolerance. The guiding
question here is whether, or under what circumstances, it is epistemically adequate
to respond tolerantly to a disagreement. But what does it even mean for a speciﬁc
response to a disagreement to be epistemically adequate? What criteria can be used
to decide whether a particular intellectual stance is adequate from an epistemological
perspective? In what follows, I will ﬁrst argue that there are, in particular, two
independent forms of rationality that are equally relevant for an assessment of the
epistemic adequacy of a tolerant stance.
4.1
Two Dimensions of Epistemic Adequacy
In recent years, a lively debate has developed in social epistemology about the
epistemically best response to disagreement.1 The majority of authors within this
debate assumes that the epistemically appropriate response to a disagreement is, in
particular, the modiﬁcation of one’s belief that is rationally required in light of that
disagreement. Alvin Goldman, in his article on Social Epistemology in the Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, summarizes this idea as follows:
Suppose that two people form conﬂicting beliefs about a given question: one believes
p while the other believes not-p. [. . .] Obviously they cannot both be correct in their beliefs;
the two propositions believed are contradictory. But can they be rational to hold fast to their
initial beliefs [. . .]? How (if at all) should they proceed to revise their initial assessments in
light of their disagreement? This is the problem of [. . .] disagreement.2
Indeed, it is very plausible to assume that, at least in some circumstances, it is
irrational in the face of disagreement simply to hold one’s belief, and that therefore
1For an introductory overview, see for instance Balg and Constantin 2019.
2Goldman 2016, Sect. 3.4.
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
D. Balg, Live and Let Live, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-64040-1_4
53

the epistemically appropriate response to disagreement in those circumstances is also
to modify one’s belief accordingly.
To illustrate this point, consider the following example:3 Together with three
good friends, I go out to eat at a restaurant. When the bill comes at the end, we decide
to simply divide the total amount by four, so that everyone pays the same amount.
For this purpose, my friend Ali and I calculate the corresponding partial amount in
our heads. This procedure has become a tradition: we have often gone out to eat in
this constellation, and it is always Ali and I who quarter the amount in our heads.
Most of the time we come to the same conclusion—and in the few cases where we
have come to different conclusions, I myself have been wrong just as often as Ali. So
I assume that Ali is about as likely to make mistakes when it comes to simple mental
calculations. While Ali now comes to the conclusion that everyone has to pay 17 €, I
come to the conclusion that everyone has to pay 19 €.
How should we respond to the disagreement? In this situation, it seems clear that
we should now both suspend belief on how much each should pay. Suppose, for
example, Ali and I notice our disagreement, whereupon Ali suspends judgment,
while I simply continue to assume that each must pay 19 €. In this case, from an
epistemic point of view, Ali responds better to the disagreement compared to me,
since unlike me he modiﬁes his prior belief.
This does not mean, of course, that one must always suspend judgment in the face
of dissent. Whether and to what degree the occurrence of a disagreement requires the
modiﬁcation of one’s own opinion depends on various factors and is currently the
subject of lively debate. An important role seems to be played by the assessment of
the epistemic capacity of the other party—in the above case, I should presumably
abstain from judgment because I assess Ali to be about as good a mental calculator as
I am. Accordingly, in the epistemology of disagreement, various debates have also
developed about various kinds of disagreement. By far the largest of these debates
revolves around the rationally required response to so-called peer disagreements—
that is, disagreements with people one thinks are as capable as oneself.4 However,
there is also a separate body of research that addresses the question of how best to
respond to disagreements with epistemic authorities—that is, with persons whom
one believes to be more capable than oneself.5 In addition, there are corresponding
publications with regard to disagreements with epistemically inferior persons6 or
with persons whose epistemic performance cannot be accurately assessed.7
And while most of these debates are somewhat controversial, there seems to be
agreement on one point: Most authors seem to implicitly assume that the question of
3The following example is a variant of the restaurant case made famous in the epistemology of
disagreement literature, originally developed by David Christensen (see Christensen 2007).
4For an introductory overview of this debate, see Christensen 2009.
5See,
for
example,
Constantin
and
Grundmann
2018,
Dormandy
2017,
Jäger
2016,
Zagzebski 2012.
6Priest 2016.
7King 2012.
54
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

the epistemically adequate response to a disagreement is nothing other than the
question of the modiﬁcation of beliefs that is warranted in the face of a disagreement.
Most publications on the epistemology of disagreement focus exclusively on this
question, and indeed some authors have even explicitly claimed that an answer to
this question constitutes a complete explanation of the epistemic signiﬁcance of
disagreement.8
However, this assumption has recently been problematized; ﬁrst critical
considerations can be found, for example, in joint works by Christoph Kelp and
Igor Douven.9 A more detailed argumentation, to which I would like to link in the
following, was presented by Andrea Robitzsch:10 In her book, “An Externalist
Approach to Epistemic Responsibility”, Robitzsch criticizes the focus of epistemo-
logical research on peer disagreement on the question of the modiﬁcation of beliefs
required in the face of peer disagreement. The starting point of her argument is a
distinction between two different, epistemically signiﬁcant dimensions in cases of
peer disagreement: On the one hand, there is the doxastic dimension, along which the
beliefs of the participants can be epistemically evaluated against the background of
the dissent. Here, the main question is which beliefs are justiﬁed in the face of a peer
disagreement. Beyond this, however, there is the dimension of intellectual behavior.
By intellectual behavior, Robitzsch means belief-inﬂuencing acts and omissions
such as critical reﬂection, searching for further evidence, or argumentative interac-
tion. In evaluating the intellectual behavior of the participants in a disagreement
situation, the main question is whether the behavior exhibited is epistemically
desirable. Epistemically desirable intellectual behavior is behavior that makes the
achievement of epistemic goals more likely. Robitzsch names the goal of truth as the
most important epistemic goal, from which a criterion for desirable intellectual
behavior can be derived directly: intellectual behavior is epistemically desirable if
and only if it is reliable, that is, when it generates more true than false beliefs.
Taking this distinction as a starting point, Robitzsch now argues that the episte-
mic signiﬁcance of a peer disagreement is not exhausted by the fact that noticing
such a disagreement under certain circumstances makes speciﬁc modiﬁcations of
belief rationally necessary. What is the epistemic signiﬁcance of a peer disagree-
ment? Robitzsch assumes that the epistemic signiﬁcance of a peer disagreement
consists in the opportunity for epistemic improvement, drawing on David
Christensen. In his essay “Epistemology of Disagreement: The Good News,”
Christensen writes:
[. . .] Disagreement of an epistemic peer provides reason for belief revision. From my point
of view, this is a good thing: other people's opinions, in these circumstances, present
opportunities for epistemic improvement.11
8Kelly 2010, Lackey 2010, Matheson 2015, Thune 2010.
9See Douven and Kelp 2011, Kelp and Douven 2012.
10See Robitzsch 2019.
11Christensen 2007, 194.
4.1
Two Dimensions of Epistemic Adequacy
55

That an opportunity for epistemic improvement is epistemically signiﬁcant, and that
accordingly the epistemic signiﬁcance of a peer disagreement, insofar as it provides
an opportunity for epistemic improvement, consists at least in part precisely in this,
should be reasonably uncontroversial. For example, all theories of belief modiﬁca-
tion rationally required in the face of dissent also assume that the occurrence of
dissent generates additional evidence relevant to the truth or falsity of the belief in
question, and accordingly provides an opportunity for epistemic improvement
insofar as the participants adequately adjust their respective beliefs to the new
evidence. More controversial, on the other hand, is the assumption that a peer
disagreement also provides an opportunity for epistemic improvement beyond the
fact that it provides reasons for belief modiﬁcation, and thus that the epistemic
signiﬁcance of a peer disagreement is precisely not exhausted by the fact that it may
rationally require speciﬁc belief modiﬁcations.
To make this assumption plausible, Robitzsch presents the following thought
experiment: Nora and Cara both have the belief that p. In fact, however, the evidence
available to them supports—p, so that both have an unjustiﬁed belief. Now Nora and
Cara each encounter a person whom they believe to be epistemically equal to them,
and who believes—p. Both Nora and Cara stand by their belief that p. While Nora
simply ignores the other person’s belief completely, Cara responds to the disagree-
ment by carefully re-examining the reasons for her belief, discussing it at length with
her counterpart, and trying to gather more relevant evidence. In the end, however,
she still ﬁnds her belief the most plausible and sticks to her guns.
Prior to the occurrence of the disagreement, Nora’s belief and Cara’s belief have
the same epistemic status—both have evaluated the same evidence in the same way
and reached the same conclusion. And they both react the same way to the occur-
rence of the peer disagreement in that they both hold to their original belief. Thus,
whether or not belief modiﬁcation is rationally warranted in this case, Nora’s and
Cara’s beliefs should have the same epistemic status even after the occurrence of the
disagreement. Nevertheless, there seems to be an epistemic difference between Nora
and Cara; from a purely epistemic perspective, Cara responds better to the peer
disagreement than Nora. This is because Cara’s response presumably leads her to
better understand, on the basis of what reasoning, what she believes, why there is a
disagreement in the ﬁrst place, what counterarguments there are to her position, and
what further evidence would be needed to settle the question deﬁnitively.
In other words, unlike Nora, Cara exhibits epistemically desirable behavior in
response to the disagreement. In this respect, the occurrence of the peer disagreement
provides an opportunity for epistemic improvement, which is exploited by Cara but
not by Nora, even though both hold to their original beliefs. Thus, in the face of a
peer disagreement, opportunities for epistemic improvement arise that clearly go
beyond any modiﬁcations of belief. That this is so should, in fact, come as little
surprise—for even in cases speciﬁcally designed to discuss the rationally required
modiﬁcation of beliefs, the most intuitively reasonable response is often precisely
not, or not merely, an adjustment of the particular belief in dispute. In Christensen’s
restaurant case, for example, the epistemically best response to the disagreement that
has arisen seems to be simply to do the math again, or to use a calculator.
56
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

Accordingly, at ﬁrst glance, it seems somewhat unnatural that epistemologists have
focused exclusively on belief modiﬁcations here.
But does the distinction between the doxastic dimension and the intellectual
behavior dimension really show that the epistemic signiﬁcance of a disagreement
is not exhausted by the fact that it rationally requires speciﬁc modiﬁcations of belief?
One possible objection in light of the argument so far would be something like the
following: In the case of Nora and Cara, too, the epistemic improvement of Cara’s
situation made possible by the occurrence of the disagreement can be explained
entirely along doxastic dimensions. Namely, this improvement consists in the
formation of further justiﬁed beliefs. However, insofar as the doxastic dimension
is nothing other than the dimension against which the beliefs of the participants in a
disagreement are epistemically evaluated, Cara’s epistemic improvement can also
seemingly be explained exclusively along this dimension. For example, if Cara
forms a whole set of justiﬁed beliefs about what considerations militate against her
position and what one might do to counter those considerations as a result of the
disagreement that has occurred, then along the doxastic dimension alone there is a
relevant epistemic difference between Nora and Cara, since Cara has more justiﬁed
beliefs than Nora after the disagreement has occurred, and for that reason responds
better to the disagreement. The example, then, on reﬂection, in no way shows that the
intellectual behavior dimension is relevant to answering the question of the episte-
mically best response to a disagreement.
How successful this objection is, however, ultimately depends on exactly how
one interprets the distinction proposed by Robitzsch. Insofar as the doxastic dimen-
sion is indeed simply the dimension against which the beliefs of the participants in a
disagreement are evaluated, Cara’s epistemic improvement can be fully explained
along this dimension. For Cara’s epistemic improvement consists in her forming
more justiﬁed beliefs than Nora’s in the course of her response to the disagreement.
The situation is different, however, if the distinction between the doxastic dimension
and the dimension of intellectual behavior is interpreted against the background of a
distinction between different kinds of rationality.
Suppose, for instance, that along the doxastic dimension the epistemic rationality
of the participants in a disagreement is assessed, while along the intellectual behav-
ior dimension their instrumental rationality is assessed relative to the epistemic goal
of truth. By epistemic rationality, here, is meant the kind of rationality that one
exhibits when forming beliefs in propositions that are supported by the available
evidence and refrains from forming beliefs in propositions that are improbable in
light of the available evidence. Instrumental rationality, on the other hand, refers to
the kind of rationality one displays when choosing the right means to achieve
one’s ends.
Understanding the distinction between the doxastic dimension and the dimension
of intellectual behavior in this sense, it also becomes clear why Cara’s epistemic
improvement cannot be explained along the doxastic dimension. For from the
perspective of epistemic rationality, there is no difference between Nora and Cara:
prior to the occurrence of the disagreement, both have the same beliefs in the face of
the same evidence, both receive the same evidence through the mere occurrence of
4.1
Two Dimensions of Epistemic Adequacy
57

the disagreement, and both modify their beliefs in the face of this evidence in the
same way—namely, not at all. Accordingly, it is not epistemically irrational for
Nora, unlike Cara, to refrain from conscientiously re-examining her reasons or
seeking further evidence—and yet, in doing so, she misses an opportunity for
epistemic improvement. Cara thus demonstrates a better response to the disagree-
ment not from the perspective of epistemic rationality, but from the perspective of
instrumental rationality.
Now, an interpretation of the distinction between the doxastic dimension and the
dimension of intellectual behavior along the lines of the distinction between episte-
mic and instrumental rationality is helpful in the present context insofar as, against
the background of such an interpretation, it becomes immediately clear why the
epistemically best response to a disagreement is not simply the modiﬁcation of
beliefs required in the face of that disagreement. The dominant picture in current
epistemology of disagreement, according to which the occurrence of disagreement
constitutes evidence in the face of which participants must modify their prior beliefs,
is obviously truncated: for it presupposes that the epistemically best response to a
disagreement consists simply in the epistemically rational response to that disagree-
ment. As we have seen, however, considerations from the perspective of instrumen-
tal rationality are equally relevant with respect to epistemic goals.
This result is all the more signiﬁcant because epistemic and instrumental ratio-
nality are two fundamentally independent forms of rationality. Thus, one might
initially think that the two forms of rationality coincide in some sense. Take, for
instance, the epistemic goal of truth, relative to this goal, is it not obviously
instrumentally rational to always conform one’s beliefs to the available evidence?
If so, then it would be impossible for a speciﬁc response to be epistemically rational
but instrumentally irrational relative to the epistemic goal of truth. To be sure, as the
case of Nora and Cara shows, there would still be speciﬁc actions and behaviors that
are instrumentally rational relative to the goal of truth without being epistemically
rational. But such actions and behaviors would then be merely “epistemic extras,”
whereas epistemic rationality would be a minimal condition for instrumental ratio-
nality relative to the epistemic goal of truth. In view of this—the further thought
goes—it would probably make perfect sense, when answering the question of the
epistemically best response to disagreement, to focus ﬁrst on the epistemically
rational response in the face of disagreement.
In fact, however, epistemic rationality and instrumental rationality relative to
epistemic goals are two distinct and independent forms of rationality that cannot be
reduced to one another: There are cases in which the formation of a belief is
epistemically irrational but instrumentally rational relative to given epistemic
goals, and there are equally cases in which the formation of a belief is epistemically
rational but instrumentally irrational relative to given epistemic goals. Two examples
will illustrate this:12 Larissa is a huge Star Wars fan. However, due to a persistent ﬂu,
12The following case is borrowed from considerations in Kelly 2003, where an argument is made
against reducing epistemic rationality to instrumental rationality.
58
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

she has unfortunately missed the theatrical release of the latest episode, while all her
friends have already seen the movie. This puts Larissa in a somewhat precarious
situation: she deﬁnitely does not want to ﬁnd out in advance how the movie turns
out, so she has to be constantly on guard in conversations with her friends to avoid a
spoiler. One day, however, before she is even seen the movie, she is inattentive for a
small moment and the inevitable happens—she listens in while her roommate spills
the beans about the movie’s ending. In this situation, is it epistemically rational for
Larissa to form an appropriate belief about the ﬁlm’s ending?
The indisputable answer should be: Yes! Regarding the question of epistemic
rationality, there is simply no difference between this case and a situation in which
Larissa intentionally questions her roommate because she desperately wants to know
the end of the movie. In both cases, she has excellent reasons to form a belief about
the end of the movie because of her roommate’s testimony—not forming a belief in
this regard would be epistemically irrational. Now the crucial thing is that the form
of rationality relevant here has nothing to do with instrumental rationality. For it
would only be instrumentally rational for Larissa to form a belief about the end of the
ﬁlm, if she had a corresponding goal that she would achieve by forming that belief.
In fact, however, Larissa has no such goal: rather, she even explicitly has the
epistemic goal of not forming a belief about the end of the ﬁlm, at least in this
speciﬁc situation. While she may generally have the goal of eventually knowing the
end of the ﬁlm—in the speciﬁc situation with her roommate, she wants to avoid
getting any information about the ﬁlm at all costs. Given that in this speciﬁc situation
Larissa’s epistemic goal is not to form beliefs about the movie, it would thus be
irrational relative to her epistemic goals to form a belief about the movie’s ending.13
Let us compare this example with the following situation: Larissa has not been
able to see the new Star Wars episode because of her ﬂu, and now she desperately
wants to know what happens in the movie. She is so impatient that she does not want
to wait until she is well again and can go to the cinema herself. So she asks her
roommate, who has already seen the movie. He promises to give her a comprehen-
sive report—but only on the condition that Larissa forms the belief that he has
already cleaned the bathroom of the ﬂat share. In this situation, it is epistemically
13Of course, one might object at this point that Larissa’s goal of not forming a belief about the ﬁlm
is not an epistemic goal. It does refer to Larissa’s belief system—but that should not be sufﬁcient in
itself to make it an epistemic goal in the sense relevant here. Indeed, Larissa seems to want to avoid
forming a belief about the ﬁlm precisely because doing so would diminish the enjoyment of her
planned visit to the cinema. If this is so, however, then it is a practical, rather than an epistemic,
goal. To better separate practical and epistemic considerations, we could modify the case a bit:
Thus, we can simply stipulate that Larissa does not want to learn about the ﬁlm for purely epistemic
reasons. Suppose, for instance, that Larissa does not believe at all that a premature spoiler would
diminish the quality of her planned visit to the movie theater. However, she knows that if a spoiler
were to occur, she would spend so much time thinking about the movie until she actually went to the
theater that she would inevitably neglect her academic studies in the process, which, incidentally,
she is not doing for practical reasons, but out of pure intellectual curiosity. In this case, it is already
much more plausible to assume that it is instrumentally irrational relative to Larissa’s epistemic
goals for her to form a belief about the ﬁlm’s ending.
4.1
Two Dimensions of Epistemic Adequacy
59

irrational for Larissa to form this belief. For example, she has been annoyed for days
that her ﬂatmate has not yet cleaned the ﬂatmate’s bathroom—as stipulated in the
cleaning schedule—and, indeed, all available circumstantial evidence also clearly
suggests that the bathroom has not yet been cleaned. Nevertheless, relative to the
epistemic goals Larissa has, it would be instrumentally rational to form the belief in
question. After all, her primary epistemic goal is to form true beliefs about the new
Star Wars episode.
Epistemic rationality and instrumental rationality with respect to epistemic goals
are thus two independent forms of rationality—Thomas Kelly has also spoken of the
hybrid character of theoretical rationality in this context.14 These two forms of
rationality, moreover, do not merely diverge insofar as they refer to different
propositions: Thus, in light of the above examples, one might initially think that,
while it may in principle be instrumentally rational with respect to epistemic goals to
form an epistemically irrational belief, in doing so the instrumental rationality of that
belief always refers to different propositions than the one that is the content of the
already formed, epistemically irrational belief. For example, Larissa’s belief that her
roommate cleaned the bathroom of the shared apartment may be instrumentally
rational—but this instrumental rationality here clearly does not refer to truths about
who cleaned the bathroom, but to truths about Star Wars. In fact, however, cases are
also conceivable in which the formation of a belief is epistemically irrational, but at
the same time instrumentally rational with respect to the goal of forming a true belief
with respect to the proposition constituting the content of that belief.
Suppose, for example, that Paul wonders whether he is a good father and has not
yet formed a conviction about this. The evidence available to him is neither clearly
for nor against Paul being a good father. Accordingly, it would be epistemically
rational for Paul to abstain from judging. Now, however, Paul knows that fathers
14Ibid. Moreover, that epistemic rationality and instrumental rationality are independent forms of
rationality with respect to epistemic goals is not dependent on any speciﬁc theoretical assumptions
about the nature of epistemic justiﬁcation, as some authors have claimed.
For example, in his essays Epistemic Teleology and the Separateness of Propositions and The
Rejection of Epistemic Consequentialism, Selim Berker argues that, against the background of a
reliabilist justiﬁcation theory, epistemic rationality and instrumental rationality with respect to
epistemic goals coincide in some sense (Berker 2013a, 2013b). According to Berker, for example,
Larissa’s belief that her roommate cleaned the bathroom of the shared ﬂat would be epistemically
rational or justiﬁed against the background of a reliabilistic justiﬁcation theory because it leads to
Larissa reliably forming many true beliefs about the new Star Wars movie.
However, in his reply to Berker’s argumentation, Alvin Goldman has, in my view, convincingly
argued that, even against the background of reliabilism, epistemic rationality and instrumental
rationality are two independent forms of rationality with respect to our epistemic goals (Goldman
2015). For even though reliabilism is a consequentialist or instrumentalist theory of epistemic
justiﬁcation insofar as it derives the justiﬁcatory status of beliefs from the causal effects of belief-
forming processes, this does not mean that, against the background of a reliabilist theory of
justiﬁcation, all possible instrumental considerations are relevant to the justiﬁcatory status of a
belief. In particular, the causal after-effects of beliefs are clearly irrelevant to the justiﬁcatory status
of those beliefs even against the background of reliabilism. Accordingly, a reliabilist would also
clearly evaluate Larissa’s belief that her roommate cleaned the bathroom as unjustiﬁed.
60
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

who are convinced that they are good fathers are, in fact, usually good fathers—for
instance, because they go out of their way to conform to their self-image. In this case,
it would still be epistemically irrational for Paul to form the conviction that he is a
good father. After all, he has not yet formed the corresponding conviction and
accordingly has no reason to assume that he is a good father. Nevertheless, it
would be instrumentally rational to form this belief—with respect to the epistemic
goal of having a true belief about whether Paul is a good father.15
Epistemic rationality and instrumental rationality with respect to our epistemic
goals thus diverge at a very fundamental level. Accordingly, there are also two
independent dimensions that must be taken into account when answering the
question of the epistemically best response to disagreement: A speciﬁc intellectual
stance in the face of a disagreement is epistemically adequate precisely when it is
both epistemically rational and instrumentally rational relative to our epistemic
goals. Thus, in critically evaluating an epistemically tolerant stance, considerations
of epistemic rationality and considerations of instrumental rationality with respect to
epistemic goals must be given equal weight. In what follows, I will ﬁrst address the
question of the epistemic rationality of a tolerant stance.
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
Is it epistemically rational to respond tolerantly to a disagreement? According to the
conception developed in Chap. 1, it is characteristic of a tolerant attitude to stick to
one’s guns in the face of a disagreement. Thus, a tolerant response is epistemically
rational only in those cases in which it is epistemically rational to maintain one’s
own belief in the face of the conﬂicting beliefs of others. But that it is epistemically
irrational in many cases to hold one’s belief in the face of disagreement should be
obvious. To be sure, as we saw in the previous section, there is a controversial debate
within contemporary epistemology about the speciﬁc circumstances in which hold-
ing one’s own belief is epistemically irrational. That there are such circumstances,
however, is undisputed. As an example, we have already encountered Christensen’s
restaurant case: in this case, it would clearly be epistemically irrational simply to
retain one’s belief.16
However, if it is epistemically irrational in many circumstances to maintain one’s
belief in the face of disagreement, then it is also epistemically irrational in many
circumstances to respond tolerantly to disagreement. Moreover, in assessing the
epistemic rationality of a tolerant stance, one must take into account not only the
retention of one’s belief that is characteristic of that stance, but also the evaluative
component that is also characteristic of that stance: The evaluation of another
person’s belief as false and equally justiﬁed may also be epistemically irrational
15For similar cases where epistemic and instrumental rationality refer to the same proposition, see
Berker 2013b. For a discussion, see Hallsson and Kappel 2018.
16Christensen 2007.
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
61

under certain circumstances and thus lead to a tolerant stance being epistemically
inadequate.
In what follows, however, I want to discuss a much more fundamental problem:
The worry is not that a tolerant attitude is not always epistemically rational, but that a
tolerant attitude is always epistemically irrational. The suspicion behind this worry is
that a tolerant stance is necessarily epistemically irrational because there is an
inherent tension between the constituent elements of epistemic tolerance of
evaluating a dissenting belief as equally justiﬁed and simultaneously maintaining
one’s own belief.
If this suspicion turns out to be true, then a tolerant attitude would be epistemi-
cally irrational even in those cases in which the evaluation of the other person’s
belief as false and equally justiﬁed is epistemically rational and, moreover, there are
also no independent reasons for modifying one’s own belief—for instance, on the
basis of attributions of authority or equality. To respond tolerantly to a disagreement
would be epistemically irrational if only because evaluating a conﬂicting belief as
equally justiﬁed would in itself make it rationally necessary to modify one’s belief.
But is this really the case?
In what follows, I will discuss three different arguments for the assumption that
there is an inherent rational tension between evaluating a conﬂicting belief as equally
justiﬁed and simultaneously maintaining one’s own belief. I will argue that all three
arguments are misguided in that they cannot establish a fundamental instability of an
epistemically tolerant stance. Nevertheless, they show that in speciﬁc circumstances,
or against the background of speciﬁc theoretical assumptions, there may well be a
rational tension between evaluating a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed and
simultaneously maintaining one’s own belief, and that accordingly an epistemically
tolerant stance may well be problematic simply because of its characteristic
structure.
4.2.1
The First Argument for the Epistemic Irrationality of a
Tolerant Attitude
Why should one have to approximate one’s counterpart’s belief if one assumes that
this belief is equally justiﬁed? A simple and obvious answer would be the following:
In order to decide whether another person’s belief is justiﬁed, one must evaluate the
reasons on the basis of which that belief was formed—if the belief is based on good
reasons, it is justiﬁed; if it is based on bad reasons, it is unjustiﬁed. Thus, in order to
evaluate another person’s conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed, one must have
evaluated the reasons underlying that belief and found them to be good. In the
course of evaluating a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed, one accordingly gains
access to good reasons for that belief.17
17For a similar argument for the epistemic irrationality of a tolerant stance, see Feldman 2007.
62
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

But having access to good reasons means that these reasons become epistemically
relevant for oneself. Thus, while there are plenty of good reasons for all sorts of
beliefs—only a few of these reasons are epistemically relevant to me. For example,
there are various reasons on the basis of which justiﬁed beliefs about the current
weather in Cape Town can be formed. However, these reasons are not accessible to
me, and accordingly are not epistemically relevant to me—I have no beliefs about
the current weather in Cape Town, and this does not seem to be problematic from an
epistemological perspective. However, once I gain access to reasons, they become
epistemically relevant to me. For example, if I should happen to read in the
newspaper that it is bright sunshine in Cape Town today, then it would be epistemi-
cally irrational of me not to form a corresponding belief.18
It is now the same with the beliefs of others: as soon as I gain access to the reasons
a person has for his belief, these reasons become epistemically relevant for me. And
if, on the basis of an evaluation of the justiﬁcatory status of someone else’s belief, I
conclude that there are good reasons for that belief, then of course I have access to
those reasons. But if I have access to reasons that I think are good reasons for a
particular belief, then I should approach that belief.
An example: Peter has to go to Berlin for a few days on business with his
colleague Mark. On the day of departure, Peter is at the station at the agreed time,
but Mark is not there. Since Peter does not have Mark’s number, he calls his boss
Petra instead and asks her if she knows where Mark is. Petra tells Peter that she just
talked to Mark and he explained to her that he would not be leaving for the station
until a little later because he assumes the train will be late anyway. Peter does not
know how Mark comes to this conclusion: he hasn’t heard anything about a delay,
and he does not know Mark either and accordingly can’t judge how reliable he
is. When Mark ﬁnally arrives at the station, Peter asks him why he assumes that the
train is late. Mark replies that he heard on the radio at breakfast that many overhead
lines were destroyed during the night due to a storm and that most trains are delayed
or cancelled due to technical faults. In view of this information, Peter sees that Mark
has good reasons for his assumption and now also assumes that their train is delayed.
In this example, Peter is initially agnostic about the justiﬁcatory status of Mark’s
belief—he does not know whether Mark has good reasons for his belief. In order to
evaluate the justiﬁcatory status of Mark’s belief, Peter asks him to tell him his
reasons. Through Mark’s explanation, Peter now gains access to Mark’s reasons
and concludes that Mark is justiﬁed in his belief. Moreover, he also approaches
Mark’s conviction himself—and this seems to be precisely the rationally required
18In some respects, it may seem odd to say that there are reasons for a speciﬁc belief in the case
where I have not read the relevant newspaper article at all. Ultimately, however, not much depends
on the terminology used to describe the phenomenon relevant here. For instance, one could also try
to draw a distinction between subjective and objective reasons (Gibbons 2013, 29 ff.), and argue for
the newspaper article being an objective reason for believing that the sun is shining in Cape Town,
which becomes a subjective reason for me when I read it. In the same way, one could also try to
avoid the notion of ‘reason’ altogether. The case could be made, for instance, that the newspaper
article contains information that becomes epistemically relevant to me only when I learn about it.
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
63

reaction: after all, Peter now knows Mark’s reasons and can accordingly use them to
form his conviction. The example of Peter and Mark thus shows how, in the course
of the epistemic evaluation of another’s conviction, one gains access to the underly-
ing reasons, through which these reasons are now available to one for one’s own
belief formation.
One consequence of this phenomenon is that, in the case of a positive result of
epistemic evaluation, one should approximate one’s opponent’s belief. How closely
one should approach this belief depends, of course, on how good one thinks the
reasons in question are. What is special about an epistemically tolerant attitude in
this context is that one considers the belief of one’s counterpart to be equally
justiﬁed, that is, that one assumes that the reasons that speak for the truth of that
belief are just as good as the reasons that speak for one’s own belief. In the context of
a tolerant attitude, one thus ﬁnds oneself in the following situation: On the one hand,
one has access to reasons that speak for one’s own belief—these are the reasons on
the basis of which one originally formed one’s own conviction. On the other hand,
one also has access to reasons that speak against one’s own belief—these are the
reasons on the basis of which the other side has formed its conviction. Thus, one has
access to reasons in favor of one’s belief as well as access to reasons against one’s
belief. Moreover, the reasons in favor of one’s belief are just as good as the reasons
against one’s belief. Given this situation, it should be clear that one should abandon
one’s original conviction and suspend judgement.
What is to be made of this line of argument? In my opinion, there are several
problems here. First, it is not at all clear to what extent the phenomenon illustrated in
the case of Peter and Mark can be generalized to other cases. Indeed, the idea that in
the course of evaluating another person’s belief as justiﬁed one gains access to good
reasons for that belief, in light of which one ought to modify one’s own belief, seems
somewhat problematic on closer inspection: namely, insofar as what is meant by this
is that a conﬂicting belief is justiﬁed only if it has been formed on the basis of
appropriate evidence, and that access to that evidence rationally necessitates an
approach to the conﬂicting belief, the falsity of permissivism is clearly presupposed
here. For, against the background of permissivism, access to evidence in light of
which a conﬂicting belief is justiﬁed does not necessarily make an approximation to
that belief rationally necessary, since, after all, evidence alone does not determine
which belief is rational at all within the framework of permissivism. Indeed, if it
depends on some further, evidence-independent parameter—such as the subject’s
relevant background beliefs or practical interests—which belief is rational given a
given set of evidence, then there may well be cases in which one person has a
justiﬁed belief given a given set of evidence, while another person would not be
justiﬁed in that belief given the same set of evidence. Against the background of
permissivism, then, it is not at all clear why the reasons on the basis of which another
person has formed a justiﬁed belief make it rationally necessary for me to approach
that belief as well. Now this is problematic insofar as—as we saw in the last
chapter—permissivism is, on the face of it, a weak and uncontroversial assumption.
But even if one presupposes the Uniqueness thesis and thus the falsity of
permissivism, there is a very different problem. For another presupposition of the
64
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

above argument seems to be that one can evaluate the justiﬁcatory status of another
person’s belief only if one knows the reasons underlying that belief. In fact,
however, in very many cases it should be possible to evaluate the justiﬁcatory status
of a belief without having direct access to the underlying reasons in the sense that
one is aware of these reasons, or that one can understand them. An example would be
a physicist explaining to me that string theory has been subject to massive criticism
in recent years and is currently held by fewer and fewer researchers. This informa-
tion is completely new to me—I do not even know exactly what string theory even
says, let alone how popular it is in the current research discussion. Accordingly, I
have no idea what the reasons are for or against string theory. Nevertheless, even in
this case I am in a position to evaluate the epistemic status of the physicist’s belief,
and I can do so without him trying to explain to me any reasons that I do not
understand anyway: If, for instance, I know that he is a well-educated physicist who
works as a scientist at a prestigious university and specializes in the ﬁeld of particle
physics, and if, moreover, most of the statements he has made in the past about
current states of research in physics have turned out to be correct in the sense that
they have been conﬁrmed by other physicists, then I have good reason to believe that
he has good reasons for his belief. Nevertheless, in this case, in the course of my
epistemic evaluation of my counterpart’s reasons, I do not gain direct epistemic
access to these reasons—they actually remain completely hidden from me and are
thus not directly available to me for my own belief formation or modiﬁcation.
One can also imagine even more extreme cases in which the evaluation of
someone else’s belief as equally justiﬁed is rational without having any form of
access to the underlying reasons and without knowing anything else about the person
in question. Consider, for example, a case in which a friend assures me that an
acquaintance of his is convinced that she is distantly related to Angela Merkel, and
that she actually has good reasons for this belief. Insofar as I assume that my friend is
reliable in assessing whether someone has good reasons for their belief, I too have
good reason in this case to believe that my friend’s acquaintance is justiﬁed in her
belief. Yet I have no access to the speciﬁc reasons underlying that belief, nor do I
have any further information about the person who formed it.
The ﬁrst argument for the assumption that there is an inherent rational tension
between evaluating a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed and simultaneously
maintaining one’s own belief is thus unconvincing: apart from the fact that the
reasons on the basis of which one person holds a justiﬁed belief do not necessarily
make it rationally necessary for other persons to approach that belief as well, it is
easily possible to evaluate an unfamiliar belief as equally justiﬁed without having
access to the reasons underlying that belief.
4.2.2
First-Order Reasons, Second-Order Reasons and Defeaters
Are there better arguments that it is epistemically irrational to stick to one’s guns
while evaluating another person’s conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed? In a sense,
the discussion of the ﬁrst argument already suggests a promising possibility: To be
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
65

sure, the cases presented there show that it is perfectly possible to evaluate a
conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed without having access to the reasons underlying
that belief. On the other hand, even in these cases, an approximation to the belief
judged to be justiﬁed seems to be rationally warranted: For example, if I learn that a
physicist whom I consider to be a leading expert in the ﬁeld of particle physics is
convinced that string theory is probably false, then this information also gives me a
reason to believe that string theory is false. And if my friend assures me that his
acquaintance is justiﬁed in her belief that she is distantly related to Angela Merkel,
then this information gives me a reason to assume that my friend’s acquaintance is
indeed distantly related to Angela Merkel. Thus, evaluating another persons’s belief
as justiﬁed can apparently give one a reason to approach that belief even if one has
no direct access to the reasons underlying that belief in the ﬁrst place. How can this
phenomenon be explained?
At this point, it is helpful to introduce a distinction between ﬁrst-order reasons
and second-order reasons. The distinction between ﬁrst-order reasons and second-
order reasons is a widely accepted one, at least in moral philosophy, that is with
respect to practical rather than epistemic reasons, going back to Joseph Raz.19 Raz
understands ﬁrst-order reasons to be reasons for action that arise directly from ethical
considerations, interests, or desires. In contrast, second-order reasons are reasons for
acting or not acting on the basis of particular reasons. For example,20 Thomas is
considering whether to send his daughter to a particular school. The fact that the
school is very close, that philosophy classes are offered there, and that it might be
beneﬁcial to Thomas’s career to have a child at that school are ﬁrst-order reasons for
Thomas to send his daughter to that school. On the other hand, Thomas has promised
his friend David that he will only take into account considerations relevant to his
daughter’s welfare when choosing a school, and that considerations of his career will
play no part in this. This promise is now a second-order reason for Thomas. Roughly
speaking, then, second-order reasons are reasons that relate to other reasons. Cru-
cially, now, these second-order reasons are also relevant to what decision Thomas
should make: For if Thomas has promised not to take career considerations into
account when choosing a school, then he should not send his daughter to a school
simply because it might beneﬁt his career to have a child at that school.
A very similar distinction can be found in the epistemological literature, where a
distinction is made between ﬁrst-order evidence and higher-order evidence. The
special thing about higher-order evidence is that it itself refers to evidential support
relations.21 An example: Martin listens to the current weather report because he
would like to know whether it will rain tomorrow. The weather report announces
bright sunshine, whereupon Martin forms the belief that it will not rain tomorrow.
Shortly afterwards, Martin has a conversation with his colleague Anna. Anna tells
19See on this and the following Raz 2002, 34 ff.
20The following example is taken from Whiting 2016.
21Such a characterization can be found, for example, in Christensen 2010; under the concept of
second-order evidence, similar considerations can be found in Feldman 2005.
66
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

Martin that she has read about a study that clearly shows that weather reports are still
extremely prone to error and unreliable, even today, despite the most modern
technology and sophisticated methods. Martin then changes his conviction again
and now suspends judgement about tomorrow’s weather. In this case, the weather
report constitutes ﬁrst-order evidence and Anna’s statement constitutes higher-order
evidence. Both are relevant to Martin’s belief about tomorrow’s weather—the
crucial difference, however, is that Anna’s statement, unlike the weather report,
does not refer directly to tomorrow’s weather, but rather to the evidential situation in
which Martin ﬁnds himself with respect to the question of tomorrow’s weather. The
distinction between ﬁrst-order evidence and higher-order evidence in epistemology
is thus in some ways analogous to the distinction between ﬁrst-order reasons and
second-order reasons in moral philosophy. Just as it is speciﬁc to second-order
reasons that second-order reasons refer to other reasons, it is speciﬁc to higher-
order evidence that higher-order evidence is evidence about evidence. Accordingly,
a distinction can now also be introduced in epistemological terms between ﬁrst-order
reasons and second-order reasons, where second-order reasons are reasons that refer
to other reasons.
Against the background of this distinction, it can be better understood how it is
possible that the evaluation of another person’s conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed
can provide one with a reason for belief modiﬁcation even if one has no direct access
at all to the reasons underlying that belief. Thus, on the one hand, there may be cases
in which, in the course of evaluating another person’s belief as equally justiﬁed, one
gains ﬁrst-order reasons for this belief, in view of which a modiﬁcation of one’s own
belief is rationally necessary. This is the case, for instance, in the example of Peter
and Mark, whose train is late: Here, Peter’s evaluation of Mark’s belief as equally
justiﬁed is the result of a direct evaluation of Mark’s reasons—Peter knows Mark’s
reasons and accepts that these reasons are good reasons for Mark’s belief. But this
also means that Peter has direct access to these reasons and can accordingly use them
to form or modify his own beliefs. Thus, having learned of Mark’s reasons, Peter
should evaluate Mark’s belief as justiﬁed and, moreover, adopt Mark’s belief as
well. If he were now asked why he is convinced that the train is delayed due to a
technical malfunction, it would be strange if he gave as a reason that someone else
has good reasons for this belief. Rather, he should cite as a reason his knowledge of
the radio message—that is, the ﬁrst-order reasons he gained in the course of
epistemically evaluating Mark’s belief.
However, as we have already seen, there are, on the other hand, also very many
cases in which, in the course of evaluating another person’s belief as justiﬁed, one
does not gain direct access to the reasons underlying this belief and thus also no ﬁrst-
order reasons for this belief. The fact that even in these cases one should approach
the belief evaluated as justiﬁed can now be explained by the fact that here one does
not gain ﬁrst-order reasons, but instead gains second-order reasons for the truth of
the belief in question. Of course, this conjecture is still somewhat vague to
begin with: what exactly does it mean to gain a second-order reason? And why, in
the course of evaluating someone else’s belief as justiﬁed, should one gain a second-
order reason for that belief? In what follows, I will present two further arguments for
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
67

why maintaining one’s own belief in the face of evaluating a conﬂicting belief as
equally justiﬁed is necessarily epistemically irrational. Both arguments represent
attempts to explain why, in the course of evaluating another person’s belief as
equally justiﬁed, one obtains a second-order reason that rationally necessitates a
modiﬁcation of one’s own belief.
In discussing these arguments, the concept of epistemic defeat will play a central
role, so I will ﬁrst brieﬂy discuss what is meant by this. The basic idea behind the
concept of epistemic defeat is that there is speciﬁc information—so-called
defeaters—which, once we receive it, causes previously justiﬁed beliefs to cease
to be justiﬁed. Exactly how defeaters attack the justiﬁcatory status of beliefs, and
what kinds of defeaters there are, is the subject of an independent research discussion
within contemporary epistemology.22 However, according to a widely accepted
distinction, there are at least three different kinds of defeaters—namely, rebutting
defeaters, undercutting defeaters, and reason-defeating defeaters.
Rebutting defeaters are information that speaks directly against the truth of the
challenged belief. Undermining defeaters are information that indicates that some-
thing is wrong with the support relationship between the challenged belief and its
underlying evidence, such that the belief is not at all likely to be true given the
evidence. And reason-defeating defeaters speak against the truth of the reasons on
which the challenged belief is based. The different operation of each of these three
types of defeaters is well illustrated by an example:23 Suppose Peter, on the basis of
observing a number of swans, comes to the justiﬁed belief that all swans are white.
Now there are various ways in which this justiﬁed belief could be challenged. For
example, on the one hand, Peter could be given the information that there are black
swans. This information would speak directly against the truth of Peter’s belief and
thus constitute a rebutting defeater to that belief. On the other hand, Peter might
receive information that the swans he observed do not constitute a representative
sample. This information would argue that Peter’s belief is not at all highly likely to
be true given its underlying evidence, and accordingly constitutes an undermining
defeater to that belief. Ultimately, Peter might also receive information that he has in
fact observed not only white swans, but also some black swans. This information
would speak directly against the truth of the ground on which Peter’s belief is based,
and accordingly constitutes a reason-defeating defeater for that belief.
The crucial point now is that Peter’s belief that all swans are white is no longer
justiﬁed in the face of all this information respectively, and that he should accord-
ingly abandon his belief in the face of this information as well. Thus, by attacking the
justiﬁcatory status of a belief, defeaters necessitate a modiﬁcation of belief: holding
on to one’s belief in the face of a defeater is paradigmatically irrational. As we will
see below, a central idea behind the next two arguments for the epistemic irrational-
ity of a tolerant stance is that in the course of evaluating a conﬂicting belief as
22For an introduction, see for instance Grundmann 2011.
23The following example is taken from Grundmann 2009.
68
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

equally justiﬁed, one obtains second-order reasons that constitute a defeater for one’s
belief, in the face of which maintaining that belief is epistemically irrational.
4.2.3
The Second Argument for the Epistemic Irrationality of a
Tolerant Attitude
In the course of the evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed, which is
characteristic of a tolerant attitude, why should one gain second-order reasons for
this belief, in view of which it is irrational to maintain one’s own belief? At ﬁrst
glance, a promising starting point for a possible explanation is the so-called EEE
principle (short for evidence of evidence is evidence). This principle goes back to
Richard Feldman—in his essay “Reasonable Religious Disagreements”, in which he
argues for the epistemic irrationality of a tolerant attitude, he writes:
[. . .] [Even] if it is true that the theists and the atheists have private evidence, this does not get
us out of the problem. Each may have his or her own special insight or sense of obviousness.
But each knows about the other’s insight. Each knows that this insight has evidential force.
[. . .] A point about evidence that plays a role here is this: evidence of evidence is evidence.
More carefully, evidence that there is evidence for P is evidence for P. Knowing that the
other has an insight provides each of them with evidence.24
The reasoning developed in this passage can be directly applied to our present
problem: If I am epistemically tolerant, then I evaluate a conﬂicting belief as equally
justiﬁed while holding to my own belief. But this is irrational: for since a belief is
justiﬁed only if there is evidence for the truth of that belief, I must have evidence that
there is evidence for the truth of the conﬂicting belief in order to be justiﬁed in my
assumption that this belief is justiﬁed. Evidence for the assumption that there is
evidence for the truth of a belief, however, is itself evidence in favor of that belief. In
this sense, then, in the course of my evaluation of the other belief as equally justiﬁed,
I gain a rebutting defeater that speaks for the truth of that belief and, accordingly,
against the truth of my own belief, and in light of which retention of my own belief is
irrational.
An example: Peter is studying philosophy. In the course of his studies, he has
dealt with various considerations that speak for or against the existence of God and
has come to the conclusion that God does not exist. Now Peter learns that his fellow
student Petra believes that God exists. Peter has known Petra since the beginning of
his studies and appreciates her as a good philosopher. He assumes that she is as
competent as he is in terms of critically evaluating philosophical arguments and
carefully reﬂecting on complex problems. Moreover, he believes that Petra is a very
honest philosopher who will not take a stand in a philosophical debate until she has
extensively considered various arguments that are relevant in that context. More-
over, he knows that Petra took a seminar last semester on the question of the
24Feldman 2007, 151, my emphasis.
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
69

existence of God. Because of all this, Peter now assumes that Petra’s belief in the
existence of God is justiﬁed. On the other hand, however, he considers his own
conviction to be equally justiﬁed; after all, he has also dealt with relevant arguments.
Accordingly, he behaves tolerantly: he continues to assume that God does not exist,
but also does not try to convince Petra of his position.
The idea now is that such a position is therefore irrational because, insofar as
Peter’s evaluation of Petra’s belief as justiﬁed is itself justiﬁed, Peter must have
evidence for the assumption that there is evidence for the truth of Petra’s belief—if
there were no such evidence, Petra would not be justiﬁed either. And since Peter
knows that Petra is a competent and honest philosopher who has only recently
grappled with arguments relevant in this context, he does indeed have evidence for
supposing that there is evidence for the truth of her belief and that Petra is thus
justiﬁed in her belief. Now, it is the case that, assuming the EEE principle, evidence
that supports that there is evidence for the belief that God exists is itself direct
evidence for God’s existence. Accordingly, Peter has second-order reasons for
believing that God exists and, accordingly, a rebutting defeater, in light of which it
would be irrational for him to simply hold to his belief.
What is to be made of this argument? In fact, against the background of the EEE
principle, there seems to be a straightforward way of arguing that in the course of
evaluating another person’s conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed, one gains second-
order reasons for that belief. For according to this principle, the evidence on the basis
of which one arrived at the evaluation of the other person’s belief as equally justiﬁed
would simply be higher-order evidence for the truth of that belief. From this, then,
further reﬂection suggests, would arise the presumed problem for a tolerant attitude:
if the EEE principle holds, I cannot simply hold to my belief if I have evidence for
believing that there is evidence for a belief that is incompatible with my own belief.
However, if I am tolerant in the face of a disagreement, then I hold my opponent’s
dissenting belief to be justiﬁed, and it is justiﬁed to hold a belief to be justiﬁed only if
one has evidence for believing that there is evidence for that belief. Therefore, at
least in all cases in which the evaluation of the other’s belief as justiﬁed, which is
characteristic of a tolerant attitude, is itself justiﬁed, it is irrational to hold the other’s
dissenting belief to be justiﬁed and at the same time to hold one’s own belief.
Ultimately, however, much clearly depends at this point on a critical evaluation of
the EEE principle postulated by Feldman. The problem here is that the EEE principle
is a somewhat controversial one. Thus, in response to Feldman’s argument, various
counterexamples have been presented in epistemological research to show that the
EEE principle is false. Branden Fitelson, in his paper “Evidence of Evidence is not
(necessarily) Evidence”, develops, for instance, the following scenario:25 John is a
person who is completely unknown to me and to my friend Jonas—neither of us has
any information about John. Then each of us receives exactly one piece of informa-
tion about Johannes—Jonas learns his age, and I learn something about his appear-
ance. However, we are not allowed to exchange this information. I receive the
25See Fitelson 2012.
70
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

information that John has full white hair. That John has full white hair is evidence
that Jonas now knows that John is older than 35. But if Jonas knows that John is
older than 35, then he has evidence that John is bald. Thus, I have evidence that
Jonas has evidence that John is bald. However, my evidence, that is, the information
that John has full white hair, is not itself evidence that John is bald. In fact, this
information is actually evidence against John being bald. Thus, we have a potential
counterexample to the EEE principle: that John has full white hair is, on the one
hand, evidence that Jonas has evidence that John is bald, and, on the other hand,
evidence against John being bald. So evidence that someone has evidence for a
particular belief is not necessarily evidence for that belief.
How convincing is this counterexample? In my view, the case Fitelson describes
constitutes a real problem for the EEE principle. For regardless of any speciﬁc views
about what exactly evidence is, and what exactly it means to say that a belief is
evidentially supported, it should be reasonably uncontroversial that the information
that John has a full head of white hair is not evidence that he is bald. At the same
time, however, this information is very much evidence that Jonas has evidence that
John is bald. For the fact that John has a full head of white hair is evidence that John
is older than 35 years old—and given that Jonas knows how old John is, it is also
evidence that Jonas knows that John is older than 35 years old. However, Jonas
knowing that John is older than 35 means that Jonas has evidence that John is bald—
to make the case more explicit, we can stipulate, for example, that in the scenario
described, all men with full white hair are older than 35, but that at the same time
most men older than 35 are bald. In this case, the information that John has full white
hair is clearly evidence that Jonas has evidence that John is bald, but at the same time
it is not evidence that John is bald.
Should the case described by Fitelson prove to be a successful counterexample to
the EEE principle, the second argument for the epistemic irrationality of a tolerant
stance would also fail: insofar as the EEE principle is false, maintaining one’s own
belief in the face of evaluating a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed is not irrational
for the sole reason that any evidence in favor of evaluating the dissenting belief as
equally justiﬁed is also simultaneously evidence for the falsity of one’s own belief.
Whether Fitelson’s counterexample is actually successful, however, is at least
debatable—a separate, rather complicated debate has developed in current research
about the proper formulation of the EEE principle and how to deal with any
counterexamples. Cases like the one above are far from being accepted by all authors
as genuine counterexamples, so it would be rash to dismiss the EEE principle out of
hand.26
Perhaps the defender of an epistemically tolerant stance could simply shift the
burden of proof at this point and point out that he is arguing a much weaker thesis
than the proponent of the EEE principle: while the defender of a tolerant stance may
well accept that, at least in some cases, evidence that there is evidence for a particular
26For the current debate on the EEE principle, see for instance Comesaña and Tal 2015, Moretti
2016, Roche 2014, Roche 2018 or Tal and Comesaña 2017.
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
71

belief is evidence for the truth of that belief, the proponent of the EEE principle must
insist that this is necessarily true in all cases. The defender of a tolerant stance might
thus insist that the proponent of the EEE principle must ﬁrst present convincing
reasons for his claim. In what follows, however, I will argue that the epistemic
rationality of a tolerant stance is even compatible with the EEE principle, and that a
defender of this stance thus does not need to rely on the falsity of the EEE principle
at all.
If the EEE principle is correct, then it is impossible to justiﬁably evaluate a
conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed without gaining evidence for the truth of that
belief. But this does not mean that it is impossible to justiﬁably evaluate a conﬂicting
belief as equally justiﬁed without gaining a reason to modify one’s belief. Indeed, it
is perfectly possible to have evidence for the truth of a proposition without at the
same time having a reason to be convinced of that proposition. Consider the
following case: Laura knows that Mark is a notorious liar. One day Laura and her
friend Vera, who does not know Mark, meet Mark in town. In the course of the
conversation, Mark claims to have won the lottery.
That Mark claimed to have won the lottery is now evidence, on the one hand, that
Vera has evidence that Mark won the lottery, and evidence, on the other hand, that
Mark won the lottery. At the same time, while Laura has a reason to believe that Vera
is justiﬁed in believing that Mark won the lottery—she has no reason to believe that
Mark won the lottery. This can be explained by Laura’s knowledge that Mark is a
notorious liar: because Laura knows that Mark is a notorious liar, Mark’s claim to
have won the lottery gives her no reason to assume that Mark has won the lottery.
Mark’s claim to have won the lottery is evidence that Mark has won the lottery—but
this evidence is undermined by the background information about Mark’s credibility
that Laura has.
Let us look at a second example: I look at the wall and have an impression of red.
This red impression is evidence that the wall is red. But now I learn that the wall is
illuminated by a red spotlight. Given this information, my impression of red gives
me no reason to believe that the wall is red. But this does not mean that my red
impression is not evidence that the wall is red, nor that my red impression cannot
give me reason to form beliefs in other propositions. For instance, my impression of
red gives me a reason to believe that I am not colorblind. Evidence for a proposition
thus only gives us a reason to be convinced of that proposition if it is not undermined
by relevant background information. At the same time, the support relation between
a piece of evidence and a proposition may be completely undermined, even though
quite different propositions are still supported by that piece of evidence.
The phenomenon relevant here is a general feature of undermining defeaters:
undermining defeaters are always proposition-speciﬁc in the sense that they refer to
speciﬁc evidential support relations. If a person has formed a belief in proposition
p on the basis of evidence E, then in the face of an undermining defeater that
indicates that there is something wrong with the evidential support relation between
E and p, it would be irrational for that person to hold on to her belief in p. But this
does not mean that she can no longer use E at all to form her beliefs. For instance,
even in light of the defeater, it could be perfectly rational to form a belief in
72
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

proposition q on the basis of E, as long as this defeater does not at the same time
indicate that something is also wrong with the support relation between E and q.27
Applied to the context relevant to us, this means that even if evidence that another
person has evidence for a particular belief is always evidence for the truth of that
belief, then there are still possible cases in which, given evidence that another person
has evidence for a particular belief, one has reason to believe that that person is
justiﬁed in that belief, but has no reason to believe that that belief is true. Speciﬁ-
cally, these would be cases where there is an undermining defeater that relates only
to the supporting relationship between the relevant evidence and the belief that the
other person’s belief is true. Accordingly, the EEE principle is not sufﬁcient to show
that a tolerant attitude is necessarily epistemically irrational: for even if, against the
background of this principle, it is impossible to evaluate another person’s conﬂicting
belief as justiﬁed without gaining at least prima facie evidence for the truth of that
belief, it does not follow from this that maintaining one’s own belief in the face of
evaluating a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed is necessarily irrational.
4.2.4
The Third Argument for the Epistemic Irrationality of a
Tolerant Attitude
Is there yet another way to argue that evaluating a conﬂicting belief as equally
justiﬁed generates a second-order reason that rationally requires a modiﬁcation of
one’s own belief? In a sense, the strategy behind the second argument of invoking
the EEE principle to argue for the epistemic irrationality of a tolerant stance seems
very indirect. Why, of all things, should evidence that there is evidence for a belief
be evidence for the truth of that belief? Does not the mere fact that there is evidence
for a belief speak to the truth of that belief? The previous—and, as we have seen,
quite problematic—consideration was, after all, that good reasons for evaluating a
belief as equally justiﬁed are at the same time good reasons that speak for the truth of
that belief. But is not the evaluation of another person’s belief as equally justiﬁed in
itself a reason that speaks for the truth of that belief?
Insofar as merely evaluating a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed is a reason to
modify one’s own belief, it would be irrelevant to the present context if the grounds
on which such an evaluation is based were not necessarily also grounds for
modifying one’s own belief. But why should the evaluation of a conﬂicting belief
as equally justiﬁed be in itself a reason for modifying one’s belief? The idea here is
that there is a fundamental connection between epistemic justiﬁcation and truth: A
reason for a belief is a good reason from an epistemic perspective only if, given that
reason, the belief is more likely to be true.
That there is a principled connection between epistemic justiﬁcation and truth is
widely accepted among epistemologists and is sometimes even referred to as the
27See, for example, Constantin and Grundmann 2018.
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
73

textbook opinion.28 Against the background of this assumption, it now becomes
clear why evaluating a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed might itself be a good
reason for modifying one’s belief. For if good reasons make the truth of a belief more
likely, then given the information that there are good reasons for a belief, the truth of
that belief is more likely. And if, given the information that there are good reasons
for a conﬂicting belief, the truth of that belief is more likely, then that information is
itself a good reason for modifying one’s belief.
Thus, in order to meaningfully deny that the information that there are good
reasons for a belief speaks itself in favor of the truth of that belief, one would have to
argue against a fundamental connection between epistemic justiﬁcation and truth.
Such a strategy seems somewhat ambitious, however, since just about all
epistemologists accept that considerations of truth and falsity play a crucial role in
distinguishing between justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed beliefs.29 One of the reasons why it
is so plausible to suppose a connection between epistemic justiﬁcation and truth is
the normative character of epistemic justiﬁcation. For if there were no such connec-
tion at all, it would not be at all clear how epistemic justiﬁcation is supposed to be
signiﬁcant for our epistemic practice in the ﬁrst place.30 From an epistemic perspec-
tive, why should a justiﬁed belief be more valuable than an unjustiﬁed belief if the
justiﬁcatory status of a belief has nothing to do with the truth of that belief? That
epistemic justiﬁcation is signiﬁcant for our epistemic practice, however, seems
undeniable—we should only form beliefs for which we have good reasons, and
we should abandon beliefs that we learn are unjustiﬁed.
That epistemic justiﬁcation is normatively relevant in this sense must probably
also be accepted by the defender of a tolerant stance, since an ambivalent normative
evaluation of a foreign belief is characteristic of tolerance. But if there is no
interesting connection between epistemic justiﬁcation and truth, why should episte-
mic justiﬁcation be normatively relevant at all? A natural explanation of the
normativity of epistemic justiﬁcation is that epistemic justiﬁcation is normative
because it helps us keep track of truth. The reason we want to form only justiﬁed
beliefs is that we would like our beliefs to be true, and that beliefs have a higher
probability of being true the more justiﬁed they are. Or, as John Gibbons puts it in his
book “The Norm of Belief”:
At least from the ﬁrst-person point of view, it certainly seems that the point of being
reasonable is to ﬁnd out about the world, or at the very least, to get things right. So in an
everyday case when you need some groceries, it’s not only true that you ought to go to the
store. It’s also true that you ought to get in the car [. . .] If the importance of getting in the car
depends on its standing in a certain relation to your getting to the store, in this case it’s
something like a means to getting to the store, and if in a certain situation getting in the car
28Graham 2013.
29See, for example, Cruz and Pollock 2004; Williams 2001, 65.
30Alston 1999.
74
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

doesn’t stand in that relation because the car won’t start, then it looks as though the
importance of getting in the car is merely apparent.31
Just as getting into the car is relevant to me only insofar as it helps me arrive at the
supermarket, epistemic justiﬁcation seems to be relevant to us only insofar as it helps
us form true beliefs. Thus, to argue against a connection between epistemic justiﬁ-
cation and truth, one would ﬁrst need to plausibilize an alternative explanation for
the normative relevance of epistemic justiﬁcation.
Insofar as there is a fundamental connection between epistemic justiﬁcation and
truth, according to the previous reasoning, the information that a person is justiﬁed in
a belief constitutes a second-order reason for that belief. If, in order to be justiﬁed in
a belief, one must have good reasons for that belief, and good reasons are reasons
that make the truth of the belief based on them more likely, then a justiﬁed belief is
more likely to be true than an unjustiﬁed belief. In this sense, information that a
person is justiﬁed in a conﬂicting belief constitutes a second-order reason, in light of
which the retention of one’s belief is epistemically irrational.32
Again, the relevant epistemic mechanism can be explained with the help of the
more general phenomenon of epistemic defeat: Insofar as the information that
another person’s conﬂicting belief is justiﬁed speaks for the truth of that belief and
thus for the falsity of one’s own belief, this information constitutes a rebutting
defeater, in view of which retention of the original belief is irrational. It is also
irrelevant whether the other belief was formed on the basis of the same evidence as
one’s own belief: Insofar as there is the connection in question between epistemic
justiﬁcation and truth, the fact that a belief is justiﬁed speaks in favor of its truth—
and this regardless of the set of evidence on the basis of which it was formed. A
peculiarity arises in this context only in cases in which the foreign belief was formed
on the basis of the same evidence set as one’s own belief, and in which, moreover,
one has good reason to believe that it is a non-permissive evidence set—that is, an
evidence set in view of which precisely one speciﬁc belief is rational.
To understand what is special about these cases, consider the following example:
The two meteorologists Maria and Marianne want to ﬁnd out whether it will rain in
Berlin tomorrow. To do this, the two evaluate a large amount of relevant data
provided to them by a computer. Marianne studies the available data and comes to
the conclusion that it will rain in Berlin tomorrow. Then she learns that her colleague
Maria has come to a different conclusion: Maria is convinced that it will stay dry in
Berlin tomorrow. Marianne, who has known Maria since her studies and appreciates
her as a competent colleague, assumes that Maria has good reasons for believing that
it will stay dry in Berlin tomorrow and is thus justiﬁed in her conviction. Moreover,
she is convinced that, given the amount of data available, only one belief can be
rational, since her friend Roger, a respected epistemologist, has assured her that any
31Gibbons 2013, 29.
32A hint of this argument can be found in Grundmann 2015, where the “hidden paradox” of
epistemic tolerance is mentioned in this context.
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
75

given set of evidence necessarily determines exactly one belief that is rational given
that set of evidence.
In this case, from Marianne’s perspective, the information that Marianne’s
conﬂicting belief is justiﬁed not only indicates that Marianne’s belief is true, but
also that her own belief is not supported by the available data, and thus is not justiﬁed
at all. For if, as Marianne believes, any given set of evidence determines precisely
one belief that is justiﬁed given that set of evidence, and if a belief is justiﬁed only if
it is highly likely to be true given the underlying evidence, then it cannot be the case
that both Marianne’s belief and Maria’s belief are equally supported by the available
evidence, since the two beliefs contradict each other even though they were formed
on the basis of the same evidence. Accordingly, the evaluation of Mary’s belief as
justiﬁed here constitutes both a rebutting and an undermining defeater.33
Thus, in cases in which one has, ﬁrst, good reason to assume that another person’s
conﬂicting belief was formed on the basis of the same evidence as one’s own belief,
and, second, good reason to assume that, given the available evidence, at most one
belief can be rational, an evaluation of the other person’s belief as justiﬁed
constitutes both a rebutting and an undermining defeater. Does it follow from this
that even in such cases a tolerant attitude is necessarily irrational? Not directly: for in
fact what is characteristic of a tolerant attitude is not merely the evaluation of the
other’s belief as justiﬁed, but rather the evaluation of one’s own and the other’s
belief as equally justiﬁed. Against the background of the assumption that both one’s
own and the other’s belief were formed on the basis of the same evidence, and that in
view of the available evidence at most one belief can be justiﬁed, the respective
evaluations of one’s own and the other’s belief as equally justiﬁed cancel each other
out, however: Just as evaluating the other’s belief as justiﬁed in such a case speaks
against one’s own belief being justiﬁed, evaluating one’s own belief as justiﬁed
speaks against one’s other belief being justiﬁed. Given that one has equally good
reasons for evaluating one’s own belief and for evaluating the other’s belief, one
should suspend judgement here on which belief is justiﬁed in light of the available
evidence.34
In the context of a tolerant stance, then, the hybrid defeater that the evaluation of
the other’s belief as justiﬁed constitutes against the background of the assumption
that it is a non-permissive case of shared evidence is in turn defeated by the
evaluation of one’s own belief as equally justiﬁed. This does not mean, however,
that in such a constellation a tolerant stance is rational: for the resulting suspension
33Defeaters that have both rebuttal and undermining effects are also referred to as hybrid defeaters.
See for instance Kotzen 2010.
34That one has equally good reasons for evaluating the conﬂicting belief and one’s own belief as
equally justiﬁed is, of course, an idealizing assumption. However, in cases of divided evidence,
where one assumes that the case is a non-permissive one, and where there are better reasons for
either evaluation, a tolerant stance is irrational from the outset: for in such a case one ought to
abandon the worse-supported evaluation in each case in favor of the better-supported evaluation.
This means that in such a case the evaluation of one’s own and the conﬂicting belief as equally
justiﬁed, which is characteristic of a tolerant attitude, is irrational.
76
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

with respect to the question which conviction is justiﬁed in view of the available
evidence is not only incompatible with the evaluation of one’s own and the other’s
conviction as equally justiﬁed, which is characteristic of a tolerant stance, but
moreover with the retention of one’s own conviction, which is also characteristic
of a tolerant stance.
To understand this point better, consider the following case:35 Peter visits a
museum. There he enters a room in which one wall looks red. Based on his
impression of red, he forms the belief that the wall is red. He then reads in a museum
guide that the room he is in is part of an art project, and that the wall of the room is
illuminated at irregular intervals alternately with red and with white light. When the
wall is illuminated with which light is determined by a random generator. Given this
information, Peter should suspend judgement on whether his impression of red
indicates that the wall is red. Moreover, he should also clearly give up his belief
that the wall is red. Accordingly, suspending judgement on whether a belief is
supported by the available evidence would seem to constitute an undermining
defeater for that belief: If the wall is regularly illuminated in color, then given Peter’s
impression of red, it is not particularly likely that the wall is red. For it could be that
Peter has an impression of red because the wall is red—but it could just as well be
that the wall is only illuminated in red and that Peter therefore has an impression
of red.
If, however, suspending judgement on whether a belief is supported by the
available evidence constitutes an undermining defeater for that belief, then it
becomes clear why the evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as justiﬁed, which is
characteristic of a tolerant stance, is incompatible with a retention of one’s belief
even in cases where one has good reason to believe that the conﬂicting belief was
formed on the basis of the same evidence as one’s own belief, and that, moreover, it
is a non-permissive case. For such an evaluation, together with the evaluation of
one’s own belief as equally justiﬁed, which is also characteristic of a tolerant stance,
rationalizes such suspension of judgement.
So much for the third argument for the epistemic irrationality of a tolerant
attitude. To summarize, the reasoning is this: If there is a fundamental connection
between epistemic justiﬁcation and truth, then the fact that a conﬂicting belief is
justiﬁed speaks directly to the truth of that belief. Accordingly, evaluating a
conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed constitutes a rebutting defeater, in light of
which maintaining one’s belief is irrational. In cases where one has good reason to
believe that both beliefs were formed on the basis of the same, non-permissive body
of evidence, the hybrid defeater constituted by the evaluation of the other belief as
justiﬁed may be neutralized by the evaluation of one’s own belief as equally
justiﬁed—but the result is a suspension of judgement as to which belief is supported
by the available evidence, which is both incompatible with the evaluation of both
beliefs as equally justiﬁed, and constitutes an undermining defeater for one’s belief.
35The following thought experiment is based on the so-called kaleidoscope case by Ernest Sosa. See
Sosa 2009, 31–69.
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
77

Maintaining one’s belief in the face of evaluating a conﬂicting belief as equally
justiﬁed is thus irrational in any case.
What is to be made of this argument? In what follows, I will argue that the third
argument for the epistemic irrationality of a tolerant stance also fails, because it is
based on an implausible understanding of the truth-conduciveness of epistemic
justiﬁcation. Suppose, for instance, that there is no connection whatsoever between
the justiﬁcatory status and the truth of beliefs. In that case, the information that a
conﬂicting belief is justiﬁed would also not speak in any way for the truth of that
belief. Now, however, it has already been pointed out that the assumption of the
truth-conduciveness of epistemic justiﬁcation is a widely accepted standard view in
epistemology. Denying any connection between epistemic justiﬁcation and truth
would accordingly be a somewhat ambitious undertaking. In what follows, however,
I will argue that, fortunately, one need not deny any connection between epistemic
justiﬁcation and truth in order to accept the possibility of cases in which evaluating a
conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed does not rationally require any modiﬁcation of
one’s belief—but rather that any plausible interpretation of the truth-conduciveness
of epistemic justiﬁcation is perfectly compatible with the possibility of such cases.
Let me begin with a basic distinction between two different ways of interpreting
the truth-conduciveness of epistemic justiﬁcation. For instance, some authors insist
that epistemically good reasons make the truth of the belief they support probable
insofar as the belief in question is actually true with a high probability given those
reasons, for instance because of an objectively existing correlation between the
occurrence of the reasons and the truth of the belief. A prominent formulation of
this view would be, for example, reliabilism, according to which a given belief is
epistemically justiﬁed only if it was formed by a reliable cognitive process, that is, by
a process that actually tends to produce more true than false beliefs.
In contrast, some authors hold that epistemic justiﬁcation need only be truth-
conducive in a subjective sense, such that reasons for a belief are epistemically good
reasons only if, given those reasons, the belief in question is highly likely to be true
from the perspective of the person forming the belief. Thus, whereas objectivists
hold that good reasons must actually increase the objective probability of truth of the
belief in question, subjectivists hold that good reasons must increase the subjective
probability of truth of the belief in question.36 The difference relevant here becomes
36How exactly the concept of probability should be interpreted in this context, and how exactly the
distinction between objective and subjective probability should be understood, is the subject of a
controversial philosophical debate—for a brief overview, see for instance Hájek 2012. For the
present context, however, the details of this debate are not further relevant. By claiming that the
difference between subjectivists and objectivists can be spelled out in terms of a distinction between
subjective and objective probability, what is meant here is simply this: reasons increase the
objective probability of truth of a belief if and only if there is an actually existing correlation
between the occurrence of the reasons and the truth of the belief, so that in most cases in which a
subject forms that belief on the basis of those reasons, that belief is actually true. In contrast, reasons
increase the subjective probability of truth of a belief if and only if, from the perspective of the
belief-forming subject, the truth of the belief is more likely given those reasons. Objectivists now
assume that reasons for a belief are good reasons insofar as they increase the objective probability
78
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

especially clear in the context of skeptical scenarios. Take, for example, the brain in
the vat: objectively, the brain’s beliefs are truewith a vanishingly small probability—
after all, it is constantly being deceived. However, from the subjective perspective of
the brain in the vat, most of its beliefs are highly likely to be true—after all, it is
unaware of the constant deception. For example, if the brain in the vat had the
impression that it was seeing a dark cloud front, then from the perspective of the
brain in the vat it would also be very likely that it would soon rain. Objectively, of
course, it need not be very likely at all that it will rain soon. So let us assume that our
brain in the vat has an impression to that effect. Given this impression, from the
perspective of the brain in the vat, it is subjectively likely that it will rain soon.
Suppose, moreover, that it is objectively unlikely that it will rain soon. If the brain in
the vat were now to form the belief that it will rain soon, the subjectivist could easily
evaluate this belief as justiﬁed, whereas the objectivist would probably be more
inclined to evaluate it as unjustiﬁed.
The distinction between objectivist and subjectivist interpretations of the truth-
conduciveness of epistemic justiﬁcation mirrors to some extent the classic dispute
between externalists and internalists concerning epistemic justiﬁcation. Thus, a
subjectivist interpretation of the truth-conduciveness of epistemic justiﬁcation is
incompatible with all externalist theories of epistemic justiﬁcation, since all forms
of externalism regard actual reliability, that is, objective truth-conduciveness, as
necessary for epistemic justiﬁcation.37 Thus, while all externalist theories are based
on an objectivist interpretation of the truth-conduciveness of epistemic justiﬁcation,
many internalists hold a subjectivist interpretation.38 Accordingly, some authors
have explicitly attributed the conﬂict between externalist and internalist theories of
epistemic
justiﬁcation
to
the
conﬂict
between
objectivist
and
subjectivist
interpretations of the truth-conduciveness of epistemic justiﬁcation.39
At least against the background of subjectivism, one now quickly sees why the
evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed need not generate a defeater for
one’s own belief.40 Take, for example, the following case: the two bird researchers
Anselm and Gertrude are to determine the species of a bird. Anselm has been
working as a bird researcher for decades and swears by the time-honored method
of assigning birds to a species based on their song. Gertrude, on the other hand, is
fresh out of university and doesn’t think much of such conservative approaches—in
her eyes, DNA analysis is by far the most reliable way to determine a bird’s species.
Anselm, for his part, is skeptical of all these newfangled procedures. In fact, he
that belief being true. In contrast, subjectivists assume that reasons for a belief are good reasons
insofar as they increase the subjective probability of that belief being true.
37Majors and Sawyer 2007.
38Ibid. An example of a proponent of internalism who nevertheless accepts objective truth-
conduciveness as characteristic of epistemic justiﬁcation would be, for instance, Laurence Bonjour
(BonJour 1985).
39See, for example, Littlejohn 2012, 26 f.
40A consideration similar to the following argument can already be found - but with regard to
peerhood instead of justiﬁcation attributions—in Grundmann 2013.
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
79

ﬁrmly believes that he is just as reliable in identifying bird species with his
conservative method as his young colleagues are with their DNA analyses.
Suppose that determining the species of a bird by DNA analysis is objectively
more reliable than by song analysis. Against the background of subjectivism, this
fact need have no effect on the justiﬁcatory status of Anselm’s and Gertrude’s
beliefs: Suppose, for instance, that Gertrude concludes that the bird is a raven,
whereas Anselm concludes that it is a crow. That Gertrude’s reasons are objectively
stronger for truth of her belief than Anselm’s reasons are for truth of his belief need
not mean that Gertrude is better justiﬁed than Anselm. For Gertrude’s and Anselm’s
reasons are symmetrical in that, from their respective internal perspectives, they
speak equally strongly for the truth of the belief formed. Thus, given the analysis of
the bird’s song, the subjective probability that it is a raven is as high for Anselm as it
is for Gertrude, given the analysis of its DNA, that it is a crow.
On the condition of a subjectivist interpretation of the truth-conduciveness of
epistemic justiﬁcation, Gertrude’s and Anselm’s beliefs would thus be equally
justiﬁed. Accordingly, under this presupposition, it would also be completely
unproblematic if Gertrude were to evaluate Anselm’s belief as equally justiﬁed. At
the same time, it is not at all clear why such an evaluation should generate a defeater
for Gertrude’s own belief. For to evaluate Anselm’s belief as equally justiﬁed would
merely mean accepting that Anselm has reasons in light of which it is very likely for
him, or from his perspective, that the bird in question is a crow. But why should this
be relevant to Gertrude’s own belief? Because even if she accepts that it is very likely
for Anselm, given the reasons he has, that the bird is a crow, this does not mean that
it is also likely for Gertrude, given those reasons, that the bird is a crow, since the
subjective probability of truth of a proposition is person-relative.
In fact, unlike Anselm, Gertrude assumes precisely that an analysis of song is not
a particularly good method for determining the species of a bird. This means that for
her, the probability of truth of the belief that the bird is a crow does not increase,
given Anselm’s reasons for this conviction. Thus, the information that Anselm is
justiﬁed in his belief does not constitute a rebutting defeater for Gertrude’s belief,
since it does not support the falsity of her belief at all. For Anselm’s being justiﬁed in
his belief merely means that, from Anselm’s perspective, that belief is highly likely
to be true—not that his belief is objectively highly likely to be true.
To make the case even clearer, we can assume, for example, that shortly before
the meeting with Anselm, Gertrude had read a recent study which clearly shows that
the identiﬁcation of bird species using song analysis is wholly unreliable. Although
it has been established as a standard method in bird research for a long time, species
identiﬁcation by song analysis is hardly more reliable than merely guessing the
species of a bird. Now Gertrude has not only read this study, but she also knows that
Anselm knows nothing about it—perhaps because it is an English-language study
and Anselm does not know English. Why, then, should the fact that Anselm has
come to the conclusion that the bird is a crow on the basis of song analysis have any
epistemic relevance to Gertrude’s belief that it is a raven?
Thus, against the background of a subjectivist interpretation of the truth-
conduciveness of epistemic justiﬁcation, it is perfectly possible to evaluate a
80
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

conﬂicting belief as justiﬁed without at the same time accepting that there are in fact
reasons in view of which that belief is objectively more likely to be true. If evaluating
a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed simply means accepting that this belief is
based on reasons in view of which it is true with the same probability from the
perspective of the person who holds this belief as my own belief is true from my
perspective, then such an evaluation does not generate a defeater for my own belief.
In fact, the above case of Anselm and Gertrude is even more idealized than it ought
to be against the background of subjectivism: thus, the two form their respective
beliefs on the basis of different evidence, and, moreover, Gertrude has information
that the evidence on the basis of which Anselm formed his belief is not good
evidence. Accordingly, Gertrude knows that—although Anselm’s belief is true
from his perspective with a high probability—Anselm’s perspective is a bad per-
spective. Thus, it is also not surprising that in this case it is perfectly unproblematic
for Gertrude to stick to her belief.
Against the background of subjectivism, however, it is not at all necessary to
know about the epistemic inferiority of one’s opponent’s perspective in order to be
able to rationally hold on to one’s belief in the face of the evaluation of a conﬂicting
belief as equally justiﬁed. For against the background of subjectivism, evaluating a
conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed merely implies that the belief is highly likely to
be true from the perspective of the person holding that belief. However, this
information in itself does not speak at all to the fact that this belief is actually true
with a high probability. Accordingly, in order to stand by one’s belief against the
background of subjectivism in the face of the evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as
equally justiﬁed, one does not need speciﬁc information that speaks for the unreli-
ability of the perspective of the other side—rather, one needs speciﬁc information
that speaks for the reliability of that perspective, so that a modiﬁcation of one’s own
belief might be warranted.
The situation is different against the background of objectivism: For within the
framework of objectivism, the evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as justiﬁed does not
merely imply that this belief is true with a high probability from the perspective of
the person who holds this belief, but rather that this belief is actually true with a high
probability. Accordingly, against the background of objectivism, the information
that another person’s conﬂicting belief is equally justiﬁed already speaks in itself for
the truth of that belief and thus for the falsity of one’s own belief. This does not
mean, however, that it is necessarily irrational to maintain one’s own belief in the
face of the evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed: For even if the
evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed prima facie constitutes a
defeater for one’s own belief, there are still cases in which this defeater is itself
defeated and thus no belief modiﬁcation is rationally required.
Consider the following case: Peter and Maria visit a museum together. There they
enter a room in which the walls look red. Maria then forms the belief that the walls
are red. However, Peter, who unlike Maria has read the museum guide, knows that
the room is part of an art project: in fact, the walls are white and are merely
illuminated with red light. In this case, Peter is ﬁrstly justiﬁed in believing that the
walls are white. Moreover, Peter should evaluate Mary’s belief that the walls are red
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
81

as justiﬁed. Nevertheless, in this case, it seems perfectly unproblematic for Peter to
simply stick to his guns in light of his evaluation of Mary’s conﬂicting belief as
justiﬁed. How can this result be explained in light of objectivism?
Indeed, even an objectivist can accept that Peter can simply stand by his opinion
in the face of the evaluation of Mary’s conﬂicting belief as justiﬁed. It is true that he
would have to concede that the evaluation of Mary’s belief as justiﬁed prima facie
speaks for the truth of that belief and thus constitutes a rebutting defeater for Peter’s
belief—after all, Mary’s belief is justiﬁed against the background of objectivism
only insofar as Mary has a normally functioning sense perception by means of which
she can reliably identify the colour of walls, at least under normal circumstances.
Crucially, however, this defeater is itself defeated by the information that the walls
are illuminated in red. For if the walls are illuminated with colored light, then
speciﬁc conditions exist under which Mary’s sensory perception does not provide
a reliable basis for identifying the color of the walls.
This does not mean, however, that Mary’s belief is not justiﬁed: even against the
background of objectivism, it is perfectly possible for a belief to be justiﬁed even
though it is not highly likely to be true. Thus, an objectivist might still hold that a
belief is based on good reasons only if those reasons make it objectively probable, at
least in general, that the beliefs based on them are true. This claim is perfectly
compatible with the possibility of cases in which a belief is justiﬁed and based on
good reasons even though, because of special circumstances, that belief is not highly
likely to be true given the reasons on which it is based. Indeed, it would also be
somewhat surprising if the objectivist did not have the theoretical resources to accept
the possibility of such cases. After all, given examples like Peter’s and Mary’s, it is
very plausible at a pre-theoretical level that even beliefs that are not highly likely to
be true given their underlying reasons in light of speciﬁc circumstances can still be
justiﬁed.41
Many Objectivists accept the possibility of such cases, and for this reason have
attempted to modify their theories accordingly. An example of this would be the
various varieties of reliabilism proposed by Alvin Goldman: As an externalist theory
of epistemic justiﬁcation, reliabilism is clearly committed to objectivism—a belief is
justiﬁed according to reliabilism only if it has been formed by a reliable cognitive
process—that is, a process that tends to produce more de facto true beliefs than false
ones. At ﬁrst glance, this theory seems to imply problematic results in cases like
Peter and Mary’s. This is because Mary is in a situation in which forming beliefs
about the wall color based on her sensory impressions is not particularly reliable.
41The fact that defeaters can be defeated and thus lose their defeating force, while at the same time
continuing to be justiﬁably believed, is a generally accepted phenomenon of epistemic defeat (see,
for instance, Sudduth 2017, Sect. 4c). The objectivist could thus easily claim that the evaluation of a
conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed constitutes a defeater for one’s own belief, which is itself
defeated by the information that the conﬂicting belief is not highly likely to be true given its
underlying grounds due to speciﬁc circumstances, without this not still justifying the evaluation of
the conﬂicting belief as justiﬁed.
82
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

Accordingly, one might initially think that a reliabilist theory of epistemic justiﬁca-
tion would conclude here that Mary has no justiﬁed belief.
Alvin Goldman has now made various proposals to solve this problem. In his
book “Epistemology and Cognition” he presents the so-called normal-world
reliabilism, a variant of reliabilism according to which a belief is justiﬁed if it was
formed by a cognitive process that is reliable in normal worlds. Normal worlds are
said to be worlds that correspond to our basic beliefs about the nature of objects,
events, and changes in the actual world.42 In contrast, in his essay “Strong and Weak
Justiﬁcation” he proposes a distinction between two kinds of epistemic justiﬁcation,
namely strong and weak justiﬁcation. According to this distinction, a belief is
strongly justiﬁed insofar as it is formed by a cognitive process that is in fact reliable,
and weakly justiﬁed insofar as it is formed by an unreliable cognitive process, but the
person forming the belief has no access to the unreliability of the process, so that he
cannot be blamed from an epistemic perspective.43 Strong and weak justiﬁcation are
two completely independent forms of epistemic justiﬁcation: A belief can be weakly
but not strongly justiﬁed, but it can also be strongly and not weakly justiﬁed.
Another proposal is found in the essay “Epistemic Folkways and Scientiﬁc Episte-
mology”, in which Goldman develops a theory of justiﬁcation attribution. According
to this theory, the attribution of epistemic justiﬁcation proceeds essentially in two
steps: In the ﬁrst step, each evaluator creates a mental list of cognitive processes that
society regards as reliable. In the second step, a belief is attributed positive justiﬁca-
tory status only if it was produced by a cognitive process that is on the evaluator’s
mental list.44
Thus, even the reliabilist has several options for evaluating Maria’s belief as
justiﬁed. Maria has formed her belief on the basis of normally functioning percep-
tion—she is standing directly in front of the wall, she is not colorblind, and she
suffers from no other cognitive impairment. Accordingly, she forms her belief on the
basis of cognitive processes that are reliable in situations that correspond to our basic
beliefs about the actual world, that are generally regarded as reliable, and that are
also regarded as reliable by society. Moreover, Mary is in no way aware that the
processes underlying her belief are unreliable in the speciﬁc situation, so she cannot
be blamed from an epistemic perspective. Thus, even within the framework of
reliabilism, Mary’s belief can be ascribed a positive justiﬁcatory status. There are
even ways of evaluating Peter’s and Mary’s beliefs as equally justiﬁed in some
sense: for instance, both beliefs were produced by cognitive processes that are
generally regarded as equally reliable and, accordingly, are likely to count as
equivalent on the mental list of potential epistemic evaluators.
The objectivist, then, certainly has the theoretical resources to accept the possi-
bility of cases in which, given speciﬁc circumstances, a belief is not highly likely to
be true given its underlying reasons, but is nonetheless justiﬁed in a substantive
42Goldman 1986, 107.
43Goldman 1988.
44Goldman 1993.
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
83

sense. Accordingly, even the objectivist can concede that it is not necessarily
irrational to evaluate a conﬂicting belief as justiﬁed while holding to one’s own
belief. For even if, against the background of objectivism, the evaluation of a
conﬂicting belief as justiﬁed constitutes a defeater for one’s own belief, this defeater
can be defeated without thereby rendering the continued evaluation of the other’s
belief as justiﬁed irrational. An example of such a constellation would be precisely
the case of Peter and Mary: the information that the walls are lit up red does indeed
speak against Mary’s belief being true with a high degree of probability in view of
the reasons underlying it—but it does not necessarily speak against this belief being
justiﬁed, even against the background of objectivism.
Thus, the third argument for the epistemic irrationality of a tolerant stance also
fails: it does not follow from the widely held view that there is a fundamental
connection between epistemic justiﬁcation and truth that holding one’s own belief
in the face of evaluating a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed is necessarily
irrational. Thus, against the background of a subjectivist interpretation of the truth-
conduciveness of epistemic justiﬁcation, evaluating a conﬂicting belief as justiﬁed
merely speaks to the fact that this belief is highly likely to be true from the
perspective of the person who holds it. Against the background of an objectivist
interpretation, the evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as justiﬁed does indeed prima
facie speak for the truth of this belief—however, even then cases are still conceivable
in which speciﬁc information is available that indicates that the conﬂicting belief is
justiﬁed, but due to speciﬁc circumstances is nevertheless not true with a high degree
of probability in view of the reasons underlying it. In such cases, even against the
background of objectivism, a modiﬁcation of one’s own belief is not required despite
the ongoing evaluation of the other belief as justiﬁed.45
4.2.5
Conclusion
In sum, I have discussed three arguments for the claim that tolerance in response to
disagreement is necessarily epistemically irrational, because the evaluation of a
conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed, which is characteristic of a tolerant attitude,
rationally requires a modiﬁcation of one’s belief.
45In discussing the third argument, I have focused on cases in which the evaluation of a conﬂicting
belief as equally justiﬁed should constitute a rebutting defeater. However, it is easy to see that the
above reasoning can easily be applied to cases where that assessment should constitute an
undermining defeater: The reasoning about these cases was, after all, that the evaluation of a
conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed here speaks against one’s belief being supported by the
available evidence because the available body of evidence cannot speak simultaneously for the
truth and for the falsity of a proposition. However, the fact that a conﬂicting belief is highly likely to
be true from another person’s subjective perspective, or true in general but not in the present
situation due to speciﬁc circumstances, is perfectly compatible with the available evidence actually
speaking only for the truth of one’s belief. Accordingly, it is not at all clear why, in these cases,
given the evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed, one must suspend judgement on
which belief is supported by the available evidence.
84
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

The idea behind the ﬁrst argument was that in the course of evaluating a
conﬂicting belief as justiﬁed, one gains ﬁrst-order reasons for the truth of that belief,
because in order to evaluate the justiﬁcatory status of a belief, one must have access
to the reasons underlying that belief, so that they are then immediately available to
one for one’s own belief formation and modiﬁcation. A closer look, however, has
shown that the assumptions underlying this argument are far too strong: In order to
evaluate the justiﬁcatory status of a belief, one does not need direct access to the
reasons underlying that belief. Moreover, the argument seems to be based on a
non-permissive conception of evidential support relations, which—as we have
seen—is quite problematic.
The idea behind the second and third arguments was that in the course of
evaluating another person’s conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed, one gains
second-order reasons in light of which maintaining one’s own belief is epistemically
irrational. The second argument built on the EEE principle formulated by Richard
Feldman: The reasoning here was that evidence that there is evidence for a belief is
itself evidence for that belief, and that accordingly one can only justiﬁably evaluate a
belief as justiﬁed if one has evidence for that belief. The problem with this argument,
however, is ﬁrst that the EEE principle is a highly controversial principle that has to
contend with prima facie perfectly plausible counterexamples. Moreover, I have
tried to show that, even against the background of the EEE principle, there are cases
in which, given evidence in favor of the truth of a conﬂicting belief and in favor of
evaluating that belief as equally justiﬁed, one has good reason to evaluate that belief
as equally justiﬁed but no good reason to converge on that belief.
The third argument represented an attempt to argue for the epistemic irrationality
of a tolerant stance on the basis of the truth-conduciveness of epistemic justiﬁcation.
The reasoning in this context was that evaluating another person’s conﬂicting belief
as equally justiﬁed speaks for the truth of that belief and, accordingly, in itself
rationally requires modiﬁcation of one’s own belief. Closer examination, however,
has shown that this argument depends on an implausible interpretation of the truth-
conduciveness of epistemic justiﬁcation.
All three arguments have thus failed in the sense that they cannot show that a
tolerant attitude in the face of disagreement must necessarily be epistemically
irrational. At the same time, however, the discussion of these arguments has
shown that tolerance from the perspective of epistemic rationality is a thoroughly
problematic stance. To respond tolerantly in the face of a disagreement is to evaluate
the other’s belief as equally justiﬁed, and yet to stand by one’s opinion. As we have
seen, such a stance can be epistemically irrational insofar as the evaluation of the
other’s belief as equally justiﬁed or, alternatively, the reasons underlying that
evaluation speak in favor of the truth of the other’s belief in the relevant respect.
Here, it is also irrelevant whether the reasons one attributes to the conﬂicting
belief are directly accessible to one or not. If one knows the reasons on the basis of
which the belief in question was formed and holds it to be good in the relevant
objective sense, then one gains ﬁrst-order reasons in view of which a modiﬁcation of
belief is rationally required. If one has only indirect access to the reasons on the basis
of which the belief in question was formed and holds it to be good in the relevant
4.2
Is a Tolerant Attitude Epistemically Rational?
85

sense, then one gains second-order reasons in view of which belief modiﬁcation is
rationally required. Tolerance in response to a disagreement is thus rational only if
the positive normative evaluation characteristic of a tolerant attitude, as well as
the reasons underlying that evaluation, do not support the truth of that belief. Now,
the discussion above has shown that there may well be cases in which either the
evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed or the reasons underlying that
evaluation do speak for the truth of that belief. If the EEE principle or an objectivist
interpretation of the truth-conduciveness of epistemic justiﬁcation were to turn out to
be plausible, these would be all cases in which one does not have additional,
independent reasons to believe that the reasons underlying the conﬂicting belief
are misleading. In this case, a tolerant attitude would presumably be irrational more
often than rational. From the perspective of epistemic rationality, then, an intellectu-
ally tolerant stance is deﬁnitely problematic. What about from the perspective of
instrumental rationality?
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational?
As the above considerations have shown, a tolerant attitude is not necessarily
epistemically irrational. Insofar as, in the face of a disagreement, evaluating the
other’s belief as equally justiﬁed does not speak for the truth of that belief, the
retention of one’s own belief that is characteristic of a tolerant attitude may be
entirely unproblematic.46 Does this mean that tolerance is the epistemically adequate
response in such circumstances? As we saw at the beginning of the chapter, this is
not necessarily so. For in order to decide whether a speciﬁc response to a disagree-
ment is epistemically adequate, and under what circumstances, we need to take into
account not only considerations concerning epistemic rationality, but also
considerations concerning the instrumental rationality of that response relative to
our epistemic goals. Thus, in order to decide whether tolerance is a recommendable
stance from an epistemological perspective under the circumstances in which it is
epistemically rational, we must ﬁrst examine whether a tolerant stance under these
circumstances is also instrumentally rational with respect to our epistemic goals.47
46When it is said in the following that maintaining one’s own belief in the face of the evaluation of a
conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed is rational only if this evaluation does not speak for the truth of
the conﬂicting belief, then this is to be understood against the background of the discussion of the
previous section. Accordingly, that the evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed does not
speak for the truth of that belief is to say that it only speaks for the truth of that belief from the
perspective of another person, or, indeed, in general, but not in the present situation because of
speciﬁc circumstances.
47In this section, “rational” and “rationality” always mean “instrumentally rational relative to our
epistemic goals” and “instrumental rationality with respect to our epistemic goals”. In the places
where epistemic rationality is discussed, the following also always explicitly refers to “epistemic
rationality” or “epistemically rational”.
86
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

What are our epistemic goals? Although there is disagreement about the precise
answer to this question, virtually all epistemologists agree that the pursuit of truth
and the avoidance of falsehood are, if not the only, at least two of the most
fundamental epistemic goals.48 Some authors even go so far as to deﬁne the realm
of the epistemic against the background of these two goals. For example, William
Alston writes:
[There is] a speciﬁcally epistemic dimension of evaluation. Beliefs can be evaluated in
different ways. One may be more or less prudent, fortunate, or faithful in holding a certain
belief. [. . .] [But] epistemic evaluation is undertaken from what we might call “the epistemic
point of view.” That point of view is deﬁned by the aim at maximizing truth and minimizing
falsity in a large body of beliefs.49
Assuming that the pursuit of truth and the avoidance of falsehood are our central
epistemic goals, can a tolerant attitude help us achieve these goals? With respect to
these goals, is it rational to tolerate beliefs that are thought to be false, insofar as they
are justiﬁed?
To argue for the instrumental rationality of a tolerant attitude, two things would
have to be accomplished: First, it would have to be shown that it is rational in
principle to modify the beliefs of other persons that one holds to be false. Second, it
would have to be shown that, by contrast, it is rational to tolerate other persons’
beliefs that one holds to be false, provided that these beliefs are equally justiﬁed. In
what follows, I will discuss both assumptions in turn.
4.3.1
The Modification of False Beliefs
At ﬁrst glance, it may seem strange to assume that a tolerant attitude is instrumentally
rational only if it is fundamentally rational to modify the false beliefs of others. After
all, it is characteristic of a tolerant attitude precisely to refrain from modifying a false
but equally justiﬁed belief—but why should it be rational not to modify a false and
justiﬁed belief only if it is fundamentally rational to modify a false belief? At ﬁrst,
surely one might think that a successful argument against the basic rationality of
modifying others’ false beliefs would be just about the most obvious way to argue
for the rationality of a tolerant stance: If it is never rational, with respect to our
epistemic goals, to modify the false beliefs of others, then accordingly it cannot be
irrational to refrain from modifying the false but justiﬁed belief of another person.
In fact, however, it would speak directly against a tolerant attitude if it should turn
out that it is never rational to modify the false beliefs of others. To understand this
point, one need only recall the considerations of the internal structure of epistemic
48See, for example, Leplin 2009, ch. 2; Vahid 2009, ch. 1. David 2001 cites Laurence BonJour,
Roderick Chisholm, Rene Descartes, Richard Foley, Alvin Goldman, Keith Lehrer, Paul Moser,
Alvin Plantinga, and Ernest Sosa as other examples.
49Alston 1985, 59.
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational?
87

tolerance from Chap. 2: To respond tolerantly to another person’s conﬂicting belief
is, after all, not merely to refrain from modifying that belief, but rather to refrain from
modifying that belief even though one believes it to be false, because one accepts it
as equally justiﬁed. The idea of toleration, then, seems precisely to presuppose that
under normal circumstances one ought actually to modify what is tolerated, and that
it is only because of the speciﬁc positive evaluation that is opposed to the negative
evaluation that toleration is rational. Thus, to tolerate a belief is not merely to
condone a conﬂicting belief and evaluate it as equally justiﬁed, but rather to condone
a false belief because one evaluates it as equally justiﬁed—and accordingly, to
modify that belief if it were not equally justiﬁed.
Suppose, for instance, that it is not rational in principle to modify the beliefs of
others. This could be for a number of reasons: On the one hand, it could be
fundamentally irrational to modify the beliefs of others. In this case, a tolerant
attitude would also be irrational, since tolerant persons would only refrain from
modifying another person’s belief if this belief had a positive epistemic evaluation—
in many cases, tolerant persons would thus modify the beliefs of others and behave
irrationally accordingly. On the other hand, it might also be arational to modify the
beliefs of others. From an epistemic perspective, then, there would be nothing for or
against modifying others’ beliefs—modiﬁcations of others’ beliefs would be episte-
mically insigniﬁcant. In this case, strictly speaking, it would make no sense at all to
claim that a tolerant attitude is instrumentally rational. Yet this is precisely what an
advocate of epistemic tolerance must do, since he explicitly recommends the tolera-
tion of conﬂicting but equally justiﬁed beliefs as epistemically adequate.
The connection between the rationality of a tolerant attitude and the fundamental
rationality of intervention can also be illustrated by the example of ethical tolerance:
Suppose, for instance, that it is rational to tolerate the actions of a clumsy villain who
has the most diabolical intentions but who, because of his clumsiness, always
accidentally does good. Again, we would say that a tolerant stance—if it is appro-
priate—is appropriate precisely because, while it is proper under normal
circumstances to stop people with evil intentions from doing what they do, it is
more reasonable to condone their actions given the speciﬁc circumstance that the
clumsy villain’s actions have unintended good consequences. That an intervention
would be rational from an ethical point of view if the actions in question did not have
the good consequences they actually do is thus here precisely a precondition for the
rationality of ethically motivated tolerance—if it were never rational to stop other
people’s actions because of their malevolence, then it would also not be rational to
refrain from stopping a malevolent action insofar as it has good consequences.
Similarly, from an epistemic point of view, it would also not be rational to refrain
from modifying a false belief insofar as it is equally justiﬁed if it were not rational in
principle to modify another person’s false belief. An argument for the instrumental
rationality of a tolerant attitude is accordingly an argument for the thesis that, while it
is rational in principle to modify the false beliefs of others, it is rational to refrain
from such modiﬁcation in the case of false beliefs that are equally justiﬁed.
Is it generally rational to modify the false beliefs of others? In some ways, it may
seem downright obvious that this question must be answered in the afﬁrmative. The
88
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

idea here is roughly the following: Insofar as our primary epistemic goals are the
pursuit of truth and the avoidance of falsehood, it is rational with respect to these
goals to eliminate false beliefs. And since other persons are possible carriers of false
beliefs just as we are, we should look for and try to eliminate false beliefs not only in
our own belief systems but also in those of others. Admittedly, in some situations it
may be difﬁcult or even impossible to modify the beliefs of others—in principle,
however, this is not a peculiarity of other people’s beliefs, since the modiﬁcation of
one’s own false beliefs often proves to be equally difﬁcult and sometimes even
impossible.
Take, for example, the case of a person who has a fear of ﬂying: Even if this
person knows that her belief that she has a high probability of dying on an airplane
trip is irrational, it may still be extremely difﬁcult or even impossible for this person
to simply give up her belief. But that does not change the fact that, from an
epistemological perspective, she should try to abandon her belief if she knows that
it is a false belief: Just because modifying false beliefs can prove difﬁcult does not
mean that such modiﬁcation is not rational.50
In fact, however, many epistemologists are likely to be skeptical of such an
argument. For, as the epistemic dual goal of achieving truth and avoiding falsehood
is usually understood, it is an individualistic goal: that we should achieve truth and
avoid falsehood simply means that we, as individuals, should try to form true beliefs
and avoid false beliefs.51 The difference between an individualistic and a social
interpretation of our epistemic goals can be illustrated by an example: let us imagine,
for instance, that Amrei and Steffen are sitting next to each other on a park bench.
Both have each formed a false belief shortly before: While Amrei believes, based on
a conversation with her mother, that her father has bought a Mercedes, Steffen
50On the phenomenon of so-called recalcitrant beliefs, see for instance Moran 2003. In his short but
very inﬂuential text “A Letter Concerning Toleration”, John Locke expresses the concern that it is
fundamentally impossible to impose speciﬁc beliefs on another person. He writes: “Speculative
opinions [...] which require only belief, cannot be imposed [...]. For it is absurd that things should
be enjoined by laws which are not in men’s power to perform; and to believe this or that to be true
does not depend upon our will.” (Locke 2013, 75). Linda Zagzebski discusses this consideration in
her book “Epistemic Authority”, where she quite correctly points out that even quite mundane
statements can constitute successful attempts to speciﬁcally modify the beliefs of others. There is
nothing strange or extraordinary about a situation in which a person I believe to be trustworthy and
competent tells me something like “p is true. Believe me.” and I believe p on the basis of this
statement (Zagzebski 2012, 5). In this situation, not only does the person want me to believe p, but I
know that he or she does. However, if I consider the person reliable with respect to the question of p,
or if she presents me with good reasons for p, it is completely unproblematic for me to believe
p according to her demand.
51A notable exception in this regard is Stephen Grimm, who in his essay “Epistemic Normativity”
explicitly argues for a social understanding of epistemic normativity, calling the epistemic value of
truth a commons (Grimm 2009). Grimm’s argument remains individualistic, however, in that he
merely invokes a social interpretation of epistemic normativity to explain why we as individuals
should avoid falsehood and strive for truth with respect to our individual belief systems. An
epistemically motivated modiﬁcation of the beliefs of others does not initially play a role for
Grimm.
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational?
89

believes, based on a newspaper article, that Manchester United has won its last home
game. But in fact they are both mistaken: Amrei’s mother mistakenly believes that
her husband’s new BMW is a Mercedes, and the newspaper editor has made a
mistake in the ﬁgures—Manchester United actually lost its last home game. Now,
from an epistemic perspective, it seems better if Amrei and Steffen each had a true
belief: Steffen should believe that Manchester United lost its last home game, and
Amrei should believe that her father bought a BMW.
And it is precisely in this sense that epistemic goals are usually interpreted: We
should, as individuals, try to form true beliefs and avoid false beliefs. It just seems
strange to say that Steffen should not only believe that Manchester United lost its last
home game, but also convince Amrei that her father bought a BMW. Yet this is
precisely what one would have to claim if one assumes that our epistemic goals are
social goals and that we should eliminate not only our own errors but also the errors
of other people. Thus, insofar as it is to be argued, on the basis of a stipulation of
social epistemic goals, that it is generally rational to modify the false beliefs of
others, extremely controversial assumptions must be accepted.
In what follows, I will argue that a social interpretation of our epistemic goals,
while controversial, is quite plausible. Indeed, it is somewhat surprising that the
individualist interpretation is taken as the unchallenged standard and accepted
unquestioningly by most epistemologists. Is it really so crazy to assume that our
epistemic goals are social goals? In a sense, it would be somewhat surprising, after
all, if our epistemic goals were to be interpreted individualistically. To realize how
unobvious the individualistic interpretation is, it is helpful to draw an analogy with
the domain of morality: That our ethical goals are genuinely social is pretty much
indisputable. Insofar as things like happiness, freedom, absence of suffering, or
justice are valuable from an ethical perspective and constitute moral goods, it is
clearly morally imperative not only to strive for these goods for oneself, but equally
for others. If, for example, as some consequentialists claim, the avoidance of
suffering is one of our central moral goals, then it would be absurd to interpret this
goal in individualistic terms and to avoid only one’s own suffering. For from an
ethical perspective, it simply makes no difference whether we ourselves or other
persons experience suffering. Insofar as suffering is something to be avoided, we
should try to avoid all suffering—and not just our own.
Quite analogously, one could now also argue in the ﬁeld of epistemology: Insofar
as truth is valuable from an epistemic perspective and constitutes an epistemic good,
we should seek to attain truth and avoid falsehood. But if other persons are as
capable as we are of forming true and false beliefs, and are thus potential bearers of
truth and falsity—why should we care only about our own belief system? In some
ways, a social interpretation of our epistemic goals seems, at least at ﬁrst glance, a
good deal more natural than an individualistic interpretation. If falsehood is an
epistemically bad thing, we should try to avoid it. The distinction between falsehood
in one’s own belief system and falsehood in other people’s belief systems that is
drawn in the context of individualist interpretations initially seems somewhat arbi-
trary and thus requires explanation: why should we assume that, from an epistemic
perspective, we should focus only on our own belief system when avoiding falsity?
90
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

Now, of course, one could retort that it is perhaps surprising from a theoretical
perspective, but downright obvious given our epistemic intuitions, that our intellec-
tual goals should be interpreted individualistically. In the case of Amrei and Steffen
above, it would be obviously counterintuitive to claim that Steffen should correct not
only his own belief, but also Amrei’s. If a social interpretation of our intellectual
goals were indeed clearly in conﬂict with central epistemic intuitions, this would
indeed speak for individualism. However, it is questionable whether our intuitions
actually point in the appropriate direction—so a slight modiﬁcation of the example is
enough to make the rationality of epistemic altruism no longer seem implausible
at all: Suppose, for instance, that Steffen knew that Amrei’s father had bought
himself a BMW, and would now learn that Amrei mistakenly believed that her
father had bought himself a Mercedes. In a sense, it seems that Steffen certainly has a
reason here to modify Amrei’s belief. And that reason does not seem to be in any
way practical—that Steffen should inform Amrei that her father has bought a BMW
is presumably not because it would be immoral in this case to leave Amrei ignorant.
That a social interpretation of our intellectual goals may very well correspond to
our epistemic intuitions can be made plausible by means of another thought experi-
ment. Consider, for example, a variant of the famous case of the Experience
Machine: in this scenario, originally presented by Robert Nozick, scientists have
developed a device that can induce all kinds of experiences in a person connected to
it, with the induced experiences being indistinguishable from real experiences. Now
suppose a scientist were to hook up a person to this device without that person’s
knowledge. This person, who remains connected to the device for the rest of his life,
would be induced exactly the same experiences that he would have actually had if he
had not been connected to the device.52
The behaviour of the scientist in this case seems clearly problematic: presumably
many people would agree that he should not have connected the person to the device.
However, it is initially not at all clear to what extent the scientist can be morally
reproached here: By hooking up to the device, no harm is done to the person—
indeed, we can stipulate that the scientist programmed the device to spare her some
particularly bad experiences that she would otherwise have had. Moreover, we can
stipulate that the scientist’s intervention also spares other people from suffering—for
example, because an actor has been hired to play the role of the connected person, so
that relatives and friends do not even notice her sudden disappearance. Nevertheless,
the intuition remains that the scientist’s behavior is worthy of criticism. Now, a
possible explanation would be that the scientist is misbehaving from an epistemic
perspective, and thus he can be epistemically reproached: By hooking the person up
to his device, he is depriving him of a set of true beliefs. In fact, most of the beliefs
the person forms after being hooked up to the device are likely to be false.
Accordingly, the scientist would not be responsible for a moral evil, but he would
be responsible for an epistemic evil.
52For the original thought experiment, see Nozick 1974, 42 ff.
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational?
91

This is, of course, only one possible explanation of the case. For example, a
preference utilitarian would hold that the scientist should not be charged epistemi-
cally, but morally, because his actions systematically frustrate many of the afﬁliated
person’s preferences—for actual experience or authentic interpersonal relationships,
for example. In the same way, some deontologists would also formulate a moral
reproach, pointing out that the afﬁliated person is deprived of the possibility of self-
determined action. So the considerations so far are in no way sufﬁcient to show that a
social interpretation of our epistemic goals is indeed adequate. What I think the
considerations so far do show, however, is that the burden of proof cannot easily be
placed on the proponent of a social interpretation of our epistemic goals. It does seem
to be the case that an individualist interpretation is the default position within
contemporary epistemology. At the same time, however, it is not at all clear why
an individualist interpretation should be the default position in the ﬁrst place. Rather,
the analogy with the ﬁeld of morality and a ﬁrst look at our pre-theoretical intuitions
seem to suggest that a social interpretation of our epistemic goals is quite natural.
Indeed, it would also be quite surprising if an individualist interpretation turned
out to be correct, because de facto we quite often behave as if our epistemic goals
were social in nature. It regularly happens, for instance, that individuals sacriﬁce
their own intellectual and practical well-being in order to contribute to the epistemic
common good. There are countless examples of individuals who risked their lives to
make scientiﬁc progress possible. But even apart from such radical individual
examples, epistemically altruistic structures are central to our intellectual practice:
the essential function of schools, universities, museums, and other educational
institutions is to transmit knowledge and thus true beliefs—and quite explicitly not
only when it serves the fulﬁllment of practical interests. Given this, a social inter-
pretation of our epistemic goals seems anything but crazy.
Now, one might object at this point that the above arguments, even if one ﬁnds
them plausible, do not in any way show that others’ beliefs are generally epistemi-
cally relevant and that, accordingly, modifying others’ false beliefs is also generally
rational. The arguments presented merely suggest that the beliefs of others are
epistemically relevant insofar as those individuals have corresponding intellectual
preferences. For example, it is rational to open a museum of East Asian art only if
there are sufﬁciently many individuals who have a preference to learn about East
Asian art. Similarly, it is also only rational to sacriﬁce one’s life for space explora-
tion if there is a scientiﬁc community in whose interest such exploration is. And it is
also only wrong to hook a person up to the Experience Machine if that person has a
preference not to be constantly deceived.
This consideration can be illustrated by the modiﬁed example of Steffen and
Amrei: In this case, it is only rational for Steffen to modify Amrei’s belief because
Amrei has a corresponding intellectual preference—she wants to know what kind of
car her father bought. If Amrei did not have a corresponding preference, it would
also not be rational for Steffen to modify Amrei’s belief system. For example,
Steffen seems to have no reason whatsoever to convince Amrei that he had cereal
for breakfast in the morning—and this despite the fact that he can assume that Amrei
does not know that he had cereal for breakfast. Thus, others’ beliefs are not generally
92
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

epistemically relevant, and accordingly, it is not generally rational to modify others’
belief systems. Rather, others’ beliefs are epistemically relevant only against the
background of corresponding intellectual preferences, and thus modiﬁcations of
others’ belief systems are also rational only against the background of corresponding
intellectual preferences.
The question, however, is what exactly this objection is intended to show. After
all, at ﬁrst glance one might think that an advocate of epistemic tolerance could
easily agree: After all, in the vast majority of cases in which tolerance claims seem
reasonable, the intellectual preferences in question are plausibly present. In the case
of political, religious, or philosophical disagreements, one can probably normally
assume that both sides have the intellectual preference to form true beliefs regarding
the issue in dispute. And in such cases, accordingly, it would be rational under
normal circumstances to modify the false beliefs of the respective opposing side. So
insofar as the objection is merely intended to establish that modifying other people’s
belief systems is only conducive to our epistemic goals against the background of
corresponding intellectual preferences, it is not at all clear why this should give rise
to a problem for the rationality of an epistemically tolerant stance.
It would be more problematic, on the other hand, if the objection was to show that
the modiﬁcation of foreign beliefs can never be rational from a purely epistemic
perspective, but only from a practical one. For if the modiﬁcation of other people’s
beliefs is rational only against the background of corresponding intellectual
preferences, so the reasoning goes, then it is also rational only from a purely practical
perspective, since the satisfaction of preferences is not an epistemic but an ethical
goal. Thus, the goal of modifying the false beliefs of others would also be a purely
ethical goal, not an epistemic one. The problem with this argument, however, is that
it can equally be applied to modiﬁcations of one’s own belief system. For
modiﬁcations of one’s belief system also seem to be rational from the perspective
of instrumental rationality with respect to our epistemic goals only against the
background of corresponding intellectual preferences. Let us take again the example
of Amrei and Steffen: It is true that from an epistemic perspective it would be better
if Steffen believed that Manchester United lost its last home game. At the same time,
however, from an epistemic perspective it seems to be completely unproblematic
that Steffen does not believe that the number of blades of grass on the meadow in
front of him is odd—and that even if this belief were true.
Modiﬁcations of one’s own belief system also seem to be rational only against the
background of corresponding intellectual preferences.53 Of course, given this, one
53Stephen Grimm has even argued that the assumption that the epistemic value of belief
modiﬁcations always depends on the presence of corresponding intellectual preferences speaks
directly for a social interpretation of epistemic normativity (Grimm 2009). Roughly summarized,
his argument is roughly as follows: It is plausible to assume that the attainment of truth and the
avoidance of falsehood are epistemically valuable not in general, but only against the background of
corresponding intellectual preferences. If this were not so, it would not be at all clear why, for
example, it seems valuable from a purely epistemic point of view to discover truths about the
extinction of dinosaurs, but at the same time it is not at all valuable from an epistemic point of view
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational?
93

could now argue quite analogously that modiﬁcations of one’s belief system are also
rational only on the basis of practical considerations, but never on the basis of purely
epistemic considerations. However, this result would be highly controversial: most
epistemologists assume that there are genuine epistemic goals that cannot be reduced
to practical goals, and that accordingly modiﬁcations of beliefs can be instrumentally
rational or instrumentally irrational from a purely epistemic perspective. The prob-
lem with the above objection, then, is the following: Either it is irrelevant to the
question of the instrumental rationality of a tolerant attitude, or it leads to the highly
controversial result that there are no genuine epistemic goals at all relative to which
belief modiﬁcations can be more or less rational. Thus, in no case is it sufﬁcient to
show that a social interpretation of our epistemic goals in the sense suggested by the
above argument would be inappropriate for arguing for the fundamental rationality
of modifying other people’s beliefs that is relevant in the context of epistemic
tolerance.54
Nevertheless, a social interpretation of our epistemic goals as the basis of an
argument for the rationality of a tolerant attitude remains problematic—if only
because many epistemologists think it is wrong. Therefore, in what follows, I will
argue that even against the background of an individualistic interpretation of our
epistemic goals, the modiﬁcation of other people’s false beliefs is in many cases
rational from a purely epistemic perspective, and an argument for the instrumental
rationality of epistemic tolerance thus does not rely on a social interpretation of our
epistemic goals at all. Suppose, for instance, that an individualist interpretation is
to discover truths about the number of dust lint on my desk. But if this is so, then it is, on the face of
it, completely mysterious why beliefs about the number of dust lint on my desk can also be
evaluated from a purely epistemic perspective in the same way as all other beliefs. For example,
if I learn that I have an unjustiﬁed belief about the number of dust lint on my desk, then I should
drop that belief—and I should do so even though it is in no way epistemically valuable for me to
ﬁnd out the truth about the number of dust lint on my desk. Now this intuition is best explained by
the fact that other people’s intellectual preferences are also epistemically relevant to me. For
instance, it could be that other persons may very well have the intellectual preference to ﬁnd out
the truth about the number of dust lint on my desk. Accordingly, it would also be epistemically
valuable for these persons to form true beliefs about the number of dust lint on my desk, and for this
very reason my own beliefs about the number of dust lint are also amenable to ordinary epistemic
evaluation: for since other persons depend on my beliefs for their belief formation, the defective
justiﬁcatory status of my beliefs reduces the likelihood that other persons will form epistemically
valuable beliefs. On the other hand, Grimm’s reasoning actually leads him to conclude that
epistemic normativity can be reduced to ethical normativity, given its social character.
54Of course, this does not mean that practical and epistemic reasons are completely independent of
each other. In fact, it is very plausible that there are quite fundamental connections here. For
example, it should be indisputable that a good epistemic situation, in which one is familiar with
enough relevant information and has knowledge about one’s options for action, is often indispens-
able for achieving practical goals. At the same time, it is also conceivable that the particular
practical situation has an inﬂuence on the achievement of epistemic goals—think here of theories
such as subject-sensitive invariantism, according to which the justiﬁcatory status of beliefs depends
on the practical interests of the particular subject. This mutual conditionality of the practical and the
epistemic, however, does not in itself speak in any way for a reduction of the epistemic to the
practical.
94
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

correct and that our primary epistemic goal is, as individuals, to form as many true
beliefs and as few false beliefs as possible: Relative to this epistemic goal, why
would it be instrumentally rational to modify others’ false beliefs?
At this point, it may seem tempting at ﬁrst glance to invoke speciﬁc philosophical
theories that have already been used by other authors to legitimize collectivist or
social perspectives on classical epistemological problems. For example, in his book
“Relying on Others”, Sandy Goldberg argues for a social interpretation of
reliabilism, according to which cognitive processes of others are constitutive of the
justiﬁcatory status of one’s own beliefs under speciﬁc circumstances.55 Another
example would be Duncan Pritchard, who has argued in various publications for the
possibility of so-called extended knowledge.56 The idea here is that, against the
background of speciﬁc theoretical assumptions, it is plausible to assume that
artefacts are a constitutive part of our cognitive processes and that, accordingly, in
speciﬁc circumstances it depends on the nature and functioning of these artefacts
whether individual beliefs of ours constitute knowledge or are justiﬁed. In this
context, Pritchard explicitly emphasizes the role of other persons, who, after all,
make the use of corresponding artifacts possible in the ﬁrst place through their
cognitive work and thus have a direct inﬂuence on our own epistemic situation.57
Given such approaches, one could now argue directly for modifying the false
beliefs of others even against the background of an individualistic interpretation of
our epistemic goals: For if other individuals have such a direct inﬂuence on our own
epistemic situation, then it is clear that the epistemic quality of others’ beliefs are of
direct relevance to ourselves. In fact, however, one can quickly see that the presup-
position of such controversial theories is not at all necessary to argue for the direct
epistemic relevance of other people’s beliefs. For this, one need only considers the
contingent conditions of our epistemic endeavors: In all our cognitive efforts, we are
essentially dependent on other persons; our epistemic situation is genuinely social.
We live in a world of constant information ﬂow in which we must rely on other
epistemic subjects as sources of knowledge. Or as Sanford Goldberg puts it in his
book “Relying on Others”:
[. . .] [We] rely heavily on others for most of what we take ourselves to know about the
world. Ours is the age of the twenty-four-hour news cycle, and of information that is
disseminated with the click of a button, through social networks or across the world, by
way of the Internet. We have seen a proliferation of sources that disseminate information in
this way, and we have come to enjoy an increasing number of new technologies which make
access to these sources a constant part of our daily lives. Nor should we forget the more
traditional avenues through which others serve our informational needs: in our daily
conversations, through the more traditional media (print, radio, TV), and in educational
settings (where we learn from teachers and books). Insofar as we acquire our knowledge
through any of these routes, we are relying on others [. . .].58
55Goldberg 2010.
56See, for example, Pritchard 2010, Palermos and Pritchard 2013.
57Palermos and Pritchard 2013.
58Goldberg 2010, vi.
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational?
95

Given that we depend on the epistemic performance of others in our epistemic
endeavors at such a fundamental level, it is easy to see the extent to which whether
other persons hold true or false beliefs is also relevant to our own epistemic success.
Given the social nature of our intellectual situation, we can improve our own chances
of epistemic success by manipulating our social environment accordingly. Speciﬁ-
cally, we should try to surround ourselves with reliable sources of information in
order to create the conditions for successful epistemic exchange.
This point has also been seen and discussed, at least to some extent, in the
research literature. For example, in his essay “The Evolutionary and Social Prefer-
ence for Knowledge,” in which he argues for a reliabilist solution to the Menon
problem, Markus Werning compares the social dynamics of our epistemic reality
with evolutionary biological processes of mutation and selection. He writes:
It is useful to compare the social scenario to the evolutionary scenario. In the latter the factor
responsible for the spread of a trait in a species is an increase in ﬁtness. In the social case, the
factor responsible for the spread of a practice in society is an increase in value. [. . .] Since the
success of our own truth-seeking activities strongly depends on testimonial beliefs of others
being reliably produced, we have developed a culture of positive and negative sanctions
regarding the production history of beliefs. The extra value of knowledge is manifest in a
practice of providing positive and negative reinforcement which favors reliably produced
beliefs over others. Valuing instances of knowledge more than instances of merely true
belief is itself a means to make our own beliefs more likely to be true [. . .].59
The idea expressed in this passage is that by manipulating our epistemic environ-
ment we can increase the probability of forming more true than false beliefs in the
future. The speciﬁc manipulation that Werning has in mind in the context of his
concern with the Menon problem consists in assigning knowledge a greater value
than merely true belief: Since—against the background of a reliabilist conception of
knowledge—knowing subjects, in contrast to subjects who merely have true beliefs,
have formed their beliefs on the basis of reliable belief-forming processes, knowing
subjects are also more likely to function as reliable sources of information in the
future. Accordingly, by assigning a greater value to knowledge, we can enable a
selection process whose outcome is a more reliable epistemic environment.
Such reasoning can now be directly applied to the problem relevant to us: If it
makes sense from an epistemic perspective to build up an environment of reliable
sources of information in order to increase the probability of forming more true than
false beliefs in the future, then it follows directly from this that we should also, from
a purely epistemic perspective, generally try to modify foreign beliefs that we
consider to be false. For a person who holds a false belief will, ﬁrst, form new
beliefs on the basis of that false belief, which are then highly likely to be false as
well, and, second, pass that belief on to other persons, who will then in turn form
further beliefs on the basis of that belief, which are highly likely to be false.
59Werning 2009, 154 f.
96
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

Moreover, it is hardly possible for outsiders to trace such inferential and communi-
cative processes, at the beginning of which a single false belief stands.
Consider the following very simple case: Linus and Sibylle want to visit their
former ﬂatmate Marvin, who now lives in Hanover. Marvin explains to them that the
easiest way to get to Hanover is to take the train from Cologne and change trains in
Hamm. Sibylle ﬁnds out about possible connections, ﬁnds out that the cheapest train
from Hamm leaves at 4 O’Clock, and tells Linus that they have to be at Cologne
central station at 2 O’Clock. A few days before the planned trip, a short conversation
between Linus and Sibylle reveals that Linus himself has looked up the connection
and assumes that the connecting train in Hamm leaves at 3:50. However, Sibylle is
not put off by this, as she knows that Linus does not have a smartphone and relies on
his old folding timetables, which are often no longer up to date, when researching
train connections. At the same time, she does not think it is necessary to point out
Linus’ mistake—after all, she knows what time the train actually leaves Hamm, and
that should be enough to get to Hanover without any problems. However, Linus is
now very worried—unnoticed by Sibylle—that the changeover time in Hamm will
not be enough. He contacts Marvin, who then assures him that he will ﬁnd out about
alternative connections. Marvin, who assumes from his conversation with Linus that
the transfer time in Hamm is too short, looks for a connection via Bielefeld. Since he
cannot reach Linus, he contacts Sibylle and tells her that it would be easiest to go via
Bielefeld. Sibylle, who assumes that Marvin is better informed about the relevant
train connections, believes him and now also assumes that it is easiest to travel via
Bielefeld.
What happens in this case? Linus forms another false belief based on a false belief
that was not corrected by Sibylle, which he passes on to Marvin. Marvin also uses
this false belief as a basis for further belief formation. He in turn passes the resulting
false belief on to Sibylle, who now also has a false belief. For Sibylle’s own
epistemic situation, then, it would have been better if she had directly corrected
Linus’s false belief. Now, of course, one might legitimately point out that this is a
rather artiﬁcial case that is not particularly realistic. The problem described is the
result of a very unlikely misunderstanding: if the parties involved had communicated
a little better with each other, it would never have come to this—for instance, all
Sibylle would have had to do was ask Marvin why he thought that another connec-
tion was the better one after all, and the whole confusion would have been resolved.
But even if this diagnosis is correct, it does not change the fact that the phenome-
non illustrated by the above, admittedly constructed and very simpliﬁed example, is
fundamentally a realistic and serious problem. This is because many realistic
situations are incomparably more complex, which can be attributed to various
factors: Firstly, more than three people are involved in realistic situations—espe-
cially in the age of the Internet, we have reached a degree of communicative
networking that enables us to be in a constant exchange of information with
countless other people. In addition, especially on the Internet, the people from
whom we receive information often remain anonymous, so that we cannot always
trace where the information we receive actually comes from. Phenomena such as
conspiracy theories, rumours and fake news are striking examples of harmful
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational?
97

epistemic dynamics whose emergence and spread can be facilitated by unclear
chains of communication characterised by anonymity. Moreover, the issues we
normally deal with are often also much more complex than in the example
above—more often than not, simply looking at the roadmap is not enough to reach
an indisputable conclusion, but the considerations to be taken into account are
complex and difﬁcult to weigh against each other. This is especially true—and this
should be of some importance in the context of the argumentation pursued here—for
such topics and problems where demands for tolerance are particularly common,
such as religion, politics or morality.
So that the evaluation of another person’s belief as false does not give one reason
to modify this belief, it must be ensured that this false belief will not have any
negative epistemic effects on one’s own belief system. Given the dense epistemic
network of our globalized society, however, there would have to be reasonably
artiﬁcial conditions for this to happen—it simply does not happen very often that
individuals or communities are so isolated that negative epistemic feedback effects
are sufﬁciently unlikely to rationalize no modiﬁcation of their false beliefs. In
general, then, even from a purely selﬁsh point of view, it is rational to modify the
false beliefs of others: Even if a single belief that one legitimately believes to be false
need not in itself have immediately bad consequences for one’s own belief system, it
quickly has epistemically infectious effects that are beyond one’s control and
difﬁcult to track. In some circumstances, these effects can lead to a signiﬁcant
deterioration in the epistemic quality of the social environment, which would then
have immediate consequences for one’s own belief system. Thus, to the extent that
we need to rely on other people as sources of information in the future, we should
ensure that these people already have as few false beliefs as possible.
So far, then, things look pretty good for the instrumental rationality of epistemic
tolerance: in general, from an epistemic perspective, we have good reasons to
modify the false beliefs of others. This also does not require a controversial social
interpretation of our epistemic goals—although such an interpretation might be more
plausible than one might initially think. Thus, to establish the instrumental rational-
ity of a tolerant stance, all that would now need to be shown is that, despite the basic
rationality of modifying conﬂicting beliefs, in cases where another person’s belief
that is thought to be wrong is equally justiﬁed, it is more rational from an epistemic
point of view to refrain from modifying it. If this were to succeed, a tolerant response
to a disagreement would be prima facie epistemically adequate in all cases in which
the evaluation of the other person’s belief as equally justiﬁed does not require
modiﬁcation of one’s own belief: To be sure, there might then still be special
circumstances that speak against maintaining one’s own belief or in favor of
modifying the other’s belief, and in light of which a tolerant stance would be
irrational—but at a basic level there would be nothing wrong with a tolerant stance,
and the adequacy of epistemic tolerance would then have to be discussed on a case-
by-case basis. In the following section, then, I want to explore whether, in cases
where a conﬂicting belief is equally justiﬁed, toleration of that belief is reasonable.
98
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

4.3.2
The Toleration of Equally Justified Beliefs
If it is rational in principle to modify the false beliefs of others—why should it be
better, in cases where one holds another person’s belief to be false on good grounds,
to refrain from modifying that belief insofar as one also has good grounds for
believing that it is equally justiﬁed? What epistemic advantages should there be in
tolerating foreign beliefs that one holds to be false but equally justiﬁed?
In order to plausibilize the assumption that it is rational from an epistemological
perspective to refrain from modifying conﬂicting but equally justiﬁed beliefs,
reference is often made to the fundamental fallibility of human efforts at cognition.
The basic idea in this context is roughly the following: Even if it is generally rational
to modify the false beliefs of others, given our cognitive limitations it would be
intellectually irresponsible to simply rely unreservedly on one’s own mental
faculties—attempting to make the beliefs of others conform to one’s own constitutes,
at least in certain circumstances, a form of epistemic hubris that could have fatal
consequences. For since beliefs thought to be false could easily turn out to be true in
retrospect, some caution is called for in modifying others’ beliefs—at the very least,
others’ beliefs thought to be false and equally justiﬁed should accordingly not be
modiﬁed.
The idea of arguing for a tolerant stance on the basis of insight into human
fallibility is, in fact, far from new:60 it is a common consideration in philosophical
debates about tolerance that tolerance is the best response to disagreement because of
the fundamentally deﬁcient epistemic situation in which we ﬁnd ourselves. For
example, Hans Jürgen Wendel writes in his essay “Toleranz und Wahrheit” (Toler-
ance and Truth):
Tolerance arises from the knowledge of our not knowing the truth. [...] What is required is
tolerance of the divergent opinions or actions of others, which one oneself rejects as false or
incorrect, precisely because they could also be true, or, conversely, one's own could turn out
to be false.61
This idea has a certain philosophical tradition; similar arguments can already be
found, for example, in the work of John Stuart Mill: In the second chapter of his On
Liberty, Mill develops a somewhat simple argument for tolerance, which is essen-
tially based on the insight into human fallibility. Thus Mill assumes that it can only
be justiﬁed to suppress another person’s conﬂicting opinion if one can rule out that
this opinion is true. However, because of the fundamental fallibility of human
beings, one can never rule out the possibility that conﬂicting opinions are true.
Therefore, the reasoning goes, one is never justiﬁed in suppressing another person’s
conﬂicting opinion. Mill writes:
60See, for example, Höffe 1979, 473; Mill 2015, ch. 2; Popper 1984; Sieger 1965, 12 f.; Voltaire
et al. 1954, 401, Wendel 2001.
61Wendel 2001, 182.
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational?
99

[. . .] the opinion which [. . .] is attempted to suppress by authority may possibly be true.
Those who desire to suppress it, of course deny its truth; but they are not infallible. They
have no authority to decide the question for all mankind, and exclude every other person
from the means of judging.62
Against the background of this consideration, it also becomes clear why tolerance
claims are particularly common in contexts in which, ﬁrst, the probability of episte-
mic errors is particularly high and, second, there are various conﬂicting positions that
are not obviously wrong. Such contexts would be, for example, religious, ethical,
political, or scientiﬁc discourses. The basic idea behind tolerance claims in these
contexts seems to be something like the following: If different people come to
different views here, then it would be unreasonable to take one’s own position
lightly as the only correct one and try to convince others of the falsity of their
position. For since under difﬁcult epistemic conditions any position could easily turn
out to be wrong, it would be wiser to tolerate conﬂicting beliefs and thus cultivate a
fruitful plurality of different views—careless dogmatism would be fatal here.
What is to be made of this argument? At ﬁrst sight, it seems quite plausible: given
our fundamental fallibility, it would be intellectually irresponsible, especially against
the background of difﬁcult epistemic conditions, to modify others’ divergent beliefs
lightly, since our evaluation of these beliefs as false could easily turn out to be
wrong. On the other hand, however, it is questionable to what extent this observation
can form the basis of an argument for the rationality of a tolerant attitude. After all, a
tolerant attitude does not simply consist in a certain intellectual caution in dealing
with conﬂicting beliefs. Rather, a tolerant attitude is based on a speciﬁc distinction
between unjustiﬁed and justiﬁed beliefs. The idea is that the modiﬁcation of
conﬂicting, unjustiﬁed beliefs is rational, while the modiﬁcation of conﬂicting,
justiﬁed beliefs is irrational. Moreover, in the course of discussing the epistemic
rationality of intellectual tolerance, we have seen that a tolerant attitude can be
epistemically rational only if the evaluation of the deviant belief as equally justiﬁed
does not speak for the truth of that belief.
An epistemically tolerant stance, then, requires us not to modify the conﬂicting
beliefs of others only if they exhibit a speciﬁc property that, however, does not speak
for the truth of that belief. To what extent, then, should such an attitude enable us to
deal more responsibly with conﬂicting beliefs? Ultimately, the distinction between
justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed beliefs that underlies a tolerant stance seems somewhat
arbitrary: in the context of whether we should modify another person’s conﬂicting
belief, why should it be epistemically signiﬁcant whether that belief has a speciﬁc
property that does not speak to the truth of that belief at all?
In fact, however, there are some examples that seem to suggest that the distinction
between justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed beliefs characteristic of a tolerant attitude is rele-
vant to the question of whether or not we should modify the conﬂicting beliefs of
others. Consider, for example, the following example: Tim, Lisa, and Amy go out to
dinner together. During the meal, Tim tells Amy that he went to the zoo yesterday.
62Mill 2015, 19.
100
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

Based on Tim’s statement, Amy now forms the belief that Tim was at the zoo
yesterday. Lisa knows, however, that Tim is chronically unreliable when it comes to
his leisure activities. While he does tell the truth from time to time, it is more
common for him to just make up stories. Accordingly, Lisa assumes that Tim was
not at the zoo yesterday. When she comes home, a brief conversation reveals that
Lisa’s nephew Tom unjustiﬁably assumes—based on coffee grounds, for example—
that Tim was at the theatre yesterday.
In this case, it now appears, ﬁrst, that Amy, unlike Tom, has a justiﬁable belief:
For whereas Amy, who knows nothing of Tim’s subject-speciﬁc unreliability, has
formed her belief on the basis of Tim’s narrative, Tom merely assumes on the basis
of an interpretation of a coffee record that Tim was in the theater yesterday.
Moreover, it seems that modifying Tom’s belief is far less problematic than
modifying Amy’s belief. It is true that, from Lisa’s perspective, both Tom’s and
Amy’s beliefs are highly likely to be false—but, on the other hand, there is a crucial
difference: for while Amy’s belief could easily turn out to be highly likely to be true,
the same is not true of Tom’s belief. Now this difference seems to be attributable to
the fact that Amy and Tom have different reasons for their respective beliefs. Thus,
Amy formed her belief based on Tim’s testimony. Lisa does know that Tim lies in
most cases, and that a statement by Tim is accordingly not a good basis for forming a
belief in most cases. On the other hand, it is not as if Tim is completely unreliable
either: Periodically, his narratives turn out to be surprisingly truthful. The analogous
is not true of Tom’s reasons: Tom’s belief is based on bad reasons, since he only
believes that Tim was at the theater yesterday on the basis of an interpretation of a
coffee grounds. Moreover, Tom’s reasons cannot easily turn out to be good reasons
either: It’s not as if Tom has the ability to reliably ﬁgure out people’s leisure
activities on a regular basis by reading coffee grounds.
From Lisa’s perspective, then, both Amy’s and Tom’s beliefs are highly likely to
be false; however, with respect to Amy’s belief, Lisa has reason to believe that it
could easily turn out to be highly likely to be true. And because of this—the
reasoning goes—it would be problematic from an epistemological perspective if
Lisa simply modiﬁed Amy’s belief. The problem, however, is that the difference
between Amy’s belief and Tom’s belief that is relevant here is not due to Amy’s
belief being justiﬁed as opposed to Tom’s belief. Suppose, for example, that Tom
had concluded, by reading coffee records, that Tim was at the zoo yesterday. In this
case, Tom’s belief would still be unjustiﬁed, however, from Lisa’s perspective, it
could now easily turn out to be very likely true about Tom’s belief as well—for
instance, if it turns out that Tim was not lying at all when he told about his visit to
the zoo.
Thus, even if it is true that one should modify others’ conﬂicting beliefs only if
one has no reason to believe that those beliefs could easily turn out to be true with a
high probability, it would not follow from this that the distinction between justiﬁed
and unjustiﬁed beliefs underlying a tolerant attitude is relevant with respect to the
question of which conﬂicting beliefs we should modify. For whether a belief could
easily turn out to be true with a high probability does not depend on whether it is
justiﬁed or not. Thus, on the one hand, there are cases in which an unjustiﬁed belief
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational?
101

could easily turn out to be true with high probability—such as Tom’s belief in the
modiﬁed version of the example in which he assumes that Tim was at the zoo
yesterday. On the other hand, there are also cases in which a justiﬁed belief might not
easily turn out to be true with high probability: Suppose, for instance, that Tim is
completely unreliable when it comes to his leisure activities, and it would be
downright impossible for him to tell the truth in this regard. In this case, Amy’s
belief would still be justiﬁed, but might not easily turn out to be true with high
probability.
So the idea behind calls for epistemic tolerance, that given our basic fallibility
against the background of difﬁcult epistemic conditions we should refrain from
modifying conﬂicting beliefs insofar as these beliefs are equally justiﬁed, is some-
what problematic. The central problem is that it is not at all clear why, of all things,
the modiﬁcation of justiﬁed beliefs should be refrained from, since a tolerant attitude
is in any case only rational in such cases in which the evaluation of the conﬂicting
belief as equally justiﬁed does not speak for the truth of this belief. Now, however,
the above considerations have suggested a criterion, independent of justiﬁcatory
status, that might be used to decide which others’ conﬂicting beliefs we should
modify and which we should not. Speciﬁcally, the idea is that we should tolerate
precisely those conﬂicting beliefs of others that we assume—although probably false
from our perspective—could easily turn out to be probably true.
Could one not take this proposal as the starting point of an argument for the
epistemic adequacy of a tolerant stance? Of course, the attitude defended in this
framework would be somewhat different from the one at issue so far. The positive
epistemic evaluation characteristic of tolerance, rationalizing a condoning attitude,
would now no longer be an evaluation of the conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed,
but an evaluation of that belief as a belief that could easily turn out to be probably
true. Nevertheless, this would be a genuine form of epistemic tolerance, which,
moreover, bears a strong resemblance to the attitude discussed so far.
That epistemic tolerance might be epistemically adequate in the sense thus
understood seems plausible at ﬁrst glance. The case of Amy, Tim, and Lisa may
serve as a ﬁrst example of this, but there are far clearer cases. For example, suppose
Nick and Lara are two detectives trying to solve a murder case. After a thorough
evaluation of the evidence available to him, Nick has come to the conclusion that
Karl is the murderer: prints of his shoes were found in the victim’s apartment, tire
tracks of his car were found in front of his house, and he was demonstrably not at
home at the time of the crime. Lara, however, does not believe that Karl is the killer.
Because unlike Nick, she has spoken to the wife of Karl’s best friend Paul. She has
assured her that Paul is the murderer, and that he also tried to lead the trail to Karl by
borrowing his shoes and car and luring Karl out of his apartment on a pretext at the
time of the crime. Lara believes Paul’s wife, and accordingly assumes that Paul is the
murderer. At the same time, however, she is aware that, especially in murder cases,
witness statements must be treated with a certain degree of caution, and witnesses
who appear to be credible regularly turn out to be liars.
First, it seems perfectly unproblematic in this case that Nick and Lara have
conﬂicting beliefs. For example, Nick knows nothing of Lara’s conversation with
102
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

Paul’s wife, and the evidence available to him strongly suggests that Karl is the
murderer. At the same time, Lara is justiﬁed in her belief that Paul is the murderer.
To be sure, what Lara should believe already depends here on the details of the
example—in particular, on what it means exactly that witness statements regularly
turn out to be false. For example, if Lara were to assume that about half of all witness
statements are false, she should probably suspend judgement on who the murderer
is. However, to the extent that she assumes that most testimony is correct, even
though some regularly turns out to be false, she might well be justiﬁed in being
convinced that Paul is the murderer.
Moreover, in this case, it might be adequate for Lara to tolerate Nick’s belief. For,
on the one hand, it seems epistemically rational for Lara to stand by her conviction
that Paul is the murderer in the face of Nick’s conﬂicting judgment—after all, the
information Lara obtained from the conversation with Paul’s wife clearly suggests
that the evidence on the basis of which Nick formed his judgment is misleading. On
the other hand, with respect to Lara’s epistemic goals, it might be rational to refrain
from modifying Nick’s belief. Lara’s central epistemic goal in this case is to ﬁnd out
who the murderer is. And in order to achieve this goal, it might be rational to let Nick
have his conviction ﬁrst. For even if Lara initially believes Paul’s wife to be credible,
she knows that her statements could easily turn out to be lies. Thus, there is a danger
of hastily modifying Nick’s belief and thereby leading him astray. Perhaps it would
be wisest in this case if Lara ﬁrst tried to gather further evidence for Karl’s
innocence, while Nick pursued his still-relevant trail and thus perhaps also came to
surprising new insights.
Of course, this is only one possible constellation: Under certain circumstances, it
could be a better solution if Lara simply tells Nick about her conversation with
Paul’s wife. In this case, Nick should then also assume that Paul is the murderer, and
yet both could still decide not to commit themselves too quickly and continue to
consider Karl as a possible perpetrator. However, there could just as easily be
speciﬁc circumstances in which a tolerant response would actually be the better
course of action. Suppose, for instance, that Lara knew that Nick would be so
crushed to learn that he had been following a presumably false trail all along that
he would be completely unproductive for some time. Or suppose Lara knew that
Nick hated Paul’s guts, so that at the slightest suspicion of Paul he would do
everything he could to put him behind bars. In such circumstances, it would probably
be rational for Lara not to tell Nick about the conversation with Paul’s wife, because
in this speciﬁc situation, in terms of the goal of convicting the real killer, it would be
most effective for Nick to simply continue to assume that Karl is the killer.
That it can thus be epistemically adequate, at least under speciﬁc conditions, to
respond tolerantly to a disagreement seems reasonably plausible. If one can justiﬁ-
ably assume that another person’s conﬂicting belief is probably false, but at the same
time have good reason to believe that this belief could easily turn out to be true with a
high probability, it may be both epistemically rational to stick to one’s own belief
and instrumentally rational to refrain from modifying the other person’s belief.
Typically, these conditions would be satisﬁed, say, in a situation in which, ﬁrst, a
conﬂicting belief is based on grounds in light of which, under normal circumstances,
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational?
103

that belief is highly likely to be true, but in which, second, that information
constitutes a defeater for my own belief but nevertheless does not rationally require
modiﬁcation of my own belief, because, at the same time, there is a defeater for that
defeater which suggests that, in the speciﬁc circumstances present, the grounds
underlying the conﬂicting belief are misleading, and in which, third, there is a
sufﬁciently high probability that the defeater-defeater could easily turn out to be
misleading.
4.3.3
Conclusion
This last part of Chap. 3 was concerned with the question of whether, or under what
circumstances, it is instrumentally rational relative to our epistemic goals to respond
tolerantly to disagreement. Although even the precise identiﬁcation of our epistemic
goals is in some sense controversial, I have restricted myself for the moment to the
comparatively uncontroversial dual goal of achieving truth and avoiding falsehood.
To show that a tolerant attitude toward disagreement is instrumentally rational
relative to this goal, two different assumptions need to be made plausible. The ﬁrst
assumption is that it is generally rational to modify other people’s false beliefs. The
second assumption is that it is irrational to modify other people’s beliefs that are
thought to be false, insofar as those beliefs are equally justiﬁed.
As we have seen, the ﬁrst assumption is reasonably unproblematic. Thus, on the
one hand, one could defend a social interpretation of our epistemic goals, according
to which we should strive for these goals not only as individuals with respect to our
individual belief systems, but in general. Such an interpretation is prima facie quite
plausible, so an advocate of epistemic tolerance might simply shift the burden of
proof here. In fact, however, not too much depends on the plausibility of a social
interpretation of our epistemic goals, since even against the background of an
individualistic interpretation, convincing arguments can be found for the assumption
that it is rational in principle to modify other people’s false beliefs. The underlying
idea here is that as individuals we are fundamentally dependent on other people’s
beliefs in our epistemic endeavors, and that accordingly we should try to bring our
epistemic environment into as good a state as possible.
In contrast, the second assumption has proven to be much more problematic: The
reasoning that, given our fundamental fallibility, we must be especially careful about
modifying other people’s beliefs that we believe to be false is, to be sure, at ﬁrst quite
plausible. On the other hand, it is not at all clear why the distinction between justiﬁed
and unjustiﬁed beliefs should be relevant to deciding which beliefs one should
modify. This is especially true in light of the fact that—as we saw in the course of
discussing the epistemic rationality of a tolerant stance—the justiﬁcatory status of
the conﬂicting belief must not speak for the truth of that belief, since a tolerant stance
would otherwise be epistemically irrational.
Another property has proved more promising as a decision criterion in this
context. Thus, under certain circumstances, it might be rational to refrain from
modifying such beliefs that, although presumably false in view of the available
104
4
Should We Be Tolerant?

evidence, could easily turn out to be true with a high probability. If we apply this
criterion, there are presumably indeed constellations in which a tolerant attitude is
both epistemically rational and instrumentally rational relative to our epistemic
goals, and thus epistemically adequate. At the same time, however, these seem to
be very speciﬁc constellations. Given this, can general claims for intellectual toler-
ance still be reasonably maintained at all? I would like to discuss this question in the
next chapter.
4.3
Is a Tolerant Attitude Instrumentally Rational?
105

General Tolerance Requirements
5
Presumably no one would claim that one should simply always respond tolerantly to
disagreement. In this sense, it should be reasonably unproblematic that a tolerant
attitude can only be the epistemically adequate response to disagreement under
speciﬁc circumstances. Nevertheless, general claims for tolerance are often
advocated, and by general claims we do not merely mean that the speciﬁc conditions
under which a tolerant attitude is adequate are described at a general level. If
advocating a general claim for tolerance meant merely working out the general
conditions of adequacy of a tolerant attitude, and then demanding a tolerant attitude
under those conditions, we would now already be in a position to formulate such a
general claim: As we have seen, a tolerant attitude is presumably epistemically
adequate under speciﬁc circumstances, and accordingly, from an epistemological
perspective, one should respond tolerantly under those circumstances.
However, the idea behind general calls for tolerance seems rather to be that, at
least in speciﬁc domains, a tolerant attitude is in principle the appropriate response to
disagreement. For example, many people seem to ﬁnd it plausible that, with respect
to religious, political, or moral issues, a tolerant attitude toward conﬂicting beliefs is
generally desirable. However, even if one does not ﬁnd general claims of tolerance
in this sense to be particularly plausible, the above considerations raise the question
of how often, or under what circumstances, the conditions under which a tolerant
attitude constitutes the adequate response to a disagreement are met in the ﬁrst place.
For at ﬁrst sight these conditions seem to be extraordinarily speciﬁc—and insofar as
they are too speciﬁc, epistemic tolerance is not a particularly signiﬁcant attitude.
In the following I would like to discuss, by way of example, a concrete attempt to
defend a general tolerance demand in the above sense. This discussion will show
under which conditions general tolerance claims can be meaningful, and which
difﬁculties arise in defending such claims. In doing so, I will focus on tolerance
claims in scientiﬁc contexts: In the philosophy of science, there are many authors
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
D. Balg, Live and Let Live, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-64040-1_5
107

who explicitly assume that scientiﬁc communities would beneﬁt at a very basic level
from tolerant behavior on the part of their individual members.1
In order to defend this thesis, it would have to be shown that the speciﬁc
conditions elaborated in the last chapter, under which a tolerant attitude is epistemi-
cally adequate, are in principle fulﬁlled in scientiﬁc contexts. Thus, ﬁrst, it would
have to be shown that in the realm of science it is fundamentally rational to evaluate
conﬂicting beliefs as epistemically positive in the sense characteristic of a tolerant
attitude. Speciﬁcally, this means that in the domain of science it is fundamentally
rational to assume that conﬂicting beliefs could easily turn out to be true with a high
probability. Second, it would have to be shown that in the domain of science it would
be epistemically advantageous to condone conﬂicting beliefs that could easily turn
out to be true with high probability. For just because it is epistemically advantageous
to tolerate such beliefs in speciﬁc individual situations does not mean that it would
also be epistemically advantageous simply to tolerate all such beliefs in a speciﬁc
domain. And ultimately, it would have to be shown that, in the case of scientiﬁc
disagreement, it is in principle epistemically rational to stick to one’s guns. For just
because the positive epistemic evaluation of conﬂicting beliefs that is characteristic
of a tolerant attitude need not in itself make it rational to modify one’s beliefs, this
does not mean that in many cases a modiﬁcation of beliefs is not called for because
of other factors. In the following, I will discuss each of the three assumptions in turn.
Why should one assume in the ﬁeld of science that all conﬂicting beliefs could
easily turn out to be probably true? In order to plausibilize this assumption,
philosophers of science like to refer to the history of science: A look at the course
of scientiﬁc progress, so the reasoning goes, shows that in the past, theories that were
considered false regularly turned out to be surprisingly particularly powerful, and at
the same time, supposedly well-supported theories surprisingly turned out to be
false. An example of this is the historical development of medical research into the
causes of peptic ulcers:2 as early as 1875, the assumption was made that peptic ulcers
were caused by bacterial infections. At about the same time, an alternative hypothe-
sis emerged that acidosis of the stomach was the cause of peptic ulcers. Initially, both
theories developed in parallel: on the one hand, there were a number of bacterial
ﬁndings in cadavers with peptic ulcers; on the other hand, the successful treatment of
peptic ulcers with acid-binding drugs argued for the alternative explanation.
The debate was given a decisive impetus by a study in 1954 with the result that an
infection of the human stomach by bacteria was not possible. After the publication of
this study, the scientiﬁc community was ﬁrmly convinced that acidosis of the
stomach must be the cause of peptic ulcers. Although there were subsequently a
few scientists who continued to work on the bacterial hypothesis and indeed were
able to accumulate more and more conﬁrmatory evidence for this hypothesis, these
studies were either not published at all, or received little attention despite being
published. The representatives of the bacteria hypothesis only reached a broader
1See, for example, Chang 2012, ch. 5.2.2; Fischer 2013, Lacey 2012, Šešelja et al. 2015.
2For a detailed discussion of this example, see Zollman 2010.
108
5
General Tolerance Requirements

public when the therapy of gastric ulcers with the help of acid-binding agents turned
out to be less satisfactory in the course of time. A ﬁnal change was achieved when a
study conducted as early as 1979, in the course of which Heliobacter bacteria were
discovered in the stomachs of peptic ulcer patients, was published in 1984. From this
point on, the bacterial hypothesis relatively quickly prevailed over the acid hypothe-
sis, and the authors of the study were even awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine for
their work in 2005.
This is just one of many examples where a supposedly weakly supported theory
has surprisingly turned out to be the best available candidate. Indeed, the history of
science is replete with such examples. Thomas Kuhn, in his book “The Structure of
Scientiﬁc Revolutions”, even got carried away with the claim that Einstein’s general
theory of relativity in some ways bears more resemblance to Aristotelian physics
than to Newtonian mechanics3—less controversial examples of scientiﬁc theories
that were initially thought to be implausible but in the end turned out to be quite
unpredictably powerful would be, for example, Copernicus’ heliocentric theory,
which was conﬁrmed by Galileo, Darwin’s selection theory, which only found
wide acceptance in the course of the development of the synthetic theory of
evolution, or Planck’s light quantum hypothesis, which was decisively further
developed by Einstein. In the course of the history of science, therefore, there
have indeed regularly been unexpected conﬁrmations of theories that had previously
been rejected by a large part of the scientiﬁc community.
The idea now is that all these examples show how fundamentally unpredictable
scientiﬁc progress is, and that given this, it is basically true of all scientiﬁc theories
that they could easily turn out to be the best available candidate. An obvious problem
with this reasoning, however, is that it depends at a crucial point on contentious
empirical assumptions. Is scientiﬁc progress really fundamentally chaotic and unpre-
dictable? To support this claim, it is not enough to point to a few spectacular
individual examples. Rather, systematic investigations would have to be conducted
to ﬁnd out how often and under what circumstances theories thought to be false have
surprisingly turned out to be true. How the result of such investigations turns out,
however, is for the time being completely open: For in addition to all the examples in
which a theory that was hastily abandoned or not even considered in the ﬁrst place
unexpectedly turned out to be particularly powerful, there will also be a great many
examples in which a theory that was established relatively early on became better
and better supported over time and was ultimately conﬁrmed as the actual best
alternative. An example of this might be, for example, the oxidation theory, which
was developed by Antoine Laurent de Lavoisier in the eighteenth century, quickly
superseded the phlogiston theory that had prevailed up to that time and has continued
to be modiﬁed and extended to the present day. Thus, in order to plausibilize the
claim that, due to the unpredictability of scientiﬁc progress in principle, all scientiﬁc
theories could easily turn out to be the best available candidate, further empirical
work would ﬁrst have to be done.
3Kuhn 1970, 206 f.
5
General Tolerance Requirements
109

Suppose, however, that scientiﬁc progress was indeed so chaotic and unpredict-
able at a fundamental level that one should assume with respect to all theories that
they could easily turn out to be the best candidate. Does this mean that scientiﬁc
communities would beneﬁt from a tolerant attitude among their members? As we
have seen, there are individual cases in which it is quite beneﬁcial to tolerate a belief
because it could easily turn out to be probably true. Can this result be generalized? In
scientiﬁc communities where any theory might surprisingly turn out to be the best
available candidate, should all theories also be tolerated?
Many philosophers of science assume that scientiﬁc communities would beneﬁt
from a tolerant attitude because a tolerant attitude leads to a desirable pluralism of
different, conﬂicting views. The reasoning here is that theories that might easily turn
out to be the best available candidate should not be abandoned simply because they
seem implausible in light of the currently available evidence. Thus, scientiﬁc
progress has often been slowed in the past by hastily abandoning and not pursuing
weakly supported theories that in retrospect surprisingly turned out to be the best
available candidates. At best, this led to a period in which all available resources
were wasted on advancing inadequate theories when better alternatives would have
already been available. At worst, it led to promising theories being completely
forgotten and having to be painstakingly developed again from scratch. A pluralisti-
cally structured community, in which a variety of different approaches are pursued
simultaneously and not just the currently best-supported theory, can—so the argu-
ment goes—now effectively avoid this problem. Hasok Chang illustrates this idea
with the following analogy:
Once eliminated and forgotten, avenues of inquiry will be very difﬁcult and costly to
reinvent [. . .]. If we are looking for someone lost in the wilderness and we don’t know
which direction he/she has gone, would we round up all the available people into one search
party and send them in the direction we conjecture to be most likely? Or would we spread
people out a bit?4
What is to be made of this line of argument? In my opinion, there are again some
problems here. First of all, it is questionable whether tolerant scientiﬁc communities
are actually necessarily more pluralistic than intolerant scientiﬁc communities.
Admittedly, this assumption seems quite plausible at ﬁrst sight: Since a tolerant
attitude in the face of disagreement is characterized both by the retention of one’s
own position and by the refraining from any attempt to modify the conﬂicting
position, disagreements are not resolved in a community whose members behave
tolerantly. Tolerant individuals agree to disagree, so that dissent is stabilized and a
diversity of conﬂicting views is conserved. On the other hand, the connection
between tolerance and plurality is clearly limited: Thus, it is ﬁrst important to note
that plurality of opinion can only be conserved by tolerance, not generated. Rather,
as a reaction to disagreement, tolerance already presupposes the existence of
conﬂicting views. Once different conﬂicting views have been formed within an
4Chang 2012, 271.
110
5
General Tolerance Requirements

intellectual community, the diversity thus created can be effectively stabilized by
tolerant behavior on the part of individual members—but a tolerant attitude itself
contributes nothing to the creation of diversity. The assumption that tolerant
communities are more pluralistic than intolerant communities should therefore be
treated
with
caution:
Although
tolerance
fosters
plurality
under
certain
circumstances, tolerance is certainly not a guarantor of plurality.
Suppose, however, that tolerant communities are indeed more pluralistic than
intolerant communities. Is the pluralism of different, conﬂicting views provided by a
tolerant attitude epistemically beneﬁcial to scientiﬁc communities? In some ways,
such pluralism does seem beneﬁcial. For in a pluralistic community, even seemingly
weakly supported theories are sustained. Researchers working on such theories are
under no pressure to conform to the scientiﬁc mainstream, but can publish their
ﬁndings just like any other member of the community, and have an equal claim to
positions, ﬁnancial support, and other resources. Thus, in the longer term, greater
resources can be invested in researching and developing unusual, speculative
projects. Since some of these projects would probably turn out to be surprisingly
powerful over time, scientiﬁc progress could be accelerated in many areas. For in
many cases where a long-established view unexpectedly turns out to be false, widely
developed alternatives would be immediately available.5
But even if a pluralistic structure had this speciﬁc advantage, there are also a
number of speciﬁc disadvantages to consider. One obvious disadvantage is that even
if pluralistic communities are likely to generate more true output than non-pluralistic
communities in a given period, they are also likely to generate more false output than
non-pluralistic communities. Consider an example of this: Suppose that in a scien-
tiﬁc community A, at time t0, a total of three theories—X, Y, and Z—are held.
Theory X is by far the best supported theory, but since the members of A behave
tolerantly, there are enough members working on Y or Z even at the later time t1. The
situation is different in community B: here, too, theories X, Y and Z were supported
at time t0. However, due to the intolerant behavior of the members of B, all members
who did not work on the best-supported theory X, which was accordingly
represented by the majority, were under pressure. Accordingly, at time t1, B exhibits
a monistic structure—all members are now working on X only. At a later time t2,
new evidence emerges in both A and B that clearly proves that theory X is false and
Y is correct.
Does A now have an epistemic advantage over B because of the tolerant attitude
of its members in this situation? In a certain sense, yes: After all, in A between t1 and
t2 at least a part of the available resources was invested in the development of the
actually correct theory, whereas in B all resources were invested in the development
of a false theory during this period. On the other hand, between t1 and t2, community
A probably also generated more incorrect output than community B. This is because
while only one false theory was pursued in community B during this period, two
false theories were pursued in community A at the same time. At this point, of
5This argument can be found, for example, in Ibid., Ch. 5.2.2; Fischer 2013.
5
General Tolerance Requirements
111

course, one might object that it is not relevant in how many different false theories
available resources were invested, but instead only relevant what proportion of
available resources were invested in developing false theories. And in this respect,
community B is worse off than community A: For while in B all available resources
between t1 and t2 were invested in the development of false theories, in A only a part
of the available resources was invested in the development of false theories.
However, this reasoning is probably not entirely correct: in fact, what is likely to
be relevant is not only the proportion of available resources that a scientiﬁc commu-
nity invests in developing false theories, but also how these resources are allocated.
This is because investing resources in developing theories will have diminishing
marginal utility: A doubling of the resources invested in the development of a theory
will not automatically lead to a doubling of the output that results from the develop-
ment of that theory. Accordingly, the fewer resources already invested, the greater
will be the output made possible by investing a given amount of resources.
For this reason, it is plausible that community A generated more true output, but
also more false output, than community B during the period in question. Thus, it is
not at all clear whether pluralistic communities have an epistemic advantage over
non-pluralistic communities in the sense of the argument above: Even in
circumstances in which a scientiﬁc community could derive maximum epistemic
beneﬁt from its pluralistic structure, because a well-supported theory turned out to be
false and instead a weakly supported alternative maintained only thanks to the
tolerant behavior of individual members turned out to be correct, pluralistic
structures are also very likely to result in speciﬁc epistemic disadvantages. For it is
extremely unlikely that in a pluralistic community, in addition to the best-supported
theory, exactly one alternative theory will be maintained which then turns out to be
correct in the ﬁnal analysis. It is much more likely that a whole variety of different
alternatives will be developed and pursued, of which, in the best case, one will then
turn out to be powerful. This means that in pluralistic communities often more false
theories are pursued at once than in non-pluralistic communities, which, due to the
decreasing marginal utility of the available resources, probably leads in the end to
pluralistic communities generating more false output compared to non-pluralistic
communities.
Of course, this is a comparatively speculative consideration, and whether the
concern it expresses is justiﬁed depends primarily on questions to be answered
empirically—this is especially true of the claim that resources invested in research
projects have diminishing marginal utility. Ultimately, more would also need to be
said at this point about the precise formulation of the epistemic goals at stake. So far,
the adequacy of an epistemically tolerant stance has always been discussed against
the background of the very general goal of achieving truth and avoiding falsehood.
In its concrete application to scientiﬁc communities, however, it is not at all clear
how exactly this goal should be interpreted: Is it about two independent goals,
namely avoiding falsity on the one hand and achieving truth on the other? Or is it
rather a matter of achieving the most favourable ratio of truth to falsity possible? A
further question in this context is also whether all true beliefs have the same
112
5
General Tolerance Requirements

epistemic value, or whether instead a differentiation should be made between beliefs
of different relevance.
Crucially, however, in addition to all these difﬁculties, there are quite different
problems that might arise for scientiﬁc communities as a result of pluralistic
structures. At this point, it is helpful to consider what speciﬁc form of pluralism is
fostered by a tolerant attitude in the ﬁrst place: Tolerance in the sense relevant here is
always tolerance of conﬂicting beliefs. Accordingly, the pluralism fostered by a
tolerant attitude is also a pluralism of conﬂicting beliefs. Tolerant scientiﬁc
communities would thus be characterized by the fact that in them different
researchers work on different theories, all being convinced of the truth of their
respective theories.
However, such a strong form of diversity—for all its possible advantages—is
deﬁnitely problematic. This is because beliefs foster the emergence of various
cognitive biases and social dynamics that have negative epistemic consequences.
One example of a cognitive bias associated with beliefs is the so-called conﬁrmation
bias:6 people tend to select and process only information that conﬁrms their
pre-existing beliefs. Information that contradicts the truth of one’s own convictions
is either not registered at all or forgotten more quickly. Another cognitive bias
relevant in this context is the so-called belief bias:7 People tend to be inﬂuenced
by the congruence of the respective conclusion with their already existing beliefs
when evaluating the validity of logical conclusions. Arguments whose conclusions
are consistent with prior beliefs are more likely to be evaluated as valid than those
whose conclusions conﬂict with prior beliefs. The so-called backﬁre effect has
similar consequences:8 in the face of conﬂicting opinions, people tend not to weaken
their own beliefs but to strengthen them.
An example of an epistemically unfavorable social dynamic fostered by beliefs is
the phenomenon of so-called groupthink:9 people in groups tend to adapt their
personal beliefs to their anticipated group beliefs in order to avoid conﬂicts with
the group from the outset. On the one hand, this favours irrational processes of belief
formation, and on the other, intellectual autonomy and creativity are suppressed. In
addition, intellectual groups usually come to more radical conclusions than
individuals—this effect is referred to in psychology as attitude polarization.10
Pluralistic structures that create different subgroups with conﬂicting beliefs are
thus highly problematic from an epistemic perspective: they lead individuals to
radicalize and reinforce their beliefs, to immunize themselves against objections,
and to process new evidence irrationally.
6See, for example, Frimer et al. 2017, Jones and Sugden 2001, Oswald and Grosjean 2004, Taber
and Lodge 2006.
7See, for example, Dawson et al. 2016, Kahan et al. 2017, Markovits and Nantel 1989.
8See, for example, Nyhan and Reiﬂer 2010.
9See, for example, Park 1990.
10Burnstein and Sentis 1981.
5
General Tolerance Requirements
113

In their paper “Disagreement and the Division of Epistemic Labor”, Bjørn
G. Hallsson and Klemens Kappel, on the other hand, have argued that the various
cognitive biases associated with a pluralism of conﬂicting beliefs need not necessar-
ily be problematic, but may even bring speciﬁc beneﬁts in the case of scientiﬁc
communities.11 In doing so, they ﬁrst point to various empirical studies suggesting
that intellectual communities in which individual members hold conﬂicting beliefs
about a question are more reliable and effective at answering that question correctly
than homogeneous groups in which all or most members hold the same opinion.
Hallsson and Kappel now explain this epistemic advantage in terms of the cognitive
biases induced by beliefs: Namely, these cognitive biases cause individuals to be
particularly good at highlighting the advantages of their own position, and at
exposing the weaknesses of conﬂicting positions. If all positions are represented
by groups of roughly equal strength, this can lead to the overall group ultimately
being epistemically more powerful.
However, even if this argument is correct, it does not necessarily follow that a
pluralism of conﬂicting beliefs is epistemically beneﬁcial for scientiﬁc communities.
For example, Hallsson and Kappel themselves explicitly point out that the cognitive
biases associated with conﬂicting beliefs are fundamentally problematic even in the
context of scientiﬁc epistemic endeavors, despite the speciﬁc advantages—so it
would ﬁrst need to be shown whether, and especially under what speciﬁc
circumstances, the epistemic advantages of these cognitive biases outweigh the
corresponding disadvantages. In fact, the conditions under which epistemic
advantages of cognitive biases could be demonstrated in the studies cited by Hallson
and Kappel are reasonably speciﬁc and tightly controlled—so the extent to which
conclusions about real existing scientiﬁc communities can be drawn from this
without further ado is at least questionable.
This also raises the question of whether the speciﬁc advantages of a pluralism of
conﬂicting beliefs cannot also be achieved by alternative strategies. Insofar as the
epistemic advantage is that individuals who have already formed a belief are
particularly good at recognizing strengths of their own position and weaknesses of
divergent positions, one could perhaps try to simply induce these effects artiﬁcially.
For example, one could explicitly assign individual scientists to play the advocatus
diaboli and to search for weaknesses of speciﬁc positions as consistently as possible.
With the help of such and similar strategies, it might be possible to exploit the
epistemic advantages of cognitive biases without having to accept the associated
disadvantages.12
Ultimately, in addition to the consequences of a pluralism of conﬂicting beliefs
for the respective scientiﬁc community, consequences for other communities would
also have to be included. Since scientiﬁc communities have an extraordinary episte-
mic impact on other communities, this point should not be underestimated: For
11See Hallsson and Kappel 2018 for the following.
12Indeed, Hallsson and Kappel present studies suggesting that at least some obvious alternative
strategies are less effective than a genuine pluralism of conﬂicting beliefs. See Ibid.
114
5
General Tolerance Requirements

example, scientiﬁc communities characterized by a pluralism of conﬂicting beliefs
might be found to be less effective by the public. The lack of rapid and unambiguous
results and the persistence of stable disagreements could be taken as indicators of a
lack of competence, poor standards or deﬁcient structures. The result would be
diminished epistemic inﬂuence, which could have fatal epistemic consequences in
some circumstances. An example of this phenomenon might be the current situation
of academic philosophy: the fact that the philosophical community is characterized
by persistent disagreements even with respect to the most fundamental questions
might at least partly explain the conspicuously low inﬂuence of academic philoso-
phy on the formation of public opinion. Thus, even if a pluralism of conﬂicting
beliefs does indeed have epistemic advantages for the respective academic commu-
nity because of the cognitive biases it fosters, this does not yet mean that the totality
of relevant epistemic consequences of such pluralism is beneﬁcial.
However, even if one assumes that from an epistemological perspective it would
be beneﬁcial overall if scientiﬁc communities were characterized by epistemic
tolerance, clear problems arise at the latest when one considers the epistemic
rationality of a tolerant attitude. For example, the main problem is arguably that in
many situations a tolerant stance will be epistemically irrational simply because of
its characteristic retention of one’s beliefs, and thus not an adequate response to
disagreement. Thus, Hallsson and Kappel also explicitly concede that a pluralism of
conﬂicting beliefs in scientiﬁc communities is probably an expression of epistemic
irrationality. For example, it is quite plausible to assume that there are many
disagreements in scientiﬁc communities in which participants respect each other as
epistemically equal. However, insofar as equality attributions rationally require
modiﬁcation of one’s beliefs, a tolerant stance would not be an adequate response
in these cases—and as we have seen, it is quite plausible that noticing a peer
disagreement does indeed rationally require belief modiﬁcation, at least in speciﬁc
circumstances.
Even if peer disagreement is particularly rare in scientiﬁc communities, there will
still be many cases in which the participants assume that one side is epistemically
superior to the other, but at the same time it is not clear which side is the superior
one. Even in the face of such disagreements, it might be rational to modify one’s own
belief.13 Moreover, some authors have argued that even in the case of inferiority
disagreement,
belief
modiﬁcation
might
be
rationally
warranted
in
some
circumstances. It is thus quite plausible to assume that, in the case of scientiﬁc
disagreement, the retention of one’s own belief, which is characteristic of a tolerant
attitude, is epistemically irrational in many situations.14
The attempt to defend general claims of tolerance in the ﬁeld of science has thus
proven to be quite problematic. The question of the epistemic consequences of a
tolerant attitude in the context of scientiﬁc communities is somewhat complex and
can ultimately only be answered empirically. The evidence required to do so seems
13King 2012.
14See, for example, Priest 2016.
5
General Tolerance Requirements
115

too patchy at this stage to reach a conclusive judgement. To make matters worse,
many of the problems relevant here cannot be solved in general terms—what
epistemic effects a tolerant attitude has in a scientiﬁc community will depend, for
example, on the size of the community, the scientiﬁc discipline, the resources
available to the community, and many other details.
Apart from this, general claims of tolerance are in danger of failing simply
because a tolerant stance will, in many circumstances, be epistemically irrational
due to the retention of one’s beliefs that is characteristic of that stance. Again, further
philosophical research is needed to better assess the extent of this problem. What
needs to be clariﬁed is not only under what conditions belief modiﬁcation is
rationally warranted, but also under what circumstances one should assume that
these conditions actually hold. This is a question that has received comparatively
little attention in contemporary epistemology of disagreement. For example, there is
now an almost unmanageable number of publications on the problem of peer
disagreement—but the number of publications devoted to the question of under
what circumstances one should even assume that the person with whom one has a
disagreement is epistemically equal to one is still manageable.15
Defending general tolerance claims, as we have seen in the example of scientiﬁc
communities, is thus quite difﬁcult. Epistemic tolerance is a very speciﬁc and
complex attitude that is problematic in many circumstances. Simply to demand
blanket tolerance in areas in which it is particularly difﬁcult to gain secure knowl-
edge, on the basis of an insight into the fundamental fallibility of our efforts to gain
knowledge, is accordingly obviously too hasty. At the same time, it should also be
clear that, especially under epistemically difﬁcult conditions, a responsible approach
to conﬂicting beliefs is indispensable. The worry now is that a rejection of general
demands for epistemic tolerance will lead to a situation in which it is no longer
possible to make any general statements at all about what such a responsible
approach to conﬂicting beliefs might even look like. This, in turn, could encourage
the spread of intellectually irresponsible ways of dealing with conﬂicting beliefs.
Accordingly, in the following chapter I would like to discuss, by way of example,
two promising alternatives to a tolerant attitude, in order to show how an epistemi-
cally adequate way of dealing with conﬂicting beliefs can be possible even without
tolerance.
15Gelfert 2011, King 2012.
116
5
General Tolerance Requirements

Tolerance, Open-Mindedness and Humility
6
What alternatives are there to a tolerant attitude? Are there intellectual attitudes that
allow for an epistemically responsible approach to conﬂicting beliefs and at the same
time can be easily claimed on a general level? In what follows, I want to look more
closely at two speciﬁc alternatives, namely, open-mindedness and humility—both
attitudes that are the subject of lively debate in contemporary virtue epistemology. I
will proceed in such a way that, in a ﬁrst step, I distinguish open-mindedness and
humility from tolerance, in order to argue, in a second step, that an open-minded or
humble attitude can, on the one hand, just like a tolerant attitude, enable an
epistemically responsible approach to conﬂicting convictions, but that, on the
other hand, in contrast to a tolerant attitude, it should also be readily demanded on
a very general level.
Let us start with an open-minded attitude: In the current debate about intellectual
virtues, open-mindedness is one of the most frequently mentioned candidates.1 What
does it mean to be intellectually open-minded? One problem that arises in answering
this question is that the precise characterization of intellectual open-mindedness is
the subject of controversial debate within virtue epistemology research. In what
follows, I will not attempt to take a position within this discussion itself—instead, I
will present various conceptions of intellectual open-mindedness in turn, and then
later examine the extent to which, relative to each of these conceptions, an open-
minded attitude can be distinguished from a tolerant attitude. In sum, I will consider
three different conceptions of intellectual open-mindedness, each of which has
received some attention in virtue epistemology.
I would like to start with William Hare’s conception. In his book “Open-
Mindedness and Education”, open-mindedness is characterized as follows:
A person who is open-minded is disposed to revise or reject the position he holds if sound
objections are brought against it, or, in the situation in which the person has no opinion on
1Riggs 2010.
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
D. Balg, Live and Let Live, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-64040-1_6
117

some issue, he is disposed to make up his mind in the light of available evidence and
argument as objectively and as impartially as possible.2
This conception of open-mindedness is in itself still formulated in a very general
and abstract way. Indeed, at ﬁrst it is not at all clear to what extent such a characteri-
zation of open-mindedness singles out a speciﬁc intellectual virtue that can be clearly
distinguished from quite general attitudes such as rationality or objectivity.
By contrast, Wayne Riggs’ characterization is already considerably more con-
crete, building on Jonathan Adler’s reﬂections on a fundamental problem of intel-
lectual open-mindedness, namely, the problem of the compatibility of open-
mindedness and strong beliefs. The idea behind the concern that there is some
tension between an intellectually open-minded attitude and the possibility of strong
beliefs is roughly as follows: A minimal condition of intellectual open-mindedness
should be to take objections and counterarguments to one’s position seriously. But
taking objections and counterarguments to one’s position seriously is only reason-
able if one has some doubts about the truth of one’s position. If one is absolutely sure
that one’s own position is true—why should one deal at length with arguments
against that position? But if it is only reasonable to be intellectually open-minded if
one has certain doubts about the truth of one’s position, then open-mindedness
seems incompatible with strong convictions. After all, to have a strong conviction
is precisely to have no doubts about the truth of that conviction.
Adler now argues that it is not only reasonable to take objections and counter-
arguments to one’s own position seriously when one has doubts about the truth of
this position, but that it can also be reasonable to take objections and counter-
arguments to one’s own position seriously when one is aware of one’s own fallibil-
ity. Thus, in Adler’s conception, the serious engagement with conﬂicting judgments
that is characteristic of intellectual open-mindedness is rationalized not by doubts
about the truth of concrete beliefs, but rather by a fundamental judgment about one’s
own epistemic capacity. Intellectual open-mindedness in Adler’s sense is accord-
ingly based on a higher-order attitude toward one’s own beliefs as beliefs of a
fundamentally fallible subject.3
Wayne Riggs explicitly builds on Adler’s thinking when he argues for intellectu-
ally open-minded individuals to be characterized by two speciﬁc properties in
particular: First, these individuals possess self-knowledge about the circumstances
in which they are epistemically particularly prone to error due to, for example,
prejudice or incompetence, and second, they are sensitive to these circumstances,
that is, they are reliable in noticing when they are in circumstances in which they are
epistemically particularly prone to error. Intellectual open-mindedness in Adler’s
and Riggs’s sense is thus fundamentally related to insight into human fallibility and
the epistemically best way to deal with that insight.4
2Hare 1979, 9.
3See Adler 2004.
4See Riggs 2010.
118
6
Tolerance, Open-Mindedness and Humility

The ﬁnal conception of intellectual open-mindedness that I would like to consider
here comes from Jason Baehr. In his book “The Inquiring Mind”, Baehr develops a
comparatively detailed and structured analysis by formulating four necessary and
together sufﬁcient conditions for an intellectually open-minded attitude:5 A person is
intellectually open-minded precisely when she is (a) willing and (at least to some
degree) able to (b) bracket a cognitive default in order to (c) take seriously the
epistemic strengths and merits of (d) a distinct cognitive standpoint. Also according
to this analysis, an open-minded attitude need not be tied to the occurrence of
disagreement: Baehr explicitly emphasizes that one cannot be open-minded only if
one has already adopted one’s own standpoint from which one considers and
critically evaluates dissenting views. Not even the existence of different positions
between which one can carefully weigh is necessary for epistemic open-mindedness
in Baehr’s sense.
To illustrate this point, Baehr describes the case of a detective trying to solve a
murder case. The evidence at his disposal does not yet allow for a simple explanation
of the crime—apart from the fact that the detective himself does not yet have a
conviction concerning the perpetrator, there are not even different explanations
between which he could weigh. Nevertheless, it seems possible for the detective to
be open-minded in this situation. In this case, open-mindedness would mean care-
fully searching for new evidence, and in the course of further investigation avoiding
hasty explanations and hastily drawn conclusions, instead remaining neutral for as
long as possible and coming to a judgment only when the evidence is sufﬁciently
strong. By a “bracketing of cognitive preconceptions” Baehr thus understands not
only the setting aside of one’s own convictions, but also more generally the
avoidance of hasty results.
So much for Hare, Riggs, and Baehr’s conceptions of intellectual open-
mindedness. What about intellectual humility? Again, I do not wish to develop a
conception of my own, but merely to present three prominent characterizations of
intellectual humility, against the background of which the relation to a tolerant attitude
will then be discussed. The ﬁrst conception I want to consider is by Robert Roberts
and Jay Wood.6 In their essay “Humility and Epistemic Goods,” they argue that an
intellectually humble attitude is essentially characterized by a lack of concern for
one’s epistemic status. A humble person does not worry about being seen as particu-
larly gifted or successful within their intellectual community, but is largely driven in
their cognitive endeavors by an intrinsically motivated pursuit of intellectual goods
such as truth, knowledge, or understanding. Moreover, humble persons do not expect
epistemic favoritism and do not make unreasonable claims in epistemic hierarchies.
As an example of a humble person, Roberts and Wood cite the philosopher
G.E. Moore, who as a university professor always took students’ ideas seriously,
discussed objections to his own positions as if they were objections to others’
positions, and in light of valid counterarguments could readily abandon his beliefs.
5See on this and the following Baehr 2011, ch. 8.
6See Roberts and Wood 2003 for the following.
6
Tolerance, Open-Mindedness and Humility
119

This conception of intellectual humility has been critiqued by Dennis Whitcomb,
Heather Battaly, Jason Baehr, and Daniel Howard-Snyder in a joint paper.7
Whitcomb et al. present two counterexamples to argue that a lack of interest in
one’s epistemic status is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for a humble stance. The
ﬁrst example revolves around a young woman working in a male-dominated profes-
sion where it is very important to be assigned high epistemic status by colleagues in
order to be considered in personnel decisions. Now, if this woman is striving for high
epistemic status in order to preserve her chance of career success, this is not
necessarily an expression of a lack of humility. Accordingly, Whitcomb et al.
assume that a lack of interest in one’s epistemic status is not necessary for a humble
attitude. The second example describes a professor who is unconcerned about his
epistemic status but nevertheless always refers to his past academic successes,
regularly cites himself, brags about his publications to colleagues, and is unaware
of his cognitive limitations. This case is intended to show that a lack of interest in
one’s own epistemic status is also not sufﬁcient for a humble attitude.
Whitcomb et al.’s own proposal now brings the subject’s epistemic self-
assessment to the fore: according to their conception of intellectual humility, a
humble person is characterized by being aware of his or her own cognitive
weaknesses and limitations, openly acknowledging them, and taking them into
account in making intellectual decisions. Through the central component of episte-
mic self-assessment, this conception shows a certain closeness to Allan Hazlett’s
characterization, according to which a humble attitude consists essentially in the
formation of appropriate higher-order beliefs about one’s own beliefs.8
The third conception of intellectual humility comes from Maura Priest:9 Priest
agrees with Roberts and Wood, on the one hand, that humble individuals usually
lack interest in their own epistemic status. On the other hand, she agrees with
Whitcomb et al. that humble individuals are usually aware of their own cognitive
weaknesses. Ultimately, however, she assumes that neither trait is constitutive of
humble attitudes, but merely the result of such attitudes. Rather, essential to intel-
lectual humility is a speciﬁc attitude toward others: A humble person respects other
persons as equal epistemic subjects who pursue similar epistemic goals as herself.
She views her own cognitive efforts as a part of a collaborative project in which she
is only one part of many. She knows that she is dependent on the epistemic help of
others, and is herself willing to help others. This willingness to help leads up to
forms of epistemic altruism, in which one’s own epistemic disadvantages are
accepted in order to improve the epistemic situation of others.
So much for the characterizations of intellectual open-mindedness and intellec-
tual humility. So what is the precise relationship between a tolerant attitude, an
7See for the following Whitcomb et al. 2017.
8Hazlett 2012.
9See for the following Priest 2017.
120
6
Tolerance, Open-Mindedness and Humility

open-minded attitude, and a humble attitude?10 At ﬁrst glance, these seem to be three
very similar phenomena: All three attitudes enable a form of dealing with situations
of dissent and conﬂict for which a certain appreciation of plurality as well as a
conscientious examination of divergent convictions are characteristic. In addition,
insight into one’s own fallibility as well as sensitivity to epistemic weaknesses and
possibilities of error play a central role in relation to all three attitudes. At the same
time, however, it is clear that open-mindedness and humility are not simply the same
as tolerance.
One obvious difference is that tolerance, unlike humility and open-mindedness, is
a very speciﬁc attitude: whereas tolerance is a speciﬁc way of responding to a
disagreement, open-mindedness and humility are much more general attitudes.
Accordingly, it is possible to be humble and open-minded without being tolerant
at the same time. For even without being involved in any disagreement, and even
without having already formed a personal belief at all, it is readily possible to have
little interest in one’s own intellectual status, to respect other persons as equal
epistemic subjects, to be aware of one’s own cognitive limitations and weaknesses,
to evaluate the available evidence as carefully and conscientiously as possible, and to
consider different perspectives without bias.
More interesting, on the other hand, is the question of whether it is possible to be
tolerant without being humble and open-minded at the same time. In a certain sense,
the three attitudes clearly seem to diverge in this direction: Of course, it is possible in
principle to tolerate a conﬂicting belief without being aware of one’s own
weaknesses, having little interest in one’s own intellectual status, or respecting
other people as epistemically equal subjects. At the same time, however, we have
seen that an awareness of one’s own fallibility and a sensitivity to epistemically
difﬁcult conditions are precisely the main motivations for a tolerant attitude—we
should be tolerant of conﬂicting opinions precisely because we are fallible in our
own judgments.
Thus, if one takes appropriately weak deﬁnitions of intellectual open-mindedness
or humility, there is a fundamental connection between tolerance, open-mindedness,
and humility. If one takes Allan Hazlett’s conception of intellectual humility as a
starting point, for example, or a conception of intellectual open-mindedness as
represented by Wayne Riggs, then a tolerant attitude, as it is usually justiﬁed, can
certainly be interpreted as an expression of open-mindedness and humility—for in
10In the following I will compare a tolerant attitude with an open-minded or humble attitude. The
considerations made in this regard are neutral with respect to the question of the exact relationship
between open-mindedness and humility. I will merely argue that both open-mindedness and
humility are phenomena independent of tolerance—but whether open-mindedness and humility
are phenomena independent of each other remains an open question for the time being. The
previous accounts suggest that open-mindedness and humility are distinct phenomena, and indeed
this assumption seems plausible at ﬁrst glance. However, all of the considerations made below are
equally compatible with the assumption that open-mindedness and humility are the same attitude.
For a discussion of the relationship between these two virtues, see for instance Ibid. or Spiegel 2012.
6
Tolerance, Open-Mindedness and Humility
121

this case open-mindedness and humility would be nothing other than an awareness
of one’s own fallibility.11
However, if one takes stronger conceptions as a basis, tolerance without open-
mindedness or humility is very well possible: If one assumes, for instance, that the
bracketing of one’s own preconceptions, the careful and conscientious evaluation of
new evidence, or a low interest in one’s own intellectual status are constitutive of
humility and open-mindedness, then there will undoubtedly be instances of episte-
mic tolerance that are not an expression of humility and open-mindedness. For it is,
of course, conceivable that someone might tolerate the conﬂicting beliefs of others
against a background of knowledge of their own fallibility, but at the same time have
an enormous stake in their own intellectual status and be neither open to new
evidence nor interested in a critical exchange with conﬂicting positions.
Take, for example, the example of a racist police ofﬁcer who is involved in
solving a murder case. Because of his racial prejudices, he is wrongly convinced that
the victim’s Asian friend is the perpetrator. His prejudices also lead him to make
only a cursory evaluation of the available evidence and to simply ignore the
circumstantial evidence that goes against his assumption. He does not even take
his colleague, who assumes that another person is the perpetrator, seriously because
he assumes that she, unlike him, is not in a position to assess the facts correctly due
to her inexperience. Moreover, he boasts to his supervisor that he has already
identiﬁed the perpetrator. Nevertheless, he is aware that he cannot be completely
sure of his case, and that in principle his guess could still surprisingly turn out to be
wrong. Accordingly, he grudgingly acquiesces to his colleague’s desire to investi-
gate further and does not attempt to convince her of the falsity of her point of view.
In this case, the racist policeman seems to be clearly tolerant—but at the same time
he does not necessarily behave in a humble or open-minded way.
Thus, insofar as one understands by open-mindedness and humility more than the
mere admission of one’s own fallibility, these two attitudes are entirely independent
of epistemic tolerance. At the same time, against the background of such rich
conceptions, it also becomes clear to what extent there might be attractive
alternatives to a tolerant attitude: Suppose, for instance, that an open-minded and
humble person is not only aware of her own fallibility, but is always looking for new
evidence, seeks a constructive exchange with conﬂicting positions, and is open to
objections and concerns raised about her own beliefs. To what extent does an open-
minded and humble attitude in this sense enable an intellectually responsible
approach to conﬂicting beliefs?
The central idea behind the idea that a tolerant attitude makes it possible to deal
adequately with conﬂicting beliefs was that, in view of one’s own fallibility, a
modiﬁcation of other person’s conﬂicting beliefs is in many cases epistemically
irresponsible. Beliefs thought to be false can easily turn out to be surprisingly true,
which is why a rash modiﬁcation of conﬂicting beliefs is often an expression of
11The idea that humility is the basis for a tolerant attitude can be found explicitly in Audi 2012, for
example.
122
6
Tolerance, Open-Mindedness and Humility

problematic intellectual negligence. Accordingly, many authors have seen in a
tolerant attitude a promising candidate for a responsible response to disagreement
insofar as it is precisely characteristic of tolerating a belief to refrain from modifying
it. But now it is easy to see that humility and open-mindedness also make it possible
to deal responsibly with conﬂicting beliefs in this sense: For someone who respects
others as equal epistemic subjects, is aware of his or her own intellectual
weaknesses, and is open to objections and alternative views, will not hastily seek
to change other people’s beliefs simply because he or she considers them to be false.
For example, Maura Priest writes about an intellectually humble person:
The line between innocent attempts at convincing others of p and malicious attempts of
manipulating others is often a ﬁne one. In both convincing and manipulating, there is a sense
in which you attempt to get another to believe speciﬁc things. The difference lies in the way
in which the manipulator demonstrates a sense of entitlement and control. The “convincer”,
unlike the manipulator, cares that an agent comes to her belief through acceptable epistemic
means. [. . .] Evangelical religious adherents might think that religious truth is so important
that they are justiﬁed in telling half-truths as a means to get to whole ones. Professors, also,
might think it is so important that students learn certain truths that they give up on their
students acquiring appropriate reasoning habits. Those who are intellectually humble,
however, are the types who feel extremely uncomfortable in overriding the intellect of
fellow rational beings.12
A hasty and irresponsible modiﬁcation of foreign beliefs can thus also be
effectively prevented against the background of an open-minded and humble atti-
tude. The crucial point now is that general demands for open-mindedness and
humility are much easier to justify than general demands for tolerance. As we saw
in the previous chapter, general demands for tolerance are problematic for several
reasons. For example, a ﬁrst problem is that it is characteristic of a tolerant response
to a disagreement to maintain one’s original belief, even though it is presumably
rational in many circumstances to modify one’s own belief in the face of other
people’s conﬂicting opinions.
A second problem is that it is characteristic of a tolerant attitude to refrain from
modifying the other person’s belief in the face of disagreement, where the decision
of which conﬂicting beliefs to tolerate depends on a reasonably rigid criterion: The
basic idea is that we should modify other people’s conﬂicting beliefs—unless they
exhibit some speciﬁc property. Now this idea is problematic with respect to general
tolerance claims in that it has proved very difﬁcult to ﬁnd a suitable criterion for
deciding in principle which conﬂicting beliefs should be modiﬁed. And even if such
a criterion could be identiﬁed, it would still be questionable whether, at least in some
domains, sufﬁcient beliefs meet this criterion to justify general tolerance claims.
Now, the advantage of an open-minded and humble attitude is, ﬁrst, that for it no
speciﬁc (non-)modiﬁcation of one’s own conviction in the face of a disagreement is
constitutive: reacting open-mindedly and humbly to a conﬂicting conviction is
compatible with both maintaining and modifying one’s own conviction. Second,
12Priest 2017, 474 f.
6
Tolerance, Open-Mindedness and Humility
123

in the context of an open-minded and humble attitude, the decision about which
conﬂicting beliefs to modify is not based on a rigid criterion: in fact, an open-minded
and humble attitude towards a conﬂicting belief is compatible both with a modiﬁca-
tion and with a toleration of that belief.
Now this ﬂexibility is precisely the reason why general demands for open-
mindedness and humility are much less problematic than general demands for
tolerance. Moreover, general demands for open-mindedness and humility are also
unproblematic insofar as, within the framework of such demands, a speciﬁc reaction
to disagreement is not even necessarily required: For even though open-mindedness
and humility may well enable an intellectually responsible approach to conﬂicting
beliefs, these attitudes are not primarily reactions to disagreement. While tolerance is
a speciﬁc response to disagreement, it is readily possible to be open-minded and
humble without any disagreement. Accordingly, open-mindedness and humility
generally allow for an epistemically responsible approach to one’s own fallibility,
that is, also and especially with regard to one’s own belief formation and not only in
the face of disagreement.
A closer look has shown that there are alternatives to a tolerant attitude. An open-
minded and humble attitude allows for an intellectually responsible approach to the
conﬂicting beliefs of others and is much more ﬂexible than a tolerant attitude. Since
an open-minded and humble attitude is compatible with both the maintenance and
modiﬁcation of one’s own beliefs, as well as with both condoning and modifying
others’ beliefs, general demands for open-mindedness and humility are much less
problematic than general demands for tolerance. Thus, even if general demands for
tolerance are difﬁcult to justify, substantial statements can nevertheless be made at a
general level about what an epistemically responsible approach to conﬂicting beliefs
might look like.
124
6
Tolerance, Open-Mindedness and Humility

Final Evaluation and Outlook
7
At what point are we with our argumentation? Very roughly summarized, we are
faced with the following result: There are speciﬁc forms of tolerance that are not
politically or ethically but epistemically motivated. A widespread variant of episte-
mic tolerance consists in a speciﬁc intellectual attitude towards disagreement.
Characteristic of this attitude is to stick to one’s guns in response to a disagreement,
but at the same time to respect and therefore condone the position of the opposing
side as equally justiﬁed. Although many philosophers have explicitly emphasized
the appropriateness of such a tolerant stance, various concerns have also been raised.
For instance, problematic connections were suspected between an epistemically
tolerant stance and relativistic assumptions about truth or justiﬁcation. Another
concern was that it is fundamentally irrational to hold on to one’s original belief in
the face of an evaluation of a conﬂicting belief as equally justiﬁed. In the end, both
concerns turned out to be unfounded: Responding tolerantly in the face of disagree-
ment does not presuppose any problematic judgments about relativistic assumptions,
nor is it necessarily irrational.
However, even if a tolerant stance is not epistemically irrational by virtue of its
inherent structure alone, the maintenance of one’s own convictions in the face of
disagreement, which is constitutive of a tolerant stance, is presumably still irrational
in many situations due to external factors, such as the assessment of the epistemic
capacity of the other side. At the same time, it is not clear what epistemic advantages
a tolerant stance should have in the ﬁrst place: It is true that our own fallibility
requires a certain intellectual caution when dealing with other people’s beliefs. On
the other hand, the distinction between justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed beliefs that underlies
a tolerant stance does not seem to provide a suitable criterion for deciding which
external beliefs should be modiﬁed. Whether there is an alternative criterion that can
provide a suitable basis for such a decision in a relevantly wide range of contexts is
unclear: it is true, for example, that there are speciﬁc situations in which, from an
epistemic point of view, it would be best to condone beliefs that are highly likely to
be false in light of the available evidence, provided that they could easily turn out to
be highly likely to be true. The extent to which general tolerance claims can be
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
D. Balg, Live and Let Live, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-64040-1_7
125

derived from this result, however, is questionable and depends, among other things,
on complex questions that need to be answered empirically.
In view of this, the question arises as to what role intellectual tolerance should
play in our everyday epistemic life. As we have seen, it is a highly speciﬁc and in
many situations very problematic attitude, which can only be an adequate response
to disagreement under very speciﬁc conditions. Accordingly, the widely held view
that tolerance is the best response to political, ethical, religious, or ideological
disagreement has been shown to be untenable in its generality. This does not
mean, however, that on a general level nothing can be said about an intellectually
responsible approach to conﬂicting beliefs: We have become acquainted with
intellectual open-mindedness and intellectual humility, two substantial attitudes
that can make it possible to deal adequately with situations of dissent regardless of
speciﬁc circumstances.
Is this all there is to say about epistemic tolerance? Far from it: In fact, the present
paper should be understood merely as a ﬁrst contribution to a comprehensive
epistemological engagement with the topic of epistemic tolerance. In view of the
considerations so far, a whole series of open questions and further projects arise
immediately: Thus, I have focused my argument on a comparatively focused issue—
namely, whether, or under what circumstances, an epistemically tolerant stance is
epistemically adequate in response to disagreement. In doing so, a reasonably
sophisticated notion of epistemic adequacy was assumed, according to which an
attitude is epistemically adequate if and only if it is both epistemically rational and
instrumentally rational with respect to our epistemic goals. Since these are two
independent forms of rationality, the question arises whether and in what way
these two forms of rationality can be balanced against each other in cases of conﬂict.
Suppose, for instance, that there were constellations in which a tolerant attitude
would be epistemically irrational but immensely useful from the perspective of
instrumental rationality. Might it not be that in such cases we should respond
tolerantly, all things considered, even though such a response would clearly be
epistemically irrational? Always choosing the epistemically rational response, and
accordingly foregoing a tolerant stance, could lead here to a situation Hallsson and
Kappel call epistemic regret:1 If I know that a tolerant stance will bring me great
epistemic beneﬁts in the future, but forego a tolerant stance in favor of the epistemi-
cally rational response, then this decision might be regretful because of the missed
epistemic opportunities. The question, then, is how to balance considerations of
epistemic rationality with considerations of epistemic prudence. The result might be
that there are situations in which a tolerant stance, while epistemically irrational and
accordingly strictly speaking inadequate, is nevertheless a kind of epistemic stopgap
and the best response after weighing all relevant considerations.
1Hallsson and Kappel 2018. Here, we also ﬁnd initial thoughts on what a trade-off between
epistemic rationality and instrumental rationality might look like in concrete terms. Thus, against
the background of a teleological conception of epistemic normativity, Hallsson and Kappel argue
that in speciﬁc situations epistemic prudence considerations can trump classical rationality
considerations.
126
7
Final Evaluation and Outlook

Moreover, the implications of a critical evaluation of epistemic tolerance would
also need to be worked out much more carefully. The results of the investigation so
far are interesting in their own right, insofar as—as I have tried to show—epistemic
tolerance in the sense understood here is a widespread attitude that many people
consider appropriate, at least with respect to speciﬁc topics. That said, however, I
have already pointed out that the critical evaluation of a tolerant attitude is probably
also philosophically signiﬁcant: In political and moral philosophy in particular, there
seem to be many authors who have explicitly accepted speciﬁc attitudes toward
disagreement as epistemically adequate, and accordingly as desiderata of their
theorizing, that bear a striking resemblance to a tolerant attitude. Given that critical
evaluations of epistemic tolerance have tended to be negative, the extent to which
this presumption is correct would now need to be examined more closely. This
question probably cannot be answered by epistemologists alone—rather, what
would be needed here is collaboration with practical philosophers who can accu-
rately assess the implications of a critical evaluation of epistemic tolerance for their
ﬁeld of research.
However, even given a full assessment of epistemic tolerance and a careful
analysis of its philosophical implications, there would still be enough work for
epistemological tolerance research. Thus, clearly, the present book is not concerned
with epistemic tolerance in general, but more speciﬁcally with epistemic tolerance in
response to disagreement. However, as we saw right at the beginning, there are
probably other forms of epistemic tolerance that are entirely independent of the
variant discussed here. To be epistemically tolerant, after all, means in the ﬁrst
instance
merely
to
tolerate
something
on
the
basis
of
purely
epistemic
considerations. Accordingly, different forms of epistemic tolerance can be distin-
guished, for instance on the basis of the epistemic evaluation underlying this attitude.
An obviously also relevant variant would be, for instance, epistemic tolerance of
beliefs that one holds to be unjustiﬁed but true. Again, this is a form of epistemic
tolerance whose critical evaluation would presumably be of some relevance to our
epistemic practice. For example, how should a climate scientist who opposes factory
farming on environmental grounds deal with the beliefs of religious fundamentalists
who, by virtue of their faith, are also convinced of the reprehensibility of factory
farming?
This example also suggests that there are probably not only practical and intel-
lectual forms of tolerance, but also hybrid forms of tolerance for which practical and
epistemic considerations are equally characteristic. Consider, for example, the case
of an atheist whose grandmother is dying. Although he considers his grandmother’s
religious beliefs to be unjustiﬁed and false, he is nevertheless aware of how valuable
they are to his grandmother at the moment of dying. Insofar as he chooses to tolerate
his grandmother’s beliefs in this situation, this could be a genuine form of tolerance
that is neither purely practical nor purely epistemically motivated. For from an
ethical perspective there is nothing that the atheist ﬁnds objectionable about his
grandmother’s beliefs, and from an epistemic perspective there is nothing that he
approves of about them. The ambivalent normative evaluation characteristic of a
7
Final Evaluation and Outlook
127

tolerant attitude thus only emerges here when one takes equal account of practical
and epistemic dimensions.
In fact, hybrid forms of tolerance are also likely to be particularly relevant in that
there are very fundamental connections between our beliefs and our actions. On the
one hand, our beliefs guide our actions: if all goes well, our actions are based on
informed choices and thus depend directly on what we believe. Accordingly, beliefs
can be the subject not only to epistemic but also to ethical evaluation, insofar as they
lead to morally good or morally bad actions. On the other hand, our behavior also
inﬂuences our beliefs: For example, registering discrepancies between actions and
beliefs leads to cognitive dissonance, which in speciﬁc circumstances is resolved by
simply matching beliefs to the corresponding actions.2 For example, meat consump-
tion leads people to be less likely to attribute mental states and moral status to
animals.3 Given this, one might argue that not only our beliefs but also our actions
can be subject to epistemic evaluation—insofar as actions promote true or false
beliefs, they have not only practical but also epistemic consequences, and can be
epistemically evaluated on the basis of those consequences.
However, if tolerance is not a single, speciﬁc attitude, but instead there are a
variety of practical, intellectual and hybrid forms of tolerance, then it would proba-
bly ultimately be helpful to develop a taxonomy of different forms of tolerance. On
the basis of such a taxonomy, one could ﬁrst get an overview of what different ways
there are to tolerate a belief or an action in the ﬁrst place. In a second step, one could
then examine which forms of tolerance are of which importance for which contexts,
and how different forms of tolerance should be evaluated.
Furthermore, against the background of an appropriate taxonomy of different
forms of tolerance, considerations and arguments of traditional tolerance research
would also have to be reprocessed and classiﬁed. As we have seen, traditional
tolerance research has taken place almost exclusively within the framework of
practical philosophy, that is, political and moral philosophy. This does not mean,
however, that the results of this research are irrelevant to the study of non-practical
forms of tolerance. After all, practical, epistemic, and hybrid forms of tolerance are
not entirely independent attitudes, but rather different varieties of the same abstract
attitude. Accordingly, there will be fundamental commonalities, in view of which
some arguments originally related to practical forms of tolerance can be directly
applied to other forms of tolerance. For example, in the discussion of the instrumen-
tal rationality of epistemic tolerance, we have already become acquainted with the
fallibility argument, an argument that, although originally developed in the context
of practical considerations, can nevertheless be directly transferred to a discussion of
epistemic forms of tolerance without further ado.
The fact that such systematic tolerance research does not yet exist—at least to my
knowledge—is
somewhat
surprising
against
the
background
of
the
great
2For an introduction and overview of the research literature see, for example, Maio and Haddock
2009, especially Chap. 7.
3Loughnan et al. 2010.
128
7
Final Evaluation and Outlook

signiﬁcance that the concept of tolerance has for various social discourses. Given the
major ethical challenges we are currently facing and the recent populist tendencies in
political discourses, a well-founded orientation on how to adequately deal with
conﬂicting actions and beliefs is indispensable. In order to be able to offer such an
orientation, there is a particular need for corresponding philosophical research.
Philosophical tolerance research can and should make an important contribution in
this context.
7
Final Evaluation and Outlook
129

Bibliography
Adler, Jonathan (2002): Belief's own ethics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Adler, Jonathan (2004): Reconciling Open-Mindedness and Belief. In: Theory and Research in
Education 2 (2), S. 127–142.
Alston, William (1985): Concepts of Epistemic Justiﬁcation. In: The Monist 68 (1), S. 57–89.
Alston, William (1999): Perceptual Knowledge. In: John Greco und Ernest Sosa (Hg.): The
Blackwell guide to epistemology. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell. S. 223–242.
Audi, Robert (2012): Religion and Politics. In: David Estlund (Hg.): The Oxford Handbook of
Political Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. S. 223–240.
Baehr, Jason (2011): The Inquiring mind. On intellectual virtues and virtue epistemology. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Balg, Dominik; Constantin, Jan (2019): Die Epistemologie der Meinungsverschiedenheiten. In:
Martin
Grajner
und
Guido
Melchior
(Hg.):
Handbuch
Erkenntnistheorie.
Stuttgart:
Metzler. S. 295-301.
Ballantyne, Nathan; Coffman, E. J. (2011): Uniqueness, Evidence, and Rationality. In:
Philosophers' Imprint 11 (18), S. 1–13.
Bejan, Teresa M. (2017): Mere civility. Disagreement and the limits of toleration. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Bellman, Richard E.; Zadeh, LotﬁA. (2011): Local and Fuzzy Logics. In: Mario Bunge, J. Michael
Dunn und George Epstein (Hg.): Modern Uses of Multiple-Valued Logic. Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands. S. 103–165.
Bergmann, Michael (2005): Defeaters and Higher-Level Requirements. In: Philosophical Quarterly
55 (220), S. 419–436.
Berker, Selim (2013a): Epistemic Teleology and the Separateness of Propositions. In: Philosophical
Review 122 (3), S. 337–393.
Berker, Selim (2013b): The Rejection of Epistemic Consequentialism. In: Philosophical Issues
23 (1), S. 363–387.
Blanshard, Brand (2013): The Nature of Thought. London: Routledge.
Boghossian, Paul (2006): Fear of knowledge. Against relativism and constructivism. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Boghossian, Paul (2007): The Case against Epistemic Relativism. Replies to Rosen and Neta. In:
Episteme 4 (01), S. 49–65.
BonJour, Laurence (1985): The structure of empirical knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.
Bourget, David; Chalmers, David J. (2014): What do philosophers believe? In: Philosophical
Studies 170 (3), S. 465–500.
Briesen, Jochen (2017): Evidentielle Einzigkeit in klassischer und formaler Erkenntnistheorie. In:
Zeitschrift für Philosophische Forschung 71 (2), S. 183–222.
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
D. Balg, Live and Let Live, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-64040-1
131

Brown, Wendy (2000): Reﬂexionen über Toleranz im Zeitalter der Identität. In: Rainer Forst (Hg.):
Toleranz. Philosophische Grundlagen und gesellschaftliche Praxis einer umstrittenen Tugend.
Frankfurt am Main: Campus Verlag. S. 257–281.
Brueckner, Anthony; Bundy, Alex (2012): On “Epistemic Permissiveness”. In: Synthese 188 (2),
S. 165–177.
Bundesregierung (2017): Rede von Bundeskanzlerin Merkel im Rahmen des 500. Jahrestages der
Reformation am 31. Oktober 2017 in der Lutherstadt Wittenberg. Online verfügbar unter https://
www.bundesregierung.de/Content/DE/Rede/2017/11/2017-11-01-rede-merkel-
reformationsjubilaum.html?nn¼694676, zuletzt geprüft am 03.09.2018.
Burkard, Anne (2017): Everyone Just Has Their Own Opinion. In: Teaching Philosophy 40 (3),
S. 297-322.
Burnstein, Eugene; Sentis, Keith (1981): Attitude Polarization in Groups. In: Richard E. Petty,
Thomas M. Ostrom und Timothy C. Brock (Hg.): Cognitive Responses in Persuasion.
New York: Psychology Press. S. 197–216.
Carnap, Rudolf (1971): Logical Foundations of Probability. Fourth Impression. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Chang, Hasok (2012): Is Water H2O? Evidence, Realism and Pluralism. Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands.
Christensen, David (2007): Epistemology of Disagreement: The Good News. In: Philosophical
Review 116 (2), S. 187–217.
Christensen, David (2009): Disagreement as Evidence: The Epistemology of Controversy. In:
Philosophy Compass 4 (5), S. 756–767.
Christensen, David (2010): Higher Order Evidence. In: Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 81 (1), S. 185–215.
Comesaña, Juan; Tal, Eyal (2015): Evidence of evidence is evidence (trivially). In: Analysis, 75 (4),
S. 557-559.
Constantin, Jan; Grundmann, Thomas (2018): Epistemic Authority. Preemption Through
Undercutting Defeat. In: Synthese.
Cruz, Joe; Pollock, John (2004): The Chimerical Appeal of Epistemic Externalism. In: Richard
Schantz (Hg.): The externalist challenge. Berlin: De Gruyter. S. 125–142.
David, Marian (2001): Truth as the Epistemic Goal. In: Matthias Steup (Hg.): Knowledge, Truth,
and Duty. Essays on epistemic justiﬁcation, responsibility, and virtue. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press. S. 151–169.
Dawson, Erica; Gilovich, Thomas; Regan, Dennis T. (2016): Motivated Reasoning and Perfor-
mance on the Wason Selection Task. In: Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 28 (10),
S. 1379–1387.
Deutsche Presse-Agentur (2016): Papst-Botschaft: Frieden, Toleranz und Versöhnung. In:
Süddeutsche Zeitung, 03.08.2016.
Online verfügbar unter http://www.sueddeutsche.de/news/sport/olympia-papst-botschaft-
friedentoleranz-und-versoehnung-dpa.urn-newsml-dpa-com-20090101-160803-99-918844, zuletzt
geprüft am 03.09.2018.
Dormandy, Katherine (2017): Epistemic Authority. Preemption or Proper Basing? In: Erkenntnis
6 (4), S. 773-791.
Douven, Igor (2009): Uniqueness revisited. In: American Philosophical Quarterly 46 (4),
S. 347–361.
Douven, Igor; Kelp, Christoph (2011): Truth Approximation, Social Epistemology, and Opinion
Dynamics. In: Erkenntnis 75 (2), S. 271–283.
Enoch, David (2015): Against Public Reaon. In: David Sobel, Peter Vallentyne und Steven Wall
(Hg.): Oxford studies in political philosophy. Volume 1. First edition. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press. S. 112–142.
Enoch, David (2017): Political Philosophy and Epistemology. The Case of Public Reason. In:
David Sobel, Peter Vallentyne und Steven Wall (Hg.): Oxford studies in political philosophy.
Volume 3. First edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. S. 132-165.
132
Bibliography

Fantl, Jeremy; McGrath, Matthew (2002): Evidence, Pragmatics, and Justiﬁcation. In: The Philo-
sophical Review 111 (1), S. 67–94.
Feldman, Richard (2005): Respecting the Evidence. In: Philosophical Perspectives 19 (1), S. 95–
119.
Feldman, Richard (2007): Reasonable Religious Disagreements. In: Louise M. Antony (Hg.):
Philosophers Without Gods. Meditations on Atheism and the Secular Life. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. S. 194–214.
Fischer, Klaus (2013): Toleranz und Wissenschaft. In: Hamid Reza Youseﬁund Harald Seubert
(Hg.): Toleranz im Weltkontext. Geschichten – Erscheinungsformen – Neue Entwicklungen.
Wiesbaden: Springer. S. 303–312.
Fitelson, Branden (2012): Evidence of evidence is not (necessarily) evidence. In: Analysis 72 (1),
S. 85–88.
Forst, Rainer (2003): Toleranz im Konﬂikt. Geschichte, Gehalt und Gegenwart eines umstrittenen
Begriffs. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Forst, Rainer (2017): Toleration. In: Edward N. Zalta (Hg.): The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Fall 2017 Edition).
Friedman, Jane (2017): Why Suspend Judging? In: Noûs 51 (2), S. 302–326.
Frimer, Jeremy A.; Skitka, Linda J.; Motyl, Matt (2017): Liberals and conservatives are similarly
motivated to avoid exposure to one another's opinions. In: Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 72, S. 1–12.
Gelfert, Axel (2011): Who is an Epistemic Peer? In: Logos & Episteme 2 (04), S. 507–514.
Gibbons, John (2013): The Norm of Belief. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goldberg, Sanford (2010): Relying on others. An essay in epistemology. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Goldman, Alvin I. (1976): Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge. In: The Journal of Philoso-
phy 73 (20), S. 771–791.
Goldman, Alvin I. (1986): Epistemology and cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.
Goldman, Alvin I. (1988): Strong and Weak Justiﬁcation. In: Philosophical Perspectives 2, S. 51-
69.
Goldman, Alvin I. (1993): Epistemic Folkways and Scientiﬁc Epistemology. In: Philosophical
Issues 3, S. 271-285.
Goldman, Alvin I. (2015): Reliabilism, Veritism, and Epistemic Consequentialism. In: Episteme
12 (02), S. 131–143.
Goldman, Alvin I. (2016): Social Epistemology. In: Edward N. Zalta (Hg.): The Stanford Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 Edition).
Graham, Gordon (1998): Tolerance, Pluralism, and Relativism. In: David Heyd (Hg.): Toleration.
An Elusive Virtue. Princeton: Princeton University Press. S. 44–59.
Graham, Peter J. (2013): Does Justiﬁcation Aim at Truth? In: Canadian Journal of Philosophy
41 (1), S. 51–71.
Grimm, Stephen R. (2009): Epistemic Normativity. In: Alan Millar, Adrian Haddock und Duncan
Pritchard (Hg.): Epistemic value. Oxford: Oxford University Press. S. 243–264.
Grundmann, Thomas (2009): Ist Wissen erkenntnistheoretisch fundamental? Eine Kritik an
Williamson. In: Gerhard Schönrich (Hg.): Wissen und Werte. Paderborn: Mentis. S. 45–71.
Grundmann, Thomas (2011): Defeasibility Theory. In: Sven Bernecker und Duncan Pritchard
(Hg.): The Routledge companion to epistemology. London: Routledge. S. 156–166.
Grundmann, Thomas (2013): Doubts about Philosophy? The Alleged Challenge from Disagree-
ment. In: Tim Henning und David P. Schweikard (Hg.): Knowledge, Virtue, and Action.
Hoboken: Taylor and Francis. S. 72–98.
Grundmann, Thomas (2015): Die Epistemologie stabiler Dissense in der Philosophie. In: Dirk
Koppelberg und Stefan Tolksdorf (Hg.): Erkenntnistheorie – wie und wozu? Münster:
Mentis. S. 463–486.
Bibliography
133

Hájek, Alan (2012): Interpretations of Probability. In: Edward N. Zalta (Hg.): The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2012 Edition).
Hallsson, Bjørn G.; Kappel, Klemens (2018): Disagreement and the division of epistemic labor. In:
Synthese 29 (2), S. 97–122.
Hare, William (1979): Open-mindedness and education. Kingston: McGill-Queen's University
Press.
Harrison, Geoffrey (1976): Relativism and Tolerance. In: Ethics 86 (2), S. 122–135.
Hazlett, Allan (2012): Higher-Order Epistemic Attitudes and Intellectual Humility. In: Episteme
9 (03), S. 205–223.
Höffe, Otfried (1979): Ethik und Politik. Grundmodelle und -probleme der praktischen Philosophie.
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Horton, John (1998): Toleration as a Virtue. In: David Heyd (Hg.): Toleration. An Elusive Virtue.
Princeton: Princeton University Press. S. 28–43.
Horvath, Joachim; Wiegmann, Alex (2016): Intuitive expertise and intuitions about knowledge. In:
Philosophical Studies 173 (10), S. 2701–2726.
Jäger, Christoph (2016): Epistemic Authority, Preemptive Reasons, and Understanding. In:
Episteme 13 (02), S. 167–185.
Johnson, George (1996): Indian Tribes' Creationists Thwart Archeologists. In: New York Times,
22.10.1996.
Jones, Martin; Sugden, Robert (2001): Positive conﬁrmation bias in the acquisition of information.
In: Theory and Decision 50 (1), S. 59–99.
Kahan, Dan M.; Peters, Ellen; Dawson, Erica Cantrell; Slovic, Paul (2017): Motivated numeracy
and enlightened self-government. In: Behavioural Public Policy 1 (01), S. 54–86.
Kaplan, Benjamin J. (2009): Divided by faith. Religious conﬂict and the practice of toleration in
early modern Europe. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Kelly, Thomas (2003): Epistemic rationality as instrumental rationality: a critique. In: Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 66 (3), S. 612–640.
Kelly, Thomas (2010): Peer disagreement and higher order evidence. In: Richard Feldman und Ted
A. Warﬁeld (Hg.): Disagreement. Oxford: Oxford University Press, S. 111–174.
Kelp, Christoph; Douven, Igor (2012): Sustaining a rational disagreement. In: Henk W. de Regt,
Stephan Hartmann und Samir Okasha (Hg.): EPSA Philosophy of Science: Amsterdam 2009.
Dordrecht: Springer. S. 101–110.
Kim, Hye-Kyung; Wreen, Michael (2003): Relativism, Absolutism, and Tolerance. In:
Metaphilosophy 34 (4), S. 447–459.
King, Preston T. (1998): Toleration. London: Frank Cass.
King, Nathan L. (2012): Disagreement. What’s the Problem? Or A Good Peer is Hard to Find. In:
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 85 (2), S. 249–272.
Kitz, Volker (2018): Ertragt euch! In: DIE ZEIT, 07.03.2018 (11/2018). Online verfügbar unter
https://www.zeit.de/2018/11/demokratie-toleranz-gesellschaft-wahrheit-meinung-vielfalt, zuletzt
geprüft am 03.09.2018.
Kölbel, Max (2004a): III-Faultless Disagreement. In: Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
(Hardback) 104 (1), S. 53–73.
Kölbel, Max (2004b): Indexical relativism versus genuine relativism. In: International Journal of
Philosophical Studies 12 (3), S. 297–313.
Kotzen, Matthew (2010): A Formal Account of Epistemic Defeat. Manuskript, 24.03.2010. Online
verfügbar unter http://www.ﬁtelson.org/seminar/kotzen.pdf, zuletzt geprüft am 03.09.2018
Kuhn, Thomas S. (1970): The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
Kvanvig, Jonathan L. (2003): The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lacey, Hugh (2012): Pluralismo metodológico, incomensurabilidade e o status cientíﬁco do
conhecimento tradicional. In: Scientiae Studia 10 (3), S. 425–454.
134
Bibliography

Lackey, Jennifer (2010): A Justiﬁcationist View of Disagreement's Epistemic Signiﬁcance. In:
Adrian Haddock, Alan Millar und Duncan Pritchard (Hg.): Social Epistemology. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. S. 298–332.
Lasersohn, Peter (2005): Context Dependence, Disagreement, and Predicates of Personal Taste. In:
Linguistics and Philosophy 28 (6), S. 643–686.
Leplin, Jarrett (2009): A theory of epistemic justiﬁcation. Dordrecht: Springer.
Littlejohn, Clayton (2012): Justiﬁcation and the truth-connection. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Locke, John (2013): A letter concerning toleration. In: Kerry Walters (Hg.): A Letter Concerning
Toleration. John Locke. Peterborough: Broadview Press. S. 43–90.
Lohmar, Achim (2010): Was ist eigentlich Toleranz? In: Zeitschrift für Philosophische Forschung
64 (1), S. 8–32.
Lohmar, Achim (2015): Die Nachsichtigkeitskonzeption der Toleranz. Eine Replik auf Peter
Königs. In: Zeitschrift für Philosophische Forschung 69 (1), S. 61–72.
Loughnan, Steve; Haslam, Nick; Bastian, Brock (2010): The role of meat consumption in the denial
of moral status and mind to meat animals. In: Appetite 55 (1), S. 156–159.
Luper, Steven (2004): Epistemic Relativism. In: Philosophical Issues 14 (1), S. 271–295.
MacFarlane, John (2009): Varieties of disagreement. Manuskript, 18.06.2009. Online verfügbar
unter http://johnmacfarlane.net/varieties.pdf.
Maio, Gregory R.; Haddock, Geoffrey (2009): The Psychology of Attitudes and Attitude Change.
London: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Majors, Brad; Sawyer, Sarah (2007): Entitlement, opacity, and connection. In: Sanford Goldberg
(Hg.): Internalism and externalism in semantics and epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. S. 131–159.
Markovits, Henry; Nantel, Guilaine (1989): The belief-bias effect in the production and evaluation
of logical conclusions. In: Memory & Cognition 17 (1), S. 11–17.
Matheson, Jonathan (2015): Disagreement and Epistemic Peers. Oxford Handbooks Online. Online
verfügbar
unter
http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/97801
99935314.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199935314-e-13, zuletzt geprüft am 03.09.2018.
Meacham, Christopher J. G. (2014): Impermissive Bayesianism. In: Erkenntnis 79 (S6), S. 1185–
1217.
Mill, John Stuart (2015): On Liberty. In: Mark Philp und Frederick Rosen (Hg.): John Stuart Mill.
On Liberty, Utilitarianism, and Other Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press. S. 5–112.
Moran, Richard (2003): Responses to O'Brien and Shoemaker. In: European Journal of Philosophy
11 (3), S. 402–419.
Moretti, Luca (2016): Tal and Comesaña on evidence of evidence. In: The Reasoner 10 (5),
S. 38–39.
Neta, Ram (2007): In Defense of Epistemic Relativism. In: Episteme 4 (1), S. 30–48.
Nozick, Robert (1974): Anarchy, State and Utopia. New York: Basic Books.
Nyhan, Brendan; Reiﬂer, Jason (2010): When Corrections Fail. The Persistence of Political
Misperceptions. In: Political Behavior 32 (2), S. 303–330.
Oswald, Margit E.; Grosjean, Stefan (2004): Conﬁrmation bias. In: Rüdiger Pohl (Hg.): Cognitive
illusions. A handbook on fallacies and biases in thinking, judgement and memory. New York:
Psychology Press. S. 79–96.
Palermos, Orestis; Pritchard, Duncan (2013): Extended Knowledge and Social Epistemology. In:
Social Epistemology Review and Reply Collective 2 (8), S. 105–120.
Papineau, David (2013): There Are No Norms Of Belief. In: Timothy Chan (Hg.): The aim of
belief. Oxford: Oxford University Press. S. 64–80.
Park, Won-Woo (1990): A Review of research on Groupthink. In: Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making 3 (4), S. 229–245.
Popper, Karl R. (1984): Duldsamkeit und intellektuelle Verantwortlichkeit. In: Ders. (Hg.): Auf der
Suche nach einer besseren Welt. Vorträge und Aufsätze aus dreißig Jahren. München:
Piper. S. 213-229.
Bibliography
135

Price, Huw (1998): Three Norms of Assertibility, or how the MOA became extinct. In: Philosophi-
cal Perspectives 12, S. 41–54.
Price, Huw (2003): Truth as Convenient Friction. In: Journal of Philosophy 100, S. 167–190.
Priest, Maura (2016): Inferior Disagreement. In: Acta Analytica 31 (3), S. 263–283.
Priest, Maura (2017): Intellectual Humility. An Interpersonal Theory. In: Ergo, an Open Access
Journal of Philosophy 4 (20171025).
Pritchard, Duncan (2007): Recent work on epistemic value. In: American Philosophical Quarterly
44 (2), S. 85–110.
Pritchard, Duncan (2009): Defusing epistemic relativism. In: Synthese 166 (2), S. 397–412.
Pritchard, Duncan (2010): Cognitive ability and the extended cognition thesis. In: Synthese
175 (S1), S. 133–151.
Pritchard, Duncan (2012): Epistemological disjunctivism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rawls, John (2001): Justice as fairness. A restatement. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press.
Rawls, John (2005): Political liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press.
Raz, Joseph (2002): Practical reason and norms. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Reilly, Katie (2016): Read Barack Obama's Final Speech to the United Nations as President. In:
TIME, 20.09.2016.
Riggs, Wayne (2010): Open-Mindedness. In: Metaphilosophy 41 (1-2), S. 172–188.
Roberts, Robert C.; Wood, W. Jay (2003): Humility and Epistemic Goods. In: Michael Raymond
DePaul und Linda Zagzebski (Hg.): Intellectual virtue. Perspectives from ethics and epistemol-
ogy. Oxford: Clarendon Press. S. 257–280.
Robitzsch, Andrea (2019): An Externalist Approach to Epistemic Responsibility. Intellectual
Norms and their Place in Social Epistemology. Dordrecht: Springer.
Roche, William (2014): Evidence of Evidence is Evidence under Screening-Off. In: Episteme
11 (01), S. 119–124.
Roche, William (2018): Is evidence of evidence evidence? Screening-off vs. no-defeaters. In:
Episteme 15 (04), S. 451-462.
Rosen, Gideon (2001): Nominalism, Naturalism, Philosophical Relativism. In: Noûs 35 (15),
S. 69–91.
Rosen, Gideon (2007): The Case Against Epistemic Relativism: Reﬂections on Chapter 6 of Fear of
Knowledge. In: Episteme 4 (1), S. 10–29.
Schafer, Karl (2011): Faultless Disagreement and Aesthetic Realism. In: Philosophy and Phenom-
enological Research 82 (2), S. 265–286.
Schoenﬁeld, Miriam (2014): Permission to Believe. Why Permissivism Is True and What It Tells Us
About Irrelevant Inﬂuences on Belief. In: Noûs 48 (2), S. 193–218.
Šešelja, Dunja; Straßer, Christian; Wieland, Jan Willem (2015): Withstanding Tensions. Scientiﬁc
Disagreement and Epistemic Tolerance. In: Emiliano Ippoliti (Hg.): Heuristic Reasoning.
Cham: Springer International Publishing. S. 113–146.
Sieger, Gerd Joachim (1965): Toleranz im Staat. Hannover: Niedersächsische Landeszentrale für
Politische Bildung (Schriftenreihe der Niedersächsischen Landeszentrale für Politische Bildung
Reihe A, 14).
Sosa, Ernest (2009): A virtue epistemology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Sosa, Ernest (2010): The Epistemology of Disagreement. In: Adrian Haddock, Alan Millar und
Duncan Pritchard (Hg.): Social Epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. S. 278–297.
Spiegel, James S. (2012): Open-mindedness and intellectual humility. In: Theory and Research in
Education 10 (1), S. 27–38.
Sudduth, Michael (2017): Defeaters in Epistemology. In: James Fieser, Bradley Dowden (Hg.):
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Taber, Charles S.; Lodge, Milton (2006): Motivated Skepticism in the Evaluation of Political
Beliefs. In: American Journal of Political Science 50 (3), S. 755–769.
Tal, Eyal; Comesaña, Juan (2017): Is Evidence of Evidence Evidence? In: Noûs 51 (1), S. 95– 112.
Thune, Michael (2010): Religious Belief and the Epistemology of Disagreement. In: Philosophy
Compass 5 (8), S. 712–724.
136
Bibliography

Tilley, John J. (1994): Cultural Relativism and Tolerance. In: Lyceum 6 (1), S. 1–11. UNESCO
(1995): Erklärung von Prinzipien der Toleranz. Online verfügbar unter https://www.unesco.de/
sites/default/ﬁles/2018-03/1995_Erkl%C3%A4
rung%20%C3%BCber%20die%20Prinzipien
%20der%20Toleranz.pdf, zuletzt geprüft am 03.09.2018.
Vahid, Hamid (2009): The Epistemology of Belief. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Vallier, Kevin (2018): Public Justiﬁcation. In: Edward N. Zalta (Hg.): The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy (Spring 2018 Edition).
van Inwagen, Peter (1996): It Is Wrong, Everywhere, Always, for Anyone, to Believe Anything
upon Insufﬁcient Evidence. In: Jeff Jordan (Hg.): Faith, freedom, and rationality. Philosophy of
religion today. Lanham: Rowman & Littleﬁeld. S. 137–154.
Voltaire; Benda, Julien; Naves, Raymond (1954): Dictionnaire philosophique. Comprenant les
118 articles parus sous ce titre du vivant de Voltaire avec leurs suppléments parus dans les
questions sur l'encyclopédie. Paris: Garnier.
Wedgwood, Ralph (2002): The Aim of Belief. In: Philosophical Perspectives 36 (16), S. 267– 297.
Wendel, Hans-Jürgen (2001): Toleranz und Wahrheit. In: Logos (1-2), S. 171–186.
Werning, Markus (2009): The Evolutionary and Social Preference for Knowledge. How to solve
Meno's Problem within Reliabilism. In: Grazer Philosophische Studien 79, S. 137–156.
Whitcomb, Dennis; Battaly, Heather; Baehr, Jason; Howard-Snyder, Daniel (2017): Intellectual
Humility. Owning Our Limitations. In: Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 94 (3),
S. 509–539.
White, Roger (2005): Epistemic Permissiveness. In: Philosophical Perspectives 19 (1), S. 445–
459.
White, Roger (2014): Evidence Cannot Be Permissive. In: Matthias Steup (Hg.): Contemporary
Debates in Epistemology. New York: Wiley. S. 312–323.
Whiting, Daniel (2016): Against Second-Order Reasons. In: Noûs 49 (4), S. 1–23.
Wiggins, David (1998): A Sensible Subjectivism? In: Ders. (Hg.): Needs, values, truth. Essays in
the philosophy of value. Oxford: Clarendon Press. S. 185–211.
Williams, Michael (2001): Problems of knowledge. A critical introduction to epistemology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williamson, Timothy (2002): Knowledge and its limits. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williamson, Timothy (2015): "Tetralogue: I'm Right, You're Wrong". Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wright, Crispin (2001): On being in a quandary. Relativism vagueness logical revisionism. In:
Mind 110 (437), S. 45–98.
Zadeh, LotﬁA. (1975): Fuzzy logic and approximate reasoning. In: Synthese 30 (3-4), S. 407– 428.
Zagzebski, Linda Trinkaus (2012): Epistemic authority. A theory of trust, authority, and autonomy
in belief. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zollman, Kevin J. S. (2010): The Epistemic Beneﬁt of Transient Diversity. In: Erkenntnis 72 (1),
S. 17–35.
Bibliography
137

