132
Counterfactuals in Quantum Mechanics
Counterfactuals in Quantum Mechanics
Lev Vaidman
Counterfactuals in quantum mechanics appear in discussions of (a)  nonlocality,
(b) pre- and post-selected systems, and (c)  interaction-free measurement; Quan-
tum interrogation. Only the ﬁrst two issues are related to counterfactuals as they are
considered in the general philosophical literature:
If it were that A, then it would be that B.
The truth value of a counterfactual is decided by the analysis of similarities between
the actual and possible counterfactual worlds [1].
The difference between a counterfactual (or counterfactual conditional) and a
simple conditional: If A, then B, is that in the actual world A is not true and we
need some “miracle” in the counterfactual world to make it true. In the analysis
of counterfactuals out of the scope of physics, this miracle is crucial for deciding
whether B is true. In physics, however, miracles are not involved. Typically:
A : A measurement M is performed
B : The outcome of M has property P.
Physical theory does not deal with the questions of which measurement and whether
a particular measurement is performed? Physics yields conditionals: “If Ai, then
Bi”. The reason why in some cases these conditionals are considered to be coun-
terfactual is that several conditionals with incompatible premises Ai are considered
with regard to a single system.
The most celebrated example is the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen ( EPR prob-
lem) argument in which incompatible measurements of the position or, instead, the
momentum of a particle are considered. Stapp has applied a formal calculus of coun-
terfactuals to various EPR-type proofs [2,3] and in spite of extensive criticism [4–9],
continues to claim that the nonlocality of quantum mechanics can be proved without
the assumption “reality” [10].
Let me give here just the main point of this controversy. Stapp provides elaborate
arguments in which an a priori uncertain outcome of a measurement of O in one
location might depend on the measurements performed on an entangled quantum
particle in another location. But if anything is different in a counterfactual world, the
outcome of the measurement of O need not be the same as in the actual world. The
core of the difﬁculty is this randomness of the outcomes of quantum measurements.
The formal philosophical analysis of counterfactuals which uses similarity criteria,
presupposes that in a counterfactual world which is identical to the actual world in
all relevant aspects up until the measurement of O, the outcome has to be the same.
Thus, Stapp’s analysis tacitly adopts the counterfactual deﬁniteness [4, 5] which is
essentially equivalent to “reality” or  hidden variables and which is absent in the
conventional quantum theory.

Counterfactuals in Quantum Mechanics
133
C
Important examples of quantum counterfactuals are elements of reality. Consider
the following deﬁnition [11]:
If we can infer with certainty that the result of measuring at time t of an observable O is o,
then, at time t, there exists an element of reality O = o.
If we consider several elements of reality which cannot be veriﬁed together, we
obtain counterfactuals. A celebrated example is the Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger
( GHZ) entangled state of three spin- 1
2 particles [4,13]:
|⟩=
1
√
2
(|↑⟩A|↑⟩B|↑⟩C −|↓⟩A|↓⟩B|↓⟩C).
(1)
We consider spin component measurements of these three particles in the x and y
directions. The counterfactuals (the elements of reality) have a more general form
than merely “the value of O is o”, they are properties of a set of three measurements:
{σAx}{σBx}{σCx} = −1,
{σAx}{σBy}{σCy} = 1,
(2)
{σAy}{σBx}{σCy} = 1,
{σAy}{σBy}{σCx} = 1.
Here {σAx} signiﬁes the outcome of a measurement of σx of particle A, etc. Since
one cannot measure for the same particle both σx and σy at the same time, this is
a set of counterfactuals. It is a very important set because no local hidden variable
theory can ensure such outcomes with certainty; there is no solution for the set of
equations (2).
Lewis’s theory of counterfactuals is asymmetric in time [14]. The counterfactual
worlds have to be identical to the actual world during the whole time before A,
but not after. This creates difﬁculty in applications of counterfactuals to physics
and especially to quantum mechanics because “before” and “after” are not ab-
solute concepts. Different Lorentz observers might see different time ordering of
measurements performed at different places. Finkelstein [15] and Bigaj [16] have
attempted to deﬁne time asymmetric counterfactuals to overcome this difﬁculty. But
in my view, the time asymmetry of quantum counterfactuals is an unnecessary bur-
den [17]. We can consider a time symmetric (or time neutral) deﬁnition of quantum
counterfactuals.
The general strategy of counterfactual theory is to ﬁnd counterfactual worlds
closest to the actual world. In the standard approach, the worlds must be close only
before the measurement. In the time-symmetric approach, the counterfactual worlds
should be close to the actual world both before and after the measurement at time t.
Quantum theory allows for a natural and non-trivial deﬁnition of “close” worlds as
follows: all outcomes of all measurements performed before and after the measure-
ment of O at time t are the same in the actual and counterfactual worlds.

134
Counterfactuals in Quantum Mechanics
A peculiar example of time symmetric counterfactuals is the three box paradox
[18]. Consider a single particle prepared at time t1 in a  superposition of being in
three separate boxes:
|1⟩=
1
√
3
(|A⟩+ |B⟩+ |C⟩).
(3)
At a later time t2 the particle is found in another superposition:
|2⟩=
1
√
3
(|A⟩+ |B⟩−|C⟩).
(4)
For this pre- and post-selected particle, a set of counterfactual statements, which
are elements of reality according to the above deﬁnition, is:
PA = 1,
PB = 1.
(5)
Or, in words: if we open box A, we ﬁnd the particle there for sure; if we open box
B (instead), we also ﬁnd the particle there for sure. Indeed, not ﬁnding the particle
in box A (or B) collapses the pre-selected state (3) to a state which is orthogonal to
the post-selected state (4).
Beyond these counterfactual statements, there are numerous manifestations of
the claim that in some sense, this single particle is indeed in two boxes simultane-
ously. A single photon which interacts with this particle scatters as if there are two
particles: one in A and one in B, but two or more photons ( light quantum) do
not “see” two particles. Many photons see this single particle as two particles if the
photons interact weakly with the particle. Indeed, there is a useful theorem which
says that if a strong measurement of an observable O yields a particular outcome
with probability 1, (i.e. there is an element of reality) then a weak measurement
yields the same outcome. Sometime this is called a weak-measurement element of
reality [19]. The outcomes of weak measurements are weak values ( weak value
and weak measurements):
(PA)w = 1,
(PB)w = 1.
(6)
Contrary to the set of counterfactuals above, the weak measurements can be per-
formed simultaneously both in box A and box B. Thus, the existence of counterfac-
tuals helps us to know the outcome of real (weak) measurement.
The three-box paradox and other time-symmetric quantum counterfactuals have
raised a signiﬁcant controversy [11, 20, 21, 21–28]. It seems that the core of the
controversy is that quantum counterfactuals about the results of measurements of
 observables, and especially “elements of reality” are understood as attributing
values to observables which are not observed. But this is completely foreign to quan-
tum mechanics. Unperformed experiments have no results! “Element of reality” is

Counterfactuals in Quantum Mechanics
135
C
just a shorthand for describing a situation in which we know with certainty the
outcome of a measurement if it is to be performed, which in turn helps us to know
how weakly coupled particles are inﬂuenced by the system. Having “elements of
reality” does not mean having values for observables. The semantics are misleading
since “elements of reality” are not “real” in the ontological sense.
An attempt to give counterfactuals some ontological sense, at the cost of plac-
ing artiﬁcial constraints on the context in which counterfactuals are considered, was
made by Grifﬁths [29]. He showed that counterfactuals have no paradoxical fea-
tures when only  consistent histories are considered. Another recent step in this
direction are quantum counterfactuals in very restrictive “measurement-ready” situ-
ations [30].
Penrose [31] used the term “counterfactuals” in a very different sense:
Counterfactuals are things that might have happened, although they did not in fact happen.
In interaction-free measurements [32], an object is found because it might have
absorbed a photon, although actually it did not. This idea has been applied to
“counterfactual computation” [33], a setup in which the outcome of a computation
becomes known in spite of the fact that the computer did not run the algorithm (in
case of one particular outcome [34]).
In the framework of the  Many-Worlds Interpretation, Penrose’s “counterfac-
tuals” are counterfactual only in one world. The physical Universe incorporates
all worlds, and, in particular, the world in which Penrose’s “counterfactual” is
actual, the world in which the “counterfactual” computer actually performed the
computation.
This work has been supported in part by the European Commission under the
Integrated Project Qubit Applications (QAP) funded by the IST directorate as Con-
tract Number 015848 and by grant 990/06 of the Israel Science Foundation.
Literature
1. D. Lewis: Counterfactuals. Oxford, Blackwell (1973).
2. H.P. Stapp: S-Matrix interpretation of quantum theory. Phys. Rev. D 3, 1303 (1971).
3. H.P. Stapp: Nonlocal character of quantum theory. Am. J. Phys. 65, 300 (1997).
4. B. Skyrms: Counterfactual deﬁniteness and local causation. Phil. Sci. 49, 43 (1982).
5. M. Redhead: Incompleteness, Nonlocality, and Realism: A Prolegomenon to the Philosophy of
Quantum Mechanics. New York, Oxford University Press (1987).
6. R.K. Clifton, J.N. Butterﬁeld, M. Redhead: Nonlocal inﬂuences and possible worlds – a Stapp
in the wrong direction. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 41, 5 (1990).
7. D. Mermin: Nonlocal character of quantum theory? Am. J. Phys. 66, 920 (1998).
8. W. Unruh: Nonlocality, counterfactuals, and quantum mechanics. Phys. Rev. A 59, 126 (1999).
9. A. Shimony, H. Stein: Comment on Nonlocal character of quantum theory, Am. J. Phys. 69,
848 (2001).
10. H.P. Stapp: Comments on Shimony’s an analysis of Stapp’s ‘a Bell-type theorem without hidden
variables’, Found. Phys. 36, 73 (2006).
11. L. Vaidman: The meaning of elements of reality and quantum counterfactuals: Reply to
Kastner. Found. Phys. 29, 856 (1999).

136
Covariance
12. D.M. Greenberger, M.A. Horne, A. Zeilinger: Going beyond Bell’s theorem. In Bell Theorem,
Quantum Theory and Conceptions of the Universe, M. Kafatos, ed., p. 69, Dordrecht, Kluwer,
(1989).
13. N.D. Mermin: Quantum mysteries revisited. Am. J. Phys. 58, 731 (1990).
14. D. Lewis: Counterfactual dependence and time’s arrow. Nous 13, 455 (1979).
15. J. Finkelstein: Space-time counterfactuals. Synthese 119, 287 (1999).
16. T. Bigaj: Counterfactuals and spatiotemporal events. Synthese 142, 1 (2004).
17. L. Vaidman: Time-symmetrized counterfactuals in quantum theory. Found. Phys. 29, 755
(1999).
18. Y. Aharonov, L. Vaidman: Complete description of a quantum system at a given time. J. Phys.
A 24, 2315 (1991).
19. L. Vaidman: Weak-measurement elements of reality. Found. Phys. 26, 895 (1996).
20. W.D. Sharp, N. Shanks: The rise and fall of time-symmetrized quantum mechanics. Philos. Sci.
60, 488 (1993).
21. R.E. Kastner: Time-symmetrised quantum theory, counterfactuals and ‘advanced action’. Stud.
Hist. Philos. Mod. Phy. 30 B, 237 (1999).
22. L. Vaidman: Defending time-symmetrised quantum counterfactuals. Stud. Hist. Philos. Mod.
Phy. 30 B, 337 (1999).
23. R.E. Kastner: The three-box paradox and other reasons to reject the counterfactual usage of
the ABL rule. Found. Phys. 29, 851 (1999).
24. R.E. Kastner: The nature of the controversy over time-symmetric quantum counterfactuals.
Phil. Sci. 70, 145 (2003).
25. L. Vaidman: (2003) Discussion: Time-Symmetric Quantum Counterfactuals. e-print: PITT-
PHIL-SCI000001108 (2003).
26. U. Mohrhoff: Objective probabilities, quantum counterfactuals, and the ABL rule A response
to R. E. Kastner. Am. J. Phys. 69, 864 (2001).
27. K.A. Kirkpatrick: Classical three-box ‘paradox’. J. Phys. A 36, 4891 (2003).
28. T. Ravon, L. Vaidman: The three-box paradox revisited. J. Phys. A 40, 2882 (2007).
29. R.B. Grifﬁths: Consistent quantum counterfactuals. Phys. Rev. A 60, R5 (1999).
30. D.J. Miller: Counterfactual reasoning in time-symmetric quantum mechanics. Found. Phys.
Lett. 19, 321 (2006).
31. R. Penrose: Shadows of the Mind. Oxford, Oxford University Press (1994).
32. A.C. Elitzur, L. Vaidman: Quantum mechanical interaction-free measurements. Found. Phys.
23, 987 (1993).
33. G. Mitchison, R. Jozsa: Counterfactual Computation. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 457, 1175 (2001).
34. L. Vaidman: Impossibility of the counterfactual computation for all possible outcomes. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 98, 160403 (2007).
Covariance
K. Mainzer
Covariance means form invariance, i.e. the form of a physical law is unchanged
(invariant) with respect to transformations of reference systems. Covariance can be
distinguished from  invariance which refers to quantities and objects [2]. The co-
variant formulation of laws implies that the form of laws is independent of the state
of motion in a reference system that an observer takes. In that sense, all fundamental

