Structural 
Genomics and 
Drug Discovery
Wayne F. Anderson Editor
Methods and Protocols
Methods in 
Molecular Biology   1140

 M E T H O D S I N M O L E C U L A R B I O LO G Y
Series Editor
John M. Walker
School of Life Sciences
University of Hertfordshire
Hat ﬁ eld, Hertfordshire, AL10 9AB, UK 
 For further volumes:
  http://www.springer.com/series/7651  

   

 Structural Genomics 
and Drug Discovery 
 Methods and Protocols 
 Edited by 
 Wayne F.  Anderson
Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases,
Midwest Center for Structural Genomics,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA 

 ISSN 1064-3745 
ISSN 1940-6029 (electronic)
ISBN 978-1-4939-0353-5     ISBN 978-1-4939-0354-2 (eBook) 
 DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2 
 Springer New York Heidelberg Dordrecht London 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2014931091 
 © Springer Science+Business Media New York   2014 
 This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is 
concerned, speciﬁ cally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction 
on microﬁ lms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, 
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this 
legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁ cally for 
the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. 
Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the 
Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions 
for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution 
under the respective Copyright Law. 
 The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not 
imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁ c statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and 
regulations and therefore free for general use. 
 While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication, neither 
the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be 
made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein. 
 Printed on acid-free paper 
 Humana Press is a brand of Springer
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com) 
 Editor 
 Wayne F.   Anderson  
 Center for Structural Genomics 
 of Infectious Diseases
Midwest Center for 
 Structural Genomics
Northwestern University Feinberg 
 School of Medicine  
Chicago,  IL ,  USA 

 For Caroline, who has been a wonderful partner for nearly 50 years and made this, as well 
as everything else, possible. 
 Dedication 

   

vii
 “Structural Genomics” as an area of investigation arose from the recognition that genome 
sequence information could be combined with improved methods for macromolecular 
structure determination to allow high-throughput structure determination. One of the 
early justiﬁ cations for developing the ﬁ eld was the potential to make use of the structural 
information in drug discovery efforts. All three of these areas, genome sequencing, macro-
molecular structure determination, and structure-aided drug discovery, have seen dramatic 
improvements in technology and methodology. 
 This volume focuses on high-throughput structure determination methods and how 
they can be applied to lay the groundwork for structure-aided drug discovery. The methods 
and protocols that are described can be applied in any laboratory interested in using detailed 
structural information to advance the initial stages of drug discovery. Due to the advances 
in technology and methodology that have occurred during the past 10–15 years, even the 
nonspecialist can apply structural biology to most biomedical problems. The methods and 
approaches that distinguish structural genomics from “classical” structural biology have 
been decreasing as more and more research groups adopt high-throughput methods and 
apply them to their speciﬁ c biological research problems. 
 In some respects, structure-aided drug discovery is very speciﬁ c to the one particular 
protein target being studied and the approaches of structural genomics would not seem to 
be appropriate. However, if one looks at the problem broadly, there often is more than one 
protein that could be targeted, and when multiple proteins are being investigated, the 
advantages of carrying out most of the steps in parallel can increase productivity. 
 The initial chapters deal with bioinformatics and data management because selecting 
target proteins and planning how the large amount of diverse data will be handled are the 
ﬁ rst steps. Following these are the chapters on high-throughput methods for cloning, 
expression and solubility testing, protein production, puriﬁ cation, crystallization screening, 
and screening for suitability for NMR structure determination. One of the continuing 
problems faced by structural genomics efforts is the limited success rate that, not surpris-
ingly, accompanies increased throughput and the associated reduction in individual atten-
tion to each protein. Although there is no panacea, a number of chapters describe methods 
that can rescue, or salvage, target proteins that are failing as they proceed through the 
pipeline. Finally, the concluding chapters describe methods that use the proteins that have 
been produced in order to identify initial small molecule hits. These hits can then feed into 
drug discovery efforts. At this point in the process, the number of technically and biologi-
cally suitable targets will have been reduced and each protein, together with the hits that 
have been generated, will require individual attention. 
 The structural genomics approach provides an efﬁ cient initial step toward drug discovery 
and the methods described will be useful to anyone interested in moving in this direction.  
 Chicago ,  IL ,  USA 
 Wayne   F.   Anderson  
 Pref ace 

   

ix
 Contents
Preface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
vii
Contributors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
xi
 1 Data Management in the Modern Structural Biology 
and Biomedical Research Environment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1
Matthew D. Zimmerman, Marek Grabowski, Marcin J. Domagalski, 
Elizabeth M. MacLean, Maksymilian Chruszcz, and Wladek Minor
 2 Structural Genomics of Human Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
27
Khan Tanjid Osman and Aled Edwards
 3 Target Selection for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases. . . . . . . . . . . .  
35
Corin Yeats, Benoit H. Dessailly, Elizabeth M. Glass, 
Daved H. Fremont, and Christine A. Orengo
 4 Selecting Targets from Eukaryotic Parasites for Structural Genomics 
and Drug Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
53
Isabelle Q.H. Phan, Robin Stacy, and Peter J. Myler
 5 High-Throughput Cloning for Biophysical Applications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
61
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson
 6 Expression and Solubility Testing in a High-Throughput Environment . . . . . .  
75
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson
 7 Protein Production for Structural Genomics Using E. coli Expression  . . . . . . .  
89
Magdalena Makowska-Grzyska, Youngchang Kim, 
Natalia Maltseva, Hui Li, Min Zhou, Grazyna Joachimiak, 
Gyorgy Babnigg, and Andrzej Joachimiak
 8 Eukaryotic Expression Systems for Structural Studies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  107
Christopher A. Nelson, William H. McCoy, and Daved H. Fremont
 9 Automated Cell-Free Protein Production Methods 
for Structural Studies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  117
Emily T. Beebe, Shin-ichi Makino, John L. Markley, and Brian G. Fox
10 Parallel Protein Purification. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  137
Ludmilla Shuvalova
11 Oxidative Refolding from Inclusion Bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  145
Christopher A. Nelson, Chung A. Lee, and Daved H. Fremont
12 High-Throughput Crystallization Screening  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  159
Tatiana Skarina, Xiaohui Xu, Elena Evdokimova, and Alexei Savchenko
13 Screening Proteins for NMR Suitability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  169
Adelinda A. Yee, Anthony Semesi, Maite Garcia, 
and Cheryl H. Arrowsmith

x
14 Salvage or Recovery of Failed Targets by In Situ Proteolysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  179
Yufeng Tong, Aiping Dong, Xiaohui Xu, and Amy Wernimont
15 Salvage of Failed Protein Targets by Reductive Alkylation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  189
Kemin Tan, Youngchang Kim, Catherine Hatzos-Skintges, 
Changsoo Chang, Marianne Cuff, Gekleng Chhor, Jerzy Osipiuk, 
Karolina Michalska, Boguslaw Nocek, Hao An, Gyorgy Babnigg, 
Lance Bigelow, Grazyna Joachimiak, Hui Li, Jamey Mack, 
Magdalena Makowska- Grzyska, Natalia Maltseva, 
Rory Mulligan, Christine Tesar, Min Zhou, and Andrzej Joachimiak
16 Salvage or Recovery of Failed Targets by Mutagenesis 
to Reduce Surface Entropy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  201
Lukasz Goldschmidt, David Eisenberg, and Zygmunt S. Derewenda
17 Data Collection for Crystallographic Structure Determination. . . . . . . . . . . . .  211
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter
18 Structure Determination, Refinement, and Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  239
George Minasov and Wayne F. Anderson
19 Virtual High-Throughput Ligand Screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  251
T. Andrew Binkowski, Wei Jiang, Benoit Roux, Wayne F. Anderson, 
and Andrzej Joachimiak
20 Ligand Screening Using Fluorescence Thermal Shift Analysis (FTS)  . . . . . . . .  263
Chi-Hao Luan, Samuel H. Light, Sara F. Dunne, 
and Wayne F. Anderson
21 Ligand Screening Using Enzymatic Assays  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  291
Kiira Ratia, Shahila Mehboob, and Hyun Lee
22 Ligand Screening Using NMR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  305
Benjamin E. Ramirez, Aleksandar Antanasijevic, 
and Michael Caffrey
23 Screening Ligands by X-ray Crystallography  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  315
Douglas R. Davies
24 Case Study—Structural Genomics and Human Protein Kinases . . . . . . . . . . . .  325
Jonathan M. Elkins
Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  337 
Contents

xi
 HAO  AN • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, 
Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA 
 WAYNE  F.  ANDERSON • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases  , 
 Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA;   Midwest Center 
for Structural Genomics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL, USA
 ALEKSANDAR  ANTANASIJEVIC • Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics , 
 University of Illinois at Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 CHERYL  H.  ARROWSMITH • Division of Cancer Genomics and Proteomics ,  Northeast 
Structural Genomics Consortium (NESG), Ontario Cancer Institute  ,  Toronto , 
 ON ,  Canada  
 GYORGY  BABNIGG • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Computational 
Institute, University of Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  ;   Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center 
for Structural Genomics, Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  
 EMILY  T.  BEEBE • Department of Biochemistry ,  University of Wisconsin-Madison  ,  Madison , 
 WI ,  USA  
 LANCE  BIGELOW • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, 
Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA 
 T.  ANDREW  BINKOWSKI • Computation Institute, Center for Structural Genomics of 
Infectious Diseases ,  University of Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 MICHAEL  CAFFREY • Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics ,  University of 
Illinois at Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 CHANGSOO  CHANG • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, 
Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA ;   Biosciences Division ,  Structural 
Biology Center, Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA 
 GEKLENG  CHHOR • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, 
Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA 
 MAKSYMILIAN  CHRUSZCZ • Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry ,  University of South 
Carolina  ,  Columbia ,  SC ,  USA  
 MARIANNE  CUFF • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, Argonne 
National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  ;   Biosciences Division, Structural Biology Center, 
Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  
 ZBIGNIEW  DAUTER • Synchrotron Radiation Research Section, Macromolecular 
Crystallography Laboratory ,  National Cancer Institute, Argonne National Laboratory  , 
 Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  
 DOUGLAS  R.  DAVIES • Emerald Bio  ,  Bainbridge Island ,  WA ,  USA  
 ZYGMUNT  S.  DEREWENDA • Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics , 
 University of Virginia School of Medicine  ,  Charlottesville ,  VA ,  USA 
 BENOIT  H.  DESSAILLY • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Department 
of Structural and Molecular Biology ,  University College London  ,  London ,  UK  
 Contributors 

xii
 MARCIN  J.  DOMAGALSKI • Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics , 
 University of Virginia  ,  Charlottesville ,  VA ,  USA  ;   Center for Structural Genomics of 
Infectious Diseases (CSGID) ,  University of Virginia, Charlottesville  ,   VA ,  USA; Midwest 
Center for Structural Genomics (MCSG), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 
USA; New York Structural Genomics Research Consortium (NYSGRC), University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI), University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA  
 AIPING  DONG • Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto  ,  Toronto , 
 ON ,  Canada  
 SARA  F.  DUNNE • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, High Throughput 
Analysis Laboratory and Department of Molecular Biosciences ,  Northwestern University  , 
 Evanston ,  IL ,  USA  
 ALED  EDWARDS • Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto  ,  Toronto ,  ON , 
 Canada  ;   Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases  ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  
 DAVID  EISENBERG • UCLA-DOE Institute for Genomics and Proteomics, Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, University of California  ,  Los Angeles ,  CA ,  USA 
 JONATHAN  M.  ELKINS • Nufﬁ eld Department of Clinical Medicine ,  Structural Genomics 
Consortium, University of Oxford  ,  Oxford ,  UK 
 ELENA  EVDOKIMOVA • Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry , 
 University of Toronto  ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  
 BRIAN  G.   FOX • Department of Biochemistry ,  University of Wisconsin-Madison  ,  Madison , 
 WI ,  USA  
 DAVED  H.  FREMONT • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases  ,  St. Louis , 
 MO ,  USA  ;   Department of Pathology and Immunology ,  Washington University  ,  St. Louis , 
 MO ,  USA  ;   Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics ,  Washington University  , 
 St. Louis ,  MO ,  USA  
 MAITE  GARCIA • Division of Cancer Genomics and Proteomics ,  Northeast Structural 
Genomics Consortium (NESG), Ontario Cancer Institute  ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  
 ELIZABETH  M.  GLASS • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Mathematics 
and Computer Science Division ,  Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  
 LUKASZ  GOLDSCHMIDT • UCLA-DOE Institute for Genomics and Proteomics, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, University of California  ,  Los Angeles ,  CA ,  USA 
 MAREK  GRABOWSKI • Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics ,  University 
of Virginia  ,  Charlottesville ,  VA ,  USA  ;   Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious 
Diseases (CSGID), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; Midwest Center 
for Structural Genomics (MCSG), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; 
New York Structural Genomics Research Consortium (NYSGRC), University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI), University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA  
 CATHERINE  HATZOS-SKINTGES • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural 
Genomics, Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  
 WEI  JIANG • Argonne Leadership Computing Facility, Argonne National Laboratory  , 
 Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  
 GRAZYNA  JOACHIMIAK • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, 
Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  
Contributors

xiii
 ANDRZEJ  JOACHIMIAK • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Computational 
Institute, University of Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  ;   Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center 
for Structural Genomics, Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  ;   Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology ,  University of Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 YOUNGCHANG  KIM •  Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, University of 
Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  ;   Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, Argonne National 
Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  ;   Structural Biology Center, Argonne National 
Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  
 KEEHWAN  KWON • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, J. Craig Venter 
Institute  ,  Rockville ,  MD ,  USA  
 HYUN  LEE • Center for Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, University of Illinois at Chicago  , 
 Chicago ,  IL ,  USA 
 CHUNG  A.  LEE • Department of Pathology and Immunology ,  Washington University  , 
 St. Louis ,  MO ,  USA  
 HUI  LI •  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, Argonne National Laboratory  , 
 Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  
 SAMUEL  H.  LIGHT • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA  
 CHI-HAO  LUAN • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, High Throughput 
Analysis Laboratory ,  Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University  , 
 Evanston ,  IL ,  USA  
 JAMEY  MACK • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, Argonne 
National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  
 ELIZABETH  M.   MACLEAN • Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics , 
 University of Virginia  ,  Charlottesville ,  VA ,  USA; Center for Structural Genomics of 
Infectious Diseases (CSGID), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; Midwest 
Center for Structural Genomics (MCSG), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 
USA; New York Structural Genomics Research Consortium (NYSGRC), University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI), University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA  
 SHIN-ICHI  MAKINO • Department of Biochemistry ,  University of Wisconsin-Madison  , 
 Madison ,  WI ,  USA  
 MAGDALENA  MAKOWSKA-GRZYSKA • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, 
University of Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 NATALIA  MALTSEVA • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, University of 
Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 JOHN  L.  MARKLEY • Department of Biochemistry ,  University of Wisconsin-Madison  , 
 Madison ,  WI ,  USA  
 WILLIAM  H.  MCCOY • Department of Pathology and Immunology ,  Washington University  , 
 St. Louis ,  MO ,  USA  
 SHAHILA  MEHBOOB • Center for Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, University of Illinois at 
Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 KAROLINA  MICHALSKA • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, 
Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA ;   Biosciences Division ,  Structural 
Biology Center, Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA 
Contributors

xiv
 GEORGE  MINASOV • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases  ,   Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA;  Midwest Center for Structural 
Genomics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 WLADEK  MINOR • Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics ,  University of 
Virginia  ,  Charlottesville ,  VA ,  USA ;   Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases 
(CSGID), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; Midwest Center for Structural 
Genomics (MCSG), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; New York Structural 
Genomics Research Consortium (NYSGRC), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 
USA; Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA  
 RORY  MULLIGAN • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Computational 
Institute, University of Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA 
 PETER  J.  MYLER • Seattle Structural Genomics Center for Infectious Disease  ,  Seattle ,  WA , 
 USA  ;   Seattle Biomedical Research Institute  ,  Seattle ,  WA ,  USA ;   Department of Global 
Health ,  University of Washington ,  Seattle ,  WA ,  USA ;   Department of Medical Education 
and Biomedical Informatics ,  University of Washington  ,  Seattle ,  WA ,  USA 
 CHRISTOPHER  A.  NELSON • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, 
Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Pathology and Immunology, 
Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA  
 BOGUSLAW  NOCEK • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, Argonne 
National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  ;   Biosciences Division ,  Structural Biology Center, 
Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA ;   Center for Structural Genomics of 
Infectious Diseases, Computational Institute, University of Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 CHRISTINE  A.  ORENGO • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Department 
of Structural and Molecular Biology ,  University College London  ,  London ,  UK  
 JERZY  OSIPIUK • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, Argonne 
National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  ;   Biosciences Division ,  Structural Biology Center, 
Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  ;   Center for Structural Genomics of 
Infectious Diseases, Computational Institute, University of Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 KHAN  TANJID  OSMAN • Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto  ,  Toronto , 
 ON ,  Canada  
 SCOTT  N.  PETERSON • Inﬂ ammatory and Infectious Disease Center, Sanford-Burnham 
Medical Research Institute  ,  La Jolla ,  CA ,  USA  
 ISABELLE  Q.H.  PHAN • Seattle Structural Genomics Center for Infectious Disease  ,  Seattle , 
 WA ,  USA  ;   Seattle Biomedical Research Institute  ,  Seattle ,  WA ,  USA 
 KANAGALAGHATTA  RAJASHANKAR • NE-CAT and Department of Chemistry and Chemical 
Biology ,  Cornell University, Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA 
 BENJAMIN  E.  RAMIREZ • Center for Structural Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago  , 
 Chicago ,  IL ,  USA 
 KIIRA  RATIA • Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy ,  University of 
Illinois at Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  ;   Research Resources Center ,  University of Illinois 
at Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 BENOIT  ROUX • Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology ,  University of Chicago  , 
 Chicago ,  IL ,  USA 
 ALEXEI  SAVCHENKO • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Department of 
Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry ,  University of Toronto  ,  Toronto ,  ON , 
 Canada  
Contributors

xv
 ANTHONY  SEMESI • Division of Cancer Genomics and Proteomics ,  Northeast Structural 
Genomics Consortium (NESG), Ontario Cancer Institute  ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  
 LUDMILLA  SHUVALOVA • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA ;   Midwest Center for Structural 
Genomics ,   Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA 
 TATIANA  SKARINA • Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry , 
 University of Toronto  ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  ;   CSGID  ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  
 ROBIN  STACY • Seattle Structural Genomics Center for Infectious Disease  ,  Seattle ,  WA , 
 USA  ;   Seattle Biomedical Research Institute  ,  Seattle ,  WA ,  USA  
 KEMIN  TAN • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, Argonne 
National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  ;   Biosciences Division ,  Structural Biology Center, 
Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA ;   Center for Structural Genomics of 
Infectious Diseases, Computational Institute, University of Chicago  ,  Chicago ,  IL ,  USA  
 CHRISTINE  TESAR • Biosciences Division ,  Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, 
Argonne National Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA 
 YUFENG  TONG • Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto  ,  Toronto , 
 ON ,  Canada  
 AMY  WERNIMONT • Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto  ,  Toronto , 
 ON ,  Canada  
 XIAOHUI  XU • Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry ,  University of 
Toronto  ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  ;   Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, University of 
Toronto  ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  
 CORIN  YEATS • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Department of 
Structural and Molecular Biology ,  University College London  ,  London ,  UK  
 ADELINDA  A.  YEE • Division of Cancer Genomics and Proteomics ,  Northeast Structural 
Genomics Consortium (NESG), Ontario Cancer Institute  ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  
 MIN  ZHOU • Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, University of Chicago  , 
 Chicago ,  IL ,  USA ;   Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, Argonne National 
Laboratory  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA  
 MATTHEW  D.  ZIMMERMAN • Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics , 
 University of Virginia  ,  Charlottesville ,  VA ,  USA  ;   Center for Structural Genomics of 
Infectious Diseases (CSGID), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; Midwest 
Center for Structural Genomics (MCSG), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 
USA; New York Structural Genomics Research Consortium (NYSGRC), University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI), University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA  
Contributors

1
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_1, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 1  
 Data Management in the Modern Structural Biology 
and Biomedical Research Environment 
 Matthew  D.  Zimmerman ,  Marek  Grabowski ,  Marcin  J.  Domagalski , 
 Elizabeth  M.  MacLean ,  Maksymilian  Chruszcz , and  Wladek  Minor 
 Abstract 
 Modern high-throughput structural biology laboratories produce vast amounts of raw experimental data. 
The traditional method of data reduction is very simple—results are summarized in peer-reviewed publica-
tions, which are hopefully published in high-impact journals. By their nature, publications include only the 
most important results derived from experiments that may have been performed over the course of many 
years. The main content of the published paper is a concise compilation of these data, an interpretation of 
the experimental results, and a comparison of these results with those obtained by other scientists. 
 Due to an avalanche of structural biology manuscripts submitted to scientiﬁ c journals, in many recent 
cases descriptions of experimental methodology (and sometimes even experimental results) are pushed to 
supplementary materials that are only published online and sometimes may not be reviewed as thoroughly 
as the main body of a manuscript. Trouble may arise when experimental results are contradicting the 
results obtained by other scientists, which requires (in the best case) the reexamination of the original raw 
data or independent repetition of the experiment according to the published description of the experi-
ment. There are reports that a signiﬁ cant fraction of experiments obtained in academic laboratories cannot 
be repeated in an industrial environment   (Begley CG & Ellis LM, Nature 483(7391):531–3, 2012). This 
is not an indication of scientiﬁ c fraud but rather reﬂ ects the inadequate description of experiments per-
formed on different equipment and on biological samples that were produced with disparate methods. For 
that reason the goal of a modern data management system is not only the simple replacement of the labo-
ratory notebook by an electronic one but also the creation of a sophisticated, internally consistent, scalable 
data management system that will combine data obtained by a variety of experiments performed by various 
individuals on diverse equipment. All data should be stored in a core database that can be used by custom 
applications to prepare internal reports, statistics, and perform other functions that are speciﬁ c to the 
research that is pursued in a particular laboratory. 
 This chapter presents a general overview of the methods of data management and analysis used by 
structural genomics (SG) programs. In addition to a review of the existing literature on the subject, also 
presented is experience in the development of two SG data management systems, UniTrack and LabDB. 
The description is targeted to a general audience, as some technical details have been (or will be) published 
elsewhere. The focus is on “data management,” meaning the process of gathering, organizing, and storing 
data, but also brieﬂ y discussed is “data mining,” the process of analysis ideally leading to an understanding 
of the data. In other words, data mining is the conversion of data into information. Clearly, effective 
 Matthew D. Zimmerman and Marek Grabowski have contributed equally to this work. 

2
data management is a precondition for any useful data mining. If done properly, gathering details on 
millions of experiments on thousands of proteins and making them publicly available for analysis—even 
after the projects themselves have ended—may turn out to be one of the most important beneﬁ ts of 
SG programs.  
 Key words    Databases  ,   Data management  ,  Structural biology  ,   LIMS  ,   PSI ,   CSGID  
1  Introduction 
 Both structural genomics consortia and individual structural biology 
laboratories produce tremendous amounts of data, and having 
accurate, complete and consistent data is critical for reproducibility  
of biomedical research [ 1 ]. A single trip to a synchrotron for data 
collection by a productive crystallographic lab can generate hun-
dreds of datasets totaling around 2 TB of raw data [ 2 ]. Modern 
data processing software can reduce, on the ﬂ y, a raw set of diffrac-
tion images into a single ﬁ le that contains a description of every 
diffraction peak: Miller indices, intensity, and experimental uncer-
tainty (sigma). These data are further reduced into one relatively 
small file that contains scaled and merged diffraction intensities. 
However, each ﬁ le has to be associated with a particular sample 
(protein crystal) and the description of the experiment, which is 
usually written in the header of the diffraction image. These data 
are further used for structure determination and/or for function–
structure relation studies. 
 To perform these studies the experimenter needs information 
about the protein (at a minimum, the protein sequence), crystalli-
zation conditions, and, for functional studies, protein production 
details. If this information is available, the process described above 
is simple to implement. Data harvesting from structure determina-
tion is relatively straightforward. The whole process following the 
placement of a crystal in the X-ray beam can be entirely controlled 
and captured by computer. 
 However, while this is very simple in theory, this simplicity has 
not yet been translated into practice. Analysis of the Protein Data 
Bank (PDB) [ 3 ,  4 ] shows that the number of data collection 
parameters marked as “NULL” in the header information (i.e., the 
detailed description of the experiment) is still signiﬁ cant [ 5 ,  6 ]. 
Moreover, data in the header are sometimes self-contradictory, 
contradictory to the experimental description in the paper citing 
the structure, or both [ 7 ,  8 ]. In that case, contacting the authors 
of the deposit and paper may be the only way to resolve the arising 
problems. Taking into account that only a small fraction, about 
13 % [ 9 ], of structures determined by high-throughput consortia 
are converted (reduced) to peer-reviewed papers, the correctness 
of data uploaded to various databases like TargetTrack [ 10 ], 
TargetDB [ 11 ], and data banks like PDB is absolutely critical 
( see  below).  
1.1  Data in 
Structural Biology
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

3
 Since their inception, many structural genomics efforts have 
adopted policies that experimental data produced by member 
consortia should be made available to the community from the 
moment of target selection. This has been particularly true for the 
two large initiatives from the National Institutes of Health (NIH): 
the Protein Structure Initiative (PSI) established in 2000 by the 
National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) and 
the SG centers focusing on infectious diseases established in 2007 
by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
(NIAID). Even some partially privately funded SG efforts like the 
Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC) have established policies 
to release some experimental data to the general public [ 12 ] (typi-
cally only after the structure is determined and deposited). In the 
speciﬁ c case of the centers funded by NIGMS and NIAID, the 
NIH established the target registration database, TargetDB [ 11 ], 
and required that all member consortia deposit data on the prog-
ress of their targets. Subsequently many other SG centers world-
wide have deposited some of their experimental data as well. 
 Initially, the main purpose of TargetDB was the prevention of 
duplication of effort between different SG centers and maximiza-
tion of the structural coverage of the protein fold space. The scope 
of the data was very modest. It included protein identiﬁ cation 
information (sequence, organism) and the timeline of changes in 
experimental status for each target. Status events included target 
selection, cloning, expression, puriﬁ cation, as well as crystallization, 
diffraction, determination of crystal structure, and PDB deposition 
(for targets studied by X-ray crystallography) or obtaining the 
HSQC spectra, determination of NMR structure, and BMRB/PDB 
deposition (for targets studied by NMR). 
 However, even the modest amount of data available in 
TargetDB permitted interesting analyses of the overall SG struc-
ture determination pipeline [ 13 ,  14 ]. In particular, the overall efﬁ -
ciency of the pipeline—the ratio of solved structures to clones—was 
found to be below 10 % even in the most productive centers. 
The two steps that contributed most to the failure of a target in the 
pipeline were production of soluble protein and diffraction-quality 
crystals. Not surprisingly, the success ratio depended very strongly 
on the type of protein as well as the methodology used by par-
ticular centers. There was not a single overall bottleneck factor. 
In 2004, TargetDB was extended to the Protein Expression, 
Puriﬁ cation, and Crystallization Database (PepcDB) [ 15 ] which 
in addition to simple status history included multiple trials, track-
ing of failed as well as successful experiments, and more detailed 
descriptions of protocols. 
 In 2010, PepcDB and TargetDB were merged into a single 
new database, TargetTrack, part of the new PSI-Structural Biology 
Knowledge Base (PSI-SBKB) [ 10 ,  16 ]. The new repository 
1.2  Large-Scale 
Initiatives Create New 
Databases: TargetDB/
PepcDB/TargetTrack
Data Management

4
extended the deﬁ nition of a target to include protein–protein 
complexes and incorporated tracking of biological assays needed in 
the PSI:Biology phase. As of January 2013, TargetTrack contained 
data on over 300,000 targets and over 1,000 protocols.  
 Development of effective data management systems was a necessity 
for the large-scale SG centers, not only in order to provide the data 
to the scientiﬁ c community but also particularly to effectively han-
dle the huge amounts of experimental data, plan experiments, 
adjust experimental approaches (e.g., choice of cloning vectors, 
sequence truncation, crystallization conditions, structure deter-
mination procedures), and prioritize targets. These needs required 
gathering far more data than what was being required by 
TargetTrack. 
 In general, two levels of data management are needed in high- 
throughput, high-output structural biology programs: the  target 
tracking level and the  experiment tracking level. The target track-
ing level comprises target selection, overall experimental status of 
each target, center-wide efﬁ ciency statistics, and generation of 
reports to the public and to other databases such as TargetTrack. 
Almost all SG centers have a separate target-tracking database, 
though some functionality (e.g., target selection) can be “ofﬂ oaded” 
to other specialized databases. The primary audience for the target- 
tracking level is everyone interested in a “high-level” view of the 
data produced by the center: the center’s scientists and adminis-
trators as well as members of the scientiﬁ c community with inter-
est in the targeted proteins. This level is typically not designed for 
uploading new data or providing all details of individual experi-
ments; these tasks are better handled at the experimental tracking 
level. 
 The experimental tracking level comprises the tools used to 
collect the results of experiments performed in the laboratory. This 
type of tool is generally known as a “laboratory information 
management system” or LIMS. LIMSs are typically used day to 
day by the researchers conducting the experimental work of a labo-
ratory and may be highly customized to the protocols and work 
ﬂ ow of a particular laboratory. LIMSs may also provide tools to 
help design experiments, operate laboratory equipment, semiauto-
matically harvest data, track the use of resources, etc. As a result, 
the primary audience for the LIMS is composed of those interested 
in a “low-level” view of the data, the center researchers themselves. 
As compared to the target-tracking level, it is not uncommon to 
use more than one LIMS in a single SG center, as different systems 
may be used in different laboratories. 
 It should be noted that splitting the data management system 
of a typical SG center into two distinct levels, “high-level” target 
tracking and “low-level” experiment tracking, is somewhat 
 arbitrary. Some data are natural candidates to be kept at the LIMS 
1.3  Diverse 
Approaches to Data 
Management in SG 
Centers
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

5
level only, for example, the location in the freezer where a particular 
clone is stored or the particular lot of a reagent or a crystallization 
buffer. Conversely, some data may only apply at the target-tracking 
level, for example, the number of publications referencing a given 
protein. In principle, it is possible for a single database and/or data 
management system to fully implement both levels. However, in 
practice, it seems that solutions where the two levels are imple-
mented as separate systems/databases appear to be more common, 
especially for the larger scale projects. 
 There have been several “top-down” attempts to design a gen-
eral framework for SG data management systems in the form of 
data dictionaries [ 17 ] or a protein production UML data model 
[ 18 ]. The latter has been implemented by several systems, such as 
HalX [ 19 ] or the Protein Information Management System (PiMS) 
[ 20 ] used by a number of European SG labs. However, most of the 
SG centers set up data management systems in a more ad hoc, 
“bottom- up” manner. Initially, some centers attempted to use 
commercial LIMS, but often these solutions were not ﬂ exible 
enough or even robust enough, and most SG centers developed 
their own solutions “in-house.” There are exceptions to this rule. 
For example, the Structural Genomics Consortium uses two com-
mercially available software systems: the Beehive LIMS (Molsoft 
LLC;   http://www.molsoft.com/beehive.html   ) and Electronic 
Laboratory Notebook (now iLabber; Contur Software;   http://
www.contur.com/home/   ). It should be noted however that unlike 
many SG consortia, SGC does not deposit the results of its experi-
ments to PepcDB or TargetTrack. Several of the SG-developed 
data management systems have been described in the literature 
[ 21 – 23 ], but to our knowledge, none of these systems have been 
fully commercialized. 
 One comprehensive data SG management system that has 
gained wider use is Sesame, developed by Zsolt Zolnai at Center 
for Eukaryotic Structural Genomics (CESG) [ 22 ]. It has been 
adopted by a number of labs and specialized centers. 
 The data management system for the Joint Center for Structural 
Genomics (JCSG) was developed by the center’s programming 
team in parallel with the construction of the physical pipeline. 
The LIMS part of the system functions as a hub of information, 
recording all pipeline steps from target selection to deposition. 
The tracking database uses Oracle as its engine and tracks 424 
experimental parameters, organized into 130 tables [ 24 ]. The 
tools and interfaces to the database contain approximately 360,000 
lines of code, which illustrates the level of complexity of this and 
similar systems. 
 The Northeast Structural Genomics (NESG) consortium’s 
data management system is organized as a “federated database 
framework,” comprising a set of distributed, interconnecting 
 databases [ 21 ]. The main target-tracking database, SPINE, serves 
Data Management

6
as an analysis system, utilizing data mining and machine learning 
tools. In particular, decision trees are used for predicting chances 
for protein solubility, successful puriﬁ cation, and crystallization. 
These predictions are used in directing targets to X-ray crystallog-
raphy or NMR studies [ 14 ]. 
 The other two large-scale PSI:Biology centers—the Midwest 
Center for Structural Genomics (MCSG) and the New York 
Structural Genomics Research Consortium (NYSGRC)—use the 
data management system developed in the Minor Lab at the 
University of Virginia. In both cases, the system is based on a col-
lection of customized LIMS in each site laboratory and a central 
database (UniTrack, described below) that curates and uniﬁ es data 
obtained by various laboratories. In the case of MCSG, several dif-
ferent LIMSs are used in different laboratories, including LabDB, 
Mnemosyne, and ANL-DB. In NYSGRC, two different instances 
of LabDB are used. Similar systems are also deployed in the Center 
for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases (CSGID) and the 
Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI).  
2  A Centralized Target Management System: UniTrack 
 The central, public system comprising the target-tracking level of 
the SG management system developed by the Minor Lab at the 
University of Virginia is named UniTrack. As mentioned above, 
the MCSG, NYSGRC, CSGID, and EFI consortia are all driven by 
variants of the UniTrack system. The system comprises a core 
abstraction based on 10 years of experience in SG data manage-
ment, with a common database architecture and set of tools for 
managing target and experimental data. Each site is based on the 
UniTrack core but is then highly customized for the needs of the 
particular center or consortium of research laboratories. In each 
case, the UniTrack-derived system comprises the central tracking 
database and a set of auxiliary databases and applications, which 
collect and integrate experimental data and are provided by distrib-
uted LIMSs deployed in participating laboratories (Fig.  1 ). 
Experimental data from different LIMSs are combined and incor-
porated into UniTrack via a standard protocol. In the most basic 
case, each LIMS generates XML ﬁ les in a predeﬁ ned format, which 
are parsed by UniTrack tools. An alternative (and more efﬁ cient) 
method, where a LIMS directly communicates with the tracking 
database, has also been developed. The LIMSs can be very diverse; 
however, they all must be able to provide the minimum set of 
required data for cloning, expression, puriﬁ cation, and crystalliza-
tion experiments.
 The experimental pipeline starts with target selection and 
validation, which is speciﬁ c for a particular center. The validation 
 process is performed automatically and typically involves checking 
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

7
the accuracy of the amino acid and the nucleotide sequences as 
well as checking if the selected protein is homologous to proteins 
with structures in the PDB or to targets selected by other SG centers. 
Validated targets are inserted into the tracking database. Protein 
annotations and related data are automatically imported from 
external databases such as NCBI GenBank [ 25 ], Uniprot [ 26 ], 
PDB, and the PSI-SBKB. Depending on the needs of a particular 
center, between 30 and 80 attributes of any given protein target 
are stored in UniTrack. 
 UniTrack keeps a history and the results of the experiments for 
each target (Fig.  2 ). About 400 distinct data attributes are used to 
describe an experimental trial, from the cloning of a target through 
the determination of its structure. Almost all protein production 
and crystallization data can be automatically imported from the 
local LIMS or equipment database. However, smaller labs that do 
not have a LIMS deployed can still contribute data to UniTrack by 
entering it manually using the customized interface. Diffraction 
 Fig. 1   The architecture of the UniTrack data management system. The central 
database interacts with LIMSs distributed in member labs. A number of auxiliary 
databases are used to store data from the PDB, data from other SG centers, and 
SG publications. The central database is responsible for producing reports for 
external data repositories such as PSI-SBKB. UniTrack databases are synchro-
nized with external data sources such as NCBI GenBank, UniProt, and PubMed 
via custom scripts. Users interact with the system via a web interface  
 
Data Management

8
and structure determination data is currently imported automati-
cally only from the LabDB instances that have the  hkldb module 
enabled [ 27 ]. Researchers in other labs upload scaling logs and 
reﬁ nement ﬁ les manually via the interface.
 The tracking database also generates real-time internal reports 
and statistics as well as the XML ﬁ les that are being submitted to 
the TargetTrack repository. In addition, the periodic reports 
required by various bodies are generated in real time from the 
database and accessible to the general public. In some sense, all of 
the portions of UniTrack that generate publicly accessible web 
pages serve as reports. 
 The customized instances of UniTrack for each center drive 
dynamic parts of the centers’ corresponding web portals. The web 
interfaces are implemented using the Model–View–Controller 
(MVC) architecture, with separate layers for data retrieval (model), 
“business logic” (controller), and web page rendering (view). 
 Fig. 2   Fragment of an experiment tree displayed in the UniTrack-based CSGID interface.  Boxes represent 
particular experiments: puriﬁ cation (P), crystallization drop (XD), crystal harvest (X), data collection (beamline 
name), structure solution (Sol), reﬁ nement (R factor), and PDB deposit (PDB id).  Paths  in the tree represent 
trials for a particular sample. The  white box  that appears when the cursor hovers over an item displays addi-
tional details about a particular step. In addition, clicking on any of the boxes display all the data known about 
this step stored in the database 
 
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

9
Even with the use of the CakePHP MVC framework (  http://
cakephp.org  ) the customized web interfaces for the centers are 
quite complicated; as an example, the implementation of the 
CSGID web interface contains over 50,000 lines of source code. 
 LabDB is a modular “super-LIMS,” originally developed to track 
the structure determination pipeline from cloning to structure 
determination (Fig.  3 ). The central component of the system is a 
PostgreSQL database server coupled with a web-based framework, 
along with two specialized tools:  Xtaldb , for designing and tracking 
crystallization experiments, and  hkldb , a module of the HKL- 
2000/3000 system [ 27 ] for incorporating information from crys-
tallographic data collection and structure determination.  hkldb and 
Xtaldb can also be used with stand-alone databases.
 One of the fundamental design goals of LabDB is to harvest data 
automatically or semiautomatically from laboratory equipment 
whenever possible. To that end, the system has modules to import 
data from a variety of different types of laboratory equipment, 
including chromatography systems (GE Healthcare AKTA sys-
tems), electrophoresis documentation and separation systems 
2.1  The LabDB 
“Super-LIMS”
 Fig. 3   A typical target overview page in the LabDB LIMS 
 
Data Management

10
(Bio-Rad GelDoc, Caliper LabChip GX), crystallization  observation 
robots (Rigaku Minstrel, Formulatrix Rock Imager), and others. 
The system provides tools to import data from groups of many 
similar experiments at once, for example from spreadsheet ﬁ les, 
and to track shipments of puriﬁ ed protein and other samples from 
one laboratory to another. 
 A good example of how the LabDB system incorporates labo-
ratory hardware to capture data automatically is the reagent track-
ing module. The system provides a tool to label bottles of chemical 
reagents with unique barcodes, which are tied to more detailed 
information about the chemicals in the database. When a researcher 
prepares a stock solution of a given reagent, he or she ﬁ rst scans the 
barcode of the reagent bottle before weighing out the chemical. 
LabDB uses this to track the particular lots and suppliers of chemi-
cals and link them with the details of the stock solutions created 
(which are then also labeled with unique barcodes). These bar-
codes allow data to be carried along the pipeline, providing much 
more detailed information about the origin and history of given 
stock solutions than would be possible with hand-written labels. 
Furthermore, as this data is linked to later steps, it is possible to 
determine which reagent lots were used in successful vs. unsuccess-
ful experiments, especially if complications arise in the replication 
of experimental results. 
 Two issues are critical for a LIMS to be widely adopted: the 
LIMS should facilitate experimental procedure whenever possible, 
and the system should harvest data accurately and efﬁ ciently 
(i.e., both quickly and easily). Automatic retrieval of data directly 
from lab equipment such as balances or solution formulation 
robots, along with efﬁ cient collection of experimental design 
parameters, minimizes manual data entry and facilitates a more 
complete and more accurate description of the experiment. Using 
barcode scanners and tablet computers, LabDB performs calculations 
on the ﬂ y based upon the information retrieved via the barcodes, 
such as calculating the amount of chemical needed to create a 
particular concentration given various volumes. 
 The most recent advances in LabDB are in the area of tracking 
other kinds of biomedical experiments beyond the traditional SG 
pipeline of clone to structure. These include spectrophotometric 
kinetic assays, ﬂ uorescence-based thermal shift assays, and isothermal 
titration calorimetry.  
 The infectious disease centers funded by the NIAID were among 
the ﬁ rst to expand the traditional SG pipeline into biological and 
biomedical research. The CSGID and the Seattle Structural 
Genomics Center for Infectious Disease (SSGCID) are tasked to 
speciﬁ cally characterize the structures of proteins with important 
biological roles in human pathogens, especially those on the 
2.2  The Expansion 
of SG into Biomedical 
Research
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

11
NIAID Category A–C priority lists. A particular focus of these 
centers is screening puriﬁ ed proteins for binding to inhibitors, 
 cofactors, substrates, and analogs. This screening is done both in 
silico and in vitro via a variety of techniques, including ﬂ uorescence- 
based thermal shift binding, spectrophotometry, isothermal titra-
tion calorimetry, and crystallography-based screening. Sometimes 
the results of computational experiments like model prediction or 
ligand binding are also included. 
 At its outset in 2000, the PSI was predominantly focused on 
developing new technologies and protocols for structure determi-
nation and, in its second phase, solving signiﬁ cant numbers of 
structures in part as an attempt to increase the structural coverage 
of the “fold space” of proteins [ 28 ,  29 ]. In its third phase, 
PSI:Biology, the initiative has expanded into large-scale biological 
and biomedical research. By focusing on targets of biological and 
medical signiﬁ cance, whether selected by PSI centers or nominated 
directly by the biological community, PSI:Biology centers can 
expand their impact by providing not only 3-D protein structures 
but also techniques for efﬁ cient protein production and puriﬁ ca-
tion and materials such as cloned expression vectors (made avail-
able through material repositories). In some cases, puriﬁ ed protein 
samples are even supplied directly to other laboratories. The deter-
mination of 3-D protein structures, in concert with advanced 
biomedical research, allows for more complete characterization of 
many signiﬁ cant proteins and presents the biochemical and bio-
physical data in the context of structural information. The ultimate 
goal is the creation of a powerful scientiﬁ c and intellectual network 
to study even the most challenging biomedical problems. 
 The EFI, a U54 “Glue Grant” funded by NIGMS, is another 
example of the use of SG methods applied to a large-scale bio-
logical project. In this program, the traditional SG pipeline of 
clone to structure is only the ﬁ rst step in a broader program to 
develop a large-scale, multidisciplinary strategy to assign function 
to unknown enzymes identiﬁ ed by genome sequencing. Biological 
experiments performed by the EFI include enzymatic assays, 
binding assays, mass spectroscopy, metabolomics, and in silico 
binding studies.  
 One cannot overestimate the importance of target selection by the 
scientiﬁ c community for such collaborative networks. For 
PSI:Biology the mechanism is twofold: (a) community members 
can submit targets through the community nomination target pro-
gram and (b) the “high-throughput-enabled biology partnerships” 
supported by PSI:Biology can directly nominate targets relevant to 
their areas of functional study. These biological partnerships, where 
consortia of biological researchers from a variety of areas are paired 
with high-throughput structure determination consortia, focus on 
2.3  Data 
Management 
Challenges in 
Collaborative 
Networks
Data Management

12
particular cellular organelles or protein complexes (such as mito-
chondrial proteins, nuclear receptors, tight junction membrane 
proteins) or particular systems (immune function complexes, natu-
ral product biosynthesis, cell–cell adhesion, etc.). As of February 
2013, PSI programs had about 3,000 community requests and 
6,500 targets selected by the high-throughput- enabled biological 
partnerships. 
 Collaborative networks provide special challenges in experi-
mental data management, as biological research uses a very broad 
array of methods, including microscopy, enzymology, biophysical 
techniques, and whole-cell experiments to address projects of 
interest. The power of such a network can be dramatically enhanced 
when large centers provide not only structural information but also 
pure protein samples to the whole network. The protein samples can 
then be used for many different in vitro experiments. The impor-
tance of the ability to perform a large array of experiments using 
the same protein sample cannot be overemphasized, as inconsis-
tent experimental results may be caused by the use of different 
protein samples, e.g., differences in afﬁ nity tags, cloning boundar-
ies, and chemical incorporations [ 30 – 32 ]. 
 Similarly, the NIAID centers also accept target nominations 
from the community. Targets directly requested by community 
and other “community-interest” targets constitute about a third of 
all targets for both the CSGID and SSGCID. As of February 2013, 
CSGID has accepted about 2,000 community targets from over 
100 requesters—mostly academic researchers but also pharmaceu-
tical companies such as Novartis and Merck. Close to one-half 
of all structures solved by the CSGID and about 40 % by SSGCID 
are community-nominated or community-interest proteins. 
Community collaborations impose speciﬁ c demands on SG data 
management systems. They require establishing effective commu-
nication between the community researchers and the center, espe-
cially at the stages of selection, cloning, ligand binding, and 
functional studies. UniTrack contains tools that allow community 
requesters to monitor the progress of their targets. 
 In addition, the data management system for SG centers 
must interact with another component of the collaborative net-
work—the material repositories. The two existing repositories, 
the PSI:Biology Materials Repository (  http://psimr.asu.edu/   ) 
[ 33 ,  34 ] and BEI Resources (  http://www.beiresources.org   ) 
[ 35 ], used by the infectious disease SG centers store tens of 
thousands of protein clones that are available to researchers 
worldwide. LabDB contains modules assisting the center 
researchers in tracking shipments of clones to the repositories, 
while the UniTrack interfaces allow checking the availability of 
particular constructs.  
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

13
3  Tracking Biomedical Experiments with SG Data Management Systems 
 For the traditional structural biology pipeline, the experimental 
steps required to produce, for example, a structure by X-ray 
 crystallography are well prescribed. A gene of interest is cloned and 
expressed, protein is puriﬁ ed and set up for crystallization, crystals 
are harvested, crystallographic data are collected, and the structure 
is determined (a similar pipeline can be described for structure 
solution by NMR). Despite differences in protocol, the basic data 
parameters of each type of experiment are well known. Data param-
eters comprise both the details of an experimental design and the 
measurable outcomes of the experiment. For example, design 
parameters for an expression experiment might include the strain 
of organism expressed, media used, temperature of expression, 
etc., and outcome parameters might include the rate and optical 
density of growth, estimates of expression yield, etc. 
 Furthermore, the “traditional” process is essentially linear; for 
each given step in the process, the prior step is a prerequisite. Thus, 
(1) the types of experiment steps needed (cloning, expression, 
etc.), (2) the data parameters to be collected at each step, and (3) 
the order in which steps are performed can all be deﬁ ned a priori. 
This has made the design of the data management systems used to 
track high-throughput structural biology experiments somewhat 
straightforward. However, the process of target salvage or rescue, 
which involves returning to prior experimental steps once a target 
has “stalled” or otherwise failed in the pipeline, does add some 
complications. 
 Today, SG centers (and other programs that include high- 
throughput structural biology as a component) increasingly incor-
porate into their work ﬂ ows other types of biomedical experiments 
spanning many other disciplines: biochemistry, biophysics, micro-
biology, cell biology, etc. This has raised signiﬁ cant challenges in 
data management, whether these biomedical experiments are per-
formed in-house or by research partnerships. Unlike the traditional 
SG data pipeline, the number of different types of experiments that 
may be performed has expanded dramatically. Each of these experi-
mental procedures differs signiﬁ cantly both in methodology and in 
parameters that are collected and thus require different types of 
tools to efﬁ ciently capture their data. 
 Additionally, the ways in which experiments are interrelated 
are more complex. Biomedical studies are generally not linear 
(i.e., they cannot be organized into a simple, step-by-step “pipe-
line”), and many experimental steps can be done in any order. For 
example, a ligand binding experiment can either be done before or 
after structure determination; one is not a prerequisite for the 
other. However, the two experiments can inﬂ uence one another; 
Data Management

14
the results of a ligand-binding screen can suggest potential soaking 
experiments, or conversely, unidentiﬁ ed density in a structure can 
suggest potential binding partners. Given the more complex inter-
relationships between experiments, the data structure required to 
track them is much more complicated. 
 In an ideal world, individual components of a LIMS would be 
developed to track details of each kind of biological or functional 
experiment and track the appropriate data. The sheer diversity of 
techniques used makes this development slow and resource inten-
sive. To some degree, such tools are in development. For example, 
the LabDB LIMS includes modules for tracking the results of spec-
trophotometric kinetic assays, ﬂ uorescence-based thermal shift 
assays, and protein and DNA electrophoresis. The Sesame LIMS 
includes modules for NMR and cryo-EM experiments as well as 
metabolomics. A key challenge for such LIMSs is that they should 
be able to automatically import detailed experimental information 
from laboratory equipment. For example, LabDB automatically 
parses data ﬁ les from two different RT-PCR systems used for 
ﬂ uorescence- based thermal shift assays and converts the data into a 
common format for data comparison and analysis (Fig.  4 ).
 A somewhat complementary approach is to develop a more 
“generic” LIMS design, which allows the researcher to create a 
“protocol” describing a type of experiment and then provide data 
each time the protocol is used. Typically, the data provided for 
each experiment type is more general—for example, a textual 
description of the experiment or perhaps the names and values of 
parameters relevant to the experiment described. The TargetTrack 
speciﬁ cation allows experimenters to provide data in this format 
for “biological experiments” or “biophysical assays.” Another 
example of a LIMS that follows this model is PiMS, where most 
data input to the system is described in terms of protocols and 
samples. The advantage of such an approach is in its ﬂ exibility. 
New components of the LIMS are not needed to adapt to the new 
experimental types. This is at the expense of greater difﬁ culty in 
data mining due to the relatively unstructured format of data 
imported into the system. 
 In order for a LIMS to be successful, the system must also 
provide tools that drive the design of new experiments. This is 
useful in multiple contexts, whether one is identifying targets for 
salvage/rescue or providing more immediate feedback while an 
experiment is still in progress. The tools for this purpose should 
make use of well-designed data mining mechanisms. For example, 
the new very-fast-pixel array detectors allow for data collection 
with narrow oscillation ranges, even below 0.01°. Tests of these 
detectors with high-quality crystals may show the advantages of 
using very narrow oscillations. In practice however, the mosaicity 
of typical macromolecular crystals used today for structure solu-
tion (for an example, see the distribution in Fig.  5 ) limits the 
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

15
advantages of narrow oscillations. For high-mosaicity crystals, 
experimenters should use larger oscillation ranges such as 0.5° 
rather than 0.05°. Unfortunately, there are no publicly available 
databases of experimental conditions used during diffraction 
experiments, and data collection protocols are based more on 
anecdotal evidence than on data mining. The large difference in 
productivity of similar synchrotron beamlines can be associated 
with differences in experimental protocols that synchrotron users 
are advised to adopt [ 36 ].
 The types of data mining that can be done with the data collected 
by SG centers can be divided into two broad categories. The ﬁ rst is 
real-time (or near-real-time) analyses, which provide not only 
3.1  Data Mining
 Fig. 4    The ﬂ uorescence-based thermal shift assay module of the LabDB LIMS, showing the graphical 
representation of the imported experimental data. Data were imported from an Applied Biosystems 7900-HT 
RT-PCR system  
 
Data Management

16
overall summaries of the status of an experimental pipeline but also 
additional experimental guidance. The second is more detailed 
statistical analyses, which require more in-depth transformation 
and processing of the results. 
 Typically, real-time analyses can be done through the use of 
“dashboards” or “scoreboards,” which present a current (or nearly 
current) view of a particular type of data in a running database. 
These analyses can include such trivial measures as the overall 
success rate of a center, the success rate of individual experimental 
steps for particular labs or for particular organisms, and the mean 
time between target selection and deposition for various classes 
of proteins. It can also include some less trivial analyses that can 
be computed in real time, such as determination of phasing 
method—single-wavelength 
anomalous 
diffraction 
(SAD), 
multiple- wavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD), or molecular 
replacement (MR)—that would maximize the probability of 
success in the diffraction experiment. For structure validation the 
 Fig. 5   Histogram showing the distribution of maximum mosaicity value (as ﬁ t during integration) of diffraction 
datasets collected on MCSG targets processed at the University of Virginia, as tracked by the  hkldb module of 
HKL-3000. Only datasets that resulted in both a scaled dataset and an initial model are counted in the 
distribution 
 
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

17
analysis of various parameters describing structure quality in the 
context of best similar structures is very important. There are a 
number of examples of such dashboards in the interfaces of the 
“uniﬁ ed” data management systems (Figs.  6 and  7 ).
Cummulative Growth
expression-tested clones
soluble clones
successful purifications
crystals harvested
structures deposited in PDB
5000
4800
4600
4400
4200
4000
3800
3600
3400
3200
3000
2800
2600
2400
targets
time
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Aug 2010
Sep 2010
Oct 2010
Nov 2010
Dec 2010
Jan 2011
Feb 2011
Mar 2011
Apr 2011
May 2011
Jun 2011
Jul 2011
Aug 2011
Sep 2011
Oct 2011
Nov 2011
Dec 2011
Jan 2012
Feb 2012
Apr 2012
Mar 2012
May 2012
Jun 2012
Jul 2012
Aug 2012
Sep 2012
Oct 2012
Nov 2012
Dec 2012
Jan 2013
Feb 2013
Mar 2013
Apr 2013
 Fig. 6   Example of a data dashboard: a plot of the cumulative progress for the MCSG center 
 Fig. 7   Example of a data mining “dashboard”: a plot of  R free  vs. resolution for structures determined by the 
CSGID 
 
 
Data Management

18
 In particular, internal reports tracking the productivity of 
member labs (which tabulate the number of experimental steps 
performed at each lab overall as well as within the last 2 weeks or 
2 months) have been very useful. These internal reports can aid in 
the early identiﬁ cation of bottlenecks arising in the experimental 
pipeline. Of course, this is only possible if the data in the database 
are current and not “censored” by experimenters. Censorship is 
deﬁ ned in this case as an omission of unsuccessful experiments, 
mainly because the researcher did not see the value of a negative 
result. Other types of dashboards often used are the scatterplots 
representing the quality measures for deposited structures (such as 
 R ,  R free , or the Molprobity clashscore vs. resolution; see Fig.  7 ). 
These plots can be ﬁ ltered by various criteria, such as the project, 
organism, source of crystals, or name of the crystallographer. These 
reports make apparent which deposits are outliers with respect to 
the structure quality guidelines established by the NIH. The 
authors of such deposits are often subsequently asked to re-reﬁ ne 
and redeposit them. 
 By contrast, more detailed analyses often require signiﬁ cant 
processing of the data, determination of data accuracy and com-
pleteness, calculation of statistical measures, etc. and thus require a 
more detailed (and off-line) processing of experimental data. These 
types of data mining studies have included in-depth measurements 
of the properties of peptides most likely to produce crystal struc-
tures [ 14 ,  37 ,  38 ] and the design of new formulations of crystalli-
zation screens [ 39 ,  40 ]. Ideally, such data mining studies should 
produce tools to help researchers design, validate, and optimize 
their experiments. For example, the Check My Metal server enables 
improved reﬁ nement of metal sites in protein structures [ 41 ]. 
 A key goal of many SG programs is to make their results available 
and useful to the scientiﬁ c community in forms other than publica-
tions or PDB deposits. This objective is addressed in part by the 
PSI Knowledgebase [ 10 ,  16 ], which provides a centralized web 
resource for searching SG structures, biological annotations, 
homology models, and experimental data and protocols. The ulti-
mate purpose of the Knowledgebase is to convert SG data into 
useful information to be used by the biological community. Some 
individual centers also developed tools for dissemination of SG 
results. For example, JCSG developed Topsan [ 42 ], which is a 
wiki-type web resource that creates individual “pages” describing 
each PDB deposit to which the community can collaboratively add 
new information. This approach is also used by Proteopedia [ 43 ]. 
The SGC developed iSee interactive 3D presentations of structures 
solved by the consortium. These are generated using the ICM 
software developed by Molsoft LLC [ 44 ]. The UniTrack-based 
web portals have the ability to automatically generate a set of 
3.2  Making Data and 
Information Available 
to the Public
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

19
interactive 3D presentations for new protein structures using the 
ICM technology. Interactive content is embedded directly on the 
pages describing each structure and can be accessed using the freely 
available ActiveICM plug-in. Each structure presentation is accom-
panied by a short annotation written by the researcher who solved 
the structure. This includes a structure description and any poten-
tial functional information. Each automatically created  presentation 
can be further expanded and/or highly customized by the annota-
tor. An example of an extended and highly customized presenta-
tion can be seen using an ICM-enabled web browser on the 
CSGID website (  http://csgid.org/csgid/deposits/view/3E4F   ). 
Within the presentation, users can rotate and manipulate struc-
tures to view structural units, ligands, oligomerization states, and 
B-factor distributions. Additionally, presentations can be down-
loaded and edited using ICM Browser, Browser Pro, or ICM Pro. 
ActiveICM is being used for scientiﬁ c publishing [ 45 ] by journals 
such as PLoS ONE and Nature.  
 A data management system is truly successful when the paradigm 
“data in, information out” is fully satisﬁ ed. Despite enormous 
progress, the major unmet challenge of high-throughput programs 
including structural genomics is an adequate rate of conversion of 
data into biomedically useful information, ideally as peer-reviewed 
papers. This is a general difﬁ culty of modern science; one is 
swamped in experimental data, and extraction of useful informa-
tion is quite often a Sisyphean task. Addressing this task effectively 
requires either very substantial manual labor or implementation of 
“knowledge-based systems,” with comprehensive tools for efﬁ -
ciently summarizing and mining experimental data, and in some 
cases implementation of machine learning methods. Ultimately, the 
only way to check the consistency and accuracy of a database is to 
examine reports generated by the database for internal and external 
users. The usefulness for external users, i.e., the scientiﬁ c commu-
nity, is the justiﬁ cation for the high costs related to the development 
and maintenance of databases. The scientiﬁ c community is not lim-
ited to academic users but may also include commercial companies 
working on new drugs. Reliable information about the relationships 
between functional and structural data could potentially save 
millions of dollars in the drug discovery process [ 1 ]. 
 Why is the development of data management systems so difﬁ -
cult? There may be no single, deﬁ nitive answer to that question, 
but the problem is clearly widespread. The personal experience of 
one author shows that even a relatively simple database to track an 
airline’s checked baggage may fail when the baggage is lost and 
cannot be recovered for a number of days due to inadequate tools 
for checking data consistency. Similarly, the authors have received 
e-mails from an airline at (for example) 8:30 p.m. with a new late 
3.3  Unmet 
Challenges
Data Management

20
night departure time but also stating that they should still “be at 
the gate prior to 4:30 p.m.,” making one wonder if airline database 
programmers have mastered time travel. Unfortunately for database 
operators/developers, but fortunately for science, cutting- edge 
databases used in biomedical sciences appear to operate with fewer 
failures despite their tremendous complications. Keeping track of 
very diverse biological experiments performed in multiple labs, as 
well as tracking the shipments of constructs, proteins, crystals, and 
data between labs, is a problem of great complexity. In our opinion 
the main issue faced by data management systems in biological 
consortia is “creeping entropy,” the accumulation of inconsistent 
or plainly wrong data, causing users to lose conﬁ dence in the 
usefulness of the system. “Virtually all software systems today suffer 
to an unnecessary degree from the force of entropy” [ 46 ]. 
Correction of these issues requires data curation, which is very 
expensive in terms of time and resources. In fact, data curation 
should be considered a necessary part of the routine maintenance 
of any database to oppose its natural tendency toward disorder and 
inconsistency. This process cannot be (fully) automated; while 
tools can be developed to assist in the curation process, ultimately 
a human being must review the data to ensure its validity. In recent 
years, the needs of biology-related databases led to the formation 
of a new and growing profession, biocurator [ 47 ]. To illustrate the 
scope of this new ﬁ eld, scientists from over 250 different institu-
tions worldwide are represented in the International Society for 
Biocuration [ 48 ]. 
 A particular problem in designing and maintaining effective 
data management systems for large-scale biological programs is the 
interaction of two very different “cultures” involved with the sys-
tem: the data management system developers and the biological 
researchers. People with training and experience in both software 
development and biological research are still relatively rare. Despite 
earnest efforts, the two groups often do not understand each other 
well. For example, addressing a request by a biologist, a system 
developer may propose a solution that is elegant, general, and yet 
fails completely to address the needs identiﬁ ed by the biologist. 
In turn, biologists are often bewildered when they are told by system 
developers that a supposedly minor modiﬁ cation of their experi-
mental procedure would require an extensive redesign of the data-
base schema taking several months of work. It is very important 
that project leaders try to bridge this cultural gap. This is especially 
crucial when designing new parts of the data management system. 
Development of an appropriate database abstraction is the single 
most important part of the design, requiring close collaboration of 
the two groups. At the testing and maintenance stage, it is crucial 
that real experiments leading to new structures and publications 
are performed by these two groups together. This approach is used 
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

21
in the development of LabDB and UniTrack, where both the 
people responsible for particular biomedical projects and the people 
who are writing the code are considered “developers” of the data 
management systems. 
 As mentioned above, one of the particular challenges of track-
ing biological data is the sheer diversity of potential experiments. 
When a chain of experiments is planned, one successful experiment 
in the chain can make others unnecessary. When data management 
systems were focused on tracking the “standard” structure deter-
mination pipeline, there was an implicit understanding of the scope 
of the methods that would be used, and thus most of the parame-
ters that would need to be harvested could be determined or pre-
dicted a priori. The level of diversity increases even more when 
data from different consortia are brought together into a single 
database like TargetTrack. 
 Another particular challenge is in the sheer amount of experi-
mental data to be collected. As the centers continue to become 
more efﬁ cient at producing greater numbers of experimental samples 
more quickly, the process of actually entering the results into the 
databases becomes a rate-limiting step, even when data are har-
vested semiautomatically. In particular, the process of protein crys-
tallization, where each protein sample can potentially be used to 
produce thousands of individual crystallization trials, represents a 
virtual avalanche of data to be imported into the database. Further, 
given the comparatively large number of crystallization experi-
ments typically required to yield useful results [ 49 ], the temptation 
to only include positive outcomes is strong, even though both 
positive and negative results are crucial for usefully data mining 
crystallization results. Some LIMSs, like LabDB, have partially 
addressed this issue by importing experimental data from the labo-
ratory automatically or semiautomatically, but many systems still 
have challenges in ensuring that data entry and import are as sim-
ple as possible. Similarly, systems for importing data like the XML 
ﬁ les used by TargetTrack will not be able to scale to the millions of 
data produced by the high-throughput centers. 
 Outside SG and other large projects, in many small-scale bio-
logical research laboratories, data are still primarily managed 
through written notebooks and spreadsheets. Such tools are not 
adequate to handle more complicated data. None of the available 
general-purpose commercial or open-source LIMSs have gained 
wide acceptance among small-scale laboratories. Some LIMS-like 
systems are in use; many pieces of scientiﬁ c equipment come with 
specialized databases for automatically gathering and analyzing the 
data collected with that equipment. However, there is little incen-
tive for equipment vendors to provide tools to integrate data from 
these databases with data from other databases, let alone data col-
lected manually. Such tools are being created by the SG centers, 
Data Management

22
and hopefully when they encompass a sufﬁ ciently broad range of 
experimental methods, they might be a decisive factor in encourag-
ing adoption of modern data management systems in small-scale 
laboratories.  
4  Conclusions 
 Data management in a large modern laboratory has become para-
mount for coordinating and tracking the vast amount of data gen-
erated across multiple experiments, time frames, and centers, not 
to mention the potential for data mining to extract even more use-
ful and interesting information. Successful data management 
requires a system with a well-planned, cohesive, and ﬂ exible frame-
work. How to best achieve this coordination and level of detail is 
currently being addressed in different ways, but the measure of 
success comes back to “data in, information out.” A coherent 
organizational structure using a “bottom-up” approach, along 
with mechanisms to connect these results into a uniﬁ ed system, has 
been working well for the SG centers, giving them the ability to 
adapt to new nonlinear and distributed experimental pipelines. In 
particular, the development of “super-LIMS” such as LabDB gives 
much needed ﬂ exibility as the frontier of the SG landscape contin-
ues to advance across organizations. The overall success of SG data 
management efforts should be measured not only in classical terms, 
i.e., the number of papers and/or number of citations, but most of 
all by the impact on the scientiﬁ c community. There is no simple 
measure of that impact, but the number of papers published by an 
SG center jointly with other institutions is an indication of this 
impact. The map of collaborations for one SG center (Fig.  8 ) illus-
trates that the “big data” produced by the large-scale SG centers is 
also relevant to the biological research performed in small- scale 
laboratories around the world.
 Acknowledgments 
 The authors would like to thank Alex Wlodawer, Tom Terwilliger, 
Heidi Imker, Steve Almo, Wayne Anderson, Andrzej Joachimiak, 
Rachel Vigour, and Zbyszek Dauter for valuable comments on the 
manuscript. This work was supported by PSI:Biology grants U54 
GM094585 and U54 GM094662 as well as grants R01 GM053163 
and U54 GM093342. This work was also supported with federal 
funds from the NIAID, NIH, Department of Health and Human 
Services, under Contract Nos. HHSN272200700058C and 
HHSN272201200026C.  
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

23
 Fig. 8  Map showing locations of collaborators of the MCSG (institutions of scientists who coauthored papers funded at least in part by the center) 
 
Data Management

24
 References 
  1.  Begley CG, Ellis LM (2012) Drug develop-
ment: Raise standards for preclinical cancer 
research. Nature 483(7391):531–533  
  2.  Minor W et al (2006) HKL-3000: the integra-
tion of data reduction and structure solution—
from diffraction images to an initial model in 
minutes. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 
62(Pt 8):859–866  
  3.  Berman HM et al (2000) The Protein Data 
Bank. Nucleic Acids Res 28(1):235–242  
  4.  Berman H, Henrick K, Nakamura H (2003) 
Announcing the worldwide Protein Data Bank. 
Nat Struct Biol 10(12):980  
  5.  Peat TS, Christopher JA, Newman J (2005) 
Tapping the Protein Data Bank for crystalliza-
tion information. Acta Crystallogr D Biol 
Crystallogr 61(Pt 12):1662–1669  
  6.  Wlodawer A et al (2008) Protein crystallogra-
phy for non-crystallographers, or how to get 
the best (but not more) from published macro-
molecular structures. FEBS J 275(1):1–21  
  7.  Hooft RW et al (1996) Errors in protein struc-
tures. Nature 381(6580):272  
  8.  Koclega KD et al (2009) ‘Hot’ macromolecu-
lar crystals. Cryst Growth Des 10(2):580  
  9.  SBKB P-N PSI impact: ex-cited use of PSI 
structures  
  10.  Gabanyi MJ et al (2011) The Structural 
Biology Knowledgebase: a portal to protein 
structures, sequences, functions, and methods. 
J Struct Funct Genomics 12(2):45–54  
  11.  Chen L et al (2004) TargetDB: a target regis-
tration database for structural genomics proj-
ects. Bioinformatics 20(16):2860–2862  
  12.  Edwards A (2008) Open-source science to 
enable drug discovery. Drug Discov Today 
13(17–18):731–733  
  13.  O’Toole N et al (2004) The structural genom-
ics experimental pipeline: insights from global 
target lists. Proteins 56(2):201–210  
  14.  Goh CS et al (2004) Mining the structural 
genomics pipeline: identiﬁ cation of protein 
properties that affect high-throughput experi-
mental analysis. J Mol Biol 336(1):115–130  
   15.  Kouranov A et al (2006) The RCSB PDB 
information portal for structural genomics. 
Nucleic 
Acids 
Res 
34(Database 
issue):
D302–D305 
  16.  Berman HM et al (2009) The protein structure 
initiative structural genomics knowledgebase. 
Nucleic 
Acids 
Res 
37(Database 
issue):
D365–D368 
  17.  Westbrook J et al (2003) The Protein Data 
Bank and structural genomics. Nucleic Acids 
Res 31(1):489–491  
  18.  Pajon A et al (2005) Design of a data model for 
developing laboratory information manage-
ment and analysis systems for protein produc-
tion. Proteins 58(2):278–284  
  19.  Prilusky J et al (2005) HalX: an open-source 
LIMS (Laboratory Information Management 
System) for small- to large-scale laboratories. 
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 61(Pt 6):
671–678  
  20.  Morris C et al (2011) The Protein Information 
Management System (PiMS): a generic tool 
for any structural biology research laboratory. 
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 67(Pt 4):
249–260  
  21.  Goh CS et al (2003) SPINE 2: a system for 
collaborative structural proteomics within a 
federated database framework. Nucleic Acids 
Res 31(11):2833–2838  
  22.  Zolnai Z et al (2003) Project management sys-
tem for structural and functional proteomics: 
sesame. J Struct Funct Genomics 4(1):11–23  
  23.  Raymond S, O’Toole N, Cygler M (2004) A 
data management system for structural genom-
ics. Proteome Sci 2(1):4  
  24.  JCSG web portal.   http://www.jcsg.org/   . 
Accessed 4 Mar 2013  
  25.  Benson DA et al (2013) GenBank. Nucleic 
Acids Res 41(Database issue):D36–D42  
  26.    Apweiler R, Bairoch A, Wu CH (2004) Protein 
sequence databases. Curr Opin Chem Biol 
8(1):76–80  
  27.  Cymborowski M et al (2010) To automate or 
not to automate: this is the question. J Struct 
Funct Genomics 11(3):211–221  
  28.    Nair R et al (2009) Structural genomics is the 
largest contributor of novel structural leverage. 
J Struct Funct Genomics 10(2):181–191  
  29.  Liu J, Montelione GT, Rost B (2007) Novel 
leverage of structural genomics. Nat Biotechnol 
25(8):849–851  
  30.    Bucher MH, Evdokimov AG, Waugh DS 
(2002) Differential effects of short afﬁ nity tags 
on the crystallization of  Pyrococcus furiosus 
maltodextrin-binding protein. Acta Crystallogr 
D Biol Crystallogr 58(Pt 3):392–397  
  31.  Koth CM et al (2003) Use of limited proteoly-
sis to identify protein domains suitable for 
structural analysis. Methods Enzymol 368:
77–84  
  32.    Kim Y et al (2008) Large-scale evaluation of 
protein reductive methylation for improving 
protein crystallization. Nat Methods 5(10):
853–854  
  33.  Cormier CY et al (2011) PSI:Biology-materials 
repository: a biologist’s resource for protein 
Matthew D. Zimmerman et al.

25
expression plasmids. J Struct Funct Genomics 
12(2):55–62 
 34.  Cormier CY et al (2010) Protein structure 
initiative material repository: an open shared 
public resource of structural genomics plas-
mids for the biological community. Nucleic 
Acids Res 38(Database issue):D743–D749  
  35.  Baker R, Peacock S (2008) BEI Resources: 
supporting antiviral research. Antiviral Res 
80(2):102–106 
  36.  Chruszcz M, Wlodawer A, Minor W (2008) 
Determination of protein structures—a series 
of fortunate events. Biophys J 95(1):1–9  
  37.  Page R et al (2003) Shotgun crystallization 
strategy for structural genomics: an optimized 
two-tiered crystallization screen against the 
 Thermotoga 
maritima 
proteome. 
Acta 
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 59(Pt 6):
1028–1037  
  38.  Babnigg G, Joachimiak A (2010) Predicting 
protein crystallization propensity from protein 
sequence. J Struct Funct Genomics 11(1):
71–80  
  39.  Kimber MS et al (2003) Data mining crystalli-
zation databases: knowledge-based approaches 
to optimize protein crystal screens. Proteins 
51(4):562–568 
  40.  Newman J et al (2005) Towards rationalization 
of crystallization screening for small- to 
medium-sized 
academic 
laboratories: 
the 
PACT/JCSG+ strategy. Acta Crystallogr D 
Biol Crystallogr 61(Pt 10):1426–1431  
  41.  Zheng H et al (2008) Data mining of metal ion 
environments present in protein structures. 
J Inorg Biochem 102(9):1765–1776  
  42.  Weekes D et al (2010) TOPSAN: a collabora-
tive annotation environment for structural 
genomics. BMC Bioinforma 11:426  
  43.  Hodis E et al (2008) Proteopedia—a scientiﬁ c 
‘wiki’ bridging the rift between three- 
dimensional structure and function of biomac-
romolecules. Genome Biol 9(8):R121  
  44.  Lee WH et al (2009) SGC—structural biology 
and human health: a new approach to publish-
ing structural biology results. PLoS One 4(10):
e7675  
 45.  Raush E et al (2009) A new method for 
publishing three-dimensional content. PLoS 
One 4(10):e7394  
  46.  Hubert R (2001) Convergent architecture: 
building model-driven J2EE systems with 
UML. Wiley, New York  
   47.  Howe D et al (2008) Big data: the future of 
biocuration. Nature 455(7209):47–50  
  48.  Bateman A (2010) Curators of the world unite: 
the International Society of Biocuration. 
Bioinformatics 26(8):991  
  49.  Chayen NE, Saridakis E (2008) Protein crys-
tallization: from puriﬁ ed protein to diffraction- 
quality crystal. Nat Methods 5(2):147–153  
Data Management

27
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_2, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 2  
 Structural Genomics of Human Proteins 
 Khan  Tanjid  Osman and  Aled  Edwards 
 Abstract 
 Structural genomics efforts focused on the human proteome have had three aims: to understand the structural 
and functional variations within protein families; to understand the structural basis of disease and genetic 
variation; and to determine the structures of human integral membrane proteins. The overarching theme 
is to advance the understanding of human health and to provide a structural platform to aid in the develop-
ment of therapeutics. A decade or more of work in this ﬁ eld has identiﬁ ed optimal experimental strategies 
that can be used to expedite expression and crystallization of human proteins—and we provide some guidance 
to this end.  
 Key words   Human proteins  ,  Protein families  ,  Protein kinases  ,   Methyltransferases  ,  Structural basis of 
disease  ,  Human membrane protein  
1  Structural Genomics of Human Proteins 
 The human proteome, as deﬁ ned in 2001 by the Human Genome 
Project, remains relatively unexplored from functional and struc-
tural perspectives. Although the extent of its characterization is 
difﬁ cult to quantify, bibliometric analysis of research within repre-
sentative subsets of human proteins (protein families) reveals that 
most publications are focused on a limited number of the proteins. 
As one example, in 2012, more than 70 % of the world’s publica-
tions on human protein kinases, a protein family comprising over 
500 members, focused on the 50 kinases that were the most popu-
lar before the sequence of the human genome was determined [ 1 ]. 
Structural genomics projects were launched in part to close this 
“structure and function” knowledge gap. 
 As applied to human proteins, structural genomics has two 
aims. The ﬁ rst aim is to be able to predict the structures of all 
human proteins by determining the fundamental relationships 
between sequence and structure. This goal is best served by focus-
ing on determining the structures of proteins whose sequences 
least resemble those of other proteins in the structural databases. 

28
This can be achieved without consideration of the source organism; 
the target selection strategies are therefore dominated by prag-
matic considerations (e.g., which proteins are able to be expressed). 
This work, of course, increases the structural understanding of the 
human proteome through the sequence similarity of the newly 
determined proteins to any human orthologues. 
 The second aim of structural genomics, as applied to the 
human proteome, leans more toward application of structural biology 
to the understanding of disease and for drug discovery. Accordingly, 
target selection in this branch of structural genomics is dominated 
by considerations of the application, not by fundamental sequence–
structure relationships, and focuses on the human proteins 
themselves. What connects the two branches of structural genom-
ics is the application of parallel experimental approaches to large 
numbers of proteins and a willingness to study proteins not yet of 
intense interest to the broader research community. The main 
scientiﬁ c questions addressed by structural genomics as applied to 
human proteins are concerned with speciﬁ city and selectivity of 
ligand binding and with the functional consequences of inter-domain 
interactions.  
2  Three Broad Scientiﬁ c Strategies in Human Structural Genomics 
 Gene duplication has allowed the expansion of many protein fami-
lies in humans. For example, there are 518 protein kinases, 60 pro-
tein methyltransferases (PMTs), and over 800 G-protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs) in the human genome [ 2 – 4 ]. Many of these 
families are important for drug discovery [ 5 ]—indeed there are 
few, if any, known drug targets that are not members of protein 
families having close paralogues in the human genome. Accordingly, 
it is central to drug discovery to understand the structural basis for 
selective inhibition of one protein family member and to under-
stand the potential for cross-reactivity with other family members. 
 Structural genomics projects are making signiﬁ cant contribu-
tions to the structural mapping of human protein families [ 6 ]. 
For example, structural genomics efforts have now contributed 
more than half of the known structures of the protein kinase cata-
lytic domains, more than 75 % of the known structures of bromo-
domains, and about half of the known structures of GPCRs. This 
structural information is being used to understand biological 
mechanisms and to develop novel, potent, and selective chemical 
inhibitors. 
 Given that protein families share common folds and functions, 
the structural analysis of different members is not likely to reveal 
profound structural differences. However, the systematic comparison 
of multiple family members can reveal differences that have 
2.1  Understanding 
Structural and 
Functional Variations 
Within Protein 
Families
Khan Tanjid Osman and Aled Edwards

29
meaningful biological impact. Systematic analysis can also lead to 
technical advances that increase the probability of generating a 
structure. This narrative is exempliﬁ ed by the structure of the tyro-
sine kinase Fes/Fps. Fes/Fps was discovered in the early 1980s, 
and it served as a paradigm for studying viral and cellular oncopro-
teins as well as was one of the proteins in which SH2 domains were 
ﬁ rst identiﬁ ed and characterized [ 7 ,  8 ]. As one might expect, the 
structure of Fes had been aggressively sought after but the protein 
had proven recalcitrant to crystallization. 
 In 2008, the Knapp group applied structural genomics strategies 
to this enzyme and discovered one bacterial expression construct, 
out of ~30 tested, that produced a stable derivative of the Fes cata-
lytic domain, when the kinase was co-expressed with a phosphatase 
[ 9 ]. This construct included the kinase domain and the abutting 
SH2 domain, which was shown to make stabilizing contacts 
with the N-lobe of the catalytic domain [ 9 ]. This structure also 
suggested a new mechanism of regulation in which the phosphory-
lated substrate peptide induced conformational changes in the 
SH2 domain and the kinase domain—positioning the kinase in a 
catalytically competent form. 
 The structures of multiple protein family members also can 
suggest unanticipated opportunities to design selective inhibitors. 
This is exempliﬁ ed by the design of an inhibitor to the Dot1L 
methyltransferase, whose structure revealed a large pocket that was 
not utilized by published S-adenosyl methionine competitive 
inhibitors and that was shown not to be present in dozens of other 
SAM-binding enzymes [ 10 ]. Using chemical screening data and 
structural biology as a guide, the addition of a halide to existing 
inhibitors allowed Yu et al. to generate a new inhibitor with 
increased potency, remarkable selectivity, and, serendipitously, 
improved solubility properties [ 10 ]. 
 The application of structural genomics to human proteins is 
likely to continue to have its greatest impact in the translational 
disciplines. The use of structural genomics and the resulting infor-
mation will serve as a catalyst to generate potent and selective mol-
ecules for “neglected” family members, thus leading to a larger 
number of inhibitors (chemical probes) than currently available 
and affording those scientists interested in drug discovery using 
the larger palette of inhibitors as discovery   tools. Current pilot 
projects in which medicinal chemistry efforts are coordinated with 
structural genomics projects have rapidly led to novel, useful 
chemical probe tools [ 10 – 23 ]. 
 Of course, the continued development and reﬁ nement of 
structural genomics technologies will also impact all structural 
biologists, whether or not the target protein is human, whether the 
protein acts alone or within a complex, and whether or not the 
target is relevant to drug discovery.  
Human Protein Targets

30
 The application of structural genomics to protein families is 
pragmatic. What is learned from one family member can be applied 
to another [ 24 ,  25 ]. Small-molecule crystallization promoters can 
be developed for a family based on the chemistry of the enzyme 
reaction or the binding event, and this chemical library can be used 
for all family members [ 26 ]. Additionally, expression technologies 
developed for a single family member can often be applied to many 
members. 
 The application of structural genomics to unconnected individ-
ual human proteins might seem less obvious, but largely through 
chance, protein structures for well over a hundred proteins mutated 
in human diseases have emerged from structural genomics pipelines 
[ 6 ]. With the advent of next-generation sequencing (NGS) to clinical 
genetics and oncology [ 27 ] the role of structural genomics in this 
area is likely to become more strategic and integrated. NGS, coupled 
with the increasingly collaborative nature of clinical science, is generat-
ing a ﬂ ood of genetic links to monogenic and complex diseases 
[ 28 – 34 ]. Many of these newly prioritized proteins will not overlap 
with the existing interests of structural biology groups; this results in 
a bolus of “orphan” human proteins. Structural genomics groups are 
well positioned to tackle these proteins; in essence, structural genom-
ics efforts will engage in “clinician- guided structural biology.” 
 The protein mutated in ﬁ brodysplasia ossiﬁ cans progressiva 
(FOP) is a representative example in which the structural genomics 
pipeline yielded the structure of a protein mutated as a result of a 
protein family strategy [ 35 ]. FOP is caused by a dominantly acting 
mutation in the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptor 
ALK2. The disease-causing mutations reduce binding of the inhib-
itor FKBP12 and promote signaling in the absence of the ligand. 
The crystal structure of the enzyme in complex with FKBP12 and 
a potent inhibitor has proven to be an excellent template for ratio-
nal design of more drug-like inhibitors. This is now ongoing in 
several translational laboratories (e.g.,   http://www.ncats.nih.gov/
research/rare-diseases/trnd/projects/fop.html   ). 
 Structural genomics projects are now being contacted by 
members of the clinical genetics community in an effort to provide 
structural explanations for rare diseases. This “clinician-driven” 
structural biology is expected to increase in intensity over the com-
ing years, as NGS approaches are increasingly cost effective and 
accessible. One recent example is a mutation discovered through 
a clinical exome analysis of Walker–Warburg syndrome, a form of 
muscular dystrophy [ 36 ]. The lead clinician contacted the 
Structural Genomics Consortium, and within a few months the 
structure of the mutated protein, 2-C-methyl- D -erythritol 
4- phosphate cytidylyltransferase-like protein, was completed and the 
structural basis of the disease explained (personal communication, 
Dr. Wyatt W. Yue, University of Oxford). It is hoped that this pow-
erful partnership of “high-throughput” approaches will accelerate the 
translation of genetic information into therapeutics.  
2.2  Understanding 
the Structural Basis of 
Disease and Genetic 
Variation
Khan Tanjid Osman and Aled Edwards

31
 The rate at which integral membrane protein (IMP) structures are 
being determined is increasing dramatically (  http://blanco.biomol.
uci.edu/mpstruc/listAll/list   ). Nearly all recent structures are 
derived from laboratories that are explicitly involved in structural 
genomics or that adopt the “highly parallel” strategies of structural 
genomics, such as the screening of multiple constructs in parallel, the 
screening of orthologues, and the parallel exploration of multiple 
expression hosts. 
 Due to the paucity of IMP structures in the Protein Data Bank 
(  www.pdb.org   ) and the need of drug discoverers to understand the 
differences among family members in the human proteome, for 
years to come, IMP targets could be selected with the view that not 
only will any new human IMP structure be useful, but any new 
structure from any organism can also be useful. The driving con-
sideration for the next few years will likely be cost-effectiveness. 
There are many routes to get IMP structures; the least expensive is 
probably the best choice. This is one of the aims of structural 
genomics and where it should excel.  
3  Practical Suggestions 
 Not surprisingly, the experimental approach used to tackle a given 
human protein is entirely dependent on the question being asked. 
If the protein has a domain(s) that is the target for drug discovery, 
then the individual domain may be the best target [ 37 ]. If there is 
evidence that the activity is inﬂ uenced by other domains within the 
protein or in other proteins, then, obviously, the target should 
include both partners. Target selection strategies might prioritize 
genetic links to disease, protein families, or simply unknown 
domains. Whichever target selection strategy is used, the generic 
target prosecution process is similar. There are excellent reviews 
on the detailed strategies [ 37 ,  38 ], but the broad outline is as 
follows:
  1.   Do a sequence alignment to establish the approximate bound-
aries of the domain(s) of interest.  
  2.   Using these boundaries as a guide, attempt to express ~10 dif-
ferent derivatives of the domain, each having slightly different 
N- and C-termini.  
  3.   Explore the expression of these derivatives in  E. coli to identify 
the one(s) that produces soluble protein. ~60 % of human 
 protein domains will succumb to this approach.  
  4.  If unsuccessful, then pursue, in parallel or in sequence, other 
approaches such as changing the tag, the expression conditions, 
2.3  The Structures 
of Human Integral 
Membrane Proteins
Human Protein Targets

32
and/or the expression host. There is no way to know which, if 
any, will prove successful, but suggested prioritization of 
approaches based on experience and large sample sets is 
described by Gräslund et al. [ 38 ]. 
 It is worth emphasizing that despite decades of analysis, it is 
still not possible to identify a priori which recombinant derivative 
(if any) of a protein or a protein domain will express in soluble 
form and, of these, which will crystallize. Parallel exploratory 
approaches are essential, and structural biologists who do not 
implement this “parallel” approach up front risk wasting time and 
money. If there were a single lesson from structural genomics 
efforts, it would be that.  
 Acknowledgements 
 The authors would like to acknowledge the National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Department of Health and Human Services, for funding CSGID 
under 
Contract 
Nos. 
HHSN272200700058C 
and 
HHSN272201200026C. 
 They also would like to acknowledge the Structural Genomics 
Consortium (SGC). SGC is a registered charity (number 1097737) 
that receives funds from AbbVie, Boehringer Ingelheim, the 
Canada Foundation for Innovation, the Canadian Institutes for 
Health Research, Genome Canada through the Ontario Genomics 
Institute [OGI-055], GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Lilly Canada, the 
Novartis Research Foundation, the Ontario Ministry of Economic 
Development and Innovation, Pﬁ zer, Takeda, and the Wellcome 
Trust [092809/Z/10/Z].  
 References 
  1.  Edwards AM, Isserlin R, Bader GD, Frye SV, 
Willson TM, Yu FH (2010) Too many roads 
not taken. Nature 470:163–165  
  2.  Arrowsmith CH, Bountra C, Fish PV, Lee K, 
Schapira M (2012) Epigenetic protein families: 
a new frontier for drug discovery. Nat Rev 
Drug Discov 11:384–400  
  3.  Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, Hunter 
T, Sudarsanam S (2002) The protein kinase 
complement of the human genome. Science 
(New York, NY) 298:1912–1934  
  4.  Stevens RC, Cherezov V, Katritch V, Abagyan 
R, Kuhn P, Rosen H, Wüthrich K (2013) 
The GPCR Network: a large-scale collabora-
tion to determine human GPCR structure and 
function. Nat Rev Drug Discov 12:25–34  
  5.  Hopkins AL, Groom CR (2002) The drugga-
ble genome. Nat Rev Drug Discov 1:727–730 
  6.   Edwards A (2009) Large-scale structural biology 
of the human proteome. Annu Rev Biochem 
78:541–568  
  7.  Sadowski I, Stone JC, Pawson T (1986) A 
noncatalytic domain conserved among cyto-
plasmic protein-tyrosine kinases modiﬁ es the 
kinase function and transforming activity of 
Fujinami sarcoma virus P130gag-fps. Mol Cell 
Biol 6:4396–4408  
  8.  Stone JC, Atkinson T, Smith M, Pawson T 
(1984) Identiﬁ cation of functional regions in 
the transforming protein of Fujinami sarcoma 
virus by in-phase insertion mutagenesis. Cell 
37:549–558  
Khan Tanjid Osman and Aled Edwards

33
  9.  Filippakopoulos P, Koﬂ er M, Hantschel O, 
Gish GD, Grebien F, Salah E, Neudecker P, 
Kay LE, Turk BE, Superti-Furga G et al (2008) 
Structural coupling of SH2-kinase domains 
links Fes and Abl substrate recognition and 
kinase activation. Cell 134:793–803  
  10.  Yu W, Chory EJ, Wernimont AK, Tempel W, 
Scopton A, Federation A, Marineau JJ, Qi J, 
Barsyte-Lovejoy D, Yi J et al (2012) Catalytic 
site remodelling of the DOT1L methyltrans-
ferase by selective inhibitors. Nat Commun 
3:1288 
  11.  Filippakopoulos P, Qi J, Picaud S, Shen Y, 
Smith WB, Fedorov O, Morse EM, Keates T, 
Hickman TT, Felletar I et al (2010) Selective 
inhibition of BET bromodomains. Nature 
468:1067–1073 
  12.  Fish PV, Filippakopoulos P, Bish G, Brennan 
PE, Bunnage ME, Cook AS, Federov O, 
Gerstenberger BS, Jones H, Knapp S et al 
(2012) Identiﬁ cation of a chemical probe for 
bromo and extra C-terminal bromodomain 
inhibition through optimization of a fragment- 
derived hit. J Med Chem 55:9831–9837  
  13.  Guetg C, Lienemann P, Sirri V, Grummt I, 
Hernandez-Verdun 
D, 
Hottiger 
MO, 
Fussenegger M, Santoro R (2010) The NoRC 
complex mediates the heterochromatin forma-
tion and stability of silent rRNA genes and cen-
tromeric repeats. Embo J 29:2135–2146  
  14.   Hewitson KS, Holmes SL, Ehrismann D, Hardy 
AP, Chowdhury R, Schoﬁ eld CJ, McDonough 
MA (2008) Evidence that two enzyme-derived 
histidine ligands are sufﬁ cient for iron binding 
and catalysis by factor inhibiting HIF (FIH). 
J Biol Chem 283:25971–25978  
  15.  James LI, Barsyte-Lovejoy D, Zhong N, 
Krichevsky L, Korboukh VK, Herold JM, 
MacNevin CJ, Norris JL, Sagum CA, Tempel 
W et al (2013) Discovery of a chemical probe 
for the L3MBTL3 methyllysine reader domain. 
Nat Chem Biol 9:184–191  
  16.  Jones MH, Hamana N, Nezu J, Shimane M 
(2000) A novel family of bromodomain genes. 
Genomics 63:40–45  
  17.  Kawamura A, Tumber A, Rose NR, King ON, 
Daniel M, Oppermann U, Heightman TD, 
Schoﬁ eld C (2010) Development of homoge-
neous luminescence assays for histone demeth-
ylase catalysis and binding. Anal Biochem 
404:86–93 
  18.  King ON, Li XS, Sakurai M, Kawamura A, 
Rose NR, Ng SS, Quinn AM, Rai G, Mott BT, 
Beswick P et al (2010) Quantitative high- 
throughput 
screening 
identiﬁ es 
8- hydroxyquinolines as cell-active histone 
demethylase inhibitors. PLoS One 5:e15535  
  19.  Kruidenier L, Chung CW, Cheng Z, Liddle J, 
Che K, Joberty G, Bantscheff M, Bountra C, 
Bridges A, Diallo H et al (2012) A selective 
jumonji H3K27 demethylase inhibitor modu-
lates 
the 
proinﬂ ammatory 
macrophage 
response. Nature 488:404–408  
  20.  Picaud S, Da Costa D, Thanasopoulou A, 
Filippakopoulos P, Fish PV, Philpott M, 
Fedorov O, Brennan P, Bunnage ME, Owen 
DR et al (2013) PFI-1—A highly selective pro-
tein interaction inhibitor targeting BET bro-
modomains. Cancer Res 73(11):3336–3346  
   21.  Rose NR, Woon EC, Kingham GL, King ON, 
Mecinovic J, Clifton IJ, Ng SS, Talib-Hardy J, 
Oppermann U, McDonough MA et al (2010) 
Selective inhibitors of the JMJD2 histone 
demethylases: combined nondenaturing mass 
spectrometric screening and crystallographic 
approaches. J Med Chem 53:1810–1818  
  22.  Tian YM, Yeoh KK, Lee MK, Eriksson T, 
Kessler BM, Kramer HB, Edelmann MJ, 
Willam C, Pugh CW, Schoﬁ eld CJ et al (2011) 
Differential sensitivity of hypoxia inducible fac-
tor hydroxylation sites to hypoxia and hydroxy-
lase 
inhibitors. 
J 
Biol 
Chem 
286:13041–13051  
  23.  Vedadi M, Barsyte-Lovejoy D, Liu F, Rival- 
Gervier S, Allali-Hassani A, Labrie V, Wigle TJ, 
Dimaggio PA, Wasney GA, Siarheyeva A et al 
(2011) A chemical probe selectively inhibits 
G9a and GLP methyltransferase activity in 
cells. Nat Chem Biol 7:566–574  
  24.  Orengo CA, Thornton JM (2005) Protein 
families and their evolution-a structural per-
spective. Annu Rev Biochem 74:867–900  
  25.  Weigelt J, McBroom-Cerajewski LD, Schapira 
M, Zhao Y, Arrowsmith CH (2008) Structural 
genomics and drug discovery: all in the family. 
Curr Opin Chem Biol 12:32–39 
  26.  Vedadi M, Niesen FH, Allali-Hassani A, 
Fedorov OY, Finerty PJ Jr, Wasney GA, Yeung 
R, Arrowsmith C, Ball LJ, Berglund H et al 
(2006) Chemical screening methods to iden-
tify ligands that promote protein stability, pro-
tein 
crystallization, 
and 
structure 
determination. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
103:15835–15840  
  27.  Shyr D, Liu Q (2013) Next generation 
sequencing in cancer research and clinical 
application. Biol Proced Online 15:4  
  28.  Hoischen A, Van Bon BW, Gilissen C, Arts P, 
Van Lier B, Steehouwer M, De Vries P, De 
Reuver R, Wieskamp N, Mortier G et al (2010) 
De novo mutations of SETBP1 cause Schinzel- 
Giedion syndrome. Nat Genet 42:483–485  
  29.   Janer A, Antonicka H, Lalonde E, Nishimura T, 
Sasarman F, Brown GK, Brown RM, Majewski J, 
Human Protein Targets

34
Shoubridge EA (2012) An RMND1 Mutation 
causes encephalopathy associated with multiple 
oxidative phosphorylation complex deﬁ ciencies 
and a mitochondrial translation defect. Am J 
Hum Genet 91:737–743  
  30.  Lo YM, Chan KC, Sun H, Chen EZ, Jiang P, 
Lun FM, Zheng YW, Leung TY, Lau TK, 
Cantor CR et al (2010) Maternal plasma DNA 
sequencing reveals the genome-wide genetic 
and mutational proﬁ le of the fetus. Sci Transl 
Med 2:61ra91  
  31.  Ng SB, Buckingham KJ, Lee C, Bigham AW, 
Tabor HK, Dent KM, Huff CD, Shannon PT, 
Jabs EW, Nickerson DA et al (2010) Exome 
sequencing identiﬁ es the cause of a mendelian 
disorder. Nat Genet 42:30–35  
  32.  Ng SB, Bigham AW, Buckingham KJ, Hannibal 
MC, McMillin MJ, Gildersleeve HI, Beck AE, 
Tabor HK, Cooper GM, Mefford HC et al 
(2010) Exome sequencing identiﬁ es MLL2 
mutations as a cause of Kabuki syndrome. Nat 
Genet 42:790–793  
  33.  Saunders CJ, Miller NA, Soden SE, Dinwiddie 
DL, Noll A, Alnadi NA, Andraws N, Patterson 
ML, Krivohlavek LA, Fellis J et al (2012) Rapid 
whole-genome sequencing for genetic disease 
diagnosis in neonatal intensive care units. Sci 
Transl Med 4:154ra135  
  34.  Veltman JA, Brunner HG (2012) De novo 
mutations in human genetic disease. Nat Rev 
Genet 13:565–575  
  35.  Chaikuad A, Alfano I, Kerr G, Sanvitale CE, 
Boergermann JH, Trifﬁ tt JT, Von Delft F, 
Knapp S, Knaus P, Bullock AN (2012) 
Structure of the bone morphogenetic protein 
receptor ALK2 and implications for ﬁ brodys-
plasia ossiﬁ cans progressiva. J Biol Chem 
287:36990–36998  
  36.  Roscioli T, Kamsteeg E-J, Buysse K, Maystadt I, 
Van Reeuwijk J, Van den Elzen C, Van Beusekom 
E, Riemersma M, Pfundt R, Vissers LELM et al 
(2012) Mutations in ISPD cause Walker-
Warburg syndrome and defective glycosylation 
of α-dystroglycan. Nat Genet 44:581–585  
  37.  Savitsky P, Bray J, Cooper CD, Marsden BD, 
Mahajan P, Burgess-Brown NA, Gileadi O 
(2010) 
High-throughput 
production 
of 
human proteins for crystallization: the SGC 
experience. J Struct Biol 172:3–13 
  38.  Graslund S, Sagemark J, Berglund H, Dahlgren 
LG, Flores A, Hammarstrom M, Johansson I, 
Kotenyova T, Nilsson M, Nordlund P et al 
(2008) The use of systematic N- and C-terminal 
deletions to promote production and struc-
tural studies of recombinant proteins. Protein 
Expr Purif 58:210–221  
Khan Tanjid Osman and Aled Edwards

35
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_3, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 3  
 Target Selection for Structural Genomics 
of Infectious Diseases 
 Corin  Yeats ,  Benoit  H.  Dessailly ,  Elizabeth  M.  Glass , 
 Daved  H.  Fremont , and  Christine  A.  Orengo 
 Abstract 
 This chapter describes the protocols used to identify, ﬁ lter, and annotate potential protein targets from an 
organism associated with infectious diseases. Protocols often combine computational approaches for mining 
information in public databases or for checking whether the protein has already been targeted for structure 
determination, with manual strategies that examine the literature for information on the biological role of 
the protein or the experimental strategies that explore the effects of knocking out the protein. Publicly 
available computational tools have been cited as much as possible. Where these do not exist, the concepts 
underlying in-house tools developed for the Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases have 
been described.  
 Key words   Target selection  ,  Vaccine and virulence targets  ,  Essential proteins  ,  Drug targets  ,  Domain 
annotation ,   Structure homologue recognition  ,   Secondary structure and disorder prediction  , 
 Construct boundary identiﬁ cation 
1  Introduction 
 Target selection for structure determination includes both manual 
and automated strategies for analyzing proteins from selected 
organisms and identifying those proteins for which it would be 
valuable to determine the 3D structure. The purpose of structural 
genomics applied to infectious diseases is to acquire structural 
knowledge of proteins that are either responsible for communicat-
ing or maintaining a disease or responsible for lowering the efﬁ cacy 
of any treatment regimes (e.g., drugs designed to inhibit particular 
proteins and biological pathways/processes). 
 The target selection strategies range from those which are 
entirely computational (e.g., predicting that a protein is a homo-
logue of a known drug target in a different pathogenic organism) 
through to methods which use experimental data for a protein 
(e.g., to determine whether it is essential to the organism). 

36
The target selection process considers whether proteins meet at 
least one of the following criteria: the protein is likely to be essen-
tial, a virulence factor, a vaccine candidate, a known drug target, or 
related to a known drug target. Candidate targets that meet one of 
these criteria are further analyzed to ensure that there is no close 
homologue for which the structure has already been determined 
and that the protein does not contain many regions that are prob-
lematic for structure determination (e.g., transmembrane regions 
or disordered regions). Computational methods also exist for 
gauging whether a protein has high solubility and crystallizes easily 
and is therefore likely to be a successful target in the experimental 
structure determination pipeline. 
 Below is described a range of methods for identifying particu-
lar categories of protein targets. The initial focus is on strategies for 
recognizing proteins that are likely to be good drug targets, essen-
tial proteins, virulence factors, or good vaccination targets in bac-
teria. Also included are general strategies for using metabolic 
pathway information to target proteins that would allow complete 
structural coverage of a pathway. Strategies for identifying inner 
and outer membrane regions are also described. These are very 
challenging targets and may be more suited to projects focused on 
membrane proteins. Methods for identifying proteins involved in 
host–pathogen interactions are described and can be valuable for 
identifying potential virulence factors. Finally, some bioinformatics 
strategies are included for checking whether there are close homo-
logues of the targets in the PDB [ 1 ] or the TargetTrack [ 2 ] data-
bases and for optimizing the design of constructs by identifying 
domain regions within the target protein.  
2  Materials 
 Computational protocols described in this chapter have been 
written in Java, C, C++, python, or perl. The databases and data 
warehouses referred to have been set up in ORACLE, MySQL, 
and PostgresSQL. Websites have been set up in HTML.  
3  Methods 
 A number of target selection protocols were used, and each are 
described in a separate section below. 
 The identiﬁ cation of drug–target interactions (interactions between 
drugs and target proteins) is a key area in genomic drug 
discovery. 
3.1  Protocol 
for the Identiﬁ cation 
of Known and 
Potential Drug Targets
Corin Yeats et al.

37
 The target selection strategy has been based on several main criteria, 
which are listed below:
  1.  Target proteins should be unique. All targets selected are ana-
lyzed to remove targets already present in the PDB or the 
TargetTrack.  
  2.  Target proteins should be conserved. It is a good idea to look 
for sequence conservation because conserved proteins are 
potentially very good targets for designing broad-spectrum 
antimicrobials. Several approaches can be used:
 (a)  Sequence homology (in silico): This approach provides 
accurate information, but it is limited because of the lim-
ited number of genomes sequenced. Consequently the 
number of comparisons is limited.  
 (b)   Sequence homology (experimental): A plethora of com-
parative genomic hybridization (CGH) studies can be 
undertaken. During these studies, tens or hundreds of 
strains are screened on the microarrays for their gene com-
position. This line of research has enabled scientists to reli-
ably infer gene conservation.  
 (c)  Essential genes: It is sensible to mine the literature for 
gene knockout or gene inactivation studies; for example, 
there are often studies reported for common target species 
such as  Staphylococcus and  Salmonella . Because these genes 
are unusually highly conserved, a bioinformatics approach 
can be used to identify their homologues among close rela-
tive species. As an example, essential gene information 
with regard to  B. subtilis can be used to ﬁ nd homologues 
in  B. anthracis . 
  3.  Target proteins might possess predicted motifs or be involved 
in cellular functions attractive for drug design. Accordingly, it 
is possible to mine the databases for the following:
 (a)  Proteins that are involved in essential metabolic pathways 
and already targeted by the scientiﬁ c community for drug 
design. 
 (b)   Proteins that may have protease motifs or are involved in 
cell-wall biogenesis. Perturbation of posttranslation modi-
ﬁ cation has shown to signiﬁ cantly impair cell viability. 
Therefore, research focused on the design of protease 
inhibitors has been rapidly expanding. On the other hand, 
disruption of the microbial cell wall has been a major focus 
in antimicrobial research for decades.  
 (c)  Proteins that may be involved primarily in metabolite 
transport, cell division, protein synthesis, central interme-
diary metabolism, or amino acid metabolism.  
3.1.1  Method
Infectious Disease Targets

38
 (d)   Virulence factors or virulence-associated genes (VAGs): 
Broad literature searches can be conducted as well as data-
base searches regarding gene knockouts, gene expression, 
or proteomics studies.  
  4.  Finally, it is a good idea to select proteins that may have a 
higher chance of being expressed and puriﬁ ed. Both predictive 
(in silico) and experimental evidence (e.g., from proteomics) 
can be used. Proteins should be screened for the presence of 
signal peptides and especially the number of transmembrane 
segments (TMS).
 (a)   Proteins with large TMS numbers are most probably 
membrane proteins, and they have been shown to be very 
difﬁ cult to purify. Therefore priority is given to proteins 
with no more than 1 TMS.  
 (b)   High-throughput proteomics studies provide reliable 
information not only with regard to protein expression 
(conﬁ rming gene predictions) but also protein localiza-
tion, e.g., cytoplasm, periplasm, or cell membrane. Proteins 
that are localized in the cytoplasm or the periplasm may 
have a higher chance to be expressed and puriﬁ ed. 
 A gene required for growth in a rich medium and whose deletion 
is sufﬁ cient to confer a lethal phenotype can be categorized as 
essential. The identiﬁ cation of essential genes is important not only 
for the understanding of the minimal requirements for life but also 
for practical applications such as identiﬁ cation of new targets for 
antimicrobial drugs. The prediction and discovery of essential 
genes have been performed by various experimental procedures, 
but they require a large investment of time and resources and are 
not always feasible. Considering these experimental constraints, a 
computational approach capable of accurately predicting essential 
genes is of great value. 
  1.  Sequence comparison with known essential genes using Blastp 
and a cutoff of  e -value 1e − 05. The Database of Essential Genes 
(DEG) contains all the essential genes that are currently avail-
able. The database contains genes detected in  Staphylococcus 
aureus by an antisense RNA technique, in  M. genitalium by 
transposon mutagenesis, in  H. inﬂ uenza by high-density trans-
poson mutagenesis, in  V. cholera by a mariner-based transpo-
son, in yeast by genetic footprinting, and in  M. genitalium and 
 H. inﬂ uenzae by comparative genomics. This method is not 
optimal for detection of essential genes due to varying physi-
ologies in different organisms and presence of paralogous 
genes. However, given the absence of public modeling tools, 
this approach can be considered as a viable option for fast 
screening. 
3.2  Protocol for the 
Identiﬁ cation of 
Essential Genes
3.2.1  Method
Corin Yeats et al.

39
  2.  The Model SEED uses ﬂ ux balance analysis (FBA) to predict 
essential genes in bacterial genomes. Partially developed under 
the NIH-funded BRC-NMPDR, it is a public tool. In short, 
Model SEED works by ﬁ rst constructing a genome-scale 
model of a particular organism. The genome-scale model 
reconstruction process begins with the functional roles assigned 
to each gene in the genome during the SEED annotation pro-
cess. Each metabolic functional role in the SEED is associated 
with a set of biochemical reactions. When a functional role is 
assigned to a gene in an organism, it is assumed that the reac-
tions associated with that functional role also play a part in that 
organism’s metabolism. Then a draft genome-scale metabolic 
model is created by assembling all of the reactions mapped to 
functional roles in the organism’s genome. Model SEED also 
assembles a biomass reaction for the organism that captures all 
of the small molecules that the organism must produce in 
order to grow. Some of these small molecules are universal 
such as deoxy- nucleotides required for DNA, nucleotides 
required for RNA, and amino acids required for protein. Other 
small molecules depend upon the organism being analyzed. 
For example, only gram-positive organisms need to produce 
teichoic acid as part of their cell walls. Once the list of biomass 
components for an organism has been assembled, FBA is used 
to test the draft model and determine if it is capable of simul-
taneously producing every biomass component from the com-
pounds that may be transported from the extracellular 
environment. The draft model typically contains gaps in its 
network that prevent the production of one or more biomass 
components. When this happens, a gap ﬁ lling optimization is 
performed which identiﬁ es the minimal number of reactions 
that must be added to the draft model to enable the production 
of every biomass component. This produces a “core” genome-
scale model that is capable of predicting the growth conditions 
for an organism. FBA is used with this “core” model to simu-
late the knockout of every gene represented in the model. 
Knockouts are simulated by constraining the ﬂ ux through any 
reactions associated with the knocked out gene(s) to zero (if no 
other gene is present that also encodes the reaction). Also in 
these simulations, the uptake of any compound from the envi-
ronment is allowed if the organism has a transporter for that 
compound. As a result, the simulation conditions reﬂ ect 
growth on rich media due to the wide variety of nutrients that 
may be consumed from the media. When a knockout results 
in a loss of biomass production, it is marked as essential. 
The essentiality predictions will tend to be very conservative 
because they simulate growth on rich media conditions and 
only capture the essentiality of metabolic genes. Therefore, it is 
expected that the genes identiﬁ ed as essential are deﬁ nitely 
Infectious Disease Targets

40
essential while it is possible that other essential genes exist that 
may have been missed.  
  3.    All targets selected from  steps 1 and  2 should be filtered 
for targets already present in the PDB or in the TargetTrack 
(see STRAP protocol below).  
 One objective of determining protein structures from pathogenic 
organisms is to increase the current knowledge of biochemical 
processes that are important in infectious diseases. Knowing the 
protein structures of all components of a metabolic pathway greatly 
enhances how well it is understood. To identify new targets, all 
metabolic pathways from a pathogenic organism can be annotated 
to show their current structural coverage. The pathways can be 
extracted from BioCyc [ 3 ], a collection of over 1,000 pathway/
genome databases; each database describes the genome and meta-
bolic pathways of a single organism. 
 By annotating metabolic pathways, target selection can be 
assisted in two ways. Firstly, it helps to identify and complete path-
ways of particular interest in infectious diseases. Secondly, proteins 
can be selected that may be good drug targets. This is through 
observation of the frequency of pathways and their components 
across organisms, including their presence or absence in particular 
pathogenic organisms and eukaryotes. For example, a protein from 
a pathway that occurs in many pathogenic organisms, but not in 
eukaryotes, may be considered a good target. After visual inspec-
tion of the pathway, if a protein is considered critical to the con-
nectivity of that pathway, it may be viewed as an even better target. 
In another example, a protein from a pathway that is unique to a 
particular pathogenic organism might also be selected as a poten-
tially good target. 
 The ﬂ at ﬁ les provided for each organism in BioCyc can be down-
loaded and parsed for protein data including protein sequences, 
pathway, and functional annotations. In order to transfer the anno-
tations to the organisms of interest, the sequences from BioCyc 
and the pathogenic strains being considered are compared. If the 
two strains are identical it is a simple matter of directly linking the 
resources. Otherwise the best match at a sequence identity of 
>90 % is considered the ortholog. While this method can mis- 
annotate the function of a protein, the resulting structure is likely 
to be sufﬁ ciently similar to allow accurate homology modeling. 
 Sequences selected from the pathogenic organism are also 
compared to the TargetTrack and PDB sequences to identify those 
already with a structure or a target in process (Fig.  1 ). This infor-
mation can then be linked to the pathway data allowing character-
ization of the structural coverage and targeting of each strain’s 
metabolic pathways. It can also be used in the context of the entire 
3.3  Selecting Target 
Proteins Using 
Metabolic Pathways
3.3.1  Method
Corin Yeats et al.

41
BioCyc database, allowing identiﬁ cation of pathways unique to 
bacteria or particular pathogens. The substrate annotations for 
each reaction will also provide a source of potential ligands for 
studying complexes with the protein.
 The availability of whole-genome sequences of bacterial pathogens 
has allowed researchers to examine protein sequence data and 
identify vaccine candidates. Candidates include those proteins pre-
dicted to be outer membrane, lipoproteins, adhesins, and secreted 
proteins. Proteins used in vaccine discovery should not be homol-
ogous to host proteins. 
3.4  Protocol for the 
Identiﬁ cation of 
Vaccine Candidates
 Fig. 1   Protocol used by CSGID to select targets from pathways annotated in 
BioCyc. The ﬁ nal stage is to provide visualization of this data. One means of doing 
this is Pathway Tools, part of the BioCyc software package. It is used to visualize 
BioCyc pathways and can include custom annotations (Fig.  2 ). It can be used to 
give a visual overview of the structural coverage of pathways while providing 
within its interface in-depth annotations of pathways. Information about align-
ments between BioCyc proteins (that are pathway components) and the PDB, 
TargetDB, and putative target proteins can be integrated into Pathway Tools. 
Other information describing each BioCyc protein, such as domain architecture 
assignments, predicted transmembrane regions, disordered regions, and func-
tional assignments, is provided to the user to assist in target selection  
 
Infectious Disease Targets

42
 This method is an expanded and modiﬁ ed approach to the secreted 
and outer membrane protein identiﬁ cation protocol discussed later.
  1.   Bacterial lipoproteins are a diverse and functionally important 
group of proteins that are amenable to bioinformatics analyses 
because of their unique signal peptide features (G + LPP). The 
ﬁ rst step is to scan genomes for these using the HMM search 
tool, LipoP. LipoP was developed for identiﬁ cation of lipopro-
teins in Gram-negative bacteria, but the authors state, “Even 
though Gram-positive lipoprotein signal peptides differ from 
Gram-negatives, the HMM was able to identify 92.9 % of the 
lipoproteins included in a Gram-positive test set” [ 4 ] (  http://
www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/LipoP/   ).  
  2.   Predict the subcellular localization of proteins using PsortB 
(  http://www.psort.org/psortb/   ), and extract proteins identi-
ﬁ ed as extracellular or outer membrane.  
  3.   Detect signal sequences for each secretion pathway which can 
be identiﬁ ed using a suite of   tools:
 (a)    Phobius (  http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/phobius/   ).  
 (b)   TatP—search for twin-arginine signal peptide (  http://
www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TatP-1.0   ). 
 (c)  SecretomeP—search for nonclassical and leaderless secretion 
of proteins (  http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SecretomeP   ). 
 (d)    TargetP—search for subcellular location of proteins: mito-
chondrial, chloroplastic, secretory pathway, or other (  http://
www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TargetP/  )  .  
3.4.1  Method
 Fig. 2   Illustration of view from Pathway Tools 
 
Corin Yeats et al.

43
  4.   Each protein identiﬁ ed using the methods in  steps 1 – 3 is then 
compared to the human genome using Blastp. This step looks 
for global similarities rather than local. Exclude proteins that 
have a Blastp  e -value less than 1e − 05.  
 Virulence is the ability of a pathogen to invade, damage a host, and 
evade host immune defenses. This capability is derived from a 
range of complex host–pathogen interactions and can be expressed 
as the pathogen’s toxicity, invasiveness, colonization, and ability to 
be transmitted to another host. A method for discovery of genes 
involved in virulence entails iterative gene screening via labor- 
intensive laboratory experiments. With the availability of thou-
sands of bacterial genomes and robust compute resources it is 
possible to compare and mine genomic data for potential genes of 
interest, thus accelerating the discovery process. 
  1.   Carry out sequence comparisons with known virulence genes 
using Blastp and a cutoff  e -value of 1e − 05. The Virulence 
Factor Database contains known virulence protein sequences 
and annotations for 24 pathogenic genera [ 5 ] including 409 
virulence factors, 2,353 related genes, and 24 pathogenicity 
islands.  
  2.  Various virulence factors have characteristic domains and 
motifs cited in the literature. Pfam domain families can be 
searched to identify potential virulence proteins. Some exam-
ples of those domains include LPXTG, NPQTN, NAKTN, 
QVPTGV, YSIRK G/S, WXG, and CNA_B.  
  3.  All targets selected should be analyzed to remove targets 
already present in the PDB or the TargetTrack (see STRAP 
protocol below).  
 A large number of proteins encoded by pathogens must, at some 
point, interact with proteins made by the host. There are many 
roles that these interactions play during an infection, including 
those by which the immune system recognizes the pathogen and 
limits the infection. A successful pathogen must ﬁ nd ways around 
the barriers to infection erected by its host, for example, by modu-
lating speciﬁ c signal transduction pathways. 
 The aim of this target selection protocol is to identify proteins 
from the host and the pathogen that have a well-characterized, 
physical interaction. The number of proteins identiﬁ ed by this pro-
tocol will increase with time, as the rate of deposition of experi-
mentally characterized interactions has only recently begun to 
expand due to high-throughput methods. 
 The data used to identify known interactions is taken from the 
iRefIndex database (  http://ireﬁ ndex.uio.no/wiki/iRefIndex   ), 
3.5  Protocol 
for the Identiﬁ cation 
of Virulence Genes
3.5.1  Method
3.6  Selecting 
Host–Pathogen 
Interaction Targets
3.6.1  Details of 
the Method
Infectious Disease Targets

44
which amalgamates all the major interaction resources into a 
non- redundant set. In this database, a search can be made for 
protein–protein interactions to identify protein pairs that included 
a protein from one, or more, of a range of eukaryotic hosts 
(i.e., human, mouse, rat, horse, cow, rabbit). The range of eukary-
otic hosts is important in order to avoid missing an interacting pair 
of proteins that had been characterized in one host, but not in 
humans. 
 The interacting pathogenic protein partner of the eukaryotic 
host is then selected from the range of infectious disease bacterial 
organisms being targeted. The selected pathogens can include all 
strains. The reasoning is that even if the human–bacteria interac-
tion was reported in a nonpathogenic strain, the interaction could 
still be of interest, since there may be orthologs of the bacterial 
protein in pathogenic strains. This can be seen as a more compre-
hensive set from which one can extract interactions of interest. The 
same approach can be used to extract all interactions reported for 
viruses and their sub-strains. 
 A variety of information is reported for each interaction:
  1.  The “UniProt ID” and taxonomy of the target.  
  2.  The “Interaction ID”: This links to the iRefIndex website, 
which reports details about the interaction—links to both the 
host and the pathogen targets are included.  
  3.  The “NCBI ID” of the target, which links to the protein 
record at the NCBI, and related annotations sourced from the 
NCBI (e.g., gene name).  
 Two ﬁ lters are applied to the potential target set:
  1.  Determine if the target has >90 % sequence identity to a struc-
ture already in the PDB. Exceptions can be made in the case of 
an unaligned region of >150 residues.  
  2.  Determine if the target has >90 % sequence identity to a target 
in TargetTrack that has reported progress in the last 2 years.  
 Further ﬁ ltering may be needed to reduce redundancy in the 
list of targets. This is for three reasons: (1) multiple interactions 
involving a single protein, either host or pathogen; (2) duplication 
due to extracting the interaction from both host and pathogen; 
and (3) conserved interactions between close homologues.  
 Membrane proteins constitute about 30 % of all polypeptides in 
both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, but less than 1 % of solved struc-
tures are of this type. Their structures are difﬁ cult to determine 
because of their poor performance in over-expression systems and 
their insolubility. However, these targets would be suitable for 
solving by a specialized structural genomics center. 
3.7  Selecting Inner 
Membrane Proteins 
and Outer Membrane 
Proteins
Corin Yeats et al.

45
 There are a number of software tools available to ﬁ nd inner 
membrane proteins (IMPs) and outer membrane proteins (OMPs).
  1.   IMPs can be characterized by three bioinformatics programs 
designed for identifying transmembrane helices. These are 
MEMSAT [ 6 ], Phobius, and TMHMM [ 7 ]. MEMSAT is pro-
duced at University College London, while TMHMM and 
Phobius are publicly available bioinformatics methods created 
by the Sonhammer group, based at Stockholm University. 
These three algorithms can be used independently to predict 
IMPs and the results then compared using a jury system; a 
positive identiﬁ cation of an IMP by two of the three methods 
is required to give an overall prediction of an IMP. This is very 
similar to the method used to annotate IMPs in the UniProt 
protein information resource [ 8 ].  
  2.   OMPs can be predicted using the beta-barrel OMP predictor 
BOMP [ 9 ] and the Freeman–Wimley beta-barrel prediction 
method [ 10 ]. Scores produced by the different methods can 
be combined and proteins with an overall score above a thresh-
old designated as putative OMPs.  
 Viruses are selected for study based on their potential for causing 
infectious disease in humans. The target selection protocol com-
bines a review of the literature with an appreciation of how the 
high-throughput pipeline can be most productive. Most efforts are 
directed toward viral proteins where host interacting partners have 
been clearly identiﬁ ed, thus ensuring the collection of structural 
information from physiologically relevant complexes. To illustrate 
the procedure, consider target proteins from the genus  Flavivirus . 
Members of this group include West Nile virus, Japanese encepha-
litis, Saint Louis encephalitis, yellow fever virus, Murray Valley 
encephalitis, and dengue virus types 1–4. These viruses are respon-
sible for causing signiﬁ cant global health epidemics [ 11 ] in the 
form of mosquito-borne illness manifesting as fever or encephalitis 
in humans. 
 Although there are no speciﬁ c therapies available for many of 
these diseases, vaccines have been developed for yellow fever and 
Japanese encephalitis viruses. In contrast to bacterial target selec-
tion, viral target selection requires knowledge of both the content 
and organization of each viral genome. Members of the genus 
 Flavivirus are encoded by small single-stranded, positive-sense 
RNA genomes, each having a type I 5′ cap but no poly (A) tail [ 12 ]. 
Each genome is translated as a single polyprotein, which is cleaved 
by both virus- and host-encoded proteases into three structural 
proteins (C, prM/M, E) and seven nonstructural proteins (NS1, 
NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5). The NS proteins include 
an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (NS5), a  helicase/protease 
(NS3), and other proteins that form part of the viral replication 
3.7.1  Method
3.8  Protocol for 
Selection of Viral 
Targets
Infectious Disease Targets

46
complex [ 13 ,  14 ]. Representative crystal structures have been 
determined for many of these proteins including C, prM, E, NS2B, 
NS3, and NS5. 
 However, during the selection process it became apparent 
that the majority of neutralizing antibodies recognize the struc-
tural E protein (the major component of the viral envelope), 
although subsets do exist that bind to the M protein as well as 
NS1 [ 15 – 18 ]. At least nine spatial epitopes on the E protein have 
been deﬁ ned by antibody mapping with distinct biologic activities 
including receptor binding, dimerization, trimerization, and acid-
catalyzed fusion [ 19 – 21 ]. In general, virus-speciﬁ c epitopes elicit 
antibodies with the strongest neutralizing activity [ 20 ,  22 ], and 
animal protection from virus challenge correlates with neutraliz-
ing activity in vitro [ 20 ,  23 – 25 ]. Further, neutralizing monoclo-
nal antibodies against many of these viruses are freely available 
from members of the  Flavivirus research community. Therefore, a 
good strategy is to select a diverse set of  Flavivirus envelope pro-
teins for structural determination, both alone and in complex with 
neutralizing monoclonal antibodies. The aim is to obtain high-
resolution structural data on antibody complexes with envelope 
proteins in order to better understand the mechanism of potent 
neutralization. This information is of great value toward vaccine 
development. 
 Another example of a viral target selection method involves 
members of the genera  Orthopoxvirus , a group which includes vari-
ola (the causative agent of smallpox), monkeypox, and cowpox. 
With the global eradication of smallpox, routine inoculation against 
the disease using vaccinia ceased in the United States in 1972. To the 
extent that vaccination with vaccinia provided orthopox- speciﬁ c 
immunity, the global loss of cross-protective immunity is likely to 
favor transmission of various orthopoxvirus from animals to 
humans. Indeed, several zoonotic orthopoxvirus species are known 
to be in circulation. The most worrisome of these include monkey-
pox in Africa, vaccinia-like viruses in Brazil, and cowpox in Europe 
[ 26 – 31 ]. The risk to public health in the United States became 
clear in 2003 when 93 people from Midwestern states contracted 
monkeypox through contact with infected rodents imported from 
West Africa [ 32 ]. 
 Target selection for these viruses can be aided by information 
about the genomic organization. The linear double-stranded 
DNA genomes of orthopoxvirus encode approximately 200 open 
reading frames [ 33 ]. The central part of each genome contains 
about 90 highly conserved genes for “housekeeping” functions, 
such as replication and assembly, that are essential for viral growth 
in vitro. In contrast, the virus termini encode genes that are typi-
cally not essential for viral growth in vitro but appear to explain 
the differences in host range and virulence observed between 
Corin Yeats et al.

47
orthopoxvirus members. Further, genes in the terminal regions 
appear to be  subject to diversifying selection, presumably through 
adaptive molecular evolution to their hosts [ 34 ]. 
 The speciﬁ c functions of many of these virulence factors remain 
unclear. Much of what is known about the orthopoxvirus life cycle 
comes from studies on vaccinia virus [ 35 ]. Viral entry occurs 
through fusion with the plasma membrane and release of the viral 
core into the cytoplasm. Vaccinia virus is unusual because it repli-
cates in the cytoplasm rather than the nucleus of infected cells. 
Following productive replication and packaging, virions are envel-
oped in the Golgi and exocytosed. Lysis of infected cells and release 
of viral particles occur within 7–24 h after the initial infection. 
Both housekeeping and virulence genes can be considered as can-
didates for target selection. The least likely targets can be ﬁ ltered 
from each genome using a series of simple steps. 
 Since selection of viral targets often involves detailed examination 
of the literature, and may involve experimental studies, a number 
of ﬁ lters are ﬁ rst applied to remove proteins that are already being 
targeted (i.e., are in TargetTrack) or have a solved structure in the 
PDB (see the STRAP protocol below). Proteins with transmem-
brane regions may be eliminated unless the transmembrane helix is 
at the one end of the protein and can be easily removed, leaving a 
region big enough to potentially be a domain. 
 Selection of an expression system for these targets is compli-
cated by the fact that many of the viral proteins are normally 
produced in the secretory pathway. Such targets require post-
translational modiﬁ cations such as disulﬁ de bonds or carbohydrate 
addition and are best made by refolding from  E. coli or by expres-
sion in eukaryotic cells. A few  Orthopoxvirus strains that do not 
directly infect humans can be included for target selection to 
increase the chances of successful crystallization experiments. For 
example, mousepox (the causative agent in mice of a disorder 
resembling human smallpox infection) contains many proteins 
very similar to those found in monkeypox, cowpox, and vaccinia 
virus (which infect humans). Thus mousepox targets should yield 
information relevant to understanding human poxvirus infection. 
Target selection in herpesvirus is very similar to that of poxvirus 
except for the occasional transcript that requires splicing to assemble 
a functional gene.  
 Once targets have been selected either through the protocols 
described above or in direct collaboration with pathogen research-
ers, it is possible to run several automatic protocols to determine 
whether the target is related to any protein already in PDB or 
TargetTrack (see STRAP protocol below) and to automatically 
obtain structural and functional annotations for the protein. 
3.8.1  Method
3.9  Protocol for 
Automatic Annotation 
of Targets
Infectious Disease Targets

48
 Once a target is identiﬁ ed, the GenBank identiﬁ er can be used to 
import various annotations from public resources:
  1.   Protein name, species, function descriptions, and DNA sequence 
are extracted from the NCBI via the efetch web services.  
  2.   The CATH domain architecture and more speciﬁ c functional 
family (“FunFam”) assignments can be obtained using the 
Gene3DScan web service.  
  3.   Similar proteins in TargetTrack can be identiﬁ ed using a 
BLAST search web service maintained internally by University 
College London—the underlying TargetTrack database is 
updated nightly.  
  4.   Similar proteins in the PDB are identiﬁ ed using the European 
Bioinformatics Institute’s BLAST search web service, which is 
updated nightly.  
  5.  Signal peptides and transmembrane helices (Phobius), disor-
dered regions (IUPRed), low-complexity regions (seg), and 
coiled-coil regions (marcoils) are all determined using a suite 
of web services hosted at Gene3D [ 36 ].  
 Once targets have been annotated and selected for structure deter-
mination, the ﬁ nal bioinformatics stage is to design a set of con-
structs that optimize the chance of expressing and solving the 
structure of the target. While solving the structure of the entire 
protein is desirable, the presence of transmembrane regions, signal 
peptides, low- or medium-complexity stretches of amino acid 
sequence, and other structurally unstable features can signiﬁ cantly 
reduce the likelihood of being able to achieve this. 
 STRAP was developed by the Orengo group in 2004 [ 37 ] and 
evolved through several versions as a protocol for preparing targets 
based on CATH [ 38 ], Pfam [ 39 ], or other HMM-based domain 
predictions within proteins. 
 Before running STRAP all targets are searched against the PDB 
and TargetTrack using BLAST to identify homologues. Targets are 
annotated with information on the level of sequence similarity to 
matched proteins. The Protein Structure Initiative structural genom-
ics centers tend to exclude targets with more than 30 % sequence 
identity to a solved structure or protein in TargetTrack. However, 
the Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases (CSGID) 
and other structural genomics centers may target proteins with 
higher levels of sequence similarity if it is likely that more accurate 
structural information is required, e.g., for drug design, than can be 
obtained by homology modeling. 
 Overview of STRAP protocol for assigning domain boundaries 
and problematic regions and for designing constructs:
  1.   Domains are assigned by creating a hybrid domain architecture 
from Pfam, CATH, and Pfam-B. Potential domains are 
3.9.1  Method
3.10  Protocol for 
Design and Selection 
of Constructs: STRAP
3.10.1  Method
Corin Yeats et al.

49
 identiﬁ ed using the resources’ search software and then inte-
grated into a single architecture using DomainFinder3, and 
the matches are weighted according to source. CATH matches 
are selected as ﬁ rst preference since these are most likely to 
accurately deﬁ ne true structural domains, while Pfam-B are the 
least likely and hence given the lowest weight [ 40 ].  
  2.  The non-domain structural regions are identiﬁ ed, Phobius for 
signal peptides and transmembranes, while secondary struc-
ture elements are identiﬁ ed with PSI-PRED, and disordered 
regions of >40 residues in length are found using IUPred [ 41 ].  
  3.  The non-domain elements are then used to reﬁ ne or extend 
the domain boundaries, with transmembrane regions acting as 
termini for potential constructs. Secondary structure predic-
tion can be run (e.g., using PSIPRED) and domain regions 
extended if it is clear that the predicted boundaries are cutting 
secondary structure elements.  
  4.   The set of constructs generated include all single-domain 
regions, all sequential combinations (allowing for gaps of up to 
50 residues), and all lengths of sequence that do not cross a 
“boundary element” (i.e., transmembrane or disordered 
region) (Fig.  3 ).
 Fig. 3   Schematic representation of predicted CATH (structural) domains and Pfam domains in a target sequence. 
Signal peptides, transmembrane regions, and disordered regions are also identiﬁ ed. Constructs are designed to 
include one or more predicted domains. The longest construct chosen in this case is a region of sequence with 
a match in the PDB, i.e., a close homologue. This is likely to identify the most reliable boundaries for structure 
determination. If there is a very close homologue in the PDB (e.g., >=60 % sequence identity) likely to have 
similar structure and function, it may not be necessary to target this region of the sequence. The threshold varies 
depending on the structural genomics consortium and the reasons for solving the structure       
 
Infectious Disease Targets

50
 Acknowledgments 
 Drs. Corin Yeats and Benoit Dessailly are supported with federal 
funds from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and 
Human Services, under Contract Nos. HHSN272200700058C 
and HHSN272201200026C.  
 References 
  1.  Rose PW, Beran B et al (2011) The RCSB pro-
tein data bank: redesigned website and web 
services. Nucleic Acids Res 39:D392–D401  
  2.  Chen L, Oughtred R, Berman HM, Westbrook 
J (2004) TargetDB: a target registration data-
base 
for 
structural 
genomics 
projects. 
Bioinformatics 20:2860–2862  
  3.  Caspi R et al (2010) The MetaCyc database of 
metabolic pathways and enzymes and the 
BioCyc collection of pathway/genome data-
bases. Nucleic Acids Res 40:D742–D753  
  4.  Juncker AS, Willenbrock H, Von Heijne G, 
Brunak S, Nielsen H, Krogh A (2003) 
Prediction of lipoprotein signal peptides in 
Gram-negative 
bacteria. 
Protein 
Sci 
12:1652–1662  
  5.  Chen LH, Xiong ZH, Sun LL, Yang J, Jin Q 
(2012) VFDB 2012 update: toward the genetic 
diversity and molecular evolution of bacterial 
virulence 
factors. 
Nucleic 
Acids 
Res 
40:D641–D645 
  6.  Jones DT (2007) Improving the accuracy of 
transmembrane protein topology prediction 
using evolutionary information. Bioinformatics 
23:538–544 
  7.  Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, 
Sonnhammer ELL (2001) Predicting trans-
membrane protein topology with a hidden 
Markov model: application to complete 
genomes. J Mol Biol 305:567–580  
  8.  The UniProt Consortium (2011) Ongoing and 
future developments at the universal protein 
resource. Nucleic Acids Res 39:D214–D219  
  9.  Berven FS, Flikka K, Jensen HB, Eidhammer I 
(2004) BOMP: a program to predict integral 
beta-barrel outer membrane proteins encoded 
within genomes of Gram-negative bacteria. 
Nucleic Acids Res 32:W394–W399  
  10.  Freeman TC Jr, Wimley WC (2010) A highly 
accurate statistical approach for the prediction 
of transmembrane beta-barrels. Bioinformatics 
26:1965–1974 
  11.  Burke DS, Monath TP (2001) Flaviviruses. In: 
Knipe DM, Howley PM (eds) Fields virology. 
Lippincott Williams &Wilkins, Philadelphia, 
pp 1043–1125  
  12.   Chambers TJ, Hahn CS, Galler R, Rice CM 
(1990) Flavivirus genome organization, expres-
sion, and replication. Annu Rev Microbiol 
44:649–688  
  13.  Khromykh AA, Sedlak PL, Westaway EG 
(1999) Trans-complementation analysis of the 
ﬂ avivirus Kunjin ns5 gene reveals an essential 
role for translation of its N-terminal half in 
RNA replication. J Virol 73:9247–9255  
  14.  Khromykh AA, Sedlak PL, Westaway EG 
(2000) Cis- and trans-acting elements in ﬂ avi-
virus RNA replication. J Virol 74:3253–3263  
  15.  Colombage G, Hall R, Pavy M, Lobigs M 
(1998) DNA-based and alphavirus-vectored 
immunisation with prM and E proteins elicits 
long-lived and protective immunity against the 
ﬂ avivirus, Murray Valley encephalitis virus. 
Virology 250:151–163  
  16.  Falconar AK (1999) Identiﬁ cation of an epit-
ope on the dengue virus membrane (M) pro-
tein deﬁ ned by cross-protective monoclonal 
antibodies: design of an improved epitope 
sequence based on common determinants 
present in both envelope (E and M) proteins. 
Arch Virol 144:2313–2330  
  17.  Pincus S, Mason PW, Konishi E, Fonseca BA, 
Shope RE, Rice CM, Paoletti E (1992) 
Recombinant vaccinia virus producing the prM 
and E proteins of yellow fever virus protects 
mice from lethal yellow fever encephalitis. 
Virology 187:290–297  
  18.  Vazquez S, Guzman MG, Guillen G, Chinea 
G, Perez AB, Pupo M, Rodriguez R, Reyes O, 
Garay HE, Delgado I et al (2002) Immune 
response to synthetic peptides of dengue prM 
protein. Vaccine 20:1823–1830  
  19.  Kimura-Kuroda J, Yasui K (1988) Protection 
of mice against Japanese encephalitis virus by 
passive administration with monoclonal anti-
bodies. J Immunol 141:3606–3610  
  20.  Roehrig JT, Staudinger LA, Hunt AR, Mathews 
JH, Blair CD (2001) Antibody prophylaxis and 
Corin Yeats et al.

51
therapy for ﬂ aviviral encephalitis infections. 
Ann N Y Acad Sci 951:286–297  
  21.  Schlesinger JJ, Walsh EE, Brandriss MW 
(1984) Analysis of 17D yellow fever virus enve-
lope protein epitopes using monoclonal 
 antibodies. J Gen Virol 65(Pt 10):1637–1644  
  22.  Roehrig JT, Mathews JH, Trent DW (1983) 
Identiﬁ cation of epitopes on the E glycopro-
tein of Saint Louis encephalitis virus using 
monoclonal 
antibodies. 
Virology 
128:
118–126  
  23.  Diamond MS, Sitati E, Friend L, Shrestha B, 
Higgs S, Engle M (2003) Induced IgM pro-
tects against lethal West Nile Virus infection. 
J Exp Med 198:1–11  
  24.  Mathews JH, Roehrig JT (1984) Elucidation 
of the topography and determination of the 
protective epitopes on the E glycoprotein of 
Saint Louis encephalitis virus by passive trans-
fer with monoclonal antibodies. J Immunol 
132:1533–1537 
  25.  Oliphant T, Engle M, Nybakken G, Doane C, 
Johnson S, Huang L, Gorlatov S, Mehlhop E, 
Marri A, Chung KM et al (2005) Development 
of a humanized monoclonal antibody with 
therapeutic potential against West Nile virus. 
Nat Med 11:522–530  
  26.  Eis-Hubinger AM, Gerritzen A, Schneweis 
KE, Pfeiff B, Pullmann H, Mayr A, Czerny CP 
(1990) Fatal cowpox-like virus infection trans-
mitted by cat. Lancet 336:880  
  27.  Kroon EG, Mota BE, Abrahao JS, da Fonseca 
FG, de Souza Trindade G (2011) Zoonotic 
Brazilian vaccinia virus: from ﬁ eld to therapy. 
Antiviral Res 92:150–163  
  28.  Learned LA, Reynolds MG, Wassa DW, Li Y, 
Olson VA, Karem K, Stempora LL, Braden ZH, 
Kline R, Likos A et al (2005) Extended interhu-
man transmission of monkeypox in a hospital 
community in the Republic of the Congo, 
2003. Am J Trop Med Hyg 73:428–434  
  29.  Pelkonen PM, Tarvainen K, Hynninen A, 
Kallio ER, Henttonen K, Palva A, Vaheri A, 
Vapalahti O (2003) Cowpox with severe gen-
eralized eruption, Finland. Emerg Infect Dis 
9:1458–1461  
  30.  Vogel S, Sardy M, Glos K, Korting HC, 
Ruzicka T, Wollenberg A (2012) The Munich 
outbreak of cutaneous cowpox infection: trans-
mission by infected pet rats. Acta Derm 
Venereol 92:126–131  
  31.  Wolfs TF, Wagenaar JA, Niesters HG, 
Osterhaus AD (2002) Rat-to-human transmis-
sion of cowpox infection. Emerg Infect Dis 
8:1495–1496  
  32.  Reed KD, Melski JW, Graham MB, Regnery 
RL, Sotir MJ, Wegner MV, Kazmierczak JJ, 
Stratman EJ, Li Y, Fairley JA et al (2004) The 
detection of monkeypox in humans in the 
Western Hemisphere. N Engl J Med 350:
342–350  
  33.   McLysaght A, Baldi PF, Gaut BS (2003) 
Extensive gene gain associated with adaptive 
evolution of poxviruses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A 100:15655–15660  
  34.  Esteban DJ, Hutchinson AP (2011) Genes in 
the terminal regions of orthopoxvirus genomes 
experience adaptive molecular evolution. BMC 
Genomics 12:261  
  35.  Moss B (2007) The viruses and their replica-
tion. Wolters Kluwer, Philadelphia, PA  
  36.  Yeats C, Lees J, Carter P, Sillitoe I, Orengo C 
(2011) The Gene3D Web Services: a platform 
for identifying, annotating and comparing 
structural domains in protein sequences. 
Nucleic Acids Res 39:W546–W550  
  37.  Bray JE, Marsden RL, Rison SC, Savchenko A, 
Edwards AM, Thornton JM, Orengo CA 
(2004) A practical and robust sequence search 
strategy for structural genomics target selection. 
Bioinformatics 20:2288–2295  
  38.  Cuff AL et al (2011) Extending CATH: 
increasing coverage of the protein structure 
universe and linking structure with function. 
Nucleic Acids Res 39:D420–D426  
  39.  Punta M et al (2012) The Pfam protein families 
database. Nucleic Acids Res 40:D290–D301  
  40.  Yeats C, Redfern OC, Orengo C (2010) A fast 
and automated solution for accurately resolv-
ing 
protein 
domain 
architectures. 
Bioinformatics 26:745–751  
  41.  Dosztányi Z, Csizmok V, Tompa P, Simon I 
(2005) IUPred: web server for the prediction 
of intrinsically unstructured regions of proteins 
based 
on 
estimated 
energy 
content. 
Bioinformatics 21:3433–3434  
Infectious Disease Targets

53
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_4, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 4  
 Selecting Targets from Eukaryotic Parasites for Structural 
Genomics and Drug Discovery 
 Isabelle  Q.H.  Phan ,  Robin  Stacy , and  Peter  J.  Myler 
 Abstract 
 The selection of targets is the ﬁ rst step for any structural genomics project. The application of structural 
genomics approaches to drug discovery also starts with the selection of targets. Here, three protocols are 
described that were developed to select targets from eukaryotic pathogens. These protocols could also be 
applied to other drug discovery projects.  
 Key words   Target selection  ,   Structural genomics  ,  Eukaryotes  ,  Pathogens  ,  Drug targets  ,  Bioinformatics  
1  Introduction 
 The success of the methods developed in early structural genomics 
projects led to the application of the approach to speciﬁ c scientiﬁ c 
problems. Early projects focused on the exploration of protein 
structure and selected targets for that purpose [ 1 ,  2 ]. More recently, 
there has been a transition to applying structural genomics meth-
ods to structure-aided drug discovery. The Seattle Structural 
Genomics Center for Infectious Disease (SSGCID) has focused on 
providing experimentally determined structures that serve as an 
initial step in the development process of structure-based drugs, 
vaccines, and diagnostics for infectious diseases [ 3 ,  4 ]. 
 The SSGCID has focused its structure determination efforts 
on human pathogens, including bacterial, eukaryotic, and viral 
organisms from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases (NIAID) list of biodefense organisms and those causing 
emerging and re-emerging diseases. Here, we describe three pro-
tocols for selecting targets as applied to seven eukaryotic patho-
gens:  Babesia bovis ,  Coccidioides immitis ,  Cryptosporidium parvum , 
 Encephalitozoon cuniculi ,  Entamoeba histolytica ,  Giardia lamblia , 
and  Toxoplasma gondii . 
 The ﬁ rst protocol involves identiﬁ cation of potential drug 
targets in the seven eukaryotic species listed above. The approach 

54
involves searching for proteins with sequence similarity (>50 % 
over >75 % of their length) with protein targets in the  DRUGBANK 
database [ 5 ].  DRUGBANK represents a comprehensive and publicly 
available resource that combines detailed drug (i.e., chemical) 
data with comprehensive target (i.e., protein) information [ 5 ]. 
The database contains over 6,700 drug entries and over 4,000 
non- redundant protein sequences that are linked to these drug 
entries. Selecting proteins with sequence similarity to known drug 
targets substantially increases the likelihood that selected proteins 
are “druggable.” In addition, knowledge of chemical ligands (e.g., 
the drugs that act against their  DRUGBANK homologues) that are 
likely to bind these proteins should increase their success in travers-
ing the structure determination pipeline and provide ligands 
for co- crystallization. Determination of their three-dimensional 
 structures will facilitate basic biomedical research by signiﬁ cantly 
shortening the time needed for development of novel chemothera-
peutic agents. The application of this protocol yielded a total of 
679 targets in the seven chosen eukaryotic pathogens. 
 The second protocol focuses on identifying representatives of 
hand-selected drug candidates. In this case, drug targets were 
obtained through a literature survey, discussions, and communica-
tions with pharmaceutical and academic researchers. A total of 93 
targets representing 42 protein families from 32 organisms were 
collected. Orthologs were identiﬁ ed in the above seven eukaryotic 
pathogens using OrthoMCL clustering. OrthoMCL is a genome- 
scale algorithm for grouping orthologous protein sequences [ 6 ]. 
It provides not only groups shared by two or more species/
genomes but also groups representing species-speciﬁ c gene expan-
sion families. This protocol yielded a total of 65 targets in the seven 
chosen eukaryotic pathogens. 
 The third protocol uses the TDRtargets public repository [ 7 ]. 
The TDRtargets project has collected diverse information relevant 
to drug target identiﬁ cation for a variety of important human 
pathogens [ 7 ] and provides a website where researchers can look 
for information on targets of interest. In addition, by using the 
TDRtargets database tools, researchers can quickly prioritize genes of 
interest by running simple queries (such as looking for small 
enzymes or proteins with high-quality structural models), assign-
ing numerical weights to each query (in the history page), and 
combining these results to produce a ranked list of candidate targets. 
This protocol yielded a total of 614 targets in the eukaryotic patho-
gens of the genera  Babesia ,  Brugia ,  Cryptosporidium ,  Leishmania , 
 and Trypanosoma . 
 The methods in this chapter describe the following steps of the 
target selection strategy: (1) creating the reference genome 
sequence dataset, (2) selecting candidate targets, and (3) ﬁ ltering 
out sequences not conducive to structural genomics approaches. 
Data management is a major component of target selection in 
structural genomics; however, it is outside the scope of this chapter.  
Isabelle Q.H. Phan et al.

55
2  Materials 
  1.   Computer running the UNIX operating system, Internet 
connection ( see  Note 1 ).  
  2.   Installed bioinformatics software: NCBI blast [ 8 ], OrthoMCL 
[ 6 ], Phobius [ 9 ], or TMHMM [ 10 ] ( see  Note 2 ). 
  3.  Proﬁ ciency in a scripting language such as Python or Perl for 
parsing and combining the results of the target selection steps. 
A workable alternative that has been tested is the cloud-based 
database service SQLShare [ 11 ].  
3  Methods 
  1.   Select a representative strain for each genus ( see  Note 3 ). 
  2.    Download CDS (i.e., DNA) and protein sequences in fasta format 
from EupathDB [ 12 ], which stores all organisms described in the 
introduction, except for  Coccidioides , for which the sequences 
were downloaded from the Broad Institute ( see  Note 4 ).  
  1.   Download target protein sequences from DrugBank in fasta 
format.  
  2.   Perform a sequence similarity search using BlastP of these 
reference sequences against DrugBank, and keep the hits with 
at least 50 % similarity over 75 % of their length ( see  Note 5 ). 
  3.  The remaining protein sequences were Jaccard clustered [ 13 ] 
to remove paralogs that shared >75 % similarity over 75 % of 
their length.  
  1.   Obtain protein sequences of nominated drug candidates from 
the relevant repository if a database identiﬁ er is provided or 
search the UniProt database ( see  Note 6 ). 
  2.  Combine sequences from the ﬁ rst step with reference protein 
sequences obtained in Subheading  3.1 , and perform all-against- 
all BlastP, followed by OrthoMCL clustering using a Markov 
inﬂ ation index of 1.2 ( see  Note 7 ).  
  3.   Select sequences from the reference genomes that cluster with 
the original nominated sequences from  step 1 .  
  1.  Query database using the TDRtargets “search for targets” web 
form   http://tdrtargets.org/search  ( see  Note 8 ). 
  2.  Download results. In the horizontal menu on top of the page, 
click on “my queries.” The results are listed under “My target 
queries,” click on the “Export” link, and export using the 
default format.  
  3.   Download sequences from the Source Database ( see  Note 9 ). 
3.1  Create the 
Reference Genome 
Sequence Dataset
3.2  Select Candidate 
Targets
3.2.1  DrugBank 
Homologues
3.2.2  Representatives 
of Known Drug Targets
3.2.3  TDR Targets
Eukaryotic Parasite Targets

56
  1.   Remove targets containing introns unless cDNA is available 
( see  Note 10 ). 
  2.   Screen proteins with known structure or those selected by 
other structural genomics centers to remove targets showing 
greater than 95 % conservation and 95 % coverage to targets in 
the 
Structural 
Biology 
Target 
Registration 
Database 
(TargetTrack, formerly TargetDB [ 14 ]) and sequences in the 
Protein Data Bank [ 15 ] by performing a BlastP search against 
these two databases ( see  Note 11 ). 
  3.   Remove targets that contain transmembrane domains pre-
dicted by TMHMM or Phobius ( see  Note 12 ), except for 
N-terminal signal sequences, which are removed before PCR 
ampliﬁ cation.  
  4.  Remove targets that are longer than 750 amino acid residues in 
length and have a cysteine content greater than 10 ( see  Note 13 ). 
Those criteria are “rules of thumb,” but it is known that limit-
ing the number of cysteine residues decreases the likelihood of 
protein aggregation.  
 Established high-throughput centers will run these steps 
routinely using customized automated software pipelines. The 
SSGCID uses the Ergatis workﬂ ow management system that exe-
cutes jobs in parallel on a computer cluster [ 16 ]. Another popular 
tool is the Galaxy platform [ 17 ]. 
4  Notes 
  1.   The UNIX operating system is required for installing the 
stand-alone versions of the sequence clustering and transmem-
brane prediction tools that we describe. There are many cross- 
platform alternatives; for example, the Jaccard algorithm is 
widely used for clustering sequences and is available in a variety of 
languages, including R and Perl, and transmembrane predic-
tions can be obtained by querying the TMHMM web service 
  http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/ws/ws.php?entry=TMHMM   . 
  2.   The current version of OrthoMCL (v.2.0) requires a relational 
database. The version we used (v.1.4) does not require a rela-
tional database; it is still available for download but is no lon-
ger supported.  
  3.   The choice may be restricted by the availability of fully anno-
tated genomes, as many genomes are ﬁ rst published as unas-
sembled contigs. Beware that genome sequences in EupathDB 
are continuously updated between releases and sequence quality 
can vary widely depending on the organism.  
3.3  Remove Targets 
Not Conducive to 
Structural Genomics
Isabelle Q.H. Phan et al.

57
  4.    Different repositories will store different gene predictions and 
annotations, or different versions, of the same genome. Beware 
of inconsistent CDS (ORF) and protein sequences, due, for 
example, to frameshifts or truncations, duplicate sequences, 
missing start or stop codons, as well as use of an asterisk at the 
end of protein sequences and non-ASCII characters in the 
annotation, which may affect downstream sequence analysis. In 
EupathDB, proteins that contain asterisks within the sequence 
are likely to indicate a pseudogene and can be discarded.  
  5.   Choose the blast+ tabular output with the option “-outfmt 
ppos” to obtain the percent similarity (or conservation) as the 
percentage of positive-scoring matches. Several new options 
for customizing the tabular output format were introduced in 
blast+ version 2.2.28, including the option ‘stitle’ to display 
the product description.  
  6.   Due to the non-standardized nature of protein annotation, 
using a combination of as many search terms as possible, such 
as gene, product, function, and organism name, and checking 
position-speciﬁ c annotations (such as active sites) will increase 
the likelihood of ﬁ nding the correct sequence [ 18 ].  
  7.   The OrthoMCL (v.1.4) Markov Inﬂ ation Index was reduced 
to 1.2 from its default value of 1.5 in order to obtain larger 
clusters of more distant relatives.  
  8.  The original query for the SSGCID target selection was pub-
lished as   http://tdrtargets.org/published/browse/t/390   . 
  9.   Click on one of the links in the gene_name column of the 
exported spreadsheet to check the Source Database. Beware 
that the Source Database may differ for each organism.  
  10.   Information on introns and exons is stored differently, depend-
ing on which database the sequence came from. In EupathDB, 
the number of exons conveniently appears as a gene attribute 
in the “Select Column” menu at the top of the search results 
table. In GenBank records, the exon locations appear in the 
CDS section of the features.  
  11.   The TargetTrack and PDB databases are updated weekly. 
Including the target status in the TargetTrack fasta header 
allows the recovery of targets that have been marked as “work 
stopped” and are thus no longer pursued by the depositor. 
However, this requires building a custom fasta ﬁ le from the 
XML format as the status is not included in any of the target 
protein fasta ﬁ les provided on the TargetTrack website.  
  12.   TMHMM and Phobius predictions are limited to helical trans-
membrane domains. There are no established predictors yet 
for transmembrane beta-barrels. This is relevant insofar as 
transmembrane beta-barrels are present in the mitochondria of 
Eukaryotes.  
Eukaryotic Parasite Targets

58
  13.   This is a trivial computing task; however, these values can also be 
computed using online sequence analysis tools such as ProtParam 
(  http://web.expasy.org/protparam/  ). In SQLShare, assuming 
that the protein sequence is in upper- case, the number of 
cysteines is easily obtained via the SQL statement: SELECT 
len([sequence]) − len(replace([sequence],’C’,″)) AS cysteines.  
 Acknowledgments 
 The SSGCID has been funded with Federal funds from the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, under Contract 
Nos.: HHSN272201200025C and HHSN272200700057C.  
 References 
  1.  Brenner SE (2000) Target selection for struc-
tural genomics. Nat Struct Biol 7(Suppl):967–
969. doi:  10.1038/80747   
  2.  Liu J, Hegyi H, Acton TB, Montelione GT, 
Rost B (2004) Automatic target selection for 
structural genomics on eukaryotes. Proteins 
56(2):188–200. doi:  10.1002/prot.20012   
  3.  Myler PJ, Stacy R, Stewart L et al (2009) 
The Seattle structural genomics center for 
infectious disease (SSGCID). Infect Disord 
Drug Targets 9(5):493–506  
  4.  Stacy R, Begley DW, Phan I et al (2011) 
Structural genomics of infectious disease drug 
targets: the SSGCID. Acta Crystallogr Sect F 
Struct Biol Cryst Commun 67(Pt 9):979–984. 
doi:  10.1107/S1744309111029204   
  5.   Wishart DS, Knox C, Guo AC et al (2006) 
DrugBank: a comprehensive resource for in 
silico drug discovery and exploration. Nucleic 
Acids Res 34((Database issue)):D668–D672. 
doi:  10.1093/nar/gkj067   
  6.   Li L, Stoeckert CJ Jr, Roos DS (2003) 
OrthoMCL: identiﬁ cation of ortholog groups 
for 
eukaryotic 
genomes. 
Genome 
Res 
13(9):2178–2189. doi:  10.1101/gr.1224503   
  7.  Aguero F, Al-Lazikani B, Aslett M et al (2008) 
Genomic-scale prioritization of drug targets: 
the TDR Targets database. Nat Rev Drug 
Discov 7(11):900–907. doi:  10.1038/nrd2684   
  8.  Camacho C, Coulouris G, Avagyan V et al 
(2009) BLAST+: architecture and applications. 
BMC 
Bioinformatics 
10:421. 
doi:  10.1186/1471-2105-10-421   
  9.  Kall L, Krogh A, Sonnhammer EL (2004) A 
combined transmembrane topology and signal 
peptide prediction method. J Mol Biol 
338(5):1027–1036. 
doi:  10.1016/j.jmb.
2004.03.016   
  10.   Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, 
Sonnhammer EL (2001) Predicting trans-
membrane protein topology with a hidden 
Markov model: application to complete 
genomes. J Mol Biol 305(3):567–580. 
 doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4315   
  11.  Howe B, Cole G, Souroush E et al. Database-
as- a-service for long-tail science. In: Judith 
Bayard Cushing JF, Shawn Bowers (eds) 
Proceedings of the 23rd international confer-
ence on Scientiﬁ c and statistical database man-
agement, Portland, 2011. Lect Notes Comput 
Sci, vol 6809. Springer-Verlag, pp 480–489  
  12.  Aurrecoechea C, Brestelli J, Brunk BP et al 
(2010) EuPathDB: a portal to eukaryotic 
pathogen 
databases. 
Nucleic 
Acids 
Res 
38((Database 
issue)):D415–D419. 
doi:  10.1093/nar/gkp941   
  13.  Jain AK, Dubes RC (1988) Algorithms 
for clustering data. Prentice Hall advanced 
 reference series. Prentice Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ 
  14.  Chen L, Oughtred R, Berman HM, Westbrook 
J (2004) TargetDB: a target registration database 
for structural genomics projects. Bioinformatics 
20(16):2860–2862. 
doi:  10.1093/bioinfor-
matics/bth300   
  15.  Rose PW, Bi C, Bluhm WF et al (2013) The 
RCSB Protein Data Bank: new resources for 
research and education. Nucleic Acids Res 
41(D1):D475–D482. 
doi:  10.1093/nar/
gks1200  
Isabelle Q.H. Phan et al.

59
  16.  Orvis J, Crabtree J, Galens K et al (2010) 
Ergatis: a web interface and scalable software 
system for bioinformatics workﬂ ows. Bio-
informatics 26(12):1488–1492. doi:  10.1093/
bioinformatics/btq167   
  17.  Giardine B, Riemer C, Hardison RC et al 
(2005) Galaxy: a platform for interactive 
 large- scale genome analysis. Genome Res 
15(10):1451–1455. doi:  10.1101/gr.4086505   
  18.  Hinz U (2010) From protein sequences to 
3D-structures and beyond: the example of the 
UniProt knowledgebase. Cell Mol Life Sci 
67(7):1049–1064. 
 doi: 10.1007/
s00018-009-0229-6   
Eukaryotic Parasite Targets

61
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_5, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 5  
 High-Throughput Cloning for Biophysical Applications 
 Keehwan  Kwon and  Scott  N.  Peterson 
 Abstract 
 Efﬁ cient high-throughput gene cloning represents a critical ﬁ rst step for conducting functional and structural 
proteomics in the post-genomic era. The ligation-independent cloning (LIC) method has been almost 
universally adopted by large structural biology centers as a component of high-throughput structure deter-
mination pipelines. The LIC platform is easy to use, of low cost, and rapid, and importantly, it is easily 
adapted to 96- or 384-well format, thereby facilitating automation. Procedures are described for 96-well 
format cloning using the LIC technology.  
 Key words   96-Well format  ,   High-throughput cloning  ,   Ligation-independent cloning (LIC)  
1  Introduction 
 Life science technologies are evolving rapidly, driving accelerated 
progress in a number of diverse ﬁ elds. One of the best examples is 
the impact that advances in DNA sequence technology have had on 
biology [ 1 ]. Gene sequences have continued to accumulate in public 
databases at an ever-increasing rate. Several massive sequence sur-
veys have been reported recently that served to increase the number 
of known genes at an unprecedented rate [ 2 – 4 ]. The greatly 
expanded availability of gene sequences has placed increased 
demands on the functional characterization of proteins [ 5 ]. 
Structural characterization of proteins is one strategy to attribute 
function to uncharacterized proteins. Perhaps more importantly, 
structural biology is able to address questions related to the size and 
breadth of the protein “universe.” It is becoming clear that the 
number of protein families is not inﬁ nite and that many protein fam-
ilies contain members (orthologous sequences) that are unrecogniz-
able by standard BLAST-based sequence comparisons [ 6 ]. Deﬁ ning 
the limits of the protein universe requires high- throughput protein 
structure determination pipelines. These pipelines must be equipped 
with highly optimized and efﬁ cient procedures for PCR ampliﬁ ca-
tion and cloning of target gene sequences. A variety of powerful 

62
gene cloning methods have been developed including Gateway 
recombination cloning [ 7 ,  8 ], Topo cloning [ 9 ], Gibson assembly 
[ 10 ,  11 ], and ligation-independent cloning (LIC) [ 12 ,  13 ]. 
 The Gateway cloning technology uses a highly optimized and 
speciﬁ c recombinase to catalyze open reading frame (ORF) clon-
ing. Once entry clones are prepared, genes can be easily shuttled 
into a variety of Gateway-compatible expression vectors. The avail-
ability of large and comprehensive ORF clone sets as Gateway 
entry clones and for applications requiring the transfer of genes 
into multiple downstream vectors elevates the utility of this plat-
form. The Gateway cloning strategy appends additional amino acid 
residues onto recombinantly expressed protein, thereby prohibit-
ing its widespread use in structural biology [ 14 ]. The LIC method 
exploits the exonuclease activity of T4 DNA polymerase to gener-
ate complementary 12–15 base-pair overhanging ends in both the 
target PCR product and the linearized vector DNA. The annealed 
vector backbone and PCR amplicon are directly transformed into 
 E. coli where the nicked plasmid substrate is repaired and sealed by 
DNA ligase. One of the primary strengths of the LIC method is its 
single-step cloning of ORFs into expression vectors. 
 The LIC method is described, including the preparation of 
vector backbone and PCR amplicons, LIC reaction setup,  E. coli 
transformation, and preparation of frozen stock cultures. The LIC 
vector, pMCSG7, was constructed by the Midwest Center for 
Structural Genomics (MCSG) [ 15 ]. This vector contains an 
N-terminal hexa-histidine tag followed by TEV protease cleavage 
sequence and serves as the workhorse vector in the high- throughput 
pipeline. This method is presented in the context of a 96-well 
format.  
2  Materials 
    1.  TAE running buffer: 40 mM Tris–acetate and 1 mM EDTA, 
pH 8.3. Prepare 1× TAE by diluting from 10× TAE ( see  Note 1 ). 
Add water to a volume of 900 mL to 1-L graduate cylinder 
and add 100 mL 10× TAE. Cover the cylinder with a piece of 
Paraﬁ lm and mix well by inversion.  
  2.   1 kb Ladder (Life Technologies).  
  3.   8 well, 1.5 mm comb (GE Healthcare Biosciences).  
  4.   10× BlueJuice™ Gel Loading Buffer (Life Technologies).  
  5.   Ethidium Bromide (10 mg/mL).  
  6.   SspI restriction endonuclease (New England BioLabs).  
  7.   ß-Agarase I (New England BioLabs).  
  8.   Expression vector, pMCSG7 (Fig. 1 ) [ 15 ].
  9.   UltraPure Low Melting Point Agarose (Life Technologies).  
2.1  Vector 
Preparation
2.1.1  Components
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

63
  10.   UltraPure Agarose (Life Technologies).  
  11.   Isopropanol.  
  12.   70 % Ethanol.  
  1.  Wide gel electrophoresis system.  
  2.   Transilluminator/blue box.  
  3.   Heating blocks set to 65 and 45 °C.  
  4.   Thermal cycler.  
  5.  HE 33 mini submarine electrophoresis unit with included cast-
ing tray (GE Healthcare Biosciences). 
    1.   LabChip DNA 5K Assay Chip (PerkinElmer).  
  2.   Phusion ® High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (New England 
Biolabs).  
  3.  Hard-Shell ® Thin-Wall 96-Well Skirted PCR Plates (BioRad).  
2.1.2  Equipment
2.2  Preparation 
of DNA Inserts by 
Polymerase Chain 
Reaction
2.2.1  Components
 Fig. 1  LIC reaction overview with pMCSG7 cloning site and PCR product. A pair of PCR primers are designed 
with adequate length (18–22 bp) to anneal to gene-speciﬁ c regions of the target genes of interest (GOI) to 
achieve a  T m in the range of 58–62 °C. LIC vector-speciﬁ c sequences are appended to the 5′-end of both the 
forward and reverse primers. Forward = 5′-TACTTCCAATCCAATGCG and reverse = 5′-TTATCCACTTCCAATG. 
The plasmid pMCSG7 is an expression vector driven by the T7 promoter. A single SspI restriction cleavage site 
is located within the cloning site. Hexa-histidine fusion tag and TEV protease cleavage sequence are encoded 
5′ to SspI site. LIC reactions are performed following the method described. Inserts are treated with T4 DNA 
polymerase using dCTP, and 5′-overhangs of the vector backbone are prepared with T4 DNA polymerase using 
dGTP. After annealing of the T4-treated inserts and vector backbone, and they are transformed into  E. coli clon-
ing strains such as DH5α or DH10B 
 
High Throughput Cloning

64
  4.   Tape Pads (Qiagen).  
  5.  Template genomic DNA.  
  6.   Forward and reverse PCR primers.  
  7.  Millipore 96-well ﬁ ltration plate.  
  8.   100 mM dNTP set (dATP, dCTP, dGTP, dTTP).  
  1.  Centrifuge capable of spinning plates.  
  2.  Thermal cycler with 96-well head.  
  3.  Biomek 96 and Span-8 robots.  
  4.  LabChip 90 (PerkinElmer).  
  5.  Spectrophotometer.  
    1.   T4 DNA polymerase (3,000 U/mL) (New England BioLabs).  
  2.  100 mM dNTP set (dATP, dCTP, dGTP, dTTP).  
  3.  Dithiothreitol.  
  4.   Hard-Shell ® Thin-Wall 96-Well Skirted PCR Plates (BioRad).  
  1.  Thermal cycler.  
  2.  Centrifuge capable of spinning plates.  
    1.   DH5α (or DH10B)  E. coil chemically competent cells (Life 
Technologies).  
  2.  Ampicillin solution (100 μg/mL) ( see  Note 2 ). 
  3.  SOC medium: 0.5 % Yeast extract, 2 % tryptone, 10 mM NaCl, 
2.5 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM MgSO 4 , 20 mM glucose 
( see  Note 3 ). 
  4.  Q-trays with 2xYT and selective antibiotics (100 μg/mL 
ampicillin).  
  5.  Aluminum foil seals (CIC).  
  6.  Airpore tape sheet (Qiagen).  
  7.  2.2 mL 96-well block.  
  8.   Hard-Shell ® Thin-Wall 96-Well Skirted PCR Plates (BioRad).  
  9.  50 % glycerol.  
  10.   Clear polystyrene, ﬂ at-bottom 96-well plate.  
  1.   Thermal cycler (96-well).  
  2.  Centrifuge capable of spinning 96-well plates.  
  3.   Spectrophotometer.  
  4.   96-well plate shaking incubator (Multitron II Shaking 
Incubator).  
2.2.2  Equipment
2.3  Ligation- 
Independent Cloning
2.3.1  Components
2.3.2  Equipment
2.4  Transformation 
and Preparation of 
Frozen Cultures
2.4.1  Reagents
2.4.2  Equipment
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

65
3  Methods 
 Digestion of a LIC vector, pMCSG7, is carried out using restriction 
enzyme, SspI ( see  Note 4 ).
  1.  Transfer 5 μg pMCSG7 vector to a PCR tube and bring the 
volume to 40 μL with sterile deionized water. Add 5 μL 
NEBuffer, and mix well.  
  2.   Add 5 μL SspI (5 U/μL), and incubate the reaction mixture at 
37 °C for 6 h. Then, incubate at 60 °C for 20 min to inactivate 
the SspI. The cleavage reaction and inactivation are carried out 
using a thermal cycler.  
  3.   Linearized plasmid vector backbone is puriﬁ ed in two subse-
quent agarose gel runs, the ﬁ rst being in 0.6 % agarose gel and 
then a second time in 0.6 % low melting point agarose gel ( see 
 Note 5 ).  
  4.   A 0.6 % agarose gel containing 0.5 μg/mL ethidium bromide 
is placed on an agarose gel apparatus. Fill the apparatus with 1× 
TAE running buffer containing 0.5 μg/mL ethidium bromide. 
Load linearized plasmid with gel loading dye, and separate the 
linearized plasmid from uncut vector at 80 V for 90 min.  
  5.  Use the transilluminator/blue box to cut out the DNA band 
corresponding to the linear vector from the agarose gel. Load 
the second LMP gel with the cut DNA bands. Run the gel at 
80 V for 90 min. Record a gel picture before and after band 
excision (ensure that only long-wavelength UV light is used to 
record the gel picture).  
  6.   Place each cut band in a microfuge tube, and record the weight 
of the gel slice (use the empty tube weight to tare).  
  7.  ß-Agarase digestion: Incubate the tubes in a benchtop heat 
block at 65 °C for 10 min to melt the agar (vortex frequently). 
Once melting is complete, move the tubes to a benchtop heat 
block set at 45 °C for 10 min to equilibrate the temperature 
(again, vortex frequently). Add the ß-agarase to each tube 
(2 μL per 100 mg of gel weight). Continue the incubation in 
the heat block (45 °C) for 10 min (vortex frequently). Then 
add an additional 1 μL ß-agarase per 100 mg gel. Continue the 
incubation for an additional 2 h. Remove the tubes from the 
heat block and place on ice for 5 min. Spin the tubes at 
16,000 ×  g  in a microfuge for 5 min. Decant or pipette the 
supernatant into a new microfuge tube.  
  8.  Ethanol precipitation: Add 1/10 total volume of 3 M sodium 
acetate, 10 μL of glycogen blue, and two volumes of 100 % 
ethanol into the tube containing the puriﬁ ed vector (if neces-
sary, split into multiple tubes). Incubate overnight at −20 °C. 
Spin in a microfuge at 16,000 × g for 30 min. Wash the pellet 
with 70 % ethanol (~300 μL), and repeat the spin for 30 min. 
3.1  Preparation 
of LIC Vector 
Backbone, pMCSG7
High Throughput Cloning

66
Discard the supernatant. Air-dry the pellet on the bench top. 
Resuspend the pellet in 25 μL of sterile deionized water. 
Measure the vector backbone concentration recovered using 
the NanoDrop spectrophotometer.  
  9.  Purity test by transformation: The purity of the backbone plas-
mid is tested by transformation ( see  Note 6 ).  
 The following procedure is designed for a 96-well-plate-format 
PCR ( see  Note 7 ).
  1.  Design the primers for cloning into the LIC vector (pMCSG7) 
( see Fig.  1 ). 
  2.  Thaw the PCR primers. If they have been kept frozen at 
−20 °C, they can be moved to a 4 °C refrigerator overnight 
to thaw.  
  3.  The forward and reverse primers are diluted from the original 
stock concentrations to obtain a ﬁ nal working concentration of 
200 ng/μL. Dilute and mix the forward and reverse primers 
and distribute into the wells of a 96-well plate.  
  4.  Set up the program on the thermal cycler for PCR as described 
in Table  1 ( see  Note 8 ).
  5.   Prepare the Phusion master mix, including reaction buffer, 
dNTPs, genomic DNA, and Phusion DNA polymerase. Thaw 
these PCR components (except the forward and reverse prim-
ers). Thaw the reagents for PCR, and prepare a master mix in 
a large enough vessel, mixing components well before use 
(Table  2 ) ( see  Note 9 ). Transfer the master mix solution into a 
25 mL reservoir. Aliquot and transfer 23 μL of the master mix 
solution into each well of a 96-well PCR plate using a multi-
channel pipette.
  6.   Add 2 μL of the combined-primer solution to each well using 
a multichannel pipette and mix well using the pipette.  
3.2  Preparation 
of DNA Inserts by 
Polymerase Chain 
Reaction
 Table 1 
 Program of a thermal cycler for PCR 
 Cycle 
 Temperature (°C) 
 Time 
 Cycle repetitions 
 I 
 98 
 1 min 
 1 
 II 
 98 
 10 s 
 25 
 55 
 30 s 
 72 
 30 s/kbp a 
 III 
 72 
 10 min 
 1 
 a  Extension time is based on the largest fragment present in each individual 
plate. Thermocycler programs are preset with appropriate names that corre-
spond with desired extension times  
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

67
  7.  Put the PCR plate onto the thermal cycler, and start.  
  8.  PCR product puriﬁ cation: Transfer the PCR products into a 
96-well Millipore ﬁ lter plate. Place the plate on a vacuum sys-
tem for 10 min or until the wells on the plate are dry. Resuspend 
the PCR products in 40 μL of sterile deionized distilled water, 
shake for 20 min on a benchtop shaker at room temperature, 
and transfer to a new 96-well plate.  
  9.  Verify the PCR products’ size, and determine concentration by 
running the ampliﬁ ed products on an LC-90 (PerkinElmer) 
( see Fig.  2 ) or an agarose gel and a spectrophotometer 96-well 
plate reader ( see  Note 10 ).
 T4 DNA polymerase reactions are performed on both the LIC 
vectors and PCR products to create complementary overhangs on 
each DNA fragment ( see Fig.  1 ).
  1.  PCR products are treated with T4 DNA polymerase. Dilute 
the PCR products with sterile deionized distilled water to a 
ﬁ nal concentration of 16.7 nM ( see  Note 11 ) in a ﬁ nal volume 
of 20 μL. Aliquot 12 μL of the diluted PCR product to a new 
96-well PCR plate. The reagents for T4 polymerase reactions 
are combined as shown in Table  3 and added to the diluted 
PCR product plate ( see  Note 12 ).
  2.   The vector backbone is diluted with sterile deionized distilled 
water to a ﬁ nal concentration of 16.7 nM. An aliquot of 12 μL 
of the plasmid is transferred to a new 96-well PCR plate. 
Prepare the T4 DNA polymerase solution as described in Table  3 
3.3  Ligation- 
Independent Cloning 
Reaction
 Table 2 
 Preparation of master mix solution 
 PCR components 
 1 Reaction (μL) 
 1 96-Well plate a 
 At the ﬁ nal reaction 
 5× buffer (GC or HF) 
 5.0 
 528 μL 
 1× 
 10 mM dNTP 
 2.0 
 211.2 μL 
 800 nM 
 Sterile deionized water 
 14.5 
 1531.2 μL 
 – 
 Phusion DNA polymerase 
 0.5 
 52.8 μL 
 1 U 
 Genomic DNA (50 ng/μL) 
 1.0 
 105.6 μL 
 50 ng 
 Master mix volume 
 23 
 2428.8 μL 
 – 
 Primers (200 ng/μL) 
 2 
 2 μL 
 16 ng/μL 
 Total reaction volume 
 25 
 25 μL/reaction 
 a Prepare 10 % extra master mix solution for multiple PCR reactions. Each PCR reaction volume is 25 μL, 
and master mix solution used per reaction is 23 μL. In order to perform 96 PCR reactions, 2,438.8 μL of 
master mix solution (10 % extra volume) is required  
High Throughput Cloning

68
 Fig. 2  Verify the size of PCR products and determine the concentration using LC-90. ( a ) LC-90 with 96-well 
sample plate. ( b ) Gel-like image of PCR products in a row from the sample plate. ( c ) Exported data to verify the 
sizes of PCR products and their concentrations 
 Table 3 
 Preparation of T4 DNA polymerase reaction solution 
 Stock 
 1 Reaction (μL) 
 1 96-Well plate (μL) 
 At the ﬁ nal reaction 
 NEBuffer 2 
 10× 
 2.0 
 211.2 
 1× 
 T4 Polymerase 
 3 U/μl 
 0.2 
 21.1 
 0.04 U/reaction 
 dCTP a 
 10 mM 
 5.0 
 528.0 
 2.5 mM 
 DTT 
 100 mM 
 0.8 
 84.5 
 4 mM 
 Volume subtotal 
 8.0 
 844.8 
 PCR products 
 16.7 nM 
 12.0 
 10 nM 
 Volume total 
 20.0 
 Prepare 10 % extra T4 DNA polymerase solution. Aliquot 8 μL of the mixture and transfer to PCR prod-
ucts to initiate the 3′ → 5′ exonuclease reaction 
 a dCTP is for T4 DNA polymerase treatment of PCR products, and dGTP is used for the reaction of vector 
backbone  
 
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

69
but add dGTP instead of dCTP. Initiate the reaction by adding 
the T4 DNA polymerase solution to the plasmid backbone in 
each well of the 96-well PCR plates ( see  Note 13 ). 
  3.  Mix the reactions very gently by pipetting up and down. 
Incubate on a thermal cycler at 22 °C for 30 min. Inactivate 
the enzyme at 75 °C for 20 min.  
  4.   Pipette 2 μL of the completed T4 DNA polymerase-treated 
PCR products into a new 96-well PCR plate. Pipette 1.0 μL of 
completed T4 DNA polymerase-treated vector to each well 
and mix by gently stirring with the pipette tip. Give the plate a 
quick spin in a centrifuge, and then incubate the reactions at 
22 °C for 5 min on a thermal cycler.  
  5.  The reaction is quenched by adding 1.0 μL of 25 mM EDTA 
to each well followed by a gentle mixing with a pipette tip.  
  1.  Thaw a 96-well plate of chemically competent DH10B (or 
DH5α)  E. coli cells on ice for approximately 10 min ( see  Note 14 ). 
  2.  Turn on a thermal cycler, and set the temperature to 42 °C.  
  3.   Once thawed and while on ice, add 2 μL of the annealed reac-
tion mixture to the cells using a multichannel micropipette 
( see  Note 15 ).  
  4.  Cover the plate with an Airpore tape sheet (Qiagen) and incu-
bate on ice for 30 min ( see  Note 16 ). 
  5.  Heat-shock the cells by quickly placing the plate into the pre-
heated 42 °C block of the thermal cycler for 45 s ( see  Note 17 ). 
  6.  Immediately place the plate on ice for 2 min.  
  7.    Add 60 μL of room-temperature SOC media to each well. 
Gently swirl once or twice with the pipette tip to mix. Do not 
pipette up and down. Cover with a new Airpore tape sheet and 
incubate statically at 37 °C for 1 h.  
  8.  Remove the Q-trays from 4 °C approximately 30 min before 
plating and place on a bench top. Wipe away any moisture 
from the inside of the lids using a Kimwipe. Leave the lids 
slightly ajar for 30 min, allowing the moisture on the plate to 
dry. If moisture is excessive, place the plates in an airﬂ ow hood, 
with lids slightly ajar ( see  Note 18 ). 
  9.   Organize and label the Q-trays according to the plate layout so 
that one well in the transformation reaction plate equates to 
one square-well in the Q-tray. Label the back of the plate. 
  10.   Plate 35 μL of the transformation reaction onto the corre-
sponding Q-tray well containing 2xYT (with added 0.8 % glu-
cose and 100 μg/mL ampicillin for pMCSG7).  
  11.   To spread the transformation reactions within the wells, care-
fully tilt the plate in a circular motion and place on a plate rota-
tor at low setting until dry ( see  Note 19 ). 
3.4  Transformation 
and Preparation of 
Frozen Cultures
High Throughput Cloning

70
  12.   Place the Q-trays inverted in a static incubator at 37 °C for ~16 h.  
  13.   Record the number of colonies for each well.  
  14.   Prepare the medium for 1 mL liquid cultures in a 2.2 mL 
96-well block (Whatman) by mixing 98 mL 2xYT, 2 mL 40 % 
glucose, and 0.1 mL ampicillin (100 mg/mL) ( see  Note 20 ). 
  15.  Transfer 1 mL medium into each well of a 2.2 mL 96-well block.  
  16.   From the Q-trays, pick a colony by carefully stabbing a colony 
using a sterile toothpick and transfer to a well containing 1 mL 
liquid medium ( see  Note 21 ). 
  17.   Cover with an Airpore tape sheet, and place the block in an 
incubator shaker designed for 96-well blocks such as a 
Multitron shaker (ATR) at 37 °C at 900 rpm ( see  Note 22 ). 
  18.   Monitor the cell density until the average corrected OD 600 nm 
value for the whole plate is between 0.7 and 0.8.  
  19.   Transfer 30 μL of 50 % glycerol into each well of a new 96-well 
plate. Transfer 120 μL of the culture into the 96-well plate and 
mix by pipetting repeatedly. The ﬁ nal glycerol concentration of 
the frozen culture is 10 %. The frozen cultures are sealed with 
an aluminum foil seal (CIC) and covered with a 96-well plate 
lid. The frozen cultures are stored at −70 or −80 °C.  
  20.   The rest of the cultures are grown until the average cell density 
value at OD 600 nm is between 1.5 and 1.7.  
  21.   Centrifuge the cell culture at 2,200 ×  g for 30 min at 4 °C.  
  22.   Decant the supernatant from the block into a reservoir con-
taining 10 % bleach. Get rid of any residual medium by placing 
an inverted plate onto an absorbent towel. The block of cell 
pellets is sealed with an aluminum foil seal and stored at 
−20 °C. The pellet will be used for plasmid preparation.  
4  Notes 
  1.   Add about 800 mL of deionized water to a 1-L glass beaker. 
Weigh 48.4 g of Tris base [tris(hydroxymethyl)aminometh-
ane] and 3.7 g of EDTA, disodium salt, and transfer to the 
beaker. Measure 11.4 mL of glacial acetic acid (17.4 M) at a 
fume hood and transfer to the beaker. Stir with a magnetic stir 
bar until the crystals are completely dissolved. Bring the vol-
ume up to 1 L with deionized water, and store the 10× buffer 
solution at room temperature.  
  2.   It is critical to make a fresh ampicillin solution before adding 
to the medium for culture. In order to prepare a small volume 
of fresh ampicillin, weigh out the ampicillin in a microfuge 
tube and calculate the volume to make 100 mg/mL. Dissolve 
the ampicillin in the microfuge tube in the appropriate volume 
of autoclaved deionized distilled water.  
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

71
  3.  Add about 900 mL of deionized distilled water to a 1-L bea-
ker. Weigh 20 g tryptone, 5 g yeast extract, and 0.5 g NaCl; 
transfer to the beaker; and stir until they are completely dis-
solved. Add 2.5 mL of 1 M KCl, 10 mL of 1 M MgCl 2 , and 
10 mL of 1 M MgSO 4 . Adjust the volume to 1 L with deion-
ized distilled water, and sterilize the medium by autoclaving. 
After cooling down to room temperature, add 18 mL of 20 % 
ﬁ lter-sterilized glucose solution.  
  4.   The ligation-independent vector, pMCSG7, contains a single 
SspI restriction cleavage site within the cloning region as 
shown in Fig.  1 . SspI creates a single cut, linearizing the plas-
mid. The enzyme cannot exceed 10 % per reaction by volume. 
The total volume of the cleavage reaction can be set between 
16 and 50 μL, and a thermal cycler is used to set the tempera-
ture and incubation time.  
  5.   The gel should be loaded with ~35 ng of plasmid per cubic 
mm of well volume and diluted to the maximum volume of the 
well (i.e., 5 μg in a ~150 μL volume in a ~160 mm 3 ).  
  6.  It is recommended to validate the purity of the puriﬁ ed back-
bone by transformation into  E. coli competent cells. In order 
to conﬁ rm the transformation procedure and efﬁ ciency of 
competent cells, use pUC19 as a positive control. The linear-
ized backbone should not generate transformants, whereas 
positive control does.  
  7.  Primer plates/wells should be organized so that the PCR reac-
tions for each strain/genome are clustered in neighboring 
wells. Make a separate master mix for each genome and 
 dispense into the corresponding wells, enzyme being added 
last. This is immediately followed by the addition of the primer 
mix. Template DNAs used in PCR can be either genomic DNA 
or ampliﬁ ed product from a whole genomic ampliﬁ cation reac-
tion using REPLI-g (Qiagen).  
  8.  The extension (or elongation) time of the batch PCR is based 
on the largest target gene in the PCR plate as described in 
Table  1 . It is also recommended that each plate groups reac-
tions with similar lengths of amplicons. Target genes greater 
than 2 Kbp are grouped together for PCR, while target genes 
less than 2 Kbp are grouped separately.  
  9.   PCR reaction buffer can be selected based on the G + C con-
tent of target genes. Use HF buffer ﬁ rst, but if it fails due to a 
high G + C content of the target genes, use GC buffer.  
  10.    When handling small numbers of samples it is easy to use aga-
rose gels to analyze PCR products. When handling 96 or more 
PCR reactions it is recommended to use an automated capillary 
electrophoresis system such as LC-90 (PerkinElmer). Any results 
determined to be failures should be repeated a second time. 
High Throughput Cloning

72
The automated system determines the DNA concentration 
automatically. If the system is not available, use a spectropho-
tometer plate reader to determine PCR amplicon yields and 
concentration.  
  11.   An automated liquid-handling robot, Biomek FX Span-8, can 
be used to prepare PCR dilutions of the puriﬁ ed PCR prod-
ucts. Alternatively one can simplify this using an average con-
centration of the PCR products to prepare dilutions. It is best 
to remove strong outliers prior to determining an average.  
  12.   The volumes for a single T4 DNA polymerase reaction in 
Table  3 are too small for pipetting accurately. It is advised to 
prepare a scaled-up T4 DNA polymerase solution to achieve 
accuracy.  
  13.   Because the T4 DNA polymerase-treated backbones are going 
to be mixed with the treated PCR amplicons in 96-well for-
mat, the advanced preparation of treated vector backbone plas-
mid in a 96-well plate will make it more convenient to perform 
consistent reactions. 
  14.   Be extremely meticulous when handling plasmids, culture, 
and/or isolated proteins in 96-well format to avoid well-to- 
well cross-contamination. Cross-contamination can happen at 
any step and will lead to protein mixtures inevitably complicat-
ing downstream expression and solubility screening.  
  15.   Label the plate and mark the top left corner with an “X”; this 
helps to make sure that the orientation of the DNA plate and 
the competent cells is consistent. Do not pipette cells up and 
down. Gently swirl once or twice with the pipette tip to mix.  
  16.   Do not exceed the incubation time on ice. It will reduce the 
transformation efﬁ ciency.  
  17.   Extending the heat-shock past 45 s can damage the cells and 
reduce transformation efﬁ ciency. The optimal heat shock dura-
tion is 45 s.  
  18.   If a lot of moisture is left in the Q-trays, the moisture will col-
lect in the wells and allow liquid growth of transformants and 
lead to failure to form isolated colonies.  
  19.   Glass beads can be used to spread the transformants on the 
Q-tray, but this practice may lead to cross-contamination if 
extreme care is not taken. 
  20.  It is critical to use fresh ampicillin solution before addition to 
culture medium. In order to prepare a small volume of fresh 
ampicillin, weigh out ampicillin in a microfuge tube and calcu-
late the required volume to make 100 mg/mL. Dissolve the 
ampicillin in sterile deionized distilled water. Addition of glu-
cose in the medium is optional. Presence of glucose in the 
medium suppresses leaky expression of the recombinant protein 
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

73
in early-growth-phase cultures and helps maintain tight control 
of expression.  
  21.   Leave the colony-picked toothpick in the well of the 96-well 
block for about 10 min and remove very carefully to prevent 
cross-contamination. Instead of picking the entire colony, 
stabbing the colony with a toothpick is helpful to inoculate a 
similar quantity of cells into the medium so that bacterial 
growth across wells is more similar.  
  22.   A shaking incubator designed for 96-well plates and blocks is 
highly recommended to use for culturing. The orbit diameter 
of the shaker should be 3 mm, which will provide sufﬁ cient 
agitation and aeration of the culture. Standard shakers may be 
used for cultures; however, failures in overexpression of recom-
binant proteins may arise. If only a standard shaker is available, 
a 24-well block (5 mL cultures in 10 mL well capacity) is 
recommended.  
 Acknowledgments 
 This work was supported by the National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health, Department 
of Health and Human Services, under contract Nos. 
HHSN272200700058C and HHSN272201200026C.  
 References 
  1.  Berglund EC, Kiialainen A, Syvanen AC (2011) 
Next-generation sequencing technologies and 
applications for human genetic history and 
forensics. Investig Genet 2:23  
  2.  Human Microbiome Project, C (2012) 
Structure, function and diversity of the healthy 
human microbiome. Nature 486:207–214  
  3.  Qin J, Li R, Raes J, Arumugam M, Burgdorf 
KS, Manichanh C, Nielsen T, Pons N, Levenez 
F, Yamada T, Mende DR, Li J, Xu J, Li S, Li D, 
Cao J, Wang B, Liang H, Zheng H, Xie Y, Tap 
J, Lepage P, Bertalan M, Batto JM, Hansen T, 
Le Paslier D, Linneberg A, Nielsen HB, 
Pelletier E, Renault P, Sicheritz-Ponten T, 
Turner K, Zhu H, Yu C, Li S, Jian M, Zhou Y, 
Li Y, Zhang X, Li S, Qin N, Yang H, Wang J, 
Brunak S, Dore J, Guarner F, Kristiansen K, 
Pedersen O, Parkhill J, Weissenbach J, Meta 
HITC, Bork P, Ehrlich SD, Wang J (2010) A 
human gut microbial gene catalogue estab-
lished by metagenomic sequencing. Nature 
464:59–65 
  4.  Rusch DB, Halpern AL, Sutton G, Heidelberg 
KB, Williamson S, Yooseph S, Wu D, Eisen JA, 
Hoffman JM, Remington K, Beeson K, Tran B, 
Smith H, Baden-Tillson H, Stewart C, Thorpe 
J, Freeman J, Andrews-Pfannkoch C, Venter 
JE, Li K, Kravitz S, Heidelberg JF, Utterback 
T, Rogers YH, Falcon LI, Souza V, Bonilla-
Rosso 
G, 
Eguiarte 
LE, 
Karl 
DM, 
Sathyendranath S, Platt T, Bermingham E, 
Gallardo V, Tamayo-Castillo G, Ferrari MR, 
Strausberg RL, Nealson K, Friedman R, Frazier 
M, Venter JC (2007) The Sorcerer II Global 
Ocean Sampling expedition: northwest Atlantic 
through eastern tropical Paciﬁ c. PLoS Biol 
5:e77  
  5.  Braun P, LaBaer J (2003) High throughput 
protein production for functional proteomics. 
Trends Biotechnol 21:383–388  
  6.  Godzik A (2011) Metagenomics and the pro-
tein universe. Curr Opin Struct Biol 21:
398–403  
  7.  Reboul J, Vaglio P, Tzellas N, Thierry-Mieg N, 
Moore T, Jackson C, Shin-i T, Kohara Y, 
Thierry-Mieg D, Thierry-Mieg J, Lee H, Hitti 
J, Doucette-Stamm L, Hartley JL, Temple GF, 
Brasch MA, Vandenhaute J, Lamesch PE, Hill 
DE, Vidal M (2001) Open-reading-frame 
sequence tags (OSTs) support the existence of 
at least 17,300 genes in C. elegans. Nature 
Genet 27:332–336  
High Throughput Cloning

74
  8.  Walhout AJ, Temple GF, Brasch MA, Hartley 
JL, Lorson MA, van den Heuvel S, Vidal M 
(2000) GATEWAY recombinational cloning: 
application to the cloning of large numbers of 
open reading frames or ORFeomes. Methods 
Enzymol 328:575–592  
  9.  Heyman JA, Cornthwaite J, Foncerrada L, 
Gilmore JR, Gontang E, Hartman KJ, 
Hernandez CL, Hood R, Hull HM, Lee WY, 
Marcil R, Marsh EJ, Mudd KM, Patino MJ, 
Purcell TJ, Rowland JJ, Sindici ML, Hoefﬂ er 
JP (1999) Genome-scale cloning and expres-
sion of individual open reading frames using 
topoisomerase I-mediated ligation. Genome 
Res 9:383–392 
  10.  Gibson DG, Benders GA, Andrews-Pfannkoch 
C, Denisova EA, Baden-Tillson H, Zaveri J, 
Stockwell TB, Brownley A, Thomas DW, Algire 
MA, Merryman C, Young L, Noskov VN, 
Glass JI, Venter JC, Hutchison CA 3rd, Smith 
HO (2008) Complete chemical synthesis, 
assembly, and cloning of a Mycoplasma genita-
lium genome. Science 319:1215–1220  
  11.  Gibson DG, Benders GA, Axelrod KC, Zaveri 
J, Algire MA, Moodie M, Montague MG, 
Venter JC, Smith HO, Hutchison CA 3rd 
(2008) One-step assembly in yeast of 25 over-
lapping DNA fragments to form a complete 
synthetic Mycoplasma genitalium genome. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:20404–20409  
  12.  Aslanidis C, de Jong PJ (1990) Ligation- 
independent cloning of PCR products (LIC- 
PCR). Nucleic Acids Res 18:6069–6074  
  13.  Haun RS, Moss J (1992) Ligation-independent 
cloning of glutathione S-transferase fusion 
genes for expression in  Escherichia coli . Gene 
112:37–43  
  14.  Structural Genomics C, China Structural 
Genomics C, Northeast Structural Genomics 
C, Graslund S, Nordlund P, Weigelt J, Hallberg 
BM, Bray J, Gileadi O, Knapp S, Oppermann 
U, Arrowsmith C, Hui R, Ming J, dhe- Paganon 
S, Park HW, Savchenko A, Yee A, Edwards A, 
Vincentelli R, Cambillau C, Kim R, Kim SH, 
Rao Z, Shi Y, Terwilliger TC, Kim CY, Hung 
LW, Waldo GS, Peleg Y, Albeck S, Unger T, 
Dym O, Prilusky J, Sussman JL, Stevens RC, 
Lesley SA, Wilson IA, Joachimiak A, Collart F, 
Dementieva I, Donnelly MI, Eschenfeldt WH, 
Kim Y, Stols L, Wu R, Zhou M, Burley SK, 
Emtage JS, Sauder JM, Thompson D, Bain K, 
Luz J, Gheyi T, Zhang F, Atwell S, Almo SC, 
Bonanno JB, Fiser A, Swaminathan S, Studier 
FW, Chance MR, Sali A, Acton TB, Xiao R, 
Xiao R, Zhao L, Ma LC, Hunt JF, Tong L, 
Cunningham K, Inouye M, Anderson S, Janjua H, 
Shastry R, Ho CK, Wang D, Wang H, Jiang M, 
Montelione GT, Stuart DI, Owens RJ, Daenke S, 
Schutz A, Heinemann U, Yokoyama S, Bussow 
K, Gunsalus KC (2008) Protein production 
and puriﬁ cation. Nat Methods 5:135–146  
  15.   Stols L, Gu M, Dieckman L, Raffen R, Collart FR, 
Donnelly MI (2002) A new vector for high-
throughput, 
ligation-independent 
cloning 
encoding a tobacco etch virus protease cleav-
age site. Protein Expr Purif 25:8–15  
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

75
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_6, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 6  
 Expression and Solubility Testing in a High-Throughput 
Environment 
 Keehwan  Kwon and  Scott  N.  Peterson 
 Abstract 
 The expression and screening of the solubility of recombinant proteins is an important step in the 
high- throughput (HT) production of target proteins. For many applications,  E. coli remains the most 
widely used expression system due to the relative ease of adapting it to HT pipelines. Herein is described 
a platform using a 96-well format for efﬁ cient expression and solubility screening of target proteins.  
 Key words    Protein expression  ,   Soluble expression  ,  High throughput  ,   BL21(DE3)  ,   Automation  , 
 96- well format  ,  SDS-PAGE  
1  Introduction 
 The puriﬁ cation of soluble recombinant protein in a high- 
throughput (HT) environment is an essential step for subsequent 
functional and structural characterization. As the demand for 
recombinant proteins expands so do the options of commercially 
available protein expression systems. A wide variety of HT ORF 
cloning and protein expression and puriﬁ cation platforms have 
been developed [ 1 – 4 ]. A number of these technologies have been 
evaluated to discover their speciﬁ c merits to improve the overall 
efﬁ ciency of recovering soluble recombinant protein from cell 
lysates. A number of fusion tags have been developed used for both 
direct puriﬁ cation of recombinant protein and also that dramati-
cally improve the solubility of expressed proteins [ 5 ,  6 ]. A variety 
of expression system hosts are available including  E. coli , baculovi-
rus, mammalian cell, and in vitro expression systems. The  E. coli 
expression systems are the most widely used due to their ease of 
use and high efﬁ ciency for small- or large-scale protein production. 
Most HT platforms are designed to accommodate small-scale 
(volume) cultures of large numbers of target proteins [ 7 – 11 ]. 
An expanding number of downstream applications involving 

76
recombinant proteins are being adopted and include small-molecule 
drug and vaccine screens, protein functional assays, protein inter-
action studies, and large-scale structure determination. The struc-
tural determination of proteins requires ever-decreasing amounts 
of protein. However, small-scale protein production pipelines are 
generally not well suited to the scale-up that is required to generate 
milligram quantities of protein. Large-scale protein puriﬁ cation 
procedures are more laborious, costly, and not well suited to HT 
approaches. It is therefore useful to devise strategies that allow the 
identiﬁ cation of protein targets that have the greatest likelihood of 
being efﬁ ciently expressed in soluble form in large-scale attempts. 
 Screening of recombinant proteins for their relative expression 
levels and solubility provides valuable information for the scale-up 
production of protein with a high frequency of success. High sample 
capacity and mathematical standardization are the primary hall-
marks of a useful protein solubility screening pipeline. There are 
four commonly used methods to evaluate protein expression and 
solubility: SDS-PAGE, antibody detection, enzymatic assay, and 
capillary electrophoresis. SDS-PAGE is the most common way to 
evaluate the solubility of expressed proteins. However, it is not well 
suited to HT or quantitative measures of protein levels. Dot blot 
detection of recombinant proteins using antibodies is amenable to 
high-throughput approaches but sacriﬁ ces the valuable informa-
tion provided by 1D protein separation [ 12 ,  13 ]. Enzymatic assays 
are useful if recombinant proteins harbor a substrate tag. For 
example, the S-tag assay based on RNase S activity measurements 
allows high sensitivity and quantitative measurements. Mathematical 
methods, such as scoring systems for protein solubility, have been 
developed, e.g., based on the S-tag assay [ 6 ,  14 – 16 ]. Capillary 
electrophoresis (CE) is amenable to automation, estimation of 
molecular weight, and quantitation using a scoring approach and is 
highly sensitive requiring only small protein quantities [ 17 ]. 
Described is an HT expression platform to enable the puriﬁ cation 
of recombinant protein in  E. coli . Also described is the screening of 
expression and solubility of target proteins using an automated 
capillary electrophoresis and SDS-PAGE analyses.  
2  Materials 
  1.   Chemically competent  E. coli expression cells such as 
BL21(DE3); minimum transformation efﬁ ciency (1 × 10 6 /μg 
plasmid DNA).  
  2.  SOC medium: 0.5 % Yeast extract, 2 % tryptone, 10 mM NaCl, 
2.5 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM MgSO 4 , 20 mM glucose.  
  3.   48-well Q-trays (Molecular Devices) with 2× YT and selective 
antibiotics ( see  Note 1 ).  
2.1  Transformation 
and Preparation of 
Frozen Cultures
2.1.1  Material 
Requirements
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

77
  4.  Ampicillin solution (100 mg/mL).  
  5.  50 % glycerol.  
  6.  2.2 mL 96-well block.  
  7.  Clear polystyrene, ﬂ at-bottom 96-well plate.  
  8.  Hard-Shell Thin-Wall 96-Well Skirted PCR Plates (BioRad).  
  9.  Airpore Tape Sheets (Qiagen).  
  10.   Aluminum foil seals.  
  1.  Thermal cycler.  
  2.  Spectrophotometer (96-well plate reader).  
  3.  96-well plate shaking incubator (ATR Multitron II Shaking 
Incubator).  
  4.  Centrifuge for spinning 96-well plates (Eppendorf 5810R).  
  1.  2.2 mL 96-well block.  
  2.  Clear polystyrene, ﬂ at-bottom 96-well plate.  
  3.  Airpore Tape Sheets (Qiagen).  
  4.  Ampicillin solution (100 mg/mL).  
  5.  Isopropyl-β- D -thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG).  
  6.  Media such as LB or 2× YT.  
  1.  96-well plate shaking incubator (ATR Multitron II Shaking 
Incubator).  
  2.  Centrifuge capable of spinning 96-well plates (Eppendorf 
5810R).  
  3.  Spectrophotometer (96-well plate reader).  
  1.  Lysis buffer [Tris–HCl pH 7.8 at 4 °C, 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM 
DTT] ( see  Note 2 ). 
  2.  Dithiothreitol.  
  3.  Lysonase™ Bioprocessing Reagent-1 mL (EMD Millipore).  
  1.  Misonix Sonicator 3000 (Qsonica).  
  2.  Microplate Horn (Qsonica).  
  3.  NanoDrop™ ND-1000 Spectrophotometer.  
  4.  Hard-Shell Thin-Wall 96-Well Skirted PCR Plates (BioRad).  
  5.  Centrifuge for spinning 96-well plates (Eppendorf 5810R).  
  6.  Hearing protectors.  
2.1.2  Equipment
2.2  Overexpression 
in 96-Well Format
2.2.1  Material 
Requirements
2.2.2  Equipment
2.3  Preparation of 
Samples for 
Expression and 
Solubility Testing
2.3.1  Material 
Requirements
2.3.2  Equipment
Expression and Solubility Testing

78
  1.   Hard-Shell Thin-Wall 96-Well Skirted PCR Plates (BioRad) or 
Hard-Shell Thin-Wall 384-Well Skirted PCR Plates (BioRad).  
  2.   HT Protein Express LabChip (Perkin Elmer).  
  3.   HT Protein Express Reagent (Perkin Elmer).  
  1.   LC-90 (Perkin Elmer).  
  1.  NuPAGE Novex 12 % Bis–Tris Gels, 17-well (Life Technologies).  
  2.  NuPAGE MES SDS Running Buffer (20×) (Life Technologies).  
  3.  LDS-Sample Loading Buffer (4×) (Life Technologies).  
  4.  Nu-PAGE antioxidant (Life Technologies).  
  5.   Nu-PAGE reducing agent (10×) (Life Technologies).  
  6.   LDS-Sample Loading Buffer-4× (Invitrogen).  
  7.   Precision Plus Protein Dual Color Standards (BioRad).  
  8.  Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 Stain ( see  Note 3 ). 
  9.  Destaining solution ( see  Note 4 ). 
  1.   Thermal cycler.  
  2.   Centrifuge for spinning 96-well plates.  
  3.   SDS-PAGE apparatus such as Thermo Scientiﬁ c EC Mini ver-
tical Gel Systems.  
3  Methods 
 An extended protocol for the transformation of expression clones 
into an  E. coli expression strain can be found in Chapter   5 .
  1.  Thaw a 96-well plate of chemically competent  E. coli expres-
sion strain such as BL21(DE3) ( see  Note 5 ). 
  2.   Follow the protocol in Subheading   3.4  described in the earlier 
chapter. 
  3.   Label two clear polystyrene, ﬂ at-bottom 96-well plates as fol-
lows: frozen culture and overexpression.  
  4.   After 1 h of incubation, transfer 200 μL of each culture into 
the two ﬂ at-bottom 96-well plates using a multichannel 
micropipette. 
  5.   Monitor cell densities at 600 nm using 96-well plate spectro-
photometer ( see  Note 6 ).  
  6.   Monitor the cell density until the average corrected OD 600nm 
value for the whole plate is in the range of 0.7–0.9.  
2.4  Expression and 
Solubility Testing 
Using LC90 (Perkin 
Elmer)
2.4.1  Material 
Requirements
2.4.2  Equipment
2.5  Expression and 
Solubility Testing 
(Using SDS-PAGE)
2.5.1  Material 
Requirements
2.5.2  Equipment
3.1  Transformation 
and Preparation of 
Frozen Cultures
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

79
  7.   Add 40 μL of 50 % glycerol into each well of the 96-well 
culture plate and mix by pipetting repeatedly. The ﬁ nal glyc-
erol concentration of the frozen culture is 10 %. The frozen 
cultures are sealed with an aluminum foil seal and covered with 
a 96-well plate lid. The frozen cultures are stored at −70 or 
−80 °C.  
  8.   Adjust the temperature of the incubating shaker to 25 °C, and 
induce expression of target proteins by adding 5 μL of 40 mM 
IPTG to the other 200 μL cultures in the 96-well plate (go to 
 step 9 of Subheading  3.2 ). 
 E. coli is usually grown in a rich medium such as LB and 2× YT 
with appropriate antibiotics ( see  Note 7 and Table  1 ).
  1.   Thaw frozen cultures on ice ( see  Note 8 ).  
  2.   Prepare medium for 1 mL liquid cultures in a 2.2 mL 96-well 
block by mixing 98 mL 2× YT, 2 mL 40 % glucose, and 0.1 mL 
100 mg/mL ampicillin.  
  3.  Transfer 1 mL medium into each well of a 2.2 mL 96-well 
block.  
  4.   Inoculate the medium with 30 μL of frozen culture using a 
multichannel micropipette and cover with an Airpore tape 
sheet, and place the block in a microplate shaker at 37 °C at 
900 rpm.  
  5.   After 1 h of incubation, transfer 200 μL of each culture into 
the two ﬂ at-bottom 96-well plates using a multichannel 
micropipette. 
  6.   Monitor cell densities at 600 nm using the 96-well plate 
spectrophotometer.  
  7.   Grow cells until the cell densities (OD 600nm ) of the cultures in 
the 96-well block are in the range of 0.7–0.9.  
  8.  Adjust the temperature of the incubating shaker to 25 °C.  
  9.   Add 5 μL of 40 mM IPTG to the 200 μL cultures to achieve a 
ﬁ nal concentration of 1 mM ( see  Note 9 ).  
3.2  Culture and 
Overexpression in a 
2.2 mL 96-Well Block
 Table 1 
 Concentrations of antibiotics 
 Antibiotics 
 Stock concentration 
 Final concentration in media 
 Ampicillin 
 100 mg/mL in water 
 100 μg/mL 
 Kanamycin 
 50 mg/mL in water 
 50 μg/mL 
 Chloramphenicol 
 34 mg/mL in 100 % ethanol 
 34 μg/mL 
 Tetracycline 
 12.5 mg/mL in water 
 12.5 μg/mL 
Expression and Solubility Testing

80
  10.   Incubate the plates at 25 °C for 18–20 h (overnight) at 
900 rpm using an incubator shaker.  
  11.   Split the culture into two Hard-Shell PCR 96-well plates 
(~65 μL per well).  
  12.   Pellet the culture at 2000 ×  g for 30 min at 4 °C.  
  13.   Decant the supernatant from the block into a reservoir con-
taining 10 % bleach. Get rid of any residual media by placing 
the inverted plate onto an absorbent towel.  
  14.   Seal the plates, and store the pellets at −80 or −20 °C. Keep 
one plate as a backup sample. Proceed to the lysis step for the 
plate being tested for expression and solubility.  
  1.  Prepare chilled lysis buffer for resuspension and lysis of cells 
( see  Note 10 ).  
  2.  Take one of the stored 96-well plates containing cell pellets 
(IPTG-induced cell pellets) from the freezer and thaw on ice.  
  3.  Add 50 μL of the lysis buffer using a multichannel micropipette 
(or automated liquid handler such as Biomek FX), and resus-
pend cells by pipetting repeatedly.  
  4.  Check the absorbance at 600 nm using the NanoDrop for a 
couple of wells before and after lysis to ensure that lysis is 
complete ( see  Note 11 ). 
  5.  Seal the plate with a clear tape pad, and keep the plate on ice.  
  6.   Set up the sonicator (water-mediated sonication method) 
( see  Note 12 ). Attach the power cable to the reservoir in the 
Microplate Horn. Add ice to cool the water. Fill the reservoir 
with water so that the plate will ﬂ oat when placed in the reser-
voir. Place the plate in the reservoir. Put down the lid of the 
Microplate Horn. Set a timer, and sonicate for 2 min at a power 
setting of 5.5. Sonicate a total of seven sonication cycles per 
plate ( see  Note 13 ). 
  7.  Take the OD 600 reading of the same wells that were checked 
before sonication using the NanoDrop.  
  8.  If lysis is complete, aliquot 20 μL to a new PCR 96-well plate.  
  9.  Centrifuge the remaining cell lysates at 2,400 ×  g for 30 min.  
  10.   Without mixing or disturbing the pellet, carefully transfer approxi-
mately 20 μL of the supernatant to a new PCR 96-well plate.  
 High-throughput automated capillary electrophoresis (LC90, 
Perkin Elmer) is used for expression and solubility testing of 
recombinant proteins ( see  Note 14 ).
  1.  Transfer 2 μL of whole-cell lysates and supernatants into 7 μL 
of HT protein express sample buffer (provided with the protein 
chip) in a 96-well PCR plate ( see  Note 15 ). Mix the samples 
3.3  Preparation of 
Samples for 
Expression and 
Solubility Testing
3.4  Expression and 
Solubility Testing 
Using LC90
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

81
and the sample buffer by pipetting repeatedly. Cover the plate 
with an adhesive tape sheet.  
  2.  Boil the lysate and supernatant plate using a thermal cycler at 
100 °C for 2 min and centrifuge at 2,000 ×  g for 1 min.  
  3.  Place the diluted plate in the LC90, and run the instrument 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  
  4.  Analyze the expression and solubility of the recombinant pro-
teins ( see  Note 16 ). 
  1.  Aliquot 3 μL 4× LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies) and 
transfer into a 96-well PCR plate. Add 1.2 μL NuPAGE 
Reducing Agent (10×), and add 8.8 μL of undiluted lysate and 
supernatant samples. Mix the samples (lysates and superna-
tants) and sample buffer by pipetting repeatedly. Cover the 
plate with an adhesive tape sheet.  
  2.  Heat the plate, using a thermal cycler, for 2 min at 95 °C and 
centrifuge at 2,000 ×  g for 1 min.  
  3.  This plate can be stored at −20 °C until ready for use or used 
immediately.  
  4.  Set up SDS-PAGE (or Nu-PAGE) apparatus with MES running 
buffer and 17-well 12 % Bis–Tris gel. Four gels can be set up in 
each gel box.  
  5.  Prepare 1 L 1× MES running buffer from 20× running buffer 
(Life Technologies). Transfer 50 mL MES running buffer into 
a 1 L graduate cylinder and bring to 1 L with deionized dis-
tilled water. Cover the graduated cylinder with a piece of 
paraﬁ lm, and mix the running buffer by inverting the gradu-
ated cylinder two to three times. Transfer 600 mL of the buffer 
into the SDS-PAGE lower buffer chamber. Add 1 mL 
Nu-PAGE antioxidant to the remaining running buffer and 
mix by inverting as before. Transfer the buffer with antioxidant 
to the upper buffer chamber. Remove the comb, and using a 
10 mL syringe, rinse the wells with buffer ( see  Note 18 ). 
  6.  Load 5 μL of protein standard in the ﬁ rst well of each gel. 
Then, load 10 μL samples using an eight-channel micropipette 
( see  Note 19 ). 
  7.  Set the power supply to run at 120 V for approximately 1 h.  
  8.  Stop running when the dye front reaches the bottom, and 
remove gels.  
  9.  Carefully remove the gel from the cassette and place in a plastic 
gel box with Coomassie Blue staining solution. Stain the gels 
on a rotator for 5 min.  
  10.   Decant the staining solution, rinse the gels with distilled water, 
and add the destaining solution.  
3.5  Expression 
and Solubility Test 
(Using SDS- PAGE) 
( See  Note 17 )
Expression and Solubility Testing

82
4  Notes 
  1.  A 48-well Q-tray requires 300 mL agar-containing media. 
Prepare 600 mL 2× YT medium containing 1.5 % bacto agar 
(9 g) in a large ﬂ ask (1 L). The medium is autoclaved for 
20 min on liquid cycle. The medium is cooled on a bench top, 
and appropriate antibiotics are added. The medium is shaken 
to mix well, and in a hood pour 300 mL per Q-tray. If bubbles 
form, they can be eliminated by ﬂ aming brieﬂ y with a Bunsen 
burner. The condensation in the Q-trays may be removed by 
placing the plates in an airﬂ ow hood with their covers slightly 
ajar while the medium solidiﬁ es. The prepared Q-trays are 
stored at 4 °C until use.  
  2.  Lysis buffer is prepared as follows: Add about 900 mL of 
deionized water to a 1-L glass beaker. Weigh 6.056 g of Tris 
base [tris (hydroxymethyl) aminomethane] and 17.532 g of 
NaCl and transfer to the beaker. Stir with a magnetic bar and a 
stirrer until the crystals are completely dissolved. Adjust the 
pH to 7.8 (at 4 °C or pH to 7.15 at 25 °C). The pH of Tris 
buffer is dependent on temperature (−0.031/°C). Bring to 
1 L adding deionized water. Sterilize the buffer by ﬁ ltration 
and store at 4 °C. Just before use, add DTT to a ﬁ nal concen-
tration of 1 mM.  
  3.  To detect proteins in a gel, several staining solutions are available, 
including Coomassie Blue, silver staining, SYPRO Ruby, and 
SYPRO Orange. The selection of staining solutions is based on 
the samples and experimental requirements such as the quan-
tity of proteins and complexity of protein mixtures. For expres-
sion and solubility testing, Coomassie Blue staining is the most 
widely used method. Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 staining 
solution is prepared as follows: Weigh out 2 g of Coomassie 
R-250 and transfer to a 1-L beaker. Add about 400 mL of 
deionized water, 400 mL methanol, and 75 mL acetic acid to 
the beaker. Acetic acid should be measured and transferred in 
a fume hood. Stir with a magnetic bar and a stir plate to dis-
solve the Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250. Bring the solution 
to 1 L with deionized water.  
  4.  Destaining solution for Coomassie Blue-stained gel contains 
7.5 % acetic acid and 5 % methanol. Add 800 mL deionized 
water to a 1-L glass beaker, and add 75 mL acetic acid and 
50 mL methanol to the beaker in a fume hood. Bring the solu-
tion to 1 L with deionized water.  
  5.  The expression vector, pMCSG7, is a pET vector that is based 
on a T7 promoter-driven expression system. In order to express 
target proteins using pMCSG7, the  E. coli strain is genetically 
modiﬁ ed by a chromosomal insertion containing the T7 RNA 
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

83
polymerase gene under the control of the lacUV5 promoter 
(λDE3 lysogen). Therefore, upon the addition of IPTG, the 
target protein is induced/expressed. BL21(DE3) and 
BLR(DE3) are frequently used strains compatible with IPTG 
induction. A known positive control (soluble, well- expressed 
protein) and a negative control ( E. coli without expression vec-
tor) for the expression should be placed in the corners; wells 
A01 and H12 should be reserved for positive controls, and 
wells A12 and H01 should be reserved for negative controls. 
The positive control is to validate the expression process, and 
the negative control is used to establish the background of 
endogenous  E. coli proteins in host cells for expression and 
solubility analysis.  
  6.  In order to measure the cell density directly on a 96-well plate, 
use a clear bottom 96-well plate and a 96-well plate spectro-
photometer. It is necessary to determine a correction factor to 
relate plate O.D. at the given culture volume in a speciﬁ c 
96-well plate to real O.D. for a 1 cm path length. O.D.s at 
600 nm of a bromophenol blue dilution series (0, 0.0025 %, 
0.0033 %, 0.0050 %, 0.0067 %, and 0.01 %) are measured both 
at 1 cm path length and a volume of 200 μL in the plate as 
shown in Fig.  1 . Perform linear regression analysis to obtain 
 Fig. 1   Determine the correction factor for the 96-well plate optical density read-
ing to a 1 cm path-length optical density. The ratio of the slope of ODs with 1 cm 
path to ODs of the 96-well plate was used as a correction factor. The calculated 
correction factor is for 200 μL samples in a speciﬁ c 96-well plate (catalog num-
ber 12-565-501) (Fisher Scientiﬁ c). The correction factor is 1.718 (98.939/57.595). 
The OD at 600 nm for a 1 cm path can be calculated by the multiplication of the 
OD at 600 nm of 200 μL samples on the 96-well plate and the correction factor  
 
Expression and Solubility Testing

84
the slope of each dilution series. The ratio is used for correction 
of O.D.
  7.  Preparation of fresh antibiotic medium is critical for the selec-
tion of transformants and optimal protein overexpression. 
Antibiotics must be prepared fresh before use. When using a 
combination of the pMCSG7 expression vectors and 
BL21(DE3)  E. coli strain 100 μg/mL ampicillin is required. 
The concentrations of antibiotics are summarized in Table  1 . 
  8.  Steps 1 – 4 in Subheading  3.2 are used when starting from fro-
zen cultures. An option is to streak cells from glycerol stocks 
onto media (2× YT or LB with 100 μg/mL ampicillin), fol-
lowed by growth at 37 °C overnight to pick a colony for 1 mL 
liquid culture ( see  step 16 in Subheading   3.4  of Chapter   5  ) . 
However, direct inoculation using frozen culture is easier and 
faster. Another option, if time allows, is to proceed with over-
expression immediately after preparation of frozen cultures. 
The rest of the cultures can be used to overexpress directly 
(proceed directly to  step 5 in Subheading  3.2 ). 
  9.  In order to make aliquots easily and accurately with a multi-
channel micropipette for small-volume cultures, 40 mM 
IPTG stock is used. For 1 mL cultures, add 10 μL of 100 mM 
IPTG. For large cultures (>50 mL), 1 M stock IPTG should 
be used to induce protein expression at a ﬁ nal concentration 
of 1 mM.  
  10.   Lysis buffer contains 300 mM NaCl and 1 mM DTT to reduce 
protein aggregation. The high salt in the buffer is advantageous 
for downstream protein puriﬁ cation, preventing nonspeciﬁ c 
protein–protein interactions and protein sticking to chromato-
graphic matrices. The lysis buffer is prepared just before use by 
combining 10 mL of stock lysis buffer, 6 μL lysonase (EMD 
Biosciences), and 10 μL of 1 mM DTT. Lysonase is a mixture 
of recombinant lysozyme and benzonase. Lysozyme breaks 
down cell walls, and benzonase is a nuclease. Lysonase can be 
replaced with lysozyme. The nucleic acids are also degraded by 
sonication, so if you select sonication as a lysis method, it is not 
necessary to add benzonase. For all steps cold buffers should 
be used and samples should be kept on ice.  
  11.   A tenfold decrease in OD 600nm value after sonication is a good 
indication that the cell lysis was performed successfully.  
  12.   Two widely used HT cell lysis methods are sonication using a 
sonicator and chemical lysis using a speciﬁ c lysis buffer con-
taining detergents to liberate active proteins. An enzymatic 
lysis method using lysozyme is usually performed with sonica-
tion and chemical lysis. Sonication of cells in a 96-well plate 
can be performed using a microplate horn, a water-mediated 
sonication device, or a 96-tip horn. Here, we described using 
a microplate horn as shown in Fig.  2 .
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

85
  13.   Although the microplate horn is placed in a sonabox, using 
additional hearing protection is recommended. It is important 
to use a PCR plate for the sonication because the wells of the 
plate bottom should be in good contact with water for efﬁ cient 
sonication. Between each sonication cycle, the plate and water 
chamber need to be cooled.  
  14.   Various methods to test expression and solubility of recombi-
nant proteins are available: SDS-PAGE, capillary electrophoresis 
[ 17 ], S-tag assay [ 6 ,  14 – 16 ], and dot blotting [ 12 ,  13 ]. 
  15.   As an option, while the dilutions are prepared, the lysates and 
supernatants can be rearrayed to appear next to each other as 
shown Fig.  3 . Two lysates and two supernatants from 96-well 
plates can ﬁ t in a 384-well plate.
  16.   When an LC-90 is used to test expression and solubility of 
recombinant proteins, their scores are rated based on relative 
purity (% purity in LabChip HT software) which is a quantity 
ratio of protein of interest (POI) to total proteins. This param-
eter, which was obtained from the software directly, is inde-
pendent of loading volume and dilution factor because total 
protein quantity represents the actual loading quantity. 
Therefore, relative purity is an ideal parameter to determine 
the level of expression and solubility of the recombinant POI. 
The relative purity of the POI was corrected by the subtraction 
of the background relative purity of the same molecular weight 
 Fig. 2    A microplate horn and a Sonicator 3000 A 96-well plate are ﬂ oated on 
water and sonicated 
 
Expression and Solubility Testing

86
endogenous proteins in the  E. coli host strain from that of the 
POI. The levels of expression and solubility of proteins were 
deﬁ ned using a score from 0 to 6, depending upon their cor-
rected relative purity (0: <2 %, 1: 2–5 %, 2: 5–10 %, 3: 10–15 %, 
4: 15–20 %, 5: 20–25 %, and 6: >25 %). Figure  4 is an example 
of a virtual gel-like image from an LC-90 electrochromato-
gram with the scores.
  17.   If HT capillary electrophoresis equipment is not available, 
SDS-PAGE can be used for 96-well plate samples. Proteins of 
small size (<12 KDa) cannot be separated from the system 
peak of the LC-90, so SDS-PAGE is required. In order to 
obtain the best resolution for small proteins, use a 12 % Bis–
Tris gel (a higher percentage gel is better if it is available) with 
MES running buffer (Life Technologies). Some target pro-
teins migrate exactly the same as a major endogenous  E. coli 
 Fig. 3   Rearray of lysate and supernatant samples. Using an eight-channel micropipette, lysate (expression) 
and supernatant (soluble) samples are rearrayed next to each other for the LC-90  
 
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

87
protein on the capillary electrophoresis chip. Expression and 
solubility of these proteins also require conﬁ rmation by 
SDS-PAGE.  
  18.   The antioxidant in the upper chamber is for samples in which 
reducing agent is desired. Prior to sample loading, wash the 
residuals out of the well after removing the comb.  
  19.   Loading layout: Combine columns of the lysate and the super-
natant 96-well plates (gel 1: column 1 of lysate and column 1 
of supernatant plate, etc.)  
 Acknowledgement 
 This work was supported by the National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health, Department of 
Health 
and 
Human 
Services, 
under 
contract 
Nos. 
HHSN272200700058C and HHSN272201200026C.  
 Fig. 4  Expression and solubility test of recombinant proteins using the LabChip 
90 system. After lysis of cells by sonication, target proteins in whole lysate (L) 
and supernatant (S) were separated on the LabChip90. Electrochromatograms 
were converted into virtual gel images. Expression and solubility of target pro-
teins,  Campylobacter jejuni subsp. jejuni NCTC 11168, are shown with the gel-
like ﬁ gure along with their scores.  1 . Cj0064c: ﬂ agellar biosynthesis protein 
(58.03 KDa),  2 . Cj0078c: cytolethal distending toxin (31.65 KDa),  3 . Cj0812: puta-
tive oxidoreductase (56.52 KDa),  4 . Cj1613c: hypothetical protein (31.35 KDa),  5 . 
Cj0045c: hypothetical protein (31.31 KDa),  6 . Cj1349c: hypothetical protein 
(54.58 KDa) 
 
Expression and Solubility Testing

88
 References 
  1.  Braun P, LaBaer J (2003) High throughput 
protein production for functional proteomics. 
Trends Biotechnol 21:383–388  
  2.  Chambers SP (2002) High-throughput pro-
tein expression for the post-genomic era. Drug 
Discov Today 7:759–765  
  3.  Lesley SA (2001) High-throughput pro-
teomics: protein expression and puriﬁ cation in 
the postgenomic world. Protein Expr Purif 
22:159–164 
  4.  Stevens RC (2000) Design of high-throughput 
methods of protein production for structural 
biology. Structure 8:R177–R185  
  5.  Kwon K, Hasseman J, Latham S, Grose C, Do 
Y, Fleischmann RD, Pieper R, Peterson SN 
(2011) Recombinant expression and functional 
analysis of proteases from Streptococcus pneu-
moniae, Bacillus anthracis, and Yersinia pestis. 
BMC Biochem 12:17  
  6.  Kwon K, Pieper R, Shallom S, Grose C, Kwon 
E, Do Y, Latham S, Alami H, Huang ST, 
Gatlin C, Papazisi L, Fleischmann R, Peterson 
S (2007) A correlation analysis of protein char-
acteristics associated with genome-wide high 
throughput expression and solubility of 
Streptococcus pneumoniae proteins. Protein 
Expr Purif 55:368–378  
  7.  Braun P, Hu Y, Shen B, Halleck A, Koundinya 
M, Harlow E, LaBaer J (2002) Proteome-scale 
puriﬁ cation of human proteins from bacteria. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:2654–2659  
  8.  Christendat D, Yee A, Dharamsi A, Kluger Y, 
Savchenko A, Cort JR, Booth V, Mackereth 
CD, Saridakis V, Ekiel I, Kozlov G, Maxwell 
KL, Wu N, McIntosh LP, Gehring K, Kennedy 
MA, Davidson AR, Pai EF, Gerstein M, Edwards 
AM, Arrowsmith CH (2000) Structural pro-
teomics of an archaeon. Nat Struct Biol 
7:903–909  
  9.  Dieckman L, Gu M, Stols L, Donnelly MI, 
Collart FR (2002) High throughput methods 
for gene cloning and expression. Protein Expr 
Purif 25:1–7  
  10.  Luan CH, Qiu S, Finley JB, Carson M, Gray 
RJ, Huang W, Johnson D, Tsao J, Reboul J, 
Vaglio P, Hill DE, Vidal M, Delucas LJ, Luo M 
(2004) High-throughput expression of C. 
elegans proteins. Genome Res 14:2102–2110  
  11.  Moy S, Dieckman L, Schiffer M, Maltsev N, Yu 
GX, Collart FR (2004) Genome-scale expres-
sion of proteins from Bacillus subtilis. J Struct 
Funct Genomics 5:103–109  
  12.  Eshaghi S, Hedren M, Nasser MI, Hammarberg 
T, Thornell A, Nordlund P (2005) An efﬁ cient 
strategy 
for 
high-throughput 
expression 
screening of recombinant integral membrane 
proteins. Protein Sci 14:676–683  
  13.  Sugar FJ, Jenney FE Jr, Poole FL 2nd, Brereton 
PS, Izumi M, Shah C, Adams MW (2005) 
Comparison of small- and large-scale expres-
sion of selected Pyrococcus furiosus genes as an 
aid to high-throughput protein production. J 
Struct Funct Genomics 6:149–158  
  14.   Braud S, Moutiez M, Belin P, Abello N, Drevet 
P, Zinn-Justin S, Courcon M, Masson C, Dassa 
J, Charbonnier JB, Boulain JC, Menez A, 
Genet R, Gondry M (2005) Dual expression 
system 
suitable 
for 
high-throughput 
ﬂ uorescence- based screening and production 
of 
soluble 
proteins. 
J 
Proteome 
Res 
4:2137–2147  
  15.  Goldberg JM, Baldwin RL (1999) A speciﬁ c 
transition state for S-peptide combining with 
folded S-protein and then refolding. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 96:2019–2024  
  16.  Kim JS, Raines RT (1993) Ribonuclease 
S-peptide as a carrier in fusion proteins. Protein 
Sci 2:348–356  
  17.   Frederick RO, Bergeman L, Blommel PG, 
Bailey LJ, McCoy JG, Song J, Meske L, 
Bingman CA, Riters M, Dillon NA, Kunert J, 
Yoon JW, Lim A, Cassidy M, Bunge J, Aceti DJ, 
Primm JG, Markley JL, Phillips GN Jr, Fox BG 
(2007) Small-scale, semi-automated puriﬁ cation 
of eukaryotic proteins for structure determina-
tion. J Struct Funct Genomics 8:153–166  
Keehwan Kwon and Scott N. Peterson

89
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_7, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 7  
 Protein Production for Structural Genomics Using  
E. coli Expression 
 Magdalena  Makowska-Grzyska ,  Youngchang  Kim ,  Natalia  Maltseva , 
 Hui  Li ,  Min  Zhou ,  Grazyna  Joachimiak ,  Gyorgy  Babnigg , 
and  Andrzej  Joachimiak 
 Abstract 
 The goal of structural biology is to reveal details of the molecular structure of proteins in order to 
 understand their function and mechanism. X-ray crystallography and NMR are the two best methods for 
atomic level structure determination. However, these methods require milligram quantities of proteins. In 
this chapter a reproducible methodology for large-scale protein production applicable to a diverse set of 
proteins is described. The approach is based on protein expression in  E. coli as a fusion with a cleavable 
afﬁ nity tag that was tested on over 20,000 proteins. Speciﬁ cally, a protocol for fermentation of large quan-
tities of native proteins in disposable culture vessels is presented. A modiﬁ ed protocol that allows for the 
production of selenium-labeled proteins in deﬁ ned media is also offered. Finally, a method for the puriﬁ ca-
tion of His 6 -tagged proteins on immobilized metal afﬁ nity chromatography columns that generates high-
purity material is described in detail.  
 Key 
words  
 Protein 
expression  , 
  Protein 
puriﬁ cation , 
  Disposable 
vessel 
fermentation  , 
 Selenomethionine- labeling  ,   IMAC ,   His-tag  ,   High-throughput  
1  Introduction 
 Structural genomics uses X-ray crystallography and NMR 
 spectroscopy for structure determination and requires milligram 
quantities of high-quality proteins. Protein samples must be solu-
ble, highly homogeneous, and free of critical contaminants (espe-
cially proteases, metals, lipids, and other impurities). In structural 
genomics it is also important that numerous proteins or their con-
structs are produced in parallel and in a highly reproducible man-
ner. To achieve these objectives, every step in the production of a 
protein must be carefully evaluated, optimized, and accelerated, 
including gene cloning, protein expression, and puriﬁ cation. Over 
the years, much effort has been put into optimizing  Escherichia coli 
as an expression host for proteins from other bacteria and higher 

90
organisms [ 1 – 8 ]. A variety of classes of proteins, from prokaryotic 
to human and from single domain to protein complexes, can be 
produced in  E. coli [ 1 ,  2 ,  9 – 12 ]. Because these proteins vary greatly 
in their properties, to facilitate puriﬁ cation each protein is typically 
fused with an N- or a C-terminal afﬁ nity tag. A hexahistidine 
(His 6 )-tag is most commonly used as it allows the use of immobi-
lized metal afﬁ nity chromatography (IMAC) for all soluble pro-
teins [ 4 ,  7 ,  13 – 15 ]. 
 Rapid technological advances have been made during the last 
decade in structural genomics pipelines that use robotic hardware, 
software, process parallelization, improved fermentation, and 
semiautomated puriﬁ cation methods [ 16 ,  17 ]. Developments have 
also been made to reduce the time and labor of protein production 
methods [ 13 ,  18 – 21 ]. An example of an improvement in the fer-
mentation step of protein production is the growth of high cell 
density bacterial cultures in polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bot-
tles [ 19 ]. Expression of proteins using optimized minimal media in 
non-sterilized disposable PET bottles reduces the time required 
for media preparation and the fermentation volume by a factor of 
2–3 and eliminates much of the cleanup that follows cell harvest-
ing. Disposal of the autoclaved bottles after use reduces the risk of 
cross-contamination of subsequent cultures. 
 Another key development includes the availability of speciﬁ -
cally labeled proteins for X-ray crystallography or NMR spectros-
copy. This protocol also uses disposable fermentation vessels 
for production of selenomethionine-labeled proteins [ 1 ,  22 ]. 
It involves a production of in vivo-labeled proteins in optimized 
minimal media. The method relies on forcing selenomethionine 
incorporation via inhibition of endogenous methionine biosynthe-
sis by the addition of inhibitory amino acids [ 23 ]. Selenium-labeled 
protein crystals are then used for X-ray diffraction data collection 
and de novo phasing for structure determination. 
 The choice of puriﬁ cation and handling procedures plays a 
critical role in obtaining high-quality protein samples. This stan-
dard puriﬁ cation protocol has been designed for His 6 -tagged pro-
teins and implemented on a semiautomated chromatography 
platform with minimal human involvement [ 1 ,  9 ]. Puriﬁ cation 
starts with the preparation of crude extract (or lysate) followed by 
two chromatography steps. The ﬁ rst afﬁ nity chromatography step 
(IMAC-I) is done on a Ni +2 -charged column and immediately fol-
lowed by buffer exchange on a desalting column. The IMAC-I 
step produces proteins with purity typically above 80–95 % as 
judged by SDS-PAGE. After IMAC-I, the His 6 -tag from the target 
protein is cleaved with a highly speciﬁ c recombinant tobacco etch 
virus (TEV) protease (developed by Dr. B. G. Fox, University of 
Wisconsin; this protease is fused to a non-cleavable His 7 -tag and is 
resistant to auto-inactivation) at a designed cleavage site (ENLYFQ↓S). 
Magdalena Makowska-Grzyska et al.

91
This cleavage produces a protein with three amino acids (SNA) 
added to its N-terminus [ 24 ,  25 ]. The second  chromatography 
step, a subtractive IMAC (IMAC-II), is also performed on the 
Ni +2 -charged column. During the IMAC-II process, the cleaved 
protein elutes in the ﬂ ow through and is separated from the 
released His 6 -tag, undigested protein, persistent endogenous 
 E. coli proteins having afﬁ nity for IMAC column, and His 7 - tagged 
TEV protease. This step is also followed by buffer exchange. The 
buffer 
exchange 
process 
is 
important 
as 
it 
removes 
 low-molecular- weight contaminants and transfers the protein into 
buffer conditions suitable for downstream steps, such as protease 
treatment, protein concentration, crystallization, and storage. The 
protein is then concentrated using centrifugal concentrators. 
If higher purity protein sample is needed, the buffer exchange step 
after IMAC-I and IMAC-II or after both processes can be replaced 
with size-exclusion chromatography (SEC). Batches of different 
proteins can be puriﬁ ed in parallel using IMAC and buffer exchange 
or SEC columns. The puriﬁ cation process described above typi-
cally produces high-quality protein samples with 95–98 % purity. 
 One of the key elements of large-scale protein production is 
the proper long-term storage of protein samples. We recommend 
that the concentrated protein solutions (20–200 mg/mL) are 
pipetted dropwise (30–50 μL) directly into liquid nitrogen and the 
resulting small pellets are collected into plastic tubes and stored in 
liquid nitrogen or at −80 ºC. These small aliquots can be rapidly 
thawed at room temperature and used for subsequent crystalliza-
tions and biophysical characterizations or in biochemical experi-
ments, while the bulk of the material remains safely stored. 
 It is important to keep in mind that the high-throughput 
approach described here involves processing a large number of 
proteins (or their variants) using standardized protocols that are 
not optimized for any given protein but work reasonably well for 
many proteins. Consequently, these protocols may need to be 
altered for a speciﬁ c protein that failed the standard high- 
throughput puriﬁ cation procedure. This also includes efﬁ cient 
protocols for the puriﬁ cation of proteins without afﬁ nity tags and 
stable protein–protein and protein–nucleic acid complexes. 
 In this chapter, a method for large-scale production of heter-
ologous fusion proteins in  E. coli is described. The protocol for the 
production of native proteins uses 2-L PET bottles as disposable 
culture vessels. In addition, a modiﬁ ed expression protocol that 
allows for the production of selenium-labeled proteins in deﬁ ned 
minimum medium is included. Finally, a method for the puriﬁ ca-
tion of numerous proteins that generates high-purity samples for 
structural biology and biochemical applications and a technique 
utilized to prepare protein samples for long-term storage are 
presented.  
Protein Production Using E. coli Expression

92
2  Materials 
 Prepare all solutions using ultrapure water (resistance of 18 MΩ in 
a 1 cm cell; conductivity of less than 5.6 μS/m) and analytical 
grade reagents. Follow all waste disposal guidelines when dispos-
ing waste materials. 
  1.  Ampicillin, sodium salt: Prepare a 100 mg/mL stock by dis-
solving 1 g of ampicillin in water to a ﬁ nal volume of 10 mL. 
Store aliquots at −20 °C. 1 mL of 100 mg/mL solution is 
required per 1 L of culture to achieve a ﬁ nal concentration of 
100 μg/mL.  
  2.  Kanamycin sulfate: Prepare a 30 mg/mL stock by dissolving 
300 mg kanamycin sulfate in water to a ﬁ nal volume of 10 mL. 
Store aliquots at −20 °C. 1 mL of 300 mg/mL solution is 
required per 1 L of culture to achieve a ﬁ nal concentration of 
30 μg/mL.  
  3.  Luria Bertani (LB) broth: Dissolve 25 g of preformulated LB 
powder in water to a ﬁ nal volume of 1 L. Add ampicillin and 
kanamycin sulfate to 100 and 30 μg/mL, respectively 
( see  Note 1 ). 
  1.  Ampicillin, kanamycin sulfate, B1, and B12 vitamins, premixed 
solids in a foil packet (Orion Enterprises, Inc): Prepare a stock 
solution by dissolving contents of one foil pouch (ampicillin, 
2.5 g; kanamycin sulfate, 1.5 g; thiamine (B1), 50 mg; and 
vitamin B12, 135 mg) in 50 mL of water. Store aliquots at 
−20 °C, and avoid light during storage. 1 mL of this solution 
is required per 1 L of culture to achieve a ﬁ nal concentration of 
50 μg/mL for ampicillin, 30 μg/mL for kanamycin sulfate, 
1 μg/mL for thiamine, and 2.7 μg/mL for vitamin B12.  
  2.  Trace Metal Supplement, as concentrated solution (Orion 
Enterprises, Inc): Store at 4 °C, and avoid light. Use 10 mL for 
1 L culture to achieve ﬁ nal concentrations of 5 mg EDTA, 
430 mg MgCl 2 ⋅ 6H 2 O, 5 mg MgSO 4 , 10 mg NaCl, 1 mg 
FeSO 4 ⋅ 7H 2 O, 1 mg Co(NO 3 ) 2 ⋅ 6H 2 O, 11 mg CaCl 2 , 1 mg 
ZnSO 4 ⋅ 7H 2 O, 0.1 mg CuSO 4 ⋅ 5H 2 O, 0.1 mg AlK(SO 4 ) 2 , 
0.1 mg H 3 BO 3 , 0.1 mg Na 2 MoO 4 ⋅ 2H 2 O, 0.1 mg Na 2 SeO 3 , 
0.1 mg Na 2 WO 4 ⋅ 2H 2 O, 0.2 mg NiCl 2 ⋅ 6H 2 O. 
  3.  Vacuum ﬁ ltration system with a 0.22 μm polyethersulfone 
membrane such as sterile Stericup® vacuum ﬁ ltration unit 
(Millipore Corporation).  
  4.  50 % Glycerol solution (Sigma Aldrich): Use ultrapure water 
and a ReagentPlus grade of glycerol to prepare the 50 % solu-
tion. Filter the solution using sterile vacuum ﬁ ltration unit. 
Use 10 mL of this solution per 1 L of culture to achieve a ﬁ nal 
glycerol concentration of 0.5 %.  
2.1  Materials for 
Media Preparation for 
the Production of 
Native Proteins
2.2  Materials for 
Media Preparation 
for the Production 
of Selenomethionine-
Labeled Proteins
Magdalena Makowska-Grzyska et al.

93
  5.  M9 “Pink” medium and non-inhibitory amino acids (NIAAC), 
premixed solids in a foil packet (Orion Enterprises, Inc): Dissolve 
one foil pouch (Na 2 HPO 4 , 6.8 g; KH 2 PO 4 , 3.0 g; NaCl, 0.75 g; 
glucose monohydrate 4.4 g; NH 4 Cl, 1.0 g; Na 2 SO 4 , 0.28 g; 11 
amino acids ( L -glutamate,  L -aspartate,  L - arginine,  L -histidine, 
 L -alanine,  L -proline,  L -glycine,  L -serine,  L -glutamine,  L -aspara-
gine,  L -tryptophan, 200 mg each)) in water to a ﬁ nal volume of 
1 L ( see  Note 2 ).  
  6.   Selenomethionine and inhibitory amino acids (IAAC), pre-
mixed solids in a foil packet (Orion Enterprises, Inc): Dissolve 
one foil pouch in 250 mL of water. Use 30 mL for 1 L of cell 
culture resulting in 150 mg each/L of  L -valine,  L -isoleucine, 
 L -leucine,  L -lysine,  L -threonine,  L -phenylalanine, and 90 mg/L 
of selenomethionine.  
  1.  Freshly transformed  E. coli BL21(DE3) cells (Stratagene) 
 carrying plasmid pMAGIC and containing a gene for the tar-
get protein in vector pMCSG7 [ 25 ] or one of its derivatives 
( see  Note 3 ). Alternatively, a glycerol stock can be used. For 
details on cloning protocols  see Chapter   5  in this book.  
  2.   Isopropyl-β- D -thio-galactopyranoside (IPTG), premixed solid 
in a foil packet (Orion Enterprises, Inc). Prepare a 1 M stock 
by mixing 11.9 g of IPTG (one pouch) with water to a ﬁ nal 
volume of 50 mL and store the aliquots at −20 °C. 0.5 mL of 
this solution is required per 1 L of culture to achieve a ﬁ nal 
concentration of 0.5 mM.  
  3.  Lysozyme from chicken egg white. Prepare a 50 mg/mL stock 
by mixing 500 mg of lysozyme with water to a ﬁ nal volume of 
10 mL. Store at −20 °C. 1 mL of 50 mg/mL solution is 
required per 50 mL of a re-suspended culture pellet to achieve 
a ﬁ nal concentration of 1 mg/mL.  
  4.  Protease inhibitor cocktail such as Complete Protease Inhibitor 
Cocktail tablets (Roche). Use one tablet per 8 g of wet cell 
paste (or 50 mL of resuspended cells). 
  5.  Sterile tubes for starter cultures such as 5-mL round bottom 
polypropylene culture tubes.  
  6.  500-mL polyethylene terephthalate beverage bottles (PET, 
Continental Glass and Plastics, Inc). Use one bottle per target 
protein for a small overnight culture. One bottle contains 
enough culture to inoculate two 1-L cultures [ 19 ,  22 ].  
  7.   2-L polyethylene terephthalate beverage bottles (PET, 
Continental Glass and Plastics, Inc.). Use one bottle per liter 
of culture [ 19 ,  22 ].  
  8.   Foam tube plugs such as Identi-Plugs ® (Jaece Industries).  
  9.   1-L centrifuge bottles (such as Nalgene ® high speed polycar-
bonate centrifuge bottles with polypropylene-ether screw/
blue silicone gaskets).  
2.3  Other General 
Materials for Protein 
Production
Protein Production Using E. coli Expression

94
  10.   Incubator/shaker.  
  11.   Centrifuge.  
  12.   A spectrophotometer and cuvette that can measure absorbance 
at 600 nm and 10 mm disposable semi-micro cuvettes.  
  1.  Puriﬁ cation buffers. All buffers must be ﬁ ltered through a 
0.22 μm polyethersulfone ﬁ lter:
 (a)  Lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 % 
glycerol, 20 mM imidazole, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol).  
 (b)   Desalting buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 
5 % glycerol, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol).  
 (c)   Elution buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 
5 % glycerol, 250 mM imidazole, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol).  
 (d)   Crystallization buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 250 mM 
NaCl, 2 mM 1,4-dithio-DL-threitol).  
  2.   Recombinant tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease carrying a 
non-cleavable His 7 -tag [ 24 ] and mutated to reduce self- 
inactivation [ 26 ]. Use puriﬁ ed TEV protease as a 5–10 mg/
mL solution in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl, 10 % 
glycerol, 2 mM β-mercaptoethanol. For His 6 -tag cleavage, 
incubate at a protein: protease mass ratio of 1:50 ( see  Note 4 ). 
  3.   Sonicator.  
  4.   Centrifuge.  
  5.   Polyvinylidene ﬂ uoride (PVDF) syringe ﬁ lter (0.45 μM).  
  6.   ÄKTAxpress chromatography system (GE Healthcare), or the 
equivalent.  
  7.  5-mL HisTrap HP column (GE Healthcare) or the equivalent.  
  8.   53-mL HiPrep 26/10 desalting column (GE Healthcare) or 
the equivalent.  
  9.   Superdex 200 HiLoad 26/60 size exclusion chromatography 
(SEC) column (GE Healthcare) or the equivalent.  
  10.   96-well deep well blocks such as sterile, 96-well 2-mL square 
top, round bottom polypropylene plates (BioExpress).  
  11.   Slide-A-Lyzer™ dialysis cassette (Thermo Scientiﬁ c) of proper 
liquid capacity or the equivalent dialysis device.  
  12.   Centrifugal ﬁ lter devices.  
  13.   A spectrophotometer absorbance at 280 nm (such as NanoDrop 
1000, for which no cuvette is required)  
  14.   Cryogenic dewar (such as foam dewar FD-800, Spearlab) with 
small (10–20 mL) glass beakers.  
  15.   Plastic cryogenic screw-cap tubes (such as 2.0-mL Nalgene ® 
cryogenic vials).  
 16.    Conical centrifuge tubes.  
2.4  Materials for 
Protein Puriﬁ cation
Magdalena Makowska-Grzyska et al.

95
3  Methods 
 It is important to mention that large-scale protein fermentation is 
one of the many components of the protein production pipeline at 
a structural genomics center. Before proteins are produced on 
milligram- scale, target proteins are processed through several 
stages of the pipeline. First, protein targets are carefully selected, 
cloned into appropriate expression vectors, and protein expression 
and solubility is assessed in a small-scale (5 mL). Only the targets 
with conﬁ rmed high-level expression and good solubility are 
moved into the large-scale fermentation process described here. 
Failed constructs are salvaged [ 1 ]. 
 The incubators, shakers, and sonicators should be disinfected 
biweekly using 10 % bleach. All disposables should be autoclaved, 
while non-disposables should be disinfected in 10 % bleach. When 
disinfecting with 10 % bleach, ensure at least 20 min of contact 
time. Wear nitrile gloves, safety glasses and a lab coat during these 
procedures. 
  1.   To prepare a starter culture, inoculate 1 mL of LB medium 
containing 100 μg/mL ampicillin and 30 μg/mL kanamycin 
sulfate in a 5-mL plastic tube with a fresh transformant or a 
glycerol stock of pMCSG7/pMAGIC transformed  E. coli 
BL21(DE3) cells. Place in an incubator and shake at 220 rpm 
and 37 °C for 4–6 h. Use one tube per protein.  
  2.   To prepare small overnight culture, add 50 μL of the turbid 
starter culture to 50 mL of fresh LB medium containing 
100 μg/mL ampicillin and 30 μg/mL kanamycin sulfate in a 
500-mL PET beverage bottle. Place in an incubator and shake 
at 150 rpm and 37 °C overnight.  
  3.   Prepare LB medium in 2-L PET bottles using 990 mL of ultra-
pure water. Add ampicillin and kanamycin sulfate to a ﬁ nal 
concentration of 100 and 30 μg/mL, respectively.  
  4.  Add 10 mL of the saturated overnight culture to each 1 L of 
fresh LB medium containing 100 μg/mL ampicillin and 
30 μg/mL kanamycin sulfate. Shake the bottles in an incuba-
tor at 37 ºC at 180 rpm until cells grow to OD 600nm 0.8–1.0. 
Start measuring OD after about 2.0–2.5 h.  
  5.   Transfer bottles to a pre-cooled 4 °C incubator and shake for 
1 h ( see  Note 5 ).  
  6.   Increase incubator temp to 18 ºC. Induce the cells by adding 
0.5 mL of 1 M IPTG solution to a ﬁ nal concentration of 
0.5 mM.  
  7.   Grow cells at 18 ºC and shake at 180 rpm overnight.  
  8.   Pour cell culture in 1-L centrifuge bottles. Centrifuge for 
10 min at 7,880 ×  g (in a rotor such as Sorvall F8S-6x1000y). 
Remove the supernatant.  
3.1  Production 
of Native Proteins
Protein Production Using E. coli Expression

96
  9.  Perform all procedures at 4 ºC from here on.  
  10.   Re-suspend the cells by adding 25 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer 
and gentle shaking (150 rpm).  
  11.   Add one tablet of protease inhibitor cocktail per 8 g of wet cell 
paste.  
  12.   Transfer the re-suspended cells into a 50-mL tube and bring 
volume up to 40 mL with lysis buffer ( see  Note 6 ). 
  13.   Add 50 mg/mL lysozyme solution to a ﬁ nal concentration of 
1 mg/mL (for example, 0.8 mL of the solution for 40 mL of 
cell suspension).  
  14.   Cryo-cool the cell suspension with liquid nitrogen and store at 
−80 ºC.  
  1.  Prepare 1-mL starter cultures in LB medium with antibiotics 
as described in  step 1 of Subheading  3.1 . 
  2.  Dissolve 1 pouch of M9 “Pink” salts and NIAAC in 980 mL of 
ultrapure water in 2-L PET beverage bottles. Add 10 mL 
of 50 % glycerol, 10 mL of Trace Metal Supplement, 1 mL of 
ampicillin, kanamycin sulfate, B1, and B12 vitamins stock 
solution.  
  3.  To make small overnight cultures, aliquot 50 mL of the pre-
pared M9 “Pink” Medium into 500-mL PET beverage 
bottles.  
  4.  Add 50 μL of the turbid starter LB culture to each 50 mL of 
M9 “Pink” medium. Place the bottles in an incubator and 
shake at 150 rpm and 37 °C overnight.  
  5.  Prepare M9 “Pink” medium in 2-L PET bottles described in  step 
2 of this Subheading  3.1 . using 940 mL of ultrapure water ( see 
 Note 2 ).  
  6.   Add 25 mL of small culture from 500-mL PET bottle to each 
2-L bottle of the prepared M9 “Pink” medium.  
  7.   Shake in an incubator at 37 ºC at 180 rpm until cells grow to 
OD 600nm 1.0–1.4. Start measuring OD after about 2.5–3 h.  
  8.   Transfer bottles to a precooled 4 °C incubator and shake for 
1 h ( see  Note 5 ).  
  9.   Add 30 mL of selenomethionine and IAAC solution per 1 L of 
culture ( see  Note 7 ). 
  10.   Increase incubator temp to 18 ºC. Induce the cells by adding 
0.5 mL of 1 M IPTG solution at a ﬁ nal concentration of 
0.5 mM.  
  11.   Grow cells at 18 ºC and shake at 180 rpm overnight.  
  12.   Recover the cells by centrifugation, and proceed as described 
in  step 8 of Subheading  3.1 . 
3.2  Production of the 
Selenomethionine 
Labeled Proteins
Magdalena Makowska-Grzyska et al.

97
    1.  Lyse the cell suspension. Thaw the cells on ice with gentle 
 mixing and sonicate on ice for 5 min by means of a program or 
with manual control using a 4-s on and 20-s off mode and 
power/voltage settings according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions ( see  Note 8 ). 
  2.  Transfer the cell lysate to 45-mL centrifuge tubes. Centrifuge 
for 1 h at 29,500 ×  g in an SS-34 rotor. Alternatively, centrifu-
gation can be performed in the 50-mL tubes for 1 h and 
20 min in a conical ﬁ xed-angle rotor (such as Sorvall F13-
14x50cy). Filter the supernatant into a clean 50-mL tube using 
0.45 μm PVDF or polyethersulfone syringe ﬁ lter to remove 
residual particulates.  
  3.  Apply the ﬁ ltered supernatant with a maximum ﬂ ow rate of 
1 mL/min to a 5-mL HisTrap HP column ( see  Note 9 ) that 
was equilibrated with lysis buffer. Wash the column at 4 mL/
min with 30 column volumes (CV) of lysis buffer to remove 
contaminating endogenous  E. coli proteins. Elute the bound 
His 6 -target proteins with elution buffer over 5 CV at 4 mL/
min. Collect fractions into a 10 mL loop or a 96-well deep-
well block (Fig.  1 , top). If high-purity protein sample is needed 
do not use the desalting column in the next step, but proceed 
to Subheading  3.3.3 . Otherwise,  see  step 4 of this section.
  4.   Apply the eluted protein to a 53-mL HiPrep 26/10 desalting 
column (GE Healthcare) pre-equilibrated with desalting buf-
fer. Wash with 2.5 CV of desalting buffer at 8 mL/min. Collect 
1.7-mL fractions into a 96-well deep-well block ( see  Note 10 ). 
  5.   Pool the peak fractions, and measure the volume. Take a 50 μL 
aliquot of each protein sample. These samples will be later used 
as “uncut controls” for SDS-PAGE. Estimate the concentra-
tion of the partially pure protein spectrophotometrically at 
280 nm using an appropriate molar extinction coefﬁ cient. 
  6.   Calculate the amount of  TEV protease needed (protein:protease 
mass ratio 1:50). Add fresh β-mercaptoethanol to the protein 
pool to replenish the reducing agent. Add the required amount 
of protease. 
  7.   Incubate proteins with TEV protease for 1–2 days at 4 ºC. 
Run SDS-PAGE to determine if the cleavage was successful 
using the “uncut” samples as a reference. If the His 6 -tag was 
cleaved, run IMAC-II ( see  Note 11 ). 
  1.   Apply the IMAC-I protein pool and TEV protease mixture 
onto a 5-mL HisTrap HP column (GE Healthcare) pre- 
equilibrated with lysis buffer with a maximum ﬂ ow rate of 
1 mL/min. Wash the column at 3 mL/min with 8 CV of lysis 
buffer to elute the cleaved target protein. Next, increase the 
imidazole concentration to 32.5 mM (5 % elution buffer), and 
3.3  Protein 
Puriﬁ cation
3.3.1  IMAC-I Puriﬁ cation
3.3.2  IMAC-II Puriﬁ cation
Protein Production Using E. coli Expression

98
wash the column with 5 CV of that buffer at 4 mL/min to 
elute any residual target protein that was not washed out in the 
lysis buffer wash. Finally, elute the uncut His 6 -tag protein (if 
any) and the His 7 -TEV protease with 100 % of elution buffer 
over 3 CV at 4 mL/min. Collect all peaks from the ﬂ ow-
through, wash, and elution in 1.7-mL fractions into a 96-well 
deep-well block (Fig.  1 , bottom).  
  2.   Pool the peak fractions from the ﬂ ow-through, and wash and mea-
sure the volume. Estimate the concentration of the protein spec-
trophotometrically at 280 nm using appropriate molar extinction 
coefﬁ cient. Run SDS-PAGE to determine sample purity (Fig.  2 ). 
If a protein sample of high purity is needed, proceed to the next 
section (Subheading  3.3.3 ). Otherwise,  see  step 3 of this section.
  3.   Dialyze against crystallization buffer overnight at 4 ºC in dialy-
sis cassettes. Choose an appropriate dialysis cassette membrane 
capacity for the nominal molecular weight limit of the 
protein.  
 4.  Concentrate to a ﬁ nal volume of ~1 mL using a centrifugal con-
centrator depending on protein solubility ( see  Note 12 ). 
Measure protein concentration at 280 nm.  
 Fig. 1   Puriﬁ cation chromatograms of two His 6 -labeled proteins on IMAC-I ( top ) and IMAC-II after cleavage with 
TEV protease ( bottom ).  Red stars indicate collected protein peaks 
 
Magdalena Makowska-Grzyska et al.

99
  5.  Set up crystallizations ( see Chapter   12  in this book).  
  6.   Freeze the remaining protein via drop freezing by dispensing 
the protein sample as a series of single drops. Use a P200 pipet 
and aliquot the protein into small beakers ﬁ lled with liquid 
nitrogen and placed in a foam dewar. Dispense from a height 
of approximately 4 in. [ 27 ]. Collect the frozen droplets into a 
pre- chilled plastic cryogenic screw-cap tube and store at 
−80 ºC ( see  Note 13 ). 
 If puriﬁ cation of a single oligomeric state is critical, the purity of 
the sample is not satisfactory, or protein aggregation is sus-
pected, the buffer exchange step after IMAC-I, IMAC-II, or 
both can be replaced with SEC step. The choice of the running 
buffer for this step will depend on the condition and destination of 
the protein sample. In the case where the SEC procedure is the ﬁ nal 
puriﬁ cation step, it is recommended to use crystallization buffer. 
3.3.3  Size-Exclusion 
Chromatography 
Puriﬁ cation
 Fig. 2    Puriﬁ cation of two His 6 -labeled proteins monitored by SDS-PAGE (Lonza 
PAGEr™ Gold 4–20 % gradient precast gel).  Lanes 1 and  6 : Soluble cell extracts. 
 Lanes 2 and  7 : Pooled peak fractions after IMAC-I.  Lanes 3 and  8 : Cleavage of His 6 -
tag with TEV protease.  Lanes 4 and  9 : Pooled peak fractions after IMAC-II.  Lane 5 : 
Molecular weight standards (kDa). IDP0564 (gi|126699790; amino acid ABC trans-
porter, substrate-binding protein [ Clostridium difﬁ cile 630]) and IDP05558 
(gi|16803797; hypothetical protein lmo1757 [ Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e]) are 
targets from the Center of Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases (CSGID)  
Protein Production Using E. coli Expression

100
If the protein sample needs to undergo His 6 -tag cleavage with 
TEV protease, using the desalting buffer is recommended.
  1.   Equilibrate the SEC column with at least 2 CV of desalting or 
crystallization buffer at a ﬂ ow rate recommended by the manu-
facturer (for Superdex 200 HiLoad 26/60 SEC column a ﬂ ow 
rate of 2.5–3.0 mL/min is used).  
  2.   Apply the protein sample onto an SEC column (for Superdex 
200 HiLoad 26/60 use a ﬂ ow rate of 1.5–2.0 min/mL). The 
volume of the samples should be no more than 2 % of the col-
umn volume and be free of precipitation (if needed, concen-
trate to a smaller volume and remove the precipitation by 
centrifugation or ﬁ ltration through a 0.22 μm PVDF or poly-
ethersulfone syringe ﬁ lter). Collect 1.8 mL fractions into a 
96-well deep-well block ( see  Note 14 ).  
  3.   Pool the peak fractions from the size-exclusion column. If SEC 
puriﬁ cation 
was 
performed 
after 
IMAC-I, 
follow 
Subheading  3.3.1 ,  step 6 . If SEC puriﬁ cation was performed 
after IMAC-II, follow Subheading  3.3.2 ,  step 4 . 
 E. coli strains are commonly used as a host for expression of pro-
teins of microbial origin (and many eukaryotic proteins as well). 
The method is cost effective and remains the ﬁ rst choice for pro-
tein expression in structural genomics centers [ 1 ,  2 ,  4 ]. Over the 
years, over 20,000 proteins from over 150 different bacterial strains 
have been produced using the standardized protocols described 
here. Large-scale expression and solubility levels for a sequence 
diverse set of proteins from over 60 bacterial strains that were pro-
duced in  E. coli as an expression host have been analyzed. Results 
of the analysis are presented in Fig.  3 . It was observed that, while 
good expression levels (40 % or higher) were obtained for proteins 
from more than 40 of the examined bacterial species, solubility 
levels for these proteins were generally lower (20–30 %). This 
method was very successful in expressing over 80 % of target pro-
teins from Gram-negative  Burkholderia thailandensis E264, of 
which almost 50 % were soluble. Interestingly, proteins from 
Gram-positive  Bacillus cereus ATCC 10987 were also expressed at 
high levels (over 70 %) with 40 % of them soluble, whereas  Bacillus 
anthracis str. Sterne was more problematic, with 40 % of tested 
proteins expressed and only 5 % soluble. A very limited success was 
achieved producing proteins from  Rhodopseudomonas palustris 
BisB18, for which only about 5 % of targets were overexpressed 
and none were soluble. These results suggest that many bacterial 
species may produce proteins that are less compatible with stan-
dard protein production protocols and may require a more cus-
tomized approach for expression and puriﬁ cation. Alternatively, 
these difﬁ cult proteins may need to be tested in other expression 
systems like cell-free expression and insect or mammalian cells.
3.3.4  Evaluation 
of Bacterial Protein 
Expression in  E. coli 
System
Magdalena Makowska-Grzyska et al.

 Fig. 3   Bacterial protein expression and solubility in the  E. coli system. The expression and solubility values of 
more than 1,400 proteins from 25 species are shown on a normalized 0–100 scale. Expression ( blue bars ) and 
solubility ( red bars ) levels are calculated as a percentage of the relative abundance of the target protein in the 
cell lysate or the soluble fraction, respectively. The highest possible level of expression, when the relative 
abundance is above 80 %, is set as 100 % 
 

102
4  Notes 
  1.  The use of antibiotics and freshly prepared media alleviates the 
need for sterilization of media and signiﬁ cantly reduces the 
labor involved. We have observed that un-inoculated controls 
exhibited no growth during the time required for protein 
expression in experimental cultures [ 19 ].  
  2.   Keep the culture volume at exactly or below 1,000 mL for 
convenient centrifugation in 1-L centrifugation bottles.  
  3.   Plasmid pMAGIC encodes one rare  E. coli tRNA speciﬁ c for 
two Arg codons (AGG/AGA) [ 1 ]. The Midwest Center for 
Structural Genomics has developed over 80 expression vectors 
for large-scale protein production that are optimized for struc-
tural genomics applications [ 14 ,  25 ]. Many of these vectors are 
available to the scientiﬁ c community from the PSI Biology 
Materials Repository (  http://psimr.asu.edu   ).  
  4.   The TEV protease typically used in our procedures was 
expressed from vector pRK508, which carries a non-cleavable 
His 7 -tag (a gift from Dr. D. Waugh, NCI). More recently, we 
started using a construct expressed from vector pMHT238Δ 
(developed by Dr. B. G. Fox, University of Wisconsin). This 
plasmid, in addition to non-cleavable His 7 -tag, also carries sev-
eral mutations and a C-terminal truncation that improve TEV 
protease solubility and produce high levels of the protein 
(100–130 mg/L of LB medium). This plasmid can be obtained 
from the PSI Biology Materials Repository [ 28 ]. 
  5.   We routinely grow 16 L of cultures at once. Transferring all 16 
cultures to an incubator that is kept at 4 °C allows them to cool 
quickly within 45–60 min to achieve a ﬁ nal culture tempera-
ture of 16–18 °C. When a smaller number of cultures are used 
(such as four to eight 2-L bottles) the incubator can be pre-
cooled to 10 °C to achieve the same ﬁ nal effect.  
  6.   Keep the volume of the cell resuspension below 40 mL to 
account for an increase of solution volume upon immersing 
the sonication probe during the lysis step.  
  7.   We routinely use 90 mg of selenomethionine per 1 L of culture 
(30 mL of selenomethionine solution per 1 L) with the assump-
tion that methionine residues comprise 2 % of the protein 
amino acid composition. If the methionine content is higher 
(5 % or more) the amount of selenomethionine added to the 
culture needs to be increased to 120 mg/L [ 29 ]. 
  8.  We routinely break cells using sonicators from Qsonica 
equipped with a converter and a dual horn that allows us to 
process two samples simultaneously. Other lysis techniques 
such as French press, detergent lysis, or manual shearing should 
yield comparable results.  
Magdalena Makowska-Grzyska et al.

103
  9.  For routine puriﬁ cations, we use an ÄKTAxpress chromatography 
system (GE Healthcare) and 5-mL HisTrap columns, HiPrep 
26/10 desalting columns, and/or Superdex 200 26/60 SEC col-
umns (all columns from GE Healthcare). The ÄKTAxpress sys-
tem has the capability of purifying four different proteins per 
puriﬁ cation unit. Each ÄKTAxpress unit has ﬁ ve column posi-
tions. We use four of these positions for Ni-afﬁ nity columns and 
one for a desalting or an SEC column. There are ﬁ ve loops avail-
able to store peak fractions from the IMAC step before the pro-
tein is loaded onto the desalting or the SEC column. If a 
chromatography system is not available, the IMAC can be per-
formed using manually poured Ni-NTA columns with a peristaltic 
pump or by gravitational ﬂ ow.  
  10.   The buffer exchange step is introduced to prepare the protein 
sample for a cleavage with TEV protease and a subsequent 
IMAC-II step. We ﬁ nd that using a desalting column instead 
of dialysis speeds up the puriﬁ cation process, as the buffer 
exchange step is included in our ÄKTAxpress program follow-
ing the IMAC-I step. Speciﬁ cally, the protein is eluted from a 
Ni-afﬁ nity column using elution buffer into a 10 mL loop and 
then applied onto a desalting column. To prevent Ni 2+ ion 
leakage from the metal afﬁ nity column, 2 mL of 5 mM EDTA 
solution in the desalting buffer is injected onto the desalting 
column prior to the injection of the protein. This creates an 
EDTA zone that sequesters released Ni 2+ ions.  
  11.   We frequently ﬁ nd that His 6 -tag cleavage is complete after 
overnight incubation with TEV protease. Sometimes we 
encounter fusion proteins that are only partially cleaved. This 
may be due to steric occlusion of the cleavage site. In some 
cases that problem can be mitigated by using larger amount of 
the protease and performing the reaction at higher tempera-
ture. On occasion, we deal with proteins that do not undergo 
cleavage of N-terminal His 6 -tag with TEV protease despite 
being designed to do so. In such cases, we do not proceed with 
the IMAC-II step but purify the protein using SEC and set up 
crystallizations with the uncleaved form. We also typically 
attempt to re-clone such protein into a vector that has a longer 
linker between the TEV cleavage site and the N-terminus of 
the protein or a vector with a C-terminal His 6 -tag.  
  12.   Because high protein concentrations are needed for crystalliza-
tion, we typically concentrate proteins to a concentration of 
~1 mM or higher, depending on protein solubility. On average 
we obtain 50–100 mg of protein from 1 L of culture (thus it is 
not uncommon to have, for example, a ﬁ nal volume and con-
centration of 1 mL of 60 mg/mL solution for a 30-kDa bacte-
rial protein). 
  13.  Long-term protein storage is an important issue. The common 
practice of freezing proteins in a glycerol solution is problematic 
Protein Production Using E. coli Expression

104
  1.  Kim Y, Babnigg G, Jedrzejczak R et al (2011) 
High-throughput protein puriﬁ cation and 
quality assessment for crystallization. Methods 
55:12–28  
  2.  Gräslund S, Nordlund P, Weigelt J et al (2008) 
Protein production and puriﬁ cation. Nat 
Methods 5:135–146  
  3.  Vincentelli R, Bignon C, Gruez A et al (2003) 
Medium-scale structural genomics: strategies 
for protein expression and crystallization. Acc 
Chem Res 36:165–172  
  4.  Elsliger M-A, Deacon AM, Godzik A et al 
(2010) The JCSG high-throughput structural 
biology pipeline. Acta Crystallorgr Sect F 
Struct Biol Cryst Commun 66:1137–1142  
  5.  Peti W, Page R, Moy K et al (2005) Towards 
miniaturization of a structural genomics 
pipeline 
using 
micro-expression 
and 
microcoil NMR. J Struct Funct Genomics 6:
259–267  
  6.  Price WN II, Handelman SK, Everett JK et al 
(2011) Large-scale experimental studies show 
because glycerol can possibly interfere with crystallization and 
may need to be removed by dialysis after thawing. To overcome 
this problem we have implemented a drop-cryoprotection pro-
cedure, in which small aliquots (30–50 μL) of protein solution 
are dropped directly into small cylindrical containers (10–20 mL 
beakers) ﬁ lled with liquid nitrogen. Dropped aliquots form 
spherical pellets, which sink to the bottom of the container. 
These pellets are retrieved from the bottom of the container 
with a pair of forceps, placed into pre-chilled Nalgene ® cryo-
genic vials, and kept at liquid nitrogen temperature or at −80 ºC 
for long-term storage.  
  14.   The preparative SEC can be performed on any commercially 
available puriﬁ cation workstation or with a simple peristaltic 
pump system. We have developed protocols for ÄKTAxpress 
and ÄKTAexplorer chromatography systems (GE Healthcare), 
in which the buffer exchange step after IMAC-I or IMAC-II is 
replaced with preparative SEC.  
 Acknowledgments 
 This work was supported by the National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases Contract (HHSN272200700058C and 
HHSN272201200026C), the National Institute of Health Grant 
GM094585, and the US Department of Energy ofﬁ ce of Biological 
and Environmental Research under Contract No. DE-AC02- 
06CH11357. This work has been created by UChicago Argonne, 
LLC, Operator of Argonne National Laboratory (“Argonne”). 
Argonne, a US Department of Energy Ofﬁ ce of Science laboratory, 
is operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The US 
Government retains for itself, and others acting on its behalf, a 
paid-up nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide license in said article 
to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the 
public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or behalf of 
the government.  
 References 
Magdalena Makowska-Grzyska et al.

105
unexpected amino acid effects on protein 
expression and solubility in vivo in  E. coli . 
Microb Inform Exp 1:1–20  
  7.  Xiao R, Anderson S, Aramini J et al (2010) The 
high-throughput protein sample production 
platform of the Northeast structural genomics 
consortium. J Struct Biol 172:21–33  
  8.  Studier FW (2005) Protein production by 
auto-induction in high-density shaking cul-
tures. Protein Expr Purif 41:207–234  
  9.  Kim Y, Dementieva I, Zhou M et al (2004) 
Automation of protein puriﬁ cation for struc-
tural genomics. J Struct Funct Genomics 
5:111–118  
  10.  Lesley SA, Wilson IA (2005) Protein produc-
tion and crystallization at the joint center for 
structural genomics. J Struct Funct Genomics 
6:71–79 
  11.  Lesley SA, Kuhn P, Godzik A et al (2002) 
Structural genomics of the  Thermotoga mari-
tima proteome implemented in a high- 
throughput structure determination pipeline. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci 99:11664–11669  
  12.  Page R, Peti W, Wilson IA et al (2005) NMR 
screening and crystal quality of bacterially 
expressed prokaryotic and eukaryotic proteins 
in a structural genomics pipeline. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 102:1901–1905  
  13.  Donnelly MI, Zhou M, Millard CS et al (2006) 
An expression vector tailored for large-scale, 
high-throughput puriﬁ cation of recombinant 
proteins. Protein Expr Purif 47:446–454  
  14.  Eschenfeldt W, Maltseva N, Stols L et al (2010) 
Cleavable C-terminal His-tag vectors for struc-
ture determination. J Struct Funct Genomics 
11:31–39 
  15.  Porath J (1992) Immobilized metal ion afﬁ nity 
chromatography. 
Protein 
Expr 
Purif 
3:
263–281  
  16.  Burley SK, Joachimiak A, Montelione GT et al 
(2008) Contributions to the NIH-NIGMS 
protein structure initiative from the PSI pro-
duction centers. Structure 16:5–11  
  17.  Joachimiak A (2009) High-throughput crys-
tallography for structural genomics. Curr Opin 
Struct Biol 19:573–584  
  18.  Kim Y, Bigelow L, Borovilos M et al (2008) 
High-throughput protein puriﬁ cation for X-ray 
crystallography and NMR. Adv Protein Chem 
Struct Biol 75:85–105  
  19.  Millard CS, Stols L, Quartey P et al (2003) A 
less laborious approach to the high-throughput 
production 
of 
recombinant 
proteins 
in 
Escherichia coli using 2-liter plastic bottles. 
Protein Expr Purif 29:311–320  
  20.  Abdullah JM, Joachimiak A, Collart FR (2009) 
“System 48” high-throughput cloning and 
protein expression analysis. Methods Mol Biol 
498:117–127  
  21.  Acton TB, Xiao R, Anderson S et al (2011) 
Preparation of protein samples for NMR struc-
ture, function, and small-molecule screening 
studies. Methods Enzymol 493:21–60  
  22.  Stols L, Millard CS, Dementieva I et al (2004) 
Production of selenomethionine-labeled pro-
teins in two-liter plastic bottles for structure 
determination. J Struct Funct Genomics 
5:95–102  
  23.  Van Duyne GD, Standaert RF, Karplus PA et al 
(1993) Atomic structures of the human immu-
nophilin FKBP-12 complexes with FK506 and 
rapamycin. J Mol Biol 229:105–124  
  24.  Kapust RB, Waugh DS (2000) Controlled 
intracellular processing of fusion proteins by 
TEV protease. Protein Expr Purif 19:312–318  
  25.  Stols L, Gu M, Dieckman L et al (2002) A new 
vector 
for 
high-throughput, 
ligation- 
independent cloning encoding a tobacco etch 
virus protease cleavage site. Protein Expr Purif 
25:8–15  
  26.  Blommel PG, Fox BG (2007) A combined 
approach to improving large-scale production 
of tobacco etch virus protease. Protein Expr 
Purif 55:53–68  
  27.  Deng J, Davies DR, Wisedchaisri G et al (2004) 
An improved protocol for rapid freezing of 
protein samples for long-term storage. Acta 
Crystallogr D 60:203–204  
  28.  Cormier C, Park J, Fiacco M et al (2011) 
PSI:Biology-materials repository: a biologist’s 
resource for protein expression plasmids. 
J Struct Funct Genomics 12:55–62  
  29.  Sauder MJ, Rutter ME, Bain K et al (2008) 
High throughput protein production and crys-
tallization at NYSGXRC. Methods Mol Biol 
426:561–575  
Protein Production Using E. coli Expression

107
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_8, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 8  
 Eukaryotic Expression Systems for Structural Studies 
 Christopher  A.  Nelson ,  William  H.  McCoy , and  Daved  H.  Fremont 
 Abstract 
 This protocol describes protein production in mammalian cells by transient transfection. It assumes the 
expression construct contains either a 6-HIS or Fc fusion tag to allow recovery of the protein by afﬁ nity 
chromatography. The method is one of the simplest available for protein expression in eukaryotic cells, 
requires little specialized equipment, and has a reasonably high rate of success.  
 Key words    Kozak  ,   Signal sequence  ,   CMV expression vector  ,  HEK293-F cells  ,   Polyethylenimine  , 
 PEI ,   Kifunensine  ,   Transient transfection  ,   Mammalian cell  
1  Introduction 
 The majority of structural genomics targets are produced in  E. coli as 
natively folded proteins. This approach works well for the subset of 
proteins (both prokaryotic and eukaryotic) that naturally reside in 
the cell cytoplasm and have evolved to fold efﬁ ciently in the absence 
of posttranslational modiﬁ cations, such as carbohydrate addition, 
disulﬁ de bond formation, or enzymatic cleavage. In contrast, 
attempts to produce ectodomains from secreted or membrane-
bound surface proteins in bacteria usually result in the formation 
of nonfunctional insoluble aggregates. Often these proteins can be 
recovered and converted to functional forms through the use of in 
vitro refolding methods. An example of one such method is the 
oxidative refolding protocol outlined in Chapter   11  . Still, to fur-
ther increase the range of protein targets available for structural 
studies, a high-throughput protein expression system based in 
eukaryotic cells that could exploit posttranslational processing in 
the secretory pathway has long been sought. The most successful 
eukaryotic systems to date include protein production in insect 
cells using baculovirus expression vectors, protein production in 
mammalian cells using stably integrated or transiently transfected 
expression constructs, or protein production in yeast cells. A sum-
mary of efforts to use these systems for high-throughput structural 

108
proteomics has been reported [ 1 ]. In brief, each of these systems 
has proven technically challenging and more expensive in time and 
materials than bacterial expression and can only be justiﬁ ed as a 
salvage pathway for proteins that cannot be made in bacteria. For 
comparison, production of a protein using a baculovirus expres-
sion system can take up to 6 weeks. This includes construction of 
the transfer plasmid containing the target gene, production ampli-
ﬁ cation and titration of recombinant virus, infection of insect cells, 
and protein harvest. This is considerably longer than the 1–2 weeks 
needed to express a target in  E. coli . Although isolated examples of 
successful selenomethionine incorporation have been reported for 
proteins made in eukaryotic cells, so far no robust solution for 
heavy atom labeling in these cell systems exists. This represents a 
severe limitation for their use in structural studies. Still, for pro-
teins that cannot be made in bacteria, eukaryotic expression sys-
tems offer an alternate means of production and have resulted in a 
good number of reported structures (for example [ 2 – 5 ]), some of 
which are labeled with selenomethionine (for example [ 7 – 11 ]). 
 The current benchmark system for high-level transient mam-
malian protein expression, speciﬁ cally the transfection of suspen-
sion-grown HEK293 cells, was in development over 10 years ago 
[ 12 – 14 ]. Detailed protocols exist which describe its development 
and use [ 15 ,  16 ]. Recent modiﬁ cations have made it simpler, 
faster, and more cost effective to use. Of particular advantage has 
been the development of 293-F cells (Life Technologies). These 
cells thrive in suspension culture at high density, and the ability to 
maintain large numbers of cells in a small volume has resulted in a 
signiﬁ cant increase in the yield of protein per liter. Transfection 
efﬁ ciencies around 60 % can be achieved using an inexpensive cat-
ionic polymer, polyethylenimine (PEI), as the DNA delivery 
reagent [ 17 ]. Higher efﬁ ciencies can be achieved by increasing the 
concentration of PEI, but the result is often lower yields due to 
polymer toxicity. The procedure is relatively fast, with peak produc-
tion occurring 3–6 days after transfection. In total, protein pro-
duction by transient transfection of 293-F cells requires about 2 
weeks. This includes assembly of the target gene expression con-
struct, cell transfection, and protein harvest. Further, protein puri-
ﬁ cation is made easier by the fact that 293-F cells can be grown in 
serum-free (and protein-free) culture media. 
 Alternative versions of this protocol have been developed to 
minimize the amount of N-linked carbohydrate [ 13 ]. These involve 
expression of the protein in medium containing glycosylation pro-
cessing inhibitors, like kifunensine or swainsonine [ 18 ,  19 ], or 
expression in cells that lack the ability to make complex N-linked 
glycans, such as 293-S cells [ 20 ] (ATCC CRL-3022). In either 
case, it is necessary to trim the remaining carbohydrate stalk by 
Christopher A. Nelson et al.

109
digestion with endoglycosidase H, endoglycosidase F1, or PNGase 
F. Although technically difﬁ cult, the system can be used to pro-
duce selenomethionine-labeled target proteins [ 1 – 20 ]. 
 This protocol is optimized for protein production using the 
mammalian cell line Freestyle 293-F, a subline of HEK293 [ 21 ] 
that grows well in suspension culture. The 293-F cells are main-
tained in serum-free, protein-free medium supplemented with 
penicillin–streptomycin and glutamax. Typically the cells grow to 
densities of 1–3 × 10 6 cells/mL and should be split every 1–2 
days. For a single transfection, grow 200 mL of cells in a 1-L 
vented-cap polystyrene ﬂ ask using an orbital shaker rotating at 
125 rpm. The shaker must be housed in a humidiﬁ ed 8.0 % CO 2 
incubator at 37 °C. 
 Nearly any mammalian expression vector containing the 
human cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter regulatory region can 
be used to drive protein expression in 293-F cells, and an accept-
able choice is pcDNA3.1 (Life Technologies, number V790-20). 
The pLEXm series of vectors driven by the strong chicken B-actin 
promoter has also worked well [ 9 ]. Good success has been reported 
with C-terminal 6-HIS, human IgG2-Fc, or mouse IgG2b-Fc 
afﬁ nity tags. An afﬁ nity tag is used primarily for protein puriﬁ cation 
but also provides a marker for following the level of protein 
 expression. It is desirable to include a protease cleavage site on the 
expression construct so that the fusion tag can be removed after 
puriﬁ cation. Probably the most common enzyme to use for this 
purpose is tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease because it works at 
4 °C and displays good selectivity [ 22 ]. It is also desirable, but not 
necessary, to add an expression marker. For example, use of an 
internal ribosome entry site to link target gene expression to that 
of a reporter gene, like green ﬂ uorescent protein (ORF-IRES- 
GFP), so that the transfection efﬁ ciency can be followed using a 
ﬂ uorescence microscope [ 23 ,  24 ]. 
 An N-terminal signal peptide is required to target proteins to 
the secretory pathway. Either use the signal peptide encoded by 
the protein or, if the signal peptidase cleavage site is known, replace 
the endogenously encoded signal peptide with one optimized for 
protein production obtained from an expression vector ( see  Note 1 ). 
In each case, the sequence around the methionine start codon 
should ﬁ t the Kozak consensus ( see  Note 2 ). To produce soluble 
protein, remove all single-pass transmembrane regions by trunca-
tion. For multi-pass transmembrane proteins replace the trans-
membrane and cytoplasmic regions with a linker of appropriate 
length to allow for proper folding (for example, multiple Gly–Ser 
codons). Finally, check for and remove any glycosylphosphati-
dylinositol (GPI) or myristoylation anchor sites. For cytoplasmic 
proteins, it is unnecessary to remove any signal sequence.  
Eukaryotic Expression Systems

110
2  Materials 
 Prepare all solutions using ultrapure water (made by purifying 
deionized water to a conductivity of 18 MΩ cm at 25 °C) and ana-
lytical grade reagents. Prepare and store all reagents at 4 °C (unless 
otherwise indicated). 
  1.  LB - medium : Add 1 L of tap water to a wide-mouthed 2-L 
Erlenmeyer ﬂ ask (with bafﬂ es if available). Weigh out 20.6 g 
LB Broth EZMix Powder (Sigma Chemical Company) and 
add to ﬂ ask. Mix until dissolved. Adjust the pH to between 7.5 
and 8.0 with 10 M sodium hydroxide. Seal with aluminum 
foil, autoclave, and store at 4 °C. Typically 1 L (one ﬂ ask) of 
medium is used for ampliﬁ cation of each expression 
construct.  
  2.  QIAGEN Plasmid Mega Kit can be stored at room temperature 
(15–25 °C) for at least 2 years.  
  3.  GC10 Competent Cells (Sigma). Store at −80 °C.  
  1.  Serum - free protein - free medium : GIBCO FreeStyle 293 
Expression Medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 
Penicillin–Streptomycin (Life Technologies) and GlutaMAX 
(Life Technologies). 
  2.  FreeStyle 293 - F cells (Life Technologies).  
  3.  Vented - cap Erlenmeyer ﬂ ask : 1-L sterile disposable polycarbon-
ate, Erlenmeyer/shaker culture ﬂ ask with bafﬂ ed bottom and 
vented cap (ICS Bioexpress).  
  1.  Opti - MEM (Life Technologies).  
  2.  PEI stock : Prepare by dissolving 50 mg of PEI, Linear, MW 
25,000 (Polysciences Inc.) in 50 mL water and then adjust the 
pH to 7.0 with HCl. Filter the diluted PEI through a 0.2 μm 
polyethersulfone (PES) membrane (for example, using a 
Nalgene MF75 series bottle top ﬁ lter), then aliquot into 10 mL 
tubes, and store at −80 °C.  
  3.   Transfection tubes : Use sterile 14 mL translucent polypropyl-
ene round-bottom tubes (17 × 100 mm) with snap cap.  
  4.  Kifunensine ( 20x ): In a tissue culture hood, pipette 42 mL 
Opti-MEM into a sterile 50 mL conical tube. Add 1 mg 
Kifunensine (Cayman Chemical) and invert to dissolve. Filter 
and store at −20 °C.  
  1.  Ni - NTA SuperFlow resin : Nickel-charged afﬁ nity matrix 
(Qiagen) for 6-HIS-tagged proteins.  
  2.  Protein A Sepharose 4 Fast Flow : (GE life Sciences) for Fc-tagged 
proteins.  
2.1  Expression 
Construct 
Ampliﬁ cation
2.2  Cell Culture
2.3  Transient 
Transfection
2.4  Protein Recovery
Christopher A. Nelson et al.

111
  3.  M - PER Mammalian protein extraction reagent (Thermo 
Fisher Scientiﬁ c).  
  4.  PBS ( 10x ): Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered salt solution with-
out calcium and magnesium (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁ c).  
  5.  Imidazole stock (250 mM): Weigh out 3.4 g imidazole and 
dissolve in 160 mL water. Add 20 mL of 10× PBS. Adjust the 
pH to 8.0 with 10 N sodium hydroxide. Bring the volume to 
200 mL with water.  
  6.  Endoglycosidase H (New England Biolabs).  
3  Methods 
 A single 200 mL 293-F transfection requires 200 μg of DNA. One 
Qiagen mega prep (tip 2500) typically yields between 1.5 and 
2.5 mg of DNA from 500 mL of bacterial culture, assuming the 
use of a high-copy-number plasmid.
  1.  Using a sterile loop, streak  E. coli cells (e.g., GC10 cells) con-
taining the expression plasmid from a frozen stock ( see  Note 3 ) 
onto an LB-agar selection plate supplemented with appropri-
ate antibiotic ( see  Note 4 ). Grow overnight at 37 °C to obtain 
a well-isolated single colony. Prepare 1 L (one ﬂ ask) of bacterial 
culture medium (LB) for each protein to be expressed.  
  2.  The next day, seed a bacterial culture by placing one colony 
into 1 L of LB with antibiotic. Grow at 37 °C in a 200 RPM 
shaker for 12–16 h.  
  3.  Harvest the cells by centrifugation at 5,000 ×  g for 20 min at 
4 °C. Pour off supernatant. Cell pellets may be used fresh or 
stored at -20 °C.  
  4.  Purify the expression plasmid DNA from the cell pellets using a 
Qiagen mega prep kit by following the manufacturer’s protocol.  
  5.  The DNA samples must be sterile for transfection. Be sure to 
wash the DNA precipitates thoroughly with 70 % ethanol (to 
remove traces of salt), air-dry to remove ethanol, and then 
dissolve in sterile TE ( see  Note 5 ). 
  1.  On the day of transfection, the cell density should be ~1 × 10 6 
cells per mL. The cell culture must be healthy, with cell viabil-
ity greater than 90 %. The suspension should be well dispersed 
and consist mainly of single cells ( see  Note 6 ). For a single 
transfection, place 200 mL of cells in a 1-L disposable vented-
cap Erlenmeyer ﬂ ask ( see  Note 7 ). 
  2.  If desired, add 10 mL of N-glycosylation processing inhibitor 
kifunensine (20× stock) to each 200 mL culture just prior to 
transfection. If the inhibitor is used, remember to include it in 
3.1  Growth and 
Puriﬁ cation of the 
Expression Plasmid
3.2  Transient 
Transfection of 
Suspension Cells
Eukaryotic Expression Systems

112
all subsequent expression medium used for that expression. 
The inhibitor typically has little impact on the amount of pro-
tein produced.  
  3.  Place 200 μg DNA in a 14 mL tube containing 5 mL Opti- 
MEM without antibiotic. Vortex to mix.  
  4.  In a second tube, place 300 μg PEI solution (1 mg/mL) with 
5 mL Opti-MEM and vortex brieﬂ y. The optimum μg DNA:μg 
PEI ratio varies for each construct, and is best determined 
empirically, but is typically around 1:1.5 or 1:2.  
  5.  Pipette the diluted PEI solution into the DNA solution, with 
occasional mixing, and hold at room temperature for 15 min 
to allow DNA–PEI complexes to form.  
  6.  Add the 10 mL PEI–DNA mixture to 200 mL of cells in the 
vented ﬂ ask, and place the culture back on an orbital shaker in 
a CO 2 incubator at 37 °C. Wait for 3 days before harvesting.  
  1.  After 3 days, pellet the cells in sterile centrifuge tubes by cen-
trifugation at 1,000 ×  g (4 °C) for 5 min. Harvest the superna-
tant, and replace it with 200 mL of fresh pre-warmed FreeStyle 
293 expression medium. Continue the incubation for another 
3 days ( see  Note 8 ) before harvesting the ﬁ nal supernatant.  
  2.  Prepare the expression supernatant for chromatography by 
adding 1/10th volume of 10 % sodium azide, 1/10th volume 
of 10× PBS, and 1/25th volume 250 mM imidazole stock in 
PBS, and adjust the pH to 8.0 with sodium hydroxide. Pass the 
supernatant through a 0.2 μm ﬁ lter and place on ice. If the 
0.2 μm ﬁ lter clogs, centrifuge the supernatant at 15,000 ×  g 
(4 °C) for 15 min to remove aggregate before completing the 
ﬁ ltration step.  
  3.   Processed supernatant may now be passed over the appropri-
ate affinity column. A single pass is usually sufficient to 
capture the afﬁ nity-tagged proteins on Ni-NTA or protein A. 
If binding to the column appears low, one may concentrate 
the sample to ~5 column volumes via ultraﬁ ltration to improve 
protein capture.  
  4.  Wash the column with 10 volumes 1× PBS.  
  5.  Elute the protein from Ni-NTA using 2 column volumes of 
250 mM imidazole pH 8.0 in PBS. It is best to soak the 
column in imidazole solution at room temperature for 10 min 
to ensure that all the tagged protein releases.  
  6.  Alternately, elute from protein A using 2 column volumes of 
1 M glycine–HCL pH 4.0. Elute directly into a tube containing 
1/5th column volume of 1 M Tris–HCl pH 7.4.  
  7.  In either case, the recovered protein should be run on size- 
exclusion chromatography immediately after elution.  
3.2.1  For Secreted 
Proteins
Christopher A. Nelson et al.

113
  8.   If the N-glycosylation processing inhibitor kifunensine was 
used during expression, the recombinant protein should be 
trimmed with Endo H. Concentrate the protein in size-exclu-
sion buffer to a small volume using a spin concentrator. Add 
1/10th volume 10× G5 reaction buffer (50 mM sodium citrate 
pH 5.5) supplied with the Endo H enzyme. Save a sample of 
uncut protein for SDS-PAGE analysis. Cut the rest of the pro-
tein overnight at room temperature using 1 unit Endo H/μg 
protein.  
  9.   After 3 days, collect the cells by low-speed centrifugation at 
1,000 ×  g (4 °C) for 5 min and decant liquid.  
  10.   Add 10 mL of M-PER reagent for each gram of wet cell pellet. 
If a large number of cells are to be lysed, ﬁ rst add 1/10 the 
ﬁ nal recommended volume of M-PER to the cell pellet. Pipette 
the mixture up and down to resuspend the pellet. Then add 
the rest of the M-PER reagent to the cell suspension.  
  11.   Rock the mixture gently on ice for 10 min or until cell lysis 
occurs.  
  12.   Separate the soluble proteins from the cell debris by centrifu-
gation at 15,000 ×  g (4 °C) for 15 min. Filter the supernatant 
through a 0.2 μm bottle top ﬁ lter. Adjust the pH to 8.0 with 
sodium hydroxide ( see  Note 9 ).  
  13.   Recover the targeted protein by afﬁ nity chromatography as 
described in  steps 3 – 7 above.  
4  Notes 
  1.   The choice of signal peptide can have a considerable impact on 
the amount of protein synthesized and secreted from mamma-
lian cells. Efforts to understand signal peptides and engineer 
them to improve their performance are still ongoing. One sig-
nal peptide that works well in mammalian cells is the honeybee 
melittin secretion signal encoded by the baculovirus expression 
vector 
pMelBac 
(MKFLVNVALVFMVVYISYIYA, 
Life 
Sciences number). It is typical to mutate the second amino acid 
from lysine to alanine in order to use the restriction enzyme 
Nco I at the 5′ end of the gene. The mutation allows the Nco 
I site to encode the initiation codon ATG. Whichever signal 
peptide is used, it is a good idea to check the fusion construct 
with the program SignalP [ 25 ] to detect potential problems 
with 
signal 
sequence 
recognition 
before 
attempting 
expression.  
  2.   Most eukaryotic mRNAs contain a short recognition sequence 
that greatly facilitates the initial binding of mRNA to the small 
subunit of the ribosome. The consensus sequence for initiation 
3.2.2  For Intracellular 
Proteins
Eukaryotic Expression Systems

114
of translation in vertebrates is ACCATGG (also called the 
Kozak sequence [ 26 ,  27 ]). 
  3.   To make a frozen stock, mix log-phase  E. coli cells 1:1 with 
sterile 30 % glycerol in LB and freeze at -80 °C in a screw cap 
tube. To use, scrape a few crystals off the top and streak onto 
an LB plate with the appropriate antibiotic for selection. Grow 
the plated cells overnight at 37 °C. A single vial of cells can be 
used many times and kept indeﬁ nitely if not allowed to thaw.  
  4.   Typical working concentrations for antibiotic selection are ampi-
cillin 100 μg/mL, carbenicillin 100 μg/mL, chloramphenicol 
33 μg/mL, kanamycin 30 μg/mL, streptomycin 25 μg/mL, 
and tetracycline 15 μg/mL.  
  5.  If contamination becomes a problem, ﬁ lter the DNA sample 
using a 0.22 μm syringe (for example, Millex-GV 13 mm 
PVDF syringe ﬁ lter units, Millipore) ﬁ lter into a sterile tube. 
However, if sterile TE is used to suspend the DNA, ﬁ ltration is 
usually not necessary.  
  6.   If the cells grow in clumps, increase the speed on the orbital 
shaker.  
  7.   To increase efﬁ ciency, it is desirable to carry out the transfection 
in the absence of antibiotic. Further, Life Technologies does 
not recommend the use of antibiotics for 293-F culture. 
However, this invites a serious risk of contamination. A good 
compromise is to cut the antibiotic concentration in half during 
protein expression. For this protocol, the expression media 
should contain 50 units/mL of penicillin and 50 μg/mL of 
streptomycin (or 1/2× of the 100× stock, Life Technologies).  
  8.   The cell viability drops over time, but we routinely collect 
supernatants on days 3 and 6 post-transfection. In fact, some 
constructs have expressed relatively well through day 9. Check 
the cell viability with trypan blue before attempting to extend 
the expression time. 
  9.   The binding of protein A is optimal at pH 8–9 for mouse 
IgG1. For a different species or isotype of antibody, consult 
the literature.  
 Acknowledgments 
 This work was supported by the Center for Structural Genomics of 
Infectious Diseases (CSGID) project. The project has been funded 
in whole or in part with federal funds from the National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), Department of Health and Human Services, under 
Contract 
Nos. 
HHSN272200700058C 
and 
HHSN272201200026C.  
Christopher A. Nelson et al.

115
 References 
  1.  Aricescu AR, Assenberg R, Bill RM, Busso D, 
Chang VT, Davis SJ, Dubrovsky A, Gustafsson 
L, Hedfalk K, Heinemann U et al (2006) 
Eukaryotic expression: developments for struc-
tural proteomics. Acta Crystallogr D Biol 
Crystallogr 62:1114–1124  
  2.  Fremont DH, Monnaie D, Nelson CA, 
Hendrickson WA, Unanue ER (1998) Crystal 
structure of I-Ak in complex with a dominant 
epitope of lysozyme. Immunity 8:305–317  
  3.  Nelson CA, Warren JT, Wang MW, Teitelbaum 
SL, Fremont DH (2012) RANKL employs dis-
tinct binding modes to engage RANK and the 
osteoprotegerin decoy receptor. Structure 
20:1971–1982  
  4.  Nybakken GE, Nelson CA, Chen BR, Diamond 
MS, Fremont DH (2006) Crystal structure 
of the West Nile virus envelope glycoprotein. 
J Virol 80:11467–11474  
  5.  Bowden TA, Aricescu AR, Gilbert RJ, Grimes 
JM, Jones EY, Stuart DI (2008) Structural 
basis of Nipah and Hendra virus attachment to 
their cell-surface receptor ephrin-B2. Nat 
Struct Mol Biol 15:567–572  
  6.  Alexander JM, Nelson CA, van Berkel V, Lau 
EK, Studts JM, Brett TJ, Speck SH, Handel TM, 
Virgin HW, Fremont DH (2002) Structural 
basis of chemokine sequestration by a herpesvi-
rus decoy receptor. Cell 111:343–356  
  7.  Fremont DH, Crawford F, Marrack P, 
Hendrickson WA, Kappler J (1998) Crystal 
structure 
of 
mouse 
H2-M. 
Immunity 
9:385–393 
  8.  Lustbader JW, Wu H, Birken S, Pollak S, 
Gawinowicz Kolks MA, Pound AM, Austen D, 
Hendrickson 
WA, 
Canﬁ eld 
RE 
(1995) 
The expression, characterization, and crystalli-
zation of wild-type and selenomethionyl 
human chorionic gonadotropin. Endocrinology 
136:640–650  
  9.  Aricescu AR, Lu W, Jones EY (2006) A time- 
and cost-efﬁ cient system for high-level protein 
production 
in 
mammalian 
cells. 
Acta 
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 62:1243–1250  
  10.  Barton WA, Tzvetkova-Robev D, Erdjument- 
Bromage H, Tempst P, Nikolov DB (2006) 
Highly efﬁ cient selenomethionine labeling of 
recombinant proteins produced in mammalian 
cells. Protein Sci 15:2008–2013  
  11.  Bishop B, Aricescu AR, Harlos K, O’Callaghan 
CA, Jones EY, Siebold C (2009) Structural 
insights into hedgehog ligand sequestration by 
the 
human 
hedgehog-interacting 
protein 
HHIP. Nat Struct Mol Biol 16:698–703  
  12.  Berntzen G, Lunde E, Flobakk M, Andersen 
JT, Lauvrak V, Sandlie I (2005) Prolonged and 
increased expression of soluble Fc receptors, 
IgG and a TCR-Ig fusion protein by transiently 
transfected adherent 293E cells. J Immunol 
Methods 298:93–104  
  13.  Durocher Y, Perret S, Kamen A (2002) High- 
level and high-throughput recombinant pro-
tein production by transient transfection of 
suspension-growing human 293-EBNA1 cells. 
Nucleic Acids Res 30:E9  
  14.   Schlaeger EJ, Christensen K (1999) Transient 
gene expression in mammalian cells grown in 
serum-free suspension culture. Cytotechnology 
30:71–83  
  15.  Geisse S, Fux C (2009) Recombinant protein 
production by transient gene transfer into 
mammalian cells. Methods Enzymol 463:
223–238  
  16.  Nettleship JE, Rahman-Huq N, Owens RJ 
(2009) The production of glycoproteins by 
transient expression in mammalian cells. 
Methods Mol Biol 498:245–263  
  17.  Boussif O, Lezoualc’h F, Zanta MA, Mergny 
MD, Scherman D, Demeneix B, Behr JP 
(1995) A versatile vector for gene and oligo-
nucleotide transfer into cells in culture and in 
vivo: polyethylenimine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A 92:7297–7301  
  18.  Chang VT, Crispin M, Aricescu AR, Harvey 
DJ, Nettleship JE, Fennelly JA, Yu C, Boles 
KS, Evans EJ, Stuart DI et al (2007) 
Glycoprotein structural genomics: solving the 
glycosylation problem. Structure 15:267–273  
  19.  Elbein AD, Tropea JE, Mitchell M, Kaushal 
GP (1990) Kifunensine, a potent inhibitor of the 
glycoprotein processing mannosidase I. J Biol 
Chem 265:15599–15605  
  20.  Reeves PJ, Callewaert N, Contreras R, Khorana 
HG (2002) Structure and function in rhodop-
sin: high-level expression of rhodopsin with 
restricted and homogeneous N-glycosylation 
by a tetracycline-inducible N-acetylglucos-
aminyltransferase I-negative HEK293S stable 
mammalian cell line. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
99:13419–13424  
  21.  Graham FL, Smiley J, Russell WC, Nairn R 
(1977) Characteristics of a human cell line 
transformed by DNA from human adenovirus 
type 5. J Gen Virol 36:59–74 
  22.  Kapust RB, Tozser J, Copeland TD, Waugh 
DS (2002) The P1′ speciﬁ city of tobacco etch 
virus protease. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 
294:949–955  
Eukaryotic Expression Systems

116
  23.  Bouabe H, Fassler R, Heesemann J (2008) 
Improvement of reporter activity by IRES- 
mediated 
polycistronic 
reporter 
system. 
Nucleic Acids Res 36:e28  
  24.  Mancia F, Patel SD, Rajala MW, Scherer PE, 
Nemes A, Schieren I, Hendrickson WA, 
Shapiro L (2004) Optimization of protein 
production in mammalian cells with a coex-
pressed ﬂ uorescent marker. Structure 12:
1355–1360  
  25.  Bendtsen JD, Nielsen H, von Heijne G, Brunak 
S (2004) Improved prediction of signal pep-
tides: SignalP 3.0. J Mol Biol 340:783–795  
  26.  Kozak M (1986) Point mutations deﬁ ne a 
sequence ﬂ anking the AUG initiator codon 
that modulates translation by eukaryotic ribo-
somes. Cell 44:283–292  
  27.  Kozak M (1987) An analysis of 5′-noncoding 
sequences from 699 vertebrate messenger 
RNAs. Nucleic Acids Res 15:8125–8148  
Christopher A. Nelson et al.

117
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_9, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 9  
 Automated Cell-Free Protein Production Methods 
for Structural Studies 
 Emily  T.  Beebe ,  Shin-ichi  Makino ,  John  L.  Markley , and  Brian  G.  Fox 
 Abstract 
 In contrast to cell-based protein expression, cell-free production is highly consistent, scalable, and amenable 
to automation. Robots can handle many samples and perform repetitive procedures that are otherwise 
prone to human error. Here is described commercially available robotics for a wheat germ cell-free system 
with emphasis on practical applications for structural and functional studies. In addition, described is a 
cell-free method for preparing protein complexes. 
 Key words  Wheat germ cell-free translation  ,   Robotic protein production  ,   High-throughput expression 
screening  ,   Tangential ﬂ ow dialysis  ,  Bilayer translation  ,   Repeat-batch translation  ,   Protein complex  
1  Introduction 
 Cell-free protein production offers a consistent and scalable 
alternative to cell-based methods and is easily automated. Several 
types of cell-free systems have been developed commercially using 
extracts derived from rabbit reticulocytes,  E. coli , mammalian cells, 
insect cells, and wheat germ [ 1 ]. Although protein yields from 
these systems were historically lower than cell-based methods, this 
is not the case today. Cell-free production has, indeed, proven to 
be a powerful means for generating milligram quantities of high- 
quality proteins including membrane proteins and protein com-
plexes for structural determination, functional assay, and drug 
discovery [ 2 – 4 ]. 
 The wheat germ cell-free system is particularly suitable for 
high-throughput screening and subsequent scale-up procedures. 
The eukaryotic origin for this system makes it a good choice for the 
production of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic proteins. In addi-
tion, the wheat germ preparation contains less intrinsic proteolytic 
activity than comparable  E. coli lysates [ 5 ]. A complete suite of 
robots for conducting small-scale suitability screening to milligram 
scale production is commercially available from CellFree Sciences. 

118
These automation developments, in conjunction with the versatility 
and production potential of wheat germ cell-free protein expres-
sion, have made this platform an economical and labor- efﬁ cient 
choice for the structural biology lab [ 6 – 8 ]. 
 Removing inhibitory by-products from the translation reaction 
and supplying fresh substrates are key factors for efﬁ cient protein 
production. Several methods have been developed including bilayer 
and repeat-batch methods. The bilayer method utilizes a diffusion 
mechanism without any physical separation between the reaction 
(lower) and replenishing (upper) buffer layers [ 6 ]. The repeat-batch 
methods use ultraﬁ ltration, either in conjunction with centrifuga-
tion or by pumping the reaction through a tangential ﬂ ow dialysis 
cassette. Repeat-batch methods require numerous cycles of reaction 
concentration and buffer and/or mRNA addition over the course 
of 18–48 h, operations that are impractical to perform manually. 
The repeat-batch automation prolongs the translation reaction and 
typically results in milligrams of target protein. 
 A workﬂ ow from a small-scale selection of targets to large-scale 
production using a suite of robots from CFS, including the 
GenDecoder, Protemist DT II, and Protemist XE, has been estab-
lished. With a small staff, it is possible to screen up to 192 targets at 
a time for expression, solubility and afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation success on 
the GenDecoder. In many cases, these samples are suitable for explo-
ration of function of the translated proteins [ 9 ]. Suitable targets are 
then scaled up for production on either the medium-scale Protemist 
DT II or the large-scale Protemist XE for milligram production of 
proteins labeled for either NMR or X-ray crystallography. 
 This chapter illustrates how to use these robots to produce and 
evaluate protein for structural biology applications. Also described 
is a simple modiﬁ cation of the methods to produce a protein 
complex. 
2  Materials 
 Protein synthesis robots and required disposables and accessories 
are available from CFS ( see  Note 1 ). Although buffers are also 
commercially available, here are described the current formulations 
of some buffers that can be made in-house and are suitable for 
target protein-speciﬁ c modiﬁ cations or additions. 
 The GenDecoder and Protemist DT II are bilayer-type robots. 
The GenDecoder is best suited for microgram production of 
many proteins for screening purposes, and the Protemist DT II 
can produce 10- to 100-fold higher yields of afﬁ nity puriﬁ ed pro-
tein for assays. The Protemist XE is a tangential ﬂ ow repeat-batch 
robot and can generate tens of milligrams of protein in a few days 
( see  Note 2 ). 
2.1  Protein 
Synthesis Robots
Emily T. Beebe et al.

119
 The GenDecoder robot (Fig.  1a ) is capable of performing both 
transcription and translation and has the option of accepting pre-
pared mRNA and performing bilayer translation only. Expression, 
solubility, and puriﬁ cation analysis can be performed either manually 
by SDS-PAGE (Fig.  2 ) or using automated methods such as capillary 
electrophoresis [ 10 ].
 The GenDecoder robot comes with metal 96-well lids with 
silicone seals and bake-resistant high- and low-volume Teﬂ on buf-
fer troughs. The robot contains an internal microprocessor and 
does not require a computer for operation. It is a ﬂ oor standing 
unit with temperature-controlled incubation chambers, an internal 
plate centrifuge, and robotic liquid-handling capabilities. The 
GenDecoder requires an AC 100 V power source, has a footprint 
of 1.56 m ( w ) × 1.96 m ( h ) × 1.07 m ( d ), and weighs 600 kg. It can 
perform up to 384 bilayer reactions of 150 μL each in 20 h.
 Consumables 
  1.   96-well U-bottom plates (Greiner).  
  2.   96-well thin-walled PCR plates (for transcription only).  
  3.   Adhesive plate sealers (USA Scientiﬁ c).  
  4.   1–10 μL racked tips (Molecular BioProducts 20U; only needed 
for robot-directed transcription).  
  5.   10–200 μL racked tips (Molecular BioProducts 300U; needed 
for transcription and translation).  
 This robot is a table-top model and with dimensions of 0.70 m 
(w) × 0.79 m (h) × 0.5 m (d) and a weight of 100 kg (Fig.  3a ). 
Unlike the GenDecoder, it requires a computer with installed 
Protemist DT II software and an AC 100–240 V power source. 
This robot consists of a liquid-handler and Peltier-cooled block 
2.1.1  GenDecoder
2.1.2  Protemist DT II
 Fig. 1   Setup of the GenDecoder robot. ( a ) The GenDecoder front exterior view. ( b ) Left-side interior houses tip 
boxes and blotting cassette ( C ) for optional ethanol drying of precipitated mRNA from robot-performed tran-
scription reactions. Tip boxes  A and  B are needed in this conﬁ guration for translation-only operation. ( c ) Right- 
side interior contains four plate incubators ( I , back row), buffer trough/plate chamber with four slots and 
plexiglass lid ( G ), DNA plate support ( D ) for optional transcription, 96-well reaction plate support ( E ) for transla-
tions, metal plate-lid caddy ( H ), and plate centrifuge with balance plate ( F ) 
 
Robotic Cell-Free Protein Production

120
incubators, and is capable of performing batch puriﬁ cation using 
either immobilized metal afﬁ nity chromatography (IMAC) or glu-
tathione chromatography with His-tagged or GST-tagged targets, 
respectively. The Protemist DT II can perform transcription, trans-
lation, and puriﬁ cation, but can be programmed to perform a sub-
set of these operations, on a 6-mL or 1.2-mL scale. Up to six 
individual samples can be produced on the 6-mL scale and 24 
samples on the 1.2-mL scale. Automated puriﬁ cation can only be 
used at the 6-mL scale. Other items included with the robot are 
reaction racks for 6 or 1.2-mL scale production.
 Consumables 
  1.  2 mL tubes (Grenier).  
  2.  14 mL tubes (Falcon, 17 × 100 mm).  
  3.   1 mL long liquid-handler tips (ALOKA).  
  4.  Reaction cups (6-mL scale only, CFS).  
  5.  24-well plates (1.2-mL scale only, Falcon).  
 Fig. 2   SDS-PAGE result of a typical GenDecoder screen. ( a ) and ( b ) Soluble (S) and pellet (P) fractions from 
plate rows G and H, respectively, of a 96-well screen. N, No mRNA negative control; C, GFP positive control. S 
and P fractions were loaded in alternating lanes using a multichannel pipette. ( c ) IMAC elution fractions of rows 
G and H. These samples were also loaded in alternating lanes with a ﬁ xed-width multichannel pipette. Two 
GenDecoder translation rows require three 26-lane gels. Gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue dye. 
For reference, the GFP control in panel resulted in 6.9 μg puriﬁ ed GFP/150 μL bilayer reaction 
 
Emily T. Beebe et al.

121
 This robot is the smallest of the three with dimensions of 0.52 m 
( w ) × 0.49 m ( h ) × 0.31 m ( d ) and a weight of 20 kg, and requires an 
AC 100–240 V power source (Fig.  4a ). If ambient laboratory tem-
perature is subject to ﬂ uctuation, the robot may be housed in a 
temperature-controlled cabinet capable of maintaining an optimal 
2.2  Protemist XE
  Fig. 3   The Protemist DT II. ( a ) Front view with external computer interface. ( b ) Internal organization. Reagents 
for transcription, translation, and puriﬁ cation are stored in the Peltier-cooled reagent chamber ( A ). Reagents 
are aliquoted into the reactions using a liquid-handling arm. The robot is shown set up with 6-mL adaptor plate 
installed in the reaction chamber ( B ). A separate adaptor plate is needed for 1.2-mL scale translation (not 
shown).  Inset : black reaction cups used with 6-mL translation programs. Translation and batch puriﬁ cation are 
performed in these cups, and puriﬁ cation buffer removal is facilitated by decanting after robotic tilting of the 
reaction chamber 
 Fig. 4   Protemist XE assembly. ( a ) The robot prior to setup with single-use tubing harnesses and ﬁ ltration 
device. ( b ) Single-use consumables required for operation. Capital letters show position of each item on the 
robot. The Protemist XE program takes the user through step-by-step installation.  A . Translation buffer bottle. 
 B . Tubing harness connecting the translation buffer, mRNA, and reaction chambers to the pump via three pinch 
valves ( green ).  C . mRNA tube.  D . Translation reaction tube.  E . Peristaltic pump and connecting tubing. 
 F . Dialysis cassette.  G . Waste receptacle and tubing, connected to outlet ports on the dialysis cassette.  H . Tube/
bottle caps with tubing outlets and Teﬂ on micro stir bar 
 
 
Robotic Cell-Free Protein Production

122
translation temperature of 15 °C. A laptop computer with Protemist 
XE software is included with this machine. Unlike the GenDecoder 
and Protemist DT II, the Protemist XE performs translation of only 
one sample at a time. This simple machine comprises a peristaltic 
pump, disposable tubing, and a series of pinch valves to repeatedly 
concentrate half the volume of the translation through one or more 
tangential ﬂ ow cassettes, followed by buffer and/or mRNA addition.
 Consumables (Fig.  4b ) 
  1.   Single use 5,000 molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) PES 
Vivaﬂ ow 50 tangential ultraﬁ ltration cassettes (Sartorius Stedim).  
  2.   Single use dialysis tubing kit, consisting of tubing harnesses 
A–D and magnetic micro stir bar (CFS).  
  3.   50-mL conical tubes (Falcon).  
  4.   Modiﬁ ed tube/bottle caps and plugs (CFS), designed to 
accept dialysis tubing, align tubes in machine, and minimize 
contamination.  
  5.   500 mL to 1 L sterile plastic bottles (Millipore, Stericup assem-
bly with 0.2 μm ﬁ lters).  
  6.   Baked 500 mL and 1 L beakers with stir bars for fresh transla-
tion buffer preparation.  
   Plasmid solutions must be RNase-free. Because most plasmid prep-
aration kits include an RNase treatment step, it is highly recom-
mend that puriﬁ ed plasmid be treated with proteinase K followed by 
a second puriﬁ cation step to remove trace RNase contaminants [ 11 ]. 
DNA concentration is optimally at least 0.2 mg/mL for the 
GenDecoder and 1 mg/mL for the Protemist DT II or Protemist 
XE. DNA and all transcription/translation reagents should be pre-
pared in ultrapure RNase-free water such as Milli-Q (MQ).  
 Available from CFS ( see  Note 3 ). Store at −80 °C ( see  Note 4 ). 
  1.   5× TB + Mg, for GenDecoder and Protemist DT II: 400 mM 
HEPES–KOH diluted from 1 M HEPES–KOH (pH 7.8), 
100 mM magnesium acetate, 10 mM spermidine trihydrochlo-
ride, and 50 mM DTT ( see  Note 5 ). Store at −80 °C.  
  2.   Transcription buffer LM (CFS), for Protemist XE.  
 25 mM NTPs: 25 mM each of ATP, GTP, CTP, and UTP, pH 
adjusted to 7 with 2 N KOH and measured using a pH test strip. 
Store at −80 °C ( see  Note 5 ). 
  1.   SP6 RNA polymerase, 80 U/μL (CFS).  
  2.   RNase inhibitor, 80 U/μL (CFS).  
2.3  Reagents for 
Transcription and 
Translation
2.3.1  Plasmids
2.3.2  Wheat Germ 
Extract
2.3.3  Transcription 
Buffers
2.3.4  Nucleotides
2.3.5  Transcription 
Enzymes ( See  Note 6 ). 
Store at −20 °C
Emily T. Beebe et al.

123
  1.   5× DB, for GenDecoder: 120 mM HEPES–KOH, 500 mM 
potassium acetate, 12.5 mM magnesium acetate, 2 mM sper-
midine trihydrochloride, 20 mM DTT, 6 mM ATP, 1.25 mM 
GTP, 80 mM creatine phosphate, 0.025 % (w/v) sodium azide, 
pH adjusted to 7.8 with a pH electrode using 2 N KOH. Store 
this buffer at −80 °C ( see  Note 5 ). 
  2.   SUB-AMIX-NA, for Protemist DT II (CFS;  see  Note 7 ). This 
is a four-component buffer at 40× concentration. All compo-
nents can be aliquoted and stored at −20 °C.  
  3.   SUB-AMIX-SG-NA, for Protemist XE.  
 6 mM amino acid mixture: All 20 amino acids at 6 mM in water, 
pH adjusted to 7 with 2 N KOH and measured using a pH test 
strip. Do not ﬁ lter the preparation because some amino acids 
are not fully dissolved at this concentration ( see  Note 8 ). Store 
at −20 °C.  
 Dissolve in water to make 20 or 50 mg/mL and store at −80 °C 
( see  Note 9 ). Dilute from the stock solution to 1 mg/mL for 
small-scale reactions on the day of use.  
  1.   Sodium azide, 5 % (w/v) in MQ water. Store at −20 °C.  
  2.  Chloramphenicol: 25 mg/mL in ethanol. Store at −20 °C.  
  1.  Plate centrifuge rotor (and compatible centrifuge): JS 5.9 
(Beckman Coulter, Avanti J-30I).  
  2.  Thin-walled 96-well PCR plates (ISC Bioexpress).  
  3.   Criterion 4–20 % TGX or Stain-free TGX, 26-well, 1.0 mm 
SDS-PAGE gels (Bio-Rad).  
  4.  3× SDS sample buffer: 150 mM Tris–HCl (pH 6.8), 37.5 mM 
EDTA (pH 8.0), 6 % (w/v) SDS, 0.01 % (w/v) bromophenol 
blue, 6 % (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol, and 30 % (v/v) glycerol.  
  5.  Precision Plus Protein Unstained Standards (Bio-Rad).  
  6.  Ni-Sepharose High-Performance chromatography resin (GE 
Healthcare).  
   7.   Ni binding/washing buffer: 50 mM sodium dihydrogen 
 phosphate, 300 mM NaCl, 25 mM imidazole, pH adjusted to 
8.0 with 2 N NaOH. Store at room temperature.  
  8.  Ni elution buffer: 50 mM sodium dihydrogen phosphate, 
300 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, pH adjusted to 8.0 by 
HCl. Store at room temperature.  
  9.  1 M DTT solution (for puriﬁ cation, optional). Dilute 1/500 
in puriﬁ cation buffers just before use.  
  10.   96-Well multi-screen HTS, HV, 0.45-mm ﬁ lter plate 
(Millipore).  
2.3.6  Translation Buffers
2.3.7  Amino Acids
2.3.8  Creatine Kinase 
(Roche Applied Sciences)
2.3.9  Antimicrobials 
( See  Note 10 )
2.4  Reagents 
and Equipment 
for Analysis 
and Puriﬁ cation
Robotic Cell-Free Protein Production

124
  11.   Coomassie brilliant blue protein stain: 40 % (v/v) ethanol, 
10 % (v/v) acetic acid, 0.15 % (w/v) Coomassie Brilliant Blue 
R-250.  
  12.   Fluorescence gel imager (optional; Gel Doc EZ imager, 
Bio-Rad).  
3  Methods 
 The operation ﬂ ow of the robots starts with the GenDecoder to 
test for expression level, solubility, and ease of puriﬁ cation. If the 
expression proﬁ le is suitable ( see  Note 11 ), production continues 
on the Protemist DT II for functional testing or optimization or 
the Protemist XE for structural studies. Although wheat germ 
expression is quite scalable from small scale to large scale, care 
must be taken in estimating yields, because the GenDecoder and 
Protemist DT II use different grades and concentrations of wheat 
germ extract from the Protemist XE. For this reason, estimating 
scale-up yields is best done by normalizing the small-scale yield to 
the concentration of extract.  
 Although the GenDecoder robot is designed to accept plasmid 
DNA and perform both transcription and bilayer translation, bet-
ter results have been found by manually performing the transcrip-
tion and then introducing mRNA into the robot. Since the 
development of the GenDecoder, the transcription protocol has 
been modiﬁ ed to reduce handling, with the elimination of an etha-
nol precipitation and mRNA pelleting step ([ 10 ];  see  Note 12 ). 
Herein is described the procedure for screening one 96-well plate 
followed by IMAC analysis. 
  1.   Prepare miniprep scale plasmids for each construct to be tested; 
treat them with proteinase K to ensure that they are RNase-
free [ 11 ]; design a plate loading map ( see  Note 13 ). 
  2.   Pipette 2.5 μL of each plasmid into the wells of a U-bottom 
96-well plate. For GenDecoder operation, each transcription 
reaction volume will be 5 μL ( see  Note 14 ).  
  3.   Prepare enough 2× transcription master mix to add an equal 
volume to each DNA aliquot ( see  Note 15 ). For one 96-well 
plate, 240 μL of transcription master mix is needed. Prepare 
250 μL of transcription master mix:
 
●
 100 μL 5× TB + Mg  
 
●
 80 μL 25 mM NTPs  
 
●
 10 μL SP6 RNA polymerase  
 
●
 5 μL RNasin  
 
●
 55 μL MQ water  
3.1  Scale-Up 
Considerations
3.2  GenDecoder 
Operation
3.2.1  Manual Plate 
Transcription for the 
GenDecoder
Emily T. Beebe et al.

125
  4.  Add an equal volume of the transcription master mix to the 
DNA in the plate, taking care that both DNA and transcription 
mix drops are combined. 
  5.  Carefully seal the plate with an adhesive plate sealer, cover with 
a lid, and seal the edges of the plate with Paraﬁ lm to discourage 
evaporation ( see  Note 16 ). 
  6.  Incubate the plate at 37 °C for 4 h ( see  Note 17 ). 
  1.  During the last hour of transcription, check the following 
setup conditions for the GenDecoder (Fig.  1 ):
 
●
 200-μL size tips are loaded in the second from back left-
most tip box, positions 2–12 for each row to be translated 
(Fig.  1b-A ). 
 
●
 200-μL size tips are loaded in the third from back leftmost 
tip box, in positions 1 and 2 for each row (Fig.  1b-B ). 
 
●
 The blotting cassette is inverted and in the leftmost posi-
tion (Fig.  1b-C ).  
 
●
 A dummy PCR plate is placed in the back-most position of 
the PCR plate row (Fig.  1c-D ). 
 
●
 A dummy 96-well plate with a metal lid is placed in the 
position where the real transcription plate will go 
(Fig.  1c-E ). 
 
●
 A balance plate with a metal lid is placed in position by the 
centrifuge (Fig.  1c-F ). 
  2.  Turn on the GenDecoder. Initialize and check that the robot 
parameters are set for 20 μL of extract (the translation reaction 
mixture) and 125 μL of translation buffer, transcription time is 
0 min, translation time is 1200.0 min (20 h), and dry up time 
is 1000.0 min.  
  3.  Highlight the columns to be translated using the touch screen. 
If entire rows will be used, highlight all columns ( see  Note 18 ). 
  4.   On the Program menu, select “Screening/1 Plate.”  
  5.   Push “Start” and conﬁ rm layout check.  
  1.   Prepare the feeding layer translation mix in a clean 50-mL 
tube. This will consist of 1× DB and 0.3 mM amino acids. To 
make enough for 1 plate, a dead volume of 7 mL is needed, in 
addition to the 12 mL needed for translation, for a total of 
19 mL ( see  Note 19 ).
 For one plate, combine 
 
●
 3.8 mL 5× DB  
 
●
 950 μL 6 mM amino acids  
 
●
 14.25 mL MQ water  
3.2.2  Setting Up the 
GenDecoder Robot
3.2.3  Preparation of 
Translation Reagents
Robotic Cell-Free Protein Production

126
  2.  Prepare reaction layer translation mix ( see  Note 20 ). Calculate 
the amount of reaction mix as follows: minimal reaction mix 
volume = [(20 μL × 12 wells) + 40 μL dead volume] × (# of 
rows). By this formula, one plate will require 2.24 mL ( see 
 Note 21 ).
 To make the reaction mix, combine 
 
●
 700 μL WEPRO2240H (CFS)  
 
●
 2.2 μL creatine kinase, 50 mg/mL  
 
●
 308 μL 5× DB 
 
●
 140 μL 6 mM amino acids  
 
●
 1,089.8 μL MQ water  
  1.  Remove the transcriptions from the incubator and carefully 
peel off the plate seal.  
  2.  Pause the robot and add the feeding buffer to a baked, thin- 
walled Teﬂ on trough and place it in the fourth position from 
the left side of the buffer chamber ( see  Note 22 ). Position the 
vessel containing the reaction buffer to the left of the feeding 
buffer trough (Fig.  1c-G ;  see  Note 21 ). 
  3.  Replace the empty dummy reaction plate (Fig.  1c-E ) with the 
real transcription plate. Do not add a lid to the plate, but place 
the lid face down in the lid storage area (Fig.  1c-H ). 
  4.   Resume the robot. The GenDecoder will dispense 20 μL of the 
reaction mix and 125 μL of the feeding buffer to each well.  
  5.   Just after the reaction is set up, pause the robot. Seal the plate 
with an adhesive plate sealer.  
  6.   Resume the robot. The GenDecoder will move the plate to 
incubator 1 (Fig.  1c-I ) and maintain the translations at 26 °C 
for 20 h.  
  1.   When the program is ended, remove the plate from the 
GenDecoder and centrifuge in a JS 5.9 rotor with a Beckman 
Coulter Avanti J-30I ﬂ oor centrifuge or the equivalent at 
3,750 ×  g and 4 °C for 1 h.  
  2.   Prepare two SDS-PAGE sample plates by dispensing 10 μL of 
each 3× SDS-PAGE sample buffer and water into each well of 
a thin-walled 96-well PCR plate. One plate will contain the 
soluble fraction samples; the other plate will contain the pellet 
samples.  
  3.   After centrifuging, immediately remove the translation super-
natants and transfer to a clean 96-well plate.  
  4.   To the remaining pellet fractions, add 150 μL of water or buf-
fer and resuspend by pipette.  
3.2.4  GenDecoder 
Finalization
3.2.5  Expression, 
Solubility, and Puriﬁ cation 
Analysis of GenDecoder 
Translations
Emily T. Beebe et al.

127
  5.  Sample 10 μL from each well of the soluble and pellet plates 
and transfer to the corresponding SDS-PAGE sample plates.  
  6.  Prepare enough afﬁ nity resin for a 10 μL bed volume for each 
translation by equilibrating in binding buffer, ending with a 
50 % slurry.  
  7.  Transfer 20 μL of slurry to the wells of a ﬁ lter plate assembled 
with a U-bottom 96-well collection plate.  
  8.  Add 100 μL of binding buffer and 100 μL of soluble fraction 
to each well.  
  9.  Incubate the plate with shaking for 10 min or longer at room 
temperature.  
  10.   Centrifuge the plate for 1 min at 2,500 ×  g using a JS5.9 rotor 
in a Beckman Coulter Avanti J-30I centrifuge or the 
equivalent.  
  11.   Exchange the collection plate for a fresh wash collection plate 
and wash each well with 150 μL of binding buffer. Repeat cen-
trifuge/wash cycle step three times.  
  12.   Add 50 μL of elution buffer to each well. Incubate the plate for 
10 min with shaking.  
  13.   Spin the plate 1 min to collect elution. Sample elution fractions 
for SDS-PAGE.  
  14.   Perform SDS-PAGE using a multichannel pipette to load gels. 
Three 26-lane gels will be needed for analysis of every two 
rows of GenDecoder translations.  
  15.   Image the gels directly by in-gel tryptophan-speciﬁ c ﬂ uores-
cent chemical modiﬁ cation upon UV activation [ 12 ]. The Bio-
Rad Gel Doc EZ imager or similar equipment is designed for 
this application. Alternatively, Coomassie-stain the gels to 
assess the expression and puriﬁ cation yields, and percent solu-
bility ( see  Note 11 ). An example analysis is shown in Fig.  2 .  
 This protocol describes protein synthesis at the 6-mL scale includ-
ing transcription, translation, and puriﬁ cation, starting with puri-
ﬁ ed DNA. This scale can produce up to six different samples or 
36 mL of one sample. The puriﬁ cation function includes two 
methods of elution, either by competition from imidazole for 
IMAC or reduced glutathione for GST puriﬁ cation ( see  Note 23 ). 
 The Protemist DT II user guide, Reagent Preparation manual, 
and operation program are intuitive and simple to use. The soft-
ware will take the user through the setup and placement of all 
reagents in the Reagent Unit, and reaction cups (or plate) in the 
Reaction Unit (Fig.  3b ).
  1.  After turning on the robot and PC, select the protocol using 
the Open command on the Protemist DT II File menu 
( see  Note 24 ). 
3.3  Protemist DT II 
Operation
Robotic Cell-Free Protein Production

128
  2.  Prepare transcription, translation, and puriﬁ cation reagents 
according to the Reagent Preparation manual for the number 
of samples selected ( see  Notes 25 – 27 ).  
  3.  Follow the cues from the software to insert reagents into the 
chilled reagent chambers until needed.  
  4.  Place the reaction cups in the reaction chamber.  
  5.  Run the program. Translation takes approximately 20 h; puri-
ﬁ cation will add 3 h more.  
  6.    After the run, remove the eluted samples and analyze as desired.  
 The Protemist XE method consists of three main cycles, each sub-
divided into multiple substeps. The ﬁ rst main cycle is repeated 
twice and consists of concentration of the reaction to half-volume 
by passing it through the ultraﬁ ltration cassette and replenishing 
with fresh translation buffer to the starting volume. Its purpose is 
to dilute residual transcription components that could negatively 
affect translation. The second main cycle is repeated 20 times and 
is comprised of a routine of concentration, addition of fresh buffer, 
and incubation for 15 min to allow translation ( see  Note 28 ). The 
third main cycle involves concentration followed by the addition of 
more mRNA. For a 48 h campaign, the entire three-cycle routine 
is repeated six times. As the quality of translation buffer degrades 
over 48 h, it is a good idea to prepare this reagent fresh on the ﬁ rst 
day, and then prepare supplemental buffer for the second day. 
 This large-scale robot requires a 6–12 h transcription reaction 
and a 24–48 h translation campaign. The translation volume of the 
Protemist XE can be selected between 10 and 40 mL. For every 
10 mL of translation, 1 Vivaﬂ ow 50 dialysis cassette and  connecting 
tubing will be required. For this protocol, the method for a 10-mL 
translation of a SeMet-labeled protein using the 48 h campaign is 
described. 
  1.   For a 10-mL translation, 15 mL of transcription plus 4.5 mL 
of dead volume is required. The transcription reaction requires 
a ﬁ nal concentration of 0.05 mg/mL DNA. For this scale, pre-
pare at least 1.5 mg pure, concentrated DNA free of RNase 
using a commercial maxiprep kit followed by proteinase K 
treatment, phenol:chloroform extraction, and dissolution in 
MQ water [ 11 ]. 
  2.   In a 50 mL conical tube, prepare 19.5 mL transcription con-
sisting of:
 
●
 3.9 mL 5× LM transcription buffer (ﬁ nal 1×)  
 
●
 1.95 mL 25 mM NTPs, pH 7.0 (ﬁ nal 2.5 mM)  
 
●
 244 μL 80 U/μL SP6 RNA polymerase (ﬁ nal 1 U/μL) 
 
●
 244 μL 80 U/μL RNasin (ﬁ nal 1 U/μL) 
3.4  Protemist XE 
Operation
3.4.1  Preparation of 
mRNA for the Protemist XE
Emily T. Beebe et al.

129
 
●
 0.05 mg/mL plasmid DNA  
 
●
 MQ water to 19.5 mL.  
  3.   Cap securely and incubate for 6 h to overnight at 37 °C.  
  4.   After transcription is complete, centrifuge the transcriptions 
at 18,000 ×  g for 3 min at 25 °C to pellet the precipitate 
( see  Note 29 ).  
  5.    Transfer the clariﬁ ed transcriptions to a fresh 50-mL conical tube.  
  1.   For a 10-mL, 48 h translation, 660 mL translation buffer plus 
110 mL dead volume is required (770 mL total). For best 
results, prepare 400 mL buffer for the ﬁ rst day of translation, 
and prepare an additional 370 mL on the second day.  
  2.   To prepare the ﬁ rst batch of SeMet-labeling buffer, in a clean, 
baked 1 L glass beaker, combine:
 
●
 367.3 mL MQ water  
 
●
 10 mL each 40× SUB-AMIX-SG-NA S1, S2, S3, and S4 
(ﬁ nal 1× each)  
 
●
 400 μL of 5 % sodium azide (ﬁ nal 0.005 %)  
 
●
 400 μL of 25 mg/mL chloramphenicol (ﬁ nal 25 μg/mL)  
 
●
 20 mL 6 mM 19-amino acid mix, no Met (ﬁ nal 0.3 mM) 
( see  Note 30 ) 
 
●
 1.9 mL 125 mM SeMet (ﬁ nal 0.6 mM).  
  3.   Filter translation buffer through a 0.2-μm ﬁ lter into a 1 L 
Stericup bottle using a vacuum, and partially degas.  
  1.    In a 50-mL conical tube, combine the following ( see  Note 31 ):
 
●
 5 mL WEPRO8240/H (CFS; ﬁ nal, 120 OD/mL)  
 
●
 50 μL of creatine kinase, 20 mg/mL (ﬁ nal, 0.1 mg/mL)  
 
●
 2.5 mL clariﬁ ed transcription reaction  
 
●
 2.5 mL freshly prepared translation buffer.  
 The Protemist XE is easy to use and the step-by-step operation is 
clearly described by the software and in the manual.
  1.   Assemble the consumables required for translation (Fig.  4b ): a 
clean waste bottle, three caps with plugs, tubing kit (tubing 
harnesses “A” through “D”), 5-kDa MWCO dialysis cassette, 
micro stir bar, and a 1 L bottle of MQ water ( see  Note 32 ). 
  2.   Turn on the robot and open the software. Select the 
WEPRO7240_48 h program for 10 mL sample volume and 
10 mL ﬁ nal volume.  
  3.   Pour 30–40 mL water into two clean 50-mL conical tubes.  
3.4.2  Preparation of 
Translation Buffer
3.4.3  Preparation of 
Translation Reaction
3.4.4  Running the 
Protemist XE
Robotic Cell-Free Protein Production

130
  4.   Follow the on-screen instructions through vessel, tubing, and 
ﬁ ltration cassette placement ( see  Note 33 ). 
  5.   The Protemist XE will wash the tubing with water.  
  6.  Fill two clean 50-mL tubes with 15 mL each of translation buf-
fer and place in the mRNA and reaction tube positions. Place 
the translation buffer bottle in position. The robot will prime 
the tubing with translation buffer.  
  7.   Insert the mRNA tube and prime the connected tubing with 
mRNA according to the robot instructions.  
  8.  Add a clean, magnetic micro stir bar to the reaction tube con-
taining the extract and place this tube in position ( see  Notes 34 
and  35 ).  
  9.   Run the translation program ( see  Note 36 ). 
  10.   After 24 h, make 370 mL fresh translation buffer and carefully 
add this to the translation buffer bottle during one of the 
15 min incubation steps ( see  Note 37 ). 
 When the program has ended, the software will illustrate how to 
drain the tubing and remove the sample. Proceed with sample 
analysis or puriﬁ cation. 
 Any of these methods can be used in the production of protein 
complexes produced by co-translation ( see  Note 38 ). The ability of 
two or more proteins to assemble into a puriﬁ able complex should 
be ascertained at the small-scale level. It is important to carefully 
consider the placement of afﬁ nity tags to enable appropriate inter-
actions and to facilitate stoichiometric puriﬁ cation of the complex. 
Co-translational complex formation is initiated by combining 
mRNA from different templates at pre-optimized ratios in the 
translation mixture. In small-scale tests, optimal expression is seen 
when 20 % of the ﬁ nal translation volume consists of the added 
transcription. The Protemist DT II and Protemist XE can accept 
50 % and 25 % volume transcription, respectively, in the starting 
translation reactions. There is generally less protein of each subunit 
produced in co-translation due to the limited total synthesis 
capacity of the reaction. Alternatively, mRNA can be puriﬁ ed 
from individual transcription reactions and added to the transla-
tion. A typical concentration of puriﬁ ed mRNA in the translation 
is 0.7 mg/mL for small-scale reactions.  
4  Notes 
  1.   Perform a test run when consumables from new sources are 
used, as there may be slight differences that can affect robot 
function.  
3.5  Removing 
the Sample
3.6  Robotic 
Application to Protein 
Complex Formation
Emily T. Beebe et al.

131
  2.  The Protemist10 and Protemist100 are alternative repeat-batch 
robots that use centrifugal ultraﬁ ltration; however, they are no 
longer commercially available [ 3 ,  8 ,  10 ]. 
  3.   The 
GenDecoder 
and 
Protemist 
DT 
II 
use 
the 
WEPRO1240/2240(H/G) series of extract (CFS), with a 
starting concentration of 60 or 120 OD/mL at 260 nm per 
reaction, respectively. The Protemist XE uses the higher- 
performance WEPRO7240/8240(H/G) extracts (CFS), 
which are optimized for maximal protein expression at 
120 OD/mL. The “H” or “G” designation indicates the 
extract has been pretreated with resin to remove wheat germ 
proteins that co-purify with IMAC or glutathione chromatog-
raphy, respectively. Due to the technical requirements of gen-
erating highly active wheat germ extracts [ 13 ], we do not 
recommend making wheat germ extract in-house.  
  4.  Flash-freezing in liquid nitrogen is recommended for refreezing 
leftover thawed extract. Repeated freeze/thaw cycles should 
be avoided.  
  5.   These reagents may be substituted with commercially available 
counterparts from CFS.  
  6.   SP6 RNA polymerase and RNase inhibitor are sold as a set by 
CFS. They are custom-produced by a third party vendor 
(Promega Corporation) using a high concentration (80 U/
μL) and 1-mL volume formulation not offered directly through 
Promega. Enzymes can be kept long term at −80 °C, but once 
thawed, the aliquot should be stored at −20 °C.  
  7.   The “NA” designation stands for “no amino acids.” Amino 
acids are prepared and added separately as described for SUB-
AMIX- NA, which allows protein labeling for structural stud-
ies. If unlabeled protein is desired, SUB-AMIX or 
SUB-AMIX-SG, which contain amino acids, can be used. The 
SG formulation is designed for use with WEPRO7240/8240 
series extracts (CFS) on the Protemist XE.  
  8.   If desired, modiﬁ ed amino acids such as selenomethionine 
(SeMet) may be substituted for X-ray crystallography studies. 
SeMet can be prepared as a 125 mM stock solution in MQ 
water, without pH adjustment or ﬁ ltering and is used at a 
working concentration of 0.6 mM. SeMet should be used with 
a modiﬁ ed amino acid stock containing 19 amino acids, omit-
ting methionine. Amino acids containing stable isotope labels 
( 15 N,  13 C, and/or  2 H) are available commercially for NMR 
applications.  
  9.   The Protemist XE uses a 20 mg/mL creatine kinase stock 
solution.  
Robotic Cell-Free Protein Production

132
  10.   These antimicrobials are used with the Protemist XE to 
discourage microbial growth during translation.  
  11.   We select promising candidates for scale-up by a criterion of 
2.5 μg or greater puriﬁ able protein from a small-scale 
GenDecoder reaction. By an extrapolation of the small-scale 
bilayer synthesis results, they are expected to be afﬁ nity puri-
ﬁ ed to a level of at least 0.4 mg per 1 mL extract. Actual scale-
up synthesis concomitantly increases expression yield, typically 
by a factor of 2 or more depending on the methods. However, 
if a protein exhibits some insolubility, follow-up assessment is 
recommended to ensure that higher concentrations of the pro-
tein in the reaction do not signiﬁ cantly decrease the solubility. 
Based on our experiences, insolubility can negatively affect 
puriﬁ cation yield.  
  12.   The GenDecoder method can be modiﬁ ed to skip transcrip-
tion using instructions provided by CFS at the time of robot 
installation.  
  13.   For SDS-PAGE analysis, it is easiest to load samples directly 
from 96-well plates. One row of the GenDecoder plate will ﬁ ll 
one 26-well midi-size gel with soluble and pellet fractions. 
Therefore, when planning the layout of the transcription plate, 
always include at least one “No DNA” sample per row, substi-
tuting water for plasmid solution to allow comparison of the 
protein proﬁ le of sample lanes to that of the wheat germ 
 background. If afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation analysis is also planned, a 
positive puriﬁ cation control such as tagged-GFP is helpful and 
should be present at least in every other row, as two rows of 
elution samples will ﬁ t on one 26-well gel.  
  14.   Reaction volume can be increased to 6 μL if denaturing gel 
analysis is desired to check mRNA quality [ 14 ]. 1 μL can be 
removed prior to adding the mRNA plate to the GenDecoder.  
  15.   Working concentration of the transcription components: at 
least 0.1 mg/mL DNA, 1× TB + Mg, 4 mM NTPs, 1.6 U/μL 
SP6 RNA polymerase, and 0.8 U/μL RNasin.  
  16.   It is critical that transcription plates are well-sealed, or reac-
tions may evaporate during the course of the incubation, espe-
cially near the plate edges. Dried transcriptions will not be 
competent for translation.  
  17.   After 1–2 h, the transcriptions should look cloudy. This appear-
ance is due to the formation of insoluble magnesium pyro-
phosphate, a by-product of transcription. For small-volume 
transcriptions this precipitate may be hard to see, but reference 
to a clear “No DNA” control can be helpful when determining 
if the transcriptions are progressing properly.  
  18.   If not every row will be used, simply remove the rows of tips 
from the tip boxes that will not have reactions ﬁ lled. 
Emily T. Beebe et al.

133
  19.   If you are only translating a few rows, you will still need this 
7 mL dead volume to ensure accurate pipetting by the 
GenDecoder. For example, for three rows you will need 
(125 μL × 12 wells × 3 rows) + 7 mL dead volume = 11.5 mL 
feeding layer. We have found the GenDecoder to be labor- 
efﬁ cient when more than 24 samples will be screened. We gen-
erally use manual bilayer translation to screen fewer samples.  
  20.   The GenDecoder will add 20 μL of reaction mix to the plate 
containing 5 μL of transcription per well. The robot ﬁ lls a 200-
μL pipette tip and multi-dispenses six times to ﬁ ll half of the 
plate, then repeats the process to dispense reaction mix into 
the rest of the plate. It is a good idea to prepare an extra 40 μL 
of reaction mix per row to compensate for dead volume in the 
pipette tip.  
  21.   It is economical to distribute the required amount in one row 
of an additional 96-well plate aligned with the multichannel 
pipette in the GenDecoder. Plate alignment can be checked 
ahead of time to ensure proper handling, but care must be 
taken to align the plate precisely with the multipipetter. If less 
handling is preferred or the number of rows is greater than 5, 
a 200 μL total dead volume can be added to the reaction mix 
calculation. This solution can be installed in the robot using 
the thick-walled Teﬂ on reagent trough that comes with the 
GenDecoder in the third position slot directly to the left of the 
trough holding the translation buffer (Fig.  1c-G ). 
  22.   The ﬁ rst and second positions from the left in the GenDecoder 
buffer chamber are for transcription and mRNA puriﬁ cation 
buffers, respectively.  
  23.    Other programs are provided with the Protemist DT II software 
for proteolytic elution using TEV or PreScission protease.  
  24.   The programs are easily modiﬁ able to accommodate changes, 
such as skipping steps to allow use of a manually produced 
transcription reaction. 
  25.   One 6-mL reaction requires 25 μg of RNase-free plasmid DNA 
in a 250 μL transcription.  
  26.   Transcription can be performed manually to reduce the amount 
of master mix dead volume that is needed for robotic 
transcription.  
  27.   If amino acids are to be added separately in coordination with 
an “NA” series translation buffer, subtract the volume of the 
amino acids from the volume of WEPRO2240 extract to main-
tain a ﬁ nal translation volume of 6 mL.  
  28.   The Protemist XE automatically adjusts the ﬂ ow rate and 
length of incubation between ﬁ ltration/buffer addition cycles 
to maintain the 15-min cycle.  
Robotic Cell-Free Protein Production

134
  29.   Do not chill the transcriptions at any time; this can lead to 
mRNA precipitation.  
  30.   The translation buffer volume requirement is high for the 
Protemist XE, and the reagent cost of producing stable isotope- 
labeled targets for NMR may be excessive. The Protemist XE 
is most economical for the production of unlabeled or SeMet- 
labeled proteins.  
  31.   No dead volume is needed for the translation reaction.  
  32.   Additional tubing is required for translations greater than 
10 mL. This tubing is available from CFS and is used to con-
nect the multiple dialysis cassettes.  
  33.   When inserting the tubing into the valves, it is important to 
push it ﬁ rmly into the valve and not just into the ﬁ rst groove; 
otherwise the Protemist XE will not pump properly. When 
correctly inserted, the tubing should seem to “disappear” into 
the valves.  
  34.   To avoid contamination, do not allow the rigid end of the tub-
ing that is inserted in the reaction tube to touch anything but 
the reaction itself. 
  35.   Be careful not to impede the stir bar with the tubing.  
  36.   In the case of air bubbles, an alarm will sound. Through on-
screen prompts, the software will illustrate how to manually 
adjust the pump speed to remove the bubble and proceed with 
the program. Air bubbles can form if the translation buffer has 
not been adequately degassed or if the solution has been 
cooled, which can facilitate dissolution of air into the buffer.  
  37.   Decant carefully to avoid getting bubbles in the buffer intake 
tubing.  
  38.   We have determined the structure of a co-translated protein 
complex produced robotically with SeMet labeling and solved 
by X-ray crystallography (PDB ID 3KDF).  
 Acknowledgments 
 This work was made possible by funding from NIGMS PSI-II 
grant U54 GM074901 to J.L.M. at the Center for Eukaryotic 
Structural Genomics (CESG), and PSI-Biology grants U54 
GM094584 to the Transmembrane Protein Center (TMPC; 
B.G.F.) and U01 GM094622 to the Mitochondrial Protein 
Partnership (MPP; J.L.M.). We thank the many members of 
CESG, TMPC, and MPP and our biology collaborators for their 
invaluable contributions.  
Emily T. Beebe et al.

135
 References 
  1.  Carlson ED, Gan R, Hodgman CE, Jewett MC 
(2012) Cell-free protein synthesis: applications 
come of age. Biotechnol Adv 30:1185–1194  
  2.  Burgie SE, Bingman CA, Makino S, Wesenberg 
GE, Pan X, Fox BG, Phillips GN Jr (2011) 
Structural architecture of  Galdieria sulphura-
ria DCN1L. Proteins 79:1329–1336  
  3.  Beebe ET, Makino S, Nozawa A, Matsubara Y, 
Frederick RO, Primm JG, Goren MA, Fox BG 
(2011) Robotic large-scale application of wheat 
cell-free translation to structural studies including 
membrane proteins. N Biotechnol 28:239–249  
  4.  Junge F, Haberstock S, Roos C, Stefer S, 
Proverbio D, Dötsch V, Bernhard F (2011) 
Advances in cell-free protein synthesis for the 
functional and structural analysis of membrane 
proteins. N Biotechnol 28:262–271  
  5.  Rui E, Fernandez-Becerra C, Takeo S, Sanz S, 
Lacerda MVG, Tsuboi T, del Portillo HA (2011) 
 Plasmodium vivax : comparison of immunoge-
nicity among proteins expressed in the cell-free 
systems of  Escherichia coli and wheat germ by 
suspension array assays. Malar J 10:192–199  
  6.  Sawasaki T, Hasegawa Y, Tsuchimochi M, 
Kamura N, Ogasawara T, Kuroita T, Endo Y 
(2002) A bilayer cell-free protein synthesis sys-
tem for high-throughput screening of gene 
products. FEBS Lett 514:102–105  
  7.  Vinarov DA, Lytle BL, Peterson FC, Tyler 
EM, Volkman BF, Markley JL (2004) Cell-
free protein production and labeling protocol 
for NMR-based structural proteomics. Nat 
Methods 1:149–153  
  8.  Vinarov DA, Loushin Newman CL, Markley JL 
(2006) Wheat germ cell-free platform for 
eukaryotic protein production. FEBS J 273:
4160–4169  
  9.  Takasuka TE, Walker JA, Bergeman LF, Vander 
Meulen KA, Makino SI, Elsen NL, Fox BG 
(2012) 
Cell-free 
translation 
of 
biofuels 
enzymes. Methods Mol Biol 1118:71–95, 
2014, Humana Press, New York  
  10.  Frederick RO, Bergeman L, Blommel PG, 
Bailey LJ, McCoy JG, Song J, Meske L, 
Bingman CA, Riters M, Dillon NA, Kunert J, 
Yoon JW, Lim A, Cassidy M, Bunge J, Aceti 
DJ, Primm JG, Markley JL, Phillips GN Jr, 
Fox BG (2007) Small-scale, semi-automated 
puriﬁ cation of eukaryotic proteins for struc-
ture determination. J Struct Funct Genomics 
8:153–166  
  11.  Makino S, Goren MA, Fox BG, Markley JL 
(2010) Cell-free protein synthesis technology 
in NMR high-throughput structure determina-
tion. Methods Mol Biol 607:127–147  
  12.  Ladner CL, Yang J, Turner RJ, Edwards RA 
(2004) Visible ﬂ uorescent detection of pro-
teins in polyacrylamide gels without staining. 
Anal Biochem 326:13–20  
  13.   Takai K, Sawasaki T, Endo Y (2010) Practical 
cell-free protein synthesis system using puriﬁ ed 
wheat embryos. Nat Protoc 5:227–238  
  14.  Makino S, Beebe ET, Markley JL, Fox BG 
(2013) Cell free protein synthesis for func-
tional and structural studies. Methods Mol Biol 
1091:161–178, Humana Press, New York  
Robotic Cell-Free Protein Production

137
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_10, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 10  
 Parallel Protein Puriﬁ cation 
 Ludmilla  Shuvalova 
 Abstract 
 Structural genomics has increased demands on protein production laboratories to supply large numbers of 
different proteins in high quantities and qualities in shorter times. Extensive experience with many differ-
ent technologies and strategies developed and implemented by structural genomics groups have helped 
identify an optimal approach to puriﬁ cation of a large number of widely different proteins. This standard-
ized protocol can be applied to many samples and can be used in parallel protein puriﬁ cation.  
 Key words   Parallel protein puriﬁ cation ,   His-tag afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation  ,  Gel ﬁ ltration  ,   Ion exchange 
chromatography  ,   TEV protease  ,  His-tag cleavage  
1  Introduction 
 One challenge of structural genomics is to produce high-quality 
samples of a wide variety of proteins that have different properties. 
The introduction of automation and multidimensional chroma-
tography, such as provided by the AKTAexplorer and AKTAxpress 
systems by structural genomics projects [ 1 ] is an important step 
in the development of high throughput protein production. 
These systems allow the puriﬁ cation of four or more proteins 
simultaneously. The design of a standard puriﬁ cation and handling 
protocol that is independent of the features of the individual pro-
tein is essential. There are several key elements in successful parallel 
protein puriﬁ cation: (a) recombinant proteins should be fused to a 
poly-histidine tag which enables uniform metal ion afﬁ nity chro-
matography; (b) proteins should have a standard expression vector 
which incorporates a Tobacco Etch Virus (TEV) protease recog-
nition and cleavage site between the poly-histidine tag and the 
target protein, so the tag can be removed with TEV protease; and, 
(c) the selected proteins should have their isoelectric points at 
least 0.5–1.0 unit away from the buffer pH chosen for use during 
the puriﬁ cation. 

138
 A well-established “standard” protocol for parallel protein 
puriﬁ cation based on successful experience with hundreds of proteins 
is provided. 
2  Materials 
 Make all the solutions using molecular biology grade reagents and 
ultrapure water (purifying deionized water to sensitivity of 18 MΩ cm 
at 22 °C). Filter solutions and store at 4 °C. Add 2- mercaptoethanol 
(5 mM ﬁ nal concentration) immediately before use. 
  1.   Lysis buffer: 1.5 mM magnesium acetate, 1 mM calcium chlo-
ride, 500 mM sodium chloride, 100 mM ammonium sulfate, 
43 mM disodium phosphate, 3.25 mM citric acid, 5 % glycerol, 
5 mM imidazole, 0.08 % dodecylmaltoside (DDM) (add just 
before use), 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (add just before use), 
EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (add just before use). 
After mixing all of the ingredients the pH of the buffer is about 
7.5. At this point it can be left as is or adjusted to pH 8.3 
( see  Note 1 ). Store at 4 °C.  
  2.   Loading/Storage buffer: 10 mM Tris–HCl, 500 mM sodium 
chloride, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (add just before use), 
pH 8.3 or 7.5 ( see  Note 1 ). Filter through a 0.45 μm ﬁ lter. 
Store at 4 °C.  
  3.   Low imidazole buffer: 10 mM Tris–HCl, 25 mM imidazole, 
500 mM sodium chloride, pH 8.3.   Filter through a 0.45 μm 
ﬁ lter.  
  4.   High Imidazole buffer: 10 mM Tris–HCl, 500 mM imidazole, 
500 mM sodium chloride, pH 8.3. Filter through a 0.45 μm 
ﬁ lter. Store at 4 °C.  
  5.  His-tag cleavage buffer: 10 mM Tris–HCl, 500 mM sodium 
chloride, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (add just 
before use), pH 8.3. Filter through a 0.45 μm ﬁ lter. Store at 
4 °C.  
  6.   Recombinant TEV protease appropriately puriﬁ ed and stored 
( see  Note 2 ) [ 2 ]. 
  1.   Digital sonic dismembrator (sonicator) equipped with ½ in. 
tapped horn with ﬂ at tip.  
  2.   SLA-3000 or similar rotor and SS-34 ﬁ xed angle rotor.  
  3.  Centrifuge tubes 500, 250, and 50 ml.  
  4.  V-bottom 96-deep-well (2 ml/well) blocks.  
  5.   Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis cassettes of various volume capacity and 
molecular weight cutoff.  
2.1  Buffers
2.2  Protein 
Puriﬁ cation Supplies
Ludmilla Shuvalova

139
  6.  Chromatography columns: HiLoad 26/60 Superdex 200 prep 
grade gel ﬁ ltration column (one per puriﬁ cation module), 
HisTrap FF 5 ml Ni columns (4 per puriﬁ cation module), 
MonoQ 10/100 GL and MonoS 10/100 GL ion exchange 
columns (1 each) ( see  Note 3 ). 
  7.  ÄKTAxpress automated multistep puriﬁ cation system (one or 
more modules), GE Healthcare Life Sciences.  
3  Methods 
 Carry out all procedures at 4 °C unless otherwise speciﬁ ed. 
  1.  Spin down the grown cell cultures with over-expressed pro-
teins in 500 ml centrifuge bottles using SLA-3000 or similar 
rotor at 4 °C, 12,000 ×  g , 10 min. Pour off the supernatant and 
save the wet cell pellets. Place on ice.  
  2.  Keeping the samples on ice, resuspend cells in cold lysis buffer. 
The ratio of the wet cell pellet to the volume of lysis buffer 
should be 1 g/3–5 ml; usually cells from 1.5 L of culture will 
give a ﬁ nal volume of 120–150 ml ( see  Notes 4 and  5 ). Transfer 
the slurries obtained into 50 ml tubes and freeze by placing 
into −30 °C freezer overnight or longer ( see  Note 6 ). 
  3.  Thaw the previously ( step 2 ) frozen slurries with over-
expressed proteins (4 proteins per puriﬁ cation module) under 
cold running water.  
  4.  Transfer the thawed samples to 250 ml beakers and put on ice 
in ice buckets.  
  5.  Place the ice bucket with the sample next to a sonicator, 
immerse the tip of the sonicator in the solution slightly above 
the bottom of the beaker.  
  6.  Use the following settings for sonication: 10 s on/10 s off, 
10 min active time at 60 % amplitude. The total cycle will take 
20 min.  
  7.  Repeat  steps 5 and  6 for each sample.  
  8.  Transfer the sonicated slurries into 50 ml centrifuge tubes. 
Balance and centrifuge samples, using a precooled SS-34 rotor 
at 4 °C, 40,000 ×  g , 40 min.  
  9.  Collect the supernatants in 250 ml centrifuge bottles. At this 
point the protein extracts are ready for immediate puriﬁ cation 
or they can be frozen at −20 °C until the next puriﬁ cation. 
 Puriﬁ cation is carried out using one (for 4 proteins) or more 
ÄKTAxpress puriﬁ cation modules at 4 °C. The following strategy, 
3.1  Cell Lysis and 
Preparation of the Cell 
Extracts
3.2  Parallel Protein 
Puriﬁ cation
Protein Puriﬁ cation

140
even though tailored for this particular system, can be applied to 
any equipment capable of handling parallel protein puriﬁ cation.
  1.  Wash the sample inlets with at least 20 ml of loading buffer at 
10–20 ml/min ﬂ ow rate.  
  2.  Equilibrate the HiLoad 26/60 Superdex 200 prep grade gel 
ﬁ ltration column with 2 column volumes of loading buffer at 
1–3 ml/min ﬂ ow rate (column 5 in ÄKTAxpress software).  
  3.  Equilibrate the HisTrap FF 5 ml Ni columns with 5 column 
volumes of loading buffer at 8 ml/min (columns 1–4 in 
ÄKTAxpress software).  
  4.  Load sample 1 to column 1 at 4 ml/min ﬂ ow rate.  
  5.  Wash column 1 with at least 20 column volumes of loading 
buffer at 4 ml/min. If necessary, continue to wash until a sta-
ble UV baseline is reached.  
  6.  Repeat  steps 4 and  5 for the remaining samples/columns until 
they are all loaded and washed.  
  7.  Wash column 1 with 5 column volumes of low imidazole buf-
fer at 4 ml/min ﬂ ow rate.  
  8.  Elute the target protein from column 1 with 5 column vol-
umes of high imidazole buffer at 4 ml/min and collect in the 
loop of the system.  
  9.  Load the protein from the loop ( step 8 ) to the gel ﬁ ltration 
column (column 5) at 3 ml/min and run 1.3 column volumes 
of loading buffer through at the same ﬂ ow rate.  
  10.   Collect all the resulting peaks with a UV absorbance of 
20 mAU or greater into a 96-deep-well block (2 ml/well).  
  11.   Repeat  steps 7 – 10 for the remaining samples/columns.  
  12.   Evaluate the collected sample peaks by SDS-PAGE and pool the 
fractions containing the puriﬁ ed target proteins. At this point 
the proteins can be concentrated and used for crystallization 
trials, enzymatic assays, immediate his-tag cleavage or they can 
be aliquoted and frozen in liquid nitrogen ( see  Note 7 ) and 
placed in a −80 °C freezer for storage.  
  1.  For His-tag removal, add TEV protease to a puriﬁ ed protein at 
an approximate ratio of 1 mg protease per 20 mg of protein.  
  2.  Inject the mixture into a Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis cassette with an 
appropriate molecular weight cutoff and immerse the cassette in 
a beaker (250–500 ml, depending on the size of the cassette) 
containing the his-tag cleavage buffer. Several proteins can be 
dialyzed in one beaker.  
  3.  Place the beaker on a stirring plate and start the cleavage at 
37 °C for 1 h (any lab incubator can be used) stirring constantly, 
then move it to 4 °C and stir overnight. By this time for most 
3.3  His-Tag Cleavage 
from Puriﬁ ed Proteins
Ludmilla Shuvalova

141
proteins, the tag will be fully cleaved ( see  Note 8 ). Check if the 
tag is cleaved using SDS-PAGE.  
  4.   Move the dialysis cassette containing the cleaved protein into a 
500 ml beaker containing loading/storage buffer for 15 min at 
4 °C for buffer replacement. Repeat three times. Then move 
the cassette into a 1 L beaker and leave to dialyze overnight at 
4 °C. This is to ensure that all of the EDTA from his-tag cleavage 
buffer is removed. 
  5.   Remove the protein/TEV protease mixture from the dialysis 
cassette and apply to a HisTrap FF 5 ml Ni column that has 
been pre-equilibrated with loading/storage buffer. Collect the 
protein without the his-tag in the ﬂ ow through. This can be 
done using any puriﬁ cation system or by gravity ﬂ ow. 
  6.   Check the purity of the protein using SDS-PAGE, concentrate 
to the desired concentration and use for crystallization trials, 
enzymatic assays or aliquote and freeze in liquid nitrogen and 
place in −80 °C freezer for storage.  
4  Notes 
  1.   It is found that basic pH, such as the 8.3 suggested, improves 
his-tagged protein binding to the Ni column. Due to the pos-
sible precipitation of a protein it is very important to be sure 
that the isoelectric point (p I ) of the protein is at least 0.5–1.0 
pH units removed from the buffer used. If the p I is too close 
to 8.3 use a buffer with a pH of 7.5.  
  2.   There are several TEV protease constructs such as pRK508, 
pMHT238, and pRK793 currently used by structural genom-
ics centers and scientiﬁ c laboratories. All of them provide the 
expression of polyHis-tagged TEV protease and produce over 
100 mg of protein per 1 L of culture. The puriﬁ cation protocol 
is quite simple and consists of two steps: metal afﬁ nity chroma-
tography followed by gel ﬁ ltration [ 2 ]. However, there are two 
very important points to remember: (1) the ﬁ nal concentration 
of pure TEV protease should not be higher than 5 mg/ml to 
avoid precipitation and (2) the storage buffer has to have 50 % 
glycerol.  
  3.  In some cases, after this procedure, the resulting protein still 
shows additional bands on the SDS-PAGE. For further puriﬁ -
cation, ion exchange columns such as MonoQ 10/100 GL 
(with a buffer pH above the p I of the protein) and MonoS 
10/100 GL (with the buffer pH below the p I of the protein) 
can be used. It is important to consider several points 
when planning the strategy for ion exchange chromatography: 
(a) the pH of the chosen buffer should be at least 1.0 unit away 
from the p I of the protein, the greater the difference—the 
Protein Puriﬁ cation

142
tighter the protein will bind to the column and will be eluted 
closer to the end of the salt gradient; (b) the protein solution 
should have as low a concentration of salt as possible while still 
high enough to keep the protein soluble prior to loading on 
the column; (c) to lower the existing salt concentration in the 
protein solution the sample can be dialyzed or simply diluted 
to the desired salt concentration; (d) for better separation the 
length of the gradient should be at least 30 column volumes.  
  4.  For the great majority of proteins the ratio of 1 g of wet 
cells/3–5 ml of lysis buffer works well. Sometimes, however, 
the protein can reach its limit of super-saturation (too high 
overexpression or low solubility) during cell lysis. In that case 
the ratio can be increased to 1 g/10 ml.  
  5.   Some proteins have a low solubility and the use of the lysis 
buffer by itself does not bring them into solution. In this case, 
many times the addition of 1–4 M urea or 1–2 M of arginine 
to lysis buffer aids in solubility. Urea and arginine are removed 
during the wash with loading/storage buffer after the protein 
is bound to a HisTrap FF 5 ml Ni column.  
  6.  It is known that the freezing and thawing of a cell suspension 
helps break cell membranes due to ice crystals formed during 
the slow freezing of the sample at −30 °C followed by a slow 
thawing under the running cold water. This cycle helps with 
cell lysis.  
  7.  For crystallization trials it is best to use the proteins soon after 
they are puriﬁ ed. Proteins can be aliquoted into small tubes 
and frozen in liquid nitrogen for later use. Each aliquot should 
be thawed only once, so the volume of aliquot should be chosen 
accordingly. To properly thaw the frozen protein the sample 
should be removed from the −80 °C freezer and warmed up at 
~22 °C in water bath or by simply holding in a hand for a short 
period of time. After the ice is gone the tube should be imme-
diately put on ice. This technique prevents the protein from 
precipitating during the thaw. Do not put the frozen protein 
taken from −80 °C directly on ice as this prolongs the thawing 
time and allows very high local concentrations of protein which 
can cause precipitation.  
  8.  For most proteins overnight is enough time for a complete his- 
tag cleavage. However, for some proteins more time may be 
needed. In that case the cleavage should be monitored every 
6–8 h until sufﬁ cient cleavage has occurred. It is possible 
that cleavage will not occur. A couple of reasons might be: 
(a) The TEV protease may not be active (that can be easily 
ﬁ xed with new TEV); (b) the TEV cleavage site is not accessible 
due to protein conformation.  
Ludmilla Shuvalova

143
 Acknowledgments 
 This work was supported by the Center for Structural Genomics of 
Infectious Diseases (CSGID, funded by NIAD under Contracts 
No. HHSN272200700058C and HHSN272201200026C) and 
by the Midwest Center for Structural Genomics (MCSG, grant 
No. U54 GM0945585).  
 References 
 1.  Kim Y, Dementieva I, Zhou M et al (2004) 
Automation of protein puriﬁ cation for struc-
tural genomics. J Struct Funct Genomics 
5(1–2):111–118 
 2.  Tropea JE, Cherry S, Waugh DS (2009) 
Expression and puriﬁ cation of soluble his- 
tagged TEV protease. In: Sharon AD (ed) 
Methods in molecular biology: high throughput 
protein expression and puriﬁ cation, vol 498. 
Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, pp 297–307  
Protein Puriﬁ cation

145
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_11, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 11  
 Oxidative Refolding from Inclusion Bodies 
 Christopher  A.  Nelson ,  Chung  A.  Lee , and  Daved  H.  Fremont 
 Abstract 
 This protocol describes the growth and puriﬁ cation of bacterial inclusion body proteins with an option to 
selenomethionine label the targeted protein through feedback inhibition of methionine biosynthesis in 
common (non- auxotrophic) strains of  E. coli . The method includes solubilization of inclusion body proteins 
by chemical denaturation and disulﬁ de reduction, renaturation of the solubilized material through rapid 
dilution by pulsed injection into refolding buffer containing arginine and a mixture of oxidized and reduced 
glutathione, recovery of the recombinant protein using a stirred cell concentrator, and removal of the aggre-
gated or misfolded fraction by passage over size-exclusion chromatography. The quality of the resulting 
protein can be assessed by SDS-PAGE.  
 Key words   Inclusion bodies  ,  Recombinant protein expression  ,   Induction  ,  Escherichia coli ,  Feedback 
inhibition ,  Selenomethionine labeling  ,  Cell lysis  ,  Solubilization  ,  Protein concentration  ,   Aggregation  , 
 Protein refolding  ,   Protein puriﬁ cation ,  Size-exclusion chromatography  
1  Introduction 
 In eukaryotes, disulﬁ de bond formation occurs during protein 
folding through a complex process that takes place primarily in the 
endoplasmic reticulum and that is catalyzed by the enzyme protein 
disulﬁ de isomerase in the presence of millimolar concentrations of 
oxidized and reduced glutathione [ 1 ]. Disulﬁ de bonds can be sta-
bly maintained only in an oxidizing environment. Because the 
cytoplasm of wild type  E. coli is a reducing environment, proteins 
that require disulﬁ de bonds cannot be made efﬁ ciently in typical 
competent  E. coli strains. Such proteins usually pack into insoluble 
inclusion bodies and upon isolation require an additional refolding 
step to convert the protein to its functional form [ 2 ]. 
 Possible reasons for these failures include: improper or absent 
disulﬁ de bond formation, lack of glycosylation, absence of 
required folding chaperones, absence of partner subunits, absence 
of cofactors or metal ions, absence of covalent modiﬁ cations such 

146
as lipidation or methylation, the presence of transmembrane 
regions or signal peptides, excessive toxicity, or excessive sensitiv-
ity to cellular proteases, to name just a few. In fact, overexpression 
of target proteins in bacteria commonly results in the formation of 
cytoplasmic inclusion bodies, insoluble densely packed aggregates 
containing large quantities of highly pure recombinant protein. 
Inclusion bodies form even at low levels of expression and even 
when the majority of the protein being produced is correctly 
folded and soluble. The main advantage of inclusion bodies is the 
ease with which they can be separated from bacterial contaminants 
by low-speed centrifugation, a property that makes the use of 
afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation tags unnecessary. Further, inclusion body pro-
teins are resistant to proteolytic attack, and because most inclu-
sion body proteins are nonfunctional, they can be produced even 
if the native protein is toxic to bacteria. The downside of inclusion 
bodies is that, after recovery, they must be denatured and refolded 
to convert the insoluble material into a functionally active form. 
 There is no single refolding method that works for all proteins. 
However, the literature contains many protocols detailing speciﬁ c 
examples of protein refolding from inclusion bodies, and a number 
of good reviews exist that discuss the topic in general terms (for 
example, [ 3 – 11 ]). Probably the best place to ﬁ nd starting condi-
tions for a refolding experiment, if a literature search fails, is the 
REFOLD database (http:\\refold.med.monash.edu.au) [ 12 ]. To 
begin, search for a protein closely related to yours and use those 
conditions. Alternately, if the structure of a closely related protein 
has already been deposited in the PDB, the database may contain a 
citation describing how that protein was refolded. Finally, look for 
companies that sell a related protein. Many will list citations on 
their websites describing how each was refolded. It is more difﬁ cult 
to ﬁ nd refolding conditions for a protein of unknown function or 
fold. Speciﬁ c conditions must be determined for each target and 
optimized through a process of trial and error. What follows is a 
simple and robust refolding protocol that has proven successful for 
a variety of proteins. It includes the option to selenomethionine 
label the protein by feedback inhibition for X-ray crystallography 
[ 13 ]. It is assumed that the target protein has been cloned into a 
standard  E. coli expression vector downstream of an IPTG induc-
ible promoter (for example, pET-based vectors). The signal pep-
tide (if present) should have been removed and replaced with a 
methionine codon for initiation. All transmembrane regions should 
have been removed by truncation or by replacement with a linker 
of appropriate length to allow the protein to refold (for example, 
multiple Gly-Ser codons). It is best to select a competent  E. coli 
strain that has been optimized for protein expression. T7-driven 
expression plasmids (for example, pET-based vectors) are designed 
to work in DE3 containing strains. The DE3 Lysogen encodes T7 
RNA polymerase downstream of the lacUV5 promoter so that 
Christopher A. Nelson et al.

147
expression can be induced by IPTG. It is also assumed that one has 
transformed competent  E. coli cells with the expression plasmid 
and made a frozen stock. 
 Misfolded or incompletely folded polypeptides contain exposed 
hydrophobic stretches that are normally hidden in the native con-
formation. These stretches are prone to aggregation in a 
concentration- dependent manner. A large amount of aggregation 
usually indicates too high a protein concentration was used in the 
refolding. Trial and error is required to ﬁ nd the optimal amount. 
This method uses injection to dilute the protein as quickly as pos-
sible in order to keep the effective concentration of misfolded pro-
tein low. Further, by pulsing the injections, the method allows time 
for the protein to refold which further helps to lower the concen-
tration of misfolded protein in the reaction. After refolding, the 
protein needs to be concentrated for size-exclusion chromatogra-
phy. This method describes using a 400 mL stirred cell concentra-
tor. Nitrogen gas at high pressure drives the refolding solution out 
of the ultraﬁ ltration cell through a permeable membrane. Solutes 
above the molecular weight cutoff of the membrane are retained in 
the cell, while water and solutes below the cutoff pass into the ﬁ l-
trate and out. Gentle stirring minimizes the buildup of concen-
trated solutes at the membrane surface. Stir as gently as possible to 
limit denaturation of the refolded protein by shear stress. Complete 
this step as quickly as possible. At high concentrations, misfolded 
protein will be driven to aggregate with, and denature, correctly 
folded protein. It is important to limit the amount of time this is 
allowed to happen. A ﬁ nal volume of 5–10 mL is required for size- 
exclusion chromatography. 
 This protocol represents a good starting point for an oxidative 
refolding experiment. Many factors may need to be adjusted to 
optimize the ﬁ nal yield. For example, alterations of pH, salts, sta-
bilizers, detergents, and redox reagents can be made as required. 
At the end of the method, there is a list of suggestions found to be 
most useful in optimizing this technique. In many cases, the pro-
tocol has yielded protein of sufﬁ cient quantity and quality to be 
adequate for structural work [ 14 – 17 ]. 
2  Materials 
 Prepare all solutions using ultrapure water (prepared by purifying 
deionized water to attain a conductivity of 18 MΩ cm at 25 °C) 
and analytical grade reagents. Prepare and store all reagents at 4 °C 
(unless otherwise indicated). 
  1.  (a)   LB-medium : Add 1 L of tap water to a wide-mouthed 2-L 
Erlenmeyer ﬂ ask (with bafﬂ es if available). Weigh out 
20.6 g LB Broth EZMix Powder (Sigma Chemical 
Company) and add to ﬂ ask. Mix until dissolved. Adjust the 
2.1  Bacterial Growth
Oxidative Refolding

148
pH to between 7.5 and 8.0 with 10 M sodium hydroxide. 
Seal with aluminum foil, autoclave and store at 4 °C. 
Typically 4 L (4 ﬂ asks) of medium are used for the growth 
of each protein. 
 (b)   Methionine deﬁ cient medium for selenomethionine labeling : 
Add 1 L of tap water to a wide-mouthed 2-L Erlenmeyer 
ﬂ ask (with bafﬂ es if available). Weigh out 22.6 g of 
SelenoMethionine 
Medium 
Complete 
(Molecular 
Dimensions, Inc., number MD12-501). Seal with alumi-
num foil, autoclave and store at 4 °C. Typically 4 L (4 
ﬂ asks) of medium are used for the growth of each protein. 
For each liter of medium, weigh out 5.1 g nutrient supple-
ment (part of MD12-501) and dissolve in 50 mL water. 
Filter the supplement through a 0.2 μm polyethersulfone 
(PES) membrane (for example, using a bottle top ﬁ lter) 
and add 50 mL to each ﬂ ask right before use.  
  2.  Feedback inhibition stock : For 10 L of cell culture, combine the 
following amino acids: 1.0 g of lysine, 1.0 g threonine, 1.0 g 
phenylalanine, 0.5 g leucine, 0.5 g isoleucine, 0.5 g valine, and 
0.5 g  L -selenomethionine. Mix well and keep at −20 °C in an 
airtight container. Add 0.5 g per liter of methionine free 
expression media about 20 min before IPTG induction.  
  3.  0.2 M IPTG stock : Weigh out 2.38 g isopropyl β- D -1- 
thiogalactopyranoside and dissolve in 50 mL water. Use 5 mL 
per liter of cell culture for a 1 mM IPTG induction.  
  4.  Lysozyme stock : Weigh out 40 mg lysozyme and dissolve in 
4 mL water. Use 1 mL per liter of cell culture.  
  5.  DNase I stock : Weigh out 40 mg DNase I and dissolve in 4 mL 
water. Use 1 mL per liter of cell culture.  
  6.  Divalent cation stock (40×): Make 400 mM MgCl 2 and 
400 mM CaCl 2 in water. Weigh out 0.40 g of magnesium 
chloride hexahydrate, 0.44 g calcium chloride hexahydrate and 
dissolve in 5 mL water.  
  1.  1 M Tris–HCl (pH 8.0) stock : Add about 800 mL to a 1-L 
graduated cylinder. Weigh out 157.60 g of Trizma-base and 
add to cylinder. Stir until dissolved. Adjust the pH to 8.0 with 
concentrated HCl. Adjust the volume to 1 L with water. 
Autoclave and store at room temperature.  
  2.  0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0) stock : Add about 350 mL water to a 1-L 
glass beaker. Weigh out 146.12 g ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid 
and add to beaker. Stir while slowly adding sodium hydroxide 
pellets until the solution reaches pH 8.0. Wait until everything 
dissolves to check the ﬁ nal pH. Adjust the volume to 500 mL 
with water then autoclave and store at room temperature.  
2.2  Inclusion Body 
Puriﬁ cation
Christopher A. Nelson et al.

149
  3.   10 % sodium azide stock (1,000×): Add about 40 mL water to a 
50-mL conical tube. Weigh out 5 g sodium azide, add it to the 
conical tube and mix until dissolved. Adjust the volume to 
50 mL with water.  
  4.  5 M sodium chloride stock : Add about 700 mL water to a glass 
beaker. Weigh out 292.2 g sodium chloride and dissolve. 
Adjust to 1,000 mL with water. Autoclave and store at room 
temperature.  
  5.   1 M DTT stock : Add about 5 mL water to a 50-mL conical 
tube. Weigh out 1.54 g  DL -dithiothreitol and add it to the 
tube. Mix until dissolved and adjust the volume with water to 
10 mL. Make fresh each day.  
  6.  Solution buffer : 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 1 mM EDTA 
(pH 8.0), 0.01 % sodium azide, 1 mM DTT, and 25 % sucrose. 
Add about 50 mL water to a 100 mL graduated cylinder or a 
glass beaker. Add 5 mL 1 M Tris–HCl (pH 8.0) stock, 0.2 mL 
0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0) stock, 0.1 mL 10 % sodium azide stock, 
and 0.1 mL of 1 M DTT stock. Weigh out 25 g sucrose and 
transfer to the cylinder. Adjust the volume to 100 mL with 
water. Mix and store at 4 °C.  
  7.   Lysis buffer : 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 1 mM EDTA 
(pH 8.0), 0.01 % sodium azide, 1 mM DTT, 200 mM sodium 
chloride, 1.0 % sodium deoxycholate, and 1.0 % Triton X-100. 
Add about 50 mL water to a 100 mL graduated cylinder or a 
glass beaker. Add 5 mL 1 M Tris–HCl (pH 8.0) stock solution, 
0.2 mL 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0) stock, 0.1 mL 10 % sodium 
azide stock, 0.1 mL 1 M DTT stock, and 4 mL 5 M sodium 
chloride stock. Weigh out 1.0 g sodium deoxycholate and add 
to the cylinder. Adjust the volume to 99 mL with water. Slowly 
add 1 mL of Triton X-100 while stirring. Mix until dissolved 
and store at 4 °C.  
  8.  Wash buffer with Triton : 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 1 mM 
EDTA (pH 8.0), 0.01 % sodium azide, 1 mM DTT, 100 mM 
sodium chloride, and 0.5 % Triton X-100. Place about 1.5 L 
water into a 2-L beaker. Add 100 mL of 1 M Tris–HCl 
(pH 8.0) stock, 4 mL 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0) stock, 2 mL 10 % 
sodium azide stock, 2.0 mL 1 M DTT stock, and 40 mL of 
5 M sodium chloride stock. Slowly add 10 mL of Triton X-100 
while stirring. Adjust the volume to 2,000 mL with water. Mix 
until dissolved and store at 4 °C.  
  9.   Wash buffer without Triton X - 100 : 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 
1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 0.01 % sodium azide, 1 mM DTT, and 
100 mM sodium chloride. Same as  item 8 above but without 
Triton.  
Oxidative Refolding

150
  1.   TE (1×) : Add 1 mL 1 M Tris–HCl (pH 8.0) and 0.2 mL 0.5 M 
EDTA (pH 8.0) to 99 mL water.  
  2.  AEBSF stock : Weigh out 48 mg 4-(2-Aminoethyl) benzenesul-
fonyl ﬂ uoride hydrochloride and dissolve in 2 mL water 
( see  Note 1 ).  
  3.  14.3 M 2-Mercaptoethanol . Store at room temperature.  
  4.  Guanidine hydrochloride . Store at room temperature.  
  5.  Refolding buffer : 0.4 M  L -Arginine, 100 mM Tris–HCl 
(pH 8.0), 2.0 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 5.0 mM  L -glutathione 
reduced, 0.5 mM  L -glutathione oxidized, and 0.5 mM AEBSF. 
Add about 300 mL of water to a 500 mL plastic polypropylene 
beaker ( see  Note 2 ). Weigh out 27.9 g  L -Arginine and 4.84 g 
Trizma-base. Adjust to 400 mL total volume with water. Mix 
and refrigerate until the temperature reaches 4 °C. Add 2 mL 
AEBSF 
stock, 
612 
mg  L -glutathione 
reduced, 
and 
122.4 mg  L -glutathione oxidized right before refolding. Adjust 
the pH to 8.3. Pass the refolding buffer through a 0.2 μm ﬁ lter 
and place it at 4 °C to chill.  
  6.  Sizing buffer : 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM sodium 
chloride, 0.01 % sodium azide. Place 1,800 mL of water in a 
2-L beaker. Add 40 mL 1 M HEPES (pH 7.5), 17.4 g sodium 
chloride and 2 mL of 10 % sodium azide stock. Adjust to 2 L 
with water. Pass the sizing buffer through a 0.2 μm ﬁ lter and 
place it at 4 °C to chill before using. Place under vacuum for 
20 min to degas if the buffer is to be used warm.  
3  Methods 
  1.   Using a sterile loop, streak  E. coli cells [e.g., BL21-CodonPlus 
(DE3)-RIL cells] containing the expression plasmid from a 
frozen stock ( see  Note 3 ) onto an LB-agar selection plate sup-
plemented with appropriate antibiotic ( see  Note 4 ). Grow 
overnight at 37 °C to obtain a well-isolated single colony. 
Prepare 4 L (4 ﬂ asks) of cell-culture medium (LB or methio-
nine deﬁ cient medium) for each protein to be expressed.  
  2.  The next morning, start a seed culture by placing one colony 
into 100 mL of LB with antibiotic. Grow at 37 °C in a 200 rpm 
shaker until OD 600 reaches 0.2–0.4, usually 4–5 h.  
  3.  (a)   For unlabeled protein production . Use 10 mL of seed cul-
ture to inoculate 1,000 mL (1:100 dilution) of LB supple-
mented with antibiotics in a 2-L wide-mouthed Erlenmeyer 
ﬂ ask. Return cells to shaker and grow at 37 °C and 200 rpm 
until OD 600 is about 0.6. This typically takes 2–3 h. Prior to 
IPTG induction take 1 mL of sample for SDS-PAGE 
( see  Note 5 ). Add 1.0 mM IPTG (5 mL 0.2 M IPTG stock) 
2.3  Solubilization 
and Refolding
3.1  Inclusion Body 
Production
Christopher A. Nelson et al.

151
per ﬂ ask. Continue cell growth for at least 4 h but no lon-
ger than 12 h at 37 °C with shaking. 
 (b)  Optional method to selenomethionine label protein through 
feedback inhibition of methionine biosynthesis . Use 10 mL 
of seed culture to inoculate 1,000 mL (1:100 dilution) of 
methionine deﬁ cient medium supplemented with antibi-
otics in a 2-L wide- mouthed Erlenmeyer ﬂ ask. Return 
cells to shaker and grow at 37 °C and at 200 rpm until 
OD 600 is about 0.6. This typically takes 4–5 h. Prior to 
induction take 1 mL of sample for SDS- PAGE ( see  Note 5 ). 
Add 0.5 g feedback inhibition stock to each ﬂ ask. After 
15 min, induce protein expression by the addition of 
1.0 mM IPTG (5 mL 0.2 M IPTG stock) per ﬂ ask. 
Continue cell growth for at least 4 h but no longer than 
12 h at 37 °C with shaking.  
  4.  Take 1.0 mL of post-induction sample for SDS-PAGE. Harvest 
the cells by centrifugation at 5,000 ×  g for 20 min at 4 °C. Pour 
off supernatant. The cell pellets may be used fresh or stored at 
−20 °C, although extraction is probably more efﬁ cient after 
freeze-thaw.  
  1.  Thaw cells (if frozen) and suspend in 100 mL of  solution buffer 
per 4 L of initial cell culture. Vortex or pipet until homoge-
neous. Sonicate on ice to break cells open (typically 4 
cycles × 30 s per burst) using a large ~1 cm probe.  
  2.   To the 100 mL of lysate, add 10 mL of 10 mg/mL  lysozyme 
stock (ﬁ nal concentration of 1 mg/mL,  see  Note 6 ) and 10 mL 
of 10 mg/mL  DNase I stock (ﬁ nal concentration of 1 mg/mL) 
and 2.5 mL of  divalent cation solution . Stir at room tempera-
ture for 20 min.  
  3.   Add 100 mL of  lysis buffer . Incubate the mixture on ice for 1 h 
with constant stirring. Remove the stir bar and sonicate at full 
power (3 cycles × 60 s). Cool lysate on ice between each sonica-
tion. Add 10.0 mL of  0.5 M EDTA (pH8.0) to the ~222 mL 
of lysate.  
  4.  Spin bottles at 6,000 ×  g for 15 min. Resuspend the inclusion 
bodies in 100 mL  wash buffer with Triton by sonication at full 
power for 60 s bursts returning bottle(s) on ice between sonica-
tions to chill. Three bursts are usually sufﬁ cient to suspend the 
inclusion bodies. Smash large bits with a spatula to help speed 
suspension. Spin bottles at 6,000 ×  g for 30 min ( see  Note 7 ).  
  5.  Remove supernatant and repeat wash, as described above, two 
or three more times using 225 mL of  wash buffer with Triton 
each time. Remember to suspend the inclusion bodies com-
pletely between each spin by sonication. Remove the superna-
tant and wash the pellet twice more with 225 mL of  wash 
3.2  Puriﬁ cation
Oxidative Refolding

152
buffer without Triton . If the procedure worked well, and the 
protein is well behaved, there will be a large chalky-white pel-
let. If the protein does not make good inclusion bodies, the 
pellet will be small and resemble peanut butter. The better the 
inclusion body preparation the better the chance of refolding.  
  6.  After the last wash ( see  Note 8 ), transfer the inclusion body 
pellet to a preweighed 50 mL conical tube using a spatula. 
Weigh the pellet and add 5 mL  TE buffer per gram of wet 
 pellet. Add 50 μL of  10 % sodium aside stock per gram of wet 
pellet. Sonicate inclusion bodies to disperse. Store inclusion 
bodies at 4 °C for up to 1 week or at −80 °C indeﬁ nitely. 
  1.  Solubilize 5 mL of the ﬁ nal slurry by adding 3.4 g  guanidine 
hydrochloride (~7 M ﬁ nal) and 4 μL of  14.3 M 2- mercaptoethanol 
stock (~10 mM ﬁ nal). Use a 14 mL polypropylene round- 
bottom tube (17 × 100 mm) for the solubilization. Keep at 
room temperature for at least 60 min. Usually everything dis-
solves during this step, but spin 16,000 ×  g to remove any 
insoluble contaminants ( see  Note 9 ). Bring the volume up to 
10 mL with TE and add another 4 μL of  14.3 M 2-mercapto-
ethanol stock . If any protein precipitates (white particles form in 
the solution), add just enough  guanidine hydrochloride to dis-
solve them (no more than 3.4 g). Remove 10 μL of post- 
solubilization sample for SDS-PAGE ( see  Note 5 ). 
  2.  Run SDS-PAGE to determine the amount of protein recov-
ered. Heat the SDS-PAGE samples (pre-induction, post-
induction, and post-solubilization,  see  Note 5 ) at 95 °C for 
3 min. Load onto an SDS-PAGE gel with an appropriate 
molecular weight marker. Run the gel, Stain with colloidal 
blue (Life Technologies,) and check that the induction and 
puriﬁ cation worked.  
  3.  A rough approximation of the protein concentration in the 
solubilized slurry can be determined from the SDS-PAGE gel 
by comparison of the post-solubilization band against the con-
centrations of the molecular weight marker proteins. As a start-
ing point, a good ﬁ nal protein concentration in the refolding is 
somewhere in the range of 1–5 μM ﬁ nal ( see  Note 10 ). In the 
next step a total volume of 10 mL will be injected into the 
400 mL of refolding buffer. If the solubilized protein is too 
concentrated, dilute a portion to 10 mL using 3 M  guanidine 
hydrochloride in TE. Save the rest of the solubilized mixture 
capped tightly at 4 °C for future refoldings. It is common to 
spin the diluted mixture at 5,000 ×  g for 10 min to remove any 
insoluble material. Passing the solution through a low protein 
binding syringe ﬁ lter is also suggested ( see  Note 11 ). The 
10 mL diluted slurry is now ready to refold.  
3.3  Solubilization
Christopher A. Nelson et al.

153
 Preform the refolding at 4 °C in a cold room.
  1.  Prepare and chill 400 mL of  refolding buffer as indicated above. 
The  refolding buffer must be cold (4 °C) before beginning. 
Check that the pH of the refolding buffer is 8.3 and adjust if 
necessary.  
  2.   Use a large stir bar (>3 cm) and stir plate to mix the  refolding 
buffer until a signiﬁ cant vortex forms.  
  3.  Use a 25-gauge needle and syringe to inject 2 mL of the solu-
bilized protein solution as close to the stir bar as possible at the 
bottom of the vortex. Inject the protein slowly (over 1–2 min). 
Reduce the agitation rate until the stir bar is just spinning.  
  4.  Repeat the injection ( steps 2 and  3 ) at hour intervals until all 
10 mL of solubilized material has been diluted into the 400 mL 
refolding.  
  5.  Dispose of the needle in a sharps container.  
  6.   Cover the refolding experiment loosely with paper to keep 
out dust and to allow volatiles to escape. Stir slowly over-
night at 4 °C.  
  1.  Filter the 400 mL after refolding though a 0.2 μM membrane.  
  2.  Pre-wet an appropriate ultraﬁ ltration membrane ( see  Note 12 ) 
hydrophilic-side-down in water for at least 10 min.  
  3.   Assemble the stirred cell setup ( see  Note 13 ), minus the top 
lid, ensuring that the pre-wetted membrane is hydrophilic-
side- up (shiny side-up) and the rubber O-ring is seated prop-
erly on the membrane. Secure the bottom piece to tightly 
clamp the membrane.  
  4.  Pour the ﬁ ltered refolding solution into the stirred cell and 
attach the top lid with the valve in the open position.  
  5.  Fit the completed stirred cell setup into its casing and attach 
the nitrogen hose. The setup should be placed upon a mag-
netic stir plate in a cold box or in cold room at 4 °C.  
  6.  Slowly open the nitrogen tank. Once the nitrogen is ﬂ owing, 
slowly close the valve on the stirred cell lid to seal it. (Be care-
ful, too abrupt a pressure change may shatter the membrane).  
  7.  Be sure to collect the ﬁ ltrate in case a membrane failure does 
occur. Also ensure that the stir-bar inside the cell is stirring 
slowly and not making contact with the membrane.  
  8.   Continue concentration of the refolding solution until there is 
approximately 5–10 mL left. This should not take longer than 
4 h. If the ﬂ ow rate drops, because the membrane is plugged, 
replace the membrane with a new one ( see  Note 14 ). 
3.4  Refolding
3.5  Recovery 
and Puriﬁ cation
Oxidative Refolding

154
  9.   If there is not much precipitate, remove the concentrated pro-
tein using a 10 mL syringe and ﬁ lter the solution through a 
low protein binding syringe ﬁ lter ( see  Note 11 ). If there is a 
large amount of precipitate, spin the solution ﬁ rst then ﬁ lter it. 
  10.   Apply the concentrated (and ﬁ ltered) protein solution to the 
appropriate FPLC size-exclusion column ( see  Note 15 ) equili-
brated in  sizing buffer . 
  11.   Collect fractions to analyze on SDS-PAGE ( see  Note 16 ). Pool 
fractions of interest ( see  Note 17 ). 
 If a signiﬁ cant amount of precipitation occurs
  1.  Try injecting a lower quantity of protein.  
  2.   Try adding sodium chloride to the refolding buffer in concen-
trations from 50 to 300 mM.  
  3.   Try changing the pH of refolding buffer.  
  4.   Try substituting NDSB-201 (Sigma) for  L -arginine in the 
refolding buffer. Concentrations of 400 mM to 1.0 M NDSB-
201 work well.  
  5.  Alter the ratio and concentration of oxidized/reduced gluta-
thione in the refolding buffer.  
  6.   Change the length of time for refolding. In some cases over-
night may be enough, other proteins require a few days.  
  7.  Try adding glycerol at concentrations from 5 to 25 % to the 
refolding buffer.  
4  Notes 
  1.   AEBSF is an irreversible serine protease inhibitor that is effec-
tive at concentrations between 0.1 and 1 mM. Aqueous solu-
tions are stable for up to 6 months if refrigerated at a pH less 
than 7. If protein degradation is a problem, use additional 
inhibitors: leupeptin at 1 μg/mL ﬁ nal (make 10 mg/mL stock 
in water) or pepstatin at 1 μg/mL ﬁ nal (make 10 mg/mL 
stock in DMSO).  
  2.  Keep a stock of water at 4 °C in a cold room to save time cooling 
the refolding buffer after you make it. This mix of  L - ARGININE 
monohydrochloride Trizma-base results in a ﬁ nal pH of ~8.3, 
minimizing the need for titration of the refolding buffer.  
  3.  To make a frozen stock, mix log-phase  E. coli cells 1:1 with 
sterile 30 % glycerol in LB and freeze at −80 °C in a screw cap 
tube. To use, scrape a few crystals off the top and streak onto an 
LB plate with the appropriate antibiotic for selection. Grow the 
plated cells overnight at 37 °C. A single vial of cells can be used 
many times and will keep indeﬁ nitely if not allowed to thaw.  
3.6  Optimization
Christopher A. Nelson et al.

155
  4.   Typical working concentrations for antibiotic selection are; 
ampicillin 100 μg/mL, carbenicillin 100 μg/mL, chloram-
phenicol 33 μg/mL, kanamycin 30 μg/mL, streptomycin 
25 μg/mL, and tetracycline 15 μg/mL.  
  5.  Pellet 1 mL of cells in microcentrifuge at 10,000 ×  g for 5 min 
and suspend in 100 μL of 2× SDS sample buffer with 
2- mercaptoethanol. Sonicate the sample to lower the viscosity 
and make gel loading easier. Use a microtip and try not to 
foam the sample. To the 10 μL post-solubilization sample, add 
90 μL of 2× SDS sample buffer with 2-mercaptoethanol and 
mix. 
  6.   If the protein you are trying to express has a molecular mass 
around 14,307 Da, then you might want to skip the addition 
of lysozyme. Some lysozyme usually survives puriﬁ cation and 
can make it difﬁ cult to tell if your protein has refolded or not.  
  7.  Inclusion bodies differ in solubility. The goal of washing is to 
remove as many contaminants as possible without losing the 
pellet. Monitor the size of the pellet during wash steps and 
adjust the stringency accordingly. To wash, use 250 mL bottles 
in a ﬁ xed angle rotor at 6,000 × g for 30 minutes. For example, 
in a Beckman JLA 16.250 rotor that would be at 6,300 rpm, or 
in a Sorvall GSA rotor that would be at 6,100 rpm.  
  8.   If the pellet is large enough, and resists being dissolved, you 
can wash with 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 
0.5 M guanidine hydrochloride, and 5 mM DTT after the ﬁ nal 
wash without Triton to remove remaining contaminants.  
  9.  Try to use as little Guanidine hydrochloride as possible. If 
3.5 g was sufﬁ cient to dissolve all the protein, next time try 
3.0 g, and so on. Proteins are most soluble away from their 
isoelectric point (p I ). If a protein appears difﬁ cult to dissolve 
try adding 0.5 mL of 3 M sodium acetate pH 5.2 (the salt 
solution normally used to precipitate DNA) to the 5 mL slurry.  
  10.   For a 30,000 Da protein, 1–5 μM represents 12–60 mg pro-
tein in a 400 mL refolding. The correct amount of protein to 
use must be determined by trial and error and may take several 
refoldings.  
  11.  Before injecting the solubilized solution into the refolding buf-
fer, or running the recovered protein over a size-exclusion col-
umn, it must be ﬁ ltered. Millex series ﬁ lters work well for small 
volumes (either Millex-GV ﬁ lter, 0.22 μm, PVDF, 13 mm, 
non-sterile, Millipore number SLGVX13NK, or Millex-GP ﬁ l-
ter, 0.22 μm, PES, 13 mm, non-sterile, Millipore number 
SLGPX13NK). Modiﬁ ed hydrophilic PVDF is the lowest pro-
tein binding membrane ﬁ lter available in this form, but it has a 
slower throughput rate, being only 15–25 % as fast as the PES 
membrane ﬁ lter. Still, PVDF is adequate for most ﬁ ltrations.  
Oxidative Refolding

156
  12.   For sample concentration, care must be taken to select an 
ultraﬁ ltration membrane with a sufﬁ ciently low molecular 
weight cutoff to retain the targeted protein. Of course, the 
tighter the membrane, the slower the ﬁ ltration rate. The 
Ultracel PLC series of membranes from Millipore (5 kD- 
PLCCC, 10 kD-PLC010, 30 kD-PLCTK, and 100 kD- 
PLCHK) work well. They are designed for protein solutions 
less than 0.1 mg/mL and display low protein binding. The 
regenerated cellulose membranes YM10, YM30, and YM 50 
(Millipore) also work well.  
  13.   A good 400 mL ﬁ ltration setup is the Millipore Model 8400 
(Millipore number 5124). It ﬁ ts membranes of 76 mm in 
diameter ( see  Note 12 ). Of course many companies offer 
 tangential ﬂ ow ﬁ ltration setups designed to serve this purpose. 
You will need to select the correct size and an appropriate 
membrane cassette if you choose another system.  
  14.   The concentration step must be done as quickly as possible. 
Have the FPLC ready and as soon as the refolding mixture 
reaches 5–10 mL (and after ﬁ ltering,  see  Note 11 ) inject it 
onto a size-exclusion column to separate the aggregates away 
from the correctly folded protein. If recovery by concentration 
fails, try buffer exchange or dilution followed by capture on 
ion exchange resin (anion or cation depending of the p I of 
your protein) or buffer exchange followed by capture on 
Ni-NTA resin if the protein has a 6-HIS tag.  
  15.  The point of this step is to separate the aggregate from the 
refolded protein. We use HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 75 prep 
grade and HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 200 prep grade columns 
(GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Concentrate the sample as little 
as possible. The manufacturer suggests a loading volume of up 
to 5 mL for these columns. By injecting 5–10 mL you will loose 
some resolution but avoid losses caused by over concentrating 
the sample. Once the aggregate is removed you can further 
concentrate and rerun the sample to get better resolution.  
  16.   Correctly folded proteins usually run as a single tight band on 
nonreducing SDS-PAGE. Misfolded or aggregated protein 
will run as a background smear. Often only a portion of the 
recovered protein is correctly folded, and many need further 
“polishing” by ion exchange or hydrophobic interaction chro-
matography to achieve purity. The conversion of solubilized 
protein to functional form is between 2 and 5 % for most pro-
teins. It is possible to pool correctly folded protein from sepa-
rate refolding attempts to get enough to work with.  
  17.   Don’t assume your protein is a monomer (unless you have rea-
son to believe it is). People often mistake their correctly folded 
protein for aggregate because it elutes at a larger than expected 
Christopher A. Nelson et al.

157
molecular weight. Some proteins are multimers (dimers, tri-
mers, tetramers etc.) and migrate as such on size- exclusion 
chromatography.  
 Acknowledgement 
 This project has been funded in whole or in part with Federal funds 
from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human 
Services, under Contracts No. HHSN272200700058C and 
Contract No. HHSN272201200026C.  
 References 
  1.  Benjamin PT, Weissman JS (2004) Oxidative 
protein folding in eukaryotes: mechanisms and 
consequences. J Cell Biol 164:341–346  
  2.  Kane JF, Hartley DL (1988) Formation of 
recombinant protein inclusion bodies in 
Escherichia coli. Trends Biotechnol 6:
95–101  
  3.  Kelly RF, Winkler ME (1990) Folding of 
eukaryotic proteins produced in Escherichia 
coli. Genet Eng 12:1–19  
  4.  Rudolph R, Lilie H (1996) In vitro folding of 
inclusion body proteins. FASEB J 10:49–56  
  5.  Armstrong N, De Lencastre A, Gouaux E 
(1999) A new protein folding screen: applica-
tion to the ligand binding domains of gluta-
mate and kainate receptor and to lysozyme 
and carbonic anhydrase. Protein Sci 8(7):
1475–1483  
  6.  Lilie H, Schwarz E, Rudolph R (1998) 
Advances in refolding of proteins produced in 
 E. coli . Curr Opin Biotechnol 9:497–501  
  7.  Batas B, Schiraldi C, Chaudhuri JB (1999) 
Inclusion body puriﬁ cation and protein refold-
ing using microﬁ ltration and size exclusion 
chromatography. J Biotechnol 68:149–158  
  8.  Middelberg APJ (2002) Preparative protein 
refolding. Trends Biotechnol 20(10):437–443  
  9.  Jungbauer A, Kaar W (2007) Current status of 
technical protein refolding. J Biotechnol 128:
587–596  
  10.  Hevehan DL, Clark EDB (1997) Oxidative 
renaturation of lysozyme at high concentra-
tions. Biotechnol Bioeng 54(3):221–230  
  11.  Wetlaufer DB, Branca PA, Chen G (1987) The 
oxidative folding of proteins by disulﬁ de plus 
thiol does not correlate with redox potential. 
Protein Eng 1(2):141–146  
 12.   Chow MK, Amin AA, Fulton KF, Fernando 
T, Kamau L, Batty C, Louca M, Ho S, 
Whisstock JC, Bottomley SP, Buckle AM 
(2006) The REFOLD database: a tool for the 
optimization of protein expression and 
refolding. Nucleic Acids Res 34(Database 
issue):D207–D212  
  13.  Van Duyne GD, Standaert RF, Karplus PA, 
Schreiber SL, Clardy J (1993) Atomic struc-
tures of the human immunophilin FKBP-12 
complexes with FK506 and rapamycin. J Mol 
Biol 229(1):105–124  
 14.  Nelson CA, Fremont MD, Sedy JR, Norris 
PS, Ware CF, Murphy KM, Fremont DH 
(2008) Structural determinants of herpesvi-
rus entry mediator recognition by murine B 
and T lymphocyte attenuator. J Immunol 
180:940–947  
  15.  Nelson CA, Pekosz A, Lee CA, Diamond MS, 
Fremont DH (2005) Structure and intracellu-
lar targeting of SARS-coronavirus Orf7a acces-
sory protein. Structure 13:75–85  
  16.  Luca VC, AbiMansour J, Nelson CA, Fremont 
DH (2012) Crystal structure of the Japanese 
encephalitis virus envelope protein. J Virol 
86(4):2337–2346  
  17.  Lazear E, Peterson LW, Nelson CA, Fremont 
DH (2013) Crystal structure of the cowpox 
virus encoded NKG2D-ligand OMCP. J Virol 
87:840–850  
Oxidative Refolding

159
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_12, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 12  
 High-Throughput Crystallization Screening 
 Tatiana  Skarina ,  Xiaohui  Xu ,  Elena  Evdokimova , and  Alexei  Savchenko 
 Abstract 
 Protein structure determination by X-ray crystallography is dependent on obtaining a single protein crystal 
suitable for diffraction data collection. Due to this requirement, protein crystallization represents a key 
step in protein structure determination. The conditions for protein crystallization have to be determined 
empirically for each protein, making this step also a bottleneck in the structure determination process. 
Typical protein crystallization practice involves parallel setup and monitoring of a considerable number of 
individual protein crystallization experiments (also called crystallization trials). In these trials the aliquots 
of puriﬁ ed protein are mixed with a range of solutions composed of a precipitating agent, buffer, and 
sometimes an additive that have been previously successful in prompting protein crystallization. The indi-
vidual chemical conditions in which a particular protein shows signs of crystallization are used as a starting 
point for further crystallization experiments. The goal is optimizing the formation of individual protein 
crystals of sufﬁ cient size and quality to make them suitable for diffraction data collection. Thus the com-
position of the primary crystallization screen is critical for successful crystallization. 
 Systematic analysis of crystallization experiments carried out on several hundred proteins as part of 
large-scale structural genomics efforts allowed the optimization of the protein crystallization protocol and 
identiﬁ cation of a minimal set of 96 crystallization solutions (the “TRAP” screen) that, in our experience, 
led to crystallization of the maximum number of proteins.  
 Key words    Protein crystals  ,   Crystallization screen  ,   Vapor diffusion  ,   Protein crystallography  
1  Introduction 
 Protein crystallization is a key step in obtaining high-quality 3D 
structures using X-ray crystallography. However, ﬁ nding the 
unique combination of buffer and precipitant solutions, which 
promote crystallization of a particular protein, represents a contin-
uous challenge for crystallographers [ 1 – 3 ]. Consequently, a signiﬁ -
cant amount of effort has been dedicated to the development and 
optimization of techniques that increase the success rate in protein 
crystallization [ 2 ,  4 – 6 ]. In spite of this, protein crystallization 
remains a complicated and time-consuming process of performing 
a signiﬁ cant number of trial-and-error experiments involving sys-
tematic testing of variable chemical and physical parameters [ 7 ]. 

160
These parameters primarily include the concentration of the 
protein [ 8 ], the temperature of crystallization [ 9 ], and the chemical 
composition and the concentration of components of crystalliza-
tion solution [ 10 ]. 
 While the initial phase of protein crystal formation remains 
poorly understood [ 11 ], protein crystallization usually occurs at 
supersaturating protein concentration, making this an important 
factor in the crystallization process [ 8 ]. Exposure of proteins to 
diverse precipitating reagents decreases protein solubility leading 
to protein supersaturation, thus creating conditions favorable for 
protein crystallization. This phenomenon forms the basis of all 
protein crystallization experiments. 
 The most common techniques for protein crystallization fall 
under the general category of crystallization by vapor diffusion 
[ 2 ,  4 ,  12 ]. In this approach a droplet of puriﬁ ed protein sample is 
mixed with crystallization solution and is equilibrated against a 
larger reservoir of the same solution in a sealed crystallization 
chamber. The difference in reagent concentration between the 
droplet and reservoir (the droplet contains protein and crystallization 
solution in a deﬁ ned ratio) leads to transfer of water vapor from 
droplet to reservoir, increasing the concentrations of precipitant 
and protein in the droplet, which ideally prompts protein crystalli-
zation. The position of the protein droplet “sitting” on an elevated 
platform or “hanging” from the lid of a crystallization chamber 
distinguishes between sitting and hanging drop types of vapor dif-
fusion crystallization experiments. 
 Since no single universal solution can be designed for protein 
crystallization, crystallization experiments are performed in parallel, 
screening a range of conditions. In a typical crystallization screen, 
a protein is tested at ﬁ xed pre-saturation concentration against a 
set of crystallization solutions selected according to a particular 
strategy. In the case of a sparse matrix approach [ 13 ], the crystal-
lization screen contains a wide range of solutions featuring many 
chemically diverse components. These solutions are based on pre-
viously reported successful crystallization experiments. Positive 
results from a sparse matrix screen are followed by a systematic 
evaluation of the chemical factors, such as precipitant, that contrib-
ute to protein crystallization varying concentrations and pH values 
in order to optimize protein crystallization. 
 The signiﬁ cant variation in chemical composition of different 
sparse matrix and crystallization screens with novel screen compo-
sitions is reported on a regular basis [ 14 ,  15 ]. This necessitates a 
systematic mining of crystallization experiment results in order to 
streamline the crystallization process. 
 Large-scale structural genomics projects are uniquely posi-
tioned to provide such analysis [ 16 – 22 ]. Protein crystallization 
success has been improved by deﬁ ning the most efﬁ cient 
 crystallization screens from among widely used and commercially 
Tatiana Skarina et al.

161
available sparse matrix screens [ 23 ]. The current dataset includes 
the results of crystallization experiments on more than 700 differ-
ent proteins from all three kingdoms of life (bacteria, archaea, and 
eukarya) with more than 200 structures determined. Analysis of 
this dataset resulted in a novel screen named “TRAP” that includes 
the 96 most successful crystallization compositions. The number 
of selected crystallization solutions makes it easily adaptable for 
high- throughput as well as for use in single-protein crystallization 
experiments.  
2  Materials 
 All solutions must be prepared with ultrapure water and analytical 
grade reagents. Please carefully follow the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions for the handling and disposal of toxic reagents. All stock solu-
tions should be ﬁ ltered using 0.22 μM pore size membranes and 
kept at 4 °C unless indicated otherwise.
 2.1.   Standard protein sample solution: 10 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-
1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) pH 7.5, 500 mM 
NaCl. 
 2.2.    Precrystallization solution 1: 25 % polyethylene glycol (PEG) 
3350, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.5.  
 2.3.    Precrystallization solution 2: 2 M ammonium sulfate, 
100 mM HEPES pH 7.5.  
 2.4.    “TRAP” crystallization trial screen (96 conditions).
  1.  15 % (v/v) PEG 400, 0.2 M magnesium chloride, 0.1 M 
HEPES pH 7.5.  
  2.  1 M ammonium citrate, 0.1 M 1,3-Bis[tris(hydroxymethyl)
methylamino]propane (BIS-Tris propane) pH 7.0.  
  3.  2 M ammonium citrate, 0.1 M BIS-Tris propane pH 7.0.  
  4.  4 M ammonium acetate, 0.1 M sodium acetate pH 4.6.  
  5.  1.5 M ammonium chloride, 0.1 M sodium acetate 
pH 4.6.  
  6.  2 M ammonium dihydrogen phosphate, 0.1 M Tris–HCl 
pH 8.5.  
  7.  1.1 M ammonium tartrate, 0.1 M sodium acetate pH 4.6.  
  8.  1 M lithium sulfate, 0.1 M BIS-Tris propane pH 7.0.  
  9.  3.2 M sodium chloride, 0.1 M sodium acetate pH 4.6.  
 10.   3.2 M sodium chloride, 0.1 M BIS-Tris propane pH 7.0.  
 11.   5 M sodium chloride.  
 12.   30 % (v/v) PEG 400, 0.1 M potassium chloride, 0.01 M 
magnesium chloride, 0.05 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
Crystallization Screening

162
 13.   2 M ammonium sulfate, 5 % (v/v) isopropanol.  
 14.   2 M ammonium sulfate, 0.2 M sodium, potassium tartrate, 
0.1 M sodium citrate, pH 5.6.  
 15.   1.5 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M sodium acetate pH 4.6.  
 16.   2.5 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M sodium acetate pH 4.6.  
 17.   2 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M Bis(2-hydroxyethyl)
amino- tris(hydroxymethyl)methane (BIS-Tris) pH 5.5.  
 18.   1.5 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M BIS-Tris pH 6.5.  
 19.   1.6 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M sodium chloride, 0.1 M 
HEPES pH 7.5.  
 20.   2.5 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M BIS-Tris propane 
pH 7.0.  
 21.   2 M ammonium sulfate, 4 % (w/v) sucrose.  
 22.   1.5 M ammonium sulfate, 12 % (v/v) glycerol, 0.1 M 
Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
 23.   2 M ammonium sulfate, 1 % (w/v) PEG 2000 mono- 
methyl ether (MME).  
 24.   2 M ammonium sulfate, 2 % (v/v) PEG 400, 0.1 M 
HEPES pH 7.5.  
 25.   4 M sodium formate.  
 26.   2 M sodium formate, 0.1 M sodium acetate pH 4.6.  
 27.   4 M sodium nitrate, 0.1 M BIS-Tris propane pH 7.0.  
 28.   1 M sodium, potassium phosphate pH 6.9.  
 29.   0.7 M sodium citrate, 0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
 30.   1.4 M sodium citrate, 0.1 M HEPES pH 7.5.  
 31.   28 % (v/v) PEG 400, 0.2 M calcium chloride, 0.1 M 
HEPES pH 7.5.  
 32.   30 % (v/v) PEG 2000 MME, 0.2 M ammonium acetate, 
0.1 M sodium citrate pH 5.6.  
 33.  10 % (w/v) PEG 5000 MME, 5 % (v/v) Tacsimate ( see 
 Note 1 ), 0.1 M HEPES pH 7.0.  
 34.   10 % (w/v) PEG 4000, 5 % (v/v) isopropanol, 0.1 M 
HEPES pH 7.5.  
 35.   15 % (v/v) isopropanol, 0.1 M potassium chloride, 
0.025 M magnesium chloride, 0.05 M sodium cacodylate 
pH 6.0.  
 36.   20 % (w/v) PEG 4000, 10 % (v/v) isopropanol, 0.1 M 
sodium citrate pH 5.6.  
 37.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.1 M citric acid pH 3.5.  
 38.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.1 M sodium acetate pH 4.5.  
Tatiana Skarina et al.

163
 39.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M sodium chloride, 0.1 M 
sodium citrate pH 5.6.  
 40.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M sodium chloride, 0.1 M 
BIS-Tris pH 5.5. 
 41.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M sodium chloride, 0.1 M 
HEPES pH 7.5.  
 42.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
 43.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.1 M BIS-Tris–HCl pH 6.5.  
 44.   30 % (w/v) PEG 2000 MME, 0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
 45.   20 % (w/v) PEG 5000 MME, 0.1 M BIS-Tris pH 6.5.  
 46.   20 % (w/v) PEG 8000, 0.2 M sodium chloride, 0.1 M 
phosphate citrate pH 4.2.  
 47.   20 % (w/v) PEG 10000, 0.1 M 2-( N -morpholino)eth-
anesulfonic acid (MES) pH 6.0.  
 48.   30 % (w/v) PEG 2000 MME, 0.2 M ammonium sulfate, 
0.1 M sodium acetate pH 4.6.  
 49.   30 % (w/v) PEG 2000 MME, 0.2 M ammonium sulfate, 
0.1 M sodium cacodylate pH 6.5.  
 50.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M 
BIS-Tris pH 5.5. 
 51.   27 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M 
HEPES pH 7.5.  
 52.   25 % (w/v) PEG 4000, 0.2 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M 
sodium acetate pH 4.6.  
 53.   25 % (w/v) PEG 5000 MME, 0.2 M ammonium sulfate, 
0.1 M sodium citrate pH 5.6.  
 54.   30 % (w/v) PEG 5000 MME, 0.2 M ammonium sulfate, 
0.1 M MES pH 6.5.  
 55.   25 % (w/v) PEG 5000 MME, 0.2 M ammonium sulfate, 
0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
  56.   30 % (w/v) PEG 8000, 0.2 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M 
sodium cacodylate pH 6.5.  
 57.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M diammonium hydrogen 
citrate.  
 58.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M ammonium formate.  
 59.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M ammonium dihydrogen 
phosphate.  
 60.   18 % (w/v) PEG 8000, 0.2 M calcium acetate, 0.1 M 
sodium cacodylate pH 6.5.  
 61.   9 % (w/v) PEG 8000, 0.2 M calcium acetate, 0.1 M 
sodium cacodylate pH 6.5.  
Crystallization Screening

164
 62.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.05 M calcium chloride, 0.1 M 
Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
 63.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M calcium chloride.  
 64.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M calcium acetate.  
 65.   30 % (w/v) PEG 2000 MME, 0.1 M potassium 
thiocyanate.  
 66.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M magnesium nitrate.  
 67.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M magnesium chloride, 
0.1 M BIS-Tris pH 5.5.  
 68.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M magnesium chloride, 
0.1 M BIS-Tris pH 6.5.  
 69.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M magnesium chloride, 
0.1 M HEPES pH 7.5.  
 70.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M magnesium chloride, 
0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
 71.   30 % (w/v) PEG 4000, 0.2 M magnesium chloride, 
0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
 72.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M magnesium formate.  
 73.   30 % (w/v) PEG 4000, 0.2 M lithium sulfate, 0.1 M 
Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
 74.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M lithium sulfate, 0.1 M 
HEPES pH 7.5.  
 75.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M lithium citrate.  
 76.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M lithium sulfate, 0.1 M BIS- 
Tris pH 5.5.  
 77.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M ammonium acetate, 0.1 M 
BIS-Tris pH 5.5. 
 78.   30 % (w/v) PEG 4000, 0.2 M ammonium acetate, 0.1 M 
sodium citrate pH 5.6.  
 79.   30 % (w/v) PEG 4000, 0.2 M ammonium acetate, 0.1 M 
sodium acetate pH 4.6.  
 80.   30 % (w/v) PEG 8000, 0.2 M sodium acetate, 0.1 M 
BIS- Tris pH 6.5.  
 81.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M sodium tartrate.  
 82.   25 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M sodium tartrate, 0.1 M 
Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
 83.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M sodium dihydrogen 
phosphate.  
 84.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M potassium, sodium 
tartrate. 
 85.   30 % (v/v) Jeffamine ED-2001, 0.1 M HEPES pH 7.0.  
Tatiana Skarina et al.

165
 86.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M sodium sulfate.  
 87.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M sodium thiocyanate.  
 88.   30 % (w/v) PEG 4000, 0.2 M sodium acetate, 0.1 M 
Tris–HCl pH 8.5.  
 89.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M potassium chloride.  
 90.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M potassium dihydrogen 
phosphate.  
 91.   20 % (w/v) PEG 8000, 0.05 M potassium dihydrogen 
phosphate.  
 92.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M potassium sulfate.  
 93.   10 % (w/v) PEG 6000, 5 % (v/v) 2-methyl 2,4- pentanediol 
(MPD), 0.1 M HEPES pH 7.5.  
 94.   15 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.1 M succinic acid pH 7.0.  
 95.   1 % (w/v) PEG 2000 MME, 1 M succinic acid, 0.1 M 
HEPES pH 7.0.  
 96.   20 % (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.05 M zinc acetate.  
  2.5.  Crystallization plates for vapor diffusion experiments (sitting/
hanging drop setup) are available from many suppliers.  
3  Methods 
  1.  Prepare a 200 μL protein sample at the highest concentration 
(usually 10 mg/mL and higher) tolerated by the protein with-
out the signs of precipitation ( see  Note 2 ). The protein sample 
should be at least 90 % pure as judged by Coomassie Brilliant 
Blue-stained sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel elec-
trophoresis (SDS-PAGE).  
  2.  Filter the protein solution through a 0.22 μm pore size mem-
brane into a sterile container.  
  3.  Keep the protein sample at 4 °C while performing the follow-
ing steps ( see  Note 3 ). 
  1.  Pipet 0.2–0.5 mL of the precrystallization solution 1 into a 
reservoir of the sitting drop crystallization plate. Pipet 0.2–
0.5 mL of precrystallization solution 2 into the next reservoir 
of the same crystallization plate.  
  2.  Pipet 2 μL of protein sample onto the center of a drop well 
above the reservoir with precrystallization solution 1.  
  3.  Pipet 2 μL of precrystallization solution 1 into the protein 
sample drop. Do not mix the drop.  
  4.  Repeat  steps 2 through  4 with precrystallization solution 2.  
  5.  Seal both crystallization chambers, and wait for 30 min.  
3.1  Protein Sample 
Preparation
3.2  Selection 
of the Protein 
Concentration for 
Crystallization Trials
Crystallization Screening

166
  6.   After 30 min, inspect the two drops using a light microscope 
with magniﬁ cation between 20× and 100×. If one or both 
drops show signs of microcrystalline or light granular precipi-
tate (Fig.  1b, c ) then proceed with crystallization trials 
(Subheading  3.3 below) at the current protein sample 
concentration.
  7.   If both drops demonstrate heavy precipitation of protein 
(Fig.  1d ), dilute the protein sample with the standard protein 
sample buffer and repeat  steps 1 – 6 until microcrystalline or 
light granular precipitate is observed. Use the protein solu-
tion at the deﬁ ned concentration to set up crystallization trials 
( see Subheading  3.4 ).  
  1.   Prepare a 5–30 mM stock solution of the small molecule by 
diluting the appropriate amount of reagent in 100 % dimethyl-
sulfoxide (DMSO).  
  2.   Prepare a standard protein sample buffer supplemented with 
3 % DMSO.  
  3.   Dilute the ligand stock solution to 0.05–0.1 mM with the buffer 
from the previous step. If any precipitation occurs dilute further 
or increase the DMSO concentration up to 5 % until no pre-
cipitate is observed. 
  4.   Add the diluted ligand solution to the protein sample to estab-
lish a protein:ligand ratio between 1:5 and 1:10.  
  5.  Incubate at 4 ºC for 2 h ( see  Note 4 ).  
  6.   Concentrate the protein:ligand sample at 4 °C to the concen-
tration appropriate for crystallization using centrifugal ﬁ lters 
with the appropriate molecular weight cutoff.  
  7.   Proceed with crystallization trials.  
  1.   Pipet 100 μL of each of the 96 crystallization solutions from 
the TRAP screen into the lower reservoirs of a 96-format sit-
ting drop crystallization plate ( see  Note 5 ).  
  2.   Pipet 1–2 μL of the protein sample solution into each of the 
drop wells ( see  Note 6 ). 
3.3  Preparation of 
the Protein Sample for 
Co-crystallization with 
a Small-Molecule 
Ligand That Has Low 
Water Solubility
3.4  Setting Up 
Crystallization Trials
 Fig. 1   Examples of protein concentration screening results: ( a ) clear drop; ( b ) light precipitate; ( c ) microcrystal-
line precipitate; ( d ) heavy brown precipitate 
 
Tatiana Skarina et al.

167
  3.   For each well add the same (1–2 μL) amount of the reservoir 
solution to the protein solution.  
  4.   Seal the plate carefully with optically clear sealing tape.  
  5.   Store the crystallization trial plate at 20 °C.  
  6.   Monitor the crystallization trials using a light microscope 
with magniﬁ cation between 20× and 100× after 1 day, 3 days, 
1 week, and so on ( see  Note 7 ).  
4  Notes 
  1.   Tacsimate is a unique crystallization reagent developed exclu-
sively by Hampton Research. Tacsimate is composed of a mix-
ture of titrated organic acid salts. Tacsimate contains 1.8305 M 
malonic acid, 0.25 M ammonium citrate tribasic, 0.12 M 
succinic acid, 0.3 M  DL -malic acid, 0.4 M sodium acetate trihy-
drate, 0.5 M sodium formate, and 0.16 M ammonium tartrate 
dibasic 1. This mixture is titrated to the appropriate pH using 
sodium hydroxide and is available in pH 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9 
reagent formulations.  
  2.  We use the standard protein sample solution listed in 
Subheading  2 as our default protein solution. However this 
protein sample solution can be substituted for an alternative 
depending on the information available about the protein to 
be crystallized. In general, the protein sample solution should 
promote the sample’s stability and homogeneity. Avoid solutions 
such as phosphate-based buffers that can lead to the formation 
of salt crystals. Also try to avoid using reagents that will 
decrease the chances of protein crystallization, for example, 
some detergents.  
  3.  If the protein tends to precipitate at low temperature it should 
be kept at room temperature.  
  4.   The protein sample can be incubated at room temperature if it 
tends to precipitate at lower temperature.  
  5.   Follow the manufacturer’s recommendations for the optimal 
amount of the lower reservoir solution for the particular type 
of crystallization plate used in the experiment. Differing 
amounts of reservoir solution will affect the rate of equilibra-
tion of the protein sample drop.  
  6.   In cases where the amount of puriﬁ ed protein is very limited, 
the volume of the protein sample drop can be decreased to as 
little as 50 nL. Accurate dispensing of low volume drops will 
require the use of a nanodrop liquid-handling system. One 
problem with nanodrops is that the smaller volume droplets can 
lead the droplet’s prematurely drying out.  
Crystallization Screening

168
  7.  If no promising crystallization signs are observed after 4–6 
weeks, the crystallization plates can be moved to 4 °C and 
monitored at this temperature.  
 Acknowledgements 
 This work was supported with federal funds from the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes 
of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, under 
Contract 
Nos. 
HHSN272200700058C 
and 
HHSN272201200026C.  
 References 
  1.  Chayen NE (2004) Turning protein crystalli-
zation from an art into a science. Curr Opin 
Struct Biol 14(5):577–583  
  2.  McPherson A (2004) Introduction to protein 
crystallization. Methods 34(3):254–265  
  3.  Chayen NE, Saridakis E (2008) Protein crys-
tallization: from puriﬁ ed protein to diffraction- 
quality crystal. Nat Methods 5(2):147–153  
  4.  Bergfors T (2009) Protein crystallization. In: 
Tsigelny IF (ed) IUL biotechnology, 2nd edn. 
International University Line, La Jolla  
  5.  Ochi T et al (2009) Perspectives on protein crys-
tallization. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 101(1–3):
56–63  
  6.  Bolanos-Garcia VM, Chayen NE (2009) New 
directions in conventional methods of protein 
crystallization. 
Prog 
Biophys 
Mol 
Biol 
101(1–3):3–12 
  7.  McPherson A (1990) Current approaches to 
macromolecular crystallization. Eur J Biochem 
189(1):1–23 
  8.  Saridakis E, Chayen NE (2003) Systematic 
improvement of protein crystals by determin-
ing the supersolubility curves of phase dia-
grams. Biophys J 84(2 Pt 1):1218–1222  
  9.  McPherson A (1985) Crystallization of pro-
teins by variation of pH or temperature. 
Methods Enzymol 114:125–127  
  10.   Enrico A, Stura GRN, Wilson IA (1992) Strategies 
in the crystallization of glycoproteins and protein 
complexes. J Cryst Growth 122(1–4):273–285  
  11.  Blow DM et al (1994) Control of nucleation of 
protein crystals. Protein Sci 3(10):1638–1643  
  12.  Benvenuti M, Mangani S (2007) Crystallization 
of soluble proteins in vapor diffusion for X-ray 
crystallography. Nat Protoc 2(7):1633–1651  
 13.  Jancarik J, Kim S-H (1991) Sparse matrix 
sampling: a screening method for crystalliza-
tion of proteins. J Appl Cryst 24:409–411  
  14.  Bulek AM et al (2012) TCR/pMHC opti-
mized protein crystallization screen. J Immunol 
Methods 382(1–2):203–210  
  15.   Grimm C et al (2010) A crystallization screen 
based on alternative polymeric precipitants. 
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66(Pt 
6):685–697  
  16.  Berry IM et al (2006) SPINE high-throughput 
crystallization, crystal imaging and recognition 
techniques: current state, performance analysis, 
new technologies and future aspects. Acta 
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 62(Pt 10):
1137–1149  
  17.  Chayen NE, Saridakis E (2002) Protein crystal-
lization for genomics: towards high- throughput 
optimization techniques. Acta Crystallogr D 
Biol Crystallogr 58(Pt 6 Pt 2):921–927  
  18.  Sauder MJ et al (2008) High throughput pro-
tein 
production 
and 
crystallization 
at 
NYSGXRC. Methods Mol Biol 426:561–575  
  19.  Stewart L, Clark R, Behnke C (2002) High- 
throughput crystallization and structure deter-
mination in drug discovery. Drug Discov 
Today 7(3):187–196  
  20.  Sugahara M et al (2008) High-throughput 
crystallization-to-structure pipeline at RIKEN 
SPring-8 center. J Struct Funct Genomics 
9(1–4):21–28  
  21.  Page R, Stevens RC (2004) Crystallization 
data mining in structural genomics: using posi-
tive and negative results to optimize protein 
crystallization 
screens. 
Methods 
34(3):
373–389  
  22.  Hui R, Edwards A (2003) High-throughput 
protein crystallization. J Struct Biol 142(1):
154–161  
  23.  Kimber MS et al (2003) Data mining 
 crystallization 
databases: 
knowledge-based 
approaches to optimize protein crystal screens. 
Proteins 51(4):562–568  
Tatiana Skarina et al.

169
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_13, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 13  
 Screening Proteins for NMR Suitability 
 Adelinda  A.  Yee ,  Anthony  Semesi ,  Maite  Garcia , 
and  Cheryl  H.  Arrowsmith 
 Abstract 
 NMR spectroscopy is a valuable tool in structural genomics. Identiﬁ cation of protein samples that are 
amenable to structure determination by NMR spectroscopy requires efﬁ cient screening. The preparation 
of multiple samples in parallel and screening by NMR is described. The method described is applicable to 
large structural genomics projects but can easily be scaled down for application to small structural biology 
projects. All the equipment used is commonly found in any NMR structural biology laboratory.  
 Key words   NMR screening  ,   Autoinduction  ,   Structural genomics  ,  NMR spectroscopy  ,  NMR sample  
1  Introduction 
 NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography are the two methods 
most commonly used to determine atomic resolution protein 
structures in structural genomics projects. These two methods are 
complementary and together are able to yield structures of more 
proteins than either method alone [ 1 – 6 ]. While rapid, parallel 
structure determination in solution by NMR is limited to proteins 
of ~20 kDa or less, the NMR samples allow immediate and insight-
ful follow-up experiments to identify functional molecular interac-
tions and map binding surfaces [ 7 ]. The major bottleneck or 
restriction point in the NMR structural genomics pipeline is the 
identiﬁ cation of a protein sample that is amenable to multidimen-
sional 3D-NMR spectroscopy using  15 N and  13 C-stable isotope 
labels [ 2 ,  3 ]. Once such a sample has been identiﬁ ed, the probability 
of solving its 3D structure is very high, and all subsequent invest-
ment of resources into such a sample will be well spent. This key 
bottleneck/decision point is analogous to that of obtaining a well-
diffracting crystal in the crystallography pipeline. Importantly, 
identiﬁ cation of good-quality NMR samples can be performed in a 
rapid, parallel screening procedure for many samples and/or con-
structs (and conditions, if desired), early in the NMR pipeline. 

170
 A protocol for identifying proteins amenable to NMR structure 
determination is described. This protocol has been reﬁ ned over 
approximately 15 years, on more than 3,000 samples of archaeal, 
bacterial, and eukaryotic proteins leading to over 500 “structure 
quality” samples. Importantly, this procedure does not require 
sophisticated automation and can be readily implemented in most 
laboratories with standard commercially available equipment. The 
protocol makes use of the powerful pET expression system for 
recombinant proteins in  E. coli [ 8 ], combined with hexa-histidine 
tagged target protein for rapid afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation. The hexa-His- 
tag usually does not interfere with the NMR spectrum of the target 
protein [ 2 ], and can be readily cleaved with TEV protease if 
desired. The optimized NMR screening buffer has a high salt con-
tent because that can avoid aggregation and/or increase solubility 
for many more proteins compared to low-salt buffers. While higher 
salt concentration may compromise the performance of some 
cryogenic NMR probes, we are able to obtain many more 
structure- quality samples (leading to high-quality solution struc-
tures) using high-salt as opposed to low-salt buffers. 
 The use of 2D  15 N-HSQC spectra to assess the NMR suitability 
of the target [ 2 ] is done because it offers [ 1 ] greater information 
content than 1D  1 H NMR [ 2 ], is relatively fast and inexpensive, 
and [ 3 ] accurately reﬂ ects the amenability of the protein for subse-
quent  15 N, 13 C-based spectroscopic structure determination. In a 
well-folded protein that adopts a single conformation in solution, 
backbone amide  1 H- 15 N pairs (and Tyrosine indole NHs) appear as 
single, well dispersed peaks, while side chain NH 2 groups appear as 
two peaks sharing a common  15 N chemical shift. Thus, the number 
of peaks, their degree of chemical shift dispersion and their unifor-
mity of intensity provide key information on the biophysical prop-
erties of the protein, including whether it is fully or partially folded, 
aggregated, or in multiple conformations [ 1 ,  2 ]. 
 The cost of  13 C-labeled carbon sources combined with the low 
frequency (25–10 %) of each sample having sufﬁ cient NMR quality 
necessitates an initial “screening sample” using only  15 N-labeled pro-
tein. However, an important consideration in the initial  15 N-NMR  
screening protocol is the degree to which the results are reproducible 
for a subsequent  15 N- 13 C-labeled sample for full 3D-NMR data col-
lection and structure determination. Thus, the media (especially car-
bon and nitrogen sources) should be as similar as possible for both 
the  15 N screening sample and the  15 N- 13 C structure determination 
sample. Cost estimates showed that  13 C-glucose is by far the least 
expensive source of  13 C for uniform protein labeling in  E. coli . One 
would like to take advantage of autoinduction during the screening 
phase when we are dealing with a large number of samples, but be 
able to switch to IPTG-induction with  13 C-glucose as the sole carbon 
source for the smaller number of targets prepared for full NMR data 
collection, with high reproducibility. Therefore the screening 
Adelinda A. Yee et al.

171
protocol was optimized for a glucose- based media, but took advan-
tage of an autoinduction strategy to achieve optimal induction of 
protein expression for multiple cultures that may grow at different 
rates, without the need to monitor optical density. 
 Autoinduction takes advantage of the fact that the presence of 
glucose in the medium prevents the transport of lactose into the 
cell [ 9 ]. The original autoinduction medium of Studier and col-
leagues [ 10 – 12 ] uses more glycerol and lactose than glucose as 
carbon sources, which is expensive for  13 C-labeling [ 13 ]. To ensure 
reproducibility of the yield and behavior of the protein between 
 15 N-screening cultures and  15 N- 13 C-“structure production” cul-
tures an autoinduction protocol was developed in which glucose is 
used as the main carbon source for  E. coli growth. When the 
medium runs out of glucose, the remaining lactose will induce 
transcription of the protein target at high cell densities. Using a 
test set of six different proteins, the glucose–lactose ratio in the 
autoinduction medium was optimized so that very similar growth 
curves and induction levels were obtained at the point of harvest 
compared with IPTG-induction. Since this protocol was imple-
mented in 2007, hundreds of targets using glucose autoinduction 
medium have been screened and well over 30 NMR structures 
have been deposited in the PDB [ 14 ]. 
 Developments in NMR technology over the past decade have 
also increased the feasibility and productivity of NMR sample screen-
ing. Automatic sample changers coupled with software for auto-
mated acquisition of multiple spectra have increased productivity per 
spectroscopist and per spectrometer. The availability of 1.7 mm 
cryogenic microprobes allows the use of less protein per screening 
sample, and/or the screening of more conditions per protein with-
out the need to increase protein production. This chapter describes 
the current NMR screening procedure using a Bruker 500 MHz 
spectrometer equipped with 1.7 mm cryogenic microprobe and 
B-ACS sample changer. The procedure is also applicable to screen-
ing with conventional 5 mm probe spectrometers but would 
require increased protein per sample, or higher ﬁ eld strength.  
2  Materials 
   All solutions are prepared using deionized water. Store the stock 
solutions in a screw cap container at room temperature.
  1.   1 M ZnSO 4 : dissolve 1.44 g of ZnSO 4 ·7H 2 O in 5 mL of water.  
  2.   1 M MgSO 4 (Warning: add the water slowly, the solution gets 
hot and could boil over): dissolve 12.32 g of MgSO 4 ·7H 2 O in 
50 mL of water.  
  3.   1 M CaCl 2 : dissolve 7.35 g CaCl 2 ·2H 2 O in 50 mL of water.  
2.1  15 N-Labelled 
Autoinduction Minimal 
Medium
2.1.1  Stock Solutions
Screening for NMR Suitability

172
  1.   In an autoclavable 2 L ﬂ ask, if using a shaker, or 1 L centrifuge 
bottle, if using the LEX system, dissolve 6.8 g of Na 2 HPO 4 , 
3 g of KH 2 PO 4 , 0.5 g of NaCl, and 0.6 g of  15 N-labelled 
NH 4 Cl, in 500 mL water and autoclave the medium.  
  2.   In a separate small beaker or tube, mix the following: 1 mL of 
1 M MgSO 4 stock solution; 5 mg of biotin; 5 mg of thiamine . 
HCl; 10 μL of 1 M ZnSO 4 stock solution; 100 μL of 1 M 
CaCl 2 stock solution; 2.5 g of glucose; 1 g of lactose; and 
enough water to make 10 mL. Stir or shake until all compo-
nents dissolve. Filter-sterilize through a 0.2 μm syringe ﬁ lter 
into the autoclaved  15 N-labelled solution.  
  1.   Lysis Buffer: 10 mM imidazole, 20 mM Tris, 500 mM NaCl, 
10 μM ZnSO 4 , pH 8.5.  
  2.   Wash Buffer : 30 mM imidazole, 20 mM Tris, 500 mM NaCl, 
10 μM ZnSO 4 , pH 8.5.  
  3.   Eluiton Buffer : 500 mM imidazole, 20 mM Tris, 500 mM 
NaCl, 10 μM ZnSO 4 , pH 8.5.  
 Buffer stock solutions are prepared using deionized water. Store 
the solutions at room temperature ( see  Note 1 ).
  1.   1 M sodium acetate, adjust pH to 5.0 with acetic acid.  
  2.  1 M Tris, adjust pH to 7.7 with HCl or NaOH.  
  3.   Base NMR screening Buffer: 450 mM NaCl, 10 mM DTT, 
10 μM ZnSO 4 , 1 mM benzamidine, 0.1 % Sodium azide, 
10 % D 2 O.  
3  Methods 
 Use an incubator shaker for the Starting Cultures and a larger 
incubator shaker for the Large Scale Culture (Fig.  1 ). This is imple-
mented in parallel to grow up to 24 different targets per incubator 
using the modiﬁ ed LEX system ( see Fig.  1 ). The same incubator 
shaker can hold up to 12 fermentation ﬂ asks if using a shaking 
system for aeration. Fermentation in minimal media takes 3 days 
per batch of targets. One person can ferment up to 3 batches of 
24 targets per week. The steps below are for a single batch of 24 
cultures carried out in parallel by one person.
  1.   Large scale cultures: Add an appropriate amount of sterile anti-
biotic solution(s), depending on the vector and competent 
cells used, to 24 ﬂ asks/bottles of prepared  15 N-labelled mini-
mal media.  
  2.   Transfer 20 mL aliquots of the Large Scale Culture into 
twenty- four 100 mL ﬂ asks. 
2.1.2  Medium per Target
2.2  Puriﬁ cation 
Buffers
2.3  NMR Buffers
3.1  Fermentation 
for Screening
Adelinda A. Yee et al.

173
  3.  Starting culture: Inoculate each 100 mL ﬂ ask with a single 
colony from a plate of freshly transformed plasmid, or any-
where from 20 to 50 μL of glycerol stock of  E. coli harboring 
the desired plasmid.  
  4.  Incubate the Starting Cultures while shaking at 37 °C, 200 rpm 
overnight ( see  Note 2 ). 
  5.  Inoculate each Large Scale Cultures with an entire Starting 
Culture and aerate, or shake at 200 rpm, at 37 °C for 24–30 h.  
  6.  Harvest the cells by centrifugation at 12,000 ×  g for 20 min at 
4 °C.  
  7.  Freeze the cell pellets in a tube at −80°C until ready for 
puriﬁ cation.  
 This stage is implemented in parallel. Ideally, there is no limit as to 
how many targets can be puriﬁ ed per batch. Typically 12 targets 
can be puriﬁ ed at a time ( see  Note 3 ). A digital sonicator with a 
4-prong horn is used to lyse the cells, and a centrifuge equipped 
with SLA600TC rotor is used for centrifuging the cell lysates. 
3.2  NMR Samples for 
Screening
 Fig. 1   Innova 4430 incubator shaker modiﬁ ed into a LEX fermentation system (Harbinger Inc.) by introducing 
air lines that aerate each bottle via a glass frit sparger (available from Harbinger Inc.). This modiﬁ cation does 
not alter the shaking mechanism of the Innova 4430. Another advantage of this LEX system, aside from 
increasing the fermentation capacity of each incubator, is that the centrifuge bottle serves as the fermentation 
vessel and hence, facilitates the harvesting of the cells. The LEX system is well suited to minimal media, com-
pared with rich media like TB or LB because foaming is limited in minimal media and hence eliminates the 
need to add anti-foam during fermentation. Good aeration also facilitates growth in minimal media  
 
Screening for NMR Suitability

174
The method described here is for His-tagged proteins. If a different 
tag is used, purify the proteins accordingly and proceed to  step 12 .
  1.   Add 25 mL of lysis buffer into the frozen cell pellet. Shake the 
tube vigorously, this will dislodge and thaw the frozen cell pellet 
from the bottom of the falcon tube and form a thick sludge.  
  2.   Lyse the cells by sonication on ice.  
  3.   Centrifuge the cell debris at 23,000 ×  g for 20 min at 4 °C.  
  4.   Decant the supernatant into another tube and add 3 mL of 
Ni-NTA suspension to the latter ( see  Note 4 ). Discard the cell 
debris.  
  5.   Rock the tubes for an hour to allow the proteins to bind to the 
Ni-NTA beads at 4 °C.  
  6.   Centrifuge the beads down at 2,500 ×  g for 5 min at 4 °C.  
  7.   Carefully decant and discard the supernatant.  
  8.   Wash the beads by adding 10 mL of Lysis Buffer, rock the 
tubes for 10–15 min at 4 °C, centrifuge the beads down and 
discard the supernatant.  
  9.  Repeat the washing step two more times using 10 mL of 
Washing Buffer each time.  
  10.    In the last washing step, pour the beads into a gravity ﬂ ow 
column.  
  11.   Elute the protein from the beads with 5 mL of Elution Buffer.  
  12.   Measure the protein yield ( see  Note 5 ). 
   13.   Concentrate each protein to around 0.5 mL using a centrifugal 
concentrator ( see  Note 6 ). 
  14.   Transfer 100 μL of each concentrated protein into a 100 μL 
dialysis button ( see  Note 7 ). 
  15.   In a 50 mL tube, prepare each NMR buffer by mixing 0.5 mL 
of the 1 M buffer stock with 49.5 mL of NMR screening buf-
fer ( see  Notes 1 and  8 ). 
  16.   Put each dialysis button into its respective tube and dialyze by 
rocking overnight at 4 °C.  
  17.   Transfer each sample into an NMR tube using a syringe.  
  1.   Measure the  15 N-HSQC. Use a standard HSQC sequence in 
the Bruker pulse sequence library: hsqcetfpf3gpsi2 [ 15 ,  16 ] 
with the following acquisition parameters:  1 H and  15 N sweep-
width of 7,000 and 2,000 at 500 MHz, respectively; number 
of t1 increments = 64; number of scans per increment = 32. 
Total acquisition time per sample is approximately 3 h.  
  2.   Process the spectra using NMRpipe and NMRDraw software [ 17 ]. 
  3.   Classify the HSQC as “good,” “promising,” “poor,” or mostly 
“unfolded” ( see Fig.  2 ).
3.3  NMR Screening
Adelinda A. Yee et al.

175
4  Notes 
  1.  3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid (MOPS) buffer at 
pH 6.5 is one of our standard screening buffers but a 1 M 
stock solution turns yellow at room temperature in less than a 
week, so only make enough for immediate use. Any leftover 
MOPS stock may be stored at 4 °C for up to 2 weeks, but after 
prolonged storage even at 4 °C this buffer will eventually turn 
yellow. We do not use yellow MOPS solution.  
  2.  Make sure the starting culture is very cloudy before proceed-
ing to the next step. From our observations, overnight incu-
bation sufﬁ ces for starting culture inoculated with a freshly 
 Fig. 2   Sample  15 N-HSQC spectra that we would classify as ( a ) GOOD ( see  Note 8 ). Protein construct of the PHD 
domain of human methyltransferase MLL5 (GI:33636768) from residues 109 to 188. The structure was sub-
sequently solved (PDB: 2LV9) ( b ) PROMISING ( see  Note 9 ). This is an alternate construct of the PHD domain of 
methyltransferase MLL5 (GI:33636768) from residues 82 to 194. ( c ) POOR. Full length protein construct of 
 L. monocytogenes lmo0240 (GI:16802286). ( d ) MOSTLY UNFOLDED ( see  Notes 10  and  11 ). Protein construct 
of  C. rodentium EspB (GI:5802672) from residue 124 to 231. Spectra are plotted with  1 H chemical shift on the 
horizontal axis from 6 to 10.5 ppm and  15 N chemical shift on the vertical axis from 105 to 136 ppm 
 
Screening for NMR Suitability

176
transformed colony from a plate. For those inoculated with 
glycerol stocks, it depends on the cell density of the glycerol 
stock used as well as the condition of the glycerol stock 
(i.e., how long has it been in the −80 °C freezer and how many 
times has it been freeze-thawed). If the starting culture does 
not grow well, it can be re-inoculated with more glycerol stock 
and incubated again overnight.  
  3.   One sonicator can lyse 4 targets per batch ( step 2 ) and the 
SLA600TC rotor can spin 14 tubes per batch ( steps 3 ,  6 , 
and  8 ), so the optimal number of targets per puriﬁ cation batch 
should be multiples of 12.  
  4.   Most Ni-NTA beads come in 30 % ethanol solution. We 
remove the ethanol by exchanging the storage solution of the 
Ni-NTA beads into Lysis Buffer to make a 50 % suspension.  
  5.   The number of NMR buffer conditions that can be tested will 
depend on the yield. We use the semi-quantitative Bradford assay 
because most of our targets for screening have His 6 -tags and are 
eluted with high imidazole concentrations that interfere with 
using absorbance at 280 nm to fully quantify the protein.  
  6.  The ﬁ nal volume to which the sample should be concentrated 
will depend on the yield as well as the NMR spectrometer's 
sensitivity. We try to achieve a ﬁ nal concentration of around 
5 mg/mL for a 1.7 mm microprobe at 500 MHz.  
  7.   We number each of our dialysis buttons so that we can identify 
which contains which protein when all the buttons are dialyzed 
in the next step.  
  8.   Before our group acquired the 1.7 mm microprobe, the yield 
from one fermentation ﬂ ask would only allow us to screen with 
one buffer condition because of the sample volume requirement 
of 0.5 mL. We use the protein’s theoretical p I (  http://web.
expasy.org/protparam   ) to decide which of our three standard 
buffers (acetate 5.0; MOPS 6.5; Tris 7.7) to exchange against. 
With the lower volume requirement of the microprobe, we can 
usually screen against all of our three standard buffers and some-
times other buffers as well, such as Sodium Phosphate 
(Na 2 HPO 4 ), 
4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1- piperazineethanesulfonic 
acid (HEPES), 2,2-Bis(hydroxymethyl)-2,2′,2″-nitrilotriethanol 
(Bis-Tris), etc.  
  9.   A “good”  15 N-HSQC spectrum should display good peak dis-
persion, roughly uniform peak intensities and the number of 
peaks should correspond roughly to the expected number of 
NH groups based on the protein sequence. We rarely observe 
the NHs for the His 6 -tag and so do not count those residues in 
our analysis. For most of the targets that fall into this category, 
Adelinda A. Yee et al.

177
we would proceed with uniform  13 C and  15 N labeling of the 
protein and determine its structure with ease. However, 
because we screen the targets at much lower concentrations 
than that required for full NMR data acquisition, some sam-
ples “fail” at the structure determination stage due to limited 
solubility at higher concentrations.  
  10.   A “promising”  15 N-HSQC spectra shows a hint of peak disper-
sion and most of the time the peak intensities are nonuniform, 
and the number of peaks do not match the expected peak 
count based on the protein sequence, indicative of multiple 
conformations. For targets under the promising classiﬁ cation, 
as well as the few failures in “good” classiﬁ cation ( see  Note 8 ), 
it is worthwhile to screen more buffer or pH conditions. If the 
protein function is known, screening with suspected ligands is 
an obvious route for recovery of the sample. If the number of 
peaks observed is more than expected, check the number of 
cysteines in the protein sequence and make sure enough DTT 
is added (or perhaps use a stronger reductant such as TCEP). 
For example  see PDB_id 2KKX and 2KKY [ 18 ]. If reductant is 
not the issue, and the protein is of unknown function, a bioin-
formatic search such as remote sequence homology to a PFAM 
family may give a clue as to what ligand to try (e.g., PDB_id 
2K5T). For cases in which too few NH resonances are 
observed, sequence the plasmid DNA and acquire the mass 
spectra for the protein sample to ensure that the protein in the 
NMR sample is not truncated. If the protein sample is the cor-
rect, expected size, we assign the resonances that are observ-
able and solve the parts of the protein that we can “see” by 
NMR. An example is PDB_id 1JJG [ 19 ], in which less than 
80 % of the expected peaks in the  15 N-HSQC spectra were 
observed and even those peaks are nonuniform in intensity. 
Thus, a structure or part of a structure can still be determined 
for proteins that give only a “promising”  15 N-HSQC. If differ-
ent buffer conditions and a ligand search fail to stabilize the 
sample, then alternative constructs should be cloned and 
rescreened. In cases of domains within larger eukaryotic pro-
teins we routinely screen multiple constructs of the target 
domain in parallel, in order to ﬁ nd the best construct for NMR. 
Figure  2a, b shows the remarkable difference in stability and 
 15 N-HSQC with small changes in protein domain boundary.  
  11.   A “poor”  15 N-HSQC is characterized by broad overlapping 
peaks in the middle of the  15 N-HSQC whereas a soluble, but 
“unfolded” protein will have sharp intense peaks in the middle. 
From our experience, targets falling under these categories 
almost always require construct redesign.  
Screening for NMR Suitability

178
 Acknowledgements 
 We acknowledge the support of NIGMS Protein Structure 
Initiative grant U54-GM094597 to NESG consortium, the 
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and 
the Canada Foundation for Innovation for infrastructure funding.  
 References 
  1.  Christendat D, Yee A, Dharamsi A, Kluger Y 
et al (2000) Structural proteomics of an 
archeon. Nat Struct Biol 9:603–609  
  2.  Yee A, Chang X, Pineda-Lucena A et al (2002) 
An NMR approach to structural proteomics. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:1825–1830  
  3.  Yee AA, Savchenko A, Ignachenko A et al 
(2005) NMR and X-ray crystallography, com-
plementary tools in structural proteomics of 
small proteins. J Am Chem Soc 127:
16512–16517  
  4.  Peti W, Etezady-Esfarjani T, Herrmann T et al 
(2004) NMR for structural proteomics of 
Thermotoga maritima: screening and structure 
determination. J Struct Funct Genomics 5:
205–215  
  5.  Tyler RC, Aceti DJ, Bingman CA et al (2005) 
Comparison of cell-based and cell-free proto-
cols for producing target proteins from the 
Arabidopsis thaliana genome for structural 
studies. Proteins 59:633–643  
  6.  Snyder D, Chen Y, Denissova N et al (2005) 
Comparisons of NMR spectral quality and suc-
cess in crystallization demonstrate that NMR 
and X-ray crystallography are complementary 
methods for small protein structure determina-
tion. J Am Chem Soc 127:16505–16511  
  7.  Montelione GT, Arrowsmith C, Girvin ME, 
Kennedy MA et al (2009) Unique opportuni-
ties for NMR methods in structural genomics. 
J Struct Funct Genomics 10:101–106  
  8.  Studier FW, Moffatt BA (1986) Use of bacte-
riophage T7 RNA polymerase to direct selective 
high-level expression of cloned genes. J Mol 
Biol 189:113–130  
  9.  Hogema BM, Arents JC, Bader R et al (1998) 
Inducer exclusion by glucose 6-phosphate in 
Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 28:755–765  
  10.  Studier FW (2005) Protein production by 
auto-induction in high density shaking cultures. 
Protein Expr Purif 41:207–234  
  11.  Li Z, Kessler W, van den Heuvel J, Rinas U 
(2011) Simple deﬁ ned autoinduction medium 
for high-level recombinant protein production 
using T7-based Escherichia coli expression 
systems. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 91:
1203–1213  
  12.  Fox BG, Blommel PG (2009) Autoinduction 
of protein expression. Curr Protoc Protein Sci 
56:5.23.1–5.23.18  
  13.  Tyler RC, Sreenath HK, Aceti DJ et al (2005) 
Auto-induction medium for the production of 
[U-13C, U-15N]-labeled proteins for NMR 
screening and structure determination. Protein 
Expr Purif 40:268–278  
  14.   Lemak A, Gutmanas A, Chitayat S et al (2011) 
A novel strategy for NMR resonance assignment 
and protein structure determination. J Biomol 
NMR 49:27–38  
  15.  Palmer AG, Cavanagh J, Wright PE, Rance M 
(1991) Sensitivity improvement in proton- 
detected two-dimensional heteronuclear cor-
relation NMR spectroscopy. J Magn Reson 
93:151–170  
  16.  Kay LE, Keifer P, Saarinen T (1992) Pure 
absorption gradient enhanced heteronuclear 
single quantum correlation spectroscopy with 
improved sensitivity. J Am Chem Soc 114:
10663–10665  
  17.  Delaglio F, Grzesiek S, Vuister GW et al (1995) 
NMRPipe: a multidimensional spectral pro-
cessing system based on UNIX pipes. J Biomol 
NMR 6:277–293  
  18.  Wu B, Skarina T, Yee A, Jobin MC et al (2010) 
NleG Type 3 effectors from enterohaemor-
rhagic Escherichia coli are U-Box E3 ubiquitin 
ligases. PLoS Pathog 6:e1000960  
  19.  Ramelot T, Cort JR, Yee AA et al (2002) 
Myxoma virus immunomodulatory protein 
M156R is a structural mimic of eukaryotic 
translation initiation factor eIF2a. J Mol Biol 
322:943–954  
Adelinda A. Yee et al.

179
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_14, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 14  
 Salvage or Recovery of Failed Targets by In Situ 
Proteolysis 
 Yufeng  Tong ,  Aiping  Dong ,  Xiaohui  Xu , and  Amy  Wernimont 
 Abstract 
 In situ proteolysis is the method of proactively adding tiny amounts of nonspeciﬁ c proteases to aid in the 
crystallization of proteins and protein macromolecular complexes. The simplicity of the procedure and 
high recovery rate make it a method of ﬁ rst choice for recalcitrant targets. An improved and updated in 
situ proteolysis protocol used in high-throughput structural biology platforms is described.  
 Key words   Limited proteolysis  ,  In situ proteolysis  ,   Crystallization  ,   Nonspeciﬁ c protease  ,  Trypsin  , 
 Chymotrypsin  
1  Introduction 
 Limited proteolysis by proliﬁ c proteases is a classical approach for 
probing the structure and dynamics of proteins and protein–nucleic 
acid complexes. It is widely used to identify stable domains in pro-
teins for crystallization [ 1 – 5 ]. Using the method to set up crystal-
lization trials normally requires identiﬁ cation of the termini of a 
stable fragment and re-cloning of the corresponding construct, or 
puriﬁ cation of milligrams of a homogenous population of protease- 
trimmed fragment. 
 Successful crystallization of protein by the addition of tiny 
amounts of protease in the crystallization drop without purifying 
the stable fragments, also known as in situ proteolysis, can be 
traced back to 1936, when James R. Sumner and Stacey F. Howell 
at Cornell University crystallized jack bean canavalin in the pres-
ence of trypsin at a 1:6 w/w ratio [ 6 ]. They were also able to get 
similar crystals using the proteases ﬁ cin, papain, bromelase, and 
pepsin. Interestingly, the use of protease was inspired by their 
observation that canavalin preparations contaminated with bacteria 
were crystallizable; but the crystals were not reproducible unless 
proteases were added [ 6 ]. Serendipitous contamination in the 

180
crystallization drop by microbes—bacteria or fungi, or by unknown 
proteases present in the raw materials, yielding diffracting protein 
crystals, has been repeatedly reported in the literature [ 6 – 15 ]. 
However, proteolysis of protein samples during crystallization was 
considered something that should be normally avoided [ 16 ]. 
Proactive addition of protease in the crystallization drop was not 
popular until recently [ 9 ,  12 ,  14 ,  17 – 19 ]. The ﬁ rst modern exam-
ple of in situ proteolysis may be that of the crystallization of anti-
body Fv fragment in 1997 [ 9 ]. After observation of the degradation 
of scFv in the initial crystals, that took more than 3 weeks to grow, 
David Rose and coworkers decided to add subtilisin at 1:100 
molarity ratio, which resulted in formation of crystals within 3 days 
and an eightfold increase in crystal size. 
 Dong et al. showcased the ﬁ rst large scale trial of in situ prote-
olysis for protein crystallization using chymotrypsin or trypsin 
[ 19 ]. In a follow-up paper, the list of proteases used was expanded 
and the method applied to proteins of different species and differ-
ent families with much success, garnering a 13 % rescue rate for 
proteins recalcitrant to giving diffracting crystals [ 20 ]. In situ pro-
teolysis has been proven capable of rescuing targets that failed in 
previous crystallization trials, and improving crystals with low dif-
fraction resolution. The method is now routinely used for protein 
crystallization at the Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC) and 
the Midwest Center for Structural Genomics (MCSG) and is also 
gaining wider acceptance in the macromolecular crystallography 
community. It has been combined with the techniques of mass 
spectroscopy [ 21 ,  22 ] and microseeding [ 23 ] for protein crystalli-
zation; has been used for successful crystallization of protein–
protein complexes [ 23 – 26 ]; and has been commercialized. 
 The advantage of the method lies in its simplicity. Proteases are 
premixed with the target proteins immediately before setting up 
crystallization drops, and pilot screening is not necessary. Proteases 
are treated like compounds in additive screening. Some reasons for 
the success of the method when proteases exist in the solution 
include: removal of ﬂ oppy termini of the target protein to give a 
stable and crystallizable fragment in situ; cleavage in the middle of 
the polypeptide chain to improve the packing of the crystal lattice 
[ 20 ,  25 ]; digestion of denatured or unfolded populations of the 
target protein or contaminant proteins in the solution.  
2  Materials 
 Routine application of in situ proteolysis requires large amounts of 
protein samples—each protease will require an amount of protein 
equal to that used for regular crystallization screens.  Well- expressing 
and soluble proteins are thus better candidates for the method. 
Typical protein concentrations of 10–40 mg/mL in 10–20 mM 
2.1  Target Proteins
Yufeng Tong et al.

181
buffer solution that is devoid of chelating reagents like EDTA or 
EGTA is used ( see  Note 1 ). While the highest purity and homoge-
neity of the protein preparation is always desirable for crystalliza-
tion, there is no absolute requirement for a particular level of purity 
( see  Note 2 ). In situ proteolysis can be applied to stock proteins 
frozen and stored at −80 °C, to macromolecular complexes, and to 
multi-domain proteins ( see  Note 3 ). 
 Eight proteases are routinely used ( see  Notes 4 and  5 ). Stock solu-
tions of proteases at 1 mg/mL were prepared according to the 
following formulations:
  1.   Trypsin from bovine pancreas is dissolved in 1 mM hydrochlo-
ric acid with 2 mM CaCl 2 ( see  Note 6 ). 
  2.  α-Chymotrypsin from bovine pancreas is dissolved in 1 mM 
hydrochloric acid with 2 mM CaCl 2 ( see  Note 6 ). 
  3.   Subtilisin A is dissolved in 10 mM NaAc with 5 mM CaAc 2 
( see  Note 6 ).  
  4.  Thermolysin from  Bacillus thermoproteolyticus rokko is dis-
solved in 10 mM Tris–HCl at pH 7.5 with 150 mM NaCl, 
2 mM CaCl 2 ( see  Note 6 ). 
  5.   Papain from papaya latex is dissolved in Milli-Q grade water.  
  6.  Elastase from porcine pancreas is dissolved in 10 mM Tris–
HCl at pH 8.8.  
  7.   Dispase I from  Bacillus polymyxa is dissolved in 10 mM Tris–
HCl at pH 7.5 with 100 mM NaCl.  
  8.  Endoproteinase Glu-C from  Staphylococcus aureus V8 is dis-
solved in Milli-Q grade water.  
 The stock solutions are divided into 20 μL aliquots in 200 μL 
PCR strip tubes, ﬂ ash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at 
−80 °C until the time of use.  
  1.  Commercial or homemade crystallization screens ( see  Note 7 ). 
  2.  96-well sitting drop vapor diffusion crystallization plates.  
  3.  Clear sealing tape.  
  4.  SDS-PAGE: 4–20 % Mini precast.  
  5.  SilverQuest silver staining kit from Life Technology.  
  6.  0.1 % triﬂ uoroacetic acid solution for mass spectroscopy.  
3  Methods 
 Handling of target proteins and proteases should be carried out on 
ice until setting up crystallization drops manually, using multichannel 
pipettes, or using a liquid handling robot. The following procedure 
2.2  Proteases
2.3  Crystallization 
and Miscellaneous 
Supplies
3.1  Crystallization
In Situ Proteolysis

182
assumes the use of one protease from the list of eight and one sparse 
matrix crystallization screen of 96 conditions. If more than one pro-
tease or crystallization screen is chosen, change the volumes 
correspondingly.
  1.  Prepare 50 μL target protein solution, recombinant or from 
natural sources, puriﬁ ed to a reasonable purity and concen-
trated to 10–40 mg/mL depending on the solubility of the 
protein ( see also  Notes 1 and  2 ). Measure the protein concen-
tration based on UV absorbance at 280 nm using a NanoDrop, 
or the Bradford method. At the same time, thaw the protease 
stock solution on ice.  
  2.   Transfer 100 μL for each of the 96 screen solutions to the cor-
responding reservoir wells on the 96-well plates, and tempo-
rarily seal with tape.  
  3.   Mix 5 μL protease stock solution of choice with the 50 μL 
target protein solution in a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube, ﬁ n-
ger tapping a few times to mix the samples thoroughly, and 
sediment any aggregated protein by spinning the sample in a 
benchtop centrifuge pre-chilled to 4 °C at top speed for 5 min 
( see  Note 8 ).  
  4.  Dispense 96 × 0.5 μL protein solution to the sample drops on 
the crystallization plate; transfer 0.5 μL screen buffer from res-
ervoir wells to the sample drops and mix.  
  5.  Seal the crystallization plate with clear sealing tape and check 
each drop under a microscope to make sure the solutions are 
well mixed and no bubbles exist in the drops. Make note of 
unusual drops and store the plate at room temperature on a 
stable platform or in an imaging system.  
  6.   Inspect the drops on the second day, the third day, 1 week, and 
2 weeks from date of setup ( see  Notes 9 and  10 ). 
 Once crystals grow to a mountable size, they should be harvested and 
tested by X-ray diffraction. The size of the protein fragments in the 
crystals can be roughly estimated using SDS-PAGE or more accu-
rately measured using mass spectroscopy ( see  Notes 3 ,  11 , and  12 ). 
  1.  Add 8 μL Milli-Q grade water to the cap of a 1.5 mL 
 microcentrifuge tube.  
  2.   Open the drop with crystals and pipette two 2 μL reservoir 
solution drops onto a glass coverslip.  
  3.   Harvest a crystal using a harvesting loop, wash the crystal twice 
in the two drops of reservoir solution and dissolve the crystal 
in the water.  
  4.  For crystals of 0.05 × 0.05 × 0.05 mm dimensions, harvest about 
one or two crystals and dissolve in the water ( see  Note 13 ).  
3.2  Veriﬁ cation 
of Protein Fragments 
in the Crystals
3.2.1  To Harvest Crystals 
for SDS-PAGE Veriﬁ cation
Yufeng Tong et al.

183
  5.  Add 3 μL of 4× SDS-PAGE loading dye to the tube, close the 
cap, spin down the liquid for 1 min in a benchtop centrifuge at 
top speed, heat the tube at 95 °C for 5 min and load all the 
sample onto a 4–20 % precast polyacrylamide gel and run 
electrophoresis.  
  6.  Silver stain the gel using the silver staining kit.  
  1.   Find a non-PEG and non-detergent based stabilizing solu-
tion, in which the crystal is not cracked or dissolved, by soak-
ing the crystal in the solution and observing it under a 
microscope ( see  Note 12 ).  
  2.  Add 8 μL Milli-Q grade water to the cap of a 1.5 mL micrcen-
trifuge tube.  
  3.  Pipette 3–5 drops of 2 μL stabilizing solution found in  step 1 
onto a glass coverslip.  
  4.   Harvest a crystal using a harvesting loop, and wash 3–5 times 
sequentially in the drops of the stabilizing solution, then dis-
solve in the water.  
  5.   For crystals of 0.1 × 0.1 × 0.1 mm dimensions, harvest 3–5 
crystals and dissolve in the water ( see  Note 13 ). 
  6.   Add 50 μL 0.1 % triﬂ uoroacetic acid solution and run mass 
spectroscopy according to protocol.  
4  Notes 
  1.  Sample concentrations higher than that used for normal crys-
tallization, at least 20–30 mg/mL, were recommended in 
Dong et al.’s original protocol [ 19 ]. This gave an overall higher 
success rate. The reason could be that the higher protein con-
centrations lead to higher concentrations of crystallizable frag-
ments after protease treatment. However, successful cases have 
also been observed for much lower protein concentrations. 
Chelating reagents in the buffer will deplete metal ions required 
for the activation or stabilization of several proteases and 
should thus be avoided.  
  2.   Typical puriﬁ cation procedures in high-throughput structural 
proteomics settings use immobilized metal afﬁ nity chromatog-
raphy (e.g., Ni-NTA for His6-tagged recombinant proteins) 
followed by size exclusion chromatography. This can produce 
proteins of around 95 % purity judged by SDS-PAGE for 
highly expressing constructs. However, in certain cases, con-
taminant proteins are very difﬁ cult to remove and the purity of 
the target protein coming out of the standard puriﬁ cation pro-
cedure may be as low as 50 % or less; in situ proteolysis may 
serve the purpose of removing contaminants (Fig.  1 ).
3.2.2  To Harvest Crystals 
for Mass Spectroscopy 
Veriﬁ cation
In Situ Proteolysis

184
  3.  Due to the nature of proteolysis, the size of the protein 
 fragments in the crystals should be estimated using SDS-PAGE 
and silver-staining, or the molecular weight measured using 
ESI or MALDI mass spectroscopy. The latter method is not 
always feasible and requires a dedicated instrument ( see also 
 Notes 11 – 13 ). Multi-domain proteins pose a particular chal-
lenge for in situ proteolysis and often end up with one stable 
domain out of the multiple domains in the initial polypeptide 
[ 27 ] (Fig.  2 ).
  4.   These eight proteases have all proven successful in our hands. 
While trypsin and chymotrypsin yielded more structures than 
other proteases, this may be quite biased because the numbers 
of samples tried with these two proteases are much higher than 
that with other proteases. Elastase has had the lowest success 
rate so far in our experience.  Items 3 – 8 in Subheading  2.2 are 
listed in an increasing order of price per unit weight. When the 
quantity of the target protein for crystallization is limited, in 
situ proteolysis can be tried for the proteases from the top of 
the list ﬁ rst. Exploitation of other proteases not on the list is 
also encouraged.  
  5.  A previous protocol [ 20 ] suggested pilot screening to identify 
a “promising” protease that gives the largest stable domain. 
Given the fact that protein fragments from a compact but 
 Fig. 1   Crystallization of the ArfGAP domain of ARFGAP1: ( a ) Constructs A2 (a.a. 1–128), A3 (a.a. 1–143) were 
puriﬁ ed using Ni-NTA ( Lane Ni ), followed by gel ﬁ ltration ( Lane GF   ). There were high molecular weight con-
taminants that were difﬁ cult to remove, which were digested by α-chymotrypsin treatment for 30 min at room 
temperature ( Lane Chymo ). ( b ) Both constructs A2 and A3 gave similar plate shaped crystals among heavy 
precipitation in the drop. The deposited structure (PDB: 3DWD) was solved from a crystal of construct A2. 
Residues after 120 are not visible in the electron density map 
 
Yufeng Tong et al.

185
nicked domain can still interact with each other, and that there 
is no direct relationship between the SDS-PAGE band pattern 
and the success of in situ proteolysis, pilot screening is not 
necessary if the protein sample is abundant. When the amount 
of protein is limited, a “promising” protease from pilot screen-
ing is one that will digest the target protein to smaller pieces 
rather than one that does not cleave the target protein at all.  
  6.  While the pH optimum for trypsin and α-chymotrypsin is 
around 8.0, the buffer of 1 mM HCl with 2 mM CaCl 2 is used 
to retard autolysis of the proteases. Calcium is also required for 
the activation and stabilization of subtilisin A, dispase I, and 
thermolysin.  
  7.  While certain conditions in the commercial screens contain 
heavy atoms that may inhibit the activity of proteases, this is 
not generally a concern because ﬁ rst, proteases are pre-mixed 
with proteins, and second, as it is a sparse matrix screen, miss-
ing a few conditions should not make a statistical difference.  
  8.  Concentration of the protease stock solutions are normalized 
to 1 mg/mL, so that mixing of 5 μL protease solution with 
50 μL protein solution at 10 mg/mL gives a protease–protein 
ratio of 1:100 (w/w). A protease–protein ratio in the range of 
1:100–1:500 (w/w) has been a good starting point from our 
experience.  
  9.  In a few cases, we noticed that crystals from in situ proteolysis 
drops formed overnight but started to deteriorate visibly from 
the second day, and completely disappeared within 3 days. 
It may be that the protease continues to digest target proteins 
even while they are packed in the crystal lattice. Thus, the crys-
tallization drops should be inspected promptly and crystals 
harvested as soon as the size is mountable.  
  10.   We also noticed, in cases where a target protein crystallized 
with or without the presence of proteases, that the proteolysis 
 Fig. 2  In situ proteolysis applied to a multiple domain protein: ( a ) All four constructs gave crystals of similar 
shape in the presence of papain 1:100 (w/w). ( b ) Domain architectures of the C-terminal part of ITSN2 protein 
corresponding to the four constructs. ( c ) Silver staining of the crystal contents suggests they are of same size. 
The solved structure (PDB:3GF9) contains the RhoGEF domain only  
 
In Situ Proteolysis

186
method usually gives crystals much faster. This is consistent of 
observations by other groups (e.g., [ 9 ]).  
  11.   Different proteases can yield crystals containing different pro-
tein fragments. The same protease can lead to crystals grown in 
different conditions with different protein fragment contents 
(Fig.  3 ). Thus, it is important to verify the contents of crystals 
from different crystallization drops.
  12.    Triton, Tween, SDS, or PEG molecules will overwhelm the 
polypeptide signal in an ESI or MALDI mass spectroscopy, 
and thus should be carefully removed from the crystals by 
 washing in a solution that does not contain them. If the crys-
tals grow in non-PEG, non-detergent based conditions, the 
reservoir solution may well be a stabilizing solution for the 
crystal. If the crystal grows in a PEG based condition, a sodium 
chloride solution of 1.5–2.0 M is a good starting point to test 
if it can stabilize the crystal. A stabilizing solution may not 
always be possible to ﬁ nd. 
 Fig. 3   Crystallization of IQGAP2 GRD domain under different conditions: ( a ) SDS-PAGE of subtilisin generated 
crystals in condition SGC-A05 (1.6 M (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 , 0.2 M NaAc, 0.1 M HEPES at pH 7.5). ( b ) SDS-PAGE of subtili-
sin generated crystals from the Red Wings Screen-H12 (Lane Subst, 20 % PEG 4K, 20 % isopropanol, 0.1 M 
NaCitrate at pH 6.5), Chymotrypsin generated crystals from RW-C01 (Lane Chymo, 1.5 M (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 , 0.1 M 
 Tris–HCl at pH 8.5). ( c ) Crystals from different protease treatments: α-chymotrypsin (RW-C01), subtilisin (RW- 
H12), dispase (SGC-F3), thermolysin (SGC-G4). Crystals were not seen without in situ proteolysis within the 
time that protease treated protein generated crystals.  See   http://www.sgc.utoronto.ca/SGC-WebPages/toronto-
technology-crystallization.php  for the details of the formulations of the SGC Screen and Red Wings Screen 
 
Yufeng Tong et al.

187
  13.  Silver-staining has a practical lower detection limit of about 50 ng 
protein, while a sample for mass spectroscopy normally requires 
about 5 μg protein. A 3D crystal of 0.05 × 0.05 × 0.05 mm size, 
contains about 1.35 g/cm 3 × 125 × 10 −9 cm 3 ≅ 168 ng pro-
teins [ 28 ], one crystal of this size should be detectable using 
silver staining. Mass spectroscopy requires much more protein 
and this may not be easily obtainable. One 0.1 × 0.1 × 0.1 mm 
crystal contains about 1.35 μg protein. Most often, the volume 
of protein crystals are much smaller, in which case many crys-
tals are required to run a decent mass spectroscopic analysis.  
 Acknowledgment 
 We are grateful for members of SGC and MCSG for the domesti-
cation of the in situ proteolysis method on the high-throughput 
structural biology platforms.  
 References 
  1.  Nouwen N, Stahlberg H, Pugsley AP, Engel A 
(2000) Domain structure of secretin PulD 
revealed by limited proteolysis and electron 
microscopy. EMBO J 19:2229–2236  
  2.  Longhi S, Ferron F, Egloff MP (2007) Protein 
engineering. Methods Mol Biol 363:59–89  
  3.  Danley DE, Haggan ME, Cunningham D, 
Fennell KF, Pauly TA, LeMotte PK (2000) A 
crystallizable form of RIIbeta regulatory 
domain obtained by limited proteolysis. Acta 
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 56:1038–1041  
  4.  Cui J, Somerville RL (1993) The TyrR protein 
of  Escherichia coli , analysis by limited proteoly-
sis of domain structure and ligand-mediated 
conformational changes. J Biol Chem 268:
5040–5047  
  5.  Gao X, Bain K, Bonanno JB, Buchanan M, 
Henderson D, Lorimer D, Marsh C, Reynes 
JA, Sauder JM, Schwinn K et al (2005) High- 
throughput 
limited 
proteolysis/mass 
 spectrometry for protein domain elucidation. 
J Struct Funct Genomics 6:129–134  
  6.  Sumner JB, Howell SF (1936) The isolation of 
a fourth crystallizable jack bean globulin 
through the digestion of canavalin with tryp-
sin. J Biol Chem 113:607–610  
  7.  Sawaya MR, Pelletier H, Kumar A, Wilson SH, 
Kraut J (1994) Crystal structure of rat DNA 
polymerase beta: evidence for a common poly-
merase mechanism. Science 264:1930–1935  
  8.  Campbell EA, Muzzin O, Chlenov M, Sun JL, 
Olson CA, Weinman O, Trester-Zedlitz ML, 
Darst SA (2002) Structure of the bacterial 
RNA polymerase promoter speciﬁ city sigma 
subunit. Mol Cell 9:527–539  
  9.  Hoedemaeker FJ, Signorelli T, Johns K, Kuntz 
DA, Rose DR (1997) A single chain Fv frag-
ment of P-glycoprotein-speciﬁ c monoclonal 
antibody C219. Design, expression, and crystal 
structure at 2.4 A resolution. J Biol Chem 
272:29784–29789  
  10.  Machius M, Wiegand G, Huber R (1995) 
Crystal structure of calcium-depleted  Bacillus 
licheniformis alpha-amylase at 2.2 A resolution. 
J Mol Biol 246:545–559  
  11.   Nieves-Alicea R, Focia PJ, Craig SP III, Eakin AE 
(1998) Limited proteolysis of a trypanosomal 
hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase yields 
crystals that diffract X-rays to near atomic resolu-
tion. Biochim Biophys Acta 1388:500–505  
  12.  Umland TC, Taylor KL, Rhee S, Wickner RB, 
Davies DR (2001) The crystal structure of the 
nitrogen regulation fragment of the yeast prion 
protein Ure2p. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
98:1459–1464  
  13.  Mandel CR, Gebauer D, Zhang H, Tong L 
(2006) A serendipitous discovery that in situ 
proteolysis is essential for the crystallization of 
yeast CPSF-100 (Ydh1p). Acta Crystallogr F 
Struct Biol Cryst Commun 62:1041–1045  
In Situ Proteolysis

188
  14.  Johnson S, Roversi P, Espina M, Deane JE, 
Birket S, Picking WD, Blocker A, Picking WL, 
Lea SM (2006) Expression, limited proteolysis 
and preliminary crystallographic analysis of 
IpaD, a component of the  Shigella ﬂ exneri type 
III secretion system. Acta Crystallogr F Struct 
Biol Cryst Commun 62:865–868  
  15.  Bai Y, Auperin TC, Tong L (2007) The use of 
in situ proteolysis in the crystallization of 
murine CstF-77. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol 
Cryst Commun 63:135–138  
  16.  McPherson A (1990) Current approaches to 
macromolecular crystallization. Eur J Biochem 
189:1–23  
  17.  Gaur RK, Kupper MB, Fischer R, Hoffmann 
KM (2004) Preliminary X-ray analysis of a 
human V(H) fragment at 1.8 A resolution. 
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 60:
965–967  
  18.  Taneja B, Patel A, Slesarev A, Mondragon A 
(2006) Structure of the N-terminal fragment 
of topoisomerase V reveals a new family of 
topoisomerases. EMBO J 25:398–408  
  19.  Dong A, Xu X, Edwards AM, Midwest Center 
for Structural Genomics Structural Genomics 
Consortium (2007) In situ proteolysis for pro-
tein crystallization and structure determina-
tion. Nat Methods 4:1019–1021  
  20.  Wernimont A, Edwards A (2009) In situ prote-
olysis to generate crystals for structure deter-
mination: an update. PLoS ONE 4:e5094  
  21.  Little DJ, Whitney JC, Robinson H, Yip P, 
Nitz M, Howell PL (2012) Combining in situ 
proteolysis and mass spectrometry to crystal-
lize  Escherichia coli PgaB. Acta Crystallogr F 
Struct Biol Cryst Commun 68:842–845  
  22.  Gheyi T, Rodgers L, Romero R, Sauder JM, 
Burley SK (2010) Mass spectrometry guided in 
situ proteolysis to obtain crystals for X-ray 
structure determination. J Am Soc Mass 
Spectrom 21:1795–1801  
  23.  Abskharon RN, Soror SH, Pardon E, El HH, 
Legname G, Steyaert J, Wohlkonig A (2011) 
Combining in-situ proteolysis and microseed 
matrix screening to promote crystallization of 
PrPc-nanobody complexes. Protein Eng Des 
Sel 24:737–741  
  24.  Ismail SA, Chen YX, Miertzschke M, Vetter 
IR, Koerner C, Wittinghofer A (2012) 
Structural basis for Arl3-speciﬁ c release of 
myristoylated ciliary cargo from UNC119. 
EMBO J 31:4085–4094  
  25.  Kobayashi K, Saito K, Ishitani R, Ito K, Nureki 
O (2012) Structural basis for translation termi-
nation by archaeal RF1 and GTP-bound 
EF1alpha complex. Nucleic Acids Res 40:
9319–9328  
  26.  Lee HR, Choi WC, Lee S, Hwang J, Hwang E, 
Guchhait K, Haas J, Toth Z, Jeon YH, Oh TK 
et al (2011) Bilateral inhibition of HAUSP 
deubiquitinase by a viral interferon regulatory 
factor protein. Nat Struct Mol Biol 18:
1336–1344  
  27.  Yachnin BJ, Colin DY, Volpato JP, Ebert M, 
Pelletier JN, Berghuis AM (2011) Novel crys-
tallization conditions for tandem variant R67 
DHFR yield a wild-type crystal structure. Acta 
Crystallogr F Struct Biol Cryst Commun 67:
1316–1322  
  28.  Fischer H, Polikarpov I, Craievich AF (2004) 
Average protein density is a molecular-weight- 
dependent function. Protein Sci 13:2825–2828  
Yufeng Tong et al.

189
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_15, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
Chapter 15
Salvage of Failed Protein Targets by Reductive Alkylation
Kemin Tan, Youngchang Kim, Catherine Hatzos-Skintges,  
Changsoo Chang, Marianne Cuff, Gekleng Chhor, Jerzy Osipiuk,  
Karolina Michalska, Boguslaw Nocek, Hao An, Gyorgy Babnigg,  
Lance Bigelow, Grazyna Joachimiak, Hui Li, Jamey Mack,  
Magdalena Makowska-­Grzyska, Natalia Maltseva, Rory Mulligan, 
Christine Tesar, Min Zhou, and Andrzej Joachimiak
Abstract
The growth of diffraction-quality single crystals is of primary importance in protein X-ray crystallography. 
Chemical modification of proteins can alter their surface properties and crystallization behavior. The Midwest 
Center for Structural Genomics (MCSG) has previously reported how reductive methylation of lysine resi-
dues in proteins can improve crystallization of unique proteins that initially failed to produce diffraction-
quality crystals. Recently, this approach has been expanded to include ethylation and isopropylation in the 
MCSG protein crystallization pipeline. Applying standard methods, 180 unique proteins were alkylated and 
screened using standard crystallization procedures. Crystal structures of 12 new proteins were determined, 
including the first ethylated and the first isopropylated protein structures. In a few cases, the structures of 
native and methylated or ethylated states were obtained and the impact of reductive alkylation of lysine resi-
dues was assessed. Reductive methylation tends to be more efficient and produces the most alkylated protein 
structures. Structures of methylated proteins typically have higher resolution limits. A number of well-
ordered alkylated lysine residues have been identified, which make both intermolecular and intramolecular 
contacts. The previous report is updated and complemented with the following new data; a description of a 
detailed alkylation protocol with results, structural features, and roles of alkylated lysine residues in protein 
crystals. These contribute to improved crystallization properties of some proteins.
Key words Chemical modification, Lysine reductive alkylation, Methylation, Ethylation, 
Isopropylation, Protein crystallization
1  Introduction
X-ray crystallography is the most important method for the 
elucidation of atomic resolution three-dimensional structures of 
biological macromolecules. Its success depends essentially on the 
availability of diffraction-quality single crystals. The generation of 
protein crystals suitable for structure determination remains a 

190
major bottleneck in structural biology. Not all proteins crystallize 
and an analysis of the data from large-scale structural genomics 
efforts reveals that at best ~15 % of purified proteins produce a 
three-dimensional structure. Consequently, there is much interest 
in exploring salvage approaches to increase the structure determi-
nation success rate, specifically by increasing the propensity of pro-
teins for crystallization and improving the diffraction-quality of 
crystals.
The crystallization of proteins is influenced by many factors 
associated with the sample itself (impurities, conformational flexi-
bility and local disorder, polydispersity, chemical non-­homogeneity, 
missing interacting partners, insufficient loading with ligands, 
etc.). Over the years, numerous approaches have been described 
that address these issues [1–3] but few have been tested vigorously 
on a large set of protein samples under controlled conditions [4]. 
Protein surface properties are important for protein crystallization. 
Modification of the protein surface, either by site-directed muta-
genesis [3, 5] or chemical modification [4, 6–9], is a well-­
established strategy to promote protein crystallization. It is believed 
that these modifications reduce the surface entropy of the protein 
[10] and support protein–protein associations [11]. Among pro-
tein surface modification strategies, reductive methylation of lysine 
residues has been successfully applied to obtain good protein sam-
ples and high quality crystals for structure determination either in 
a small sample set or a large sample set in structural genomics cen-
ters [4–6, 9, 11, 12]. Some proteins can only be crystallized after 
methylation [6, 9, 12–14] and often crystals of modified proteins 
diffract to higher resolution [4, 12, 15]. Besides surface entropy 
reduction [10] and new surface contact creation [11], it was pro-
posed that N-methyl to oxygen contacts of methylated lysines are 
important for assisting in the formation of diffraction-quality crys-
tals [4, 14, 16]. Since the potential of other reductive alkylation 
methods such as ethylation and isopropylation remains unknown, 
experimental protocols have recently been expanded to include 
these two in parallel with reductive methylation in the Midwest 
Center for Structural Genomics (MCSG) pipeline to assess these 
alternative alkylation approaches.
Reductive alkylation of proteins is a simple, inexpensive method 
that involves modification of the solvent-exposed ε-amino group 
of lysine (and under some conditions the N-terminal α-amino 
group) [17] with reducing agents dimethylamine-borane complex 
and formaldehyde (for reductive methylation), acetaldehyde (for 
reductive ethylation) or acetone (for reductive isopropylation). 
Reductive methylation and ethylation produce both mono-alkyl 
(mmLys or meLys) and di-alkyl (dmLys or deLys) derivatives. The 
reaction mechanism for reductive methylation is believed to involve 
a nucleophilic addition of an unprotonated lysine ε-amino group 
to formaldehyde to form an N-methylol moiety, which dehydrates 
Kemin Tan et al.

191
and is then hydrogenated to form monomethylated lysine 
(mmLys). In the second step of the exampled reductive methyla-
tion, the secondary amine reacts with a second molecule of form-
aldehyde, which undergoes hydrogenation leading to dimethylated 
lysine (dmLys).
	
R
NH
CH O
R
N
CH
R
NH
CH
R
N
CH
2
2
3
3
2
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
«
=
®
®
(
)
2
	
The properties of methylated lysines in proteins have been inves-
tigated by NMR. The pKa of dmLys measured in calmodulin ranges 
from 9.29 to 10.23 [17, 18] and is slightly lower than observed for 
lysine 9.84–10.71 [19]. This is consistent with an observed decrease 
in the protein isoelectric point after methylation [12].
The chemical modification is fast, specific (only free amino 
groups are modified), and requires few steps under relatively mild 
buffer and chemical conditions. Moreover, native and reported 
methylated proteins show very similar structures and in most cases 
maintain their biochemical function [6, 9, 15, 17]. In an early 
effort to assess the efficacy of methylation on a sample set of statis-
tical significance, 370 proteins that have no significant sequence 
similarity and resisted crystallization efforts in the MCSG during 
PSI-2 were modified. The results of the evaluation with an 
improved success rate in protein crystal structures production were 
reported [4, 16].
Reductive methylation has since continued to be used as an 
effective salvaging method for proteins that fail in producing 
diffraction-­quality crystals in initial screenings. The proteins tested 
were biased to those that could be purified in reasonable scale 
(5–20  mg/ml). Of the 180 proteins that were modified and 
screened, 12 structures were determined, including the first ethyl-
ated and the first isopropylated protein structures (Tables 1 and 2). 
Together with the previous trial of methylated proteins, 32 alkyl-
ated protein structures out of 550 proteins have been determined, 
a 5.8 % success rate. Considering only ~15 % of proteins purified in 
their native form result in a crystal structure, the 5.8 % success rate 
represents a 37 % increase as the proteins targeted in this project 
Table 1 
Summary of reductive alkylation results for proteins processed in this study
Alkylation 
sets
Number of 
proteins treated
Macroscopic 
crystals harvested
Diffraction data 
set collected
Structure(s) 
solved
Methylation
180
21
11
10
Ethylation
74
10
1
1
Isopropylation
21
4
1
1
Reductive Alkylation

192
derive from a subset of proteins that failed to produce a structure 
in initial attempts. Therefore, the use of alkylation complements 
the experiments with native proteins. Reductive alkylation, partic-
ularly methylation of protein lysine residues, provides a simple, 
specific, fast, inexpensive, and efficient method to alter protein 
­surface properties that can improve protein crystallizability and 
crystalline order and can aid in structure determination. There are 
very few known side reactions and the method does not require 
laborious processing of the protein. The method requires a reason-
able amount of material and can be applied to several samples in 
parallel; it does not involve any specialized equipment and there-
fore can be considered as a good generic approach to salvage proj-
ects that failed in the initial crystallization screens. Hence, it fits 
well into high-throughput approaches for structure determination 
and suits regular laboratories as well.
2  Materials
All proteins were prepared by following the standard procedure 
developed by the MCSG [20] and Center for Structural Genomics 
of Infectious Diseases (CSGID). For preparation of protein, details 
on cloning and protein purification protocols, see the Chapters 5 
2.1  Protein 
Preparation
Table 2 
Structures of alkylated proteins and their properties
PDB ID
Identifier  
APC number
Molecular 
weight (Da)
Protein pI
Hydropathy 
score
# of Lys in 
sequence
Resolution 
limit (Å)
Methylated
3R6D
APC100850
24,384
6.2
−0.211
10
1.25
3OP3
CDC25CA-c005
22,688
6.4
−0.550
11
2.70
3QOM
APC100114
54,865
5.0
−0.348
22
2.31
3PNN
APC100138
33,627
4.8
−0.254
13
1.98
4DZR
APC100341
34,655
5.3
−0.201
8
2.55
4EVX
APC101548
13,487
4.8
−0.085
2
1.70
4H7L
APC100584
16,925
4.9
−0.203
3
2.45
4I4D
APC109063
9,957
6.5
−0.410
1
2.10
4IQN
APC101506
25,598
4.2
−0.485
10
1.75
4JDU
APC105901
37,969
9.5
0.021
25
1.47
Ethylated
4IPT
APC100850
24,384
6.2
−0.211
10
1.55
Isopropylated
4IAG
APC109219
14,595
4.2
−0.009
1
1.90
Native
4HNGa
APC100850
24,384
6.2
−0.211
10
1.50
aThis native structure is listed for comparison to its pairing methylated and ethylated structures
Kemin Tan et al.

193
and 7 in this book. This procedure can also be applied to seleno-­
methionine labeled proteins. The alkylation protocol requires 
approximately 5–20 mg of purified proteins at concentrations of 
5–10 mg/ml for each sample.
All reagents are prepared fresh the day of experimentation and all 
solutions are kept at 4 °C or on ice. They include:
	 1.	1 M dimethylamine-borane complex (ABC) in deionized water 
(6 mg of ABC in 100 μl of water).
	 2.	1 M formaldehyde (for methylation) or 1 M acetaldehyde (for 
ethylation) or 1 M acetone (for isopropylation) in deionized 
water.
	 3.	1 M glycine in deionized water.
	 4.	1 M dithiothreitol (DTT).
	 5.	Reaction buffer: 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 % 
(v/v) glycerol, and 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol.
3  Methods
The initial reductive methylation protocol was performed accord-
ing to Rypniewski et al. [6] and Rayment et al. [9]. The experi-
ment was conducted using sodium borohydride as the reducing 
agent. However, to reduce foaming and subsequent protein dena-
turation, the protocol was modified to a more gentle treatment 
with 1 M dimethylamine-borane complex (ABC) as the reducing 
agent [12]. More recently, commercial reductive alkylation proto-
cols/kits have also become available (Hampton Research, Inc.). 
Due to its proven success rate, reductive methylation remains the 
primary alkylation choice especially when the amount of protein is 
limited. Otherwise, parallel experiments including reductive ethyl-
ation and reductive isopropylation are performed. Experimental 
protocols for ethylation and isopropylation are similar to the one 
for methylation except for their second reducing agents as described 
below. Parallel experiments take advantage of the high-throughput 
structure determination pipeline in the MCSG and CSGID.
	 1.	Add 20 μl of 1 M ABC per 1 ml of protein solution and mix 
gently.
	 2.	Immediately add 40 μl of 1 M formaldehyde (for methylation), 
acetaldehyde (for ethylation) or acetone (for isopropylation) 
per 1 ml of protein solution, then mix gently.
	 3.	Incubate the solution at 4 °C for 2 h and repeat the procedure 
one more time.
	 4.	At the end of the second incubation, add an additional amount 
of 10 μl of ABC per 1 ml of protein.
	 5.	Incubate the solution at 4 °C overnight (12–14 h).
2.2  Reagent 
Preparation
3.1  Reductive 
Alkylation, Day 1
Reductive Alkylation

194
	 1.	Add 80 μl of 1 M glycine (to a final concentration of 5 mg/ml) 
and 6 μl of 1 M DTT (to a final concentration of 5 mM) to 
quench the reaction.
	 2.	Leave solution on ice for 2 h.
	 3.	The modified proteins are either buffer exchanged extensively 
by dialysis overnight against a large volume of crystallization 
buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 250 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT) 
or preferably purified by size exclusion chromatography, which 
not only removes residual reagents from the reaction, but also 
separates higher molecular weight protein aggregates, which 
may have formed during the reaction. In some cases, analysis 
of the size exclusion chromatography profile can reveal 
reaction-­induced changes in the oligomerization states of the 
protein.
	 4.	The modified proteins are then concentrated to the desired 
concentration for characterization and crystallization  
(see Note 1).
	 1.	The modified proteins are characterized using SDS PAGE; 
selected samples are characterized using MALDI-TOF spec-
trometry (Tecan) or Electrospray Ionization mass spectrome-
try (ESPI-TOF) with QStar XL (Applied Biosystems Inc.)
	 2.	The modified proteins are screened for crystallization condi-
tions in sitting drops (Mosquito, TTP Labtech); 0.4 μl of pro-
tein is added to 0.4  μl of crystallization solution and 
equilibrated over a 135 μl well solution. Commercial crystal-
lization formulations available from Hampton Research 
(Index), Decode Genetics (Emerald Biostructures) (Wizard I 
& II), and Qiagen (Nextal Biotechnologies) (PEGs II) or the 
MCSG suite including MCSG-1 to -4 (Microlytic, Inc) are 
used for the crystal screening. Plates are kept at 4 or 16 °C in 
Robohotels and imaged with the Minstrel III system 
(RIGAKU) (see Notes 2 and 3).
4  Notes
	 1.	Impact of alkylation for protein properties:
A number of studies [12, 16, 17, 21] have indicated that meth-
ylation of lysine residues in proteins changes their biochemical 
properties such as pI, solubility, and hydropathy. After chemi-
cal modification, many proteins had noticeably changed prop-
erties with the key difference being reduced solubility 
occasionally associated with protein aggregation and precipita-
tion, as has been reported previously [12].
3.2  Reductive 
Alkylation, Day 2
3.3  Characterization 
and Crystallization of 
Modified Proteins
Kemin Tan et al.

195
The alkylation protocol described above requires 5–20 mg 
protein at a concentration of less than 10 mg/ml. Higher pro-
tein concentrations may sometimes produce cross-linked or 
aggregated protein samples. For about a quarter of the sam-
ples, the modified protein became significantly less soluble and 
could not be recovered after the reaction or displayed signifi-
cant cross-linking, as revealed by SDS PAGE. In extreme cases, 
proteins were solidified after a few days of storage at 4 °C. In 
sporadic cases, proteins were degraded after alkylation, dis-
played several bands on the SDS PAGE and yielded no crystals. 
In a third of the cases, the detrimental effect of alkylation on 
the protein behavior was less pronounced. In approximately 
another third of the samples, protein properties improved 
significantly.
The protocol described above is composed of several steps 
that can be executed in less than 2 days for several proteins in 
parallel and can be automated using a liquid handling worksta-
tion. The completeness of the reaction after the alkylation 
reaction was assessed using mass spectrometry (data not 
shown). For those tested that included mostly methylated and 
some ethylated and isopropylated proteins, the alkylation rates 
significantly varied. Although the intention was to generate 
homogeneous fully N-alkylated proteins, the majority of pro-
teins had more than 90  % of lysines modified; however, we 
observed cases where as little as 50 % of lysines were modified. 
Our data suggest that methylation is faster and more efficient 
than ethylation but the actual reaction time of alkylation seems 
to be protein dependent.
	 2.	Structural impact of lysine alkylation:
The structural observation of lysine residues after alkylation 
provides important information about the consequences of the 
chemical modification.
In alkylated protein structures, the majority of lysine resi-
due side chains are in fact poorly ordered and many could not 
be observed although they are detected by mass spectrometry. 
The ordered methylated lysines are mostly in the dmLys form, 
and are typically involved in interactions with protein and/or 
solvent (Fig. 1a). These interactions seem to help stabilize the 
­modified side chains. In some low-resolution methylated pro-
tein ­structures, no modified lysine side chain can be reliably 
built into the model. For example, in the 2.7 Å structure of the 
human cyclin G associated kinase (GAK) (PDB entry 3OP3), 
a collaborative project with the Structural Genomics 
Consortium (SGC, Oxford), no methyl group was built for the 
six lysines in the structure, though reductive methylation was 
essential in improving the crystal diffraction limit from 6 to 
2.7 Å. However, at a low contour level (0.75σ) in a 2Fo–Fc 
Reductive Alkylation

196
Fig. 1 Examples of methylated, unmethylated and ethylated lysines found in alkylated protein structures and 
the interactions promoted by alkylated lysines. Proteins are drawn in stick format incased in navy mesh of a 
2Fo–Fc map contoured at 1σ. (a) A di-methylated lysine 53 (dmLys53) interacts with carboxylates, carbonyl, 
and water. It is also a part of an extended hydrogen bond network. The figure was prepared based on the 
structure of a secreted protein from Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar typhimurium str. 14028S (gi: 
267994654, PDB code: 4HG1). In this case, the native protein crystals from initial screenings diffracted to 
about 3.5 Å. After the protein was methylated, the modified protein crystals diffracted to 1.75 Å and its struc-
ture determination was straightforward (Table 1, PDB: 4HG1). This was a project in collaboration with the 
Program for the Characterization of Secreted Effector Proteins (PCSEP) of the Pacific Northwest National 
Laboratory. (b) An unmethylated lysine (Lys48) involved in multiple interactions (salt bridge and hydrogen 
bonds) with other protein atoms and one water molecule in a methylated structure (PDB code: 3BED). It is 
believed that a lysine involved in strong intrachain interactions may prevent the residue from being methyl-
ated. The exampled structure is from the mannose/sorbose specific IIA subunit of phosphotransferase system 
from E. faecalis v583. (c) A diethylated lysine (deLys) in two conformations. Ethylated lysine residues tend to 
have multiple conformations and be at least partially disordered. In this structure from an ethylated short-chain 
dehydrogenase/reductase from V. parvula DSM 2008, the deLys184 forms an additional hydrogen bond to 
Asp188. It also makes hydrophobic contacts to Tyr25 and Phe187. The hydrophobic interaction added from 
ethylated lysine is believed to be its major feature. (d) In the methylated structure (PDB code: 3BED) as men-
tioned in (b), the two chains, (A) and (B), make a contact that is nearly twofold symmetric. Across the small 
interface, methylated lysine 190 from the (B) chain (dmLys B190) forms an extensive interaction to the  
(A) chain. Carbon atoms from the (A) and (B) chains are colored in yellow and salmon, respectively
Kemin Tan et al.

197
electron density map, a likely dmLys324 forms a hydrogen 
bond to the carbonyl group of Val363 in a loop, which may 
help to stabilize this loop.
In several cases, both alkylated and unalkylated surface 
lysines were observed in the electron density. Some of these 
unmethylated lysines are believed to be involved in multiple 
interactions with neighboring residues (and solvent) and there-
fore resist alkylation (Fig. 1b). In the structure of the man-
nose/sorbose specific IIA subunit of the phosphotransferase 
system from Enterococcus faecalis v583 (PDB entry: 3BED), 
three of five lysine residues in each of the two protein chains 
are ordered. Among these, Lys48 remains unmethylated while 
the other two are clearly modified. There are a few mmLys also 
observed. Although partial disorder could be a factor, some 
likely resulted from local geometries where the Nζ atom was 
involved in a strong hydrogen bond to other protein atom(s) 
restricting accessibility to reagents.
From limited observations of ethylated and isopropylated 
protein structures, the ethyl groups or isopropyl groups 
attached to the Nζ atom of modified lysine tend to have mul-
tiple conformations (Fig. 1c). In the ethylated protein struc-
ture of a short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase from Veillonella 
parvula DSM 2008 (PDB entry: 4IPT), three out of ten 
lysines were modeled as diethylated lysines. No ethyl group on 
other lysine side chains was observed in electron density maps 
due to either its absence or disorder. The ordered deLys show 
multiple conformations and/or partial disorder as well. In the 
isopropylated protein structure from a zorbamycin binding 
protein from Streptomyces flavoviridis (PDB entry: 4IAG) the 
isopropyl group attached to the only lysine of the molecule 
also has multiple conformations (data not shown).
	 3.	Roles of alkylated lysines:
The ordered alkylated lysines are engaged in a variety of intra-
molecular and intermolecular interactions with the protein and 
solvent. These interactions may help stabilize the protein and 
create new crystal packing contacts, producing diffraction-­
quality crystals.
New interactions promoted by alkylated lysine are 
observed. Besides the interactions that involve contacts 
between the dmLys methyl groups with carboxylates and car-
bonyls on the surface of the protein as reported earlier by Kim 
et al. [4], Shaw et al. [14], and Fan and Joachimiak [16], sev-
eral additional types of interactions were also observed, such as 
the interaction with His residues [4]. The deLys shows a new 
type of hydrophobic interaction (observed for the first time) 
with the aromatic rings of Tyr and Phe, suggesting that adding 
a larger hydrophobic alkyl group to lysine changes the nature 
Reductive Alkylation

198
of the interactions from a hydrogen bond interaction (with 
methyl group) to a hydrophobic interaction (with ethyl and 
isopropyl groups) (Fig. 1c). Interestingly, ethylated lysine can 
still make a hydrogen atom bond through its Nζ nitrogen 
(Fig. 1c). Experimental observations [4, 11, 12] and quantum 
­mechanical calculations [16] show that the methyl group in 
dmLys or mmLys is polar and is capable of acting as hydrogen-
bond donors in quasi-hydrogen (albeit weaker) bonds formed 
with oxygen and nitrogen atoms of proteins as well as ordered 
solvent. In some cases, the interaction is exclusively with a sin-
gle water molecule, but more often the methylated lysine 
becomes part of an extensive interaction network on the pro-
tein surface (Fig. 1a). It has been proposed that methylation of 
lysine residues enhances crystal packing by solvent reorganiza-
tion around methylated lysine side chains, favoring the forma-
tion of protein crystals through solvent entropic gain [16]. 
The distances between methyl carbons in the dmLys (or 
mmLys) and oxygen or nitrogen atoms range from 3.2 to 
3.8 Å, somewhat longer than a typical hydrogen bond distance 
between two electronegative atoms, as predicted from theo-
retical calculations (3.28 Å) [16].
Alkylating a lysine expands its interaction radius. Lysine is 
underrepresented at the protein–protein and crystal packing 
interfaces [11, 22–24]. Chemical modification to the lysine resi-
due sometimes changes its properties from non-supporting 
interactions to promoting interactions. For example, methyl 
groups provide a convenient extension to the ε-amino group of 
the lysine (i.e., Lys53 in Fig. 1a) allowing a weak, long distance 
(>4.2  Å) interaction with oxygen or nitrogen (i.e., Glu47 in 
Fig.  1a) to be replaced with stronger, shorter ε-amine-[N-­
methyl]—oxygen/nitrogen interactions [16]. Adding methyl 
groups effectively increases the interaction radius of lysine by 
1–1.4 Å. Therefore, modification of Lys, for example, to dmLys 
may be seen as similar to replacing Lys with a “longer” Arg resi-
due. Arginine has a higher propensity to promote interactions 
and is found more often on protein–protein [25] and crystal 
packing interfaces [22–24]. Most interactions with an Arg side 
chain occur approximately in the plane of the guanidinium moi-
ety. The dimethylamino group, however, is not planar, and inter-
action with it can occur over a wider range of angles providing 
a greater interaction surface than Arg, although individual inter-
actions are weaker than those with a guanidium group. Of course, 
this may also cause “unwanted” effects such as protein aggrega-
tion, providing an explanation as to why after methylation 
some proteins precipitate or change their oligomeric state [12]. 
Kemin Tan et al.

199
Similar mechanisms may happen with lysine ethylation and iso-
propylation as well.
Alkylated lysine may produce more ordered and tighter 
packing. Intrachain interactions promoted by alkylated lysine 
residues can improve protein stability, molecular packing, and 
help to produce more ordered diffraction-quality crystals 
(Fig. 1d). Additionally, lysine alkylation alters the surface, chang-
ing protein solubility and allowing for the exploration of a differ-
ent set of protein orientations as they pack to form a crystal. An 
alkylated protein can explore an “interaction space” that is differ-
ent from the native protein. This often leads to a new selection of 
crystal packing contacts with lower lattice disorder as manifested 
by a reduction in isotropic B-factors. Quantum mechanical calcu-
lations showed that methylated lysines attract more ordered sol-
vent molecules [16]. These water molecules are being released to 
bulk solvent upon protein crystallization leading to a net entro-
pic gain. Additionally, for proteins with both native and alkylated 
structures, the solvent contents of alkylated crystals are ~4–5 % 
less than native crystals. Protein crystals with lower solvent con-
tent tend to have higher crystalline order and usually diffract to 
higher resolution [4, 26].
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank all members of the Structural Biology Center and 
Midwest Center for Structural Genomics at Argonne National 
Laboratory for their help in conducting these experiments. This 
work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant num-
ber GM GM094585, Contract numbers HHSN272200700058C 
and HHSN272201200026C and by the US Department of 
Energy, Office of Biological and Environmental Research, under 
contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.
References
	 1.	Ferré-D’Amaré AR, Burley SK (1994) Use of 
dynamic light scattering to assess crystallizabil-
ity of macromolecules and macromolecular 
assemblies. Structure 2:357–359
	 2.	Dong A, Xu X, Edwards AM et al (2007) In 
situ proteolysis for protein crystallization and 
structure determination. Nat Methods 4: 
1019–1021
	 3.	Derewenda ZS (2004) Rational protein crys-
tallization by mutational surface engineering. 
Structure 12:529–535
	 4.	Kim Y, Quartey P, Li H et al (2008) Large-­
scale evaluation of protein reductive methyla-
tion for improving protein crystallization. Nat 
Methods 5:853–854
	 5.	D’Arcy A, Stihle M, Kostrewa D et al (1999) 
Crystal engineering: a case study using the 24 
kDa fragment of the DNA gyrase B subunit 
from Escherichia coli. Acta Crystallogr D Biol 
Crystallogr 55:1623–1625
	 6.	Rypniewski WR, Holden HM, Rayment I 
(1993) Structural consequences of reductive 
Reductive Alkylation

200
methylation of lysine residues in hen egg white 
lysozyme: an X-ray analysis at 1.8-A resolution. 
Biochemistry 32:9851–9858
	 7.	Means GE, Feeney RE (1990) Chemical modi-
fications of proteins: history and applications. 
Bioconjug Chem 1:2–12
	 8.	Rayment I (1997) Reductive alkylation of 
lysine residues to alter crystallization properties 
of proteins. Methods Enzymol 276:171–179
	 9.	Rayment I, Rypniewski WR, Schmidt-Base K 
et  al (1993) Three-dimensional structure of 
myosin subfragment-1: a molecular motor. 
Science 261:50–58
	10.	Derewenda ZS, Vekilov PG (2006) Entropy 
and surface engineering in protein crystalliza-
tion. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 
62:116–124
	11.	Sledz P, Zheng H, Murzyn K et al (2010) New 
surface contacts formed upon reductive lysine 
methylation: improving the probability of pro-
tein crystallization. Protein Sci 19:1395–1404
	12.	Walter TS, Meier C, Assenberg R et al (2006) 
Lysine methylation as a routine rescue strategy 
for protein crystallization. Structure 14: 
1617–1622
	13.	Schubot FD, Waugh DS (2004) A pivotal role 
for reductive methylation in the de novo crys-
tallization of a ternary complex composed of 
Yersinia pestis virulence factors YopN, SycN 
and YscB. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 
60:1981–1986
	14.	Shaw N, Cheng C, Tempel W et  al (2007) 
(NZ)CH…O contacts assist crystallization of a 
ParB-like nuclease. BMC Struct Biol 7:46
	15.	Kobayashi M, Kubota M, Matsuura Y (1999) 
Crystallization and improvement of crystal 
quality for X-ray diffraction of maltooligosyl 
trehalose synthase by reductive methylation of 
lysine residues. Acta Crystallogr D Biol 
Crystallogr 55:931–933
	16.	Fan Y, Joachimiak A (2010) Enhanced crystal 
packing due to solvent reorganization through 
reductive methylation of lysine residues in oxi-
doreductase from Streptococcus pneumoniae. 
J Struct Funct Genomics 11:101–111
	17.	Means GE (1977) Reductive alkylation of 
amino 
groups. 
Methods 
Enzymol 
47: 
469–478
	18.	Zhang M, Thulin E, Vogel HJ (1994) 
Reductive methylation and pKa determination 
of the lysine side chains in calbindin D9k. 
J Protein Chem 13:527–535
	19.	Zhang M, Vogel HJ (1993) Determination of 
the side chain pKa values of the lysine residues in 
calmodulin. J Biol Chem 268:22420–22428
	20.	Kim Y, Dementieva I, Zhou M et  al (2004) 
Automation of protein purification for struc-
tural genomics. J Struct Funct Genomics 
5:111–118
	21.	Means GE, Feeney RE (1995) Reductive alkyl-
ation of proteins. Anal Biochem 224:1–16
	22.	Anashkina A, Kuznetso E, Esipova N et  al 
(2007) Comprehensive statistical analysis of 
residues interaction specificity at protein–pro-
tein interfaces. Proteins 67:1060–1077
	23.	Glaser F, Steinberg DM, Vakser IA et al (2001) 
Residue frequencies and pairing preferences at 
protein–protein interfaces. Proteins 43:89–102
	24.	Juers DH, Matthews BW (2001) Reversible 
lattice repacking illustrates the temperature 
dependence of macromolecular interactions. 
J Mol Biol 311:851–862
	25.	Magalhaes A, Maigret B, Hoflack J et al (1994) 
Contribution of unusual arginine–arginine 
short-range interactions to stabilization and 
recognition in proteins. J Protein Chem 13: 
195–215
	26.	Wang J, Dauter M, Alkire R et  al (2007) 
Triclinic lysozyme at 0.65 Å resolution. Acta 
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 63:1254–1268
Kemin Tan et al.

201
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_16, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 16  
 Salvage or Recovery of Failed Targets by Mutagenesis 
to Reduce Surface Entropy 
 Lukasz  Goldschmidt ,  David  Eisenberg , and  Zygmunt  S.  Derewenda 
 Abstract 
 The success of macromolecular crystallization depends on the protein’s ability to form speciﬁ c, cohesive 
intermolecular interactions that serve as crystal contacts. In the cases where the protein lacks surface 
patches conducive to such interactions, crystallization may not occur. However, it is possible to enhance 
the likelihood of crystallization by engineering such patches through site-directed mutagenesis, targeting 
speciﬁ cally residues with high side chain entropy and replacing them with small amino acids (i.e., surface 
entropy reduction, SER). This method has proven successful in hundreds of crystallographic analyses of 
proteins otherwise recalcitrant to crystallization. Three representative cases of the application of the SER 
strategy, assisted by the automated prediction of the mutation sites using the SER prediction (SERp) 
server are described.  
 Key words    Protein crystallization  ,  Surface entropy reduction  ,   Site-directed mutagenesis  ,   Protein 
engineering  ,   Crystal contacts  
1  Introduction 
 That even a single amino acid replacement at the protein’s surface 
can critically affect solubility and propensity for crystallization has 
long been established long [ 1 ,  2 ]. However, the idea that it is pos-
sible to rationally engineer patches that would systematically 
enhance protein crystallizability is relatively new [ 3 ,  4 ]. The Surface 
Entropy Reduction (SER) concept was initially suggested on the 
basis of a thermodynamic argument that the presence on the pro-
tein’s surface of residues with large, ﬂ exible side chains, character-
ized by high conformational entropy (e.g., Lys and Glu), interferes 
with the ability of the protein to form stable crystal contacts. This 
is because the immobilization of such side chains at the site of a 
contact would increase the entropic cost of crystallization [ 3 ,  5 ,  6 ]. 
Thus, mutational modiﬁ cation of surface patches rich in large 
amino acids and their replacement with residues with small side 
chains was suggested as a way of engineering sites with enhanced 

202
ability to mediate crystal contacts [ 7 ]. Subsequent experimental 
[ 3 ,  5 ], theoretical [ 8 ], and data mining [ 9 ,  10 ] studies strongly 
supported this hypothesis. A number of protein structures solved 
using crystals generated by the SER strategy revealed that the 
mutated sites almost invariably were involved in crystal contacts, 
providing a ﬁ rm validation of the underlying hypothesis [ 4 ,  11 –
 14 ]. The three types of amino acids that are of particular signiﬁ -
cance are Lys, Glu, and Gln. Crystallizable variants can be obtained 
by mutating these amino acids to such residues as Ala, Ser, Thr, or 
even Tyr, the side chain of which has only two degrees of rotational 
freedom [ 7 ]. It has been shown that often two or three simultane-
ous mutations of residues located in close proximity on the surface 
are necessary for optimal effect [ 7 ]. The key question is what speciﬁ c 
sites on a given protein’s surface should be targeted for mutagenesis. 
Therefore, we implemented an automated algorithm that allows 
the investigator to identify such sites from amino acid (or cDNA) 
sequence alone was implemented [ 15 ]. 
 Here we describe three representative cases of the application 
of the surface entropy reduction strategy using automated identiﬁ -
cation of target surface sites, assisted by the SERp server. The 
information obtained from the server can be used in several ways. 
In one example, three different variants were generated, each with 
a different mutated patch. In the second example, only one surface 
site was chosen, but three distinct variants were generated by 
replacing the target residues with alanines, threonines, or tyrosines. 
In the ﬁ nal example, ﬁ ve patches identiﬁ ed by SERp were all 
mutated into single variants using alanines for replacement. In 
each case, one or more of the variants yielded crystals suitable for 
diffraction studies and the corresponding structures were pub-
lished and deposited in the Protein Data Bank.  
2  Materials 
 The SER strategy is typically used when the target protein, or a 
complex, fails to crystallize despite extensive screening. Thus, all 
relevant expression constructs and puriﬁ cation protocols are 
normally well established and followed. 
 The Surface Entropy Reduction prediction (SERp) server is 
accessible to academic and commercial users free of charge online 
at   http://services.mbi.ucla.edu/SER   . A job submission requires 
only the amino acid or cDNA sequence of the target protein and a 
valid e-mail address. The default parameters are recommended for 
new users, though the ability to adjust most processing parameters 
is also provided. 
 Desired SER mutations are typically introduced into the target 
protein using QuikChange ® site-directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent 
Technologies) and should be conﬁ rmed by direct DNA 
Lukasz Goldschmidt et al.

203
sequencing. Multiple mutations in close proximity can be introduced 
in a single reaction if they can be placed within a single primer, or 
alternatively the Multi-Site version of the QuikChange protocol, 
or QuikChange ® Multi, can be used. The latest generation of these 
kits (i.e., QuikChange ® Lightning) provide accelerated protocols 
capable of handling short and long templates. Protein expression 
and puriﬁ cation are then carried out as established for the wild- type 
protein. 
 Commercial crystallization kits can be purchased from various 
companies and methods for high-throughput crystallization 
screening are described elsewhere in this volume ( see  Note 1 ). 
3  Methods 
 To illustrate the utility of the SER approach, we describe the 
application of the method to three distinct examples of proteins 
that failed to produce diffraction-quality crystals in their wild type 
form. These proteins are: (1) A 144-residue, monomeric prokary-
otic disulﬁ de isomerase YphP from  B. subtilis ; (2) Met6p, a 789-res-
idue fungal methionine synthase; and (3) the 364-residue catalytic 
domain (amino acids 364) of the human vaccinia-related protein 
kinase 1 (VRK1). 
 After opening the SERp server’s URL in the browser, the user 
simply pastes the protein (or cDNA) sequence into the proper text 
box and enters the e-mail address, to which the results of the analysis 
are to be sent. Although providing a short name or identiﬁ er for 
the protein is optional, use of this ﬁ eld is encouraged to help with 
the identiﬁ cation of results. All results are stored on the server and 
can be retrieved for up to 30 days after the submission by using the 
submitter’s e-mail address and a personal identiﬁ cation number 
(PIN). The server can also be used to screen a larger set of sequences 
by using the Batch Submission mode. This mode accepts the com-
mon FASTA ﬁ le format as input. Results can be conveniently 
viewed and sorted on the server’s Web site; selected results can also 
be e-mailed to the submitter. 
 The default processing parameter values are suitable for most 
users and do not need to be adjusted. At the core of the SER algo-
rithm are three primary analyses: the entropy proﬁ le, secondary 
structure prediction, and the evolutionary conservation prediction 
[ 15 ]. Those analyses should remain enabled unless the user has a 
strong reason to omit one. For example, to exclude evolutionary 
information from multiple sequence alignments, the evolutionary 
conservation prediction can be turned off by unchecking the cor-
responding check box, or by setting the weight for this analysis to 
zero. The server can operate without secondary structure  prediction 
if the user deems these predictions to be unreliable, although we 
3.1  Using the SERp 
Server: General 
Remarks
Surface Mutagenesis

204
found the secondary structure predictions to be beneﬁ cial in virtually 
all cases, and thus do not recommend disabling this analysis. 
 Once the submitted sequence has been analyzed (typical 
processing times are less than a minute), a list of suggested muta-
tions is presented on the results “Summary” tab. Mutations are 
organized in clusters and are reported in order of predicted suc-
cess. Clusters with a SERp score of 3.0 (arbitrary scale) and above 
are considered as optimal targets. Details about the calculation of 
each cluster’s SERp score can be found on the “Score Details” tab, 
where the contribution of each primary analysis is shown on a 
per- residue basis. Important data are also presented in graphical 
form on the “Graphs” tab. The ﬁ rst graph titled “Overall Score” 
explains why a particular set of mutations is predicted to be effective 
in conferring enhanced crystallizability. 
 Brieﬂ y, ideal candidate sites are non-conserved, and contain 
clusters of high side chain entropy residues (i.e., Lys, Glu and Gln) 
that lie in solvent-exposed loops of the protein. The stacked graph 
shows the average side chain entropy in red, and the conﬁ dence 
that a particular region falls between secondary structure elements 
in blue. Such regions are presumed to have a higher likelihood to 
lie on the surface. Residues that are found to be conserved in multi-
ple sequence alignments are panelized relative to their conservation 
level, while the occurrence of proposed replacement residues is scored 
favorably and is also shown in green on the stacked graph. 
 Each proposed cluster is highlighted on the graph, and its rank 
and score are shown near the top. The residue patterns pre- and 
post-mutation within each cluster are also important and are thus 
included near the bottom of the graph. The overall aim is to generate 
new consecutive patches of residues with low side chain entropy, 
which have the potential to form crystal contacts. Such new con-
tacts can then contribute to the stability of the crystal or produce 
new crystal forms with superior diffraction quality. Regions that 
could form a low-entropy patch are shaded in gray, and the pro-
posed replacement residues within are highlighted in green. 
 Results from the Meta Search are also summarized on this 
graph, but are not utilized in the selection algorithm. It is up to 
user to evaluate those additional pieces of information. For exam-
ple, detected sequence signatures for highly conserved regions of 
proteins are shown at the bottom of the graph in pink. If possible, 
mutations in those regions should be avoided. Homologous struc-
tures in the PDB with high sequence similarity are used to estimate 
the surface accessibility of residue ( see  Note 2 ). Results from this 
analysis are shown at the bottom of the graph for each residue, 
with darker gray colors indicating higher solvent accessibility. 
 Analysis of larger or more difﬁ cult targets may beneﬁ t from 
minor adjustments of the processing parameters. For example, the 
cluster limit cutoff can be increased to suggest more cluster  candidates. 
If other replacement residues besides alanine should be considered, 
Lukasz Goldschmidt et al.

205
those residues can be listed as potential “Target amino acids” in the 
respective ﬁ eld ( see  Note 3 ). To avoid replacement of a certain resi-
due type or to consider mutations of other residues with high side 
chain entropy, the “Mutable amino acid” list can be adjusted 
( see  Note 4 ). By default the server will suggest a maximum of three 
mutations per cluster, where a cluster is deﬁ ned as a patch of con-
secutive “high entropy” or “target” residues, with gaps no larger 
than two amino acids in length. Larger clusters with more replace-
ments can be also considered if the target’s solubility allows it. 
 The SER analysis for the amino acid sequence of YphP from  
B. subtilis, with default parameters, identiﬁ es three candidate clus-
ters containing high side chain entropy residues (underlined) in 
putative solvent exposed locations:  39 GluLys Ala Glu 42 ;  100 GlnGlu  101 ; 
and  113 Lys,Glu  114 . The respective scores for these sites are: 5.2, 3.8, 
and 4.4 (Fig.  1 ). Six variants were generated, each containing 
mutations within a single cluster, either to alanines or tyrosines 
( see  Note 2 ). Although the ﬁ rst cluster has the highest SERp score, 
the authors found that the variants targeting this site yielded only 
poor-quality crystals under a variety of conditions. However, the 
second most highly scored site, with alanines replacing the two high 
entropy residues, gave reproducible crystals in two different condi-
tions and ultimately yielded a structure at 2.3 Å resolution [ 16 ].
 The SERp analysis of the amino acid sequence of the methionine 
synthase Met6p identiﬁ es only three potential target clusters; of 
these, a three-residue cluster ( 103 LysLys AlaThr Glu 107 ) in a pre-
dicted surface exposed loop has by far the highest score, 6.1 
(Fig.  2 ). A comparison with known homologues of bacterial and 
plant origin conﬁ rmed the surface location of the loop [ 17 ]. The 
investigators chose to focus on this site alone, and generated three 
variants, so that each had the high-entropy residues replaced with 
alanines, threonines, or tyrosines ( see  Note 2 ). The catalytic activ-
ity of the protein was not affected. Each of the three variants 
yielded a distinct crystal form, suitable for diffraction studies. The 
resolution of the diffraction data ranged between 2.0 to 2.8 Å.
 This potentially important drug target was under study for several 
years before the SER strategy ﬁ nally brought the project to fruition 
(Dr. C. K. Allerston, personal communication). The SERp server 
identiﬁ ed a total of four clusters rich in high-entropy residues, 
i.e.,  34 LysLysGlu  36 ;  212 Glu Tyr LysGlu  215 ;  292 GluLys Asn Lys 295 ; and 
 359 LysLys  360 (the current version actually identiﬁ es ﬁ ve clusters, 
including  312 GluLys 313 — see  Note 2, Fig.  3 ). In this case, the inves-
tigators decided to mutate all these clusters simultaneously, thus 
introducing 11 mutations into protein ( see  Notes 5 and  6 ). The 
modiﬁ ed variant yielded a crystal form that diffracted to 2.4 Å 
(unpublished; PDB code 3OP5).
3.1.1  B. subtilis  
Prokaryotic Disulﬁ de 
Isomerase YphP
3.1.2  C. albicans  
Methionine 
Synthase Met6p
3.1.3  The Catalytic 
Domain of the Human 
Vaccinia-Related Kinase 
1 (VRK1)
Surface Mutagenesis

206
4  Notes 
  1.  We do not observe any speciﬁ c correlation between the nature 
of the engineered variants and conditions under which they 
crystallize, although no systematic analysis has been carried out. 
 Fig. 1   Summary of the key results from the SER analysis of the  B. subtilis prokaryotic disulﬁ de isomerase YphP. 
Proposed mutations are organized in clusters and are reported in order of predicted success ( top left ). Clusters 
with a SERp score of 3.0 and above are optimal targets, as indicated by the  color gradient  of the  horizontal bar . 
The residue composition of each cluster is shown. Residues suggested for mutation are shaded  green , existing 
low entropy residues are shaded  yellow . Results from the Meta Search for homologous structured in the 
Protein Data Bank (PDB) for conserved sequence signatures are summarized on the  top right . The stacked 
summary graph shows the sidechain entropy and secondary structure proﬁ les in  red and  blue , respectively. All 
clusters are  highlighted on the graph, with the cluster rank and score annotations near the top ( green boxes  ). 
The residue sequence and the residue patterns pre and post mutation are displayed below the proﬁ le (high 
entropy residues in  pink , mutable resides in  red , suggested mutations in  green and replacement residues in 
 yellow ). The estimated solvent accessibility of each residue, computed from homologous structures in the PDB, 
is shown next with darker  grays indicating higher accessibility. Finally, the predicted secondary structure is 
shown using the common cartoon diagram 
 
Lukasz Goldschmidt et al.

207
In those cases where the wild-type protein is known to crystallize, 
albeit yielding poor-quality crystals, the variants typically crys-
tallize under different conditions. It is therefore recommended 
that all SER variants are screened de novo. In our laboratories 
we use various commercial screens for this purpose, but we 
observe that chances of success or vastly increased with the 
alternative reservoir strategy [ 7 ,  18 ].  
  2.  The databases utilized by the SERp server are updated regu-
larly (at least monthly), and thus cluster scores and rankings 
may change over time. At present, homology modeling is not 
explicitly used by the SERp algorithm. This information, and 
utilization of information about crystal contacts in homolo-
gous structures, will be used in version 2.0.  
  3.  The current algorithm has no capability of predicting what type 
of an amino acid is best suited for a particular cluster, and by 
default suggests Ala. Most of the successful examples of the SER 
application use this strategy, but as shown in our examples, other 
types of amino acids (e.g., Thr or Tyr) may also yield good 
results. At the moment this is purely the investigator’s call.  
  4.   The current SERp algorithm targets Lys, Glu and Gln residues 
for mutagenesis. Obviously, removal of a charged, polar residue 
 Fig. 2   SER analysis results for  C. albicans  methionine synthase Met6p. The annotations in this ﬁ gure are analo-
gous to those in Fig.  1 . For this target, additionally several sequence signatures were found. The top three hits 
are named in the Blocks section in the Meta Search Summary with the respective expectation values. Regions 
that match each signature are marked in  pink below the stacked proﬁ le graph. Due to space reasons, only the 
residue region 270–532 is shown 
 
Surface Mutagenesis

208
from the surface will have an effect on the protein solubility. 
While this is not built into our prediction, the next version of 
the server will attempt to predict mutations that are least 
deleterious to solubility. At the moment, we recommend that 
the users target Lys-rich clusters in preference to Glu.  
  5.   The “multi-patch” strategy is rarely used and requires further 
investigation. Nevertheless, several crystal structures have been 
successfully obtained using crystals obtained by this approach. 
One other such example is the  Arabidopsis prenyl pyrophos-
phate synthase [ 19 ]. 
  6.  In all the examples listed, and in the vast majority of the crystal 
structures obtained through the SER strategy, the engineered 
surface patches are directly involved in crystal contacts. It is 
always instructive to examine not only the details of the target 
protein or complex, but also those of the packing features to 
better understand the crystallization process.  
 Fig. 3   SER analysis results for the catalytic domain of the human vaccinia-related kinase 1, VRK1. Similar to 
Figs.  1 and  2 , the highest-scoring ﬁ ve clusters are shown, annotated equivalently. A large cluster comprised of 
residues 292–307 is highlighted ( box ) because of regularly spaced residues with high side chain entropy. 
Within the cluster only three residues near the beginning on the cluster are suggested for mutation because 
they lie between two helices, as evidenced by the peak of the stacked graph ( bottom ). Due to space reasons, 
only the C-terminal region with residues 100–363 is shown 
 
Lukasz Goldschmidt et al.

209
 Acknowledgment 
 This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health, 
grant GM095847.  
 References 
  1.  McElroy HH, Sisson GW, Schottlin WE et al 
(1992) Studies on engineering crystallizability by 
mutation of surface residues of human thymi-
dylate synthase. J Cryst Growth 122:265–272  
  2.  Dale GE, Broger C, Langen H, D’Arcy A, 
Stuber D (1994) Improving protein solubility 
through rationally designed amino acid replace-
ments: solubilization of the trimethoprim- 
resistant type S1 dihydrofolate reductase. 
Protein Eng 7:933–939  
  3.  Longenecker KL, Garrard SM, Shefﬁ eld PJ, 
Derewenda ZS (2001) Protein crystallization 
by rational mutagenesis of surface residues: Lys 
to Ala mutations promote crystallization of 
RhoGDI. Acta Crystallogr D 57:679–688  
  4.  Derewenda ZS (2004) Rational protein crys-
tallization by mutational surface engineering. 
Structure 12:529–535  
  5.  Mateja A, Devedjiev Y, Krowarsch D, 
Longenecker K, Dauter Z, Otlewski J, 
Derewenda ZS (2002) The impact of Glu → 
Ala and Glu → Asp mutations on the crystalli-
zation properties of RhoGDI: the structure of 
RhoGDI at 1.3 A resolution. Acta Crystallogr 
D 58:1983–1991  
  6.  Derewenda ZS, Vekilov PG (2006) Entropy 
and surface engineering in protein crystalliza-
tion. Acta Crystallogr D 62:116–124  
  7.  Cooper DR, Boczek T, Grelewska K, Pinkowska 
M, Sikorska M, Zawadzki M, Derewenda Z 
(2007) Protein crystallization by surface 
entropy reduction: optimization of the SER 
strategy. Acta Crystallogr D 63:636–645  
  8.  Pellicane G, Smith G, Sarkisov L (2008) 
Molecular dynamics characterization of protein 
crystal contacts in aqueous solutions. Phys Rev 
Lett 101:248102  
  9.  Cieslik M, Derewenda ZS (2009) The role of 
entropy and polarity in intermolecular contacts in 
protein crystals. Acta Crystallogr D 65:500–509  
  10.  Price WN 2nd, Chen Y, Handelman SK, Neely 
H, Manor P, Karlin R, Nair R, Liu J, Baran M, 
Everett J, Tong SN, Forouhar F, Swaminathan 
SS, Acton T, Xiao R, Luft JR, Lauricella A, 
DeTitta GT, Rost B, Montelione GT, Hunt JF 
(2009) Understanding the physical properties 
that control protein crystallization by analysis 
of large-scale experimental data. Nat Biotechnol 
27:51–57 
  11.  Longenecker KL, Lewis ME, Chikumi H, 
Gutkind JS, Derewenda ZS (2001) Structure 
of the RGS-like domain from PDZ-RhoGEF: 
linking heterotrimeric g protein-coupled sig-
naling to Rho GTPases. Structure 9:559–569  
  12.  Derewenda U, Mateja A, Devedjiev Y, 
Routzahn KM, Evdokimov AG, Derewenda 
ZS, Waugh DS (2004) The structure of 
 Yersinia pestis V-antigen, an essential virulence 
factor and mediator of immunity against 
plague. Structure 12:301–306 
  13.  Janda I, Devedjiev Y, Derewenda U, Dauter Z, 
Bielnicki J, Cooper DR, Graf PC, Joachimiak 
A, Jakob U, Derewenda ZS (2004) The crystal 
structure of the reduced, Zn 2+ -bound form of 
the  B. subtilis Hsp33 chaperone and its implica-
tions for the activation mechanism. Structure 
12:1901–1907  
  14.  Bielnicki J, Devedjiev Y, Derewenda U, Dauter 
Z, Joachimiak A, Derewenda ZS (2006)  B. sub-
tilis ykuD protein at 2.0 A resolution: insights 
into the structure and function of a novel, 
ubiquitous 
family 
of 
bacterial 
enzymes. 
Proteins 62:144–151  
  15.  Goldschmidt L, Cooper DR, Derewenda ZS, 
Eisenberg D (2007) Toward rational protein 
crystallization: a web server for the design of 
crystallizable protein variants. Protein Sci 
16:1569–1576  
  16.  Derewenda U, Boczek T, Gorres KL, Yu M, 
Hung LW, Cooper D, Joachimiak A, Raines 
RT, Derewenda ZS (2009) Structure and func-
tion of  Bacillus subtilis YphP, a prokaryotic 
disulﬁ de isomerase with a CXC catalytic motif. 
Biochemistry 48:8664–8671  
  17.  Ubhi D, Kavanagh KL, Monzingo AF, 
Robertus JD (2011) Structure of  Candida 
albicans methionine synthase determined by 
employing surface residue mutagenesis. Arch 
Biochem Biophys 513:19–26  
  18.  Newman J (2005) Expanding screening space 
through the use of alternative reservoirs in 
vapor-diffusion experiments. Acta Crystallogr 
D 61:490–493  
  19.  Hsieh FL, Chang TH, Ko TP, Wang AH 
(2011) Structure and mechanism of an 
 Arabidopsis medium/long-chain-length prenyl 
pyrophosphate synthase. Plant Physiol 155:
1079–1090  
Surface Mutagenesis

211
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_17, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 17  
 Data Collection for Crystallographic Structure 
Determination 
 Kanagalaghatta  Rajashankar and  Zbigniew  Dauter 
 Abstract 
 Diffraction data measurement is the ﬁ nal experimental step of crystal structure analysis; all subsequent 
stages are computational. Good-quality data, optimized for a particular application, make the structure 
solution and reﬁ nement easier and enhance the accuracy of the ﬁ nal models. This chapter describes the 
principles of the rotation method of data collection and discusses various scenarios that are useful for dif-
ferent types of applications, such as anomalous phasing, molecular replacement, ligand identiﬁ cation, etc. 
Some typical problems encountered in practice are also discussed.  
 Key words   Diffraction data collection  ,   Diffraction data quality  ,   Rotation method  ,   Strategy  
1  Introduction 
 Any X-ray structure determination project involves several steps, 
including selecting a target, cloning the gene, expressing the gene to 
obtain a sufﬁ cient amount of the protein, crystallizing the protein, 
collecting the diffraction data, and determining and reﬁ ning the 
structure. Clearly, diffraction data collection is the last truly experi-
mental step of the X-ray structure solution process. All subsequent 
stages are computational and can easily be repeated with different 
programs, algorithms, and parameters. Good-quality data make all 
of the computations easier and the resulting structural model more 
accurate. It is therefore important to carefully ﬁ ne- tune all data 
collection parameters in order to obtain a diffraction data set best 
suited to the particular application. 
 Three important (and somewhat mutually contradicting) 
characteristics of an ideal data set are its completeness, resolution, 
and redundancy (in that order). First, the diffraction data set should 
be complete, i.e., it should contain all possible unique reﬂ ections, 
and all recorded intensities should be measured accurately and be 
accompanied by reliably estimated uncertainties. Second, the data 
should extend to the highest possible resolution. However, aiming at 

212
a very high resolution requires a higher X-ray dose/longer exposure, 
which may result in radiation damage and, in turn, incomplete 
data. Third, the data should be redundant, to provide good count-
ing statistics. However, aiming at very high redundancy may result 
in lower-resolution data. Hence, one has to perform a “balancing 
act” to obtain the best possible data for the goals of the project and 
the potential of the crystal in hand. 
 In practice, the measured data are never ideal, but are usually 
inﬂ uenced to some extent by various errors and discrepancies. 
Crystallographic experiments with different goals require different 
characteristics of the measured diffraction data [ 1 ,  2 ]. For example, 
phasing of a novel protein structure using an anomalous diffraction 
approach requires data that are different from those required for 
phasing by molecular replacement or for the ultimate, high-resolution 
reﬁ nement of the atomic model. Hence, one has to ﬁ ne-tune the 
data collection parameters to suit the goal of the experiment. In the 
following discussion, data quality requirements for different types 
of experiments will be described. 
 The methods based on anomalous diffraction require the utmost 
accuracy of the measured intensities because they aim to utilize the 
inherently small anomalous signal for phasing. The data resolution 
does not need to extend to the full diffraction capability of the 
crystal. In fact, it may be more advantageous if one is not exces-
sively ambitious, and limits the effective exposure, by utilizing less 
than the full diffraction potential of the sample. Aiming at the 
highest-resolution data results in excessive radiation damage, which 
can signiﬁ cantly degrade the accuracy of the data. However, the data 
set should be complete at low resolution, with all strongest, 
low-resolution reﬂ ections measured accurately.  
 The data quality requirements of these methods are similar to those 
of SAD/MAD, although perhaps not so stringent. These require-
ments are more relaxed because the isomorphous signal is usually 
stronger than the anomalous signal. The effects of radiation damage 
should be avoided, and the exposure times should not be selected 
overzealously. Of course, since, in this case, more than one set of data 
is measured from several crystals, the possibility of non- isomorphism 
between different crystals has to be taken into account.  
 The data meant for molecular replacement do not need to extend 
to high angles, since, in this type of calculation, only relatively 
low- resolution data are used. Again, all strong, low-resolution 
reﬂ ections should be measured completely, since they play an 
especially important role in this approach, which is based on the 
Patterson function. Omission of these reﬂ ections is equivalent to 
setting their intensities to zero, which would severely bias the 
 calculated Patterson synthesis.  
1.1  Single- or 
Multi- Wavelength 
Anomalous Diffraction 
(SAD/ MAD)
1.2  Single or 
Multiple Isomorphous 
Replacement (SIR/
MIR)
1.3  Molecular 
Replacement (MR)
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

213
 If one is collecting data to determine the structure using direct 
methods, one has to aim for atomic resolution, i.e., 1.2 Å or higher. 
To attain such data resolution, the crystal must be subjected to a 
high X-ray dose. In such situations, the strong, low-resolution 
reﬂ ections reach the saturation level of the detector. To overcome 
this problem, the data should be collected in multiple passes: ﬁ rst, 
a low-resolution pass with a lower X-ray dose to accurately measure 
the low-resolution data, followed by a high-resolution pass with a 
higher X-ray dose to obtain reasonable intensity counts for the weak, 
highest-resolution reﬂ ections. Data completeness at low- resolution 
is also very important.  
 The diffraction data intended for the ultimate model reﬁ nement 
should extend to as high a resolution as the crystal is reasonably 
able to provide. A certain amount of radiation damage is then 
unavoidable, but it should not be excessive, so that the crystal 
should not “die” before the completion of the data set. A small 
amount of missing data is acceptable, but it should be remembered 
that missing reﬂ ections (especially the strongest) always deteriorate 
the appearance of all Fourier maps, biasing the interpretation of 
ﬁ ne structural features. For very well-diffracting crystals, it may be 
advisable to use multiple passes for data collection.  
 The highest priority in experiments intended for the initial search 
for potential ligands is rapid turnover. Because ligand identiﬁ cation 
is usually based on difference Fourier maps, the total data com-
pleteness and resolution are not so crucial. For the proper struc-
tural analysis, data from such initially identiﬁ ed complexes may be 
more accurately and comprehensively measured later.  
 In practice, however, diffraction experiments are often performed 
only once, and the same data are used for structure solution using the 
SAD, MAD, or MR methods and for the ﬁ nal model reﬁ nement. 
This is especially relevant in structural genomics applications, in 
which some compromises are unavoidable. Seeking too ambitious 
a resolution limit may result in a data set that is only partially com-
plete and signiﬁ cantly deteriorated due to radiation damage. At the 
same time, too much attention to data accuracy will not deliver the 
highest possible resolution or the required data completeness. 
Selection of the appropriate protocols and fulﬁ lling most of the 
requirements, without excessively degrading any single one of them, 
requires careful adjustment of various experimental parameters. It is 
not always easy, even for experienced  experimenters, to optimally 
select these parameters. 
 Since the human eye is a very good detector of patterns, it is 
good practice to visually inspect one or a couple of the initial, test 
diffraction images and also to index them and check the predicted 
diffraction patterns. It is very easy to see whether the diffraction 
1.4  Direct Methods
1.5  Reﬁ nement
1.6  Ligand Finding
1.7  The Reality
Crystallographic Data Collection

214
image shows a single lattice or comes from multiple crystals, 
whether the reﬂ ection proﬁ les are acceptable and excessively 
smeared or overlapping, or whether there are too many overloaded 
pixels. In addition, it is important to check that the beamstop is 
positioned correctly and does not allow the direct beam to go 
through or create too much scatter around the detector center or, 
conversely, cast a shadow that is unnecessarily large, obstructing 
some of the low-resolution reﬂ ections. 
 Before proceeding with collecting the data, it is beneﬁ cial to 
take the time to run one of the available data collection strategy 
programs [ 3 – 6 ]. Using one or two initial test diffraction images, 
these programs are able to provide a set of optimized parameters 
based on the realistic estimation of the crystal, beam, and detector 
characteristics. 
 Another approach employs advanced robotization of the data 
collection process, which involves recording test exposures from a 
number of automatically positioned and centered crystals of equiv-
alent specimens, indexing and integrating the initial diffraction 
images, and subsequently prioritizing all crystals on the basis of the 
obtained statistics. The best-diffracting crystal is then used for 
collecting the full data set. Such an approach is becoming increas-
ingly popular in high-throughput structural biology, as it can save 
human effort and increase the experimental throughput.  
2  Geometrical Principles of the Rotation Method 
 In the rotation method [ 7 ], diffraction data are recorded on a 
(usually) ﬂ at detector positioned in front of the crystal, whereas 
the X-ray beam is delivered perpendicular to the detector. If the 
X-rays are monochromatic, with the wavelength  λ , only reﬂ ections 
fulﬁ lling Bragg’s law,  λ = 2 d sin θ , give rise to diffraction, which can 
be illustrated by the Ewald construction (Fig.  1 ). To bring more 
reﬂ ections to diffraction, the crystal is rotated by small angular 
amounts during exposure (Fig.  2 ). If the goniostat is equipped 
with additional axes, these are used only to set the crystal in the 
appropriate orientation; however, during data collection, the crys-
tal is always rotated around a single axis (usually referred to as the 
omega axis), perpendicular to the incoming X-ray beam. Proper 
selection of data collection parameters will result in optimal data. 
The good news is that only a few parameters need to be optimized, 
namely, crystal-to-detector distance (affects the maximum data 
resolution); total and per-image rotation range (affects data com-
pleteness and the spot separation in a diffraction image); exposure 
time and X-ray ﬂ ux (these two affect the diffraction strength); 
and choice of wavelength (applicable mainly for SAD/MAD 
experiments). The following sections describe these parameters 
and explain how they affect the data collection procedure.
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

215
 The total rotation range needs to be large enough to measure all 
reﬂ ections within the asymmetric unit of the reciprocal lattice, 
 producing a complete data set. A range of 180° will always ensure 
the full completeness of the native data for all crystal symmetries, 
but, in many cases, completeness may be achieved earlier, avoiding 
unnecessary radiation damage. It is therefore beneﬁ cial to select a 
starting crystal orientation that ensures the full completeness in the 
smallest rotation range. If the crystal survives, the range may be 
2.1  Total 
Rotation Range
 Fig. 1   The Ewald construction illustrates Bragg’s law in three dimensions. The diffraction occurs at a diffraction 
angle, 2 θ , if the reﬂ ection, with resolution d represented by the reciprocal lattice point at a distance 1/ d from 
the origin of the reciprocal space, lies at the surface of the Ewald sphere of radius 1/ λ , centered at the direct 
X-ray beam. The graph represents the central cross-section through the three-dimensional Ewald sphere. This, 
and most of the other ﬁ gures, are reproduced with permission from the International Union of Crystallography 
from Acta Crystallogr D [ 24 ] 
 Fig. 2   To bring consecutive reﬂ ections to diffraction, the crystal, represented here as a reciprocal lattice, has 
to be rotated 
 
 
Crystallographic Data Collection

216
extended so that more images are collected. This will increase data 
multiplicity, which results in increased accuracy. Selection of the 
optimal start and range of rotation in such a “minimalist” approach 
depends on the crystal symmetry and orientation. For example, 
when rotating a crystal of symmetry P422 around the fourfold 
axis, it is enough to cover 45°, but if it is rotated around a vector 
lying in the  a ,  b -plane, 90° of rotation is necessary to achieve com-
pleteness of the data (Fig.  3 ). Moreover, if the starting orientation 
is incorrect, the required range may be unnecessarily extended 
(Fig.  4 ).
 Real crystals are built from small, mosaic blocks, slightly misori-
ented with respect to each other. As a result, each block diffracts in 
an orientation that is slightly different from that of the surround-
ing blocks, so that, in effect, the diffraction of a single reﬂ ection 
from a mosaic crystal is not instantaneous, but occurs in a small 
angular range,  η , during crystal rotation. As a result, the direction 
of the diffracted beam also spans a small angular range, producing 
a reﬂ ection proﬁ le at the detector that is slightly widened in the 
angular direction. In extreme cases, if the orientation of small 
crystallites is completely random, as in a powder sample, each 
reﬂ ection forms a ring at the detector window, which is typical in 
the powder diffraction technique. However, mosaicity does not 
increase the radial width of reﬂ ections, since the Bragg angle 
depends only on the crystal cell dimensions. 
 Other effects inﬂ uencing the direction of diffracted rays are 
X-ray beam divergence and monochromatization. The beam diver-
gence,  δ , depends on its collimation and the source size, and the 
spectral bandwidth Δ λ / λ of the beam depends on the properties of 
2.2  Mosaicity and 
Beam Divergence
 Fig. 3   The reciprocal space asymmetric unit for the crystal class 422 is shown as a shaded region. If the crystal 
is rotated around its fourfold axis ( a ), the width of the asymmetric wedge is 45°, but if it is rotated around any 
vector in the  a ,  b plane ( b ), 90° of rotation is necessary for total completeness 
 
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

217
the monochromator. The primary beam is therefore not ideally 
parallel, and its wavelength band pass encompasses a small range. 
This not only increases the angular width of the reﬂ ection proﬁ les, 
but also extends their radial width. The size of reﬂ ection proﬁ les at 
the detector window is therefore usually larger than the size of the 
primary beam and dimensions of the crystal. 
 These effects are schematically illustrated in Fig.  5a , and their 
interpretation in the reciprocal space is shown in Fig.  5b . The inten-
sity proﬁ le of the individual reﬂ ection obtained while the crystal 
rotates is called the rocking curve, and its width, Δ θ , depends on 
both crystal mosaicity and beam divergence. It also depends on the 
angle at which the reﬂ ection crosses the surface of the Ewald sphere, 
which determines how long the reﬂ ection diffracts. Additionally, 
the observed reﬂ ection proﬁ les are inﬂ uenced by the detector point-
spread function.
 The cell dimensions of macromolecular crystals are usually much 
larger than the wavelength of X-rays used for diffraction 
 experiments, and the Ewald sphere is therefore rather densely pop-
ulated by the reciprocal lattice points. When a stationary crystal of 
protein is exposed to X-rays, a signiﬁ cant number of reﬂ ections will 
be lying at the surface of the Ewald sphere. Since the reciprocal 
lattice consists of planes that cross the Ewald sphere at a circle, dif-
fracted X-rays from reciprocal points in each of these planes give 
2.3  Lunes and 
Rotation Range per 
Exposure
 Fig. 4   The orthorhombic crystal rotated around one of its twofold axes, where reﬂ ections in the region marked 
in  green are recorded on the lower half of the detector, and those in the  brown region in the upper half of the 
detector window. The graphs show the central cross-section through the Ewald sphere, viewed along the 
spindle axis. 90° of rotation covers the full asymmetric unit, if the rotation started with the other two symmetry 
axes either parallel or perpendicular to the beam ( a ). In a diagonal starting orientation ( b ), the covered regions 
correspond to two 45°-wide symmetry-equivalent wedges, missing about 30 % of unique data 
 
Crystallographic Data Collection

218
rise to a cone of diffracted rays that produce reﬂ ections located on 
the ﬂ at detector window at ellipses (Fig.  6 ).
 If the crystal rotates during exposure, all reﬂ ections between 
two limiting positions of each such ellipse will be recorded at the 
 Fig. 5   Schematic illustration ( a ) of the beam divergence  δ and crystal mosaicity  η . The total width of the rocking curve 
corresponds to the sum of these two contributions. In the reciprocal space ( b ), the beam divergence is represented 
by a slightly rotated Ewald sphere, and the crystal mosaicity by the ﬁ nite, non-zero angular size of the reciprocal 
lattice point. The radial size of a reciprocal lattice point depends on the uniformity of the crystal cell dimen-
sions. The wavelength band pass, Δ λ / λ , may be represented by the thickness of the Ewald sphere surface  
 Fig. 6   If the crystal does not move during exposure, only reﬂ ections positioned at the surface of the Ewald 
sphere diffract. Reﬂ ections from successive parallel planes in the reciprocal lattice form a set of ellipses at the 
detector window, since their rays form cones having a common axis 
 
 
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

219
detector, forming a lune containing reﬂ ections from the same 
reciprocal lattice plane (Fig.  7 ). The width of each lune in the 
direction perpendicular to the spindle axis is proportional to Δ φ , 
the angular width of the exposure. If this width is too large, the 
consecutive lunes will overlap at the edges of the detector, corre-
sponding to high-angle, high-resolution reﬂ ections (Fig.  8 ). This 
situation should be avoided because the individual reﬂ ection pro-
ﬁ les may also overlap, making the proper intensity integration 
impossible. The gap between two consecutive lunes depends on 
the distance between the reciprocal lattice planes oriented approxi-
mately perpendicular to the primary X-ray beam, which is related 
to the crystal unit cell dimension in this direction. The maximum 
allowable rotation width per image can be estimated from the for-
mula Δ φ max = (180 d )/( π a ) −  η (Fig.  9 ), in which  d is the resolution, 
 a is the primitive cell dimension along the beam, and 180/ π con-
verts the units to degrees. In addition, the crystal mosaicity,  η , 
diminishes the permitted width of an image. Often, thin, plate-like 
crystals have their longest cell dimension in the direction perpen-
dicular to the crystal plane and, unfortunately, such crystals tend 
to sit ﬂ at in the loops. It may be beneﬁ cial to use bent loops or 
employ the kappa goniostat and reorient the crystal to prevent the 
 Fig. 7   If the crystal rotates during exposure, each ellipse moves accordingly, so that reﬂ ections from individual 
reciprocal lattice planes are grouped in lunes. The width of each lune in the direction perpendicular to the 
spindle axis is proportional to the amount of the crystal rotation 
 
Crystallographic Data Collection

220
longest cell axis from adopting an orientation parallel to the beam, 
which would otherwise cause signiﬁ cant overlap of reﬂ ection 
proﬁ les (Fig.  10 ).
 As mentioned previously, the diffraction by a single reﬂ ection is 
not instantaneous. Instead, it occurs during rotation of the crystal 
over a small span of time, while the reciprocal lattice point crosses 
the surface of the Ewald sphere. Since the data are recorded in a 
series of exposures corresponding to a series of consecutive narrow 
rotation ranges, the intensity of some reﬂ ections is spread over two 
or more images. Those reﬂ ections that started diffracting on one 
image and still diffract on the next one are called partially recorded, 
or simply, “partials.” In contrast, those reﬂ ections whose rocking 
width, and therefore total intensity, are within one diffraction 
image are called fully recorded, or “fullys.” 
 If the amount of rotation per image, Δ φ , is smaller than the 
width of the rocking curve, Δ θ , all reﬂ ections are partials since 
2.4  Fully Recorded 
and Partial 
Reﬂ ections: Wide and 
Fine Slicing
 Fig. 8   The gaps between consecutive lunes depend on the distance between the reciprocal lattice planes of 
the same family. If the rotation range increases ( a ,  b ), the width of each lune widens, and eventually they will 
start overlapping at the highest diffraction angles ( c ) 
 
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

221
 Fig. 9    To avoid overlap of the successive lunes at highest angles, the image width, Δ φ , should be smaller than 
180 d / πa −  η , where  d is the maximum resolution,  a is the cell dimension along the beam direction, and  η  is the 
crystal mosaicity  
 Fig. 10    For thin crystals having their longest axis perpendicular to the plate, it may be advisable to use bent loops or 
reorientation of the kappa goniostat because a long axis that is (approximately) parallel to the spindle will never adopt 
an orientation parallel to the beam. Such an orientation would lead to signiﬁ cant overlap of reﬂ ection proﬁ les  
 
 
Crystallographic Data Collection

222
each reﬂ ection is wider than the angular width of the exposure. 
This leads to two different approaches for data collection, wide 
slicing, when Δ φ ≈ Δ θ , and ﬁ ne slicing, when Δ φ ≪ Δ θ . These two 
methods utilize different ways of integrating reﬂ ection intensities. 
 In the wide-slicing technique, the intensity is integrated in all 
detector pixels of the individual reﬂ ection proﬁ le, and the back-
ground level is estimated from surrounding pixels within each 
recorded diffraction image. For partial reﬂ ections, the intensities esti-
mated from subsequent images are simply added. In the ﬁ ne- slicing 
approach, it is possible to build the reﬂ ection proﬁ le and to estimate 
background in three dimensions, i.e., the detector  x and  y coordi-
nates and the “perpendicular” direction of the spindle  φ rotation, 
using appropriate pixels from consecutive images (Fig.  11 ) [ 8 ].
 If the image width, Δ φ , is signiﬁ cantly larger than the reﬂ ec-
tions width, Δ θ , the reﬂ ection intensities are recorded at only a 
fraction, Δ θ /Δ φ , of the total exposure time, while the background 
accumulates during the whole exposure. As a consequence, the 
resulting signal-to-noise ratio in wide slicing is worse than in the 
ﬁ ne-slicing mode. 
 In the wide-slicing mode, each lune contains fully and partially 
recorded reﬂ ections. Fullys are located in the middle of each lune, 
and partials are close to the edges. Partials at the upper edge of 
each lune appear at the next exposure, at the lower edge of the 
 Fig. 11   If the rotation range is much smaller than the crystal mosaicity, each 
reﬂ ection is spread over several images, and it is possible to build a three- 
dimensional proﬁ le in the so-called “shoe-box” 
 
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

223
corresponding lunes (Fig.  12 ). The appearance of the lune’s edges 
depends on the crystal mosaicity. If each lune has well-deﬁ ned, 
sharp edges, the mosaicity is small, but reﬂ ection intensities that 
fade away gradually without forming well-deﬁ ned lune edges 
suggest that the mosaicity is high (Fig.  13 ).
 Fig. 12    Fully recorded reﬂ ections occur in the middle of each lune. Partials remaining from the previous image 
are located near the lower edge, and those that just started diffracting occur near the upper edge of each lune, 
provided that a crystal rotates upwards at the side closer to the detector  
 Fig. 13   High mosaicity increases the number of partials, making each lune wider. Characteristically, with low 
mosaicity, the edges of each lune are sharply deﬁ ned; with high mosaicity, the reﬂ ection intensities gradually 
fade away without making well-deﬁ ned lune edges 
 
 
Crystallographic Data Collection

224
 The ﬁ ne slicing may lead to more accurate intensity estimations, 
but at the cost of exposing many more images. This factor is impor-
tant if the detector readout time is relatively large. Collecting ﬁ ne 
sliced data at a synchrotron beamline with an Image Plate scanner 
with 1-s exposures and 30 s of detector cycle time is obviously not 
economical. In contrast, with a pixel array detector with readout 
time in the milliseconds range, the ﬁ ne-slicing mode should be the 
method of choice.  
 Even if the total rotation reaches 360°, some reciprocal lattice points 
lying close to the rotation axis will have no chance to cross the Ewald 
sphere (Fig.  14 ). Reﬂ ections in this “blind region,” or “cusp”, can-
not be measured in one rotation pass of data collection. The width of 
the blind region depends on the curvature of the Ewald sphere and 
therefore on the X-ray wavelength (Fig  15 ). Using a short wave-
length minimizes the fraction of reﬂ ections lost in the blind region. 
For a wavelength of 1 Å, reﬂ ections lost do not exceed about 2 % at 
2.0 Å resolution and about 8 % at 1.0 Å resolution. In fact, if the 
unique crystal axis is mis-set from the direction of the spindle axis, all 
reﬂ ections within the blind region will have their symmetry mates in 
a different region of reciprocal space, and the overall data complete-
ness will not suffer (Fig.  16 ). The blind region negatively affects the 
data completeness only if the crystal is oriented and rotated around 
its unique symmetry axis or if it has  P 1 symmetry.
2.5  Blind Region
 Fig. 14   Even after 360° rotation, some reﬂ ections in the blind region (shown in  brown ), close to the rotation 
axis, will never cross the surface of the Ewald sphere. The blind region is narrow at low resolution, but is sig-
niﬁ cant at high resolution, numerically comparable to the X-ray wavelength. The fraction of reﬂ ections lost in 
the blind region at diffraction angle  θ is 1 − cos θ. (Color ﬁ gure online) 
 
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

225
  Fig. 15   The width of the blind region depends on the wavelength, deﬁ ning the curvature of the Ewald sphere. 
At a short wavelength, the blind region is smaller than at a long wavelength 
 Fig. 16  If the crystal has one unique symmetry axis, it is beneﬁ cial to mis-set it from the direction of the spindle 
axis by at least  θ max . By doing so, all reﬂ ections in the blind region will have their symmetry mates in the 
measurable region of the reciprocal space 
 
 
Crystallographic Data Collection

226
 Each detector has a certain limit of the dynamic range, i.e., maximum 
intensity that can be measured and stored in a single pixel. For 
example, most of CCD detectors store numbers as 16-bit integers, 
so that the maximum pixel value is 2 16 − 1 = 65,535, and higher 
intensities are truncated to this value (Fig.  17 ). The PILATUS 
detectors work with 20-bit numbers, and their numerical dynamic 
range is about 1 million.
 Well diffracting crystals require a high X-ray dose or sufﬁ ciently 
long exposures to adequately measure all high-resolution reﬂ ections, 
often resulting in a number of strong, low-resolution reﬂ ections 
having overloaded pixels in their diffraction proﬁ les. These strongest 
reﬂ ections play an important role in the anomalous and molecular 
replacement phasing procedures. They should be adequately mea-
sured in a separate rotation pass of data collection, with shorter 
exposures or attenuated beam intensity. Such a “low-resolution” 
pass may cover only low-resolution data, using longer detector dis-
tance and wider rotation per image. Reﬂ ections from all passes 
should then be scaled together. 
 If the initial exposure suggests that an additional, low- resolution 
pass may be required, it is better to perform it before the high-
resolution pass. It is beneﬁ cial to measure the most important 
reﬂ ections while the crystal is not signiﬁ cantly affected by radiation 
2.6  Overloaded 
Detector Pixels
 Fig. 17  A detailed proﬁ le of an overloaded reﬂ ection, with several central pixels 
having the maximum tolerated value 65,535 
 
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

227
damage, inevitably incurred when exposures are longer. The low-
resolution pass involves much less damage, and the subsequent 
high-exposure pass is therefore not signiﬁ cantly inﬂ uenced. 
 In this context, using the ﬁ ne-slicing mode is also beneﬁ cial 
because the strongest intensities are split between several images, 
and the probability of overloads is considerably diminished.  
 In certain crystal classes, reﬂ ections can be indexed according to 
more than one permitted, but not equivalent, schemes. This occurs 
when the symmetry of the crystal class (point group) is lower than 
the symmetry of the lattice, as, e.g., for crystals with polar axes that 
can be directed in two ways (Fig.  18 ). The affected point groups 
are 4, 3, 321, 312, 6, and cubic 23, including space groups with all 
combinations with screw axes. For a single pass of data collection, 
it is immaterial how all the reﬂ ections are indexed, but for merging 
or comparing data from multiple passes or separate crystals (including 
derivatives), it is important to preserve the same indexing scheme 
in all contributing sets of data. This effect may also occur in other 
symmetries, if some cell parameters serendipitously adopt certain 
particular values and the crystal lattice “pretends” to show higher 
symmetry than that of the crystal structure.
 If, at the stage of data collection, the crystal structure and true 
symmetry are unknown, then in cases of tetragonal, trigonal, 
hexagonal and cubic lattices it is always safer to assume that the 
crystal has symmetry lower than holohedry (4 instead of 422, 
3 instead of 622, and 23 instead of 432) and adjust the data collec-
tion strategy accordingly. 
 It is advisable to always start the data collection at the appro-
priate optimal crystal orientation to achieve completeness after 
2.7  Alternative 
Indexing and Twinning
 Fig. 18   In polar space groups, as, for example, in P4, reﬂ ections can be indexed in two permitted, but not 
equivalent, ways, with the unique polar axis directed in one ( a ) or the opposite ( b ) way. This has to be taken 
into account in merging reﬂ ections from different data sets 
 
Crystallographic Data Collection

228
minimal total rotation range, but to continue collecting 180° of data. 
If completeness is achieved earlier, the images affected by radiation 
damage can be discarded, but this approach may be beneﬁ cial if 
the crystal symmetry is found to be lower than suggested by the 
initial indexing. 
 The same crystal classes can be affected by merohedral twinning 
[ 9 ], which occurs when the individual crystalline specimen con-
tains separate, alternatively oriented domains, and non- equivalent 
reﬂ ections from both domains overlap precisely. In such cases, the 
same considerations apply, since the real crystal symmetry is then 
lower than apparent from indexing and even from scaling the data. 
In perfect merohedral twins, when the twinning fraction is 1/2, 
i.e., the irradiated volume of both twin domains is equal, the scaling 
statistics ( R merge ) may suggest a high degree of symmetry, whereas 
in reality, the crystal has lower symmetry. Data from twinned 
crystals are characterized by an intensity distribution that is differ-
ent from the “normal” Wilson statistics, with smaller fractions 
of very weak and very strong reﬂ ections, which are apparent from, 
e.g., N( z ) or H tests. 
 It is always advisable to test diffraction data for twinning early 
on, because more than the expected rotation range may be neces-
sary. It is possible to quickly test data for twinning at the dedicated 
“Merohedral Crystal Twinning Server”   http://nihserver.mbi.
ucla.edu/Twinning/   . 
 Radiation damage incurred to protein crystals, especially at the 
bright contemporary synchrotron beamlines, results in signiﬁ cant 
degradation of diffraction data quality. Even at cryo-temperatures 
of about 100° K after absorbing about 20–43 MGy, the total inten-
sity of all diffracted reﬂ ections diminishes to half of the original 
value [ 10 ,  11 ]. The ﬁ rst to suffer are the highest-resolution reﬂ ec-
tions, and 1 MGy of the absorbed dose increases the data-scaling 
B factor by about 1 Å 2 , but the intensities of the low-resolution, 
strongest reﬂ ections also change as a result of structural rearrange-
ments and chemical modiﬁ cations (breakage of disulﬁ de bridges, 
decarboxylation of acids, etc.). The effects of radiation damage, 
therefore, degrade not only the data resolution and quality, but 
may also be responsible for potential misinterpretation of certain, 
ﬁ ne structural features, such as partially occupied ligands, or of the 
behavior of functionally important residues. 
 Cryo-cooling and, in certain cases, the use of radical scavengers 
diminish the secondary effects resulting from the diffusion of certain 
active species throughout the crystal. However, primary radiation 
damage, i.e., the immediate effect following the absorption of 
X-ray quanta, as a physical phenomenon is inevitable [ 12 ]. In practice, 
limiting the radiation damage can be achieved only by reducing 
2.8  Radiation 
Damage
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

229
the exposure time or attenuating the intensity of the X-ray beam. 
As pointed out previously, a certain degree of damage is allowable 
if the data are to be used for ﬁ nal model reﬁ nement, but for 
anomalous phasing applications, it should be avoided. 
 It is therefore advisable to check the data for radiation damage 
early in the data collection process. Contemporary data processing 
programs allow integration and merging of collected data almost 
in parallel to the image acquisition. The existing strategy programs, 
e.g., BEST [ 5 ], RADDOSE [ 11 ], are able to suggest the appropri-
ate level of exposure, allowing the collection of complete data 
within the selected total absorbed dose. 
 The useful criteria for radiation damage are the scaling B factors 
and  R merge values. Often the degradation of the reﬂ ection proﬁ les 
and the loss of high resolution are apparent by visual inspection of 
the diffraction images. The  R merge and  χ 2 values of the individual 
images may reveal characteristic behavior, with the highest values 
at the beginning and end of the range, and the smaller values in the 
middle (Fig. 19 ). This distribution of values occurs because average 
intensities are most similar to those recorded in the middle of the 
session and therefore most distant from those measured at the start 
and end of the session.
 Fig. 19   R merge and  χ 2 values for individual images from a severely radiation-damaged crystal. Both of these 
values are large for images at the beginning and end of the whole set, when the intensities are most different 
from values averaged over the entire set. In contrast, the intensities from images recorded in the middle, have 
intensities similar to the average values for the entire set  
 
Crystallographic Data Collection

230
3  Practical Protocols 
 Two approaches are most often executed in practice, especially 
within structural genomics projects. The ﬁ rst applies to proteins 
with no known similar structure in the PDB that could serve as an 
MR search model; the second is used for cases in which a suitable 
search model is available. Often the crystallized protein has seleno-
methionine introduced to its sequence, even if it can be expected 
to be solved by MR. The advisable protocols for these two cases are 
similar, with somewhat different priorities in the speciﬁ c details. 
 Obviously, it is necessary to start the data collection session by 
executing the necessary preliminaries, such as selecting the 
 appropriate wavelength, accurately centering the crystal (and 
beam) at the rotation spindle axis, etc. At the beginning, a couple 
of orthogonal (separated by 90°) images should be exposed with 
typical conditions (e.g., 0.5° rotation, detector distance set for 2 Å 
resolution, and modest beam intensity) and carefully inspected 
visually. Often, such inspection allows the crystal to be discarded 
immediately if the observed images cannot be interpreted as forming 
a single, or at least a clearly identiﬁ able, lattice of reﬂ ections. The 
initial images should be indexed and (assuming it was successful) 
further decisions about strategy and data collection parameters 
adjusted, preferably with the use of a strategy program, on the 
basis of the initial interpretation of these images, i.e., the estimated 
crystal symmetry, cell dimensions, mosaicity, orientation, resolution 
limit, etc. As emphasized above, it is advisable to avoid overexpos-
ing the crystal; in practice, there should be no more than a few 
overloaded detector pixels present in each image. If necessary, for 
very-well- diffracting crystals, the low-resolution pass should be 
executed ﬁ rst, before the second pass, to encompass all weak, 
high-angle reﬂ ections. The results of the low-resolution pass may 
also suggest improved parameters for the second pass. 
 Attention should be paid to the optimal selection of the start 
range of rotation, so that data completeness may be achieved after 
minimal total rotation. However, it is beneﬁ cial to continue record-
ing images, which, if the crystal is not excessively damaged by the 
radiation, are useful for the enhancement of data multiplicity and 
possibly for identifying cases of pseudosymmetry or twinning. 
 It is strongly advised to proceed with the integration and initial 
merging of recorded intensities immediately after the start of data 
collection. In fact, there is no excuse for not doing so. Any initial 
errors and misinterpretations can then be adequately and rapidly 
corrected. Moreover, the structure solution using the SAD or MR 
approaches can be attempted rapidly, when the crystal is still on the 
goniostat, and decisions can be made about collecting additional 
data at the same or a different wavelength (moving from SAD to 
MAD). If the results obtained from one crystal are not satisfactory, 
3.1  Most Common 
Approaches
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

231
another specimen can be utilized immediately. Automatic programs 
such as xia2 [ 13 ], EDNA [ 14 ], etc. can be useful for achieving better 
throughput; however, one should carefully inspect the characteris-
tics and quality of the data in the data processing logﬁ les. 
 Different procedures must be applied when many sets of 
images are recorded “blindly” from a number of similar crystals 
with the intention of interpreting them later. In such an approach, 
it is only possible to evaluate and select the best set of images and 
process them without the possibility of “run time” intervention 
and feedback. This kind of approach considerably limits the human 
effort at the expense of using a large amount of beam time. It is 
more beneﬁ cial to treat the diffraction data collection as a scientiﬁ c 
process, not as a mere technicality.  
 Data intended for molecular replacement can be measured with any 
wavelength. Most of the synchrotron beamlines perform optimally 
at about 1 Å, and this wavelength is appropriate for MR applica-
tions and for collecting the ultimate data for structure reﬁ nement. 
The wavelength may need to be shorter only if the crystals diffract 
to atomic resolution; otherwise, the limitations of the shortest 
available detector distance may preclude achieving high enough 
diffraction angles. 
 Collecting the SAD data requires that the wavelength is in the 
region providing signiﬁ cant anomalous signal from the anomalous 
scatterers present in the sample. The maximum  f ″ value corre-
sponds to the peak point of the ﬂ uorescence spectrum, with the 
caveat that not all elements have their absorption edges in the 
wavelength region available at most of the macromolecular syn-
chrotron beamlines (Fig.  20 ). One can either set the wavelength to 
the peak value suggested from the spectrum, or use a wavelength 
in the high-energy, remote region, 50–100 eV above the expected 
edge value, without recording the spectrum. For utilizing lighter 
anomalous scatterers which have their edges beyond the wave-
length region available at synchrotrons (Ca, K, Cl, S, P), longer 
wavelengths are preferred, in the region of 1.7–2.1 Å [ 15 ] and, if 
available, with a helium path between the crystal and detector, to 
diminish absorption and scattering of X-rays by air. To obtain a good 
anomalous signal from sulfur in native proteins, it is advisable to 
extend data redundancy, but with a signiﬁ cantly attenuated beam.
 For the MAD work, it is necessary to record the ﬂ uorescent 
spectrum. The accurate values of the peak and edge wavelengths, 
and estimations of the anomalous corrections  f ′ and  f ′′ can be 
obtained using the program CHOOCH [ 16 ]. There is no consen-
sus among the community about the best protocol for performing 
the MAD experiment, except that everybody agrees that the level 
of exposure should not be too ambitious. One option is to collect 
data at three wavelengths (in any order) with modest redundancy. 
Another protocol includes collecting only at the edge and remote 
3.2  Choice of 
Wavelength
Crystallographic Data Collection

232
wavelengths with extended redundancy, avoiding the peak 
wavelength altogether, where the most absorption and radiation 
damage would be incurred. This consideration is very important 
for elements characterized by L III edges with extremely large  f ′′ 
values at peak wavelengths, such as lanthanides (Sm, Eu, Gd) and 
tantalum (often used as Ta 6 Br 12 2− cluster). On the other hand, mer-
cury does not show any white line in its spectrum, so that only the 
edge and remote wavelengths are useful. The Hg-derivative data 
are  especially susceptible to radiation damage, since the Hg bonds 
to cysteine break very easily. 
 The most common anomalous scatterer for SAD and MAD 
phasing is selenium, genetically introduced to proteins in the form 
of selenomethionine (SeMet). This procedure is standard for pro-
teins expressed in bacteria, but it may be difﬁ cult to introduce 
SeMet to proteins obtained through other protocols. If the protein 
naturally contains metals such as Zn, Cu, Fe, or Mn, they can be 
used for anomalous phasing. Proteins often naturally coordinate 
calcium (Ca), and it may be possible to exchange Ca for lan-
thanides, providing a very signiﬁ cant anomalous signal. It is also 
possible to soak protein crystals in heavy-metal salts according to 
classic derivatization protocols or by short-soaking approaches [ 17 ]. 
The short soaking in cryo-solutions containing bromides (for MAD) 
 Fig. 20   K ( red ) and L III ( blue ) absorption edges of various elements.  Symbols of the most often used anomalous 
scatterers are shown explicitly. The X-ray wavelength (energy) region available at most synchrotron beamlines 
is  shaded 
 
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

233
or iodides (for SAD) provides another possibility [ 18 ]. Crystals of 
large structures such as multiprotein or protein:DNA complexes 
can be derivatized with polynuclear metal clusters, such as, for 
example, [Ta 6 Br 12 ] 2− , [PW 12 O 40 ] 3− , providing very strong anoma-
lous signals from the multicenter “superatoms,” especially at low 
resolution [ 19 ]. 
 Several criteria are commonly used to judge data quality, but not all 
of them are equally useful or statistically accurate. The traditional, 
and obligatorily quoted,  R  merge  = ( Σ hkl Σ  i  | I i − < I > |)/( Σ  hkl  Σ i I i ) is not 
statistically valid, since it does not take into account the effects of 
multiple measurements. More informative forms of agreement fac-
tors have been proposed, such as  R meas = ( Σ hkl [ n /( n − 1)] Σ  i  | I  i  − < I > |)/
( Σ hkl Σ  i  I  i  ) [ 20 ], and  R pim = ( Σ hkl [1/( n − 1)] Σ  i  | I  i  − <  I > |)/( Σ hkl Σ  i  I  i  ) 
[ 21 ]. Unfortunately, these are not universally adopted in publica-
tions or in the PDB. Another measure of data quality is the average 
 I / σ ( I ) ratio; however, it is not always easy to properly estimate 
reﬂ ection uncertainties,  σ ( I ), by using counting statistics, since 
two-dimensional detectors do not measure individual X-ray quanta 
but reproduce values proportional to their number. High multi-
plicity provides a better estimation of uncertainties from the real 
spread of individual measurements around the average value of 
intensity. Of course, data completeness and multiplicity also pro-
vide important information. The useful and statistically valid new 
criterion recently proposed is CC 1/2 [ 22 ], the correlation coefﬁ -
cient between two halves of the data set, scaled as a whole and 
merged in two randomly selected parts. It is important to inspect 
the values of the quality criteria at the highest-resolution range. 
The commonly accepted data resolution limit used corresponds to 
 I / σ ( I ) of about 2.0, but there are indications that this criterion 
should be signiﬁ cantly relaxed [ 22 ]. 
 Anomalous data are also judged by the average Bijvoet ratio 
Δ F anom / F (as a function of resolution) and CC anom , the correlation 
coefﬁ cient between signed anomalous differences in two randomly 
split halves of the data. Anomalous signal useful for phasing exists 
in resolution ranges where CC anom is higher than 30 % [ 23 ].  
 There are several reasons for failure of data collection experiments. 
Obviously, unsatisfactory crystal quality is the most common scenario, 
but often, apparently difﬁ cult situations may be remedied after 
proper interpretation. 
 Incorrect detector coordinates of the beam center is a common 
source of failure of autoindexing. The beam center is the location 
of the (0, 0, 0) reﬂ ection and the place at the detector where a 
direct beam intercepts its front window if the beam stop is removed. 
For successful indexing of diffraction images, accurate beam center 
coordinates are crucial. Deviation of the beam center by a small 
3.3  Quality Criteria
3.4  Potential 
Problems and Their 
Remedies
3.4.1  Incorrect 
Beam Center
Crystallographic Data Collection

234
amount (several pixels) can be tolerated and reﬁ ned by indexing 
programs. However, large deviations (more than half of the spot 
separation) result in failure in indexing. Hence, the failure rate 
increases with the length of the cell dimensions, where the spot 
separation is small. If the detector rail is not precisely parallel to the 
direct beam direction, the beam center at two different crystal-to- 
detector distances may not be the same. It is advisable to conﬁ rm, 
or obtain the accurate values of the beam center from the beam 
line staff or from previous experiments.  
 A large beam and a big crystal of good quality always provide the 
best data. For smaller crystals, it is advisable to adjust the beam to 
the crystal size (Fig.  21 ), to avoid unwanted background scattering 
from noncrystalline surroundings (excess solvent, ﬁ ber loop, air). 
However, this rule cannot be easily applied if the crystals are very 
elongated or nonuniform within their whole volume. For long, 
thin, needle-like crystals, it is possible to collect data at several dis-
crete spots along the length of the needle and scale them together 
to generate a complete data set (Fig.  22a ). A better way is to per-
form the so-called “vector scan” or “helical scan,” available at sev-
eral minibeam-capable synchrotron facilities, where each image is 
collected at a slightly different spot on the crystal and successively 
translated along the length of the crystal (Fig.  22b ). This process 
also maximizes the use of the whole crystal volume, thereby reducing 
the radiation damage.
 Good single crystals are capable of providing high-quality data, 
no matter which part of the crystal is used for data collection. 
However, in practice, crystals may be nonuniform in quality, 
non- homogenous, cracked, warped (because of the meniscus force 
of the cryo-solution), etc. The use of a minibeam of a few microns 
3.4.2  Use of Small Beam 
for Nonuniform Crystals
 Fig. 21   ( a ) If the beam size is much larger than the crystal, there will be a signiﬁ cant additional scatter of the 
cryo-solution and loop, unnecessarily increasing the level of background at the diffraction images. ( b ) If the 
beam size is adjusted to the crystal size, the background level is lower, and the signal-to-noise ratio of the data 
is therefore higher 
 
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

235
in size can provide useful diffraction data from such samples. Using 
microdiffraction techniques, one can evaluate the quality of diffrac-
tion on different parts of a large crystal and collect data on the best 
part. Figure  23 shows diffraction spot proﬁ les from a warped crystal. 
 Fig. 22   With long, thin crystals it is possible increase the signal-to-noise ratio and to minimize radiation dam-
age by acquiring data with a small beam at several points along the crystal ( a ), or with the so-called helical 
data collection approach ( b ), in which the crystal is slowly translated during rotation and the beam moves 
between the two ends of the crystal 
 Fig. 23    Analogous diffraction images recorded from a large, warped crystal using a large (100 μm,  left ), 
medium (50 μm,  middle  ), and small (20 μm,  right ) beam. With the larger beam, the reﬂ ection proﬁ les are 
elongated and diffused, suggesting very high mosaicity. A small beam results in more uniform reﬂ ection pro-
ﬁ les and a cleaner image background 
 
 
Crystallographic Data Collection

236
As can be seen, with a 100-μm beam, the reﬂ ection proﬁ les are 
very streaky, making it difﬁ cult to estimate their Bragg intensities. 
The spot proﬁ les improve when a smaller beam is used. With a 
20-μm beam, the spots are less streaky and usable for integration.
 Acknowledgements 
 K.R.R. is supported by a grant from National Institute of General 
Medical Sciences (8 P41 GM103403-10) of the National Institutes 
of Health. Z.D. has been supported by the Intramural Research 
Program of the NIH, National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer 
Research. 
 References 
  1.  Dauter Z, Wilson KS (2001) Principles of 
monochromatic data collection. In: Rossmann 
MG, Arnold E (eds) International tables for 
crystallography, vol. F, pp. 177–195  
  2.  Dauter Z (2010) Carrying out an optimal 
experiment. Acta Crystallogr D66:389–392  
  3.  Popov AN, Bourenkov GP (2003) Choice of 
data-collection parameters based on statistic 
modelling. Acta Crystallogr D59:1145–1153  
  4.  Bourenkov GP, Popov AN (2006) A quantita-
tive approach to data-collection strategies. Acta 
Crystallogr D62:58–64  
  5.  Bourenkov GP, Popov AN (2010) Optimization 
of data collection taking radiation damage into 
account. Acta Crystallogr D66:409–419  
  6.  Leal RM, Bourenkov GP, Svensson O, Spruce D, 
Guijarro M, Popov AN (2011) Experimental 
procedure for the characterization of radiation 
damage in macromolecular crystals. J Synchrotron 
Radiat 18:381–386  
  7.  Arndt UW, Wonacott AJ (1977) The rotation 
method in crystallography. North Holland, 
Amsterdam  
  8.  Pﬂ ugrath JW (1999) The ﬁ ner things in X-ray 
diffraction data collection. Acta Crystallogr 
D55:1718–1725 
  9.  Yeates TO (1997) Detecting and overcoming 
crystal twinning. Methods Enzymol 276:
344–358  
  10.  Henderson R (1990) Cryo-protection of pro-
tein crystals against radiation damage in electron 
and X-ray diffraction. Proc Roy Soc London 
B241:608  
  11.  Owen LO, Rudino-Pinera E, Garman EF 
(2006) Experimental determination of the radi-
ation dose limit for cryocooled protein crystals. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:4912–4917  
  12.  Garman EF (2010) Radiation damage in mac-
romolecular crystallography: what is it and why 
should we care? Acta Crystallogr D66:
339–351  
  13.   Winter G (2010) xia2: an expert system for 
macromolecular crystallography data  reduction. 
J Appl Cryst 43:186–190  
 14.   Incardona M-F, Bourenkov GP, Levik K, 
Pieritz RA, Popov AN, Svensson O (2009) 
EDNA: a framework for plugin-based appli-
cations applied to X-ray experiment online 
data analysis. J Synchrotron Radiat 16:
872–879  
   15.  Mueller Dieckmann C, Panjikar S, Tucker PA, 
Weiss MS (2005) On the routine use of soft 
X-rays in macromolecular crystallography. Part 
III. The optimal data collection wavelength. 
Acta Crystallogr D61:1263–1272  
  16.  Evans G, Pettifer R (2001) CHOOCH: a pro-
gram for deriving anomalous-scattering factors 
from X-ray ﬂ uorescence spectra. J Appl 
Crystallogr 34:82–86  
  17.  Sun PD, Radaev S, Kattah M (2002) 
Generating isomorphous heavy-atom deriva-
tives by a quick-soak method. Part I: test cases. 
Acta Crystallogr D58:1092–1098  
  18.  Dauter Z, Dauter M, Rajashankar KR (2000) 
Novel approach to phasing proteins: derivatiza-
tion by short cryo-soaking with halides. Acta 
Crystallogr D56:232–237  
  19.  Dauter Z (2005) Use of polynuclear metal 
clusters in protein crystallography. Compt 
Rend Chim 8:1808–1814  
  20.  Diederichs K, Karplus PA (1997) Improved 
R-factor for diffraction data analysis in macro-
molecular crystallography. Nat Struct Biol 
4:269–275  
Kanagalaghatta Rajashankar and Zbigniew Dauter

237
  21.  Weiss MS, Hilgenfeld R (1997) On the use of 
merging R factor as a quality indicator for X-ray 
data. J Appl Crystallogr 30:203–205  
  22.  Karplus PA, Diederichs K (2012) Linking crys-
tallographic model and data quality. Science 
336:1030–1033 
  23.  Schneider 
TR, 
Sheldrick 
GM 
(2002) 
Substructure solution with SHELXD. Acta 
Crystallogr D58:1772–1779  
  24.  Dauter Z (1999) Data collection strategies. 
Acta Crystallogr D55:1703–1717  
Crystallographic Data Collection

239
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_18, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 18  
 Structure Determination, Reﬁ nement, and Validation 
 George  Minasov and  Wayne  F.  Anderson 
 Abstract 
 It can be a tremendous advantage to have the X-ray crystal structure of a protein that is targeted for drug 
discovery. Due to recent advances in methods, software and hardware, crystallographic structure determi-
nation no longer requires a specialist in the method, but rather it has become a technique that can be 
readily applied to many research problems. The high-throughput approaches developed and used by struc-
tural genomics projects can be adapted and used to aid drug discovery efforts. It should be emphasized, 
however, that one cannot blindly accept the results of automated approaches and that it is essential to 
carefully validate the model, which is the interpretation of the observed electron density. It is important to 
be sure that it correctly describes the structure. 
 The investigator that wishes to make use of the extensive database of protein structures in the Protein 
Data Bank (PDB) also needs to be know how to evaluate structural models, understand how they are 
related to the experimental data and be able to utilize computer graphics programs to look at the electron 
density distribution together with the model.  
 Key words   Structure determination  ,  Structure reﬁ nement  ,   X-ray crystallography  ,   Structure valida-
tion  ,   Protein structure  ,   Phase determination  
1  Introduction 
 The major problems in applying crystallography to drug discovery 
are getting suitable crystals for the experiment (covered in an earlier 
chapter), and solving what is called the “phase problem.” During 
the data collection only the amplitudes of structure factors are mea-
sured, while for electron density map calculations, the phases, which 
are not directly measured, are also needed. There are several meth-
ods that can be used to overcome this problem. In the Molecular 
Replacement (MR) method, the missing phase information comes 
initially from an existing model of a homologous structure. In 
Single or Multiple Anomalous Diffraction techniques (SAD or 
MAD), the phase information is derived from anomalously scatter-
ing atoms that are incorporated in, or bound to, the protein mole-
cule (the most commonly used is Se atoms incorporated into the 

240
protein as selenomethionine). Data is collected at one wavelength 
that is at, or shorter than, the wavelength of the absorption edge of 
the anomalous atom (SAD) or at several wavelengths very near the 
absorption edge (MAD). In the Multiple Isomorphous Replacement 
(MIR) method phases are obtained from the differences in intensi-
ties between the native and heavy atom derivative data sets. It is also 
possible to determine phases using what are called Direct Methods, 
but this is rarely applied to protein structures because a very high 
resolution is required. 
 Due to the number and variety of protein structures available 
in the Protein Data Bank (PDB), the most common method of 
structure determination is Molecular Replacement. This method is 
also the easiest for the novice to apply. In addition, many proteins 
(other than membrane proteins) likely to be considered as drug 
targets will already have at least one related structure in the PDB 
that can be used as a search model. Thus, MR is the ﬁ rst structure 
determination method described here. 
 Prior to determining a crystal structure, one should spend 
some time familiarizing oneself with the software programs crystal-
lographers use as tools. Some programs are combined into pack-
ages (suites), e.g., CCP4 [ 1 ], Phenix [ 2 ], HKL3000 [ 3 ], that can 
be run on a laptop, desktop, or a local server. Some programs (e.g., 
BALBES [ 4 ], MolProbity [ 5 ]) can be run over the web on remote 
servers. The CCP4 system is a complete set of programs that is 
probably the most common and frequently used package. 
It includes programs for all major methods and steps of the pro-
cess. It covers all computational needs such as data processing, 
model preparation, and data conversion.  
2  Molecular Replacement (MR) 
 The basic assumption of the Molecular Replacement method is 
that the arrangement of atoms in a related known structure is close 
enough to the unknown structure that one can use it as an initial 
model. For MR one only needs a native data set and a “good” 
search model. A “good” search model is deﬁ ned as an atomic pro-
tein model, which has high identity in the primary amino acid 
sequence to that of the protein whose structure one is trying to 
determine. The task is to obtain the orientation of the model and 
its location in the asymmetric unit (a.u.). If there are multiple pro-
tein chains in the a.u., then the proper orientation and correct 
position for all of them need to be determined. Again, the assump-
tion is that when the search model is correctly positioned in the 
cell, the atoms in the model provide a good representation of the 
positions of the atoms in the unknown structure. There are cases 
when the search model has to be “trimmed,” by removing ﬂ exible 
loops or termini. To decide which loops are likely to be ﬂ exible, an 
George Minasov and Wayne F. Anderson

241
easy approach is to download several models from the PDB and 
overlay them. Those loops where the models do not agree very 
well can be removed from the search model. In some cases the 
model should be split into two or more pieces based on substruc-
tures within the protein. Usually these pieces resemble domains in 
multi-domain proteins. 
 There are several steps in MR. The ﬁ rst step is to ﬁ nd the ori-
entation of the model(s) in the a.u. This is done using the Rotation 
Function (RF). The RF solutions are the angles one should apply 
to the model to orient the search model in the crystal structure. 
The second step is the Translation Function, which gives the best 
position for the model with the given orientation. These methods 
will always have a “best” solution, though it may not be correct. 
Thus, to aid in determining if one has the correct solution, all ori-
ented and positioned models are checked for steric clashes where 
the atoms in the models would overlap. Finally, the six parameters 
for each solution (three orientation and three positional) are 
reﬁ ned by treating the atoms of the model as a rigid group. The 
possible solutions which pass clash score conditions will be sorted 
and listed based on the results for the Rotation and Translation 
Functions and Clash Score. A variety of software is available for 
crystallographers to determine crystal structures using Molecular 
Replacement. Many of them are incorporated in the CCP4 (Phaser 
[ 6 ], MolRep [ 7 ], MrBump [ 8 ], AMoRe [ 9 ]), or Phenix (Phaser) 
program systems, though some are on remote servers (e.g., 
BALBES [ 4 ]). Before attempting to determine a structure with 
any MR software, it is a good idea to estimate number of chains 
(molecules) in the a.u. by running the Cell Content Analysis in 
CCP4. 
  1.   If one is going to use the CCP4 suite, the ﬁ rst step is to con-
vert the original intensities into structure factors. Input ﬁ les 
usually have ﬁ le extensions .sca or .hkl, while the output ﬁ le 
has .mtz, which is a standard ﬁ le extension in CCP4.  
  2.   Next download the homology model from the PDB site and 
create a search model by removing water and ligands (if pres-
ent) from the ﬁ le. 
  3.  Analyze the downloaded model for the presence of ﬂ exible loops 
and termini that may differ from the unknown structure.  
  4.   If the model consists of several domains, then splitting the 
.pdb ﬁ le into several domains would be an appropriate option.  
  5.   By running the Cell Content Analysis program one can esti-
mate the number of protein chains in the a.u. and enter these 
parameters into the MR program. In most programs there are 
a limited number of parameters one can vary: resolution limits, 
number of chains to search, number of allowed steric clashes, 
clash distances, and sorting parameters for the ﬁ nal scoring.  
2.1  Practical 
Considerations
Structure Determination

242
  6.  Depending on the MR program, the output is the best  solution, 
or a table with a list of several possible solutions. The output 
.pdb ﬁ le will have the solution judged to be the best by the 
software. In addition, there will be a .mtz ﬁ le that can be used 
to calculate electron density maps. The electron density map, 
together with the coordinates for the model should be loaded 
into a graphics program such as COOT [ 10 ], and the model 
checked for agreement with the electron density.  
 If one is happy with the MR solution, the next step is to move on 
to the reﬁ nement and building/rebuilding steps. The best strategy 
is to reﬁ ne the atomic coordinates and thermal factors, for example 
in Refmac [ 11 ], letting the reﬁ nement converge, then add water in 
an automatic mode using a program such as ARP/wARP [ 12 ] and 
follow this with several rounds of reﬁ nement. At this point, if the 
resolution is high enough   (better than 2.0 Å) the model may be 
rebuilt using ARP/wARP. Unless the search model used for MR is 
the same as the protein of interest, there will be a number of amino 
acid residues that need to be changed to the correct sequence. The 
best way to make these changes is using a graphics program like 
COOT [ 10 ]. Any manual model rebuilding should be followed 
with steps of model reﬁ nement. At some point the whole model 
should be checked using the coordinates of the reﬁ ned model and 
calculated electron density maps. The most common electron den-
sity maps used in MR are difference ( F o −  F c ) and sum (2 F o −  F c ) 
maps ( see  Note 1 ). The default colors for the maps are blue for 
2 F o −  F c , green and red for  F o −  F c positive and negative peaks, 
respectively. The sigma levels can be adjusted, but usually they are 
around 1 sigma for 2 F o −  F c and 3 sigma for  F o −  F c . In a well-reﬁ ned 
structure, the model should be within the density in the 2 F o −  F c 
map and peaks on  F o −  F c map should be as low as possible. Large 
positive peaks in the  F o −  F c difference map (3 sigma and higher) 
indicate missing parts of the model. Atoms should be added or 
parts of the model ﬁ tted into the positive peak. If there are signiﬁ -
cant negative peaks, the model has extra, or mispositioned parts or 
atoms, which are not actually present in the crystal structure. The 
atoms either should be deleted from the model or they should be 
moved out of negative density and ﬁ tted into the positive density 
peaks (Fig.  1 ). After each manual correction, the model should 
again be reﬁ ned and steps of reﬁ nement and manual correction 
should be repeated until the negative and positive density peaks in 
the difference electron density maps disappear ( see  Note 2 ). During 
the reﬁ nement cycles, two important numbers that are checked to 
monitor progress are  R work and  R free .  They are calculated as 
 R =  Σ || F o | − | F c ||/ Σ | F o |. The  R work is calculated over the reﬂ ections 
used in the reﬁ nement, while  R free is calculated from a set of reﬂ ec-
tions that were never used in reﬁ nement. The  R free set of reﬂ ections 
usually represent about 5 % of total number of measured intensities. 
2.2  Model Rebuilding 
and Reﬁ nement
George Minasov and Wayne F. Anderson

243
After each model improvement  R work and  R free should drop, which 
will improve the quality of the electron density maps by reducing 
the noise level. This drop in the noise level helps to see more 
details, such as alternative conformations for side chains (Fig.  2 ), 
disordered and partial water, buffer molecules or small ligands. 
It is for this reason that the process is iterative.
 There are several software packages that are available for structure 
solution using SAD. The most common and complete packages 
are HKL3000 [ 3 ], Phenix [ 2 ], Sharp [ 13 ], and Solve/Resolve 
[ 14 ,  15 ]. All of these packages are in some sense “black boxes.” 
There are some differences among them, but all of them have simi-
lar internal components and functions. The whole process of SAD 
entails a set of steps that can be done in an automatic fashion, but 
it is good to check each step to verify that the process is proceeding 
satisfactorily. 
 The ﬁ rst step is the analysis of the anomalous data and ﬁ nding 
the effective resolution that provides signiﬁ cant differences 
between Friedel pairs. This step is followed by the process of locat-
ing the positions of the anomalous atoms. Some packages use 
direct methods, others analyze the Anomalous Patterson map to 
ﬁ nd sites. These sites will be reﬁ ned and, based on these sites, ini-
tial electron density maps will be calculated. At this point, it is 
important to determine the correct hand for the identiﬁ ed anoma-
lous atom sites. Both hands need to be checked and the one with 
the best correlation with the experimental data and the best con-
nectivity in the electron density map should be chosen as the cor-
rect hand. For some space groups, this means choosing the correct 
2.3  Single (Multiple) 
Anomalous Diffraction
 Fig. 1   Electron density maps  F o −  F c  at 3 sigma level ( green and  red ) and  F o −  F c at 1 sigma level ( blue ) before 
and after side chain of the histidine was ﬁ tted into correct position. The histidine is shown as ball-and-stick 
model with nitrogens, oxygens, and carbons before and after correction shown in  blue ,  red ,  green , and  yellow , 
respectively. Water molecules are shown as red crosses. The ﬁ gures are screenshots of images made in Coot [ 10 ] 
 
Structure Determination

244
enantiomorphic space group that deﬁ nes the hand (left or right) of 
the screw axes. Once the correct hand and the locations of the 
anomalous scattering atoms have been determined, the next step is 
phase reﬁ nement. 
 There are several methods for phase reﬁ nement, such as sol-
vent ﬂ attening and histogram matching for phase modiﬁ cation. 
The result of these methods should be electron density maps that 
have better connectivity and higher contrast. If there is more than 
one protein chain in the asymmetric unit, Non-Crystallographic 
Symmetry (NCS) averaging can be used for phase improvement 
after the NCS relationships between molecules have been 
determined. 
 After the phase reﬁ nement has been completed, the actual 
model building starts. Depending upon the resolution of the data, 
several approaches to model building can be used. At high resolu-
tion, free atoms are placed in the map, connected into peptides, 
then into protein chains. After several iterations, the pieces are 
connected, where possible, and loops built. The process repeats as 
new free atoms are added, and the chains rebuilt. If the sequence 
is provided to the program, side chains are built into the density. 
If the resolution is too low for the free atom approach, larger pieces 
of secondary structure are placed in the map. 
 The result of this process may be a complete, or nearly 
 complete, model. Often, however, a partial model is obtained. If 
only a partial model is obtained, the automatic building step could 
be repeated, or the model can be completed manually. To manually 
complete the model, the electron density map and current model 
are examined in a graphics program such as COOT [ 10 ]. If the 
current model is of low quality, or represents less than 50 % of the 
 Fig. 2   Building an alternative conformation for the methionine. Electron density maps are contoured at 3 sigma 
level for  F o −  F c ( green  and  red  ) and 1 sigma level for 2 F o −  F c ( blue ). The model is ball-and-stick with colors 
 blue ,  red ,  green , and  yellow for nitrogens, oxygens, sulfurs, and carbons, respectively. Water molecules are 
shown as red crosses. The ﬁ gures are screenshots of images made in Coot [ 10 ] 
 
George Minasov and Wayne F. Anderson

245
total number of atoms, it sometimes can be improved using another 
phase modiﬁ cation step to give a better map for automatic model 
building. Once one is satisﬁ ed with the model, the process moves 
to reﬁ nement and model improvement.  
 As the ﬁ nal stages of reﬁ nement are approached, one should start 
checking the geometric quality of the model by running validation 
programs. The most common validation tools can be run through 
the PDB Web site. This validation report shows the primary 
sequence of the model, which should be veriﬁ ed and mismatches in 
the model corrected. The close contacts are checked and distances 
less than 2.2 Å are reported. If there are close contacts listed in the 
report, they should be ﬁ xed in a manual rebuilding step. Usually 
they are related to alternative conformations and disordered water 
molecules. Inconsistencies in the labeling of alternative conforma-
tions should be corrected, and there should be no close contacts in 
the ﬁ nal model. An important table and graph is the Ramachandran 
plot, which is the two dimensional representation of the peptide 
chain conformational angles  φ and  ψ . All the residues that have 
angles that are not in the allowed region should be carefully checked 
and corrected. There are occasional exceptions, residues whose 
conformational angles are not in the allowed region. These usually 
are functionally or structurally important, for example in catalytic or 
binding sites, and the residues should be very well ﬁ tted in the elec-
tron density. If the electron density does not strongly support the 
unfavorable conformation, one should assume that the model is 
incorrect if the conformational angles are in a disallowed region of 
the Ramachandran plot. The next plot in the output of the PDB 
validation analysis provides the residue statistics, in which the con-
formations of the side chains, and the planarity of peptide bonds are 
analyzed. Again, any outliers should be examined and corrected if 
possible. Some side chains may have higher energy conformations 
and if the electron density supports it, they can be left in those con-
formations. After all the corrections to the model have been made, 
it should again be reﬁ ned and validated. This process should be 
repeated until there are no problems remaining to be ﬁ xed. Another 
validation program, MolProbity (Duke University server) [ 5 ] will 
check all the parameters discussed above, as well as reporting the 
overall clash score for the model. A separate table will list all the 
residues with a high clash score. Each of these residues should be 
carefully examined and corrected. When the model passes all of the 
validation criteria it is ready for deposition to the PDB and/or for 
use in structure aided drug discovery. 
 If the structure is of a complex with a ligand, the validation of 
the ligand is very important. Because a small molecule ligand has 
very few atoms compared to the protein, its contribution to the 
overall statistics like  R work and  R free , will be small. The most impor-
tant validation is to omit it from the model, reﬁ ne the model without 
2.4  Validation
Structure Determination

246
the ligand, and verify that the electron density unambiguously 
indicates that it is there. Small molecule ligands generally do not 
have full occupancy and it is essential to carefully check that the 
electron density and difference electron density clearly indicate 
that the ligand is present, that the right compound has been mod-
eled and that the ligand is in the correct orientation. Pozharski 
et al. [ 16 ] have recently published a very informative analysis of 
protein–ligand complexes in the PDB and provide useful advice for 
anyone working on a complex, or making use of such data from 
the PDB.  
3  Evaluating Models 
 Objectively evaluating your own model during the course of deter-
mining and reﬁ ning a structure is critical, but even if one is not 
determining a structure, but making use of a structure someone 
else has determined, it is important to know how to evaluate a 
model. This is discussed in many places, but a recent review by 
Wlodawer et al. [ 17 ] is particularly appropriate. 
 When determining a structure, one has to evaluate the data 
and model several times. The ﬁ rst evaluation occurs at the point of 
choosing a search model for molecular replacement. The evalua-
tion consists of two parts: the data quality and the quality of the 
model. For the data, there are several parameters that need to be 
checked: the resolution limits of the data, whether the data set is 
complete (were the intensities of all possible reﬂ ections measured), 
the redundancy (how many times each intensity was measured), 
the overall  R merge and  R merge for the last shell, the I/sigma (I) ratio 
overall and for the last, or highest resolution, shell. One problem 
in evaluating the statistics is that some of the statistical parameters 
are correlated with each other. For example, high redundancy will 
tend to increase  R merge there are measures of data quality that are 
corrected for redundancy [ 18 ], but these are often not used. 
 One should aim for the overall data completeness to be 100 % 
or very close to that. Occasionally one sees cases where some shells 
have low completeness because they include ice rings that are due 
to crystal freezing problems and result in the rejection of measure-
ments of reﬂ ections. Another problem that can lead to low 
 completeness is when the orientation of the crystal relative to the 
rotation axis causes missing measurements due to the “blind 
region.” This can generally be avoided at the time of data collec-
tion if care is taken. In any case, overall completeness should cer-
tainly be higher than 90 % and no shell should be less than 80 %. 
 All these statistical parameters should be analyzed in order to 
properly deﬁ ne the resolution of the data. For example, one could 
cut data at a resolution corresponding to the last shell having 90 % 
or higher completeness, a redundancy of four, I over sigma (I) 
greater than two and  R merge below 50 %. However, if completeness is 
George Minasov and Wayne F. Anderson

247
close to 100 %, redundancy more than 6, and I over sigma (I) greater 
than four, one could keep a shell with an  R merge close to 60 %. 
 There are potential problems with the data that are easy to see 
in the raw images, but difﬁ cult to deﬁ ne when one only has access 
to the processed structure factors and overall statistics ( see   Note 3 ). 
This is one reason the crystallographic community should make 
the primary images available as well as the structure factors. 
 It is important to know how good the model is. Usually the 
higher the resolution the better the model should be. The overall 
quality of a model can be judged by the  R work and  R free values, as 
has been discussed. These parameters reveal how well the model 
explains the measured intensities. It is important to check the dif-
ference between  R work and  R free as this can reveal if the structure 
was overreﬁ ned. In most cases, protein models are not highly over-
determined because the crystals do not diffract well enough to get 
very high resolution. The result is that the models can be overre-
ﬁ ned. The common use of  R free helps to identify structures that 
have been overreﬁ ned. 
 A model should, of course, agree with what is known about 
bond lengths, bond angles, dihedral angles, and nonbonded con-
tacts. The limited resolution of most protein structures means that 
there is not sufﬁ cient diffraction data to support claims of unusual 
geometry or high energy conformations. Remember, the model is 
an interpretation of the electron density and it must make chemical 
sense. Whenever there is any question, or doubt, concerning a 
model, always examine the electron density around the site in 
question and ask whether it supports the interpretation provided in 
the model. 
 When evaluating complexes with ligands, it is wise to be extra 
cautious. Because most ligands will have a small number of atoms 
compared to the protein, their contribution to the overall statistics 
can be small. Similarly, they generally will not be validated as care-
fully as the protein. It is very common to determine a structure and 
ﬁ nd that there are other molecules bound. In addition to the bound 
water molecules, other solvent and buffer molecules, crystallization 
agents, and cryoprotection agents are found most commonly. 
High-throughput puriﬁ cation methods are rapid and often result in 
the protein being kept fairly concentrated. As a result, proteins fre-
quently co-purify with metals, substrates, and co- factors from the 
expression system used to produce the protein. Thus even if they 
were not intentionally added, relevant ligands may be present in a 
structure. Sometimes it is not straightforward to determine what 
the ligands are and atoms may be listed in the PDB ﬁ le as “unknown.” 
Metals are a special group of ligands that are very common. They 
could be identiﬁ ed using anomalous diffraction measurements, but 
frequently their identity can also be validated based on the nature of 
interacting atoms, the geometry and bond lengths of interacting 
atoms [ 19 ]. In addition to looking at the electron density to verify 
that it fully supports the presence and identiﬁ cation of a ligand, 
Structure Determination

248
quantitative measures, such as the real space correlation coefﬁ cient 
[ 20 ] can be used to evaluate modeled ligands. 
 Crystallographic B-factors can provide useful information 
when evaluating a model. Atoms that are very mobile can have a 
high B-factor, but high Bs can also be an indication that atoms or 
residues are misplaced or a ligand has been modeled that is not 
really there. Atoms that have Bs that are signiﬁ cantly higher than 
neighboring atoms should be investigated. 
 Because of the detailed information that can be obtained, crys-
tal structures of proteins that are the focus of drug discovery efforts 
are extremely useful. Because of advances in the hardware and soft-
ware needed for crystallographic structure determination, it is no 
longer necessary to be a specialist in the technique to make use of 
it. However, it is still important to be able to evaluate the resulting 
structural models and understand how they impact a drug discov-
ery project.  
4  Notes 
  1.  Although we describe the coefﬁ cients as ( F o −  F c ) and (2 F o −  F c ), 
one actually should use weighted coefﬁ cients that minimize 
the bias in the electron density map toward the atoms used to 
calculate the phases. These coefﬁ cients are (mF o − DF c ) and 
sum (2mF o − DF c ) [ 21 ]. Phase bias is particularly a concern 
when using MR or trying to a correct misplaced segment of a 
model.  
  2.   One should remember that when electron density maps are 
contoured using sigma, the standard deviation of the density 
values, the ( F o −  F c ) difference electron density maps will never 
get completely ﬂ at. 
  3.   There are a range of crystallographic problems, some subtle 
and some not so subtle, that can affect the quality of a model. 
Some of these, like radiation damage, crystal twinning and 
anisotropic diffraction can have large affects on data quality. 
A discussion of the treatment of problems such as these is beyond 
the scope of this discussion, but anyone that uses crystal struc-
tures should be aware of these kinds of potential problems.  
 Acknowledgments 
 The authors would like to acknowledge the Center for Structural 
Genomics of Infectious Diseases (CSGID, funded by NIAD under 
Contracts No. HHSN272200700058C and HHSN27220120
0026C) and the Midwest Center for Structural Genomics (MCSG, 
grant No. U54 GM0945585).  
George Minasov and Wayne F. Anderson

249
 References 
  1.  Winn MD et al (2011) Overview of the CCP4 
suite 
and 
current 
developments. 
Acta 
Crystallogr D D67:235–242  
  2.  Adams PD, Afonine PV, Bunkóczi G, Chen 
VB, Davis IW, Echols N, Headd JJ, Hung 
L-W, Kapral GJ, Grosse-Kunstleve RW, McCoy 
AJ, Moriarty NW, Oeffner R, Read RJ, 
Richardson DC, Richardson JS, Terwilliger 
TC, Zwart PH (2010) PHENIX: a compre-
hensive Python-based system for macromolec-
ular structure solution. Acta Crystallogr D 
D66:213–221 
  3.  Otwinowski Z, Minor W (1997) Processing of 
X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation 
mode. In: Carter CW Jr, Sweet RM (eds) 
Methods 
in 
enzymology, 
vol 
276, 
Macromolecular 
crystallography, 
part 
A. 
Academic, New York, pp 307–326  
  4.  Long F, Vagin A, Young P, Murshudov GN 
(2008) BALBES: a molecular replacement 
pipeline. Acta Crystallogr D D64:125–132  
  5.  Chen VB et al (2010) MolProbity: all-atom 
structure validation for macromolecular crys-
tallography. Acta Crystallogr D D66(1):12–21  
  6.  McCoy AJ, Grosse-Kunstleve RW, Adams PD, 
Winn MD, Storoni LC, Read RJ (2007) Phaser 
crystallographic software. J Appl Crystallogr 
40:658–674  
  7.  Vagin A, Teplyakov A (1997) MOLREP: an 
automated program for molecular replace-
ment. J Appl Crystallogr 30:1022–1025  
  8.  Keegan RM, Winn MD (2007) Automated 
search-model discovery and preparation for 
structure solution by molecular replacement. 
Acta Crystallogr D D63:447–457  
  9.  Navaza J (1994)  AMoRe : an automated pack-
age for molecular replacement. Acta Crystallogr 
D A50:157–163 
  10.  Emsley P, Cowtan K (2004) Coot: model- 
building tools for molecular graphics. Acta 
Crystallogr D 60(Pt 12, Supp 1):2126–2132  
  11.  Murshudov GN, Vagin AA, Dodson EJ (1997) 
Refmac: 
“Reﬁ nement 
of 
macromolecular 
structures 
by 
the 
maximum-likelihood 
method”. Acta Crystallogr D D53:240–255  
  12.  Langer GG, Cohen SX, Perrakis A, Lamzin VS 
(2008) Automated macromolecular model 
building for X-ray crystallography using ARP/
wARP version 7. Nat Protoc 3:1171–1179  
  13.  de La Fortelle E, Bricogne G (1997) Maximum- 
likelihood heavy-atom parameter reﬁ nement 
for the multiple isomorphous replacement and 
multiwavelength anomalous diffraction meth-
ods. Methods Enzymol 276:472–494  
  14.   Terwilliger TC, Berendzen J (1999) Automated 
MAD and MIR structure solution. Acta 
Crystallogr D D55:849–861  
  15.  Terwilliger TC (2000) Maximum likelihood 
density modiﬁ cation. Acta Crystallogr D 
D56:965–972  
  16.  Pozharski E, Weichenberger CX, Rupp B 
(2013) Techniques, tools and best practices for 
ligand electron-density analysis and results 
from their application to deposited crystal 
structures. Acta Crystallogr D D69:150–167  
  17.  Wlodawer A, Minor W, Dauter Z, Jaskolski M 
(2008) Protein crystallography for non- 
crystallographers, or how to get the best (but 
not more) from published macromolecular 
structures. FEBS J 275:1–21 
  18.  Diederichs K, Karplus PA (1997) Improved 
R-factors for diffraction data analysis in macro-
molecular crystallography. Nat Struct Biol 
4:269–275  
  19.  CheckMyMetal (CMM): Metal binding site 
validation 
server, 
  http://csgid.org/csgid/
metal_sites/   
  20.  Brändén CI, Jones TA (1990) Between objec-
tivity and subjectivity. Nature 343:687–689  
  21.  Read RJ (1986) Improved Fourier coefﬁ cients 
for maps using phases from partial structures 
with errors. Acta Crystallogr D A42:140–149  
Structure Determination

251
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_19, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 19  
 Virtual High-Throughput Ligand Screening 
 T. Andrew  Binkowski ,  Wei  Jiang ,  Benoit  Roux , 
 Wayne  F. Anderson , and  Andrzej  Joachimiak 
 Abstract 
 In Structural Genomics projects, virtual high-throughput ligand screening can be utilized to provide 
important functional details for newly determined protein structures. Using a variety of publicly available 
software tools, it is possible to computationally model, predict, and evaluate how different ligands interact 
with a given protein. At the Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases (CSGID) a series of 
protein analysis, docking and molecular dynamics software is scripted into a single hierarchical pipeline 
allowing for an exhaustive investigation of protein–ligand interactions. The ability to conduct accurate 
computational predictions of protein–ligand binding is a vital component in improving both the efﬁ ciency 
and economics of drug discovery. Computational simulations can minimize experimental efforts, the slow-
est and most cost prohibitive aspect of identifying new therapeutics.  
 Key words   Protein  ,   Ligand  ,   High-throughput screening  ,   Docking ,   Molecular modeling  
1  Introduction 
 In the context of structural genomics (SG), identiﬁ cation of bound 
ligands can provide many beneﬁ ts. A bound ligand can increase the 
stability of crystal packing to provide a higher resolution structure, 
provide hydrogen bonding interactions to anchor a highly ﬂ exible 
loop region, and/or provide important functional evidence for 
proteins of unknown function. As structural genomics initiatives 
move toward more specialized goals (i.e., centers for structural 
genomics of infectious disease, tuberculosis, biology) identiﬁ cation 
of ligand bound structures can play an even bigger role: function 
prediction and validation or early stage drug discovery efforts. 
 Identifying ligands for co-crystallization experiments in struc-
tural genomics requires a different strategy than for a concerted 
drug discovery effort. The latter is characterized by a high-degree 
of knowledge about the protein target, its biochemical mechanism, 
and substrates. This information is used to highly tailor an effort to 
identify an optimum ligand in order to alter a speciﬁ c mechanism, 

252
most likely through inhibition of the mechanism. The structural 
genomics effort, by design of target selection, is characterized by a 
signiﬁ cantly reduced amount of information about the protein. In 
some circumstances, a newly determined structure will represent 
the ﬁ rst three-dimensional model of the protein. Any additional 
protein–ligand interaction data that is generated can provide valu-
able context for increasing the biological impact of the structure. 
 In many structural genomics efforts, the program’s through-
put does not allow for signiﬁ cant effort or resources to be allocated 
to further biological experimentation beyond structure determina-
tion. This includes the signiﬁ cant amount of time that may be 
required to obtain new protein crystals with bound ligands, collect 
data, and reﬁ ne models, in addition to the time necessary to ana-
lyze small molecule compound databases, synthesize compounds, 
and optimize solubility. Therefore, the introduction of computa-
tional approaches to increase efﬁ ciency, reduce costs, and improve 
success of ligand identiﬁ cation for protein targets is a pragmatic 
approach undertaken by many structural genomics efforts. 
 At the CSGID a series of protein analysis, docking and molec-
ular dynamics software packages have been combined into a single 
hierarchical pipeline allowing for an exhaustive investigation of 
protein–ligand interactions. The APPLIED (Analysis Pipeline for 
Protein–Ligand Interactions and Experimental Determination) 
pipeline allows for the evolutionary analysis of protein binding sites 
with cheminformatics obtained from petascale computational 
docking experiments to create a high-quality library of datasets of 
protein–ligand interaction. Such libraries provide global scale anal-
ysis of protein domain-small molecule interactions that can be used 
to provide insights on protein function, predict ligand interactions, 
and perform early stage computer aided drug discovery.  
2  Materials 
 The methodologies utilized in the APPLIED Pipeline use the fol-
lowing software packages:
  1.  DOCK 6, University of California, San Francisco [ 1 ].  
  2.   AUTODOCK, The Scripps Research Institute [ 2 ].  
  3.   NAB (Nucleic Acid Builder) [ 3 ]. 
  4.   CHARMM 
(Chemistry 
at 
HARvard 
Macromolecular 
Mechanics), Harvard University [ 4 ]. 
  5.   SurfaceScreen, Argonne National Laboratory [ 5 ]. 
  6.  Falkon, Argonne National Laboratory [ 6 ].  
  7.   Swift, Argonne National Laboratory [ 7 ]. 
 The software is organized into a pipeline using a series of 
scripts written in the PERL and PYTHON scripting languages. 
2.1  Software
T. Andrew Binkowski et al.

253
The pipeline is implemented and operates on “Intrepid” an IBM 
BlueGene/P supercomputer located at the Advanced Leadership 
Computing Facility (ALCF) at Argonne National Laboratory. 
Access to Intrepid is provided through the Department of Energy’s 
INCITE (Innovative and Novel Computational Impact on Theory 
and Experiment) program.  
 The APPLIED pipeline uses publicly available three-dimensional 
protein structure data from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [ 8 ]. The 
ZINC [ 9 ] database of commercially available compounds is used 
for virtual screening.  
3  Methods 
 At CSGID virtual ligand screening is driven by the multistage, com-
putational APPLIED pipeline ( see Fig.  1 ). The automated pipeline is 
a data driven workﬂ ow for the rapid transformation of knowledge 
from initial target characterization into the prediction and validation 
of small compound binding afﬁ nity. All steps require large-scale 
computation using distributed tools to harness high- performance 
computing resources for efﬁ cient calculations. Computational results 
are used to drive experimental studies in CSGID’s high-throughput 
protein structure determination pipeline.
 Given a target with an existing three-dimensional structure, 
automated binding site identiﬁ cation and analysis is conducted 
2.2  Databases
3.1  APPLIED Pipeline 
Overview
 Fig. 1  The APPLIED pipeline combines automated binding site identiﬁ cation, 
docking and rescoring into a singular workﬂ ow to investigate protein–ligand 
interactions for structural genomics targets 
 
Virtual Ligand Screening

254
using the SurfaceScreen methodology [ 5 ,  10 ,  11 ]. Based on 
 comparison to a library of binding sites, SurfaceScreen identiﬁ es 
surfaces sharing structural and physicochemical properties, thereby 
uncovering the most probable active site. The active site is propa-
gated down the pipeline for massively parallel docking simulations 
using mixed strategies to develop a complete cheminformatics pro-
ﬁ le of the pocket. 
 In the language of molecular modeling, ligand screening can be 
separated into two loosely deﬁ ned steps, “docking” and “scoring” 
[ 12 ]. The docking step aims to predict the preferred orientation and 
conformation of the ligand molecule bound to the protein receptor 
(the ligand “pose”), and the scoring step aims to predict the binding 
afﬁ nity of the ligand for a given ligand orientation. While docking 
can proceed successfully via heuristic simpliﬁ cations, the shortcom-
ings of ligand screening approaches stem from the approximate scor-
ing functions. The fundamental principles controlling ligand binding 
are relatively well understood, but scoring often relies on extremely 
simpliﬁ ed approximations in order to achieve the computational 
 efﬁ ciency needed to handle large databases [ 13 – 15 ]. Nonetheless, to 
have any predictive and practical value, scoring must reﬂ ect the 
 binding free energies with sufﬁ cient accuracy. 
 Arguably, physics-based approaches such as molecular 
mechanics-generalized born surface area (MM/GBSA) and free 
energy perturbation molecular dynamics (FEP/MD) simulations 
represent the most accurate approach to quantitatively character-
ize the binding free energy of small ligands with macromolecules. 
These physics-based methods can naturally handle the inﬂ uence of 
solvent and dynamic ﬂ exibility [ 14 ], and indeed, previous studies 
indicate that they are often more reliable than simpler scoring 
schemes [ 16 ,  17 ] .  
 In the APPLIED pipeline, after the initial docking poses are 
generated, compounds are “funneled” into highly parallelized 
implementations of these complex rescoring methods. The top 
ranked 10,000 molecules are rescored using MM-GBSA method-
ology [ 18 ]. The FEP/MD-GCMC (molecular dynamics free 
energy perturbation- grand canonical Monte Carlo) [ 19 ] method is 
then used to rescore the top 100 compounds based on free energy 
binding estimations. A full run through the pipeline requires over 
500,000 computing hours, but has been efﬁ ciently scaled for opti-
mal performance on the BlueGene/P. 
 The pipeline currently docks against the aggregated ZINC 
library of commercially available compounds [ 20 ] (over 21 million 
in release 12), allowing the easy purchase of compounds and mini-
mizing the need for chemical synthesis capabilities.  
 Collectively, the APPLIED pipeline is a hybrid of highly parallel 
and high-throughput techniques, integrated with an innovative 
model for parallel scripting at extreme scales, and carefully tuned 
3.2  Pipeline 
Architecture
T. Andrew Binkowski et al.

255
for the Intrepid BG/P. SurfaceScreen, DOCK, and AUTODOCK 
leverage the BG/P in a high-throughput computing mode. FEP- 
REMD/GCMC uses a new, innovative, and highly parallel variant 
of CHARMM to achieve excellent scaling using MPI. 
 SurfaceScreen, DOCK, and AUTODOCK involve many thou-
sands of discrete, loosely coupled computations with signiﬁ cant 
data exchange taking place via ﬁ les. An important goal of the pipe-
line is to ensure that these computations can be performed rapidly 
and reliably. A set of custom tools was developed to specify and 
orchestrate the execution of many independent tasks. These tools 
are based on Swift, a system for the rapid and reliable speciﬁ cation, 
execution, and management of large-scale computational pipelines 
[ 7 ,  21 ] and Falkon, a system to efﬁ ciently provision cluster 
resources for long-running workﬂ ows composed of short discrete 
tasks [ 6 ]. 
 It has been shown that a loosely coupled approach (e.g., treat-
ing application invocations as functions and passing data through 
the ﬁ le system) permits effective use of the BG/P for workﬂ ows in 
which applications can be integrated into a larger application as if 
they were ordinary functions [ 6 ,  22 ] . These middleware compo-
nents have been extensively tested at scales across the entire BG/P 
complex and have achieved near-linear speedup on workloads that 
comfortably encompass the performance characteristics of the 
pipeline in both ﬁ le I/O and task duration [ 6 ,  22 ] . 
 One complete molecular dynamics (MD) run of binding free energy 
calculation consists of one hydration and one binding site calcula-
tion each requiring tens of independent FEP windows. It needs to 
be emphasized that the employment of SSBP/GSBP signiﬁ cantly 
decreases the size of simulated region (number of simulated atoms), 
and therefore it is not necessary to invoke a large number of CPUs 
for a single FEP window. Even with an excellently scaled MD pack-
age, like NAMD [ 23 ], it is impossible for BG/P to run these tens 
of FEP windows independently. To take full advantage of BG/P, 
the Parallel Distributed Replica (REPDSTR) mode is employed to 
run in a highly efﬁ cient parallel/parallel mode. Historically, 
CHARMM was the ﬁ rst MD package equipped with parallel/paral-
lel mode for free energy calculations. 
 In REPDSTR mode, each of the underlying multiple I/O 
controls one FEP window, all the windows run in parallel, and each 
window is a smaller parallel job that occupies 32 processors (opti-
mized). Thus, the total number of MPI ranks is proportional to 
the number of FEP windows multiplied by 32. On BG/P, usually 
each REPDSTR job is run with 2,048 MPI ranks (hydration simu-
lation) or 4,096 MPI ranks (binding site). For a speciﬁ c binding 
complex, one is always able to modify the number of FEP windows 
(replicas) of each interaction type to make the total number of 
3.2.1  High-Throughput 
Computing Mode
3.2.2  Parallel Distributed 
Replica Mode
Virtual Ligand Screening

256
windows 128 or 64, resulting in 4,096 MPI ranks (128 × 32) or 
2,048 MPI ranks (64 × 32). 
 The possible “load balance” problem happening in many par-
allelized jobs is eliminated naturally due to the similarity of the 
calculation between these replicas (they all employ CHARMM 
PERT module and deal with the same structure). Multiple binding 
complexes with REPDSTR are run so that more racks can be 
invoked for one single job and accelerate the throughput simulta-
neously. It needs to be noted that, for a ﬁ xed acceptor, the varia-
tion of ligand species only causes tiny (~20 atoms) variation in size 
of simulated binding structure, and therefore the “load balance” 
problem remains insigniﬁ cant. 
 Besides the parallel/parallel structure of the REPDSTR mod-
ule, another signiﬁ cant advancement is the implementation of rep-
lica exchange between these FEP windows. The replica exchange 
method has been exhaustively proven to be signiﬁ cant in speeding 
the sampling/convergence of free energy calculations. However, 
so far those implementations in biological simulations have been 
limited to relatively small systems and/or a small number of repli-
cas due to lack of efﬁ cient parallel/parallel programming and the 
unavailability of a large number of processors in parallel. With 
REPDSTR mode and the abundant resource of BG/P, a successful 
development of the Hamiltonian-exchange scheme for FEP calcu-
lation, with infrequent point-to-point message communications 
(1 per 100 MD steps) between these tens of windows has been 
implemented. The new replica exchange scheme was proven to be 
efﬁ cient on BG/P (the message communication between FEP 
windows merely causes ~4 % speed loss compared with normal 
MD) and signiﬁ cantly increases the convergence/conﬁ dence of 
the free energy calculation.  
   The SurfaceScreen methodology attempts to optimize two com-
ponents, global shape and local physicochemical texture, for dis-
covering the similarity between surfaces [ 5 ,  10 ,  11 ]. Utilizing 
global shape and local physicochemical texture, the protein sur-
faces are shape matched against libraries of annotated surfaces 
extracted from the PDB. The Delauney triangulation and alpha- 
shape methods are used to accurately decompose and describe 
pockets and voids in protein structure [ 24 – 27 ]. 
 SurfaceScreen has proven useful in identifying distant func-
tional relationships between proteins void of sequence or struc-
tural homology. By focusing on a library of binding sites, the 
method is used to screen for homologous binding sites. In the 
pipeline, similar binding surfaces are run in parallel to the target 
surface to predict cross reactivity reactions (i.e., side effects) or 
identify species-speciﬁ c inhibitors ( see Fig.  1 ). For example, one 
can automatically eliminate compounds with high-predicted bind-
ing afﬁ nity for human proteins while screening for inhibitors 
against bacterial homologs.  
3.3  Approaches
3.3.1  Stage 1: Receptor 
Surface Analysis
T. Andrew Binkowski et al.

257
 Once regions of receptor surfaces are identiﬁ ed via SurfaceScreen , 
it is relatively straightforward to perform docking and scoring of a 
large database of ligands. The mixed success of different docking 
methods against a particular target has inspired the integration of 
two different docking applications in the pipeline: DOCK and 
AUTODOCK. 
 Both software packages have been ported and optimized to 
run on the BlueGene/P architecture. During docking, both the 
active site residues and ligands are allowed to be ﬂ exible to achieve 
“induced ﬁ t” docking. The top ranked 5,000 compounds, as eval-
uated by each application’s internal scoring function, are passed 
along for re-scoring.  
 A molecular mechanics (MM) potential function based on the 
Generalized Born (BG) and surface area (SA) approximation is 
employed for further reﬁ nement of initial docking poses and calcu-
lation of binding energies [ 28 ]. MM/GBSA relies on more com-
plex, physically realistic models for solvation, electrostatic 
interactions, and conformational change and has been shown to 
outperform most docking program’s internal scoring functions 
[ 16 ,  17 ] . 
 The calculation of MM/GBSA energies involves minimization 
with a conjugate gradient method, molecular dynamics (MD) sim-
ulation (Langevin at constant temperature), another minimization 
round, and a ﬁ nal energy evaluation. Implementation of this 
method in the pipeline allows both the ligand and selected residues 
within the receptor-binding pocket to be ﬂ exible. Since rescoring 
is applied to all ligands output from the prior docking runs, it 
allows one to universally evaluate/rank/sort the results from both 
DOCK and AUTODOCK. Modules from the molecular modeling 
software Nucleic Acid Builder (NAB) is used to drive the 
MM-GBSA scoring procedures [ 3 ].  
 The equilibrium binding constant  K b for the process correspond-
ing to the association of a ligand L to a protein P + L → LP, can be 
expressed as a sequence of well-deﬁ ned steps that can be calculated 
from free energy perturbation (FEP) MD simulations [ 29 – 31 ]. 
Furthermore, biasing potentials restraining the translation, orien-
tation, and conformation of the ligand can help enhance the con-
vergence of the calculations [ 29 – 36 ]. Such an FEP procedure can 
provide correct results as long as the effect of all the restraining 
potentials is rigorously taken into account and unbiased. 
 FEP/MD methods are challenging and ambitious at the present 
time and a certain level of skepticism exists on the role of such com-
putationally demanding methods. However, rescoring based on 
FEP/MD simulations for protein–ligand interactions has the poten-
tial to become a powerful tool in drug discovery and optimization 
[ 31 ,  32 ,  34 ,  37 ]. Nonetheless, despite outstanding developments in 
3.3.2  Stage 2: Initial 
Docking Pose
3.3.3  Stage 3: MM/GBSA 
Re-Scoring
3.3.4  Stage 4: FEP/MD 
Rescoring
Virtual Ligand Screening

258
simulation methodologies, carrying out brute-force FEP/MD 
 calculations of large macromolecular assemblies surrounded by 
explicit solvent molecules often remain prohibitive. For this reason, 
it is necessary to seek ways to decrease the computational cost of 
FEP/MD calculations while keeping them accurate. 
 An attractive strategy to decrease the cost of FEP/MD compu-
tations consists of simulating a small number of explicit atoms in the 
vicinity of the region of interest, while representing the inﬂ uence of 
the surrounding with an effective “boundary potential” [ 38 – 41 ]. 
This is reasonable because binding speciﬁ city is often dominated by 
local interactions in the vicinity of the ligand, while the remote 
regions of the receptor contribute in only an average manner. The 
method used in the present study is called the Generalized Solvent 
Boundary Potential (GSBP). GSBP includes both the solvent-
shielded static ﬁ eld from the distant atoms of the macromolecule 
and the reaction ﬁ eld from the dielectric response of the solvent 
acting on the atoms of the simulation region. 
 It is also possible to reduce the computational cost of FEP/
MD simulations and even improve their accuracy by using an inter-
mediate approach combining some aspects of both explicit and 
implicit solvent treatments [ 38 ,  40 ] . It consists of simulating a 
small number of explicit solvent molecules in the vicinity of a 
region of interest, while representing the inﬂ uence of the sur-
rounding solvent with an effective “solvent boundary potential” 
[ 38 – 41 ]. Recently a Hamiltonian-exchange scheme in CHARMM 
based on the Parallel Distributed Replica (REPDSTR) was imple-
mented 
to 
form 
an 
FEP/REMD/GCMC 
methodology. 
Convergence is improved signiﬁ cantly with a reduced cost of com-
putation [ 42 ] . This represents a signiﬁ cant breakthrough in how 
the CHARMM biomolecular simulation package can be utilized 
on leadership scale machines such as the BlueGene/P.  
4  Notes 
 The APPLIED pipeline implementation is only available on 
Intrepid at the ALCF. All individual software components are 
freely available and there is no technical limitation that would pre-
clude replicating the pipeline on other large-scale computing 
resources.  
 Acknowledgments 
 This research used resources of the Argonne Leadership Computing 
Facility at Argonne National Laboratory, which is supported by the 
Ofﬁ ce of Science of the US Department of Energy under contract 
DE-AC02-06CH11357. We would like to acknowledge Drs. 
T. Andrew Binkowski et al.

259
Devleena Shivakumar, Mike Wilde, Zhao Zhang for valuable dis-
cussions and support on computational method development and 
implementation. The submitted manuscript has been created by 
UChicago Argonne, LLC, Operator of Argonne National 
Laboratory (“Argonne”). Argonne, a US Department of Energy 
Ofﬁ ce of Science laboratory, is operated under Contract No. 
DE-AC02-06CH11357. The US Government retains for itself, 
and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up nonexclusive, irrevocable 
worldwide license in said article to reproduce, prepare derivative 
works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and 
display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government. This work was 
in part supported with Federal funds from the National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Department of Health and Human Services, under Contracts No. 
HHSN272200700058C and HHSN272201200026C and by the 
National Institute of Heath Grant GM094585.  
 References 
  1.  Lang PT, Brozell SR, Mukherjee S, Pettersen 
EF, Meng EC, Thomas V, Rizzo RC, Case DA, 
James TL, Kuntz ID (2009) DOCK 6: com-
bining techniques to model RNA-small mole-
cule 
complexes. 
RNA 
15(6):1219–1230. 
doi:  10.1261/rna.1563609   , rna.1563609 [pii]  
  2.   Morris GM, Huey R, Lindstrom W, Sanner MF, 
Belew RK, Goodsell DS, Olson AJ (2009) 
AutoDock4 and AutoDockTools4: automated 
docking with selective receptor ﬂ exibility. J 
Comput Chem 30(16):2785–2791. doi:  10.1002/
jcc.21256   
  3.  Macke T, Case DA (1998) Modeling unusual 
nucleic acid structures. In: Molecular modeling 
of nucleic acids. American Chemical Society 
682:379–393  
  4.  Brooks BR, Brooks CL 3rd, Mackerell AD Jr, 
Nilsson L, Petrella RJ, Roux B, Won Y, Archontis 
G, Bartels C, Boresch S, Caﬂ isch A, Caves L, Cui 
Q, Dinner AR, Feig M, Fischer S, Gao J, 
Hodoscek M, Im W, Kuczera K, Lazaridis T, Ma 
J, Ovchinnikov V, Paci E, Pastor RW, Post CB, 
Pu JZ, Schaefer M, Tidor B, Venable RM, 
Woodcock HL, Wu X, Yang W, York DM, 
Karplus M (2009) CHARMM: the biomolecular 
simulation program. J Comput Chem 30(10):
1545–1614. doi:  10.1002/jcc.21287   
  5.  Binkowski TA, Joachimiak A (2008) Protein 
functional surfaces: global shape matching and 
local spatial alignments of ligand binding sites. 
BMC 
Struct 
Biol 
8:45. 
doi:  10.1186/
1472-6807-8-45   
  6.   Raicu I, Zhao Y, Dumitrescu C, Foster I, Wilde 
M (2007) Falkon: a fast and light-weight task 
execution framework. IEEE/ACM Super
Computing 
  7.  Zhao Y, Hategan M, Clifford B, Foster I,von 
Laszewski G, Raicu I, Stef-Praun T, Wilde M 
(2007) Swift: fast, reliable, loosely coupled par-
allel computation. IEEE International work-
shop on scientiﬁ c workﬂ ows, Salt Lake City, 
Utah, USA  
  8.   Berman HM, Battistuz T, Bhat TN, Bluhm 
WF, Bourne PE, Burkhardt K, Feng Z, 
Gilliland GL, Iype L, Jain S, Fagan P, Marvin 
J, Padilla D, Ravichandran V, Schneider B, 
Thanki N, Weissig H, Westbrook JD, 
Zardecki C (2002) The Protein Data Bank. 
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 58(Pt 6 
No 1):899–907. doi:S0907444902003451 
[pii]  
  9.    Irwin JJ, Sterling T, Mysinger MM, Bolstad ES, 
Coleman RG (2012) ZINC: a free tool to dis-
cover chemistry for biology. J Chem Inf Model 
52(7):1757–1768. doi:  10.1021/ci3001277   
  10.    Binkowski TA, Adamian L, Liang J (2003) 
Inferring functional relationships of proteins 
from local sequence and spatial surface pat-
terns. J Mol Biol 332(2):505–526  
  11.    Binkowski TA, Joachimiak A, Liang J (2005) 
Protein surface analysis for function annotation 
in high-throughput structural genomics pipe-
line. 
Protein 
Sci 
14(12):2972–2981. 
doi:  10.1110/ps.051759005   
  12.   Shoichet BK (2004) Virtual screening of 
chemical 
libraries. 
Nature 
432(7019):8
62–865. doi:  10.1038/nature03197   , nature
03197 [pii]  
Virtual Ligand Screening

260
  13.  Shoichet BK, Leach AR, Kuntz ID (1999) 
Ligand 
solvation 
in 
molecular 
docking. 
Proteins 
34(1):4–16. 
doi:  10.1002/
(SICI)1097-0134(19990101)34:1<4::AID- 
PROT2>3.0.CO;2-6   
  14.  Carlson HA, Masukawa KM, Rubins K, 
Bushman FD, Jorgensen WL, Lins RD, Briggs 
JM, McCammon JA (2000) Developing a 
dynamic pharmacophore model for HIV-1 
integrase. J Med Chem 43(11):2100–2114, 
jm990322h [pii]  
  15.  Schneider G, Bohm HJ (2002) Virtual screen-
ing and fast automated docking methods. 
Drug Discov Today 7(1):64–70, S1359644
601020918 [pii]  
  16.  Price DJ, Jorgensen WL (2000) Computational 
binding studies of human pp 60c-src SH2 
domain 
with 
a 
series 
of 
nonpeptide, 
phosphophenyl- containing 
ligands. 
Bioorg 
Med Chem Lett 10(18):2067–2070, S0960- 
894X(00)00401-7 [pii]  
  17.    Wesolowski 
SS, 
Jorgensen 
WL 
(2002) 
Estimation of binding afﬁ nities for celecoxib 
analogues with COX-2 via Monte Carlo- 
extended linear response. Bioorg Med Chem 
Lett 12(3):267–270, S0960894X01008253 
[pii]  
  18.   Graves AP, Shivakumar DM, Boyce SE, 
Jacobson MP, Case DA, Shoichet BK (2008) 
Rescoring docking hit lists for model cavity 
sites: predictions and experimental testing. J 
Mol Biol 377(3):914–934. doi:  10.1016/j.
jmb.2008.01.049  , 
S0022-2836(08)00096-
X [pii]  
  19.  Deng Y, Roux B (2008) Computation of bind-
ing free energy with molecular dynamics and 
grand canonical Monte Carlo simulations. J 
Chem Phys 128(11):115103. doi:  10.1063/
1.2842080   
  20.  Irwin JJ, Shoichet BK (2005) ZINC-a free 
database of commercially available compounds 
for virtual screening. J Chem Inf Model 
45(1):177–182. doi:  10.1021/ci049714+   
  21.  Zhao Y, Wilde M, Foster I (eds) (2007) Virtual 
Data Language: a typed workﬂ ow notation for 
diversely structured scientiﬁ c data. Workﬂ ows 
for eScience. Springer London  
  22.  Raicu I, Zhang Z, Wilde M, Foster I, Beckman 
P, Iskra K, Clifford B (2008) Towards loosely 
coupled programming on a petascale system. 
IEEE/ACM SuperComputing  
  23.  Phillips JC, Braun R, Wang W, Gumbart J, 
Tajkhorshid E, Villa E, Chipot C, Skeel RD, 
Kale L, Schulten K (2005) Scalable molecular 
dynamics with NAMD. J Comput Chem 26:
1781–1802  
  24.  Binkowski TA, Naghibzadeh S, Liang J (2003) 
CASTp: computed atlas of surface topography of 
proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 31(13):3352–3355  
  25.  Liang J, Edelsbrunner H, Fu P, Sudhakar PV, 
Subramaniam S (1998) Analytical shape com-
putation of macromolecules: I. Molecular area 
and volume through alpha shape. Proteins 
33(1):1–17  
  26.  Liang J, Edelsbrunner H, Fu P, Sudhakar PV, 
Subramaniam S (1998) Analytical shape com-
putation of macromolecules: II. Inaccessible 
cavities in proteins. Proteins 33(1):18–29 
  27.  Liang J, Edelsbrunner H, Woodward C (1998) 
Anatomy of protein pockets and cavities: mea-
surement of binding site geometry and impli-
cations for ligand design. Protein Sci 7(9):
1884–1897  
  28.  Kollman PA (1993) Free energy calculations: 
applications to chemical and biochemical phe-
nomena. Chem Rev 93:2395–2417  
  29.  Deng Y, Roux B (2006) Calculation of stan-
dard binding free energies: aromatic molecules 
in the T4 lysozyme L99A mutant. J Chem 
Theory 
Comput 
2(5):1255–1273. 
doi:  10.1021/ct060037v   
  30.  Roux B, Nina M, Pomes R, Smith JC (1996) 
Thermodynamic stability of water molecules in 
the bacteriorhodopsin proton channel: a 
molecular dynamics free energy perturbation 
study. Biophys J 71(2):670–681. doi:  10.1016/
S0006-3495(96)79267-6   , 
S0006- 3495(96)
79267-6 [pii]  
  31.  Wang J, Deng Y, Roux B (2006) Absolute 
binding free energy calculations using molecu-
lar dynamics simulations with restraining 
potentials. 
Biophys 
J 
91(8):2798–2814. 
doi:  10.1529/biophysj.106.084301   , 
S0006- 3495(06)71994-4 [pii]  
  32.  Boresch S, Tettinger F, Leitgeb M, Karplus M 
(2003) Absolute binding free energies: a quan-
titative approach for their calculation. J Phys 
Chem 107:9535–9551  
  33.  Woo HJ, Dinner AR, Roux B (2004) Grand 
canonical Monte Carlo simulations of water in 
protein environments. J Chem Phys 121(13):
6392–6400  
  34.    Woo HJ, Roux B (2005) Calculation of abso-
lute protein-ligand binding free energy from 
computer simulations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A 102(19):6825–6830  
  35.    Hermans J, Wang L (1997) Inclusion of loss of 
translational and rotational freedom in theo-
retical estimates of free energies of binding. 
application to a complex of benzene and 
mutant t4 lysozyme. J Am Chem Soc 119:
2707–2714  
T. Andrew Binkowski et al.

261
  36.  Gilson MK, Given JA, Bush BL, McCammon 
JA (1997) The statistical-thermodynamic basis 
for computation of binding afﬁ nities: a critical 
review. Biophys J 72:1047–1069  
  37.  Simonson T, Archontis G, Karplus M (2002) 
Free energy simulations come of age: proteinli-
gand recognition. Acc Chem Res 35:430–437  
  38.  Beglov D, Roux B (1994) Finite representa-
tion of an inﬁ nite bulk system: solvent bound-
ary potential for computer simulations. J Chem 
Phys 100:9050–9063  
  39.  Berkowitz 
M, 
McCammon 
JA 
(1982) 
Molecular dynamics with stochastic boundary 
conditions. Chem Phys Lett 90:215–217  
  40.  Im W, Bernèche S, Roux B (2001) Generalized 
solvent boundary potential for computer simu-
lations. J Chem Phys 114(7):2924–2937  
  41.  Warshel A, King G (1985) Polarization con-
straints in molecular dynamics simulation of 
aqueous solutions: the surface constraint all 
atom solvent (scaas) model. Chem Phys Lett 
121:127–129  
  42.  Jiang W, Hodoscek M, Roux B (2009) 
Computation of absolute hydration and 
 binding free energy with free energy perturba-
tion distributed replica-exchange molecular 
dynamics. J Chem Theory Comput 5:
2583–2588  
Virtual Ligand Screening

263
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_20, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 20  
 Ligand Screening Using Fluorescence Thermal 
Shift Analysis (FTS) 
 Chi-Hao  Luan ,  Samuel  H.  Light ,  Sara  F.  Dunne , and  Wayne  F.  Anderson 
 Abstract 
 The ﬂ uorescence thermal shift (FTS) method is a biophysical technique that can improve productivity in a 
structural genomics pipeline and provide a fast and easy platform for identifying ligands in protein function 
or drug discovery screening. The technique has gained widespread popularity in recent years due to its 
broad-scale applicability, throughput, and functional relevance. FTS is based on the principle that a protein 
unfolds at a critical temperature that depends upon its intrinsic stability. A probe that will ﬂ uoresce when 
bound to hydrophobic surfaces is used to monitor protein unfolding as temperature is increased. In this 
manner, conditions or small molecules that affect the thermal stability of a protein can be identiﬁ ed. 
Herein, principles, protocols, data analysis, and special considerations of FTS screening as performed for 
the Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases (CSGID) pipeline are described in detail. 
The CSGID FTS screen is designed as a high-throughput 384-well assay to be performed on a robotic 
platform; however, all protocols can be adapted to a 96-well format that can be assembled manually. Data 
analysis can be performed using a simple curve ﬁ tting of the ﬂ uorescent signal using a Boltzmann or 
double Boltzmann equation. A case study of 100 proteins screened against Emerald Biosystem’s ADDit™ 
library is included as discussion.  
 Key words   Protein ligand  ,   Protein folding  ,  Thermal shift  ,  High-throughput screening  ,  Drug discovery  
1  Introduction 
 When integrated into a structural genomics pipeline, complimentary 
biochemical and biophysical techniques can enhance protein struc-
ture determination productivity and provide a platform for gener-
ating novel insights into protein function. Since the ﬂ uorescence 
thermal shift (FTS) method was ﬁ rst described in 2001, the tech-
nique has gained widespread popularity and been effectively applied 
to address a variety of drug screening and general biophysical ques-
tions [ 1 ]. Providing an efﬁ cient medium- to high- throughput 
method for monitoring protein thermal denaturation across 
multiple conditions, FTS has increasingly found a place within 
structural genomics operations [ 2 – 4 ]. Several features suit FTS for 

264
the structural genomics context and explain its growing popularity 
within the ﬁ eld:
  1.   FTS has broad-scale applicability. As the need for customization 
is limited, FTS is suitable for handling the hundreds of func-
tionally and structurally diverse proteins found within a typical 
structural genomics pipeline.  
  2.   FTS allows for the characterization of protein stability a cross a 
range of conditions. Finding a stable condition can be a critical 
for crystallization and thus data provided by FTS can help 
maximize crystallization success.  
  3.   FTS can identify biological ligands. Functionally uncharacter-
ized proteins frequently constitute a sizable fraction of targets 
within the structural genomics pipeline. Screening simple 
libraries by FTS presents a cost-effective method for identifying 
unknown biological ligands, the identiﬁ cation of which contrib-
utes to the overall scientiﬁ c output and provides co-crystallization 
opportunities that increase the likelihood of crystallographic 
success.  
  4.   FTS can serve as a primary screening method for protein tar-
gets that lack a suitable functional or binding assay to identify 
leads for drug discovery.  
 In this chapter, the basic principles behind FTS are reviewed 
and methodological and analytical considerations pertinent to the 
application of FTS in the structural genomics context and in drug 
discovery are discussed. For a more thorough review of the prin-
ciples behind FTS  see ref.  5 . 
 The FTS technique relies on the principle that proteins unfold at a 
critical temperature. At lower temperatures, proteins adopt a native 
state, which generally consists of compact and predictable tertiary 
structure. At higher temperatures, proteins denature, losing sec-
ondary and tertiary elements and forming a molten globule or 
aggregates. Thermal stability is an intrinsic property that results 
from protein sequence and determines the temperature at which 
thermal denaturation occurs. Thermal stability can be measured by 
monitoring protein denaturation while incrementally raising sam-
ple temperature and is conveniently quantiﬁ ed as the temperature 
that marks the midpoint of thermal denaturation ( T m ). 
 FTS provides a convenient method for measuring protein  T m . 
The method takes advantage of changes in intrinsic (i.e., from 
protein tryptophans) or extrinsic (e.g., from dyes, such as anilinon-
aphthalene sulfonate or SYPRO Orange) ﬂ orescence that accom-
pany protein denaturation. As they reliably provide a strong signal, 
extrinsic dyes are more commonly used in current practice. The 
use of extrinsic dyes relies upon a simple principle. Driven primarily 
by the hydrophobic effect, proteins tend to adopt three- dimensional 
1.1  Principles of FTS
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

265
structures with hydrophobic residues disproportionately buried at 
the core, resulting in a more polar external layer and a more hydro-
phobic internal core. In the protein’s native state the internal 
hydrophobic core is sheltered by the external layer and inaccessible 
to the bulk solvent. Denaturation disrupts the tertiary structure of 
the protein and exposes core residues, increasing the number of 
solvent accessible hydrophobic residues. Effective FTS dyes sub-
stantially increase their quantum yield when interacting with 
hydrophobic residues, ensuring that a measurable ﬂ orescent signal 
is produced when denaturation results in the exposure of hydro-
phobic core components. 
 It is a well-established thermodynamic phenomenon that 
ligand binding affects protein thermal stability. This connection 
between binding and thermal stability allows ligands to be identi-
ﬁ ed on the basis of their effect on protein  T m . Prior to the advent 
of FTS, it would have been impractical to screen the effect of 
ligands on protein stability on all but the smallest scales. However, 
because the necessary components of an FTS experiment are quite 
basic (requiring only puriﬁ ed protein, appropriate dye, temperature- 
controlled apparatus, and a ﬂ uorescence detector) medium- to 
high-throughput FTS screens are achievable.  
 FTS has found a number of disparate applications within the protein 
sciences. The technique has been used as a quality control measure 
for protein production, as a means to determine the impact of 
point mutations on protein folding and stability [ 6 ,  7 ], as a method 
to screen storage buffers [ 8 – 11 ], as a way to examine the effects 
of urea and other denaturants or glycerol and other protectants 
[ 12 ,  13 ], and as a technique to investigate ligand binding [ 1 ,  14 ,  15 ]. 
This chapter focuses on FTS screening applications for the identi-
ﬁ cation of protein ligands and suitable crystallization conditions.  
 In the structural genomics context, studied proteins are often 
well- expressed and usually screening of only a limited number of 
conditions is called for (<10,000 and often <1,000 conditions). 
For this reason, sample consumption is generally not a major 
concern. Therefore, FTS can be applied routinely as a protein char-
acterization measure, regardless of protein function and the exis-
tence, or lack of, alternative functional assays. 
 FTS has two crystallization applications, to identify solvent/
solute conditions and small molecule ligands. The former affects 
the protein through solvent effects or solute-mediated solvent 
effects. Ligand screening, on the other hand, is meant to identify 
the speciﬁ c interaction of a small molecule with the protein. In this 
regard, ligand screening is similar to the task of drug discovery; 
however it usually does not require as high a binding afﬁ nity as 
is necessary for a therapeutic agent. Due to differences in the 
conﬁ guration and the screening concentrations of the two types of 
1.2  Applications
1.3  Unique Concerns 
for Crystallography 
Application
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

266
libraries, the protein preparation and buffer volumes differ between 
the two tactics. For solvent and solute conditions the screening 
concentration is in the 1–100 mM range, therefore a 1× library in 
buffer is prepared for direct use in the FTS screen, and a small amount 
of high concentration stock protein is added to the conditions. 
However, for ligand screens, small molecules at concentrations in the 
5–50 μM range are sufﬁ cient for 1:1 or similar stoichiometry.  
 Within drug discovery applications, FTS can be used either as a 
primary or as a secondary screen. The amount of protein required 
for the many conditions contained within a typical primary screen 
can be problematic. Before choosing FTS as a primary screening 
method one should consider:
  1.  Is an alternative functional assay available?  
  2.  What is the total cost of a functional assay (substrate, cofactors, 
detection methods, HTS availability, etc.)?  
  3.  What is the total cost of an FTS assay?  
 If, after weighing these factors, the decision is made to proceed 
with an FTS primary screen, measures can be taken to minimize 
sample requirements. For example, miniaturization of assay volume 
and utilization of a pooled screening format (i.e., screening two or 
more compounds per well) can reduce the material cost. 
 While the substantial protein requirement can make FTS a 
suboptimal primary screening option, FTS frequently provides an 
excellent resource for secondary screening. Assuming a limited 
number of hits are identiﬁ ed in the primary screen, minimal 
resources are required for secondary FTS screening. As a secondary 
screen, FTS can be conducted in a timely fashion to help weed- out 
false positives, reducing the number of compounds that needed to 
be screened in expensive and difﬁ cult in vivo functional assays.  
2  Materials and Instrumentation 
 FTS assay detection utilizes environment sensitive dyes that 
fluoresce in hydrophobic environments. Three examples of dyes 
that can serve as reporters for protein unfolding are: (1) Nile red 
(Ex 585 nm, Em 665 nm), (2) SYPRO Orange (Ex 492 nm, Em 
575 nm), and (3) bis-ANS (Ex 350 nm, Em 492 nm) or 1,8-ANS 
(Ex 350 nm, Em 492 nm). These represent ﬂ uorophores in the 
red, green, and blue spectrum, respectively. Although ANS-based 
molecules have been used widely in protein investigations and in 
the early FTS experiments, SYPRO Orange has become the pre-
ferred probe molecule for FTS in recent years. One of the main 
reasons that SYPRO Orange has gained popularity is that most 
commercially available qPCR instruments only support Ex/Em 
1.4  Unique Concerns 
for Drug Discovery 
Applications
2.1  Dye
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

267
 ﬁ lters above 400 nm due to their light source (tungsten lamp or 
LED). Therefore, the lower wavelength bis-ANS and 1,8-ANS 
dyes are incompatible with these machines. SYPRO Orange also 
has a higher quantum yield increase when in hydrophobic environ-
ment, providing an easily measured signal to noise ratio. Nile Red, 
however, remains a viable option for FTS. Particularly for drug 
discovery screens, ﬂ uorescent compounds, which are most pro-
nounced in the green range, can interfere with the dye signal. 
Because typical libraries produce less interference within its excitation/
emission spectra, Nile Red provides an alternative for screening 
purposes to, in applicable cases, delineate degenerated signal. 
 For the purposes of this protocol, 5,000× SYPRO Orange in 
DMSO obtained from a commercial vendor (Life Technologies, 
Bio-Rad, or Sigma-Aldrich) is added either by directly mixing with 
buffer/protein stock solution or by a nanoliter liquid handling 
robot.  
 HEPES is the most commonly used buffer in FTS experiments. 
The advantage of HEPES for FTS lies in its pH stability with 
respect to temperature change. Dependent upon the buffering 
strength requirement, either higher or lower concentration, e.g., 
100 or 20 mM HEPES can be used. A prescreen test can be helpful 
for selecting a buffer suitable for large-scale screening. NaCl is usually 
included in the buffer at 150 mM concentration.  
 Arraying a number of disparate small libraries in a high-throughput 
convenient format is preferable to relying upon a single master 
library, as this provides the ﬂ exibility to customize the screening 
strategy to best meet the experimental objective. For a given 
experiment, appropriate library selection depends on the goals of 
the screen. 
 To identify biological ligands for proteins of unknown func-
tion, it is useful to screen a library that contains common biological 
metabolites. As of June 2013, there were 14,747 ligands in PDB 
structures. Screening all PDB ligands would be impractical due to 
the prohibitive expense and would be unnecessary since the major-
ity (10,092 out of 14,747) appear in a single structure. The top 21 
are the 20 amino acids plus water, which appear in 71,614–86,016 
structures. The next population group consists of 28 ligands that 
are present in1,009–10,787 structures. Less than 10 % of PDB 
ligands (1,453) are present in more than 5 structures and less 
than 2 % (258) are in more than 55 structures, demonstrating a 
manageable number of molecules that frequently appear in protein 
structures (Fig.  1 ). A valuable list composed by Vedadi and col-
leagues contains 143 common physiologically relevant molecules, 
many of which overlap with the most highly represented PDB 
ligands [ 8 ]. This library provides a good option if the objective of 
the screen is to identify unknown biological ligands or to verify 
2.2  Buffer System
2.3  Screening 
Libraries
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

268
that a recombinant protein has the capacity to bind its annotated 
cofactors, substrates, or inhibitors.
 In some cases, a library composed of common biological 
molecules is inconsistent with the screening objective. If the exper-
iment seeks to address a narrow hypothesis, a target-speciﬁ c library 
may present a more appropriate screening option. For example, a 
kinase inhibitor library may provide the most pertinent information 
when screening a kinase. 
 A different set of considerations is relevant when the objec-
tive of the screen is not to identify ligands but rather conditions 
conducive to crystallization. In such cases, the screened library 
should contain common crystallization additives. Alternatively, 
conditions in a crystallization screen can be directly tested by FTS 
in advance of crystallization trials. Screens performed for the pur-
pose of informing crystallization are typically conducted at the 
millimolar concentrations relevant for crystallization trials. 
Results from these screens can serve as a guide for crystallization, 
allowing the crystallographer to avoid conditions in which the 
 Fig. 1   Histogram of the number of occurrences of the top 450 PDB ligands which appeared in more than 25 
structures from 14,747 ligands in PDB structures. 10,092 out of 14,747 only appear in one structure. The top 
21 are the 20 amino acids plus water, which appear in 71,614–86,016 structures. The next population group 
consists of 28 ligands that are present in1,009–10,787 structures. These include ions and the four nucleotides. 
Less than 2 % (258) ligands appear in more than 55 structures, demonstrating that a reasonable sized screen-
ing library can be constructed from the molecules that frequently appear in protein structures  
 
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

269
protein exhibits unfavorable properties. Conditions that destabi-
lize a protein may produce crystallization-interfering heterogene-
ity and can be avoided on the basis of FTS screening results. The 
avoidance of buffer conditions that produce a multiphasic transi-
tion, presumably resulting from protein heterogeneity, has also 
been shown to be an important consideration for crystallization 
success [ 16 ].  
 Because of the relatively high cost of developing the original instru-
ment by 3-Dimensional Pharmaceuticals [ 1 ], other devices have 
been repurposed for FTS assays. Real-time PCR instruments are 
naturally suited for this assay and were tested by different groups 
[ 17 ]. They have become widely adopted as the instrument of 
choice for FTS. Commercially available qPCR machines used to 
perform FTS assays include the iQ5, CFX96, and CFX384 models 
by Bio-Rad; the Applied Biosystems 7500 by life Technologies; the 
LightCycler 480 by Roche; and the Stratagene Mx3005p, to name 
a few. All Real-time PCR instruments are enabled with (1) 96- or 
384-well thermal cycler that can raise the temperature of the sam-
ples in discrete, preprogramed steps; and (2) a ﬂ uorescence detec-
tor that has the capacity to illuminate each sample with a speciﬁ ed 
wavelength and detect the ﬂ uorescence emitted by the excited 
ﬂ uorophore. Although some older qPCR machines, such as the 
iQ5 and the Applied Biosystems 7900, need to be customized to 
be able to perform FTS with SYPRO Orange, new models have the 
capability out of the box.  
 At the Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases 
(CSGID), a TTP Labtech Mosquito to transfer protein samples, a 
Beckman Biomek FX for adding screen buffers, and a Labcyte 
Echo 550 for transferring compounds are used. The Mosquito is a 
nanoliter liquid handling robot conﬁ gured with a ﬁ xed eight chan-
nel head and a ﬁ ve position deck. It is fast and accurate at dispens-
ing sub-microliter amounts of protein and requires a very small 
dead volume, allowing conservation of sample. Its precision is not 
affected by stabilizing detergents in the buffer. The Biomek FX is 
outﬁ tted with a 96 channel pipetting head and is the workhorse for 
pipetting buffers and crystallography screens. The Echo is a non-
contact acoustic liquid handling system that transfers ﬂ uid down to 
2.5 nL. It allows very precise additions of small molecule ligands in 
DMSO or aqueous buffers. It can go from any well on a source 
plate to any well on a destination plate, and therefore can be used 
to create dilution curves on assay plates. The Echo, as conﬁ gured, 
cannot accommodate high levels of detergents and takes signiﬁ cantly 
longer to transfer microliter volumes to a 384-well plate, and, there-
fore, is not used for dispensing protein.  
2.4  Detection 
Instrumentation
2.5  Liquid Handling 
Robotics
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

270
3  Assay Procedure 
 This discussion is focused on the high-throughput screening 
aspects of the FTS methods as applied to protein crystallization 
and drug discovery. Therefore, the procedures are described using 
384- or 96-well plates in screening experiments and compound 
libraries in DMSO. 
  1.  Criteria for hit selection. Unfortunately, there is not always a 
straightforward formula for identifying FTS hits. In many cases, 
a simple cutoff (often 3 standard deviations above baseline  T m ) 
can be employed. However, false negatives are a concern with 
any criteria. Ligand binding will typically produce positive Tm 
shifts, but in some cases binding will stabilize the denatured 
state and result in no shift or negative shifts. Numerous exam-
ples of known ligands producing negative shifts have been docu-
mented. However, because ligands that produce negative shifts 
only rarely bind the native protein, they are typically disregarded 
in the high-throughput context. On the other hand, for drug 
discovery, a ligand that causes negative shift is also interesting, 
as it can show speciﬁ c binding.  
  2.  Assay volume and protein concentration. If conserving protein 
samples is not an issue, screening 2 μg of protein in a 10 μL 
assay volume consistently produces a robust signal. If protein is 
scarce and thus its conservation is critical, serial analysis of both 
protein concentration and assay volume can be tested to allow 
identiﬁ cation of the minimum conditions that produce adequate 
signal. Even with plenty of protein, a lower concentration is 
preferred because, as in all molecular characterizations, inter-
ference between testing molecules is possible.  
  3.  DMSO tolerance. When screening a DMSO solubilized library 
it is important to account for the effect of DMSO on protein 
stability. Some proteins tolerate DMSO poorly, necessitating a 
lower concentration. If only a low DMSO concentration is well 
tolerated for a given amount of protein, assay volume can be 
varied to accommodate. If pooling compounds, it is important 
that the cumulative amount of DMSO is within the DMSO 
tolerance of the protein.  
  4.  Plates. Commercial PCR plates are generally suitable for FTS. 
However, it is necessary to test a new brand or a new batch of 
plates to see if an artiﬁ cial transition occurs in the absence of 
protein. In the past, the authors have encountered plates that 
generate an artiﬁ cial transition at ~50 ºC comparable in 
magnitude to the protein transition exhibited in a typical FTS 
experiment.  
  5.  Fluorescent compounds. Some compounds ﬂ uoresce in the 
green range, interfering with the SYPRO Orange ﬂ uorescent 
3.1  Experimental 
Considerations Prior 
to Beginning 
the Assay
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

271
signal. In these cases Nile Red dye can be used as an 
alternative.  
  6.   pH effect and optimal pH for screening. Protein stability has 
complex pH dependence. A pH screen is advisable prior to 
library screening. Figure  2 demonstrates a variety of pH and 
salt effects with data obtained on protein samples from the 
CSGID.
 Fig. 2   T m plots for 9 CSGID proteins that exhibit distinct patterns of pH and NaCl dependence of protein stability. 
Proteins are referred by their locus tags 
 
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

272
  7.  Promiscuous binders (false positives). Some compounds bind 
nonselectively to multiple proteins. These are easily identiﬁ ed 
after a number of unrelated proteins are screened. In these 
cases, the compounds can be ﬂ agged in the analysis for further 
conﬁ rmation or discarded. When a hit is identiﬁ ed, especially 
from a relatively new library, a “counter” assay should be per-
formed to verify the speciﬁ city of the binding. This can be 
done with proteins unrelated to the protein of interest.  
  8.  Hit analysis (component contribution analysis). It is advisable 
to evaluate hits by  scrutinizing all the contributing compo-
nents. In other words, for molecules that are ion- carriers, the 
effect should always be compared to other molecules contain-
ing the same ion. An example of this occurred when a hit com-
pound was found in a library screen of a  Staphylococcus aureus 
protein of unknown function. The molecule identiﬁ ed was a 
Zn 2+ carrying pyrithione which gave a large  T m shift. Subsequent 
tests found that Zn 2+ alone could cause a large shift as well, indi-
cating that the protein can compete with pyrithione for chelated 
Zn 2+ . Further examination of the protein found that it was a 
Zn 2+ carrier. Ca 2+ and Cl − are other examples of ions that can 
frequently produce sizable thermal shifts. Therefore, dissecting 
the molecules in the screen library into its components is a 
necessary step for accurately identifying hit molecules.  
  9.  Ligand binding and  T m shift. The effect of ligand binding on 
 T m is not always straightforward. It is especially important to 
be aware of this complexity when using FTS to conﬁ rm hit 
molecules found in functional assays or other binding assays. 
Ligand binding may cause positive, negative, or negligible  T m 
shifts. For example, the  Campylobacter jejuni MurA exhibits a 
0° shift in the presence of its substrate phosphoenolpyruvate, a 
−1.5 °C shift in the presence of its substrate UDP-N-
acetylglucosamine, and a 9 °C shift in the presence of both 
substrates.  
 Different considerations are relevant for FTS screens applied for 
drug discovery and crystallographic purposes. These stem from 
differences in the chemical properties of screened libraries and the 
desired ligand binding afﬁ nity. For drug discovery, libraries are often 
composed of limited solubility molecules and the intent of the screen 
is to identify high-afﬁ nity binders. Consequently, it is practical to 
screen compounds at low- to mid-micromolar (typically screened at 
10 μM) concentrations. 
 A sample 384-well assay protocol is provided below. 
Compound libraries are typically stored at 10 mM in microplate 
format and nanoliter robotic transfer equipment is used to prepare 
screens. 
3.2  Protocol for Drug 
Discovery
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

273
  1.  Prepare protein assay stock in HEPES buffer at 0.1 μg/μL 
concentration:
 Total Volume protein = Number of wells × 10 μL 
  2.  Add 5,000× Sypro Orange (Sypro-O) to protein. The volume 
of Sypro-O is calculated as:
 Volume sypro-O = Total Volume protein × 0.001  
  3.  Transfer 10 μL protein–dye mix to each well of the assay plate.  
  4.   Add compounds to assay plate using an Echo acoustic liquid 
handler. A multicompound pooled format is used, where up to 
ﬁ ve compounds (20 nL each) are added to each well. If the 
library is dissolved in DMSO, it is critically important to test the 
effect of DMSO on protein thermal unfolding prior to screen-
ing. For practical purposes, the DMSO concentration used in 
the screen should produce less than a 1 °C  T m shift (half of the 
2 °C cutoff used to report an FTS hit). Therefore, in some cases, 
pool size will be determined by the DMSO tolerance limit. 
Increasing the assay volume could be considered to help in this 
regard, e.g., increasing the assay volume to 12 μL would allow 
adding one more compound to the pool and this translates into 
a 20 % increase in throughput. Other factors to consider when 
deciding upon pool size are the goal of the screen, the com-
pound library concentration, and the anticipated hit rate.  
  5.  Mix and centrifuge to remove air bubbles. A Scientiﬁ c Industries 
Multi Microplate Genie plate shaker is used with setting 800 
for 5 min and the plate is spun at ~200 ×  g for 1 min.  
  6.   Seal with an optically transparent PCR plate seal.  
  7.   Acquire data on qPCR instrument. Starting at 10 °C, increase 
by 0.5 °C per minute up to 95 °C, reading the plate at every 
temperature point. As the screen progresses, a narrower tem-
perature range can be used to speed up plate detection. To 
avoid false negatives due to the narrow temperature range, all 
compounds with a melting curve that deviates from the con-
trol can be selected as potential hits.  
 Alternatively, a HEPES/Sypro Orange solution can be pre-
pared for diluting protein or preparing other screen solutions. This 
works better when preparing a small number of assay wells. In 
practice, if protein stock concentration is no less than 10 times that 
of the assay concentration, it is acceptable to use a dilution factor 
1000X, i.e., 1 μL SYPRO Orange to 1 mL HEPES buffer.  
 In contrast to drug discovery screens, screens that are meant to 
guide crystallization contain highly soluble compounds that are 
not expected to interact with high afﬁ nity to the protein. In this 
case it makes sense to screen libraries at the low- to mid-millimolar 
concentrations that may be relevant for crystallization. 
3.2.1  384-Well format 
assay protocol
3.3  Protocol for 
Thermal Stability 
Proﬁ ling
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

274
  1.  Prepare protein assay stock in 100 mM HEPES buffer at 
1-2 μg/μL concentration:
 Total Volume protein = Number of wells × 1 μL 
  2.  Add 5,000× SYPRO Orange to protein assay stock. The vol-
ume of Sypro-O is calculated as:
 Volume sypro-O = Total Volume protein × 0.01,  
  3.   Transfer 1 μL of the protein–dye mix to the assay plate with 
Mosquito liquid handler.  
  4.  Add screen conditions to assay plate, 9 μL per well for each 
condition, with Biomek FX.  
  5.   Mix and centrifuge to remove air bubbles. A Scientiﬁ c 
Industries Multi Microplate Genie plate shaker is used with 
setting 800 for 5 min and the plate is spun at ~200 ×  g for 
1 min.  
  6.  Seal with an optically transparent PCR plate seal.  
  7.   Acquire data on qPCR instrument. Starting at 10 °C, or 30 °C 
below the  T m , increase by 0.5 °C per minute up to 95 °C, reading 
the plate at every temperature point.  
  1.   Prepare protein assay stock in HEPES buffer at 1 μg/μL 
concentration:
 Total Volume protein = Number of wells × 1 μL 
  2.  Add Sypro-O to protein. The volume of Sypro-O is 
calculated as
 Volume sypro-O = Total Volume protein × 0.01,  
 
  where the Sypro-O stock concentration is 5,000× and assay 
concentration is 5×.  
  3.  Transfer 2.5 μL protein–dye mix to assay plate.  
  4.  Add screen conditions to assay plate, 22.5 μL per well for each 
condition.  
  5.  Mix and centrifuge to remove air bubbles. A Scientiﬁ c 
Industries Multi Microplate Genie plate shaker is used with 
setting 800 for 5 min and the plate is spun at ~200 ×  g for 
1 min.  
  6.  Seal with an optically transparent PCR plate seal.  
  7.   Acquire data on qPCR instrument. Starting at 10 °C, or 30 °C 
below the  T m , increase by 0.5 °C per minute up to 95 °C, reading 
the plate at every temperature point.  
3.3.1  384-Well format 
assay protocol
3.3.2  96-Well format 
assay protocol
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

275
4  Data Analysis 
 The drug screening process typically starts with a primary screen, 
followed by a deconvolution screen on the hit wells (if a pooled 
compound format is used), then a dose–response series on the hit 
compounds, and ﬁ nally characterization of conﬁ rmed hits. In car-
rying out this process there is no need to collect information by 
other methods to determine which molecules to pick for the next 
step; the only factor requiring consideration is the result from FTS 
experiments, namely  T m , the shape of the melting curve, and the 
binding speciﬁ city. To determine these basic parameters, a simple 
curve ﬁ tting procedure using either the Boltzmann or double 
Boltzmann equation is sufﬁ cient. The melting curve of a selected 
hit molecule can, of course, be reanalyzed by a more detailed analysis 
and used in corroboration with results from other methods. The 
scope of this chapter only covers FTS, and therefore no discussion 
of corroborating FTS data with alternate methods is included. 
 FTS data is recorded as ﬂ uorescence intensity vs. temperature.  
T m can be determined from the ﬁ rst derivative of the transition 
proﬁ le without curve ﬁ tting. The ﬁ rst derivative can be automati-
cally calculated using the software package that accompanies most 
qPCR machines. For simple transitions, using the ﬁ rst derivative is 
an easy and straightforward method to obtain  T m . However, the 
data quality of the derivative is poor compared to using curve ﬁ tted 
relative ﬂ uorescence units (RFU). It also does not provide an esti-
mate of the relative magnitude of the transition if the transition is 
multiphasic. The transition width is better deﬁ ned from the curve 
ﬁ tted RFU. The pre-transition (pre-melting) ﬂ uorescence reading 
is also very informative. Its value depends upon the folding state of 
the protein. Exposure of hydrophobic patches in unoccupied bind-
ing sites or interfaces can result in high background ﬂ uorescence. 
Reduced background upon the addition of a small molecule indi-
cates a possible speciﬁ c interaction between the small molecule and 
the protein. Therefore, even in library screening mode, the RFU 
data is used as the primary data for analysis. 
 Besides transition temperature,  T m , the following parameters 
can be derived from the thermal scanning proﬁ le: transition width 
 k 1 , background reading  F A which indicates the protein’s pre- 
transition folding state, magnitude of transition Δ F , as well as the 
characteristics of the transition, i.e., whether it is monophasic or 
multiphasic.  
 As discussed previously, the transition proﬁ le can be analyzed either 
with the RFU reading or the ﬁ rst derivative. The ﬁ rst derivative is 
a direct way to obtain  T m and multi-phasic transitions are more 
visually apparent. However,  F A and Δ F are lost in this analysis. 
4.1  FTS Parameters
4.2  Curve 
Fitting Model
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

276
A ligand that stabilizes the native conformation or promotes the 
folded conformation will often reduce  F A . Under most conditions, 
particularly when protein concentration has been reduced to con-
serve the sample, curve ﬁ tted RFU is used for data analysis. 
 The transition proﬁ le can be ﬁ tted to two different curve ﬁ tting 
models. One is the Boltzmann sigmoidal model,  F x =  F A + ( F B −  F A )/
(1 + exp(( T m − x)/ k 1 )). Simple transitions can be ﬁ t to this model. 
The model has four parameters:  F A ,  F B ,  T m , and  k 1 , which have 
been deﬁ ned above and Δ F =  F B −  F A . Another parameter is also 
useful,  T m10 , which gives more information about the change in 
cooperativity of the folding process.  T m10 can be calculated as 
 T m10 =  T m −  k 1 × ln9. Thus it converts the transition width  k 1 to a 
temperature so that Δ T m10 can be directly compared with Δ T m to 
discern the change in transition characteristics with a ligand, as 
demonstrated in Fig.  3 . For a biphasic transition, a double 
Boltzmann model can be used.
 Broadening of the transition at low compound concentration is an 
indicator of a high-afﬁ nity binder. This is especially true when the 
ligand-bound state has a distinct transition, as shown in Fig.  4 
with a penicillin-binding protein. When a mixture of bound and 
unbound protein exists, the two distinct states both contribute to 
4.3  Biphasic 
Transitions
 Fig. 3   Normalized melting curves for a CSGID protein with NaCl and MnCl 2 , dem-
onstrating the use of  T m and  T m10 . The steeper transition with MnCl 2 is shown by 
a greater Δ T m10 value than that of Δ T m .  T m10 converts the transition width  k 1 in 
the Boltzmann model to a transition temperature so that Δ T m10 can be directly 
compared with Δ T m to discern the change in transition characteristics when a 
ligand bound 
 
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

277
the FTS proﬁ le, appearing convoluted in the ﬂ uorescence reading 
and as two peaks in the ﬁ rst derivative plot. Therefore, when a hit 
is found in a primary screen, a dose-curve exploration needs to put 
more emphasis on studying the melting curve behavior at low 
compound concentrations. High-afﬁ nity ligands at concentrations 
closer to the protein concentration will cause this biphasic transition 
where a broadening of the transition is clearly visible. This may or 
 Fig. 4   Biphasic transition indicating high-afﬁ nity binding. The data shown is for a 
secreted penicillin-binding protein from  Corynebacterium diphtheriae NCTC 
13129 with penicillin. The protein concentration is 1.8 μM. At close to equal 
molar ratio, the melting curve exhibits a biphasic behavior, indicative of a high- 
afﬁ nity binding and a two state transition 
 
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

278
may not associate with a large  T m shift. The transition width parameter 
 k 1 from Boltzmann ﬁ tting can serve as an indicator for speciﬁ c 
binding. The peak value in a plot of  k 1 vs. ligand concentration 
indicates the concentration of ligand at which 50 % of the protein 
is in the free state and 50 % in ligand bound state.
 A discussion of the methods by which FTS can be used to deter-
mine  K D and other binding properties is beyond the scope of this 
chapter. A sophisticated analysis and a well-described theoretical 
framework have been reviewed elsewhere [ 5 ]. In general, caution is 
advised when interpreting afﬁ nity solely on the basis of FTS data. 
When enthalpy changes of binding are comparable, rank-ordering 
compounds on the basis of  T m should provide an accurate picture of 
relative afﬁ nity. However, if there are signiﬁ cant differences in 
enthalpy changes of binding a rank-ordered list may be misleading.  
5  A Case Study: 100 CSGID Proteins Screened Against the ADDit™ Library 
 The data below are from 100 CSGID proteins screened with the 
ADDit additive screen library by FTS. The data are examined in 
terms of the property of the screening conditions and the impact 
on protein stability and solubility behavior. This can have practical 
implications for assisting scientists in decisions relating to sample 
preparation and crystallization practice. 
 The ADDit conditions are marketed by Emerald Biosystems as 
a screen kit. The conditions are classiﬁ ed into ﬁ ve categories: (1) 
Salts/Ions, 24 conditions, (2) Volatile Organics/Solvents, 12 con-
ditions, (3) Nonvolatile Organics/Polymers, 24 conditions, (4) 
Detergents, 12 conditions, and (5) Others (Chelators, Reducing 
Agents, Linkers, Chaotropes, etc.), 24 conditions. The ADDit 
conditions have been studied systematically on selected proteins 
via crystallization trials by McPherson and colleagues. Their effects 
on proteins as manifested in crystallization experiments were 
reported [ 18 ]. The thermal shift data examines the effects of these 
same conditions on a set of proteins using a different approach. 
Because the CSGID proteins tested were not selected by a set of 
rules other than that they are targets of interest for CSGID, the 
results provide general insight into physicochemical properties of 
proteins under the test conditions. 
 The FTS data for each condition is presented as a histogram of 
Δ T m for the 100 proteins. In Figs.  5 ,  6 ,  7 ,  8 ,  9 ,  10 ,  11 , and  12 , the 
proteins are binned into six categories: (1) “No  T m ” indicates pro-
teins in which no thermal transition was observed under the condi-
tion; (2) proteins that exhibited destabilized behavior with Δ T m 
<−5 °C; (3) proteins that exhibited destabilized behavior with 
−2 °C > Δ T m > −5 °C; (4) proteins that exhibited little or no change 
with −2 °C < Δ T m < 2 °C; (5) proteins that were stabilized with 
4.4  Hit Follow-Up
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

279
ammonium sulfate
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
60
40
20
0
60
40
20
0
60
40
20
0
60
40
20
0
60
40
20
0
60
40
20
0
60
40
20
0
60
40
20
0
60
40
20
0
60
40
20
0
barium iodide
barium chloride
calcium chloride dihydrate
cadmium chloride dihydrate
cesium chloride
cupric chloride dihydrate
holmium chloride
lithium chloride
cobalt chloride dihydrate
gadolinium bromide
lanthanum acetate
 Fig. 5   Histogram of Δ T m  of 100 CSGID proteins showing effect of 12 salts and ions on protein stability. 
Nonspeciﬁ c solvent effects account for the majority of the events and follow the Hofmeister series 
 
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

280
lithium sulfate
manganese (ll) chloride
tetrahydrate
magnesium chloride
hexahydrate
potassium citrate
potassium chloride
samarium bromide,
hexahydrate
sodium chloride
sodium malonate
yttrium nitrate
samarium chloride
sodium fluoride
yttrium chloride hexahydrate
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
 Fig. 6   Histogram of Δ T m of 100 CSGID proteins shows the effect of 12 salts and ions on protein stability 
 
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

281
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
1-propanol
2-Butanol
Acetonitrile
DMSO
Ethyl Acetate
N,N-Dimethylformamide
trifluoroethanol
2-Propanol
dioxane
Ethanol
Methanol
trifluoro acetic acid
 Fig. 7   Histogram of Δ T m of 100 CSGID proteins shows the effect of 12 volatile organics/solvents on protein 
stability 
 
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

282
1,2,3-heptanetriol
1,3 butanediol
1,4 butanediol
1,6 hexanediol
2,5 Hexanediol
dextran sulfate sodium salt
gamma butyrolactone
1,3 propanediol
1,5-diaminopentane di-HCI
1,8-diaminooctane
6-aminocaproic acid
ethylene glycol
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
 Fig. 8   Histogram of Δ T m of 100 CSGID proteins shows the effect of 12 nonvolatile organics/polymers on 
protein stability 
 
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

283
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
glycerol anhydrous
glycyl-glycyl-glycine
MPD
polyethylene glycol 2000 MME
polyethylene glycol 4000
polypropylene glycol P400
polyvinylpyrrolidone K15
polyethylene imine
polyethylene glycol 400
polyethylene glycol 10000
jeffamine M-600
glycine
 Fig. 9   Histogram of Δ T m of 100 CSGID proteins shows the effect of another 12 nonvolatile organics/polymers 
on protein stability 
 
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

284
NAD
ATP disodium salt
N-Acetyl-L-Cysteine
EDTA
spermine tetra-HCl
trimethylamine HCI
urea
DTT
BME
spermine
hexaminecobalt trichloride
guanidine HCI
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
 Fig. 10  Histogram of Δ T m of 100 CSGID proteins shows the effect of 12 chelators, reducing agents, and 
chaotropes on protein stability 
 
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

285
Phenol
benzamidine HCI
EPPS
D(+)-sucrose
imidazole
non-detergent sulfo-betaine
201
taurine
PIPES
D(+)-glucose monohydrate
xylitol
arginine
betaine monohydrate
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
 Fig. 11   Histogram of Δ T m of 100 CSGID proteins shows the effect of another 12 chelators, reducing agents, 
and chaotropes on protein stability 
 
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

n-Dodecyl-b--D-maltoside
LDAO
CTAB
b-Octylb-D-glucopyranoside
Polysorbate 80 (Tween 80)
Zwittergent 3-10
n-Octyltetraoxyethylene
Triton X-100
Lauryl Sulfobetaine
(Zwittergent 3-12)
CHAPS
Brij 56 (Polyoxyethylene 10
cetyl ether)
ASB-14 (Amidosulfobetaine-14)
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
60
40
20
0
NoTM
< −5
> 5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
 Fig. 12   Histogram of Δ T m of 100 CSGID proteins shows the effect of detergents on protein stability. Despite the 
fact that the hydrophobic portion of a detergent can interact with SYPRO Orange to give a prohibitively high 
background reading, an intact transition was observed for most proteins with three detergents, zwittergent 
3-10, Lauryl sulfobetaine (zwittergent 3-12), and  n -Octyltetraoxyethylene 
 

287
2 °C < Δ T m < 5 °C; and (6) proteins that exhibited signiﬁ cant stabilized 
behavior with Δ T m > 5 °C.
 Two types of effects were observed, nonspeciﬁ c solvent effects 
and speciﬁ c binding effects, where the former were the majority of 
the events with Δ T m values <2 °C and the latter were more rare but 
with Δ T m > 5 °C. The data indicate that the overall solvent and 
solute effects follow the Hofmeister series. The more generally 
relevant properties of these molecules are discussed here. Before 
continuing with the discussion, it should be noted that the effects 
are not a result of the His6 tag on the protein. The His6 tag on the 
N-terminus is included for puriﬁ cation purposes and was not 
removed before screens were carried out. Hofmeister effects have 
been observed for many proteins that do not have His6 tags, even 
on the elastin-based polypeptide with the sequence poly(VPGVG) 
that has only Val, Pro, Gly residues and only the N- and C-termini 
are charged in the 50 kDa molecule [ 19 ]. Generally the stability 
effect is ascribed to ion and protein interactions mediated by 
backbone rather than charged groups [ 20 ]. 
 Several generalizations can be made from the large dataset. 
Cations such as sodium, potassium, barium, lithium, cesium, and 
magnesium are neutral or are slightly stabilizing. The anions sul-
fate, citrate, and malonate have strong stabilizing effects. PEGs, 
glycine, tri-Glycine, and EDTA rarely inﬂ uence protein stability. 
Even the well-known protein denaturant urea is quite neutral, 
while guanidinium HCl (GuaHCl) is more destabilizing. However, 
there is a small population of proteins to which GuaHCl has a sta-
bilizing effect. Figure  11 shows that the three sugars in the ADDit 
library,  d -glucose,  d -sucrose, and xylitol, are either neutral or 
stabilizers for a majority of the tested proteins. Simple alcohols 
destabilized the majority of the proteins studied. 
 The multivalent cations cadmium, cobalt, gadolinium, lantha-
num, samarium, yttrium, holmium, and copper have a detrimental 
effect as shown by a high population of Δ T m < −5 °C and No  T m for 
a number of proteins. For the same protein, this behavior is cor-
related with the observation on NiCl 2 in another library. Because 
these proteins all contain a His6 puriﬁ cation tag, the effect could 
partially be due to the His6 tag to the protein’s structural 
stability. 
 The detergent data are shown in Fig.  12 . The FTS with SYPRO 
Orange is not readily applicable to conditions containing detergents. 
This is due to the SYPRO Orange paradigm: ﬂ uorescence genera-
tion is due to the dye interacting with exposed hydrophobic surfaces 
of the protein when unfolded. The hydrophobic portion of a deter-
gent can interact with SYPRO Orange to give a prohibitively high 
background reading. It is interesting to note, however, that an intact 
transition was observed for most proteins with three detergents, 
zwittergent 3-10, Lauryl sulfobetaine (zwittergent 3-12), and  n -
Octyltetraoxyethylene. They are destabilizers but only mild ones. 
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

288
In protein studies, the purpose of using detergent is not for enhanc-
ing stability, but rather reducing aggregation. Importantly, the 
destabilizing effect is not signiﬁ cantly negative.  
 Acknowledgments 
 The authors would like to acknowledge the Center for Structural 
Genomics of Infectious Diseases (CSGID) funded by NIAD 
under Contracts No. HHSN272200700058C and HHSN
272201200026C.  
 References 
  1.  Pantoliano MW et al (2001) High-density minia-
turized thermal shift assays as a general strategy 
for drug discovery. J Biomol Screen 6:429–440. 
doi:  10.1089/108705701753364922   
  2.   Zucker FH et al (2010) Prediction of protein 
crystallization outcome using a hybrid method. 
J Struct Biol 171:64–73. doi:  10.1016/j.
jsb.2010.03.016  
  3.  Senisterra GA, Finerty PJ Jr (2009) High 
throughput methods of assessing protein sta-
bility and aggregation. Mol Biosyst 5:217–223. 
doi:  10.1039/b814377c   
  4.  Niesen FH, Berglund H, Vedadi M (2007) 
The use of differential scanning ﬂ uorimetry to 
detect ligand interactions that promote protein 
stability. 
Nat 
Protoc 
2:2212–2221. 
doi:  10.1038/nprot.2007.321   
  5.   Zhang R, Monsma F (2010) Fluorescence- 
based thermal shift assays. Curr Opin Drug 
Discov Devel 13:389–402  
  6.   Lavinder JJ, Hari SB, Sullivan BJ, Magliery TJ 
(2009) High-throughput thermal scanning: a 
general, rapid dye-binding thermal shift screen 
for protein engineering. J Am Chem Soc 
131:3794–3795. doi:  10.1021/ja8049063   
  7.  Pershad K, Kay BK (2013) Generating thermal 
stable variants of protein domains through 
phage 
display. 
Methods 
60:38–45. 
doi:  10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.12.009   
  8.  Vedadi M et al (2006) Chemical screening 
methods to identify ligands that promote pro-
tein stability, protein crystallization, and 
structure determination. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 103:15835–15840. doi:  10.1073/
pnas.0605224103   
  9.  Nettleship JE, Brown J, Groves MR, Geerlof A 
(2008) Methods for protein characterization 
by 
mass 
spectrometry, 
thermal 
shift 
(ThermoFluor) assay, and multiangle or static 
light scattering. Methods Mol Biol 426:299–318. 
doi:  10.1007/978-1-60327-058-8_19   
  10.  Reinhard L, Mayerhofer H, Geerlof A, Mueller- 
Dieckmann J, Weiss MS (2013) Optimization 
of protein buffer cocktails using Thermoﬂ uor. 
Acta Crystallogr Sect F: Struct Biol Cryst 
Commun 
69:209–214. 
doi:  10.1107/
S1744309112051858   
  11.  Phillips K, de la Pena AH (2011). The com-
bined use of the Thermoﬂ uor assay and 
ThermoQ analytical software for the determi-
nation of protein stability and buffer optimiza-
tion as an aid in protein crystallization. Curr 
Protoc Mol Biol. Chapter 10, Unit10 28. 
doi:  10.1002/0471142727.mb1028s94   
  12.    Stepanenko OV et al (2008) Hydrophobic inter-
actions and ionic networks play an important role 
in thermal stability and denaturation mechanism 
of the porcine odorant-binding protein. Proteins 
71:35–44. doi:  10.1002/prot.21658   
  13.  Sheth PR et al (2010) Expression, puriﬁ cation, 
stability optimization and characterization of 
human Aurora B kinase domain from  E. coli . 
Arch 
Biochem 
Biophys 
503:191–201. 
doi:  10.1016/j.abb.2010.08.004   
  14.  Sledz P, Lang S, Stubbs CJ, Abell C (2012) 
High-throughput interrogation of ligand bind-
ing mode using a ﬂ uorescence-based assay. 
Angew Chem 51:7680–7683. doi:  10.1002/
anie.201202660   
  15.   Giuliani SE, Frank AM, Collart FR (2008) 
Functional assignment of solute-binding pro-
teins of ABC transporters using a ﬂ uorescence- 
based 
thermal 
shift 
assay. 
Biochemistry 
47:13974–13984. doi:  10.1021/bi801648r   
  16.  Geders TW, Gustafson K, Finzel BC (2012) 
Use of differential scanning ﬂ uorimetry to 
optimize the puriﬁ cation and crystallization of 
PLP-dependent enzymes. Acta Crystallogr 
Chi-Hao Luan et al.

289
Sect F: Struct Biol Cryst Commun 68:596–600. 
doi:  10.1107/S1744309112012912   
  17.   Lo MC et al (2004) Evaluation of ﬂ uorescence- 
based thermal shift assays for hit identiﬁ cation in 
drug discovery. Anal Biochem 332:153–159. 
doi:  10.1016/j.ab.2004.04.031   
  18.   McPherson A, Cudney B (2006) Searching for 
silver bullets: an alternative strategy for crystal-
lizing macromolecules. J Struct Biol 156(3):
387–406  
  19.  Urry DW (1993) Molecular machines: how 
motion and other functions of living organisms 
can result from reversible chemical changes. 
Angew Chem (German) 105:859–883; Angew 
Chem Int Ed Engl 32:819–841  
  20.  Sedlák E, Stagg L, Wittung-Stafshede P (2008) 
Effect of Hofmeister ions on protein thermal 
stability: roles of ion hydration and peptide 
groups? Arch Biochem Biophys 479(1):69–73. 
doi:  10.1016/j.abb.2008.08.013   
Fluorescence Thermal Shift Screening

291
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_21, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
Chapter 21
Ligand Screening Using Enzymatic Assays
Kiira Ratia, Shahila Mehboob, and Hyun Lee
Abstract
An important aspect of enzymatic assays is that the effect of a ligand on enzyme activity is readily apparent 
and quantifiable. Enzyme-based assays are, therefore, highly amenable to high-throughput ligand screening, 
which profiles the effect of a panel of small molecules on a designated target. In order for enzyme assays 
to provide useful screening data, the kinetics, assay components, readout signal, and overall stability of the 
assay are optimized and adapted to the equipment prior to the screen. For the screen itself, careful consid-
eration is given to the number of replicates, the plate layout, the compound concentration, and the details 
of assay assembly. Lastly, in the post-screen stages, the ligand screening data is processed and analyzed 
using various strategies, and the resulting preliminary hits are subjected to a series of secondary and 
tertiary assays to eliminate false positives and poor quality hits. The various stages of screening are 
described, using a viral protease, NS3/4A from Hepatitis C virus, as an example of an enzyme target.
Key words High-throughput screening, Enzyme assay, Assay optimization, Hit validation, Inhibition, 
HCV protease, NS3/4A
1  Introduction
In the last decade, high-throughput screening (HTS) of small 
­molecules has become increasingly commonplace outside of the 
pharmaceutical industry [1]. Individual screening facilities are avail-
able at many academic institutions, and several off-site screening 
networks and centers have emerged to address multiple aspects of 
small molecule screening. Target-based screens, conceptually the 
simplest type of screen, are most often directed at enzymes, as they 
comprise the majority of drug targets [2]. At the heart of any target-­
based screening campaign is the assay, which reports the effect of a 
compound on the system. By their very nature, enzymes provide a 
convenient method for assaying activity. The turnover of substrate(s) 
by an enzyme can be quantitated through the appearance of 
product(s) or the disappearance of substrate(s). Though a handful of 
native substrates or products can be directly detected using spectro-
photometric techniques in a useful wavelength range, most enzyme 
reactions must be modified to produce a signal that can be easily 

292
measured on a standard microplate reader [3]. Colorimetric, fluo-
rescent, and luminescent signals are the standard output for screen-
ing applications, although screening campaigns can take advantage 
of more sophisticated measurements when necessary.
Biochemists and chemists have developed numerous solutions 
for converting enzyme-catalyzed reactions into assays amenable to 
HTS. One widely used method is to couple the reaction of interest 
(Reaction A) to another enzyme-catalyzed reaction (Reaction B), 
which requires a product from Reaction A to produce a measurable 
signal. For example, if Reaction A converts ADP to ATP, the ATP 
can be used by a coupled reaction, containing the enzyme lucifer-
ase and substrate luciferin, to produce a luminescent signal. Other 
strategies for creating a measurable signal from an enzyme reaction 
include, but are not limited to, (1) modifying the substrate with a 
fluorogenic group, (2) introducing fluorescence resonance energy 
transfer (FRET) donor/quencher pairs into the design of the assay, 
(3) using alternative substrates for the enzyme, or (4) quenching 
the reaction with a chromophore that requires the product of the 
enzyme reaction to produce a color change.
This method profiles the pre-screen assay optimization, auto-
mated HTS, and post-screen data analysis strategies typical to 
many screening campaigns, and uses a screen developed for a viral 
protease, NS3/4A from Hepatitis C Virus (HCV), as a case study. 
NS3/4A is a serine protease that is essential to HCV replication by 
cleaving at four sites in the viral polyprotein to produce five mature 
proteins. The assay to measure enzyme activity utilizes a simple, 
FRET-based peptide substrate derived from an NS3/4A cleavage 
site [4]. The screening protocols outlined in this method pertain 
specifically to the NS3/4A enzyme assay, but the general principles 
of the process can be applied to many enzyme-based ligand screens.
2  Materials
	 1.	Purified NS3/4A enzyme.
	 2.	Enzyme Assay Buffer: (50  mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 4  mM 
reduced glutathione (GSH), 0.25 % Chaps, 15 % glycerol, and 
0.1 mg/mL BSA).
	 3.	Substrate: 
Ac-DED(QXL™520)EE-Abu-ψ[COO]ASC(5-­
FAM)-NH2 (Anaspec).
	 4.	Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).
	 5.	10 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS).
	 6.	Low-volume assay plates: black, low-volume, 384-well plate.
	 7.	Standard assay plates: black, flat bottom, 384-well plates.
	 8.	Multichannel pipets.
	 9.	Microplate reader with plate shaking capability.
2.1  Pre-screen 
Assay Optimization
Kiira Ratia et al.

293
	 1.	Enzyme Assay Buffer.
	 2.	NS3/4A enzyme (1.33× in Enzyme Assay Buffer, as deter-
mined in Subheading 3.1.2).
	 3.	Peptide substrate (4× in Enzyme Assay Buffer, as determined 
in Subheading 3.1.1).
	 4.	10 % w/v SDS solution.
	 5.	Screening compounds (stored in 384-well polypropylene plates, 
at 10 mM in 100 % DMSO) (see Note 1).
	 6.	Assay plates: black, flat bottom, 384-well plates.
	 7.	Pin tool cleaning supplies: 100 % DMSO, 95 % ethanol, lint-­free 
blotting sheets.
	 8.	Microplate reader, with excitation wavelength set to 490 nm, 
and emission wavelength set to 520 nm.
	 9.	Automated liquid-handling workstation (Tecan Freedom EVO 
200) equipped with 96- or 384-channel pipetting head and 
appropriate tips, a 100  nL 384-well pin tool for dispensing 
compound, a plate shaker, and a temperature-controlled carrier 
for cooling on-deck enzyme solution.
	 1.	Compound clustering software such as Tripos Selector or 
Tripos Benchware HTS Dataminer.
	 2.	Assay components for continuous and/or secondary assays.
	 3.	Assay components to test compound binding reversibility.
	 4.	Assay components to determine IC50 values and to perform 
detailed mode of inhibition studies.
	 5.	Data analysis software such as Origin and SigmaPlot Enzyme 
Kinetics module.
3  Methods
Assay optimization is critical for achieving high quality, reliable 
results from ligand screening. Though there are numerous factors 
to be considered depending on the enzyme and the assay, some 
important measures common to almost all pre-screen protocols 
include optimizing the substrate and enzyme concentrations, 
­testing the DMSO tolerance of the system, choosing buffer addi-
tives (reducing agent, detergent, and bovine serum albumin 
(BSA)), and assessing enzyme stability. Because the binding of 
screening compounds can be influenced by other ligands in solu-
tion, such as the substrate, it is important to thoroughly character-
ize the kinetic parameters of the enzyme with its substrate(s) and 
applicable cofactors before embarking on a screen. The Michaelis 
constant (KM) is an appropriate substrate concentration for many 
screening efforts since it will allow for both competitive and 
2.2  Automated 
Screening of 
Compound Libraries
2.3  Post-screen 
Analysis
3.1  Pre-screen 
Assay Optimization
Enzymatic Screening for Ligands

294
non-competitive ligand binding. When [S] = KM, the concentrations 
of free enzyme [E] and enzyme bound to substrate [ES] are equal, 
or balanced [5]. For assays biased towards competitive inhibitors, 
as is the case for the assay outlined in this method, the recom-
mended substrate concentration is typically reduced to sub-KM 
values [6].
The DMSO tolerance of an enzyme, and of the assay as whole, 
should be tested prior to screening, since commercially available 
compounds are almost always stored in 100  % DMSO. DMSO 
concentrations in a screen typically fall below 1  % (v/v), but 
depending on the desired compound concentration, concentra-
tions >5 % are occasionally required. Another component of most 
assays, reducing agents, plays an important role in preventing the 
oxidation of cysteine residues in the target enzymes [7, 8] and 
greatly reduces the reactivity of many electrophilic groups on non-
specific inhibitors. The addition of a carrier protein such as BSA to 
the assay is also important, as it can stabilize the target enzyme, 
particularly at the low enzyme concentrations (pM to low nM) 
used for screening. BSA also minimizes enzyme losses on pipette 
and plate well surfaces and can act as scavenger for compounds that 
display nonspecific binding. Addition of detergents such as 
Triton-X 100, Tween 20, and CHAPS to assay buffers has become 
commonplace for reducing false positives, since detergents can 
prevent the protein aggregation induced by many compounds [9].
	 1.	Prepare a series of substrate concentrations at twofold the 
final testing concentrations (0.94, 1.88, 3.75, 7.5, 15, 30, and 
60 μM) in Enzyme Assay Buffer (see Notes 2 and 3).
	 2.	Prepare 30 nM NS3/4A (twofold of final testing concentration) 
enzyme solution in Enzyme Assay Buffer (see Note 4).
	 3.	Distribute 5 μL of enzyme solution to each of 21 wells in a 
384-­well black low-volume plate (wells A01-G03). Distribute 
5 μL of Enzyme Assay Buffer to each of 21 wells in the same 
plate (wells A04-G06) in order to measure the substrate back-
ground signal in the absence of enzyme.
	 4.	Initiate the enzyme reaction by adding 5  μL of the various 
substrate concentrations to each of six wells in the plate, e.g., 
the 0.94  μM stock will be added to wells A01–A06, the 
1.88 μM stock will be added to wells B01–B06, and so on.
	 5.	Prior to measuring fluorescence, shake the plate for 30 s in the 
microplate reader.
	 6.	Monitor the fluorescence intensity at 490/520 nm (excitation/
emission) continuously for 10 min with the microplate reader.
	 7.	Calculate the enzyme velocities from the initial, linear portion 
of each reaction time course. Subtract the substrate back-
ground signals from the enzyme velocities for each substrate 
3.1.1  Peptide KM 
Determination
Kiira Ratia et al.

295
concentration. To determine the maximal velocity (Vmax) and 
KM, fit the data to Eq. 1, where y is the corrected, initial veloc-
ity and x is the concentration of substrate.
	
y
V
x
K
x
=
´
+
max
M
	
(1)
	 1.	Prepare the substrate at twofold the final fixed concentration 
(slightly lower than KM value determined above). The KM value 
of the peptide substrate with NS3/4A in the Enzyme Assay 
Buffer is 2.1 μM. 1 μM substrate was used for screening.
	 2.	Prepare a series of NS3/4A enzyme concentrations (0, 2, 5, 
10, 20, 30 nM) in Enzyme Assay Buffer.
	 3.	Add 5  μL of the various enzyme concentrations to each of 
three wells in a black, low-volume 384-well plate, e.g., the 
0 nM stock will be added to wells A01–A03, the 2 nM stock 
will be added to wells B01–B03, and so on.
	 4.	Initiate the enzyme reaction by adding 5 μL of the 2× substrate 
to all wells containing enzyme (A01–G03) and shake the plate 
for 30 s.
	 5.	Monitor the fluorescence intensity at 490/520 nm (excitation/
emission) continuously for at least 30 min with the microplate 
reader.
	 6.	Determine the enzyme concentration that produces the fastest 
reaction for t = 6 min, while also remaining in the linear range 
of the progress curve (see Note 5).
	 1.	Prepare a series of DMSO concentrations at eightfold the final 
testing concentrations (0, 8, 16, 32, 48, 64, and 80 % (v/v)) 
in Enzyme Assay Buffer.
	 2.	Prepare the NS3/4A enzyme solution in Enzyme Assay Buffer 
at 1.33-fold (13.33 nM) the final concentration.
	 3.	Prepare the NS3/4A substrate solution in Enzyme Assay 
Buffer at eightfold (8 μM) the final concentration.
	 4.	Distribute 30 μL of the enzyme solution to each of 21 wells in 
a black, 384-well plate (wells A01-G03). Distribute 30 μL of 
Enzyme Assay Buffer to each of 21 wells in the same plate 
(wells A04–G06) in order to measure the effect of DMSO on 
the substrate.
	 5.	Add 5 μL of the various DMSO stock concentrations to each 
of six wells in the 384-well plate, e.g., the 0 % stock will be 
added to wells A01–A06, the 8 % stock will be added to wells 
B01–B06, and so on.
	 6.	Shake the plate for 30 s.
	 7.	Incubate the plate for 10 min at room temperature.
3.1.2  Enzyme 
Concentration Optimization
3.1.3  Assay DMSO 
Tolerance
Enzymatic Screening for Ligands

296
	 8.	Initiate the reaction by adding 5 μL of 8× substrate to all 42 
wells, and shake the plate for 30 s.
	 9.	Monitor the fluorescence intensity at 490/520 nm (excitation/
emission) continuously for at least 20 min with the microplate 
reader.
	10.	Analyze the data to determine the highest concentration of 
DMSO that reduces the enzyme activity and substrate stability 
by less than 10 %.
	 1.	Prepare the 4 μM (fourfold of final concentration) substrate in 
Enzyme Assay Buffer.
	 2.	Prepare the NS3/4A enzyme solution in Enzyme Assay Buffer 
at 1.33-fold (13.33 nM) the final concentration (see Note 6). 
The Enzyme Assay Buffer should be equilibrated to room tem-
perature prior to diluting enzyme. Immediately upon dilution, 
record the time, and incubate the diluted enzyme at room 
temperature with the container uncapped.
	 3.	Measure the enzyme activity immediately after dilution by 
distributing 30 μL of diluted enzyme solution to each of six 
wells in a standard, black, 384-well plate. Add 30 μL of Enzyme 
Assay Buffer to each of six additional wells.
	 4.	Initiate the enzyme reaction by adding 10 μL substrate to all 
12 wells filled in step 3. Shake the plate for 30 s.
	 5.	Monitor the fluorescence intensity at 490/520 nm (excitation/
emission) continuously for at least 10 min with the microplate 
reader. Record slopes.
	 6.	Repeat steps 3–5 at t = 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 4 h (see Note 7).
	 1.	Prepare the NS3/4A enzyme and substrate as described in 
steps 1 and 2 of Subheading 3.1.4.
	 2.	Prepare three potential stop solutions: 10 % SDS, 0.5 M acetic 
acid, and 0.1 M NaOH.
	 3.	Distribute 30 μL of the enzyme solution to each of six wells in 
a black, 384-well plate. Distribute 30  μL of Enzyme Assay 
Buffer to each of six wells in the same plate.
	 4.	Initiate the enzyme reaction by adding 10 μL substrate to all 
12 wells filled in step 3. Shake the plate for 30 s.
	 5.	Incubate the plate for an additional 5.5  min at room 
temperature.
	 6.	Add 10 μL of 10 % SDS to all 12 wells to quench the enzyme 
reaction. Shake the plate for 30 s.
	 7.	Monitor the fluorescence intensity at 490/520 nm (excitation/
emission) continuously for at least 30 min with the microplate 
reader. Record slopes.
3.1.4  Enzyme Stability
3.1.5  Stop Solution 
Selection
Kiira Ratia et al.

297
	 8.	Repeat steps 3–7 with 0.5 M acetic acid and 0.1 M NaOH as 
stop solutions in order to find out the best stop solution 
(see Note 8).
	 1.	Prepare 7  mL of 13.33  nM NS3/4A (1.33-fold of final 
concentration) enzyme solution in Enzyme Assay Buffer.
	 2.	Prepare 5 mL of 4 μM (fourfold of final concentration) substrate 
in Enzyme Assay Buffer.
	 3.	Distribute 30 μL of the enzyme solution into each of 192 wells 
located in columns 1–12 of a standard black, 384-well plate 
(positive control wells). Distribute 30  μL of Enzyme Assay 
Buffer into the remaining 192 wells of the plate (negative con-
trol wells) (see Note 9).
	 4.	Initiate the enzyme reaction by adding 10 μL of 4× substrate 
to all wells in the plate.
	 5.	Shake the plate for 30 s.
	 6.	Incubate the plate for an additional 5.5  min at room 
temperature.
	 7.	Add 10 μL of stop solution (10 % (w/v) SDS in this case) to all 
wells to quench the enzyme reaction. Shake the plate for 30 s 
and measure the fluorescence signal at 490/520 nm (excita-
tion/emission).
	 8.	Calculate the Z′-factor (see Note 10) with Eq. 2, based on the 
standard deviations of the positive (σp) and negative (σn) con-
trol wells and their respective means (μp, μn).
	
Z
p
n
p
n
¢
=
-
+
(
)
-
-factor
1
3 s
s
m
m
	
(2)
The screening portion of any hit discovery process is oftentimes 
the most rapid and straightforward, but the screening builds heavily 
on the assay optimization experiments outlined in Subheading 3.1. 
Going into the screening, the concentration of the substrate has 
been fine-tuned to fall below the KM value, but high enough to 
give a sufficient signal. The enzyme concentration has been 
adjusted to produce the highest possible signal for the initial rate 
period (linear range) for the given reaction time. The buffer com-
ponents have been optimized to stabilize the enzyme, maintain the 
required pH, and protect against nonspecific compound binding 
and reactivity. The stop/quench solution has been chosen to effec-
tively stop the reaction without having deleterious effects on the 
readout signal.
Although the screen outlined in this method measures the 
readout at a fixed time point once the reaction has been quenched, 
screens can also measure the slopes of the reaction progress curves. 
This latter strategy, using a continuous assay as opposed to an 
3.1.6  Z′-Factor Test
3.2  Automated 
Screening of 
Compound Libraries
Enzymatic Screening for Ligands

298
endpoint assay, can be time-consuming and requires more data 
processing. However, the slopes provide much more information 
and are a more accurate reflection of the enzyme’s activity in the 
presence of ligand. This is especially true if the screen is performed 
at lower wavelengths (<500  nm), where compounds will often 
interfere with the readout signal.
Though not a concern for the screen outlined in this method, 
the order of addition of each component in the assay assembly 
process, as well as the incubation time after each addition, should 
also be taken into consideration, as dictated by the enzyme mecha-
nism and desired mode of inhibition [1]. For example, some 
enzymes must bind a cofactor prior to compound addition and 
also require a prolonged incubation with compound (>30 min) 
before the reaction is initiated [10]. In one of the simplest scenarios, 
as outlined for the HCV NS3/4 protease assay screen, the enzyme 
solution is added first, compound is then added and incubated 
with the enzyme for approximately 5 min, and then substrate is 
added to initiate the reaction.
One of the most crucial aspects of the screen itself is the com-
pound concentration chosen. Ideally, a pre-screen should be per-
formed with a small subset of compounds at a given concentration. 
The resulting hit rate should then dictate how the concentration 
should be adjusted to achieve the desired hit rate for larger screens 
[11]. For small molecules, typical compound concentrations range 
from 10 to 50 μM in enzyme-based screens but can vary depending 
on the enzyme, the type of assay, and the nature of the compounds. 
Fragment libraries, composed of small molecules with molecular 
weights in the 150–300 kDa range, are often screened in the high 
μM to low mM range to compensate for the lower binding affinities 
expected with compound fragments.
Due to the inherent instrumental, biologic, and human-­
introduced errors associated with screening, it is becoming increas-
ingly commonplace to perform high-throughput screens in 
duplicate, if costs and materials permit. Replicates can be ­represented 
on the same plate or on separate plates, as is the case outlined below, 
and serve to dramatically reduce the number of false positives 
advancing to the hit validation stage [12]. The plate layout is also 
important to consider, since both positive and negative controls will 
be required on each plate. The screen outlined below reserves 32 
wells in the leftmost columns for negative controls and 32 wells in 
the rightmost columns for positive controls. Some assays, especially 
those that are cell-based, are particularly prone to systematic errors 
across the plate (e.g., edge effects), so controls should be positioned 
to best normalize for this variation [13].
	 1.	Program the liquid-handling robot to perform steps a–i for 
each duplicate set of 384-well assay plates (corresponding to 
one compound plate):
3.2.1  Automated 
Screening of Compound 
Libraries
Kiira Ratia et al.

299
(a)	 Pipet 30  μL of Enzyme Assay Buffer into all wells of 
columns 1 and 2 of each plate.
(b)	Pipet 30 μL of the prepared enzyme solution into all wells 
of columns 3–24 of each plate.
(c)	 Pin tool transfer 0.1 μL from the compound plate into 
each of the duplicate assay plates. After each transfer, 
wash the pin tool in DMSO, blot to remove excess DMSO, 
then wash in ethanol, blot again, and allow to air dry 
(see Note 11).
(d)	Allow the enzyme and the compound to incubate 10 min 
at room temperature.
(e)	 Pipet 10 μL of the substrate solution to all wells of each 
plate. Start timer at onset of substrate addition.
(f)	 Shake the set of plates for 30 s at 1,600 rpm.
(g)	When the timer reaches 6 min, pipet 10 μL of 10 % SDS to 
all wells of each plate.
(h)	Shake the set of plates for 30 s at 1,600 rpm.
(i)	 Measure the fluorescence intensity of each plate, using an 
excitation wavelength of 490 nm and an emission wave-
length of 520 nm (see Note 12).
	 2.	Calculate the Z′-factor for each plate (Eq. 2, Subheading 3.1.6) 
and the percent enzyme inhibition (%I) for each well, based on 
the mean values of the positive (μp) and negative (μn) control 
wells of the same plate:
	
%I
signal
=
´
-
-
-
æ
è
çç
ö
ø
÷÷
100
1
m
m
m
n
p
n
	
(3)
	 3.	Compare the %I of duplicate wells, and construct a replicate 
plot if desired (see Note 13). The %I values of both replicates 
should be taken into consideration during post-screen analysis.
There are several different strategies for classifying compounds as 
hits from a primary screen. Regardless of the strategy, a careful 
analysis of the data needs to be conducted prior to selecting cutoff 
criteria. The criteria can be limited to one method or ultimately 
encompass several strategies depending on what is most suitable 
for a particular dataset. Some popular hit identification methods 
include:
	 1.	Threshold cutoff. This is the simplest way of selecting primary 
hits. A threshold cutoff is assigned above which compounds 
will be selected for further analysis. For example, a cutoff of 
50 % inhibition indicates that all compounds displaying >50 % 
inhibition will be selected as primary hits. If the compounds 
were screened at 30  μM, then the primary hits will reflect 
3.3  Post-screen 
Analysis
3.3.1  Identification  
of Primary Hits
Enzymatic Screening for Ligands

300
­compounds theoretically displaying IC50 ≤ 30  μM. Another 
threshold cutoff method can be employed when only a limited 
number of hits can be pursued in secondary analyses. This 
strategy is to simply select, for example, the top 0.5 % of the 
compounds that display the highest inhibition.
	 2.	Statistical distribution of hits. This strategy looks at the statisti-
cal distribution pattern of the % inhibition of enzyme activity. 
Hits can then be selected as all compounds that display a % 
inhibition that is 2–3 standard deviations from the mean 
depending on how many hits can be pursued.
	 3.	Scaffold-based hit selection. Any screening library has structural 
redundancy. If ten compounds in the library represent a particu-
lar scaffold, and five of these are in the top 100 hits, then this 
represents an enrichment of this scaffold. However if only one of 
the ten compounds surfaces as a top hit, then it could very likely 
be a false positive. Computational algorithms are required to per-
form this analysis. Scaffolds that show up as being enriched in the 
top 1 % of inhibitors are typically pursued further.
Most active inhibitors will always be selected no matter which 
of the above selection methods are used. The challenge, however, 
is to identify the marginally active compounds that could lead 
towards the development of a potent lead. Additionally, potent 
compounds may assay as only marginally active in a screening set-
ting due to factors such as compound instability, solubility, decay 
due to repeated freeze-thaw cycles or robot errors (systematic or 
random). The goal is to establish hit selection strategies that do 
not overlook such compounds.
After primary hits are identified, a thorough evaluation is necessary 
to identify and triage potentially problematic compounds that are 
false positives. In the early stages, it is important to remember that 
the goal of hit validation studies is to identify compounds (true hits) 
that can be developed into leads if drug discovery is the end goal. 
The focus should be on the quality of the compounds and not on 
quantity or the number of hits obtained. The steps to identify false 
positives include:
	 1.	Removal of potentially reactive groups. Compounds with unde-
sirable functional groups need to be removed from further 
consideration. Pursuing such compounds in the early stages of 
drug discovery is a waste of time and resources since com-
pounds containing reactive groups are inherently nonspecific. 
Such compounds include, but are not limited to, azides, 
isonitriles, aldehydes, Michael acceptors, and isothiocyanates. 
If a reasonable number of hits are identified this can be done 
by visual inspection. In the case of a large number of hits, a 
computational filter needs to be employed. One such filtering 
3.3.2  Secondary Assays 
to Identify False Positives
Kiira Ratia et al.

301
approach is the Rapid Elimination of Swill (REOS) program 
developed at Vertex [14].
	 2.	Cluster analysis. In cases where a large number of primary hits 
cannot all be pursued in a secondary assay, clustering tech-
niques aid in the identification of compounds that are repre-
sentative of diverse scaffolds in the collection of primary hits. 
Clustering techniques are based on the assumption that struc-
turally similar compounds exhibit similar biological activity. 
The primary hits can be partitioned into various groups using 
a 2D similarity search such as the Tripos Selector module or 
the Tripos Benchware HTS Dataminer. Both tools share the 
same principles for clustering. The Tripos “selector” module 
generates clear groups by partitioning the compounds into 
various clusters, while the Benchware HTS Dataminer displays 
the proximity to other compounds. Using both tools one can 
select compounds from each cluster that are the most similar 
and most diverse for further investigation.
	 3.	Confirmation of inhibitory activity of primary hits using a 
continuous assay. In most cases, primary hits are identified by 
endpoint assays in the HTS format. The inhibitory activity of 
these primary hits need to be confirmed by repeating the assays 
in a continuous format. To pursue these assays, the primary 
hits can be used from the main library or purchased from ven-
dors. These assays follow the reaction rate as a function of time 
and will provide a more robust method of confirming the pri-
mary hits. Auto-fluorescent compounds and compounds that 
have a strong absorbance at the detection wavelength can easily 
be removed in this step if the baseline of the progress curve 
before addition of enzyme is significantly perturbed.
	 4.	Decouple enzyme assays. For coupled enzyme assays, it is impor-
tant to test the compounds with just the coupling enzyme sys-
tem. This needs to be done to confirm that the compound 
does not inhibit the coupling enzyme but just the enzyme 
under consideration.
	 5.	Identification of irreversible inhibitors. Most drug discovery 
projects ignore irreversible inhibitors as they tend to be non-
specific and/or toxic. Such inhibitors can be identified by incu-
bating the enzyme with the inhibitor at a concentration that is 
ten times the IC50 value. After incubating for an hour the enzyme-­
inhibitor sample can be subjected to mass spectrometry. Enzymes 
that have been covalently modified will be easily identified by the 
change in mass. Another technique is to dilute out the inhibitor 
by buffer exchange either by simple dialysis or by the use of spin 
columns. The enzyme activity test is then repeated with this 
enzyme. Covalently modified enzymes will still remain inactive, 
while non-covalent inhibitors get diluted out and become unbound 
from the enzyme, restoring the enzyme’s activity.
Enzymatic Screening for Ligands

302
Secondary assays rule out the majority of the false positives; 
however there are nonspecific inhibitors that tend to escape these 
steps. Tertiary assays are required to rule out such compounds and 
confirm the true positives.
	 1.	Determination of IC50 values to select the most active inhibitors 
(Dose–response curves). IC50 values should be determined using 
assay conditions similar to the primary screen but with differ-
ent concentrations of the inhibitors (for example from 0 to 
200  μM). Reaction progress should be monitored continu-
ously and the data can be fit to the Hill equation:
	
v
V
x
IC
x
n
n
n
i =
´
+
max
50
	
(4)
where yi is the % inhibition in the presence of the inhibitor, Vmax 
is the maximum % inhibition, x is the inhibitor concentration, 
and n is the Hill coefficient. Inhibitors with IC50 values <1 μM 
are the most promising inhibitors, but even those with higher 
IC50 values should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Dose–
response curves can easily identify nonspecific inhibitors and 
covalent modifiers. Such inhibitors are correlated with steep 
dose–response curves with Hill coefficients that are unreason-
ably high [15]. These inhibitors should be removed from fur-
ther consideration (see Note 14).
	 2.	Detailed kinetics. To investigate the binding mode of the most 
promising inhibitors, a steady-state kinetic analysis of inhibi-
tion needs to be performed. For these studies, the enzyme 
activity needs to be monitored as a function of substrate and 
inhibitor concentrations simultaneously. The data can be ana-
lyzed by using SigmaPlot’s Enzyme Kinetics software to deter-
mine the mode of inhibition (competitive, uncompetitive, 
non-­competitive, mixed type).
	 3.	Independent assay to confirm binding. It is advised, and oftentimes 
necessary, to confirm binding of the inhibitor by independent 
methods to ensure that the inhibition is not assay specific. 
Methods to confirm binding include isothermal titration calo-
rimetry (ITC), Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR), and thermal 
shift analysis (TSA), among others.
4  Notes
	 1.	The compounds in this method are supplied in 384-well plates 
with conical wells. Wells in columns 1, 2, 23, and 24 contain 
100  % DMSO. Wells in columns 3–22 contain compounds 
(10 mM in 100 % DMSO). Each plate contains 320 compounds 
and 64 control wells.
3.3.3  Tertiary Assays to 
Confirm True Positives
Kiira Ratia et al.

303
	 2.	Large quantities of Enzyme Assay Buffer without GSH, 
CHAPS, and BSA can be prepared, aliquoted, and stored at 
−20 °C. A 10 mg/mL stock of BSA dissolved in water can be 
stored at 4 °C for several months and can be added to the 
Enzyme Assay Buffer as required. Fresh solutions of GSH and 
CHAPS, however, should be prepared on a daily basis as 
needed.
	 3.	The FRET-based NS3/4A protease assay is well established, 
and two FRET substrates are commercially available, one with 
Edans/Dabcyl as the fluorophore/quencher pair (excitation: 
340 nm/emission: 490 nm) and the other with FAM/QXL 
(excitation: 490 nm/emission: 520 nm).
	 4.	The enzyme concentration should be optimized beforehand to 
yield a linear progress curve for at least 2–3 min at the highest 
substrate concentration.
	 5.	The enzyme reaction time can vary from minutes to hours, but 
it should be established well before the screen is to take place 
so that the programs controlling the automation of the screen 
can be adjusted and optimized.
	 6.	Enzyme stability varies with each concentration, and it is very 
important to examine the enzyme stability at its screening con-
centration as opposed to testing the stability of the higher con-
centration stock solutions.
	 7.	Automated HTS often requires that the prepared enzyme 
solution be stable for at least 2–3 h at room temperature. If the 
enzyme is not stable at room temperature, many liquid-­
handling robots are equipped with temperature-controlled 
carriers that can incubate solutions at lower temperatures.
	 8.	Choose a stop solution that generates the most stable signal 
over the span of 30 min.
	 9.	Oftentimes enzymes are screened without prior identification 
of known inhibitors. In these cases, 100 % enzyme inhibition 
(referred to as negative control wells in this protocol) is mim-
icked by excluding enzyme. In cases where inhibitors are 
known, it is preferable to include enzyme solution in all wells 
and add the known inhibitor to the negative control wells to 
achieve 100 % enzyme inhibition.
	10.	The Z′-factor, at minimum, should be 0.5, although a Z′-factor 
≥0.7 is preferred for enzyme-based screens.
	11.	Pin tool transfer of compound to the enzyme wells should 
include at least three up and down motions of the notched end 
of the pin tool through the meniscus of the well contents to 
ensure complete delivery of compound and a degree of mixing.
	12.	The strength of the microplate reader’s photomultiplier tube 
(PMT) signal, expressed as the gain in many cases, should be 
Enzymatic Screening for Ligands

304
calibrated for the assay under screening conditions. For positive 
control wells (uninhibited enzyme), the PMT should be tuned 
to report a signal that is ~80 % of the highest possible reading 
for the instrument.
	13.	A replicate plot visualizes the reproducibility of the screen. 
The percent inhibition of replicate #1 is plotted against the 
percent inhibition of replicate #2. The data should trend along 
a diagonal line, where x = y.
	14.	A true hit will display a reasonable dose–response curve. It needs 
to be kept in mind that many times issues with compound 
solubility lead to a wrong estimation of IC50 value based on a 
single data point. For example, the primary screen can indicate 
a 60 % inhibition at the screening concentration of 30 μM. 
However, the dose–response curve may indicate that the curve 
plateaus at 60  % inhibition, with IC50 < 1  μM. Compounds 
with poor solubility often produce curves that plateau well 
below 100 % inhibition, and the resulting IC50 values are usually 
artificial.
References
	 1.	Dove A (2007) High-throughput screening 
goes to school. Nat Methods 4:523–532
	 2.	Zheng CJ, Han LY, Yap CW et  al (2006) 
Therapeutic targets: progress of their explora-
tion and investigation of their characteristics. 
Pharmacol Rev 58:259–279
	 3.	Goddard JP, Reymond JL (2004) Enzyme 
assays for high-throughput screening. Curr 
Opin Biotechnol 15:314–322
	 4.	Taliani M, Bianchi E, Narjes F et al (1996) A 
continuous assay of hepatitis C virus protease 
based on resonance energy transfer depsipep-
tide substrates. Anal Biochem 240(1):60–67
	 5.	Copeland RA (2005) Evaluation of enzyme 
inhibitors in drug discovery. A guide for medic-
inal chemists and pharmacologists. Methods 
Biochem Anal 46:1–265
	 6.	Macarron R, Hertzberg RP (2011) Design and 
implementation of high throughput screening 
assays. Mol Biotechnol 3:270–285
	 7.	Johnston PA, Foster CA, Shun TY et al (2007) 
Development and implementation of a 384-­
well homogeneous fluorescence intensity 
high-­throughput screening assay to identify 
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-­1 
dual-specificity protein phosphatase inhibitors. 
Assay Drug Dev Technol 5:319–332
	 8.	Tierno MB, Johnston PA, Foster C et  al 
(2007) Development and optimization of 
high-­throughput in vitro protein phosphatase 
screening assays. Nat Protoc 2:1134–1144
	 9.	Feng BY, Shoichet BK (2006) A detergent-­
based assay for the detection of promiscuous 
inhibitors. Nat Protoc 1:550–553
	10.	Lu H, England K, am Ende C et  al (2009) 
Slow-onset inhibition of the FabI enoyl reduc-
tase from francisella tularensis: residence time 
and in vivo activity. ACS Chem Biol 4(3): 
221–231
	11.	Zhang JH, Chung TDY, Oldenburg KR 
(1999) A simple statistical parameter for use 
in evaluation and validation of high through-
put screening assays. J Biomol Screen 4(2): 
67–73
	12.	Wu Z, Liu D, Sui Y (2008) Quantitative assess-
ment of hit detection and confirmation in sin-
gle and duplicate high-throughput screenings. 
J Biomol Screen 13(2):159–167
	13.	Malo N, Hanley JA, Cerquozzi S et al (2006) 
Statistical practice in high-throughput screen-
ing data analysis. Nat Biotechnol 24(2): 
167–175
	14.	Walters WP, Stahl MT, Murcko MA (1998) 
Virtual screening: an overview. Drug Discovery 
Today 3(4):160–178
	15.	Walters WP, Namchuk M (2003) Designing 
screens: how to make your hits a hit. Nat Rev 
Drug Discov 2(4):259–266
Kiira Ratia et al.

305
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_22, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 22  
 Ligand Screening Using NMR 
 Benjamin  E.  Ramirez ,  Aleksandar  Antanasijevic , and  Michael  Caffrey 
 Abstract 
 NMR has proven to be an invaluable technique for identifying and characterizing ligand interactions with 
biomolecules. NMR-based detection of ligand binding to protein targets is described. Speciﬁ cally, the use 
of the WaterLOGSY NMR experiment to screen mixtures of compounds from a fragment library for bind-
ing to inﬂ uenza H5 hemagglutinin is detailed.  
 Key words   Screening  ,   Fragment libraries  ,  Hemagglutinin  ,   Inﬂ uenza  ,   WaterLOGSY  
1  Introduction 
 The study of protein–ligand interactions by NMR provides valu-
able information about protein function and regulation. 
Importantly, the advent of high ﬁ eld NMR spectrometers and 
cryogenic probes has enabled studies of protein–ligand interac-
tions at relatively low concentrations (nM to μM). Moreover, the 
availability of automated sample preparation and measurement 
makes ligand screening by NMR amenable to medium to high 
throughput screens. One recent strategy is to screen libraries of 
chemical fragments with the goal of linking or elaborating frag-
ments to obtain relatively high afﬁ nity ligands [ 1 ]. Together these 
developments have facilitated ligand screening by NMR with the 
goal of discovering and developing novel therapeutics. 
 There are two strategies for ligand screening by NMR: protein 
(or "target") -based and ligand-based. Protein-based studies have 
the potential to quickly identify binding as well as the binding site 
of a particular ligand. For example, Fesik and colleagues have 
screened compound libraries using spectral perturbations of the 
2D HSQC spectra of  13 C- or  15 N-labeled proteins [ 2 ]. However, 
an inherent obstacle in this method is that the protein NMR sig-
nals must be observable and the protein chemical shifts need to be 
assigned for characterization of the binding site. Consequently, the 
method is generally limited to studies of proteins with molecular 

306
weights less than ~50 kDa. In contrast, ligand-based methods 
observe the resonances of ligands that typically have relatively low 
molecular weights (i.e., <2,000 Da) and are in fast exchange 
between bound and free states. As a consequence, the molecular 
weight of the protein is not a limiting factor. Thus, it is possible to 
develop NMR experiments where the ligand signals are perturbed 
by virtue of the fact that they interact with a macromolecule. For 
example, Dalvit and colleagues have developed a ligand-based 
experiment termed WaterLOGSY [ 3 ]. As shown in Fig.  1 , in the 
WaterLOGSY experiment the  1 H of bound water molecules are 
selectively inverted, magnetization is allowed to transfer (via NOE) 
to the  1 H of the bound ligand, and the  1 H of the free ligand are 
observed. Importantly, WaterLOGSY exhibits outstanding sensi-
tivity with potential to decrease protein concentrations into the 
low nM range and ligand concentrations into the low μM range. 
However, the ligand-based techniques do not give direct informa-
tion about the ligand binding site on the protein, which must be 
obtained from site-speciﬁ c mutagenesis, escape mutagenesis, com-
petition studies using a ligand with a known site, or high resolution 
structural information in follow-up studies. Finally, ligand screen-
ing studies are often complemented by a number of follow-up NMR 
studies such as the determination of  K d by WaterLOGSY [ 3 ,  4 ]. 
Alternatively, one can utilize other ligand-based NMR experiments 
like saturation transfer difference (STD), to validate or  conﬁ rm hits 
obtained by WaterLOGSY or to study the orientation of the ligand 
[ 5 – 7 ]. Moreover, in certain circumstances it may be possible to 
 Fig. 1   Schematic representation of ligand-based NMR experiment. The  small spheres  and  octagons represent 
water and ligand molecules, respectively. The WaterLOGSY magnetization pathways after excitation of water 
 1 H are represented by  grey arrows . Magnetization transfers between free water and bound water to the ligand 
are distinguished by the sign and magnitude of the WaterLOGSY signal (color ﬁ gure online) 
 
Benjamin E. Ramirez et al.

307
characterize the structure of the bound ligand using the transfer 
NOESY method [ 8 ], or even to determine the structure of the 
protein–ligand complex by NMR [ 9 ]. In addition, protein–ligand 
interactions may be further studied by other biophysical techniques 
including ﬂ uorescence, calorimetry, and x-ray crystallography. In 
what follows, the experimental details of the WaterLOGSY NMR 
experiments to screen a fragment library of 352 compounds for 
binding to Inﬂ uenza hemagglutinin with the long-term goal of 
developing novel antivirals are described.
2  Materials 
 The experiments were performed in PBS buffer, which consists of 
20 mM KHPO 4 and 150 mM NaCl dissolved in double-distilled 
H 2 O and titrated to pH 7.2 with HCl ( see  Note 1 ). Deuterium 
oxide (99.9 %) is used for the lock signal.  
 The fragment library consists of 352 compounds from Zenobia 
Therapeutics, Inc. [ 10 ]. Each compound is dissolved in 100 % 
 d -DMSO to a ﬁ nal concentration of 200 mM in a 96-well format 
( see  Note 2 ).  
 In this study the protein target, inﬂ uenza H5 hemagglutinin (HA) 
[ 7 ], was obtained from BEI resources. The H5 HA stock solution 
was at 8 μM in PBS. The purity and the integrity of the protein 
were veriﬁ ed by SDS PAGE ( see  Note 3 ). 
3  Methods 
  1.  Add 1.25 μL of the compound stock solution to 442.5 μL of 
PBS in an microcentrifuge tube and repeat for compounds 
2–6 ( see  Note 4 ). Add 50 μL of 100 %  2 H 2 O to the mixture 
for the lock signal. This sample will serve as the reference and 
control sample with a ﬁ nal compound concentration of 
500 μM ( see  Note 5 ).  
  2.  Prepare a second sample as described in  Step 1 , starting with 
432.5 μL of PBS. Add 10 μL of the HA stock solution to 
obtain a ﬁ nal protein concentration of 160 nM ( see  Note 6 ). 
  3.    Sample 1, the reference/control sample, and Sample 2, which 
contains the protein target, are added to 7 inch, 5 mm OD NMR 
tubes using long-tip pipets (Wilmad-LabGlass) ( see  Note 7 ).  
  1.   All data were acquired on a Bruker 600 MHz DRX spectrom-
eter equipped with a 5 mm TXI cryoprobe possessing a single 
 z -axis pulsed ﬁ eld gradient ( see  Note 8 ) and automated 
NMRCase sample changer. Sample temperature was  maintained 
at 25 °C ( see  Note 9 ) for all experiments.  
2.1  NMR Buffers
2.2  Ligands
2.3  Protein
3.1  Sample 
Preparation
3.2  Data Acquisition 
and Analysis
Ligand Screening by NMR

308
  2.  After inserting the sample, lock the spectrometer on the  2 H sig-
nal, tune and match the  1 H channel, and then proceed to shim, 
either manually or using the gradient shimming function (Bruker 
subroutine gradshim). Next proceed to calibrate the  1 H 90° pulse 
by observing the null signal obtained with a 360° pulse (Bruker 
pulse program zg). One should also note the center frequency or 
position of the H 2 O signal in a simple 1D experiment.  
  3.   Acquire a 1D reference spectrum being careful to optimize all 
variables related to water suppression (Bruker pulse program 
zgesgp). In particular, one may need to adjust  1 H carrier posi-
tion, length or power of the shaped pulse, and possibly the 
pulsed ﬁ eld gradient strength ( see  Note 10 ). Aside from serv-
ing to conﬁ rm the contents of the sample, the 1D reference 
spectra also serve to assure that the spectrometer is working 
properly, that water suppression is sufﬁ cient, and that the pres-
ence of additives (e.g., protonated glycerol) or contaminants is 
tolerable ( see  Note 11 ). 
  4.  Acquire the WaterLOGSY spectrum for samples containing the 
protein target using the pulse sequence shown in Fig.  2 
( see  Note 12 ). For this experiment, the experimental parame-
ters are 2.4 s of relaxation delay followed by a 2 s NOE mixing 
 Fig. 2    Pulse sequence diagrams of the ( a ) double pulsed ﬁ eld gradient spin echo (dpfgse) 1D water suppression 
and ( b ) WaterLOGSY experiments. The  solid bars and  boxes represent hard 90° and 180° rf pulses, respectively. 
In ( a ), the shaped 180° water pulse has a  sinc shape  with a duration of 2.2 ms; gradient strengths are 12 
and15 G/cm, respectively. For the WaterLOGSY experiment (adapted from ref.  3 ), the  shaded shaped pulse is a 
10 ms iBurp2 pulse; the gradients surrounding this pulse have a strength of ~20 G/cm. The mixing period is 
usually 1–2 s in duration; during this period a weak bipolar gradient is applied to suppress radiation damping. 
Also, hard 180° pulses are applied in the mixing period to remove artifacts. For both experiments,  d1 , the relax-
ation delay is typically 2–3 s, and the total acquisition time is ~2 s. Phase cycling:  ϕ 1 =  x , x , y , y ;  ϕ 2 = − x ,− x ,− y ,− y ; 
 ϕ rec =  x ,− x ,− x , x ;  ϕ 3 =  x ,− y ,− x , y ;  ϕ 4  = − x ,− x ,− x ,− x , y , y , y , y , x , x , x , x ,− y ,− y ,− y ,− y ;  ϕ 5 =  x , x , x , x ,− y ,− y ,− y ,− y ,− x ,− x 
,− x ,− x , y , y , y , y ;  ϕ recWL =  x ,− x , x ,− x ,− x , x , x ,− x . All other rf pulses are applied with phase along the  x -axis. The pulse 
sequence program for the WaterLOGSY experiment is available from the authors by request  
 
Benjamin E. Ramirez et al.

309
time. The water magnetization is selectively inverted using an 
iBurp2 pulse of 10 ms ( see  Note 13 ). Typically 256 or 512 
scans are required for reasonable sensitivity resulting in a total 
experimental time of ~0.5–1 h ( see  Note 14 ).
  5.  Repeat  steps 2, 3 , and  4 for the reference/control samples.  
  6.   All data are processed using the NMRPipe software package 
[ 11 ] ( see  Note 15 ). Speciﬁ cally, for each WaterLOGSY dataset 
the following procedure was followed: 2× zero ﬁ lling, apply a 
line-broadening term of 5 Hz, Fourier transform, and phase 
the resulting spectra. To determine if any ligands bind, one 
should compare spectra of the control/reference spectrum to 
the spectrum obtained with the target in solution. This analysis 
can be done by visual comparison as shown in Fig.  3 or by 
subtraction of the spectra ( see  Note 16 ).
 Fig. 3   WaterLOGSY spectrum of ligand binding to inﬂ uenza H5 HA. The  upper spectrum  represents the WaterLOGSY 
of a mixture of six compounds in the  absence of H5 HA. The observed signals represent magnetization transfer 
from free water to free compounds. The  lower spectrum represents the WaterLOGSY of a mixture of six com-
pounds in the  presence of H5 HA. The resonances that change (i.e., become positive in the present phasing 
scheme) identify compounds that bind to the protein target as highlighted by  arrows . The negative signals denoted 
by  asterisks are due to protonated glycerol present in the protein stock solution  
 
Ligand Screening by NMR

310
4  Notes 
  1.  For NMR studies, the use of non-protonated buffers is highly 
desirable to minimize masking of the ligand signals and base-
line distortions. In cases where phosphate is problematic, one 
can use deuterated buffers, which are commercially available 
(e.g., acetic acid, Bis–TRIS, HEPES, MES, and Tris–HCl). In 
cases where additives are necessary to stabilize or solubilize the 
protein, many are commercially available in deuterated forms 
including dithiothreitol, DMSO, dodecylphosphorylcholine, 
EDTA, glycerol, methanol, mercaptoethanol, B-octylglucoside, 
and urea.  
  2.  The compounds are screened at a ﬁ nal concentration of 
500 μM, which represents a dilution of 1:400 and a ﬁ nal 
DMSO concentration of <2 % for a mixture of compounds. 
Consequently, we have found we can screen libraries dissolved 
in protonated DMSO without loss of too much information 
(i.e., the region near the DMSO signal at 2.50 ppm). In cases 
where the DMSO signal is problematic (or another additive 
possessing a single resonance), it may be suppressed by  selective 
saturation in a manner similar to the water signal. The com-
pounds exhibit differences in solubility and thus the actual ﬁ nal 
concentrations may not always be the same. Finally, other 
libraries consisting of "drug-like" compounds or natural prod-
ucts may be screened in the same manner.  
  3.   Generally one would like to work with relatively pure protein 
samples (i.e., >90 %). It is also desirable to demonstrate that 
the puriﬁ ed protein is biologically active (e.g., able to bind to 
a conformationally dependent monoclonal antibody or, in the 
case of enzymes, exhibit the expected activity). Nonetheless, 
impure fractions may be screened in cases where the  appropriate 
controls are performed to ensure speciﬁ city (e.g., a cell mem-
brane fraction in the presence and absence of an over- expressed 
protein, c.f. ref.  12 ).  
  4.   We have found that mixtures of 6 compounds are convenient 
based on ease of bookkeeping (the libraries are often in a 
96-well format with each row consisting of 12 compounds) 
and reasonable spectral resolution. Mixtures of higher num-
bers of compounds will clearly increase the throughput (e.g., 
12–24) but at the expense of less resolution for the signals of 
individual compounds. However, each compound typically 
exhibits multiple signals (i.e., reporters), which further reduces 
problems due to spectral overlap.  
  5.   We typically screen compounds at 500 μM, which we ﬁ nd to 
be a nice balance between sensitivity and afﬁ nity. Under these 
conditions, we detect binding to protein targets for ~1–5 % of 
Benjamin E. Ramirez et al.

311
the compounds. With respect to afﬁ nity, screening compounds 
at lower concentrations will lower the number of “hits,” while 
screening compounds at higher concentrations will increase 
the number of “hits.”  
  6.  We routinely screen at protein concentrations of 100 nM–
1 μM. Since, the ligands are present in excess, the observed 
NMR signal for protein–ligand interactions are proportional to 
the protein concentration (i.e., increasing protein concentration 
increases signal or decreases the necessary acquisition time).  
  7.  Library screens require a large number of NMR tubes. It is 
strongly advised that the same type of tube is used throughout 
and that the tubes are new or unused. We use 7 inch, 5 mm 
OD NMR tubes for our sample changer but prefer 4 inch, 
3 mm OD NMR tubes for routine work, which provides an 
optimal balance between sample volume, sensitivity, and cost. 
In cases where a 1.7 mm microprobe is available, one may use 
1.7 mm OD NMR tubes to reduce the volume even further. 
Importantly, the volume savings compared to a 5 mm are con-
siderable; for 3 mm and 1.7 mm diameter tubes the working 
volumes are 175 and 50 μL, respectively. Finally, note that dif-
ferent sized NMR tubes will require different sized sample 
spinners.  
  8.  The use of higher magnetic ﬁ elds leads to the expected increases 
in sensitivity and resolution, the latter of which may allow for 
the screening of mixtures containing more compounds or pro-
tein/compound mixtures at lower concentrations. The experi-
ments may be performed manually and thus a sample changer 
is not absolutely required.  
  9.  We typically run our samples at 25 °C; however, lower tem-
peratures may be of interest in some cases to stabilize the pro-
tein sample or increase the correlation time and NOE efﬁ ciency. 
With respect to the latter approach, one could alternatively add 
 d -glycerol to increase the correlation time of the protein.  
  10.   Once the setup is completed, it is advisable to acquire a 1D 
spectrum with high S/N with a suitable number of scans. Prior 
to this, one should carefully optimize the water suppression 
element. The standard dpfgse 1D pulse sequence provides 
excellent suppression of water. Parameters that may require 
adjustment include the  1 H rf carrier position, power level of 
shaped 180° pulse, gradient strength, and receiver gain. It is 
particularly important to have water suppression optimized for 
the WaterLOGSY because the resulting signals are relatively 
weak and could easily be obscured or diminished due to the 
dynamic range limits of the rf receiver. Since the pulse program 
for the WaterLOGSY experiment we used was derived from 
the zgesgp pulse program and hence uses the same element for 
Ligand Screening by NMR

312
water suppression, one can directly use the optimized param-
eters determined for the “reference” 1D spectrum for the 
WaterLOGSY experiments. If the same buffer and tube are uti-
lized, these parameters can normally be used for all future 
experiments as long as one veriﬁ es that the  1 H 90° pulse length 
is similar/identical.  
  11.   Another reason to record a 1D spectrum with high S/N is that 
it reveals the true contents of the sample tube at the start of the 
screen. In certain cases, especially when ligand mixtures are 
used, the actual amount of ligand in the sample tube can vary 
drastically from what one may have calculated or expected. 
This can be due to relatively trivial causes such as the formation 
of precipitates upon mixing or simply precipitation of the 
ligand stock solution or alternatively from pipetting errors. 
A 1D spectrum with high S/N will also likely reveal some sig-
nals from the protein target. While such signals are not terribly 
informative about the state of the target, they do provide some 
reassurance that the target is in solution and that the amount 
of target is consistent between samples.  
  12.   For ligand screening efforts, it is useful to include a positive 
control with a known ligand for optimization of experimental 
parameters (e.g., protein and ligand concentrations and experi-
mental times) and to ensure that the protein is functional and 
stabile.  
  13.   For WaterLOGSY screening, we have chosen a mixing time of 
2 s. Increasing the mixing time to 5 s will increase the signal, 
albeit with an increased experimental time. Note that mixing 
times of 2 s or less are most appropriate for measuring  K d or 
determining proximity to bound water in follow-up studies 
due to spin diffusion and rebinding events [ 13 ].  
  14.   The signal/noise of this experiment is proportional to the 
2 1/2 * NS (number of scans) and thus NS may be decreased to 
save time or increased to increase signal/noise.  
  15.   Many other NMR processing programs are also appropriate 
(e.g., TopSpin by Bruker).  
  16.  It is important to use the same phasing parameters as used in 
the 1D reference spectra to remove confusion about binding 
versus nonbinding. When phased properly, the non- 
exchangeable  1 H of nonbinding ligands will exhibit a negative 
signal and binding ligands will exhibit a positive signal 
(exchangeable  1 H will always exhibit a positive signal and thus 
are not useful probes of binding). Moreover, we ﬁ nd it useful to 
compare the WaterLOGSY spectra of the mixture in the pres-
ence and absence of protein to remove any ambiguities. Also, 
note that the difference of these spectra will increase the signal 
(i.e., sensitivity) of the resonances used to detect binding.  
Benjamin E. Ramirez et al.

313
 References 
  1.  Maurer T (2011) Advancing fragment binders 
to lead-like compounds using ligand and 
protein- based NMR spectroscopy. Methods 
Enzymol 493:469–485  
  2.  Shuker SB, Hajduk PJ, Meadows RP, Fesik SW 
(1996) Discovering high-afﬁ nity ligands for 
proteins: SAR by NMR. Science 274:
1531–1534  
  3.  Dalvit C, Fogliatto G, Stewart A, Veronesi M, 
Stockman B (2001) WaterLOGSY as a method 
for primary NMR screening: practical aspects 
and range of applicability. J Biomol NMR 
21:349–359 
  4.  Nomme J, Fanning AS, Caffrey M, Lye MF, 
Anderson JM, Lavie A (2011) The Src homol-
ogy 3 domain is required for junctional adhe-
sion molecule binding to the third PDZ 
domain of the scaffolding protein ZO-1. J Biol 
Chem 16:43352–43360  
  5.  Meyer B, Peters T (2003) NMR spectroscopy 
techniques for screening and identifying ligand 
binding to protein receptors. Angewantde 
Chemie 42:864–890  
  6.  Celigoy J, Ramirez B, Tao L, Rong L, Yan L, 
Feng YR, Quinnan GV, Broder CC, Caffrey M 
(2011) Probing the HIV gp120 envelope gly-
coprotein conformation by NMR. J Biol Chem 
286:23975–23981 
  7.  McCullough C, Wang M, Rong L, Caffrey M 
(2012) Characterization of inﬂ uenza hemag-
glutinin interactions with receptor by NMR. 
PLoS One 7:e33958  
  8.  Post CB (2003) Exchange-transferred NOE 
spectroscopy and bound ligand structure deter-
mination. Curr Opin Struct Biol 13:581–588  
  9.  Petros AM, Fesik SW (1994) Nuclear magnetic 
resonance methods for studying protein–ligand 
complexes. Methods Enzymol 239:717–739  
  10.  Nienaber V (2010) Start small and stay small. 
Minimizing attrition in the clinic with a focus 
on CNS therapeutics. Curr Top Med Chem 
9:1688–1704  
  11.  Delaglio F, Grzesiek S, Vuister GW, Zhu G, 
Pfeifer J, Bax A (1995) NMRPipe: a multidi-
mensional spectral processing system based on 
UNIX pipes. J Biomol NMR 6:277–293  
  12.  Assadi-Porter FM, Tonelli M, Maillet EL, 
Markley JL, Max M (2010) Interactions 
between the human sweet-sensing T1R2- 
T1R3 receptor and sweeteners detected by 
saturation transfer difference NMR spectros-
copy. Biochim Biophys Acta 1798:82–86  
  13.  Angulo J, Nieto PM (2011) STD-NMR: appli-
cation to transient interactions between bio-
molecules- a 
quantitative 
approach. 
Eur 
Biophys J 40:1357–1369  
Ligand Screening by NMR

315
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_23, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 23  
 Screening Ligands by X-ray Crystallography 
 Douglas  R.  Davies 
 Abstract 
 X-ray crystallography is an invaluable technique in structure-based drug discovery, including fragment- based 
drug discovery, because it is the only technique that can provide a complete three dimensional readout of 
the interaction between the small molecule and its macromolecular target. X-ray diffraction (XRD) tech-
niques can be employed as the sole method for conducting a screen of a fragment library, or it can be 
employed as the ﬁ nal technique in a screening campaign to conﬁ rm putative “hit” compounds identiﬁ ed 
by a variety of biochemical and/or biophysical screening techniques. Both approaches require an efﬁ cient 
technique to prepare dozens to hundreds of crystals for data collection, and a reproducible way to deliver 
ligands to the crystal. Here, a general method for screening cocktails of fragments is described. In cases 
where X-ray crystallography is employed as a method to verify putative hits, the cocktails of fragments 
described below would simply be replaced with single fragment solutions.  
 Key words   X-ray diffraction  ,   XRD  ,  Fragment-based drug design  ,  Crystal soaking  ,  Fragment 
screening  
1  Introduction 
 The ﬁ eld of Fragment Based Drug Discovery (FBDD) has advanced 
signiﬁ cantly in the past 15 years, arguably reaching maturity with the 
FDA approval of the ﬁ rst small molecule drug that had its genesis in 
fragment-based screening methods [ 1 ]. X-ray diffraction (XRD) 
methods are considered to be cumbersome by many in the FBDD 
arena, especially compared to high-throughput biochemical screens 
or surface plasmon resonance. However, there is little disagreement 
that an X-ray crystal structure represents a gold standard in frag-
ment screening in that it provides a direct three dimensional read-
out of the interaction of the fragment with the macromolecular 
target. XRD methods also beneﬁ t from high sensitivity (the abil-
ity to detect weak binders) and the ability of the researcher to 
work at high (>10 mM) concentrations of fragment [ 2 ]. 
 Furthermore, the tools and techniques of XRD continue to 
improve. Silicon pixel detectors such as the various PILATUS 
models (Detectris, Inc.) allow the collection of complete XRD data 

316
sets from synchrotron X-ray sources in less than 1 min [ 3 ]. Coupled 
with the added throughput afforded by screening of crystals soaked 
in cocktails of different fragments or ligands [ 4 – 6 ], more than a 
thousand fragments could, theoretically, be screened in a single 
day. Thus, XRD remains a relevant and useful method for fragment 
screening and can be deployed at the beginning of a fragment 
screen (screening cocktails of fragments) or at the end of a screen, as 
a method to verify structures of fragments identiﬁ ed as putative 
hits from other orthogonal screening methods. 
 The success of any XRD-based ligand screening campaign 
ultimately rests on the nature of the particular crystal system 
being employed in the study. Most critically, the crystal must have 
a ligand binding site not blocked by crystal lattice contacts or 
crystallant molecules and be amenable to the soaking of ligands, 
or else, the protein must be able to readily crystallize in the pres-
ence of ligands. The crystal must also, of course, retain favorable 
diffraction properties when ligands are bound. The process of 
selecting and reﬁ ning a crystallographic system for ligand screen-
ing is a complex topic, beyond the scope of the method under 
discussion. Many of the issues to be considered, including solvent 
channels, interference from solvent molecules, and pH have been 
discussed [ 7 ]. 
 For clarity and simplicity, the methods detailed below make the 
assumption that the crystal system being investigated is “soakable,” 
i.e., that small molecule ligands can permeate preformed crystals and 
fully or nearly fully occupy the ligand binding sites therein, provid-
ing the opportunity for the electron density of the bound ligand to 
be elucidated through XRD methods. The methods detailed below, 
reﬁ ned from over 8 years of practice at Emerald Bio, describe the 
handling of ligand solutions, the preparation of crystallization plates 
for soaking, the production and handling of crystals and strategies for 
data processing and structure interpretation.  
2  Materials 
  1.   Methanol: >99.8 % pure, anhydrous (Sigma-Aldrich) ( see  Note 1 ). 
  2.   Containers: borosilicate glass vials, 15 × 45 mm, ﬁ tted with 
plastic screw-cap lids with Teﬂ on™ inserts (VWR) ( see  Note 2 ).  
  3.   Repeating pipette capable of dispensing volumes as low as 
500 nl.  
  4.   Disposable pipette tips, 10–20 μl volume.  
  1.  Trays: SBS standard 96-well format sitting drop vapor diffusion 
plate; Compact 300 Crystallization Plates or similar (Rigaku 
Reagents).  
  2.  Pipettes able to handle 1 μl volume ( see  Note 3 ). 
2.1  Methanol 
Solutions of Ligands/
Fragments
2.2  Crystallization 
Tools and Components
Douglas R. Davies

317
  3.   Clear packing tape for sealing trays.  
  4.   Crystal mounting pins for cryo-crystallography such as 
CrystalCap HT (Hampton Research), or similar pin ﬁ tted with 
a mounting loop, e.g., LithoLoops (Molecular Dimensions).  
  5.   Cryo-crystallography pin storage: Pin vials (or similar, 
Hampton Research) for hand-mounting or SPINE format 
robotic pucks, or ALS-style robotic pucks.  
  6.   Liquid nitrogen, several liters.  
  7.  Safety equipment for handling liquid nitrogen (gloves, face 
shield, apron).  
  8.  Dewars for liquid nitrogen storage. Spearlab cryogenic foam 
dewars or stainless steel dewars (Hampton Research) combine 
safety and durability. For long-term storage and shipping, a 
dry- shipping dewar is required (Taylor Wharton Cryogenics).  
  9.   Crystallization solution for growth of the crystals to be 
investigated.  
3  Methods 
  1.   Mixtures of ligands for soaking crystals should be chosen to 
facilitate preliminary identiﬁ cation of the bound molecule by 
the shape of the electron density. Thus, mixtures should be 
chosen with maximum shape diversity in mind. Ideally, no 
ligands in the mixture will share the same scaffold, or at the 
very least, will be distinctly and uniquely modiﬁ ed versions of 
the same scaffold. Distinct compounds should have features 
that can be distinguished from one another even at low to 
moderate resolution (2.5–3.0 Å) ([ 8 ], for example).  
  2.   Prepare stock solutions at 50–100 mM concentration in neat 
methanol. Add the compound as dry powder to a tared boro-
silicate glass vial or plastic Eppendorf tube, calculate the 
amount of solvent necessary to achieve the desired solution, 
and then add the appropriate amount of anhydrous methanol 
directly to the tube.  
  3.   Mixtures are prepared by adding equal volumes of the high 
concentration methanol solutions to a new vial or tube. For 
fragment screening, mixing equal volumes of eight different 
50 mM stock solutions results in a cocktail where each compo-
nent is present at 6.25 mM.  
  1.  Deposit an aliquot of methanol solution of ligand or fragment 
cocktail onto the surface of the well or sitting drop chamber, 
and allow the solvent to evaporate, leaving a thin ﬁ lm of dry 
ligand. Adjusting the ratio of the volume of fragment solution 
deposited to the volume of the crystallant allows adjustment of 
3.1  Preparation 
of Fragment Mixtures
3.2  Preparation 
of Crystallization Trays
Crystallographic Ligand Screening

318
the ﬁ nal concentration of the fragments in the experiment. 
A typical experiment would use a 1 μl drop of fragment cocktail, 
evaporated, which would ultimately be overlaid with 1 μl of 
crystal stabilization solution for soaking. In such a case, the 
concentration in the fragment cocktail solution would be equal 
to its concentration in the soak ( see  Note 4 ). 
  2.  If cryoprotection of the crystals will be necessary prior to freez-
ing for data collection, conﬁ gure the 96-well trays such that 
each ligand or ligand mixture is plated in duplicate, with pairs 
of identical formulations arranged one above the other on 
adjacent rows of the plate. This conﬁ guration is convenient 
because it allows one to prepare the cryoprotectant in the 
well of the row directly below the drop containing the crystal 
( see  Note 5 ).  
  3.  Cover the sitting drop vapor diffusion plates with a 3-inch 
wide piece of clear packing tape to prevent dust or other 
contaminants from entering the wells (Duck Brand HD Clear 
Heavy Duty Packaging Tape, for example). Plates with dried 
ﬁ lms of ligands in the wells can be stored indeﬁ nitely at room 
temperature for later use. 
  1.  In a sitting drop vapor diffusion crystallization plate, set up 
multiple replicate drops using the protein target and an estab-
lished optimized crystallization solution. A minimum of one 
crystal per ligand or ligand mixture to be screened will be 
needed ( see  Note 6 ). 
  2.  To ﬁ nd a suitable stabilization solution for soaking, the ﬁ rst 
and most simple approach is to try the reservoir solution from 
the sitting drop vapor diffusion experiment that produced the 
crystal in the ﬁ rst place ( see  Note 7 ). Pipette 20–100 μl of the 
reservoir solution into a clean reservoir of an unused sitting 
drop vapor diffusion plate, and then transfer 1–2 μl of the 
reservoir solution into the drop well.  
  3.  Using a crystal mounting loop that is approximately the same 
size or slightly larger than the crystal of interest, scoop the 
crystal from its drop and place it in the soaking solution in the 
drop well.  
  4.  Seal the crystallization plate with clear packing tape and 
 incubate overnight to simulate typical soaking time ( see  Note 8 ).  
  5.  Harvest the crystal using a crystal mounting loop to transfer 
the crystal from the stabilization solution to a 1–2 μl drop of 
stabilization solution containing cryoprotectant (if neces-
sary), then immediately ﬂ ash-cool the crystal by plunging the 
pin and mounting loop into a vessel ﬁ lled with liquid nitrogen 
( see  Note 9 ).  
3.3  Preparation 
of Crystals and 
Validation of Soaking 
Techniques
Douglas R. Davies

319
  6.   Mount the crystal on an X-ray goniometer equipped with a 
cryostream, and test the crystal for diffraction quality. If the 
observed diffraction quality is comparable to that of a crystal 
harvested without soaking, then the stabilization solution is 
acceptable for soaking.  
  1.    Resuspend the ligand “ﬁ lm” on the bottom of the crystalliza-
tion plate wells in a suitable amount of soak solution. Use a 
clean pipette tip for each different drop to avoid 
cross-contamination.  
  2.   Using a crystal mounting loop, manually transfer 1–2 crystals 
to each drop. Be sure to clean your mounting loop or use dif-
ferent loops between transfers to avoid cross-contamination 
from ligands in neighboring drops.  
  3.   Seal the crystallization plate with clear packing tape and incu-
bate the plate overnight prior to harvesting ( see  Note 8 ). 
  4.  Place a drop of cryoprotectant solution over the dried ligand 
compound contained in a well, resuspend by pipetting up and 
down or allow several minutes to a few hours for fragments to 
dissolve and diffuse throughout the cryoprotectant. This step 
is important, because many fragments bind with afﬁ nities in 
the  K d ~1 mM–100 μM range, and compound in the cryopro-
tectant will prevent “back-soaking,” i.e., diffusion out of the 
crystal.  
  5.  Flash-cool the crystal by plunging directly into liquid nitrogen, 
transfer to a cryo-cooled goniometer for X-ray data collection.  
  1.   Collect a complete XRD data set for each soaked crystal. Care 
must be taken to achieve a complete dataset of good quality. 
A stringent set of guidelines for data quality can be found 
in ref. [ 9 ]. 
  2.   Reduce and scale the diffraction data using the data processing 
software of your choice. Solve the structure using molecular 
replacement methods and perform a few rounds of restrained 
reﬁ nement to lower the crystallographic R-factors and improve 
the electron density maps.  
  3.  View the electron density maps in a molecular modeling 
program such as Coot [ 10 ]. Coot has a convenient tool called 
“ﬁ nd unmodeled blobs” which allows the user to search any 
electron density map for large (multi-atom) peaks with no cor-
responding modeled atoms. By searching the  F o −  F c map at 3.0 
sigma, one can quickly ﬁ nd sites of potential ligand binding.  
  4.  Evaluate the shape of any signiﬁ cant electron density blobs 
that are discovered. If a mixture of fragments was used for 
soaking, critical evaluation of the observed electron density 
compared to the shape of the ligands must be undertaken 
( see  Note 10 ).  
3.4  Crystal Soaking 
and Harvesting
3.5  Data Collection, 
Structure Solution, 
and Interpretation
Crystallographic Ligand Screening

320
4  Notes 
  1.   Solvents other than methanol can be used. Methanol is preferable 
because, as a volatile solvent, it leaves no residue and cannot 
perturb crystallization or crystal stability as some solvents, such 
as DMSO, can. As discussed in Subheading  3 , volatile solvents 
allow the researcher to deposit fragments or ligands as a thin ﬁ lm 
on the surface of the wells of crystallization plates.  
  2.   Methanol’s convenience comes at a cost of needing to take 
extra precautions with liquid handling. Care must be taken to 
ensure that fragment stocks do not evaporate during handling 
or while in storage. Vials should not be left uncapped for any 
longer than necessary. If replicate experiments are planned, 
one way to minimize solvent loss is to use a repeating pipette, 
withdraw one aliquot from the stock solution, reseal the vial, 
then deposit drops in the replicate wells of crystallization 
plates. For storage, Teﬂ on inserts are much better than rub-
ber for containing methanol. Storage at −20 °C is essential to 
reduce evaporation. Eppendorf tubes are also suitable substi-
tutes for storing methanol at −20 °C, and, in fact, are better 
able to prevent evaporation than glass vials with Teﬂ on 
inserts, but are often avoided since glass vials are easier to label 
with barcode stickers, and are easier to open and close with 
gloved hands.  
  3.  When working with methanol solutions using repeating pipetters, 
it is important to work quickly to avoid evaporation of the 
volatile solvent. Some loss of volume may be difﬁ cult to avoid 
at this step. Depending on the quality of the pipette, dispensing 
of the last one or two drops may be problematic, so it is impor-
tant to plan accordingly.  
  4.   Care should be taken with the pipetting of methanol solutions 
into crystallization plates. Careless pipetting or a volumetric 
excess of methanol stock solution compared to the ﬁ nal volume 
of crystallant will result in the ﬁ lm of dried compound extend-
ing up the walls of the drop well of the crystallization tray. 
If the crystallant or soak solution does not cover or at least “wet” 
the entire ﬁ lm, the ligands cannot be completely dissolved into 
the crystallant and the ﬁ nal concentration of ligands in the 
crystal drop will be less than the value calculated. 
 Some fragments may be partially insoluble in the crystalli-
zation soak buffer, and the ﬁ lm of dried compound will not 
appear to go into solution but remain as solid compound at the 
bottom of the well. In general this is considered to be acceptable, 
as the soak solution will have a saturating amount of fragment 
in solution and any poorly soluble fragments that bind the target 
may still be visualized due to equilibrium effects.  
Douglas R. Davies

321
  5.   Including ligands in the cryoprotectant solution is a sensible 
precaution for any effort to capture small molecule complexes 
with proteins. If the ligand is present in the cryoprotectant 
solution at the same concentration as in the drop containing 
the crystal, then equilibrium effects will prevent “back- 
soaking” or loss of the bound small molecule due to diffusion 
out of the crystal. This is particularly important for experi-
ments involving weakly binding fragments, where dissociation 
constants can be on the order of 1 mM or less.  
  6.   A robust crystal system can produce dozens or even hundreds 
of crystals per plate. In very favorable cases, multiple crystal 
structures of different protein–small molecule complexes can 
be determined from crystals harvested from a crystallization 
drop with a volume of less than 1 μl [ 11 ].  
  7.   In a vapor diffusion crystallization experiment, a protein solu-
tion (typically 10–20 mM buffer plus 50–500 mM NaCl, plus 
1–2 mM DTT or TCEP) is mixed with the crystallization solu-
tion (typically 100 mM buffer plus a high concentration of a 
precipitant like a salt or PEG), usually in a 1:1 ratio. The drop 
containing protein is in close proximity to a reservoir of ~50–
100 times the volume of the crystallization solution. Over 
time, water diffuses from the drop until it reaches equilibrium 
with the crystallization solution. Thus, the volume of the drop 
tends to decrease, while the concentration of all the solutes 
increases. At equilibrium, the drop contains the same solutes as 
the reservoir solution, but at slightly lower concentrations. 
The drop also contains all the solutes of the protein buffer, but 
at higher concentrations than in the original protein sample. 
The effect of moving the crystal to a solution consisting of the 
reservoir solution only is to increase the concentrations of pre-
cipitants around the crystal slightly and to remove the solutes 
from the original protein buffer. 
 Such a change in crystal environment is tolerated by most 
protein crystals. In cases where the original protein solution 
contained high concentrations of salt, for example, it may be 
necessary to supplement the stabilization solution with the 
same salt, to avoid osmotic shock to the crystal upon transfer. 
Other variations on the stabilization buffer may include 
increasing the concentrations of the precipitants or including 
cryoprotectant in the stabilization/soaking buffer [ 12 ].  
  8.  Small molecules may be soaked into protein crystals on time 
scales ranging from a few seconds to several hours [ 13 ]. Due 
to this variability, overnight soaks (approximately 16–24 h) are 
preferred. However, it should be noted that in cases where 
binding of a ligand requires displacement of a tightly bound 
water molecule, several days or weeks can be necessary to 
achieve full occupancy of ligands in the crystal [ 14 ]. 
Crystallographic Ligand Screening

322
  9.   A receptacle for the pin should already be submerged in the 
nitrogen (such as a puck or vial). Successful ﬂ ash-cooling is 
aided by the fastest possible transition from room temperature 
to liquid nitrogen temperature. Because a still vessel of liquid 
nitrogen develops a thin layer of super-cooled gas just above its 
surface, slow dipping of the pin through this layer can cause 
suboptimal ﬂ ash-cooling. The researcher can remove the cold 
air layer through the use of a fan system or simply by blowing 
gently toward the nitrogen a second before plunging the pin 
into it.  
  10.   In cases where the shape of the electron density feature is 
ambiguous, it may be necessary to perform “deconvolution” 
experiments where individual candidate fragments are soaked 
into a crystal and new datasets are solved. Another consider-
ation to keep in mind is that components of the crystallization 
solution can contribute to the electron density. Buffer, cryo-
protectants, PEG, and other buffer components can produce 
“blobs” in the electron density map that may be mistaken for 
bound fragments. If an electron density feature appears in mul-
tiple structures, regardless of the fragments in the soaks, it is 
likely a solvent contribution. Phosphate and sulfate can be par-
ticularly problematic solvent components, especially in nucleic 
acid or nucleotide-binding proteins. These tetrahedral anions 
can occupy phosphate binding sites that might otherwise be 
targets for acidic fragments. Since sulfate and phosphate are 
generally present in crystallization solutions at concentrations 
greater than 100 mM, it is highly unlikely that even a tight-
binding fragment could out-compete them.  
 References 
  1.  Tsai J, Lee JT, Wang W et al (2008) Discovery 
of a selective inhibitor of oncogenic B-Raf 
kinase with potent antimelanoma activity. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:3041–3046  
  2.  Davies TG, Tickle IJ (2012) Fragment screen-
ing by X-ray crystallography. Top Curr Chem 
317:33–59 
  3.  Broennimann C, Eikenberry EF, Henrich B 
et al (2006) The PILATUS 1 M detector. J 
Synchrotron Radiat 13(Pt 2):120–130  
  4.  Verlinde CLMJ, Kim H, Bernstein BE et al 
(1997) Antitrypanosomiasis drug development 
based on structures of glycolytic enzymes. In: 
Veerapandian P (ed) Structure-based drug 
design. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp 365–394  
  5.  Bosch J, Robien MA, Mehlin C et al (2006) 
Using fragment cocktail crystallography to 
assist inhibitor design of Trypanosoma brucei 
nucleoside 2-deoxyribosyltransferase. J Med 
Chem 49:5939–5946  
  6.  Nienaber VL, Greer J (2000) Discovering 
novel ligands for macromolecules using X-ray 
crystallographic screening. Nat Biotechnol 
18:1105–1108  
  7.  Davies DR, Begley DW, Hartley RC et al 
(2011) Predicting the success of fragment 
screening by X-ray crystallography. Methods 
Enzymol 493:91–114  
  8.  Davies DR, Mamat B, Magnusson OT et al 
(2009) Discovery of leukotriene A4 hydrolase 
inhibitors using metabolomics biased fragment 
crystallography. 
J 
Med 
Chem 
52(15):
4694–4715  
  9.  CSGID/SSGCID (2008) X-ray crystal struc-
ture metrics for infectious disease.   http://www.
csgid.org/csgid/pages/sg_metrics   
Douglas R. Davies

323
  10.  Emsley P, Cowtan K (2004) Coot: model- 
building tools for molecular graphics. Acta 
Crystallogr Sect D Biol Crystallogr 60:
2126–2132  
  11.  Davies DR, Staker BL, Abendroth JA et al 
(2011) 
An 
ensemble 
of 
structures 
of 
Burkholderia 
pseudomallei 
2,3-bisphospho-
glycerate- dependent phosphoglycerate mutase. 
Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst 
Commun 67(Pt 9):1044–1050  
  12.  Hassell AM, An G, Bledsoe RK et al (2007) 
Crystallization of protein-ligand complexes. 
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 63(Pt 1):
72–79  
  13.  Geremia S, Campagnolo M, Demitri N et al 
(2006) Simulation of diffusion time of small 
molecules 
in 
protein 
crystals. 
Structure 
14(3):393–400  
  14.  Begley DW, Hartley RC, Davies DR et al 
(2011) Leveraging structure determination 
with fragment screening for infectious disease 
drug 
targets: 
MECP 
synthase 
from 
Burkholderia pseudomallei. J Struct Funct 
Genomics 12(2):63–76  
Crystallographic Ligand Screening

325
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2_24, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 Chapter 24  
 Case Study—Structural Genomics and Human 
Protein Kinases 
 Jonathan  M.  Elkins 
 Abstract 
 A brief summary is made of some of the methods in structural genomics and drug discovery as they apply 
to protein kinases.  
 Key words    Protein kinase  ,   Kinase inhibitors  ,   Crystallization  ,   Dephosphorylation  ,   Differential scan-
ning ﬂ uorimetry  
1  Introduction 
 Protein kinases are a large family of proteins of which many mem-
bers are involved in fundamental cellular processes. As such, many 
protein kinases are seen as potential targets for drug discovery. 
Determination of their structures is helpful in the understanding of 
their function and for the purposes of inhibitor design and improve-
ment. The aim of this chapter is to provide a brief discussion of 
some methods in structural genomics and drug discovery as they 
apply to protein kinases, and not to cover the function, mechanism 
and structural biology of protein kinases for which there are many 
excellent reviews in the scientiﬁ c literature. 
 First, a brief introduction to a few points relevant for the 
discussion of methods that follows, for those not familiar with this 
protein family: 
 There are just over 500 protein kinases in the human genome, 
making them one of the largest protein families. The majority 
catalyze the transfer of a phosphate from ATP to a serine, threo-
nine, or tyrosine residue on a protein (Fig.  1a ). Many protein 
kinases will also auto-phosphorylate, either as a means of activation 
or incidentally. Auto-phosphorylation sometimes occurs only after 
external activation of the kinase (e.g., through phosphorylation by 
another protein kinase or binding of an activating protein) or may 

326
be an intrinsic capability of a particular kinase. Intrinsic auto- 
phosphorylation activity often results in a phosphorylated protein 
kinase when it is over-expressed in a heterologous organism such 
as bacteria or insect cells. This phosphorylation can result in a 
heterogeneous population of the desired protein. Furthermore, 
auto- phosphorylation can sometimes be accompanied by substan-
tial changes in the structure. This is especially true when phos-
phorylation is part of the activation mechanism, for example, when 
it promotes a more ordered activation loop [ 1 ]. So, as well as 
heterogeneity of surface shape and charge, auto-phosphorylation 
can result in heterogeneity of protein conformation. For an intro-
duction to kinase activation and conformational changes, the 
review by Huse and Kuriyan is recommended [ 1 ].
 Protein kinases have a conserved core kinase domain that con-
sists of two lobes, formed by the N-terminal and C-terminal parts 
of the domain, connected by a single polypeptide linker (the 
“hinge” region). The co-substrate ATP is bound between the 
N-terminal and C-terminal lobes, and protein substrates are bound 
adjacent to the γ-phosphate of the ATP (Fig.  1b ). In the absence 
of ATP or an inhibitor binding between the N-terminal and 
C-terminal lobes, the kinase domain is often much more ﬂ exible 
and the two lobes are more able to move relative to each other. 
However, as will be discussed below, in addition to the conserved 
two-lobed core, many kinases have additional ﬂ anking sequence 
regions or even whole domains which are essential for activity, cor-
rect folding or for solubility, in addition to other functions these 
regions or domains may have. 
 Fig. 1   ( a ) The reaction catalyzed by protein kinases. ( b ) Binding of ATP and 
substrate to a protein kinase. Insulin receptor kinase is used for this example, 
with PDB IDs 1IRK [ 30 ] and 1IR3 [ 31 ] for apo and holo structures, respectively. 
ATP is in  magenta and the peptide in  yellow 
 
Jonathan M. Elkins

327
 The rate at which human protein kinase structures are being 
determined has increased greatly in recent years (Fig.  2a ) as has 
been the case for protein structures in general. This increase is 
largely due to improvements in available equipment and method-
ologies. The systematic application of these methodologies in 
structural genomics centers has made a particular impact on the 
rate that new structures are being determined. Some of the meth-
odologies employed at the Structural Genomics Consortium 
(SGC) have been described in recent publications [ 2 – 4 ]. Particular 
reasons for success are the parallel generation of expression con-
structs, and parallel expression testing and puriﬁ cation methods 
that can be performed on a small scale.
1.1  Kinases, 
Structural Genomics, 
and Drug Design
 Fig. 2   Progress in determining the structures of human protein kinases. ( a ) Progress of structure determination 
of novel structures, categorized by the source of the deposited structure in the Protein Data Bank. As of March 
2013, a total number of human protein kinase structures that have been determined is 196. “Structural 
Genomics” includes structures from all worldwide structural genomics efforts, of which the majority were 
determined by the Structural Genomics Consortium. This graph does not include structures of kinases from 
closely related organisms, such as the structure of mouse PKA released in the PDB in 1992 (PDB ID 1CPK). 
( b ) Number of individual deposited structures (e.g., with different inhibitors) in the PDB for each kinase. Here, 
all structures that have >95 % sequence identity to the human kinase are considered. ( c ) Progress in the 
development of kinase inhibitor drugs. ( d ) Total number of protein kinase structures in the PDB over time. All 
structures that have >95 % sequence identity to a human protein kinase are considered  
 
Protein Kinase Example

328
 Considering all structures that have >95 % sequence identity to 
a human protein kinase, there are now over 2,000 kinase structures 
in the PDB and the rate of deposition is increasing (Fig.  2d ). There 
are, of course, many more that have been determined as part of 
drug discovery efforts but not deposited. The structures are dis-
tributed unevenly across the kinase family, with a small number of 
popular kinases accounting for the majority of structures (Fig.  2b ). 
This distribution is similar to that of patents and publications on 
kinases [ 5 ], and all of these distributions feature a similar set of 
popular targets which account for the majority of past activity. 
There have recently been several kinase inhibitors approved for use 
as drugs (Fig.  2c ). The efﬁ cient production of new structures and 
reagents (expression systems and chemical probes) that is enabled 
by high-throughput methodologies will hopefully facilitate valida-
tion of additional clinical targets, which will then aid the expansion 
of drug discovery efforts on such new targets.  
2  Methods 
 The more than 500 human protein kinases cluster into a number 
of large families [ 6 ]. It is essential when designing truncation 
constructs to consider in which family and subfamily an individual 
kinase belongs, as there is considerable variation in domain bound-
aries between the different subfamilies. For example, the AGC 
kinase family all have an extended ﬂ exible C-terminus which wraps 
back onto the N-terminal lobe of the kinase domain (Fig.  3a, b ). 
Within this AGC family, the subfamily containing MRCKα, 
MRCKβ, MRCKγ, ROCK1, ROCK2, and DMPK all have, in 
addition to the extended C-terminus, an N-terminal extension of 
three α-helices that combines with the C-terminus to form a dimer-
ization motif (Fig.  3c ) (for example,  see refs.  7 – 9 ).
 As well as a kinase domain, many kinases contain one or more 
additional domains. It is sometimes important to consider includ-
ing these additional domains when designing expression con-
structs. Some subfamilies have additional domains which are 
integral to the kinase domain structure. For example, the G-protein- 
coupled receptor kinases have integral regulator of G-protein sig-
nalling (RGS) domains (e.g., GPRK6 [ 10 ], Fig.  3d ) and in two 
cases PH domains as well (e.g., GRK2 [ 11 ], Fig.  3e ). In addition 
to kinases with integral domains there are others having domains 
that, although not integral to the kinase domain, bind the kinase 
domain under certain conditions. For example, the Src and Abl 
tyrosine kinases have an N-terminal SH3 domain in addition to the 
SH2-kinase domains [ 12 ], or Protein Kinase G (PKG) which has 
N-terminal cGMP binding domains. In both of these  examples, 
the additional domains bind the kinase domain in an auto- 
inhibitory mechanism. As well as including these additional 
2.1  Construct Design
Jonathan M. Elkins

329
domains to obtain a biologically relevant structure, in some cases it 
is necessary to include them in order to obtain soluble overexpres-
sion of the desired protein. Furthermore, to obtain a structure of 
one of these multi-domain arrangements, it may be necessary to 
have the protein in the correct phosphorylation state. 
 For some other kinases, it is necessary to include additional 
domains to get soluble overexpression. For example, the inhibitor 
of κB (IκB) kinase (IKK) family of four protein kinases each have 
an N-terminal kinase domain followed by a ubiquitin-like domain 
and a scaffold/dimerization domain and, to get soluble overex-
pression, it is necessary to include some or all of these additional 
 Fig. 3   Some example protein kinase structures to show variation in domains and phosphorylation states. 
The N-terminal lobe of each kinase is shown as a  light green surface , and the C-terminal lobe as a  dark blue 
surface . ( a ) Protein kinase C theta (PKCθ) with the activation loop in  yellow , the C-terminal tail in  red , and 
phosphorylated residues (or a point mutation on the activation loop to glutamate to mimic a phosphorylated 
residue) shown as  spheres . The phosphorylations are important for the loops in  red  or  yellow to form ordered 
structures. ( b ) Protein kinase C iota (PKCι) from two angles, colored as ( a ) with phosphorylated residues shown 
as  spheres . ( c ) Dystrophia myotonica-protein kinase (DMPK) with the C-terminal tail in  red and N-terminal 
dimerization motif in  yellow . ( d ) G protein-coupled receptor kinase 6 (GRK6) with the C-terminal tail in  red and 
N-terminal RGS domain in  yellow . ( e ) G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2) with the C-terminal tail in  red , 
N-terminal RGS domain in  yellow , and PH domain in  magenta . ( f ) Dual-speciﬁ city tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation 
regulated kinase 2 (DYRK2) with N-terminal DH/NAPA region in  magenta . ( g ) Calcium/calmodulin-dependent 
protein kinase II gamma (CAMK2γ) with C-terminal auto-inhibitory helix in  yellow 
 
Protein Kinase Example

330
domains, as seen in the structures of the kinases IKKβ and TBK1 
[ 13 ,  14 ]. Some subfamilies, while not having such additional 
domains, have small regions adjacent to the kinase domain that are 
important for the folding and stability (and function) of the kinase. 
An example is the N-terminal DH/NAPA regions of DYRK kinases 
[ 15 ] (Fig.  3f ). Others exert a considerable stabilizing effect, such 
as the C-terminal auto-inhibitory helix of calcium/calmodulin- 
dependent kinase II [ 16 ] (Fig.  3g ). 
 Despite the total number of human protein kinase structures 
that have now been determined (approaching 200) the diversity of 
the kinase family means there are still those for which a BLAST 
search of the PDB does not yield a related structure with boundaries 
that are well enough deﬁ ned for the purposes of designing expres-
sion constructs. The pGenThreader server has been found [ 17 ] to 
give good results in most cases. The method used (matching of 
predicted secondary structure to existing structures) is more sensi-
tive in cases of low homology and has the additional advantage of 
identifying, in most cases, all of the secondary structure elements 
that would likely be found in an ordered protein structure. The list 
of PDB matches produced by a pGenThreader search can be fur-
ther ﬁ ltered, if necessary, by considering only those matches to a 
protein kinase that is from a similar region of the phylogenetic tree. 
This helps to ensure that the appropriate additional domains, or 
protein regions, are included in the PDB template that will be used 
for construct design. 
 Some protein kinases exist as complexes with regulatory pro-
teins and to get soluble protein expression it may be necessary, or 
beneﬁ cial, to co-express the proteins. For example, the recently 
published structure of CDC7 was obtained by co-expression of 
CDC7 and its effector protein DBF4 [ 18 ]. The structure of CDC7 
also provides an example of a case where more serious protein 
engineering was necessary in order to obtain success in crystalliza-
tion. CDC7 has a long activation loop and omitting a segment of 
this ﬂ exible loop by a splice truncation was successful in crystalliza-
tion. Another example of successful co-expression is the use of the 
Hsp90 co-chaperone CDC37 to produce tyrosine kinases such as 
RAF1 [ 19 ] or BRAF [ 20 ]. Still another is the use of phosphatase 
co-expression to prevent auto-phosphorylation, as discussed below. 
 In the SGC, after taking into account the above factors, the 
following general approach to construct design has been taken:
  1.   Design and test expression for an initial set of 10–30 trunca-
tion constructs, usually in  E. coli . More constructs should be 
designed for targets which are expected to be more difﬁ cult. 
It has been observed that the ratio of soluble to insoluble con-
structs is less than 1 in 30 for many kinases and so it is  sometimes 
important to test an even larger number of constructs. At SGC 
Oxford, the average number of constructs made per kinase 
Jonathan M. Elkins

331
structure determined is 32. The number is lower for older 
structures and much higher for more recent structures or 
structures yet to be determined.  
  2.   If unsuccessful, design additional constructs, again usually in 
 E. coli , but often with the puriﬁ cation tag on the other termini, 
often with much longer N- or C-termini, and, sometimes with 
alternate puriﬁ cation tags. In some cases it has been observed 
that it is necessary to have a longer N-terminal region in order 
to get soluble expression.  
  3.   If still unsuccessful, again design additional constructs, usually 
for insect cells, and again sometimes with other types of puriﬁ -
cation tag.  
  4.  Once soluble constructs are identiﬁ ed, attempts are made to 
purify the protein from them. At this stage issues with protein 
precipitation, aggregation, or problematic auto- phosphorylation 
may be encountered. If so, then the ﬁ rst step is usually to design 
still more constructs. Often a new construct solves these 
problems.  
 Soluble and well-behaved proteins are used for inhibitor 
screening and crystallization. If crystallization is unsuccessful then 
once again, new constructs are generated. It has proven impossible 
to rationalize why particular constructs are successful in crystalliza-
tion. Sometimes crystals only appeared with constructs containing 
extended N-terminal or C-terminal regions, even though those 
regions were disordered in the resulting structures. There is also a 
wide variation in crystallization success between kinases. For some 
kinases many constructs have generated crystals, while for others 
only a single construct has ever been successful.  
 Phosphorylation is the key feature of protein kinases that requires 
speciﬁ c attention during expression and puriﬁ cation. 
 During expression, phosphorylation can sometimes prevent 
formation of correctly folded protein. When using  E. coli as a host, 
performing a co-expression with phosphatase may solve the prob-
lem. Commonly the nonspeciﬁ c bacteriophage λ-phosphatase is 
used, but for some tyrosine kinases the  Yersinia pestis YopH phos-
phatase has been successful [ 21 ]. The result is usually a homoge-
nous non-phosphorylated protein, although in some cases speciﬁ c 
phosphorylations are not removed. When using insect cells, 
however, phosphatase co-expression is problematic due to 
unwanted effects on endogenous proteins causing lack of protein 
over- expression [ 22 ]. A reliable method for preventing unwanted 
auto- phosphorylation when expressing proteins in insect cells is 
still unavailable. 
 If a kinase can be expressed without phosphatase co- expression, 
then (if it does auto-phosphorylate) it is often expressed as a 
2.2  Protein 
Expression and 
Puriﬁ cation
Protein Kinase Example

332
mixture of different phosphorylation states. This may not be a 
problem, and many kinases have crystallized from such heteroge-
neous populations. If crystals are not forthcoming then there 
are three main choices: (1) Co-express the kinase with phosphatase, 
as above. (2) De-phosphorylate the puriﬁ ed kinase using a phos-
phatase in vitro. (3) Separate the different phosphorylation states 
(this can sometimes be accomplished on a high resolution ion 
exchange chromatography column). 
 In 
vitro 
dephosphorylation 
can 
be 
attempted 
with 
λ-phosphatase or alkaline phosphatase. Although in vitro 
λ-phosphatase treatment may not remove all phosphorylations [ 23 ], 
the phosphorylations that are removed are more likely to be those 
that are surface-exposed. Removal of surface-exposed phosphory-
lations, especially if they are not stoichiometric, is likely to have a 
considerable effect on crystal formation, even if other phosphory-
lations are not removed. This phosphatase treatment can be conve-
niently performed directly after an initial afﬁ nity chromatography 
step and is compatible with simultaneous protease digestion of a 
puriﬁ cation tag if that is required. 
 For some kinases, lack of phosphorylation may substantially 
reduce the chances of crystallization, or if crystallization is success-
ful, result in a structure in which regulatory regions are disordered. 
Many kinases have one or two phosphorylation sites on their acti-
vation loop, which promote ordering of this loop. Some kinases 
have additional phosphorylation sites which are important for form-
ing an ordered structure; for example, as mentioned above, the AGC 
kinase domains have a long C-terminal tail which binds back onto 
the N-terminal lobe of the kinase domain. For the majority of AGC 
kinases, phosphorylation at one, two, or three sites on this C-tail is 
required for binding of the C-tail to the N-lobe. The structure of 
Protein Kinase C iota (PKCi) was obtained from protein phos-
phorylated on the activation loop and at one site on the C-tail 
(the turn motif), while at another site on the C-tail where most 
AGC kinases have a phosphorylation site (the hydrophobic motif) 
PKCi has a naturally occurring phosphorylated- residue-mimicking 
glutamate [ 24 ] (Fig.  3b ). 
 Since in vitro auto-phosphorylation will sometimes result in 
fewer phosphorylations than occur during protein expression [ 23 ], 
phosphatase co-expression followed by in vitro auto- phosphorylation 
is a method that can be used for the generation of protein with 
the desired auto-phosphorylation sites, but without additional 
phosphorylations that may be introduced during translation.  
 To aid crystallization, it is often helpful to add either a non- 
hydrolysable ATP analogue or an inhibitor. Sometimes it is also 
helpful to add inhibitors to aid protein stability or solubility. 
With protein kinases, the Differential Scanning Fluorimetry (DSF) 
method, or Tm shift (ΔTm) is usually effective for identifying 
2.3  Inhibitor 
Screening
Jonathan M. Elkins

333
suitable inhibitors. Due to the ﬂ exibility of most protein kinases in 
the absence of an inhibitor, binding usually provides signiﬁ cant 
thermal stabilization. Methods for the use of DSF for kinase inhibi-
tor screening have been published [ 25 ]. DSF has been shown to 
have reasonable correlation with  K d for inhibitor binding [ 25 – 27 ]. 
 A large ΔTm has been found to be a good indicator of the suc-
cess of a particular inhibitor in crystallization (where a kinase is 
amenable to crystallization with different inhibitors). Only in a few 
cases has DSF been difﬁ cult to apply to kinases. One example is the 
MRCK/DMPK family where multiple unfolding transitions can 
occur, probably due to separate unfolding of the dimerization 
regions. The analysis is further complicated because some inhibi-
tors bind to this dimerization region instead of, or as well as, the 
ATP binding site. DSF is, however, not equally useful for all 
kinases. Some give much larger average and maximum ΔTm 
values. Some give ΔTm > 30°, while others have never shown a 
ΔTm more than 5°. For those giving lower maximum ΔTm, it is 
more difﬁ cult to identify weakly stabilizing inhibitors from back-
ground variation.  
 In the SGC, the general crystallization strategy has been to try as 
many construct/inhibitor combinations as possible. For some 
kinases, only a speciﬁ c combination of construct and inhibitor has 
ever given crystals, while for others, crystallization success has been 
more common. Some kinases generally co-crystallize in the same 
crystal form with different inhibitors, whereas for others many dif-
ferent crystal forms have been observed. Sometimes different con-
structs have crystallized with different inhibitors. 
 Dependence on a particular inhibitor for crystallization is easy 
to rationalize if the inhibitor is involved in crystal packing interac-
tions. An example is the recent structure of MAPK7 (ERK5) with 
the speciﬁ c inhibitor ERK5-IN-1 where the inhibitor is involved in 
separate crystal packing interactions with two different MAPK7 
molecules in the crystal [ 28 ]. 
 Inhibitors for co-crystallization can either be added to the con-
centrated protein immediately before crystallization or added to 
dilute protein before concentration. In either case, it is beneﬁ cial to 
centrifuge the protein:inhibitor sample just before crystallization 
to remove any insoluble compound, impurity from the compound, 
or precipitated protein. 
 Adding the inhibitor directly to the concentrated protein is 
preferred for convenience and reduction in the use of multiple cen-
trifugal concentrators when testing multiple different inhibitors if:
 
●
 The apo protein can be concentrated without aggregation.  
 
●
 The inhibitor is dissolved at a sufﬁ ciently high concentration.  
 
●
 The inhibitor has reasonable solubility in aqueous buffer 
(complete solubility is not required but it must be sufﬁ ciently 
2.4  Crystallization 
Strategy with 
Inhibitors
Protein Kinase Example

334
soluble that binding to the protein can shift the equilibrium in 
favor of sufﬁ cient dissolved compound).  
 Adding the inhibitor to the dilute protein is preferred if:
 
●
 The apo protein has a tendency to aggregate or precipitate upon 
concentration (addition of inhibitor may stabilize the protein).  
 
●
 Only lower concentration stocks of inhibitor are available (it is 
important to avoid adding too high a concentration of harsh 
solvents such as DMSO to the protein).  
 
●
 The inhibitor has poor solubility in aqueous buffer.  
 Co-crystallization has been preferred over ligand soaking for 
generation of kinase:inhibitor structures. For novel structures, it is 
much more likely that crystals are obtained in the presence of an 
inhibitor. For additional structures of a particular kinase with new 
inhibitors co-crystallization is preferred; ﬁ rstly, because crystals 
suitable for soaking are difﬁ cult to generate (although apo crystals 
are not necessarily required since inhibitors can be displaced dur-
ing soaking), and secondly, due to the wide variation in protein 
conformations that kinases can adopt when bound to different 
inhibitors. These may either result in failure of the soaking experi-
ment (if the crystal form cannot adapt to the required protein 
movements) or the resultant structure may not represent a highly 
sampled conformation in solution. Developing a crystal soaking 
system can, however, be worthwhile to obtain structures with 
many similar inhibitors. 
 The recent structure of the N-terminal kinase domain of RSK2 
with a ﬂ avonol glycoside inhibitor [ 29 ] is an extreme example of the 
large-scale movements of the two lobes of the kinase domain that can 
occur relative to each other. However, the ﬂ exibility of kinases with 
different inhibitors is not restricted to this type of movement and 
changes in the positions of other secondary structural elements or 
individual residues are very common. Indeed, kinase inhibitors are 
often designed to exploit such inactive conformations (the so-called 
“type II” inhibitors) to achieve better speciﬁ city.  
 Two of the often mentioned recovery strategies are potentially 
problematic when applied to protein kinases. 
 The in situ proteolysis during crystallization may be problem-
atic as kinases have many ﬂ exible loops, including those that are 
important for function and regulation of the kinase. While the pro-
teolysis may assist in crystallization, deletion of these loops may 
result in a structure lacking biologically important regions, or, 
given the ﬂ exibility of the kinase domain, in a conformation not 
representative of the intact protein, making the structure of less 
value for inhibitor design. It is, however, worth noting that the 
presence of inhibitors often greatly reduces proteolysis of kinases, 
and is a useful strategy when performing limited proteolysis for 
identiﬁ cation of domain boundaries. 
2.5  Recovery 
Strategies
Jonathan M. Elkins

335
 Lysine methylation may also be problematic as most protein 
kinases have a lysine residue in their ATP binding site (on strand 
β3), which forms a salt bridge with a glutamate from helix αC. 
Methylation of this lysine could result in conformational changes, 
as well as altering the binding of an inhibitor used in 
crystallization.  
 Acknowledgements 
 I wish to thank Brian Marsden for helping with data on the num-
ber of kinase structures deposited in the PDB. 
 The SGC is a registered charity (number 1097737) that 
receives funds from AbbVie, Boehringer Ingelheim, the Canada 
Foundation for Innovation, the Canadian Institutes for Health 
Research, Genome Canada, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Lilly 
Canada, the Novartis Research Foundation, the Ontario Ministry 
of Economic Development and Innovation, Pﬁ zer, Takeda, and 
the Wellcome Trust [092809/Z/10/Z].  
 References 
  1.  Huse M, Kuriyan J (2002) The conformational 
plasticity of protein kinases. Cell 109:275–282  
  2.  Gräslund S, Nordlund P, Weigelt J et al (2008) 
Protein production and puriﬁ cation. Nat 
Methods 5:135–146  
  3.  Savitsky P, Bray J, Cooper CDO et al (2010) 
High-throughput production of human pro-
teins for crystallization: the SGC experience. 
J Struct Biol 172:3–13  
  4.  Shrestha B, Smee C, Gileadi O (2008) 
Baculovirus expression vector system: an 
emerging host for high-throughput eukaryotic 
protein expression. Methods Mol Biol 439:
269–289  
  5.  Fedorov O, Müller S, Knapp S (2010) The 
(un)targeted cancer kinome. Nat Chem Biol 
6:166–169 
  6.  Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R et al 
(2002) The protein kinase complement of the 
human genome. Science 298:1912–1934  
  7.  Jacobs M, Hayakawa K, Swenson L et al (2006) 
The structure of dimeric ROCK I reveals the 
mechanism for ligand selectivity. J Biol Chem 
281:260–268 
  8.  Elkins JM, Amos A, Niesen FH et al (2009) 
Structure of dystrophia myotonica protein 
kinase. Protein Sci 18:782–791  
  9.  Heikkila T, Wheatley E, Crighton D et al 
(2011) Co-crystal structures of inhibitors with 
MRCKβ, a key regulator of tumor cell invasion. 
PLoS One 6:e24825  
  10.  Lodowski DT, Tesmer VM, Benovic JL et al 
(2006) The structure of G protein-coupled 
receptor kinase (GRK)-6 deﬁ nes a second lin-
eage of GRKs. J Biol Chem 281:16785–16793  
  11.  Tesmer JJG, Tesmer VM, Lodowski DT et al 
(2010) Structure of human G protein-coupled 
receptor kinase 2 in complex with the kinase 
inhibitor balanol. J Med Chem 53:1867–1870  
  12.  Nagar B, Hantschel O, Young MA et al (2003) 
Structural basis for the autoinhibition of c-Abl 
tyrosine kinase. Cell 112:859–871  
  13.  Xu G, Lo Y-C, Li Q et al (2011) Crystal struc-
ture of inhibitor of κB kinase β. Nature 
472:325–330  
  14.  Ma X, Helgason E, Phung QT et al (2012) 
Molecular basis of Tank-binding kinase 1 acti-
vation by transautophosphorylation. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 109:9378–9383  
  15.  Soundararajan M, Roos AK, Savitsky P et al 
(2013) Structures of down syndrome kinases, 
DYRKs, reveal mechanism of kinase activation 
and substrate recognition. Structure (in press)  
  16.  Rellos P, Pike ACW, Niesen FH et al (2010) 
Structure of the CaMKIIdelta/calmodulin 
complex reveals the molecular mechanism of 
CaMKII kinase activation. PLoS Biol 8:
e1000426  
Protein Kinase Example

336
  17.  Buchan DWA, Ward SM, Lobley AE et al 
(2010) Protein annotation and modelling 
servers at University College London. Nucleic 
Acids Res 38:W563–W568  
  18.  Hughes S, Elustondo F, Di Fonzo A et al 
(2012) Crystal structure of human CDC7 
kinase in complex with its activator DBF4. Nat 
Struct Mol Biol 19:1101–1107  
  19.  Hatzivassiliou G, Song K, Yen I et al (2010) 
RAF inhibitors prime wild-type RAF to activate 
the MAPK pathway and enhance growth. 
Nature 464:431–435  
  20.  Wan PTC, Garnett MJ, Roe SM et al (2004) 
Mechanism of activation of the RAF-ERK 
signaling pathway by oncogenic mutations of 
B-RAF. Cell 116:855–867  
  21.  Seeliger MA, Young M, Henderson MN et al 
(2005) High yield bacterial expression of active 
c-Abl and c-Src tyrosine kinases. Protein Sci 
14:3135–3139 
  22.  Brading RL, Abbott WM, Green I et al (2012) 
Co-expression of protein phosphatases in insect 
cells affects phosphorylation status and expres-
sion levels of proteins. Protein Expr Purif 
83:217–225 
  23.  Shrestha A, Hamilton G, O’Neill E et al (2012) 
Analysis 
of 
conditions 
affecting 
auto- 
phosphorylation of human kinases during 
expression in bacteria. Protein Expr Purif 81:
136–143  
  24.  Messerschmidt A, Macieira S, Velarde M et al 
(2005) Crystal structure of the catalytic domain 
of human atypical protein kinase C-iota reveals 
interaction mode of phosphorylation site in turn 
motif. J Mol Biol 352:918–931  
  25.  Fedorov O, Niesen FH, Knapp S (2012) 
Kinase inhibitor selectivity proﬁ ling using dif-
ferential scanning ﬂ uorimetry. Methods Mol 
Biol 795:109–118  
  26.  Bullock AN, Das S, Debreczeni JÉ et al (2009) 
Kinase domain insertions deﬁ ne distinct roles 
of CLK kinases in SR protein phosphorylation. 
Structure 17:352–362  
  27.  Bullock AN, Debreczeni JE, Fedorov OY et al 
(2005) Structural basis of inhibitor speciﬁ city 
of the human protooncogene proviral insertion 
site in moloney murine leukemia virus (PIM-1) 
kinase. J Med Chem 48:7604–7614  
  28.  Elkins JM, Wang J, Deng X et al (2013) X-ray 
crystal structure of ERK5 (MAPK7) in com-
plex with a speciﬁ c inhibitor. J Med Chem 
(in press) 
  29.   Utepbergenov D, Derewenda U, Olekhnovich 
N et al (2012) Insights into the inhibition of 
the p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK) by the ﬂ a-
vonol glycoside SL0101 from the 1.5 Å crystal 
structure of the N-terminal domain of RSK2 
with bound inhibitor. Biochemistry 51:
6499–6510  
  30.  Hubbard SR, Wei L, Ellis L et al (1994) Crystal 
structure of the tyrosine kinase domain of the 
human insulin receptor. Nature 372:746–754  
  31.  Hubbard SR (1997) Crystal structure of the 
activated insulin receptor tyrosine kinase in 
complex with peptide substrate and ATP ana-
log. EMBO J 16:5572–5581  
Jonathan M. Elkins

337
Wayne F. Anderson (ed.), Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1140, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-0354-2, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
 A 
 ActiveICM  .........................................................................1 9 
 ADDit™  ..................................................................278, 287  
 Additive  .....................................1 80, 268, 278, 293, 308, 310  
 Adhesins  .............................................................................4 1 
 Affinity tags  .................................................. 1 2, 91, 108, 130  
 β-Agarase digestion  ............................................................6 5 
 Aggregated protein  ........................................... 1 56, 182, 195  
 ÄKTAexplorer  ..........................................................1 04, 137  
 ÄKTAexplorer purification system  ...................................1 39 
 ÄKTAxpress  ................................9 4, 103, 104, 137, 139, 140  
 ÄKTAxpress purification system  ......................................1 39 
 ALK2 .................................................................................30  
 Alternative indexing  .................................................2 27–228 
 AMoRe ............................................................................2 41 
 Analysis Pipeline for Protein–Ligand Interactions 
and Experimental Determination 
(APPLIED)  ....................................2 52–254, 258  
 Anomalous phasing  ..................................................2 29, 232  
 Antibody detection  .............................................................7 6 
 Antimicrobial drugs  ............................................................3 8 
 Antimicrobial research  ........................................................3 7 
 Antisense RNA technique  ..................................................3 8 
  APPLIED.   See Analysis Pipeline for Protein–Ligand 
Interactions and Experimental Determination 
 ARP/wARP  .....................................................................2 42 
 Asymmetric unit  ....................................... 2 15–217, 240, 244  
 AUTODOCK  ................................................. 2 52, 255, 257  
 Autoindexing  ....................................................................2 33 
 Autoinduction  ..........................................................1 70–172 
 Automated prediction of the mutation sites  .....................2 01 
 Automation  ................................................ 7 6, 118, 137, 170  
 B 
 B-ACS sample changer  ....................................................1 71 
 B-actin promoter  ..............................................................1 08 
 Baculovirus  .................................................................7 5, 113  
 expression vectors  .......................................................1 13 
 BALBES  ..................................................................2 40, 241  
 Beam divergence  .......................................................2 16–218 
 Beehive LIMS  ...................................................................... 5 
 BEI resources ..............................................................1 2, 307  
 BEST ...............................................................................2 29 
 B-factor  .............................................................. 1 9, 228, 248  
 Bijvoet ratio  ......................................................................2 33 
 Bilayer method  .................................................................1 18 
 BioCyc  ..........................................................................4 0, 41  
 Biological assays  ...................................................................  4 
 Biomedical research  ..................................................1 –23, 54  
 Biomek 96 robot  .................................................................6 4 
 Biophysical techniques  .............................................2 63, 307  
 Bio-Rad GelDoc  ................................................................1 0 
 BlastP  ............................................................... 3 8, 43, 55, 56  
 BMP.   See Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 
  BMRB/PDB deposition  .......................................................  3 
 Boltzmann equation .........................................................2 75 
 BOMP  ...............................................................................4 5 
 Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) ..................................3 0 
 BRAF ...............................................................................3 30 
 Bragg angle  .......................................................................2 16 
 Bragg’s law  ................................................................2 14, 215  
 BRC-NMPDR  ..................................................................3 9 
 Broad spectrum anti-microbials  .........................................3 7 
 Bromides  ..........................................................................2 32 
 Bromodomains  ...................................................................2 8 
 Browser Pro  ........................................................................1 9 
 Bruker 500 MHz spectrometer  ........................................1 71 
 C 
 CakePHP MVC framework  .................................................  9 
 Caliper LabChip GX  .........................................................1 0 
 CATH domain  ...................................................................4 8 
 CC 1/2 .................................................................................233  
 CCD detector  ...................................................................2 26 
 CCP4  .......................................................................240, 241  
 CDC7  ..............................................................................330  
 Cell-based protein expression  ...........................................1 17 
 Cell–cell adhesion  ...............................................................1 2 
 Cell Content Analysis  ......................................................2 41 
 Cell culture  ...................... 7 0, 93, 95, 109–111, 148, 150, 151  
 Cell-free protein production  .....................................1 17–134 
 Cell lysis  ..................................................... 8 4, 112, 139, 142  
 Cell transfection  ...............................................................1 08 
 Cell-wall biogenesis  ............................................................3 7 
 Central intermediary metabolism  .......................................3 7 
 CGH.  See Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) 
 CHARMM.   See Chemistry at HARvard Macromolecular 
Mechanics (CHARMM) 
 Check My Metal  ................................................................1 8 
 INDEX 

 Chemical denaturation  .....................................................1 45 
 Chemical incorporations  ....................................................1 2 
 Chemically competent cells  ................................................6 4 
 Chemical modification  ..............1 27, 189–191, 194, 195, 198  
 Chemical screening  ............................................................2 9 
 Cheminformatics  ......................................................2 52, 254  
 Chemistry at HARvard Macromolecular Mechanics 
(CHARMM) .......................... 2 52, 255, 256, 258  
 CHOOCH ......................................................................2 31 
 Chromatography systems  .............................................9 , 104  
 Chymotrypsin  ........................................... 1 80, 181, 184–186  
 Clash score  ...............................................................2 41, 245  
 Cleavable affinity tag  ..................................................9 1, 108  
 Clinical exome  ....................................................................3 0 
 Clinical genetics community  ..............................................3 0 
 Clinician-guided structural biology  ....................................3 0 
 Cloning ..............................3 , 4, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 61–73, 75, 89, 
93, 179, 192, 211  
 boundaries  ....................................................................1 2 
 vectors  ............................................................................. 4 
 Cluster analysis  .................................................................3 01 
 CMV expression vector  ....................................................1 08  
 Co-crystallization  ................5 4, 166–168, 251, 264, 333, 334  
 Coiled-coil regions  .............................................................4 8 
 Community requests  ..........................................................1 2 
 Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)  .....................3 7 
 Competitive inhibition  ...............................................2 9, 294  
 Completeness  .................................................... 1 8, 195, 211, 
213–216, 224, 227, 228, 230, 233, 246  
 Computational approach(es)  ......................................3 8, 252  
 Contur Software  ...................................................................  5 
 COOT .............................................................2 42–244, 319  
 “Core” genome-scale model  ................................................3 9 
 Co-translated protein complex  .........................................1 34 
 Coupled reaction  ..............................................................2 92 
 Covalent inhibitor  ............................................................3 01 
 Cryo-cooling  ....................................................................2 28 
 Cryo-EM  ...........................................................................1 4 
 Cryogenic microprobe  ......................................................1 71 
 Cryoprotection  ................................................. 1 04, 247, 308  
 Crystal  .......................2 , 30, 36, 54, 70, 82, 89, 113, 118, 140, 
146, 159, 169, 179, 189, 201, 211, 239, 251, 263, 
305, 307, 330 
 contacts  ........................................2 01, 202, 204, 207, 208  
 lattice  .................................................. 1 80, 185, 227, 316  
 Crystallization  ..............................................2 , 29, 47, 54, 91, 
140, 159, 179, 190, 201, 247, 251, 264, 316, 330  
 database  ..........................................................................  3 
 observation robots .........................................................1 0 
 optimization  ...............................................................1 59 
 screening  .............................................................1 59–157 
 solution  ............................... 1 60, 161, 165, 166, 194, 317, 
318, 321, 322  
 Crystallography based screening  .........................................1 1 
 Crystal mosaicity  ...................................... 2 17–219, 221–223  
 Crystal structure  ................................................ 3 , 18, 30, 46, 
191, 208, 227, 240–242, 248, 321  
 Cytoplasmic proteins  ........................................................1 09 
 Cytoplasmic regions  .........................................................1 08 
 D 
 Database  ...................................................... 3 –10, 16, 18–21, 
38, 40, 41, 43, 44, 48, 54–57, 146, 253, 257  
 Database of Essential Genes (DEG)  ..................................3 8 
 Data collection  ...........................................2 , 8, 9, 14, 15, 90, 
170, 211–236, 318, 319  
 Data harvesting  ....................................................................  2 
 Data management  ....................................................1 –22, 54  
 Data reduction  ..................................................................3 19 
 Data retrieval  ........................................................................  8 
 DBF4 ...............................................................................330  
 DE3 lysogen strain  ...........................................................1 46 
 Denaturation  ............................................ 1 47, 193, 263–265  
 De novo phasing  .................................................................9 0 
 Diagnostics  .........................................................................5 3 
 Differential scanning fluorimetry  .....................................3 32 
 Diffraction  .................................. 2 , 3, 7, 15, 16, 90, 180, 182, 
189–191, 195, 197, 199, 202–205, 211–217, 220, 
222, 224, 226, 228, 229, 231, 233–235, 239, 
243–244, 247, 248, 315, 316, 319  
 data  .........................................1 6, 90, 191, 205, 211–214, 
228, 231, 235, 247, 319  
 quality crystals  ........................................3 , 190, 191, 197, 
199, 203  
 Direct methods  ................................................. 2 13, 240, 243  
 Disordered regions  ........................................... 3 6, 41, 48, 49  
 Dispase  ............................................................. 1 81, 185, 186  
 Disulfide bond  ..................................................................1 45 
 Disulfide reduction ...........................................................1 45 
 DNA ligase  .........................................................................6 2 
 DNA sequence technology  .................................................6 1 
 2D 15N-HSQC spectra  ...................................................1 70 
 3D NMR data  ..................................................................1 70 
 DOCK  ............................................................. 2 52, 255, 257  
 Dot1L  .................................................................................2 9 
 3-D protein structures  ........................................................1 1 
 Drug discovery  ...........................................1 9, 28, 29, 31, 36, 
53–58, 117, 239, 245, 248, 251, 252, 257, 
264–267, 270, 272–273, 300, 301, 315, 325, 328  
 Drug-target interactions  .....................................................3 6 
 E 
 EDNA ..............................................................................2 31 
 EFI.   See Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI) 
 Elastase  .....................................................................1 81, 184  
 Electronic Laboratory Notebook  ..........................................  5 
 Endoglycosidase  .......................................................1 08, 110  
 Endoproteinase Glu-C  .....................................................1 81 
338 
  
STRUCTURAL GENOMICS AND DRUG DISCOVERY: METHODS AND PROTOCOLS
 
Index

 Engineered surface patches ...............................................2 08 
 Entropy profile  .................................................................2 03 
 Enzymatic assay .............................1 1, 76, 140, 141, 291–304  
 Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI)  ..................................6 , 11  
 Ergatis workflow management system  ...............................5 6 
 Essential genes ..............................................................3 7–40 
 Essential metabolic pathways  .............................................3 7 
 Eukaryotic cells  ..................................................................4 7 
 Eukaryotic expression systems  ..................................1 07–115 
 Eukaryotic hosts  .................................................................4 4 
 Eukaryotic pathogens  ...................................................5 3, 54  
 EupathDB  ....................................................................5 5–57 
 e -value ...........................................................................3 8, 43  
 Evolutionary conservation prediction  ...............................2 03 
 Ewald sphere  .............................2 15, 217, 218, 220, 224, 225  
 Exonuclease activity  ............................................................6 2 
 Experimental approaches  ..........................................4 , 28, 31  
 Experimental data  ..............3 , 4, 6, 12, 15, 18, 19, 21, 35, 243  
 Experiment tracking  .............................................................  4 
 Expression  ...................3 , 6, 11, 13, 29–32, 38, 47, 62, 63, 72, 
73, 75–87, 89–104, 107–114, 118, 119, 124, 
126–127, 130–132, 137, 141, 146, 148, 150, 151, 
170, 171, 202, 203, 247, 327, 328, 330–332  
 hosts .................................................................. 3 1, 32, 89  
 system  ...........4 4, 47, 75, 82, 100, 107–114, 170, 247, 328  
 F 
 Failed protein targets  ................................................1 89–199 
 Falkon  .......................................................................2 52, 255  
 Fast pixel array detectors  ....................................................1 4 
 FBA.  See Flux balance analysis (FBA) 
 FBDD.   See Fragment-based drug discovery (FBDD) 
 293-F cells  ................................................................1 08, 110  
 Feed-back inhibition ................................ 1 46, 148, 150, 151  
 Fermentation  .........................................9 0, 95, 172–173, 176  
 Fes/Fps  ...............................................................................2 9 
 Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP)  .......................3 0 
 FKBP12 , 30  
 Fluorescence-based thermal shift assays  ................. 1 0, 14, 15  
 Fluorescence-based thermal shift binding  ..........................1 1 
 Fluorescence resonance energy transfer  ............................2 92 
 Fluorescence thermal shift (FTS)  ............................2 63–288 
 Flux balance analysis (FBA)  ...............................................3 9 
 F o – F c maps  ...............................................................2 42, 319  
 2 F o – F c maps ..............................................................1 96, 242  
 Folding chaperones  ...........................................................1 45 
 Fold space  .......................................................................3 , 11  
 FOP.  See Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) 
 Fourier maps  .....................................................................2 13 
 Fourier transform  .............................................................3 09 
 Fragment-based drug discovery (FBDD)  .........................3 15 
 Fragment libraries  .....................................................2 98, 307  
 Friedel pairs  ......................................................................2 43 
 Frozen protein  ..................................................................1 42 
 FTS.  See Fluorescence thermal shift (FTS) 
 Functional studies  .....................................................2 , 11, 12  
 Function–structure relation studies  .......................................  2 
 “FunFam”  ............................................................................48  
 Fusion 
 proteins  .................................................................9 1, 103  
 tags  ................................................................. 6 3, 75, 108  
 F ˝ value .....................................................................2 31, 232  
 G 
 Galaxy platform  ..................................................................5 6 
 Gateway-compatible expression vectors  .............................6 2 
 Gateway recombination cloning  .........................................6 2 
 GC10 Competent Cells  ...................................................1 09 
 Gel filtration chromatography  ..................................1 39, 141  
 GenBank  ..................................................................7 , 48, 57  
 GenDecoder robot  ............................................ 1 19, 124, 125  
 Gene 
 conservation  ..................................................................3 7 
 expression  ..................................................... 3 8, 108, 109  
 inactivation  ...................................................................3 7 
 knock-outs  ..............................................................3 7, 38  
 predictions  ..............................................................3 8, 57  
 Gene3D ..............................................................................4 8 
 Gene3DScan  ......................................................................4 8 
 Genera  .................................................................... 4 3, 46, 54  
 Generalized born (BG)  ............................................2 54, 257  
 Generalized solvent boundary potential (GSBP)  .....2 55, 258  
 Genetic footprinting  ...........................................................3 8 
 Genome  ............1 1, 27, 28, 37, 39–43, 45–47, 54–57, 71, 325  
 Genome-scale model (reconstruction)  ................................3 9 
 Genomic drug discovery  .....................................................3 6 
 Genus ...........................................................................4 5, 55  
 Gibson assembly  .................................................................6 2 
 Glutamax  ..................................................................1 08, 109  
 Glycosylation  ....................................................................1 45 
 Glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor site  .........................1 09 
 G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs)  ......................2 8, 328  
 Green fluorescent protein (GFP)  .............................1 09, 120  
 GSBP.  See Generalized solvent boundary potential (GSBP) 
 Guanidine hydrochloride  .................................. 1 50, 152, 155  
 H 
 HalX  .....................................................................................  5 
 Harvest data  ...............................................................4 , 9, 10  
 HEK293-F cells  ...............................................................1 08 
 Hexa-histidine tag  ......................................................6 2, 170  
 High-density transposon mutagenesis  ................................3 8 
 High imidazole buffer  ..............................................1 38, 140  
 High throughput cloning  .............................................6 1–73 
 High-throughput expression screening  ............................1 17 
 High throughput screening (HTS)  ..........1 17, 123, 266, 270, 
291–293, 301, 303  
 Hill equation  ....................................................................3 02 
STRUCTURAL GENOMICS AND DRUG DISCOVERY: METHODS AND PROTOCOLS
    339
 
Index 

 His-tag  ..............................1 10, 120, 138, 140–142, 170, 174  
 affinity purification  .............................................1 46, 170  
 cleavage  .......................................................1 38, 140–142  
 cleavage buffer  ............................................ 1 38, 140, 141  
 His 6 -tag cleavage  ................................................ 9 4, 100, 103  
 HKL-2000/3000  ..................................................................9  
 HKL3000 .................................................................240, 243  
 hkldb module ...................................................................8 , 16  
 HMM search tool  ..............................................................4 2 
 Hofmeister effects  ............................................................2 87 
 Honeybee melittin secretion signal  ...................................1 13 
 Host immune defenses  .......................................................4 3 
 Host–pathogen interactions  ...................................3 6, 43–44  
 Host proteins  ......................................................................4 1 
 Hsp90  ...............................................................................330  
 HSQC spectra  ......................................................................  3 
 HTS.   See High throughput screening (HTS) 
 Human cytomegalovirus  ...................................................1 08 
 Human genome  .............................................. 2 7, 28, 43, 325  
 Human Genome Project  ....................................................2 7 
 Human orthologues  ............................................................2 8 
 Human proteins  ................................... 2 7–32, 256, 325–335  
 Human proteome  ................................................... 2 7, 28, 31  
 Hydrophobic stretch  .........................................................1 47 
 I 
 IC 50 ........................................................... 293, 300–302, 304  
 ICM Browser  .....................................................................1 9 
 ICM Pro  .............................................................................1 9 
 ICM software  .....................................................................1 8 
 Immobilized metal affinity chromatography 
(IMAC)  ..............................9 0, 91, 103, 104, 120, 
124, 127, 131, 183  
 Immune function complexes ...............................................1 2 
 IMP.  See Inner membrane protein (IMP); Integral 
membrane protein (IMP) 
 Inclusion bodies  ........................................................1 45–156 
 Infectious diseases  ........................ 3 , 6, 10, 12, 35–50, 53, 99, 
192, 251, 269 
 centers  ...............3 , 6, 10, 12, 35–49, 53, 99, 192, 251, 269  
 Inner membrane proteins (IMPs)  .................................4 4–45 
 Insect cells  ........................................................ 1 17, 326, 331  
 In silico  ................................................................... 1 1, 37, 38  
 In situ proteolysis  .............................................1 79–187, 334  
 Integral membrane protein (IMP)  ......................................3 1 
 Interaction ID  ....................................................................4 4 
 Inter-domain interactions  ...................................................2 8 
 Intermolecular interactions  ...............................................1 97 
 In vivo labeled proteins  .......................................................9 0 
 Iodides  ..............................................................................2 33 
 Ion exchange chromatography  ..................................1 41, 332  
 iRefIndex  ......................................................................4 3, 44  
 Irreversible inhibitors  ........................................................3 01 
 I/σ(I) ........................................................................2 33, 246  
 I/sigma(I)  ................................................................. 246, 247  
 iSee  .....................................................................................1 8 
 Isoelectric point (p I ) .........................1 37, 141, 155, 156, 176, 
191, 192, 194  
 Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC)  ................. 1 0, 11, 302  
 IUPRed  ........................................................................4 8, 49  
 J 
 Jaccard clustered  .................................................................5 5 
 K 
 K b  ......................................................................................257  
 K d  ..................................................................... 278, 306, 312, 
319, 333  
 Kifunensine ..............................................................1 10–112 
 Kozak consensus  ...............................................................1 09 
 L 
 LabChip 90  ..................................................................64, 87  
 LabDB  ..........................................6 , 8–10, 12, 14, 15, 21, 22  
 Laboratory information management system 
(LIMS)  ......................................... 4 –7, 10, 14, 21  
 LacUV5 promoter  ......................................................8 3, 146  
 Lanthanide  .......................................................................2 32 
 Large scale cultures  ...................................................1 72, 173  
 Large-scale production  ...............................................9 1, 118  
 Large-scale protein 
 production  ...................................................... 7 5, 91, 102  
 purification  ...................................................................7 6 
 Lethal phenotype  ...............................................................3 8 
 LIC.   See Ligation independent cloning (LIC) 
 Ligand binding  ...................................................... 1 1–14, 28, 
254, 265, 270, 272, 294, 306, 309, 316, 319  
 Ligation independent cloning (LIC)  ............................6 2–69 
 platform  ...................................................... 6 2, 63, 65, 66  
 technology  ....................................................................6 2 
 L III edge ............................................................................2 32 
 Limited proteolysis  ...................................................1 79, 334  
 LIMS.  See Laboratory information management 
system (LIMS) 
 Linearized plasmid vector ...................................................6 5 
 Linearized vector DNA  ......................................................6 2 
 Lipidation  .........................................................................1 45 
 LipoP ..................................................................................4 2 
 Lipoproteins  .................................................................4 1, 42  
 Loading buffer  ...................................................... 6 2, 78, 140  
 Low complexity regions  ......................................................4 8 
 Low imidazole buffer  ...............................................1 38, 140  
 Low volume drops  ............................................................1 67 
 Lysis buffer  .................................................7 7, 80, 82, 84, 94, 
96–98, 138, 139, 142, 149, 151, 172, 174, 176  
 M 
 MAD.   See Multiple-wavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD) 
 Mammalian cell  ..........................................................7 5, 108  
340 
  
STRUCTURAL GENOMICS AND DRUG DISCOVERY: METHODS AND PROTOCOLS
 
Index

 Marcoils  ..............................................................................4 8 
 Mariner-based transposon  ..................................................3 8 
 Material repositories  .....................................................1 1, 12  
 Maximal velocity (V max ) ............................................2 95, 302  
 Membrane proteins  ..........................................1 2, 31, 36, 38, 
44–45, 117, 240 
 MEMSAT  ..........................................................................4 5 
 Mercury  ............................................................................2 32 
 Merohedral Crystal Twinning Server  ...............................2 28 
 Merohedral twinning  ........................................................2 28 
 Metabolic model  .................................................................3 9 
 Metabolite transport  ...........................................................3 7 
 Metabolomics  ...............................................................1 1, 14  
 Methylation  .......................................1 45, 190–195, 198, 335  
 Michaelis constant ( K M ) ...................................2 93–295, 297  
 Microarrays .........................................................................3 7 
 Microbial cell-wall  ..............................................................3 7 
 Miller indices  ........................................................................  2 
 Milligram scale production  ...............................................1 17 
 Misfolded protein  .............................................................1 47 
 Mitochondrial proteins  .......................................................1 2 
 Mixed-type inhibition  ......................................................3 02 
 Mnemosyne  ..........................................................................  6 
 Model building  .........................................................2 44, 245  
 Model SEED  .....................................................................3 9 
 Model–View–Controller (MVC) architecture  .................8 , 9  
 Modified proteins  .....................................................1 90, 194  
 Molecular dynamics  .................................. 2 52, 254, 255, 257  
 Molecular replacement (MR)  ....................................1 6, 212, 
213, 226, 230, 231, 239–241, 246, 319  
 MolProbity  ......................................................... 1 8, 240, 245  
 clashscore  ......................................................................1 8 
 MolRep  ............................................................................2 41 
 Molsoft LLC  ..................................................................5 , 18  
 Mosaicity  .......................1 4–16, 216–219, 221–223, 230, 235  
  MR.  See Molecular replacement (MR) 
 MrBump ...........................................................................2 41 
 Multidimentional chromatography  ..................................1 37 
 Multi-pass transmembrane proteins  .................................1 09 
 Multiple domain protein  ..................................................1 85 
 Multiple isomorphous replacement  ..........................2 12, 240  
 Multiple mutations  ...........................................................2 03 
 Multiple-wavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD)  ........1 6, 
212–214, 230–232, 239, 240  
 MVC.   See Model–View–Controller (MVC) architecture 
 Myristoylation anchor site  ................................................1 09 
 MySQL  ..............................................................................3 6 
 N 
 NAB.  See Nucleic Acid Builder (NAB) 
 NAMD .............................................................................2 55 
 Nanodrop liquid handling system  ....................................1 67 
 Native proteins  ............................8 9, 91, 92, 95–96, 192, 231  
 Natural product biosynthesis  ..............................................1 2 
 NCBI  ................................................................. 7 , 44, 48, 55  
 NCBI ID  ............................................................................4 4 
 NCS.  See Non-Crystallographic Symmetry (NCS) 
 NEBuffer  ............................................................................6 5 
 Next-generation sequencing (NGS)  ...................................3 0 
 NIAID Category A–C priority lists  ...................................1 1 
 15N-labelled autoinduction minimal medium  .........1 71–172 
 N-lobe ........................................................................2 9, 332  
 NMR  ........................................................3 , 6, 13, 14, 89, 90, 
118, 131, 134, 169–178, 191, 305–312  
 protein structure  .......................................................3 , 16  
 sample  ..........................................1 69, 171, 173–174, 177  
 screening  ............................................. 1 70–172, 174–175  
 screening buffer  .......................................... 1 70, 172, 174  
 spectroscopy  .................................................... 8 9, 90, 169  
 structure  ..................................................................3 , 170  
  NMRPipe  .................................................................1 74, 309  
 Non-competitive inhibition  ......................................2 94, 302  
 Non-covalent inhibitor  .....................................................3 01 
 Non-Crystallographic Symmetry (NCS)  .........................2 44 
 Non-specific inhibitor  ..............................................2 94, 302  
 N- or C-terminal affinity tag  .............................................9 0 
 Northeast Structural Genomics  ............................................  5 
 N-terminal hexa-histidine tag  ............................................6 2 
 N-terminal signal peptide  .................................................1 09 
 Nuclear receptors  ................................................................1 2 
 Nucleic Acid Builder (NAB)  ....................................2 52, 257  
 O 
 Oncoproteins  ......................................................................2 9 
 Open reading frame (ORF) cloning  .............................6 2, 75  
 Origin  ..................................................1 0, 100, 117, 205, 293  
 Orthologues  ...........................................2 8, 31, 40, 44, 54, 61  
 OrthoMCL  ..................................................................5 4–57 
 Oscillation ranges  .........................................................1 4, 15  
 Outer membrane  ........................................ 3 6, 41, 42, 44–45  
 Outer membrane proteins (OMPs)  ..............................4 4–45 
 Oxidative refolding  ...........................................1 07, 145–156  
 protocol .......................................................................1 47 
 P 
 Papain  ............................................................... 1 79, 181, 185  
 Parallel protein purification  ......................................1 37–142 
 Parallel screening  ......................................................1 60, 169  
 Paralogous genes  .................................................................3 8 
 Paralogs  ..............................................................................5 5 
 Paralogues  ...........................................................................2 8 
 Parsing  ................................................................................5 5 
 Partial reflections  ......................................................2 20–224 
 Pathogenic organisms  .........................................................4 0 
 Pathway/genome databases  ................................................4 0 
 Patterson function  ............................................................2 12 
 Patterson map  ...................................................................2 43 
 pcDNA3.1 ........................................................................108  
STRUCTURAL GENOMICS AND DRUG DISCOVERY: METHODS AND PROTOCOLS
    341
 
Index 

 Peak 
 dispersion  ............................................................1 76, 177  
 intensities  ............................................................1 76, 177  
 PepcDB  ............................................................................3 –5 
 PERL ............................................................. 3 6, 55, 56, 252  
 pGenThreader server  ........................................................3 30 
 Phasing method  ..................................................................1 6 
 Phenix .............................................................. 2 40, 241, 243  
 Phobius  ..................................................4 2, 45, 48, 49, 55–57  
 p I .  See Isoelectric point (p I ) 
 PILATUS detector  ...........................................................2 26 
 PiMS.   See Protein Information Management System 
(PiMS) 
 Pipeline .............................................................. 3 , 5, 6, 9–11, 
13, 16, 18, 21, 22, 30, 36, 45, 54, 56, 61, 62, 76, 
90, 95, 169, 190, 193, 252–258, 263–264  
 pLEXm vectors  ................................................................1 08 
 PLoS ONE  ........................................................................1 9 
 pMAGIC ............................................................. 9 3, 95, 102  
 pMCSG7  .......................62, 63, 65–66, 69, 71, 82, 84, 93, 95  
 pMelBac  ...........................................................................1 13 
 PMTs.   See Protein methyltransferases (PMTs) 
 Positive-sense RNA genomes  .............................................4 5  
 PostgreSQL  ..........................................................................  9 
 PostgresSQL  ......................................................................3 6 
 Post-translation modification  .............................................3 7 
 Precipitating agent  ............................................................1 60 
 Protein 
 complex  ....................... 4 , 12, 90, 117, 118, 130, 134, 180  
 concentration  ..........................9 1, 98, 103, 147, 152, 160, 
165–166, 180, 182, 183, 195, 270, 276, 277, 306, 
307, 311  
 crystallizability enhancement  ..............................1 92, 201  
 crystallization  ......... 2 1, 159–161, 167, 180, 190, 199, 270  
 crystals  ......................................................... 9 0, 180, 187, 
189, 196, 198, 199, 228, 232, 252, 321  
 expression  .........................................3 , 38, 75, 76, 84, 89, 
95, 100–102, 108, 114, 118, 131, 146, 151, 171, 
203, 330–332  
 extract  .............................................................. 4 0, 42, 44, 
48, 90, 110, 117, 128, 131, 132, 139, 256  
 families ............................................... 2 7–31, 54, 61, 325  
 folding ........................................................................2 65 
 fragments in the crystal  ......................................1 82–184 
 identification information  ...............................................  3 
 Kinase C  .............................................................3 29, 332  
 kinases  .................................................... 2 7, 28, 325–335  
 labeling  ...............................................................1 31, 170  
 ligand  ....................1 66, 246, 252, 253, 257, 305, 307, 311  
 localization ....................................................................3 8 
 methyltransferases  ........................................................2 8 
 production  ............................................2 , 5, 7, 11, 75, 76, 
89–104, 108, 109, 117–134, 137, 150, 171, 265  
 purification  .......... 7 6, 84, 94, 97–101, 108, 137–142, 192  
 sequence ..........2 , 40, 41, 43, 54, 55, 57, 58, 176, 177, 264  
 supersaturation  ...........................................................1 60 
 surface  ................................................. 1 90, 192, 198, 256  
 surface modification  ...................................................1 90 
 Protein Data Bank (PDB)  ......................2 , 3, 7, 8, 17, 18, 31, 
36, 37, 40, 41, 43, 44, 47–49, 57, 134, 146, 171, 
175, 177, 184, 185, 192, 195–197, 204–206, 230, 
233, 240–242, 247, 256, 267, 268, 326–328, 330  
 Protein Information Management System (PiMS)  ........5 , 14  
 Protein methyltransferases (PMTs)  ....................................2 8 
 Protein–protein complexes  ...........................................4 , 180  
 Protemist DT II robot  .......................1 18, 119, 121, 124, 127  
 Protemist XE robot  ..................................................1 29–130 
 Proteomics  ..................................................................3 8, 183  
 Proteopedia  .........................................................................1 8 
 Pseudosymmetry  ...............................................................2 30 
 PSI:Biology Materials Repository  ......................................1 2 
 PSI-Structural Biology Knowledge Base 
(PSI-SBKB)  ...................................................3 , 7  
  PsortB  .................................................................................4 2 
 Pulsed injection  ................................................................1 47 
 Purification  .................................................3 , 6, 8, 11, 67, 75, 
76, 84, 89–91, 94, 97–101, 103, 104, 108–111, 
118–124, 126–128, 130, 132, 133, 137–142, 146, 
148–149, 151–153, 155, 170, 172, 173, 176, 179, 
183, 192, 202, 203, 247, 287, 327, 331–332  
 protocol ................................................. 9 0, 141, 192, 202  
 Python  .................................................................. 3 6, 55, 252  
 Q 
 QuikChange® 
 Lightning kit  ..............................................................2 03 
 Multi kit  .....................................................................2 03 
 site-directed mutagenesis kit  ......................................2 02 
 R 
 RADDOSE  .....................................................................2 29 
 Radiation damage  ............................................ 2 12, 213, 215, 
228–229, 232, 234, 235, 248  
 Radical scavengers  ............................................................2 28 
 RAF1 ................................................................................330  
 Ramachandran plot  ..........................................................2 45 
 Rapid Elimination of Swill (REOS) program  ..................3 01 
 Raw data  ...............................................................................  2 
 Reciprocal lattice  ...................................... 2 15, 217–220, 224  
 Recombinant tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease  ..............6 2, 
63, 90, 91, 94, 97–100, 102, 103, 109, 133, 137, 
138, 140–142, 170  
 Recombinant virus  ..............................................................9 4 
 Reductive alkylation  .................................................1 89–199 
 protocol .......................................................................1 93 
 Reductive ethylation  .................................................1 90, 193  
 Reductive isopropylation  ..........................................1 90, 193  
 Reductive methylation  .............................. 1 90, 191, 193, 195  
342 
  
STRUCTURAL GENOMICS AND DRUG DISCOVERY: METHODS AND PROTOCOLS
 
Index

 Refinement  .......................................8 , 18, 29, 212, 213, 229, 
231, 239–248, 257, 319  
 REFOLD database  ..........................................................1 46 
 Refolding buffer  ....................................... 1 50, 152, 154, 155  
 Refolding methods  ...........................................................1 46 
 Refolding protocol  ............................................................1 46 
 Relative fluorescence units (RFU)  ............................2 75, 276  
 Renaturation  .............................................................1 45, 157  
 Repeat-batch method  .......................................................1 18 
 Repository  ............................... 3 , 7, 8, 11, 12, 54, 55, 57, 102  
 Resonance  .........................................1 77, 292, 302, 306, 309, 
310, 312, 315 
 Resources use tracking  ..........................................................  4 
 Reversible inhibitors  .........................................................3 01 
 RF.  See Rotation Function (RF) 
 R free   ...............................................................17, 18, 242, 243, 
245, 247 
 RFU.  See Relative fluorescence units (RFU) 
 R meas   ..................................................................................233  
 R merge  ..................................................228, 229, 233, 246, 247  
 RNase-free plasmid solution  ............................................1 22 
 Rotation Function (RF)  ....................................................2 41 
 R pim  ...................................................................................233  
 RSK2  ................................................................................334  
 RT-PCR  .......................................................................1 4, 15  
 R work   .......................................................... 242, 243, 245, 247  
 S 
 SAD.   See Single-wavelength anomalous diffraction (SAD) 
 S-adenosyl methionine  .......................................................2 9 
 Salvage approach  ..............................................................1 90 
 SAM-binding enzymes  ......................................................2 9 
 Saturation transfer difference (STD) NMR  .....................3 06 
 SEC.  See Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) 
 Secondary structure prediction  ................... 4 9, 203, 204, 330  
 Secreted and outer membrane protein identification 
protocol  .............................................................4 2 
 Secreted proteins  ........................................ 4 1, 111–112, 196  
 SecretomeP  .........................................................................4 2 
 SEED annotation process  ..................................................3 9 
 Selective antibiotics  ......................................................6 4, 76  
 Selenomethionine (SeMet) ..........................................9 0, 93, 
102, 129, 131, 148, 230, 232, 240  
 labeled proteins  ...................................9 0, 92–93, 96, 128, 
134, 146, 150–151 
 labeling  ....................................................... 1 29, 134, 148  
 Semi-automated chromatography platform  ........................9 0 
 Sequence comparison  ............................................. 3 8, 43, 61  
 SER.  See Surface entropy reduction (SER) 
 SERp server.   See Surface Entropy Reduction prediction 
(SERp) server 
 Sesame  ............................................................................5 , 14  
 SG pipeline.   See Structural genomics (SG) pipeline 
 Sharp  ........................................................ 1 53, 177, 223, 243  
 SH2 domains  ......................................................................2 9 
 SigmaPlot  .................................................................2 93, 302  
 Signal peptidase cleavage site  ...........................................1 09 
 Signal peptides  .................. 3 8, 42, 48, 49, 109, 113, 145, 146  
 Signal sequence  ............................................ 4 2, 56, 109, 113  
 Single isomorphous replacement (SIR)  ............................2 12 
 Single-pass transmembrane regions  .................................1 09 
 Single-wavelength anomalous diffraction (SAD)  ..............1 6, 
212–214, 230–233, 240, 243  
 Size exclusion chromatography (SEC)  ..............................9 1, 
94, 99–100, 103, 104, 112, 147, 156, 183, 194  
 Solubilization of inclusion body  .......................................1 46 
 Soluble expression  ............................................................3 31 
 Solve/Resolve  ...................................................................2 43 
 Sonication  .......................... 8 0, 84, 85, 87, 102, 139, 151, 174  
 Source code  ..........................................................................  9 
 Space groups  ..................................................... 2 27, 243, 244  
 Span-8 robot  ......................................................................6 4 
 Sparse matrix  ............................................ 1 60, 161, 182, 185  
  Spectrophotometric kinetic assays  ................................1 0, 14  
 SQLShare  .....................................................................5 5, 58  
 SQL statement  ...................................................................5 8 
 SspI ......................................................................... 6 3, 65, 71  
 SspI restriction endonuclease  .............................................6 2 
 Stable crystal contacts  .......................................................2 01 
 S-tag assay  ....................................................................7 6, 85  
 Stirred-cell concentrator  ...................................................1 47 
 STRAP ............................................................. 4 0, 43, 47–49  
 Structural biology  .............................................. 1 –22, 28–30, 
56, 61, 62, 91, 118, 190, 214, 325  
 Structural genomics (SG) pipeline  ..............................1 0, 11, 
30, 90, 169, 263, 264  
 Structure-based drugs  .........................................................5 3 
 Structure determination  .....................................2 , 3, 8, 9, 11, 
13, 21, 35, 36, 48, 49, 53, 54, 61, 76, 89, 90, 169, 
170, 177, 189, 190, 192, 193, 196, 211–236, 
239–248, 252, 253, 263, 327, 331  
 procedures  .......................................................................  4 
 Subtilisin A ...............................................................1 81, 185  
 Super-LIMS  .............................................................9 –10, 22  
 Surface entropy reduction (SER)  ......................1 90, 201–208  
 Surface Entropy Reduction prediction 
(SERp) server  .................................2 02–205, 207  
 Surface mutagenesis  .................................................2 01–208 
 Surface plasmon resonance (SPR)  ............................3 02, 315  
 SurfaceScreen  ...................................................2 52, 254–257  
 Swift  .........................................................................2 52, 255  
 Synchrotron  ..................... 2 , 15, 224, 228, 231, 232, 234, 316  
 T 
 Tacsimate-crystallization reagent .....................................1 67 
 Tangential flow dialysis  ....................................................1 18 
 Tantalum ..........................................................................2 32 
 TargetDB  ............................................................. 2 –4, 41, 56  
STRUCTURAL GENOMICS AND DRUG DISCOVERY: METHODS AND PROTOCOLS
    343
 
Index 

 TargetP  ...............................................................................4 2 
 Target selection .............................3 –6, 11, 16, 28, 31, 35–49, 
54, 55, 57, 252  
 TargetTrack  .................................... 2 –5, 8, 14, 21, 36, 37, 40, 
43, 44, 47, 48, 56, 57  
 Target tracking  .................................................................4 –6 
 TatP ....................................................................................4 2 
 T4 DNA polymerase  .................................. 6 2–64, 67–69, 72  
 T7-driven expression plasmids  .........................................1 46 
 TDRtargets  ..................................................................5 4, 55  
 TEV protease.   See Recombinant tobacco etch virus 
(TEV) protease 
 Thermal cycler  ......................... 6 3–67, 69, 71, 77, 78, 81, 269  
 Thermal shift  ............................................................2 72, 278  
 Thermal shift analysis (TSA)  ......................... 1 0, 14, 15, 302  
 Thermolysin  ..................................................... 1 81, 185, 186  
 Tight junction membrane proteins  .....................................1 2 
 T m  ........................................63, 264, 265, 270–276, 278, 287  
 ΔT m  ...................................................276, 278–287, 332, 333  
 TMHMM  ..............................................................4 5, 55–57  
 Tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease 
 Topo cloning  ......................................................................6 2 
 Topsan ................................................................................1 8 
 TopSpin  ............................................................................3 12 
 Toxicity  ............................................................... 4 3, 108, 145  
 Transient mammalian protein expression  .........................1 00 
 Translational laboratories  ...................................................3 0 
 Translation function  .........................................................2 41 
 Transmembrane helices  ................................................4 5, 48  
 Transmembrane regions  ............3 6, 41, 47–49, 109, 145, 146  
 Transmembrane segments (TMS)  ......................................3 8 
 Transposon mutagenesis  .....................................................3 8 
 Tripos Benchware HTS Dataminer  .........................2 93, 301  
 Tripos Selector  ..........................................................2 93, 301  
 Triton  ................................................1 49, 151, 155, 186, 294  
 Truncation  ............................... 4 , 57, 102, 109, 146, 328, 330  
 Trypsin  ..................................................... 1 79–181, 184, 185  
 Twinning  .................................................. 2 27–228, 230, 248  
 U 
 U54 “Glue Grant”  ..............................................................11  
 UML data model  ..................................................................  5 
 Uncompetitive inhibition  .................................................3 02 
 Uncut vector  .......................................................................6 5 
 UniProt  .....................................................................7 , 45, 55  
 UniProt ID  .........................................................................4 4 
 UniTrack  ........................................................ 6 –9, 12, 18, 21  
 V 
 Vaccine candidate  ...................................................3 6, 41–43  
 Vaccines  .......................................................4 1, 45, 46, 53, 76  
 Vaccinia-like viruses  ...........................................................4 6 
 Vapor diffusion  ......................................... 1 60, 165, 316, 318  
 crystallization  ...................................... 1 60, 181, 318, 321  
 Virulence  ................................................................ 4 3, 46, 47  
 Virulence associate genes (VAGs)  ......................................3 8 
 Virulence factor  ................................................ 3 6, 38, 43, 47  
 W 
 WaterLOGSY NMR  .......................................................3 07 
 Web page rendering  ..............................................................  8 
 96-Well format  .................. 6 2, 72, 77–78, 274, 307, 310, 316  
 Wet cell pellet  ...........................................................1 12, 139  
 Wheat germ cell-free system  ............................................1 17 
 Wheat germ extract  .......................................... 1 22, 124, 131  
 Whole-cell experiments  .....................................................1 2 
 Wilson statistics  ...............................................................2 28 
 X 
 xia2  ...................................................................................231  
 XML files  ............................................................. 6 , 8, 21, 57  
 X-ray crystallography ................................................. 3 , 6, 13, 
89, 90, 118, 131, 134, 146, 159, 169, 189, 307, 
315–322 
 X-ray diffraction (XRD)  ......................9 0, 182, 315, 316, 319  
 Xtaldb  ...................................................................................9  
 Y 
 YopH  ................................................................................3 31 
 Z 
 Z′-factor  ........................................................... 2 97, 299, 303  
 ZINC  .......................................................................2 53, 254   
344 
  
STRUCTURAL GENOMICS AND DRUG DISCOVERY: METHODS AND PROTOCOLS
 
Index

