Brownian Motion
81
B
15. Bethe, H. A. & W. Heitler, On the stopping of fast particles and on the creation of positive
electrons, RSL, Proc., A, 146 (1934), 83–112.
Bethe, H. A. The inﬂuence of screening on the creation and stopping of electrons, Camb Phil
Soc Proc 30 (1934), 524–39.
16. Heitler, W., The quantum theory of radiation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1936,
§ 17, 161–77).
17. Bethe, H. A. & E. E. Salpeter, Quantum mechanics of one and two systems, in Handbuch der
Physik, 35 (Atoms I) (Berlin: Springer, 1957, 409–30).
18. Heisenberg, W., Kosmische Strahlung Vortr¨age. . . (Berlin: Springer, 1953)
19. Blumenthal, G. & R. Gould, Bremsstrahlung, synchrotron radiation, and Compton scattering
of high-energy electrons traversing dilute gases, Rev Mod Phys, 42 (1970), 237–70.
20. Wheaton, B. R., The tiger and the shark: Empirical roots of wave-particle dualism (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1983 parts I & II, 71–195).
21. Schweber, S., QED and the men who made it. . . (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994)
22. Wheaton, B., Inventory of sources for history of twentieth-century physics (ISHTCP): the re-
search database, Physis, 36 (1999), 225–31.
Brownian Motion
Charlotte Bigg
Brownian motion is the irregular and perpetual agitation of small particles sus-
pended in a liquid or gas. In 1828 the Scottish botanist Robert Brown (1773–1858)
published the ﬁrst extensive study of the phenomenon. Brown showed notably that
this motion equally affects organic and inorganic particles, suggesting a physical
rather than a biological explanation [1]. Developments in thermodynamics and the
kinetic theory in the second half of the nineteenth century led several scientists to
consider Brownian motion as a visible consequence of thermal molecular agitation;
but it was not until the early twentieth century that a convincing quantitative de-
scription and theoretical explanation of the motion was worked out.
In particular A. Einstein (1879–1955), M. von Smoluchowski (1872–1917) and
J. Perrin (1870–1942) demonstrated that the Brownian motion of particles sus-
pended in a liquid is caused by their incessant collisions with the molecules making
up the liquid, and they developed new, statistical methods of measuring this motion.
Instead for instance of measuring the instantaneous velocity of individual particles,
as scientists had previously, ﬁnding values widely diverging from those predicted by
the kinetic theory, Einstein proposed in 1905 to measure their mean displacement.
He found that the mean displacement of a particle on the X axis during a period of
time t is proportional to the square root of t:
λx =
√
t ×
 
RT
N
1
3πkP .

82
Brownian Motion
R is the gas constant, T the absolute temperature, N the number of molecules in
a mole (Avogadro’s number), k the viscosity of the ﬂuid, and P the radius of the
particle. The mean displacement for a given period of time can be thus be calculated
when R, N, T , k, and P are known; conversely N or P can be obtained when mean
displacement and other factors are known [2].
In a series of experiments on colloidal suspensions that involved careful mea-
surement of the diameter, density and displacement of particles, Perrin supplied
evidence in support of this approach (see Fig. 1), and he demonstrated the broad
agreement of experimental determinations of Avogadro’s number made by himself
and others on the basis of a wide range of phenomena [3,4].
Beyond the elucidation of the origin of Brownian motion, the signiﬁcance of
these investigations is twofold. First, they helped clarify two major scientiﬁc and
epistemological issues of late nineteenth century physical science, about the atomic
hypothesis and the relationship between mechanics and thermodynamics. In the in-
troduction to his 1905 paper on Brownian motion, Einstein stated
“In this paper it will be shown that according to the molecular-kinetic theory
of heat, bodies of microscopically-visible size suspended in a liquid will perform
movements of such magnitudes that they can be easily observed in a microscope, on
account of the molecular theory of heat. [. . .]
Fig. 1 Measuring the displacement of invidual particles: “three drawings obtained by tracing lines
to link the consecutive positions of the same grain of rubber at intervals of 30s” [3,81]

Brownian Motion
83
B
If the movement discussed here can actually be observed (together with the laws
relating to it that one would expect to ﬁnd), then classical thermodynamics can no
longer be looked upon as applicable with precision to bodies even of dimensions
distinguishable in a microscope; an exact determination of actual atomic dimensions
is then possible. On the other hand, had the prediction of this movement proved to
be incorrect, a weighty argument would be provided against the molecular-kinetic
conception of heat” [2].
Einstein and others’ investigations of Brownian motion provided conclusive ev-
idence in favour of the kinetic theory of heat and the existence of atoms, as well as
of the statistical nature of the second law of thermodynamics. Perrin was awarded
the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1926 for having “put a deﬁnite end to the long struggle
regarding the real existence of molecules.” Secondly, this work announced and pre-
pared the emergence of new ﬁelds of investigation in twentieth century physical
science: statistical thermodynamics, the study of ﬂuctuation phenomena, and the
general theory of stochastic processes, of which Brownian motion continues to con-
stitute the archetypal example.
In the history and philosophy of science, the history of research on Brownian
motion is frequently cited as a perfect example of “the failure of experiment and
observation, unguided (until 1905) by theory, to unearth the simple laws governing
a phenomenon.” [6]
Primary Literature
1. R. Brown: A brief account of microscopical observations made in the months of June, July, and
August 1827, on the particles contained in the pollen of plants; and on the general existence
of active molecules in organic and inorganic bodies. Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal 5,
358–371 (1828)
2. A. Einstein: ¨Uber die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der W¨arme geforderte Bewe-
gung von in ruhenden Fl¨ussigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen. Annalen der Physik 17, 549–560
(1905). This and subsequent articles by A. Einstein on Brownian motion were reprinted
in: A. Einstein: Untersuchungen ¨uber die Theorie der “Brownschen Bewegung” (1905). Ed.
R. F¨urth (Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft, Leipzig 1922) (=Oswalds Klassiker der exacten
Wissenschaften, 199) [Engl. Investigations on the Theory of the Brownian Movement. Trans.
A.D. Cooper (Methuen, London 1926)]
3. J. Perrin: Mouvement brownien et r´ealit´e mol´eculaire, Annales de Chimie et de Physique 18,
1–114 (1909) [Trans. F. Soddy repr. in The question of the Atom. Ed. M.J. Nye (Tomash
Publishers, Los Angeles, San Francisco 1986, 505–601]
4. J. Perrin: Les Atomes (Alcan Paris, 1913) [engl. (4th edition) Atoms. trans. D.LL. Hammick
(Constable & Company, London 1916)]
Secondary Literature
5. J. Stachel ed.: The collected papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 2: The Swiss Years: Writings
1900–1909 (Princeton University Press, Princeton 1989, esp. 206–222)
6. S. G. Brush: A History of Random Processes. I. Brownian Movement from Brown to Perrin.
Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 5, 1–36 (1968–9)

84
Bub–Clifton Theorem
7. M. J. Nye: Molecular Reality (Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam 1972)
8. G. Pohl: The theory of Brownian motion – one hundred years old. In: The Global and the Local:
The History of Science and the Cultural Integration of Europe, ed. by M. Kokowski (Cracow
2007, 419–424). Online as: http://www.2iceshs.cyfronet.pl/proceedings.html
Bub–Clifton Theorem
Jeffrey Bub
The two fundamental ‘no go’ theorems for hidden variable reconstructions of the
 quantum statistics, the  Kochen-Specker theorem [4] and  Bell’s theorem
[1], can be formulated as results about the impossibility of associating a classical
probability space (X, F, Pρ) with a quantum system in the state ρ, when certain con-
straints are placed on the probability measure Pρ. The Bub–Clifton theorem [2,3],
by contrast, is a ‘go’ theorem: a positive result about the possibility of associating a
classical probability space with a quantum system in a given state.
If Pρ is required to satisfy the conditions:
(a) Pρ(a, b, . . .|A, B, . . .) is a classical probability measure deﬁned for all eigen-
values a, b, . . . of the  observables A, B, . . . in some set of observables E.
(b) If A, A′, . . . ∈E commute, then Pρ(a, a′, . . . |A, A′, . . .) coincides with the
quantum mechanical probability assigned by ρ.
then the existence of Pρ is equivalent to the requirement that the set of numbers:
{Pρ(a, a′, . . . |A, A′, . . .); A, A′ ∈E commute}
should satisfy a ﬁnite family of inequalities (Boole’s ‘conditions of possible expe-
rience’), so the non-existence of Pρ entails a violation of at least one inequality
(see Pitowsky [6, 7]). If Pρ exists, then it is a weighted average of pure states
(characteristic functions onto 1-element subsets of X or 2-valued (0,1) probability
measures).
The Kochen-Specker and Bell theorems can be formulated (following Pitowsky)
as follows:
The Kochen-Specker Theorem. There is a set of observables E such that for all ρ
the classical probability measure Pρ does not exist.
Bell’s Theorem. There is a set of local observables E on H ⊗H and a state ρ ∈
H ⊗H such that the classical probability measure Pρ does not exist.

