Chapter 6 
Evolutionary Aspects of Language Change 
Johann-Mattis List 
J.-M. List (✉) 
Department of Linguistic and Cultural Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany 
Chair of Multilingual Computational Linguistics, University of Passau, Passau, Germany 
e-mail: mattis_list@eva.mpg.de; mattis.list@uni-passau.de 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
A. du Crest et al. (eds.), Evolutionary Thinking Across Disciplines, Synthese Library 
478, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-33358-3_6
Abstract While it has been known for a long time that human languages can change 
in various ways, it was only in the early nineteenth century that scholars realized that 
certain aspects of language change proceed in a surprisingly regular manner, 
allowing us to reconstruct historical stages of languages which have never been 
documented in written sources. The ﬁndings led to the establishment of historical 
linguistics as a scientiﬁc discipline, devoted to the investigation of how languages 
change and why. Although evolutionary thinking plays a major role in historical 
linguistics, practitioners often have the tendency to emphasize the peculiarities of 
language evolution rather than the commonalities with other kinds of evolution. In 
part, this seems to be justiﬁed by some phenomena for which it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd 
counterparts in different disciplines. In part, however, this may also due to a 
communication problem that is characteristic for interdisciplinary research, since 
scholars lack a common terminology. As a result, it is difﬁcult for linguists to explain 
their particular evolutionary views on language change to practitioners from other 
disciplines, while evolutionary terminology from disciplines such as biology is 
difﬁcult to grasp for linguists. In the study, I will try to present some important 
evolutionary aspects of language change for which it is hard to ﬁnd counterparts in 
other disciplines and then point to current challenges of evolutionary studies in 
historical linguistics which have to deal with these aspects. 
Keywords Language change · Historical linguistics · Language evolution · History 
of linguistics 
103

104
J.-M. List
6.1 
Introduction 
Language change and language evolution have received much attention of late. 
Inspired by quantitative approaches from evolutionary biology, scholars have started 
to pay increased attention to the phylogenetic development of the world’s larger 
language families (Bouckaert et al., 2012; Bouckaert et al., 2018; Gerardi et al., 
2021; Gray et al., 2009; Kolipakam et al., 2018; Sagart et al., 2019). Had phyloge-
netic reconstruction been largely ignored in qualitative research, or reduced to the 
subgrouping of the major branches of a language family by means of qualitative 
cladistic analysis, it has now become a popular research topic in historical linguistics 
and – despite initial skepticism – the majority of scholars now seems to accept 
phylogenetic studies based on Bayesian inference or maximum likelihood as a 
powerful set of tools that are valid for the exploration of a language family’s past. 
The introduction of phylogenetic methods in historical linguistics is accompanied 
by an increasing amount of discussions devoted to the nature of language evolution 
in comparison with other kinds of evolution. Following a long tradition of skepti-
cism towards evolutionary explanations of language change, many scholars still 
emphasize the peculiarity of language evolution in comparison with biological 
evolution, and some scholars even ﬁnd it misleading to discuss language change 
as an evolutionary phenomenon at all. On the other hand, there is a growing number 
of attempts to model the dynamics of language evolution formally and computa-
tionally. In the following, I will try to give a short background on the history of 
evolutionary thinking in the ﬁeld of historical linguistics from the beginning of the 
nineteenth century until today (Sect. 6.2) and then point to four aspects of language 
change which I consider crucial, in so far as they reﬂect differences in the evolu-
tionary processes which often do not have a direct counterpart in evolutionary 
biology. I will then discuss three unsolved problems in historical linguistics for 
which no solutions have been proposed so far, also due to the fact that they are 
peculiar for language change. While I am not able to propose a proper solution for 
these problems, I conclude that future efforts in linguistics should try to concentrate 
on the adaptation of methods from other disciplines to linguistic needs rather than to 
the direct transfer. 
6.2 
Background 
The discipline of comparative linguistics has a long tradition of evolutionary think-
ing, reaching much deeper back in time than that of biology (List et al., 2016). In 
contrast to biologists, who had to infer that observed biological diversity was the 
result of a long succession of changes, linguists could observe these changes almost 
directly through the comparison of documents written in the same language at 
different times. Having almost direct access to ancestral stages of contemporary 
languages was a striking advantage of linguistics over biology which was already

observed by August Schleicher (1821–1868) in 1863 (Schleicher, 1863). It helped 
linguists not only in the development of methods for the inference of phylogenetic 
relationships but also allowed them to propose techniques by which the supposed 
pronunciation of individual words in ancestral languages could be estimated. This 
technique, known as “linguistic reconstruction” (Fox, 1995) is still the key objective 
of historical language comparison and linguists consider it as as much more impor-
tant than the reconstruction of phylogenies. 
6
Evolutionary Aspects of Language Change
105
6.2.1 
From Words to Trees 
Linguists have known for a long time that languages evolve and that the languages 
we observe today may stem from common sources which themselves no longer 
exists. First speculations on the common descent and the tree- or network-like 
separation of languages can already be found in early studies of the seventeenth 
century and thereafter (List et al., 2016). Until the late eighteenth century, however, 
the dominant view among scholars in Europe was that all human languages were 
products of the mythical Confusion of Tongues which prevented the construction of 
the Tower of Babel (Klein, 2004). 
First systematic investigations in which languages were compared for their 
genetic relatedness were carried out towards the end of the eighteenth century and 
reached ﬁrst popularity with the detection of the Indo-European language family, 
represented speciﬁcally by Sanskrit, Ancient Greek, Latin, and Gothic (Grimm, 
1822; Rask, 1818), which was later expanded by more languages from other 
branches (Slavic, Albanian, Armenian, see e.g. Hübschmann, 1877), and reached 
its current state with the detection of Hittite (Hrozný, 1915). 
Unlike modern phylogenetic trees, early linguistic trees were much less formal 
and systematic, but had the tendency to resemble true trees much more closely. As an 
example, consider Schleicher’s tree from 1853 (Schleicher, 1853), which has the 
appearance of a massive oak with a big trunk. Only later, the family tree visualiza-
tions became more schematized, but the interpretation was still far away from being 
formalized (Fig. 6.1). 
As an example for the lack of formalization, consider again a tree by Schleicher, 
this time from 1861 (Schleicher, 1861). While this tree looks much more formalized 
than the earlier tree from 1853, the description of this tree in the text is interesting, 
since Schleicher points to branch lengths as representing the supposed time which 
had elapsed since separation while at the same time emphasizing that the distance 
between extant languages reﬂected their synchronic closeness. While the German 
passage remains unclear in the wording, one way to read it is to assume that 
Schleicher made a direct distinction between the “closeness” of languages as 
shown by their horizontal arrangement on a tree and the closeness as derived from 
the history reﬂected in divergence times. While it is impossible to depict the former 
systematically in a two-dimensional drawing, it is possible that Schleicher thought of 
some additional closeness between languages independent of their evolutionary

history and tried to mark this in his tree drawing by separating the major subgroups 
visually from each other in the tree and by placing languages like Albanian and 
Greek horizontally close to each other while at the same time assigning them a larger 
divergence time than given for Celtic and Italian (Fig. 6.2). 
106
J.-M. List
Fig. 6.1 August Schleicher’s Oak Family Tree from 1853 
Die ältesten teilungen des indogermanischen bis zum entstehen der grundsprachen der den 
sprachstamm bildenden sprachfamilien laßen sich durch folgendes schema anschaulich 
machen. Die länge der linien deutet die zeitdauer an, die entfernung derselben von einander 
den verwantschaftsgrad. 
(Translation): The oldest splits of Indo-European until the development of the funda-
mental languages of the language families which constitute the stem of the language 
[sprachstamm] can be visualized by the following schema. The length of the lines indicates 
the elapsed time, the distance of the lines from each other indicates the degree of relation-
ship. (Schleicher, 1861: 6f, my translation and emphasis) 
Even if my attempt to interpret the peculiarities of Schleicher’s family tree from 
1861 along with his explanations turns out to be wrong: what seems important about 
this early phase of tree thinking in historical linguistics is that scholars did not use the 
tree model as a clear-cut tool for mathematical modeling. Instead they used the idea 
of a branching tree as a source of inspiration for the modeling of phenomena which 
they could observe but not yet fully understand.

6
Evolutionary Aspects of Language Change
107
Fig. 6.2 Schleicher’s, 1861 
tree, which groups the 
languge family into tree 
major groups 
6.2.2 
From Trees to Waves 
Not long after Schleicher and some colleagues had propagated their family tree 
models for the ﬁrst time, scholars began to contest them. One of the most promi-
nently cited opponents of Schleicher’s family trees was Johannes Schmidt 
(1843–1901), who devoted a complete booklet to contradict Schleicher (Schmidt, 
1872). In this study, Schmidt presented concrete data in the form of sets of homol-
ogous words (“cognate sets” in linguistic terminology) for the major Indo-European 
branches known by then and classiﬁed them according to their distribution across the 
branches. He noted that one could easily ﬁnd examples for homologs shared 
exclusively 
among 
different 
possible 
pairings 
(Greek 
vs. 
Old 
Indian, 
Greek vs. Slavic, Slavic vs. Old Indian) with no residues (“reﬂexes” in linguistic 
terminology) in any of the other branches. Based on this ﬁnding, Schmidt refuted the 
family tree hypothesis, arguing that a tree could not explain the observed data. What 
Schmidt proposed instead was the rather fuzzy idea of a wave-like expansion of the 
major branches of the Indo-European languages which contributed to their gradual 
separation and would explain the speciﬁc commonalities between individual pairs 
which seemed to contradict each other. 
Unfortunately, Schmidt did not see that the cases he listed could be perfectly 
explained by the traditional tree model assuming well-known phenomena like

differential loss (Geisler & List, 2013) or incomplete lineage sorting (Jacques & List, 
2019; List et al., 2016). But although his critic was not valid and his alternative 
model, the “wave theory” (Wellentheorie), as it was called thereafter, did not offer 
any concrete instructions with respect to the formal modeling of language diver-
gence and spread, many linguists started to present it as a valid alternative to the 
family tree model and even today, no textbook on historical linguistics can get away 
to present the family tree model without mentioning the wave theory as an alterna-
tive to the tree. 
108
J.-M. List
Nowadays, the wave theory is often presented as some kind of diffusion model in 
which languages gradually diverge without splitting abruptly. This model of lan-
guage evolution is a valid way to describe language divergence which was already 
mentioned by Hugo Schuchardt [Schuchardt (1900), 1842–1927), and it is clear that 
family tree models are not capable of modeling the split process in detail. Attributing 
diffusion models to Schmidt’s wave theory, however, does not seem to be justiﬁed 
and has led to a lot of confusion among students of historical linguistics (see Jacques 
& List, 2019 for a detailed discussion on this topic). 
6.2.3 
From Waves to Forests 
After the heated debates about trees and waves during the end and the beginning of 
the nineteenth century, neither the tree model nor the wave theory were essentially 
advanced any further. Both models were only described and discussed in prose with 
no attempts of providing a formal modeling and trees in particular were viewed with 
a large amount of skepticism. As a result, the tree model needed a very long time to 
recover: only a few studies in the twentieth century explicitly used family trees, and 
if they did so, they typically contrasted them with the wave model – or what scholars 
thought the wave model represented. Scholars typically labeled family trees as 
unrealistic and not capable of depicting language history in all its complexity. 
The bad reputation of the tree model is nicely reﬂected in the work of Morris 
Swadesh (1909–1967), one of the founding fathers of the modern lexicostatistical 
techniques of data annotation and data sampling which are still used in modern 
phylogenetic approaches. Although Swadesh had proposed a method to estimate the 
divergence time of two languages, based on a molecular-clock assumption of lexical 
change (Swadesh, 1950, 1952, 1955), he never expanded the model to account for 
more than two languages and preferred to draw maps of geographic and genetic 
proximity between multiple languages instead of forcing his data into a tree model 
(Swadesh, 1959). 
Dyen proposed a method by which a family tree could be inferred from data 
coded in Swadesh’s lexicostatistical coding scheme (see Dyen in Hymes, 1960), and 
Sankoff (Sankoff, 1969) presented automatically computed trees with branch lengths 
using an agglomerative clustering procedure similar to UPGMA (Sokal & Michener, 
1958). Neither of the approaches, however, was extensively discussed or followed 
up in later work, and it was not until the end of the twentieth century, when language

trees gained new popularity due to the introduction of biological methods (Gray & 
Jordan, 2000), that scholars began to reconstruct family trees en masse from 
linguistic data. 
6
Evolutionary Aspects of Language Change
109
The introduction of phylogenetic methods from evolutionary biology to historical 
linguistics in the early twenty-ﬁrst century marked a quantitative turn in the disci-
pline (List, 2014, p. 209f). Animated by the prospective of shedding light on long-
standing so far unsolved problems in historical linguistics, more and more scholars 
began to use methods inspired or transferred from evolutionary biology to infer 
language trees (Holman et al., 2011; Ringe et al., 2002) or phylogenetic networks 
(Ben Hamed, 2005; Heggarty et al., 2010; Nakhleh et al., 2005; Nelson-Sathi et al., 
2011). A at the same time scholars began to produce new automatic methods for 
various tasks in historical linguistics, such as the comparison of words through 
phonetic alignments (Kondrak, 2000; List, 2012a; Prokić et al., 2009), the detection 
of homologous words (List, 2012b, 2014; Steiner et al., 2011), or the inference of 
potential pathways of semantic change (List et al., 2013; Steiner et al., 2011). 
While some scholars initially argued that the long-standing debate about waves 
and trees could be solved by reconstructing splits graphs, speciﬁcally Neighbor-
Nets, from data on language distances (Ben Hamed & Wang, 2006; Heggarty et al., 
2010; McMahon & McMahon, 2005), more and more scholars have by now turned 
to the reconstruction of language phylogenies based on likelihood models 
(Felsenstein, 1981) and Bayesian inference using popular software packages such 
as MrBayes (Ronquist et al., 2009) and BEAST 2 (Bouckaert et al., 2014) which do 
not compute a single tree or network but rather provide a distribution (or forest) of 
trees which ﬁt the data best under a certain model. 
Although tree thinking is gaining ground in historical linguistics, there is still a 
considerable debate about the advantages of trees over distance-based approaches in 
historical linguistics (Jacques & List, 2019; Kalyan & François, 2019) and phylo-
genetic methods are still met with great reservation (Donohue et al., 2012; Hock, 
2017). In addition, scholars have pointed to problems in the data collection (Geisler 
& List, 2010; Holm, 2017), the phylogenetic models applied in phylogenetic 
reconstruction (Chang et al., 2015), or in the process of coding words for homology 
(List, 2016; Wu & List, 2023). While most of these problem can be handled by 
enhancing phylogenetic data, the way in which data are coded, and the models which 
are used to analyze the data in phylogenetic reconstruction, quite a few challenges 
remain, which will be discussed in detail in Sect. 6.4. 
6.3 
Key Aspects of Language Change 
While the discussion and inference of evolutionary patterns is considerably old in 
historical linguistics, the application fo quantitative methods with the goal of aiding 
phylogetic reconstruction is still considerably young. Moreover, unlike in biology, 
where methods were designed for models which were originally designed for the 
handling of evolutionary processes in biology alone, most phylogenetic methods in

linguistics have not created for linguistic purposes but were transferred from neigh-
boring disciplines. While interdisciplinary transfer has many advantages, it also 
bears the risk of creating pointless results which are difﬁcult to explain. In most 
cases, a careful modeling accompanied by an exhaustive review of the constructs 
proposed in the source discipline seems indiscpensible. Having provided a short 
overview on major historical aspects of evolutionary thinking in historical linguistics 
in the previous section, it is time to discuss some core aspects of language change 
which are important for a better understanding of language evolution in contrast to 
biological evolution: the systematicity of language change and speciﬁcally sound 
change (Sect. 6.3.1), the fact that words can have a history of their own (Sect. 6.3.2), 
the impact of communication strategies on language change processes (Sect. 6.3.3), 
and the possibility that human language is not monophyletic (Sect. 6.3.4). 
110
J.-M. List
6.3.1 
Itˈs the System! 
Language is a system which essentially concatenates a ﬁxed number of sounds to 
sequences, being only restricted by the encoding and decoding capacities of its users. 
This is the core reason why sound change is so different from change in biological 
characters. If we say that German d goes back to Proto-Germanic *θ (pronounced as 
th in path), this does not mean that there were a couple of mutations in a couple of 
words of the German language. Instead it means that the system which produced the 
words for Proto-Germanic changed the way in which the sound *θ was produced in 
the original system. 
In some sense, we can think metaphorically of a typewriter, in which we replace a 
letter by another one. As a result, whenever we want to type a given word in the way 
we know it, we will type it with the new letter instead. But this analogy would be too 
restricted, as we can also add new letters to the typewriter, or remove existing ones. 
We can also split one letter key into two, as happens in the case of palatalization, 
which is a very common type of sound change during which sounds like [k] or [g] 
turn into sounds like [tʃ] and [dʒ] when being followed by front vowels (compare 
Italian cento “hundred,” which was pronounced [kɛntum] in Latin and is now 
pronounced as [tʃɛnto]). 
Since it is the sound system that changes during the process we call sound change, 
and not the words (which are just a reﬂection of the output of the system), we cannot 
equate sound change with mutations in biological sequences, since mutations do not 
recur across all sequences in a genome, replacing one DNA segment by another one, 
which may not even have existed before. The change in the system, as opposed to the 
sequences that the system produces, is the reason for the apparent regularity of sound 
change. 
This culminates in Leonard Bloomﬁeld’s (1887–1949) famous expression that 
‘phonemes [i. e., the minimal distinctive units of language] change’ (Bloomﬁeld, 
1973, p. 351). From the perspective of formal approaches to sequence comparison, 
we could restate this as: ‘alphabets change.’ Hruschka et al. (2015) have compared

sound change with concerted evolution in biology. We can state the analogy in 
simpler terms: sound change reﬂects systemic changes in language history, and 
concerted evolution results from systemic changes in biological evolution. It’s the 
system, stupid! 
6
Evolutionary Aspects of Language Change
111
Given that sound systems change in language history, this means that the problem 
of character alignments (i.e. determining homology/cognacy) in linguistics cannot 
be directly solved with the same techniques that are used in biology, where the 
alphabets are assumed to be constant, and alignments are supposed to identify 
mutations alone. If we want to compare sequences in linguistics, where we have to 
compare sequences that were basically drawn from different alphabets, this means 
that we need to ﬁnd out which sounds correspond to which sounds across different 
languages while at the same time trying to align them. 
In Fig. 6.3, I have tried to give a ﬁctitious example for sound change that could 
occur with two speakers of the same language and would force their pronunciations 
to diverge. The ﬁrst speaker suffers from a cold, which is why the person pronounces 
all nasal sounds [m, n, ŋ] (for convenience written as m, n, ng) as their 
corresponding voiced stop sounds [b, d, g]. The second speaker suffers from the 
loss of two front teeth, which is why this person pronounces instances of the sharp 
[s] as [θ] (for convenience written as th), while all voiced instances of the sound 
([z]) become pronounced as a [ð] (for convenience written as dh). As can be seen 
from the ﬁgure, the actual comparison of the ﬁve test words which they procude 
cannot be done by relying on the similarity of individual segments, but needs to take 
the overal structure of them into account. 
Fig. 6.3 Fictitious example for the systemicity of sound change

112
J.-M. List
6.3.2 
Chaque Mot a Son Histoire 
The competing models of the family tree and the wave theory determined a large part 
of the discussions about language evolution in the nineteenth century. At the same 
time, however, dialectologists had begun to investigate to which degree the sound 
laws which had been for the major Indo-European language family would be 
reﬂected in the contemporary dialects of European languages. Realizing that the 
supposed regularities would never match up completely and that exceptions could be 
found in all parts of the lexicon, they concluded that – at least to some degree – 
language evolution should not exclusively be studied as the evolution of entire 
languages, but rather as the individual evolution of the entities which deﬁne them. 
Under the slogan “Chaque mot a son histoire” (every word has its history), 
usually attributed to Jules Gillieron (1854–1926, Campbell, 1999, p. 189), they 
began to assemble evidence in the form of dialect maps in which the geographic 
distribution of words and sound correspondence patterns was displayed. Contrary to 
the promise of the slogan, however, concrete word histories involving concrete 
evolutionary scenarios of word evolution in time were rarely reconstructed. 
Along with the quantitative turn, we can see an increased interest in the recon-
struction of evolutionary scenarios for individual words (Gąsiorowski, 2013; Gray 
et al., 2007) inspired by attempts to reconcile gene trees with species trees in 
evolutionary biology (Nakhleh, 2013). Concrete attempts of automating the recon-
struction of evolutionary scenarios at the word level, however, have failed to yield 
satisfying results so far, since they usually naively derive word trees from automat-
ically inferred phonetic alignments and thus fail to distinguish processes of sound 
change from processes of morphological change (Willems et al., 2016). 
Similar to genes in biology, which may evolve by random mutation and by more 
disruptive processes like duplication, the words of a language can evolve due to 
sound change and due to various processes of word formation by which existing 
language material is reused to form new words (List, 2016). As a result of word 
formation, the words in a given language can be grouped into word families which 
share homologous material. As an example, consider German Knochen “bone” and 
Swedish knoge “knuckle,” which both back to Proto-Germanic *knuk-an “joint.” 
While the Proto-Germanic word is not reﬂected in English, German has another 
word Knöchel “knuckle,” which has a direct counterpart in English knuckle and goes 
back to Proto-Germanic *knuk-ila “small joint,” a diminutive form. Figure 6.3 
shows how the complex etymological relations can be displayed in the form word 
trees which have been reconciled with the overall language tree (Fig. 6.4). 
The example of “bone” in the Germanic languages show that in order to recon-
struct evolutionary scenarios for individual words, a thorough distinction of sound 
change and word formation processes is needed. This has direct consequences on 
phonetic alignment analyses in linguistics, which can only model sound change 
processes and should therefore not be used in those cases where word formation 
processes obscure word similarities (Schweikhard & List, 2020). As a result, how-
ever, the reconstruction of evolutionary scenarios is very tedious and although initial

attempts to formalize the representation of etymological scenarios have been carried 
out (Schweikhard & List, forthcoming), the future will show to which degree this 
procedure can be automated. 
6
Evolutionary Aspects of Language Change
113
Fig. 6.4 Word family for *knuk- “bone” in Proto-Germanic and its evolution in German, English, 
and Swedish. A shows the word tree which was reconciled with the language tree. B shows the 
semantic change pattern. The table shows the etymological relations among the words and their 
parts (morphemes) 
6.3.3 
Speakers and Listeners 
In contrast to evolution in biology, where organisms are reproduced physically, 
language exists only in communication, where it is constantly reproduced by those 
who produce speech and those who perceive speech. This speaker-listener or 
producer-recipient model (to include sign languages as one form of natural language 
which is neither produced by speaking nor perceived by listening) of language use is 
important for a closer understanding of the evolutionary dynamics underlying 
language change. Both perspectives, the perspective of the producer and the per-
spective of the recipient, invoke different dynamics that guide communication. From 
the perspective of the producer, it would be useful to reduce the efforts needed to 
transport a message to the recipient. As a result, speakers tend to assimilate words, 
shorten forms, or produce words imperfectly. Since the message needs to be decoded 
by the recipients, however, speakers cannot allow themselves to be too sloppy when 
producing speech signals. As a result, communication always oscillates between the 
two extremes of effortless speech on the one hand and clear messages coded in 
speech on the other hand. 
The impact of these opposing forces on sound change are still not completely 
understood, but Ohala (1989) assumed that some concrete sound change phenomena 
might be better explained as originating from a misperception by speech recipients 
(pp. 182) rather than resulting from speech production, which is often assumed to be 
the most important factor contributing to sound change (Hock, 1991, p. 11). Sound 
change induced by reception would result from acoustic similarities in spoken and 
from visual similarities in signed languages. On the other hand, sound change 
induced by production typically reﬂects similarities in articulation (of sounds or 
signs). 
Unfortunately, no large-scale studies on sound change patterns in the languages 
of the world have been carried out so far (see Kümmel 2007 as a notable exception 
and a pioneering contribution to the investigation of consonant change). As a result,

it remains an open question which of the two forces is prevailent in sound change. As 
a result, it is not possible to verify whether it is justiﬁed to identify production-driven 
changes with regular (systemic) language change (which happens gradually during 
acquisition, or – depending on the theory – also in later stages, Bybee, 2002), and 
perception-based changes with change resulting from second language acquisition 
and language contact (Mowrey & Pagliuca, 1995, p. 48). 
114
J.-M. List
6.3.4 
Polygenesis Is Possible 
Biologists are often surprised when they hear that linguists are reluctant to apply 
methods for automatic language comparison to large and global language samples. 
In linguistics, scholars tend to emphasize that one can only compare languages 
historically (i.e., with the goal of investigating their evolutionary history) when 
knowing that they are genetically related. One could, of course, compare all 
languages in the world (and there are studies in which this is done, Jäger, 2018), 
but a successful classical historical comparison of languages requires to know that 
they share a common origin. This knowledge can be achieved in different ways, and 
scholars in linguistics often differ in the details Campbell and Poser (2008), but they 
agree that the comparison of two random languages like, for example, Chinese and 
Greek (as it was carried out by Webb, 1787) would not make sense if the goal 
consists in the identiﬁcation of shared etymologies, since it is commonly assumed 
that the languages are not related with each other. 
That linguists have to prove that two or more languages are related before they 
start to compare them is in strong contrast to biology. The idea of multiple origins as 
an alternative to a single origin itself has also been discussed in evolutionary 
biology. In linguistics, however, scholars are largely agnostic regarding the common 
origin of all languages, and even those who assume that languge originated only 
once usually acknowledge that the methods for historical language comparison are 
far too shallow to be able to reconstruct back to Proto-World. 
Afﬁrming disinterest in the origin of language has a long tradition in linguistics. 
In its Statuts from 1866 (published in 1871, 1871), the Société de Linguistique de 
Paris declared that it would not support any research on the origin of language. Even 
August Schleicher, who propagated language trees, afﬁrmed this attitude in a letter to 
Ernst Haeckel (Schleicher, 1863, p. 22), where he wrote: 
It is impossible to presuppose a material descent of all languages from a single proto-
language. (My translation, original text: “Eine so zu sagen materielle Abstammung aller 
Sprachen von einer einzigen Ursprache können wir also unmöglich voraussetzen.”) 
Although not explicitly spelled out nowadays, the statutes are still active in most 
linguistic circles. Even scholars who only try to bend the boundaries of the classical 
methods for historical language comparison and propose deeper groupings of well-
established language families, like Indo-European and Basque (Blevins & Sproat,

2021) or Turkic, Mongolic, Tungusic, Japanese, and Korean (known as “Altaic” 
language family) receive harsh and at times also justiﬁed criticism (Georg, 2017). 
6
Evolutionary Aspects of Language Change
115
6.4 
Future Challenges for Historical Linguistics 
Historical linguistics has made a lot of progress since the beginning of the quanti-
tative turn. On the one hand, phylogenetic reconstruction has improved a lot and 
scholars begin to acknowledge the advantage of trees with branch lengths and 
methods that overcome the often circular reasoning of cladistic approaches to 
subgrouping. On the other hand, methods for automatic sequence comparison that 
can be used for phonetic alignment and the automatic detection of homologous 
words have not only greatly improved over the past years, but also been 
complemented by annotation tools which make the general process data annotation 
in historical linguistics much more promising (List, 2017) and allow scholars to 
inspect their data in ways which would not have been possible without the help of 
interactive computational applications. 
There remains, however, a considerable number of major future challenges for 
historical linguistics, which shall be discussed in a bit more detail in the following. 
These challenges pertain to the area of linguistic typology, a branch in comparative 
linguistics, which deals with the world-wide distribution of certain linguistic prop-
erties (so-called universals), or – in its dynamic form – with worldwide tendencies 
and trends of language change. 
6.4.1 
Typology of Sound Change 
The ﬁrst of these challenges is the challenge to establish a world-wide typology of 
sound change patterns. We have seen that sound change is a process that depends 
highly on the overall system of the language in which it occurs. Nevertheless, 
scholars have been noting for a long time now that sound changes proceed in 
surprisingly similar ways across independent language families spoken in different 
areas of the world. Initial attempts to establish a typology of sound change have been 
made in the past, but studies have been limited to certain types of sounds and areas in 
which the sounds occur Yang and Xu (2019). Another problem is that none of the 
approaches carried out so far attempted to unify transcription systems or to list sound 
changes exhaustively for a uniform sample of the languages in question. 
As three major obstacles in the compilation of a typology of sound change, we 
can identify:
•
the data problem (it is tedious if not impossible to ﬁnd a broad enough sample of 
sound change patterns for the more than 300 language families in the world,

116
J.-M. List
•
the modeling (current formats lack the detail which we would need to handle 
sound change processes in a reasonable complexity, and
•
the comparison problem (it is not clear how to identify similar sound change 
processes in cross-linguistic samples, given the important role which systemic 
aspects play in triggering or blocking sound change). 
Linguistic research has advanced with respect to some of these obstacles. Uniﬁed 
standards for lexical data have been proposed (Forkel et al., 2018) and have lead to 
the publication of large cross-linguistic lexical datasets (Rzymski et al., 2020; List 
et al., 2022a). At the same time, standards for the representation of speech sounds 
have been proposed (Anderson et al., 2018) and successfully integrated into 
workﬂows for the retro-standardization of linguistic data (see Geisler et al., 2021 
for a recent example). Methods for automatic language comparison have also greatly 
improved lately, as demonstrated by recent experiments in which the regularity of 
sound change was used to predict words which had not yet been elicited in linguistic 
ﬁeldwork with the help of the information from homologous words in a computer-
assisted workﬂow with high accuracy (Bodt & List, 2022). Unfortunately, however, 
not many datasets provide information on attested or reconstructed ancestral lan-
guages which would be important to test the direction of sound change processes. 
At the same time, the problem of comparing sound change processes across 
different language families has barely been investigated. Since similar sound change 
patterns (a [t] might become a [d] in many different languages) often involve 
different conditioning contexts (the sound change could only happen between 
vowels or only at the beginning or the end of a word), there is no straightforward 
way to compare sound changes directly. In the future, more innovations regarding 
the representation and inference of sound change processes will be needed in order to 
advance our research on the typology of sound change. 
6.4.2 
Typology of Lexical Borrowing 
Lexical borrowing, the process by which words are transferred from one language to 
another, is one of the most characteristic aspects of language change, and one of the 
reasons whey many words have a history of their own. For a long time, scholars have 
been speculating that there are certain limits to borrowing depending on the meaning 
which borrowed words express. Thus, while technical terms are easily borrowed, 
since they often enter a given language together with the technical innovation they 
refer to, words denoting body parts are rarely exchanged, since all languages tend 
have words that denote body parts, so borrowing would only occur in those 
situations where a larger proportion of the language users is multilingual and actively 
switches from one language to the other in their daily conversation. 
Knowing that words denoting certain concepts are much less or much more 
frequently borrowed in the languages in the world would be very useful for historical 
language comparison, since it would help us to distinguish borrowed from inherited

traits in those cases where evidence is sparse. While there have been intensive 
debates regarding the question if globally ranked lists for the borrowability of 
concepts could be established (Lee & Sagart, 2008; Pozdniakov, 2014; Starostin, 
2007; Zenner et al., 2014), no true large-scale studies on lexical borrowing have been 
carried out so far (with 40 languages only, the World Loanword Database by 
Haspelmath & Tadmor, 2009 is unfortunately not large enough to provide sufﬁcient 
evidence). 
6
Evolutionary Aspects of Language Change
117
Methods for automatic borrowing detection have made some progress recently 
(Miller et al., 2020; List & Forkel, 2022a; List & Hantgan, 2022b, see the overview 
in List, 2019). All in all, however, they are not yet capable of handling the 
complexities of lexical borrowing processes. Major improvements for automatic 
borrowing detection methods in the future can only be expected if scholars ﬁnd ways 
to to infer the direction of borrowings and if they manage to design methods that 
could also detect instances of semantic borrowing or loan transfer in which words 
are translated from another language rather than being transferred directly (compare 
German Wolkenkratzer, lit. “cloud-scraper” → “skyscraper”). 
6.4.3 
Typology of Semantic Shift 
Words do not only modify their sounds during language evolution, they may also 
easily change their meanings. This process, known as semantic change can lead to 
interesting extreme cases of semantic divergence, as in the case of German selig 
which is homologous with English silly, but means “holy” rather than “crazy” 
(Szemerényi, 1970). The idiosyncrazy of the processes by which words change 
their meaning are one of the factors that contribute to the difﬁculty of ﬁnding 
homologous words across different languages. The ultimate source of semantic 
change lies in the actual communication involving language producers and language 
recipients (as discussed in Sect. 6.3.3) during which creative language used is 
conventionalized with time (Enﬁeld & Comrie, 2015). Scholars have noted for a 
long time that the pathways of semantic change may resemble across languages used 
in different areas in the world and stemming from different language families. Initial 
attempts to collect common pathways of semantic change across a larger sample of 
the world’s languages exist, but they are usually limited in scope (Blank, 1997; 
Wilkins, 1996). Even the Database of Semantic Shifts by Zalizniak et al. (2020), 
which assembles semantic shift patterns for more than 2000 concepts from the 
literature is still rather small in size and extremely sparse, since the authors rely on 
direct quotes from the literature. 
Similar to the problem of establishing a sound change typology, we can identify 
three major problems in establishing a large, world-wide sample of semantic shifts: 
(1) the data problem (homogeneous, standardized lists of lexical items for a large 
sample of the world’s languages would be needed), (2) the modeling problem 
(concepts would have to be modeled rigorously and uniﬁed across all data), and 
(3) the inference problem (there are not enough ancestral languages to infer a

sufﬁciently large amount of semantic shift patterns from known processes of seman-
tic change). 
118
J.-M. List
Some progress has been made by now. The data problem has been partially 
already addressed with the large standardized collections mentioned above 
(Rzymski et al., 2020, List et al., 2022a), which can also be used to infer polysemy 
networks from cross-linguistic data (List et al., 2018) which are undirected, but seem 
to provide some hints on pathways of semantic change (Münch & Dellert, 2015). 
The modeling problem has also found a preliminary solution in the form of the 
Concepticon project (List et al., 2022b), a database which offers standard concept 
identiﬁers along with deﬁnitions and links to existing datasets in which the concepts 
have been used (https://concepticon.clld.org). For the inference problem, Dellert 
(2016) has proposed a method to infer the direction of semantic change processes by 
applying causal inference techniques, but it seems that the approach is very data 
hungry, so it would not be feasible to employ it with sparse cross-linguistic collec-
tions of lexical data, as they have been assembled by now. 
There remain, however, many challenges for future work. Cross-linguistic data 
needs to be expanded, the representation of concepts needs to be expanded as well in 
order to provide a broader coverage, and inference methods by which semantic 
change directions can be inferred from cross-linguistic data for individual language 
families need to be developed. Here, it might be possible to make use of methods for 
ancestral state reconstruction (Jäger & List, 2018) applied to automatically inferred 
sets of homologous words, but this would also presuppose substantially enhanced 
algorithms that infer homologous words which express different meanings (cross-
semantic cognates). While initial methods have been proposed for this task 
(Wu et al., 2020), they have so far not been rigorously evaluated. 
6.5 
Conclusion 
Although the processes driving language evolution are not the same as those driving 
biological evolution, both kinds of evolution have a lot in common, which is also 
reﬂected in the successful transfer of methods for phylogenetic reconstruction in 
biology to the domain of language. While trees and alternative models of macro-
evolution were discussed quite early in the history of linguistics, it was not until the 
end of the twentieth century that scholars increased their efforts to formalize their 
approaches. Interdisciplinary exchange with evolutionary biology and transfer of 
methods from biology to linguistics played a crucial role in the propagation of 
quantitative methods in historical linguistics. 
Despite numerous commonalities, however, biological evolution and linguistic 
evolution also exhibit striking differences. Four of these differences – the systemic 
nature of sound change (Sect. 6.3.1), the individual histories of words (Sect. 6.3.2), 
the interaction of speaker and listener (Sect. 6.3.3), and the possibility that spoken 
languages have evolved multiple times (Sect. 6.3.4) – were discussed more closely 
in this study.

6
Evolutionary Aspects of Language Change
119
With these differences in mind, I have then presented three major challenges for 
the ﬁeld of historical linguistics, for which no solutions have been proposed so far, 
and for which it is also unlikely that we will ﬁnd a satisfying solution during the next 
time. These problems – the identiﬁcation of global tendencies in sound change (Sect. 
6.4.1), the ranking of concepts according to their borrowability (Sect. 6.4.2), and the 
assessments of general tendencies in semantic change (Sect. 6.4.3) are speciﬁcally 
challenging because they result at least in part from the peculiarities of language 
evolution. As a result, it is not possible to solve these problems by simply transfer-
ring methods from evolutionary ﬁelds. Instead, targeted solutions will be needed 
which combine current efforts to automate the traditional linguistic methods for 
historical language comparison with new ideas derived from interdisciplinary 
exchange with different disciplines. While the transfer of biological methods has 
played an important role for linguistic approaches in the past, it seems that it is time 
to work towards a more conscious adaptation of methods to our linguistic needs. 
Acknowledgements This research was supported by the Max Planck Society Research Grant 
CALC³ 
(https://digling.org/calc/) 
and 
the 
ERC 
Consolidator 
Grant 
ProduSemy 
(Grant 
No. 101044282, see https://doi.org/10.3030/101044282). Views and opinions expressed are how-
ever those of the authors only and do not necessarily reﬂect those of the European Union or the 
European Research Council Executive Agency (nor any other funding agencies involved). Neither 
the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. 
References 
Anderson, C., Tresoldi, T., Chacon, T. C., et al. (2018). A cross-linguistic database of phonetic 
transcription systems. Yearbook of the Poznań Linguistic Meeting, 4, 21–53. 
Ben Hamed, M. (2005). Neighbour-nets portray the Chinese dialect continuum and the linguistic 
legacy of Chinaś demic history. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 272, 1015–1022. 
Ben Hamed, M., & Wang, F. (2006). Stuck in the forest: Trees, networks and Chinese dialects. 
Diachronica, 23, 29–60. 
Blank, A. (1997). Prinzipien des lexikalischen Bedeutungswandels am Beispiel der romanischen 
Sprachen. Niemeyer. 
Blevins, J., & Sproat, R. (2021). Statistical evidence for the proto-indo-European-Euskarian 
hypothesis a word-list approach integrating phonotactics. Diachronica, 38(4), 506–564. 
https://doi.org/10.1075/dia.19014.ble 
Bloomﬁeld, L. (1973). Language. Allen & Unwin. 
Bodt, T. A., & List, J.-M. (2022). Reﬂex prediction. A case study of Western Kho-Bwa. 
Diachronica, 39(1), 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1075/dia.20009.bod 
Bouckaert, R., Lemey, P., Dunn, M., et al. (2012). Mapping the origins and expansion of the 
indo-European language family. Science, 337, 957–960. 
Bouckaert, R., Heled, J., Kühnert, D., et al. (2014). BEAST 2: A software platform for Bayesian 
evolutionary analysis. PLoS Computational Biology, 10, e1003537. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
journal.pcbi.1003537 
Bouckaert, R. R., Bowern, C., & Atkinson, Q. D. (2018). The origin and expansion of Pama– 
nyunganlanguages across Australia. Nature Ecology and Evolution, 2, 741–749. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41559-018-0489-3

120
J.-M. List
Bybee, J. L. (2002). Word frequency and context of use in the lexical diffusion of phonetically 
conditioned sound change. Language Variation and Change, 14, 261–290. 
Campbell, L. (1999). Historical linguistics. An introduction (2nd ed.). Edinburgh University Press. 
Campbell, L., & Poser, W. J. (2008). Language classiﬁcation: History and method. Cambridge 
University Press. 
Chang, W., Cathcart, C., Hall, D., & Garret, A. (2015). Ancestry-constrained phylogenetic analysis 
ssupport the indo-European steppe hypothesis. Language, 91, 194–244. 
Dellert, J. (2016). Using causal inference to detect directional tendencies in semantic evolution. In 
S. G. Roberts, C. Cuskley, L. McCrohon, L. Barceló-Coblijn, O. Fehér, & T. Verhoef (Eds.), 
The evolution of language: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference (EVOLANG11). 
Donohue, M., Denham, T., & Oppenheimer, S. (2012). New methodologies for historical linguis-
tics? Calibrating a lexicon-based methodology for diffusion vs. subgrouping. Diachronica, 29, 
505–522. 
Enﬁeld, N. J., & Comrie, B. (Eds.). (2015). Languages of mainland South-East Asia. The state of 
the art. Mouton de Gruyter. 
Felsenstein, J. (1981). Evolutionary trees from DNA sequences: A maximum likelihood approach. 
Journal of Molecular Evolution, 17, 368–376. 
Forkel, R., List, J.-M., Greenhill, S. J., et al. (2018). Cross-linguistic data formats, advancing data 
sharing and re-use in comparative linguistics. Scientiﬁc Data, 5, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
sdata.2018.205 
Fox, A. (1995). Linguistic reconstruction: An introduction to theory and method. Oxford Univer-
sity Press. 
Gąsiorowski, P. (2013). Gruit grus: The indo-European names of the crane. Studia Etymologica 
Cracoviensia, 18, 51–68. https://doi.org/10.4467/20843836SE.13.003.0940 
Geisler, H., & List, J.-M. (2010). Beautiful trees on unstable ground. Notes on the data problem in 
lexicostatistics. In HAL Artchives Ouvertes. https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01298493/ 
Geisler, H., & List, J.-M. (2013). Do languages grow on trees? The tree metaphor in the history of 
linguistics. In H. Fangerau, H. Geisler, T. Halling, & W. Martin (Eds.), Classiﬁcation and 
evolution in biology, linguistics and the history of science. Concepts – methods – visualization 
(pp. 111–124). Franz Steiner Verlag. 
Geisler, H., Forkel, R., & List, J.-M. (2021). A digital, retro-standardized edition of the tableaux 
phonétiques des patois suisses romands (TPPSR). In M. Avanzi, N. LoVecchio, A. Millour, & 
A. Thibault (Eds.), Nouveaux regards sur la variation dialectale (pp. 13–36). Éditions de 
Linguistique et de Philologie. https://tppsr.clld.org 
Georg, S. (2017). The role of paradigmatic morphology in historical, areal and genealogical 
linguistics. Journal of Language Contact, 10, 353–381. 
Gerardi, F., Reichert, S., & Coelho Aragon, C. (2021). TuLeD (Tupían lexical database): Introduc-
ing a database of a south American language family. Language Resources and Evaluation, 55, 
1–19. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10579-020-09521-5 
Gray, R. D., & Jordan, F. M. (2000). Language trees support the express-train sequences of 
Austronesian expansion. Nature, 405, 1052–1055. 
Gray, R. D., Greenhill, S. J., & Ross, R. M. (2007). The pleasures and perils of Darwinzing culture 
(with phylogenies). Biological Theory, 2, 360–375. 
Gray, R. D., Drummond, A. J., & Greenhill, S. J. (2009). Language phylogenies reveal expansion 
pulses and pauses in Paciﬁc settlement. Science, 323, 479–483. 
Grimm, J. (1822). Deutsche Grammatik (2nd ed.). Dieterichsche Buchhandlung. 
Haspelmath, M., & Tadmor, U. (Eds.). (2009). World loanword database. de Gruyter. https://wold. 
clld.org 
Heggarty, P., Maguire, W., & McMahon, A. (2010). Splits or waves? Trees or webs? How 
divergence measures and network analysis can unravel language histories. Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 365, 3829–3843. 
Hock, H. H. (1991). Principles of historical linguistics (2nd ed.). Mouton de Gruyter.

6
Evolutionary Aspects of Language Change
121
Hock, H. H. (2017). Indo-European linguistics meets Micronesian and Sunda-Sulawesi. Wellington 
Working Papers in Linguistics, 23, 63–67. 
Holm, H. J. (2017). Steppe homeland of indo-Europeans favored by a Bayesian approach with 
revised data and processing. Glottometrics, 37, 54–81. 
Holman, E. W., Brown, C. H., Wichmann, S., et al. (2011). Automated dating of the worldś 
language families based on lexical similarity. Current Anthropology, 52, 841–875. 
Hrozný, B. (1915). Die Lösung des hethitischen Problems. Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-
Gesellschaft, 56, 17–50. 
Hruschka, D. J., Branford, S., Smith, E. D., et al. (2015). Detecting regular sound changes in 
linguistics as events of concerted evolution. Current Biology, 25, 1–9. 
Hübschmann, H. (1877). Ueber die stellung des armenischen im kreise der indogermanischen 
sprachen. Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung der indogermanischen Sprachen, 23, 
5–49. 
Hymes, D. H. (1960). Comment on “Lexicostatistics so far” (by D. H. Hymes). Current Anthro-
pology, 1, 34–39. 
Jacques, G., & List, J.-M. (2019). Save the trees: Why we need tree models in linguistic recon-
struction (and when we should apply them). Journal of Historical Linguistics, 9, 128–166. 
https://doi.org/10.1075/jhl.17008.mat 
Jäger, G. (2018). Global-scale phylogenetic linguistic inference from lexical resources. Scientiﬁc 
Data, 5, 1–16. 
Jäger, G., & List, J.-M. (2018). Using ancestral state reconstruction methods for onomasiological 
reconstruction in multilingual word lists. Language Dynamics and Change, 8, 22–54. 
Kalyan, S., & François, A. (2019). When the waves meet the trees. Journal of Historical Linguis-
tics, 9, 167–176. https://doi.org/10.1075/jhl.18019.kal 
Klein, W. P. (2004). Was wurde aus den Wörtern der hebräischen Ursprache? Zur Entstehung der 
komparativen linguistik aus dem Geist etymologischer Spekulation. In: Veltri G, Necker G 
(Eds) Gottes Sprache in der philologischen Werkstatt: Hebraistik vom 15 (pp 3–23). Bis zum 
19. jahrhundert. procsym; Brill, Leiden. 
Kolipakam, V., Jordan, F. M., Dunn, M., et al. (2018). A Bayesian phylogenetic study of the 
Dravidian language family. Royal Society Open Science, 5, 1–17. 
Kondrak, G. (2000). A new algorithm for the alignment of phonetic sequences. In Proceedings of 
the 1st North American chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics conference 
(pp. 288–295). 
Kümmel, M. J. (2007). Konsonantenwandel. Reichert. 
Lee, Y.-J., & Sagart, L. (2008). No limits to borrowing: The case of Bai and Chinese. Diachronica, 
25, 357–385. 
List, J.-M. (2012a). Multiple sequence alignment in historical linguistics: A sound class based 
approach. In E. Boone, K. Linke, & M. Schulpen (Eds.), Proceedings of ConSOLE XIX 
(pp. 241–260). 
List, J.-M. (2012b). LexStat. Automatic detection of cognates in multilingual wordlists. In Pro-
ceedings of the EACL 2012 Joint workshop of visualization of linguistic patterns and 
uncovering language history from multilingual resources (pp. 117–125). Stroudsburg. 
List, J.-M. (2014). Sequence comparison in historical linguistics. Düsseldorf University Press. 
List, J.-M. (2016). Beyond cognacy: Historical relations between words and their implication for 
phylogenetic reconstruction. Journal of Language Evolution, 1, 119–136. https://doi.org/10. 
1093/jole/lzw006 
List, J.-M. (2017). A web-based interactive tool for creating, inspecting, editing, and publishing 
etymological datasets. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (pp. 9–12). System Demonstrations. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
List, J.-M. (2019). Automated methods for the investigation of language contact situations, with a 
focus on lexical borrowing. Language and Linguistics Compass, 13,  1–16.

122
J.-M. List
List, J.-M., & Forkel, R. (2022a). Automated identiﬁcation of borrowings in multilingual wordlists 
[version 3; peer review: 4 approved]. Open Research Europe, 1, 1–31. https://doi.org/10.12688/ 
openreseurope.13843.3 
List, J.-M., & Hantgan, A. (2022b). First steps towards the detection of contact layers in Bangime: 
A multi-disciplinary, computer-assisted approach [version 2; peer review: 2 approved]. Open 
Research Europe, 2(10), 1–27. https://doi.org/10.12688/openreseurope.14339.2 
List, J.-M., Terhalle, A., & Urban, M. (2013). Using network approaches to enhance the analysis of 
cross-linguistic polysemies. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on computa-
tional semantics – Short papers (pp. 347–353). Association for Computational Linguistics. 
List, J.-M., Pathmanathan, J. S., Lopez, P., & Bapteste, E. (2016). Unity and disunity in evolution-
ary sciences: Process-based analogies open common research avenues for biology and linguis-
tics. Biology Direct, 11, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13062-016-0145-2 
List, J.-M., Greenhill, S. J., Anderson, C., et al. (2018). CLICS2 . An improved database of cross-
linguistic colexiﬁcations assembling lexical data with help of cross-linguistic data formats. 
Linguistic Typology, 22, 277–306. https://doi.org/10.1515/lingty-2018-0010 
List, J.-M., Forkel, R., Greenhill, S. J., et al. (2022a). Lexibank, a public repository of standardized 
wordlists with computed phonological and lexical features. Scientiﬁc Data, 9(316), 1–31. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-022-01432-0 
List, J. M., Tjuka, A., Rzymski, C. et al. (2022b). Concepticon. A resource for the linking of concept 
lists. Version 3.0.0. Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena. URL https:// 
concepticon.clld.org/ 
McMahon, A., & McMahon, R. (2005). Language classiﬁcation by numbers. Oxford University 
Press. 
Miller, J. E., Tresoldi, T., Zariquiey, R., et al. (2020). Using lexical language models to detect 
borrowings in monolingual wordlists. PLoS One, 15, e0242709. 
Mowrey, R., & Pagliuca, W. (1995). The reductive character of articulatory evolution. Rivista di 
Linguistica, 7, 37–124. 
Münch, A., & Dellert, J. (2015). Evaluating the potential of a large-scale polysemy network as a 
model of plausible semantic shifts. In H. Baayen, G. Jäger, M. Köllner, et al. (Eds.), Pro-
ceedings of the 6th Conference on quantitative investigations in theoretical linguistics. 
Eberhard-Karls University. 
Nakhleh, L. (2013). Computational approaches to species phylogeny inference and gene tree 
reconciliation. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 28, 719–728. 
Nakhleh, L., Ringe, D., & Warnow, T. (2005). Perfect phylogenetic networks: A new methodology 
for reconstructing the evolutionary history of natural languages. Language, 81, 382–420. 
Nelson-Sathi, S., List, J.-M., Geisler, H., et al. (2011). Networks uncover hidden lexical borrowing 
in indo-European language evolution. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 278, 1794–1803. 
Ohala, J. J. (1989). Sound change is drawn from a pool of synchronic variation. In L. E. Breivik & 
E. H. Jahr (Eds.), Language change: Contributions to the study of its causes (pp. 173–198). 
Mouton de Gruyter. 
Pozdniakov, K. (2014). O poroge rodstva i indekse stabilŉosti v bazisnoj leksike pri massovom 
sravnenii: Atlantičeskie jazyki [On the threshold of relationship and the “stability index” of 
basic lexicon in mass comparison: Atlantic languages]. Journal of Language Relationship, 11, 
187–237. 
Prokić, J., Wieling, M., & Nerbonne, J. (2009). Multiple sequence alignments in linguistics. In 
Proceedings of the EACL 2009 workshop on language technology and resources for cultural 
heritage, social sciences, humanities, and education (pp. 18–25). 
Rask, R. K. (1818). Undersögelse om det gamle Nordiske eller Islandske sprogs oprindelse 
[nvestigation of the origin of the old Norse or Icelandic language]. Gyldendalske Boghandlings 
Forlag. 
Ringe, D., Warnow, T., & Taylor, A. (2002). Indo-European and computational cladistics. Trans-
actions of the Philological Society, 100,  59–129.

6
Evolutionary Aspects of Language Change
123
Ronquist, F., Mark, P., & van der Huelsenbeck, J. P. (2009). Bayesian phylogenetic analysis using 
MrBayes. In P. Lemey, M. Salemi, & A.-M. Vandamme (Eds.), The phylogenetic handbook. A 
practical approach to phylogenetic analysis and hypothesis testing (2nd ed., pp. 210–266). 
Cambridge University Press. 
Rzymski, C., Tresoldi, T., Greenhill, S., et al. (2020). The database of cross-linguistic 
Colexiﬁcations, reproducible analysis of cross-linguistic polysemies. Scientiﬁc Data, 7, 1–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-019-0341-x 
Sagart, L., Jacques, G., Lai, Y., et al. (2019). Dated language phylogenies shed light on the ancestry 
of Sino-Tibetan. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the United States of 
America, 116, 10317–10322. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1817972116 
Sankoff, D. (1969). Historical linguistics as stochastic process. Dissertation, McGill University. 
Schleicher, A. (1853). Die ersten Spaltungen des indogermanischen Urvolkes [The ﬁrst splits of the 
Indo-European proto people]. Allgemeine Monatsschrift für Wissenschaft und Literatur, 3, 
786–787. 
Schleicher, A. (1861). Compendium der vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen 
Sprache. Böhlau. 
Schleicher, 
A. 
(1863). 
Die 
Darwinsche 
Theorie 
und 
die 
Sprachwissenschaft: 
Offenes 
Sendschreiben an Herrn Dr. Ernst Haeckel [Darwinian theory and language science. Open 
letter to Dr. Ernstt Haeckel]. Hermann Böhlau, Weimar. 
Schmidt, J. (1872). Die Verwantschaftsverhältnisse der indogermanischen Sprachen [The rela-
tionship among Indo-European languages]. Hermann Böhlau. 
Schuchardt, H. (1900). Über die Klassiﬁkation der romanischen Mundarten [On the classiﬁcation 
of romance dialects]. Probe-Vorlesung, gehalten zu Leipzig am 30. April 1870. Graz. 
Schweikhard, N. E., & List, J.-M. (2020). Developing an annotation framework for word formation 
processes in comparative linguistics. SKASE Journal of Theoretical Linguistics, 17, 2–26. 
Schweikhard, N. E., & List, J.-M. (forthcoming). Modeling word trees in historical linguistics. 
Preliminary ideas for the reconciliation of word trees and language trees. In B. Brogyanyi & 
R. Lipp (Eds.), Sprach(en)forschung: Disziplinen und interdisziplinarität. Akten der 27. 
Fachtagung der gesellschaft für sprache und sprachen (pp. 1–20). Dr. Kovač. 
Societé de Linguistique de Paris. (1871). Statuts: Approuvés par décision ministérielle du 8 mars 
1866. Bulletin de la Société de Linguistique de Paris, 1, III–IV. 
Sokal, R. R., & Michener, C. D. (1958). A statistical method for evaluating systematic relationships. 
University of Kansas Scientiﬁc Bulletin, 28, 1409–1438. 
Starostin, S. A. (2007). Computer-based simulation of the glottochronological process (letter to 
M. Gell-Mann). In S. A. Starostin (Ed.), Trudy po yazykoznaniyu [Works in linguistics] 
(pp. 854–861). LRC Publishing House. 
Steiner, L., Stadler, P. F., & Cysouw, M. (2011). A pipeline for computational historical linguistics. 
Language Dynamics and Change, 1, 89–127. 
Swadesh, M. (1950). Salish internal relationships. International Journal of American Linguistics, 
16, 157–167. 
Swadesh, M. (1952). Lexico-statistic dating of prehistoric ethnic contacts: With special reference to 
north american indians and eskimos. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 96, 
452–463. 
Swadesh, M. (1955). Towards greater accuracy in lexicostatistic dating. International Journal of 
American Linguistics, 21, 121–137. 
Swadesh, M. (1959). The mesh principle in comparative linguistics. Anthropological Linguistics, 1, 
7–14. 
Szemerényi, O. (1970). Einführung in die vergleichende Sprachwissenschaft [Introduction to 
comparative linguistics]. Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. 
Webb, D. (1787). Some reasons for thinking, that the Greek language was borrowed from the 
Chinese. In Notes on the Grammatica Sinica of Mons. Fourmont. Dodsley.

124
J.-M. List
Wilkins, D. P. (1996). Natural tendencies of semantic change and the search for cognates. In 
M. Durie (Ed.), The comparative method reviewed: Regularity and irregularity in language 
change (pp. 264–304). Oxford University Press. 
Willems, M., Lord, E., Laforest, L., et al. (2016). Using hybridization networks to retrace the 
evolution of indo-European languages. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 16, 1–18. https://doi.org/10. 
1186/s12862-016-0745-6 
Wu, M.-S., & List, J.-M. (2023). Annotating cognates in phylogenetic studies of south-east Asian 
languages. Language Dynamics and Change, 1–37. https://doi.org/10.1163/22105832-
bja10023 
Wu, M.-S., Schweikhard, N. E., Bodt, T. A., et al. (2020). Computer-assisted language comparison. 
State of the art. Journal of Open Humanities Data, 6, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.5334/johd.12 
Yang, C., & Xu, Y. (2019). A review of tone change studies in East and Southeast Asia. 
Diachronica, 36, 417–459. 
Zalizniak, A. A., Smirnitskaya, A., Russo, M., et al. (2020). Database of semantic shifts (version 
from 07/10/2020). Institute of Linguistics at the Russian Academy of Sciences. http:// 
datsemshift.ru/ 
Zenner, E., Speelman, D., & Geeraerts, D. (2014). Core vocabulary, borrowability and entrench-
ment. Diachronica, 31,  74–105.

