Emergence, Complexity and Computation ECC
Chaotic 
Harmony
Ali Sanayei
Otto E. Rössler
A Dialog about Physics, Complexity 
and Life 

Emergence, Complexity and Computation
Volume 11
Series editors
Ivan Zelinka, Technical University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic
e-mail: ivan.zelinka@vsb.cz
Andrew Adamatzky, University of the West of England, Bristol, UK
e-mail: adamatzky@gmail.com
Guanrong Chen, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
e-mail: eegchen@cityu.edu.hk
Editorial Board
Ajith Abraham, MirLabs, USA
Ana Lucia C. Bazzan, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre
RS, Brazil
Juan C. Burguillo, University of Vigo, Spain
Sergej Cˇ elikovsky´, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Czech Republic
Mohammed Chadli, University of Jules Verne, France
Emilio Corchado, University of Salamanca, Spain
Donald Davendra, Technical University of Ostrava, Czech Republic
Andrew Ilachinski, Center for Naval Analyses, USA
Jouni Lampinen, University of Vaasa, Finland
Martin Middendorf, University of Leipzig, Germany
Edward Ott, University of Maryland, USA
Linqiang Pan, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
Gheorghe Pa˘un, Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania
Hendrik Richter, HTWK Leipzig University of Applied Sciences, Germany
Juan A. Rodriguez-Aguilar, IIIA-CSIC, Spain
Otto Rössler, Institute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, Tübingen, Germany
Vaclav Snasel, Technical University of Ostrava, Czech Republic
Ivo Vondrák, Technical University of Ostrava, Czech Republic
Hector Zenil, Karolinska Institute, Sweden
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/10624

About this Series
The Emergence, Complexity and Computation (ECC) series publishes new
developments, advancements and selected topics in the ﬁelds of complexity,
computation and emergence. The series focuses on all aspects of reality-based
computation approaches from an interdisciplinary point of view especially from
applied sciences, biology, physics, or Chemistry. It presents new ideas and
interdisciplinary insight on the mutual intersection of subareas of computation,
complexity and emergence and its impact and limits to any computing based on
physical limits (thermodynamic and quantum limits, Bremermann’s limit, Seth
Lloyd limits…) as well as algorithmic limits (Gödel’s proof and its impact on
calculation, algorithmic complexity, the Chaitin’s Omega number and Kolmogorov
complexity, non-traditional calculations like Turing machine process and its
consequences,…) and limitations arising in artiﬁcial intelligence ﬁeld. The topics
are (but not limited to) membrane computing, DNA computing, immune
computing, quantum computing, swarm computing, analogic computing, chaos
computing and computing on the edge of chaos, computational aspects of
dynamics of complex systems (systems with self-organization, multiagent systems,
cellular automata, artiﬁcial life,…), emergence of complex systems and its
computational aspects, and agent based computation. The main aim of this series it
to discuss the above mentioned topics from an interdisciplinary point of view and
present new ideas coming from mutual intersection of classical as well as modern
methods of computation. Within the scope of the series are monographs, lecture
notes, selected contributions from specialized conferences and workshops, special
contribution from international experts.

Ali Sanayei
• Otto E. Rössler
Chaotic Harmony
A Dialog about Physics, Complexity
and Life
123

Ali Sanayei
Institute for Theoretical Physics
University of Tübingen
Tübingen
Germany
Otto E. Rössler
Institute of Physical and Theoretical
Chemistry
University of Tübingen
Tübingen
Germany
ISSN 2194-7287
ISSN 2194-7295
(electronic)
ISBN 978-3-319-06780-3
ISBN 978-3-319-06781-0
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0
Springer Cham Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014940404
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or
information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief
excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the
purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the
work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of
the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must
always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the
Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with
respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Foreword
Ali and Otto ﬁrst met in 2011 at a conference in Greece on dynamical systems and
chaos. At this meeting, the two talked at length mostly on chaos theory, and from
then on they remained in regular contact discussing different topics. In December
2012, Ali, a young physicist, decided to capture different topics and ideas in Otto’s
research activities of more than 40 years in a biographical interview. So, on
weekends Ali brought a video camera for the interview. Even though the red
thread of the interview was intended to be autobiographical, the two of them rather
turned to eagerly discuss unsolved problems in science as a whole. While for Ali
quantum mechanics and classical mechanics are two powerful streams in modern
physics—he always tries to ﬁnd an analogy or proportionality between them–, in
Otto’s view both ﬁelds do not need to be seen as fundamentally separate whereby
he draws a connection to the ancient Greek philosophers. Something the two of
them have in common, however, are a high opinion of Paul Dirac’s work, as well
as of Graham Farmelo’s colourful biography.
In the hour-long interviews of Ali and Otto, life and biography somehow are
eclipsed by the debate about unsolved problems and complex theoretical themes.
Both discussion partners try to ﬁnd explanations, whereby Ali defends quantum
mechanics, which Otto attempts to incorporate into his web of classical assump-
tions and interpretations. While at ﬁrst only a few interviews had been planned, the
two scientists came together for more and more sessions, further illustrating their
love for ﬁnding answers to physical problems. Otto is inclined to mix in different
disciplines because of his long research experience in science, with some cher-
ished topics repeated like musical themes. Evolution is one of these beloved topics
and chaos theory, of course, is another. In addition, Otto tries to sell thoughts about
endophysics and cryodynamics, newly designed theories or disciplines, as he dares
to call them. In Otto’s eyes, these new ﬁelds have major implications for the
understanding of physics and cosmology, maybe even harbouring new sources of
energy.
The big topics focused on in 25 sessions are chemical evolution (life), humanity
theory, brain equation, chaos, endophysics, and cosmology. In Otto’s opinion,
many points are already solved, but of course, as unassuming as he is, he knows
that there still is much work to be done and that many more convincing arguments
are necessary to win over the physics community. Otto is very thankful for
v

his many co-operations and long-term associations with lifelong friends across the
globe and also with his many students. The gratefulness for the privilege to do
research and teach at the university is evident. His main tools are paper and pencil
and in our time, of course, the computer, although ‘‘only’’ to demonstrate his ideas.
Ali is very much engaged in the roots of physics and natural science as a whole.
Perhaps he sometimes is too tolerant and too hesitant to interrupt Otto’s repetitions
and excitement in explaining his beloved topics. On the other hand, Ali is very
determined to get the right point and to discover surprises in reﬂecting new topics
of science. Both, the young and the almost old scientist in dialogue, reveal an
optimistic view, playful intuition, enthusiasm and joy in their joint—sometimes a
little chaotic—journey through the natural sciences. And so, in the words of
Heraclitus ‘‘out of differences the most beautiful harmony arises.’’
Reimara Rössler
Ivan Zelinka
vi
Foreword

Preface
Scientiﬁc dialogs in a genuine atmosphere surrounded by creative paintings above
a piano, with beautiful various objets d’art, fantastic photographs and many
prestigious books bring to life the eminent Rumi’s statement that ‘‘There is no
limit for thought, and there is a world of freedom inside every person.’’ That was
the atmosphere in which I conducted 25 interviews with a scientist who ignited his
own ‘‘Otto-cycle’’ in the 1950s, to become a biologist at ﬁrst, and turned to
theoretical chemistry afterwards. Later, Maxwell’s equations electriﬁed him,
Poincaré’s three-body problem and chaotic strange attractors absorbed him, and
Einstein’s general theory of relativity attracted him to physics. Nevertheless, at the
end of my interviews as long as the ‘‘cycle’’ was running with its high efﬁciency,
he could also become a theologian and ultimately even combine all of those four
strands together!
The pivotal principle for Otto E. Rössler and me, which made both of us have 25
prosperous dialogs, was Dirac’s Principle of Beauty: ‘‘If one is working from the point
of view of getting beauty in one’s equations, and if one has really a sound insight, one
is on a sure line of progress.’’ Let it not remain unsaid that the elegant atmosphere in
which those talks took place supported metaphysically our joint principle and even led
us spontaneously to talk about a link between symmetry and art.
It was not the ﬁrst time that I had discussions with Otto, but it was the ﬁrst time
that we had dialogs in that exceptional atmosphere. Although our discussions were
not ‘‘dialogs concerning the two chief world systems,’’ we did not achieve com-
plete agreement on several ideas. Nonetheless, for those special interviews I had
made a treaty with myself, that I should not criticize him during his elaborations.
Although it was quite difﬁcult on several occasions to be faithful to my inner
treaty, I succeeded in not having a pro and con round-table with him but rather an
interview. The main reason for my promise was simply to get to know his com-
plete ideas about a given subject without any external intervention. Otherwise due
to his kindness, as soon as I wanted to make a comment he would stop talking in a
ﬂow and might lose a main clue and then it became difﬁcult to come back to the
primary path. In this way, I can now say that I have obtained almost complete
vii

answers to my questions, none of which he knew beforehand. One could imagine
that it may be burdensome to undergo many interviews and to answer various
questions for which one does not have any idea in advance. So the next point
which I should perhaps underline here is that those dialogs could not only collect
comparatively complete answers, but also that Otto did not have any idea what my
questions would be. It is also worth mentioning that I personally had no idea what
his answers would be so that I could have tailored my questions in anticipation.
Such a strategy—despite its seeming laboriousness—could enlarge the degree of
creativity in our project and helped both of us not to saturate in a steady state.
The main thread in these dialogs was to start out from an early age, when Otto
E. Rössler began becoming a scientist, up until now. Accordingly, the style of the
book can be called a ‘‘scientiﬁc autobiography,’’ for we were not going to talk
about the private life. As I see it, one of the principal advantages of such a
collection is to harvest his ideas about several subjects which can stimulate and
foster more discussions and trigger comments. So I would be delighted if I had
succeeded in establishing a basis for others who would like to discuss with Otto or
even try to refute his ideas. As physicist John Wheeler, and subsequently also
philosopher of science, Karl Popper, put it, ‘‘our whole problem is to make the
mistakes as fast as possible’’; we also are reminded of Einstein’s saying that the
essence of science is that ‘‘anyone who has never made a mistake has never tried
anything new.’’
To preserve the dialogical structure, we kept the style of the whole book in the
form of ‘‘questions and answers.’’ Moreover, the reader will see an easy switching
of subjects between biology, theoretical chemistry and physics. Keeping the
autobiographical structure of the book implied to preserve the sequence of themes
as they occurred. Otto loved to remain in his ‘‘cycle’’ and draw upon various ﬁelds
and combine them in unexpected ways to answer my questions. Hence the reader
will realize that when Otto talks about, for example, intelligence, he cannot reign-
in his emotions and starts explaining the special behavior of orangutans with
abundant eagerness! Due to his special style, he also mentions many names and
works—not only in physics, but also in biology, zoology, chemistry, philosophy,
mathematics, literature, theology, etc. In order that the reader can easily follow, a
comprehensive index and bibliography have been compiled at the end.
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe believed that ‘‘Every day we should hear at least
one little song, read one good poem, see one exquisite picture, and if possible,
speak a few sensible words.’’ I hope our 25 dialogs can be considered as some
‘‘sensible words.’’
My special gratitude goes to Oliver Purnell and Michal Rössler for editing all
interviews. I would also very much like to thank Ivan Zelinka, Guanrong (Ron)
viii
Preface

Chen, Thomas Ditzinger and Andrew Adamatzky who helped me a lot to ﬁnish
this work. I am delighted to dedicate the book to my parents who ﬁrst taught me
that, in any chaos, one can eventually ﬁnd harmony.
Tübingen, December 2013
Ali Sanayai
Preface
ix

Contents
1
Early Steps in Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Entering Theoretical Biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Dynamical Function Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Chaos. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8
Cosmos, T-Tube System, Poincaré and Boltzmann. . . . . . . . . . . .
79
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem . . . . . . . .
89
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem . . . . . . . . . . .
101
11
Thermodynamics and Its Proposed Counterpart . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
12
Newton’s Laws, Symmetry, Noether Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
14
Three-Body Problem, Poincaré Recurrence,
Homoclinic Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
147
15
The Brain Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
157
16
Repulsion and Attraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
165
xi

17
Einstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
175
18
Intelligence, Orangutans and Second Darwinism . . . . . . . . . . . . .
193
19
Hubble Law, Cryodynamics, Cosmology and Technology. . . . . . .
203
20
Taffy-Puller, Topology and General Relativity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
209
21
Sinai Billiard and Plane-Tree Alley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
215
22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell, Indistinguishability, Spin. . . . . . . .
223
23
The Sixth Hilbert Problem, Physics and Beauty. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
235
24
Physics and Religion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
245
25
Open Problems or Eight Dreams of Rationalism . . . . . . . . . . . . .
255
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
263
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
273
xii
Contents

Chapter 1
Early Steps in Science
My ﬁrst question: When did you ﬁrst encounter the philosophy of science? When
was that important point in your life?
I was a playful child, and as a child I had a ‘‘Märklin Baukasten,’’ a metal
construction kit for children to build mechanical toys with wheels, and I invented a
little motor using a rubber band so that the rubber band would be coiled up on the
axis of a simple toy car. The car would run a little while on its own, it was
absolutely trivial, but I loved these things. Later, out of this familiarity with metal
plates and axes and cogwheels I came up with a strange idea which I did not
understand at the time. If you had a vertical metal plate and through that plate there
came out 2 axes with a turning wheel each as a knob, and there was a hidden
mechanism connecting the wheels with each other, I convinced myself that from
the outside, you could not judge for sure what kind of mechanism was hidden
behind these two wheels. At that time I did not know anything about measurement
or uncertainty or Gödel, but I was fascinated by the kind of uncertainty that would
arise—this just came back to me. I am not sure that my father understood what I
had in mind when I confronted him with this problem at the time.
Do you remember the exact time or year?
This was when I was 11 years old, in 1951. Shortly thereafter, this equipment for
building-up mechanical toys was complemented by electrical components,
including little electromagnets, so that a DC motor could be built in the same
hands-on fashion out of Märklin elements. There was also a little book edited by a
ﬁrm to encourage young people to work with the toy elements they provided. I
remember I wrote a letter to this ﬁrm named ‘‘Rim’’ after correcting all the
misprints and errors I had found in the booklet they had supplied with the material.
I got a very kind letter back from them thanking me for having helped them
improve their book. I did not know at that time that this was typical scientiﬁc
behavior, displayed. It was just my childish joy in solving mechanical problems
and inventing a machine. Then I had this catastrophe in life called puberty.
Afterwards, radio-amateuring became my favorite pastime. I became the youngest
licensed radio amateur in the country. I had invented by trial and error a new
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_1,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
1

amplitude modulation for radio transmitters whereby the amplitude of the carrier
wave was made proportional to the sound wave, a fact which would cause a strong
distortion as one would guess. But I included a negative feedback—from the
demodulated carrier wave back to the low-frequency input—to effectively
suppress the distortion despite the fact that the carrier wave still mirrored the
voice volume. In this way, one could save a lot of money in terms of the amount of
electricity consumed by a transmitter. This was my ﬁrst invention if you so wish.
The year was?
That was when I was 17 years old.
When working with this equipment, were you also dealing with philosophical
questions?
This had just been ‘‘stupid science’’ as it were,—mechanical and electrical
engineering. Then there occurred something like a cut in my life, I discovered the
poet Schiller in high school. I saw that he was interested in deep questions
regarding the motivations of human beings. So I started trying to understand how
motivations work, and the question of free will appeared very important to me. Is
not everything deterministic, but how then can you have a free will? When in high
school still, I was asked to write a long essay on a favorite topic of mine over the
summer holidays, I wrote about Schiller the poet and the problem of free will in his
plays. I saw that he had a very deep understanding of human motivations and that
one could derive logically that the ‘‘net of motivations’’ was inﬁnitely complex. I
wonder how I came to this idea at the time. My high school teacher signed the
essay but refused to grade it. The text contained also religious ideas. I drew a
connection between Schiller, religion and philosophy. At that time I had entered a
religious order on my own, the so-called 3rd order of Saint Francis. I was under the
inﬂuence of an impressive Fransciscan monk who was very short, had a caring
personality and who, when preaching, stood like a giant. Later I would ask him
whether he would approve of my becoming a scientist or whether I should join the
ﬁrst order as he had hoped. He told me that it was okay if I continued with my deep
insights. I did not know yet that Teilhard de Chardin, a Jesuit priest, had hit earlier
on the very question which I felt I had solved.
What exactly was that question?
The question was, why do we have life and why do we exist? Is there something
lawful behind this? Can this be fully understood? I was optimistic that one could
completely understand everything, including the origin of life—a mechanism
which predicts why life must arise and what is the ‘‘drive’’ behind it. What the
force is that is giving rise to life.
Do you know the exact year when you solved this question?
Succeeding completely to my own satisfaction came later, when I was 20 years
old, in the third semester of my medical studies.
2
1
Early Steps in Science

And to answer this question: You didn’t try to study theology, but went through
science instead?
I attended theological courses at the university, and it was a theological motivation
that spurred me on, but the mechanism envisioned was purely scientiﬁc. I
effectively re-discovered Teilhard de Chardin’s ﬁnding: the existence of a drive
that pervades the universe and leads towards ‘‘Point Omega,’’ the end point of
evolution. At the same time, I liked to have a mechanism for this energetic drive
which involved a different type of thinking. I saw both ways in one glance and was
sure they would meet. Speciﬁcally, there was an insight I got from a little textbook
that every medical student got for free from a pharmaceutical ﬁrm at the time
called Tropon. It was about physiology and was written by Hans Lullies. It
featured a person whom I would meet later in life, Ludwig von Bertalanffy. He
effectively opened my eyes to a new principle. Bertalanffy was a theoretical
biologist and had written the ﬁrst book titled ‘‘Theoretical Biology,’’ as I later
learned. He also had invented the notion of a ‘‘Fliessgleichgewicht’’—literally
‘‘ﬂow-based equilibrium’’—which is misleadingly translated into ‘‘steady state.’’
He was quoted in the little book with a mental picture offered, a juxtaposition of
ﬁre and life. A mouse would, if put into a ‘‘black box’’ with only input and output
measured, be virtually indistinguishable from a candle ﬂame. This inspired me to
see a connection between the ﬂame as a self-maintaing dynamical structure and
life. It made me see the unbounded power of the ﬂame—to transform everything it
touches into itself. I saw the connection between ﬂame and life, and I also could
see the difference: The ﬂame cannot become something else, it can only become
more of the same, more ﬁre. The juxtaposition allowed me to see something in
between the two: rust. Rust causing iron to become rusty is also an autocatalytic
process; this is what rust and ﬂame have in common. However, from experience
one knows that rust looks different here and there. While being autocatalytic and
trying to become more and more of the same thing, rust at the same time has more
degrees of freedom. So, I could see that if you combine autocatalysis with more
chemical degrees of freedom, then maybe this built-in power of self-amplifying
autocatalysis in chemistry (if given free reign) makes for a bridge between the
primitive form of autocatalysis seen in ﬁre and the highly developed branching
autocatalysis that we ﬁnd in life. I predicted that this drive that I had glimpsed in a
Teilhard-type fashion would be inherent in chemistry, so that a very simple
chemical soup would self-organize in such a way that eventually, new side-paths
of the autocatalysis would be opened-up that are themselves autocatalytic, but
more sophisticated. Charles Darwin had had essentially the same idea 100 years
before. So it was not very original, but the ‘‘pictorial conviction’’ that this really
carries through was perhaps new.
You had this idea when you were 20 years old and a medical student?
Yes, I got convinced I could prove that life was a self-organizing process.
1
Early Steps in Science
3

But the motivation came from theology. Why did you go to medicine, why not
theology or, for example, physics?
It was two reasons, I think. When building receivers and transmitters on my own
recipes, I had started to read electronics engineering books. Once, I encountered a
book with equations meant to describe how these elements, when put together,
worked. On the left-hand side of the equation there was a dot on the variable x. I
could not understand this equation at all and knew that I would never understand it.
This was the ﬁrst differential equation I ever encountered, and it would take me
10 years before I returned to differential equations. However, the reason I chose
medicine was an ethical one. I thought, one has to devote one’s life to serving
other people, it was a kind of substitute for my not doing theology, for not
becoming a begging monk. Something like practical theology. Then, while I
studied medicine and physiology, this window opened-up to understanding
evolution, I was kind of carried away from this philanthropic motivation into a
causal scientiﬁc type of thinking which nonetheless enabled me to keep my
benevolent intentions. I did not think there was a contradiction between these two
ways of thinking and acting. But eventually, the scientiﬁc side would win the
upper hand in my life, a fact which I would have been unable to predict at the time.
You began your studies of medicine at age 19. Was there an additional reason for
choosing medicine? Did you get any suggestions?
My mother was very much trying to push me in this direction because her father
had been a medical doctor after ﬁrst studying theology.
You started at the University of Tübingen. How many years did it take to ﬁnish
medicine? As a medical student, what was the next interesting question to work on?
It was a slow development. I turned to one of the best professors of medicine in
Tübingen, Erich Letterer, head of the pathology institute. I became a doctoral
student in pathology because I liked his style of lecturing. I worked in his institute
for several years as a student, assisting him even to dissect colleagues at the
university in which case he felt responsible to make the ﬁnal diagnosis himself. I
was assigned an immunological dissertation, trying to reproduce a certain type of
disease in mice called Alzheimer’s, by injecting them daily with a foreign protein,
bovine gamma globulin, in differing doses. This took 4 years, a very long time. The
mice did not produce the symptoms that were expected, but instead produced
immunological tolerance, a new phenomenon I did not know about when describing
it in my dissertation, but which would soon after win a Nobel prize for its ﬁrst
discoverers. It was a big disappointment to my professor that I had not found the
disease he had expected—amyloidosis. The experience helped me overcome
disappointment in science. While still working in the pathological institute at night,
I started to write scientiﬁc letters. My motivation was that in this way I might be
able to help a sick child I had met in the surgical clinic once. I was then a student in
a higher semester at 24 years of age. The ﬁrst letter, addressed to Ludwig von
Bertalanffy, apparently never reached him—I met him 5 years later—, described
4
1
Early Steps in Science

my theory of evolution. Another letter went to physicist Carl-Friedrich von
Weizsäcker who had written a book ‘‘The History of Nature’’ which contained
similar ideas to those I had developed. A third went to Konrad Lorenz who had
written nice books on animal behavior. The letter contained a proof that if adding
consciousness to animal behavior had any evolutionary cost to it, consciousness
would have been selected-out. I eventually received an answer almost a year later
when I was already in Seewiesen. However, as stated I had initially written to
Carl-Friedrich von Weizsäcker.
So you encountered physics during your medical studies?
Yes, I had read a book by von Weizsäcker. In one chapter of his pocket book ‘‘The
History of Nature’’ he had commented on the origin of life. I could specify what he
had said there. So I came into contact with this eminent physicist. Weizsäcker got
interested and made the ‘‘mistake’’ of answering my letter. He invited me to visit
him at the home of his mother near Lake Constance. It was a pleasant encounter,
his charming mother brewed coffee. He told me things which I had not expected
talking about, like that Lise Meitner had asked him whether she should publish,
and he had encouraged her to do so. What I did not know at the time was that he
had been the scientiﬁc assistant of Lise Meitner ’s at her institute in Berlin, and
that she had had to leave the country. Only later did I realize the historical context.
Meitner did publish, but her colleague Otto Hahn had done so a month before. So
everybody thinks he was the ﬁrst, even though her article was submitted earlier. So
I suddenly was included a bit in this strange tragic history of physics, owing to this
encounter and friendship with von Weizsäcker. He was a theoretical physicist and
close friend of Werner Heisenberg’s . He told me how Heisenberg had told him in
a taxi cab—when Weizsäcker was only 13—that ‘‘I (Heisenberg) have just proven
Newton wrong.’’ This information that it is possible to prove a giant wrong
triggered his desire to do science. They enjoyed a lifelong friendship with
professional beneﬁts, as Heisenberg would always make sure that Weizsäcker got
a new position whenever he chose to enter a new ﬁeld.
Weizsäcker also told me the story of the day Heisenberg visited Niels Bohr during
the war in Copenhagen; he had accompanied Heisenberg waiting outside, while
Heisenberg, talking to Niels Bohr, handed over the blueprint of a nuclear reactor.
This fact does not seem to be very well known; at least Michael Frayn does not
mention it in his play ‘‘Copenhagen.’’ During wartime it is high treason if a secret
is given to the other side and if I remember correctly, I learned that Heisenberg
wore the uniform of an ofﬁcer of the German army. I later asked a person who
should know because of his close relationship with Heisenberg, and was told that
this was not implausible because there was a law in Germany called ‘‘Sippenhaft’’,
where the whole family would be put in jail if one member had done something
against the state. But if Heisenberg had committed the same act as a member of the
army, the army would have been responsible if the truth came out. So the story
1
Early Steps in Science
5

may be true. This is just politics, I apologize, but it shows how a young person can
suddenly be told secrets of a historical dimension, and it illustrates my saying that
science is friendship.
After that meeting, you went back to Tübingen and continued your medical
studies?
I had told Weizsäcker that I wanted to pursue science from now on and stop
studying medicine. But he replied, ‘‘Please, do me the favor and do your medical
exam. You just need an academic degree, then you can continue doing science. If
you do me that favor, I will give you a position at Max Planck.’’ Indeed, after
ﬁnishing I got a visiting position at Max Planck in Seewiesen near Starnberg.
When did you ﬁnish your dissertation?
I was one year late because the doctoral thesis took so long. I was 26 at the time. I
found myself at Seewiesen giving a talk on the evolution of life, and no one was
interested at the Cybernetics Institute. But there was a neighboring Max Planck
Institute headed by Konrad Lorenz. While I was already working at the division of
Mittelstaedt, I received a letter from Lorenz in the neighboring institute, sent to my
student address in Tübingen, in reply to my letter from almost a year before. I
could answer that I was working 500 yards from his place, so he had to invite me
to pay him a visit out of curiosity or perhaps because my letter had caught his
interest. As mentioned, I had given a proof that it is never the subjective side
which is selected by evolution, only the functional side. So if one camel is more
thirsty and the other has the better nose, it is the better nose that is picked by
evolution, not the stronger thirst. That was a new thesis to Lorenz apparently.
Which Lorenz?
Right, it was ethologist Konrad Lorenz, not my later chaos friend meteorologist Ed
Lorenz. I then went to see Konrad and that became a friendship, too.
What was the main topic in your thesis?
The title of my thesis on immunology, in fact immunological tolerance, was
‘‘Long-term immunization of albino mice with bovine gamma globulin.’’
When you worked at Max Planck—did you forget everything in medicine?
I was suddenly in the role of a theoretician of evolution.
So at Max Planck you did not work on physics, only on evolution?
Yes, on evolution as a physical phenomenon. I discussed mainly with Lorenz. He
invited me to give a talk in his department about my understanding of how evolution
works in nature. I gave the example of a glass ﬁlled with honey that is tipped-over on
a table, and how the ﬁrst outpouring wave causes a mound which inhibits the rest
from ﬂowing out freely. It was my example of how free energy could, for a while,
remain hidden in pockets from which it would exert a further inﬂuence before being
dissipated away, thereby improving the chances for more free energy to be drawn
6
1
Early Steps in Science

into round-about ways of dissipation, and so forth. Lorenz was quite taken with this
presentation, other attendees from his institute were more critical. One advanced
colleague, Norbert Bischof, realized that I did not know anything about differential
equations and was the ﬁrst to kindly suggest to me the use of a computer. He even
made a brief attempt at teaching me programming—in vain.
You did not have any course on mathematics in medicine?
No, I only trusted my own intuition. These two famous people, von Weizsäcker
and Lorenz, each made the mistake of taking seriously the intuition of someone
who knew nothing in a formal sense. This type of credit given—call it
friendship—is the essence of science, I still feel. I loved the questions found, no
matter what the available tools, and became acquainted with the fundamentals in a
stepwise manner.
You learned differential equations at that Institute?
Not at all, that took its time. I lost my position at Max Planck after 10 months
because I did not ﬁt squarely into the department of Biocybernetics. Strangely, my
mother paid a visit and asked to extend my stay but she was only told ‘‘Your son
will make his way.’’
Now you lost your position at Max Planck and your age was 26, so we’ll stop here
and will continue starting the next session at 26 years!
1
Early Steps in Science
7

Chapter 2
Entering Theoretical Biology
You are now 26 years old. Our last point was that you lost your position at Max
Planck because your stipend had ﬁnished. Now, please, continue: What happened
after that?
I turned 27 that year. It was the year I would get married. I worked at the University
of Marburg for a while to ﬁnish my medical training as a ‘‘Medizinalassistent.’’
Before getting the approbation (license to work as a doctor) one had to work for
2 years as a supervised medical intern in different departments. In my spare time
I continued with my scientiﬁc notes.
Is there anything important about getting married? From the Copenhagen
viewpoint it is a spike in your psi-function.
I agree—many things happen when you make such decisions in your life, it is not
the responsibility of one’s own self alone, so the situation is very complex. You are
at the mercy of another person in a symmetric, compounded way. It is a miracle. It
is much easier to continue on science. After leaving Seewiesen I continued
scribbling down notes on my thoughts on the origin of life. A short unpublished
paper emerged. I also was allowed to give a talk on my theoretical approach to
evolution in the medical clinic in Marburg in the lecture hall. It was received with
interest. It was my ﬁrst public talk after the two seminar talks held at Seewiesen.
I learned to talk slowly. The auditorium felt that I seemed to belong to the 19th
century—an opinion my wife heard. The origin of life remained my topic while
working in medicine and I had also another meeting with Carl-Friedrich von
Weizsäcker in Marburg. His encouragement continued.
What exactly was the project you were thinking about?
It had to do with Teilhard de Chardin. I realized that he had tried to build a
consistent theory of evolution, based on a pervasive drive in nature seen by him
that propels everything towards becoming more and more highly organized. He
coined the notion of the ‘‘Point Omega’’—the ﬁrst attractor in history—which
attracts everything in the cosmos (ﬁrst spotted by him in 1915, when he was a
chaplain at the front, under the name ‘‘Point Theta’’ at ﬁrst—a bull’s eye).
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_2,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
9

Everything in the universe is propelled towards an asymptotic state of a maximally
highly organized complexity. I could support this idea of Teilhard’s eventually
with my chemical-kinetic equations.
Then I was allowed to visit the institute of a famous man, a freshly decorated
Nobel Prize winner Manfred Eigen, who kindly invited me to give a talk—an
event which was consummated before his whole institute on a skiing vacation in
Hoch-Sölden in Austria. It was an important experience because I completely
ﬂunked the test. I gave a talk about my ideas on how chemical substances inﬂuence
each other so that eventually you get autocatalysis in a network that is branching
out. In the discussion I was asked whether I could deﬁne mathematically what a
differential equation is. I answered that I had just presented many examples of such
equations, what was it that was meant by deﬁning it exactly? I was told that since I
would not answer formally, it was no use talking to me any longer. Such an
experience can make you stronger.
Who told you so?
The highly decorated scientist thereby effectively forced me to be more formal than
I had been. Much later both he and I would independently write a paper on mad-cow
disease. So our thoughts apparently went along parallel lines over decades.
And then you modeled your idea as an equation?
Yes, because a good fate intervened. I was using libraries very often and wrote a
big paper on chemical evolution that by happenstance never appeared. I submitted
it to the Journal of Theoretical Biology in Buffalo, N.Y. and got a favorable review
but was told I should translate it from German into English even though the journal
in principle accepted German manuscripts. My English was not good enough, I
felt, a drawback I could not overcome at that time. Strangely, the same institution
in Buffalo had posted an announcement for a stipend in the Journal of Theoretical
Biology. Since I knew that my wife was interested in going to the U.S., I applied
for this stipend. Later I learned that I was the only one out of about 170 applicants
who got it. So by this stroke from heaven I suddenly found myself working at the
Center for Theoretical Biology. It may have had to do with my paper submitted to
the same institution. It gave me this opportunity to meet a whole new continent;
America.
You were 27 years old? And how long did you stay at the institute in Buffalo?
It was only a bit more than half a year. It was in 1969, so I was 29 years old.
Did you do any special work during the 6 months there?
Actually no. My wife had a position at the famous Immunological Institute at the
same university, with Professor Ernest Witebsky. I was just sitting in my room in
the institute at Ridge Lea Road, writing notes and talking with people at the
institute, mostly with Bob Rosen who had just ﬁnished the manuscript for his book
10
2
Entering Theoretical Biology

‘‘Dynamical System Theory in Biology.’’ I was reading these notes and we talked,
and I was attending talks of visitors, including Ludwig von Bertalanffy who was
there, too—to whom I had written my ﬁrst scientiﬁc letter 5 years before which, as
you may remember, he apparently never got. It was very nice to talk with him
about evolution, the origin of life, theoretical biology and the way he had invented
it as a science. I also attended a talk by Stu Kauffman at the Buffalo Institute.
Being a medical doctor, too, he had independently invented almost the same
theory of chemical evolution as I had. A lifelong friendship with Bob Rosen
followed, and with Stu.
And then you came back from the United States to Germany?
Yes, after having been given a ‘‘semi-permanent position’’ in Buffalo which was a
very nice thing to hear. I then got a stipend from the German DFG research
organization. I chose to work in Tübingen with it. By happenstance, a scientist
whom I had met in Marburg, chemist Friedrich Franz Seelig, had just received a
call from Tübingen and was willing to accept me as a stipend holder to work with
him at the University of Tübingen. So I found myself working at the Chemistry
department there.
As a postdoc, what did you do?
The new chair was busy buying an analog computer at the time. I was sent to a
course to professionally use such a machine and was then the one who worked the
most with it. It was quite nice to be able to put my mind into these mutually
inﬂuencing electrical variables (voltages) that one could watch performing on the
screen of the oscilloscope. I liked very much this way of understanding dynamics
in the same pictorial way in which also spatial intuition works. There was a kind of
synchrony between this machine and my mind.
At that time, was there only one such computer?
There was another analog computer from a different ﬁrm in the department of
biology, but I never saw it. These machines were the state of the art at the time.
You had this computer at the chemistry department?
Yes, and I was virtually free to use it all the time.
So you started simulating dynamical systems on an analog computer?
Yes, and instead of working with the almost inﬁnite number of variables that one
has to deal with in the origin-of-life theory, I kind of reduced the number of
variables more and more, and soon discovered a 3-variable ‘‘chemical multivi-
brator.’’ I constructed analogies between electronics on the one hand and chemical
reactions on the other. ‘‘Liquid automata’’ was a name I coined and proved to be
correct. It is quite counterintuitive that you can have an automaton, a discrete-state
machine, which is a well stirred ﬂuid. It indeed is a simple digital computer
2
Entering Theoretical Biology
11

because the differential equations underlying both the soup and a chip are the
same. The computers we are using are, in reality continuous-time differentiable
dynamical systems. Automata theory is but a simpliﬁed description of these more
complicated continuous systems. It was nice to get persuaded by a machine, to see
the interaction of smooth dynamical variables everywhere, in chemistry and
evolution, and also in electronics. I even already saw some chaotic oscillations on
the oscilloscope screen in 1970, but I misinterpreted them as being noise-induced.
You were 30 years old at that time. Did you know about chaotic systems by then?
Not at all. It was only a few years later, during this on-going work with electronic
systems and their analogs in chemistry, in continuation of my previous
evolutionary networks, that I started to put my mind into the mutual interplay
of four, and then three, variables.
When you were working on the analog computer, did you know Edward Lorenz?
When you encountered the concept of chaos, did you meet him personally or did
you only read his paper?
The paper was a present given to me by my friend Art Winfree in 1975. Years
before, my friend Wolfgang Engelmann had introduced me to Art. In 1972, Art
invited me after my ﬁrst paper on the parallelism between electronics and liquid
chemical systems to give a talk at Purdue University in his department. Then I saw
him again 3 years later in Vienna at a conference on biochronological systems. He
had attended my talk and told me afterwards that this was a little bit boring, my
deductive theory of chronobiological systems, did I not do something more
interesting in the wake of my liquid automata? I told him that I was thinking about
a three-variable limit cycle that looks like a knot and cannot be ﬂattened into a
more or less circle-like thing but is irreducibly more complicated because it is
genuinely three-dimensional. He replied that this sounded to him like chaos. I
asked: What do you mean by chaos, I know the term only from trafﬁc jams. He
told me there had been a conference in Aspen, Colorado, as usual without
proceedings, which he had attended, ‘‘on chaos’’ and that he had collected all the
papers written on the subject up to that time and that he would send me a folder
with them all. I thought he is a very good friend but people in America are always
very positive and kind but possibly nothing will come out of this. Lo and behold,
6 weeks later I received a big folder with all the papers that had been written on
chaos up to the time, most still in preprint form.
In that folder, was there a paper that stimulated you especially?
Yes, Ed Lorenz’s paper of 1963, whom I would meet a year later, was there and
more recent ones like Jim Yorke’s and Bob May’s and George Oster’s, which I
remember. Art wrote me explicitly that I should do him the favor of ﬁnding a
chemical version of the Lorenz attractor.
12
2
Entering Theoretical Biology

What do you mean?
Art Winfree thereby made me his pupil by decree if you so wish—by forcing me
to work in this area because he said he had no time to do it himself, so I should
please do it in his place. Hence I felt I had the duty to try and ﬁnd a method to
implement the Lorenz equation in chemical rate equations, which are unlike Ed
Lorenz’s non-negative by deﬁnition.
So you met the Lorenz equation in these proceedings actually?
As a reprint in the folder Art had sent me.
2
Entering Theoretical Biology
13

Chapter 3
Dynamical Function Change
We enter the third session. You are now 35 years old and you just obtained a
special folder from the United States that contained several papers on chaos, one
of which was the Ed Lorenz paper.
Before that, I had obtained what is called a ‘‘habilitation’’ which is like a more
advanced second thesis that has to be defended before the faculty and serves as a
lifelong license to teach. It was about synthesizing arbitrarily large reaction
networks with a prescribed—automata-like—behavior (well-stirred automata do
exist, a somewhat paradoxical notion). Thereafter I was still without a university
position, obtaining (after a year) a lucky stipend from the VW-Foundation on the
topic of coupled optimizers in the abstract context of brain stimulation.
VW refers to the Volkswagen ﬁrm?
Yes, they are an important scientiﬁc sponsor. I had a joint project with Israel
Lieblich. We had independently thought of coupling the brains of two animals in a
mutually rewarding fashion. I had had the idea theoretically, he had planned to do
it experimentally with mice, which fact greatly surprised me. Unfortunately, he fell
victim to a car accident. I might otherwise have continued working theoretically in
Jim Olds’ footsteps on ‘‘brain stimulation reward’’ and might never have entered
chaos theory. I was deeply interested in understanding the functional differences
between human beings and other animals. I forgot to mention my previous ‘‘brain
equation,’’ which I found when I was 33 years old.
This was before you encountered chaos—so let’s talk about the brain equation
ﬁrst.
When setting up the brain equation, I postulated that you need to have something
which I called ‘‘will-o-the wisp’’ potentials present in the latter equation, meaning
attracting or repulsive potentials that arise spontaneously in unpredictable positions
in space, as an essential part of the function performed by the brain. I did not realize
at the time that my potential-type brain equation is intrinsically chaotic itself, so
that adding these will-o’-the-wisp potentials was absolutely redundant. So my later
chaos work showed me that the brain equation was even more powerful than I had
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_3,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
15

thought when setting it up. The brain equation, which got derived in a step-by-step
manner in a long paper presented at Trieste at a conference on the mathematics of
the nervous system, thereafter did not catch-on in the biological community for a
long time. Presumably because it is too mathematical, although the equation is very
useful to be applied in principle in artiﬁcial intelligence, in artiﬁcial motivation and
in the therapy of autism. It contains arbitrarily strong desires and is mandatory, I
believe, for the realization of artiﬁcial brains.
And it is an ordinary differential equation?
Implicitly, yes. It more speciﬁcally is a potential equation much like Newton’s
equation but with orthogonal trajectories, and it is time dependent. It depends on
your own momentary position in space while you are moving around. It also
depends on the time spans elapsed since the last ﬁlling-up events for the different
sub-potentials, but also on the momentary distances to the closest corresponding
ﬁlling stations. It thereby yields an approximate solution to a variant of a famous
mathematical problem, the ‘‘travelling-salesman problem.’’ The same mathematical
variant of the travelling salesman problem would 6 years later be described
independently in a book by Gary and Johnson. While I had called it the ‘‘travelling-
salesman-with-alarm-clocks problem,’’ they called it the ‘‘decision-type travelling
salesman problem.’’ This problem possesses a lot of applications and is ‘‘NP-
complete,’’ as the technical term goes. The brain equation marks the essential
difference between ‘‘behavioral biology’’ and ‘‘biochemical biology’’ in the sense of
Darwin. There exists a second survival-determining environmental reality at work
in biological evolution besides Darwin’s slow temporal change. Namely, rapidly
recurrent changes in space and time. These changes explain why we need a brain.
The so derived brain equation is decoupled from the biochemical level of life and
remains fully functional—indeed alive—when implemented in a robot.
Did you get any comments or feedback on this equation from other people?
Michael Conrad called the problem solved by the brain equation the ‘‘Rossler
task.’’ Some of my students got very interested. A student of my friend Kunihiko
Kaneko was assigned the brain equation for a doctoral thesis after I had given a
talk on it in Tokyo. But his thesis did not get ﬁnished and I have a very bad
conscience for not having been helpful enough. The student was too modest to
contact me directly. It can happen that one has a pupil very far away with whom
one needs to have an intense interaction without knowing so. But to return, I
should at this point perhaps also mention the recent book ‘‘Neosentience’’ written
by Bill Seaman on which I was allowed to collaborate. A central motivation of the
collaboration was the brain equation.
This equation has the potential to show chaotic behavior. But you did not mention
this equation in your habilitation thesis?
The latter had been written a year before.
16
3
Dynamical Function Change

Do you want to explain the structure of the brain equation or would you rather go
on with chaos?
It is a temptation to stick a bit longer with the brain equation. If it is true that the
brain can be described by an equation—if you can know what a brain is for—, then
you can build artiﬁcial brains which ultimately could be ﬁtted into the head of a
needle pin, as Michael Conrad predicted. He had been a student of Dirac’s in
Florida and happened to work in Tübingen at the time. He was a co-editor with
Werner Güttinger
and Mario DalCin at the Trieste conference and volume on
‘‘The Physics and Mathematics of the Nervous System’’ which contains the brain
equation, published in the Springer Lecture Notes in Biomathematics (volume 4).
The brain equation was a belated outgrowth of my discussions held with Konrad
Lorenz 6 years before. The basic difference between chemical life and behavioral
life—brain life—lies in a distinction which Darwin could have made and possibly
did make already himself—I never checked. I always shied away from reading his
books, especially the one with the intimidating title ‘‘On the Expression of
Emotions in Animals and Man.’’ One can predict chemical evolution—as Darwin
already did with his theory of the ‘‘warm little pond.’’ But while one can predict
many things in chemical and biochemical evolution, the latter also depends
critically on history—on many historical accidents. For example, the vertebrate
eye—our own eye—is built in a way which is not quite optimal since the optical
nerve, rather than coming from behind, runs right over the layer of light-sensitive
cells with all its many necessary branchings—a fact which is a functional
drawback. The eye of mollusks avoids this historical shortcoming and hence is less
‘‘stupid’’ in its otherwise convergent design. There are many accidents of history
built into chemical and biochemical evolution. The brain equation, by contrast, is
predictable on functional grounds alone, being independent of the biochemical
history. So the theory of how the brain works is much simpler than the theory of
how the biochemical machinery of life works. It was quite a surprise to me that
mathematics alone sufﬁces to predict the functional structure of brains. As a
consequence, one can also understand the interaction between several functionally
coupled brains, which by the way is chaotic, of course. It also allows you to
understand and predict a very important point in human life—the notion of
benevolence—which is an unfamiliar topic in scientiﬁc research. Benevolence
means that one makes the goals of the other person one’s own goals. This is a very
complicated situation, mathematically speaking. You have two coupled optimiz-
ers, the one optimizer tries to optimize the optimality functional of the second, and
vice versa, which gives rise to a positive feedback.
A cycle?
Yes, and this feedback then generates what I call with Detlef Linke the ‘‘person
attractor.’’ This is a favorite theory of mine which I dare mention here. I love it but
it is not easy to describe to the world—it immediately invokes the question of
whether the whole dream of life that we are experiencing is a benevolent gift, or not.
3
Dynamical Function Change
17

Is it like game theory where each wants to optimize the other’s outcome?
Precisely, it is strange that this is possible, I feel. It is like heaven.
People do act like this.
Yes, someone who can act like this is called a ‘‘person.’’ So the brain equation
enables a theory of ‘‘personogenesis.’’ It then turns out that a commonly held
belief is ﬂawed: Human beings are not persons (people) from birth—they become
people by ‘‘waking up’’ as a person while still a toddler. This delay will make no
difference for the law-makers, by the way. The toddler suddenly invents the idea
that the other—usually the caretaking mother—is benevolent in the sense of
wanting to make him happy. This budding suspicion of a benevolent intention
being present over there towards the goals that make themselves felt in an
inescapable fashion over here, leads to a cascade of events. It ﬁrst gives rise to a
direct optimizing response manifest in displaying tentative exaggeration of one’s
own pleasure—like opening one’s mouth unnaturally wide up when being fed. If
this improves the success as it predictably does, the concept of a cooperative
intention is eventually projected into the position of the other (mother) as a
simulation. This is the start of a game. The budding hunch of a benevolent
intention being present over there arises in an internally simulated scenario in
which the anticipated reward becomes an intended effect in a bi-directionally
simulated, and in reality performed game. Niels Birbaumer is a specialist for such
games in real life. Two coupled brain equations with ‘‘cognition’’ (an added
universal simulator as it is present in higher animals) do implement game theory in
a new sense. This is my favorite topic, if I am allowed to continue…
Please, do.
First, an attempt to reciprocate is started by tentatively beginning to give something
to Mom despite the fact that it remains genuinely valuable—like a red ball. This
giving is tried out only very hesitantly at ﬁrst—with taking the valuable object back
at the last moment. Tears ﬂow when Mom overestimates what is only budding here,
by her seriously accepting the playfully offered gift. Soon after this stage, a genuine
‘‘giving’’ act—the ﬁrst deliberate present—is delivered. Sigmund Freud who ﬁrst
saw this budding interaction still claimed that an anal product was the ﬁrst example
of letting go of something good. This was a misunderstanding on his part. His
description was the only rationalization by which a prude society could be offered
an inkling of the deep truth of what becoming a person means. The mystery of an
autonomous optimizer becoming a person in interaction is tremendous—even
though this is ‘‘just’’ a math problem. The understanding of what happens here—an
act of creation-out-of-nothing by inventing the suspicion of benevolence—is
probably the most important implication of the brain equation. It presupposes that
the latter is endowed with a universal simulator (cognitive map machine) which is
unavoidable in evolution. Then one can look at two coupled such autonomous
optimizers. One of the possible implications under exactly speciﬁable coupling
conditions is the ‘‘personogenetic function change.’’ Benevolence—deliberate
18
3
Dynamical Function Change

cross optimization—is not something that can be taught. Attributing a person
property to an outside place in the world, and responding reciprocally in a positive
feedback, transforms the toddler into a person. This interactional implication of the
brain equation entails a myriad of consequences. In particular, it allows for a causal
functional treatment of autism—but this is another story. A psychiatrist from Mars
would call the new functional state ‘‘the human schizophrenia.’’ For to understand
benevolence means that you split your mind up into two equally strong parts—
giving and taking—when suddenly appreciating an act of giving. The Martian
would note that the disease is contagious and can be exported to other species and
planets and stellar systems. ‘‘Galactic export’’ is a neutral term.
Is there not a speciﬁc initial condition needed here? Suddenly, a new behavior
appears without any special precondition?
Thank you. There indeed exist special initial conditions. You can describe the
whole epigenetic occurrence in a deterministic fashion since the brain equation is
deterministic. The interaction between two deterministic systems—mother and
child seen as two autonomous optimizers with cognition—creates something out
of nothing. If you so wish, you can call this extraordinary event a ‘‘misunder-
standing.’’ The child is possibly wrong in his simulation, picturing that the mother
wants happiness to arise over here. I realize I switched from the brain equation via
the add-on of a universal simulator and long-term memory directly over to the ﬁrst
scientiﬁc theory of benevolence…
You went ahead very fast—too fast.
One can functionally explain the whole thing in the cold language of science and
mathematics. But I should have said at the outset that it is all based on a simple
evolutionary fact. The human smile differs functionally from the displays of most
other animals. Realizing this makes the jump ahead offered above intuitive—
perhaps. So we suddenly talk about the face—the ‘‘antlitz’’ as Emmanuel Levinas
calls it with a German word. On the human face, the smile and the laughter look
virtually identical. This is the biological ‘‘trap’’ that underlies the ‘‘personogenetic’’
epigenetic function change. Before explaining further, I should perhaps say that
human beings do share this coupling property with the wolf. The wolf when happy—
corresponding to a high positive sum potential in the brain equation—is wagging his
tail. But he also does so—a second reason for the same display—when he is bonding.
That is, when the sum potential of the brain equation isn’t high (happiness), but only
a speciﬁc sub-potential (bonding) is activated to a high level. So, when a dog meets
another dog whom he loves—or else his both beloved and respected master—, he
wags his tail, too. The tail-wagging is a bonding display independent from his being
happy for other reasons. The wolf or dog in this way closely resembles a human
being emotionally, with the smile of happiness and the smile of affection. Every dog-
owner is aware of, without being able to tell why it is, that his dog is so much
engaged with the heart, that having a dog is almost as rewarding as having a child.
Nevertheless there is a decisive difference. The dog is not mirror-competent.
Technically speaking, the universal simulator—which is necessary to improve the
3
Dynamical Function Change
19

performance of the brain equation if the source density in the underlying
mathematical travelling salesman problem lies below a certain threshold—is not
powerful enough in the wolf. It did not have to be made powerful enough in the
ecological niche in which the wolf lives to make the wolf’s brain ‘‘mirror-
competent.’’ This means empirically speaking that dogs cannot recognize
themselves in a mirror. As is well known, dogs also cannot hold in their minds
the features of a leach, or the concept of a thrown stone (which fact makes it possible
to train them in a non-cruel way by throwing a stone at them whenever misbehaving,
according to Lorenz). Dogs cannot project their own momentary activity into an
opposing position and realize when doing so that the mirror image is bound to do the
same things they do. This ‘‘mirror competence’’ is by no means speciﬁc to human
beings, however—chimpanzees, for instance, love to look at parts of their body that
they cannot see without a mirror, for example, as Wolfgang Köhler ﬁrst saw in 1917.
Do most of them have a good relationship with humans?
Mirror-competent animals are always fascinating to watch, but except for
elephants there rarely develops a deep friendship to a caretaker as it occurs
between master and dog. I do know of a magpie—a mirror-competent social
bird—and his human parent. So elephants, magpies, and presumably dolphins
fulﬁll the precondition for becoming people if mirror competence and bonding are
all that is needed. Nevertheless they usually do not fall into this ‘‘trap’’ as we all
know. The reason is that they are not like wolves and humans with a functional
overlap of the two expressions of joy in general and bonding in particular. The
analogs of the smile and the laughter do not overlap as they do in the dog.
Elephants are mirror-competent, as Frans de Waal could prove, so are dolphins and
whales, as my friend Gottfried Mayer found out. Magpies are, as Helmut Prior
found out, and so possibly are gibbons, keas, giant octopuses and perhaps even
some species of mantis shrimp. Of those species of higher animals that are both
mirror-competent and bonding, you can deliberately treat one young animal in
such a way that, whenever he is happy and you as the bonding partner, are happy
too, because you deeply like him, deliberately make the type of signaling motion
that to this animal is a bonding reward (like a mother’s laughter is to her toddler).
It can be a bonding sound. In this way, it is predictably possible to lure a
chimpanzee into becoming a ‘person’, or else also a little white elephant. So this is
quite a ‘‘dangerous’’ insight compared to previous scientiﬁc and societal
prejudices. Is it ethically allowed to tell humankind that its essence has not a
biological but, rather, a functional origin? Which, by mathematical fact would
mean that there can indeed be a white elephant who is wiser than the humans who
come to ask his advice—if you treated him with the very same benevolence a
human mother raises her child on. All of these dynamical predictions come
ultimately from the brain equation.
If you like, we can come back to the brain equation in a later session. The next
session will be on chaos and chaotic attractors.
20
3
Dynamical Function Change

Chapter 4
Chaos
We start the fourth session of recording the scientiﬁc autobiography. You now
have received a conference folder which contained among others the Edward
Lorenz paper of 1963. Next, I would like to learn how you proceeded in the chaos
ﬁeld, especially: how you created the chaos attractor, and how did your ideas and
insights arise?
I was quite astonished that chaos exists apart from a trafﬁc jam, and that it was
possible to use this word to describe something speciﬁc in nature. I learned this
from Art Winfree when he told me that my trying to ﬁnd a 3-dimensional knot-
shaped limit cycle in a dynamical system was very close to doing chaos theory. He
gave me the homework to ﬁnd a chemical reaction system which produces similar
solutions as the chaotic Lorenz equation does in meteorology. The Lorenz
equation has these two butterﬂy-like wings where the trajectory moves from one
side to the other and back—it is quite complicated. Of course I assumed that this is
what I had to do: try and ﬁnd such a system, with non-negative variables (since
chemical concentrations cannot become negative), one chemical concentration
inﬂuencing the other, and there is also a back reaction, but not with two
concentrations as I was acquainted with, but three. If two give you a periodic
oscillation and limit cycle, as I had found 3 years before, three might give you
something more complicated, like chaos. I soon realized that this was too hard for
me to do—to do him the favor to ﬁnd a chemical analog to the Lorenz system.
Then my mind started to wander because I did not want to disappoint Art. I started
to think what is the essence of 3-dimensional motions that are consistent—
everywhere locally parallel—in space?
One of the earliest ideas I had was that I thought of my nose and of a rope being
wrapped around my nose thereby coming closer to the tip with diminishing loop
size, and that then this rope was losing hold at the tip, falling off and coming back
up again towards the nose’s base in a loop to be wrapped around again. I predicted
that when I would try to implement a motion like this, it may be non-periodic and
chaotic. 25 years later Normann Kleiner did an experiment with ﬂuids which
turned out to be chaotic and in addition, when we investigated the attractor, had
exactly this rope-around-the-nose like shape. It was a concentric motion that
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_4,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
21

became smaller and smaller and when coming close to the middle would shoot out
and then go back to the circumference, and it indeed produced chaos. In 1975,
I ﬁrst used a simpler way of arriving at the desired goal. I am quite sure how I hit
on the decisive idea—on a way I could be absolutely certain to produce chaos in
three dimensions—by using no other elements for the proof than ordinary two-
variable oscillators. I should perhaps ﬁrst explain that an ordinary oscillator is
doing an interesting spiralling-type motion in two dimensions, which eventually
reaches a circling path. Also, that Poincaré and Bendixson had realized that when
you are conﬁned to a plane and you have smooth hairlines there to describe a
moving point without ever overlapping, not very many possibilities remain for you
to generate a so-called ﬂow. So in two dimensions, the most complicated thing you
can have is what Poincaré called a ‘‘limit cycle.’’ The motion hereby approaches
more and more closely a closed line as the ﬁnal regime, called limit cycle because
as a limit of inﬁnitely many approaching spirals, a closed curve is formed to which
all the other solutions converge from the outside as well as from the inside.
Due to overlaps being forbidden for ﬂow lines in two dimensions, it is quite easy to
classify possible ﬂows in two dimensions, as Poincaré did in 1882. I knew the
essence from Bob Rosen’s 1970 book on ‘‘Dynamical System Theory in Biology’’
which I had watched growing and which still is one of the gentlest books to
introduce people to dynamical thinking. Bob was a genius in simplifying things,
making them maximally clear. Coming from the Rosen School, I knew there was a
system called the van-der-Pol oscillator. The van der Pol oscillator has a
mathematically equivalent system which is called the Liénard oscillator.
Everybody thinks it is the same system but the Liénard oscillator is much easier
to understand than the van der Pol. The Liénard oscillator has a very simple
underlying principle: There is a point that is moving along a one-dimensional
stable manifold, a line, and suddenly this line becomes unstable and the point
switches up to another one-dimensional stable manifold (there are two in all). The
point can move backwards there towards a threshold, to make a switching move
down again, and so forth forever, shuttling between minus one and plus one, say.
This is a neat limit cycle in the sense of Poincaré. We have a letter Z embedded
into a square as it were, with a motion going around the square, in a counter-
clockwise direction, with the two horizontal parts of the Z slow, the vertical
transitions fast. It is a kind of prototype oscillator, a maximally simple
multivibrator. The point is that you can fall off a cliff, something stable suddenly
stops and you fall off, but then there is another attractor from which you can then
eventually come back ‘‘falling upwards’’ again. It is easy to understand this
switching system, this cycle, which is based on what is in electronics called a
‘‘ﬂipﬂop.’’ This type, of two stable regimes between which you can continually,
switch, is also called a hysteresis loop—if you are on the one side near the
threshold, you have to perturb only a little bit to be suddenly free and go to the
other manifold. In other words, there are two one-dimensional stable manifolds
and there are two thresholds. That is the essence. I did not know at the time that
this is called ‘‘singular-perturbation theory’’ in mathematics and is a very general
22
4
Chaos

principle. I suddenly realized that if you have instead of the two one-dimensional
manifolds, two 2-dimensional manifolds that each contain a simple ﬂow like an
expanding spiral; then again there can be a threshold, now along a line rather than
at a point, a real cliff. Now you can have the same thing again, but the switching is
not between one-dimensional manifolds but between 2-dimensional planes.
That was the breakthrough. You can now arrange for everything you want on the
one plane, like a spiraling-out oscillation, for example, and then you have this
switching threshold. Then, after switching up there, you can have something else,
for example the same oscillatory regime as below but laterally shifted—just as we
had a different motion on the other level in the previous one-dimensional case.
Then again there is a threshold for falling back, only this time along a line rather
than at a mere point as in the case of the Z. Now we can predict—check with the
aid of two sheets of paper—how the overall motion will look with both levels
combined. I guessed immediately that this would give you chaos, if you did the
shifts in the right fashion. I was so completely sure that this would work that I gave
a talk on it in our seminar of Theoretical Chemistry and encountered a lot of
ambivalent skepticism from the audience who did not want to believe me because I
had made it so simple. One attendee told me that now I had lost because with this
recipe on hand, he would be faster than me ﬁnding a working equation on the
computer and then the result would belong to him because mere general ideas do
not make a difference. Unless you have an equation put into a computer
demonstrating that it works, you have nothing to present, was the argument. It
belongs to the one who is faster. This looked foreign to me but it was actually quite
helpful as a constructive stimulus, much like my experience 8 years before with
the helpful Nobel Prize winner. During the Christmas break…
What year was it?
1975. During the Christmas break…
You found the equation?
No, I have to correct myself. I had the equation on hand before the Christmas
break, but I then could write down the chapter which already contained the
simulation, for I sent off the manuscript 2 days after Christmas. During the
holidays I had had discussions with my father-in-law who helped me believe that
what I saw in my mind was real. It turned out that the attractor generated in this
way is quite pretty. You have a throng of concentric expanding spirals that fall off
along a cliff in parallel, with each point then coming back towards a different point
from below, because there is a strip of lines that via the cliff, and after negotiating
a second upwards cliff, come back up again, re-injected. The points of the band
then ﬁnd themselves in a different region than when they left. This is quite
complicated because it can happen that a part of the ﬂow makes more windings
before falling down the cliff again. Because of this, the distances between two
neighboring trajectories, two neighboring paths, are bound to increase. This
increase would never stop! This is the essence of chaos—a pair of points that is
4
Chaos
23

close can, because it is diverging like two windings of an expanding spiral,
continue to get separated more and more and more, forever while staying in a
bounded domain. This is chaos because this ongoing, mixing separation gives you
something new all the time. It is miraculous: one can have an inﬁnitely often
continuing process where things are permanently separating while remaining
within a closed domain.
Without crossing each other?
Without crossing each other anywhere locally, yes. So you get an ampliﬁcation of
neighboring distances that continues forever and is, as it turns out, of a
transﬁnite—trans-inﬁnite—accuracy. So the idea of chaos has to do with throwing
a glance into the inﬁnitely ﬁne and being revealed an inﬁnitely well-crafted
structure. The latter is purely mathematical originally, but if you have an equation
that is running in a computer and is doing this, it looks very nice, especially so on
an analog computer. If you simulate it—you can look at it stereoscopically by
making two projections—it looks very appealing in three dimensions. You can
also listen to it by feeding one of the variables into an acoustic ampliﬁer. So it
became a unique experience to hear how such a chaotic attractor sounds.
In that Youtube movie of yours, the sounds from the analog computer were also
recorded?
Yes—the ‘‘sound of chaos,’’ named after Simon and Garﬁnkel’s ‘‘Sound of
Silence.’’ The analog computer had the big advantage that one could choose, by
throwing a switch, between different speeds of calculation, and so one could listen
to the chaos either when it was running very slowly or when it was ten times or a
hundred or a thousand times faster. The sound produced by this chaotic reality
turned out to be familiar to the ear. It can be very low, a hoarse roar, or when you
crank up the speed the pitch is high. Then you realize this is a vowel, for example
an ‘‘a.’’ This vowel is not completely pure because it does something new at every
moment. It turns out this is familiar, because if you have a hoarse voice—as I
almost had a second ago—, it is the same sound. Hoarseness is exactly the sound
of chaos! Thus everybody has a perfect ear for chaos. If we switch the analog
computer to a lower speed with the same motion—the same chaotic trajectory—,
the sound that it makes proves familiar, too. Our ﬂat lies close to a yellow postal
mailbox where people would stop with their motorcycles from time to time to put a
letter in and drive off again, and it turned out that I had often heard this very sound
before—that of an idling motorcycle. Everybody has heard the sound of an idling
motorcycle, but no one had listened to this chaotic system before and recognized
that this dd-ddd-ddd-d is plain chaos. It is just a low-frequency chaos. So if you
have a hoarse voice and let it run more slowly on a tape recorder, you can hear the
sound of the motorcycle. The hoarse voice and the irregular pulsing of a
motorcycle are exactly the same phenomenon. If you are waiting in your car at a
red light and you look at your gear shift, you realize that the whole car is
vibrating—not completely periodically, but the motor when idling is invariably
chaotic. You can watch this when something is hanging from the rear-view
24
4
Chaos

mirror—some people have a little toy hanging there: it will make irregular
swinging motions due to the chaotic forcing present. So chaos is something that is
very close to everyday life. Everyone is familiar with it. It is the same as with
periodic behavior, like a soprano voice. The beautiful voice of a singer is periodic.
Everybody knows periodic motions and periodic sounds, but the chaotic sounds
are just as ubiquitous—as this equation shows.
There are some other noises which I dare not mention that come from another
opening of the human body which also turn out to be chaotic. So chaos, like
periodic motions and pure sounds, is a constitutive element of everyday life. That
was an interesting discovery or realization—I cannot call it discovery, it is just a
plane fact which opened itself up and was a lot of fun to watch and listen to
simultaneously. It also turned out to have serious applications. So in the human
heart, for example, as my wife ﬁrst modeled it together with the late Herbert D.
Landahl, Rashevsky’s close colleague. Also in the endocrine system when you
have three hormones interacting in the body: They then can do this dancing either
periodically or chaotically, and mostly it is the chaotic alternative, it turns out.
Peter Sadowski and my wife made simultaneous recordings of several hormones
dancing in such a loop.
So also in the brain’s function, as recorded by the EEG?
The EEG sums the activities of millions, even billions of neurons. It is a kind of
partially synchronized activity which also appears chaotic, but is ‘‘hyper-chaotic’’
in type. We have periodic motions, we have chaotic motions, and then we have
hyperchaos, so there is a whole hierarchy of more and more complex types of
behavior depending on the number of variables involved. Plain chaos is already
very, very counterintuitive because of its inﬁnitely strong amplifying power.
Almost inﬁnitely small differences are swiftly expanded into ﬁnite differences, and
then this process repeats with even smaller original differences. I mean an interval
that is very small is being spread out to become bigger exponentially, and then a
very small sub-interval is again being ampliﬁed, so that chaos gives you an inﬁnite
power of looking into the small, the really small. It did not take us long to see that
this principle had been beautifully understood already 2 millennia ago by
Anaxagoras in ancient Greece. Anaxagoras offered an explanation of the universe
which started out from chaos—from the most complex—instead from the smallest
and simplest, as we usually tend to think. Chaos allows you to look at the world
with an eye that is focusing on inﬁnitely ﬁne detail, which mathematically turns
out to be even transﬁnitely—trans inﬁnitely—exact. Chaos is not just inﬁnitely
exact, as we try to be in science, and as computers try to approximate with ﬁnite
precision. Chaos is transﬁnitely exact, meaning that differences play a role that are
even smaller than is maximally imaginable. Its power is so strong that if two things
are even inﬁnitely close, this magnifying glass does not stop in its exponential grip
and there is no limit to the accuracy that is opening itself up in this window. This is
called transﬁnite mathematics, and Anaxagoras invented or discovered it, the
transﬁnite thinking of chaos theory—in the twelfth fragment that we still possess
4
Chaos
25

of his teachings. He starts out with what he calls the ‘‘perfect mixture.’’ This was
his model of how the world originated, how the whole cosmos originated.
Amazingly, he did not start out with the small and compact, as one would naturally
tend to think in our own Western paradigm—take, for example, the Big Bang in
which something very small is assumed to suddenly grow. He had the opposite
way of thinking. He started out with a perfect mixture of everything and then
wondered how out of a perfect mixture present at the beginning, the current
‘‘unmixed’’ state could arise. It was an unmixing process that he thought was the
essence in cosmogony. Georg Cantor, the 19th century mathematician who
invented transﬁnite mathematics (along with the word ‘‘trans-inﬁnite’’ which he
contracted into ‘‘transﬁnite’’ as mentioned) was the second person after
Anaxagoras who completely understood the power of a more than inﬁnitely exact
way of thinking. This sounds crazy, and Cantor was indeed put into a mental
asylum for much of his career in mathematics. Fortunately he did not get
drugged—the mind-numbing drugs had not been invented yet—so that he could do
his best work in a psychiatric clinic. It is only nowadays—through Mandelbrot’s
fractal theory—that people have learned to appreciate a transﬁnite complexity. The
‘‘fractals’’ of Benoit Mandelbrot turn out to be implications, not of chaos but of
hyperchaos. So if we have one more dimension than we need for chaos—four
interacting variables rather than three—, we can produce fractals—beautiful
never-stopping self-similar structures. In other words, the explanation of why
nature is fractal is because chaos theory gives birth to fractals when you go from
chaos to hyperchaos, which is deterministic chaos acting simultaneously and
independently in two mutually slanted directions. However, this next step in the
ladder of complexity generated by chaos took me two more years to discover or,
rather, uncover in equations—hyperchaotic ﬂows and their cross sections.
You created that attractor, the simplest chaotic attractor which is named after you.
Did you not try to ﬁnd a chemical reaction based on this equation?
Actually the ﬁrst system was not built according to the recipe, just alluded to—
with a folding-over obtained by employing a cliff or two for the locally parallel
hairlines in three-dimensional space comprising both positive and negative values.
It was actually done with chemical equations that cannot have negative
concentrations. The ﬁrst artiﬁcially synthetized chaotic system was a chemical
reaction system. For this had been the assignment Art Winfree had given me—that
I should ﬁnd ‘‘chemical chaos’’ for him.
But this was not that named attractor, it was another thing?
No, it was exactly the same kind of attractor, only the equation was more—
unnecessarily—complicated, so to speak.
So the essence of this attractor was based on a chemical reaction?
Formally, yes. I ﬁrst used equations that were a bit unnecessarily complicated but
employed two ﬂat 2-D ﬂows with two cliffs. By virtue of being chemical they
could not have negative concentrations.
26
4
Chaos

Thereafter, you used the analog computer to simulate their behavior?
Not yet. First it had to be a digital computer because the described recipe—of having
two sheets, two variables in a plane producing a diverging spiral, an unstable focus in
Poincaré’s terminology. This unstable focus shifted once the ﬂow had fallen down the
cliff onto another sheet, and then the ﬂow was allowed to ‘‘fall upwards’’ again along
another sharp cliff. This was a trial-and-error process that could have been done with
two sheets of transparent paper with lines drawn onto each, with two straight
thresholds acting as cliffs as described. It was mentally trivial, this result obtained by
overlaying two out-spiraling ﬂows each on a transparent sheet, with two cliff-lines
drawn to mark the transition to the other sheet. This ‘‘reinjection principle’’ was
absolutely trivial but predictably powerful. So, I made the experience that in order to
ﬁnd new things, you just have to combine two trivial ideas. There is a road towards
success built into nature and the discovery of chaos can serve as an example.
You mean that an idea which at ﬁrst doesn’t seem to be important nonetheless can
have a nice effect and be successful when taken seriously?
Yes: that one should take childishly simple ideas seriously, especially if two can be
combined.
Now, in your attractor that is nowadays famously known as the Rossler attractor,
we encounter only three parametric constants in the equation. The whole equation
is based on a,b,c as it were. If you change a, b or c numerically, you will get
different kinds of behavior. How did you ﬁnd the right values for these constants so
that the equation produces chaos? Was it by accident?
I knew beforehand that the principle works, so it was easy to ﬁnd parameters that
implement it. In some math books, the method I used is called ‘‘singular
perturbation,’’ and this way was indeed also used three years later independently
by Christian Mira at the University of Toulouse in France. The underlying two 2-D
equations to be connected via thresholds were easy to write down. What I had
added, naively, if you so wish, was that I (unlike the math books) included the
third, switching, equation on the same footing by numerically smoothing-out the
inﬁnitely sharp thresholds and simulating the whole thing as a three-variable
system rather than stopping with the mathematically ideal two variables, plus an
inﬁnitely fast ‘‘constraint’’ or switch. Computers do not like such ‘‘stiff’’ equations.
To describe these sharp transitions at the two thresholds, where suddenly things go
from one 2-D plane to the other, is a bit demanding numerically since you have
stiffness-generating nonlinearities. After such an almost-singular continuous ﬂow
was found and worked nicely on the computer after smoothing the corners a little
bit—or rather letting the transitions take a ﬁnite instead of zero time—I became
reckless, thinking it might be interesting to simplify the equations further to get rid
of any ‘‘unnecessary’’ parts in the equations. Even the features which made the
equations non-negative so as to represent realistic chemical concentrations—
concentrations cannot be negative—turned out to be unnecessary in order to retain
the chaotic behavior. So I could omit quite a few nonlinearities altogether and
4
Chaos
27

would, after simplifying the equation as much as possible by trial and error,
witness the ‘‘miracle’’ that the maximum conceptual beauty of the originally
overlaid 2 maximally simple linear 2-D ﬂows would give way to a new maximally
simple beauty of the resulting simpliﬁed 3-D ﬂows and equations. In other words,
it was possible to keep the beauty of the ﬂow but simultaneously make the
equations maximally simple. So by varying parameters systematically and putting
as many of them as possible equal to zero, it was possible to ﬁnd this simpler
equation. It is not actually the simplest one because there is another even simpler
one that I found soon after that for some reason is less well-known.
You submitted the simpliﬁed equation to a physics journal and the title was
‘‘continuous chaos’’?
Yes, ‘‘An equation for continuous chaos’’ was the title.
Was it accepted quickly?
Yes, because it was submitted by a member from the editorial board at whose
institute I had ﬁrst presented the equation.
After this, did you receive special comments or ideas from other people?
Yes, I was lucky that a colleague at Stuttgart was quite taken by these ideas.
Hermann Haken had started publishing on chaos a year before me as I learned
later. He is a specialist in laser theory and is actually one of its inventors and had,
as I then learned, found a laser equation that implements the Lorenz attractor, a
task analogous to the chemical assignment Art Winfree had given me. So he was
pursuing a parallel path and I was happy that there was this resonance in Stuttgart
for my work in Tübingen, and I was even offered a position at the time which was
a nice experience.
How did you arrive at hyperchaos? You already told us that it took two more
years. Was the word ‘‘hyperchaos’’ created by you?
It is courtesy of Paul Rapp. When he visited me in Tübingen in late 1976, I told
him that I planned to ﬁnd the next higher level of complexity in 4-dimensional
rather than 3-dimensional systems and I asked him whether I should, in case I
succeeded call it superchaos or hyperchaos. Paul convinced me that the latter term
is much better.
You mentioned already the theory of fractals. I would like to ask: Do you believe
that in a chaotic attractor, we cannot see a fractal geometry but in hyperchaos, we
can? What is the relation between chaos and fractal geometry?
I must say that also in ordinary chaos, you already have a fractal cross section, a
fractal layering.
Before explaining further, how do you deﬁne, not mathematically but more
intuitively, what a fractal is?
28
4
Chaos

The term ‘‘fractal’’ reﬂects the intuition of Benoit Mandelbrot that nature—the
trees…
What do you mean here by fractal?
It is an ingenious term coined by Benoit. I forgot to ask him how he had come to
this word. He was in this way able to bring together all previous mathematical
work done in the area. He transformed it into a common ﬁeld of study and was
incredibly creative. He also was the ﬁrst to measure the fractal dimensionality of
the cosmos—between one and two.
But again: Please, explain to me, what is the relationship between chaos and
fractals?
The chaotic motion that we looked at in our minds (above) consisted of two
arbitrarily close, locally parallel lines in an expanding spiral that—by getting re-
injected—continued on two expanding paths forever, despite remaining in a closed
ﬁnite domain all the time. Therefore, eventually, inﬁnitely small differences get
expanded with exponential rapidity into ﬁnite differences. If this is implemented in
a ﬂow—in an invertible system since differential equations are time-invertible—,
then this machine generates an inﬁnitely ﬁne layering. If you cut through the latter
you get a product of a line and a 1-dimensional Cantor set. Fractals have this
property of being transﬁnitely—more than just inﬁnitely—exact. This merely
‘‘layered fractal’’ is not yet very impressive. The fractal coastline of England—the
actual coastline is not really fractal when you zoom down to the size of
molecules—is a much more impressive example because it is fractal in two
independent directions. You can zoom into every little detail of a coastline—or
else the surrounding curve of a snowﬂake—and then forget that the snowﬂake too
is ultimately made out of molecules. These ‘‘genuine’’ or ‘‘beautiful’’ fractals
unlike the layered ones are not generated by chaos but by hyperchaos. So I
discovered hyperchaos the same year—1977—in which Mandelbrot brought out
his monumental book ‘‘The Fractal Geometry of Nature.’’ Whereas physical nature
is not truly fractal in the last instance, as far as we know. Hyperchaotic differential
equations do generate genuine fractals in their cross sections and explain the
beauty Benoit discovered.
The fractal dimension is not an integer?
The fractal dimension can be calculated mathematically. It is conveniently called a
(non-integer) ‘‘dimension.’’ I forgot who ﬁrst invented this notion; Benoit has the
history in his book. A superhuman accomplishment. The fractal dimensionality is
maximally easy to calculate.
If we go to hyperchaos, we have a fractal geometry. Is there a fractal state space?
What do you mean by saying a chaotic attractor is fractal?
The state space is usually continuous. I wonder whether anyone ever looked at a
fractal state space—this would be a new question that is related to work done by
Mohamed ElNaschie. A self-similar or self-afﬁne fractal arises as a basin boundary
4
Chaos
29

in continuous hyperchaotic ﬂows when we puncture them in two places. You can
have an ordinary chaotic ﬂow in three dimensions as we saw. Here everything is
absolutely intuitive and locally parallel, and nevertheless you get this divergence
of neighboring points. When we punch two holes into a chaotic ﬂow, as is easy to
do by playing with the three (in the above case) free parameters in the differential
equation, one gets a layered fractal dividing line between state points—initial
conditions—that either go into the one drain in the long run or into the other. If
these holes are given different colors, the striped structure consists of neighboring
colored layers in all sizes and sub-sizes, a product of a Cantor set and a line—or a
‘‘1-D fractal’’ for short. The Gumowski School—Igor Gumoswski and Christian
Mira—saw this early on. As stated, any trajectory in the chaotic cross section goes
eventually either to the one hole or to the other. By systematically scanning the
initial conditions in the area in question by using a computer, you can color them
according to where they go. What then remains is the boundary, a dividing line
between red and blue. This fractal generated by ordinary chaos consists of locally
parallel lines—actually there are sometimes curves that turn around which
complicate the picture, requiring a third color if one is very conscientious, but this
‘‘impure case’’ does not detract from the main ﬁnding. The latter is a layered
Cantor set. Although it is mathematically most intricate, it is not very impressive
when you look at it: stripes of all sizes. This is what you get if it is only chaos that
is punctured by two holes, by two separatrices invading a chaotic attractor. But if
we have hyperchaos from the beginning, then the boundary between the two
colored domains is a beautiful self-similar or self-afﬁne, ‘‘genuine’’ fractal of the
type turned into a science of its own and made famous by Mandelbrot.
So fractals are primarily not geometric structures but basin boundaries in
hyperchaotic systems?
Exactly—if you believe in nature being differentiable so that ﬂows are the
description of nature as Newton proposed. Differential equations or ‘‘dynamical
systems’’ are synonyms. Then with ‘‘hyperhyperchaos,’’ you automatically get
hyperfractals, which I herewith propose as a new term. If one adopts this term, new
branchings open up as you follow this route, so it may be worth using this
terminology. The fractal structures that Benoit found in his most famous beautiful
example, the Mandelbrot set, belong to a special class of ﬂows called symplectic or
Hamiltonian ﬂows. They are ‘‘structurally unstable,’’ that is, inﬁnitely rare in the
set of all possible ﬂows, but nature happens to be Hamiltonian on the lowest level
herself—without friction. So the symplectic—or Mandelbrotian—beauty as one
could call it, are the aesthetics that nature herself prefers on the lowest level. This
holds true despite the fact that quantum mechanics partially irons this picture out.
It is legitimate to fall into admiration when putting your mind into one of the
‘‘dragons’’ that Benoit described.
The Mandelbrot set is a whole universe. Unlike (or perhaps like) the real universe,
it is unbounded in circumference. But Mandelbrot’s universe at any rate never—
absolutely never—stops in its ﬁnest details. This is something we do not know
30
4
Chaos

(yet?) about the real universe. Imagine something that is much ﬁner than inﬁnitely
ﬁne. It is hard to picture or believe. Nevertheless it was Anaxagoras who ﬁrst saw
this in his mind as being the basis of everything, as mentioned. Unlike what
became customary to assume in later millennia, he started out with a universe that
was in a maximally ‘‘mixed’’ state originally, and then wondered how the no
longer totally mixed (partially pure) substances and structures that we ourselves
see could possibly have arisen. He thereby hit on a single substance present in the
perfect mixture that was ‘‘too ﬁne to be miscible.’’ That was the mind or Nous;
Cantor’s and Mandelbrot’s minds.
According to this idea, the world has been created with maximally complex
behavior and now it is going towards simpler behavior, and then it will perhaps go
towards complex behavior again?
The mind is capable of un-mixing the inﬁnitely ﬁne mixture according to
Anaxagoras. The mind can produce simplicity from the complex. This was
Anaxagoras’ deﬁnition of the mind. So the mind has a ﬁneness to it which is
absolutely unfathomable. It is a tribute to creation if someone can think of
something so intimidatingly ﬁne. I would think this is basically a religious idea on
the part of Anaxagoras. It is described in his surviving fragment number 12. He
speaks there of the mind, and implicitly, chaos. Although the word chaos does not
appear in this fragment, even the word Tohuwabohu of the bible, took on the new
meaning of ‘‘chaos’’ shortly after Anaxagoras. Nous and Chaos—mind and
chaos—were apparently forced together because the mind ‘‘ruah’’ got also
connected to tohuwabohu in the bible. Tohu and Bohu (‘‘wa’’ means ‘‘and’’)
obviously were older chthonic river gods originally, but no one knows for sure, it
appears. Hun-Tun in Chinese mythology—the ﬁrst emperor, also carried the name
‘‘Chaos,’’ by the way. The role of the mind is played there by Shu and Hu, his
friends who bored 7 holes into his head in the good intention to give him sense
organs. Shu-hu means ‘‘lightening.’’
If we return to hyperchaos: What difference does hyperchaos make in the fractal
geometry that one can see?
In ordinary chaos, when we make a cut through the ﬂow, we get an inﬁnitely often
folded and stretched structure which has a 1-D Cantor set as a cross section, as
mentioned. This is not maximally impressive as such. Nevertheless, in the case of
hyperchaos we have a stretching and folding in two directions, with a ‘‘folded-towel
map’’ as a cross section. If we again puncture two holes into this layered set (which
my friend Masaya Yamaguti had independently called a ‘‘folded handkerchief’’),
each point in the folded area lands eventually either in the one or the other hole
again. Coloring the two holes red and blue again lets every point in the area land
either in the red or the blue sink. The two colors again encroach onto every point in
the map—except for the zero-measure boundary which is invariant. The set of all
such ‘‘genuine fractals’’ in the sense of their speaking to the eye has not yet been
classiﬁed. The Mandelbrot set itself thrones as the simplest analytic prototype. The
rest can be considered as its entourage or precursor as it were.
4
Chaos
31

Precursor?
Yes. The unfathomable beauty of the Mandelbrot set is also the consequence of the
existence of a very special kind of hyperchaotic ﬂows. The ﬂow in question is a
symplectic ﬂow, having an analytic map for its cross section. The underlying ﬂow
has never been formulated. Nobody seems to know what classes of other Mandelbrot
sets exist in analytical maps. Each of them like the original one will be full of
surprises, down to the inﬁnitely (and then transﬁnitely) small since the structure
formation never—not even in inﬁnite time—stops. That is, these sets are ‘‘eternally
self-similar’’ since there is no end in the smallest. It is the living illustration of the
inﬁnitely creative mind conceived of by Anaxagoras around 500 B.C. which makes
itself palpable in the Mandelbrot set.
After the 1970s and 1980s, and still around the year 2000, we ﬁnd a lot of papers
on chaotic behavior which taken together give us a rather precise mathematical
deﬁnition of what is going on and how to ﬁnd new examples. This led to very nice
achievements in controlling chaos and also in anti-controlling chaos—since both
methods, suppression and facilitation, are important for applications. My question
now in 2013 is, when we look back some years and decades in the wake of many
papers published, do you think that the ﬁeld of chaos has been ‘‘saturated’’ to date
because we do not see very big achievements anymore? If not, what is the problem
here?
I would see two ways to respond to your interesting question. The one has to do
with the fate of any new development in science: After a while, people get used to
it. Inventing the automobile is no longer necessary, only improving it—like
exploiting the intrinsic chaos of the engine—which is still a topic. A new
excitement is never long-lasting. So the decline in the number of papers written on
chaos is absolutely normal. On the other hand, the frustration currently felt by
thousands of chaos aﬁcionados across the world about the fact that they are no
longer taken as seriously as at the beginning is justiﬁed for once. I feel they
anticipate that there is much more to come—whole new ﬁelds. I would bet that the
people who believe that chaos is more important than public opinion currently has
it, are right. Chaos is about to experience a revival, not as a mere fashion, but for
promising to reveal its most beautiful and important fruit.
Is it your prediction that chaos will ﬁnd a new focus in cosmology or do you have
another ﬁeld in mind?
Cosmology would be a side product, I would say. Everybody is justly interested in
cosmology but cosmology is not the decisive target of the new chaos theory. The
essential element I foresee is a return to the mind of Henri Poincaré. As mentioned
before, he is the inventor of topology. He saw that a circle and a square are
basically the same thing, which seems ridiculous at ﬁrst but topologically they are
indeed equivalent. (A pun: The name ‘‘Poincaré’’ means ‘‘quadratic point’’.) Some
people have the power to see realities that afterwards everybody regards as self-
evident. Steve Jobs’ touchscreen idea comes to mind. Poincaré ﬁrst discovered
32
4
Chaos

chaos, in the context of celestial motions, in the so-called 3-body problem in which
three stars—or a sun and a planet and a moon—interact. This was in the wake of a
famous problem, posed by the Swedish academy, of whether the solar system is
stable. Poincaré had submitted a big treatise which he suddenly retracted making
sure all already printed copies of the book would be destroyed at his own expenses,
for he had found an error, a mistake. He realized belatedly that the complexity of
this 3-body problem—it is chaotic—has an inﬁnitely ﬁne (no, transﬁnitely ﬁne)
structure. His technical invention is today still called the ‘‘homoclinic point’’, there
are also ‘‘heteroclinic points’’ in his menagerie. He was the ﬁrst after Anaxagoras,
pari passu with his mathematician colleague Georg Cantor, to see the ultimately
fractal reality behind the motion of three celestial bodies. So it is astrophysics
which played a pioneering role in the history of chaos.
How does cosmology enter?
There is another famous fundamental physical theory at stake here, statistical
thermodynamics. In the latter we also have particles that interact, just like the three
particles of the 3-body problem do, but they are small particles, this time around
and the science in charge of small particles interacting is called ‘‘thermodynam-
ics’’—as everybody thinks. We already encountered thermodynamics in the
context of chemical evolution where it enabled ‘‘order’’ (life) to arise as a side
effect to an overall increase of disorder. Thermodynamics is close in its spirit to
chaos theory, but for a long time it was not clear how the two are related. The
simplest example is three mutually repulsive particles in interaction. Nevertheless,
thermodynamics is not the right theory to apply to celestial bodies in interaction
because the latter are not repulsive but attractive over a long range: a different
ballpark. It turns out that thermodynamics possesses a sister discipline here when
the interacting particles are mutually attractive. In celestial mechanics, Poincaré
saw the ﬁrst example of this new ﬁeld.
So celestial mechanics is at odds with thermodynamics?
Absolutely, this is what I am driving at. People thought for a long time that you
need many particles in order to get the typical macroscopic behavior we are
familiar with from the theory of heat—how energy gets dissipated and
equidistributed in a system. Then, 127 years after John James Waterston, Yakov
Sinai made the theory of billiards the deterministic fundament of thermodynamics
in 1970. He proved the presence of exponential divergence of initial conditions in
billiards which is the characteristic of chaos. Exactly the same thing—many
particles interacting—applies in celestial mechanics. This, just like thermody-
namics is chaos theory in action. It took quite a while until this parallelism became
apparent. Possibly and likely, we were not the only ones to see that you can
simplify this problem in a parallel manner to Sinai’s method. By coming up with a
2-particle system in a T-tube it was possible to set up a smooth attractive version
of Sinai’s game, in which a transition towards equipartition can be observed
numerically. This deterministic analog to the so-called heat death of thermody-
namics, as Rudolph Clausius had called it, was obtained in Tübingen by Klaus
4
Chaos
33

Sonnleitner in a high-accuracy ‘‘symplectic’’ simulation. By inverting the smooth
repulsive potentials into smooth-attractive Newtonian ones, the opposite tendency
was found—anti-equipartition. Both phenomena (equipartition and anti-equipar-
tition) can be reduced to the theory of deterministic chaos.
What do you call it? I would like to hear the name you coined for that.
I guess what you are driving at is the word ‘‘cryodynamics.’’ I apologize that I am
so slowly progressing in my narrative.
We shall come back to cryodynamics in the next interview since it deserves more
detail. Let me draw attention to the fact that we have on the one hand, the
deterministic nature of chaos and on the other, have the statistical approach to
nature. The statistical viewpoint then is a bit like quantum mechanics. There, too,
we can have 2 particles or 3 particles which are already subject to the theory, and
we have the genuine statistical many-particles point of view. The deterministic
viewpoint is chaos, and there is a statistical viewpoint offered by quantum
mechanics. Chaos goes back to the many-body problem in celestial mechanics,
and in quantum mechanics we have a many-body problem, too. Do you think
quantum mechanics and chaos can be tied together? What is the meaning of
quantum chaos? Or, do you believe that it does not exist?
This is an important question. It is related to Pauli’s notion of ‘‘primary chance.’’
Pauli claimed that this type of chance is different from the one we encounter in
statistical mechanics where chance is basically deterministic chaos in modern
parlance. However, in quantum mechanics it is something else. Pauli’s ‘‘primary
chance’’ that underlies it is not explicable with Anaxagoras’ transﬁnite exact
mathematics and with fractal theory. It rather has an element that comes from the
outside of the world. There is a dice thrown from outside of the universe into the
universe. The chancefulness of quantum mechanics has nothing to do with the
chancefulness of chaos theory. Chaos theory is deterministic, quantum mechanics
is anti-deterministic. The latter’s chancefulness is not an intrinsic part of nature but
appears added-on to it from the outside. In my view, Everett’s interpretation is
deterministic, however, Copenhagen is not. But Everett also contains a non-
deterministic—or rather inexplicable—element: why a particular branch or world
is chosen. This selective picking he cannot explain, so he does bring-in a
metaphysical element as well. Nonetheless he has a deterministic theory, a fact
which is absent in the Copenhagen version of quantum mechanics.
So we have classical chaos which is deterministic and we have quantum mechanics
which is not deterministic?
It is deterministic in the hands of Everett, as far as the evolution of the wave
function as a whole is concerned.
Let me make a switch, what is your opinion about ‘‘quantum chaos’’?
34
4
Chaos

The notion is a little bit misleading in my eyes because, strictly speaking, quantum
mechanics and chaos exclude each other. My friend Joe Ford, who called himself
‘‘the prophet of chaos’’ in a tongue-in-cheek fashion, encountered grave difﬁculties
within the physics community when he tried to emphasize this difference. So I
learned that it is risky to even touch on the topic. But there can be no doubt that
quantum mechanics is a new mechanics which contains elements that contradict
chaos theory. For example, if you have quantum billiards, you only get ﬁnitely
many possible patterns on a ﬁnite table, while chaos predicts inﬁnitely many
patterns. So there is a limitation to the maximum complexity that is possible within
quantum mechanics.
Take a many-body problem, for example many electrons in a box that are not free
but conﬁned there, with a Coulomb potential. Now consider the corresponding
Schrödinger equation. In the Schrödinger equation, the term involving the
potential V reveals that the potential energy is not zero. So we obtain a very
complex equation that cannot be solved analytically, since the many-body problem
based on quantum mechanics and involving attraction cannot be solved
analytically so far. Speciﬁcally, to simplify a bit more, we can have three
electrons that are not free but exert a Coulomb potential on each other. On the
other hand, the three can be looked at as forming a classical three-body problem
of which we know that it has chaotic solutions. So why do we not have chaotic
behavior for the electrons here?
The Schrödinger equation is a partial differential equation. Partial differential
equations by deﬁnition are inﬁnitely more complex than ordinary differential
equations. Chaos as we talked about is a type of behavior described by ordinary
differential equations. So if you have ﬁnitely many particles you have chaos
already. Partial differential equations mean that you have inﬁnitely many degrees
of freedom from the outset. So the problem could be even more complex.
But in partial differential equations in classical physics, we can have chaos in a
PDE?
Yes, even more easily than in ordinary differential equations. Also in linear partial
differential equations you can have chaos. Quantum mechanics does formally
involve linear partial differential equations, so from this point of view, you would
expect chaos. But then we have quantization which limits the complexity.
My question here is, in the Copenhagen case, we do not have simultaneous
information about a particle’s position and momentum. So if you want to model
three electrons which are not free but trapped in a potential trough, you could
expect chaos, classical Hamiltonian chaos, with momentum plotted versus
position, for example. But according to the Copenhagen interpretation, you
cannot draw such a diagram because if you could, you would specify a point’s
momentum and position simultaneously. So based on the Copenhagen interpre-
tation, we cannot have Hamiltonian chaos, right?
4
Chaos
35

I agree. Therefore the so-called ‘‘quantum chaos’’ is a misnomer because the
transﬁnite exactness of chaos is no longer valid in quantum mechanics. Everything
is a little bit ‘‘wishy-washy’’ here unless you believe in an underlying deterministic
theory which explains all quantum phenomena. There indeed are also inﬁnitely
exact features in quantum mechanics like indistinguishable particles. However,
there is a big price to pay for the introduction of determinism which makes people
reluctant to do so. You have to specify from the outside which one of the many
universes that exist in quantum mechanics according to Everett is the one that you
choose. But this is not the only price.
Do you want to say that in Everett’s view, we can have quantum-based chaos
again?
I was almost ready to say so but am now hesitating. Under the following condition,
the answer is yes, if you assume a deterministic—that is, chaotic—world to be
underlying the quantum world, then you can, from this deterministic ground,
explain all quantum phenomena. Unfortunately, this deterministic underlying
hypothetical world, if it exists, is inaccessible from the inside of the quantum
world. So it is a purely hypothetical entity. It also has a further disadvantage: the
quantum world that you derive from it, the speciﬁc quantum world, depends on the
assignment of the observer. That is, you have to specify which subpart of the total
universe—the deterministic total universe assumed as giving rise to the quantum
world—belongs to the observer and which subpart belongs to the rest of the world.
Then the whole theory formally becomes a solipsistic theory, that is, a theory
which is focused on one particular observer—not just her or his body but within
this body on the consciousness-carrying subsystem of the latter which might be
one particular cell in the brain or even a particular electron in one cell of the brain.
This is very disturbing when taken seriously because quantum mechanics thereby
becomes person-centered, personalized, even solipsistic. There are experiments by
which you could distinguish between these two alternatives—of either a wishy-
washy quantum mechanics being applicable or else a deterministic quantum
mechanics. Everything in quantum mechanics—even the Bell inequality and the
‘‘relativistic Bell experiment’’—can be explained in this deterministic fashion. But
people are reluctant because this is too religious as it were—to have to consider
one particular experiencing mind. So it would be a catastrophe for the physics
community if suddenly it turned out that you cannot describe nature without
beforehand accepting that there is an ‘‘assignment’’ handed-out from up high to a
part of the universe, namely to one particular subsystem and the attached
consciousness.
After publishing the hyperchaos results, you were around 38?
Yes, I gave a paper on hyperchaos in Utah at Frank Hoppenstaedt’s Summer
Seminar on Applied Mathematics in Salt Lake City in 1978. This ﬁrst equation
contained an awful lot of nonlinear terms. It appeared in print one year later (and
shows the ﬁrst hyperchaotic attractor on the book-cover). In that year, also the
36
4
Chaos

maximally
simpliﬁed—single-nonlinear-term—hyperchaos
equation
appeared
which even could be listened to.
After that, did you continue to work on chaos?
I did. The fractal results—with the explanation of self-similarity as caused by
hyperchaos—came later. There also came the proposed explanation for the famous
Kaplan-Yorke conjecture with the ‘‘fat hierarchy’’ including ‘‘hyperfat attractors’’
(done with Jack Hudson). The ﬁrst ‘‘explicit Poincaré recurrence’’ (jointly with
Georg C. Hartmann) followed, and the beautiful ‘‘ﬂare attractor s’’ (Hartmann’s
term) which grew out from the famous ‘‘Milnor attractor’’ to which we had been
alerted by Francisco Doria. What resulted was the explanatory model of the
economy as a ‘‘society of ﬂare attractors,’’ also with Hartmann. Finally, the new
results on Hamiltonian chaos would lead to cryodynamics. All of this is, if you
wish, added footnotes to chaos theory. Hereby, the ‘‘X-attractor,’’ ﬁrst called-for in
1976, is still hiding in the fourth dimension. For the empirical research program
needed to ﬁnd it—ﬁlming a thousand toddlers playing with play-dough—remains
an unconsummated ‘‘big science’’ research project up to this day.
If you agree we can ﬁnish with this session and the very rewarding topic of chaos.
We will continue with a new topic in the next. Thank you.
4
Chaos
37

Chapter 5
Deterministic Hamiltonian
and Endophysics
Last time we talked about chaos and hyperchaos, while you were around 38, let us
continue from this age.
Thank you, what am I supposed to say? I always tried to dance on as many
platforms as possible, mentally. The next big thing was an attempt to better
understand physics; I mean non-dissipative physics. The dissipative chaos I had
been concerned with is a macroscopic phenomenon by deﬁnition because it
contains friction. So the friction-less part of nature came into the focus of my
interest. It was a quite new experience to start to simulate Hamiltonian systems—
frictionless systems—on a computer. I hit on the idea of a T-tube at the time. It was
after I had struck a friendship with Joe Ford in Atlanta, and we both saw that we
could entertain new and potentially controversial ideas on how two particles can
interact in a frictionless manner to generate chaos and other nontrivial types of
behavior. It had to do with the notion of irreversibility and whether one could ﬁght
it, that is, do something against the second law of thermodynamics. So this type of
interest began in those years.
When did this idea of a T-tube come to your mind, around 38 or 39 years of age?
No, I actually was two years older already when I wrote the ﬁrst paper on the T-tube.
This was a transition period in which I slowly switched in this direction of trying to
understand the deeper secrets of nature. There is this fundamental contradiction
between chaos on the one hand and the quantum chance—the so-called primary
chance of Wolfgang Pauli —on the other. The fact that you cannot predict the future in
classical systems, is because you can never observe a chaotic system sharply enoughto
predict its future over a longer time. This claim does not stand alone. Chance in
quantum mechanics is something different. Pauli called it ‘‘primary chance.’’ Here you
also cannot predict the outcome of an experiment, but in this case the idea is that this is
not because nature is a chaotic system, but because something ‘‘worse’’ is responsible
and interferes with observation. Pauli was always trying to be very sharp and to come
up with the most pointed notion possible. When you are trying to understand nature,
this is a very helpful strategy, it does not mean that you are an unfriendly person, it just
means that you take nature seriously as an enemy, as Francis Bacon said.
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_5,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
39

What is the exact deﬁnition or most important feature of a T-tube?
A T-tube yields the simplest possible Hamiltonian system with nontrivial behavior.
You have two particles in a T-tube, one particle in the horizontal part and one
particle in the vertical part, and you can make them interact. For example, you can
arrange for collisions by letting the vertical tube have an open connection to the
horizontal tube. If you give both particles—or just the vertical one—a rounded
upper surface, the collisions possible in the open mouth area are either gentle
(barely touching) or massive. You can plot both positions in a 2-D diagram, and
you get a nice billiard-table like behavior of the single point whose motion in the
plane describes both motions simultaneously. This ‘‘conﬁguration space’’ exactly
mimics a single frictionless billiard ball moving on a 2-D table. The rounded
interaction area complies also, which is almost a miracle—you always have locally
symmetric in- and out-angles. So one can geometrically deduce what will happen.
This was my basic idea at the time. It gives you what is called Sinai chaos.
In your paper on the T-tube conﬁguration, did you talk about chaos in this
structure as well?
Yes, exactly. There was a related third topic, namely, irreversibility. I wanted to
understand whether it would not be possible to have the irreversibility of statistical
mechanics in this 2-particle system, with each particle subjected to a 1-dimensional
motion. I next designed a 2-particle system in a T-tube in which the two particles
did not have rounded surfaces, but in which, one particle had a quadratic shape and
the other, in the vertical tube, had a triangular tip with one vertical and one slanted
side. It could then collide with the horizontal ‘‘brick’’ in two ways. If the latter is
coming from the left, say it will touch on the vertical side of the triangular tip and
hence be completely blocked in its motion and be repelled. But if it is coming from
the other side, it will be able to push the intruding vertical particle back down along
its slanted frictionless side. So coming from the one side, it would be pushed back
but from the other side it would not. I wondered whether this could help understand
irreversibility. It turned out that this system was more intelligent than its designer.
Against all expectations, the system was not showing irreversible behavior. So this
formally 4-variable system—two positions, two velocities—with its 2-dimensional
conﬁguration space that was completely transparent (I once discussed the
underlying three-manifold in its phase space with my friend Gottfried Mayer-
Kress in Los Alamos) was a beautiful playground.
The existence of chaos in the T-tube conﬁguration was a separate ﬁnding?
Chaos was one of the implications of this picture. Chaos arises only if the surface
of one of the two interacting particles is smoothly rounded, rather than being
piecewise-straight. The conﬁguration space then shows chaos according to a
theorem of Yakov Sinai of 1970.
You were around 40 or 41?
I gave a talk on this in Sitges, Spain, when I was 42.
40
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics

What was the outcome, the feedback from the audience and later, the readers?
At the conference itself there was no particular reaction, but Joe Ford became
interested. He later built a little gadget which illustrated the same thing with a
pellet in a little ﬂat box. It had the form of the previous conﬁguration space and
contained a narrowing funnel if the pellet came from the one side, and a planar
obstacle with a hole in it when it came from the other side. He would shake this
contraption in a conference talk to demonstrate the expected preferred occupation
of one of the two compartments, one smoothly narrowing up to the gap in between
them, the other rectangular except for the hole leading into the opening alley.
Indeed the compartment with the hole was preferentially occupied, but this was an
artifact due to the presence of friction in the mechanical implementation.
On what else did you work afterwards?
This work on phase space led to an idea about the origin of quantum mechanics.
More speciﬁcally, it led me back to a discovery made in 1913 in Berlin by Otto
Sackur—who died a year later from a lab accident. He re-discovered Planck’s
constant independently in a gas, that is to say, in a radiation-free, purely
mechanical context. The pertinent classical so-called Sackur-Tetrode formula for
the entropy allowed me to deterministically explain—it sounds courageous—the
h or h-bar of quantum mechanics, Planck’s constant. So, a ﬁrst possibility to
explain the mysterious minimum action of nature arose.
Not capital H, the Hamiltonian operator?
It was indeed the little h. I harked back to the classical entropy formula, found by
Sackur, which was later to be re-written by Tetrode in Holland as the so-called
Sackur-Tetrode entropy formula. This formula is well-known and justly accepted,
but it contains little h as a factor in the denominator. Everybody thinks this is not
surprising as it describes an action—more precisely an action raised to the 6N-th
power. However, this formula had been found in complete independence from
quantum mechanics. Otto Sackur had empirically re-discovered h in a gas here.
The numerical re-discovery made was much less accurate than the original
discovery of h made 13 years before by Max Planck. But here it was in the context
of entropy measurements done in a gas, without any radiation or subatomic
processes involved.
You are referring to Planck’s discovery of the Planck constant?
Yes, the little h occurs here in the context of a Hamiltonian gas. It turns out that the
Sackur-Tetrode formula contains h, not because h is put-in as a universal constant
as everybody believes, but only because it is employed as a convenient unit. To
give a comparison,—if you measure the circumference of the earth in kilometers,
no one would claim that because the formula contains kilometers, the circumfer-
ence is ‘‘quantized’’ in terms of kilometers in reality. In the same vein, the Sackur-
Tetrode formula for the entropy is not quantized, even though it contains h in the
denominator. h is only a unit of measure, but once you have recognized this,
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics
41

you can start to check in what kind of a classical system this unit h—I call it
h* (h-star)—comes out in such a way that it conforms with the experimentally
observed value h.
It was at that time that you wrote the paper on calculating the value of h?
Yes, but that manuscript was only published a year later in 1985, I ﬁrst reported
about it in Santa Fe the year before when Jonas was 1 (we had taken him along).
That was in 1984?
When I was 44.
I had wanted to touch on that paper of how to calculate the value of Planck’s
constant. What is the physical origin of Planck’s constant?
The Planck constant is a strange feature of nature discovered by Max Planck in
1900. It means that nature, if she is considered to be deterministic as physicists had
assumed up to that moment, is described by a Hamiltonian that is somehow
perturbed in the actions that occur. In a classical Hamiltonian system, there is no
ﬁnite quantum of action. Max Planck had been very much astonished to ﬁnd such
a unit action at work in nature which he could not explain, in his analysis of the
black-body radiation. Einstein would then be the ﬁrst to see the deep signiﬁcance
of this discovery for other phenomena as well.
Do you know how Max Planck arrived at his constant?
It is a famous story, Graham Farmelo wrote a little text about it in 2002 in his
book with the nice title, ‘‘It Must Be Beautiful.’’ Max Planck himself was never
quite happy with his discovery but saw that it was very important. It was a constant
that obviously had fallen from heaven—just like the other big little c of Einstein.
This parallelism explains why Planck struck this unprecedented alliance with a
‘‘nobody’’—a young patent ofﬁce clerk without a university degree yet who
claimed he had found out that c is a universal constant. Planck had found his h as a
universal constant and saw that both constants were completely unexpected and
counterintuitive. It is always a big challenge to explain things that are absurd and
‘‘cry’’ for an explanation. h and c are really worth the sweat of anyone who is able
to say something about them—even a nobody. Unintentionally I found myself in
the lane of people who try to better understand h (and later this re-occurred with c).
How did you understand h, and how can you explain it to the reader?
The main thing that I saw is that the Sackur-Tetrode formula was right. It is beautiful,
but most of all, can be derived rigorously for deterministically interacting classical
particles. It is a ‘‘phase space volume’’—an action raised to the 6N-th power. This
action is a direct consequence of the deterministic interaction of the particles
involved. There is nothing opaque (non-transparent) about it. For example, if you
change the volume of the system, or change the mass of the particles in the system, or
change the temperature, then the value of this action that you get from the phase
space volume—the 6N-th power of an action—represents a system-speciﬁc unit
42
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics

action. It will change under the mentioned manipulations. Thus there exists in
classical mechanics—a closed system of particles—what you can call a unit action.
However, this classical unit action is speciﬁc for every given system. Having seen
this, I wondered whether, maybe, there exists an overriding classical system in nature
of which we all are a part that directly explains why (in nature) a particular value of
this Sackur-Tetrode action holds true empirically. I tried this idea out by putting all
the parameters I knew about the universe into the equilibrium equation on hand—to
see whether one gets out Planck’s value for the h* of this classical system. If the
universe is taken as a classical closed system—this may be a crazy idea but one can
always try it out since anything rational is allowed in science—, then a unit action
close to h could be hoped to come out. However, a completely wrong value was
obtained. I was quite disappointed at ﬁrst. Then I realized that there exists a second
physical system from which there is as little escape as from the universe itself—the
human brain. In principle, you can calculate the classical Sackur action of the human
brain just as well—to check for the fun of it whether or not you get a value that is
closer to h. So I put in all the values pertinent to the brain if you look at it as a
momentarily closed classical statistical-mechanical system. This involved some
simpliﬁcations, of course, as a ﬁrst stab—but since electrons have the lowest mass,
they contribute most strongly to the entropy and hence to h*. So carrying out the
estimate was perhaps not an entirely nonsensical matter. I got a value equal to, I
think, 0.7 times h. Thus after putting classical numbers into a classical model,
suddenly a value came out that was very close to h. It might converge even more
closely if one did the same calculation more carefully with more realistic parameters.
So here was some potential evidence—not very striking evidence but very surprising
evidence—that maybe, h has to do with the fact that your brain is a system using
which, you observe the rest of the universe. It is a quite disturbing idea and I was
shocked at ﬁrst to come up with this thought in 1984. But there is a nice anecdote in
this context. I wrote a manuscript on this and submitted it to the Zeitschrift für
Naturforschung a, reigned by Alfred Klemm who died this year as a centenarian.
Professor Klemm asked me to name a potential referee so he could get an opinion
from a trustworthy colleague, and I gave him the name of my friend Joe Ford who
had seen the paper when he had visited with me in the same year and had found good
words about it. I thought this was a sure way to get it published. I then got back a letter
from the editor with the report by an anonymous referee that started out with the
words ‘‘Dear Otto, please do not publish this paper.’’
That was it?
Not quite. I could not publish the paper in 1984 but the next year I could present it
at a conference organized by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences on the dynamics
of the brain. So it appeared in a conference proceedings volume and hence exists.
Joe Ford of course was a very benevolent person who knew how dangerous it is to
put out such ideas. In retrospect, I am quite grateful to him.
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics
43

What did you do after that?
The next ‘‘thing’’ was endophysics. Endophysics, if you so wish came out of this
experience even though I did not see it at the time. I was pushed towards
endophysics in a roundabout way. Leibniz helped, Joe Ford and David Finkelstein
helped, Werner Kutzelnigg helped, my student Jens Meier helped, Matthias
Schramm helped, Kazuhisa Tomita in Kyoto helped, Roger Boscovich from the
18th century helped, and Hans Primas and Peter Weibel would do so later. It was
all quite naïve at ﬁrst. It had started out from trying to understand the universe
from ﬁnding something universal, demonstrable inside. Later I realized that
looking at the universe logically presupposes that you take seriously the position of
the observer as a part of the universe. This is trivial, is it not?
This was around 1990?
It was earlier, shortly after the T-tube, it was still connected to it. The ﬁrst long
paper on endophysics was written in 1985 and published two years later. There
was a forerunner in honor of Tomita, who had witnessed the bomb blast as a youth
and died prematurely.
The collection as a book?
Peter Weibel brought the endophysics book out in 1992, the second edition in
English came in 1998.
So let us now concentrate on, what is endophysics?
Endophysics is a very intuitive word like endocrinology. Endo means inside, and
endophysics is that you look at physics under the proviso that you are a part of
physics yourself—physics from within. The Greek name was given to me as a
present by David Finkelstein after I had spoken of ‘‘Physics from within’’ as a new
science—which was not unfamiliar to him.
If you say endophysics, this implies that we have an exophysics, too. Is working in
physics not automatically a part of endophysics?
It should be, but it primarily (if perhaps naively) is rather a part of exophysics. All
physics that everyone else is doing is exophysics, so it appears to me.
You mean we observe physics from outside?
This is what we pretend. We mentally place ourselves outside of the world.
If we want to understand how nature works—what is the meaning of endophysics?
Endophysics is when you acknowledge from the beginning that you are a part of the
universe and try to look at the universe from within. In this way you can make a
mental model of the exo- world, as we all do in science. Then we can check what
differences arise between the two views. One can do this only by checking in a
model, since we cannot take an outside position relative to the real universe. On the
one hand, you can have a model where you are not part of the model; on the other,
44
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics

you can put yourself into the model as a part of it. This is greatly facilitated today
since we can realize artiﬁcial minds in a computer. The long endophysics paper that
was rejected by Science magazine (it had started out with the words ‘‘a new science
is described’’) got published a few years later by John Casti in a conference book
titled ‘‘Real Worlds, Artiﬁcial Minds.’’ We can create an artiﬁcial physics within
a computer model, as Edward Fredkin and Stephen Wolfram ﬁrst did in a
discontinuous, automata-theoretic context. The name as I said is courtesy of David
Finkelstein who had held similar ideas himself. I wrote him a letter proposing that
there are two kinds of physics, two basic sciences of physics, one being physics
from without and the other physics from within, and he wrote back: why do you not
say exophysics and endophysics? He gave me permission to use the name without
quoting him. The idea soon turned out to be not totally novel. Probably, Archimedes
was the ﬁrst to have harbored the idea with his ‘‘give me where I may stand and I
shall move the earth’’ (Dós moi po sto, kai kináso tan gan [Doric Greek]), or the
dark Anaximander, who said that the whole is ‘‘unempirical’’ (ápeiron). The ﬁrst
modern scientist was Boscovich—Roger Joseph Boscovich—in the 18th century.
He became quite famous, Maxwell liked him very much. For example Maxwell
claimed in a book from 1872, the second edition of his ‘‘Theory of Heat,’’ that the
smallest parts of a body (atoms) must be ‘‘so impalpable that we cannot in any way
lay hold of them.’’ He also ﬁrst described the demon—Maxwell’s demon. Maxwell
was very much thinking along these lines, which I did not know at the time.
Boscovich wrote 2 papers in 1755 (in Latin) with very similar titles, one called ‘‘On
space and time’’ and the other ‘‘On space and time as they are recognized by us.’’
This is exactly the dichotomy between physics from without and physics from
within. I acquired a very strong admiration for Boscovich who is becoming more
and more famous again in recent years, with R. Anderton and D. Nedelkovich’s
book having just come out.
Endophysics means that you are a part of the model. For example, if you have an
equation describing a phenomenon as a mathematical model, endophysics says
that you should be one of the variables in that model?
If you try to have a complete description of this situation, you are indeed bound to
introduce the observer explicitly as a part of the system that you describe. Trying
to understand the system from the point of view of an internal observer is the task.
How can we involve ourselves in a mathematical model?
Only if we make a mathematical model of the universe in which we include a
mathematical model of an observer who is assumed to be inside that universe. It
obviously is a part of the honorable task of science to do just that. It is
unavoidable, but for some reason it got postponed for centuries and millennia.
And now we can do this?
One could always do it, but in the age of the computer it is much easier. Maxwell
had a much harder life when he arrived at his demon, Maxwell’s demon, to explain
the irreversibility in nature.
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics
45

Can we consider a very simple physical system like a spring or a pendulum?
This is exophysics.
This would be exophysics—that we can model it using a Lagrangian or
Hamiltonian or whatever. Does a simple system like a pendulum, have a
mathematical model in this way?
Two pendula that are jointly chaotic do form an example.
Let us take just one pendulum. In the context of endophysics—how can we picture
ourselves in the form of a pendulum?
Good point. We can only put a model of ourselves into a complete model universe.
So endophysics is necessarily more complicated because it not just describes what
you are seeing before your eyes, but the universe must contain a subsystem called
‘‘observer,’’ and this model observer would eventually have to become a model of
oneself.
You mean the observer needs a model?
Yes, the observer has to appear explicitly in the model.
Both in the model and as a model? So the observer needs a mathematical model
for himself?
This model must be made a part of the bigger model of the universe.
But then every observer has to use a different model for himself?
As you say, this is the crux, that is, the dangerous part of the endophysical
endeavor. This is the reason why almost no one wants to touch it because it has this
solipsistic streak to it.
You mean in endophysics we must have different results because every observer
needs a different model for himself. If that model interacts, for example, with the
mathematical model of a pendulum, the interaction result would be different?
Yes, but of course, observers are not that different. You just have to include the
brain into the physics you model. This is not as frightening as it sounds. You have
to make a model of the brain in physical terms but this is not so difﬁcult. It does
not change the formalism in any way, except that you do not just look at the
formalism as it is, but also at an internal boundary that is valid within the formally
described world. We can take particles, for example, to model a neuron. We are
made up of neurons ourselves, so the whole thing is not hopeless, since we can
model a neuron, an excitable system, on a deterministic microscopic basis.
How can I model myself for example? I see a pendulum which is moving and I want
to understand my interaction with the model, so I need my own model as a
mathematical model, too?
Yes, but we only need an idealized observer.
46
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics

How can I model myself?
There are many ways to do this, and we do not know the eventually optimal way,
as of yet. We can start out by assuming that your observer was made up of particles
that are mutually interacting. Even simpler, the observer could be made up of
pendula—many pendula—that are interacting. Simpler still; replace the observer
by a single little pendulum. It is not hard to look at what happens if the observer is
replaced by a single pendulum. It turns out you get a sharply deﬁned action, and
then you get quantum mechanics out of this assumption.
Again, my question is this; we have a pendulum, a mathematical model of it, and
we have an observer, for example you. You have a mathematical model for
yourself, and then you let your own model interact with the pendulum model, so
you get a different result than when you have just the single pendulum. Now how
can you understand that different result? Again, if you want to see the different
results, you should be in the external physics?
At ﬁrst sight it looks as if there was the danger of an inﬁnite regress here.
You should be simultaneously in endophysics and in exophysics?
Yes, but it turns out there is just one added level, it is not inﬁnitely many. You can
make a model of yourself as I said. Let us assume I was a little pendulum. That is
the idea. The observer is replaced by a single pendulum, or by a collection of
pendula. Then you can look at what happens if you make this pendulum (or these
pendula) called ‘‘observer’’ a part of the whole system.
Again, to understand this interaction, you need to look at it from the outside? So
you are simultaneously inside and outside? Would I have to tie my model to your
model to understand the different interactions? What is the important result here?
Maybe the important result is that there is no blue blood among human beings,
meaning that everybody has the same rights. The results come out the same
whether you have a single pendulum model of the observer, or a one-hundred
pendula model, or a more complicated model. As soon as you then take a zero-
temperature multi-pendula observer, the system is identical to exophysics again.
So it is only the ﬁnite temperature of the observer which really matters.
Can we have such an idea also in relativity? A moving frame which we watch from
the outside? Or is this exophysics again?
Quantum mechanics is not yet endophysics, and relativity theory is not yet
endophysics. Each of them is a theory which introduces ‘‘ad hoc’’ assumptions
compared to a classical theory, and those assumptions need to be explained.
Endophysics can, if I am not mistaken, explain both constants that underlie
quantum mechanics and relativity theory. Relativity theory as such with its own
strange constant, the universal constancy of the speed of light, c, in the vacuum,
can be looked at from a classical point of view and can predictably be explained by
classical endophysics. The so aspired-to classical view of nature as a rational
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics
47

machine was ﬁrst identiﬁed by Buddha, I would think, and second on the same
level of philosophical sophistication, by René Descartes, the two greatest minds in
science in my view. Strangely, Buddha is usually not considered a scientist, but I
got lost in generalities.
If we take your pendulum model, we now need to see what the salient point is. To
see this, we should go outside towards exophysics?
Yes. We need to have an exo model which contains an observer. The observer may
be modeled by a quite simple subsystem in order for us to get already exo results
that are of endo importance.
Do you believe, that in the double pendulum, we no longer see a chaotic motion if
we look at it from within?
I do. If this is true, it would be the reason why quantum mechanics contains no
chaos anymore. This fact is very hard to accept by the physics community.
We do encounter quantum chaos, do we not?
‘‘Quantum chaos’’ is an approximation. It always has to be written in inverted
commas. So quantum chaos is not chaos, it represents an attempt to make a bridge
between chaos and quantum mechanics. Quantum chaos does not have the
transﬁnite accuracy of chaos; it has a ﬁnite resolution eventually. So it is ‘‘ugly
chaos’’ if you wish, forgive me for using such a word. However, it can be
explained by endophysics, and then the whole thing is pure chaos theory again.
You say that this endo theory can explain quantum mechanics? Which
interpretation of quantum mechanics: Quantum mechanics in one world, in many
worlds, or both?
It is the many worlds theory which is an implication of endophysics. This is very
disquieting because, as you know, the main objection against Everett’s theory of
the many worlds (or many branches, as he called it) is that it is a subjectivist theory
that it almost looks like solipsism. This very same reproach can be made against
endophysics. It gives you an observer-speciﬁc physics, because eventually, every
observer has a different position, much as in special relativity theory, not just in
space but also in terms of his or her micro motions in time. Both relativity theory
and quantum mechanics suddenly give the observer an overriding role, which he
had not possessed before, as is well known. Exactly this fact can be explained by
endophysics.
You mentioned your efforts about h and now also about quantum mechanics in
your general theory of endophysics. Can you give some information in this context
about relativity theory? Were you interested in it?
We come into gentler waters here at ﬁrst sight. I was surprised to see that it is
harder to explain special relativity than to explain quantum mechanics from the
point of view of endophysics. If a priori speaking the world is supposed to be
rational, thoroughly rational, one has to ﬁnd a way to explain both quantum
48
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics

mechanics and relativity (special relativity and general relativity) within a purely
classical view. This rationality assumption needs to be made because only the
classical view is transﬁnitely exact, which in fact gives it a very large weight.
Quantum mechanics on the one hand has inherited many features of this transﬁnite
exactness, but on the other hand also contains this element of unpredictability
which then ceases to be mysterious if the ﬁne motions in the observer are taken
into account. Relativity also has a strange observer-centeredness to it which cannot
be eliminated. As it is well known, every person lives in a different frame by
deﬁnition because we are shaking a little bit each with our thermal motions, as
Archimedes anticipated. Some event on a distant star might be simultaneous with
me at this very moment in time but not with you. So there is an element of
solipsism already built-in into relativity theory. A similar element of solipsism is
built into quantum mechanics. The observer is alone, in an existentialist manner.
So the scandal already exists. Endophysics is the only theory which talks about
these things. It touches on a taboo, but it also explains it. It gives you the hope to
eventually come back to a satisfying completely rational picture of the universe
and yourself.
Now two questions, maybe stupid ones: when we talk about an observer both in
relativity and in the endophysics theory, should the observer be like a human being
or like an animal?
Eventually the observer should be like a human person or an ape.
Should it be alive or could it be like a piece of wood? Can you look at a table as an
observer?
No, it should be a dynamical entity; it should be a dynamical system. An observer
at any rate is a dynamical system—the whole universe is a dynamical system, but
the observer also is a dynamical system. We are familiar with the mode of action
of a neuron, for example. A neuron would be the simplest version of an observer.
We can make a chemical model of a neuron in terms of molecules interacting
without friction. Eventually one comes up with a Hamiltonian version of a
chemical observer valid on a deterministic micro level. You then suddenly have
billiard balls behind the usual quantum formalism. You can apparently indeed
assume that on the lowest level, the universe is built up out of point shaped billiard
ball like particles. That is only an assumption, but even the Higgs theory is
compatible with it.
You can consider the observer to be a ﬂower?
An internally dynamical ﬂower is still very complex, one would like to make it
simpler.
Don’t you think that a human being is more complex than a ﬂower? Although you
just modeled a human being as a pendulum?
We should use the whole brain as a part of the universe in order to ﬁnd the
interface. It then turns out that you can simplify the brain by taking a subsystem.
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics
49

Every person is different to model, but you need some simpliﬁcation or
approximation to ﬁnd a mathematical model for your observer. In this vein, you
use a pendulum model for yourself. You use it for some other people too, but other
people may have some differences to them. How do you capture these differences in
your modeling in endophysics?
It is possible to make theories of observers quite independently of their chemical
or nuclear chemical implementation. For example, observers living on a neutron
star, made up not of chemical substances and reactions as we ourselves are, but of
nuclear chemical reactions, can be conceived of as Robert Forward saw in his
book, ‘‘Dragon’s Egg’’ which he concealed as science ﬁction. It is an important
science book. It shows people living on a neutron star’s surface that are not built-
up from chemical reactions as we are, but from nuclear-chemical reactions. There
might be other ways like clouds—Fred Hoyle has a science-ﬁction story about a
‘‘Black Cloud’’ that is intelligent and even benevolent. All these observers would
have different interfaces to the world and would have a different type of quantum
mechanics, and a different type of relativity theory.
So far, we have not succeeded in considering very precise differences between
observers taken as a model. For example, you can look at a model and try to
interpret it. Do you have to consider yourself as a model interacting with that
model? So let us consider that I am the observer. Then my model should have some
differences to your own model. We do not have a way yet to consider these
differences, or do we?
We can make a model of an observer. We have to do this if we want to understand
the universe. There are some quite developed models of observers—I already
mentioned neurons. We know that the brain is made up of many neurons. It does
not matter whether we are an octopus or a vertebrate in terms of our organization.
Both systems are built out of neurons in very much the same way, and so are
insects. Thus we can have a model of a brain and agree that this brain would
contain something like neurons. Then we can say what is a neuron—a neuron is an
excitable system. What is an excitable system? It turns out that these neurons and
all excitable systems are made up of particles that interact.
How do you model neurons? You need to use some theoretical physics again. For
example, you need quantum mechanics to model such particles, or do you not?
You found out correctly that there is a loop in the whole idea of endophysics.
A loop, yes. If we want to understand quantum mechanics, we need a model of
ourselves, so to model yourself you again use quantum mechanics. Such a loop is
logically inevitable?
It is, but there is no inﬁnite regress here as you suspect, because we can assume that
the universe were classical. This is the decisive step. I mean, maybe that is
nonsense, but, if we make this assumption, then we can also assume that the
50
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics

observer were classical. We can look at different observers, but eventually on
the micro level, we come up with essentially these moving particles in boxes,
more or less. Then, an important element which I only brushed upon is classical
indistinguishability. If you assume that the universe is made up from only a ﬁnite
number of types of particles, then they would be transﬁnitely equal in each class.
It is a beautiful fact of nature that something called indistinguishability exists
empirically. Its importance is vastly underrated. It was found again by Wolfgang
Pauli, as I learned from Hans Primas who was his pupil. Indistinguishability is not
just an exact, an inﬁnitely exact, feature. It is a transﬁnitely exact feature. It is
something which is a scandal in the good sense, an absolute scandal, because it is
incompatible with any just ﬁnite or inﬁnite accuracy. Indistinguishability is a
mathematical symmetry. A mathematical symmetry is sometimes, maybe almost
always, transﬁnitely exact. So if you have a transﬁntely exact Boltzmann-type
universe, which one can assume, then within this transﬁnitely exact Boltzmann
universe, you ﬁnd a number of features that we are familiar with from quantum
mechanics, particle-speciﬁc cells are formed amongst interacting particles. We
suddenly get an analog to quantum cells. We get Pauli cells—classical Pauli cells
within a classical universe. Then we can use these classical Pauli cells to build up an
observer inside this classical universe. This then turns out to converge very closely
with what we know of our own universe. So the express fear which we had
originally that we might not be able to model anything because there is a loop in the
whole thing is, as if through a miracle, solved by the existence of tranﬁnitely exact
features (indistinguishability) in our given universe. This feature we can then
transpose onto our model universe. Thus it turns out that our hope for a complete
understanding of a model universe is very much supported by the notion of—the
discovery of—transﬁnitely exact features in our own universe, present on the
lowest level of particles. Pauli’s discovery of the Pauli cell would be the most
fundamental discovery, not just in quantum mechanics where it is a little bit of an
outsider-type result, but also in classical physics. So it is again mathematics,
transﬁnite mathematics—chaos-theoretic transﬁnite mathematics—that would be
the basis of everything.
You want to say that endophysics is a scientiﬁc theory, not a philosophical theory.
My last question on endophysics; how is it falsiﬁable?
If for the ﬁrst time you can explain things that no one could explain before, you
have a fairly good feeling. Of course, you want to falsify it again in the good
Popperian tradition, but falsiﬁcation also means ﬁnding a way to do so. Yet this is
a system that is fairly self-consistent (I did not mention the ethical reasons that
make this rationalism almost mandatory). There is a technical term for such
theoretical systems: ‘‘consistent systems of insanity’’—the culmination point every
psychotic person tries to reach. This is also what science tries to ﬁnd. As long as
you have found a system, an intrinsically consistent system, you can call it
‘‘science.’’ If no one can contradict it, then you may have to wait for years or
centuries or more until a better theory is found.
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics
51

I think a scientiﬁc theory has implicit in it a falsiﬁcation rule. For example; any
physical theory—consider quantum mechanics and the Schrödinger equation—
invokes falsiﬁcation implicitly. It means that if you ﬁnd an experiment that does not
obey the proposed equation, the latter will be falsiﬁed. It implicitly contains its
own falsiﬁcation rule. How does endophysics state its own falsiﬁcation rule?
I mean if endophysics can explain quantum mechanics, if endophysics can explain
special and general relativity, then we have made some progress also in the
direction of falsiﬁability. Then we will have to think about the next step how to
falsify this progress in a bigger context.
Another question; if special relativity will be falsiﬁed eventually, just for the sake
of the argument, would then the exophysics which explains it endophysically be
falsiﬁed as well?
If you have a more fundamental theory which explains another theory, and it then
turns out that what it explains is false, then you must have a look whether this
falsity follows also from the fundamental theory so that the latter is falsiﬁed, too.
Do you want to use the theory of endophysics as a theory of everything?
Of course, but not quite of everything. There is at least one thing that is not
covered—consciousness with the Now and its colors.
52
5
Deterministic Hamiltonian and Endophysics

Chapter 6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett
In the previous session we talked about endophysics. Now I want to continue with
this topic by asking the question; what is Everett’s main idea, and what is the
relation between your own idea of endophysics and that of Everett?
I was ﬁrst made aware of Everett in 1965, when I was 25 years old, by students of
Carl-Friedrich von Weizsäcker who were very much interested in Everett at the
time. Then I lost sight of him for almost thirty years. When I asked John Wheeler—
we were already in the 1990s—how I could contact Everett, he wrote me back that
Everett had passed away in 1982 (it was actually a year earlier). It was quite a
disappointment to me that I could not talk to him. Everett’s theory is a typical
example of endophysics. The ﬁrst theory of endophysics is due to Boscovich and I
see Everett in the same lineage of independent minds. Everett’s famous paper of
1957 in the ‘‘Review of Modern Physics’’ already contains the solution to the EPR-
problem on its last page. It is not very well known how far-reaching his paper
actually is. I later met the editor of that issue of the Review of Modern Physics in
which Everett was allowed to publish his paper, and learned from Bryce DeWitt,
who was quite young at the time as a guest editor, that he had asked Everett to un-
clarify a little bit his equations so that Bohr would not get annoyed too much by
what he had to say. It is a pity that the changes were not recorded.
Everett once picked up a hitchhiker while driving from the East coast to the West
coast, so I learned from Bryce DeWitt. The passenger was a theologian by training,
and they talked shop for several days during the long voyage about fundamental
questions. A few weeks later, Everett learned by happenstance that this same
person had committed suicide—and he was afraid that it had to do with the
conversation they had. So Everett was quite polarizing a mind as far as
metaphysics goes, and his theory is very metaphysical indeed. It is in the footsteps
of Boscovich—an ‘‘exo type’’ theory. That is, it belongs into the ﬁeld of
endophysics which knows about this distinction. It puts the fact that the observer
forms an integral part of the universe center stage in the theory. So Everett’s theory
is, if you so wish, a ‘‘solipsistic’’ theory. A person who is part of the universe
shares the same wave function with everyone else, but within that wave function
the actually obtained measurement result, the physical reality which appears, is
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_6,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
53

person-speciﬁc (private). So Everett’s theory is not a ‘‘many-worlds theory’’ as is
often claimed. Everett never said so. It can be called a ‘‘many-cuts theory.’’ It
refers to a single universe described by a unique Psi-function (as Schrödinger’s
wave function is called). Therefore the world is different for every observer, but
not just for every observer, also for every moment in time valid for a given
observer, because the observer herself or himself is continually changing in time
on a micro level (as John Bell emphasized). Therefore, the universe is changing in
a way the observer does not see. The observer thinks the universe has always the
same past and future, but in reality even the observer is going to be split according
to Everett. So this is a very Indian-type religion as it were in which a soul lives
through many lives. It is a solipsistic type of theory as such. Everett was fairly well
aware of this fact, although he did not publicize it. On the other hand, his theory is
falsiﬁable and hence scientiﬁc. Therefore one has to distinguish between the
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics and Everett. Niels Bohr was a
very great mind but could not bring himself to acknowledging the strength of this
new theory as an alternative. Everett’s theory is testable—so that it is not a mere
‘‘interpretation’’ as is usually believed but is a falsiﬁable ‘‘theory’’ of its own. The
Copenhagen interpretation of the Bohr school is also a testable theory. Experiment
can show which of the two theories survives. I would be ready to bet that this will
be the Everett theory and not the ‘‘Copenhagen interpretation,’’ as the latter will be
called afterwards.
What exactly is the meaning of ‘‘many cuts’’ in place of ‘‘many worlds’’?
It is just the difference between endo and exo. When you are a part of the world,
then the world becomes a subjectivist reality. This is hard to accept unless you
remember how it was when you were a young child. At a very young age all these
things were known to you. Later when you grew up becoming integrated into
society, you would lose this insight into the strange special role one occupies in the
world as an individual. The waking-up moment in life as a distinct person took
place when you or I were very young, around one and a half year old, sometimes
later. At that time one is very philosophical in one’s mind and knows many things
that later get lost because society does not know about them, so there is no
reinforcement. This is one of the reasons why religion is so important. The
subjectivist nature of reality and the Now—and how much one is dependent on
benevolence and how much one can also give benevolence—is something young
children are familiar with (and can later re-appreciate as scientists or in old age).
But in between, most people are not aware of this reality, so I am almost ready to
bet.
That momentary observer exists in every slice?
Yes, the state of the observer co-determines the objective reality. This fact is known
in psychology, of course, but it is not something having to do with complicated
things like how the brain works on the macro level. It rather has to do with how the
54
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett

brain is working as a physical system built out of elementary particles on the most
basic level, the micro level. The brain is not at zero temperature. Which particular
cut-type ‘‘world’’ is selected at every moment depends on the momentarily valid
microscopically deﬁned state of the observer. It is not the general noise level as
such like a non-erasable temperature-induced perturbation, it is the momentarily
applicable exact motion of all the particles in the observing part of the brain which
co-determines how the world appears—or rather exists objectively—to the
observer. It co-determines the momentary appearance of the world, both as far as
the Now is concerned and, within this given Now, what micro results—quantum
results—govern the rest of the world. While it is fairly easy to understand that
Everett’s theory refers to a ‘‘cut,’’ this cut represents a very particular selection. It
reﬂects the momentarily valid difference between the state of the consciousness-
bearing elements of the brain and the rest of the universe. This ‘‘subtraction’’ or
difference causes the quantum phenomena, I would say.
You mentioned an experiment which could help to decide which theory will
survive. What is that experiment?
It is the ‘‘relativistic EPR experiment.’’ It can be found in Everett’s only regularly
published physics paper of 1957, on the last page, but no one realized that at the
time. Later a pupil of Asher Peres’ in Tel-Aviv, Susan J. Feingold , was the ﬁrst to
my knowledge who saw the implicitly alluded-to experiment as a way to explicitly
distinguish between the Copenhagen and the Everett theory, in 1978. She
apparently did not publish. Later still, other people arrived at the same idea. I found
this idea also in a book by Roger Penrose
titled ‘‘The Emperor’s New Mind’’
published in 1989, a few months after my own paper on the subject had been
presented at Zurek’s quantum conference in Santa Fe. Several other scientists later
came up with the same idea including Anton Zeilinger in Vienna. There even was a
proposal, made by Zeilinger to ESA in 2001, to do the experiment with existing
technology. So far, the quantum community has been uneager to ﬁnd out whether
Copenhagen or Everett is right. Is the world really a solipsistic world? Actually,
solipsism is not the right word since it implies that there is only a single mind
experiencing the world. This is the opposite of what the experiment can show.
Nevertheless we have here a scientiﬁc theory which explains why the world as it
exists for an individual’s consciousness, has the properties which it has. So it is
quite frightening. The empirically decidable question posed to the experimenters of
ESA represents a worked example in endophysics.
So we do not have yet this experiment realized in practice?
Unfortunately no, we haven’t. It is interesting to see how the experiment can be
done. You need a satellite to do it, but it is a quite easy-to-do experiment given
currently available ingredients. The elements are the same as in experiments quite
often performed down here on earth. In 1967, Kocher and Commins ﬁrst set up the
whole experiment making sure that everyone could do it. Their famous successors,
including Alain Aspect, did not quote them because the inventors had not bothered
to measure through all polarization angles (as trivially feasible yet later found to be
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett
55

necessary in the wake of the Bell inequality). The experiment allows you to look at
two photons that are ‘‘correlated’’ when they come out of an atomic source. You
measure one property on the one photon and a non-commuting other property on
the other photon. Then you have measured both momentum and position (or
analogs) on two mutually symmetric particles—an idea Einstein had for the ﬁrst
time. It is called the EPR—Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen—experiment and was ﬁrst
proposed in 1935.
The novel thing that Susan Feingold
brought in was to measure, not just the
momentum here and the position there by using mere spatial separation between
two twin particles, but to use ‘‘causal separation’’ instead. Causal separation means
that you put each measurement into a receding frame relative to the other, so that
in either frame, the measurement made there is the ﬁrst (‘‘virgin’’) measurement.
Then you have two quantum measurements which both reduce the same virgin
wave function. Both do so in their own relativistic frame. The measurement made
on the other side is done later—in both cases. Therefore the ﬁrst measurement has
determined the position of a pair of twin particles while the other has determined
the momentum later which means that the momentum has been perturbed by the
ﬁrst measurement and is no longer a virgin experiment. But in the other frame the
momentum measurement was the ﬁrst and the position measurement was the
perturbed one. Thus, one has two quantum measurement results that are both
virgin—each done before the other in its own frame. This indubitable state of
affairs is incompatible with the Copenhagen interpretation while it is no problem
in Everett’s theory where each result is speciﬁc to a quantum world of its own.
According to Copenhagen, quantum mechanics would be disproved since one
could measure both the virgin momentum and the virgin position of a pair of
particles in deﬁance of the uncertainty relation. In Everett’s theory, each observer
lives in a quantum world of his or her own. Hence the incompatible pair of
measurements known by the other observer does not exist in the world of the ﬁrst,
and vice versa. No matter how hard to accept, this absurdity rescues quantum
mechanics in Everett’s theory.
I could add that endophysics goes one step further and replaces the capital Psi of
Everett for the total wave function by the capital H of the deterministic classical
Hamiltonian function of the universe. So there exists a potential further layer
behind Everett’s theory—Boltzmann’s theory. Everett did the decisive step of the
voyage. Let me summarize; if the experiment is performed and reveals what no one
doubts (namely, that the Bell correlations are conﬁrmed), then this conﬁrmation
implies that the worlds of different observers cannot all be the same. If there is only
one world, both the position and the momentum (or their analogs) of a pair of
correlated, that is, mutually equal, particles have been measured and quantum
mechanics is violated. Einstein’s plan to ‘‘complete’’—his word for ‘‘to kill’’—
quantum mechanics as represented by the Bohr school, is then vindicated. This
would be one more triumphant success of Einstein. To date, there remains the
loophole found by Everett. The same experimental outcome then proves that
Everett’s theory of quantum mechanics survives. Here each observer lives in his or
56
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett

her own quantum reality. Each then learns that one of the two measurements took
place ﬁrst in the frame to which he or she belongs, and the other came later and
hence was perturbed. This ‘‘perturbed’’ signal cannot be the same, however, as that
registered in the other spaceship in the latter’s frame. The experiment then has
proved that more than one quantum world exists. This loophole was discovered by
Everett, and on the last page of his 1957 paper he shows that he knew this. The
impending Zeilinger experiment therefore possesses maximum importance.
The question is; was the EPR proposal created to show that we are able to
measure momentum and position on two correlated particles, or one of the two? In
such an experiment we use two different photons made to radiate into different
frames. If we measure momentum and position (or their analogs) on both, an
observer in the one frame measures position and the other momentum (or an
analog)?
Let me come back to Einstein’s basic idea. Einstein chose an old physics textbooks
experiment. If you want to measure both the position and the momentum of a
particle, then you can use an experiment I learned about in high school 20 years
later when Dr. German (our physics teacher) performed it for us. He took two metal
toy locomotives that were mechanical twins of each other, without motors. In front
of each pair of bumpers, a compressible linear spring was mounted, with an
endplate. The two locomotives were pressed together so that the springs in between
them got compressed, and a woolen thread was used across both to hold them
compressed. The pair stood motionless. Then Dr. German approached the
connecting thread with a candle-ﬂame to burn the thread between the two
stationary locomotives on the table. Both locomotives promptly accelerated
symmetrically since the springs released their energy, to move with exactly the
same speed in opposite directions (to come to a standstill at corresponding positions
later). This exactly was Einstein’s idea: to use two particles equal in all properties
moving in opposite directions. Then you can measure at leisure on the one the
position and on the other the momentum. In this way you have measured both the
momentum and the position of each because they have exactly the same properties.
But they are two?
They are two, yes. Since you measure one thing on the one and the other thing on
the other, it appears impossible that the measurement done here could disturb the
measurement done there, as quantum mechanics forces you to predict.
Bohr published a paper on the same topic?
Yes, he did this in the same year, in the same journal, with the same title, so as if to
confuse the rest of the world. Bohr indeed took Einstein’s paper maximally
seriously, dropping all other activities for six weeks to produce what he hoped to
be a rebuttal. Obviously, he saw the implied danger to Copenhagen, that is, to his
own interpretation of quantum mechanics.
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett
57

What did he say in this paper against Einstein?
Essentially nothing new, although some details are worth looking at again. The
essence of Einstein’s idea remained un-disproved. Maybe I’ll ﬁrst give the solution
before trying to explain the confusion. The solution is that Einstein did not
mention with one syllable that 30 years before, he had shown that special relativity
allows one to causally decouple two systems. He clearly felt he need not mention
his old theory to embellish this new experiment. He was so proud he had the idea
of two symmetrically equal particles that he omitted mentioning as a footnote that
you could put the two particles into different frames, so that each measurement
could be made in a frame of its own moving away from the other to make sure that
the measurement done here comes ﬁrst and the measurement done there comes
later—so that each measurement comes ﬁrst in its own frame. So you have two
virgin particles, each undisturbed by the other measurement because that
measurement comes later. Then each side reduces the wave function ﬁrst. In
this way, you get ‘‘too many’’ results compared to what is allowed in the
Copenhagen interpretation. In this way the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum
mechanics could be disproved. The title of Einstein’s paper is…
Is quantum mechanics complete or not?
Yes: ‘‘Can quantum mechanics be completed’’ (literally he said; ‘‘be considered
complete’’). By completing quantum mechanics, he meant that measuring both
position and momentum becomes possible.
Did he clarify what he means by the word ‘‘completing’’ used in his paper?
He was tactful enough to use the word ‘‘complete’’ instead of ‘‘kill’’ in the title.
The title really means ‘‘Can quantum mechanics be disproved by measuring both
position and momentum?’’ He clearly thought that he had done so because the
experiment could be done. What he did not realize is the possibility that the ﬁrst
measurement would inﬂuence with superluminal speed the second measurement.
This he considered improbable. He was too good-natured to expect such a trick to
be played by nature—as this later proved to be the case as we know. If he had
taken this possibility more seriously, he would have added: If this improbable
outcome should happen, then you can—of course—separate the two experiments
much more effectively by causally insulating each from the other. Then both sides
taken together can predictably make a full quantum measurement of both
momentum and position of both particles, as is allegedly forbidden, for each
measurement is a ﬁrst measurement, and the other side’s measurement comes later.
The captain of each spaceship learns about the other’s outcome as something
achieved after he had already perturbed the wave function over there by his own
earlier measurement. Yet if each of the two is a virgin measurement, then you have
too much information in effect—such that you have indeed laid the Copenhagen
interpretation to rest. This is because you know both the undisturbed position and
the undisturbed momentum of either particle.
58
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett

By adding the relativistic aspect, you have actually made two different worlds?
This is the point: in each frame, the ordinary Copenhagen experiment holds true.
You have a Copenhagen experiment in each world?
Precisely, the two of them taken together amount to one too many. But in Everett’s
theory, this is not so: each world is a world of its own. Therefore each observer
lives in an ordinary, Copenhagen-like world, so that Copenhagen survives in each
of the two worlds.
In two sub-worlds?
Yes, Everett has doubled Copenhagen in this case—which fact is incompatible
with Copenhagen itself but completely acceptable in Everett’s theory. Therefore,
Everett’s theory survives while Bohr’s interpretation does not. It only seemingly
survives in each of the two Everett worlds.
Suppose we accept Everett’s theory in place of the Copenhagen theory: would the
mathematics of quantum mechanics be changed?
This is an important point. The answer is no. As we saw, in each half- or parallel
world, which is a Copenhagen world if taken alone, everything is ﬁne since one
measurement came ﬁrst and the other later (with the usual Bell correlations so that
it must have been inﬂuenced superluminally by the ﬁrst). The formalism is
absolutely observed.
For the whole world?
Yes, as far as one side is concerned with the two measurements that it contains.
Only interpreting both measurements as being primary and undisturbed is not
allowed. But in each world, the other measurement comes later and is therefore
perfectly acceptable as being perturbed by the ﬁrst, only the two pairs cannot be
the same in both worlds. Therefore, each observer is happy at ﬁrst sight. According
to Everett’s theory, they can stay so because each observer lives in a different
world with a different pair of results. In Everett’s theory, there is no way ever to
learn about the world of the other. So in each world, the second measurement
result is provably disturbed by the ﬁrst owing to the Bell inequality being
observed. If this is the case, the other measurement cannot be the same in the other
frame. Hence there must be more than one world, more than one pair of
measurements, existing. In this way only Copenhagen is disproved. The individual
observer could not say that there are now two worlds. Each observer has only one
world. Everything therefore is okay for him or her. Each individual other person in
the universe also necessarily is either in the one frame or the other: One of the two
spaceship captains is the earlier one for him. Thus everything is okay in Everett’s
theory. But there is a terminal problem with Copenhagen. Copenhagen is
‘‘completed’’—which means killed—by this experiment. Maybe this fact is co-
responsible that people did not do the relativistic Bell experiment for many years.
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett
59

On June 30, 2013, I was privileged to learn from Professor Zeilinger that the
necessary ‘‘quantum satellite’’ is almost but not quite ready.
But to remind you, our question was; when we use the Schrödinger equation, we
can ﬁnd an exact solution for the wave function—for example in the simple case of
a hydrogen atom. In Everett’s slices or branches or worlds, we can do the same
calculations. Can we not add all the branches together into a complete universe?
That is the exo physical viewpoint. Yes, we can.
I mean, however, that if that is the case, both reduced equations cannot possibly
work for the whole universe?
Right, the above solutions would be valid only for under-privileged inhabitants.
What you ask in effect is whether there exists a privileged outside view. The latter
can, unfortunately, only be construed in the mind, since in reality we do not have the
whole world available to our own eyes. If you wish, this is a very religious type of
thinking. As such it indirectly explains why Everett had the mentioned collision with
a theologian; it was because the theologian had realized he had met a ‘‘better
theologian’’ as far as the power of the arguments was concerned, but the two of them
with their different temperaments could not come to the wonderful resolution of the
seeming conﬂict here suggested (exo versus endo). This rationalism is acceptable
both from the point of physics and of metaphysics. From the point of view of
religion, there can be no problem with that, but Everett himself unfortunately
thought he was an atheist, and his discussion partner took his word for that—that he
now had to accept an atheistic truth. This was a misunderstanding. So a self-
misunderstanding of Everett’s was responsible for the tragic outcome, it appears.
Everett later made sure he would never again talk shop with a theologian about
physics because this proved such a dangerous topic. He himself could not quite
accept the religious (pardon me, exo) component in his whole thinking. But your
question was more speciﬁc, I am afraid. I apologize that I meandered around it.
I do not understand what exactly is changed. Everett did not want to kill the
Copenhagen view—or did he? He only wanted to complete it in the sense of
making it round? It seems that EPR wanted to kill it, but not Everett, right? In a
book just published, David Wallace from the University of Oxford quotes on the
ﬁrst page a few sentences from the original thesis of Everett. He says he only wants
that his own quantum theory be stronger than the accepted point of view and that it
can be applied to the whole world and not just to subsystems. But does it mean that
he would come from one quantum world to many?
To many quantum worlds, yes.
The book says that John Wheeler omitted these sentences when he sent the
manuscript to Bohr.
This could very well be. I had a long talk with John Wheeler about his pupil. It was
very nice how he introduced the topic to me when we were having a long walk
together in 1983 in Como, Italy. He told me unexpectedly that he had once been
60
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett

asked by a stranger, a young man: ‘‘Dear Professor Wheeler are you a real
professor?’’ He had replied, ‘‘What do you mean, I would hope so.’’ ‘‘If you are a
real professor, you would accept a ﬁnished PhD dissertation written by a student
without your having provided the topic.’’ Wheeler, impressed, had replied, ‘‘Let
me have a look.’’ He found he could comply. This is the compressed story as he
put it to me. In real life, it of course took longer and he had to help Everett to re-
write it, and so on. Wheeler also told me that very much later, a journalist asked
him, ‘‘Please, Professor, tell me what is your latest view on Everett’s theory, do
you still believe in it?’’ He had replied: Dear Mr. X, please, do grant me the favor
of retracting your question. The journalist was perplexed. He got the following
answer from Wheeler; ‘‘If I tried to explain to you why I no longer believe in it, it
might happen that I get a relapse.’’ It was very hard for him to survive Everett’s
theory, so to speak.
From the sentences of Everett which I quoted, I infer that Everett only wanted to
make quantum mechanics stronger, not change it. In interpreting EPR, you are
now mixing quantum mechanics and relativity theory. In this way, you try to kill
Copenhagen and in the same stroke prove that we have at least two different
quantum worlds?
Exactly. The whole problem of quantum mechanics is now solved; it appears to
me—due to Everett. We could call it the E2PR problem. Everett supports this
interpretation on the last page of his published paper, as mentioned. There is—if I
may put it that way—another Einstein to be added to Einstein-Podolsky and
Rosen. This is the young Einstein of 30 years before. The E-squared-PR problem
when answered can solve everything and show that Einstein was right after all.
You can indeed make sure you can measure both momentum and position in a
virgin form, thereby killing the Copenhagen ‘‘interpretation’’ if you include special
relativity, Einstein’s earlier brain child. At the same time, Everett’s ‘‘theory’’
survives. Then, after Everett’s theory has been proved empirically in this way, you
can go one step further and replace Everett’s capital-Psi wave function for the
whole universe by Boltzmann’s deterministic capital-H Hamiltonian function for
the whole universe—arriving at a deterministic exophysical theory. Boscovich,
who had this idea ﬁrst if prematurely, would be resurrected. Thus, endophysics in
the Boscovichian sense would win-out over Copenhagen. At the same time, it
would become plain why Einstein was always right in his insisting that an
irrational theory cannot be accepted, and that Copenhagen is an irrational theory.
The ﬁnal solution is only a tiny bit more complicated than Einstein had proposed
as a ﬁrst approximation. To add special relativity would not have given him any
qualms, of course. Everett would ﬁnd the solution that Einstein had not seen or
mentioned in its trivially reiterated form, but to achieve this, Everett had been
empowered by Einstein. There is this nice surviving document—a letter written by
Einstein to Everett when the latter was 12 years old. Everett was almost unfairly
strongly inﬂuenced by Einstein. To me, this early encouragement by Einstein gave
the later Everett the strength to solve this most difﬁcult problem in the history of
physics.
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett
61

You published your endophysics book in the 1990s, after the main idea had
occurred to you in the 1980s when you were about 40 years old. What happened
next that you would deem important to mention?
You mean I need not mention endophysics anymore now? Upon personal
reﬂection, I indeed see a big caesura here, almost a black hole as it were. For if you
wish, the biggest question had been solved. Then there, of course, came other
problems to the foreground wanting to be dealt with, lesser problems. I mean
special relativity and relativity theory as a whole. What is the status of relativity
once you have explained quantum mechanics within an endophysical theory? Can
one combine relativity theory with Boltzmann? We saw that we can combine
quantum mechanics with Boltzmann.
What do you mean when quoting Boltzmann here?
With Boltzmann I refer to a deterministic universe made up from many interacting
particles with Hamiltonian properties and, in the last instance, Newtonian
properties.
We can have chaotic behavior on the macroscopic level of physics as we saw. How
does chaos appear on the micro-level? Do we see chaos in quantum mechanics?
There is no chaos in quantum mechanics.
Why do we have no chaos in quantum mechanics?
Chaos is a limiting problem in quantum mechanics. We only have approximate
chaos in quantum mechanics because we have this quantum uncertainty that acts
like a ﬁnite mask. As soon as the uncertainty principle, the non-zero value of little
h, matters for the exactitude of an experiment, quantum mechanics takes over with
its built-in probabilistic ﬁnite chance. Chaos itself, which represents a determin-
istic chancefulness, is destroyed. This is because quantum mechanics is stronger in
physics than chaos theory is—as far as we as internal citizens of the physical world
can tell.
There is, for example, a simple feature in the Hamiltonian structure of classical
physics, action-angle variables. You can quantize the action-angles, for example,
using an idea of Sommerfeld. I mean, there exists a transformation between the
Hamiltonian of the classical point of view and the Hamiltonian in quantum
mechanics. Why can we not see chaotic behavior on the microscopic level?
If you are very exact in describing, we have this famous limit to observation in
physics. The Poisson brackets no longer have a zero value as they had in classical
mechanics, but rather a ﬁnite value proportional to h-bar in quantum mechanics, this
fact is inexplicable classically. So there is this ‘‘miracle’’ that something that is
inﬁnitely small in classical mechanics suddenly is ‘‘bored open’’ as it were into a
ﬁnite uncertainty. This ﬁnite uncertainty was called ‘‘primary chance’’ by Wolfgang
Pauli. This primary chance which enters here into the world is not part of a
deterministic chaos theory, it is a new type of chance, Pauli realized. He called it
62
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett

‘‘primary’’ because it is something completely different from the deterministic
chance of chaos theory. There is a ‘‘big battle’’ going on between the aﬁcionados of
the two different types of chance. It is a deep achievement that Pauli coined the word
primary chance in order to distinguish it sharply from the classical chance of
deterministic chaos which is indeed ‘‘secondary’’ since it disappears when one is
given or assumes a privileged outside position.
Chance appears primary in quantum mechanics because the inhabitants of a
deterministic world cannot possibly predict all trajectories since they do not have
the privileged position of an exo observer. If you have the same universe in a
computer, on the other hand, then there is no primary chance left—this is the
message of chaos theory. The same message implies also that by being a part of the
universe, you predictably suffer from this—to you—‘‘primary’’ chance. The word
here means that there is no way to explain it deterministically for you. We are here
back on the same joint stroll taken with John Wheeler in Como in the spring of
1983, trying to decipher the difference between the two phenomena.
This time, it is Bohr who had to explain to a journalist, Wheeler told me: ‘‘What is
quantum mechanics?’’ Bohr asked back: ‘‘Do you have a matchbox in your
pocket?’’ The journalist denied. ‘‘Here is one,’’ said Bohr and produced an empty
matchbox from his pocket. ‘‘Do you have a die with you?’’ Bohr would produce
one. ‘‘Now I am equipped to explain to you what quantum mechanics is. Please,
put the die into the match box and close it without shaking it, then give it back to
me very carefully.’’ Bohr took the match box with the die in it with great care from
the hand of the journalist, turned around very slowly, and then suddenly shook the
match box vehemently. Then he turned around very slowly again and asked the
journalist, ‘‘please, take it very carefully and open it.’’ The journalist did. ‘‘This is
quantum mechanics.’’ The demonstration reproduced to me by Wheeler’s words
and gestures mean that quantum mechanics is a chancefulness that enters into the
universe behind the back of the universe. Primary chance. An external
metaphysical interference into the machinery of the world is quantum mechanics
according to Bohr. ‘‘Primary’’ is taken here as a metaphysical notion. It is the
equivalent of an angel that interferes. It is something that cannot possibly be
explained. We could call it witchcraft as an alternative term. I once described an
experiment where you could prove that quantum mechanics has the power of
witchcraft according to the usual interpretation, but this is a too long story to
entertain here. Nevertheless quantum mechanics really is a ‘‘scandal’’ in Cartesian
rationalism—unless you turn to endophysics. Pauli was very much aware of this
when he coined the word primary chance. It is like an injection placed into a causal
universe. It is not religion, it is witchcraft, because religion lacks the element of a
lack of concern.
The famous phrase of Einstein that ‘‘God does not play dice’’, was that coined
after this explanation arrived at by Bohr, or beforehand?
I am sure, that Einstein was ﬁrst with his phrase ‘‘the Lord does not play dice.’’
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett
63

What is the meaning of that very sentence? Does it contradict the show given by
Bohr or not?
Bohr was in a sense illustrating Einstein’s idea. There is this empirical fact of a
dice-tossing taking place behind the back of the universe in quantum mechanics.
Who is the player giving the dice and shaking it…
… behind the back of the universe according to Bohr? Yes, there is this ‘‘external
chance,’’ the ‘‘primary chance’’ of Pauli’s which Bohr accepted. Bohr accepted
that there is a witchcraft-like thing in the universe. Einstein never accepted this. He
always insisted on the full phrase ‘‘Subtle is the Lord but malicious he is not.’’ He
classiﬁed Bohr’s interpretation as witchcraft while insisting on a fair metaphysics
himself.
Does that player or person or God who is shaking this matchbox know the number
on the die?
I would say, yes. Neither Pauli nor Bohr would give the player responsibility in
detail—which fact makes the whole thing a witchcraft-type idea. As soon as the
one who does the shaking is not blind, the whole thing is back within the scope of a
rational science—endophysics. If you have a universe in the computer, everything
is transparent to you as the operator.
I mean, can the outside player know what the result of shaking the die is, and then
give it to the inhabitant to open and see it?
Yes, according to rationalism.
Did Bohr believe this and simply not talk about it?
Bohr would probably have accepted Einstein’s religious idea, but I am not sure.
No, let me correct myself; Einstein said ‘‘the Lord does not play dice.’’ Bohr, by
contrast, assumed a blind dice-player to be at work.
I think it is important to see the common point—that Einstein and Bohr used the
same simile—dice-playing—to explain quantum mechanics. Who was earlier?
Einstein was, and Bohr was inﬂuenced by Einstein. He was ﬁghting Einstein with
his performance in front of the journalist.
Maybe Einstein wanted to say that the creator can know the result. But in this
context if we take up the picture, maybe the creator cannot know what the result of
the dice-throwing is?
This is exactly the difference between Einstein and Bohr.
But Bohr did not talk about this—whether the creator can know the outcome of the
shaking?
I understand, from a general point of view there is no difference between Bohr and
Einstein: Both use a metaphorical picture to explain the quantum ﬂuctuations.
64
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett

To observers within the universe, the outcome is not known, to the creator it is
known? Let us put it this way: God plays dice but he knows the result?
This would be Einstein’s view. But Einstein would add that this is not playing dice
in the sense of doing something which contradicts the laws of the universe, but
rather is a playing of dice within the laws of the universe. This alternative is much
more elegant in the sense of rationalism—which allows for chaos to exist within
the universe. It can explain almost everything, so you do not need an additional
outside die—the universe is full of chaotic dice already and it is in this case a
deterministic ballpark. However, Bohr could not accept this, he postulated
something which destroys the internal consistency of the universe—and this is
called witchcraft. This ancient debate in rationalism is resurrected by the battle-of-
giants between Einstein and Bohr.
The problem is; we have chaos in the macroscopic description of the world as no
one doubts. But how about the microscopic description?
According to Boltzmann, we also have it in the microscopic domain. Maxwell had
this insight. In his book ‘‘Theory of Heat’’ he wrote that the smallest parts of a
body (atoms) are ‘‘so impalpable that we cannot in any way lay hold of them.’’
Palpating means to feel the pulse. Why did he say so? He realized already that if
we are a part of the universe, then there automatically exist limits to what we can
observe. It is exactly the kind of limit encountered in quantum mechanics. Thus
Maxwell in a sense predicted quantum mechanics in 1872, a fact which is not
generally known. Who would have thought that anyone could have predicted
quantum mechanics?
Let us now come to Boltzmann. When we have a collision between two molecules,
then to solve this problem Boltzmann used four axioms. The fourth axiom was an
assumption which he called molecular chaos?
Yes, the ‘‘hypothesis of molecular chaos.’’
So he used the same word—chaos—that would later become famous to say that
the velocities of colliding particles are uncorrelated and independent of position in
a gas?
Yes, he assumed they are deterministically ﬁxed but postulated them to be
momentarily uncorrelated. This assumption made by him is maximally ingenious I
feel. It is admissible within a deterministic universe and can indeed be veriﬁed in
an artiﬁcial universe implemented on a small scale in a computer.
Which year exactly did Boltzmann come up with this?
I checked it, it was in 1895 in the ﬁrst volume of his lectures on gas theory.
Humankind did not know about chaos at that time?
Not under that name. Poincaré had already discovered it, and Maxwell had written
about it earlier, but so of course without using the term coined much later by Jim
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett
65

Yorke. Poincaré in the 1890s already saw the transﬁnitely exact miraculous
properties of chaos theory with the marginally erotic words ‘‘homoclinic point’’
and ‘‘heteroclinic point’’ which he invented.
Can we return from chaos to Everett and endophysics?
To ‘‘Endophysics and Everett, Incorporated.’’ Endophysics is an implication of
Boltzmann’s and Poincaré’s transﬁnitely exact view. The latter can explain
everything it appears. It is comforting to ﬁnd Everett to be a big ally here, in
endophysics. Even though he accepted the wave function, capital Psi, as being
primary rather than the capital Hamiltonian H of Boltzmann’s deterministic
theory. (Boltzmann pronounced the capital H as ‘‘Eta’’, a letter of the Greek
alphabet.) This difference can in my eyes be considered to be minor. I see Everett
as a strong supporter of endophysics.
Everett based his many-worlds theory on the paradigm of the dividing amoeba?
He did not talk about ‘‘many worlds’’ but ‘‘many cuts.’’ It all came from the
amoeba, yes. The original picture in his mind was not cutting but ‘‘branching.’’ He
vividly imagined being an amoeba and dividing. The simile of this continuously
dividing amoeba got cut out from the ﬁnal version of his thesis. Imagine you are an
amoeba—a Kafkaesque possibility. You divide, as amoebae do, and there are
suddenly two amoebas looking like you. Which of the two amoebae is the original
amoeba?! If you would take a poll and they could talk, each of them would
predictably say ‘‘I am the original amoeba for I have divided and now have an
identical twin.’’ This goes on with every division. The basic insight of Everett’s
was this amoeba theory.
66
6
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen and Everett

Chapter 7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors
Let us continue with the scientiﬁc biographical interview. Now you are between 45
and 50 years old. Let us start out with the meaning of inﬁnity in mathematics and
physics.What is the meaning of inﬁnity in nature?
Thank you. I would say that we all live only in the ﬁnite. Although the inﬁnite is
much more real than the ﬁnite—as I just realize. In nature, of course, the question
is whether we can ﬁnd anything that is inﬁnite, either in extension or in the small.
There is this interesting discovery, made around 500 B.C. by Anaxagoras, of the
transﬁnite. Transﬁnite is even bigger than inﬁnite, as Georg Cantor successfully
proved. The real question when one considers the question of inﬁnity is, whether
there is anything transﬁnite in nature. For example, space could be transﬁnite in
extension in principle. We made this experience with chaos theory, that the
transﬁnite has become real. The mathematical understanding of chaos involves
that the space within which the trajectories are moving, the state space, is
transﬁnitely exact. The state space is so ﬁne-grained that only the concept of
transﬁnity, i.e. trans-inﬁnity, allows one to understand chaos.
And also self-similar fractals?
Precisely. Fractals are generated by chaotic systems when the chaotic attractor is
punctured. When there is a hole in the attractor—actually two are needed—the
resulting basin structure forms interdigitations of all sizes, so that a fractal is formed.
This fractal remains self-similar even on inﬁnitely small scales. It is a so-called
Cantor set. When you have a hyperchaotic system, however, then this basin structure
is not just segmented along one-dimensional stripes but along two directions. The
result is a beautiful self-similar or self-afﬁne structure. While in the one-dimensional
case the fractality is that of a Cantor set, in the 2-dimensional case it is an inﬁnite
ﬁeld of blossoming ﬂowers of all sizes without limit in the small. A Cantor set is the
simplest example of transﬁnite inﬁnity, discovered by Georg Cantor in the 19th
century. The Mandelbrot set is a much nicer example because here, two Cantor sets
are intertwined forming an inﬁnitely, or rather transﬁnitely, interlaced structure in
two dimensions. For example, you can take a Mandelbrot set and zoom into it and
you ﬁnd among other things a new Mandelbrot set with some subtly different
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_7,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
67

properties, as Bob Devaney so masterfully demonstrated. At all magniﬁcations no
matter how deep you zoom in, you ﬁnd the same or a very similar structure again,
and the question arises; what does this mean?
Julia sets?
A Julia set is the basin boundary structure valid at one point in say, the Mandelbrot
set. The scandal of Mandelbrot’s pictures—‘‘scandal’’ taken in the positive sense
of absolute novelty—is that they form the most beautiful fractals. The tradition of
this type of mathematics includes many names in the wake of Georg Cantor, and
some before him, like Giordano Bruno as I learned from Elisabeth von Samsonow.
Anaxagoras in antiquity still throws the largest shadow.
What is the simplest example?
Let me pick out the Smale solenoid, or Smale-Urysohn solenoid, which is formed
under repetitive operations with dough—if you idealize the dough so that it never
starts to become grainy in the small. A ring of red dough is elongated up to twice
its former length by pulling carefully on it, then the resulting longer ring is
squeezed (e.g. ‘‘fat’’ is made drop out) so that the volume gets smaller than it was
before. Now the shrunken elongated ring is wrapped up once and put back into the
position of the original ring while the missing material is ﬁlled up with new—
white—dough. So the red double-loop is now embedded in white dough. If you cut
through it to look at its cross section, you see two round red blobs inside the round
white disk of the cut. When one then continues with the stretching and squeezing
and looping, one ﬁnds inside the location of each of the two red eyes of before two
smaller red eyes, and so forth. This shrinking and multiplying goes on forever. One
could think of a special taffy-pulling machine that does all this automatically.
What is formed in the limit is a Cantor set made up from red points lying inside a
white disk. The red points have zero area in the limit when the number of
wrapping-ups goes to inﬁnity. The number of red points then becomes two-to-the-
inﬁnite, if the number of wrap-ups is allowed to go to inﬁnity. The inﬁnity of
points which applies here is a ‘‘transﬁnite’’—trans-inﬁnite—inﬁnity in the sense of
Georg Cantor.
What do you mean by the word transﬁnite?
The word transﬁnite was coined by Cantor, meaning trans-inﬁnite. People usually
do not know how to pronounce it and what it means, but trans-inﬁnite is too long a
name, so he preferred transﬁnite because this also is no longer ﬁnite for sure, but
the term ‘‘transinﬁnite’’ would have been more ﬁtting. Transinﬁnite—more than
inﬁnitely reﬁned—structures were ﬁrst pictured in the mind of Anaxagoras. We do
not know whether there were still earlier thinkers who had had the same idea.
Anaxagoras claimed that originally, everything in the whole universe including the
mind had been mixed-up in a perfect mixture. This to us is a strange idea: That
the universe did not start out from something simple like a point, for example, as
the modern Western tradition tries to uphold with the Big Bang. The conservative
68
7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors

alternative is to have everything start out from a state of perfect mixture. In a
perfect mixture, everything has been totally mixed so you could not mix it even
more perfectly. Bones and whatever you can think of, even ﬁngernails, included,
Anaxagoras says in his surviving fragment # 12. This perfect mixture appears to be
an invariant state—it could have lasted forever. However, he saw a problem here;
he realized that one substance was ‘‘too ﬁne to be miscible’’—the mind (Nous).
The mind could not be mixed into everything else, and because of this the mind
was given control over the whole mixture which according to tradition Anaxagoras
called chaos. Then, after having been given control over the mixture, what would
the mind do? The answer given by Anaxagoras: the mind ‘‘unmixed’’ the whole
perfect mixture! For this reason, all things are no longer mixed together to date—
because the mind could accomplish this; a very strange idea indeed.
This transﬁnite ancient thinking was later taken up by a small number of people in
history, starting with Gregorius of Naziance who owned the last copy of
Anaxagoras’ book ‘‘On Nature.’’ He must have read it through because he also
used Anaxagoras’ technical term ‘‘perichoresis’’ for the ‘‘turning around’’ motion of
a mixing or unmixing chaotic motion, and applied it to the mixing of water and
wine in a religious ritual meant to symbolize the inﬁnite intertwinement of two
persons in love—yet both without losing their identities in the process (Alexandre
Ganoczy). The ritual chalice in the Roman mass of mixing water and wine stems
from Gregorius, along with the dogma of the absolute equality of two persons no
matter how different in power. Mathematician Hermann Weyl discovered that the
tradition of thinking about the transﬁnitely ﬁne, continued next with the
Mutakallimun in Islam—early Islamic philosophers who taught that the word of
revelation given to the prophet (the Koran) cannot be fully identiﬁed with the
creator in spite of its equally divine nature. Then, Spinoza and Leibniz (who had
paid a secret visit to Spinoza) took up the notion of indistinguishability in
mathematics as a transﬁnitely exact feature. This feature according to Weyl and
Primas explains the Pauli cell in quantum mechanics even though it is a purely
classical concept. Forgive me that I diverged so far, but the topic is so exciting. The
lovingly done chaotic mixture is too fascinating a concept—not only in physics.
In a ﬁnite volume you can have an inﬁnity?
Right, you have inﬁnitely many points as Cantor saw. His ‘‘continuum hypothesis’’
says that on the line between zero and unity, you actually have not just inﬁnitely
many points but transﬁnitely many.
The strangest thing is that the trajectories don’t cross each other?
In state space, in dynamical systems, especially in chaos, these hairlines of a
moving state point, as it follows its trajectory in time, never cross one another,
except on a so-called limit point or limit cycle to which they converge. But even
the limit cycle is totally alone, since every neighboring hairline—trajectory—is
only approaching it, but never reaches it completely in ﬁnite time. So, it is, how
shall I say, a very lonely situation to be such an attractor because nothing can ever
7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors
69

reach you. The attractor is either privileged or underprivileged depending on one’s
point of view. This untouchability holds true only for a limit cycle, that is, for an
attractor that is a closed line or a point. It also pertains to a trajectory ﬁlling the
surface of a torus. But it does not hold for a chaotic attractor like the solenoid,
about which we were talking, this originally red ring of dough that we had
squeezed and then poured white dough around so that the massive ring was now
white with a doubled-up narrower red ring inside (with two eyes in a cross section,
and so on, to become a Cantor set, as we saw). But what remains in the limit?
There is a controversy in mathematics about this, a little-known one. It rages
silently between Field-medalist Steven Smale who described the solenoid
mathematically on the one hand, and people who follow Urysohn in 1920s Russia
who had had the opposite idea. Smale gave a mathematical theorem which states
that the limit set that is formed in the limit of the solenoid is—just like a limiting
point or a limit cycle—not invertible any more in its splendid isolation, even
though everything else is squeezed onto it in the limit and thereby crushed out of
existence. For the whole process is non-invertible in the limit.
The other side has the opposite theorem?
Precisely, they say they do not agree that everything is going to be attracted and
crushed in the limit, because nothing ever arrives at the attractor in ﬁnite time. The
attractor is alone as a limit set from which there is no return. This non-enviable
behavior of a point attractor or limit cycle—to be lonely like a deity that attracts
everything, to then crush it out of existence like an Aztek-type god (if we do not
misunderstand them)—is the opposite to Anaxagoras’ way of differentiable
dynamical thinking. Admittedly, Anaxagoras may not have thought of attractors—
as we did above in the context of the solenoid of Smale.
Smale thought that indeed the attractor—this limiting set of transﬁnitely many red
points in the cross section of the solenoid—was an attractor in the sense of a limit
cycle, namely, that everything would be crushed out of existence on approaching
it. One calls this, mathematically speaking, an ‘‘invariant set.’’ The limit point,
limit cycle and attracting torus are each an invariant set so that nothing can happen
to them, and everything is going to be buried on them in time, since only this
limiting point or set remains invariant. However, despite this apparently
reasonable logic, the solenoid attractor does not have this property: it remains
transﬁnitely invertible (except for a zero-measure subset). Thus, paradoxically the
point set of the attractor—a Cantor set—is not an invariant set; the dough
continues to behave as it did on the ﬁrst step, just as a fractal Mandelbrot set does,
forming a never ending abyss for the pondering mind. Abyss is not the right word
here, another term could be that there is a never ending love. One could say that it
is an aesthetic idea to see such accuracy in the mind of a person or in nature.
Anaxagoras presumably is correct that this holds true—not just in a mathematical
universe but also for the real cosmos if tried to be understood by the mind. The
mind would remain and the mind would be given the power to un-mix the perfect
mixture. These very unusual ways of thinking can perhaps be fully understood
70
7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors

only by people who have played with chaotic attractors and play-dough for a long
time—thereby learning to have no qualms about putting their minds into such a
transﬁnitely exact, never stopping structure of the Mandelbrot variety. This is more
beautiful, I feel, than a ﬁnite view of the universe—or mathematics—can ever be.
You just mentioned the word ‘‘love.’’ What is the exact meaning of love in your
view? Do you believe that it is possible to deﬁne love, or do you really think it is
something strange like color or the Now which cannot be deﬁned in physics?
Thank you for the question. I agree that color and the Now already fall totally out
of the frame. Love is, being fascinated by something impossible, but nonetheless
true. Love also has this element of…
Inﬁnity?
Of inﬁnite creativity and trust. Trust, being part of love, has the same structure.
Even the trust in one’s own mind as displayed by Anaxagoras has the same
structure: not to be afraid of thinking of a beauty that never stops. I appreciate the
notion of love being mentioned because this type of thinking is not just the
thinking of a few people in the history of science or philosophy—Anaxagoras,
Cusanus, Bruno, Cantor, Mandelbrot—but it is also something that every human
being knows. For she or he invented it as a young child. I claim that this sort of
pictorial mathematics has one specialist: the young child. Young children at a
certain age make a sudden transition in their minds from a way of functioning
which, if you so wish, is trivial—I would call it ‘‘animal-like’’ even though I do
not think negatively in any way about animals. The young children use the powers
of their animal-type minds to invent something which did not exist before or need
not have existed before. It is the invention of the hypothesis of, I could say,
deliberately conﬁrmed trust. Or I could say love—it is the same thing. When you
trust totally, this trust means that you accept that there is love, only love is worthy
to be trusted fully, and only fully trusting is love.
Next question: If we have trust, there can be different degrees of that. Should the
deﬁnition not always contain this degree?
A very important point, we know that everything can be additive and usually is
additive in nature. Most everything comes in ﬁnite portions. Trust makes an
exception here. How come that a young child, of but one-and-a-half years of age
for example, can come up with the idea of something inﬁnitely or transﬁnitely
trustworthy existing—namely, the love of the mother. Then the child switches—in
an un-researched dynamics which usually takes place in the playroom—into a new
type of dialog with the kindergarten nurse or the mother or father of an inﬁnite
solidity. One observes an interactional switching towards this crazy type of
transﬁnite thinking, of trust and reciprocating, that we discussed above. It has to do
with a type of reﬂection that is like a ray passing indeﬁnitely often between two
mirrors. This awakening has to do with the smile. Why do I mention smile theory
here? It is because the smile of human beings can be investigated and understood
by science. In science, one looks at human beings as an animal species and tries
7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors
71

ﬁnding out what is different with this species compared to other species. One then
ﬁnds something quite intimidating: The smile is the decisive trait of a particular
ape. I call him the parent feeding ape. If you are a biologist coming from Mars,
you ﬁnd that there exist different types of apes on our planet, and one of them has a
very strange functional description. These apes are characterized by the fact that
the young children love to feed their parents or to do other favors to them on a
reciprocal basis. The young child wants the mother to eat this and to smell it, to
taste it and to love it. Why? Why should a child feed Mom? In a biologist’s eyes
this is a so-called ‘‘lethal factor’’ because it is counter-adaptive. It is functional
similar to parents eating their young—pedophagy—as certain spiders do, a so-
called lethal factor. It is predictably going to be eliminated by natural selection
since it does not make sense to ﬁrst produce offspring and then to kill it. But we
were concerned with the question of degree.
Once in the Zoo in Berlin—I shall not forget it—we were watching wolves and in
front of me, there was a father with a young son also watching the wolves, and I
watched the two with waxing interest. The young child had a sweet in his hand,
reached up and put it into his father’s mouth, asking ‘‘good?!’’ Apparently the
father was meant to ﬁnd it good, and it was meant as a gift from the child. I was
intrigued enough to follow the two zoo visitors on the way out and asked the
father, please let me ask how old your child is, and he said 18 months. So a child
of 18 months can put a sweet into another’s mouth and ask for conﬁrmation that he
enjoys it. That is benevolence. Benevolence is pathological—as we saw, parent-
feeding is pathological. There are ways to explain the phylogeny of this human
trait. It is not an innate trait as such, but rather a feature acquired in an interactional
function change, a so-called ‘‘hard bifurcation.’’ The epigenetic accident happens
because human beings have a certain property on their faces which other animals
lack. Only wolves and dogs have a similar property, of lesser degree, mediated not
by the face but by the tail. Happiness and affection have the same expression. Tail-
wagging in the wolf, smile in the human. It can be simulated in two coupled brain
equations. Innate releasing mechanisms lead to a bonding reward. This occurs
under two unrelated biological conditions here. One is a display of bonding shown
by the partner, the other is a display of general happiness. Happiness is often
displayed in biology. The Crislers ﬁlmed ‘‘Arctic Wild’’ for Walt Disney in the
1950s and showed that the joy of the young while being fed is the main motivation
for a night-long frustrating hunt of a parent wolf. But why should parents have a
special display for their own happiness rewarding the young? This does not make
biological sense. In wolves and in humans, this is the case because happiness
displayed, looks like bonding. The radiating face of the happy parent is the same as
in bonding so that the young predictably starts to bring sacriﬁces. This can become
overcritical, triggering a total change of behavior, a function change in the sense of
Robert Rosen.
72
7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors

Do we have any model explaining this behavior mathematically?
The brain equation eventually does this. But there is a direct evolutionary
explanation for the phenomenon itself, as I was told by Konrad Lorenz. Huxley,
one of the famous Huxleys…
The Huxley of Hodgkin and Huxley?
Neither he nor Aldous nor Darwin’s friend Thomas Henry Huxley, but the latter’s
grandson, Julian Huxley who was a senior friend of Lorenz. Julian Huxley studied
the underlying phenomenon in different animal species under the name ‘‘evolu-
tionary ritualization.’’ How come that the bonding behavior that exists in social
species sometimes disappears in evolution and then reappears later in a new niche?
In between, the species is no longer as social as its ancestors were, then, being
social is ‘‘rediscovered’’ in a new environment. Nature has to invent a new signal
for bonding in each case. Usually, signals that already exist are taken over being
given a new inherited meaning. ‘‘Ritualization’’ means that a signal which used to
have a speciﬁc meaning is slightly altered—usually stereotyped, hence the name
ritualization– to carry a new meaning. The best example, perhaps, is the African
wild dog, Lycaon pictus. This is a type of hyenas—they are related to hyenas but
form a different special species living in Southern Africa, for example. These
distant relatives of the wolf are maximally social. They actively cooperate, the
young are being pampered by every member of the pack, and they are very close
showing bonding behavior very often. How do they show their bonding affection?
They show it not by tail-wagging, they show it by mounting. Mounting has hereby
been stereotyped—ritualized. They all mount, the females like the males, but it
does not mean sexuality. Rather, the ritualized behavior is an expression of
bonding. The selection pressure was so strong that the females evolved a special
organ called a ‘‘pseudopenis’’ for the purpose. Even in a close relative to the
human species, the bonobo, also a sexual type of contact is used for the purpose of
bonding, orgasm included, which is generally misunderstood by the public and the
professionals alike. They smile with the lower part of their body, so to speak. It
looks as if they were always having sex along with the right expressions, and
humans tend to get jealous. But this is a misinterpretation. It is an example of
Huxley ritualization and signals bonding. In the same vein, one can now explain
that the smile of happiness of the satiated infant got ritualized into the bonding
signal for a primate species. Just by accident it was not a sexual gesture this time
around but another innate gesture pre-existing in the species in question (the
display of happiness shown by the satiated baby). So the cheerful smile became a
bonding signal for a particular species of apes which happens to be the human one.
The ‘‘same’’ thing happened in the evolution of the wolf, only with the signal of
submission and bonding being ritualized into acquiring a second meaning, that of
displayed happiness by the young. Here feeding seems to have required a stronger
emphasis in a previous phase of evolution. Watching evolution in action is much
like watching taffy-pulling. At any rate it somehow happened that human beings
became close functional relatives to the wolf because in wolves, too, bonding and
7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors
73

happiness displayed, have converged into one single action pattern. In either case,
the manifest outcome consists in nonsensical built-in rites. In the wolf, it has no
major unexpected consequences. It only explains why humans hit on their best
friend—the dog. But why then is the dog not human in every essential functional
respect? Humans do accept the dog as a member of the family, but dogs have some
features which separate them functionally from humans. It is not that they have no
ﬁngers and smile with the tail, which would not make for a problem: They do not
display this transition towards believing in inﬁnity that we were talking about.
They do not believe in inﬁnite love, at least I dare claim this even though Lorenz
wrote in a book that there never was a greater love in the universe than that shown
to him by his female dog ‘‘Stasi.’’
I met as a child a theologian who loved his dog, which had developed cancer in old
age, so much that he divorced his wife to live with his dog even though the dog
would have to die soon. This theologian—his ﬁrst name was also Otto—was
convinced that this dog was the essence of his life. But with humans, the same
amour fou thing not only can, but must happen owing to the positive feedback
caused by happiness acquiring a radically new level. We saw that when the child is
laughing out of happiness, the mother is laughing out of bonding. The good feeling
of the child acts as a bonding reward, as it does in many species, so mother is also
happy. She then also smiles. A positive feedback—a bonding bout—occurs
between the smile of mother which is a smile of happiness and the bonding of the
child, who is rewarded by the mother’s smile looking like a bonding smile. So the
child tries to reinforce the mother’s smile of happiness because it looks like
bonding. This is pathological biologically speaking, just as in the wolf where this
cross feedback predictably also occurs. However, in the wolf the consequence does
not make for much of a difference. This occurs only in humans. The reason is that
humans have a bigger brain. In this respect, humans again are not alone; quite a
few species have a similarly high simulational capability in their built-in ﬂight
simulator, as humans have. There is a name for it: mirror competence. Many apes
can recognize themselves in a mirror just like human beings, but dogs and wolves
cannot do that, at least there is no recorded example of a dog recognizing himself
in a mirror (although a friend of mine, Boris Schapiro claims to have an
observation to the contrary).
They think that they see another dog?
Exactly, and they learn to ignore that boringly synchronized apparition after a
while. Nevertheless they can get used to using a mirror productively: If someone is
coming up the turning staircase and there is a mirror half way up, the dog efﬁciently
uses the mirror to anticipate the person coming up. No wonder. But to use the mirror
in order to understand something about one’s own position in space or one’s own
teeth, for example, represents a different level of using the mirror. This ‘‘mirror
competence’’ shown by chimpanzees for example, requires more hardware in the
brain. The image processing unit—the universal simulator—has to be strong
enough that, in the simulation, one can put oneself into a different position and
74
7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors

look from that position back onto one’s own momentary position. Only in this way
can one be mirror competent and scratch an unfeelable blemish, for example. It
came as a big surprise that certain birds can make that transposition, too. Helmut
Prior discovered this 12 years ago in the magpie. Now we have brought together
two things to explain inﬁnity, right? One was the smile; the other was mirror
competence, two quite unexpected bedfellows. To understand Georg Cantor,
however, we need both of them.
The consequence of the bisociation—the putting together of two at ﬁrst unrelated
topics according to Arthur Koestler—is not easy to describe. The child, seeing the
mother smile out of sheer happiness, is rewarded, but this not all. At the same time,
the child is being made happy by mother giving him something, a fruit to savor, for
example. But then he will someday suddenly acquire the suspicion that mother
over there is anticipating the joy felt on his part. The mirror competence alone is
not sufﬁcient for this transposition completely into the other. It must be combined
with a positive feedback. The suspicion that what is being done over there, an act
which one can understand through mirror competence, is motivated by the desire
to see me be happy here. This suspicion—a creation of the simulating mind
captured out of the blue, since this is what simulators are meant for—is called
benevolence, or ‘‘suspicion of benevolence.’’ The child makes the strange
invention of asking himself or herself the question: does the smile perhaps mean
that the happiness experienced here, is something that is desired over there? An at
ﬁrst sight almost erotic suspicion, modern skepticism would say, but it has only to
do with the ‘‘polymorphically perverse nature of the female,’’ as Freud lectured
which was total nonsense. It is the purest form of genuine love that exists, with the
wish that there should exist happiness over there, too, which the child immediately
produces in response. The whole thing develops in a positive feedback. A whiff
that this good feeling of a marvelously sweet apple is cherished over here stands
not alone. The child in response shows more happiness—exaggerates the
appreciation—by opening the mouth artiﬁcially wide, for example. I knew one
little child who exaggerated how good something tasted, he was about 13 months
old. This was the beginning of this nascent process. Once the child has conjured up
the suspicion of benevolence, he starts checking on that. The child will give
something good to the parent but then take it back at the last second, to the
bewilderment of the parent. When you take it, there will be tears because his type
of swimming was not yet secure. Then, there suddenly is the abrupt transition
towards giving, with an almost violent not-taking-it-back. This latter behavior was
recently observed by Willie Smits on an Orangutan friend in the wild, by the way;
the observation makes one tremble. The next stage is that the child will ask
‘‘good?!’’ as we saw. This stands at the end of an unlimited positive feedback,
much as in chaos with its reinjection principle. The attractor formed here was
given the name ‘‘person attractor’’ by my late friend Detlef Linke.
Does this relationship remain many years after, or not?
It causes a function change, so this is called, an irreversible transition.
7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors
75

But some children at age 18–20 want to be completely isolated from their parents
and they do not have such a relationship with them anymore.
They are adults then, they are mature enough to have children themselves so to
speak. I remember when I was 16—I never related that story before—my
grandmother came visiting us from abroad, and I liked her. But I could not explain
to myself why I should love her, very strange. As a child, I loved her, of course.
But in this case I realized that I could not ﬁnd any reason for that anymore. It is
almost a Dostojewskian story. I have the suspicion that adults are no longer full
human beings. But this transﬁnite positive feedback that we looked at in the
solenoid of Smale with more and more red dots appearing on the cross section is
also…
Is it a positive feedback that makes the system unstable?
Yes, indeed. It is a positive feedback which does not stop and which eventually
allows you to enter the domain of the transﬁnite, this Anaxagorean mathematics.
From the dynamical-systems point of view, we do not have a limit cycle because
we have a positive feedback which makes the system not go to one point or a
simple oscillation and stay there?
Yes, the mind is always jumping and is trying to conquer the universe, to include
everything. Benevolence has inherited this intrinsic feature. The invention of
benevolence suspected, and then trying to make mother happy is then, in the next
stage, followed by the toddler asking ‘‘questions’’—an unheard-of thing in the rest
of biology: What do you want? This is absolutely pathological from the point of
view of biology, when uttered by a child. The concept of benevolence is
transcendental, but also transﬁnite. It causes a function change in the brain, in the
use of the machine code employed in the brain. Theologians might be very
interested in this. The brain equation—if you believe in the brain equation—
remains unchanged in the bifurcation on hand, the personogenetic bifurcation. You
can use the brain equation with its universal simulator in explaining both the
Smale-type and the smile-type functioning and its consequences. They are very
close mathematically speaking. I hope that Steve Smale will laugh about me when
reading this and will forgive me that I adduced child theory to encourage him to re-
ponder his claim that the solenoid has a noninvertible invariant set as its attractor.
There exist sets here—limit sets—that are as open as the universe, as unlimitedly
inﬁnite as the universe. It is nice to be allowed to talk about chaos theory and its
secrets and the secrets of the smile in the same mathematical context. For we never
left mathematics, did we?
You have mentioned these ideas in your book titled Benevolence?
I do not have a book with this short title, but it would be a beautiful idea to write a
book just on benevolence in its own right.
76
7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors

Did you not participate in writing a book on the art of intelligent machines, with
the word ‘‘benevolence’’ in the title?
Yes, the book of Bill Seaman and mine is titled ‘‘Neosentience…’’
…with benevolence in the subtitle…
… ‘‘the Benevolence Engine,’’ you are absolutely right. I learned here that one can
be much more outspoken or dangerous when telling the truth in front of a camera
than when writing a book. It is not so easy to make yourself understood in writing
because that is a more indirect medium.
Next time I plan to take you on a ride through cosmology.
Great!
7
Inﬁnite-Transﬁnite, Solenoid, Mirrors
77

Chapter 8
Cosmos, T-Tube System, Poincaré
and Boltzmann
You are around 50 years old in our story. Maybe it is a good idea to talk in this
session and perhaps in two sessions about the connection between cosmology and
your ideas?
Cosmology is a much simpler topic than is endophysics because one can treat the
cosmos from a detached outside perspective. This is what one would like to do
because all directly visible objects in the cosmos are very macroscopic. On the
other hand, there are these quantum phenomena of photons traversing the cosmos.
In particular we have this beautiful ﬁnding of 1929 by Hubble—the Hubble law—
which Father Lemaitre had qualitatively anticipated 2 years before and hypothet-
ically explained with a Doppler effect caused by expansion in the sense of the
Friedmann solution to the Einstein equation. This proposed explanation dominates
the public opinion on the planet since 1929—the ‘‘Big Bang’’ as it would be called
later in 1949 by Fred Hoyle. The Big Bang is a very beautiful concept—very deep
also because of its philosophical and theological connotations. On the other hand,
this concept also represents a big challenge.
When I was still a medical student, I already developed the idea that there was
bound to exist another explanation for the cosmological redshift, the change in
color and energy of the light emitted by stars as a function of distance. The stars
appear to be receding since their light is reduced in its frequency in a distance-
dependent fashion—in a linear fashion proportional to distance. While this is a
wonderful ﬁnding, its proposed explanation automatically meets with skepticism
from the point of view of a detached perspective: It is too much reminiscent of an
observer-centered, pre-Copernican explanation. Here we have something that
obviously is observer-centered from the point of view of this planet in this galaxy
at this moment in time. So it would at ﬁrst sight be a perfect match to the idea of
endophysics. On the other hand, if things are looking too close to one’s beliefs one
should be especially skeptical.
When I was a student I thought there might be some optical distortion effects
explaining the phenomenon. For example, if the universe had the structure that
Einstein had originally seen for it, of a closed stationary sphere, which is an
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_8,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
79

alternative to the growing sphere, then light coming from the opposite pole of the
sphere would be distorted optically. I hoped this distortion might explain the
redshift, which did not work out. Later this skepticism to not accept something that
everybody takes for granted would take on a different form. In my courses in
Tübingen I had a student for many years, Dieter Fröhlich, who always asked
constructively-subversive questions. So, the students acquired the habit of
preferring to hear new ideas rather than to follow the usual path of thinking. We
wondered jointly, in this atmosphere of mutual cooperation, whether there might be
an alternative explanation to the expansionist theory that is even more natural and
simple. We gave ourselves the following statements: The cosmos contains very
many highly massive big objects, called galaxies and galactic clusters that are all in
random motion and quite fast with velocities of about 1 percent the speed of light.
Second, we have these very light particles, the photons, criss-crossing the cosmos.
One can therefore make oneself a simpliﬁed picture by thinking of these two types
of particles as being in mutual interaction. We asked; what would happen if these
moving galaxies were replaced by moving mirrors and we would still let light pass
through this collection of moving objects? We wondered whether the interaction
with the motion of the mirrors might not change the energy of the photons in a
systematic fashion. This is a well-known situation in statistical mechanics.
Statistical mechanics deals with systems of many particles that are all in
interaction. If you come from chaos theory, you believe that this is a theory that is
basically deterministic even though you can describe it in statistical terms. So one
understands quite well what happens to a particle that passes through a cosmos
which contains moving repulsive particles, mirrors, that reﬂect the photons.
Although the repulsion would be quite gentle, nonetheless there would be a
systematic energy change to be expected for the photons as they traverse the
cosmos. It took us quite a while to realize that this picture with repulsive galaxies
would not give a decrease in the energy of the photons as they pass through this
billiard type situation, but rather an increase in energy. There would be a distance-
proportional blue-shift, that is, the opposite of what is observed. But we had, of
course, made an assumption which is the opposite of what is the case. Galaxies do
not repel photons, they attract photons.
Gravitation is the main force exerted by them while moving around in the cosmos.
Hence the hypothesis arose in the lecture room that, maybe, there is a systematic
decrease in energy for photons negotiating a path between moving attracting
galaxies and galactic clusters. I then gave a talk on this in December 2002 at the
University of Oldenburg after having been invited by my former student, Joachim
Peinke. I also had contact with Ilya Prigogine who was still active. Our statistical-
mechanical picture was a multi-particle chaos type situation which was interesting
to investigate. In December 2003, we published the hypothesis that this non-
repulsive mechanism can explain the Hubble redshift law—that this chaos-type
situation explains the decrease in energy of light-particles traversing the cosmos,
in a distance-dependent fashion just as is observed. It then still took a couple of
80
8
Cosmos, T-Tube System, Poincaré and Boltzmann

months to ﬁnd an equation, published in the journal ‘‘Chaos, Solitons and
Fractals’’ after I had talked with Roger Malina at a conference in Holland. Then I
got a letter from a young scientist with whom I had published on cosmology after
we had met at a conference in Switzerland, Ramis Movassagh. He had unearthed a
paper by Chandresekhar of 1943 in which Chandra apparently described the same
phenomenon, but not with photons going through a cloud of moving galaxies but
with fast-moving stars traversing a cloud of randomly moving stars. He looked at a
globular cluster of stars in which many stars are moving at random and where
sometimes one particular star gets very strongly accelerated in the middle of the
cluster in a so-called three-body almost-collision. Then two stars remain closely
bound circling each other as a so-called ‘‘star molecule’’ while the large potential
energy between them is carried away by the third star of the triple encounter which
is then shot-out from the middle of the globular cluster at a very high velocity.
Chandra wondered how these very old structures in our Milky Way galaxy still
persist, when not infrequently one of their members is shot out from the dense core
with a very high velocity so that the cluster should long have evaporated. These
clusters in the halo of our galaxy are, as we know to date, actually the oldest
structures in the universe, being more than 13 billion years old while the Big Bang
scenario holds that the whole cosmos is not much older than 13 billion years itself.
Chandra was able to set up a mathematical calculation using Brownian-motion
type modeling (as Einstein had introduced it in 1905) showing that these very fast
stars originating from the dense middle of the globular cluster will on their way out
be braked at a distance by the other stars so that they cannot get lost to the cluster
but are eventually slowed-down enough to remain in the cluster. So he had found
an explanation for the amazing persistence of these oldest structures in the cosmos
found in our home galaxy.
Sorry for interrupting: How exactly can this procedure explain the structure of the
cosmos and its creation in place of the Big Bang theory?
Our idea was to ﬁnd a mechanism of how light is losing energy while traversing
the cosmos. We produced an example that a fast particle would be losing energy in
interaction with randomly moving galaxies. The idea conveyed to me by Ramis
was that there might be a connection between Chandrasekhar’s result of the
braking of high-mass fast particles, namely stars in globular clusters, and the
hypothesis of a braking of low-mass fast particles, photons, that occurs in a cluster
made up not of moving stars but of moving galaxies. Otherwise, it would be the
same phenomenon.
Only quite recently did I discover that since 2007, the year our paper appeared in
Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, there is an anonymous article in Wikipedia in which
exactly the same comparison between Chandrasekhar dynamical friction and the
idea of light getting tired when traversing the cosmos, as Fritz Zwicky had ﬁrst
proposed in 1929, is made. The let-down was that Wikipedia came to the
conclusion that this analogy does not work. It is educating to see that such a ‘‘close
encounter’’ of imagination is possible in science.
8
Cosmos, T-Tube System, Poincaré and Boltzmann
81

At this point, everybody would probably wish to hear about calculations, how
strong is the effect quantitatively? The 2007 paper already contains such an
estimate. The main point though is that this is just another example of Hamiltonian
chaos theory. The general question is whether Hamiltonian chaos can explain, on
the one hand, that repulsive fast particles statistically gain energy in many-particle
interaction with more energetic heavy particles, which is the subject of a well-
known discipline called statistical thermodynamics, and whether, on the other
hand it can also explain the analogous situation in which the forces between the
particles are attractive instead of repulsive. Is it possible that here, exactly the
opposite of what is known in statistical thermodynamics occurs? Chandrasekhar
had not used the model of statistical thermodynamics; he had the idea of Brownian
motion in the back of his mind, while statistical thermodynamics is an applied
version of chaos theory. So here chaos theory proved or seemed capable of saying
a word about the cosmological redshift. There is a connection between
Hamiltonian chaos theory on the one hand and the cosmos on the other. A circle
harking back to ancient Greek ideas about chaos and the cosmos seemed to close
itself. This was quite an attractive idea.
Would you mind explaining a little more about the structure of statistical-
mechanical theories?
Thank you for this question. The chaos theory in the simplest case deals with, how
shall I explain, …
Maybe I can ask this question: If you consider these mirrors and the reﬂection of
the photons between them, this is quite like the billiard chaos. Is it possible to
apply the theory of Sinai chaos here? Or is the structure of the new statistical
mechanics that you mentioned different from Sinai chaos?
Thank you for this important ball thrown to me. Yakov Sinai was the ﬁrst to apply
chaos theory—as it was to be called later—to interacting billiards. He was very
ingenious in doing that. First, he pictured a gas of several particles that are mutually
repulsive in three dimensions. Then he wanted to understand what really happens. It
is very hard to get a completely satisfying picture out of such a difﬁcult mess of
interactions. Maybe I’ll describe his series of learned simpliﬁcations a bit: Initially
he assumed that the space in question is not 3-dimensional but only 2-dimensional.
Then he assumed that he had only two particles instead of many. These two
particles would form two interacting repulsive round disks. But it was still not clear
what these two billiards would be doing with each other, it still remained too
difﬁcult to understand. So he made an additional simpliﬁcation: he nailed one of the
two round disks onto the middle of the quadratic table so that only the other disk
would be moving. Then he realized that he could make the width of the middle
particle twice as large as before and in recompense have the moving particle shrunk
to a point, without any change in the motion of the latter. It would just be the motion
of a point being reﬂected symmetrically from a disk in the middle. Then he
identiﬁed opposing sides of the quadratic table to get a linear torus, again without
change of motion except for intermittent mirroring effects that make no difference.
82
8
Cosmos, T-Tube System, Poincaré and Boltzmann

This situation can now be replaced by—is equivalent to—a situation in which there
are very many regularly spaced ﬁxed disks, and a single point particle is moving
straight across this set until hitting a disk, to get symmetrically reﬂected into a new
direction, and so forth. My friend Harry Thomas in Basel called this ingenious
picture ‘‘tennis game in an orchard’’: The trees would symmetrically repel the
tennis ball on being hit. One could have a cut through this orchard of regularly
spaced trees and there would be a point-shaped tennis ball ﬂying between them
without friction. This is the mental picture of a Sinai gas. Under this pictorial
condition, Sinai could explain and prove that this system is chaotic. This was in
1970 already, 5 years before chaos would be given its name. It was one of the big
breakthroughs in chaos theory.
If we return now to our context of a radically different type of gaseous behavior,
possibly existing under attractive conditions, the question poses itself whether or
not a similarly simple picture can be obtained if you replace the repulsive short-
range force Sinai had used, with an attractive, long-range force. In this way one
comes up with an analog to Sinai’s problem within ﬁxed galaxies—ﬁxed centers of
gravity—and a moving point passing across them. But this is still too difﬁcult
because it remains a multi-particle 2-dimensional problem. For quite a while we
made no progress because the simpliﬁcation was not yet radical enough. Then,
interacting with Klaus Sonnleitner and John Kozak, we arrived at a ‘‘T-tube
model’’ where the motion of the billiard particles is no longer in 2-D but in 1-D. In
one dimension, however, two interacting particles cannot generate chaos. So this
appeared hopeless before the T-tube conﬁguration was hit upon. Image the letter T.
In the horizontal bar at the top, you have one particle moving back and forth
without friction, and in the vertical bar you have another particle without friction
which can move only up and down. You can then make the two particles interact
via a Newtonian force acting across the momentary 2-dimensional distance
between them, but of which only the sliding component is effective as natural in
the absence of friction. Then there are two canonical cases; you can either make
the force repulsive (as Sinai had done) or attractive. Newtonian repulsion and
Newtonian attraction then make for a prototype pair.
Sinai was repulsive?
Yes. The Sinai system and the T-tube are closely related. There is a moving point on
a 2-D conﬁguration space here. This is related to Sinai’s 2-D real-space case. Joe
Ford had told me almost 30 years ago that there exists a ‘‘theorem by Bunimovich’’
to this effect. Bunimovich recently returned the ball to the late Joe Ford in an
E-mail. The T-tube system has the added advantage that one can safely put it into a
computer because the equations are simple enough to be solved numerically with
high accuracy. An unusually accurate 4th-order Hamiltonian symplectic algorithm
(which roughly speaking repairs numerically caused deviations from exact energy
conservation), written by Sonnleitner, allowed for the simulation of both cases (the
repulsive and the attractive one, which differ only by a sign ﬂip). When the massive
particle in the stem of the T-tube was slowly moving with its higher kinetic energy
8
Cosmos, T-Tube System, Poincaré and Boltzmann
83

and the lighter particle was fast moving, then the slow massive particle took away
kinetic energy from the light fast one in a statistical fashion—just as this had been
predicted for the photons in the cosmos losing energy to the slow heavy galaxies.
To check on this, we of course also alternatively changed the sign of the attractive
Newtonian force towards repulsion. Sonnleitner predictably observed the opposite
effect. Indeed in that case the fast particle statistically gained energy showing a
tendency towards energy equipartition in conﬁrmation of statistical thermo-
dynamics. This T-tube model proved very powerful because until then, statistical
mechanics had not been based on a deterministic model, except for Sinai’s gas.
Sinai had looked at the equilibrium case since the moving particle’s energy was
constant. Here, with the two moving particles of unequal mass, we could for the ﬁrst
time numerically reproduce a well-known 150 years old fact from statistical
thermodynamics under deterministic conditions, a tendency for energy equiparti-
tion under smooth repulsive conditions. This tendency even occurred in a
maximally simpliﬁed 2-particle case of unequal masses in formally one dimension.
The tendency for equipartition of energy arose as a direct consequence of chaos
theory. Thus, deterministic chaos could explain the equipartition theorem of
statistical thermodynamics in a formally 2-particle, one-dimensional system in a
T-tube as a ‘‘prototype’’ system. It goes without saying that one could add more
particles in more T-stems. The essential ﬁnding was that chaos theory implies far-
from-equilibrium statistical thermodynamics, which was an absolutely unknown
fact so far. This was the breakthrough made by Klaus Sonnleitner. It was
accompanied by an even greater breakthrough because it possessed a mirror case—
that if you invert the sign of the force to have attraction in place of repulsion, you
get the opposite result. The latter was exactly what we had predicted for the cosmos.
Under attractive conditions, we do not get energy equipartition as everybody would
have been ready to bet, but the opposite, anti-equipartition, a new phenomenon—a
Hubble-type phenomenon. A disproportioning of temperature rather than a
smoothing-out of temperature. One could say: ‘‘so what?’’ What is the use of
reducing statistical mechanics to chaos theory? The simple result shows that we
have hit upon a sister discipline to statistical thermodynamics. So we have to give it
a new name. It is no longer a statistical thermodynamics, it is a statistical
cryodynamics, because here the temperature of the low-energy particle is
decreased, it is getting colder. Cryós means cold while thermós means hot.
At the same time, new light was thrown on one of the most bafﬂing phenomena of
nature and history; we had reproduced a phenomenon that had bafﬂed the human
mind for more than a century since Boltzmann, namely, that a time-reversible
system shows a time-directed behavior. We saw that we only need to invert time
after a while in a simulation to have the opposite behavior in the very same system.
In the one time direction, one has an increase of entropy in the case of
thermodynamics, in the other, a decrease. This is well-known even if it could not
hitherto be reproduced deterministically. This dichotomy got enlarged into a
‘‘double dichotomy’’ because after switching to attraction we now have a decrease
84
8
Cosmos, T-Tube System, Poincaré and Boltzmann

of entropy in the forward time direction in cryodynamics. This is all very surprising
because how do the particles know whether they should have the one behavior or
the other if there are 4 options, two for attraction and two for repulsion? In each case
when you let the system run for a while and then invert time, the opposite behavior
occurs. How did it know beforehand that it had not done something in the past so as
now to retrace that old path? Something like a distinction between ‘‘uncommitted’’
initial conditions and ‘‘pre-committed’’ initial conditions applies here, and this in a
doubled fashion. As it turns out, the distinction between uncommitted (virgin)
initial conditions and the others is well-known in statistical thermodynamics where
Boltzmann ﬁrst saw it in 1895 and coined the name, ‘‘hypothesis of molecular
chaos.’’ This feature means that the particle in question has no past history of
motions behind it. This implies that the two classes of initial conditions have
different measures, with the uncommitted one overwhelmingly more frequent. This
is a most interesting mathematical phenomenon within chaos theory.
You mean, this hypothesis assumes that there isn’t any correlation between
velocities and they are independent of position? Why did he call this ‘‘chaos’’?
He may have used the word chaos in a naïve sense that everything is out of
correlation with everything else. It is also possible that he already knew about the
distinction between ordinary inﬁnity and the transﬁnite super-inﬁnity which Georg
Cantor had introduced, and that it is of possibly vital importance here.
Is it possible that he wanted to assume that there is no correlation between speed
and position here? In this case it would have to do, not with an anticipation of
chaos theory but with an anticipation of quantum mechanics?
Interesting, I believe Boltzmann only wanted to say that these particles interact in
a way which does not reveal a previous interaction they had had. That it must be a
totally freshly generated, new situation—that they do not know each other
beforehand. This may have been enough to let him use the unfamiliar word
‘‘chaos.’’ We need to ﬁnd a specialized historian of science to really clarify the
roots of this notion of chaos introduced by Boltzmann.
But scientiﬁcally, you do not see any relationship between his thesis and the
deﬁnition of chaos?
There must be a deep connection here because this is a chaotic system, as we
know. If we choose a non-selected initial condition—I mean one at which the
system has not arrived by having been let run for a while, but an arbitrarily chosen
‘‘random’’ initial condition in a Cantor continuum—then we predictably always
ﬁnd in the corresponding simulation that the big particle will give away energy to
the light particle when the force is repulsive (and take-away energy when it is
attractive). However, this idealistic mathematical sensitivity can now be studied
empirically in a ﬁnite-accuracy setting for the ﬁrst time. Inﬁnity can be ﬁnitely
simulated, so to speak. When we stick to the repulsive case—the only one known
up until now in statistical mechanics—then if the two particles had not been
interacting before in the simulation, they invariably must give you this
8
Cosmos, T-Tube System, Poincaré and Boltzmann
85

time-directed behavior—of the light fast particle getting more energy from the
slow heavy particle, even though the time direction is not speciﬁed, that is, in
either direction of time. So the system shows the same coordinated behavior in
both directions of time when you start out from a non-selected initial condition,
which is what Boltzmann had seen in his mind. But now the same thing can be
reproduced in a 2-particle deterministic situation of ﬁnite accuracy, which is a very
surprising fact. As a bonus (and still more spectacular) the opposite behavior
occurs under attractive conditions. So indeed the hypothesis that a light-in-mass
particle loses energy when traversing a cosmos of randomly moving heavy-in-
mass particles called galaxies or galactic clusters appears to have been veriﬁed
numerically in this very simple 2-particle T-tube system by Klaus Sonnleitner in
his dissertation of 2010.
Do you see any relationship between this idea and the theory of the so-called
‘‘Poincaré recurrence’’? The latter period is assumed to be so extremely long,
practically inﬁnite, so that it does not affect anything in science. On the other
hand, it is true that our present situation is valid in ﬁnite time. Do you see any
relationship whatsoever between the Poincaré recurrence and the phenomenon
you mentioned?
By all means, this chaotic system is bound to obey Poincaré’s recurrence law.
Boltzmann also knew about this recurrence. At ﬁrst it was presented to him by his
Viennese colleague Loschmidt as a counterargument to his time’s arrow which he
eventually accepted. He realized, however, that the recurrence times are very, very
long. So the increase of entropy will eventually have to be followed by a decrease
of entropy again, but the recurrence time is unfathomably long mathematically.
They must remain very long in the presence of a ﬁnite numerical accuracy; this is a
new question which can now be investigated. We have thus this 2-particle chaotic
system in which we can really answer the questions brought up by Poincaré and
Boltzmann more than a century ago. However, since Sonnleitner found a
numerical ‘‘exit point’’ eventually at which the motion became dull—periodic—
for reasons of numerical inaccuracy, the problem will not prove as easy to
investigate as it appears at the ﬁrst moment. It will no doubt, be very much fun to
re-open this whole issue from the point of view of this trivial, completely
transparent chaotic 2-particle system. I can add here that the system most likely
can be simpliﬁed still further. We can make the particle in the stem of the T
‘‘inﬁnitely heavy’’ in a stepwise manner while making the interaction proportion-
ally weaker so that the effect on the light horizontal particle is unchanged. The
only difference would then be that the fast light-weight particle no longer acts back
on the slow heavy particle—as we may assume also holds true to a very good
approximation for the back-action of a passing photon on a moving galaxy. Then
the system becomes mathematically even simpler. It actually would just be a
periodically forced 2-variable Hamiltonian oscillator. The light horizontal particle
would then be periodically forced by the vertical particle, and the Poincaré map
would be as simple as that of any other periodically forced Hamiltonian oscillator.
It would be a periodically forced single-degree-of-freedom system—the simplest
86
8
Cosmos, T-Tube System, Poincaré and Boltzmann

type of Hamiltonian chaos conceivable. While all the ‘‘comfort’’ of the T-tube
paradigm would survive, all of Poincaré’s (and the later developed) instruments to
numerically study chaos in a periodically forced oscillator could be applied to this
system. But, as stated, this is merely a hope at the present moment in time because
we have not checked this possibility numerically for lack of funding. On the other
hand, to a mathematical mind this simpliﬁcation is not actually needed because the
two particles have a 2-dimensional (if non-planar) Poincaré cross section in the
4-dimensional state space since the motions occur on a three-manifold. Everything
would be facilitated if the idealization I described works. As stated, I predict that
the heavier particle need not sense the motion of the fast particle just as the
galaxies surely do not care about individual photons passing through. The
phenomena are predictably insensitive to the ratio between the masses approaching
inﬁnity. Thus indeed the simplest and oldest type of chaos theory, invented by
Poincaré in the late 1880s, can now be brought to bear on cosmology.
The question is, now that you explained the structure of the simple model of two
classical masses, how do you solve the problem that photons are rest-mass-free
particles?
This is a bit tricky. One could simply say that everything that can be predicted
about photons traversing the cosmos will hold true also for cosmic ray particles
traversing the cosmos, that is, for near-luminal protons. The fast protons would be
a mechanical analog to the photons and we would still understand what happens.
The protons would still ﬂy with almost the speed of light, so that formulas from
special relativity need to be recruited in the ﬁnal analysis. But the classical theory
would not need quantum mechanics to be valid for once—quantum mechanics
would follow suit. Of course a full-ﬂedged relativistic-and-quantum mechanical
treatment will need to stand at the end.
Then the last question in this session has to be: Can we consider the relativistic
special case of the T-tube? Suppose a moving observer wants to see the structure;
is there something different, something interesting or new, if we add the velocity
effects of relativity theory?
It is amazing: Just as quantum mechanics is not really relevant here, so also
general relativity is not really relevant here. The main phenomena are classical.
There are slight modiﬁcations when we add the fact that space time is no longer
Euclidian according to Einstein, but this would not have an essential effect in the
classical-chaos based paradigm which has been found to apply here; where chaos
is a third leg between quantum mechanics and relativity.
When we carry out this experiment in two different relativistic frames, do we see
any new or interesting things?
What we ﬁnd to hold true at low speeds classically, predictably remains valid if
relativistic speeds are allowed-in. Qualitatively speaking, this would be a
perturbation that makes no difference. The ostensibly outdated classical thinking
8
Cosmos, T-Tube System, Poincaré and Boltzmann
87

of Clausius, Poincaré and Boltzmann would be sufﬁcient to explain the main
phenomena. Both quantum mechanics and special relativity would smoothly join in
without changing the qualitative picture. But then we also know from experience
that such are the best occasions for breaking new ground again. This is virgin
territory.
88
8
Cosmos, T-Tube System, Poincaré and Boltzmann

Chapter 9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light
and a New Theorem
We talked on cosmology in the previous session and I suggest we continue a little
more. I would like to ask you, what are your ideas about the speed of light, about
relativity theory, and what are your new contributions to these topics? Which
insights do you consider important and what are the implications regarding
cosmology?
Cosmology is a very exciting ﬁeld and it is also a ﬁeld which is very safe to study
because it has no direct implications for human life except if one detects a
meteorite bent on a collision course with planet earth in observational astronomy.
Cosmology is intimately related to Einstein’s thinking because the speed of light is
so important for the measurement of large scales and c, the pertinent constant, also
is a deep mystery. No one can explain why it has a ﬁnite value and why the latter
should be a universal constant. Einstein in 1905 took c to be a universal constant as
it still remains in special relativity. Two years later, however, he reluctantly gave
up on the idea of the universally valid constant c, after he had hit on the possibility
of understanding the problem of gravity with the aid of special relativity. He
replaced a tower on earth by a long-stretched rocket-ship in constant acceleration.
In this ﬁctitious scenario, he saw that when light is ascending from the bottom of
the rocket-ship to the tip while the rocket-ship is constantly accelerating, then
during the traveling time which it takes the light to reach the tip from the rear, the
rocketship picked up further speed. So when the light arrives upstairs at the tip, the
tip always possesses a constant speed relative to the light’s source at the bottom.
So there is a predictable Doppler effect here—a redshift—compared to the rear end
of the ship.
This was a ‘‘hard’’ inescapable prediction regarding gravity as well. It represented
his next deep original insight 2 years after he had discovered special relativity in
close parallel with Poincaré (but with two farther-reaching predictions). The new
mental picture of the extended long rocketship in constant acceleration is the
source of the eventually arrived-at theory of general relativity. There existed a
deﬁnitive chance to fully understand space and time in gravitation based on the
strange feature of the speed of light possessing a constant ﬁnite value. But then a
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_9,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
89

minor catastrophe occurred. In that same article of 1907, Einstein realized that the
speed of light can no longer be a universally constant speed. For if you look down,
from the tip of the rocket ship onto a lower level where momentarily a light ray is
passing horizontally (in a glass tube ﬁlled with thin smoke to make a passing light
pulse visible), predictably the speed of light down there is reduced. For example, if
the accelerating rocketship is assumed long enough that the clock speed is halved,
also only half the speed of light is seen at work down there compared to upstairs.
Thus, the universal constancy of the speed of light c as a globally valid law of
nature was suddenly shattered. It only could be said that locally, the speed of light
remains constant. If you look at it from the tip, you see that it slowed down in the
horizontal direction. This conclusion deeply worried Einstein. For almost four
years he stopped publishing on the topic of gravitation because of this drawback.
Eventually, his close friend Paul Ehrenfest, who visited Einstein in Prague where
Einstein had obtained a professorship, could bring him back to thinking about such
questions again.
Ehrenfest brought up the topic of a rotating disk and the types of transformation
that apply there. In the attempt to help Ehrenfest with this, Einstein inevitably
harked back to the question of gravity—and would eventually succeed in
formulating the theory of general relativity. Hereby the distressing ﬁnding that the
speed of light is only locally but no longer globally constant remained a feature of
the emerging full theory.
Up to this day, the topic of the constancy of the speed of light remains a contended
issue. In Tübingen, the ‘‘chaos school’’ kept the problem on a low burner for
decades. It can be described exactly by mappings—a familiar technique in chaos
theory. We looked at what happens if you send a light pulse up from a lower level
in the rocketship and reﬂect it back down again. You can compare the intervals
generated in the zigzag between upstairs and downstairs. You can ﬁnd, for
example, that when you have a one second interval upstairs between emission and
re-arrival, you may have only half a second downstairs. Two light rays of one
second distance sent down and then up again have the original one second distance
again. However, downstairs the interval between the same pulses is consistently
half a local second. Thus, there exists a 1–1 mapping between the slower time
intervals downstairs, half a second, and the faster time intervals upstairs, one
second. This is quite surprising. Ordinarily such mappings, when you have
expansion in one of two legs, do generate chaos. Hence we expected to obtain
chaotic behavior if one produced iterates between sending light upstairs and
downstairs. This seemed to us like a promising new way of looking at Einstein’s
ideas—but to our surprise there was no chaos. The whole recurrence, as such maps
are called, proved to be bijective across the two differing time scales. Thus we
were forced to think twice about the deep paradigm of the extended long
rocketship in outer space which Einstein had invented as a Sci-Fi type riddle in
1907. This amazing ﬁctitious situation of the totally transparent extended
rocketship is usually called the ‘‘equivalence principle’’ because it postulates that
there is equivalence between an extended accelerating rocketship in outer space on
90
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem

the one hand, and an equally long tower standing on earth in gravity on the other.
This idea—to consider in special relativity acceleration at two different height
levels simultaneously—was Einstein’s deepest insight in my eyes. He always
called it ‘‘the happiest thought of my life.’’ For it was so non-trivial to arrive at this
trivial-appearing scenario. People know quite well today how he hit on this insight.
I do not know whether I should tell this little story from Einstein’s life in 1907.
He had a heavy stomach when he entered his ofﬁce—or rather the common ofﬁce—
in the Swiss Bureau of Mental Property. The big window stood wide open and he
ﬂeetingly wondered what would happen if he jumped right out of the window:
would his stomach feel lighter? He realized in a ﬂash that ‘‘of course’’ it would feel
lighter because when I am falling, the stomach by deﬁnition cannot pull down on
me since the whole body falls freely. So gravity would no longer exist when I am in
free fall. To date everyone has seen TV reports of astronauts living without gravity
in a satellite or of Stephen Hawking ﬂoating with his wheelchair weightlessly in a
parabolic ﬂight. So it is true that one indeed can be weightless. The ﬂash-like
intuition into weightlessness enabled the 28 years old Einstein to realize that he
could get rid of the phenomenon of gravity altogether—by falling. When falling,
there is no gravity left, one is effectively in free fall as in outer space. Hence there is
a way to magically switch-off gravity. Because of this foreign insight—by the way
also arrived at by Newton as Thibault Damour dug out—Einstein knew for sure that
he would be able to formally completely unravel the essence of gravity. His asset
over Newton was that special relativity with its universal speed of light c happened
to form a universal instrument in his hands that Newton lacked. After this excursion
into the history, we can at last come back to the mentioned ‘‘Einstein effect’’ that
light seems to be ‘‘creeping’’ downstairs in gravity.
Do you believe that the speed of light is constant? Did Einstein make a mistake in
that context, or did he not?
He founded special relativity on the universal constancy of c, but 2 years later felt
he had to sacriﬁce this feature. The story is maximally exciting in my eyes. We
know the speed of light is constant in special relativity and hence also in Einstein’s
rocketship. Then, if we look down in the latter from above, c appears slowed-down
transversally downstairs. The question is; can we reconcile this fact of 1907 with
the global constancy of c of 1905? I had the good fortune of having very originally
minded students over many years. Dieter Fröhlich and Heinrich Kuypers helped
me, and together we found that the situation is a little bit different than we all
thought. The point is that when the clocks are slowed-down downstairs, this is not
the only phenomenon that occurs down there. Quite recently a paper titled
‘‘Olemach’’ was devoted to unraveling this. O, L, M and Ch were combined with
two arbitrary vowels to make the theorem more pronounceable. O means omega,
the rotation rate of a given frictionless wheel downstairs in gravity. L means
length, M means mass and Ch means charge. We can haul the freely rotating wheel
(a bicycle wheel suspended at its hub, say) up and down. The rotation rate is then
reduced downstairs because a rotating wheel is by deﬁnition also a clock. There is
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem
91

a theorem in mathematical physics, the Emmy-Noether
theorem for angular
momentum, which guarantees angular-momentum conservation in the presence of
a rotational symmetry. Since rotational symmetry is preserved in Einstein’s
extended long rocketship, this theorem automatically applies. It demands that
angular momentum L is constant. But L is equal to rotation rate omega, times mass
m, times radius r squared, for a rotating wheel.
r, the radius, squared times mass m times rotation rate omega?
Yes, one can almost remember this rule because it is intuitive. We know that this
law is universally valid in the absence of friction. Thus it must also be valid at the
bottom of our accelerating Einstein rocketship. If the rotation rate omega is
reduced at the bottom of the ship, owing to the Einstein time slowdown, then either
m, the mass of our rotating frictionless wheel or r, the radius of our frictionless
rotating bicycle wheel suspended at its hub in a frictionless manner, must be
changed, or both. Since the product of omega times m times r squared is constant
in the absence of friction, the change in omega that has occurred ‘‘must’’ be
compensated-for by at least one other change. There are several hypothetical laws
that could be conjured up to apply here. But we are decisively helped by quantum
mechanics which tells us that mass m, which makes up a part of this omr2
expression, is reduced downstairs in proportion to the slowdown of time (or
equivalently omega) because local photons have less mass-energy down there.
They have a lower frequency according to Einstein as we saw. Photons are locally
inter-transformable with particles, into particle masses, as is well known.
Positronium annihilation (and creation) is a case in point with which everyone
is familiar today since it is used in positronium-emission-tomography. Everyone
knows about the ‘‘PET scan’’ today. A PET scan, in which a positronium atom is
self-annihilating into two photons of prescribed energy, works equally well at the
bottom of a tower (or the extended long rocketship) as at its top. This holds true
despite the fact that the frequency and hence mass-energy of the photons emitted
down there is reduced by the Einstein redshift factor. Recall that the clock
slowdown means that photons have a slower frequency downstairs (are redshifted).
Hence all masses locally at rest downstairs must be reduced by the redshift factor
along with the positronium atom. That is, we know for sure now that in our product
(omega, times m, times r-squared), omega and m are reduced in parallel. So, only
r remains. Since the law says that the whole thing omr2 remains constant, with
o and m gone down in parallel, r must have gone up by the same factor. Only then
is angular momentum (omega times m times r-squared) the same as before, when
the wheel is lowered reversibly to get slower and then pick up speed when hauled
up again. So we see that size (space) changes along with rotation rate (time).
How new is this result?
The size change in gravity has been seen by quite a few people, including Ron
Hatch and more recently Richard J. Cook, a physics professor at Colorado Springs,
in a paper published in 2009 on the arxiv. Thus one indeed has a new fact in
Einstein’s theory. It changes virtually everything also in cosmology by the way—it
92
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem

is embarrassing. If indeed along with m, also L is changed downstairs, we have
both a slowdown in time and a proportional increase in size. Therefore, the ratio
between length and time is constant. So it suddenly turns out that the speed of light
c is a global constant after all. You then no longer have to assume that the poor
people downstairs have to live with a smaller speed of light without noticing. It
now follows that it is no longer possible to assume that anywhere in physics—for
example, in general relativity—the speed of light were not globally constant.
Also in cosmology?
The result extends to cosmology. If one believes in a cosmos that is expanding,
one has to assume that the speed of light is only locally constant. For only then can
the whole of space expand. This is the case in the Big Bang model. So the Big
Bang model is, for a very fundamental reason ruled out by the Olemach theorem.
In this way, playing around in your mind with a rocketship that is accelerating in
outer space allows you to come up with very surprising implications. Einstein is
still alive with his way of thinking. The clock slowdown discovered by him by
sheer thinking has corollaries. The Olemach theorem is only a completed version
of Einstein’s happiest thought. One is then, of course, forced to ask the follow-up
question: How about general relativity? How can the speed of light c, which is not
a global constant in general relativity, suddenly become a constant in general
relativity? Fortunately, this does not lead to a contradiction. It turns out that in the
Schwarzschild metric, which is the most important solution in general relativity,
there indeed exists an implied observable which represents the correct measure of
length using which, the speed of light is globally constant. This fact we actually
found before discovering the same result also in the constantly accelerating rocket
ship. This earlier ﬁnding we called the gothic-R theorem. The ‘‘gothic R’’ is not the
same observable as the familiar capital R, nor the little r that are both well known
in the Schwarzschild metric. The gothic R is written in a more convoluted form
than the capital R. For this mathematically admissible new length variable, the
speed of light is globally constant. The Olemach theorem, which remains
applicable in the Schwarzschild metric, only conﬁrms the gothic-R theorem on a
less ‘‘noble’’ level as it were. A very conspicuous consequence of the new state of
affairs valid in general relativity in the wake of both theorems is that metrology is
strongly altered. Many numerical measures in the physical universe are changed.
This is because if c is globally constant, then several other formerly global
constants become merely locally valid in exchange.
It appears that a whole basic ﬁeld in physics, cosmology, is markedly affected by a
little new implication of Einstein’s happiest thought. One of the new effects is that
cosmology can no longer scientiﬁcally assume an expanding model of the cosmos.
It is perhaps interesting to add in this context that another fundamental theory of
physics, statistical mechanics, cuts the same way. A new second branch of
statistical mechanics implies that light is losing energy while negotiating its way
through randomly moving galaxies. This Zwicky-type result converges with the
Einstein type result just discussed. So it is both, a new metrology and a new
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem
93

cosmology which come out of a re-thinking of what really happens downstairs in
an accelerating extended rocketship—the ‘‘Einstein couch’’ (as it can be called
with a glance to Freud). There is one prominent specialist here—Wolfgang
Rindler—who devoted his life to thinking deeply about the accelerating rocketship
and wrote the most inﬂuential book in the ﬁeld (‘‘Relativity, Special, General and
Cosmological’’) who does not dissent so far with the sketched new results. But I
also have to admit that the number of specialists in general relativity who so far
signaled concurrence with these results is countable on one hand. It is an
interesting experience to see how intrinsically sluggish communication is in
science—but this is another topic. It is a well-known fact that after ﬁnding
something new, one is confronted with all kinds of surprises and that, the more
surprises there are, the more sluggish the appreciation is in coming. But the silence
about c-global and cryodynamics could of course also mean that both results are
nothing but two mirages seen by the same camel train.
If you stick to your result, is it not an automatic consequence that an alternative to
the Big Bang is needed? Can we have another fundamental explanation of
cosmology—after the Big Bang model?
I believe that I can show that a new explanation of the main phenomena in
cosmology is necessary in the wake of c-global and cryodynamics, Inc. The most
fundamental cosmological phenomenon is the Hubble law, for which already
several Nobel prizes were awarded and which is an absolutely indubitable
phenomenological law. Hubble himself did not get the prize but 2 years ago,
Perlmutter, Schmidt and Riess received a Nobel Prize for a modiﬁcation of the
Hubble law at high redshifts that implies a belated honor for Hubble as well. They
found that the Hubble line is no longer a straight line but possesses a little hook at
the end. It was for this little hook that the prize was awarded. But this very hook
now needs a new explanation. If the Hubble line is not caused by expansion, then
the little hook also needs a new explanation. The deviation from linearity can be
explained easily by recalling that a fractal cosmos has big holes, the so-called
voids which occur in larger and larger versions the farther you go out in distance.
If you take this fact into account in an expansion-free context, it turns out that this
little hook can be explained along with the redshift itself by the discussed Zwicky-
type dynamical friction model. So there exists a new synthesis which seems to
cover everything that is known in cosmology so far. Nevertheless it is also
important to look at all the different independent conﬁrmations of the Big Bang
that are part of the ‘‘modern synthesis’’—with the so-called ‘‘cosmic microwave
background radiation’’ (MBR) taking ﬁrst place after the Big Bang itself.
Another question: If we suppose the result which you mentioned, Olemach, is
true…
One never knows whether one does not make a major blunder in one’s mind—
…then, what is the consequence if we apply this result to the Einstein equation?
94
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem

Thank you for harking back to the fundamentals. The best-known solution to the
Einstein equation is the earliest one, found by Einstein’s friend Karl Schwarzschild
a few months before the Einstein equation got ﬁnalized. This ‘‘Schwarzschild
solution’’ happens to contain the constant-c result already, in form of the gothic-
R observable. Einstein was so meticulous in his craftsmanship that even though he
believed c not to be globally constant, his equations are compatible with a globally
constant c. It is only certain particular solutions that cease to be valid—like the
expanding universe solutions of Friedmann and Lemaitre. Note that even though
the Einstein equation itself is not changed by the globally-constant-c result, its
interpretation will need to be changed in many places.
So, we can go back to the Einstein equation and simplify its understanding and ﬁnd
new solutions? I mean, your results allow one to ignore some assumed
implications like the expansion of the universe and presumably others?
Right, the expansion model represents a special solution to the Einstein equation.
This solution ceases to be physical, and there are other solutions that cease to be
physical—like the accepted combination with Maxwell’s equation, the so-called
Einstein-Maxwell equation. It is not Einstein’s fault that this hybrid equation is no
longer correct since the gluing-together point belongs to an outdated interpretation
and hence the combination needs to be re-constructed. There is also a famous
solution to the Einstein equation alone, the Kerr-Newman solution, which like the
expanding solutions ceases to be valid. It described the properties of space and
time around rotating black holes. In return one obtains new rewards. Here it is the
existence of a so-called Reeb foliation around any rotating black hole. So we have
an on-going revolution in general relativity, even though the Einstein equation
itself is not affected. It is only several derived solutions that prove to be unphysical
owing to an error of interpretation.
You published a paper before Olemach which you called Telemach. What is the
difference? Do we have the same result in two versions, or are they completely
different?
I believe they are very different. Telemach means that T, L, M and Ch are changing
by the same factor either in the numerator (twice) or in the denominator. T (time)
in Telemach is replaced by omega (rotation rate) in Olemach. In this sense, the two
theorems are very close. But the explanation of the two theorems is quite different.
Telemach is much more complicated to derive. Olemach was found later and is
more elegant (I think) because it is based on Emmy Noether’s rotation-symmetry
theorem. Olemach helps one better to enter the exciting ﬁeld of global-c general
relativity (cGR).
I think the Ch-part in both theorems may prove to be decisive in the end—the
prediction that charge changes in a gravitational ﬁeld. Maybe you should put it up
as the main new result?
I see. We started out with mass changing downstairs near the bottom of an
extended rocket-ship in permanent acceleration. Once the local rest mass has been
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem
95

found to be changed, one is obliged to ask the question; what about charge? An
electron has both rest-mass and charge. We know that the electron’s mass is
reduced downstairs along with photon mass energy—the example was positronium
creation-and-annihilation. We also know that locally, the laws of nature must be
unchanged in any locally momentarily co-moving inertial system. That is, when a
particle is momentarily released into free fall, it ‘‘in general’’ does not change its
properties compared to its still ﬁxed neighbor. So the ratio between mass and
charge remains unchanged locally. Therefore, Ch or q (for charge) must be
changed in proportion with rest mass m. However, the ‘‘law of charge conservation
in physics’’ is as old as the American democracy because Benjamin Franklin ﬁrst
formulated it. It represents one of the fundamental pillars in physics. Now this
venerable law is suddenly gone if Einstein’s thinking about the accelerating long
rocket ship was sound. How can this unavoidable ‘‘revolution’’ be made plausible?
There exists a proposal made by James Clerk Maxwell which I once found in
Martin Goldman’s inspired book ‘‘The Demon in the Aether’’: that there exists a
golden road, a trick towards coming up with important new ﬁndings. Go to the
beginning of a ‘‘gold vein’’ where someone by happenstance—Maxwell was very
modest in his attitude and a believing socialist—has found something very
important in physics. Then go back to the ﬁrst beginning of such a gold vein—and
dig in the neighborhood of that point. Then you will in general ﬁnd a new gold
vein. He even gave this option as the only reason why every worker in science is
obliged to publish: Not to gain credit from one’s contemporaries, but only to
contribute to the thick layer of new sheets that like leaves in autumn cover the
ground so that later the beginning of a gold vein can be retrieved. For one
beginning gold vein has always other gold veins taking off in its neighborhood.
This advice is still golden, it appears. I would say the equivalence principle
represents such a miraculous place, a bounty.
I’ll go back a little; you found that charge can change after all. What then about
the law of conservation of charge?
Conservation of charge is gone. This is a major catastrophe.
If you say so. Do we need a new electrodynamics theory, even in the classical
domain?
Only, if you combine electrodynamics with gravitation. The combinations that
were accepted so far have to be re-worked because they were shown to be false. So
it is really a kind of revolution in physics that is triggered.
If we consider that charge is not conserved any more, how do you apply it in
studying black holes? What are the interesting implications regarding black
holes?
Black holes are the most interesting implication of general relativity and the most
impressive one at that. If the speed of light is globally constant and we already
know for sure that time takes an inﬁnitely long time to reach the horizon of a black
hole from the outside (and again back), then the distance from the outside world to
96
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem

the black hole automatically is inﬁnite in contradistinction to what is textbook
knowledge. This is very hard to understand intuitively because you can ﬂy around
a black hole at some distance. You can put a sphere around it which has a ﬁnite
diameter and a ﬁnite surface area. On the other hand this very same sphere
encloses an inﬁnite volume of space if it is true that c is globally constant. So the
properties of black holes are totally changed. Oppenheimer and his student
Hartland Snyder, a mathematics-educated former truck driver, discovered the
black hole as a physical solution in 1939. In their paper they already showed that
an external observer can if released into free fall reach the horizon of a stellar
black hole within 2 days (and can also in principle come up again in another
2 days according to his wristwatch if there was a strong enough trampoline
mounted on the horizon to shoot him back up). But this wristwatch time is not the
outside time. Oppenheimer and Snyder also saw that during this travelling down or
coming up, in either case an inﬁnite amount of outside time is passing. Usually,
people think that the two time scales, the external one and the falling astronaut’s
wristwatch time, have equal rights. This is what democratic thinking suggests.
Since the astronaut can fall-in in just 2 days, the horizon should be only two light-
days away. This is not true because even light takes an inﬁnite amount of outside
time to get down or come up from there. It goes without saying that an astronaut
cannot possibly outperform a light ray. With the new constancy of the speed of
light now, suddenly all solutions acquire a mutually consistent status. That is, we
indeed have an inﬁnite distance and volume inside a ﬁnite sphere. It is the
topological opposite to what my friend Benoit Mandelbrot found—that you can
have a ﬁnite area or volume inside an inﬁnitely long periphery. If you idealize a
coastline so that even atoms can have inﬁnitely ﬁnely crafted surface properties,
then the coastline of England becomes a real fractal of never stopping self-
similarity and inﬁnite length, even though comprising a ﬁnite area. Here, we have
just the opposite: a ﬁnite circumference and an inﬁnite volume. This is not really
surprising, or is it? In differential geometry, there exists something called the
Newtonian…
Pseudosphere?
Exactly, the pseudosphere has the same diameter and the same circumference at its
largest diameter as the corresponding sphere, and the same volume as the latter,
and the same surface area, but is not isotropic on its surface. Rather than having a
positive curvature, it has (the same) negative curvature everywhere. It is a very
surprising object in geometry. So, differential geometry can easily deal with the
strange fact that a ﬁnite circumference can surround an inﬁnite volume. In the case
of the black hole, the space around it has the shape of a ‘‘generic 3-pseudosphere.’’
If we omit one dimension, as feasible, it looks like two inﬁnitely long trumpets that
are glued together at the rims of their outer mouths. The trumpet has a ﬁnite
maximal transverse circumference at the rim. If you are an ant that has
successfully walked around the ﬂat rim, you think it cannot be very far to reach the
middle of the plane that you just circled. However, in this orthogonal direction, the
trumpet happens to be inﬁnitely long. So it will take the poor ant an inﬁnite time to
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem
97

reach the middle of the trumpet. All of this is easy to understand geometrically.
Only for some reason, the described change of size implicit in the longitudinal
direction got overlooked as a generic implication of general relativity for 98 years.
Suppose we want to produce black holes in a lab on earth. Why do you believe this
is dangerous based on these results?
We do not know for sure that it is dangerous, but we do know that these black
holes have completely new properties compared to what everybody thinks so far.
For example, they are no longer charged. They cannot be charged because every
in-falling charge will when approaching the horizon become inﬁnitely weak along
with the in-falling body’s rest-mass compared to the outside. The result implicit in
Olemach and Telemach, that black holes are not charged, means for example that
they cannot be detected in a high-tech detector, if one tried to produce them on
earth in a machine, a so-called collider. For their charge is the only feature by
which they can be detected apart from Hawking radiation. The latter—which fact
I did not mention so far—is also gone, owing to the inﬁnite distance of the horizon
from the outside world—the inﬁnite length of the trumpet’s neck and mouth piece.
So, black holes have radically new properties. Also, they are never ﬁnished in
ﬁnite outside time as one always knew with Oppenheimer and Snyder, but for
some reason forgot to remember. One did not think carefully enough about the
simplest facts described in their paper of 1939. I must therefore admit that I was
unhappy with the prospect of black holes being generated down on earth. I
advocated the moon instead. At the present moment in time, we enjoy a break in
the experiment for 2 years. I hope that it will not be resumed until one could make
sure that indeed no danger is involved.
I have two questions here, maybe three. The ﬁrst is: What do you think about the
famous Hawking radiation?
Hawking radiation is unfortunately non-existent. This follows from the inﬁnite
distance to the horizon. Hawking radiation deals with a local quantum ﬂuctuation, a
pair of virtual particles, say, an electron and a positron, that arises out of nothing for
a moment in order to jointly disappear again in a short enough time that the
uncertainty principle is not violated. That is what Hawking assumed. But Hawking
in addition also assumed that the horizon is quite close. So if there is this pair of
particles, one of the two could disappear behind the horizon in a maximally short
time—before the time was up when the second had to come back to its cousin to
reunite with it and disappear. If it was true that in the proper time of the loitering
ﬁrst virtual particle, the second could reach and penetrate the horizon to be
prevented from coming back—as Hawking assumed—, then Hawking radiation
would indeed exist. Now, in the proper time of the waiting outside partner, the
adventurous one will need an inﬁnitely long time to reach the horizon and disappear
behind it. Therefore the waiting partner will not be orphaned because the twin is
bound to return in ﬁnite time. It can return in due time to re-unite with its virtual
twin particle since it could not manage to disappear for good within the proper time
of the partner as Hawking assumed. Hence there is a little error in Hawking’s
98
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem

assumptions owed to the fact that he grossly underestimated the distance to the
horizon of the black hole from the outer universe. This error is very forgivable in
view of the fact that Oppenheimer and Snyder fell into oblivion. However, it
unfortunately has this big implication that Hawking radiation is non-existent so that
black holes can no longer evaporate. I hope he is not angry with me if I say so.
You mentioned the two words, ‘‘fractal’’ and ‘‘cosmos.’’ What is the meaning of a
fractal cosmos?
I had a long discussion about this with Benoit Mandelbrot. He casually remarked
that astrophysicists-plus-cosmo physicists are the most problematic subgroup of
scientists he ever had to deal with because they are so dogmatic. He had felt the
sting of their hostility when he came up with a very simple idea. The famous
‘‘Olbers paradox’’ which was already known to Kepler was given a new
explanation by him. It represents a miracle at ﬁrst sight: Why is the night sky dark?
For if we have stars at all distances as astronomers thought originally in a
Euclidean universe, then even though the stars get smaller in their visible area with
distance, their number gets up by the same square factor so that the night sky ought
to be as bright everywhere as is the disk of the sun. The Olbers paradox was solved
by Hubble, as everyone learns, when he discovered the redshift law—that the light
from distant stars and galaxies is red-shifted and therefore is no longer as bright as
the light from more close-by galaxies. But this is not the only reason. In 1907, a
precursor of Mandelbrot, Chevalier Fournier d’Albe in France, discovered the
fractal distribution of galaxies—which had not yet been fully identiﬁed as being
what they are in conﬁrmation of Immanuel Kant’s conjecture of 1754. The proof
of the conjecture—the identiﬁcation of Cepheid periodic stars in the Andromeda
galaxy—was only given in 1925 by Hubble. Fournier in 1907 had mapped out the
ﬁrst picture of the fractal distribution of galaxies. The fractal distribution of
galaxies also sufﬁces to explain Olbers paradox as Mandelbrot stressed which
caused a counter reaction from the astrophysical community.
What is the meaning of this fractal distribution?
Fractal distribution means that you have a structure like a sponge. You have holes
of all sizes. The whole structure looks very much like the Menger’s sponge. Or
take Swiss cheese. Therefore, everybody is intuitively familiar with fractals.
Do you mean some self-similar things?
Precisely, we have such a self-similar structure in the distribution of galaxies.
There are voids of all sizes.
Do we also have a fractal dimension?
Yes, the fractal dimension has been measured for the cosmos, in many independent
studies. It turned out to be less than 1.2, as I remember. If one makes more
comprehensive measurements at all wavelengths, it is possible that the fractal
dimensionality of the cosmos will become still smaller and even approach unity.
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem
99

My last question for this session: What do you think about some famous constants
in cosmology? I am referring to a paper published around 1937 by Dirac
concerning some constants in cosmology, with Einstein apparenty not agreeing to
this idea. What is your opinion?
Dirac assumed the standard expanding cosmology accepted at the time. Then you
have a ﬁnite duration of the cosmos, a ﬁnite volume, and a ﬁnite mass. Under these
assumptions his realization that we have the strange number of 10-to-the-40 here, is
absolutely correct. It only breaks down if we suddenly have an unbounded fractal
cosmos. It could also be an inﬁnitely old cosmos, and we might have a recycling
mechanism. It is only in that light that I disagree with Dirac’s hope, not with his
arguments. There happen to be very interesting exciting new ﬁndings here,
supporting that the cosmos may be eternal and inﬁnitely old at the same time,
whereby one needs a recycling mechanism. This option, favored by Mandelbrot,
was seen for the ﬁrst time around 500 B.C. by Heraclitus who had a succinct two-
word description for the cosmos: ‘‘metabállon anapaúetai,’’ which means ‘‘metab-
olizing it rests,’’ that is, remains essentially unchanged. So it is both metabolizing
and persisting, recycling. That is exactly what we would need if it is true that
Einstein’s equation supports an inﬁnite fractal cosmos—as it may actually do.
100
9
Relativity Theory, Speed of Light and a New Theorem

Chapter 10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman
Problem
Let us discuss a new topic. In Chap. 9 we talked about cosmology and the Olemach
theorem. Now I would like to propose a combined question; can one think about
evolution from a dynamical-systems point of view?
Very early on, I got intrigued by the phenomenon of evolution. I always looked at
it as a physical problem. When I studied for my second M.B., the medical
bachelor, I came across a little book which referred to Ludwig von Bertalanffy. As
mentioned, Bertalanffy had coined the notion ‘‘ﬂiessgleichgewicht’’ (ﬂowing-
equilibrium) or steady state as a dynamical phenomenon, exempliﬁed by a ﬂame
which is changing all the time but nevertheless looks unchanging. I learned about a
thought experiment that Bertalanffy had made; if you put a candle into a closed
box with holes in it (the ‘‘black box’’ had just been invented in cybernetics), and
you put a mouse into another such box with holes in it, and you measure input and
output, then the two boxes will be indistinguishable in terms of chemical input and
output. When you do not include listening, for example, you might think there are
the same things inside the two boxes, because oxygen is consumed and carbon
dioxide is generated (as we had touched upon). So from a chemical point of view,
a ﬂame and a mouse are quite similar according to Bertalanffy. This triggered
something in my mind. A ﬂame is not alive, a mouse is alive: what is the difference
between the two after you saw the similarities? For some reason, a third element of
comparison came to my mind, namely, rust. I mean the crust on the surface of iron,
the oxygenation of iron. I remembered from high school that rust has the property
of being autocatalytic; and ﬁre, of course, is autocatalytic too, as everyone knows.
When ﬁre is spreading, everything is being eaten in its reach. Life has the same
feature of trying to spread and to self-multiply by autocatalysis. So autocatalysis is
the common denominator and the whole thing is chemical. If you believe in
reductionism in modern science, then you would say that life is chemistry in its
essence. So the question arose: What is the difference between ﬁre and life?
Konrad Lorenz would later tell me in this context that Gottfried Herder had asked
the question; ‘‘What was lacking to the most human-like animal that it did not
become a human being?’’—meaning that this type of question is a most powerful
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_10,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
101

way to arrive at new answers. I could suddenly see in my mind that if you had a
kind of rust that cannot just produce more rust, but if the chemical reaction were
more complicated, then after a while as a byproduct of more and more rust being
produced, some new substance may be produced as well. This new substance
might, under certain conditions, also produce more and more of its own kind. So
suddenly there was an idea of chemical evolution in my mind. The conviction
arose that this model, that this comparison between ﬂame and life, enabled an
explanation of the thing in question, the whole thing, life. For when you have a
chemical system that is autocatalytic and at the same time can produce modiﬁed or
differing substances, then this represents a highly unstable scheme. Intuitively it
was clear to me that this sufﬁces to predict that life is bound to be generated in a
chemical system that has enough degrees of freedom to produce autocatalysis and
to produce different substances, some capable of joining into the autocatalysis so
that a shifting improvement would set in automatically. This was very convincing
to me at the time, although it would take me about 8 years to write a long
manuscript in which this was described mathematically, and 10 years to publish a
ﬁrst short paper, ﬁrst with differential equations and later as a chemical growing
automaton à la Paul Erdös.
Evolution depends on the difference between zero and nonzero?
To be or not to be, yes. A way to look at the same thing graphically goes like this; on
the left-hand side, one has a very large set of chemical substances in the form of a
vertical column of small circles (empty dots) representing chemical substances. For
example, carbon which can produce long chains with side groups, and water (on
Jupiter instead of the carbon we would need borane and nitrogen which, taken
together can also produce arbitrarily large chains, of borane rather than carbon
atoms). Water would also be such a dot, a ﬁlled-in one (black dot) among very
many dots, almost all of them not ﬁlled in initially. Only some would have a
nonzero concentration, for having a constant inﬂux so not to get empty and remain
black. Photons would also be among the latter. Time goes to the right in the scheme.
Then this ‘‘invisible machine’’ (since almost all dots are empty) would be left to
itself, along with its huge set of pre-formed possible reactions, all represented by
transparent—initially not ﬁlled-in—Teﬂon-like tubes. It would be a virtually
inﬁnite network of possible reactions, whereby the substances on the left in the
scheme could be freely moved or copied and pasted horizontally to the right to as a
function of time, let them partake in a network of tubes and knots (dots). Almost all
tubes and almost all glass balls (knots) would be empty at ﬁrst. But time would go
on. This almost everywhere invisible (not ﬁlled-in) machine indeed exists in the
sense of mathematics, even though not as a physically manifest machine at ﬁrst.
There are very many pre-formed reaction paths and sets of cooperating reactions
and autocatalytic loops hidden in the network, all transparent at ﬁrst. Then we let
the few black dots on the left ﬁll their outﬂux tubes, ﬁlling-up the next dots which in
turn ﬁll the next dot while being continually reﬁlled themselves. While the water
and CO2 and some others on the left are kept at a constant level by the environment,
their products are regenerated more and more slowly. The network of pre-formed
102
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem

reactions is slowly getting ﬁlled-in. This mental installation is lighting up like
Olafur Eliasson’s ‘‘Sun.’’ This is ongoing creation and stupid eternal determinism
in one. The scheme is very general. It is independent of the particular chemistry. It
is a mathematical machine, which eventually includes Darwin’s machine on the far
right. I admit that I never worked it out as a piece of art, or in its totally detailed
mathematics which would be the same thing. I was happy to see its existence. With
the visible machine of life—in spite of its manifest beauty—turning out to be a
virtually negligible feature within a mostly invisible machine that nonetheless can
be seen with the mind.
This seems to be important to understand.
There is a set of initial substances which are just a few ﬁlled-in nodes on the left,
but these substances are being steadily produced as ‘‘pool substances’’—like water
which is available in unlimited amounts on the earth, and many substances are
continually swept-in by rivers which are emptying into the sea or maybe a lake at
ﬁrst or even Darwin’s ‘‘warm little pond.’’ There are some substances of constant
supply. Then you have a situation where a few substances are in constant supply,
out of which there can be produced other substances, and out of these again others
and so forth. But the content of the slowly ﬁlling-in Teﬂon tubes does not
necessarily become thinner and thinner. Sometimes there will be a feeding back—
there are back-couplings. Pre-formed autocatalytic cycles and networks, if
‘‘initiated’’ by a ﬁrst inﬂux, can ‘‘reach back’’ to recruit an early (left-hand)
source as a secondary self-replenishing source. The scheme describes a so-called
‘‘universal library’’ of chemical substances that can, in principle be produced from
those on the left. They are almost all invisible at ﬁrst that is, not yet produced. This
invisible machine is the biggest analog computer that you can imagine, but it is not
there in a hands-on physical sense, it is an invisible but nonetheless mathemat-
ically existing reality.
This is a graph to describe chemical reactions.
Yes, and the initial conditions are such that most variables are initially zero, only
just a few like water and some carbon-containing molecules are already there, the
famous most common ones in terrestrial life. ‘‘Chonsp’’ used to be an
onomatopoetic word to help remember the most important chemical elements
characterizing life. C, H, O, N, S and P have also been found on Mars, for
example. These few are produced all the time, are being delivered free of charge
all the time. But apart from the few pool substances in a non-zero steady state on
the left, there is this huge network of potential reactions which happens to exist
from the beginning also, albeit invisibly. The scheme gives you conﬁdence that
you can predict what comes out of this random network of pre-formed reactions. It
turns out that you can prove that the network is evolving in a direction which
generates more and more complicated, more and more efﬁcient self-reproducing
chemical sub-machines. Eventually, a ‘‘genetic machinery’’ is bound to get newly
formed, that is ﬁlled-in. The evolution of the genetic code represents one such pre-
formed thing that would happen in a gentle manner in a not too complicated way
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem
103

within the pre-formed network. Eventually, even what I call a ‘‘brain in the
genome’’ is bound to be formed, that is, ﬁlled-in, but this is jumping ahead too fast.
The idea is a reduction of evolution to mathematics?
Precisely; you have a network of chemical reactions which is virtually inﬁnite
because there is an unlimited number of combinations involved a so-called universal
library of chemical substances in the sense of Kurd Lasswitz. You can have C–C-
backbones as we have them in life on earth—carbon is capable of producing chains.
So you have chain formation included as a pre-formed product of the few initially
present substances. Mathematically speaking the whole machine exists all the time
while its visible elements follow what is called an ‘‘evolution.’’ One can look at the
laws of this evolution. It is especially fertile—hardworking—at places where
autocatalysis and other over-regenerative cooperative loops are pre-formed. Such
autocatalytic systems and larger cooperative conglomerates will be ‘‘recruited’’
along ‘‘shortest paths’’ in between them. Once self-reproducing larger—not too
large—autonomous entities are ‘‘awoken’’ into non-zero self-maintaining concen-
trations, with modiﬁed (eventually ‘‘mutated’’) daughter systems being formed, that
eventually involve a whole mutable ‘‘genetic’’ machinery, we have a system which I
call an ‘‘Erdös growing automaton.’’ I named it after Paul Erdös, but personally I
only have ‘‘Erdös-number 4’’ (because a friend of mine with whom I have published
a joint paper has Erdös-number 3). Such a growing automaton is very close to the
mind of Erdös. The nice thing is that you have a free-of-charge giant computer here,
much bigger than any artiﬁcial computer in the cosmos can or will ever become, but
this computer is invisible even though it produces some visible substances of many
sorts all of the time. Thus this represents a very big evolutionary principle, valid and
at work within invisible machines that mathematically if not physically speaking
exist with most of their elements. So evolution is not at all surprising for a
mathematically bent mind. Evolution is pre-formed in the possible chemical
reactions of but a few non-negative variables—substances that can combine to
produce in a combinatorial fashion many, many other substances and networks of
substances. The whole thing is, apart from Erdös, also closely related to Teilhard de
Chardin with his idea of an ‘‘arrow’’ existing in nature. The basic theory behind this
is thermodynamics—non-equilibrium thermodynamics. Ilya Prigogine
had a
similar idea. We met only later but I was aware of him since I was 22 or so, so he
inﬂuenced my thinking. However, the idea just outlined is not explicit in his work as
far as I am aware. It is a very general growing-automaton type of idea. Stuart
Kauffman had a similar concept at about the same time. There is another scientist
who also saw a connection between evolution and Erdös’ growing automata, Joel
Cohen, but this was several years later. I attended a talk of his in Vienna in 1977 and
I told him afterwards that I had published virtually the same thoughts 3 years before.
Unfortunately, he did not publish thereafter. So I learned the hard way that you
should never tell someone else that you have been ﬁrst because this could kill a
whole promising cooperation. As a consequence, the whole ﬁeld would not take
off—the opposite of what a scientist desires. But of course, one can never predict
the future.
104
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem

Who organized the Vienna conference?
It was Ilya Prigone shortly after his Nobel Prize. What we saw is that dynamical
systems theory is responsible for a predictive theory of evolution among non-
negative chemical substances. It is important that their concentrations can never
become negative. Otherwise the long ‘‘silent periods’’ would not exist and the
whole thing could not become an ‘‘evolution.’’ There are very long delays
involved indeed, because only a few molecules are being built at ﬁrst, and it then
takes a long time until these molecules can, after being part of an autocatalytic
network if lucky, become a source for the next type of molecules. It is an inﬁnitely
complicated network, but nevertheless one can look at the laws of such machines.
Because of this scheme there is no doubt in my mind that ‘‘life’’ is unavoidable on
chemical grounds in nature—not just in chemistry but also in nuclear chemistry.
Robert Forward wrote an astounding book, I read it a few decades later after being
prompted by astrophysicist Hanns Ruder to read it, titled the ‘‘Dragon’s Egg.’’ It
refers to a ﬁctitious constellation of stars. In this piece of ﬁction, the egg is a
supernova and leaves a neutron star in its wake. On this neutron star, nuclear-
chemical life is evolving. The author then describes a ﬁctitious communication in
this scenario between human beings—astronomers using their instruments—and
intelligent life on the neutron star. Forward is a scientist and the whole book is a
bestselling science-ﬁction book, but at the same time it is absolutely correct in
every scientiﬁc detail. It is a scientiﬁc breakthrough that he made by showing that
the same type of evolution as we have it in chemistry exists also in nuclear
chemistry since the latter enables equally many complicated reactions, only a
million times faster—on the outer crust of a neutron star. So it indeed is a very
general principle in nature that under open conditions—when there is free energy
available as I forgot to mention at the beginning (but this was implicit)—you can
predict life. Not just under liquid-water conditions as hold true on earth and maybe
on Mars in a previous era, and no doubt presently on some of the ice-covered,
internally liquid-water carrying moons of Jupiter or Saturn, Europa and Enceladus,
respectively. But also in nuclear chemistry there predictably exists the same
mathematically pre-formed but physically growing type of network producing a
non-negative type of life. There might be other types of evolution which do not
require non-negativity of the variables although nobody uttered such thoughts
seriously. The whole thing is indeed an offspring of thermodynamics. Statistical
thermodynamics—in the form of far-from-equilibrium thermodynamics—allows
you to describe life, living organisms and evolution as an implication of the
dissipation of free energy on the way towards the so-called ‘‘heat death’’ of the
universe, as Rudolph Clausius taught in the second half of the nineteenth century.
While energy becomes more and more dissipated, at the same time some fraction of
the free energy is delegated to drawing-in more free energy into the system, to
generate more complexity and improve the whole process. In this way, evolution is
complexity-enhancing in an autocatalytic, self-improving fashion in a giant
mathematically pre-formed system that if you wish is ‘‘living’’ even in its still
colorless parts, as an invisible machine. One can hereby predict the invention of
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem
105

a genome that generates a ‘‘phenome.’’ Actually, the generation of alternative
‘‘phenomes’’ hidden in the same genome is predictable, as C. H. Waddington,
whom I met in Buffalo in 1969, ﬁrst discovered in ﬂies. One can then show that the
genome becomes more and more intelligent. There predictably exists a ‘‘brain in the
genome’’ riding on the back of the thermodynamic arrow. The arrow points towards
more and more dissipation—entropy is increasing while the heat death is
approaching—but on the way towards the heat death, you get this Teilhardian
‘‘complexiﬁcation’’ (as he called it) in nature.
There is an old fairy tale that the devil can be employed to carry stones up the hill
to build a cathedral. So it is on the back of the heat death that life is evolving. This
is what thermodynamics allows, despite the fact that every free energy is
dissipated eventually. On the way towards complete dissipation, there is
complexiﬁcation and this complexiﬁcation is self-enhancing. This is life. So life
would be a secondary effect within statistical thermodynamics. Very much later, it
would occur to me that statistical thermodynamics stands not alone. There is a
second fundamental discipline at work in which you have not a heat death as the
driving motor, but rather the contrary, where complexiﬁcation is the direct
consequence of the underlying arrow. While the arrow of time in nature is so far
believed to exist only on the back of an arrow that leads to dissipation and a heat
death, in this new second theory, there resides a complexifying arrow that does not
need to arise as a secondary effect but is the primary effect. There the main arrow
leads to complexiﬁcation directly. It is still virtually untouched territory, this sister
discipline to thermodynamics.
You mean cryodynamics?
Cryodynamics, yes. The discovery of cryodynamics opens up a door that is much
wider than the door of thermodynamics. Within the latter, there is this little niche
in which we can have life. It could well prove important for the future
development of science and humankind to more deeply understand cryodynamics
because currently unfathomable implications might be waiting.
Could you say a word about the relationship between cryodynamics and
Darwinian dynamics?
Darwinian dynamics is a part of dissipation while cryodynamics is intrinsically
anti-dissipative.
Can you mix cryodynamics with evolutionary theory?
Both do co-exist, but their intermingling is very hard to understand. Early on, Lev
Landau published a paper in the 1930s—the ﬁrst author of the famous Landau-
Lifschitz series of advanced physics textbooks—on the combination of repulsive
and attractive particles in an open two-phase system. Later, Donald Lynden-Bell in
England continued in that direction. He combined both repulsive and attractive
forces in a calculational model describing a box with a membrane in between the two
compartments, I believe. Both mentioned authors made their lives unnecessarily
106
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem

difﬁcult in my eyes through combining attraction and repulsion and looking at the
combination—a combination of thermodynamics and cryodynamics, as it were.
This did not lead very far for starting out from too difﬁcult a question. If you combine
two disciplines of which one is not yet completely understood or even seen in its own
right, forcing them into one combined little abstract model system, gives you no
chance to progress very far. Therefore cryodynamics did not arise in its own right for
more than a century after the high bloom of thermodynamics, despite the fact that
these admirable scientists had glimpsed part of the essence already. The two sciences
are primarily completely independent of one another. One should therefore look at
them on different time scales, I feel. This could not possibly be seen at the beginning.
The time scale of light ﬂying through galaxies that are moving is a very long and
slow one. A photon, passing by the Milky Way galaxy takes at least a hundred
thousand years because the distances involved measure so many light years.
Cryodynamics is mostly a very slow process in nature while evolution is very fast by
comparison. On a neutron star, evolution is about a million times faster still with its
nuclear chemical reactions than with our own chemistry (as Robert Forward
stressed). So the two types of life so to speak—the two arrows, the one of
thermodynamics and the one of cryodynamics—live on different time scales. If one
realizes this, one can understand why the anti-entropic phenomena of the second
arrow were not discovered before—it is because the time scale is so hugely different,
and also because very few people are able to put such contradictory things into one
picture in their mind. Roger Penrose, for one, did this in his book ‘‘The Emperor’s
New Mind’’ of 1989 when he drew two series of pictures, one placed above the other.
One was the entropic arrow of dissipation, symbolically represented with particles
getting spread-out more and more in a hand-drawn picture, the other underneath
gave a similar rendering for gravitation, with an increase of ‘‘lumpiness’’ at each
step, with but a few coalesced black holes remaining at the end. He clearly
juxtaposed these two arrows. However, he could not possibly know yet—I believe—
that there really is a new arrow in existence here that is just as powerful as that of
thermodynamics itself. Nobody has a good intuition into cryodynamics so far.
A question on evolution theory; human beings are capable of deducing many
things, how can evolutionary theory explain the existence of deduction in humans?
Human beings can also love many divergent things. Can evolution theory explain
the existence of this orientation in humans?
The simpliﬁed picture I gave you so far was—so one could say—essentially about
well-stirred chemical systems. We all know well stirred chemical reactions like the
Zhabotinsky reaction where you pour four liquids together. If you run it under well-
stirred conditions, it can produce chemical waves in time—oscillations—, but we
also can obtain chaos-so it can have all major kinds of dynamical behavior. Evolution
in the way I described it was essentially evolution in a well-stirred soup whereby
differences in space were not included. As soon as you include space explicitly,
everything becomes much more complicated.
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem
107

In reality, we only rarely have ordinary differential equations—the well-stirred
case in ﬂuids. We more often have ‘‘partial differential equations’’ which depend
both on time and on space. There is the nice saying of Ulrich Wais, a friend of
mine that ‘‘The Lord has created many animals and plants and many partial
differential equations.’’ Partial differential equations are much more difﬁcult to
handle than ordinary differential equations. This model of evolution that I gave
you was based on ordinary differential equations. So if we add space to the whole
thing, everything becomes more complicated in a sense. However, in other ways it
becomes simpler because one can now have a cell which has a membrane, and we
are familiar with all this in biological evolution. It is just somewhat more difﬁcult
to handle didactically—in a simulation, for example. In a few decades from now, if
the planet is still there, computers will be so fast that one can do simulations of all
the things we were discussing, but to come back to your question. There is more to
say about space in the context of pre-biochemical and biochemical evolution.
Survival can no longer be deﬁned only in a temporal fashion. Darwinian evolution,
natural selection, does not include space explicitly. It concerns chemical reactions,
which are based on partial or ordinary differential equations. The stochastic
versions of the latter needed at low concentrations are even more difﬁcult.
As soon as you have an animal as the fruit of evolution, this animal lives in an
environment in which its survival depends not just on chemical conditions that are
more or less well stirred locally, but also on where it is at a given moment in time,
how the conditions for survival are at the special location of the moment. Plants
can only thrive if there is enough light, and underneath the big trees in a forest
there is not much light left, for example. So space plays a big role in biological
evolution. But there is a different aspect of space which comes into sight here: fast
changes of survival as a function of position in space. Plants only make use of
space with their roots and phyllotaxis and so on, but they usually cannot move. As
soon as an organism invents movement, locomotion, suddenly space plays a major
role for survival. It is a second type of theoretical biology that emerges here if you
allow that survival depends not just on history and chemistry and partial
differential equation-type situations, but also on the momentary position in space
of the whole organism. This is the problem of locomotion, or rather the problem of
‘‘behavior’’ as it is called.
Behavior is something new in biology which has nothing to do in principle with
the biochemical underpinnings of the same organism. You can pose the question of
‘‘survival conditions’’ not purely in time, as Darwin did when he predicted his
mechanism of natural selection (which eventually allows you to even predict the
‘‘brain in the genome’’—we talked about this before). Survival depends not just on
history and chemistry, but also and very acutely on position. ‘‘Position-in-space
dependent survival’’ is a totally different problem. It is still a mathematical
problem as in chemical evolution, but it is a much simpler problem because it
proves to be a well-deﬁned mathematical problem that is independent of the
myriad historical chemical accidents and their relics of biochemical evolution.
108
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem

In evolution theory we suppose to pass through many steps, through many animals
to arrive at human beings. Humans are able to work with mathematics and
philosophy and they can produce many systems of logic. Can evolution theory
explain the jump from this animal point you described up to a theory of this more
modern type of brain where at the end we have a human being?
What is the ‘‘place of man in the cosmos’’—Max Scheler asked in 1926.
I mean the possession of the system of logic and also the possession of love. In
animals, love seems to be of not so high a level, in humans, many different levels of
love are observed. Can evolution theory explain this?
This is the most difﬁcult problem in our context, the difference between humans
and animals. Presently we are still at the point where we try to predict the brain
and thereby understand it. Both animals and human beings have brains, but human
beings make a different use of their brains than animals do, as far as the evidence
goes, and this needs to be explained as you say. And it indeed can be explained. It
is a bit easier for me if I ﬁrst explain how the brain works. Let me return to this
point ﬁrst if I may.
The brain is needed because survival in space no longer depends on prehistory and
well-stirred chemical conditions alone, but acutely on position in space. This
problem proves to be decoupled from the chemical history and prehistory. It turns
out to be a well-posed ‘‘optimality problem’’ in the sense of mathematics. It is
called the ‘‘travelling salesman with alarm clocks problem.’’ Now I should ﬁrst
explain what the travelling salesman problem is. Suddenly we are here right in the
midst of pure mathematics again. It is a very nice, also economically important,
problem and one that has also attracted the interest of physicists. For example, my
famous physicist friend John Wheeler wrote a long paper on the travelling
salesman problem. It is a very simple question to be solved. You have a number of
towns, say ﬁve, and you have a salesman who has a car available and has to visit
these towns to sell something. The simplest assumption is that he has to visit every
town only once and that he wants to save fuel while visiting all the towns. If you
have ﬁve towns, it depends on how they are located to determine what the shortest
path to visit all of them is. This is the ‘‘travelling salesman problem.’’ This simple
problem is mathematically very difﬁcult and interesting, because if you increase
the number of towns, then to ﬁnd the shortest path of connecting them all along a
single route becomes more and more difﬁcult in a very rapidly rising fashion. The
complexity goes up, as one says, in a ‘‘non-polynomial’’ fashion which is another
way of saying ‘‘exponentially.’’ The complexity—the number of trials necessary to
ﬁnd the optimal solution—grows very, very fast, more than exponentially fast. So
the complexity of the problem came to be called ‘‘non-polynomial complete’’ or
NP complete. Nonpolynomial is ‘‘exponential’’ and ‘‘complete’’ means that very
many other problems have just the same structure, so solving one means that all of
them can be solved. NP-completeness is currently a famous conjecture in
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem
109

mathematics. If your algorithm runs on a quantum computer in polynomial time,
you will become the richest person on earth. Most probably, I would guess, even a
quantum computer cannot solve an NP-complete problem but this is still open.
Why do I mention this strange phenomenon of the travelling salesman problem in
an abstract landscape? It is not just mathematically nice. There exists a cousin to
this problem which is called the ‘‘travelling salesman with alarm clocks problem.’’
It is slightly different—you do not have to minimize mileage as before, you only
have to avoid that an alarm-clock is going off. Here, the travelling salesman is
carrying a bag with a few alarm clocks, and each goes off after a certain ﬁxed time
unless he ﬁnds a town or ﬁlling station of matching type. All you need is imagine a
car which has not just one tank to ﬁll up with gasoline or electricity, but needs to
visit other ﬁlling stations as well—say for oil or for new tires or for repair and
these have their own speciﬁc ﬁlling stations scattered in space. If you do not make
it, the car is removed from the game and the journey is over. Each of the fuel tanks
of different colors is equally vital. Hereby they can be assumed to have equal time
limits without change of generality. Mathematically you again have a travelling-
salesman problem, only with the ‘‘constraint’’ being changed. You may have ﬁve
alarm clocks, for example, or just three. Even then the problem is maximally
difﬁcult. You have to make sure that you visit ﬁlling stations of different colors in
enough time to avoid the alarm clocks being set off. The ﬁlling stations are—for
example—randomly distributed in space. No colored tank must ever go empty,
otherwise you are dead. It is a very simpliﬁed but realistic version of survival in
space when you have sources that need to be visited from time to time like a source
to drink, a source to eat and a source of shelter in the night. One for every different
‘‘biological duty’’, as it were.
When I was a child and got restless, it could happen that my father would ask me
whether I had not to ‘‘fulﬁll a biological duty’’—to go to the john. We know we
have to drink and to eat, and so on. This travelling salesman problem of the alarm-
clocks type is a very general mathematical problem which captures the essence of
a type of predicament that we are all familiar with. It is not just humans that are
familiar with this predicament to survive by ﬁnding certain goods. Otherwise,
higher biological organisms would no longer exist. One of the types of sources
would consist in ﬁnding a partner for procreation. This second type of travelling
salesman problem is mathematically speaking a well-posed problem again. The
solutions can be studied in abstracto, being ‘‘NP-complete’’ again. You will need a
computer bigger than the visible universe to solve it if the survival time is to be
maximally long under a condition where the time gap between the maximum
travelling radius per tank ﬁlling and the minimal temporal traveling distance
between ﬁlling stations of the same type becomes small. When you have very
much time and hence many occasions to ﬁll up a particular on-board gas tank, you
do not need to care much because you so frequently pass by one. Garey and
Johnson independently discovered this travelling salesman problem. And Eric
Charnov also saw it implicitly in ecology under the name ‘‘optimum foraging
110
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem

theory’’ in the same year in which I ﬁrst proposed it. This is a unifying problem
which must be solved in biology—in any biology on any planet including the
‘‘Dragon’s Egg’’ neutron star of Robert Forward.
Now to the point: This well posed mathematical problem needs to be solved by on-
board machines called ‘‘brains.’’ To solve this problem is the very task of brains
and the reason why brains are needed in biology. In other words, you can predict
the necessity of brains because the travelling-salesman-with-alarm-clocks problem
exists in any biology in which survival depends on position in space. Darwin was
probably quite aware of this—a question for the historians.
This is not metabolic adaptation?
No, that is the point. We now have two types of adaptation; ‘‘metabolic
adaptation’’ toward the physico-chemical environment on the one hand—which is
taken care of by ordinary chemical and biological evolution—and ‘‘positional
adaptation’’ on the other. Metabolic adaptation is Darwin and Wallace’s
adaptation. ‘‘Positional adaptation’’ represents a second type of fundamental
biological problem which needs to be solved too, and which unlike metabolic
adaptation happens to be a well-posed optimality problem in mathematics. You
need nothing but mathematics to solve it, and for this reason you can predict the
necessary properties of ‘‘brains.’’ Hence brains are much easier to understand than
the rest of the body in biology because you do not need biology at all for
describing their functional features. In all biologies in the universe, it is always the
same positional-adaptation problem that has to be solved and is being solved.
Because of this mathematical well-posedness of the problem, you can try to ﬁnd a
‘‘brain equation.’’ The latter is an equation which solves this travelling-salesman-
with-alarmclocks problem up to a certain level of efﬁciency. Solving it completely
will demand a computer as big as the universe. So, this NP-complete problem is
the basis of a ‘‘theoretical biology of brains’’ in the same sense as there is a
‘‘theoretical physics of gases,’’ for example. This ‘‘hard’’ theoretical biology of
brains parallels theoretical physics in its self-understanding. It can become the
basis of a love theory.
My biochemistry teacher Günter Weitzel used to claim that ‘‘all life is chemistry.’’
We can now say in the same vein ‘‘every brain is mathematics.’’ It solves a
mathematical problem which is well-deﬁned and can be dealt with the usual
instruments of math. The modern science of ‘‘bio-informatics’’ contains the brain
equation at its core. For some reason, the specialists presently treat it only as a
special exercise in undergraduate courses, if at all. I apologetically would associate
it with ‘‘half’’ of the task of theoretical biology as Ludwig von Bertalanffy deﬁned
it. The other half would be the not yet elaborated theory of the ‘‘brain in the
genome’’ deﬁned 40 years ago with Michael Conrad. This is ‘‘music of the future,’’
of course. No one believes this so far, I am afraid. Konrad Lorenz helped me see
this. I remember when we talked shop as we did about ten times in 1966, how the
question came up. Or rather, the underlying phenomenon came up—of crabs living
at the seashore in the region of the tides. There the water is going up and down
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem
111

every few hours. So these animals should take into account in what phase of their
environment, of its physical rhythm, they are living at every moment. We realized
that this is not something that can be genetically programmed-in in Darwinism.
Genetic adaptation cannot predict what at a certain time on a certain day at a
particular seashore the position of the tide will be. It would be impossible to be
adapted to such an environment on the basis of genetic information alone. This was
the ﬁrst instance which allowed us to realize that genetic information and evolution
theory in the Darwinian sense cannot cover this problem, namely the problem of
‘‘positional adaptation’’ in space and time, as I call it. It represents a question of its
own in theoretical biology.
You mean that the brain always computes the exact position?
This is what I am driving at. The simplest case is that your organism formed by
chemical and Darwinian evolution must be cued to doing something adaptive, like
switching-on a different breathing mechanism in time before the high phase of the
tide comes. For anything like this, one can predict that you need what is called a
sensor. Only if they have a sensor can these biological organisms survive—unless
their physiology is made universally resistant to all these changes by metabolic
genetic adaptation. Without a sensor to obtain information that is not part of the
genetic information, this system cannot behave in a temporally adapted fashion. So
there predictably exists a second type of survival-relevant information that goes
beyond genetic information. That was the insight obtained jointly in 1966. We
soon saw, of course, that it is not just temporal information that is vital in this
sense, it is also spatial information. If you are in the wrong place, you will be
eaten, for example. So it is both position-in-time and position-in-space. The
information about space is even more important in general. It is ‘‘action-speciﬁc
readinesses’’—moods—that are needed in this context. It took me seven more
years to arrive at the brain equation. Mathematically, the situation that one arrives
at is the travelling salesman with alarm clocks problem. Hereby a biological
system needs to keep track of how much time has passed since one of its different
‘‘tanks’’ has been ﬁlled and hence now needs to be ﬁlled-up. As a theoretician you
realize that you are free to assume that all the tanks can have the same time limits
to be reﬁlled—it makes no difference for the difﬁculty of the task. In reality, it is
different—we cannot stop breathing except for one or a few minutes, for example,
but we can stop eating for a few days or weeks. These life-deciding clocks are not
equal in reality. Only mathematically this is no major determinant of the
complexity of the problem to be solved. Then you can start trying to solve this
problem.
There is a book by Konrad Lorenz
of 1973 titled (in literal translation) ‘‘The
Flipside of the Mirror.’’ In English it has the title ‘‘Behind the Mirror’’ which is
misleading. What he meant with the word ﬂipside (in German Rückseite) was that
we are endowed with this ‘‘mirror’’ in which the world appears to us, the mirror of
consciousness. That the world is something visible like in a mirror, but that behind
this mirror in which the world appears to us, we have a machine as the ﬂipside of
112
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem

the latter. In case something goes wrong, the driver needs the help of a mechanic
who is ready to make his face dirty going underneath the machine. We are doing
this right here, we are not afraid to use the screwdrivers of math to do justice to the
machine involved. The deductive science of behavior tries to understand the
workings of this machine which for us is so all-important. It is not a chemical-
reactions type machine, as in the case of our body and our living cells, it is a brain-
type machine. Even if its cells’ chemical constituents were to a large part suddenly
destroyed by ionizing radiation to be ‘‘metabolically dead,’’ the machine’s
electrical and mathematical behavior along with the attached consciousness could
still go on for a while—in a dead organism. So the brain is not alive in the
biological sense if you wish, it is a different type of machine with a different type
of life, even though it uses the same cellular elements, the same wet-ware. You can
replace the living elements of the brain by computer elements, as philosopher
Hilary Putnam seriously proposed in his 1981 book ‘‘Reason, Truth and History.’’
We know from experience that computers can be intelligent, but it was not known
before that we are computers as far as our brain life and consciousness is
concerned. This type of behavior and what we are doing with our brains, all
animals do, is something which belongs into informatics, not into biology. Only if
you want to repair it, it is biochemical elements that need to be repaired in general
so far. ‘‘Brainology’’ is a completely different science of its own even though
biologists are legitimately interested in both types of life, biochemical life and
mathematical life.
10
Chemical Evolution, Travelling Salesman Problem
113

Chapter 11
Thermodynamics and Its Proposed
Counterpart
Let us try to explain how the universe evolved. After our talking about biological
evolution, let me ask, can we speak of a Darwinian dynamics in cosmology?
In science we try to have a complete picture of everything when we look at it from
an external point of view. A complete picture is the goal. The strange thing is that
we then get stuck with a particular ‘‘cut’’ that we are living in at a given moment in
time, the fact that our consciousness is attached to a speciﬁc body, and so on. So
there are two different views of the same reality. It is much easier to take the
detached or exo perspective to talk objectively about the whole thing. This is the
main aim of physical theories—to try and understand the whole thing which
includes consciousness.
First, I would like to stick to the idea of a machine seen from the outside; the
cosmos is a big machine that we try to understand by deciphering its formal laws,
as Newton ﬁrst did successfully in the footsteps of Kepler and Descartes, and as
Einstein continued. In a previous discussion we saw that there is not just the arrow
of entropy increase in thermodynamics, as is well known, but that there is a
‘‘second arrow’’ at work in the universe, the ‘‘ectropic’’ arrow of cryodynamics. If
the theory is correct, the whole cosmos is an eternally recycling machine in the
sense ﬁrst seen by Heraclitus and then later on by other people, most lately
Poincaré and Boltzmann. Nietzsche—who planned a new career studying physics
in Paris—was the philosopher of eternal recurrence in the 19th century. An inﬁnite
recurrence time means that the whole thing would have to be deterministic in the
sense of repeating the same thing all over again. The assumption of inﬁnity is so
big that it all will remain full of surprises for an eternity and never become boring.
In quantum mechanics, there are modern theories which claim that whenever the
wave function is reduced to give a particular result at one point in the universe, the
wave function of the universe is split-up in almost inﬁnitely many ways so that all
solutions of Everett are real in some branch. This assumption, by the way, implies
a sort of immortality. It is very confusing to Europeans that here one suddenly
ﬁnds oneself in a typically Eastern, Indian way of thinking. Everett himself was—
as John Bell found out—actually quite close in his thinking to that of another
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_11,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
115

friend of John Bell’s, the Dalai Lama. The decisions made in quantum mechan-
ics—as to which world is going to be actualized at a given moment in time by a
given measurement—is a decision that varies from moment to moment. This
means that one is living in a different world at every moment without noticing the
change. Bell wrote a paper about this, titled ‘‘Quantum mechanics for cosmolo-
gists,’’ which indirectly refers to Everett’s theory because Everett’s is the only
version of quantum mechanics compatible with cosmology; since the other ver-
sions by deﬁnition require a measuring apparatus larger in size than the object to
be measured, which is impossible if the object is the cosmos. In his paper, Bell
proposed that the different cuts—the Everett-cuts of the universe—are not, as
Everett had proposed, simultaneous so that the many observer-speciﬁc worlds exist
in parallel—but rather mutually successive. So, one would live at every moment in
a different Everett world. He drew the connection to his friend, the Dalai Lama. He
is believed to continue after death in a different life and body until he eventually
decides to escape into Nirvana which is seen as the ultimate improvement. It is
controversial whether the Nirvana of the Indian enlightenment is a form of per-
manent death or permanent bliss; at least I am not sure which of the two inter-
pretations is the more sensible one.
To return to physics, we have the idea of a giant ‘‘world machine’’ which stems
formally from Descartes and Newton. This world machine should or can be
assumed to last for an eternal duration. In physics we have two versions of ther-
modynamics, as is not very well known. On the one hand, there is thermodynamics
itself, on the other, there is cryodynamics. Due to their interdigitation, the whole
system called cosmos can become eternally recurrent. This is a very satisfying
global picture which only became possible after the discovery of cryodynamics. It
is very important to falsify cryodynamics because if validated, it opens up the
window towards a totally different cosmology—a prospect that is completely
against the grain of the last 84 years of cosmology which in this light looks very
dogmatic. Evolution would be part of the new theory as a consequence of the
dissipative half of physics called thermodynamics, while cryodynamics would be
‘‘antidissipative’’ in its nature. This ‘‘doubling’’ of thermodynamics as it were
would enable an inﬁnite cosmology in space as well as in time, in contrast to the
short period of a few billion years allotted to us by the current ‘‘pre-cryodynamic’’
cosmology, if I may call it so.
Namely 13.8 billion years?
Right, 13.82 billion years at the current moment in time, but this number changes
almost every year. One should never be dogmatically critical of what everybody is
thinking, but one should nonetheless always try to ﬁnd a more open window, so to
speak. The new cryodynamical window suddenly allows one to return to the idea
of an eternal recycling, around-motion, perichoresis. I talked about this recently
with philosopher Friedrich Kümmel in Tübingen. Heraklitus said at about 500
B.C.: ‘‘metabállon anapaúetai’’—metabolizing it takes a rest, that is, it remains
unchanged. But if one is really so optimistic as to think that a complete picture of
116
11
Thermodynamics and Its Proposed Counterpart

physics is possible as I would support, there is this big nuisance of quantum
mechanics on the one side, and on the other side there is the other big nuisance of
consciousness. Why are we attached to one particular time slice cut through the
universe, and to one particular body populating it? Hence the ‘‘Exo’’ physics we
just talked about has to be complemented by ‘‘Endo’’ physics—the physics of
assignment.
Why am I assigned this consciousness or any consciousness at all? We are in the
possession of consciousness as the only substance that we can be sure about, and
that constitutes us. This consciousness has no place in physics. One can prove that
it does not exist at all (were there not the direct evidence). Then we have to try and
make a connection between consciousness as we experience it at this given
moment in time and the question why it is given to a particular inhabitant of a
given body, at a given time, in the vast Now-less world machine. We have to ﬁnd
the point of contact between these two realities, the reality of the world machine
on the one hand and the reality of the momentary consciousness on the other. This
assignment is an ‘‘add-on’’ characterized and guaranteed by the fact that we also
are provided with color—like the colored fruits here in front of my eyes. So both
COLOR (one should always write it with capital letters) and the NOW in
assignment are the real riddles within this big originally Newtonian picture of
physics. One might think this is psychology entering surreptitiously here, but this
has nothing to do with psychology as a discipline. It is the ‘‘miracle’’—the fact that
something is injected into the physical machine for which we cannot ﬁnd any
reason within physics and hence of course also no explanation. Why my con-
sciousness at this moment? There is nothing in the laws of physics prescribing this.
Thus we are subjected to a purely metaphysical intrusion which nonetheless is
absolutely compatible with physical thinking. In physics, this is called assign-
ment—an ‘‘assignment condition.’’
Newton ﬁrst introduced two conditions in describing the world as his basic
insights: the ‘‘Laws’’ of the world machine on the one hand and the ‘‘Initial
Conditions’’ (I.C.) on the other. These deﬁne which particular state the machine is
in at a particular moment in time. In addition to these Big Two, we have to
introduce a third equally basic element, the ‘‘Assignment Conditions’’ (A.C.).
They describe where, within this big machine of the universe, a particular con-
sciousness is attached, or more properly speaking ﬁnds itself attached to a par-
ticular element of the big machine. For if we are honest with ourselves, all that we
have is this consciousness, and if we are lucky, we can ﬁnd within the waking
dream of consciousness a picture of the world as a consistent machine. We can
then ask the question of the docking point in the world machine and within it in the
body machine where the assignment is implemented. In older times, one would
have called this type of thinking ‘‘religious thinking’’ because if one believes that
there is a reason for the assignment at this very moment, one is suddenly con-
fronted with accepting-or-not a power that lies beyond physics and is responsible
for this dream of consciousness as it is being played to my soul at this moment.
11
Thermodynamics and Its Proposed Counterpart
117

A cell-phone type analogy if you wish. Please, interrupt me so I can escape again
from this swerve towards the frightening subjective side of physics.
Let us return to Darwinian dynamics and cosmology. Is there a type of natural
selection in cosmology?
Now we are back in physics. If we try to understand biology, we need this element
of natural selection discovered by Darwin which can be explained in terms of
chemical evolution, as already seen by him. We have within thermodynamics the
phenomenon of entropy generation. Within the latter we have the fact that part of
the increase of entropy can be used to build up more complicated machines like
ﬂames and organisms or ‘‘dissipative structures’’ as my late friend Ilya Prigogine
called them. This is a question purely within the scope of physics. We can explain
it in the ‘‘thermodynamics of irreversible processes.’’ Recently, the second 50 %
of physical dynamics governed by ‘‘cryodynamics’’ was added.
You think in cryodynamics, the procedure would be inverted? Does this mean that
the arrow of time is changed there?
It is another arrow of time that cryodynamics brings in, it coexists with that of
thermodynamics. Bringing the two theories together is currently a far-from-solved
problem. There are only some ﬁrst ideas about how to proceed. Cryodynamics
guarantees an inﬁnitely long existing cosmos which then produces Darwinism, that
is to say, allows for dissipative structures on the thermodynamic side which cul-
minate in biological evolution. This happens on many celestial bodies on the basis
of different chain-building chemistries and also on the basis of nuclear chemistries
on neutron stars on a much faster time scale, as Robert Forward ﬁrst saw. Biology
is an element of this arrow, Teilhard’s arrow. Cryodynamics in turn regenerates the
conditions that evolution can happen again and again because it makes sure that
entropy is not the only king of the universe. There is a second king or queen; that
of ‘‘ectropy generation’’ in cryodynamics. I realize that I do not yet have a simple
composite picture gluing these two theories together. Cryodynamics is not a
competitor to the irreversible dynamics of evolution theory. It rather is a pre-
condition in order for evolution to be able to start inﬁnitely often in the cosmos.
Evolution contains the attractor of Teilhard de Chardin, the ‘‘point Omega’’
towards which all life forms in the cosmos are converging in an asymptotic
fashion. On the other hand, in a sense cryodynamics is much more powerful. It
does not need to produce far-from-equilibrium structures at the expense of much
more dissipation going on. While in thermodynamics organized structures incor-
porate ‘‘negative entropy’’ (as Erwin Schrödinger called it in his book ‘‘What Is
Life?’’), organized structures arise directly in cryodynamics. If you accept the
picture, in thermodynamics life is something like a crowning cream on the coffee,
a side product of the thermodynamic arrow of time on the way towards the ‘‘heat
death’’ (Wärmetod), as Clausius, inventor of the word ‘‘entropy,’’ envisioned the
future of the cosmos. Life is something like the last savings before eventually the
heat death destroys all self-organization. However, we now have an antidote,
something like a cosmic anti-death, a bit like ‘‘The spy who came from the cold.’’
118
11
Thermodynamics and Its Proposed Counterpart

There is an evolution, too, on this ‘‘left-hand side of physics’’ as it were, in
cryodynamics. It is not yet as transparent to science as evolution in thermody-
namics is. In cryodynamics, we get an ectropic arrow that is the main player from
the beginning, unlike the arrow of evolution based on the opposite process of
entropic energy-dissipation. That is, entropy is not increasing along with a bit of
order created as a side effect, but rather the order—ectropy—is directly generated
as the main effect. It is only very hard to see it in action in its purest and most
powerful form—and capture this in a grandiose picture.
Biological evolution can be considered as a chain. Every link in this chain is
transparent to us. My question is; if you want to apply the Darwinian viewpoint of
evolution theory to cosmology, what is the chain there and what are the chain
links, so that we again have a causality and every chain link is responsible for the
next one?
The Darwinian and Teilhardian viewpoint is in principle understood. Human
beings like to have a theory that is causally understandable everywhere. Quantum
mechanics could be ﬁtted in, with the notion of endophysics making this possible
in a deterministic universe. So the machine theory of Descartes still stands behind
the completed picture that is in principle obtainable. In the full picture, we sud-
denly ﬁnd a second part, cryodynamics, added to the familiar thermodynamic part.
However, the whole thing is not fully understood yet—if it is indeed true that there
is an ectropic arrow at work in cryodynamics. We would then have an arrow that is
a competitor to evolution, but a competitor that is much stronger because evolution
is as we saw only a sub-element of an arrow that tends towards a universal heat
death.
We have life like a little wavelet crowning an ocean, like an i-dot added to a
capital letter ‘‘I’’ that in principle could be neglected. But with cryodynamics, we
now have the capital letter ‘‘I’’ itself to ponder. The letter itself is ectropic in
cryodynamics, not just an appendix of it is ectropic. There exists a whole new
creativity in cryodynamics. It is much more direct than one might think. Capturing
the prototype process is still elusive. Nevertheless, ﬁnding something like indi-
vidual intelligences within cryodynamics is to me impossible to picture at the
moment. This is ‘‘terra incognita.’’ The scientiﬁc community for once needs help
from the competition—from people who are dealing with the mind—to get an idea
whether something like consciousness could have emerged more directly, in the
new ballpark of cryodynamics. Another obstacle is that cryodynamics ‘‘lives’’ on a
much slower time scale than the fast time scale of evolution which is just a few
billion years old, a number worth nothing compared to inﬁnity. So there might be
something like angels standing at the end of evolution, but there also might be
consciousness-endowed beings within the cryodynamical branch of the universe.
Thermodynamic evolution exists only as long as we have free energy ﬂowing-in.
The cryodynamic part suspends this limit, it eventually produces very many black
holes which in one model re-circulate 50 % of their population in an eternal
metabolism. Since black holes are never ﬁnished, this recirculation is possible in
11
Thermodynamics and Its Proposed Counterpart
119

principle. In this case the thermodynamic part of the dynamics of the universe can
also go on forever. So much for the combined picture, so far. Whether or not
something analogous to life and/or forms of intelligence can arise within the new
competitive arrow to thermodynamics itself since this theory is just as big and
complex as thermodynamics, is open. This is a very exciting and to me at the
moment almost frightening question. For it shows that half of physics, half of
natural science, remains yet to be understood. If we today have wonderful
machines based on thermodynamics, we will have even more wonderful machines
based on cryodynamics eventually, because the newly discovered 50 percent of the
full dynamics promise more than just a parallel ‘‘second business.’’ It is rare in
science that something as large as one of the biggest traditional ﬁelds is added to
the ballpark. Cryodynamics appears to be a new country.
… new continent. If we consider cryodynamics and look at evolution: Would a
‘‘reverse evolution’’ from human to monkey now be possible?
Within the traditional continent, we have biology, into which human beings
belong. On this continent—if we now stick to it—one can understand humans as
the products of a very rare accident that happened in evolution and enables a
function change to occur on the ontogenetic level of the individual. So we have
now slipped into another shoe as it were. For humans make a radically different
use of their own brain compared to the use that an ordinary well-behaved animal
makes. Animal brains are controlled by evolution, they are not persons. This is
another new dichotomy in science—that one has to distinguish between intelli-
gences that are persons and intelligences that are not persons. As far as we know,
there is but a single person-type intelligence in the universe, the human person.
There is this theory which I developed in the aftermath of conversations with
Konrad Lorenz: That one can have a radical change in the use made of a highly
developed brain such that the owner of this brain becomes a person. This is a
bifurcation of its own, a function change on the epigenetic level during the lifetime
of the individual that ordinarily occurs at a very early age. Nature as controlled by
evolution is ‘‘autistic’’ everywhere. I call this physiological autism. The only
example of non-autism is provided by human beings so far. One can explain why
human beings have become non-autistic. If I may repeat from an earlier session; it
has to do with the experience of benevolence made by the toddler as it is being
shown to him by the mother. You can have a system which has a certain type of
functioning—runs on an attractor—and if you then change the initial conditions of
the system, the same system with the same hardware under the same parametric
settings can be switched into a different basin of attraction, a different mode of
functioning. This is the theory of ‘‘function change’’ as Bob Rosen called it;
another word for this general phenomenon is ‘‘hysteresis.’’ The person attractor is
a new type of attractor that is compatible with the functioning of a biological brain
of sufﬁcient complexity. But it does not manifest itself ordinarily in other species.
Human beings are mirror competent bonding animals with a special social cou-
pling. Other bonding animals fulﬁll only one or two preconditions for this function
change. My publications on this since 1968 persuaded no therapist to try it out in
120
11
Thermodynamics and Its Proposed Counterpart

childhood autism so far. It is so frighteningly powerful if correct. You then can
heal from autism not only young human beings, but also a young orangutan, for
example. He or she would then become a person, too. She or he would even be a
more highly brained person, as I saw lately. Today, in the age of ‘‘artiﬁcial
intelligence,’’ everyone is looking forward to a very highly brained artiﬁcial
intelligence; I love Steven Spielberg’s movie ‘‘A.I.’’ It should be possible today to
get the same miracle already from biological hardware—like that of an orca whale
or an orangutan—is so frightening a prospect that even the professional therapists
for autism in human beings are unable to believe in their own power of healing. Of
course, human society might have a big problem integrating not just different
genders, as to date, but also Chewbaccas—George Lucas’ creation in his ‘‘Star
Wars’’ movies. This orangutan was the orange-coated superhuman pilot of the
ﬂying saucers. Science ﬁction authors have solved this problem long ago and the
public knows about it. As seen by Leo Szilard there could be a dolphin who can
talk and be wiser than any human because his brain is able to understand bigger
objectively existing connections than we poor medium-brainers can—but this a
different topic.
Evolution theorists try to explain how the universe or parts of the universe evolve.
On the other hand there is a theory in physics, quantum mechanics, which has the
same mission—to explain everything in the evolution of the universe. Now my
question; is there any bridge between these two sciences? Do they contradict each
other or can we tie them together?
This is a very difﬁcult question. Physicists doing quantum mechanics are con-
vinced they have the more basic theory. Accordingly, the older classical theory is
regarded as an epiphenomenon of the quantum reality. There is only one com-
peting way of looking at physical reality, called endophysics. My friend David
Finkelstein coined the word ‘‘endophysics’’ which means that you can have a
classical theory of the universe which implies quantum mechanics on the inside as
it were—endo means on the inside. Endophysics is now 30 years old. Endophysics
assumes that the world is classical at the basis and that as an implication of this
classically-causal machinery you have an endo perspective which contains quan-
tum mechanics. I submitted it in a paper sent to Science magazine as mentioned.
The ﬁrst sentence of the paper read ‘‘A new science is described.’’ Although I was
aware that they most likely would reject it—it was later published by John Casti in
a conference volume—I felt obliged to submit it out of fairness. It is an irony that
if you really create a new science, as I was blessed with in cooperation with David
Finkelstein—, the scientiﬁc establishment is predictably opposed to it. If the
comparison were allowed I would say this experience was made in the opposite
direction by Max Planck a century ago when he gave up on classical physics. Even
the automobile was not accepted at ﬁrst—until a woman, Berta Benz, drove the
ﬁrst 100 km in the 4-wheel motor bicycle that her husband had built but hesitated
to take seriously himself. This must be even more true if new types of technology
promise to stand at the end. I admit that I very immodestly called the foreseeable
products ‘‘world change machines.’’ The latter would change, not just something
11
Thermodynamics and Its Proposed Counterpart
121

within the world, but the whole world. This is even more frightening than cryo-
dynamics which is a tame pussycat by comparison. Cryodynamics belongs into the
usual exo picture of physics, adding just some 50 % to it. But for 30 unsellable
years endophysics is still more subversive in the sense of freeing us from the
trodden path.
Do you see endophysics as a bridge between quantum mechanics and evolutionary
physical theory including cryodynamics?
We indeed can basically have a classical theory—one that is both cryo and thermo,
so to speak—and then within this classical theory, we can look for the interface
formed for internal observers, with quantum mechanics forming an implication.
This is not a very new question. In quantum mechanics, we have the Copenhagen
interpretation and on the other hand, we also have the Everett interpretation.
Neither explains which quantum states become in effect classical states.
You mean, why in a measurement process a certain result comes out.
We have for example physicists like Wojciech Zurek who wants to build a bridge
between quantum mechanics and evolution theory. He calls it ‘‘quantum Dar-
winism.’’ Using this mixture, he attempts to explain how one quantum state
becomes practically classical on the level of our macro experience. He takes the
environment into consideration and introduces his key notion of a ‘‘non-quantum
superposition state.’’ They are not created equal, some being more apt to survive
in one particular environment than the others. Actually, I see some formal prob-
lems here because I cannot understand the meaning of ‘‘environment’’ as it is used.
He considers the term ‘‘environment’’ in the way we know it in daily life, but
‘‘environment’’ can also refer to a quantum state that has become an element of
the latter. So there is a gap here when trying to make a bridge between quantum
mechanics and classical evolution theory. What do you think of this problem? Can
quantum mechanics be improved so as to explain evolution theory as well?
All of this is very interesting, but it presupposes that the exo/endo distinction which
I introduced does not exist. It takes for granted that quantum mechanics is the basic
theory of the universe. From there, Wojciech tries to understand evolution—you
here have a lower level of evolution than in the case of Darwin, the level on which
the quantum states are selected. I have much sympathy with this kind of approach,
but my alternative way of cutting the world into pieces—namely into two layers,
the exo layer and the endo layer—allows me to avoid this problem. Quantum
mechanics would be just the endo aspect of a classical theory—and so the classical
theory would be the most important theory. Quantum mechanics could be derived
from this classical theory. I apologize that endophysics asks for a different way of
interpreting the same phenomena that are so important to understand.
Is the main idea of quantum Darwinism—that you never do any direct measure-
ment on anything and that the environment acts as a witness or as a communi-
cation channel or co-determinator—to your liking?
122
11
Thermodynamics and Its Proposed Counterpart

In a sense, I admire this approach. But I also see it as a misunderstanding of
Everett’s theory. I may be wrong here because Everett never talked about the
environment.
I don’t understand; what is the meaning of environment in this context? I think the
notion needs a very precise deﬁnition. Here we have a quantum state which has
become classical. Can we understand in this way how a quantum state comes to a
classical representation?
I do not think so. If you want to continue here, you have to explain everything in
terms of quantum mechanics. Then also the environment would become a well-
deﬁned quantum reality.
You mean an environment for everything?
This is what one has to accomplish if possible. I mean that this is what is being
attempted by Wojceich. But Everett would probably say that he has already taken
care of this—it is a pity that we cannot ask Everett himself.
I think we can ﬁnish this chapter on evolution theory. We talked about different
areas and also tried to build a bridge between quantum mechanics and evolution
theory. However, I think that many of the questions I asked are open problems for
research.
It is wonderful that so many open problems exist.
I think we sorely need paradoxes and also some open problems for progress in
science.
11
Thermodynamics and Its Proposed Counterpart
123

Chapter 12
Newton’s Laws, Symmetry, Noether
Theorem
In the previous session, we talked about evolution. Another subject with the
potential for one or two sessions is symmetry. Let us talk about symmetry in
nature, symmetry in mathematics and symmetry in physical laws. At ﬁrst, let me
ask you: How do you deﬁne symmetry? And secondly, what are your thoughts on
symmetry in physical laws? Can you, please, give a deﬁnition of symmetry in
general?
I have to admit that I never thought of deﬁning symmetry in general so far. I know
there are some mathematical ways to do it. It is a fairly intuitive concept, so we can
rely on looking at a special case like mirror symmetry as an example. What we see
in a ﬂat mirror is exactly the same thing as what we see in front of it apart from its
being ﬂipped in chirality. It is of course very nice and challenging to put this insight
of ‘‘equality’’ into mathematical terms. If you have equations for example, it is very
easy to see in general that if you make a change of sign, it is the same thing with a
change of symmetry, but there are more subtle symmetries. I was very much, I
would almost say, moved by a book by Newton. It is called ‘‘The Leibniz-Clarke
Correspondence’’ and was published in 1717. Half of its content is written by
Leibniz and the other half by Clarke who was a friend and conﬁdant of Newton’s.
So this part is effectively Newton’s. It is a correspondence held, one year before
Leibniz passed away, between these two towering mathematicians. It describes in
some chapters a type of symmetry which is not very well known. Leibniz argues
that it is conceivable to have the same universe twice; what would happen then? It is
clearly allowed to consider this symmetry. He claimed that if the whole universe
existed twice, this would make no difference compared to its existing only once.
Newton was taken aback by this idea, Leibniz had to explain. He claimed that if you
have exactly the same total universe twice, you still have only one universe because
they are identical in every respect. He went on to claim that even if you invert the
orientation of one of the two otherwise identical specimens, you still have only one
universe since the copy is identical in every respect—when you are inside of it, for
example. So if you have two mirror symmetric universes, it still is only one uni-
verse—a very strange idea of Leibniz’ indeed. Then he went on further to include
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_12,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
125

the assumption that the two mirror-symmetric universes border on each other in
such a way that there is a plane in between them belonging to both half universes, so
that the plane would look like a mirror. Then there would still only exist one half of
the combination. What would then happen if you threw a glove or some other object
that you assume could pass right through an identical copy—like two soliton
waves—into that seeming mirror? You guess it. The glove would go to this surface
to disappear through it while simultaneously a mirror copy of the glove would come
out through the same surface. Note that there is only one universe. The glove would
return from this transparent wall, reﬂected but its chirality—its handedness—would
have been changed along. So would that of a soft enough molecule thrown against
that ‘‘mirror.’’ This was quite unusual an idea of Leibniz at the time. It was very
radical because he also claimed that symmetry is a feature in mathematics and
reality that is not just an inﬁnitely accurate property, but a transﬁnitely accurate one.
Like the modern idea of fractals—where we have this Mandelbrot type thinking of
everything repeating itself all over again not just inﬁnitely many times, but in such a
way that the surface around it is transﬁnitely large. This is similar to the circum-
ference of a von-Koch snowﬂake. You know the von-Koch snowﬂake? It starts out
with an equilateral triangle, then the middle third of every side is expanded into an
equilateral triangle again (without bottom line), and so forth, so that eventually the
length of the von Koch snowﬂake is inﬁnite—and even transﬁnite. For we have a
ﬁnite number, 4 over 3, by which the overall circumference is multiplied at every
step of putting a little hat in the middle of every side. Four thirds to the inﬁnite, the
new length, is the same as two to the inﬁnite, times the original length. Two to the
inﬁnite is a transﬁnite number, it is called Aleph-one. Symmetry like fractality is a
transﬁnitely exact notion in mathematics. Symmetry is an assumption of transﬁnite
exactitude made about an object. In this sense, symmetry is a very, very strong clue
to understanding nature and physics. If one ﬁnds a symmetry that deserves the
name, it is a constraint that is not just ﬁnitely exact, or inﬁnitely exact in the usual
sense, it is transﬁnitely exact. This insight is very close to Anaxagoras’ idea of
chaos theory in ancient Greece. So there is a direct connection between symmetry
and chaos and fractality, as we have seen before.
In Euclidean geometry, you can consider a sphere and this sphere has a sym-
metrical shape.
A spherical symmetry, yes.
On the other hand, we have some fractal shapes like the Mandelbrot set or Julia
sets. I think they represent a new kind of symmetrical object. If you magnify them,
then you ﬁnd a symmetry that goes beyond Euclidean geometry. Do you think this
is a new kind of symmetry in physics or geometry?
Yes, you can insist that self-similarity is a type of symmetry of its own, absolutely.
This brings me to the concept of indistinguishability which likewise is a transﬁ-
nitely exact physical concept if it is obeyed by nature, which it is. Pauli was the
ﬁrst to think deeply about this in the last hundred years. There is a special term
which he coined—‘‘exchange symmetry.’’ It means that if you have two
126
12
Newton’s Laws, Symmetry, Noether Theorem

particles—like two eggs, for example—that are assumed to be really symmetric in
the sense that each is identical to the other except for position in space (apart from
mirror-inversion, perhaps), then these two symmetric objects obey laws that are
not the same laws that apply when they are not absolutely identical in all prop-
erties. This was called ‘‘exchange symmetry’’ by Pauli. It means that when you
exchange the two, you have changed nothing—absolutely nothing. That is, you
have changed not just something that is inﬁnitely small, in its differing across the
two specimens, but you have changed nothing at all, absolutely nothing, zero. This
is like religion if you so wish—the idea of a perfection that one would ordinarily
not believe to exist in physics. This absolute symmetry now has predictive con-
sequences that can be checked in nature. Low and behold, nature obeys the
mathematical consequences of these absolutely symmetric laws.
Exchange symmetry implies, for example, the following: Assume you have two
absolutely equal particles moving on a line like two solitons—solitons are waves
that have the feature that they can pass right through each other undisturbed. If the
two now pass right through each other, this does not mean that the left one comes
passing through to the other side on the right, and vice versa, as common sense
predicts. Rather it means that at the moment of passing through each other, the two
specimens exchange their identities. The one formerly on the left returns to its own
side, and so does the one on the right. The two now suddenly behave as if there
existed a repulsive force between their centers that forces each to return—with an
inﬁnitely strong momentary acceleration. This is a phenomenon found by Pauli to
be at work in chemistry and in physics as a whole. He called it exchange symmetry
as mentioned. It is an important feature of quantum mechanics. People believe up
to this day that it belongs to quantum mechanics, as one of its many new laws; for
it was Pauli who discovered it and Pauli was an early quantum genius. So everyone
thinks today that this is just something discrete—another quantization effect. They
do not realize that this a feature which quantum mechanics shares with classical
physics empirically, and that this phenomenon is transﬁnitely exact in its nature,
not discrete. This means that it is as exact as only chaos theory or fractal theory
allows for. Quantum mechanics for once is not a more or less discrete ediﬁce once
this effect is included. This effect is a classical continuous ultra-accurate—
‘‘transaccurate’’ would be a better-ﬁtting term—phenomenon, evidence and proof
of a transﬁnitely exact feature existing in physical nature.
I do not know whether this question makes sense if I ask it here; is nature
symmetrical?
It is hard to talk about nature as a whole, but with Leibniz I would say, yes.
If I say ‘‘nature,’’ I should perhaps clarify. Nature can be considered as a very big
phenomenon, but we need models to explain or describe it. When we have a model,
we consider physical laws. I can mention here a beautiful mathematical theory due
to Emmy Noether.
We know that, based on Noether’s theorem, for every con-
servation law in nature there exists a symmetry, and for every symmetry there
12
Newton’s Laws, Symmetry, Noether Theorem
127

exists a conserved quantity. This is a very powerful theorem in mathematics and
mathematical physics.
It is a very original idea and I love it, of course, it ﬁts perfectly into our context. It
simpliﬁes a lot of phenomena and puts them under a common umbrella. Emmy
Noether made a big progress; she was one of the most powerful mathematicians of
the 20th century, working with the great David Hilbert. The three main discoveries
she made in the area of physics are very intuitive: the translational symmetry, the
rotational symmetry and the translational symmetry in time between past and
future. They each explain a conservation law in physics. For example, conserva-
tion of energy is guaranteed if you assume that the laws of nature are invariant
under a change of position in time. The second is momentum conservation which
follows from translational symmetry in space. The third, angular momentum
conservation, follows from rotation symmetry. It is as simple as that.
This is well known for almost a century.
Yes, and it happens that there also exists a fourth—new—law that follows from
Noether’s intuition and is very important in physics as well. It applies when you
have a type of rotation symmetry that can be called a ‘‘layered rotation symmetry.’’
On every level in a tower, say, you have rotation symmetry and hence conservation
of angular momentum in the absence of friction. At the same time, the whole tower
also harbors conservation of angular momentum across height levels. This holds
true, despite the fact that the rotation rate of clocks is known to differ across height
levels as follows from Einstein’s clock slowdown downstairs. We recently talked
about the example of a rotating bicycle wheel devoid of friction which was sus-
pended from its hub and hauled up and down. This represents a new special case of
Noether’s theory. The wheel is rotating at different rates on different levels of
gravity because it represents a clock and as such ‘‘ticks’’ more leisurely down-
stairs. Nevertheless the angular momentum of the wheel is conserved across
heights. We can haul the wheel up from downstairs and go down again reversibly
as long as we wish. The rotation rate changes but angular momentum is conserved.
Therefore, one can prove that the size of the wheel and its mass or both is bound to
have changed too because the conservation law of angular momentum is so strong
that it actually forces both space and time to ‘‘give in,’’ so to speak. Indeed size is
being changed across heights (increased downstairs) and mass is being changed
across heights (decreased downstairs), and charge follows mass due to their locally
preserved ratio, a constant of nature. There are many further generalizations of
Noether’s theorem which can be found in this area, as György Darvas will pre-
dictably conﬁrm in regard to his discovery of isospins.
Now I have a general question; do you think that information is conserved in the
world?
This is difﬁcult to answer. Something like information…
128
12
Newton’s Laws, Symmetry, Noether Theorem

I know, the question is not very clear. I meant that if we assume conservation of
information in quantum mechanics; what in this case is the corresponding
symmetry?
The question is beautiful, but information is not well enough deﬁned a concept, I
am afraid.
I think information can be ‘‘created’’ but I am not sure whether this is true. Yet if
we have conservation of information, then this would mean that we may also have
a corresponding symmetry based on Noether’s theorem?
Yes, but Emmy Noether insisted on continuous symmetries. Information is not
well deﬁned so far in this direction. If we look at fractals, for example, one cannot
describe a fractal in terms of information theory. This is due to the transﬁnite
exactitude of fractals. The amount of information in a fractal structure is transﬁ-
nite, since if you see a certain little feature somewhere in the Mandelbrot set; it
always has the same or closely related features no matter how small a specimen on
the Mandelbrot robe you look at. Information in contrast has an intrinsic ‘‘discrete
ring’’ to it. It therefore can only give an approximate description of a continuous
curve, even though many nice laws hold true for information, too. Still the concept
of information is not as deep as physics itself is, if you look at it from the point of
view of dynamical systems and chaos theory. So ‘‘information’’ is a less robust
phenomenon in light of the exactitude of transﬁnite mathematics. One can hope for
a transﬁnite information theory eventually, but then you will not need the term
‘‘information’’ anymore, perhaps.
At the beginning you mentioned Leibniz’ case of two universes. Let us talk about
the idea of symmetry in quantum mechanics. Do you think we can ﬁnd a corre-
spondence between Everett’s viewpoint in quantum mechanics and symmetry? Do
we then have two worlds or just two simultaneous frames? Do you see any new or
special symmetry here?
I never thought about the relationship between Everett and symmetry. The different
Everett worlds would be different cuts through the same exo-universe. One way to
interpret Everett’s theory is that we have one exo-world, and within this exo-world,
you have a cut and I have a cut, and each cut is different. The Archimedean example
of frictionless heavy ﬂat bowls moving on an icy plane was the ﬁrst instance of a
conservation law. If we assume such a frictionless billiard-balls type universe, as
we can do, then it is a deterministic universe. If you want to look at it from the point
of view of a particular subsystem existing inside, then a difference is applicable
between that subsystem and the rest of the universe. Whenever the subsystem that
you focus on is shifted, the rest of the universe will be changed relative to the
subsystem in question. So there is a ‘‘difference principle’’ at work. This difference
principle can be used to understand Everett’s theory. Therefore, a whole new
problem arises here: If the boundaries of the observing subsystem (organism) are
redeﬁned a little bit, then automatically the physics that the organism observes also
changes. This is completely understandable in the terms we already dealt with in the
12
Newton’s Laws, Symmetry, Noether Theorem
129

spirit of Leibniz. Hence there can be no identity between the different Everett
worlds across observers. I would not know how to apply the notion of ‘‘symmetry’’
here.
The conservation laws we have in physics can never be violated because they have
a very good support by mathematical theories.
We observe that they cannot be violated and deduce from this fact that they must
be transﬁnitely exact. We know this from indistinguishability, the Pauli phe-
nomenon in chemistry. Indistinguishable particles do exist empirically even
though this fact appears inﬁnitely improbable at ﬁrst sight. As soon as we have
such a phenomenon, we know that nature is crafted with a transﬁnite accuracy.
This transﬁnite accuracy is maximally intimidating. It is such a big momentous
ﬁnding. All the discreteness and the probabilistic features of quantum mechanics
pale before this inﬁnitely powerful strength of Leibniz’ and Noether’s symmetry
theory. It is such a challenge to have indistinguishable particles—to have two
electrons—and to see the living proof before one’s eyes that if they exchange their
places, nothing has changed—not just inﬁnitely little but nothing at all. This
‘‘absolute physics,’’ as one could call it, is pervading quantum mechanics. So there
is no doubt that this absolute theory is much more powerful than any more
approximate or empiricism-based ‘‘direct’’ embracing of quantum mechanics can
be. I believe in this idealistic thinking behind physics. The best proof is the ﬁnding
of an absolute symmetry. Noether’s theorems do not just apply because we have an
idealized mathematics: this ‘‘idealized mathematics’’ makes tangible predictions
that nature fulﬁlls empirically. Therefore, nature herself is ideal, a fact which is not
well known.
Let us consider an abstract universe in which we, for example, do not have
conservation of energy or conservation of momentum, or in which some other
conservation laws are violated. More speciﬁcally, let us for the moment suppose
that we do not have symmetry in time. Because of this, we have no conservation of
energy. What are the characteristics of such a world?
I talked about these things with my friend Bob Rosen many years ago. He had
pointed out to me the ‘‘scandal’’ that Hamiltonian physics—and hence nature—is
‘‘structurally unstable’’ in the mathematical sense of René Thom. Take the har-
monic oscillator, a very simple differential equation, a frictionless pendulum, as an
example. Here physics shows this remarkable time reversibility of Hamiltonian
systems which is structurally unstable. An inﬁnitesimal perturbation in the
mathematics (a non-zero damping) destroys Hamiltonicity, destroys frictionless-
ness. So Nature is under the baton of a very, very delicate angel as it were, if
conservation laws make sure that structural instability holds true in spite of its
inﬁnite delicacy. Observation-wise, structural instability amounts to an inﬁnitely
strong vulnerability. So nature is inﬁnitely weak if you so wish, but on this inﬁnite
weakness we can absolutely rely despite the fact that this reliance means relying
on something that is inﬁnitely unlikely. We are confronted here with a feebleness
much more delicate than a spider’s web. Thus nature is inﬁnitely sensitive,
130
12
Newton’s Laws, Symmetry, Noether Theorem

inﬁnitively delicate. This delicacy of nature was forgotten for a long time because
people had grown accustomed to the discrete features of quantum mechanics,
which look so robust, so insensitive. This pseudo-discreteness follows from the
fact that quantum mechanics can be deterministically deduced as a property of the
interface between a subsystem—the observer—and the rest of the world. But why
can we not see that interface? The answer would be that this is because we are
inﬁnitely accurately conﬁned and bound to some of these inﬁnitely accurately
described elementary particles that inhabit our brain at a given inﬁnitely accurate
moment in time. In the brain, there would be a sub-portion—some cells or perhaps
a single cell or a part of a single cell—at a given moment that harbors con-
sciousness in the sense that consciousness is attached and conﬁned to it. This
subportion of the physical world to which our consciousness is tied at a given
moment would then divide the world in such a way that we are confronted with
quantum mechanics. The difference is the world as it is described by quantum
mechanics. All the measurements that have been performed in the past and, for
example, are printed in the books along with their mean values (which yield the
value of h-bar in the books) would be described by the Sackur-Tetrode equation
valid for this momentarily ‘‘switched-on’’ subsystem. They would all be subjective
measurements, results that are true only relative to one of these strangely and
inﬁnitely exactly speciﬁed subsystems. I apologize for this proposal. It almost
imposes as a religious type of thinking on physics. Inﬁnity is a theological notion if
you so wish, and so is symmetry.
What do you think is the relationship between symmetry and art? There are many
beautiful buildings in the world, erected centuries ago, which often display a very
nice symmetry, stemming from different cultures in different areas and on different
continents, but the common thing is symmetry. What is the relationship between
symmetry and art? Is this sort of symmetry different from the symmetry found in
physics?
The mathematics is the same. The human mind understands that there lies a
challenge here of a metaphysical character. Symmetry and metaphysics belong
together, and art and metaphysics have a mutual afﬁnity, too. It is a little bit of a
pity if some religions, including Judaism and Protestantism, were somehow afraid
of pieces of art. Maybe it is a sign of respect, but art and religion and symmetry are
three noble ﬁelds that are closely bound together since the era of the Shamans.
In paintings and in buildings we encounter symmetry; is there also a relationship
between symmetry in physics on the one hand and symmetry in music on the other?
Johann Sebastian Bach made some transpositions of some melodies and you do not
recognize them afterwards. Temporal symmetries are especially hard to fathom by
the mind. Susi Vrobel has a book here, called ‘‘Fractal Time.’’ Some minds are
able to understand this better than others, and I am afraid I would not be up to
saying anything perceptive in this regard. A friend of mine who is a professor of
music and at home in ancient Chinese thinking, Anthony Moore, would be a
person to ask this question.
12
Newton’s Laws, Symmetry, Noether Theorem
131

We already talked about the symmetries present in fractal geometry. What is the
meaning of symmetry in chaotic dynamical systems or chaotic attractors?
Here I would mention Christophe Letellier who could answer this question much
better than I can.
But if I ask you to answer?
I try to put myself into his mind as best I can. He loves symmetric chaotic pictures
and he found a way to multiply an attractor like a spiral-type attractor into a multi-
faceted, very symmetric structure. There are also beautiful theorems on that, but
again, I withhold judgment. I am not good enough for this type of question I am
afraid.
Can you recognize a new Noether-type conservation law in chaotic attractors or
not? In chaotic attractors, the symmetry is a kind of geometric symmetry, is it not?
It is an unusual symmetry. I mean, take the Lorenz attractor, the so-called butterﬂy
attractor of Ed Lorenz. It has a strong symmetry to it, but you can reduce this
symmetry to make a less symmetric object out of it. So symmetry is an available
option in these mathematical dynamical systems. You can play with it, but the
essence of chaos is this transﬁnite exactitude of not just every hair being counted
on the head, but of a transﬁnite exactness of the counting as it were. Mathemat-
ically—for example in the Smale solenoid attractor—we encounter self-similarity
with its transﬁnite accuracy. We already talked about the fact that the attractor in
the Smale solenoid, even though of zero measure at the end, is invertible such that
every point of the original volume of the extended basin of attraction that is
drained by the attractor is still represented on the zero-measure attractor itself, and
so in a reversible fashion if we neglect a set of zero measure. This transﬁnitely
exact invertibility was already Anaxagoras’ big insight. There exists a still unre-
solved difference of opinions about this. Steven Smale has never contradicted my
transﬁnitely oriented interpretation—although I have to admit that I never saw him
again after our two creative encounters in 1971 and 1976. From György Targonski
who held a mathematics chair in Marburg I learned the secret of the ‘‘red line’’ (as
I had dared to call the attractor in a talk in allusion to a fairy tale of the Grimm
brothers in which a head had ﬁrst been cut off and then glued back successfully,
with this ﬁne vestige remaining as the only trace). He accepted this term for the
attractor of a dissipative chaotic system, but there may be other mathematicians
like Smale who have yet to be convinced.
A last question; do you think that we can have further conservation laws in nature
due to the discovery of new symmetries?
Yes, the example of the wheel that is being hauled-up and lowered reversibly
referred to a symmetry that had not been described before. It is a symmetry in
which angular momentum is preserved even though rotation rate is not preserved.
One could use this example as a heuristic recipe to ﬁnd other nontrivial types of
symmetry which have not yet been described. There also is György Darvas, my
132
12
Newton’s Laws, Symmetry, Noether Theorem

other friend György, in particle physics who has beautiful theories in this direction
in connection with isospin conservation as I already mentioned. The CERN
experiment in elementary particle physics covers many sub-nuclear symmetries
which deserve to be studied better in this context. High energy physics is one of
the areas that depend crucially on the theory of symmetry, and in which new
symmetries can be investigated. So your question makes much more sense than I
can meaningfully answer at the moment.
Thank you.
12
Newton’s Laws, Symmetry, Noether Theorem
133

Chapter 13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory
In this session we want to consider the subject of human language. There are
different viewpoints on the evolution of language held by philosophers, but I want
to look at human languages from a dynamical-systems point of view. Before
concentrating on language as a dynamical system, I would like to ask you; how do
you look at the history and evolution of language? What is the difference between
human communication on the one hand and that of other animals or life forms on
the other?
The history of human languages is apparently much older than people tend to
think. Recently I saw a picture of a stone instrument called a ‘‘biface’’ or hand axe,
a stone instrument used 10,000 years ago, but that specimen was more than one
million years old. At that very early time, human ancestors had already developed
the civilization to produce very ﬁnely carved stone axes. The use of ﬁre is even two
million years old. I have a strong opinion about the difference between human
language—‘‘languaging’’ as Andy Hilgartner calls it—and animal languaging. It
has to do with an older theory of mine that personhood—being a person—is
something speciﬁable scientiﬁcally, not just in the sense of one’s being an
individual but as representing an altered functioning of the brain, the function
change in the sense of Robert Rosen as a hysteresis-type phenomenon. When one
has steam heating in one’s ﬂat, and you change the temperature by turning the
knob on the heater, then if you turn it back to the original reading, you will not get
the same heating level as before because there is this ‘‘hysteresis’’ involved with
most models. In other words, the same setting of parameters can have the system
in two states—either in a low or in a high heating state as in the present case. This
Bob Rosen called the ‘‘principle of function change’’, the fact that in the same
system subjected to the same parameters or external conditions, a different
dynamical steady state or attractor can nonetheless be at work.
In the same vein, if you have a brain, the latter can function in different modes
under the same external conditions. The same brain with the same experiences and
hormones etcetera can function in different modes under equal input conditions. It
may therefore be possible to completely upset the functioning of a brain so that it
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_13,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
135

functions in a radically new way compared to before, under the very same
condition. One knows about these things hypothetically in the context of
psychiatric diseases where physicians indeed think that some psychiatric
conditions are based, not on a change in hardware but only on a change in
looking at the world through the software if you so wish. So when one agrees that
the brain can support many types of functioning including even qualitatively
different ones, it makes sense to wonder whether the difference between animals
and their ‘‘languaging’’ and humans and their use of language is not an example in
the same category. If this hypothesis is correct regarding the human brain, the
brains of some animals might be susceptible to the same bifurcation phenomenon.
That is, if the human brain is making a different use of its own capabilities, then
also some animal brains could predictably be used in an analogously different
manner, and conversely also the human brain can be used in the animal way in
principle. To me, the fact that human beings are ‘‘persons’’ and thereby differ
functionally from animals is not necessarily due to the fact that they have different
brains but that they have ‘‘snapped’’ into a different usage. Then what remains to
be explained is how come that human beings make a radically different use of their
brains. This is the subject matter of a theory of the human smile. Jan van Hooff in
the Netherlands wrote a big paper in 1972 titled ‘‘A comparative approach to the
phylogeny of laughter and smile,’’ comparing smile and laughter in apes and
humans. You will be surprised that I at ﬁrst talked about states of dynamical
systems including brains and now suddenly talk about smile and laughter which
appears incongruent at ﬁrst sight.
We talked about the brain equation before. How can you explain the ability of
human beings to use language in light of your brain equation? What is language
actually?
Language in the human sense presupposes that the speakers are persons. And to
me, being a person represents a different dynamical state than being not a person.
The brain can support both being a person functionally, and being not a person
functionally. This seems to be a very broad distinction. If true it need not be
conﬁned to the human species. Then a different type of functioning can be
predicted for many brains which share certain characteristics.
Would this person then be human or not?
In one sense yes in the other, no. You can take an animal brain that is mirror
competent. This is the one condition. Human children are mirror competent from a
very young age on—it is heart-warming to watch the joy of a toddler when
presented with a mirror. Many apes are also mirror competent, apes and elephants
and some other animals like orca whales and dolphins, also magpies and keas and
the impressive Newcaledonian crow. Perhaps also some invertebrates, like the
giant octopus or some mantis shrimp species join the same fold—these animals
with the most sophisticated eyes on the planet. Most of the latter species have
never been studied even superﬁcially. ‘‘Mirror competence’’ means that you can
use the spatio-temporal simulator built into the brain (I call it the ‘‘great simulator’’
136
13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory

placing it beside the ‘‘great motivator’’) in such a way that while you observe
something, you can simultaneously put yourself into the position of what you are
observing. In neuro science, not long ago the so-called ‘‘mirror neurons’’ were
discovered by Giacomo Rizzolatti. Most higher animals possess mirror neurons,
but mirror neurons do not yet guarantee mirror competence.
Mirror competence was ﬁrst described in 1921 by Wolfgang Köhler, an elder
friend of Konrad Lorenz. He was an ape scientist and creatively observed his
chimpanzees, young child-chimpanzees, in Teneriffa in a gestalt-psychological
setting. He made important experiments with these apes, very benevolent merely
observational experiments. In a famous experiment he put different-sized boxes
into the cage and had hung a banana from the ceiling before the apes were let in.
The animals were supposed to ﬁgure out a way to get at the banana. Frustrated at
ﬁrst and for quite a while for not succeeding directly in several ways, they used
their intelligence so as to suddenly realize that you could take these boxes and put
one upon the other and then climb up. The sudden insight was the remarkable
thing. What they never learned was only to ﬁrst take the big box and then the next-
smaller one and so forth. They were just running up the random pile of boxes to
catch the banana while underneath everything would collapse. But they had gotten
the banana. The ‘‘aha!’’-effect, the sudden transition from initial despair to the
joyful anticipation of the success was a major discovery in what was called
‘‘gestalt psychology.’’
To come back to our context of mirror competence; the same Wolfgang Köhler
also observed another behavior that the same animals exhibited. They were held in
a cage that became quite cold in the morning and their urine—forgive my
mentioning this—had become frozen on the ﬂoor during the night. They
discovered that they could use the ﬂat slippery surface as a mirror, to look at
their own image. Then Köhler gave them pocket mirrors to play with and was not
astonished to see that his apes would look at their own teeth and other hidden parts
of their body in this way. So they turned out to be completely mirror competent.
This mirror competence is a type of functioning of the brain which presupposes
that the built-in simulator is very highly developed. You then cannot just anticipate
the correlated changes that occur in the environment as you are moving through it,
but can even recognize yourself in a mirror because while you are doing something
here you are aware that the same activity of your hand or whatever, is showing on
the other side in a different orientation. To identify oneself as being reﬂected in a
mirror is a very high-ranking performance and capability of brains. Only the
animal groups that I already mentioned are able to do this, but if you have this
capability of putting yourself into the shoes of the other side, you can exploit this
fact, and these animals do this, of course. This feat is not enough to become a
person, even though most everyone would naively think that it does. One has to
ask oneself, Why are these animals, these apes, that can recognize themselves in a
mirror like a small child, not also persons like human children? Everybody thinks
that this is because they are too stupid for that, but this is not true: They have no
13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory
137

reason to become a person. I mean, the way we use language presupposes that we
are persons. What does it actually mean to be a person? It is hard to deﬁne what a
person is, but it has to do with the smile.
Here I have a question. For people who are praying, is there a communication
between a person and someone who is not a person?
I am not sure that the addressee of a prayer is not a person. Prayer is a very difﬁcult
topic. Becoming a person also implies thinking of a person that stands behind the
world. Praying is in effect, in my view, talking to a person even though it is an
imagined person. Young children become persons around the age of 1 or 2 years
or so. There are no studies, to the best of my knowledge, attempting to record this
transition of pre-personhood towards personhood in a young child. It is predictably
sudden, and a very moving situation at that, which fact explains why there exists no
recorded evidence in science so far. The idea of benevolence perceived stands
behind personhood. A young child suddenly acquires the suspicion that Mom or Pa
wants him to enjoy something, to love this fruit or to be happy. The suspicion of
someone wanting you to be happy, becoming possible in the presence of mirror
competence plus a factor X, lies at the root of one’s becoming a person. How do I
come to say this? It is because of the phenomenology of the smile and the laughter
as Jan van Hooff already described it. In apes including humans, there is this
evolutionary observation that the smile and laughter have eventually converged in
one particular species, namely the human one. In humans, smile and laughter look
virtually the same. What does a smile mean? A smile represents an innate
behavioral pattern signaling that you are happy. But the smile also means that you
are friendly, that you are bonding. There is bonding friendship between the person
who smiles and the individual who is smiled at. The smile is an expression of
bonding and laughter is an expression of happiness, of exuberant joy, but laughter
has nothing to do with friendliness directly. Sometimes it can happen that if a whole
group is laughing and you are passing by, you wonder whether they are not laughing
at you or about you. So laughing is not necessarily something friendly, it is just an
expression of joy. The smile is an expression of bonding. Nonetheless these two
different expressions, which are completely disjoined in chimpanzees, have
converged in the human species 2 million years ago. This convergence between
smile and laughter characterizes the human species biologically. If you are treated
in a friendly way by your mother as a young child and you see her smile and you
laugh because you are happy, then you reward the mother by your own being happy.
This is also the case in many animal species where the expression of joy shown by
the young rewards the feeding adult. But the human mother will then, by being
made happy, also laugh. The laughter of the mother now looks like a smile to the
child. Therefore the human child unlike the young of other species is rewarded by
the mother being happy. A transposed world. Hence both are being rewarded by the
other being happy; the mother because it is normal in child-rearing animals that the
happiness of the young is a rewarding signal for the feeding adult. We also have the
opposite, that the happiness of the mother—because it looks like a smile even
though it is just laughter, is a reward to the child. So the child predictably starts
138
13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory

parenting the mother. Both animals, if you look at them as an animal species, are
rewarded by the happiness of the other: ‘‘Cross parenting.’’ This is a dynamically
unstable situation, the basis of a positive feedback. It observationally gives rise to a
‘‘bonding bout’’ as it is called. Both grow into the rituals of happy bonding much
more frequently than if the reward was unilateral as normal. This is not because
they are both parenting, it is because they are both bonding even though only one is
parenting, but it is nevertheless symmetric. This symmetry—again a symmetry!—is
pathological in the biological sense because it only makes functional sense that the
parents are rewarded by the success of their feeding the young, so that the latter
survive. Now, the young are starting to feed the adults! This is the distinguishing
feature of the human species in the eye of a biologist descended from Mars—that in
these terrestrial animals, the young are feeding the adults. This occurs nowhere else
in the biological kingdom and presumably in the galaxy.
Is it special for humans?
Exactly, it is the distinguishing functional feature of humans. If you come from
Mars and are a biologist, then you will realize that this is absolutely unexpected.
That a child tries to put food into the mouth of a mother?
And asks: Is it good? The child wants to make the mother feel good. That is
pathological in an evolutionary sense. You therefore have to classify humans
biologically as the ‘‘Pongo goneotrophicus.’’ In zoology, ‘‘Pongo’’ means great ape
and ‘‘goneotrophicus’’ means parent-feeding. From a biological point of view,
humans are the parent feeding apes. This is unusual in biology and you could
consider it as a ‘‘lethal factor’’ in the sense of evolution theory. One can explain
how this evolutionary accident occurred. The convergence of laughter and smile is
the reason. It has to do with the re-acquisition of the pair-bonding drive at an
earlier evolutionary stage in human pre-history. There is an apparent counter
argument to what I just claimed. The human species stands not quite alone with
bonding and happiness looking the same. There is one other species—namely the
wolf—in which this also happened, although in a less symmetric form, with the
familiar tail-wagging of the dog and its ancestors. Hence if this condition alone
were sufﬁcient, the wolves would also have to become persons, because again the
young could misunderstand the excited happiness of an adult as a rewarding signal
that causes the young to bring a sacriﬁce in effect. Whether or not this can be
observed I do not know, it was never looked for empirically, I think. The main
consequence which arises in the human species would nevertheless not happen in
the wolf or dog. The reason is that the wolf is not mirror competent. They therefore
cannot put themselves into the position-in-space of the other side. Only if you
combine the trait of mutual rewardability by the happiness of the other with mirror
competence does there arise a second interactional instability—the decisive one
which leads to a function change epigenetically. This second instability completely
changes the functioning of the brain of the human child. Just as it did with the
mother when she was a child. If the mother had not been a person before, the
mother would likewise become a person in this interaction. This is what happens:
13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory
139

When the mother is laughing because the child is happy, the mother is rewarding
the child in addition to its already being happy by making him more happy, since
rewards are additive. Since the child is able to put himself into the shoes of the
other side by virtue of his mirror competence, he can and will on the ﬁrst or the
tenth time acquire a strange suspicion; Mom wants me to be happy. This
‘‘suspicion of benevolence’’ then gives rise to an experiment that the child
initiates, a test; does Mom really want this wonderful happy experience to occur?
It is a suspicion about an intention that is not real, not being held here but
somewhere else, and it is benevolent: strange suspicion indeed. It arises subtly and
tentatively at ﬁrst. The toddler is, for example, exaggerating his happiness, his
anticipation of being fed by opening the mouth unnaturally wide, to see whether
this works. Predictably, it does work and even gives rise to a common laughing
bout. Mom is even more rewarded, becomes even more friendly and so, after days
or weeks, a full-ﬂedged bonding bout develops out of being fed. The less
pronounced parent-feeding tenderness in the wolf does not lead to the moving
bonding bout observable in humans which introspectively is accompanied by the
suspicion of benevolence existing over there, in a foreign will. So the idea of
benevolence—the invented absurd concept of benevolence—is what distinguishes
human beings, human persons, from other animals. The suspicion of benevolence
is like a ﬁre, an interactional instability which completely transforms the
functioning of the two brains involved. It is characterized by many active tests
made and jokeful interactions and an inexhaustible creativity in making ‘‘fun’’
together, a maximally humorous and moving event at the same time.
In Artiﬁcial Intelligence based on a biology-related model, namely the brain
equation, you will predictably have the same phenomenon, an artiﬁcial person
arising out of a computerized hardware. The essence in either case is the invention
of the suspicion of benevolence. The ‘‘animal brain’’—a formally autistic brain
since all brains are autistic by design—becomes suddenly a person. That is, it
employs cross-anticipation in a mutually rewarding fashion. The child becomes
benevolent himself; he wants Mom to be happy, too or at least Mom to be happy,
even at his own cost. Major—stupid-appearing—sacriﬁces have been observed to
be brought by young children. The essence is that it is all too nice to make a game
out of realizing that one is able to make the other happy, and to be able to
absolutely rely on this. And to test this back and forth in jokes. Both are thinking
or realizing that they are inﬁnitely valuable for the other. This is called ‘‘love,’’ but
it is not love in the sense of attraction, as society believes, it is love in the sense of
wanting to make happy at all cost. It is holy.
How do you explain the procedure of learning a language? When a child tries
hard to learn a language from his parents, is it part of the same process that you
explained in benevolence theory?
Language is much less sophisticated than the idea of benevolence. You can have
language without this transformation that I described. You can teach animals to
understand language in the form of announcements or orders very easily. Horses
140
13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory

understand what to do—understanding of an order is easy to get using plain
reinforcements. Learning to give orders is also something animals that are not
persons readily acquire. Language has these two sides to it, on the one hand it is
just a communication system which can be used and understood and is made use of
by everyone. That is not real language—you could call it imperative language or
training-to-perform language. Humans at a very young age often use language
passively and actively in this restrictive sense of understanding orders or giving
orders. The use of language without personal pronouns or with a totally false use is
compatible with the suspicion that this language is not yet a personalized language,
provided it only consists in following orders or getting effects by uttering certain
expressions. That can also be called language, but it is not personal language even
when the grammar is not underdeveloped. You could call it ‘‘pre-language.’’ This
pre-language is something that many animals can learn. Some birds, intelligent
parrots, for example, have learned it. The personal use of language has not been
observed to my knowledge so far in a non-human species, but it can predictably be
evoked. It is a grave responsibility that will thereby be incurred. Do I have the
right to mention it? It is no doubt a moral duty to try this in the case of smile-blind
human children. The fact that smile-blind human children are not the only smile-
blind intelligences that are eligible—and have the holy right to be helped—then
follows as a corollary. The method to follow is straightforward; whenever you are
happy, you have to reward the beloved mirror-competent bonding smile-blind
partner, like a young chimpanzee or orangutan or elephant. You only need give the
right bonding signal via a channel that works (for example, the acoustical one)
whenever you are acutely happy yourself in the interaction. A so-called ‘‘acoustic
smile’’ in the case of a smile-blind child will predictably work. The right acoustic
or infra-acoustic or gestural sign in the case of the young white elephant whom
you want to rescue. We need no longer keep up the false belief that there exist no
more highly developed brains on the planet than the human one. The ﬁrst holder of
a patent for the atomic bomb, Leo Szilard, even wrote a fairy tale after the bomb
had been dropped, ‘‘The Voice of the Dolphins,’’ in the desperate hope to let
intelligence rain onto the planet.
Are you serious with this?
I ﬁrst published the basic idea in 1968, and the trans-speciﬁc option in 1975. Only
Gregory Bateson whom I visited in the same year understood it at the time. Konrad
Lorenz said it was ‘‘too difﬁcult to understand’’ for him. The idea is related to
Skinner’s operant conditioning, but nevertheless totally different. A positive
feedback develops when you feed the dolphin and you reward him in addition by
your own joy, displayed as bonding. The mutual reward will develop in the same
way as it did between a human mother and her smile-blind child, when she softly
acoustically expresses her joy at a wonderful feat accomplished by the child sitting
on her lap learning to write. This situation occurred spontaneously in a
documented case (which I by chance once witnessed in a Stern-TV report, on
January 28, 2008). Both suddenly develop the suspicion that the other wants her or
13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory
141

him to be happy. To invent the suspicion of benevolence is pathological in the
animal kingdom. We saw that it represents a misunderstanding originally based on
an evolutionary accident, convergence of smile and laughter, in one particular
species. At the same time it is a ‘‘jump up towards point Omega’’ in the parlance of
Teilhard de Chardin. It anticipates in the form of a jump the asymptotic endpoint
of evolution in the cosmos. Love has this miraculous nature. It is a self-fulﬁlling
prophecy. Even if the actors realize that it is a misunderstanding, they can check
on this, and when they do, it turns out to be real. The child is at ﬁrst testing how
good, how strong, is the love of the mother and whether it is really true that his joy
is desired over there. So the whole thing is not just a misunderstanding, it is a
misunderstanding that can be checked and can be found out to be the truth. If it
suddenly proves conﬁrmed, they both recognize the other as a person who wants
the ﬁrst to be happy as a different person. With the scientiﬁc understanding of the
unbounded crazy love of the child comes also the understanding of why we as
persons are able to love each other. The ultimate reason is, if I am allowed to add
this, that within this positive feedback that we just touched with our minds, a third
person is invisibly involved. For the players did not make themselves and get the
rewards of color and light and the Now from a third side that turns out to lie
beyond the realm of science. So, genuine love—in the sense of the miracle of
personhood arising in the young child—is automatically connected with the
miracle of color and the Now as a present given to both.
How do you explain grammar in language? If you, for example, consider the
German language, you ﬁnd very special rules, some not admitting any exceptions.
If a foreigner has to learn a language, he has to be pointed to the special rules in
that grammar. How has this grammar originally been created? Did the earlier
humans invent some rules for their talking?
Sometimes people of different languages are forced by circumstances to acutely
live together and to suddenly have to communicate somehow. Then they develop a
sign system. By using redundancy in communicating repetitively, the redundancy
becomes a rule for both. The capability to make this joint invention is
automatically implicit in the natural benevolent relationship between persons.
So the grammar is not really a mysterious thing. It is an automatic implication of
persons agreeing to communicate. It is like a straw, something that is lying around
ready to be used as a symbol for anything. It is much easier to communicate along
roads that have already been used—like elephants in a forest tending to use the
trodden paths. You would not call it a language if animals or ants follow the same
path, but the principle is the same in both cases. So ‘‘grammar’’ is not as high-
ranking a feature as linguists sometimes tend to think—notwithstanding its
lawfully changing awe-inspiring regularities as the families and superfamilies
evolved over time.
A last point; natural languages can be juxtaposed to computer programming
languages. LotﬁZadeh, the inventor of ‘‘fuzzy logic,’’ says that the human
languages obey a non-binary logic which he calls fuzzy logic. He claims that we
142
13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory

can deduce, we can measure, we can compute with our natural language without a
lot of information or sometimes any information. For example, when you want to
cross a street, you see some cars coming towards you but you do not have any
exact information about their speeds, and you also do not have any exact
information about the friction coefﬁcient between your shoes and the ground, or
the speed of the wind. But by an approximate checking, whether the approaching
car’s speed is high or low, you can make a very reasonable decision in this inexact
way, based on your previous experience. Do you agree with the idea that natural
languages use another logical system, namely fuzzy logic, in contradistinction to
the strict bivalent logic?
I also think that the bivalent logic is something very artiﬁcial as a late discovery of
humanity. It is ultimately also implicit in the richer logical structure of a language.
To steer one’s way through a jungle is at least as difﬁcult as to steer a motorcycle
through a trafﬁc jam. This also is something that not only humans can do, but
many animals are apt at doing—without bivalent logic. It is implicit in using the
brain in an intelligent fashion employing spatial thinking.
Let us look at the essence of this intelligence. It seems to use a special logic for its
computations?
If you want to use the word logic for the description of any dynamics, then you can
use the word, but essentially this is just optimizing one’s way through space. Any
autonomous optimizer is doing exactly that. The brain is such an optimizer, and we
have this time-dependent optimality functional that controls our behavior. The
latter is implied by the brain equation. Only if we are conditioned by grammar will
we suddenly begin to wonder how this analog-type thinking enters into our ﬁxed
language system. It is the other way round, the former is natural and language is
something which was later formed as a very strict grid of rules that are, if you so
wish, discrete. The underlying analogical thinking is not discrete. This non-
discreteness we can wonderfully approximate by the notions of LotﬁZadeh, which
form a powerful method. It is a strictly ordered type of thinking that language
supports—language is very logical even in a discrete sense. The burden of the
discretization of thinking, implicit in language, is being alleviated by the new
fuzzy logic. We are presently on our way back towards a new analogical thinking,
with the iPad, for example.
Do you see any relationship between the dynamics of a language and chaos
theory? Can we have a chaotic model for the use of language?
The brain equation itself is chaotic in the behavior which it generates. Very small
changes in the initial conditions lead to divergent trajectories. So chaos theory is
automatically applicable to the autonomous simulator in the physico-mathematical
machine called the brain. And the brain is also a chaotic machine, since it is a
nonlinear equation that is implemented. Thus, I see no problem here, but your
question was more poignant.
13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory
143

Is it possible to have a model for the whole of a language as a dynamical system or
a differential equation, or is this not possible?
You can model the whole brain as a differential equation. The brain equation is a
case in point.
As an ordinary differential equation?
I would even go this far.
Then you consider your parameters as exact parameters, or can they vary in an
interval?
The brain equation would be an exact dynamical system, but its behavior will
show these Zadeh-type tolerances. So the optimizer is fuzzy in effect. The
optimality criterion needs to be satisﬁed, but there is always a set of possibilities to
choose from, all smoothly continuous. This fuzziness is part of the nature of the
brain equation, and only language makes an exception by being discrete and digital
in many respects.
If you consider your brain equation as a fuzzy differential equation, in the sense
that your coefﬁcients can vary to a certain degree, would you think that it becomes
more powerful in this way?
I would tend to think that a differential equation is fuzzy by deﬁnition in the sense
that what it is producing depends on some momentarily time-dependent
parameters, but that it is not fuzzy in its structure. It is a dynamical system
which produces so-called ‘‘qualitative behavior’’ in the sense of Poincaré. This
qualitative behavior is fuzzy in many respects; it is almost another word for
fuzziness. But you would not need to add fuzziness to this fuzzy system because
the deterministic dynamics produces a qualitative outcome anyhow. Qualitative
dynamics and fuzziness are parallel notions. ‘‘Fuzziness’’ could then be seen as a
way to re-discover this intrinsic qualitative structure in a context in which we
previously only had discrete tools available. So a discrete system plus fuzziness
added would be able to closely simulate the original qualitative continuous
deterministic dynamics.
Would this explain why Zadeh titled one of his papers in 1996, ‘‘Fuzzy
logic = computing with words?’’
This looks reasonable, but the words here again have a meaning which is
qualitative. So with respect to words it is correct to say that language is discrete,
but the meaning of the words is qualitative. Therefore there is a residue of
qualitative dynamics left within language and you can call this ‘‘fuzziness’’ again.
There exists a close relationship between the fuzziness of a discrete set and the
continuous qualitative transformability—a topological feature—of deterministic
dynamical systems in chaos theory, for example. So fuzziness forms a bridge
between the discrete type and the topological type of thinking. Poincaré was a
144
13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory

person with a strong mind in both ﬁelds. Topology, Poincaré’s brainchild, is
related. LotﬁZadeh is an ally to Poincaré in this respect.
Do you have a further complementary idea?
In addition to the above? I had not known before the things that I just told you. So I
am grateful that I was allowed to develop them in interaction.
13
Language and Smile: Benevolence Theory
145

Chapter 14
Three-Body Problem, Poincaré
Recurrence, Homoclinic Points
In this session we will change the subject and come back to more fundamental
questions in physics. The main subject I propose to talk about is the many-body
problem. As a ﬁrst step, let me ask you; what is a two-body system? What are the
special points? And if you like, we can then add a further body and discuss the
phenomena characteristic of three-body systems?
There is a certain risk that we eventually touch the topic of chaos. The 2-body
problem was seen by Kepler ﬁrst, formerly a student here in Tübingen. He found
this beautiful law that orbits can be elliptical, and in addition that if an elliptical
orbit is followed by a planet, the area between two rays drawn from the sun to the
planet in equal time intervals is the same no matter how far or close the body is to
the sun. If the body is very close, the angle is large because the body is moving
faster closer to the sun and if it is far away, the angle is smaller—a beautiful
simple law. The discovery that two bodies followed such a both nontrivial and
simple law was very surprising. Newton would not have been able to come up with
his wonderful equations without Kepler having found this fundamental result. It is
also surprising in retrospect that if we have two bodies, they can only follow a
periodic motion in their dance and that this motion has one of the two focal points
of an ellipse as its organizing center. There were clearly more options, a priori
speaking, than following a ﬂat elliptical orbit. In general relativity, indeed the
simple ellipse is lost and you get a rosette formation in the form of a slowly
circling open ellipse, a quasi-periodic motion. People have worked a lot on these
problems for 3 centuries since Newton ﬁrst saw the solution with his correctly
divined equations. Hill later found the reduced 3-body problem. We now already
talk about three bodies. As soon as you have a third body interacting with the two,
planet and sun, like the moon, everything becomes ‘‘messy.’’ The moon is too
small to have much inﬂuence, but in other situations three bodies sufﬁce to gen-
erate a chaotic tangle. I never looked at this closest 3-body problem in detail, but it
has been known for centuries that as soon as you have three bodies, you can no
longer write down the solutions in contrast to what Newton following Kepler could
do for the 2-body problem, although Newton’s equations remain valid.
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_14,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
147

There is no analytical solution?
One does not have a complete set of integrals to describe what happens. Thus one
has to use approximate methods. Poincaré tried to write and indeed wrote a long
mémoir about the stability of the solar system in response to a question posed by
the Swedish academy. It got accepted by this forerunner to the Nobel foundation.
Then he found out that he had made a big formal mistake. As mentioned, he
bought back the whole edition of the book that had already been printed, from his
own money to get the error eliminated. For the 3-body problem had suddenly taken
on a life of its own in his mind. We know today that this was the origin of chaos
theory. Poincaré was the ﬁrst to see the inﬁnite complexity of the tangle of tra-
jectories in space formed by the 3-body problem. He even said that the mind is
turning away in horror from the complexity that has arisen in the 3-body problem.
I always planned to check how Poincaré found the method of the Poincaré section
which enabled him to see this, a so-called 2-dimensional map.
What was the mistake in the ﬁrst special work?
The mistake was that he had overlooked the existence of chaos. So by writing the
big mémoire with the error contained in it, he had become strong and exacting
enough in his work to break through to a new clear picture. Within this clarity,
suddenly the complexity of chaos took shape. No one before him had achieved
such a depth in the 3-body problem and in mathematics. He found a way to
identify the simplest case with three bodies which gave him a clue as to what
happens—what is the source of the complexity. I know this only from Igor
Gumowski who had a great inﬂuence on me. He told me that the reduced 3-body
problem that Poincaré discovered consisted essentially of a very special conﬁgu-
ration which was physically artiﬁcial but mathematically prototypical, a typical
thought experiment. If you have one big body, which could be the sun, the sun can
for simplicity’s sake be assumed to have a permanent hollow tunnel running
through its middle. Within the latter the second body can then move up and down
periodically which is an allowed version of the Kepler problem with the ellipse
having become inﬁnitely thin.
Is this similar to the ‘‘T-tube system’’ which you already explained?
This is correct. It is also closely related to Newton’s ﬁrst intuition. He allegedly saw
an apple fall from a tree during this 1 year offorced absence from his regular studies
because of the plague. It is quite plausible that he indeed visualized the Alice-in-
Wonderland experience—that there was a hole opening underneath the apple
through the earth. And that in this tunnel, the apple would be able to fall and fall right
through the middle of the earth and upwards again on the other side—until it pre-
dictably would reach exactly the same height above the ground again which it had
had when it lost hold of its tree, touching the leaves of an imagined ‘‘anti-tree’’ in
New Zealand on the other side of the earth. Then after having made this motion, the
apple would return to come back up to the original branch on the original tree
from which it had fallen, assuming there was no air resistance in the tunnel.
148
14
Three-Body Problem, Poincaré Recurrence

This day-dreaming thought which occurred to Newton showed him that what he had
looked at in his mind was a degenerate Kepler ellipse. If the apple had had a very
slight push to the side by the wind while losing its grip, it would have fallen in a very
narrow ellipse. As soon as the idea of an ellipse had occurred to him for the falling
apple, it was clear that the ellipse could be widened further. There exists a drawing
by the hand of Newton which shows a tower on the surface of the round earth, and a
stone falling ﬁrst very close to the bottom of the tower, then—if given a horizontal
push—it follows a wider parabola or upper part of an ellipse, and as the initial
horizontal push is made stronger and stronger, the ellipse followed by the ball is big
enough to no longer quite touch the surface of the earth. Then it suddenly follows a
closed path just as Kepler had found. This day dream of stones falling from Galileo’s
tower after having been given an initial kick to reach a circular orbit around the earth
was apparently the original intuition which allowed Newton to eventually write
down his equations describing the orbits—the Hamiltonian orbits of planets.
And Poincaré?
Yes, this very intuition of Newton’s was resuscitated by Poincaré who now needed
a third body. He had already these two bodies of Newton’s, the solar sphere with a
vertical tunnel in the middle and an up and down oscillating planet inside. He could
then choose for the third body a moon circling around the equator of the sun. Now
there were three bodies, one ﬁxed (sun), one going up and down (earth), one circling
the ﬁxed one (moon). The vertically moving earth would perturb the circling moon
but much less (almost not) vice versa. What will these three bodies do in terms of
their interaction? Hereby the big body (sun) can be made big enough so one can
neglect its inﬂuence altogether because it is constant. Then only the interaction
between the horizontal moon and the vertically moving earth needs to be consid-
ered. We understand what is bound to happen. When the vertically moving earth is
close to the middle, the circling moon suffers the strongest attraction. We can
simplify further by putting the circling moon into a frictionless glass tube so only its
speed but not its radius can be affected. Then the vertically oscillating earth will, as
it approaches the middle of the sun, more and more strongly attract the circling
moon whereby the velocity of the latter is bound to increase. The converse holds
true when the earth is moving away from the middle. Thus one can start to com-
pletely understand this maximally simpliﬁed 3-body situation.
The next step in our trying to decipher how Poincaré’s mind worked is to no longer
look continually at what happens in this system—a task that is still hopeless—but
rather to make sure one looks only at well-deﬁned recurrent situations, such as
when the circling moon passes right before the middle of the sun (cuts a vertical
half plane). We can at that moment record two variables, one being the momentary
speed of the circling moon as it crosses that plane, the other the momentary
positive or negative speed of the vertically moving earth. These two numbers
deﬁne a point in a plane. Over the course of time, the successively obtained points
lawfully sprinkle the obtained ‘‘Poincaré map,’’ as the picture is called. Other
choices of observables are possible, giving related results.
14
Three-Body Problem, Poincaré Recurrence
149

Whenever it is a three-body system, the map is two-dimensional?
By no means. The assumed symmetries were necessary to obtain a maximally
simpliﬁed but still understandable case which then turned out to be inﬁnitely
complex. Poincaré’s loving patience is perplexing. Note that the system in ques-
tion has at least 17 variables (three positions, three momenta in every space
dimension, minus one due to energy conservation). To end up on a 2-D plane that
still captures the essence is like a miracle.
We have a lot of different options how to choose this map for the tangle of
trajectories?
Yes. The mentioned particular map is convenient for interpretation. We know the
horizontally circling body is at the same angular position again, we can record its
speed, and the position of the vertically moving body at that moment. We ﬁnd that
if the vertical body is in the middle position, the speed of the horizontal one is at a
maximum. If it is farther away from the middle, the speed of the circling body is
smaller. So what we get is a series of points. If one looks at the resulting map, one
eventually sees that these points each mark the edge points of little rectangles in
this 2-D plane which have the same area. This is an area preserving map as it is
called. What we then see is a so-called quasiperiodic motion. Everything is
absolutely transparent. The quasiperiodicity means that eventually all points lie on
a continuous connecting line in this 2-D plane, a line which is going to be ﬁlled-in
in the limit. There is no chaos so far, but then, what happens if we change
something? For example, we may perturb the circular orbit of the horizontally
moving moon in its glass tube into a slightly compressed form, an ellipse, or
further into a very narrow ellipse. The points that formerly lay on a smooth one-
dimensional line in the map then no longer do so. There is more structure now.
This is the point at which I cannot say how Poincaré proceeded—whether he took
exactly this particular cross section or another one. Today, one can do all of this
very easily in a simulation, but it is always the best strategy to continue thinking a
bit longer before starting to simulate. There is no doubt that one will eventually be
able to ﬁnd, with the aid of a computer, that there indeed will be what Poincaré
called a ‘‘homoclinic point.’’ Then we have all of the complexity of chaos in this
system in which we have perturbed the circular motion into an ellipse. At the time
of Poincaré’s, there were no computers, there was no chance to automatically plot
this system which preserves all the complexity of the three-body problem. Today,
because we know that we can take recourse to the computer, it would be impos-
sible to do what he did by heart in his mind. His famous homoclinic point can be
studied numerically to date. A schematic picture has once been called the ‘‘dollar
attractor.’’
How could he proceed with this problem without a computer?
This is an important question for an historian of science. I would very much like to
be informed about how he did it. Nevertheless I shy away from entering into the
chapters and books that he wrote because it will be almost a life’s task to extract
150
14
Three-Body Problem, Poincaré Recurrence

the essence; how he realized exactly the existence of homoclinic orbits which is so
maximally miraculous a ﬁnding in its transﬁnite complexity. He said that ‘‘the
mind is cringing away in horror’’ from what it sees here. He had previously
realized in his studies of 2-variable dynamical systems that there is a ‘‘uniqueness
of trajectories’’ theorem in charge. With two variables in a plane in deterministic
motion, we can only have continuous paths that never cross except in a so-called
‘‘critical point’’ where all motions stop.
The limit cycle is the second typical organizing phenomenon in two dimensions
which he also discovered. Now, we have a 2-dimensional cross section through a
locally 3-dimensional ﬂow. Here we can, in addition, ﬁnd crossing points as
mentioned. These points follow rules. We saw already that all points created in the
original circularly moving case lie on one line. They each determine an equal area.
The phenomenon of ‘‘area preservation’’ that is familiar from frictionless two-
variable systems remains valid for these maps. However we have much more
complexity, once the circle of the third body is compressed into an ellipse. Then
the successive crossing points show remarkedly complex behavior. Poincaré
convinced himself that once more, all successive points must lie on a line in the
cross section. They still lie on a line, not on one line per se, but rather on two lines
simultaneously that continue to cross each other again and again, forever. The
structure of how these two lines intersect and do this inﬁnitely often in the plane of
the cross section is what caused him to speak of a ‘‘horror.’’ He saw that there still
exist genuine critical points, like a saddle point. There also exist one-dimensional
manifolds—lines—in the cross section which emanate from or tend towards a
saddle point. To me it is a miracle that he saw this. Regarding these crossings, we
have a new problem: On the one hand, these lines have to remain lines, on the
other hand, they can now intersect. Imagine: You have only lines and each line is
well deﬁned but nonetheless now suddenly you can have an intersection. What is
the matter with those points in which two lines intersect, if each point has to stay
on its own line forever, one line exponentially expanding, the other exponentially
shrinking? The two lines are bound to meet again and again, even though one of
the two lines is getting longer and longer each time in between the crossings while
the other is getting shorter and shorter. Both originate from a periodic point in the
system, a ﬁxed point in the map, which is a saddle point. The one impinging line
(one calls it a manifold) exponentially approaches and the other exponentially
departs from the saddle point. Hence a single intersection of the two entails inﬁ-
nitely many intersections. In this way an inﬁnite complexity of criss-crossing lines
arises—an incredibly ‘‘disciplined tangle,’’ as Alfred Klemm would say. This
ﬁnding led to the famous ‘‘stable manifold theorem’’ as Steven Smale called it.
These crossing points, which forever spawn new crossing points, Poincaré called
‘‘homoclinic points’’—points leaning towards the same point, namely the saddle
point in two directions of time. They are not alone, there also exist ‘‘heteroclinic
points.’’
14
Three-Body Problem, Poincaré Recurrence
151

Sorry, there are two questions here. The ﬁrst is how can we calculate this Poincaré
map?
I am reminded here of the fairy tale about the ghost of death who upon meeting a
person is wondering why this person hurries so much to reach a certain far-away
place which is exactly the destination at which he is scheduled to meet him for
good in the evening. Forgive me, but the belief of Poincaré in the exactitude of all
this is the real miracle. It turns out that this exactitude is not just inﬁnitely exact; it
is a transﬁnitely exact phenomenon. Poincaré lived at the same time as Georg
Cantor who discovered the transﬁnite—trans-inﬁnite—accuracy of mathematics,
but Poincaré saw here the ﬁrst physical example where it can be seen in action.
What is the meaning of transﬁnite or transinﬁnite?
Transﬁnite is a word coined by Cantor. He claimed and gave proofs of its trans-
inﬁnitely inﬁnite magnitude, but no one believed him at the time. Namely, that there
is a second type of inﬁnity which is not just inﬁnite, but trans-inﬁnite in the sense of
representing the inﬁniteth power of the former. This transﬁnite exactitude which was
discovered by Cantor in the nineteenth century had already been seen by Anaxagoras
around 500 B.C. in ancient Greece. In the intervening centuries and millennia,
almost no one had come back to it, except apparently for Giordano Bruno, as
Elisabeth von Samsonow told me. Then virtually at the same time Cantor discovered
his transinﬁnite inﬁnity and Poincaré gave the ﬁrst example in a deterministic
continuous system, a three-body system. That was the birth of modern chaos theory,
the re-birth of Anaxagoras’ insight. Chaos theory is a transﬁnitely exact theory. The
Poincaré map is the best example so far. Poincaré was overwhelmed by the com-
plexity of the homoclinic tangle as mentioned, speaking of a ‘‘horror’’ that befell
him. Unfortunately, he did not appreciate Cantor, nor did he appreciate Boltzmann
even though both were ﬁshing in the same mathematical waters, so to speak. Three
exceptional people working on the same problem after a gap of 2 millennia.
Boltzmann used the word ‘‘chaos’’ but it did not have much connection to the
modern idea?
It actually has, I believe. This model which we just looked at—the three-body
problem with the inﬁnitely disciplined tangle—actually is related to Boltzmann’s
discovery of the ‘‘hypothesis of molecular chaos’’ in statistical mechanics. It lies at
the root of entropy formation, as far as I can presently see, but this is an area under
construction right now.
This principle of ‘‘chaos’’ in Boltzmann’s mind, why did he call it ‘‘chaos’’ in his
phrase ‘‘hypothesis of molecular chaos’’?
He saw in the statistics of many particles that interact deterministically that you
can take an initial condition which is freshly picked so that the respective particles
cannot have interacted as of yet. This is what he meant by ‘‘chaos’’—that a particle
is absolutely out of correlation with all others. He needed something like this
because, if they had already interacted in the past, they would—if you invert
152
14
Three-Body Problem, Poincaré Recurrence

time—go exactly back to that point where they started to interact. If you went
further in that same time direction, from that moment on they would do in the
backward direction of time what they did in the forward direction of time. The in
between ‘‘virgin point’’ where nothing had happened so far in either direction of
time cannot have had any history itself. It comes from a primordial chaos, as it
were. It is quite possible in my mind that this primordial-chaos like state is related
to Poincaré’s deepest insight. At least it is related to Anaxagoras deepest insight
that started out with the ‘‘perfect mixture’’ which he called ‘‘chaos.’’ It is a great
pity that Poincaré and Boltzmann never met. Poincaré was tragically repelled,
saying about Boltzmann, ‘‘I do not read the papers of a colleague who starts out
with an axiom and arrives at a theorem that contradicts his axiom.’’ Boltzmann
indeed started out with the assumption of reversibility (in the motion of atoms) and
came to the conclusion of a time’s arrow (irreversibility) on the macro level. He
emphasized that this ‘‘irreversibility’’ holds true in both directions of time, this
Poincaré could not know because he had not read Boltzmann.
Somehow the Poincaré recurrence was an idea designed to kill Boltzmann’s
deterministic time’s arrow?
Not quite, but it of course actually is compatible. They really were friends in their
minds, but they did never meet to ﬁnd out.
This Poincaré section that you mentioned has a special power to it. Many people
use the Euler method in the numerical analysis of a continuous system. If you
discretize a continuous system which is chaotic using this linear approximation,
then the discretized version often shows no chaos. The only reliable technique is to
calculate a Poincaré section through the continuous system?
Yes, the Poincaré method of looking at a section is very general and does not just
apply to the three-body problem that we looked at, but can be applied to any
deterministic dynamical system of three variables. Even then it must be done
accurately, as you say.
If you agree, I suggest to come back to the two-body problem. In the two-body
problem, on his way towards the discovery of general relativity, Einstein hit on a
phenomenon called rotation of the Mercury perihelion. The Mercury perihelion
somehow shows quasiperiodic behavior rather than the periodic behavior of a
Kepler ellipse?
This is correct. It is an ellipse which is a little bit open and hence is slowly
rotating. So the motion forms a rosette eventually, and this never stops—it is a
typical quasiperiodic motion.
In two-dimensional dynamical systems we have a special theorem called the
Poincaré-Bendixson theorem, according to which we can only have periodic
behavior but no crossing trajectories with two variables?
Yes, the three-dimensional behavior includes quasiperiodicity and chaos, and the
relativistic two-body problem shows quasiperiodicity.
14
Three-Body Problem, Poincaré Recurrence
153

In the Mercury perihelion problem we have a two-body system showing quasi-
periodic behavior. What is the new dimension in this system?
This is an interesting question, but the answer is a little bit trivial. If we write down
a Hamiltonian of the Newtonian type for two bodies, in which the Newtonian
attraction is perturbed a bit so that the force term is no longer quadratic in the
denominator, but is perturbed by an added constant term, for example, then we no
longer get the closed ellipses of Kepler but a rosette phenomenon. So virtually any
nonlinear perturbation of Newtonian mechanics sufﬁces to get a rosette. General
relativity is not a particularly special case in this respect.
Post-Newtonian behavior?
You can say so, but this is unspeciﬁc. ‘‘Non-Newtonian behavior’’ would be a
more general description.
The attraction function is just a little bit changed?
Yes, we do have four variables. The Kepler ellipse turns out to be structurally
unstable in a sense. This particular structural instability deserves an investigation
in its own right. It is not a phenomenon on the way towards chaos, although even
this may still be an option yet to be ruled out.
Can we have chaos in a two-body system in which one is a black hole and one a
point mass?
So far we had stuck to Newton and there we cannot have chaos in a two-body
problem. But as soon as we enter general relativity, everything is much more
complicated. I would guess that this chaos question has yet to be answered.
I remember quite complicated unbounded motions in a picture displayed in the
Misner-Thorne-Wheeler ‘‘bible’’ titled ‘‘Gravitation’’ of 1973. So my intuitive
guess regarding your question would be ‘‘yes until falsiﬁed.’’
Some researchers tried to respond to this question after adding some other pos-
tulates or other new things, for example gravitational waves, and using these they
tried to ﬁnd a positive answer. We need something that does not involve additional
variables. The gravitational waves do form something like an open question?
Yes, Einstein himself was doubtful regarding the existence of gravitational waves.
Let me conclude this subject with the following question; what do you think is an
open problem in the structure of three-body systems that one can focus on to better
understand it and produce something new? Or is this a closed research area?
It is an absolutely open research area even though it is so old. We here have to
return to this big job of Poincaré’s. One will have to re-study how he arrived at his
beautiful transﬁnitely exact tangle of homoclinic points (and heteroclinic points)
because this tangle apparently underlies the time’s arrow of statistical mechanics,
in either direction of time. Statistical mechanics as is well-known explains our
macroscopic phenomena like heat production or evolution. It can now be replaced
154
14
Three-Body Problem, Poincaré Recurrence

by this 3-body problem of Poincaré’s on the most basic level. If we go from the
Newtonian attraction considered so far to Newtonian repulsion (including more
short-range repulsive forces) then we get statistical thermodynamics. If we stick to
the attractive case, on the other hand, we unexpectedly get a new science which is
a close analog to statistical thermodynamics. It too is a sub-discipline of statistical
mechanics. In this new discipline, we do not encounter an entropy increase when
the particles interact, but rather an entropy decrease. Thermodynamics then stands
no longer alone, there is this sister discipline called ‘‘cryodynamics’’ which
actually directly follows from this particular example of Poincaré that we tried to
look at. So now there exists a direct continuation of Poincaré’s work that leads into
a second major subdiscipline of statistical mechanics besides thermodynamics
called cryodynamics. This new science really is of a high rank. It happens to
explain as a side result the phenomenon of the gravitational redshift in cosmol-
ogy—since here, too, we have a purely attractive interaction between the involved
particles, namely moving galaxies and photons. In light of this, Poincaré is
absolutely up to date. We indeed need to continue right where he left, in order to
understand modern phenomena like the Hubble redshift law. What is presently
open is only the exact quantitative relation. It might still happen that it is only
50 % of the cosmological redshift described by the Hubble law that is explained by
cryodynamics. However, it is much more likely—a priori speaking—that the
beautiful transﬁnitely exact theory of Poincaré explains everything perfectly so
that we do not need the expansion postulate at all. For it is very rare in science that
the same phenomenon is caused by two radically different theories running in
parallel—especially if one of the two involves not a single ad hoc postulate while
the other needs 24 (as I recently counted—but I admit I am partisan here). Having
encountered a qualitative explanation of the sophisticated Poincaréan type is just
too promising an alternative. Maximally simple physically and nonetheless max-
imally sophisticated mathematically—almost a dream.
Let us ﬁnish this session with the following question; why did Einstein almost
never talk about what we today call chaos or three-body systems? There is one
document which is titled ‘‘Two-body problem in general theory of relativity,’’ but
this is not a full paper, only a letter that Einstein wrote as a response to a
colleague who had tried to show that general relativity does not hold true in a
special case. Einstein sent that letter to Physical Review to show that the colleague
had not been right.
Einstein had been very much inﬂuenced by Poincaré when he was young, espe-
cially by the book ‘‘The value of Science’’ (La valeur de la science) which
appeared in 1904 (with Flammarion). This was a year before Einstein ﬁnished his
special-relativity paper. Einstein was very much impressed by Poincaré, but he
knew, I believe, that he had to keep his own work steered clear from Poincaré’s
work, because Poincaré was so overwhelming—and had known virtually every-
thing that Einstein had seen in special relativity except for two speciﬁc points in
Einstein’s paper, the transversal Doppler effect and ….
14
Three-Body Problem, Poincaré Recurrence
155

The twin paradox.
Exactly these two. But Einstein also had a maximally ingenious and enlightened
pictorial insight, namely the single light ball expanding about two mutually
receding observers. To me, this is his biggest overstepping of previous thinking.
Both Poincaré and Einstein are miracles in themselves.
Maybe there was a natural repulsion between these two minds?
No, I would rather say they were ‘‘too close.’’ So it was too dangerous to mix too
heavily with what the other had done. Then the attractive force would have been
too strong. Their minds were very close.
Is there a further point you want to add?
Thank you, but I am very happy that I barely survived your difﬁcult questions.
156
14
Three-Body Problem, Poincaré Recurrence

Chapter 15
The Brain Equation
Let us come back to the brain equation. What is the role of nonlinear dynamical
systems for understanding the brain, and can we have a brain theory in this
framework?
This is a major scientiﬁc question. Is it possible to use the arsenal of physical,
mathematical and technological thinking to contribute to biological progress?
Biology by deﬁnition does not have a very close contact to simple mathematical
thinking, although Darwin was a mathematician in his soul, as Konrad Lorenz and
I found out in discussing the fundamental questions in biology. In biology itself,
the fact that eventually one has to arrive at a mathematical understanding is not
well known. Only my friend Robert Rosen represented the opposite stance; he had
studied mathematics in order to understand biology, to him this was the royal road
in biology. It is true that a notion like the ‘‘brain equation’’ is repugnant to
biologists because they think the brain is such a big thing and needs so much
devotion on so many levels of research, and also there are so many different types
of brains, that it is impossible even to think of a single line of reasoning existing
that could explain the brain in an equation. If that is meant to be a real suggestion,
one has to be very apologetic and modest in presenting the idea.
So you believe that you can make a theory of the brain based on nonlinear
dynamical systems?
Yes.
In this theory you only need classical physics? Or do you need quantum mechanics
as well? Primarily, one has to start out from what one sees, that is, one uses
classical thinking, although eventually classical thinking breaks down as it did in
the history of physics. The question that Darwin ﬁrst tried to understand—the
mechanism of evolution (and the brain is a product of evolution)—is a purely
classical topic. Is the brain equation intended to make a new theory of the brain?
The very term ‘‘brain equation’’ is almost a slap in the face of everybody who has
not heard the word before. Unfortunately, this is also the reason why virtually
nobody knows about it because it is almost too grandiose a term, even though this
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_15,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
157

2-word notion is virtually the only way to capture the content of the idea.
Moreover, it is not a bottom-up approach, as most other biological progress is; it is
a top-down approach. It is the same thinking which Darwin introduced into
biology, although for some reason the latter’s theory is not seen as a purely
deductive paradigm in biology. The Darwinistic way of thinking seems still for-
eign to the profession. In his old age, Darwin once complained that he could no
longer enjoy both formal mathematics and beautiful music—a fact which shows
that he was acutely aware of the existence of these two realities. If you wish, he
subcutaneously injected his mathematical explanation of evolution into the whole
biological community so that they all got infected without realizing the nature of
the disease. The argument is maximally formal. If one assumes that the environ-
ment is changing in an unpredictable fashion, Darwin showed by way of proof,
then one automatically needs a source of endogenous change inside the organisms
living in that environment, since otherwise, the species is bound to die out. This is
a purely mathematical type of argument.
In a previous session, we talked about the structure of the brain equation. Here I
try to shift the topic towards some consequences of this concept. The equation
involves some variables. Do you need a special space-time deﬁnition for this
equation, or do you just consider the usual classical space-time?
It is ‘‘naïve’’ in terms of physics, this optimality equation implicit in Darwinism. It
is once more nothing but a minimalistic attempt to understand survival. ‘‘Survival’’
as introduced by Darwin is a very down-to-earth notion. He looked at changes in
the environment and at what had to be the unavoidable minimalistic response
demanded of a species—a biological surviving structure—if the environment is
changing and the survival is to go on. He realized that there must exist an
‘‘endogenous change’’ which in the last instance compensates for the external
change as far as its effect on survival is concerned. So he could predict that there is
a random change occurring in the genetic (as it came to be called later) structure of
the species. Unfortunately, he hereby had to include all the past histories—the fact
that the past of different species is very different. So his principle of inheritable
sudden changes, which we now call ‘‘mutations,’’ does not include the claim that
they are predictable in their individual features. For they depend, in order to be
effective, on the whole pre-history of the organism in question. The survival of a
species under a condition of temporal change of the environment thus automati-
cally implies that all past changes that led to the biological structure in question
enter into the potential survival-relevant effects of a new mutation or random
change of design. This makes survival in the face of a slow temporal change of the
environment a different (much more difﬁcult) problem to solve compared to sur-
vival with respect to a shortest-term change in the environment. The latter class
includes spatial changes, in the speciﬁc sense that something that is momentarily
encroaching upon the organism has to be ﬂed from, or, if the close-by resource is a
positive one like food, has to be approached. In other words, survival here depends
on the organism’s momentary position in space. This is an absolutely Darwinian-
in-spirit question and can be answered just as he did with his slow ‘‘climatic’’
158
15
The Brain Equation

changes as it were. It ‘‘only’’ turns out as a big surprise that in this case, the
prehistory—the chemical and biochemical history—does not enter in an essential
fashion. If an organism’s survival is impeded by something that is coming close to
it, then it is a necessary strategy that the organism leaves the present position in
space, or vice versa in the case of a close-by bonanza. This prediction just made is
independent of the chemical prehistory of the species. This situation actually turns
out to be a well posed optimality problem in the sense of mathematics. Eric
Charnov called this way of thinking ‘‘optimal foraging theory’’ since this is what is
required here, not to make lethal mistakes in one’s changing position in space. If
you forage, you survive in space—for example in a forest (forgive me the pun). In
other words; when survival depends on position in space, then all you need do is
make sure that a change in position improves survival. This is a mathematically
well-posed problem. It can be solved only by mathematical means, by not vio-
lating the mathematically given opportunity. The result of this insight is the brain
equation, so to speak. The brain equation applies beyond a certain level of urgency
as it were (simpler solutions sufﬁce if the environment is replete with appropriate
sources to harvest, for example). So it is a very trivial approach to the problem of
survival, much as Darwin’s own approach was in spite of its incredible power.
Both approaches are necessarily and trivially correct. Nature is bound to obey the
mathematical insights which one ﬁnds in this way.
The brain equation is ‘‘top-down’’ which at ﬁrst sight means it is unrealistic;
nevertheless it is absolutely cogent in the sense that it cannot be avoided if you try
to understand the brain. You suddenly can see why you have to look for what we
call a ‘‘brain’’ in biology, and when it is unavoidable to have a brain. You can
predict the properties of a machine that is needed for survival, for position-
dependent survival. You can call it a brain even if you never saw a brain before,
because you can predict from ﬁrst principles what has to be done by nature if
survival depends on position in space.
Can this equation also explain diseases of the brain?
Do you mean metabolic diseases of the brain, or infections? Or do you think of
functional ones like schizophrenia?
Can these diseases be described in terms of variables of the brain equation?
Once you have implemented the brain equation with a special hardware, like a
vertebrate or mollusk brain, the possible diseases depend on the particular reali-
zation. The brain equation is too general to help much when you come to particular
diseases, although certain function-change type diseases become predictable.
Another question; in this equation, do you adopt a holistic viewpoint? Do you
consider the brain as a whole and try to explain it and do not try to specify its
different parts?
It depends. This is a purely functional approach; it has nothing to do with how this
function is implemented hardware-wise, although you can also make predictions
15
The Brain Equation
159

about its implementation eventually. First you have to know what the brain is
doing, what is the essential function without fulﬁlling which it would not be a
brain? When you have the blueprint of the function that this machine has to fulﬁll
then you have a decisive entry into understanding the brain. It is just a footnote to
Darwin for short-term spatial and temporal dependences of survival.
In 1994, you wrote a paper entitled ‘‘Microconstructivism.’’ Here I want to know
what is constructivism? Especially, since you mention in that paper the relation
between ‘‘holism’’ and ‘‘constructivism.’’ The paper addresses the brain equation
as well.
That paper has to do with my more general idea of endophysics, which means that
you look at the whole world from the outside. It is again an unfamiliar type of
thinking, much like the spatial Darwinism we just talked about. Copernicus had
adopted a similar way of looking at the solar system from the outside in the
footsteps of Aristarchus. So it is indeed possible to have scientiﬁc insights which
do not follow the usual path but give you a different angle of attack as it were.
Endophysics means that you can look at the whole physical world, at everything in
the cosmos, from the outside and thereby better understand what applies when you
are inside. When you then watch the poor creatures creeping along inside this
prison, you realize that from the inside of that prison—like in Marxism—certain
things cannot possibly be understood. When you look at the situation from the
outside, you understand what cannot be seen from the inside. ‘‘Microconstruc-
tivism’’ would be the right word referring to the new micro phenomena which
predictably appear a-causal if you are a part of that world, but can be explained
and predicted causally if you look at the situation from the outside. Thus, it is an
explanation of quantum mechanics which is attempted by microconstructivism. If
you wish, this is the next, more ﬁne-grained way of looking at the whole thing—
the next level after the brain equation. The brain equation itself is more restricted
because it deals only with the survival of an organism, which is a simpler problem
than the measurement problem of physics.
In that paper you say that constructivism describes a pseudo-reality. Do you
consider the brain equation as an endophysics-type equation? If this equation is
not valid from the point of view of an observer watching the brain from the outside,
then your brain equation describes a pseudo reality; correct?
Yes, we cannot see the real truth from the inside, but the brain equation is much
more trivial. We can safely return to ordinary—single-level—thinking. It is
ordinary simple Darwinian science where you look at a phenomenon like the
survival of an animal—comparable to Buridan’s proverbial donkey which, placed
between two sources of food each at the same distance, was claimed to starve
because he could not decide which one to choose since both were equally
attractive. The brain equation is exactly this type of thinking. Buridan invented it.
It is naïve, mathematically cogent, and Buridan’s donkey would actually be saved
by the brain equation as a slightly more sophisticated step in the same type of
reasoning.
160
15
The Brain Equation

Can the brain equation be improved from the endophysical viewpoint?
I do not think so. This is a macroscopic, classical, dissipative science—biological
science in the traditional Darwinian sense. Endophysics tries to explain the scandal
of quantum mechanics itself which abruptly ceases to be classical as is well
known. So it is a different type of question that is addressed in the two approaches.
But in the mentioned paper you say that microconstructivism is a theory of the
brain—and now you have a brain equation. So what is the relationship between
micro-constructivism and the brain equation?
Thank you for hitting the point. The endo approach which describes the whole
world from the outside, ﬁnds out surprisingly that certain microscopic properties of
the brain affect the way the world looks if viewed from the inside. We do look at
the world from the inside, and we do have a brain, and some features of our brain
can be shown to change the way the outside world appears to us. What are hereby
affected are only micro motions. Let me give a simpliﬁed example. If there were a
very fast microscopic oscillation going on in the brain when looked at from the
outside (exo) perspective, then we would not be able to ‘‘edit-out’’ this oscillation
from the inside. Therefore, the world—the rest of the world—would be oscillating
for us even though in reality, only our brain would be oscillating. This is because
only the difference between those micro features of our brain and the rest of the
world would be accessible to us. This is the endo perspective. Analogously, if
there were a classical chaotic noise present on the micro level in the brain—
objectively or ‘‘exo’’ speaking—we could not edit this noise out. This ﬁnding can
in principle explain quantum mechanics, I believe. However, all of this has only to
do with the microscopic physical implementation of the brain. Endophysics here is
an ultimately inescapable way of looking at the world from the outside. Being
microscopic, endophysics is independent in theory from the brain equation as the
latter is implemented in a particular macroscopic brain. Thus we encounter the
usual distinction between macroscopic dissipative physics (brain equation) and the
microscopic, time-reversible and by a factor of 23 orders of magnitude more ﬁne-
grained, micro reality addressed by endophysics. While it is true that some of those
lowest-level features become manifest on the macro level—as quantum mechanics
is living proof of—the macro machine called ‘‘brain’’ can itself be consistently
described without taking recourse to the micro level.
Can this equation show chaotic behavior?
Yes, it does. I did not know this when I presented the brain equation in 1973. The
proceedings appeared a year later. I had felt obliged to add a mechanism that I
named a ‘‘will-o’-the-wisp potential’’ to generate the requisite randomness in the
behavior produced by the brain equation. I did not know at the time that the brain
equation in its original form does already have this chaotic feature built-in, due to
its nonlinear dissipative dynamical character.
What is this element of chaotic behavior? What is the meaning of chaotic behavior
in the brain equation, actually?
15
The Brain Equation
161

The brain equation is essentially a ‘‘motivation system.’’ A colleague of Wolfgang
Köhler, Kurt Lewin, in the 1930s invented a ‘‘topological psychology’’ which is
related (with its ‘‘vector forces’’) as I later learned. The brain equation describes
attraction and repulsion as a function of the organism’s position in the environ-
ment, and as a function of time. Speciﬁcally, it contains a function of the time
elapsed since the last encounter with a ﬁlling station of a given type (since the
individual types of ‘‘tanks’’ or alarm-clocks need to be reﬁlled or ‘‘reset’’ at
speciﬁc locations scattered in space). The ‘‘travelling salesman with alarm-clocks
problem’’ is quite intuitive. An artiﬁcial device or an animal employing the brain
equation therefore automatically follows a chaotic course in the environment. This
chaotic behavior is sensitively dependent on initial conditions. So it is indeed
possible to say that the brain equation implies chaotic behavior.
A brain that works in the normal sense should accordingly behave in a chaotic
manner?
Correct.
Did you ever think that some of the diseases that were mentioned—like MS—might
lead the system from chaotic towards non-chaotic behavior—towards periodic
behavior, say? And would this insight open up the possibility to change the brain
back into the chaotic mode?
Eventually, such ideas have to be considered. Multiple Sclerosis probably would
not be a very good example though, because it is an anatomical disease where
certain structures in the white matter of the brain are essentially mechanically
interfered with. Nerve ﬁbers are interrupted in their function by inﬂammatory
processes so as to no longer work properly. Such a dysfunction depends on the
particular way in which this brain obeying the brain equation has been wired. The
same disease may not exist in an arthropode like a mantis shrimp which likewise
implements the brain equation and is a very intelligent animal. Or think of a
mollusk like the giant octopus, which also has reached a high level of imple-
mentation of the brain equation (including an added universal simulator that makes
it arbitrarily intelligent in principle).
As I learned, biologists do not easily take to the idea that physicists, or people
working in dynamical systems, claim they can apply a perturbation to the brain
and thereby change its function from a chaotic toward a non-chaotic mode or vice
versa in order to cure a functional disease. Why do they not wish to have a part in
such a proposal?
Physiologist Horst Prehn from the University of Giessen once did what he called
the ‘‘braindrops’’ experiment. He let a human person watch a chaotically dripping
faucet, recorded the produced brain waves live with an EEG machine and fed these
waves back via a transducer to the dripping faucet in question, as a mechanical
perturbation in real time. The chaos immediately stopped—the faucet dripped only
periodically from that moment on. This beautiful experiment is much too little
known.
162
15
The Brain Equation

Why do we have this problem of a lack of communication between the two cultures
as it were? From the mathematical point of view, it ought to be possible to bridge
the gap. Why do biologists or physicians tend to not take physical or dynamical
arguments seriously?
It is, I believe, a psychological problem—a strong hesitation to accept mathe-
matics. Biologists and medical people apparently do not realize that in science,
eventually everything reduces to mathematics. It is due to lack of information, I
believe.
What are the open or future problems regarding scientists working with this
equation? Why did you not work on this equation for a long time?
I talked about it in my courses and it still happens that students are very much
interested. In the United States, Michael Conrad took it up; in Japan, Kunihiko
Kaneko advised a doctoral student to work on the brain equation but as far as I
know it did not get ﬁnished. I was invited to give a talk at Tokyo University two
decades ago. It was a physics group and I lost contact for not being available
enough as mentioned. I am very sorry for that. There are two cultures, physics on
the one hand and biology on the other, each of them having to bridge a gap that the
world does not know exists. The brain equation is a typical ‘‘no man’s land’’
concept. It actually is pure mathematics, of a type totally different from other
branches that are applied in the sciences. Garey and Johnson’s famous 1979 book
‘‘Computers and Intractablility,’’ written on the NP-completeness problem is the
best intermediary approach, but it gives no connections, neither to biology nor to
physics. So a whole big ﬁeld is still waiting to be built up before the intermediary
discipline of Artiﬁcial Intelligence can be expected to take the theoretical lead
again in the footsteps of Turing.
Would it not be nice to ﬁnd a group of some mathematicians, physicists and
biologists to work on this problem and ﬁnd some results? Would you support such
a group?
By all means. Actually there is presently the biggest program in science ever
brought on its way, funded with 1 billion euros by the European Community, with
the aim of understanding the brain better, up to building an artiﬁcial analog. Its
name is ‘‘Modelling4All.’’ Of course, this program has never heard of the brain
equation. The brain equation could no doubt help this group of interdisciplinary
enthusiasts to ﬁnd a common ground and succeed. There also exists an interdis-
ciplinary book written with Bill Seaman as the ﬁrst author, titled ‘‘Neosentience.’’
A concerted way of thinking about the brain, with artists working hand in hand
with engineers and scientists, is about to emerge at the time being. I should also
mention the beautiful artiﬁcial face, ﬁrst designed with 5 naturally combinable
‘‘emotions’’ by my pupil Wilfried Musterle 26 years ago. There is a recent heart-
moving documentary of a mechanically implemented artiﬁcial child-face on the
Internet. You see, the ‘‘top down’’ approach is almost on its way by now.
15
The Brain Equation
163

Do you think that this type of thinking manifest in the brain equation can be
implemented in an artiﬁcial intelligence—to make some viable robots?
I even believe this is the only way to make intelligent robots in a functional sense,
so that they are not just intelligent for certain tasks but are autonomous actors (in
both senses of the word) that eventually become potential competitors to animal or
human intelligences—unless we make peace with them and ﬁnd a way of coop-
eration much as the different religions have to cooperate with each other. This task
is also unsolved—despite the efforts of people like Mevlana Rumi in the distant
past and Emmanuel Lévinas in the recent past. Miraculously, really lovable per-
sons emerge from time to time. Now they could get support by a deeper scientiﬁc
understanding of two brain equations in interaction.
Do you want to add any points because my questions are ﬁnished?
There is one point which I would like to add—the qualitatively different use made
of their brains by human beings and other animals. It has to do with the interaction
problem on which we just ﬁnished. We better let it ﬂoat in the air here. Thank you
very much for your questions.
164
15
The Brain Equation

Chapter 16
Repulsion and Attraction
In our new session we are going to talk about cryodynamics. Let me start with
statistical mechanics. We have some postulates or axioms in thermodynamics,
calling them ‘‘ﬁrst law,’’ ‘‘second law,’’ ‘‘third law’’ and even ‘‘zeroth law.’’
Altogether we have four laws that we can call axioms, but some of them can
apparently be derived from one of the others. Some books start out with the axioms
and try to offer the whole theory based on these axioms. One question which
naturally arises is; why can we not change these axioms in order to come up with a
complementary theory? For example, one axiom says that the rate of entropy
change should be positive, and another axiom says no, it can also be negative. Can
a complementary theory complete this? Many books on thermodynamics after
stating some axioms go on with microscopically speciﬁed examples in order to
then generalize them to quantum mechanics. Others start out with quantum
mechanics, building the whole theory up from there to then ﬁnd the limits under
which we can go over to classical physics. Both approaches seem to be legitimate.
Now let us start taking this as a backdrop, what is cryodynamics? Can we again
start out from quantum mechanics to go to classical physics or should we depart
from classical physics?
This is a well-taken difﬁcult question. Everybody has of course his own private
way of thinking with his or her acquired preferences. To my taste—and from my
experience with chaotic systems that have but a few variables interacting—it
appears legitimate to start out from a microscopic causal mechanism in a classical
mechanical setting. Thermodynamics is the ‘‘Theory of Heat’’ with all its different
aspects including the notion of entropy, and so on. It has its quantum analogs and
special cases and explanations, but the door towards really understanding what
happens is in my view, classical chaos theory. Looking at two or more particles—a
gas has very many particles—is the starting point. What are the general properties
when you have but a few interacting particles? In chaos theory, Yakov Sinai had
the ﬁrst model of chaotic billiard balls interacting in a plane. I was told by Harry
Thomas in Basel in 1976 that he had found a way to visualize the chaotic inter-
action of particles, according to Sinai. As mentioned, he called it the ‘‘tennis game
in an orchard’’; a tennis ball ﬂying horizontally through an orchard of regularly
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_16,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
165

planted trees. If you have a tennis ball ﬂying—or rolling without friction—through
the idealized orchard, then whenever the frictionless ball is headed exactly parallel
to the inﬁnite line of trees (the latter is assumed to be inﬁnite), nothing will happen
to it, it will just continue forever. However, as soon as you give this tennis ball the
slightest deviation from the absolutely parallel direction in its alley, it is bound to
eventually hit a tree and hence be reﬂected into a new direction with in general a
different angular deviation from the middle line. From then on, it will no longer
move along a privileged straight line but move chaotically. The other straight
avenues that run through the regular orchard have the same property of being
unstable with respect to the slightest deviation from straightness inside. So Sinai
could prove in a long paper in 1970 that this system is chaotic—meaning that
almost all initial conditions lead to total unpredictability of the path of the particle
after a short time, even though everything is deterministic and can be understood
in an absolutely classical fashion. The word ‘‘chaos’’ was not yet coined for this
kind of deterministic random behavior (this would happen only 5 years later in
T.Y. Li and Jim Yorke’s paper ‘‘Period Three implies Chaos’’). There are quantum
versions of the Sinai phenomenon. Also, the particles, tennis balls, are ideally hard
spheres, but you can smooth them at the boundary a little bit, so the balls become
softer. Then still most of the results persist. Sinai’s theory is the simplest example
of thermodynamics, showing how chaos enters into the description of a deter-
ministic system, with thermodynamics forming an implication. All the insights that
chaos theory has brought are applicable to this picture, and eventually you can
hope to derive all the other laws of thermodynamics from this paradigm of a
‘‘Sinai gas.’’
It is derived from billiards?
Yes. When you look at a two-dimensional section of the rolling billiard ball, you
get a Sinai disk. Sinai ﬁrst saw that you can replace the balls by two-dimensional
disks. He then nailed one disk onto the middle of a quadratic table. Opposite sides
of the quadratic table he identiﬁed in a pairwise manner. So the table became a
torus, that is, all motions reaching the boundary would continue straight in the next
‘‘cell’’ which would be identical to the old cell. On this torus-shaped table, there
was this round disk-shaped repulsive obstacle nailed to the center of it. The
moving second ball he shrunk to a point, after doubling the central disk in
diameter, without changing the former’s path. The angles of collision with the
circular obstacle in the middle would always be locally symmetric, that is equal
from both sides. This model is the simplest example to explain thermodynamics; a
billiard table with pairs of opposing sides identiﬁed, which is mathematically
trivial to assume. It is the most impressive explanation of gas theory, whereby the
word ‘‘gas’’ itself means ‘‘chaos.’’ It was coined by van Helmont in the early
seventeenth century—chaos and gas are the same thing. Sinai’s gas is a deter-
ministic explanation of the statistical behavior which occurs with many particles
that are mutually repulsive. You can use this chaos-borne example to eventually
understand, I would say, all of the essential oddities of thermodynamics, and you
can also have a quantum version. Then it depends on your taste whether you prefer
166
16
Repulsion and Attraction

quantum mechanics to be the basic theory or whether you think that the world is
basically classical. Quantum mechanics can in principle be explained from a
classical (‘‘endo’’) perspective in my view. Sinai’s would then be a nice example
of the theory of heat, thermodynamics, as a whole.
So you prefer to start from classical theory to explain thermodynamics and
cryodynamics?
From classical chaos.
So what is the meaning of cryodynamics in your eyes? As a matter of fact, this
word was created by you?
There are some manufacturers for low-temperature products carrying the same
name. The name is therefore rather widespread, but in science, no one else
introduced it so far.
Who was the ﬁrst person to talk about the new behavior of cryodynamics? Give us
at ﬁrst a history of the subject and then, please, describe what cryodynamics is.
I should ﬁrst perhaps make a little modiﬁcation to the billiard type model of Sinai
that we just looked at. You can smooth the potentials so that the disk’s walls
become softly repulsive. Then you have a variant of the billiard model that is more
realistic. The chaos which they jointly produce according to Sinai then contains
what is called ‘‘KAM-tori.’’ They are embedded in a chaotic regime as little
islands of many sizes that are not chaotic inside. They are quasiperiodic, with non-
diverging trajectories internally. Nevertheless the quasiperiodic subset of motions
embedded in the chaos can be neglected, quantitatively speaking.
You mean Kolmogorov, Arnold, and Moser?
Exactly: KAM. Kolmogorov was Sinai’s teacher. I once had a telephone conver-
sation with Jürgen Moser before publishing my paper ‘‘Different kinds of chaos’’ in
1976. He was a maximally gentle great mind. Here what we saw is that thermo-
dynamics is still basically valid if the boundaries of the involved particles are
smoothly repulsive, despite the fact that, in principle, there are now also these
islands within which the system’s motion is not chaotic (only quasiperiodic). The
measure—more properly speaking the relative size—of these domains is negligible
for all practical purposes in the multi-particle case. So this modiﬁed smoothed-out
Sinai scenario still explains all of equilibrium thermodynamics, and we can still
apply quantum mechanics as a special case which constrains some of the results.
Thermodynamics remains explicable with its overall features in terms of these
repulsive particles even if the repulsion between the particles is not of the hard-
spheres type. Molecules in the air, for example, do repel each other. Their repulsive
boundaries are very limited in their range, but you can ask the question; what
happens if you make the repulsion more long range? In particular, what happens if
you use a Newton-like law which is quadratic in terms of the force, yet repulsive
rather than attractive (obtainable by a mere sign ﬂip)? Then you still retain all the
essential properties of thermodynamics if the particles are fast-moving, which fact is
16
Repulsion and Attraction
167

perhaps not very surprising. However, you can now also replace the repulsion by
attraction, genuine Newtonian 1/r attraction (or an equivalent under more or less
static electric or magnetic attraction). Although this may appear a trivial general-
ization, this attractive multi-particle case was neglected ever since Newton, which is
very surprising. Nevertheless this case still makes sense. You can build-up a theory
of many particles that interact not in a repulsive fashion as in thermodynamics but in
an attractive fashion. This ‘‘sister program’’ is a very simple idea, and although some
important people, like Lev Landau and Donald Lynden-Bell and my friend Rolf
Landauer, wrote about this in the 1930s and 1960s and 1970s, respectively, only a
combination of attractive and repulsive regimes were looked at in the past. This very
artiﬁcial and complicated situation did not yield major new insights at the time as far
as I am aware. The ‘‘pure case’’ which I mentioned—many attractive bodies in
interaction—was apparently never studied in its own right. The reason why I am
dwelling on this is that, you now no longer get thermodynamics; rather, you get a
totally different type of qualitative behavior, that of cryodynamics.
One question, you said that the potential is attractive here?
That is the distinguishing difference between thermodynamics and cryodynamics.
Why do you say that it is a new idea? We have attractive potentials in Newton’s
old theory. So what is new here?
It is not at all new, you are right, Isaac Newton could have done it. This indeed is
the oldest class of systems we have in exact physics. Nevertheless for some reason,
the interaction between many mutually attractive particles like galaxies, for
example, has never been looked at from a many-particles point of view, with an
eye to the qualitative implications of this type of interaction. Chaos-type quali-
tative thinking would have been required. This beautiful new situation can be
simpliﬁed into a Sinai-billiard analogous case again, only with an attractive rather
than repulsive potential involved. Sinai brought the breakthrough in the repulsive
theory, showing thermodynamics is not indeterministic but chaos-based. Since the
chaos-theoretic breakthrough, again four decades had to pass before this natural
attractive Newtonian analog came into focus.
So you believe that Rolf Landauer was the ﬁrst to start to talk somehow about this?
Not really, Rolf was essentially working on repulsive thermodynamics.
Who was the next one? What is the history of this attraction-based viewpoint?
One has to go back much further, towards a different strand of science: celestial
mechanics. The ﬁrst here was, as far as I can see, Fritz Zwicky, a Swiss-American
astronomer who is very famous because he discovered dark matter—baryonic dark
matter, to be precise. He has many other ingenious ideas to his credit, like what
humankind can do when the sun grows dangerously large in some 5 billion years’
time from now. Then one could give earth a gentle repetitive push to move away
from the sun for a sufﬁcient distance, he showed. This will no doubt become more
168
16
Repulsion and Attraction

feasible as time goes by. In our context, Zwicky had the association in his mind
that when a photon is travelling through the cosmos, the cauldron of the randomly
moving galaxies it is passing through would inﬂuence the photon’s energy in a
systematic fashion. That was a qualitatively new idea that no one else had had
before. It is the ﬁrst example of cryodynamics in action—to look at the interaction
of many particles that attract each other, galaxies and photons. The photon is
attracted, of course, like any other particle. If you wish, you can replace it with a
cosmic-ray particle, a proton of almost the same speed as a photon. The fast
particles in question then interact gravitationally with the many moving gravitation
centers, called galaxies and stars and so on, encountered in a grazing fashion.
Thus, we have the whole sky as an implementation of the idea of cryodynamics.
Zwicky was the ﬁrst to see the principle. So I have a very high respect for
Zwicky—that he was able to visualize this as early on as he did. Unfortunately, he
did not follow up on this insight with full vigor. He got discouraged by another
great scientist, Sir Arthur Eddington, who has many creative contributions to his
credit, too. Eddington found an error in the equation that Zwicky had published
and Zwicky had the courage to quote from Eddington’s private letter to him in the
next publication and admit that he had committed a mathematical error. So the
whole world was laughing and Zwicky had to make a new big discovery to regain
his credit as it were. People who are very creative—like Zwicky or Maxwell—are
notorious for making mistakes because if you are not afraid of ﬁnding something
new, it is virtually impossible not to make a mistake nine times out of ten. Only by
taking risks and then ﬁnding out together what was wrong can one make progress
in science. Ideas must not be killed before they have gotten a chance to be proved,
not in their details but in their essential core. This probing process can take more
than 7 decades as in the case of Zwicky.
After this drawback, he never talked about it?
He wrote a few more papers on the subject which I admit I did not check in detail.
He never gave up but he somehow was discouraged enough not to invest his full
force to help the idea up into a form in which it could ﬁnd acceptance. Imagine:
‘‘Tired light!’’ as it was called later. This epithet could not be washed-off. Nev-
ertheless the idea went through a second eye of a needle in history. His great
adversary Eddington had a pupil named Chandrasekhar. He came at age 19 to
England from India. He famously had a good idea on board the ship to England,
namely the quantum idea which implied that white dwarfs can exist due to electron
degeneracy, thereby paving the way also toward the later theory of neutron stars—
begun by Zwicky—and even of black holes. Chandrasekhar then wrote a paper in
1943, 14 years after Zwicky on what he called ‘‘dynamical friction.’’ It essentially
reproduces Zwicky’s result with a different method but does not mention Zwicky.
Nevertheless he gave a name to the phenomenon that Zwicky had discovered less
elegantly (and with an error) before, calling it dynamical friction.
Dynamical friction means that when you have a particle travelling through a cloud
of attractive particles in random motion, this particle will be slowed—lose kinetic
16
Repulsion and Attraction
169

energy—as if by friction, rather than gain in kinetic energy statistically as
everyone would expect in the wake of thermodynamics. The effect looks like
friction even though there is no collision anywhere here—it is all Newtonian
forces acting at a distance. This phenomenon Chandrasekhar discovered and
proved painstakingly in his 1943 paper, but so without seeing its whole signiﬁ-
cance. He not only missed making the connection to Zwicky, he also did not
realize that his braking phenomenon did not depend crucially on the mass of the
braked particle as one is familiar with from statistical mechanics. That is, he still
had a Maxwellian velocity distribution in his mind in which overly fast particles
get reduced towards the equilibrium kinetic energy to explain the braking effect.
He looked at a system of stars, a special type of star clusters called ‘‘globular
clusters.’’ These star clusters are very pretty, having a very pointed density
maximum in the middle. He realized that in the maximally dense core, from time
to time an ‘‘almost triple collision’’ occurs. Stars are too small to genuinely collide
often, but quite frequently three stars meet in such a way that two stars come
momentarily close in a very pointed Kepler ellipse while simultaneously a third
star happens to be passing by. Then the two of them can shed their potential energy
giving it to the passing third star in the form of a very large amount of kinetic
energy. The accelerated star then is shooting out from the cluster’s center leaving
behind two closely bound stars called a ‘‘star molecule.’’ The fast star tries to leave
the cluster shooting out from the middle. What Chandrasekhar recognized is that if
there did not exist a braking force preventing the accelerated star from leaving the
star cluster, these globular clusters would long have ceased to exist. However, they
actually are the oldest known structures in the galaxy and even the universe (as
mentioned). Chandrasekhar was the ﬁrst to explain this amazing empirical sta-
bility. He could show that a star racing out from the center of this cloud of stars
will be braked enough to remain within the cluster for good. But having conﬁned
his interest to stars, he did not pay much attention to what happens if the fast
particle is not a star but a moon or an equally fast asteroid, etc. Nonetheless he
conscientiously showed in an inconspicuous quantitative note that there is still
almost the same braking effect going on for lower-mass particles. Nevertheless, he
forgot about this in the rest of the paper, quoting Maxwell’s distribution of
ordinary thermodynamics, as mentioned. Obviously he never realized that here lay
a big contradiction, and that he had described a completely new theory from the
point of view of statistical mechanics. Since his method had been a Bownian-
motion type stochastic analysis in the footsteps of Einstein and Smoluchowski, the
contradiction did not force itself onto his mind. The textbooks in ‘‘Galactic
Dynamics’’ continue reproducing this error—despite the great learnedness of
Binney and Tremaine’s book in all other respects. It was a pity that Chandrasekhar
apparently never met Zwicky to talk shop with him.
You mean that in this case statistical thermodynamics cannot be applied? Why so?
170
16
Repulsion and Attraction

It is because the laws of the repulsive smooth Sinai billiard and the attractive
smooth Sinai billiard are totally different. The attraction-based theory sports an
almost perfect mirror symmetry to statistical thermodynamics. Virtually every-
thing still waits to be formulated out. This attractive version of statistical
mechanics has essentially been overlooked since Zwicky. It embodies one of the
fundamental questions that should have been asked since the beginning of sta-
tistical physics and many-body celestial mechanics. So it was possible to discover
a big new branch in the foundations of physics. When you ﬁll it out, a whole new
science emerges that is just as big as venerable old statistical thermodynamics—
namely statistical cryodynamics. It is beautiful to have a second major physical
theory of the same formal richness as one of the main pillars in the fabric of
science. It takes a little time to work out all the implications. In comparison, it took
quite a few decades until the steam engine came and eventually got morphed into a
small gasoline or diesel engine for everyone’s use.
What is your contribution in this context?
Very minor so far. I am only one of those who recognized the existence of the new
science and dared give it a name.
But you worked on it for several years?
The idea arose in a lecture course that I gave on chaos. I had students who attended
this course repetitively for the fun of it. One of them is Dieter Fröhlich, another
was the late Normann Kleiner who was my age teaching at a gymnasium. In our
discussing in the lecture hall, one of us—each thinks it was the other—came up
with the idea of asking what would happen to a light particle if it were to pass a
large number of mirrors in random motion. This idea occurred in the context of
looking at the sky with a cosmological bent. Is there a lawful distance-dependence
of the speed or the energy of the particles that are traversing the universe’s
cauldron of moving galaxies? The Hubble redshift was the reason that we arrived
at this picture of ‘‘mirrors’’ moving about. So we used in our minds a repulsive
model, which is just the same as that of statistical mechanics, and asked ourselves
the question of whether it was not also applicable as a model to the cosmos with its
cosmological redshift. As already said, the sign of the involved forces was wrong
since we assumed repulsion rather than attraction. So the original idea was radi-
cally false but nonetheless helped us to see the other question—what happens
when you have many attractive heavy particles moving around like the previously
assumed mirrors, and a light particle is moving through? Thus, even though the
repulsive mirrors were misleading, the idea of the photon losing energy while
traversing many moving particles in the cosmos proved fertile. So we re-discov-
ered in this roundabout manner the very question that Zwicky had already for-
mulated in 1929, 73 years later in Tübingen. I gave a talk on this at the University
of Oldenburg the same year. Our chapter appeared a year later—without the error
of sign—and we published quite a few papers over the years in which we elab-
orated on this idea—without realizing its more general signiﬁcance at ﬁrst. I mean,
we saw that this insight might put into question the expansion model of the
16
Repulsion and Attraction
171

universe because presently the photons are still falsely believed—as Zwicky ﬁrst
tried to debate—to lose their energy along their journey through the cosmos
through a global space expansion.
You focus on one photon in your model. If you have two photons, for example, or
very many: what is going to happen then?
We have many galaxies and we can also have many photons, but a single photon
sufﬁces to understand the essence.
But if you have two photons then an interaction between them is possible, there is a
kind of gravity between them?
Yes, but this effect is negligible here compared to the effects of the big masses
around.
If we want to go to quantum mechanics since you said that we can apply this idea
to quantum mechanics as well; would this gravitational effect in quantum
mechanics between two photons become important?
Yes. This question will become signiﬁcant when we have a very high photon
density going through the cosmos, which no doubt is the case in some regions.
John Wheeler even invented the notion of ‘‘geons’’—a torus-shaped cloud of
photons that are held together by gravitation. It is unfortunately unstable, but, if
you add quantum mechanics…
…we should then talk about the interaction of photons and matter?
Presently, it is the low-energy photons that are being cooled by the high-energy
galaxies. This process of ‘‘paradoxical cooling’’ is the characteristic of cryodynamics.
How do you enter temperature into your model?
Temperature is a notion from thermodynamics, it is the mean kinetic energy of
particles. We can look at situations in which we have not photons and galaxies—
which was our only example so far—but in which we have, for example, a gas of
high-temperature nuclei and electrons. This is called a hot plasma. We can send
through this hot plasma a ray of even hotter electrons. For example, we can assume
that we have a very hot plasma of atomic nuclei and that we are embedding this
plasma into an even hotter plasma of electrons, which one could generate artiﬁ-
cially without many problems. All one needs is to use several electron accelerators
(six in the Chu scheme) and concentrate their beams onto a hot spot within the
plasma of nucleons. Then this local electron gas of a higher temperature will
predictably cool the plasma of hot nucleons. Even though this is only a gedanken
experiment, a thought experiment, it is applicable to real-life hot plasmas. It
apparently represents a solution to the problem of stabilizing ITER—a machine
which is being built for 3 decades and is expected to need 3 more before being
ready to generate inexhaustible free energy through hot fusion by pulling the
energy source of the sun down onto earth. This machine is not expected to work
172
16
Repulsion and Attraction

soon, but cryodynamics could potentially be used to make it work sooner. Cryo-
dynamics would then have its ﬁrst down-to-earth application. Zwicky’s rebuttal of
the Big Bang would then no longer stand alone, and his idea of tired light would
become an applauded household name. The Big Bang is rather likely to become a
by-gone pure mythology in the history of science much like the famous phlogis-
ton—if cryodynamics is conﬁrmed as a fundamental principle of physics. Cryo-
dynamics would prove to be more than an abstract theory of the same beauty as
thermodynamics by becoming the motor of world economics just as thermody-
namics had done before.
What is going to happen to the entropy then?
You are touching on the abstract theory of thermodynamics in which the most
important technical notion is entropy. We know, for example, as Erwin Schrö-
dinger put it, that ‘‘life is feeding on negative entropy.’’ So entropy is very
important and life would not exist if entropy was not such a reigning phenomenon.
Ilya Prigogine devoted his life’s work to this. Also Teilhard de Chardin and the
whole of evolutionary theory is based on thermodynamics. Now cryodynamics has
surfaced as a complement to thermodynamics. All the important notions that we
have in thermodynamics—like entropy and far-from-equilibrium ‘‘dissipative
structures’’ including ﬂames and life itself—are thriving on entropy generation. All
of this then no longer stands alone. In cryodynamics, we have a radically new
notion which is called ‘‘ectropy.’’ It is numerically equal to entropy—except for
sign. You can again write down equations here. In thermodynamics, Hans Diebner
started doing that in Tübingen with a deterministic entropy formula. There might
even be an analog to life within the scope of cryodynamics. If so, it would be much
more vigorous because life is just running on the back of the global entropy
increase in thermodynamics. By contrast, the ‘‘anti-life’’ would be an implication
of the main force at work—ectropy increase—which generates the higher order
directly.
So in ectropy the rate of entropy production is negative rather than…
Yes, ectropy is entropy with the opposite sign.
Now a question; people are trying to deﬁne time based on entropy generation…
…Like Boltzmann.
If we now have another role for time based on ectropy generation, would this
allow time to go backwards toward its origin?
So far, we have no way to change the ﬂow of time. Actually one can prove that
time does not ﬂow at all, but we have the impression of time ﬂowing because we
ﬁnd ourselves in a new slice of time at every moment, a fact that cannot be
explained by physics. No one knows where the ‘‘Now’’ is coming from, the Now
that forces us to move through time along with the increasing entropy. Cryody-
namics might eventually encourage someone to ﬁnd a way to do something against
16
Repulsion and Attraction
173

this inexorable fate. This is a most elegant idea of yours. Even death could lose its
sting.
My last question; if we go to the quantum version of this new physical theory, do
you think that we then have a new phenomenon once more?
I would dare predict that the answer will be yes. At the present moment in time
there are many easier to derive classical implications. But who knows; maybe if
one starts out from quantum mechanics, one can perhaps arrive faster at novel
implications of cryodynamics. The old intuition of Boltzmann, turned around,
could be an avenue worth embarking on. Using quantum mechanics for ﬁnding
new features of cryodynamics would be an alternative way to proceed. I remember
Garnet Ord showing a slide of the double slit experiment with Feynman paths
underlaid, with half of them drawn in red, the other half in green. Green was the
involved time-inverted motions which crucially contribute to the two-slit phe-
nomenon of quantum mechanics. So, on the fundamental level of quantum
mechanics, we have two time directions acting in harmony together. Cryody-
namics and thermodynamics might constitute a reﬂection, a twin pair on the macro
level.
Also the photon is going to be very important in this context. Do you think that if
the rate of entropy is decreasing rather than increasing, we can somehow conclude
that heat can be transported from a lower temperature to a higher temperature
rather than vice versa?
Yes, that is actually the essence of cryodynamics.
Do you have any point that you want to add here?
I would just like to thank you for the expansion of the ﬁeld that we achieved in this
discussion.
174
16
Repulsion and Attraction

Chapter 17
Einstein
In this session we decided to talk about some special names in physics. We could
start with Newton, but let us start out with Einstein. People love to know more
about him. I am sure you studied a lot regarding his life, his paper and maybe his
errors, if any. You can start from whatever point you wish. Maybe it is better if you
mix both the scientiﬁc picture of Einstein and his life, and the papers and potential
errors….
He did not commit any errors.
Actually there exists a book called ‘‘Einstein’s Mistakes’’ by Hans Ohanian.
Einstein himself believed that there are incorrect papers under his name. Everyone
has this right to err because we are human. Please, start out from any point you
like to talk about Einstein.
Every child on the planet knows about Einstein, and everybody somehow loves
Einstein. There is the tragedy in Japan that people cannot accept Einstein as of yet
as a person who deserves devotion because of the fact that he is indirectly co-
responsible for the dropping of the atomic bomb. Einstein himself recognized this
when he learned the news. When his secretary Helen Dukas told him what she had
just learned from the radio that the bomb had been dropped, he said but one
word—‘‘oj weh’’ (woe is me). It is the only time in his life that he used Yiddish as
an expression from his heart. He knew at this moment that his life was shattered.
Later on, he would tell Linus Pauling ‘‘I made one mistake in my life.’’ This
mistake had sprung forth from his foreseeing the Holocaust years before it hap-
pened when no one else did. In 1939, he signed the ominous letter to President
Roosevelt which he later recognized as his single mistake. His life was in shreds
and he only remained a shadow of the person he had formerly been because he
knew something had gone awfully wrong with his life and with the world. He was
maybe the ﬁrst person in history who connected the fate of everything with his
own past activities. The bomb is of course a permanent risk for the planet, and the
planet has indeed almost undergone a nuclear war since the moment ‘‘the physi-
cists learned to sin’’ as Oppenheimer called it. He had been responsible for
building the bomb in the ﬁrst place and thereafter refused to participate in building
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_17,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
175

the next bigger bomb. So there is this tragic shadow looming over Einstein’s life
after 1945 darkening his last decade. Up to that time, he had had the greatest fun in
science, maybe greater than anyone else has ever experienced, because he was able
to see new things that looked absurd to everyone else but which to defend was his
joy, to thereby change the way everyone else on the planet would be thinking
about physics. In this respect he was akin to Newton who also had been a very
lonely mind. There even were insights which they both singlehandedly shared—
like weightlessness when you are in free fall. This was the biggest insight Einstein
believed he had ever had. When you jump out of the window, then while you are
falling everything falling with you is just an inertial system—there is no force that
could generate any acceleration any more—just like this holds true in empty outer
space as everyone is familiar with today from live reports from the space station.
Newton had had the same idea, as Thibault Damour dug out (as mentioned).
Einstein in addition could rely on the newly discovered special theory of relativity.
Poincaré and Lorentz had already seen special relativity—virtually everything
except for two points which Einstein added. But they had not seen the ‘‘ontological
dimension’’ of the main implication of special relativity—the fact that everyone in
constant motion is at the center of a frame that includes anything that is not in
motion relative to him.
The fact, implicit in Maxwell’s equations, that c—the speed of light—is a uni-
versal constant was ﬁrst recognized by Einstein as being centered on a single
observer called Einstein, for example. He only once conﬁded to an audience—in
1922 when he had just arrived by ship in Japan after learning the telegraphic news
that he had won the Nobel Prize of the previous year—how it all had come about.
His expression ‘‘Dank Dir—thanks to you—I have solved the problem’’ is con-
tained in a talk presented in German to his Japanese audience. It was translated
live into Japanese and from there into English. He had said this toward his friend
Michele Besso, after having returned to his house in late morning after a long
nightly discussion they had had in May 1905. Besso was his best elder friend of
long standing and his colleague at the Swiss patent ofﬁce. The outcome of the
translation was ‘‘Thank you, I found the solution.’’ This obscured the real mean-
ing—that he owed the breakthrough to Michele. So Besso is co-responsible for
Einstein’s deepest ﬁrst insight. It means that the speed of light c is a universal
constant for everyone as if he or she were the center of the world. Hence if
someone else is moving relative to him, the speed of light is the same constant
around the latter, too—which is a contradiction-in-terms. How can the speed of
light be the same around two people who each are in relative motion to the other?
Einstein apparently had discussed with Michele Besso the following riddle; If
Einstein was standing somewhere in the dark and a ﬂash bulb would go off at his
feet while at this very moment the fastest runner of antiquity, Achilles, was passing
by: the ﬂash would create an expanding sphere of light around Einstein but the
same ﬂash would also generate an expanding sphere of light around the fast
moving Achilles, co-moving with him. Two expanding spheres that are not
identical but both generated by the same ﬂash of light seemed to represent a logical
176
17
Einstein

impossibility. Then in the night following the intense discussion with Besso,
Einstein saw the solution in a ﬂash; it is possible to solve this conundrum—it is not
absurd.
The solution is that you ﬁrst switch over in your mind to a simpliﬁcation in which
the sphere is no longer an expanding sphere in three dimensions but only an
expanding circle in two dimensions. That is, you can omit one dimension in
describing the situation. Then you can draw a picture in three-space, plot a vertical
line in the middle with time going up around the non-moving Einstein. You now
can understand everything pictorially. The expanding light sphere is now simply
an expanding circle emanating around Einstein and expanding upwards in what is
called a ‘‘light cone.’’ In the same simultaneity of Einstein, we also have a slanted
(no longer vertical) line along which Achilles is moving within the same light
cone. Around Achilles, there now also exists an expanding light cone—the same
light cone. Two different light cones would be in contradiction. Is it possible to
have two expanding circles or perhaps ellipses within the same light cone? The
answer is, of course! Einstein is standing, the light cone is expanding around him;
Achilles is moving, the same light cone is expanding around him. But the
expanding light sphere around Achilles now is not a circle at its upper end but
rather an ellipse. What did we win with having one common light cone? It turns
out that within the same light cone, Achilles also stands in the middle with an
expanding light circle around him, while for him, now Einstein is receding
backwards, with a slanted ellipse around him in the same light cone. That is, there
are now two cuts through the light cone, each of the same standing. Each
expanding circle is horizontal in the respective person’s frame but slanted in the
other person’s frame. The price to pay for this synthesis is that simultaneity—what
is simultaneous with each in his own frame—has become personalized. In this
way, everything had become transparent and simple.
The equations of the Poincaré-Lorentz transformation were well known at the
time. Poincaré had already seen the light cone, but the ‘‘ontological component’’—
that Achilles and Einstein are really democratic equals having exactly the same
status as observers—had not been seen in a ﬂash by anyone before. That night
following the long discussion with Michele marked the beginning of modern
physics. A new type of thinking had entered with Einstein who was not afraid of
accepting insights which would have appeared absurd and disquieting to everyone
else. What does it mean that each person deﬁnes a motion system, a frame, in
which the laws of nature are the same, one for Einstein, one for Achilles? Does this
not mean that nature acquires a solipsistic aspect to it? This fact notwithstanding,
we can combine the two ‘‘solipsisms’’ into one picture. The observer was suddenly
given a role that no one had thought of or accepted before: an absolutely privileged
position. Relativity implies absoluteness.
How old was Einstein at the time?
That was in 1905 when he was 26 years old.
17
Einstein
177

What was his motivation to work on special relativity?
Both Poincaré and Einstein knew all the equations. But no one understood them
intuitively at ﬁrst. This picture of the light cone with the slanted cuts was known in
principle. It became a foreign type of thinking when taken as the central fact. It
was not the formulas, they were known. It was the reduction towards a fact of
life—simultaneity having become private—that Einstein embraced so as if he had
come from another planet. Einstein as mentioned also saw two previously over-
looked little things that had escaped the elder Poincaré’s attention. The ﬁrst was
the so-called ‘‘transversal Doppler effect.’’ If something is moving across you, then
when you look at it while it crosses your perpendicular line of sight, you are bound
to measure a redshift. This had not been seen before, but it is if you wish a very
minor point. The other new point is again ‘‘ontological’’, the twin paradox. Ein-
stein still called it the twin-clocks paradox; his friend Langevin would call it the
twin paradox 7 years later (it does not matter whether the clock is an ordinary
clock or a biochemical clock).
Is it really a paradox?
These paradoxes are only seeming paradoxes; the one with Achilles and the one
with the twin, but they are both absolutely brain busting. Up to this day, high-
school students experience grave difﬁculty understanding how it can be that if you
move away and come back, you are younger than your twin who stood put. It is
possible to draw a very simple diagram showing this. It involves three twins.
Number one stays put, number two departs from the same position at time zero to
the right (say), in order to suddenly veer back at a certain marked distance.
Number three is originally at twice the distance of the second’s return point. Twin
number three starts approaching at constant speed at the same moment the second
starts moving away at the same numerical speed. So, the second and the third meet
(passing by each other) in the middle, both having the same time on their watches.
When the third reaches the ﬁrst, the second reaches the previous starting position
of the third. So we get two symmetrically overlapping right triangles with the same
baseline. Clearly the second need not veer back at the moment of reaching the
middle, since he has exactly the same eigentime as the third at every moment,
including the moment where they meet. The returned second and the third can
stand in for each other. While they meet, they can exchange clock times, but this is
redundant since these times are identical anyhow. This example (which was
apparently given by Einstein in similar form in the 1920s once) does without mid-
way acceleration. One sees that the moving third twin—like the second but
without acceleration—has a slower-ticking clock the whole time. Hence he arrives
being younger at the standing ﬁrst twin on the left. Q.e.d.
The paradox is usually told with only two twins, the one who stays put and the
zigzag traveler. This is irreparably confusing since a sudden acceleration enters
which goes beyond the applicability of the special theory of relativity. Now the
familiar fact that motion slows down the clock rate in special relativity sufﬁces to
prove the twin’s paradox.
178
17
Einstein

Using three twins, a triple?
Triplets, yes. So the twin paradox becomes a trivial implication of special rela-
tivity. Einstein always had much difﬁculty later explaining this to lay-audiences.
He came up with the idea of two crossing space ships and while they crossed they
should exchange their clock times. But the example with the three twins is even
simpler, one feels. It clearly represents an unprecedented violation of common
sense; that just by its being made to move, a clock should ‘‘ontologically’’ tick
slower. One can, of course, slow-down clocks by cooling them. Then everybody
will understand that the cooled clock is ticking slower compared to its non-cooled
twin clock. That without cooling, just by moving, you should be able to change the
rate of a clock without this fact being detectable to the people in the moving frame
of the clock is a similar ‘‘scandal’’ as the story of Achilles. The twins paradox is
totally absurd. Up to this day, it represents one of the reasons why the number of
physics students is declining across the planet because the young shrink away in
horror from such ‘‘obvious nonsense.’’ Einstein is a miracle.
I think the main reason is the teachers making students hate the clock paradox.
I was about to say that good teachers—I know a good one—are forced by their
students to doubt this result. Only then is a good relationship between the students
and their teacher going to be maintained, as I found out. It goes without saying that
this is a tragic development. Only by facing the courage in Einstein’s spirit can one
progress. The twin paradox is typical of the way Einstein’s mind worked. He
possessed a thoroughly provocative character if you wish. He was not afraid of
ﬁnding things that everyone else in their sound mind would feel forced to reject in
order not to go crazy. He fascinated his private students he had coached to make a
living in the time he was jobless. They soon became friends and had no longer to
pay him. The price to pay was that he brainwashed them. Those relationships
turned into lifelong friendships, as if he had been a religious master. To be
‘‘scandal-prone’’ in science in the same way is very rare. No one else ever had this
strength. Newton came close, but I would not know of anyone else, maybe Galileo
or Giordano Bruno.
Einstein once said, ‘‘I have no special talents. I am only passionately curious.’’
He was not afraid of thinking. That had been one of the accusation points raised
against Galileo: ‘‘To this man, even thinking is fun!’’ Einstein went on ﬁnding
things that were ‘‘impossible.’’ His third surprise insight—that mass and kinetic
energy are inter-convertible—also from the same miraculous year 1905, would be
the one that was going to shatter the world eventually since it made the bomb
possible via the mind of Lise Meitner who thought of it at the right moment. The
fourth ‘‘characterless claim’’ came in 1907 when he looked at the accelerating long
rocketship in outer space. No one had ever seen a rocketship at that time. He was
only thinking of a high tower on earth at ﬁrst, and then replaced the tower by a
constantly accelerating rocketship in outer space—an equally long object with
1g acceleration. He saw with his mind or rather with his guts that you can replace
17
Einstein
179

gravity—which no one understands—with acceleration. The acceleration must be
valid across an equally long stretch. The accelerating long rocket-ship then
internally mimics gravity. The advantage is that this seemingly unnecessary
roundabout way (the imagined contraption in outer space) can be totally under-
stood using the results of special relativity. There indeed arises no problem in
understanding everything inside this artiﬁcial scenario. The hypothesis invoked by
Einstein was that, maybe, what holds true in the imagined rocket-ship holds true
also in the tower under gravity. Then, the rest of his life was essentially devoted to
deriving the implications of this mental visualization. It then came a little bit as a
catastrophe that this (fouth) ‘‘unwashed idea in special relativity’’ proved extre-
mely difﬁcult to fully picture. As fate had it in 1907, 2 years in the wake of special
relativity, the fourth idea of the accelerating rocket-ship made him stumble into a
trap that was unavoidable in the absence of quantum mechanics. One tiny little
result that he hated when ﬁrst confronted with (and that could only be repaired
much later by quantum mechanics) was the reason that he abandoned thinking and
publishing about gravitation for almost 4 years. It was his ﬁrst drawback, the ﬁrst
time that the pure joy that imbued Einstein’s mind—he called it his ‘‘black
soul’’—was a little bit troubled. Of course he was no longer so young at age 28. He
felt he had to accept that something that had brought him so much fun—the ﬁnding
that the speed of light was a universal constant—suddenly turned out to be no
longer a universal but only a local constant even though he had put it in as an
axiom in the ﬁrst place. A ﬁrst non-sequitur in his ediﬁce. He felt that inside the
accelerating rocketship mentioned, he had to reluctantly accept this conclusion (as
expressed on the last two pages of his long 1907 paper on special relativity). I
should perhaps brieﬂy describe what it was that he found because only then we can
understand the new solution. One can look down inside the brimming rocketship
from the tip, and one can also look up from the bottom. You can then use your
mind and the ﬁndings of special relativity. Essentially you only need your own
mind since everything is so simple, in principle. Never before had a ‘‘gedanken
experiment’’ been taken so seriously in physics. May I continue?
Please, do.
You can send a light beam up from the bottom of the constantly accelerating long
rocketship towards the tip, and the same thing you can of course do on earth inside
the long tower. This vision actually was implemented experimentally half a cen-
tury later by Pound and Rebka in 1960 at Harvard, where they used the extremely
sensitive Mössbauer effect of quantum mechanics to conﬁrm Einstein’s ‘‘gravi-
tational redshift’’ as he had called his fourth major ‘‘absurd’’ prediction. The
experiment proved that he had been right, and to date, everyone knows that all the
clocks downstairs here on earth are slower-ticking than their twins up in the
satellites of the GPS, in obeisance to Einstein’s baton. This fourth purely mental
result of the young Einstein was again the fruit of his incredibly disciplined spatial
thinking. If you look at a single light pulse, or a photon, that is emitted at the
bottom and is now ascending inside the long rocket ship in order to arrive upstairs
at the tip, something happens to this light pulse inside the rocketship. He realized
180
17
Einstein

in his 1907 review of special relativity that the light that arrives at the tip ticks
more slowly than it did locally when it was sent up from the bottom. The reason
is—while the light is ascending inside the extended long rocketship, the ship is
picking up further speed. Hence the tip of the rocketship has already acquired a
certain forward velocity relative to the bottom when the photon arrives. Therefore,
the light source at the bottom is effectively receding relative to an observer at the
tip. This ‘‘falling-back velocity’’ is constant. So the arriving light is characterized
by a constant redshift, that is, its frequency is reduced (the name is due to the fact
that red light has a longer wavelength than blue light).
This is a very simple pictorial thought, but it was maximally hard to believe
because it totally contradicts everyday intuition. I mean, the length of the rock-
etship is constant, so how can the bottom be moving away from the tip? This
patent ofﬁce clerk believed so strongly in his own way of geometric thinking, even
in the face of the counterintuitive new theory of special relativity as shaped by
Poincaré and Lorentz that he was sure that he arrived at a totally transparent
picture again. Here he stumbled on an absurd new prediction—gravitational red-
shift! It represents the most astounding ﬁnding in his life and perhaps in the history
of physics. The new impasse: the speed of light appeared to be no longer constant
inside the rocket ship. It would remain constant in every local frame inside, but it
would not remain so across heights. This is what he thought he had to reluctantly
accept that in the lateral direction if watched from above, light would appear
reduced in its speed by the redshift factor like any other process going on down
there. That was a big tragedy to him because this had been the holy assumption
from which he had started out in the ﬁrst place—that the speed of light is uni-
versally constant. Now it suddenly turned out that in gravity, the speed of light is
no longer universally constant—only locally which is much less. Actually, this
impression of his—that the speed of light has to be sacriﬁced as a globally valid
constant in order to understand gravitation—was unnecessary in reality as one can
see to date (with the help of quantum mechanics as mentioned). So for once in his
lifetime, he was not optimistic enough. He had been the most optimistic scientist
up to this time and had been rewarded with unheard-of new consistencies. His
optimism got blunted a little bit when he felt he had to give up the very insight that
had enabled him to understand Achilles and the ﬂashlight, and the transversal
Doppler effect and the twin paradox and mc-squared.
Now I pull quantum mechanics out of the hat as I said, and everybody is ready to
think that I am uttering a sacrilege when claiming that the impossible indeed holds
true—that the speed of light is rehabilitated in its global constancy even inside the
accelerating rocket-ship and by implication a tower on earth and elsewhere. I can
do this only if there is a new implication to present holding true inside the
accelerating rocketship. This point stems from quantum mechanics as announced.
Quantum mechanics implies that photons that have a lower energy downstairs, due
to their longer temporal wavelength (redshift) possess a proportionally longer
spatial extension (wavelength), too. This could conceivably be locally masked.
However, quantum mechanics also implies that atoms produced out of these
17
Einstein
181

lower-energy photons, which have a lower mass-energy (without this fact being
locally manifest, just like the reduced ticking rate and increased wavelength), are
as a consequence proportionally enlarged. For, they are created by photons that
have a lower energy due to the gravitational redshift. The technical name is
‘‘positronium creation and annihilation.’’ This quantum effect entails that another
quantum effect applies: the Bohr radius formula of full-ﬂedged quantum
mechanics. The two quantum laws taken together imply that all masses downstairs
are proportionally increased in linear size. This chain of two quantum effects
which both lay in the future was impossible to divine by Einstein in 1907.
Quantum mechanics therefore brings back a global c to special relativity in the
equivalence principle (which looks natural in retrospect) but in consequence, also
to general relativity. So far, no one has found fault with this continuation of
Einstein’s happiest thought. A doctoral student of mine who had found a proof of
the new gravitational size change using angular-momentum conservation (root of
the subsequent Olemach theorem) got a PhD denied 7 years ago. The present
renaissance of Einstein’s ‘‘global c’’ could not be foreseen at the time. The student
now deserves rehabilitation much like Louis de Broglie, the student of Einstein’s
friend Langevin.
We know that Einstein provided major contributions to quantum mechanics in the
ﬁrst era of quantum theory on energy quantization. Can we talk about these
contributions for a moment before continuing with other related points?
Einstein discovered in 1905 that Max Planck had found something very deep
which Planck himself did not understand at the time, the explanation of the photo
effect by introducing ‘‘photons.’’ It earned Einstein the friendship of Max Planck
from a distance which helped build his career after a delay of 3 years. Einstein had
a different way of thinking than almost anyone else. On the one hand, he was very
sharp in mathematics and could put much sense into equations, but on the other
hand—and in the ﬁrst place I believe—he had a very strong geometric intuition.
Algebra is the most powerful when you ﬁrst know in your mind pictorially what
you are going to derive, then you can translate it back into reality. The pictorial
mind can be no less sharp than algebra, despite the fact that it is ‘‘only’’ working
with pictures. Descartes was also one of these doubly-gifted people—maybe they
were the only major thinkers who had this ‘‘mutually potentiating’’ gift of being
both maximally productive in geometric thinking and able to make the connection
to freshly conceived algebraic equations. The notion of a ‘‘function,’’ in a plotted
diagram as every TV viewer is familiar with had ﬁrst to be invented by Descartes.
One could now ask; which of the two is more important, the equations or the
visualization? I would say that if you can think in an exact way geometrically, you
are done already, because this can then be translated into equations eventually. But
I know there are powerful dissidents—like Wolfgang Pauli perhaps. Geometry
itself was founded in ancient Greece on very simple drawings made in the sand.
Pythagoras’ theorem was already known to the Babylonians. So the connection
between algebra and geometry is very old. Soon after, in Greece, Anaxagoras
discovered the transﬁnite exactness, as you know. At that time, everyone was
182
17
Einstein

bound to use spatial intuition in the ﬁrst place. The modern two-tiered develop-
ment started more or less with Descartes, although Galileo and Kepler were
forerunners. There is this beautiful historical book by John Freely. Descartes’
‘‘analytical geometry’’, to write down equations and simultaneously be absolutely
sure that every step works for purely geometric reasons, was the historical
breakthrough. Although this was a major development, the source of it all—
geometric intuition—is in my mind still the root of science. One has to return to
this root—as Einstein did—if one wants to make major progress. This is a con-
fession of belief on my part. Maybe many people will disagree with this viewpoint.
Nonetheless all the modern developments including the computer show that the
marriage between both cultures is essential—with the leading part taken by
intuition, not by blindly following rules. The most recent ‘‘Virtual Realities’’
manage to give the mind a new exact spatial universe to roam about freely in, as in
Neuromancer (a 1984 novel by William Gibson).
Maxwell had a rationalization. He distinguished between two types of scientiﬁc
thinkers: Some like himself preferred to climb mountains on their own in lonely
solitude to get a panoramic view no one else had ever had, to thereafter awaken
others to building a tunnel from one point here to one point there. Most people
would thereafter prefer being tunnel builders and tunnel users, because you can
arrive very fast at new results in this fashion. However, without the previous
overview from the top of the mountain, this particular fast algorithmic route could
not have been built. I see a connection between Maxwell and Einstein in this
regard. Einstein was very much motivated by Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory of
light which had already led to the Michelson-Morley experiment. Maxwell himself
had proposed the experiment in a letter published after his death. There is a direct
chain from Maxwell to Michelson via a US military person if I remember cor-
rectly. So the inﬂuence of Maxwell on relativity theory is even greater than
commonly appreciated (he foresaw it before his untimely death); it was not just his
equations—which were clumsy until Heaviside reduced them from 18 to 4, as I
recently learned. Maxwell’s equations were then re-spatialized by Einstein’s mind
and in this way they enabled him to feel absolutely secure about how light is
behaving. Poincaré had had similar insights—he exerted a strong inﬂuence on
Einstein. Nevertheless Einstein was independent in his own spatial intuition. It is
very unusual that intuition is given such a high ranking in science—in this case by
two people in a row, Poincaré and Einstein. But let me return to your question.
Let me now ask you about the contributions by Einstein to quantum mechanics.
You started out from Max Planck .
Einstein saw the ﬁrst major implications of quantization which Planck himself had
not yet seen. Einstein’s paper on the photo effect is quite famous—I never studied
it in detail. Einstein is here part of a larger if still ﬂedgling community, so that he is
not as towering here as in his own ﬁeld of relativity, in which he progressed
essentially alone. Einstein also had much inﬂuence on the quantum domain in the
second decade of the 20th century—on the laser, for example. He had a lot of
17
Einstein
183

beautiful insights—even the machines which pilots rely on in their airplanes not to
lose orientation (gyroscopes) are based on patents obtained by him. He also held a
patent on refrigerators—many interests indeed. I think that his relativistic break-
through in quantum mechanics was the biggest contribution which he made in
1935 with Podolsky and Rosen…
Apparently, he always maintained that his most revolutionary idea was in quantum
mechanics. He did not look at his contribution to special relativity as revolu-
tionary. Today, most physicists see it differently.
It still could have been a little bit tongue-in-cheek since everybody knew he was
famous with relativity theory.
Do you consider his early photoelectric effect as being more important, or the
much later EPR result? The latter suggests that an interpretation accepted by the
whole scientiﬁc community—that of quantum mechanics—is not complete. But this
dissent only concerned interpretation. An interpretation can in principle be
changed later. One of the fundamentals of quantum mechanics, starting out with
the photoelectric effect, stems from Einstein as we saw. The groundwork for
quantum mechanics was laid by him. Was his deepest contribution perhaps the
EPR paper?
One can say so. His geometric intuition (which was so maximally powerful in
special relativity and then in developing the general theory) again showed up in
this magniﬁcent contribution. He saw a direct connection to the quantum riddle
itself and insisted on predicting that eventually, quantum mechanics would
become completely transparent. This is indeed the case in principle with endo-
physics where one tries to do exactly that, although no major progress was made
for 15 years. This ‘‘lower-level deterministic theory’’ is very hard to sell and is
actually very intimidating. When Einstein ﬁrst spotted the perfectly ‘‘equal rights’’
that lie behind the different ‘‘frames’’ of special relativity, this event meant a big
turn-about in science. I would provocatively call it ‘‘the religious turn-about’’ in
physics. Let me explain this by returning to Einstein in Michele Besso’s house in
early 1905. In their discussion, Achilles was passing by Einstein at high speed
while the light ﬂash was emanating from their momentarily coinciding feet. The
question had been whether the two light spheres or light circles, the one expanding
around the stationary Einstein and the one around the by-ﬂying Achilles, could be
made part of the same light cone since both had to possess symmetric rights if
c was to be a universal constant for both. We re-lived this already. This ‘‘visu-
alization’’ was the basic breakthrough which Einstein made compared to Poincaré,
who was the greater mathematician.
We were in Michele Besso’s house already before.
I am headed for a new point. Poincaré as far as I know, never accepted the total
equivalence of the two frames but would have preferred one frame—that of the
universe—to be privileged over a totally observer-centered physics, which is what
Einstein had hit upon. If special relativity is taken at face value, each person is at
184
17
Einstein

the center of an equal-rights version of the universe. If there is a way to make a
legitimate transformation between these two equal-rights versions of physics, then
we are confronted with a strange—solipsism-like—relativization of physics.
Einstein was maximally sensitive to the reproach of solipsism. In 1920 he was
publicly accused of adhering to a solipsistic theory of physics by Ernst Gehrke in a
public talk. He was much more annoyed by this claim than by Gehrke’s express
anti-Semitism, and published a rejoinder in the ‘‘Berliner Tageblatt’’ on August 27
the same year. He was the most irritated by the claim that he had introduced
solipsism into physics. Einstein is the one who dared come closest to this point in
the history of physics. Relativity actually means being at the center of it all
yourself, so it is the opposite of a relativization but gives the observer an almost
‘‘absolute’’ status. It is this experience of Einstein—that the very name of relativity
which had been coined by Poincaré and was accepted by him—touches on the
heart of physics.
The new meaning of relativity was that the observer is ‘‘absolute’’; but how can
two different observers be absolute each? It turned out there is a transformation, as
we saw. Thereafter, there is nothing solid in the old sense left. Nevertheless there
exists something that remains absolute, namely subjective experience—the colors,
the Now, everything tangible in our own private experience. How can science
reconcile this solipsistic stance in the world, which each of us has, with its
objective description of everything that is going on if Einstein is right? The battle
entailed by his combining the two views had been on Einstein’s mind since early
on, from the beginning of relativity theory and earlier, right back to his ﬁrst notes
written at age 16. He was, I would say, able to return in 1935 to check if, and prove
that, quantum mechanics can be conquered if you add to it this relativistic way of
thinking. He was accustomed to harboring frightening thoughts for years. It was
his conviction that everything can eventually be reduced to his so hard-won dis-
covery of equal rights for every observer. Or what is essentially the same, is the
fact that the observer is at the center of physics in a way which is both totally
democratic and totally privileged (Lévinas is a kindred mind here). On the one
hand, we have solipsism, on the other, we have total democratic equivalence of
everyone. These two views, which appear like absolute opposites to most every-
one, were in Einstein’s mind forced together into a new synthesis. This had been so
rewarding an experience that he set out to apply this unique synthesis also to
quantum mechanics. He felt perfectly sure that this relativistic type of thinking
would also be able to solve the riddle of quantum mechanics.
Why did he never mention the relativistic viewpoint applied to quantum mechanics
in the EPR paper?
I think it is because this was a trivial matter to him. It was absolutely self-evident
to him that everyone would see that this is implicit in what he proposed. Only his
followers would not see it because they were not Einstein and could not depart
from a secure level of everyday thinking. As we saw he had brought in just one
basic new idea; that instead of having one quantum object on which to make
17
Einstein
185

measurements, it is possible to utilize a twin copy. You can make two mechanical
toy locomotives leave from the same standing position in two opposite directions
as we have seen…
Actually, his ﬁrst idea expressed in the EPR paper was more abstract. I think that
David Bohm was the ﬁrst to exemplify Einstein’s idea using the neutral Pi meson
at rest decaying into an electron-positron pair. But in the original EPR paper, the
authors consider only two subsystems, A and B, and then look at an interaction or
non-interaction being present between them. Einstein never proposed such an
example or something like that, the paper was more general. Bohm added some
elements—so that people sometimes speak of the Einstein-Podolski-Rosen-Bohm
experiment. The latter is only one possible interpretation of the EPR idea.
Thank you and if an idea is not completely ﬁnished, it is not as clear-cut as it becomes
when people look at it from a later position, as David Bohm did. Einstein’s ‘‘naughty’’
ideawas that instead of havingone quantum object, you can havetwo.I amsure hewas
aware of the old high-school textbook example of the two equal toy locomotives of
zero-sum momentum, releasable into two mutually departing symmetric motions by
unleashing a spring that had been compressed between them. Twenty years later, in
1955, my high-school professor, Dr. German, demonstrated it, and the textbook he
used was most certainly much older since he was grey-haired at the time. Unlike me
you studied the paper from the quantum point of view, and your dissenting with my
simplistic view is very helpful. In my view it is this symmetry which allows one to
violate the uncertainty principle by making a combined momentum and position
measurement on two independent but ‘‘correlated’’ particles.
I do not understand one thing here. The Einstein idea somehow contains the
concept of correlations between these two subsystems. But it was clariﬁed later by
Bell that these correlations only mean that we have two probability distributions.
The word ‘‘correlation’’ only has a meaning if we have distributions, but the notion
of a distribution goes back to a statistical viewpoint on quantum mechanics, and
Einstein did not agree to this very viewpoint.
I would not debate that he believed in this statistical viewpoint, but I lean to the
interpretation that he did not use it in his mind because he was convinced it can be
explained.
But it did not lead him to a statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Yes, he believed in the statistical interpretation only under the condition that in
reality, there lies a deterministic explanation behind it. So he did not contradict the
formalism itself, he only wanted to explain the formalism in a causal fashion.
Max Born believed that quantum mechanics is essentially statistical. Einstein did
not agree with his friend on this point. In several letters to Max Born, he says so.
On the other hand his idea about EPR presupposes the concept of ‘‘correlation.’’
What is the meaning of correlation? Does it mean that we have two distributions
that are correlated?
186
17
Einstein

He did not think in terms of equal distributions, I would think. He believed in
identities of two parts.
Maybe he just wanted to show that we can simultaneously measure position and
momentum on one particle…
Exactly, that by using two twin particles, we can measure at leisure the momentum
on the one and the position on the other. Then we know both features on both, that
was the idea.
This sounds like David Bohm’s example. The original idea of EPR is in four pages,
and is a very abstract thing. They did not mention any example.
Maybe, because there were two coworkers, he was not allowed to tick so simply.
In the background—and in the title of the paper which is often forgotten to take
into regard (‘‘Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be consid-
ered complete’’—that is, can quantum mechanics perhaps be completed?)—, there
is the idea that you may exploit having two copies of a quantum object. He
renounced of adding that instead of having two ‘‘spatially separated’’ ways of
accessing two correlated particles with correlated quantum features, you can of
course choose two ‘‘causally separated’’ ways of accessing their joint quantum
features. This is what the word completion (‘‘complete’’) in the title of the paper
expresses.
Do you want to say that special relativity somehow existed here in the
background?
Precisely. To him, it was self-evident and trivial that you could add special rela-
tivity. He believed the idea was so strong already that it was not really necessary to
add special relativity. This is because he had already convinced himself that you
could complete quantum mechanics by measuring two non-commuting vari-
ables—like measuring the position here and the momentum there, on both sides
independently. It would be a miracle if your measurement here would have a
faster-than-light inﬂuence over there. Also this would contradict special relativity.
What John Bell discovered later was that you could formulate an inequality
proving that the ﬁrst measurement does inﬂuence the other in a superluminal
fashion. This indeed proves to be the experimental outcome, and is very hard to
understand directly, even though no information can be superluminally transmitted
in this fashion as it was later shown.
Do you consider the reaction of Niels Bohr after the EPR paper to be satisfactory
or not?
Certainly not. I looked at it once. He missed the point. Everybody missed the point
at the time, namely, that Einstein had genuinely tried to ‘‘kill’’ Bohr’s theory with
this paper because ‘‘completing’’ quantum mechanics by measuring both position
and momentum violates the uncertainty principle and especially the complemen-
tarity principle that Bohr had erected as a corollary or if you wish, smoke screen.
17
Einstein
187

It seems that the main idea was contributed by Heisenberg and Pauli to the
Copenhagen viewpoint.
Yes, and with them the majority of physicists stood behind Bohr. Bohr realized
that the article was a direct assault on him, on his own scientiﬁc identity.
Another question and maybe it is none of my business to bring it up, but from a
historical perspective it is interesting to ask; why did some other highly known
people in quantum mechanics never talk about EPR or write something against or
in favour of Einstein’s idea?
I would say it had to do with a deeper understanding since everyone else had
misunderstood Einstein’s EPR paper in terms of the power of ‘‘aggression’’ against
the established view that stood behind it. Namely, the fact that Einstein really
wanted to ‘‘kill’’ quantum mechanics in the interpretation which had come up at
this point in time.
But he did not suggest any novel interpretation. Even if one supposes that Bohr’s
interpretation is not satisfactory, Einstein still did not suggest any new interpre-
tation. He just wanted to falsify Copenhagen?
He wanted to show that the theory as a whole is untenable. That it is basically
ﬂawed, since the word ‘‘completion’’ is very contentious.
Is it not necessary to offer a new theory in order to allow science to continue,
otherwise after the old theory is gone we would have nothing left in our hands?
But you see, killing a theory …
Is also important …
Is the necessary ﬁrst step, and only then can one hope to ﬁnd a new theory. This is
nothing one has in one’s own hands; one cannot know beforehand how the shreds
of a refuted theory are going to look.
Do you believe that EPR was the main motivation for Everett to formulate his new
theory of quantum mechanics?
I feel tempted to think so. But no, let me take this back. The EPR paradox was only
one of the things that Everett explained in his paper. He mentioned the EPR paper
in his second short dissertation that got printed in Review of Modern Physics in
1957. Almost no reader saw that on the last page, he explained the EPR paradox in
terms of his own theory. Apparently, Everett was very much inﬂuenced by a letter
written to him by Einstein when he was 12 years old (as already mentioned). This
fact made him so strong. To return to Einstein, the main point of his and Podolsky
and Rosen’s article was that one could make use of the good experience he had had
with special relativity (keyword ‘‘spatial separation’’) and look at correlated twin
quantum objects, to thereby ﬁnd a violation of quantum mechanics. This is what
actually was done later. As far as I know, the idea was taken fully seriously for the
ﬁrst time by Susan J. Feingold in a paper which was never published, apparently,
188
17
Einstein

but was mentioned by her thesis adviser Asher Peres in a joint paper of 1978,
namely, that you can understand Einstein better by adding special relativity to the
EPR chapter. This to Einstein himself was implicit and self-evident, but everyone
else has been blind to this. Once you start to think in this direction, it turns out that
you can actually fulﬁll Einstein’s promise that it is possible to kill the Bohr version
of quantum mechanics, as the ‘‘relativistic EPR experiment’’ shows. Speciﬁcally,
if the two measurements are made in two different frames which are mutually
receding, this causal separation makes sure that you now have two Copenhagen-
type experiments in one. In the one frame, you make the measurement ﬁrst in the
momentarily receding satellite, and in the second frame ﬁrst down on earth. In the
other frame, on earth, it is the other way round (‘‘VX diagram’’). Then you have
two sets of quantum measurements that are each independent from the other since
in each, the wave function was reduced ﬁrst. Both measurements will be entangled
by showing the Bell correlations. This causes a contradiction. If you believe in
only one quantum world existing, then something is broken. What is broken is the
formalism of quantum mechanics itself because we now have these two inde-
pendent measurements of position and momentum (in fact their analogs). Never-
theless everything is ﬁne with quantum mechanics regarding each pair of
measurements if the one frame is assumed to be earlier and the other later. If one
frame is the ﬁrst and the other the second regarding the measurement of the non-
commuting observables recorded, everything is absolutely ﬁne. It then does not
matter on which side you are. However, if both sides are privileged in terms of
making the ﬁrst measurement, then both position and momentum have been
measured independently and Copenhagen is dead. This was apparently Einstein’s
intention. On the other hand, we are not ﬁnished in this case. For in the other—
later—interpretation, Everett’s, the measurements are not described by the same
double result. In this case we have two pairs. What the second group on the ground
records, and gets relayed by the space-bound ﬁrst group, is not the same as what
the space-bound group records and gets relayed by the earth group. Here we have 4
measurements in effect. Of those 4, only two are accessible to every individual
observer, in a way which is perfectly compatible with the formalism of quantum
mechanics. There is no longer ‘‘too much’’ information for anyone. The people on
the ground are happy with the result because they have made the ﬁrst measure-
ment, with the later one in the spaceship being Bell correlated just as it should be.
The people in the space ship are happy, because they have made the ﬁrst mea-
surement, with the subsequent measurement on the ground as relayed to them
showing the standard Bell correlations as well. The appalling thing is that this
‘‘peace’’ carries a price-tag. While Copenhagen is killed, what survives is Everett’s
objectively observer-centered quantum world. While the Copenhagen interpreta-
tion is refuted, the Everett theory is conﬁrmed and becomes the only theory of
quantum mechanics left. The same proposal was made independently by Roger
Penrose in his book ‘‘The Emperor’s New Mind’’ in a drawing on page 287.
Nevertheless no one seems to know the fact that quantum mechanics as Einstein
knew it at the time has been effectively killed by Einstein. The experiment is in
17
Einstein
189

preparation—only the quantum satellite is still to be ﬁnished, as I learned from
Anton Zeilinger, as mentioned.
But instead of saying that the whole theory has been killed, it is perhaps more
appropriate to say that we now need another new interpretation?
Exactly. After Bohr’s theory has been vanquished by Einstein, it is the theory of
Einstein’s former young correspondence partner, Everett which alone survives in
quantum mechanics. Everett’s interpretation hence becomes Everett’s ‘‘theory’’ of
quantum mechanics. This is very hard to swallow, though, because it has this
solipsistic streak to it that Einstein was so maximally afraid of in his youth, until
he could show that both of his two special-relativistic observers, the fast Achilles
and the standing Einstein, could be ﬁtted into one light cone, being just in different
‘‘cuts.’’ This time now, there are two mutually opaque whole worlds. It is very
hard to ﬁgure out what Einstein would say to this scenario in the footsteps of his
former protégé, Everett.
In every world, the result of both measurements is ﬁxed. So we are not allowed to
have a simultaneous measurement of momentum and position in either world?
This is the solution, but we have to pay the price of more than one quantum world
existing. We again brush by solipsism. It is not quite as bad as it looks because we
still have the unchanged overall wave function. It is only ‘‘projections’’ that are
mutually incompatible and inaccessible. Still, John Bell’s friend, the Dalai Lama,
would come into the play. Each individual then lives in his or her own quantum
world. Bell depicted the problem by making the Everett worlds successive rather
than simultaneous. This would be a version of the immortality of the Dalai Lama
who lives in a different body every 90 years or so, without consciously remem-
bering the previous existence. This would now happen on a micro-ﬁne time sale,
but with the same mutual opacity. This was Bell’s point in the paper ‘‘Quantum
Mechanics for Cosmologists.’’ From every second to the next, we would live in a
different world, not just in a different Now. We are anyhow at the mercy of the
Now-change in the world. The Now, too, is solipsistic, which fact is not very well
known (although Roger Shepard offered a proof almost 20 years ago). We know
we are being propelled through the Now as if riding on a chair lift. I was once
riding through a ski resort in a lift where each passenger was conﬁned to a little
seat of his own, being tied to the seat and with about 10 m distance to the next seat
(in which my wife was riding) and with a deep abyss below each. I felt very lonely
and it was a very intimidating experience, much more intimidating than riding in
an airplane. This loneliness of the rider of a ski lift is an apt illustration of how the
world is experienced by us at every moment in the Now. This solipsistic type of
thinking, which can also be called a religious type of thinking, was palpable
behind Einstein’s special theory of relativity and it is now again behind this EPR
theory, it appears to me. Einstein was afraid of it as we saw, but he had the courage
to face it. This attitude is even more impressive than if he had loved the idea and
had presented it in a boasting way. He was afraid of his own idea, but he was sure
190
17
Einstein

that somehow the riddle of quantum mechanics must and can be solved. Even if
the price to pay was to be called a solipsist eventually, he took the risk. He did not
like what he said himself but he insisted on a rational solution.
Thank you, we now can close our session on Einstein in which we mostly talked
about the EPR today. Thank you very much for your time.
17
Einstein
191

Chapter 18
Intelligence, Orangutans and Second
Darwinism
We already talked about the brain equation in detail, and we made the connection
to dynamical systems and biology. It may be a good idea to talk about
intelligences. What is human intelligence? And what about intelligence in
animals? What does it mean if one animal is smarter than another? Can you make
a link between the brain equation and this topic?
Let me try. There is a book by Willie Smits which I can mention at the beginning.
He is a forest scientist originally. Many years ago he was given a dying orangutan
baby in Borneo into his hand. He found it on a heap of trash. This baby looked at
him so convincingly as only a little baby can, he started to adopt it. Then he
became the big friend of orangutans in Borneo and is now one of the leading
experts in Orangutanology. He is the co-author of a 2008 book titled ‘‘Thinkers of
the Jungle.’’ It has a provocative title and presents many results which are
completely unknown to the scientiﬁc community about the behavior of orangutans.
For example, they love to see photographs and they remember exactly what the
photograph represents of many years ago when it was taken. Of course they can
use mirrors very freely. The name ‘‘orangutan’’ itself means forest person or forest
people. There is a story which goes like this: Why do you call them forest people?
The answer: Because they do not speak. And why don’t they speak? Because they
know that in that case they would have to join the labor force. So it was believed
that their higher intelligence prevents them from speaking. This reﬂects a great
respect for these forest people. Science largely neglected having a close look at
these—as I likewise believe—most highly developed primates of the planet
including humans. However, the brain weight is only about half the human brain
weight. So according to this criterion, they should be less smart. On the other hand,
we know that magpies and some other birds with their tiny brains exhibit
comparable intellectual capabilities not just to lower primates but even to apes, so
brain size itself is no reliable criterion. If you live in the trees, there is a selection
pressure for reducing weight wherever possible, so the brain weight of orangutans
is probably inﬂuenced by this fact. But that is just a very indirect argument which
proves nothing. I do have an argument though which can prove that they are more
intelligent even though nonspeaking than most other species on the planet. These
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_18,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
193

slow and cautious animals—or people maybe—have the genetic trait that they
produce only very few offspring during their life-time. A species can only continue
if a female member produces at least one viable successor during one generation.
Otherwise the whole population would die out. If the procreation rate is very low,
this means that the efﬁciency of child care and of making sure that the youngster
survives to adulthood must be very high, since otherwise this species would no
longer exist. One can now look at the numbers; an orangutan female can start
having a baby not before the age of 8. Then there will be another baby only every
8 years because they only raise a single child very individually and with very
much attention paid to it in close bodily contact over 7 years.
Biologically can they have more than one baby during the 8 years or not? Is it a
decision made by them not to have a baby?
Since they are treating their baby with so much care for 8 years, they do not get an
oestrus, they do not become ready to conceive again for so many years. Therefore,
an orangutan female who lives about 50 years under good conditions can only
have at most 6—and in reality maybe 5 or 4 children during her life time; say, 4.
Then two of them on average are female. So a female is reproducing with only
about two female births per life. This means that at least one of two must survive
in order to become the mother of the next generation. This is a maximally low
number. For example, in humans procreation is much more efﬁcient than in
orangutans. As far as I know, there is no other animal species which has so low a
reproductive rate. This is very surprising because these creatures do not live in a
secure environment but in the tree tops. Every night they build a nest out of
branches and leaves which they somehow put together successfully. The branches
move in the winds, although there is not much wind fortunately in the forests of
Borneo. It is very hard even to think of having to live under such precarious
conditions as a human being, of being able to successfully build a safe bed for the
night out of random tree branches and of ﬁnding the right food in different parts of
the year, knowing which types of tree are carrying food at what time, which food is
dangerous, which is helpful under what conditions, and so on. In spite of this
highly demanding life style, they have this maximally low rate of accidents as we
saw. How can this be? The only answer that comes to mind is intelligence.
Many years ago, I read a report that one had made a test with orangutans in
comparison to humans in which the subjects were offered a choice between two
objects that were both attractive. One was closer and less attractive; the other was
farther away and more attractive. Human children would prefer the more attractive
item even if it is farther away and more risky to take. The orangutans invariably
chose the less valuable but safer object in such a situation. This could mean that
their brains are tuned towards being cautious. They also are quite slow in most of
their movements, although they can be also very fast, and by the way they are very
strong, very much stronger than humans, which is no wonder. Their low
procreation rate in a very demanding environment proves mathematically that their
brains must be very efﬁcient. The low procreation rate and the respect this
194
18
Intelligence, Orangutans

demands was also emphasized by Willie Smits in the book mentioned. It actually
represents a mathematical problem as we saw, posed by the procreation rate. So
the efﬁciency of the brain which these creatures carry is proven to be singularly
high developed. The question that poses itself is whether it is possible to rate
brains according to their functional capability. Here ‘‘deductive biology’’ enters as
I call it, the fact that in biology one can explain observations in terms of theory. A
‘‘Theoretical Biology’’ in the same sense as the familiar ‘‘Theoretical Physics’’
was pioneered by Ludwig von Bertalanffy whom I met, and by Nicolas Rashevsky,
the teacher of my friend Bob Rosen. Theoretical biology is a mathematical
discipline just as theoretical physics is. It tries to derive facts known from biology
in terms of deductive reasoning. There is one example that everybody knows
about, it is Darwinism. Darwin had to explain the fact that even though the
environments in which the species live change over the course of time, species
often survive even though they may at ﬁrst be ill-adapted to a new environment.
How can this happen? Darwin realized that it is mandatory to have endogenous
changes which create an alteration in behavior or bodily features such that, in the
changed environment, the altered species can again survive. This is a very general
principle which cannot be denied. It is not very predictive in detail because it by
deﬁnition depends on what chemical and biochemical and physiological features
these organisms already possess. It thus depends crucially on history. The whole
prehistory enters. Although Darwinism is a deductive theory, it is not very strongly
predictive. It is predictive only for some general things. The most surprising
prediction implicit in Darwinism is the existence of a ‘‘Brain in the Genome,’’ as
Michael Conrad and I called it in the 1970s. In the genome, not only is the whole
evolutionary past still represented, but at the same time the genome is becoming
more and more efﬁcient in making mutations in the right domain as a kind of
directed mutability. This is a controversial issue in theoretical biology. No matter
how it is solved, however, the point is that the theory of Darwin represents a purely
mathematical insight. It says that when a parameter is changing in a given
environment so that the survival rate is affected, the biological system is bound to
produce endogenous changes including one that overcomes the deterioration of
survival. This is a mathematical argument. Amongst biologists, the fact is not very
well known that Darwin’s theory is a purely mathematical one. It is complex, it
looks as fuzzy as biology itself looks taken as a whole, but at the same time it is a
very strong, deep, provable insight—a theorem in other words.
In the same category, one can ﬁnd a second fundamental theorem. It arose in a
discussion with Konrad Lorenz who was 63 at the time. There is one phenomenon
in evolution of which I had not taken much notice before—that there are animals
living at the sea shore where the tides are coming and going in regular intervals
and where the animals have to move away from the tide or to bury themselves
when the waves come or to switch their metabolism in time. One already knows
empirically that these animals possess built-in clocks which tell them to change
their behavior just in time. This we already saw. Lorenz pointed to the fact that
this information—of when to hide or when to do something else at the sea
18
Intelligence, Orangutans
195

shore—cannot possibly come from the genes. Genetic information cannot tell you
at what hour the next tide will come. But you can have a ‘‘clock’’ which can be
synchronized by cues from the environment. Then you have information in time
which is essential for survival, but you need something like a receptor to inﬂuence
an endogenous oscillator to make sure that you can survive in such an environment
varying on a time scale that is much shorter than a generation period—that is the
difference. From this example we were then able to deduce that this second type of
information, which is not genetic but is nevertheless essential for survival, is a new
element that needs to be added to Darwinism. This new subﬁeld does not suffer
from the disadvantage we had before—that everything depends on history, on the
pre-existing chemical properties of the organism in question. We realized that this
is a type of information which is independent of how you are built. Virtually every
organism living in this tidal realm will have to do the same thing—to build a clock
and receptors in order to be able to predict what happens. This is a new temporal
element in Darwinism. Survival depends not only on long-term temporal changes
as Darwin had shown, it also depends on short-term temporal changes as this
oscillator theory reveals. However, with this identiﬁed as a principle it had now
also become possible to see that survival very often also depends on position in
space. For example, look at a moth and a candle-ﬂame. The moth is attracted to the
light and in many cases the moth will die in the ﬂame. But moths living in a region
where the trees need ﬁre to grow, like the beautiful giant sequoias in California,
will eventually need to adapt to the fact that light can be dangerous and develop a
special sensor—for example, a heat sensor. One thus realizes that if survival
depends on short-term temporal or spatial conditions in the environment, then to
take heed of these by means of special sensors does not depend on the chemical
and biochemical evolutionary pre-history of the organism in question. Invariably,
what is needed is to respond to some environmental cues in the right fashion.
Survival depends on much more predictable things here than was the case in the
theoretical biology of biochemical evolution itself. The slow, long-term evolution
follows different laws than this new problem of adapting to very short-term
changes that cannot be predicted by long term selection, by virtue of being shorter
than one generation period. This was the insight arrived at in 1966. It took me
6 years to realize that this is a problem which is actually well-known in
mathematics but which no one apparently had connected to biology at the time, the
so-called ‘‘travelling salesman problem.’’ We talked about it before, but it is just
too tempting to try to put it into a ‘‘rounded-up’’ form again if I may: You have a
map with a number of towns indicated, and you have a travelling salesman who is
selling something and has the task to visit these towns at minimum mileage costs.
So he should use the shortest connecting line between the given points on the map.
This is a simple mathematical problem and one thinks at ﬁrst sight that it is trivial
to solve. Everything consists of distances that are known. Nevertheless it turns out
that if you increase the number of towns that have to be visited, the number of
comparison-type length checks you have to make in order to ﬁnd the shortest
connecting path rises very sharply. The number of choices that are open grows
196
18
Intelligence, Orangutans

exponentially, and the difﬁculty of solving the problem therefore likewise rises
neither linearly nor polynomially with the number of towns, but rather
exponentially or more. This problem is called an ‘‘NP-complete problem’’ where
‘‘NP’’ stands for ‘‘non-polynomial’’ which essentially means ‘‘exponential’’ rather
than merely polynomial which is inﬁnitely more harmless in a sense. The word
‘‘complete’’ means that this problem in its nontrivial simplicity stands for very
many other problems which likewise are so embarrassingly difﬁcult to solve
although they look trivial. If one of them can be solved in polynomial time, all of
them can be solved. This class of NP-complete problems now possesses a ‘‘sister
class’’ in which it is not the shortest path that has to be chosen, as in the NP-
complete travelling salesman problem, but in which a slightly different travelling
problem needs to be solved. The traveller here has a car with a ﬁxed number of
different gas tanks. Each needs to be ﬁlled up in time before it runs empty, with a
tank-type speciﬁc time interval or driving distance. The ﬁlling stations for the
differently colored tanks are distributed in space independently. Yellow, red,
green, blue comes to mind. The constraint here is that you must not miss one tank
ﬁlling. As soon as the remaining travelling distance is shorter than the distance to
the next tank ﬁlling station of the same color, then you will die, that is, the car will
come to a standstill and you have lost the game. This problem turns out to be just
as hard to solve as the original travelling-salesman problem. I called it ‘‘the
travelling salesman-with-alarm-clocks problem.’’ 6 years later it got rediscovered
by Garey and Johnson under the name ‘‘decision-type travelling salesman
problem.’’ It belongs to Informatics, but even more so to Theoretical Biology in
the hard Darwinian sense which parallels Theoretical Physics. This problem has to
be solved, for example, also by orangutans. It has to be solved by all organisms
travelling in space. For this purpose, they need a ‘‘brain.’’ One can go so far as to
say that ‘‘the function’’ of a brain is to solve this decision-type travelling salesman
problem. Essentially the same problem was independently discovered by Eric L.
Charnov in a less mathematical form under the name ‘‘optimal foraging theory’’ as
a formal subdiscipline of the science of ecology. This is the existential problem of
how to survive as an organism endowed with locomotion. Garey and Johnson
proved that the decision-type travelling salesman problem is as demanding
mathematically as that of the NP-complete ordinary travelling salesman problem.
After this excursion, we can return to biology.
Every organism whose survival depends on position in space needs to solve the
TSWAP (travelling salesman with alarm-clocks problem). Hereby the addition of
more realistic conditions—unequal tank radiuses, different reﬁlling durations,
presence or not of reserve tanks, etc.—make no essential difference. The TSWAP
problem therefore deﬁnes a deductive approach applicable to the BRAIN (also
5 letters). The job of the brain thereby turns out to be independent from biological
history and to be purely mathematical. You actually arrive at a theory of brains in
biology which gives you a whole series of functional designs as a function of the
ratio of the mean distance between sources to the source-speciﬁc maximum
travelling radius. Mathematics yields a bonanza in theoretical biology that almost
18
Intelligence, Orangutans
197

rivals its role in physics. If the sources are much closer together on average than
your travelling radius covers, very simple measures sufﬁce to secure survival. There
is a book by Konrad Lorenz of 1973 titled ‘‘Behind the Mirror’’ (which I like to
quote because it quotes me—if you allow the joke) in which he gave the history of
all related ecological and ethological approaches in the usual descriptive way of
traditional biology. Many devoted people had compared different types of behavior
in simple organisms and in more complicated organisms over centuries. For
example, there are single-celled organisms which just travel around irregularly
without sensors. Obviously, the resources available for food are so dense and easy
to harvest in this case that it sufﬁces not to stay at one place all the time. The next
version of behavior was called ‘‘kinesis’’ long ago. It means that the organisms also
travel irregularly, but with the difference that when they are close to a point of high
concentration of nutrients, they just slow down due to the presence of a sensor. Here
the speed depends on the environment, on where they are. This already allows them
to survive under the given density of sources. Next, there are some worms which
already have direction-sensitive sensors. Eventually, when the distances between
sources (our ﬁlling stations) become larger relative to the maximal travelling
radius, you need to know still more precisely where to go. Behavioral ecologists
worked on this phenomenology for centuries. Ethology later ﬁtted in. But the next
steps on the ladder were less easy to spot from the comparative empirical point of
view of the ﬁeld researcher. If you do not go straight in the direction of a vitally
needed source because the pertinent tank is running out, you will have lost if the
remaining tank-ﬁlling radius is overstepped. One still ﬁnds a hierarchy of solutions
known empirically to biologists for many decades, but previously not classiﬁed
functionally. The deductive approach offered in the 1973 paper (‘‘Adequate
locomotion strategies’’) enables the hierarchy of more and more effective solutions
to be continued. It implied a distinction between insect-type behavior (choice
between a discrete set of alternative goal-directions) and spider-type, and ﬁnally the
locust, mollusk and vertebrate type of optimizing behavior (locust because the
mantis shrimps came in since). This classiﬁcation had been impossible before in
empirical biology. It is great fun to see that ﬁeld research and mathematical
deduction can converge, something which was previously possible only in physics.
One realizes with perplexity that it is possible to formulate by deductive means a
functional brain theory. The abstractly deduced solution involves CPU’s (central
processing units) combined with ‘‘motors’’ and ‘‘sensors’’ and eventually very good
distance sensors called ‘‘eyes.’’ In the hierarchy of functional brains found, an
important threshold exists. The brain equation with its purely local optimization
features represents a ‘‘plateau’’ which when reached does not yet include more
sophisticated solutions which involve ‘‘supra-local’’ or what is the same thing,
‘‘path optimization.’’ For this purpose, the design needs to be modiﬁed. The
simplest modiﬁcation is to leave it unchanged, but to add an additional device,
namely, a so-called universal simulator. Then several local solutions, chosen from
different, momentarily not actually held but simulationally adopted positions, can
be elaborated by ‘‘locomotion without (overt) locomotion’’ and evaluated before
the best one is chosen in the sense of being connected to the motors. However, this
198
18
Intelligence, Orangutans

is of course only one possible way to solve the path optimization problem on hand.
There are other strategies of global optimization possible. But let us ﬁrst look more
closely at this threshold-type solution where local simulation becomes insufﬁcient.
It represents what was called the brain equation. It is based on sensors having
speciﬁed the positions of the closest sources or ﬁlling-stations for the differently
colored tanks or clocks. It computes from those directions, and all intermediary
ones in 360 (for animals living in a 2-D environment for simplicity), the best
locally evaluated direction in which to move.
Finding the best local solution is a well posed mathematical problem—or rather
sub-problem. It is possible to ﬁnd a set of space- and time-dependent nonlinear
additive functions for every direction. Spiders are not quite there, vertebrates etc.
are. It hereby turns out that you need two such functions of the momentarily valid
distances, of the closest sources of the given n types of tank and the momentary
distances and directions of the pertinent closest sources identiﬁed with the on-board
distance sensors. The one type of function is valid under ‘‘optimistic’’ assumptions,
the other under ‘‘pessimistic’’ ones. The two are added with different time-
dependent weights in dependence of the ‘‘sum state.’’ Paradoxically, even if there
are only ‘‘positive sources’’ (no predators or abysses), there are both attractive and
repulsive directional weights involved. The temporal and spatial shape of these
could be indicated. Both are nonlinear. The spatial ones involve the circle of Thales
or a cardioid (for repulsive directions), respectively. The temporal ones are more
complicated, involving rational functions of distance and time. Slight adjustments
are no doubt still possible. One type of source—procreation-enabling ones—yield a
special shape whose attractive positive component can in principle diverge. The
outcome of all this is what I call the Brain Equation. It represents a time-dependent
force-ﬁeld which describes the attractiveness of all neighboring sources in the
environment and, more speciﬁcally, of all directions in space including all those
going backwards. For example, going in one direction will bring you closer to two
sources with a modest angular distance present in front of you, on coming closer,
you are drawn more strongly towards one of them. This is a local problem centered
about your momentary position. The equation contains potential functions or rather
their gradients. Every direction in space has an attractive and a repulsive component
for every source type (color). When the gradient or the sum of all these potentials is
taken, a locally optimal direction is determined. When you follow this locally
optimal direction according to the brain equation, then you will have a fairly good
survival record. But there is a limit to the efﬁciency of the brain equation. When the
ratio between the travelling radius per source and the mean distance of sources of
the same type is reduced still further, then the brain equation is no longer sufﬁcient
for securing survival. It then needs to be complemented by a ‘‘universal simulator’’
or ‘‘cognitive map machine’’ or synonymously ‘‘virtual reality’’ (VR). But let me
return to the brain equation.
It can happen that one direction acquires an absolute priority (an inﬁnite weight) if
the travel is to continue. This absolute priority over all other directions means that
you get an inﬁnite gradient in the brain equation. That is, an inﬁnitely strong force
18
Intelligence, Orangutans
199

is generated internally by this mathematical machine. It is like a Newton-type
equation with potentials, but here it is the gradient, not the level line, that is
followed. We have solved the ‘‘travelling salesman problem with alarm clocks’’
(or synonymously the ‘‘decision-type travelling salesman problem’’) with an
equation which is suboptimal. It is not a very highly intelligent equation because it
yields only a locally optimal solution. When the local solution no longer sufﬁces, it
becomes necessary to evaluate several local solutions starting from differing
ﬁctitious points in the neighborhood as mentioned. You here put yourself into a
position in space at which you are not at the actual moment, to evaluate the
optimal direction valid from there, and so on from several places. One can then, as
mentioned, add another machine of a much simpler mathematical structure which
is a universal simulator or VR so that you can still use the brain equation. You
would then in simulation go to another place and try from there, and then compare
what you found, ﬁnding a potentially much more optimal solution than you did
from the original local point of view. The combination of the brain equation with a
universal simulator allows you, in principle to optimally solve the travelling
salesman-with-alarm clocks problem. One can predict that biology ‘‘cannot not
use’’ this principle. You could object that I might instead choose a chess-playing
type of solution where everything is tried out in discrete steps with some other
algorithm. That would also work. We know that chess-playing computers are very
smart overtaking human players. But the chess-type solver is not as valuable as the
brain equation combined with a universal simulator. This is because in reality, you
sometimes do not have much time to ‘‘think’’—that is, simulate. If this can happen,
as is very realistic in biology, then you need the brain equation anyhow for a ﬁrst
trial in order to avoid doing something as nonsensical as just sitting there and
thinking. If you have more time a moment later, you then can elaborate. So the
brain equation offers a kind of emergency solution depending on how much time
you have to think. If you have more time due to the ﬁrst gut-type reaction, you can
improve on your solution further by using the brain equation in the simulation
mode. So the brain equation actually is a universal necessity in biology, and this
not just in terrestrial biology, but in every kind of biology. It is totally independent
of the biochemical or chemical background of a particular type of life. You can
therefore say that ‘‘brain life’’ is a form of life that is independent from the
chemical background of the organism in question. The brain equation is the same
for all organisms wherever you are in biology or on Mars or another planet,
wherever life exists in the cosmos, including even nuclear-chemical life on neutron
stars as Robert Forward conceived it. They all have to use the brain equation. So
the brain equation is very important. Forgive me if I got carried away…
I did not want to interrupt.
You are right; this is not where we started out from today. We started out with the
bigger question of what is the difference between human beings and animals. The
brain equation with its added universal simulator is the most intelligent machine
one can think of in my opinion. One can prove that this machine including the
simulator becomes as big as the moon or the sun or the solar system and eventually
200
18
Intelligence, Orangutans

the whole known universe if it is to solve the most difﬁcult and longest travelling
salesman problem. Gödel thought about very difﬁcult solutions in mathematics.
The famous ‘‘Gödel incompleteness’’ means that there exist certain mathematical
problems which he could prove are not solvable in ﬁnitely many steps. This
travelling salesman-with-alarmclocks problem—just like the original travelling
salesman problem—happens to yield a Gödel-hard problem in the limit. So the
travelling salesman problem in its two versions has a connection to this deepest
and most arcane problem of mathematics, the Gödel solution. It even turns out that
one can now understand why this solution is Gödelian. Why is it that Gödel saw
that it overtaxes the human mind to consider his problem which has no unique
solution as he and his successors like Paul Cohen taken together proved? It is now
possible to say why the Gödel solution is so strange. It is because it represents the
limit to the travelling salesman problem. The latter problem makes the arcane
Gödel incompleteness theory intuitive because the travelling-salesman problem is
so close to our own survival at every moment in every decision. I did not specially
mention that you need memory—long-term memory—although the universal
simulator automatically contains a short-term memory for handling its differing
conditionally simulated paths as we saw—if the environment is redundant, which
is generally the case in biology. If the environment does not contain redundancies,
you do not need long-term memory along with the brain equation. Long-term
memory only involves a hard-ware type addition to the brain equation. But this
memory is not very essential. A person with Alzheimer’s disease is still able to
save a child who fell into a river, for example. So memory is strangely not of the
essence for a brain. But I realize that so far, we still did not yet talk about humans
or the orangutan in his relationship to humans.
Maybe we can continue with this later. Perhaps you want to conclude by
summarizing the fundamental things brieﬂy?
Let me try my best. The orangutan as I said is very cautious. He is thinking a lot
but he is not talking and he is also not using a sign language. So it is not the vocal
organs that are missing which are responsible.
They do not make sounds?
They do have some calls.
There are also people who do not talk a lot.
And there exist human people who cannot hear and cannot produce sounds. So
talking is not ‘‘very’’ important although every language is an inﬁnitely rich and
precious thing. Nonetheless these orangutans lack something else that humans
have—maybe Willie Smits would contradict me here, but equally likely he would
specify the difference himself. He speaks of the ‘‘Thinkers of the Jungle’’ which
means that he has a very high opinion of the jungle people whom he is trying to
save. Nevertheless everybody realizes that these beings are ‘‘only’’ apes. There is
something missing with them even if it is true that their brains are more intelligent
than the human brain is, hardware-wise. We know already that an orca brain, or the
18
Intelligence, Orangutans
201

sperm whale brain which is the biggest and by far most complex brain on earth,
may be more intelligent than the human brain, and similarly for the elephants, too,
and there may also be a more intelligent species of mantis shrimps or octopuses—
such as Architeuthis perhaps. So the question is; can it be that there is some
fundamental difference between humans and the other highly brained animals?
According to the universal brain equation, the latter no doubt are more highly
developed in terms of the universal simulator employed, the hardware involved in
thinking. But there is another criterion according to which humans apparently are
‘‘superior’’ (or at least radically different functionally) because humans can easily
wipe out the remaining last thirty thousand or so specimens of orangutans of the
planet, and humans can even wipe out the whole planet and reduce it to a 2 cm
black hole—which is something that orangutans apparently are not capable of
doing. How come? What is the decisive difference between orangutans and us? It
has to do with the use made of the brain. But what is the difference between
intelligent human beings and intelligent forest people? This is at ﬁrst sight an
unsolvable conundrum. It is a very delicate problem which can be posed now in
the wake of Willie Smits’ book, ‘‘Thinkers of the Jungle.’’ I mean, people so far
despair before this question, but it can be solved.
202
18
Intelligence, Orangutans

Chapter 19
Hubble Law, Cryodynamics, Cosmology
and Technology
A new session. We again want to talk about cryodynamics, but this time on its
applications. We talked about the theory in two previous sessions. My question is
as follows; what is the application of cryodynamics to cosmology? What are the
new results that we arrive at?
Cryodynamics grew out of cosmology—or rather it grew out of a result which is
the essential result in cosmology, the Hubble law. Hubble’s extrapolation was very
courageous—not at all justiﬁed by the data points that he had in hand. He divined
that the redshift observed with the few galaxies measured at the time (most done
by Vesto M. Slipher during more than a decade) would be linearly distance-
proportional and as such would continue over very large distances. This daring
hypothesis would prove correct even though it was almost crazy to assume. People
at ﬁrst did not believe that a distance-proportional reduction of energy of photons
in the universe could possibly hold true. One of the ﬁrst who acknowledged this
very possibility was Fritz Zwicky who worked not far from Hubble in California.
Zwicky saw that you can actually derive this putative implication of Hubble’s
ﬁnding from ﬁrst principles which made it much more trustworthy. He could
anticipate the generality of the law because he envisioned a general physical
principle that would actually predict the phenomenon. He predicted that the law
was as global as it later turned out to be. However, it is not quite true that he was
the ﬁrst, Abbé Lemaitre had already had a similar idea, but it was less deep and
was more guesswork, whereas Zwicky had a physical law to offer. Still it is true
that Friedmann’s expansion principle evoked by Lemaitre was likewise up to the
task at the time. Zwicky did not introduce a new postulate, only a yet to be veriﬁed
new law implicit in accepted facts. He conjectured that light traversing moving
galaxies—which were known to exist at large distances due to Hubble’s previous
discovery—is subjected to interactions. He pictured that light traversing this
cauldron of moving galaxies would energetically interact with galaxies. It was a
strange and powerful abstraction from reality—to look at a galaxy as a point
particle, and at a photon as a point particle, too, only both endowed with differing
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_19,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
203

mass. To anticipate a systematic interaction between the two was a mighty jump of
the imagination that Zwicky introduced here. It lies in the tradition of the ﬁrst
statistical-mechanical theories which also were originally deterministic in the
sense of chaos theory. The word ‘‘gas’’ itself means chaos.
Gas theory stems from an old school of thought which aims to understand the
complex, out of very simple interactions between particles. This interaction would
be Newtonian-deterministic in kind. This thinking is very idealistic in the spirit of a
Poincaré-type celestical mechanics which today is called chaos theory. For some
reason, Boltzmann and Poincaré never got together, but Boltzmann had very similar
ideas himself. Zwicky’s idea involves both Boltzmann’s and Poincaré’s type of
thinking. Zwicky saw that the present interaction is not repulsive, as it is in
statistical thermodynamics. If you introduce attractive forces, however, you
suddenly have a new many-particle theory. Then the possibility arises, as Zwicky
implicitly saw, that the interaction is not entropic but the opposite. That is, the
heavy particles do not give away some of their energy in the interaction, dissipating
it towards the energy-poor light particles that are passing through as would be the
case with billiard balls of differing masses and energies. On the contrary, the slim
fast particles give up part of their energy to the energy-rich fat slow particles. A
very unusual sort of thinking which predictably met with immediate resistance on
the part of the scientiﬁc community. I ﬁnd it admirably powerful, showing that
Zwicky was a very original thinker. He would underscore this with other
discoveries that he made. He by the way was also the ﬁrst not to be scared by the
prospect of the sun becoming a red giant 5 billion years from now, when the earth
will then be eaten by the sun, as everyone believes. Zwicky saw that one can move
the earth away from the sun by some weak constantly acting machinery in the
category of rocket boosters. Zwicky was able to conjure-up an easy solution where
everybody thought there is none. He had the habit of provoking people by
proposing things that appeared absolutely ridiculous at ﬁrst sight. It is a good
strategy in science, in physics in general, to force yourself to be impossible. He
seemed to possess a recipe for that. But to now return to the redshift law, he
conjured-up the possibility that all the beautiful laws of thermodynamics—its
axioms and theorems—are limited in the sense that there exists a totally different
class of interactions. Microscopically speaking, the latter would not generate
thermodynamics, but an opposite science of the same caliber. This theory if it
existed would rather deserve the name cryodynamics since cryós means cold in
place of thermós, hot—an obviously absurd idea, attributed here to Zwicky.
One question; I think we cannot use the word ‘‘absurd’’ here because according to
this Zwicky-type viewpoint, the interaction has been changed to being attractive.
The word ‘‘complementary’’ comes to mind here.
Yes, cryodynamics would not be an absurd thermodynamics; it would only be so in
the mind of people who think they have to stick to traditional thinking at all cost.
Zwicky divined implicitly that attraction could entail such an unfamiliar
consequence—that big guys, the rich people, get even richer at the expense of
204
19
Hubble Law, Cryodynamics

the poor guys, namely, that the energy-rich heavy particles would draw away
energy from the energy-poor photons traversing the cosmos. This appears almost
ridiculous at ﬁrst sight. Sonnleitner calls this very principle ‘‘energetic capital-
ism.’’ How Zwicky could even have a hunch in this direction is a mystery. In our
course on chaos theory in Tübingen, we came up with essentially the same idea
when the century had just started. Zwicky got reinvented so to speak. We—that is,
Dieter Fröhlich and Normann Kleiner and the rest of the crowd—started out with
the question of what happens to light passing between randomly moving mirrors.
We at ﬁrst falsely thought, as mentioned, that in that case, the light would be
decreased in its energy. We saw the connection to cosmology and wondered
whether the Hubble redshift law might not be caused by an analogous interaction
with moving galaxies. Eventually we corrected ourselves seeing that the moving
mirrors, being repulsive, would generate the opposite effect—an increase in the
light particles’ energy. But the attractive ‘‘mirrors’’ or galaxies would indeed
predict the Hubble redshift. So we independently more than 70 years later re-
arrived at Zwicky’s conjecture as a provable result. Nevertheless we for many
years did not know that Zwicky had envisioned the same thing already. Then we
learned from Ramis Movassagh that Chandrasekhar built a bridge, yet without
knowing that he supported Zwicky, with his idea of ‘‘dynamical friction’’—of
heavy stars braking very fast ones. While this still overlapped with ordinary
statistical mechanics, where very fast particles are also retrieved back into the fold
by a kind of braking force, it obviously was the same idea again in principle.
Chandrasekhar was struck by the same idea as Zwicky. Even though this idea
contradicts the laws of thermodynamics, it is—if correct—a part of statistical
mechanics, too. Or more properly speaking, it is a part of deterministic statistical
mechanics or, even more properly, of deterministic chaos theory. Chaos theory
thus potentially describes the Hubble redshift law. In the next step, one then has to
check whether it does so only qualitatively or whether it does so quantitatively.
Then my second question; what is the application of cryodynamics to particle
physics? You already mentioned the ITER project.
If it is true that we have here a whole theory of the same caliber as
thermodynamics, namely cryodynamics, then this is a big new ﬁeld in physics
which is bound to have applications of a practical type down here on earth. There
exists a major technological problem with a concrete many-particle system, the so-
called ITER in Southern France. Using the ITER, one plans to harvest the energy
which fuels the sun also down here on earth, by enabling nuclear fusion to occur
between different types of nuclei under controlled conditions. The ITER would
produce energy in a much more clean fashion than the usual nuclear energy
sources do. It would solve all of humankind’s energy problems—if this machine
could be brought to functioning overcritically within a few years’ time. It had been
hoped to start working in the last decade, but this dream did not bear out. Now the
start has been postponed by two or more decades. Many billions of dollars have
been invested already. So the program has come to a virtual standstill in spite of
being pursued very actively. Also, the analogous project in the United States which
19
Hubble Law, Cryodynamics
205

uses not a homogeneous gas but pellets shot at concentrically with fast particles,
does not work so far. In Texas and Japan, there exist related projects, maybe also
in China. This is one of the big projects of humankind. What is the reason that it
does not reach the threshold? The reason preventing this in the hot-plasma can be
indicated. The Tokamak torus magnetically conﬁnes the hot plasma so that it can
self-heat; generating new energy through nuclear fusion as in the Sun. However,
the plasma with the nuclear interactions unfortunately also generates unpredictable
turbulences as a magneto-hydrodynamic system. The main reason why there is no
chance that it will work any time soon is that the hot plasma is dynamically
unstable in the magnetic conﬁnement that has to be used. When the hot plasma
reaches the walls of the Tokamak in a turbulent protuberance, the toroidal metallic
container at the moment of contact immediately cools down the plasma locally by
many orders of magnitude, causing the whole process to break down. No one has
so far found a way to make sure that this ‘‘breaking-out’’ can be avoided, even
though the beginning turbulence can be detected locally in time in principle.
What is your solution?
The proposed solution is that one could locally cool the too hot region before it
actually reaches the wall. That is, pushing the ghost back into the bottle locally.
Such a local cooling mechanism was unfathomable so far—you could not cool by
shooting in particles up until now. Even the idea looks absurd, but cryodynamics
says exactly this; you can cool with hotter particles. You only need to
concentrically shoot in even hotter particles. Galaxies have more kinetic energy
than the photons from which they take away motion energy. What kind of more
energetic particles could one locally inject into the hot plasma so as to cool the hot
nuclei there?
You want to shoot some particles in? Why should the interaction between these
particles and those inside the plasma be attractive rather than repulsive? They
need to be attractive in order for the theory to work?
Yes, in order for the theory to be applicable. If you can ﬁnd attractive particles to
shoot-in concentrically with sufﬁciently dirigible nozzles, like electrons, this could
cool the too hot protons and thus solve the problem.
Should you shoot-in hot electrons or cold electrons?
The electrons must be even hotter than the locally too hot protons, which is
paradoxical at ﬁrst sight. The even hotter electrons would take away energy from
the too hot protons if injected concentrically at the hot spot to create an even hotter
bath there. If you can direct several beams of very hot electrons to any point in the
Tokamak, which would not be a big technical problem in principle, you could cool
locally in time. You would need tiny holes in the walls to shoot-in through…
But there is a theoretical problem here: You explained the whole theory in
classical physics, but now you are talking about an application which is also
governed by quantum mechanics.
206
19
Hubble Law, Cryodynamics

I am not so sure that this matters much. The temperatures are so high that you can
safely apply classical thinking to the plasma particles, including Maxwell’s theory,
of course.
But you are shooting-in somehow very cool particles?
On the contrary, hot particles need to be shot in, even hotter than the ultra-hot
plasma itself, hotter by a factor of one hundred, perhaps. The whole idea looks
ridiculous—that when shooting-in even hotter particles, these should not increase
the temperature locally but rather decrease it. This is absolutely absurd at ﬁrst
sight.
I have a question here. Suppose someone carries out this experiment and the result
is not the one that you predict: Can one then conclude that the theory you offer is
falsiﬁed, or not?
Good question.
Do you consider this experiment as a way to falsify your theory?
As a potential application of the theory, it would be falsiﬁed. However,
applications are always very much more complicated than the pure case that a
theory offers. There are natural hot electrons inside the plasma. So everything is
quite complicated since there will be interactions with the local electrons.
Everything depends strongly on the involved densities, and on hydrodynamic
processes. So there are many possible reasons why the idea as a whole might turn
out to not work. Nonetheless at the present moment in time, there appears to be a
realistic chance that it will work.
Should you not ﬁrst consider a simpler problem? For example, we could set up a
tiny system of hot protons and shoot hotter electrons in, both being less hot than in
the ITER. Then we could see whether we can indeed have such a cooling.
I thought of this. For example, there is a famous experiment from the early 20th
century where you have electrons circling in a vacuum, in a not quite perfect
vacuum, and you can watch the electrons circling in a magnetic ﬁeld as a green
ring because they emit some light. This beautiful experiment was invented by
Walter Kaufmann in the ﬁrst years of the 20th century. You can tune the energy of
the circling Kaufmann electrons. There was a proposal that I once arrived at jointly
with Jürgen Parisi as to how one could interfere with the speed of the Kaufmann
electrons in order to verify cryodynamics empirically. My personal attitude would
indeed be that you do not really need do that. It is easier to verify cryodynamics in
numerical simulations. The 2-particle simulations that we did in a T-tube are
examples. This simple system is very hard to run numerically. It is presently
impossible to continue with these numerical experiments since funding agencies
are so slow. In this simulation the numerical accuracy proves to be of paramount
importance. As soon as the accuracy is reduced, the phenomenon disappears for
numerical reasons which are not fully elucidated. On the other hand, there exist
very many multi-particle simulations that have been done in the past and are still
19
Hubble Law, Cryodynamics
207

performed in galactic dynamics—how galaxies form out of stars and so on. Even
the Big Bang is being simulated in studies involving millions of simulated
particles (although no expansion exists if cryodynamics is real). All these beautiful
computer simulations never revealed this mathematical phenomenon of cooling by
hotter particles—only the two-particles T-tube simulation of Sonnleitner was
successful so far.
How about quantum mechanics? Can you predict whether the theory works there,
too, or does it not?
It should. Quantum mechanics is absolutely compatible with cryodynamics, just as
it is with thermodynamics. There must be a regime in cryodynamics in which
quantum effects take over and presumably cause a drastic modiﬁcation. It will be a
very interesting ﬁeld, just as important as we have it now with low-temperature
thermodynamic experiments.
As a last question; can you consider an area of application for cryodynamics in
biological physics?
Not at the time being, I am afraid. I feel this is not very probable because of the
fairly low temperatures in biology. But this brings me to thinking in the opposite
direction—the subnuclear domain. There exists the possibility-in-principle that
cryodynamics has an analog or even application in subnuclear physics, that is, in
the domain of the strong force. This appears highly unlikely but the incredibly fast
time scales and huge energies involved do admit analogs to thermodynamics to be
encountered here, although I never looked into this. So we could leave this here as
an open question; is it possible that apart from thermodynamics-like phenomena,
we also have cryodynamics-like phenomena in elementary particle physics?
208
19
Hubble Law, Cryodynamics

Chapter 20
Taffy-Puller, Topology and General
Relativity
There is a paper by Jim Yorke. He tried to ﬁnd a mathematical model of the taffy
pulling machines as a chaotic system. I am interested in your ideas concerning
taffy as an example of chaos. Can we see hyperchaos in this example? And what is
the importance of this physical model? Is it only a plaything or does it have
consequences in chaos theory?
Thank you. I encountered the machine in 1976 and saw that it has importance as a
model of chaos. Later I got a letter from Art Winfree who pointed me to it
independently. I had featured the taffy puller in my chaos-in-education chapter in
Hungary with several pictures. The taffy puller is a wonderful example of a chaos-
producing machine involving stretching and folding in a repetitive form as in a
cross section through an attractor. It looks miraculous if you can watch such a
machine in a sweets shop. Everyone would expect if asked that some taffy should
fall off and that the whole thing would disintegrate, but it does not, it works for
hours and months on a stretch. It is an example of chaos. You can think of two
radiating molecules or two little light bulbs placed into the taffy. Then you could
ﬁlm the two light points moving inside the taffy in the dark. Many theorems of
mathematics are illustrated in this analog implementation of chaos theory. It is a
very nice gadget. You cannot have hyperchaos in the taffy puller because you only
stretch and fold in one direction. You would need a 2-dimensional taffy puller in
which you implement the folded-towel mechanism. Then you have two positive
exponents, two directions of exponential divergence. The two expanding
movements taken together produce hyperchaos. As far as I know, such a machine
is not being used in technology, but I would not be surprised if some examples
were to be used in the future. The folding-and-stretching technique is very old and
is for example used in the production of Japanese steel swords, where the metal is
being heated and then hammered out toward twice the width and then folded over,
to be heated again and so forth. Then all inhomogenities including air bubbles are
eliminated from the metal in this mixing process, which is self-stabilizing. The
sword is also a nice illustration of a Poincaré map.
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_20,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
209

Nature is continuous, it represents a ﬂow, but you can look at a cross section
through the ﬂow which then is a Poincaré map. The taffy puller is the simplest
explicit illustration of a chaos-producing process in nature. You can take taffy or
just play-dough and think of all types of repetitive operations that one could do
with it in reality. The human mind of adult people is not ﬂexible enough to
conjure-up a catalog of all possible types of basic operations that one could
employ. I once predicted in late 1976 that there exists an attractor which I called an
‘‘X-attractor’’ in 4-dimensional ﬂows, which has not been identiﬁed so far. It
would possess a three-dimensional cross section which one could implement with
play-dough in ordinary 3-space. So this is an open question; what is the next
qualitatively new phenomenon beyond chaos which arises in four dimensions?
There is no doubt that one can ﬁnd it with 3-dimensional taffy and/or play-dough.
Every recurrent continuous motion in four dimensions can be described by a cross
section which has three dimensions. The latter can be visualized as a 3-D map
which in turn can be implemented by taffy, by play-dough.
The taffy-puller makes use only of a one-dimensional stretching, but you can do
much more with play-dough. Nevertheless it is very hard to think of new ways to
do something repetitive with play-dough. I remember I got two pieces of play-
dough as a present on my third birthday, one was white and one was brown—two
round slabs. And I began to handle them, to do things with them, eventually it was
a mess. I mean, I had blobs of brown play-dough and I had pieces of white play-
dough, and I wanted to mix them, to fuse them. So I took little pieces and put them
together in all possible ways, to no avail. It did not occur to me that I could stretch
the whole thing and fold it and stretch. Maybe it was a little bit too hard to do it
easily, but the very idea did not occur to me. I still feel ashamed that at the age of
three I did not invent the taffy puller which is a perfect mixing machine. It is very
easy if you have two pieces of play-dough, one white, one brown, to mix them
perfectly: Just put one above the other, pull them to twice the length, fold over,
pull, fold over, and after 30 steps, I guess, you would have a light-brown mixture
which shows no signs anymore of the original constituents. It would be a
molecular mixture. I was too stupid to ﬁnd the stretching mechanism, but I now
know that there are other mechanisms that you could use to manipulate repetitively
3-dimensional play-dough. The minds of all mathematicians of the planet has not
been strong enough, as yet, to ﬁnd something new here that is typical of the fourth
dimension in ﬂows, making itself felt in three-dimensional space. It will not just be
a one-dimensional pulling, or a two-dimensional pulling. Presumably it has to do
with cranking, with twisting, with turning-around. There must be a radically new
mechanism of how to both pull and twist, in order to get a new prototype attractor.
I once proposed a project tongue-in-cheek 35 years ago: to spend a million dollars
for equipment and for many volunteers who would go to the kindergartens and
give play-dough to children and ﬁlm what they are doing with it. One of these
children among 100 or 1,000 or more will come up with this new mathematical
operation which the mind of mathematicians has not been able to identify so far.
This is the ‘‘play-dough big science’’ research program which no one ever took
210
20
Taffy-Puller, Topology

seriously. I am sure that progress in differential geometry depends on this
program—including understanding general relativity
in a deeper fashion. It all
depends on a child making this invention and being ﬁlmed while doing it. Grown-
up mathematicians have too many blockades in their minds to ﬁnd the very simple
solution. As soon as one sees it, one will realize what it is. It would then determine
a ﬂow in four dimensions as a radically new phenomenon, as important in four
dimensions as chaos is in three, as oscillation and periodicity is in two dimensions
and bi-stability is in one dimension. So there is a hierarchy. We have so far only
conquered three dimensions with chaos, the fourth is still open and the ﬁfth as
well. This is a mathematical challenge in differential topology—I believe.
Why do you believe that progress in relativity and differential geometry depends
on such a breakthrough?
Chaos is a differential topological phenomenon which became famous to my great
amazement in the 1970s after Ed Lorenz had found the ﬁrst popular example in the
1960s. Steve Smale in the 1960s and other people in the 1940s had already come
across it and before them, of course, Gaston Julia and Henri Poincaré. The whole
thing comes from the mind of the inventor of topology, Poincaré. He was a very
rare spirit who inﬂuenced the whole of mathematics. Think only of his invention of
the seemingly absolutely stupid idea of topology, of not looking at quantitative
details but just at the few things that topologists are interested in, the number of
holes and twists.
You are envisioning a bridge between chaos theory and general relativity?
Yes, certainly.
Could you explain a bit more? What is the bridge between chaos and relativity?
Poincaré and Einstein are the two names here. Differential topology was invented
by Poincaré and Einstein invented…
…General relativity …
…as an important element, not of differential topology
but of differential
geometry. The two are closely related but these two minds, these two ﬁelds, never
got fused. The topologists believe that they are more high-ranking than geometers,
and the geometers maintain they have the highest-rank topic and pretend they
never need topology. So there is a jealousy in general relativity against the chaos
people. The former say they are the pupils of Einstein and the latter say they are
the pupils of Poincaré. It is of course cute, the whole thing, but differential
topology or topology as a whole is standing behind differential geometry. It is
almost a historical catastrophe that the connection between differential topology
and differential geometry has not yet been made, only because of the jealousy
between the French followers of Poincaré and the German followers of Einstein.
Poincaré is not as well-known as Einstein is, even though both are very similar in
their thinking. Poincaré came very close to what Einstein found later. While
Einstein, formally speaking, found only one or two little new things in what
20
Taffy-Puller, Topology
211

Poincaré had described before and had already called ‘‘relativity theory.’’ Einstein
also found something maximally big which Poincaré had overlooked. It is like the
two directions in the not yet existing two-dimensional taffy puller. They cannot be
reduced to each other. Some basic elements of general relativity were also already
in Poincaré’s book ‘‘The Value of Science’’ published by Flammarion in 1904 and
discussed by Einstein with his friends in the ‘‘Olympian Academy’’ which they
had founded. Poincaré describes there that the size of objects might depend on
their position in space and shows how strange the world would become under this
condition. Olafur Eliasson, the famous mathematical artist, later implemented an
approximation using two light sources of different colors in orthogonal positions
and a landscape made optically opaque by artiﬁcial fog. He is the same Eliasson
who suspended a running electrical fan from a long rope and wondered what
would happen (a beautiful hyperchaotic motion).
But to come back, Poincaré and Einstein were kindred minds. The ‘‘lights’’ that
Einstein could spot within special relativity—especially the ontological twin
paradox, and the person-centeredness of simultaneity, a whole private umbrella
around every individual that stretches out to inﬁnity—Poincaré was too old to
appreciate. The impish streak in Einstein—that he always said he had a black soul
because he drank black coffee—was inaccessible to the more seriously playing
Poincaré—although topology and homoclinicity have their rebellious streaks, too.
Since Poincaré died so early (in 1912), they could not become friends in time.
The question is; there are two ﬁelds here and apparently, their bases are similar,
topology and general relativity. But to my knowledge, we have not heard so far
that there exists a reasonable bridge between them to go back and forth. In
particular, I have not seen anything to the effect that progress in chaos theory
could help general relativity or vice versa. Can you envision such a situation?
What help could chaos theory offer in general relativity? And what is the help that
general relativity can give to chaos theory?
General relativity suffers from being a little bit too dogmatic and narrow in the
tools that it uses. It essentially only uses curvature so far, it never talks about
stretching as being of equal rank—the taffy-pulling experience is missing, if you
wish. There is some stretching implicit if you look at Flamm’s paraboloid, for
example, which is the traditional geometry behind the Einstein-Rosen bridge, but
stretching is marginal compared to the free reign that is given to curvature as
governing the structure of differentiable manifolds.
The wormhole as a paraboloid?
Yes, the wormhole, this rotated paraboloid of Flamm, is the best illustration. It
looks very beautiful, like a symmetric vase.
A bridge somehow.
It has a big opening up here and an equally big opening down there, and in the middle
it has a narrow feminine waist. This is the wormhole. Einstein-Rosen-bridge is the
212
20
Taffy-Puller, Topology

right name for it. It not only contains curvature, it also contains stretching. However,
this stretching is very limited. In general relativity, stretching does not play the same
role as curving. It is somehow suppressed in the subconscious of the minds of
general relativists for almost a century by now. They seem not to know that tearing is
just as important as folding, pardon me, curving. The stretchability of taffy has yet to
be brought in.
Why do you think that stretching is very important in general relativity?
It is a bit premature if I utter this guess, but I would dare say that in general
relativity, if you do it right, you have to include just as much stretching as you
have folding-over, that is, curving. I see here a historical fault in the reception of
Einstein’s ideas, in the sense that people overlooked the second topological
implication of nonlinearity in general relativity. They would have avoided this
blindness if Poincaré’s ideas had been included as they deserve. So the whole ﬁeld,
rather than opening up, became a little bit dogmatic as a subﬁeld of differential
geometry which can here be characterized simplistically as ‘‘differential geometry
without stretching’’—there is some stretching, but it is under-represented. So
general relativity
can be ‘‘healed’’ as it were by learning from differential
topology that stretching, which is the basis of chaos theory, is just as important in
understanding space-time geometry as curving is. Actually, the two go hand in
hand. It is very easy; whenever you have inﬁnite curvature, you also have inﬁnite
stretching.
It seems when such a progress is made, the dogma will be overcome that there was
a big difference between French and German scientists and a productive
friendship will arise at last.
It is the European reuniﬁcation in mathematics, one could call it. The whole world
would proﬁt from Poincaré and Einstein becoming friends in retrospect.
One could start like this: One could write a letter-type publication, for example, to
suggest that the people working in differential geometry and general relativity
should start working together on the potential contributions of ‘‘stretching’’ to
general relativity. But apparently the people at the moment rather work on
deepening the gap in between the two schools. I expect and hope that this gap can
be made to disappear somehow.
Thank you for saying that.
20
Taffy-Puller, Topology
213

Chapter 21
Sinai Billiard and Plane-Tree Alley
In this session I would like to come back to cryodynamics again. Let me ask you to
explain it from the basis of the T-tube model, its structure and conception. In
addition, I plan to ask you one question; I saw a paper outside physics of 2008 by
Professor Zadeh, titled ‘‘Is there a need for fuzzy logic?’’ After more than 40 years
of work he confronted this question and tried to answer it. The question came from a
professor of electrical engineering who had put the whole fuzzy logic into question
in that paper. Zadeh’s paper was a whole-hearted response. Let me ask you the
same question here: Is there any need for cryodynamics? And if so, what is it?
The shortest answer would be that chaos theory demands this new implication—
cryodynamics—to be taken seriously, for, the whole thing just stems from chaos
theory. Chaos in this light becomes even more fundamental than appreciated
previously. We know that celestial mechanics is applied chaos theory, since chaos
is an implication of deterministic Newtonian dynamics and of Einsteinian
dynamics. Only quantum mechanics causes some problems here, but these
problems do also show that chaos theory must be underlying quantum mechanics
as well, which fact may come as a surprise. At any rate, the case of attractive fast
moving particles interacting belongs to chaos theory from the beginning. At the
same time there is no reason to criticize a statistical theory, but chaos is more
fundamental. I am thinking here of deterministic systems, of constructing a many-
particle theory of mutually attracting bodies. Hamiltonian celestial mechanics
includes such a many-particle theory, just like Hamiltonian statistical thermody-
namics does. Only that we in the new case obtain a statistical cryodynamics—the
opposite of a statistical thermodynamics. (Thermós means warm and kryós means
cold in Greek). Both sciences have the same rank, but the attractive case was not
recognized as a ﬁeld of its own with the same rank and birth right as enjoyed by
the repulsive case of thermodynamics. It is indeed very unlikely, a priori speaking,
that a big old discipline like thermodynamics should possess a sister discipline
which is no less big and just as old, but somehow got overlooked.
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_21,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
215

Can I ask a question for clarity? What kind of many-body phenomena do we have
in physics that cannot be explained using statistical thermodynamics, so that we
need to invoke this new discipline?
It is the interaction of many particles that are governed by attractive rather than
repulsive potentials. In other words, it is a theory of many-particle celestial
mechanics. Celestial mechanics automatically contains such a subdiscipline
dealing with many gravitationally interacting particles. When we look at the night
sky, this is cryodynamics in action. Cryodynamics is a very old ﬁeld in terms of its
constituent elements and interactions—it just did not have a name before. The
statistical or many-body part of celestial mechanics got overlooked as a problem in
the history of physics, ever since 1687. This is almost unbelievable. Cryodynamics
has always existed as a white area on the map of physics, but since it was white,
people were misled into thinking there was nothing there.
So you have another starting point to explain cryodynamics than the T-tube
model?
Thank you for this question. Just last night, I was thinking about the simplest
possible model, and the idea occurred to me that I could draw a connection
between Sinai’s chaos theory on the one hand and cryodynamics on the other.
Sinai, so I should add, is the inventor of modern gas theory in the context of chaos
theory. In 1970, he published a very long and big paper on ‘‘a tennis game in an
orchard,’’ as a friend of mine, Harry Thomas, called it, as mentioned. Harry was a
professor of theoretical physics at the University of Basel in Switzerland. We had
many discussions when I was very fresh into chaos as it were. He had returned
from a visit to Moscow and told me about people discussing the dripping faucet
there, thinking that the irregular falling of the droplets was caused by air molecules
interfering with an otherwise periodic droplet formation. He already knew about
chaos, and we agreed that this was a deterministic phenomenon, even though
almost no one believed so at the time—that the irregularly dripping faucet was just
an illustration to Poincaré’s theory.
To come back to our topic, he told me ﬁrst-hand how one could interpret Sinai’s
gas theory. Sinai had invented this wonderful deterministic model for a gas of
many mutually repulsive particles—an almost hopeless case to understand
deterministically. It occurred to him to reduce the repulsive balls in three-D
toward repulsive round disks in two-D, on a plane. Since this was still too hard, he
saw that one could just look at two. And then ﬁx the one disk by nailing it to the
middle of a quadratic billiard table. Then the other would do all the work without
loss of generality as it were. Further, the moving disk could be shrunk to a point if
the stationary one’s diameter was doubled, with no ensuing change of trajectory.
Yes, then he identiﬁed, without loss of generality again, pairwise-opposing sides of
the quadratic table. Can you visualize this? This is Harry Thomas’ ‘‘tennis game in
an orchard.’’ An orchard is many trees planted in regular intervals. Then we can
have a ball ﬂying straight through the orchard without friction. You just need to
look at the trees as regularly spaced repulsive disks, with the ball following an
216
21
Sinai Billiard and Plane-Tree Alley

uninterrupted course. This is because the single cell with the repulsive disk in the
middle, repeats itself indeﬁnitely on an inﬁnite tessellation space as one calls such
a grid. (Like the advertisement for ‘‘Wissoll chocolate’’ from the 1950’s:
‘‘Inﬁnitely good!’’). If you make the orchard a two-dimensional tessellation space,
you have Sinai’s problem.
As a billiard model?
Yes, as a Sinai billiard. It is a great help to have this orchard before your eyes, to
have these regularly planted trees and the ball ﬂying straight in between them.
Sinai was thereby able to make a convincing connection between deterministic
dynamics in chaos theory and the qualitative behavior of many-particle systems;
the old problem of statistical thermodynamics. He was the ﬁrst to look at many-
particle chaos in a deterministic fundamental way. This picture of a tennis ball
ﬂying through an orchard gave me a mental association last night. I remembered a
certain alley in Tübingen called the ‘‘Plane-tree Alley’’, Platanenallee in German.
This alley I know from my early childhood days. I remember walking there when I
was 2 years and 4 months old, making a classical remark to my mother. I was
walking there with my mother and my little sister of 9 months’ age in a carriage…
You mean the alley in between the two arms of the Neckar river in Tübingen?
Exactly. It is a long artiﬁcial island in the Neckar river, and the tall trees are very
regularly planted and beautiful. The trees actually are leaning slightly outwards,
away from the middle line, presumably having more light on their foliage this way.
The direction of the alley is approximately west-east. When you walk there you
pass by the ‘‘Hölderlin tower’’ as a half-round protrusion on the northern side of
the Neckar river, where the allegedly insane late poet lived for more than three
decades. He would on his long walks, lift his hat before every dog he encountered
but not before any person. He had put hopes in Napoleon before, it is rumored. I
was walking there with my mother and my little sister in her carriage. A little man,
a midget (Lilliputian) in size, was coming across us. When he was within listening
distance, I was asking my mother in an excited loud voice ‘‘Is this man already
9 months old?’’ He broke into a loud laughter and my mother would explain to him
that my little sister was just nine months old. It was a good experience I had in this
alley. Now I thought of this alley again in the context of Sinai’s ball ﬂying in an
orchard. In Sinai’s case the ball is not assumed to ﬂy through in exact straight
parallelism in which case it will never touch a tree but forever remain on its
straight course. This conceptual model of many trees in a row and a ball ﬂying
through is very interesting also if you replace Sinai’s ‘‘hard’’ repulsion by a
‘‘smooth’’ repulsion. What does this minor modiﬁcation mean for Sinai’s result?
We still have the orchard, we still have the tennis ball, but now we have smooth
repulsion. The result then, of course remains basically the same. If the ball is
slightly non-parallel, we encounter chaos again. We have but one new
phenomenon; it is no longer hard-disks chaos but smooth-disks chaos. The latter
is more complicated because it involves Komogorov-Arnold-Moser ‘‘KAM’’
islands. Nevertheless we can still look at these trees and our unstable situation
21
Sinai Billiard and Plane-Tree Alley
217

when the path looked at runs right through the middle of the tessellation alley. The
trees now have a smoothly repulsive force acting on you, the ball, running in the
middle. You come closer to two trees as you approach the middle line in between
them, but you never touch a tree. So, all that occurs is that from time to time you
have to negotiate the slight elevation in the middle between two trees, a saddle
point in the parlance of differential geometry. That is all. It is a mental game like a
computer game. But now, make the trees move—this is the new idea. We keep the
symmetric path in the middle of the alley or orchard, but make the trees move, all
equally and symmetrically. We can make them approach periodically, all of them
doing the same thing. Or equivalently, but easier to visualize, we can let the trees
stand and make them ‘‘breathe’’—become broader and narrower periodically.
Then the path in the middle will be affected somehow. It will be interesting to see
what happens.
The path would be narrowed and widened?
The path does not change in its course, but the speed along the path is now no
longer strictly periodically modulated in time. We now have a second change
compared to the hard Sinai case; the speed does not just vary periodically any
more, as it did when the smoothened trees did not oscillate. There is now the added
possibility of a systematic, progressive effect on the speed. This is a new element,
there is the possibility that the Sinai game…
He had ﬁxed disks.
Yes. If we ﬁx the positions of the smoothly rising trees, then there will be only a
periodic speed change, as the ball musters the saddle point in between the two
mounds that lead up to the tall tree stems and form a saddle point in between them,
as we saw. But if we now allow the trees to move periodically and symmetrically
without touching (or let them breathe in width periodically for simplicity), we do
have a recurrent inﬂuence exerted on the travelling ball as it passes symmetrically
in between the breathing tree stems. We do not lose the symmetry even though it
of course remains a highly unstable situation. As it turns out, this example of the
periodically attracted and repelled billiard ball is equivalent mathematically to the
T-tube model, which is equally intuitive but harder to explain.
Is the number of degrees of freedom increased because these obstacles on the
billiard table are moving?
We just have a periodic forcing because the trees are all doing the same thing.
And do all have the same mean velocity?
The trees, yes, but the ball, no. The trees are all doing the same thing periodically,
and we can assume that they all just oscillate in their width. Then there is this fast
particle, the ball, passing through in between. What is going to happen to the
rolling ball in the middle? One might take guesses at this moment. It is such a
simple game. I should also add that instead of repulsion as Sinai had it, we could
have attraction, and ask the same question. But let us ﬁrst look at the repulsive case
218
21
Sinai Billiard and Plane-Tree Alley

a little longer. All these trees are repulsive and we can assume they have a
Lennard-Jones type repulsion. Hereby we assume that the attractive short-distance
part of the Lennard-Jones potential is omitted. We then have a smoothly repulsive
potential left, and its precise form—whether of the 12th order as in the Lennard-
Jones potential or whether a repulsive Newtonian potential—makes no qualitative
difference. It does not matter whether it is Newtonian, that is maximally long-
range, or short-range as in the dip-free Lennard-Jones analog. But we can predict
what happens since the situation is so simple. We just have trees oscillating in
width on each side, a particle pressing on in-between them, and this repulsive force
between the trees and the particle. What we ﬁnd is that the particle under these
forces will be accelerated on average. So the degree of freedom that we are looking
at—speed—can be understood in this structurally unstable but very simple
scenario, which happens to be identical to the T-tube model. So there is a good
motivation to take it seriously.
Can one consider this particle to be a photon?
Presently we have classical-mechanical axioms, so we do not have any problem
with the speed of light. But in principle we can include relativity without any
problems.
So you believe this picture is equivalent to the T-tube and it can explain
cryodynamics. If you now change the model and make it a little more difﬁcult; do
these trees or in the billiard table the holes move with the same speed?
All of them move together with the same speed.
If we consider every hole or every tree as a particle, then we have 2 or 3 particles.
Now, is it a two-dimensional or three-dimensional system?
We have two dimensions at the time being.
And if we do not have a perfect symmetry and if the symmetry is reduced, are the
results then changed? Do we have here a special behavior?
If we ﬁnd something interesting here in this very symmetric situation, then this
will survive if you make the system more realistic because we arranged the
symmetry only to avoid unnecessary complications. Whenever we perturb the
symmetry, we get the same qualitative behavior. So this is a prototype model, just
as Sinai’s model was a prototype itself. The model explains a very big range of
problems even though it is singularly simple and formally speaking structurally
unstable. When we are interested in the question, ‘‘What happens to the speed of a
particle when it is encountering heavy particles which are approaching or
receding?’’, we can use this model. The symmetry does not detract from the
generality of the result which matters. We can show that this particle as it moves
through this alley will be accelerated and in the mirror inverted attractive case, it
will be braked. These results carry over to the perturbed asymmetric or irregular
versions of the billiard game.
21
Sinai Billiard and Plane-Tree Alley
219

Do you believe that the Sinai paper should be read very carefully before you start
to smoothen the disks?
Yes, the plane tree problem is a subcase to Sinai’s problem in which we introduced
smooth potentials rather than the delta function potentials that he used. We
therefore get an added observable which is a change of speed.
To get more progress in this way, I mean through the use of mathematics, one
should deal ﬁrst with the original Sinai paper?
This is nothing but a footnote to Sinai’s paper, yes.
It is not easy to deal with that long paper?
I mean he took great pains to prove what his intuition showed immediately. So in a
sense the paper is very short and simple despite its complexity. Only if you look at
the details as footnotes as it were, they are very rich. You can again make many
‘‘footnotes’’ in the plane tree case but the problem itself is very simple. The
question is; can we understand or prove that if the trees are doing this, are moving
back and forth from the middle of the path or just breathing, that there is a
systematic effect that is bound to occur? The answer is: the particle will be sped-up
in the breathing alley.
Another question; some people look at statistical mechanics not from the
deterministic Boltzmann viewpoint. They start out from many particles looked at in
a statistical fashion. They consider two levels of energy, E-minus and E-plus, say.
The statistical approach just counts the number of particles lying between two
levels of energy. So they do not talk about entropy. We have just two levels of
energy, we have many particles, and we are able to count the number of particles.
This is statistical physics seen from another viewpoint. What is the role of
cryodynamics here?
You see, statistical physics in thermodynamics is just a tool. If you can introduce a
deterministic basis underneath the statistical physics which explains everything,
yielding statistically valid results from a deterministic basis, then this is a more
powerful theory. One can then reduce the number of statistical axioms to zero
because you now have only deterministic laws. Chaos theory is a big improvement
on statistical mechanics, which fact has not been appreciated sufﬁciently so far.
Here Sinai was the ﬁrst to show and prove that you can understand a gas in terms
of chaos theory, that is, in terms of a dual to celestial mechanics. You do not need
any statistical assumptions. Statistics can be used later, once you have understood
the deterministic principle. You then can even arrive at proofs why the axioms you
introduced in the statistical approach are reasonable.
Chaos yields a lower-level theory, so statistical mechanics is an implication of
chaos theory here. And the same applies if you turn everything around and use
attractive potentials, which is the sister case to the one which we just had. We had
220
21
Sinai Billiard and Plane-Tree Alley

the trees that are moving and could predict that the freshly thrown-in, frictionlessly
rolling particle gains energy when the trees are doing what we assumed. This could
be shown in detail. If we now invert the whole thing, then the symmetrically
thrown-in particle predictably is going to lose energy when it goes through the
mirror-inverted alley that is now attractive rather than repulsive. Thereby we come
to realizing that there exist two deterministic theories, two many-particle
deterministic theories, one chaotic with repulsive potentials, one chaotic with
attractive potentials. Both have the same level of importance. It is a strange fact
that there exist here two mirror-symmetric sciences, only one of which has been
looked at in the history of physics. It is unprecedented that a major discipline of
the same level of complexity as another one got overlooked for some 150 years.
Let us ﬁnish on a more aggressively formulated applied question if you apply your
idea to cosmology: is the idea of cryodynamics at variance with the Big Bang
model? Or do you believe in another explanation?
You are alluding to the Hubble law which is an empirical fact. When photons
travel through the cosmos, they suffer a distance proportional redshift—a loss of
energy which was discovered on a narrow empirical basis by Edwin Hubble and
was ﬁrst hypothetically explained on a deterministic basis by Fritz Zwicky the
same year in which Hubble had published it, in 1929. Hubble was during his whole
life quite attracted to this idea of Zwicky’s—a fact which might have cost him the
deserved Nobel Prize. Zwicky unfortunately made a mistake, an error of sign, in
his paper, so that the world was not accepting his correct intuition. It sounds
incredible, but Zwicky proposed a distance proportional reduction in the energy of
the photons passing through a cosmos containing randomly moving heavy
galaxies—just like our inverted plane trees. I should say something much more
defensive here. At the present moment in time it is not yet clear whether this new
statistical mechanics, this new subﬁeld of statistical mechanics called cryody-
namics, is also quantitatively able to explain the Hubble law. All that is for sure so
far is that it is qualitatively able to explain the Hubble law. There is a paper my
coworkers and I published in 2007 that shows that it also ﬁts quantitatively but that
is a fairly rough estimate. It no doubt will be possible to arrive at much harder
criteria. But at the present moment, one can already be sure, I dare say, that
qualitatively speaking, the Big Bang has been superseded. Whether it retains a
quantitative niche after being no longer needed qualitatively, is another matter.
From a more general point of view, the probability that you have two different
principles to explain the same phenomenon—one ﬁrst-principles, the other based
on ‘‘second-principles’’—is not very high. There are much too many sub-
postulates in one of the two.
So, you believe this idea, the inverted alley problem, can explain the Hubble law
completely?
I am absolutely convinced, but that is just a bet, not a proof.
21
Sinai Billiard and Plane-Tree Alley
221

You believe that this is a new explanation in place of the Big Bang theory? Is there
a point where your viewpoint contradicts the Big Bang, or is it just an offered
alternative explanation? What is the advantage of this theory over the Big Bang
model?
Cryodynamics makes the Big Bang theory qualitatively obsolete, but only so if this
can be conﬁrmed also quantitatively. So there is a quantitative problem that is open
and very important to solve. At the moment everything speaks in favor of the
hypothesis that Zwicky’s explanation of the Hubble law was correct notwith-
standing the fact that he at one point committed an error in his equations. If it is
true that we here have a new application of statistical mechanics which predicts a
Hubble like law, then the ﬁrst thing we have to check is whether this prediction
sufﬁces to quantitatively explain what we observe. Then—if this is the case—the
whole of cosmology kind of restarts—is reset to the year 1929 when Hubble had
found the empirical law which later proved to be correct. The explanation seen, but
not correctly explained, by Zwicky, will then become the correct explanation. So,
just as statistical thermodynamics ﬁnds a deterministic basis in chaos theory, so
statistical cryodynamics has a deterministic basis in chaos theory. The Hubble law
is a potential straightforward application. All the beliefs of the scientiﬁc
community in expansion-related explanations of other cosmological laws like
the so-called Cosmic Background Radiation, or like ‘‘accelerated expansion,’’
almost everything in cosmology would be in for an overhaul. It is as if all cars that
were designed in a realm of physics since 1929 had to be called back to the factory
because an element of their engines needs replacement.
222
21
Sinai Billiard and Plane-Tree Alley

Chapter 22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell,
Indistinguishability, Spin
The concept of spin is important in quantum mechanics. Do you think quantum
mechanics can present a complete explanation for it? Does this concept have a
correspondence in classical physics as well? How do you explain it? In quantum
mechanics, it is somehow explained with Planck’s constant. What is your
explanation of the spin?
This is a very challenging question, and I think it has never been answered. One
accepts the spin as an invention of Pauli’s. It is an ingenious discovery. It had no
precedent and it needs an explanation. Quantum mechanics as a whole needs an
explanation, the lower-case h is also unexplained so far. The spin is in the same
category as h, it is a new miracle of nature that had to be accepted and could not be
explained. Of course, science always tries to explain what it ﬁnds. So the scandal
of h, the scandal of spin and the scandal of c, the speed of light being a universal
constant, are three scandals of the 20th century which have the same magnitude as
one could say. Pauli was responsible for the spin idea. One can have the suspicion
that there is a connection between spin and h. To explain h causally is a task that
science has the duty to try even if it fails along the way. And h can be explained,
but so at a cost. The cost is that nature in some of its aspects becomes private. The
individual observer plays a role that is even bigger than one is accustomed to from
classical mechanics. We are already familiar with such a phenomenon from c,
from special relativity. Einstein was the ﬁrst to fully appreciate this. Achilles
passing by Einstein while a light ﬂash is going off at the latter’s feet would have
the same spherical cloud of light, expanding around himself at the same speed c, in
his own inertial system. Einstein saw the threat that these two private spheres
might mean the end of an objective physics, but on the next morning could
combine the two spheres as both ﬁtting into the same higher-dimensional structure
which in a cross section looks like a cone—the light cone. The latter was in
principle known, but its vital necessity to restore rationalism had not been
glimpsed before. So there must now exist a similar way to explain h, and with
h also spin. There is a classical notion that is not well known which is of great help
in this context. It is the concept of ‘‘indistinguishability.’’ Everybody believes it is
a quantum feature, but this is not the case. Elementary particles are absolutely
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_22,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
223

indistinguishable if they belong to the same class. Electrons come in two classes,
alpha and beta, but apart from this distinction according to spin, electrons are
absolutely equal all over the universe as far as we know, and there is much
evidence in favor of this statement. There are very distant clouds, hydrogen clouds,
in the universe which have exactly the same Lyman-alpha lines in their spectra as
down here on earth. So we know very well that the whole universe is obeying the
same laws of quantum physics. It is amazing how homogenous the universe is in
this respect. This amounts to a great encouragement to try and completely
understand physics—including h, including c, and including spin. But for some
reason, the younger generations over a century gave little or no priority to solving
the burning problem of how to explain these three phenomena—h, c and spin. I
have a proposal to make here—I shall try to put it into words. The decisive
ingredient is the notion of indistinguishability. It can be introduced as an axiom
into classical physics. What is the consequence if you assume to have in a classical
formalism absolutely indistinguishable particles? This is not a very new idea,
actually. It goes back to Spinoza and Leibniz and has an even longer tradition.
Hermann Weyl discovered that Leibniz had already dealt with this question and
spoke of the ‘‘Leibniz-Pauli principle.’’
Can you tell in which book or text Hermann Weyl talked about this?
Weyl wrote a beautiful book in 1928 on the Philosophy of Science and
Mathematics which has a second edition in English in 1949.
‘‘Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science.’’
Thank you. All three notions are in the title. Hermann Weyl
was quite an
interesting personality. He found out something very important here as I learned
from Hans Primas in Zurich. Primas is a pupil of Wolfgang Pauli’s, so there is a
direct tradition. I am very obliged to him for having given me this information
about the prehistory of the notion of indistinguishability. If we put indistinguish-
ability as an axiom into the classical theory of dynamical systems, what is the
consequence? Consider classical phase space—for example, the conﬁguration
space with the positions of all particles plotted against each other…
And add time to the positions…
… such that there are not just points but lines since each point moves in time. Time
is here not a dimension, only a parameter by which you label the points in such a
space. ‘‘Conﬁguration space’’ is if you give each particle a dimension of its own, as
you can do visually so long as you have only two particles in one dimension. What
happens if you assume that two particles in a frictionless tube are absolutely equal
in every respect? This absolute equality is a fact in physics as we saw. We saw that
electrons in very distant galaxies have just the same properties as electrons on earth.
How come there is this absolute equality? People nowadays talk of the ‘‘Higgs
boson,’’ for example, and assume that there is a ﬁeld and this ﬁeld manifests itself in
these particles. But ﬁeld particles—we are familiar with photons—usually come in
224
22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell, Indistinguishability, Spin

very many different varieties, in many different energies, so ﬁelds do not provide
the necessary explanation for the perfect equality…
So you add the axiom of indistinguishability to classical physics.
That is my proposal.
And after that?
After doing that you ﬁnd a new classical physics which is still classical but which
has new features in conﬁguration space. This is the space we are already familiar
with that gives the correct description of the positions of several particles—say
two particles on a line. We take our two particles on a line and assume that they are
completely indistinguishable. What is the consequence? You still can describe
where each of them is located along its own axis at a given moment in time. Take
the vertical axis for particle 1 and the horizontal axis for particle 2. Then you can
describe exactly how they are moving. But now, add the assumption that they are
indistinguishable. That is, you do not know which one is number 1 or 2. It turns out
that you then need two descriptions if you are conscientious. That is, you get two
trajectories now, two moving points, in the 2-dimensional conﬁguration space
spanned by the vertical and the horizontal axis describing the two simultaneous
positions at every moment. Every momentary position of either particle on the
original one-dimensional line (or tube) is thereby covered. You ﬁnd that, when the
two particles meet (their positions on the original line are equal), the two
trajectories—the two drawn lines in your plane—meet on the diagonal. So instead
of letting each line continue into the other triangular half-plane, you can assume
that the trajectory instead was ‘‘mirrored-back’’ on the diagonal into its own half-
plane. This description turns out to be the correct description since the two half-
planes are mutually identical. So strong is the power of absolute indistinguish-
ability. It does not matter which triangle you remove because they are identical. So
in conﬁguration space, you suddenly have a reduction of its volume by a factor of
two when you have 2 indistinguishable particles on a line. This is still pure
classical mechanics. If you have 3 indistinguishable particles, it is 3! = 6, and with
N it is N-factorial. So the number by which you must divide conﬁguration space
(as Boltzmann called the space of all positions plotted against each other) rises up
very fast. Thus if you want to describe a gas of N particles on a line, its ordinary
conﬁguration space is an N-cube (analogous to the square for N = 2). If you now
again introduce indistinguishability, you ﬁnd that the N-cube is divided, not into 2
identical cells as was the case with 2, but into N-factorial (N!) identical cells. This
is physically correct and in principle well known since Gibbs’ book ‘‘Elementary
Principles in Statistical Mechanics’’ of 1902. It means that the volume of your
conﬁguration space is maximally shrunken, since N-factorial means a very large
number—all numbers up to N being multiplied with each other, a number that rises
incredibly fast with N. If you, for example, have a gas of 1023 indistinguishable
hydrogen atoms in a volume of about one liter, and look at conﬁguration space,
then a single one of these N! cells describes the total physical reality. It then turns
out that these resulting cells have the approximate size of h per particle (if you also
22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell, Indistinguishability, Spin
225

include the velocities in the picture in order to get actions). The equation which
describes the whole thing is called the Sackur-Tetrode equation. It gives you the
phase space volume in the form of a number which is an action raised to the Nth
power. This action represents the phase space volume of the surviving cell.
Notice the nice ﬁnale of this whole grandfatherly story from the 19th century: The
action—call it h*—is more or less close to h in its value under realistic conditions.
So we have here, in an old classical domain the prediction of a number specifying
a system-speciﬁc action which is close to the h that we are familiar with from
quantum mechanics. For example, you can take the volume of your own brain,
pretend that it was a classical system with electrons being the main particles—the
others for being heavier contribute less to the cell size. Then you will come up
with a number for a ‘‘unit action’’ for this classical system which is about h/20,
which in turn is close to ‘‘h’’ (= h/2p). This classical action is within a factor of
three equal to h, the main constant of the quantum world. Thus one has here a
classical theory that comes up with a unit action that is speciﬁc to a particular
system but at the same time is very close to the effective Planck’s constant. This
virtual coincidence can be taken at face value and be proposed as a hypothetical
explanation of Planck’s constant. This is the only approach—to my knowledge—
which tries to explain h so far, and it is quite trivial. Why is this embarrassing? The
drawback is that if you change the temperature of the brain, or its volume or
anything, then the pertinent unit action h* which you get is dependent on what you
did to this system, the brain, in terms of volume and temperature. So h* is not a
universal constant of nature here, it is only a constant that is speciﬁc to a given,
momentarily closed physical system. It just happens to be close to h in the case of
the brain. In spite of this coincidental character, it is at ﬁrst sight very tempting to
guess that this h* yields a ﬁrst tentative explanation of h. If one entertains such a
hopeful thought, however, one problem arises; how come that the h in physics is
universal while our h* is not a universal constant but a constant only for a speciﬁc
system? At this point, one can either start doing the necessary calculations more
accurately—which is a mess to do—or one can start thinking endophysically.
Hereby, one asks the speciﬁc question of how a subsystem of a classical universe
sees the rest of that universe if this subsystem is on the one hand endowed with an
inescapable unit action and on the other is endowed with consciousness. This
embarrassing question arises if you believe that the subsystem in question—a
brain—is worthy to be honored by the strange question of how ‘‘the rest of
physics’’ looks relative to ‘‘it’’ so as if it were of paramount importance.
You want to explain spin. But before coming to this; why do you believe that this
unit action h* can be considered as Planck’s quantum of action, since everything
you mentioned so far was based on classical physics. We just have a parameter
here which you call h or whatever.
I call it h* written as a lowercase letter as a system-speciﬁc action.
We have a parameter here which has the dimension of an action?
226
22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell, Indistinguishability, Spin

It is not a parameter, it is an observable, it is a mathematical implication of a given
system.
Why is it Planck’s constant?
It is not Planck’s constant, it is only a unit action and actions are usually being
measured in multiples of h which is the smallest action we can observe in nature.
We know of only one constant action so far, Planck’s constant—h or h. This newly
derived action is not h, it can be named h* (or h if you wish). It is a system-
speciﬁc unit action which just happens to be close in value and meaning to h. So
we have the right to give it a name which is related to h.
Now, how can you explain spin?
Now we go over to spin.
You mentioned the Sackur-Tetrode formula.
The Sackur-Tetrode formula explains, not Planck’s constant h or h, but h*, a new
system-speciﬁc unit action that exists everywhere in nature and is different for
every momentarily closed system. Let me give it a try. We have these cells in
conﬁguration space. They were obtained as a direct consequence of the existence of
indistinguishability, of classical indistinguishability. Indistinguishability here
means not only that you get a phase space cell called h* which is different for
every closed system—its ‘‘Sackur cell’’—, but it in addition shows that it is worth
having a closer look again at what it means when you have indistinguishable
particles in a one-dimensional box. I say one-dimensional because no one ever
completely succeeded in doing this in more than one dimension classically,
although the problem is a well-posed one. I always tried to ﬁnd a stronger and
younger person to do the mathematical work to solve this open 2-D or 3-D problem.
In one space dimension it is easy as we saw because you get these ‘‘phase space
cells’’ explicitly that are all identical and of which only one remains. We saw that
the size of the cells in conﬁguration space became very small as N grew large.
Let me return to one-dimension with 2 particles again. We assume for simplicity
that the two particles do not see each other because they can pass right through
each other like solitons. We would not need to make this assumption in 2 or 3
dimensions, but in 1 dimension it facilitates understanding. What we get is two
subcells as we saw, two triangles, one located below the main diagonal of our
square-shaped conﬁguration space, one above it. Only one of the 2 is the surviving
conﬁguration space—it does not matter which one you choose since both are
identical as we saw. This half-square yields a complete description of what
happens. We now can ask what it means in physics if we return from this reduced
conﬁguration space to the real space of nature?
In physical space, we can deduce from what we have in conﬁguration space; that
something absurd happens. Whenever the two particles cross each other in real
space (as inter-penetrating solitons), the two exchange their identities! This is very
hard to believe but easy to show mathematically. So the two particles do no longer
22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell, Indistinguishability, Spin
227

pass through each other as we know they can do. We saw that they could be
solitons of exactly the same energy being exactly equal mathematically that pass
right through each other. What we ﬁnd is that when the two solitons meet and
cross, this is not what occurs in physical reality. Rather, in reality each now returns
to its own side—into its own ‘‘cell.’’ That is, you suddenly no longer have just
‘‘phase space cells’’ (of which all vanished except for one), you also have real-
space cells. So in real space, particles suddenly occupy niches even though the
whole motion is unchanged. The particles are conﬁned to cells in real space. This
is a very surprising fact which was ﬁrst seen in chemical reality in Tübingen by
Walther Kossel in 1916, by the way. These real-space cells can be mathematically
proven to exist as soon as you assume indistinguishability, classical indistinguish-
ability. We then get both phase space cells and real-space cells.
Next, you can look at the properties of these unexpected real-space cells in physics.
They are very small cells. In a joint mathematical paper with Peter Weibel, a friend
of the late Kurt Gödel, we looked at three indistinguishable particles on a ring. On
the one-dimensional ring, you of course still have the same local phenomenon that
two interpenetrating particles return because they exchanged their identities during
the act. But something additional occurs on the ring: two particles exchange their
identities also without any bodily contact whenever they are crossing a diagonal
running through the middle of the ring. Therefore, we now suddenly also have
‘‘jumping particles’’—jumping identities of particles. One particle here and one
over there exchange their identities in classical physical reality—a most
unexpected ﬁnding. Imagine, this one here continues up over there and the one
formerly over there continues right here. Thus you get this ring-shaped system of
‘‘cells’’ that consists of 2 spatially separated subcells lying exactly opposite to each
other. The whole thing, even though classical and exact is fascinatingly magical. It
is a wonderful phenomenon. I do not know why it is not very well known: It could
already have been seen by Gibbs in 1902, being implicit in what he wrote. But this
one-dimensional case stands alone in mathematics so far. The problem has not yet
been formerly solved for two dimensions—even for a narrow strip with two
solitons—, or in three. It has been an open mathematical question for 23 years and
it would be wonderful if anyone was interested in solving it rigorously (there is no
doubt that the cell formation continues). We now see that there exists a radically
new fact in classical physics—jumping identities of particles—which has nothing
to do with quantum mechanics in the sense of being caused by it. On the contrary,
quantum mechanics inherits this fact from classical physics. Nevertheless, when
we use the right classical cell size, namely the one that happens to be mine at this
moment in this brain, then we get even more quantum mechanical features,
including h*. That is, quantum mechanics can apparently be reduced to this
classical phase space partition caused by the classical indistinguishability of
particles.
Now spin—as you demanded. We already saw that particles live in cells, but these
classical cells contain as we saw only one particle each. While in physics, it is
almost always two. The reason is ‘‘spin.’’ Spin refers to the strange property that in
228
22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell, Indistinguishability, Spin

quantum mechanics, we ﬁnd that the particles live in their cells in pairs in general.
This is the difference to the classical case that we discussed; that in quantum
mechanics, you have two occupants of a cell in general instead of one. How come
that quantum mechanics on the one hand obeys the laws of classical mechanics
here—the described cell formation in classical mechanics—but then on the other
has two occupants rather than one in general? Spin is the answer. The new property
of spin, discovered by Pauli as an explanation of Kossel’s ﬁnding means that you
have electrons of two kinds, ‘‘spin up’’ and ‘‘spin down’’ as one usually says. Every
kind of particle if it can have two different spins can live pairwise in the same cell in
phase space according to quantum mechanics. Now that we have an explanation of
a phase space cell in classical mechanics, we ‘‘only’’ need to explain why it is that
there can be two spins and hence two occupants in one cell.
This is the Pauli principle.
This is the Pauli exclusion principle in a classical phase space that we are seeking
to understand.
What is the meaning of spin?
In classical physics, we do not have spin. We only have particles living in cells. All
particles live in a cell in chemistry and so in physics in accordance with classical
mechanics without spin.
In your theory, you added the axiom of indistinguishability. This classical theory
does not know of spin?
Yes, it so far only gives you the phase space cells, but it does not give you two
occupants, only a single one.
In every cell two particles can simultaneously live?
Classically, you only have one occupant for every cell but in quantum mechanics,
you mostly have two.
You now want to explain the Pauli principle in this picture?
Yes, we by now have explained half of the Pauli principle. We explained the
existence of ‘‘Pauli cells’’ so far, but we have yet to explain why there are two
occupants in a realistic Pauli cell and not just one. This implication arises
naturally, too, but to see this, we need to introduce a further step. While for a while
we could relax since the disquieting fact of observer-centeredness or endophysics
did not raise its head in the above classical description, it here encroaches again.
That is, it becomes necessary to include the observer in the picture of physics once
more. Physics is then no longer a theory which describes a system from the outside
perspective—as indistinguishability theory still does, it becomes one that describes
the universe from the point of view of a partial system, Boscovich-style. A kind of
‘‘difference principle’’ enters. I call this ‘‘Endophysics’’—physics from within as
we saw. In this complete picture of physics, you have to acknowledge that you
have an observer who is composed of classical quantum cells herself or himself.
22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell, Indistinguishability, Spin
229

This observer is observing the rest of the universe, as we all do. Then you ﬁnd out
to your surprise that this classical observer is subject to yet another indistinguish-
ability; this time it is an indistinguishability in time. The observer cannot
distinguish between moving forwards in time at the moment, or backwards in time.
We know of course that there actually is no motion in time, that we only believe
that there is motion across time, but that this is an illusion from the point of view
of physics. There is nothing in physics which says that time is moving at all (not to
say forward). This is just something we know from experience, and our models
must not contradict this empirical fact but they cannot explain it or even touch it.
Subjectively speaking, we are of course moving in time in this inexorable fashion
that ‘‘is in all’’ as poet Rilke says. Why we are put onto a new square in time at
every moment, we do not know. But we can know that when the particles in our
body, or in our brain—where consciousness resides—are reversing the direction of
their motion, then these two versions of the observer before and after the change of
direction are again indistinguishable. Thus there exists a second much more
restricted ‘‘indistinguishability’’ in physics which applies to observers regarding
their own direction in time. Indeed the direction in time within an observer is
changing in a jump-like fashion from one moment in time to the next, as the
particles inside the Sackur cell of the observer are shuttling back and forth. This
fact gives you temporal slices. These oscillating temporal slices present inside the
observer have the consequence that if you (the observer) look at the outside world,
all the particles in the Pauli cells of the world shuttle back and forth without your
being able to tell what is their forward and backward direction in time. But why
then are there two particles in every Pauli cell—or in most Pauli cells—and not
just one? I only once concocted an explanation in an exchange with Michael
Conrad. Namely, how does the world of particle motions look if you are subject to
time reversals yourself? It turns out that, if you cannot distinguish between your
own going back and forward in time, then two equal particles, one moving towards
you and the other moving away from you, are no longer equal because of having
an opposite direction of motion—spin—relative to you. The correspondingly
different angular momenta the two particles have in relation to the observer cannot
be distinguished by the latter. Forwards and backwards are indistinguishable, and
so are a positive and a negative spin. This would be a deterministic endophysical
explanation of spin.
Maybe you can indeed explain the nature of spin from the endophysics point of
view, but the point is that in classical physics, can we not explain the quantum
spin?
Yes and no. Endophysics is classical physics, with the restriction of the latter being
looked at from the inside.
Endophysics is just a viewpoint to explain phenomena?
No, endophysics is a mathematical implication of classical physics. As such it is a
reality.
230
22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell, Indistinguishability, Spin

But you said that in your classical model you do not have spin. How can you
explain spin after you assumed that you do not have spin?
As soon as you have an internal observer inside the classical model world, one
who is subject to these indistinguishable backward and forward rocking motions in
time as in rock music, then to this internal observer the rest of the model world
appears to have spin. Spin then is not something that exists in the universe. Spin is
something which the universe objectively displays relative to an internal observer
who himself is moving back and forth in time internally. So the spin would only be
an observable within the universe—an observable which pays tribute to the fact
that as an internal observer, I am observing this phenomenon. So the spin with two
occupants in the same Pauli cell is not something that exists in physics objectively,
only something that exists for an internal observer within her or his physics. An
endophysical phenomenon, that is.
Can you make a bridge between this idea and the Sackur-Tetrode equation, which
you mentioned? I mean, how can the two concepts of spin and h* be put into a
relationship?
Yes, spin just like h is an intra-observer feature infecting the measurable outside
world according to endophysics. While h* was a direct implication of the correct
description of the world with the objectively existing Sackur-Tetrode cells in phase
space, spin would be a consequence of the Sackur-Tetrode equation being valid for
a particular observer’s brain being an internal part of that universe. So, provided
that the observing brain is for some reason inexplicably distinguished by
consciousness and a Now attached to it as two nonphysical features. Then, the rest
of the universe would be ‘‘distorted’’ in its appearance toward that observer.
Namely, by the ‘‘micro-time reversals’’ that take place inside that observer. Every
observed particle then suddenly has spin. Therefore, two particles are now no
longer indistinguishable if they objectively move in opposite directions since, to
the observer, two phases of her own micromotion in time are indistinguishable. It
is a beautiful brain teaser and it actually is still not totally understood
mathematically except for one-dimensional observers. It is similar here as with
the phase space cells when the underlying space has more than one dimension.
One already sees what is bound to be true, but the details remain to be fully
elucidated mathematically. So I can put it only in a roundabout way as a conjecture
that my own micro motion in time makes it suddenly possible to distinguish
between two particles which in reality are indistinguishable. I have not been
thinking about this for 23 years, this is the ﬁrst time that I come back to it. I
convinced myself at the time that for two particles differing in their motion in
space relative to the observer, you get a differentiation such that the endo observer
can distinguish between right-turning and left-turning electrons and that they
therefore do both ﬁt into the same observed phase space cell.
Then you use quantum mechanics again?
22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell, Indistinguishability, Spin
231

On the contrary, quantum mechanics is thereby explained with one feature, spin. I
just realized that this feature entails an additional prediction. I have tentatively
explained quantum mechanics with the little h* before. Now, these time-reversals
in the observer make sure that when I am observing something, I get a ‘‘new
distinguishability’’ between right- and left-turning particles and therefore I can
now have two occupants in a phase space cell outside of myself. All of this is an
objective reality only for me; in the exo reality, there is no spin. Only if an internal
observer of the universe observes a member of a class of indistinguishable
particles in its classical Pauli cell, then where there should only be one, there are
two. It is an endogenous bias present inside my brain that is projected out into the
physical world, just as h* itself is a projection out of my body, and presumably c*
itself is also a projection outwards. So, all these three things—h, c, and spin—
come from me, from my being a part of the objective universe. This is
mathematically allowed, but physically it is an open question. It reﬂects this
‘‘grip’’ of being attached and conﬁned to one particular part and parcel of the
universe at one particular pre-assigned moment in time—I apologize for the
theological connotations.
I do not understand this particular viewpoint of yours. Do you believe in your own
thinking that quantum mechanics is a ‘part’ of classical physics?!
Absolutely, yes.
But this does not make sense to me. In a limiting case, you can offer an
explanation, in that limiting case you can have classical physics. For example, if
this h* is going to be very small, going all the way to zero, then we can have a
classical viewpoint.
Yes, you then have a classical viewpoint not only from the exo perspective, but
also from the endo perspective—at an exact zero temperature of the observer, zero
on the exo level.
But this means that classical physics is a part of quantum mechanics, not that
quantum mechanics is a part of classical physics?
It means that classical physics is a limit to quantum mechanics, not a part of it.
‘‘A limit’’ means ‘‘a subset.’’
The limit that you refer to here as a limiting case is not accessible in physics
because in physics we have this empirical quantization. But you can also want to
explain this physical quantization itself.
But you are saying that quantum mechanics is a ‘‘limit’’ of classical physics?
No, I dare say that quantum mechanics is an ‘‘implication’’ of classical physics.
Therefore it cannot be a limit. I mean that from the point of view of quantum
mechanics, you can say that classical physics is a limit to quantum mechanics. This
is correct. But if you start out from quantum mechanics, you do not understand this
fact intuitively; you only know that it is true. From a quantum perspective, you do
232
22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell, Indistinguishability, Spin

ﬁnd that classical physics is a limiting case, right. But you can also look at classical
physics as the deeper theory…
…but then you should add some axioms like the indistinguishability axiom.
No, this added axiom in classical physics is valid no matter whether quantum
mechanics exists or not. It is an objective part of physics, a classical reality that
cannot be doubted.
But you said that you introduce this axiom mathematically?
Yes, but this is unavoidable if I want to describe physics mathematically. I also
take the axiom that a continuous line exists, but we need both of these axioms of
classical physics to describe classical physics itself. This is absolutely noncon-
troversial and independent of quantum mechanics. Classical physics from the
beginning includes the feature of absolute indistinguishability, even if it was not
recognized before except by Leibniz and Gibbs (and Primas) as being a part of it.
Only then it turns out that classical physics, with the axiom of classical
indistinguishability included, can explain quantum mechanics as an endo
implication. This is a different way of looking at it than adding an axiom to
quantum mechanics. You certainly can also start out with quantum mechanics, and
classical physics then is a limit under certain artiﬁcial conditions. Both views do
not in any way contradict each other, it is a matter of taste as it were. I only would
say that if you can explain something completely in one way, then you no longer
have a dichotomy between two equal-rights approaches. For in the one case the
price to pay is much higher than in the other. Yet this is a matter of taste. To date,
quantum mechanics is routinely considered to be the more fundamental theory,
even though indistinguishability (a transﬁnitely exact feature) is assumed to be a
part of it, which is a non-sequitur. On the other hand, many will also not like this
privacy of the world of the observer which is brought in by deterministic classical
endophysics, which is so embarrassingly close to metaphysical thinking. Physicists
do not easily accept having to return to an earlier enlightened era like the pious
rationalism of a Descartes or a Boscovich or a Maxwell. The problem is that the
observer is given a center place in the universe. This is very unusual nowadays,
only Einstein always confessed to be an adherent of this type of thinking which he
attributed to Spinoza.
22
Planck’s Constant, Pauli Cell, Indistinguishability, Spin
233

Chapter 23
The Sixth Hilbert Problem, Physics
and Beauty
In today’s discussion I would like to address some fundamental questions. We have
the famous list of the 23 Hilbert problems, some of which have been solved, some
incompletely solved, some of which are still open problems, and some have been
considered to be very vague. The ‘‘sixth Hilbert problem’’ proposed in Hilbert’s
1900 lecture at Paris is generally speaking the proposal to axiomatize those
branches of physics in which mathematics is prevalent. The proposal is to treat in
the same manner by means of axioms those physical sciences in which already
today mathematics plays an important part. In the ﬁrst rank are the theories of
probabilities and of mechanics. We know that in the 1910s, Hilbert and his great
assistant Emmy Noether worked on celestial mechanics in this axiomatized
fashion. Then, in the 1920s and 1930s, Hilbert, von Neumann and other people as
well as Dirac and Jordan worked on the axiomatization of quantum mechanics and
the ‘‘Hilbert spacei’’ as is well known. In the 1930s we have probability theory
which was formulated by Kolmogorov, and the use of measure theory and other
things, tools used for example in modern quantum ﬁeld theory. The point is that the
problem has not yet been solved—I mean it is open. If you go to one of the
mentioned cases, for example to quantum mechanics, you encounter different
viewpoints. Some of them employ a large number of axioms which does not make
much sense. According to Imre Lakatos, such work is very nice, but if you
introduce axioms which are artiﬁcial and do not come from physics, this does not
make very much sense.
It could make sense.
It could make sense if you reduce the axioms and have only palpable axioms, for
example, from physics. The question is; do you consider this framework as a
consistent physics? Can we have a mathematically consistent physics without any
paradoxes or problems arising?
I would subscribe to this idea. It comes from René Descartes who ﬁrst proposed it.
If you wish it is even older, coming from Buddha who claimed that the universe is
consistent. Physics is full of surprises. The so-called neutrino oscillations in
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_23,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
235

nuclear physics, where particles change their identities over time, no one
understands enough to date to come up with a model. It is wonderful that always
new riddles are coming up which have yet to be formalized completely.
Everything that has not yet been formalized needs to be formalized. Of course
when you need to introduce probabilistic theories on the lowest level, this is a big
drawback—which one felt has to be accepted in quantum mechanics. There are
still attempts to get rid of the accepted indeterministic explanations of quantum
mechanics, as endophysics tries to do. The goal of Descartes to ﬁnd a consistent
mathematical description of the universe is still a valid goal and should be upheld
in my view. As soon as it is given up, the spirit of science is also given up.
Do you also believe that we should have a consistent physics theory and should
follow this avenue?
It is the aim of science to obtain a completely transparent picture of the machine of
the universe, as Descartes would have said. This is called ‘‘rationalism.’’
Heraclitus, a contemporary of Buddha’s, had the same idea. Like these two,
Descartes had a very humanistic motivation for proposing this machine theory of
the universe. Its purpose was to rule out that we live in a world that is controlled by
potentially evil spirits—which would be the alternative. If you really think there
exists a so called ‘‘primary chance,’’ as Wolfgang Pauli called it, then this means
that witchcraft is built into nature. Witchcraft is of course the opposite of
rationalism. So quantum mechanics came very close in history to sacriﬁcing
rationalism. It is an interesting fact that this was not taken up as the challenge it
presents: to ﬁnd a way out of this trap as soon as possible.
Quantum mechanics in the canonical Copenhagen view acknowledges that science
so far does not and indeed cannot predict the point in time when a certain Geiger
counter will click because of a quantum transition occurring on a probabilistic
basis in a radioactive probe. These clicks could be inﬂuenced by witchcraft in
principle, and quantum mechanics would have to subscribe to this witchcraft if it
could be identiﬁed as a viable force in the world. I once proposed an experiment
for public TV called the ‘‘Hot Chair.’’ A person—anyone who is ready—is invited
to sit down and be confronted with a ‘‘Dehmelt atom’’ that is producing little light
ﬂashes irregularly on a quantum basis in accordance with the probabilistic
equations that exist. There would be a little computer installed that translates the
light pulses of the Dehmelt atom into a Morse code. Each combination of light and
dark intervals would give rise to a letter, or most of them. The Morse code would
thus give a real-time translation of the activities of this ﬂashing atom that everyone
including the audience can see. The task of the person sitting on the hot chair
would be to prove to the planet that she or he can inﬂuence this Dehmelt atom, the
signals that come out from it. This would be an absolutely acceptable scientiﬁc
situation. If a person hereby proved to be able to make a meaningful short message
appear within the otherwise meaningless salad of letters, of say ten or twenty
letters in length, then this person would have to be ofﬁcially made a part of the
laws of nature. So this example—for which probably no TV station would give
236
23
The Sixth Hilbert Problem, Physics and Beauty

money at present but which is in accord with quantum physics as we know it—
demonstrates to the eye how much the progress of science has been imperiled by
the probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics. Such, that physics itself is
no longer immune to becoming part of a belief in witchcraft. It is not known to the
public at large to date that probabilistic quantum mechanics stands in violation of
rationalism. Because of this accepted silence, rationalism has been abandoned in
1927 with the advent of quantum mechanics—unless one takes seriously the
attempts to explain quantum mechanics deterministically.
Do you think that quantum mechanics is not mathematically consistent? What is
the problem?
It is at best marginally consistent because it is based on acausal probability as
illustrated by the Dehmelt atom.
Do you—to go one step further—believe that we can have two given theories in
two different ﬁelds of physics that contradict each other in some points and remain
so?
Either the one or the other or both would need to be corrected.
Do we have this situation at present, or is this not the case?
At the time being, quantum mechanics and general relativity cannot be uniﬁed so
far.
But they are not put in doubt, neither of them. One does not see any direct and
sharp contradiction at the moment.
Oh yes, I would say they contradict each other massively. Otherwise they could be
uniﬁed. The fact that they cannot be uniﬁed so far means that there are manifest
contradictions at work. So physics is at the present moment in time not in a state
which can be…
Maybe they can be uniﬁed, and we only have not yet found out how to do it. This
fact does not mean that the two theories contradict each other, or does it?
It is quite normal that one is not ﬁnished ﬁnding the right explanation for
something. This is the case here.
Consider speciﬁcally general relativity and quantum mechanics. Should we go
along with Hilbert’s viewpoint and axiomatize both theories and then link them
together?
If a theory is wrong, axiomatization does not help at all, it only makes it all more
wrong because everything is even harder to change afterwards. Axiomatization is
dangerous if you do it too early.
What do you mean by a theory being ‘‘wrong’’?
23
The Sixth Hilbert Problem, Physics and Beauty
237

A theory can be right or wrong as far as nature is concerned. If it is beautiful but
wrong, it is a great pity that people will be misled more easily into following the
wrong road.
But I think we cannot use the words ‘‘wrong’’ and ‘‘right’’ for a physical theory.
We can only say that it has not yet been falsiﬁed.
Okay, but these are shades of meaning. Popper was of course a very bright and
important mind, but this insight of his is a footnote at this point. If you ﬁnd a
theory which works—and this means that it explains also a great many little things
that were not even seen before—, then you have made very good progress even
though you always have to accept the possibility that a new version of the theory
will eventually contain this one as a special case while being much more beautiful
itself. So a conﬁrmed result of a scientiﬁc theory always survives as a special case
to a better theory.
Consider quantum mechanics. Since its start almost a century ago by now, this
theory more or less works from the point of view of experimentation.
Yes, it works beautifully within the limits which it describes itself. Its drawback is,
that it cannot predict when a certain ‘‘quantum decision’’ will be made by nature,
and, that certain superluminal correlations exist as in the Bell-Aspect experiment.
We can start to axiomatize quantum mechanics, as a lot of people have tried to do,
some with more, some with less success.
Yes, some attempts are more elegant than others.
On the other hand, do you consider that this theory is somehow acceptable so far?
And general relativity is as well?
Quantum mechanics is quite acceptable, I would say. One ‘‘only’’ has to ﬁnd a
causal explanation still. As far as the facts—the effects that it does predict—are
concerned, quantum mechanics is the most successful and precise physical theory
of history.
And general relativity is also a successful theory so far?
Yes, although it is not a very well-conﬁrmed theory as of yet. There are quite a few
things that got conﬁrmed marvellously but do not really touch on the core of the
theory. The majority is already implicit in the equivalence principle of special
relativity from which general relativity was derived. However, there is a major
exception—black holes. They seem to exist. Think only of the 4-million solar-
mass enigma at Sagittarius A* in the center of the Milky Way galaxy, with its
many beautifully ﬁtting conﬁrmed properties. Black holes have additional
properties—for example, that they are never ﬁnished in ﬁnite outer time—which
are so far not appreciated to be implicit in general relativity, since the latter has not
yet been ‘‘tuned’’ in the right way so that they can also be derived. So far, these
new properties only follow from a ‘‘pre-version’’ of general relativity, the Einstein
238
23
The Sixth Hilbert Problem, Physics and Beauty

equivalence principle and the famous Rindler metric, but not yet from general
relativity in the canonical form that exists so far.
If we want to ﬁnd the bridge between quantum mechanics and general relativity in
order to make physics more consistent; do you consider the possibility of taking
some axioms from quantum mechanics, and then some axioms from general
relativity and let mathematics ﬁnd the bridge between the two? Do you consider
this method acceptable, or do you have a different proposal?
This method will be wonderful if it works. But you can never be sure that a brute-
force method will work. One almost always ﬁrst needs a new way of looking at
some element of one or the other theory that looks foreign at ﬁrst sight to enable
the uniﬁcation. Just by hoping that by continuing with things that are already
known they will suddenly ﬁt together does not work in general, this is wishful
thinking.
Then what is your idea as to how to get a consistent physics?
I mean, physics is never consistent in a ﬁnished sense. One can always remain
optimistic that it will be possible to progress further in the direction of making the
whole ﬁeld even more consistent. That is the problem beﬁtting science since
Descartes’ book ‘‘Meditations on the First Philosophy’’ of 1641, published after
his young daughter had died, a fact which made him fearless. This is quite a long
time of continuous progress. One always has to be very modest in one’s claims. On
the other hand, one has to be very strong in one’s beliefs. This is possible because
so much depends on rationalism. Witchcraft is maximally dangerous if it really
re-enters into the world, even if its proponents are maximally sympathetic people.
I have a friend…
Another question. Sometimes mathematics predicts that some phenomena exist
which so far have not yet been seen or conﬁrmed. Take, for example, Dirac’s hole
theory or his prediction of the positron. Dirac created it as something that only
follows from his marvelous equation. A lot of people disagreed with it after its ﬁrst
proposal, but it was eventually largely accepted. He said that because the
mathematics showed it to me and the mathematics is beautiful, I believed in it. By
the way, I do not have a deﬁnition of ‘‘beautiful’’—it is somehow case dependent.
Mathematics convinced him to believe in it for physics. It is the fault of the
experimental physicists if they cannot conﬁrm it. Today it is largely accepted and
we have other things that ‘‘merely’’ come from equations. Consider for example
the equations of gravitational waves.
The last word always belongs to empiricism. A prediction that has not been
veriﬁed (unless it followed from known facts in a faultless logical way) cannot be
accepted as a true fact until experiment has conﬁrmed it. The gravitational waves
that you mentioned form a typical case in point. They have never been found. Only
indirect evidence exists, and there are alternative ways to explain the same
evidence. People do not like these alternatives at present to the point of refusing to
acknowledge that a relevant parameter in the description of the observations was
23
The Sixth Hilbert Problem, Physics and Beauty
239

put equal to zero and hence does not show up in the descriptive equation (as I
witnessed). This of course happened unintentionally—the fact that ‘‘tidal friction’’
and ‘‘magnetofriction’’ were omitted in the model. So the ‘‘indirect evidence’’ that
exists so far in favor of gravitational waves is insufﬁcient in my eyes. Einstein
himself was never quite convinced of their existence. I hasten to add that I would
not have been able to spot these weak points if I had not strong theoretical
evidence against their existence—namely my new ‘‘global-c result’’ in the
equivalence principle and in the Schwarzschild metric of general relativity. I do
not insist on them in any way here but only say this is the nice thing with science;
that everyone is allowed to place bets about how nature works, bets that are subject
to falsiﬁability. Hereby the more elegant shorter paths are unfairly privileged.
Everyone has a chance and it is only beauty—elegance—that allows the winner to
reach the box ﬁrst. Students are usually not told this secret of Dirac’s.
If reasonable mathematics implies a phenomenon like gravitational waves, should
one, as a physicist believe in it or not?
At ﬁrst I would tend to say, yes. But there is a trap here. If you interpret facts in
one particular direction because you like a theory in a simple naked form, it can
happen that you neglect other ways to interpret the same data. The method you just
sketched is not at all a sureﬁre way to make progress in science. Let me come back
to gravitational waves. Hulse and Taylor won a Nobel Prize for the discovery of a
pulsar circling an invisible partner. They interpreted their data in terms of
gravitational waves—the fact that the orbit slowly shrinks. But they forgot to say
that they had put one parameter equal to zero—tidal friction in the invisible partner
star if it is a dark white dwarf. I recently met the discoverer of the ﬁrst and so far
only ‘‘double pulsar’’ with its new bonanza of data, Michael Kramer, a discovery
which again deserves a Nobel Prize, but again only for the data, not for the
interpretation. Alfred Nobel was very sensitive here himself. The ‘‘frictional
interpretation’’ of the Hulse-Taylor
result has yet to be ruled out. Kramer’s
stronger friction effect may analogously come, not from tidal friction but from
magnetofriction between the two neutron stars circling each other at the earth-
moon distance. If this alternative source of friction can be ruled out, gravitational
waves would become much more probable.
You do not believe in these observational physical results? Only if the theory says
we should have such a thing you can accept it?
No, no, facts must be accepted. Only theories can be wrong, and if a wrong theory
explains it all…
… meaning with reasonable mathematics…
…we have a problem, yes. Even with reasonable mathematics there is no
guarantee that the theory is correct because of the potentially large set of equally
relevant parameters omitted. This is why the experimental method was originally
invented in the ﬁrst place—to reduce the number of theoretically possible
parameters.
240
23
The Sixth Hilbert Problem, Physics and Beauty

What do you mean by a ‘‘correct theory’’?
One being observed by nature herself.
Take a theory that has not yet been observed in its consequences in nature.
Consider again Dirac. He arrived at some equations for some phenomena which
led him to accept a ‘‘negative energy.’’ No one believed him but he said that he
could explain it by creating his ‘‘hole theory.’’ Some people thought it was a crazy
thing to do because we do not see such a thing and experimenters have not yet
conﬁrmed it.
If you have time reversals, as apparently exist on a very short time scale in
quantum mechanics, then this would be one predictable implication. I am not at all
opposed to it because I have a mental bridge of my own.
It was conﬁrmed ﬁnally by some experiments.
Yes.
At that moment in time, would you have said I accept your theory, or not?
I admit I would have had reservations. One can never accept a theory as long as
there is no plausible evidence that this theory could or must be obeyed by nature.
Dirac was one of the most creative physicists in ﬁnding new candidate laws that
nature might obey. It was perhaps because he had been trained as an engineer ﬁrst.
But as long as such a candidate law has not found conﬁrmation—it could also be a
theoretical, very indirect conﬁrmation or consistency with another theory—,
skepticism is allowed. So, the nice phrase that ‘‘the beneﬁt of the doubt’’ must
never be withheld remains valid. That is, any way of testing the theory must
legitimately be kept open and sought. Oftentimes the canon of solid physical facts
contains side features that miraculously ﬁt. Thinking creatively, therefore, is
always allowed. You need such minds.
If you have an experiment that conﬁrms a theory, this does not imply that the
theory is true. I mean, the word ‘‘true’’ is not okay here. We can say ‘‘this theory
was successful in this experiment’’ but we do not know about another experiment.
Yes, but some theory can be very convoluted in its logical structure. If it then is
conﬁrmed in many ostensibly unrelated points, this automatically also throws light
on other previously unseen and still unconﬁrmed points. So there can be webs of
theory that are virtually incorrigible owing to their multi-tieredness. They still
might eventually be generalized further and shown to be special cases to a more
general theory, but some features will then survive. The ‘‘phlogiston theory’’ of ﬁre
and the ‘‘miasma theory’’ of infection did not survive but their correct elements
(oxygen and bacteria) did. Also many features that are to date explained with
cosmic expansion may someday survive under another umbrella. So the opinion
that theories can always be overthrown is not quite correct. One cannot overthrow
facts that have been veriﬁed many times.
23
The Sixth Hilbert Problem, Physics and Beauty
241

Do you believe that without a theory, we can still observe nature?
You cannot even use your eyes without using theories. So the idea of a theory-free
observation is untenable. Any observation is theory-based, including an observation
which betrays the opposite. You cannot escape thinking. Hence one should be quite
happy with one’s own optimism in believing in theory. Theory-building is a
wonderful invention and it has been miraculously successful for a million years.
I am thinking of a ‘‘modern’’ hand axe that is a million years old that could not have
been built without theoretical knowledge.
A ﬁnal question; you said that it is not favorable for physicists to formulate the
mathematics of some creation of their mind ‘‘too early.’’ You seem to believe that
as long as the experiment cannot give some positive signals, you cannot believe in
the mathematics?
This is not exactly what I would say. There is a difference between a basic insight
which can be maintained from the beginning and the crafting of more detailed
theories which need time to blossom. So my answer has two wings as it were.
Some mathematics is presentable soon and should be worked out before too much
phenomenology has been accrued.
Then what do you think of this saying of Eddington’s which you mentioned in your
course: ‘‘I never accept any result of experimental physicists unless they ﬁt my
theory.’’ This is the other way around?
It is nice, it was a bit tongue-in-cheek, was it not?
What do you really think about it? Are you sure it was a joke?
Of course.
You do not take it a little bit seriously?
I mean he was a little bit conceited as he shows with this joke. But he also was
joking about himself, which is sympathetic.
But this was not a joke—on the part of Dirac. He somehow believed that if the
theory is ‘‘beautiful,’’ then it should be taken very seriously.
Einstein said a similar thing once. When you have accrued many reasons for belief
in something consistent that you or someone else found, you can stick to that
against early evidence which seems to contradict it. Evidence never has only one
meaning, so evidence as such is not a very strong argument, at least not at the
beginning. Evidence tends to be overrated—and underrated, since sometimes the
tiniest evidence is inﬁnitely powerful.
This belief in one’s own theory is somehow a metaphysical thing, or is it not?
Suppose Einstein had once said ‘‘because it is beautiful I accept it’’. Would this
part of the sentence—‘‘because it is beautiful’’—have an exact meaning?
242
23
The Sixth Hilbert Problem, Physics and Beauty

It would mean in the assumed case that the theory has so many implications—even
inﬁnitely many perhaps with a few of them already known to me—, that otherwise
this theory would not have congealed in my head. The chances therefore are very
high that it will indeed be conﬁrmed in further observations. But it is hard to put
oneself into Einstein’s mind.
The same applies to Dirac when he said; ‘‘Physical laws should have
mathematical beauty.’’ One can personally accept this. But if we can continue a
bit more here, what is the meaning of beauty? Can beauty be case-dependent?
Beauty is perhaps the wrong word; one of its main features is simplicity. And
simplicity is always beautiful by deﬁnition.
What is the meaning of simplicity?
It is just as difﬁcult to deﬁne as beauty is, but it sounds a bit more scientiﬁc. To
quote Newton ‘‘Truth is ever to be found in simplicity.’’
There lie a lot of challenges in the word ‘‘simplicity’’ in philosophy. Many
deﬁnitions of simplicity do exist.
But simplicity is a form of beauty. It is more easy to absorb than the word beauty
which has many connotations that have nothing to do with science. On the other
hand, of course, if lay people are drawn into physics by the use of the word
‘‘beauty’’ or ‘‘charm,’’ this is legitimate, too. So I would not say that you have to
prune physical theory from words like ‘‘beauty.’’
Thank you for combining simplicity and beauty.
23
The Sixth Hilbert Problem, Physics and Beauty
243

Chapter 24
Physics and Religion
In this session I would like to ask a somewhat different question. It actually is
motivated by Einstein. Can one expect a good inﬂuence of religion on the study of
physics and its progress? Often one ﬁnds the opposite opinion among physicists—
that as soon as we have progress in physics we do not need religion anymore.
Some go as far as to say that we do not need God anymore for explaining the
whole thing. I would like to ask you, what is your opinion in this respect and do
you believe there is an interaction between religion and physics? Can they
mutually motivate each other or are they completely insulated from one another?
This unexpected question I ﬁnd important. Most people interested in science have
seen the book ‘‘Subtle is the Lord’’ written by Abraham Pais about Einstein, in
homage to his famous synonymous saying. Einstein always tried—in the footsteps
of Spinoza—to have a ‘‘complete picture.’’ Of course when you insist on having a
complete picture, you are neither a scientist nor a religious thinker but just a
human being. This is the basis from which one has to start out. There is no
difference at all between rational thinking in religion and rational thinking
elsewhere. Yet a complete picture is what one needs. Only if one is not afraid of
the biggest questions can one suddenly ﬁnd a new avenue within any given ﬁeld.
The upshot is; there never was a contradiction. In the past, the very good thinkers
often were specialized both in religion and in science, Maimonides for example
and his predecessor in Persia, Avicenna. These people were originally applied
people, physicians, and at the same time theologians. The book written by
Maimonides, ‘‘Advice for the Perplexed,’’ has a very nice title and covers both
sides. Bringing the two ﬁelds together became, half a millennium later, the big
contribution of René Descartes. Descartes was a religious thinker in the ﬁrst place
and laid the basis for modern science which follows him up to this day. He posed
the question of whether the world is consistent as a machine, as a way to get clarity
about the big dream that we are dreaming with our waking consciousness at every
moment, and whether this situation is acceptable. The fact that consciousness is
not a part of science shows that everything that is important is not part of science.
Hence there is a more rational way to approach the most important things than that
of science. There are facts that have nothing to do with science but are much more
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_24,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
245

primary and palpable than any scientiﬁc fact—like that we right now have this
particular clock time of 1.04 p.m. there is no way to explain this, it is ‘‘just’’ a fact.
Where does the Now come from? Color as well, and light itself, brightness is
nothing that exists in nature. I once talked with Bob Rosen about the red rear
lights of a car driving in front of us, this impressive redness when the car is
braking. Redness came up as a topic, and he told me about the founder of the
famous young quantum physicists’ school in Göttingen…
Max Born…
Born wrote, so Bob told me, in one of his books about this problem of color and its
non-existence in physics, a fact that not many people know about. Color does not
exist in physics, the Now does not exist, and pain and pleasure do not exist in physics.
This, even though there are equations for artiﬁcial brains that if implemented
physically determine a response like having pain or pleasure but nonetheless are only
governed by space- and time-dependent potential gradients generated by endoge-
nous and exogenous clues. What is a potential gradient, an endogenous force? It only
has a meaning in terms of subjective experience. So the only reality that exists for
anyone is the soul, which is a subjective experience. The latter is everything, all the
fears that one has, all the hope that one has, all the skepticism one harbors is
subjective. None of these forces exists in science as an identiﬁable recurrent reality,
notwithstanding the fact that one is threatened by death at every minute. One
somehow does not talk about this or think about it even though one reads the
newspapers. One sees on TV reports other people’s problems and wars, and about the
danger of the atomic bomb and the danger of black holes, perhaps. So everyone
knows about the fragility of life, and how peculiar being inside one particular body
really is, although most of the living ones have the diagnosis of a deadly disease or
the systematic unfolding of a fatal accident still ahead of them. The body has its
problems that need to be cured by different types of doctors, starting with the teeth,
with a new hip becoming virtually mandatory in old age, and so forth. But this is not
usually seen as a part of science in the sense of it needing a deeper understanding.
‘‘Understanding’’ comprises science and religion, physics and subjective experi-
ence. So does the theory of love. Love is not part of science, even though all the
elements of it form a part and topic of science. Recently Pope Francis said nice things
in South America to young people encouraging them to wake up and to do
something, to change something, to take responsibility. But responsibility is again
something that does not exist in science. The very idea of being responsible, being
able to act as a person and thereby work a miracle, as Lévinas showed, is not
addressed in science so far. Nevertheless science is a ﬁeld designed and opened up
with the express aim to work ‘‘miracles’’ by using the leverages laid into our hands.
Finding a new thing in science is tantamount to being given a chance to work a
miracle, compared to what was possible before. Finding new truths as a precondition
is the aim.
246
24
Physics and Religion

There is a letter written to Einstein by a child of 10 or 12 years who asked
Einstein, how do scientists think about religion? The letter is part of the collection
of letters written to Einstein. I believe that if you asked the same question to
physicists nowadays, many would say that as soon as we learn sufﬁciently much
more, we will be able to dispense with God. But Einstein responded differently to
the questioner. He answered that as we learn more about things, we also improve
our thinking about God. Even though we might get rid of some naïve viewpoints
regarding God, we improve our understanding of the non-physical. That is, we
learn to understand God on a much deeper level.
This is a nice way to say it.
But my question is; why is it that when we learn more things about nature and in
particular physics, our belief in God becomes deeper? And why do others say that
as we learn more, we need God less?
This shows that there exists something like two schools here—the skeptic school
and the open-minded school. The latter of course has its roots in the old texts, like
in the old testament, where there are lines which say how much the speaker feels
oppressed by the ‘‘ﬁst’’ of the creator being so close to his neck. One is totally at
the mercy of a power that one hopes has a friendly face. It is the insight that one is
so dependent on every little seemingly chanceful event in the world—as dealt with
in chaos theory, for example—, and of one’s being enclosed in this particular skin
and having a wart somewhere in the face, or a tooth ache or an ailment.
Why does my consciousness apparently reside in certain cells in this particular
single brain at this particular single moment in time? Why am I attached to this
body at this moment? I call these the ‘‘Assignment Conditions’’ (A.C.). If you try
to have a complete picture of the world, as is the task of natural science, then you
ﬁnd you have the Laws, the Initial Conditions (I.C.) and the Assignment
Conditions (A.C.). Why is a certain participant in the world machine located at a
particular place in it and assigned this particular consciousness to her or his body
or brain or parts of the brain or speciﬁc brain cells or subelements of such a cell?
These elements exist despite the fact that this same brain might suffer a stroke the
next minute. The whole thing is such an—one is tempted to say—‘‘unfair
situation’’ that one cannot help but respond morally to it. Maybe the most efﬁcient
way to avoid responding for a modern person is to be brain-washed into no longer
believing that there exists anything outside the narrow ﬁeld of the relations
described by science. I am referring to the Assignment Conditions which are never
mentioned. Following the car accident which took the life of my young son, the
idea of assignment conditions (A.C.) was the ﬁrst new idea my mind formed in the
hospital during my bodily convalescence. Then I knew I should go on. He had
called me tenderly ‘‘stupid old gray one.’’
Science today is a substitute religion, that is, is in competition with real religion.
But it is not a religion; it is just a technique Descartes invented. He invented it to
ﬁght, to vanquish a potentially evil demon. He wanted to know whether this whole
24
Physics and Religion
247

thing of being a living consciousness he found imposed on him and presumably
everyone else is not ‘‘a bad dream.’’ It is a dream since its substance is mind-stuff,
not thing-stuff. It is a seemingly consistent dream or chain-dream, but it could be a
bad dream, a malevolent imposition, and the outﬂow of an evil intention. Even
though everything is so beautiful with its colors, we also have pain, we have
wounds, and we have losses. There must be an excuse or a promise of an eventual
healing behind the things that are so hard to accept or even unacceptable. There
exist things that appear to be unacceptable, and there are situations in life that
cannot be tolerated. Hopefully one is spared them. Religion would have the
purpose of giving an excuse for the proneness towards, and the sometimes
inescapability of, tragedy. Anyone who says I do not believe in tragedy can also
say I do not believe in religion. But it would be stupid to not believe in tragedy,
right? It is absolutely wonderful that one has this little niche of science in which
people have the assigned privilege of being allowed to work miracles for and do
good to their fellow human beings by ﬁnding something new that is made available
to everyone. Art is on the same level, you can also work miracles there, but you
need many personal gifts and good teachers to become a good artist. In science, it
is the same thing and you need to be fearless. But you also need to meet very good
scientists. You need someone who, for example, tells you while you are still at a
fairly young age that you are a ‘‘genius.’’ It is an old trick used by the Shamans. It
is very much motivating for the rest of one’s life. This is, of course, just a special
case of interpersonal kindness in general; one should cultivate this kindness which
is of the essence of science. It is like the Islamic school in Cordoba where people
still knew about the deep helpful mission of human beings within a religious
context. Their picture which was much more rational than modern science had
inﬂuenced as we saw via Maimonides and Saint Francis, René Descartes.
Descartes was directly inﬂuenced by Ignatius of Loyola, the founder of the Jesuit
school of thought because he attended a boarding school run by Jesuit priests not
long after Ignatius’ passing away, in La Flèche in Southern France. Loyola
invented the ‘‘experiment’’ in a modern sense before Galilei. He did not use the
term ‘‘experiment’’ which had not been invented at the time, but the related term
‘‘exercise.’’ The famous exercises (‘‘exercitia’’) of the Jesuit order (that had been
founded by him as a counter-reformation to Protestantism) would subsequently
acquire a more restricted tamer meaning. Originally, ‘‘exercitium’’ just meant
doing a decisive experiment. What would be a really important experiment?
Ignatius used his own life as an experimental tool. Like his belated pupil
Descartes, he was forced to ﬁnd out whether the whole thing is acceptable. He had
experienced the ordeal of his leg having to be artiﬁcially broken for several times
following a horse-riding accident without anethesia. Was the gift of life something
benevolent in the sense of giving him a role worth fulﬁlling despite the ordeals?
First, he made the experiment of becoming a begging monk. The experiment went
still farther as an ‘‘exercise’’ even though it sounds ridiculous to modern ears and
disturbingly sweet. He had decided to go to Palestine because he had always
regretted not being Jewish and thereby closer to Jesus. So he went to a seaport,
248
24
Physics and Religion

mounted a ship and asked the captain, ‘‘Please take me along since you are leaving
for Palestine in a few hours.’’ The captain would of course ask what he could pay.
You see that I am a mendicant without money. Then the captain would ask him,
amused, ‘‘Okay, why should I then take you along?’’ The self-conﬁdent answer
was: ‘‘Because then you will arrive.’’ This was his way of experimenting with his
own life. Two captains would throw him off their ship, the third took him along, or
so the tale goes. One can bet with history’s hindsight which one of the three ships
was the only one that arrived in Palestine. It was a stupid, a crazy example of doing
an experiment by throwing one’s whole existence in as a token. But it was a token
played, not against reason, but already within the scope of the daring Cartesian
program to test the ‘‘degree of benevolence’’ of the instance that screened to him
the living dream of waking reality. It was a very causal type of thinking in spite of
its seeming irrationality. Descartes sharpened the test to checking whether or not
the world is relationally consistent—causally consistent, thereby inventing the
program of science. As long as it still is causal, everything is ﬁne because then one
can ‘‘put the dream-giving instance to shame’’ by one’s acting fairly towards a
fellow person since the others would be ‘‘mere machines’’ that one would be
inﬁnitely privileged over by the possession of consciousness. Not to misuse this
inﬁnite power of exteriority—staying outside the mere machines—would cause an
evil dream-giving instance to self-destruct for having been dwarfed. But so only as
long as the hypothesis of the world and everything in it being a causal machine
was not falsiﬁed. This was the birth of science in the modern sense, and quantum
mechanics still is its deepest challenge. Benevolence here is not a nicety alone but
is the sharpest sword conceivable—directed not against the poor fellow person
whom one helps, but against the dream-giving instance itself. Quantum mechanics
is the ship to mount and safely steer back towards rationalism.
We arrived at the word benevolence. You have co-authored a book about this
topic. My question is this; what is the meaning of benevolence? And what is its
relationship to religion and physics?
Benevolence is an invention that has been made by human beings.
And love is benevolence?
There is a close relationship but they are not identical, benevolence presupposes
love. Benevolence is a notion which got largely forgotten much like religion.
Everybody still knows what religion is, that it is not science but nonetheless not
nonsensical. Benevolence is a fact, an experience that everyone has made in her or
his lifetime. For example, one may encounter it in a bus, when one is carelessly
riding without a valid ticket which happens from time to time to almost everyone.
When one is then caught and a neighbor whom one never met before says, ‘‘This is
his ticket’’ producing his own, and this person on being asked to produce his own
ticket fumbles and eventually says, ‘‘I must have lost it’’ and goes free because this
is too difﬁcult to disantangle for the conductor. This is benevolence—‘‘exteriority’’
in the sense of Descartes and Levinas, practiced as a weapon against heaven. It
does not take much to save someone else from losing his face.
24
Physics and Religion
249

What is the motivation here? The other person sacriﬁces himself?
By no means, I assumed that the risk is very minor. But why should one be
benevolent, this is the question. Benevolence has to do with being moved in the
heart.
You believe one cannot learn it by practicing? Is it a natural characteristic of
some people?
On the contrary, I would say that it is absolutely learned. There is nothing non-
learned in it, but it is a reality if you had good luck yourself. Actually, everybody
knows what benevolence is from early childhood on. For example I remember a
very big hand looming over my head. It must have been the hand of my father’s
but I was not afraid of it. Benevolence is a hypothesis that in human beings comes
up at a very young age. This event, when it was ﬁrst recognized or rather invented,
is later forgotten in general. It occurs between 1 and 2 years of age usually, and it
is the deepest experience that one has ever made. The experience of benevolence
felt to exist turns one into a person. So personhood is something that can be
scientiﬁcally deﬁned. If you understand benevolence, you are a person. Benev-
olence, even though it looks very religious, is something which is an implication of
a scientiﬁc theory called ‘‘person theory.’’ We already talked about that at length.
Person theory is a theory that can be applied, not just to natural brains—human and
animal brains—, it can be applied to artiﬁcial brains as well. Thus, science touches
here on something very deep when looked at from a philosophical point of view.
Physics and life come dangerously close.
Is this an epistemological theory? You talked about the phenomenology of persons,
and your theory of benevolence makes a connection to philosophy. Maybe, you
want to unify everything here?
I have no intention to unify—it happens automatically.
You mean it is the phenomenology that you just explained?
Exactly, it is a reality which one can understand.
A further question; do you personally believe that religion can be a good
motivation for doing physics?
Absolutely, I would even go so far as to say that without religious thinking, you
cannot do good physics. Of course, except for spotting a mistake made in an
equation written by someone else—that is not something deep enough although it
is also a very important scientiﬁc achievement. Everything new that is real
progress and not just happenstance progress will depend on deep thinking. Deep
thinking means thinking as deeply as a child 18 months of age does—which is
very hard to do when you are grown up.
On the other hand, if you learn or create something new in physics, then this can
have a feedback onto your religious viewpoint. What is this feedback? Why can
this feedback for some people decrease their belief in religion while for some
250
24
Physics and Religion

others after creating something new in physics their belief in religion is
strengthened?
It may depend on temperament. But it also depends on whether your mind has
been opened up before towards this deeper level of reality—of realizing that color
and the Now are gifts. One has the highest level of theological capabilities as a
young child. Some people had the good luck of being nourished in this type of
thinking during their childhood and adolescence while others did not have this
privilege. Also many people lose this feeling because they think it is not rational
and therefore admissible when growing up. They of course keep it in their personal
lives and in the way they treat their neighbors and in the character they display and
so on, but they do not know any more that this is applied religion. For example,
many physicians are such somnambulatory heroes. They think that it is just the
behavior of a certain self-conﬁdent attitude and do not realize that the principles
they use in their lives are intrinsically religious.
My next question is this; I think that you agree that ethics is something more than
religion. I mean, a person cannot be religious but she or he can nonetheless be
completely moral.
Absolutely, I would say this represents the practical side of religion, and the
connection to religion can be masked or forgotten.
You can somehow say ethics is a super-religion because you need not believe in
some special things or religions in order to have ethics. You can possess ethics,
you can be moral without religion, I think.
In the time of Goethe there was a proverb: ‘‘Who possesses science and art also
possesses religion; who lacks these two may be given religion.’’ It was a very
haughty phrase. If you use the word ‘‘religion’’ in the sense of different religions,
of partial religions so to speak, one can still feel the enlightenment’s verve behind
it. But what I referred to was the real religion which comprises all religions and is
behind all religions. It looks like a ﬁght with heaven as Descartes and Levinas
showed.
What is the role of ethics in science? A scientist should be moral. On the other
hand, let us suppose the following situation; one has arrived at a new creation in
physics which is completely new and important and technically appealing but
represents a result that could prove dangerous for humanity.
A ‘‘technically sweet’’ bomb, for example.
What is the responsibility of that imagined scientist? Should she or he not talk
about it, not publish, because it may cause a problem for humanity? What is the
role of ethics in physics?
This is a very concrete question. I happen to know about a real-life example here.
My late friend Carl-Friedrich von Weizsäcker was asked by Lise Meitner (who
happened to be his boss at the Kaiser-Wilhelm Institute as I later learned, but she
24
Physics and Religion
251

may already have been in exile in which case this happened on the phone): ‘‘Shall I
publish my ﬁnding that the ‘‘mass defect’’ in nuclear ﬁssion (that she and Otto
Hahn had jointly discovered) implies a well-deﬁned large amount of kinetic energy
by Einstein’s mass-energy formula?’’ von Weizsäcker had answered, as he told me
in the presence of his mother when I visited with him in 1964 in her house near
Lake Constance, that he had advised her to publish. It was a strange topic to begin
a conversation because I had not yet met him in person and had expected we would
discuss chemical evolution. The question posed to him was, maybe, the most
important question raised in the 20th century.
What did she do?
She did publish. Only it turned out that her paper appeared 1 month after that of
her colleague Otto Hahn (his in January, hers in February 1939) who later won a
Nobel Prize for it.
You believe that Otto Hahn was not morally pressed as to whether or not he should
publish? That only for this lady it was a gnawing question so that it took some time
for her to come to a decision? That this is what we call ethics?
She was a religious person as a child as one knows. Nevertheless she decided in
the way she had been advised by her 26 years old assistant who had convinced her
to publish because it would become known anyhow—a straightforward idea.
But did she know that Otto Hahn would publish the idea 1 month before her?
I believe not. The exchange with her coworker took place months before. So her
decision to publish probably had nothing to do with Otto Hahn’s decision to
publish and to publish without her, which is hard to understand. She would keep
him in high esteem and almost forgive him. The question is, of course; was this
good advice or not that Carl-Friedrich von Weizsäcker had given his boss? Why
did he say she should publish? And why did he tell me?
On the other hand, it can happen in principle that you will come into the situation
that you have to ask the same question yourself from a younger person: Shall I
publish a result that, as you said, is ‘‘technically sweet’’ but potentially dangerous
for humanity, what would you do?
If the dangers are as big as they were in the mentioned case, it would have been
wiser not to publish because the ‘‘sin’’ would then not become your own. In later
life she was indeed haunted by the fact that she had acquired a co-responsibility for
the bomb. I recently saw a TV documentary about her. She was as a child told by
her grandmother not to play the piano on the Sabbath because this would be
punished from heaven directly. She promptly put this to an experimental check—
and found empirically that nothing happened. So she performed a religious
experiment as a child. I had not seen the connection to the story of Ignatius before.
252
24
Physics and Religion

Let me ask you whether you think that religion can be a motivation for doing
physics? Can results coming from physics contribute to improving a person’s
belief in religion?
Yes, religion can motivate scientiﬁc success and can also gain from better
understanding the subtleties of the Lord to use a pious man’s words.
If ethics can postpone a technical publication, do you consider this as something
completely positive and ﬁtting?
Absolutely, yes.
So you consider a postponement in science to be potentially necessary. If you have
an idea that is dangerous and ethics says you should not publish, then you arrive
at the conclusion that you do not publish it, right?
Exactly.
Then science is inhibited by the postponement, or is it not?
We do not know beforehand. It could take a 1,000 years until a theory or idea re-
surfaces in science.
One must be a very courageous personality to decide to do so and ignore an
achievement and therefore, perhaps miss a prestigious prize.
Yes, but this automatically follows from scientiﬁc ethics anyhow. Actually, this
question is not as foreign as it sounds because there are many very dangerous
ﬁndings in science that are lying on the table and no one is misusing them.
This is what you believe when you deﬁne science; you believe that science is
friendship.
Yes, its root is friendship.
And this friendship has for its center ethics.
Ethics is part of it, yes. I once had the opportunity to ﬂy in a tiny airplane from
Santa Fe to Los Alamos for a chaos meeting of the University of California taking
place in the non-military part of the Laboratory. It was a very small airplane. There
were about ﬁve specialists riding with me and I was the only outsider. They talked
shop openly about a topic they called ‘‘weapons physics.’’ They were so happily
engaged talking about weapons physics that I saw that they very much liked their
ﬁeld. I could see how innocent these people were, thinking about progress in
weapons physics. Of course we have similarly dangerous progress in biochem-
istry—for example regarding viruses. Some dangerous viruses have died out
except for a few still kept in a laboratory. So there are many other dangerous
elements in science which humanity has learned to cope with—to keep under the
rug and under control. This is because our present time is already a little bit
advanced on the way towards a global democracy, so people behave as if this
democracy were already existent and behave responsibly against this backdrop.
24
Physics and Religion
253

Unfortunately, this rationality has not yet been integrated. Clashes are still possible
between powers, and hence there is still the danger of such knowledge getting into
hands that are non-benevolent. As soon as one has a society which has the same
laws everywhere, humanity can rely on the non-misuse of new results. If you so
wish, the danger of misuse is only a consequence of the planet not having been
united as of yet, that the United Nations have not enough power. A world
government is an option that—like a development that happened in South Africa—
can be generated to date on the initiative of a radiant personality who makes it
clear to everyone that they should listen to their children. Then this safety problem
would go away. Of course, misusable facts could still fall into the hands of
desperate individuals. But this risk has always existed for parts of humanity. If the
planet had already been united democratically, one could say that Carl-Friedrich
von Weizsäcker’s advice was sound. And of course, being open in science is one
of the oldest traditions of humankind. Dialog is what distinguishes persons from
nonpersons, and persons are never quite left alone.
254
24
Physics and Religion

Chapter 25
Open Problems or Eight Dreams
of Rationalism
In this session let us conclude the previous 24 sessions with the following question.
You have worked and commented on a lot of topics in our previous interviews; do
you consider the whole ﬁeld to be rational, or are there some totally open things
that need explanation, too? What is the meaning of rationalism in science?
Thank you for the beautiful question. I would say that science and rationalism are
one and the same thing. Science was invented in the modern sense by René
Descartes who called his procedure rationalism. Of course, rationalism has a long
history; Buddhism and the Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam
are rational ediﬁces of thought. The idea that rationalism is decisive, both for
physical survival and for moral survival, is the insight of Descartes. From 1641
until 1927—the advent of quantum mechanics—the rationalist world view of
Descartes and his followers loomed large in science as its fundament and core. But
this stopped when quantum mechanics was invented. Quantum mechanics causes a
big crisis in rationalism. This gloomy mood can be repaired as far as I can tell. Let
me go in circles or spirals touching on eight points along the way.
Please start.
As a ﬁrst unexplained point and inexplicable phenomenon, I would like to mention
COLOR. You could also take light in general—not the wavelength of the radiation
triggering the experience, but the experience itself as a so-called ‘‘primary quality.’’
I once met a friend who saw different colors with his two eyes. But this is not the
point. Not the relation between colors or their external stimuli is what I have in
mind—I am referring here to the self-identity of a tulip’s redness, for example.
Although it is not very well known, one can prove that color does not exist in
science, in nature, anywhere. The same holds true for pain and pleasure, the
‘‘talking character’’ which they all possess. There is nothing in science that is
capable of explaining, or predicting, or excusing this primary experience. It is a
funnel leading out of the world—or equivalently a ‘‘Mehrwert,’’ a value added from
outside. What I mean is the ‘‘presence’’ that it represents, the visible or touchable
cloth of an angel lowered into our world. My friend Art Winfree, following several
rainy weeks in a row, once boarded a little airplane to see the blue sky again, even
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0_25,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
255

though the machine—offered to the faculty of Purdue University—had a defective
altimeter as he realized when mounting the pilot’s seat. If the clouds had formed a
fog reaching down to the ground on his descent, he would have crashed. He took the
chance—this was inexplicable to himself. There is an appeal involved in the
‘‘primariness’’ of color that is plainly irrational. To a scientist, the purity of color is
provably nonexistent, its personal touch, its self-identity, its ‘‘primariness’’ is a
revelation—a manifest miracle.
People deﬁne color based on the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation. What is
the problem here when you say it is not rational?
Of course we all know that our retina has three types of receptors to measure the
wavelength of light, and that this information is somehow ‘‘translated’’ into color
in the brain. But there is no part in the brain, no mechanism, by which redness
(say) could be generated. Color is a uniquely subjective experience. As a so-called
‘‘quale’’—a ‘‘how-thing’’ in Latin—it is not at all represented in the wave length or
anywhere else in the circuitry of the brain. There is nothing in nature as seen by
science that could explain the transition from the nerve signals, the ‘‘pulse coding’’
or whatever code is used, towards the experience of color as a so-called ‘‘primary
quality.’’ If one could explain the brain and everything that happens in the brain in
terms of pure machine-like dynamical processes and equations—as I would
subscribe to—, then one would never even come up with the question of
something like color existing. Leibniz saw the problem clearly with his famous
example of the windmill in his book ‘‘Monadology.’’ He wanted to describe the
brain in a scientiﬁc, Cartesian sense. The biggest machine of his time was the
windmill, it was full of big wheels and little cogwheels; it was the forerunner of the
church organ and the computer, built in the Netherlands. He compared the brain
with a giant windmill, and there is a little staircase on the side that you can climb-
up to enter one of the two side-doors of the windmill which look almost like two
‘‘ears’’ if the turning arms represent a somewhat peculiar analog to a ‘‘nose’’
protruding from this giant ‘‘head’’ erected in the landscape. You can enter the ear
of the windmill and describe all the interlocking cogwheels, all their quantitative
dynamical relationships. That would be a model of a brain at the time of Leibniz.
He continued his tale with the event when the scientist would come out of the
windmill’s ear door after a long time, standing on top of the staircase with all the
news reporters and their cameras (he did not foresee either of these to us familiar
realities although he foresaw the telephone and the tape recorder at another
occasion) waiting eagerly to get his report.
‘‘Professor Leibniz, have you completely understood the brain?’’ He would
conﬁdently reply; ‘‘yes, messieurs, I have completely mapped out and understood
it.’’
‘‘Every detail?’’
‘‘Yes.’’
‘‘How about consciousness?’’ would be the next question.
256
25
Open Problems or Eight Dreams of Rationalism

‘‘What consciousness?’’ would then be his reply. Leibniz ﬁrst saw it clearly after
Descartes that the machine theory of the world and the brain does not yield the
slightest cue for the existence of anything like color or subjective experience in
general. The machine would be totally consistent as a machine, nothing more.
Today one would say that there is also a ‘‘screen’’ inside the brain—the ‘‘great
simulator’’—on which everything spatial and short-term temporal is represented in
a functionally (if not anatomically) connected fashion. This screen, even though it
exists in the brain (and also the brain equation with the big screen or VR machine
added), would not have colors and smells on it anywhere, only coded signal
sequences talking to each other in coincidences.
So what is your suggestion? You mentioned as your ﬁrst point the phenomenon of
color. Do you have any argument here whether this phenomenon is rational?
It is rational to say that we are confronted here with a miracle, the miracle of the
‘‘qualia,’’ the qualities of experience. Philosophers have known this for a long
time. Physiologist Emil Du Bois-Reymond in Berlin (whose brother Paul was a
mathematics professor in Tübingen) wrote a famous paper in 1872 titled
‘‘Ignorabimus’’ (we shall never know). It dealt exactly with this question. So
this is a long-standing problem. People have learned to accept and live with the
fact that we shall never know where the qualia come from. In artiﬁcial intelligence,
the problem is a virtual taboo still. It is the ﬁrst big riddle in rationalism in my
eyes.
What is the second?
The second inexplicable phenomenon in our walking around peripatetically in
half-circles is the NOW. With the Now it is just the same thing as with the qualia.
You can prove that there is no instrument or machine by means of which you could
measure when it is Now. Buddha lived only in the Now. The Now again does not
exist in science, it is provably non-existent. This is strange since time does exist in
physics in many equations and so does simultaneity; even though the latter is
observer-speciﬁc, as Einstein discovered. But the Now which seems to be moving
for us at this very moment is provably nonexistent in science where nothing is
moving according to Parmenides. Popper had a long discussion on this with
Einstein.
In the Minkowski diagram, the Now part refers to an area in which the speed of
light is larger than c, and this is why physicists say it does not exist because it does
not make physical sense.
Yes, the Now extends to both sides in between the two light cones, the upwards-
opening one of the future and the downwards-opening one of the past. Again, we
have a constantly moving-up mid-point in between the two light cones in deﬁance
of the frozen description just given. So the Now itself, which determines the
momentary tips of the light cones, has nothing physical behind it that one could tie
it to. It is not an element of science.
25
Open Problems or Eight Dreams of Rationalism
257

What is the next ‘‘miracle’’ if any?
The third inexplicable phenomenon is the ASSIGNMENT of the body. Why is our
consciousness assigned to this particular body? When I was about 3 years old I
suddenly realized that the little dimples I knew I had on top of the knuckles on the
back of my right hand (i.e. both hands) had disappeared, and I felt it was kind of
cruel that I had been changed without being asked beforehand. It was a typical
‘‘philosophical’’ experience. The assignment of the body becomes a problem when
one has a health accident—then this prison-type situation ﬂeetingly enters
consciousness again. The reason why the body is assigned to a certain
consciousness is provably inexplicable. It makes one feel very humble.
A fourth item?
After these three subjectivist miracles—I could have added that the Now is not
even inter-subjective according to Roger Shepard—, I come to an indubitably
objectivist miracle; the existence of consistent LAWS in nature, laws hoped to
govern all phenomena. Science has been quite successful ﬁnding laws after
Descartes had shown how important it is to ﬁnd consistency as the only way to get
rid of the irrationalism of witchcraft, which is the alternative. He was able to prove
that only if the world is consistent in its quantitative relations, is consciousness
acceptable in the sense of it not being a ‘‘bad dream.’’ Daniel F. Galoye’s 1964
science-ﬁction novel ‘‘Simulacron-Three’’ comes close: a computer-world in
which the ‘‘ID-units’’ ﬁnd inconsistencies and thereafter get suspicious. That the
world be consistent is a necessary condition in order for it not to be a ‘‘bad dream’’
according to Descartes. For it is only under this condition of well-craftedness, that
one can prove that one is not in the hands of a malevolent higher-level power.
Under this condition, an act of fairness, shown towards a fellow machine-like
inhabitant of the universe is bound to put a malevolent demiurge to shame. For the
person performing it would be morally superior to the consciousness-giving
instance. This offered ‘‘chance to get even’’ for a mere endo observer is the reason
why the search for consistency in science is so important. Leibniz called this
procedure ‘‘Theodicy’’—calling the Dream-Giving-Instance before the court of
reason. Descartes was apparently sure that heaven would not ﬂunk this test.
A striking example of a previously not seen consistency is the correspondence
between symmetry and conservation laws, discovered by Emmy Noether.
Thank you for this illustration. The inﬁnite accuracy of these laws that shows up in
her ﬁrst theorem is fundamental. This accuracy which is transﬁnitely exact allows
for a causal description of thermodynamics, cryodynamics and quantum mechan-
ics. Even though it looks like a huge success, this dream of a consistent causal
science is not all that is at stake. For the wonderful machine thereby found could
still belong to the Hades. The Hades of Greek mythology (the ‘‘shadow world’’)
was in its structure identical to our own upper world—except for the absence of
the qualia. The ‘‘blood’’ was missing—so much that the king of the Hades would
rather prefer to be the lowliest slave on the surface of the earth bending his back
258
25
Open Problems or Eight Dreams of Rationalism

under the whipping of the plough driver as Homer wrote. Even the breath-taking
transﬁnite accuracy of a fractal cannot reach the living color of a quale.
The quantum irreversibility comes to my mind here also. It was recently mentioned
by Zeilinger (who was the third of three authors) in a paper in the Proceedings of
the Royal Society titled ‘‘The Oxford Questions on the foundations of quantum
physics.’’ One of the open problems mentioned there was exactly this one. They
considered it as an unsolved problem so far.
Which one?
‘‘Is irreversibility fundamental for describing the classical world?’’ And ‘‘how is
irreversibility involved in quantum measurement?’’
Yes, classical physics is reversible, this reversibility lies at the root of
thermodynamics and cryodynamics. Both are reducible to determinism if we
assume the number of particles per unit volume in the universe is ﬁnite and in
addition assume indistinguishability between equal particles. This transﬁnitely
exact, ‘‘polished equality’’ of elementary particles of the same class and the same
spin is an intimidating empirical feature of nature. It has the same mathematical
rank as fractality. It is so strong in my opinion that it even overrides the current
belief in the existence of ‘‘primary’’ statistical phenomena in quantum mechanics.
Thermodynamics got interpreted as a statistical theory for a long time, and so did
quantum mechanics. However, owing to classical indistinguishability theory, a
transﬁnitely exact deterministic level is bound to underlie both quantum mechanics
and classical mechanics. Hermann Weyl knew about these things in the footsteps
of Josiah Willard Gibbs, as I learned from my friend Hans Primas.
Next number ﬁve?
We now plunge even deeper into non-classical physics. Number ﬁve is the hoped-
for possibility to arrive at an EXPLANATION OF h AND c, Plancks constant and
Einstein’s constant. Both constants are different from other constants in that they
are all-pervasive. In the absence of a rational explanation for both the quantum
chancefulness and the observer-centered speed of light, there is a big hole in
physics in case its program is still Cartesian rationalism. There exists a single
attempt to explain little h, that of Otto Sackur of 1913.
We talked about it in a previous session.
Yes—but here is a new point; possibly, little-c can be explained along with little-h.
The Sackur cell in the observer’s brain would then be strengthened in its
hypothetical fundamental role in physics that we discussed. We had seen that
every momentarily closed system possesses a system-speciﬁc unit action h*,
including the brain. The brain can be compared to a radio receiver which contains
a non-eliminable ‘‘noise source’’ in its input stage. Archimedes was the ﬁrst to spot
an ‘‘inevitability’’ like this when he said ‘‘Give me where to stand and I shall move
the earth.’’ It was obviously an ironic statement. Being inside a system does not
allow you to do this! Maxwell’s claim that it is impossible to palpate an atom
25
Open Problems or Eight Dreams of Rationalism
259

addresses the same underprivilegedness of a subsystem in a Hamiltonian world. If
h is caused by this Maxwellian principle which appears worthy to rule out, then
besides h, c can also be seen in this light. A physically deﬁned subsystem in the
brain would be responsible for both. The Sackur cell can do this in principle as we
saw because it involves micro time reversals t* which would be ‘‘projected-out’’
into the outside world along with h*. The micro time reversals along with h* could
then be associated with a spatial length l*. Then t* and l*, taken together, would
deﬁne an observer-speciﬁc velocity, c* = l*/t*.
But it would not be ‘‘c’’?
This absurd speculation can be disproved by calculating. Suppose the unknown
speed c* were numerically close to c. Then the hypothesis of it being an
explanation of c could be checked by ‘‘calculating back’’ to obtain the unknown
underlying ‘‘observer-diameter’’ l*. So by inserting the real c, one could determine
the unknown l*. If nonsense comes out, one can forget about this mental
adventure. If one puts in the available numbers, a value of about 7.4 lm can be
arrived at for l*, as I once obtained 15 years ago.
This makes no sense.
I agree. To assume that the Sackur cell in the brain had this small spatial size
appears even more implausible than was the case when Descartes put the seat of
consciousness into the pineal gland. The latter is many thousand times bigger and
obviously the wrong candidate. l* corresponds to the diameter of a single cell in
the reticular formation of the brain where consciousness is sometimes assumed to
reside. I mentioned all this only because it is clear anyhow that the observer-
centeredness of h and c is desperate speculative nonsense. Einstein should rather
not have proposed this dangerous experiment which Zeilinger and Pan are
preparing now, with the risk that an observer-speciﬁc world will be forced upon
physics if the two spaceship captains conﬁrm the Bell correlations as no one
doubts. I apologize for having alluded to this nightmare.
What is the next point in your ‘‘rationalism’’?
Number six is the RELATIVISTIC BELL EXPERIMENT itself. It will yield
demonstrably observer-centered measurements in accordance with endophysics as
mentioned. In previous ordinary Bell-Aspect experiments, the correlations seen
between both measurements in the experiment were superluminal. One accepted this
manifest miracle as a ‘‘quantum property’’ of the physical world. The Copenhagen
interpretation allowed for this and since the outcome cannot be misused for sending
superluminal messages (only ‘‘half-messages’’), everyone got used to it. However,
the relativistic Bell experiment is a different matter. Since the two measuring stations
belong to two mutually receding frames, each measurement is the ﬁrst in its own
frame. In the world of each observer, the observed correlations are compatible with
quantum mechanics in the sense of Copenhagen. The two worlds contradict quantum
mechanics only if their results are known to all observers. Then, both ‘‘momentum’’
and ‘‘position’’ (or their analogs) have been measured on a pair of correlated
260
25
Open Problems or Eight Dreams of Rationalism

particles. Only if each observer lives in a quantum world of his or her own is
everything ﬁne again. Then each has reduced the wave-function ﬁrst, and the other
comes later. Our hypothetical causal explanation—that the micro motions inside the
observer enter the result—then is the only remaining way to interpret the relativistic
Bell experiment. This makes the latter maximally important.
So far, the two interpretations, Copenhagen and Everett, cannot be experimentally
distinguished.
This is the point: now they suddenly can. Einstein no doubt was aware of this
option. The Zeilinger quantum satellite experiment to check on the latter has been
in progress since 2001. It will prove that the assignment of an Everett world is an
empirical reality in physics—unless the Bell correlations are violated!
Your seventh point?
We enter ordinary classical intuition again with the ‘‘seventh rationally to accept
miracle,’’ which is EXTERIORITY. The term is due to French philosopher
Emmanuel Levinas. It refers to the fact that there exists an inﬁnitely strong
inﬂuence, not only ‘‘vertically’’ (with the quantum assignment conditions of the
sixth point), but also ‘‘horizontally.’’ We ﬁnd ourselves with our bodies ‘‘outside’’
(exterior) to our fellow neighbors. Being outside another person means that you
can do good, or refrain from doing good. The inﬁnite power of exteriority stems
from being not identical with the other. For the consciousness-endowed person is
not a mere machine since consciousness is an add-on, an inﬁnite privilege as
Descartes saw. Levinas quotes Jesus for having made the same discovery of an
inﬁnite power existing here, with his notion of the ‘‘neighbor.’’ The inﬁnite
privilege turns you, the responsibility-carrying conscious subject, into a ‘‘hos-
tage’’—a strangely moving idea. Levinas almost wails over how much pity he
deserves for being so inﬁnitely powerful. By being on the outside of the other
person, in a rational Cartesian machine world, a person endowed with conscious-
ness is in a most pitiful situation. I once listened to Levinas on TV, he was a very
old man at the time and one of the most charming souls I ever encountered. The
same exteriority principle is by the way implemented in ‘‘Lampsacus,’’ hometown
of all persons on the Internet, proposed in 1994.
One more open problem?
The eighth Cartesian point would be the ORIGIN OF MUTUAL TRUST in the life
of the individual as an acquired non-genetic trait based on the smile feedback. I just
realize I can use this last point to come back to your beauty question in a kind of
summary: There would exist three types of beauty in science. The ﬁrst is the beauty
of the consistency of the laws (Descartes-Newton-Einstein-Dirac). The second is
the beauty of the smile-feedback (Darwin-van Hoof-Disney-Buber). The third
stands behind both as the substance injected into the assigned Now captured in an
ancient Egyptian phrase (‘‘heaven and earth are ﬁlled with your splendor’’).
Thank you for this futuristic conclusion.
25
Open Problems or Eight Dreams of Rationalism
261

Bibliography
Abraham, M. (1914). More recent gravitation theories (in German). Jahrbuch für Radioaktivität
und Elektronik, 11, 470–520.
Anaxagoras (500–428 B.C.), Fragment # 12. In G. S. Kirk, & Raven, J. E. (Eds.), The presocratic
philosophers (pp. 372–374). London: Cambridge University Press 1957, 1979.
Anaximander (610–546 B.C.). In Kirk and Raven, The prescoratic philosophers (pp. 110–113).
Anderton, R., & Nedelkovich, D. (2013). Natural Philosophy and Relativity of Boscovich. Lulu.
Aristarchus of Samos (310–230 B.C.). See Archimedes (ca. 287–212 B.C.), The Sand Reckoner.
[Quote: ‘‘Aristarchus’ hypotheses are that the ﬁxed stars and the Sun remain unmoved, that
the Earth revolves about the Sun on the circumference of a circle, the Sun lying in the middle
of the orbit, and that the sphere of ﬁxed stars, situated about the same center as the Sun, is so
great that the circle in which he supposes the Earth to revolve bears such a proportion to the
distance of the ﬁxed stars as the center of the sphere bears to its surface.’’].
Aspect, A. (1999). Bell’s inequality test: More ideal than ever. Nature, 398, 189–90.
Avicenna, M. E. (2005). The metaphysics of the healing. In M. E. Marmura (Ed.), Utah: Brigham
Young University.
Bacon, F. (1960). Novum organum scientiarum. 1620. In F. H. Anderson (Ed.) The new organum
and related writings. New York: Liberal Arts Press.
Baier, G., & Klein, M. (Eds.). (1991). A chaotic hierarchy. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of mind. New York: Ballantine.
Bell, J. S. (1964). On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen. Physics, 1, 195–200; reprinted in: Bell, J. S.
(1987). Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Bell, J. S. (1981). Quantum mechanics for cosmologists. In C. Isham, R. Penrose, & D. Sciama
(Eds.), Quantum gravity (Vol. 2, pp. 611–637). Oxford: Clarendon Press. reprinted in: Bell, J. S.
(1987). Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics. Cambridge University Press.
Bendixson, I. (1901). Sur les courbes déﬁnies par des équations différentielles. Acta
Mathematica, 24, 1–88.
von Bertalanffy, L. (1932). Theoretical biology (Theoretische Biologie). Stuttgart: Borntraeger.
von Bertalanffy, L. (1953). Biophysics of the equilibrium-of-ﬂow (Biophysik des Flies-
sgleichgewichts). Braunschweig: Vieweg.
Binney, J., & Tremaine, S. (2008). Galactic dynamics (2nd edn). Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Bohm, D. (1951). Quantum theory. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Bohr, N. (1913). On the constitution of atoms and molecules. Philosophical Magazine, 26, 4.
Bohr, N. (1935). Can quantum mechanical description of physical reality be considered
complete? Physical Review, 48, 696–702.
Boltzmann, L. (1964). Lectures on gas theory (Vorlesungen über Gastheorie, Vol. 1, Barth,
1896). Leipzig: University of California Press.
Boscovich, R. J. (1758). A theory of natural philosophy (Theoria philosophiae naturalis). Vienna.
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
263

Briggs, G. A. D., Butterﬁeld, J. N., & Zeilinger, A. (2013). The Oxford questions on the
foundations of quantum physics. Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 469, 1–8.
Boer, H. (2004). KAM theory—the legacy of Kolmogorov’s 1954 paper. Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 41, 507–521.
Bruno, G. (1584). De l’inﬁnito universo e mondi. Venice 1584. (On the inﬁnite universe and
worlds.) Reprint Venize 2012.
Buber, M. (1958). I and Thou. New York: Scribner.
Bunimovich, L. A. (2000). Billiards and other hyperbolic systems with singularities. In Ya G
Sinai (Ed.), Dynamical systems, ergodic theory and applications (pp. 192–234). Berlin:
Springer.
Buridan’s ass (2009). In: Oxford companion to phrase and fable. Encyclopedia.com.
Calaprice, A. (Ed.). (2002). Dear professor Einstein—Albert Einstein’s letters to and from
children (foreword by Evelyn Einstein, essay by Robert Schulman). New York: Prometheus
Books.
Cantor, G. (1874). On a property of the intrinsic idea of all real algebraic numbers (in German).
Journal für die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik, 77, 258–262.
Chandrasekhar, S. (1943). Dynamical friction I. Astrophysical Journal, 97, 1–27.
Charnov, E. L. (1976). Optimal foraging: The marginal value theorem. Theoretical Population
Biology, 9, 129–136.
Clausius, R. (1865). On different easy to apply versions of the principal equations of the
mechanical theory of heat (in German). Annalen der Physik und Chemie, 125, 353–390.
Cook, R. J. (2009). Gravitational space dilation, arXiv:0902.2811.
Copernicus, N., On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres (De revolutionibus orbium
coelestium). 1st edn. Nuremberg 1543, 2nd edn. Basel 1566.
Damour, T. (1987). The problem of motion in Newtonian and Einsteinian theory. In S. Hawking,
& W. Israel (Eds.), 300 years of gravitation (pp. 128–198). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Darvas, G. (2012). Isotopic ﬁeld charge—spin conservation in general relativity theory. In M.
C. Duffy, V. O. Gladyshev, A. N. Morozov, P. Rowlands (Eds.), Physical interpretations of
relativity theory (pp. 53–65). Liverpool: Sutherland.
Darwin, C. (1859). On the origin of species by means of natural selection—or the preservation of
favoured races in the struggle for life. London: Murray.
Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of the emotions in man and animals. London: Murray.
Dehmelt, H., van Dyck, R. S., Schwinberg, P. B., Gabrielse, G., & Bull, G. (1979). Single
elementary particle at rest in free space I-IV. American Physical Society, 24, 757.
Descartes, R. (1641). Meditations on the ﬁrst philosophy (Meditationes de prima philosophia)
also known as Metaphysical Meditations.
Devaney, R. L. (1996). The fractal geometry of the Mandelbrot set. Paperback. Berkeley: Key
curriculum Press.
de Waal, F. (2006). In S. Macedo, & J. Ober (Eds.) Primates and philosophers: How morality
evolved. Princeton: Princeton Science Library.
Diebner, H. H., & Rössler, O. E. (1998). A deterministic entropy based on the instantaneous
phase space volume. Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung, 53a, 51–60.
Dirac, P. A. M. (1926). On the theory of quantum mechanics. Proceedings of the Royal Society A,
112, 661–677.
Dirac, P. A. M. (1937). The cosmological constants. Nature, 139, 323.
Dirac, P. A. M. (1958). The principles of quantum mechanics (4th ed.). London: Oxford
University Press.
Du Bois-Reymond, E. (1912). On the limits of recognizing nature (Über die Grenzen des
Naturerkennens) 1872; Lectures Ignorabimus by Emil du Bois-Reymond (edited by Estelle du
Bois-Reymond), (pp. 441–473). Leipzig: Veit.
Eddington, A. S. (1981). The nature of the physical world. Gifford lectures 1928. MacMillan:
University of Michigan Edition.
264
Bibliography

Ehrenfest, P. (1911). Which traits of the light quantum hypothesis play an essential role in the
theory of heat radiation? (in German). Annalen der Physik, 341, 91–118.
Einstein, A. (1905) On the electrodynamics of moving bodies (in German). Annalen der Physik,
17, 891–921, In The principles of relativity. London: Methuen (1923).
Einstein, A. (1907). On the relativity principle and the conclusions drawn from it (in German).
Jahrbuch der Radioaktivität, 4, 411–462.
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., & Rosen, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description of physical
reality be considered complete? Physical Review, 47, 777–780.
Eliasson, O. (2003). In S. May (Ed.) The weather project. London: Tate.
Eliasson, O. (Ed.). (2010). Otto’s impossible talks. Inst. Raumexperimente Berlin, Verlag der
Universität der Künste Berlin.
Engelmann, W. (2007). Rhythms of life—an introduction using selected topics and examples.
http://bioclox.bot.biologie.uni-tuebingen.de/.
Everett, H. (1957). ‘‘Relative State’’ formulation of quantum mechanics. Reviews of Modern
Physics, 29, 454–462.
Farmelo, G. (Ed.). (2002). It must be beautiful: Great equations of modern science. London:
Granta Books.
Farmelo, G. (2009). The strangest man—the hidden life of Paul Dirac, quantum genius. London:
Faber and Faber.
Finkelstein, D. (1959). Some new conservation laws. Annals of Physics, 6, 230–243.
Fischer, J., & Plessner, H. (2013). Laughter and smile—an investigation of the limits of human
behavior (in German). In Hauptwerke der Emotionssoziologie (pp. 274–279). Berlin:
Springer.
Fischer, U. R., & Schopohl, N. (2001). Hal l state quantization in a rotating frame. Europhysics
Letters, 54, 502–507.
Flamm, L. (1916). Contributions to Einstein’s gravitation theory (in German). Physikalische
Zeitschrift, 17, 448–454.
Frayn, M. (1998). Copenhagen. London: Methuen.
Forward, R. F. (1980). Dragon’s egg. New York: Ballatine Books.
Fournier d’Albe, E. E. (1907). Two new worlds: I. The infra world: II. The supra world. London:
Longmans and Green.
Frauendiener, J., Hoenselaers, C., & Konrad, W. (1999). A shell around a black hole. Classical
and Quantum Gravity, 7, 585–591.
Fredkin, E., & Toffoli, T. (1982). Conservative logic. International Journal of Theoretical
Physics, 21, 219–253.
Freely, J. (2009). Aladdin’s lamp—how Greek science came to Europe through the Islamic world.
New York: Vintage Books.
Friedmann, A. (1999). On the possibility of a world with constant negative curvature of space (in
German). Zeitschrift für Physik 21, 326–332 (1924). (English translation in General Relativity
and Gravitation 31, 2001–2008, 1999).
Froebel, F. (1844). In Blow S. E. (Ed.), Mother‘s songs, games and stories: Froebel’s the Kose-
Lieder (Mutter- und Koselieder). Bad Blankenburg.
Galilei, G. (1914). Discorsi e dimostrazioni matematiche intorno a due nuove scienze. Leiden
1638. In Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Relating to Two New Sciences. New
York: Dover.
Galouye, D. F. (1964). Simulacron-3. New York: Bantam Books. (Welt am Draht [A Puppeteer’s
World], Munich: Goldmann, 1965).
Ganoczy, A. (1995). Chaos, chance, belief in creation—Chaos theory as a challenge for theology
(in German). Mainz: Matthias-Grünewald-Verlag.
Garey, M. R., & Johnson, D. S. (1979). Computers and intractability—a guide to the theory of
NP-completeness. San Francisco: Freeman.
Bibliography
265

Gibbs, J. W. (1960). Elementary principles in statistical mechanics, developed with especial
reference to the rational foundation of thermodynamics. New York: Scribner 1902
(New York: Dover 1960).
Gibson, W. (1984). Neuromancer. New York: Ace Books.
Giel, K. (1988). Aspects of the dialogical—on the philosophical pedagogics of Martin Buber
(in German). http://www.klaus-giel.de/doc/Buber.pdf.
Gödel, K. (1931). Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter
Systeme I. Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 38, 173–198 (1931) (On formally
undecidable propositions of principia mathematica and related systems I. New York: Basic
Books, 1963; New York: Dover, 1992).
Goldman, M. (1983). The demon in the Aether—the story of James Clerk Maxwell. Edinburgh:
Paul Harris.
Gregory of Nazianzus (1975). On human nature (De humana natura). In J. Plevnic (Ed.), J. Egan,
Gregory of Nazianzus and the logos doctrine (pp. 281–322). ON: Willowdale.
Gumowski, I., & Mira, C. (1980). Recurrences and discrete dynamic systems. Berlin: Springer.
Haken, H. (1970). Laser theory. In S. Flügge (Ed.), Handbuch der Physik (Vol. 25/2c). Berlin:
Springer.
Hahn, O. (1944). Artiﬁcial transmutations of atoms and the splitting of heavy nuclei (in German).
Publications of the German Scientiﬁc Institute (DWI), Stockholm, Series 3: Naturwissens-
chaften, No. 1. Stockholm: Almquist and Wiksells.
Hawking, S. W. (1974). Black hole explosions? Nature, 248(5443), 30–31.
Heaviside, O. (1892). On the forces, stresses, and ﬂuxes of energy in the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, London, 183, 423–480.
Heraclitus (2001). Fragment # 70: Metabolizing it rests (Metabállon anapaúetai). In Fragments—
the collected wisdom of Heraclitus. New York: Haxton Brooks Viking.
Higgs boson (14 March 2013). New results indicate that particle discovered at CERN is a Higgs
boson. CERN-Press release.
Hilbert, D. (1902). Mathematical problems. The Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society,
8, 437–479.
Hill, G. W. (1878). Researches in the lunar theory. The American Journal of Mathematics, 1,
5–26, 129–147, 245–260.
Hoppenstaedt, F. (Ed.) (1979). Nonlinear oscillations in biology (Lectures in Applied
Mathematics, 17) Rhode Island: The American Mathematical Society.
Hoyle, F. (1950). The nature of the universe—a series of broadcast lectures. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Hoyle, F. (1957). The black cloud. London: William Heinemann.
Hubble, E. (1929). A relation between distance and radial velocity among extra-galactic nebulae.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 15, 168.
Hulse, R. A., & Taylor, J. H. (1975). Discovery of a pulsar in a binary system. Astrophysical
Journal, 195(pt. 2), L51–L53.
Huxley, J. (1914). The courtship habits of the Great Crested Grebe (Podiceps cristatus), with an
addition to the theory of sexual selection. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London,
84, 491–562.
Jordan, P., von Neumann, J., & Wigner, E. (1934). On an algebraic generalization of the quantum
mechanical formalism. Annals of Mathematics, 35, 29–64.
Julia, G. M. (1918). Mémoire sur l’itération des fonctions rationnelles. Journal de Mathématiques
Pures et Appliquées, 8, 47–246.
Kant, I., Critique of pure reason (1781). In P. Guyer & A. Wood, Cambridge edition of the works
of Immanuel Kant. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1999.
Kaplan, J. L., & Yorke, J. A. (1979). Chaotic behavior of multidimensional difference equations.
In H. -O. Peitgen & H. -O. Walther (Eds.), Functional differential equations and
approximations of ﬁxed points: Proceedings, Bonn, July 1978 (pp. 204–227). Berlin: Springer.
266
Bibliography

Kauffman, S. (1996). At home in the universe—the search for the laws of self-organization and
complexity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kaufmann, W. (1903). On the ‘‘electromagnetic mass’’ of the electrons (in German). Göttinger
Nachrichten, 3, 90–103.
Kenneﬁck, D. (2005). Einstein versus the physical review. Physics Today, 58, 43–48.
Kepler, J. (1609). New astronomy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1993.
Kloeden, P., Rossler, O. E., & Rossler, R. (1990). A predictive model for life expectancy curves.
BioSystems, 24, 119–125.
Kocher, C. A., & Commins, E. D. (1967). Polarization correlation of photons emitted in an
atomic cascade. Physical Review Letters, 18, 575–577.
Köhler, W. (1921). Intelligence tests in apes (in German). Berlin: Springer 1963.
Korzybski, A. (1921). Manhood of Humanity. New York: Dutton.
Kossel, W. (1919). On the physical nature of the valence forces (in German). Naturwissens-
chaften, 7(336–345), 360–366.
Kozak, J.J., & Rossler, O. E. (1982). Weak mixing in a quantum system. Z. Naturforsch. 37a,
33–38.
Kümmel, F. (1972). The consciousness of time as the uniﬁcation of spontaneity and receptivity—
On the Foundation of the objectivity of understanding in the Critique of Pure Reason (in
German). Zeitschrift für Philosophische Forschung, 26(1), 21–28.
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and refutations—the logic of mathematical discovery. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lakatos, I. (1978). Mathematics, science and epistemology. Philosophical papers (Vol. 2).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Landau, L. D. (1965). In D. ter Haar (Ed.), Collected papers of L.D. Landau, 1930. London:
Gordon and Breach.
Landauer, R. (1978). Stability in the dissipative steady state. Physics Today, 31, 23–24.
Langevin, P. (1911). The evolution of space and time (in French). Scientia 10, 31–54 (1973
transl. J. B. Sykes; also in Wikisource).
Lasswitz, K. (1901). The universal library (in German) [English Translation in C. Fadiman, (Ed.),
Fantasia mathematica. New York: Simon and Schuster 1958].
Leibniz, G. W., & Clarke, S. (1716). R. Ariew (Ed.), The Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence.
Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett 2000.
Leibniz, G. W. (1714). Monadology (La Monadologie) (English translation by Robert Latta,
1898, George MacDonald Ross, Leeds 1999).
Lemaître, G. (1927). A homogeneous universe of constant mass and crossing light rays taking
into account the radial velocity of extra-galactic nebulae (in French). Annales de la Société
Scientiﬁque de Bruxelles A, 47, 49–56.
Lennard-Jones, J. E. (1924). On the determination of molecular ﬁelds. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, Series A, 106, 463–477.
Letellier, C. (2013). Chaos in nature. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Levin, K. (1936). Principles of topological psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lévinas, E. (1947). Time and the otherperson (Le temps et l’autre) (English Translation).
Pittburgh: Duquesne University Press 1990.
Li, T.-Y., & Yorke, J. A. (1975). Period three implies chaos. The American Mathematical
Monthly, 82, 985–989.
Liénard, A. (1928). Etude des oscillations entretenues. Revue générale de l’électricité, 23,
901–912, 946–954.
Linke, D. B. (2003). Media theory, brain research and accepting Turkey into the EU—
international Flusser Lecture (in German). Cologne: Verlag der Buchhandlung Walter König.
Lorenz, E. N. (1963). Deterministic nonperiodic ﬂow. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 20,
130–141.
Lorenz, K. (1954). Man Meets Dog. London: Routledge Classics.
Bibliography
267

Lorenz, K. (1978). Behind the mirror. Engelska: Mariner Books. (Die Rückseite des Spiegels
[The Mirror’s Flip Side]. Munich: Piper, 1973).
Loschmidt, J. J. (1866). On the size of the molecules of the air (in German). Sitzungsberichte der
kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften Wien 52, Abt. II, 395–413.
Loyola, I. (1997). cf. Life of St. Ignatius of Loyola. Charlotte: TAN Books.
Lullies, H. (1958). Physiologie, vols. 1 and 2. Cologne, Tropon.
Lyman, T. (1906). The spectrum of hydrogen in the region of extremely short wave-length.
Memoirs of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 13, 125–146.
Lynden-Bell, D. (1996). Inertia. In O. Lahav, E. Terlevich, & R. J. Terlevich (Eds.),
Gravitational dynamics: Proceedings of the 36th Herstmonceaux Conference in honour of
Professor D. Lynden-Bell’s 60th birthday (pp. 235–243). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Maimonides, M. (1963). A guide for the perplexed (transl. by S. Pines). University of Chicago
Press.
Malina, R. F. (2 Jan 2012). A role for the sublime in art/science? Leonardo Quarterly Reviews,
pp. 14–19.
Mandelbrot, B. B. (1977). The fractal geometry of nature. New York: Freeman.
Maxwell, J. C. (2001). Theory of heat, 2nd edn., 1872. New York: Dover.
May, R. M. (1974). Biological Populations with nonoverlapping generations: Stable points, stable
cycles, and chaos. Science, 186, 645–647.
Mayer-Kress, G. (1999). In R. Stettler (Ed.), 3rd International Symposium of Science, Technics,
and Aesthetics: Frontier Communication: Human Beings, Apes, Whales, Electronic Networks,
Lucerne, Switzerland.
Meitner, L., & Frisch, O. R. (1939). Disintegration of uranium by neutrons: A new type of
nuclear reaction. Nature, 143, 239–240.
Menger, K. (2002). Selecta Mathematica (Vol. 1). Vienna: Springer-Wien.
Michelson, A. A., & Morley, E. W. (1886). Inﬂuence of motion of the medium on the velocity of
light. American Journal of Science, 31, 377–386.
Milnor, J. (1985). On the concept of attractor. Communications in Mathematical Physics, 99,
177–195.
Minkowski, H. (1909). Space and time (Raum und Zeit). Physikalische Zeitschrift 10, 104–111
[for Minkowski diagram, see: N. D. Mermin, Space and time in special relativity (pp.
155–199). New York: McGraw-Hill 1968].
Misner, C. W., Thorne, K. S., & Wheeler, J. A. (1973). Gravitation. San Francisco: Freeman.
Moser, J. (1962). On invariant curves of area-preserving mappings of an annulus. Nachr. Akad.
Wiss. Göttingen Math.-Phys. Kl. II, 1–20.
Mössbauer, R. L. (1958). Nuclear resonance ﬂuorescence by gamma radiation in Ir-191 (in
German). Zeitschrift für Physik A, 151, 124–143.
Newton, I. (1687). Mathematical principles of natural philosophy (Philosophiae naturalis
principia mathematica) (‘‘The Principia’’, transl. Andrew Motte, 1729).
Nitschke, A. (1962). The orphaned child of nature (in German). Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Noether, E. (1918). Invariant variantional problems (in German). Nachr. Königl. Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften Göttingen, Math-phys. Klasse, 235–257.
Olbers, H. W. (1758–1840, rediscoverer of Kepler’s 1610 result), see Mandelbrot, B. The fractal
geometry of nature (p. 103). New York: Freeman, 1977.
Olds, J. (1976). Reward and drive neurons. In: A. Wauquier & E. T. Rolls (Eds.), Brain
stimulation reward (pp. 1–30). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Oppenheimer, R., & Snyder, H. (1939). On continued gravitational contraction. Physical Review,
56, 455–459.
Ord, G. (2005). Transﬁnite physics. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Pais, A. (1982). Subtle is the Lord—the science and life of Albert Einstein. Oxford University
Press.
268
Bibliography

Pan, J.-W., Simon, C., Brukner, C., & Zeilinger, A. (2001). Entanglement puriﬁcation for
quantum communication. Nature, 410, 1067–1070.
Pauli, W. (1924). Discovery of nulear spin to explain the hyperﬁne structure of the atomic spectra
(in German). Naturwissenschaften 12, 74 [Cf. Pauli, W. In Kronig and Weisskopf (Eds.),
Collected works in two volumes. New York: Wiley, 1964].
Penrose, R. (1989). The emperor’s new mind—concerning computers, minds, and the laws of
physics (p. 287, Fig. 6.32). Oxford University Press.
Perlmutter, S., & Schmidt, B. P. (2003). Measuring cosmology with supernovae. Lecture Notes of
Physics, 598, 195–217.
Pickover, C. A. (2009). The math book—from Pythagoras to the 57th dimension—250 milestones
in the history of mathematics. New York: Sterling.
Plessner, H. (1950). The smile (in German). In: Pro regno, pro sanctuario, Festschr. for G. van
der Leeuw.
Poincaré, H. (1993). New methods of celestial mechanics (3 vols, in French 1892). College Park:
American Institute of Physics.
Poincaré, H. (1958). The value of science (in French, Flammarion, Paris 1904). New York:
Dover.
Popper, K. R. (2002). The logic of scientiﬁc discovery (Logik der Forschung, 1934). New York:
Routledge Classics.
Popper, K. R. (1979). Objective knowledge—an evolutionary approach (revised edn.). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Pound, R. V., & Rebka, G. A. (1960). Apparent weight of photons. Physical Review Letters, 4,
337–341.
Pöschel, J. (2001). A lecture on the classical KAM-theorem. Proceedings of Symposia in Pure
Mathematics (AMS), 69, 707–732.
Prehn, H. (2001). The neuro-loop—biofeedback interfaces. In H. H. Diebner, T. Druckrey & P.
Weibel (Eds.), Sciences of the interface—Festschrift for Otto E. Rössler (pp. 202–231).
Tübingen: Genista-Verlag.
Prigogine, I. (1955). Introduction to thermodynamics of irreversible processes. Springﬁeld: C.C.
Thoma.
Primas, H. (2003). Between mind and matter. Mind and Matter, 1, 81–119.
Putman, H. (1981). Reason, truth, and history. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rashevsky, N. (1954). Topology and life: In search of general mathematical principles in biology
and sociology. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 16, 317–348.
Riess, A., et al. (1998). Observational evidence from supernovae for an accelerating universe and
a cosmological constant. Astronomical Journal, 116, 1009–1038.
Rindler, W. (2001). Relativity—special, general, and cosmological. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron system. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 27, 169–192.
Rosen, R. (1967). Optimality principles in Biology. London: Butterworth.
Rosen, R. (1970). Dynamical system theory in biology. New York: Wiley.
Ross, J., Corlan, A. D., & Müller, S. C. (2012). Proposed principles of maximum local entropy
production. Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 116, 7858–7865.
Rössler, O. E. (1971). A system-theoretic model of biogenesis (in German). Zeitschrift für
Naturforschung, 26 b, 741–746.
Rössler, O. E. (1974). Adequate locomotion strategies for an abstract organism in an abstract
environment: A relational approach to brain function. Lecture Notes in Biomathematics, 4,
342–369.
Rössler, O. E. (1975). Mathematical model of a proposed treatment of early infantile autism. San
Diego Biomedical Symposium, 14, 105–110.
Rössler, O. E. (1976). An equation for continuous chaos. Physics Letters A, 57, 397–398.
Rossler, O. E. (1976/1979). Chaos Movie. www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tmmdg2P1RIM
Bibliography
269

Rössler, O. E. (1978). Deductive biology—some cautious steps. Bulletin of Mathmatics, 40,
45–58.
Rössler, O. E. (1979). Chaotic oscillations: An example of hyperchaos. In F. Hoppenstaedt (Ed.),
Nonlinear oscillations in biology (Vol. 17, pp. 141–156). Lectures in applied mathematics
Rhode Island: American Mathematics Society.
Rössler, O. E. (1979). An equation for hyperchaos. Physics Letters A, 71, 155–157.
Rössler, O. E. (1979). Chaos. In W. Güttinger & H. Eikemeier (Eds.), Structural stability in
physics (pp. 290–309), Berlin: Springer.
Rössler, O. E. (1992). Bell’s symmetry. Symmetry: Culture & Science, 3(4), 385–400.
Rössler, O. E. (1994). Micro-constructivism. Physica D, 75, 438–448.
Rössler, O. E. (1996). Jumping identities of particles. Symmetry: Culture & Science, 7, 307–319.
Rössler, O. E. (1998). Endophysics—the world as an interface. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Rössler, O. E. (2000). Einstein’s Aarau vision. In: J. Fischer (Ed.), Art Space Aarau (pp.
191–194). Aarau: Verlag Vittorio de Angelis.
Rossler, O. E. (2006). Static cosmology from chaos-borne Hubble law. Nonlinear Phenomena in
Complex Systems, 9, 53–60.
Rössler, O. E. (2011). Variantology: Einstein-Bohr battle conﬁrms Everett’s eternal now. In
Siegfried Zielinski, Eckhard Fürlus & Daniel Irrgang (Eds.), Variantology 5: Neapolitan
affairs, on deep time relations of arts, sciences and technologies (pp. 417–432). Verlag der
Buchhandlung Walter Köenig: Cologne.
Rössler, O. E. (2011). The new science of cryodynamics and its connection to cosmology.
Complex Systems, 20, 105–113.
Rössler, O. E. (2012). Einstein’s equivalence principle has three further implications besides
affecting time: T-L-M-Ch theorem (‘‘Telemach’’). African Journal of Mathematics and
Computer Science Research, 5, 44–47.
Rossler, O. E. (2013). Olemach theorem: Angular-momentum conservation implies gravitational
redshift proportional change of length, mass and charge. European Scientiﬁc Journal, 9(6),
38–45.
Rossler, O. E. (2013). Rolling ball in breathing plane-tree alley paradigm. European Scientiﬁc
Journal, 9(27), 1–7.
Rössler, O. E. (2014). The brain equation. In: ISCS 2013: Interdisciplinary Symposium on
Complex Systems, (pp. 47–56). Berlin: Springer.
Rossler, O. E., Rossler, R., & Landahl, H. D. (1978). Arrhythmia in a periodically forced
excitable system. In: Sixth International Biophysics Congress Kyoto, abstracts (p. 296).
International Union for Pure and Applied Biophysics.
Rössler, O. E., Hudson, J. L., & Klein, M. (1989). Chaotic forcing generates wrinkled boundary.
Journal of Physical Chemistry, 93, 2858–2860.
Rössler, O. E., Kampis, G., Nadler, W., Musterle, W., Schapiro, B., & Urban, B. (1990). Highly
parallel implementation of an autonomous direction optimizer with cognition (abstract).
Biophysical Journal, 57, 194a; contains proposal for the Pandaka pygmaea Brain Research
Institute.
Rössler, O. E., & Hudson, J. L. (1993). A ‘‘superfat’’ attractor with a singular-continuous 2-D
Weierstrass function in a cross section. Zeitschrift für Naturforschung, 48a, 673–678.
Rossler, O. E., & Hartmann, G. C. (1995). Attractors with ﬂares. Fractals, 3, 285–296.
Rössler, R., & Rössler, O. E. (Eds.). (1994). Jonas’ World - A Child’s Thoughts (in German).
Reinbek: Rowohlt.
Rössler, O. E., & Conrad, M. (2002). Interface theory and almost-solipsism. Journal of New
Energy, 6, 120–124.
Rössler, O. E., Fröhlich, D., & Kleiner, N. (2003). A time-symmetric Hubble-like law: Light rays
grazing randomly moving galaxies show distance-proportional redshift. Zeitschrift für
Naturforschung, 58a, 807–809.
270
Bibliography

Rössler, O. E., Sanayei, A., & Zelinka, I. (2013). Is hot fusion made feasible by the discovery of
cryodynamics? In: I. Zelinka, O. E. Rössler, V. Snásel, A. Abraham & E. Corchado (Eds.),
Nostradamus—modern methods of prediction, modeling and analysis of nonlinear systems
(pp. 1–4). Berlin: Springer.
Rossler, R., Götz, F., & Rossler, O. E. (1979). Chaos in endocrinology. Biophysical Journal, 25,
216a.
Sackur, O. (1913). The universal signiﬁcance of the so-called elementary quantum of action (in
German). Annalen der Physik, 40, 67–86.
Sanayei, A. (2013). Revisiting Dirac and Schrödinger: A proof offered for the non-relativistic
time-dependent Schrödinger equation. arXiv:1309.1787.
Scheler, M. Die Stellung des Menschen im Kosmos. Bouvier, Bonn 1926 (17th edn. 2007), Man’s
Place in Nature. Noonday, New York 1961.
Schiller, F., On the Aesthetic Education of Man (in German, 1795), transl. by E.M. Wilkinson and
L.A. Willoughby. Oxford: Clarendon Press 1967.
Schrödinger, E. (1926). An undulatory theory of the mechanics of atoms and molecules. Physical
Review, 28, 1049–1070.
Schrödinger, E., Die gegenwärtige Situation in der Quantenmechanik. Naturwissenschaften, 23,
844–849 (1935); Present situation in quantum mechanics. American Philosophical Society,
124, 323–338 (1980).
Schuster, G., Smits, W., & Ullal, J. (2008). Thinkers of the jungle—the orangutan report.
Potsdam: Ullmann.
Seaman, B., & Rossler, O. E. (2011). Neosentience—the benevolence engine. Chicago: Intellect.
Shepard, R. N. (1995). Personal communication.
Sinai, Ya. G. (1970) Dynamical systems with elastic reﬂections. RussianMathematicalSurveys,
25, 137–189.
Sinai, Ya. G. (2004) What is a billiard? Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 51,
412–413.
Slipher, V. M. (1917). Nebulae. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 56,
403–409.
Smale, S. (1967). Differentiable dynamical systems. Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society, 73, 747–817.
Smoluchowski, M. (1906). On the kinetic theory of the Brownian molecular motion and the
suspensions (in German). Annalen der Physik, 326, 756–780.
Sonnleitner, K. (2010). StV4: A symplectic time-reversible Störmer-Verlet procedure of the fourth
order for Hamiltonian multi-particle systems, with two applied examples (gas, T-tube
conﬁguration), in German. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Tübingen.
Spaemann, R. (1996). Persons—essays on the difference between ’’something‘‘ and ’’someone‘‘
(in German). Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
Spinoza, B. (1998). Principia philosophiae cartesianae 1663. The Principles of Cartesian
Philosophy. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Stone, A. Douglas (2005). Einstein’s unknown insight and the problem of quantizing chaos.
Physics Today, 58, 37–43.
Szilárd, L. (1961). The voice of the dolphins. New York: Stanford University Press.
Teilhard de Chardin (1999). The Human Phenomenon (1955, in French). Eastbourne: Sussex
Academic Press.
Tetrode, H. (1912). The chemical constant of gases and the elementary quantum of action.
(in German) Annalen der Physik, 38, 434–442.
van Hooff, J. A. R. A. M. (1972). A comparative approach to the phylogeny of laughter and smile.
In: R. A. Hinde, (Ed.), Non-verbal communication (pp. 203–238). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
von Weizsäcker, C. F. (1952). The World View of Physics. London: Routledge.
von Neumann, J. (1932). Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics (First Engl. edn. New
York: Dover, 1943, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1955).
Bibliography
271

Vrobel, S. (2011). Fractal Time. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Waddington, C. H. (1941). Evolution of developmental systems. Nature, 147, 108–110.
Wallace, A. R. (1870). Contributions to the theory of natural selection (2nd ed.). London:
Macmillan.
Wallace, D. (2012). The emergent multiverse: Quantum theory according to the Everett
interpretation (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Waterston, J. J. (1892). On the physics of media that are composed of free and perfectly elastic
molecules in a state of motion, 1845. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London A, 183, 1–79.
Weyl, H. (1949, 2009). Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science. Princeton: Princeton
University Press (ﬁrst German edition: Oldenbourg Verlag, Munich 1928).
Weyl, H. (1952). Symmetry. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Winfree, A. T. (1967). Biological rhythms and the behavior of populations of coupled oscillators.
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 16, 15–42.
Winfree, A. T. (1972). Spiral waves of chemical activity. Science, 175, 634–636.
Yamaguti, M., Hata, M., & Kigami, J. (1993). Mathematics of fractals. Providence: American
Mathematical Society.
Yandell, B. H. (2002). The Honors Class: Hilbert’s Problems and their Solvers, pp. 159–162.
Peters, Natick, Mass.
Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8, 338–353.
Zadeh, L. A. (1996). Fuzzy logic = computing with words. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems,
4, 103–111.
Zadeh, L. A. (2012). Computing with words—principal concepts and ideas. Berlin: Springer.
Zeilinger, A., Oxford open problems. See Briggs et al., 2013.
Zhabotinsky, A. M. (1964) A periodic oxidation reaction in the ﬂuid phase (in German). In: L.
Kuhnert & U. Niedersen (Eds.), Selbstorganisation chemischer Strukturen (pp. 83–89).
Frankfurt: Harri Klein.
Zurek, W. H. (1985). Cosmological experiments in superﬂuid Helium? Nature, 317, 505–508.
Zurek, W. H. (2009). Quantum Darwinism. Nature Physics, 5, 181–188.
Zwicky, F. (1929). On the red shift of spectral lines through interstellar space. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 15, 773–779.
Zwicky, F. (1939). On the formation of clusters of nebulae and the cosmological time scale.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 25, 604–609.
272
Bibliography

Index
A
Achilles, 177–179, 181, 184, 223
Adaptation, metabolic, 112–113
Adaptation, positional, 112–113
Amoeba, 66
Analog computer, 11, 24, 27, 103
Anaxagoras, 25–26, 31–34, 67–71, 126,
132, 152, 182
Anaximander, 45
Angular momentum conservation, 92–93,
128, 137
Archimedes, 45, 49, 259
Aristarchus of Samos, 160
Artiﬁcial brains, 16–17
Artiﬁcial physics, 45
Assignment conditions, 117–118, 247, 261
Aspect, Alain, 55, 238, 260
Attractor dollar, 150
ﬂare, 37
hyperfat, 37
Milnor, 37
X-, 37, 210
Autism, 16, 19, 120
Automata growing, 104
Automata liquid, 11, 12
Automata theory, 12, 15, 45
Avicenna, 245
B
Bacon, Francis, 39
Baier, Gerold
Basin structure, 70
Bateson, Gregory, 141
Bell correlation, 58, 61, 189–190, 260–261
Bell experiment, 36, 59, 186–187, 189,
238, 260
Bell inequality, 36, 56, 59
Bell, John, 54, 116, 186–187, 189, 238, 260
Benevolence theory, 135, 140
Benz, Berta, 121
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von, 3, 4, 11, 101,
111, 195
Billiard, Sinai, 33, 165–168, 170, 215
Billiard, Waterston, 33
Biochronological systems, 12
Biocybernetics, 7
Birbaumer, Niels, 18
Black holes, 62, 95–99, 107, 119–120, 154,
169, 202, 238, 246
Bohm, David, 186–187
Bohr, Niels, 5, 54–55, 57–61, 64–65, 182,
188–189
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 51, 56, 61, 65–66,
79, 84–88, 115, 152–153, 174, 204,
220, 225
Born, Max, 186, 246
Boscovich, Roger, 44–45, 55, 63, 240, 244
Braindrops experiment (Horst Prehn), 162
Brain equation, 15–20, 72, 76, 111–112, 136,
140, 142–143, 157–158, 193, 197–202
Brain in the genome, 103, 106, 108, 111, 195
Bruno, Giordano, 68, 71, 152, 179
Buber, Martin, 261
Bunimovich, Leonid, 83
Buridan, Johannes, 160
Butterﬂy attractor of Ed Lorenz, 21, 132
C
c-global, 94
Cantor, Georg, 26, 30, 33, 67–71, 75, 85, 152
Cantor set, 29–30, 67–70
Casti, John, 45, 121
Celestial mechanics, 33–34, 168, 171, 215,
220, 235
A. Sanayei and O. E. Rössler, Chaotic Harmony,
Emergence, Complexity and Computation 11, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06781-0,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
273

CERN experiment, 133
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan, 81, 169–170,
205
Chaos, 6, 12–17, 21–29, 48, 51, 62, 66–69,
75–76, 80–85, 87, 107, 126–128, 132,
143–150, 162, 165–168, 203–204,
209–218, 220–222, 247, 253
Chaos movie, 24
Chaotic attractors, 20, 25, 27, 29–30, 39, 67,
69–71, 132
Chaotic dice, 65
Charnov, Eric, 110, 159, 197
Chemical chaos, 26
Chemical equations, 26
Chemical evolution, 10, 17–18, 33, 101,
108–109, 118, 196, 252
Chemical growing automation, 102
Chemical life, 17, 105, 113, 208
Chemical multivibrator, 11
Chemical reaction system, 21, 26
Chemical soup, 3
Chemical waves, 107
Chu, Steven, 151, 172
Clausius, Rudolph (heat death, entropy), 34,
87, 95, 105
Cohen, Joel, 104
Cohen, Paul, 201
Conrad, Michael, 16, 111, 163, 195, 230
Continuous chaos, 28
Continuum hypothesis, 69
Cook, Richard, 92
Copenhagen interpretation, 5, 9, 34–36, 53–55,
57–59, 122, 188–190, 236
Cosmology, 32–34, 77–79, 81, 87, 92–94,
100–101, 115–116, 155, 203–204,
221–222
Crislers’ arctic wild, 72
Cross section, 26, 28–32, 68–70, 76, 87,
150–151, 209, 222
Cryodynamics, 34, 37, 84, 85, 94, 106–107,
115–116, 118–119, 155, 165–169,
203, 207, 208, 222–224, 258
Cusanus, Nicolaus, 71
D
Dalai Lama, 116, 190
DalCin, Mario, 17
Damour, Thibault, 91, 176
Darvas, György, 128, 132
Darwin, Charles, 3, 16, 73, 103, 108, 111,
112, 115, 118, 119, 127, 157-161,
193, 195-197
Darwinism, 112, 118, 122, 158, 160, 193,
195, 196
Darwinism, second, 193
de Broglie, Louis, 182
Decision-type travelling salesman problem,
16, 197, 200
Dehmelt atom, 236, 237
Demon in the aether, 100
Descartes, René, 48, 115, 116, 119, 182, 183,
233, 236, 239, 245, 247-249, 251, 255,
257, 258, 260, 261
Deterministic dynamical system, 144, 153
Devaney, R. L., 68
DeWitt, Bryce, 54
Diebner, Hans H., 173
Dirac, Paul, 17, 100, 188, 235, 239,
241–243, 261
Disciplined tangle, 151, 152
Disney, Walt, 261
Dollar attractor, 150
Doppler effect, 93, 136, 178, 181
Doria, Francisco, 37
Dragon’s Egg, 50, 105, 111
Dynamical friction, 81, 94, 169, 205
Dynamical systems, 12, 30, 69, 105, 129,
132, 135, 136, 144, 151, 153, 162,
193, 224
E
Ectropy, 118, 119, 173
Eddington, Sir Arthur, 169, 242
Ehrenfest, Paul, 90
Eigen, Manfred, 10
Einstein, Albert, 42, 56–58, 61, 63, 64, 65,
79, 80, 81, 87, 89–96, 100, 115, 128,
153–156, 170, 175–180, 183-190,
211–213, 215, 223, 239, 240, 242,
243, 245, 247, 252, 257, 259–261
Einstein equation, 94, 95
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen experiment (EPR),
56, 184, 186
Einstein-Rosen bridge, 212
Einstein’s Letters to and from Children, 264
Eliasson, Olafur, 103, 212
ElNaschie, Mohamed, 29
Endophysics, 44–53, 55, 56, 61–64, 66,
79, 119, 121, 122, 160, 161, 229–231,
236, 260
Energetic capitalism, 205
Engelmann, Wolfgang, 12
Entropy, 165, 173
Entropy decrease, 85, 86, 118, 155, 173
274
Index

Entropy increase, 84, 86, 106, 115, 118, 155
Erdös, Paul, 102, 104
Equipartition of energy, 33, 84
Equivalence principle, 90, 96, 182, 184,
239–240
Everett, Hugh, 34, 36, 48, 53–55, 57, 59–61,
66, 115, 116, 123, 129, 188–190, 261
Everett worlds, 59, 129–130, 190
Everett theory, 54, 55, 189
Evolutionary ritualization, 73
Exchange of identities, 127, 227, 228
Exchange symmetry, 126, 127
F
Farmelo, Graham, 42
Feingold, Susan, 55–56, 188
Feynman, Richard, 174
Finkelstein, David, 44–45, 121
Flamm’s paraboloid, 174–175, 212
Fliessgleichgewicht, 3, 101
Flipﬂop, electronic, 22
Flipside of the mirror, 112
Folded handkerchief map, 31
Folded towel map, 32, 209
Foraging theory, optimal, 111, 158, 197
Ford, Joe, 35, 39–40, 44, 83
Forest people, 193, 202
Forward, Robert, 50, 105, 107, 111, 118, 200
Fournier d’Albe, Chevallier, 99
Fractal cosmos, 94, 99–100
Fractal geometry, 29–30, 129
Fractals, 26, 29–32, 67, 81–82, 99, 126, 129
Franklin, Benjamin, 96
Frayn, Michael, 5
Fredkin, Edward, 45
Freely, John, 183
Freud, Sigmund, 60, 75, 94
Friedmann expansion, 79, 95, 203
Function change, 15, 72, 75, 120, 135, 139
Function change, personogenetic, 18
G
Galactic clusters, 80–81, 86
Galactic dynamics, 170, 207
Galilei, Galileo, 149, 179, 183
Ganoczy, Alexandre, 69
Geons, 172
Gibbs, Josiah Willard, 225, 228, 233, 259
Gibson, William, 183
Gödel, Kurt, 186, 201, 228
Gödel’s incompleteness theorem, 201
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang, viii
GPS, 180
Gravitational redshift, 155, 180–181
Gravitational waves, 154, 239
Gregorius of Naziance, 69
Güttinger, Werner, 17
Gumowski, Igor, 30, 148
H
Haken, Hermann, 28
Hahn, Otto, 5, 252–253
Hamiltonian celestial mechanics, 215
Hamiltonian chaos, 35–36, 82, 86
Hamiltonian function, 56, 61
Hamiltonian orbit, 149
Hamiltonian oscillator, 86
Hamiltonian systems, 39, 41, 42, 46, 49, 61,
66, 82, 130
Hard bifurcation, 72
Hatch, Ronald, 92
Hawking radiation, 91, 98
Heat death, 33, 105–106, 118
Heisenberg, Werner K., 6, 188
Heraclitus, 100
Herder, Gottfried, 101
Hilbert, David, 128, 235, 237
Hilbert, the sixth problem, 235
Hilbert space, 235
Hill, E.L., 147
Higgs boson, 224
Higgs theory, 49
Hilgartner, C. Andy, 135
Homoclinic point, 33, 65, 147, 150, 151, 155
Hoppenstaedt, Frank, 36
Hoyle, Fred, 50, 79
Hubble, Edwin, 84, 94, 99, 203, 222
Hubble law, 79, 94, 155, 203, 221, 222
Hubble line, 94
Hudson, Jack, 37
Hulse, R. A. and Taylor J. H., 240
Hun Tun, 31
Hyperchaos, 26, 28–31, 36, 39, 209
Hyperchaotic attractor, 36
Hyperchaotic ﬂow, 26, 29, 32
Hyperfat attractors, 37
Hypothesis of molecular chaos, 65, 85, 152
Hysteresis, 22, 120, 135
I
Ignatius, 248
Indistinguishability, 51, 69, 126, 130,
223–225, 227–233, 259
Inﬁnitely long trumpet, 97
Index
275

Inﬁnitely exact, 25–26, 36, 51, 126, 131, 152
Inﬁnitely old cosmos, 100
Inﬁnite-transﬁnite, 67
Invariant set, 31, 70, 76
Isospin, 128, 133
ITER, 172, 205, 207
J
Japanese steel sword, 209
Jobs, Steve, 32
Jordan, Pascual, 235
Julia, Gaston, 211
Julia set, 68, 126
K
KAM tori, 167
Kant, Immanuel, 99
Kaplan-Yorke conjecture, 37
Kauffman, Stuart, 11, 104
Kaufmann, Walter, 207
Kepler, Johannes, 99, 115
Kepler ellipse, 147, 148
Kerr-Newman solution, 95
Klemm, Alfred, 43, 151
Kocher and Commins, 55
Köhler, Wolfgang, 20, 137, 162
Kossel, Walter, 228–229
Kozak, John, 83
Kramer, Michael, 240
Kuypers, Heinrich, 91
Kümmel, Friedrich, 166
Kutzelnigg, Werner, 44
L
Lagrangian function, 46
Lakatos, 235
Landahl, Herbert, D., 25
Landauer, Rolf, 168
Landau, Lev, 106, 168
Langevin, Paul, 178, 182
Language, theory of, 19, 135–136,
140–142, 201
Languaging, 135
Lasswitz, Kurd, 104
Leibniz-Clarke correspondence, 125
Leibniz, Gottfried, 44, 69, 125, 127, 129,
224, 233, 256, 257
Leibniz-Pauli principle, 224
Lemaitre, Georges Abbé, 79, 95, 203
Lennard-Jones potential, 219
Letellier, Christophe, 132
Lévinas, Emmanuel, 19, 164, 246, 249, 261
Lewin, Kurt, 162
Lieblich, Israel, 15
Liénard oscillator, 22
Light cone, 177–178, 184, 190, 223, 257
Limit cycle, 12, 21–22, 69–70, 76, 151
Linke, Detlef, 17, 75
Lorentz, Hendrik A., 176–177, 181
Lorenz attractor, 12, 28, 132
Lorenz, Edward, 7, 12–13, 132, 211
Lorenz, Konrad, 5–7, 17, 73–74, 101, 111,
112, 120, 132, 195, 198
Loschmidt, J. J., 86
Lucas, George, 121
Lynden-Bell, Donald, 106, 168
M
Maimonides, 245, 248
Malina, Roger, 81
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 26, 29–31, 68, 70–71,
99–100, 126, 129
Mandelbrot set, 30–31, 68, 70, 126
Many cuts theory, 54, 66
Many worlds of Everett, 49, 54, 66
Maxwell equation, vii, 95, 176, 191
Maxwell, James Clerk, 45–46, 65, 96,
169–170, 183, 207, 260
Maxwell’s demon, 45
Mayer-Kress, Gottfried, 20, 40
Meitner, Lise, 5, 187, 251
Menger sponge, 99
Michelson-Morley experiment, 183
Microconstructivism, 160–161
Milky Way galaxy, 81, 107, 238
Milnor attractor, 37
Minkowski diagram, 257
Mira, Christian, 27, 30
Mirror competence, 20, 77, 136–140
Mixing process, 26, 61, 69, 209–210
Molecular chaos, 65, 85, 152
Monadology, 256
Moore, Anthony, 132
Mössbauer effect, 180
Motivation system, 162
Movassagh, Ramis, 81, 205
Müller, Stefan C., 269
Mutakallimun, 69
N
Neuromancer, 183
Newtonian attraction, 34, 83, 154–155, 168
Newtonian repulsion, 83, 155, 219
276
Index

Newton, Isaac, 5, 30, 62, 83, 91, 101, 116,
125, 147, 154–155, 167, 176, 179,
204, 215, 219, 243
Newton’s equation, 16, 200
Newton’s Laws, 125, 127, 147, 168
Nietzsche’s eternal recurrence, 115
Noether, Emmy, 92, 95, 127–130, 132,
235, 258
NP-complete, 16, 110–111, 197
NP-completeness, 109
O
Olds, Jim, 15
Olemach theorem, 93–95, 99, 101, 182
Olympian Academy, 212
Oppenheimer, Robert, 97–99, 175
Oppenheimer and Snyder, 97–99
Orangutan, 75, 121, 141, 193–195, 201–202
Ord, Garnet, 174
Ordinary differential equations, 16, 35,
108, 144
P
Pais, Abraham, 245
Parisi, Jürgen, 207
Parmenides, 257
Partial differential equations, 35, 108
Pauli, Wolfgang, 34, 39, 51, 62, 63, 69,
127, 130, 175, 182
Pauli cell, 51, 69, 223, 229–232
Pauli exchange symmetry, 126
Pauli indistinguishability, 126
Pauli primary chance, 34, 39, 62–63, 236
Pauli principle, 187
Pauli spin, 185, 223
Pauling, Linus, 175
Peinke, Joachim, 80
Penrose, Roger, 55, 107, 189
Perfect mixture, 25, 30, 68, 70, 153
Perichoresis, 69, 116
Perlmutter, Riess, Schmidt, 94
Person theory, 250
Physiological autism, 120
Planck constant, 41–42, 121, 182, 183, 223
Planck, Max, 6–9, 41, 121, 182
Plane-tree alley, 215–217
Poincaré, Henri, 21–22, 27, 32, 66, 79, 87–88,
144–155, 169, 175, 177, 211
Poincaré-Bendixson, 27, 153
Poincaré homoclinic point, 32, 65, 115, 144,
149
Poincaré-Lorentz transformation, 175, 177, 181
Poincaré map, 79, 144, 149, 184
Poincaré recurrence, 36, 86, 115
Poincaré section, 70–71, 148
Point omega, 9, 91, 118
Positronium creation and annihilation, 92–94,
181
Poisson brackets, 62
Popper, Sir Karl R., viii, 51, 238
Pound and Rebka, 180
Prehn, Horst, 162
Prigogine, Ilya, 80, 104, 105, 173
Primary chance, 34, 39, 62, 236
Primas, Hans, 44, 51, 69, 224
Prior, Helmut, 74
Pseudosphere, 97
Psi-function, 9, 53
Psi function of Everett, 53, 58, 61
Putnam, Hilary, 113
Q
Quantum mechanics, see Everett, see
Endophysics
Quasiperiodic motion, 150, 153
R
Rapp, Paul, 28
Rashevsky, Nicolas, 26, 195
Reeb foliation, 95
Red line attractor, 132
Reinjection principle, 27, 75
Relativity, general, 49, 52, 87, 90, 93–96, 98,
147, 153–155, 182, 211–213, 237–240
Relativity, special, 48, 53, 54, 60, 61, 87–92,
97, 153, 175–180, 183–185, 212,
219, 248
Relativistic Bell experiment, 36, 59, 260–261
Rilke, Rainer Maria, poem ‘‘Autumn’’, 230
Rizzolatti, Giacomo, 137
Rosen, Robert (Bob), 10, 11, 22, 72, 120, 130,
135, 157, 195, 246
Rossler attractor, 27
Rossler task, 16
Rotation symmetry, 95, 128
Rindler metric, 239
Rindler, Wolfgang, 94
Ruder, Hanns, 105
Rumi, vii, 164
S
Sackur-Tetrode formula (equation), 41, 42,
131, 226–227, 231
Index
277

Sackur cell, 227, 230, 259, 260
Schiller, Friedrich, 2
Schramm, Matthias, 44
Schrödinger, Erwin, 118, 173
Schrödinger equation, 35, 52, 60, 118
Schwarzschild, Karl, 95
Self-afﬁne, 29, 30, 67
Schapiro, Boris, 74
Shepard, Roger, 190, 258
Sinai billiard, 168, 217
Sinai, Yakov, 33, 40, 82–84, 165–168,
216–218
Sinai chaos, 40, 82
Singular perturbation theory, 22
Skinner, Burrhus, F., 141
Smale, Steven, 70, 76, 132, 151, 211
Smale solenoid, 68, 132
Smile theory, 71
Smits, Willie, 75, 193, 195, 201, 202
Smoluchowski, Marian, 170
Solipsism, 48, 49, 55, 177, 185, 190
Sommerfeld, Arnold, 62
Sound of chaos, 24
Sound of motorcycle, 24
Spin, 223, 224, 226–230
Spinoza, 69, 224, 233, 245
Stable manifold theorem, 151
State space, 29, 67, 69, 87
Statistical mechanics, 34, 40, 80, 82, 84,
85, 93, 152, 154, 155, 165, 170, 171,
205, 220–222, 225
Szilard, 121, 141
T
Taffy puller, 68, 73, 209–211
Targonski, György, 132
Teilhard de Chardin, 2, 3, 9, 104, 118,
142, 173
Telemach, 95, 98
Tennis game in an orchard, 83, 165, 216
Thermodynamic of irreversible processes, 118
Thermodynamics, repulsive, 171
Thom, René, 130
Thomas, Harry, 83, 165, 216
Three-body problem, 35, 150, 152, 153, 155
Tired light, 169, 173
Tomita, Kazuhisa, 44
Topology, 32, 145, 211, 212
Topology, differential, 211, 213
Transﬁntely exact, 51
Travelling salesman problem, 16, 20, 109, 110,
196, 197, 200, 201
Travelling salesman with alarm clocks, 109,
110, 112
T-tube system, 83, 86, 148
Turing, Alan, 163
Two-body problem, 147, 153, 155
Twin paradox, 156, 178, 179, 181
V
van der Pol oscillator, 22
van Helmont, Jan Baptist, 166
van Hooff J.A.R.A.M. (Jan), 136, 138, 261
Variantology, 270
von Koch snowﬂake, 126
von Weizsäcker, Carl-Friedrich, 5, 9, 53, 251,
252, 254
VX-digram, 189
Vrobel, Susi, 131
W
Waal de, Frans, 21
Waddington, C.H., 106
Wais, Ulrich, 108
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 53, 61, 63, 109, 172
Wallace, David, 60
Waterston, John James, 33
Weibel, Peter, 44, 228
Weitzel, Günter, 111
Weyl, Hermann, 69, 224, 256
Wheeler, John Archibald, viii, 60, 63, 109, 154
Winfree, Art T., 12, 13, 21, 26, 28, 209, 255
Wolfram, Stephen, 45
X
X-attractor, 37, 210
Y
Yamaguti, Masaya, 32
Yorke, Jim, 12, 37, 65, 166
Z
Zadeh, Lotﬁ, 143–145, 215
Zhabotinsky reaction, 107
Zielinski, Siegfried, 270
Zurek, Wojciech, 55, 122
Zwicky, Fritz, 81, 93, 168–170, 172, 203
278
Index

