O
Objectiﬁcation
Peter Mittelstaedt
The Concept of Objectiﬁcation
In quantum mechanics, the term “objectiﬁcation” is used for the attribution of a
state or of the value of an observable to a quantum system. Correspondingly, the
concepts of strong and weak objectiﬁcation are used by some authors for state attri-
bution and value attribution, respectively. Objectiﬁcation may refer to the situation
before the measurement (the preparation) and to the situation after a measurement
(the reading). In particular, the so-called “problem of objectiﬁcation” is concerned
with the situation after the measuring process. It is also called the “measurement
problem”. See also  Bohmian mechanics; Measurement theory; Metaphysics in
Quantum Mechanics; Modal Interpretation; Projection Postulate.
This problem has a long history. Already in his book “Mathematische
Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik” of 1932, J. von Neumann [1] observed, that
a ﬁrst and preliminary theory of the quantum measurement process does not lead to
the objectiﬁcation of the measurement result such, that the object system possesses
the measured value of the observable in question after the measurement. For cor-
recting this obvious deﬁciency of quantum mechanics, von Neumann introduced the
“projection postulate” as a new and additional requirement for quantum mechanics.
In contrast, Heisenberg [2] argued that the indispensability of the separation be-
tween the quantum object and the apparatus after the measurement is the real origin
for the impossibility to objectifying the values of the system and of the apparatus –
but not a deﬁciency of quantum theory.
Objectiﬁcation in the Quantum Measurement Process
The quantum theory of  measurement, ﬁrst conceived by J. von Neumann (ref
[1], 233–238) and further developed my many authors [3,4,7] considers the object
system S as well as the measurement apparatus M as proper quantum systems. The
measurement of an observable A, with discrete and nondegenerate values Ai and
eigenstates ϕ (Ai) is treated in three steps.1 In the ﬁrst step, the preparation, the
systems S and M are dynamically independent and prepared in pure states ϕ and ,
1 For sake of simplicity we mention here the only simplest version of the measurement process.
Generalisations can be found in the literature, e.g. in ref. [3] and [4].
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
417
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

418
Objectiﬁcation
respectively. In the second step, the premeasurement, the interaction Hamiltonian
Hint(A) between systems S and M is turned on for some time interval t. If the
interaction Hint(A) is suited for a measurement of the observable A, then the prepa-
ration state (S + M) = ϕ ⊗ of the compound system S + M will be changed
within the time interval t to the state after the premeasurement
′(S + M) = exp{−(i/ℏ)Hint(A)t}(S + M) =

ciϕ (Ai) ⊗i,
where i are eigenstates of the pointer observable that refer to pointer values Zi.
The coefﬁcients ci are given by the scalar products ci = (ϕ(Ai), ϕ). It can be
shown that for any observable A there exists an interaction Hint(A) that provides a
state ′(S + M) after the premeasurement with the bi-orthogonal decomposition as
shown here.
In the third step of the measurement, objectiﬁcation and reading, the systems S
and M are again dynamically independent but still correlated. Considered as sub-
systems of S+M in the entangled state ′(S+M), S and M can be described by the
correlated  mixed state W ′
S =  |ci|2 P[ϕ(Ai)], W ′
M =  |ci|2 P[i], respec-
tively. There are two kinds of mixed states. Formally, a mixed state is a self-adjoint
positive operator W with trace 1. As any self-adjoint operator it can be decomposed
according to its spectral decomposition as W =  wi P[ϕI] with 0 ⩽wi
⩽1.
(The states W ′
S and W′
M discussed here are already written in their spectral de-
composition). The two kinds of mixed states are distinguished by their preparation.
a) If object systems are prepared in states ϕi, say, with a priori probabilities wi,
then any single system is said to be in a mixed state W =  wi P[ϕI], i.e. it
is in one of the states ϕi with probability wi. This very special kind of a mixed
state is called a “mixture of states” [4], a “real mixture” [8], or a Gemenge [2]. It
is a classical mixture which can, however, formally be described by the operator
W =  wi P[ϕI]. b) If a compound system S = S1 + S2 of subsystems S1 and S2
is prepared in a pure state (S), then the subsystem S1, say, is in the reduced mixed
state W(S1) = tr2{P[(S)]} where “tr2” denotes the trace with respect to system
S2. The state W(S1) is a mixed state which does, however, in general not admit
an “ ignorance interpretation”. It is also called “improper mixture” [8]. Spec-
tral decomposition, see  Density operator; Ignorance interpretation; Measurement
theory; Operator; Probabilistic Interpretation; Propensities in Quantum Mechanics;
Self-adjoint operator; Wave Mechanics.
The two mixed states W′
S and W′
M that appear in the third step of the measuring
process are improper mixtures of this kind, which do not admit ignorance interpre-
tation. This means, that it is not allowed to say that the system S with the state W′
S
is actually in one of the states ϕ(Ai), but the observer does not know the state. In
other words, neither the state ϕ(Ai), nor the value Ai can be attributed to the system,
which means that the measuring result cannot be objectiﬁed. The opposite assump-
tion, that the system S were in a state ϕ(Ai) and would possess the value Ai, leads
to a contradiction with the statistical predictions of quantum mechanics. – The same
conclusions hold, mutatis mutandis, for the state W′
M of the apparatus M, and for
the state i and the value Zi of the pointer.

Objectiﬁcation
419
O
The impossibility to objectify the values Ai of the measured observable and even
the values Zi of the pointer observable, is called the “measurement problem”. There
are many attempts to solve this problem, either within the framework of quantum
mechanics or by convenient generalisations or modiﬁcations of this theory.2
Objectiﬁcation of Unsharp Observables
and Unsharp Objectiﬁcation
The most promising attempt to solve the problem of objectiﬁcation within the well
known quantum mechanics in  Hilbert space consists of a generalisation of the
concept of an observable to unsharp  observables. Formally, the projection-valued
or (PV) measures, which correspond to  self-adjoint operators, are replaced in
this attempt by the more general positive operator valued (POV) measures. Orig-
inally, the expectation of the advocates of this attempt was, that in spite of the
non-objectiﬁcation theorems for (PV) observables3 at least unsharp (POV) observ-
ables can be objectiﬁed.
However, within the quantum theory of measurement that is formulated in terms
of (POV) observables, it could be shown that neither system objectiﬁcation nor
pointer objectiﬁcation can be obtained. There was only a small chance to achieve
pointer objectiﬁcation, if even for the pointer observable an unsharp (POV) observ-
able is used. This situation is also called “unsharp objectiﬁcation” [5,6]. However,
reading of an unsharp pointer observable corresponds to a situation, where pointer
states which belong to different pointer values, are no longer strictly orthogonal.
Thus, “one cannot claim with certainty, that the reading one means to have taken is
reproducible on a ‘second look’ at the pointer”.4 Hence, even if unsharp objectiﬁ-
cation could be achieved in this way, we would loose the reliability of the results of
our reading.
Primary Literature
1. von Neumann, J.: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik. Springer, Berlin (1932).
2. Heisenberg, W.: Die PhysikalischenPrinzipien der Quantentheorie. S. Hirzel, Leipzig (1930).
3. Busch P., P. J. Lahti, P. Mittelstaedt: The Quantum Theory of Measurement. Springer, Heidelberg
(1991/1996).
4. Mittelstaedt, P.: The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics and the Measurement Process.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1998).
5. Busch, P., A. Shimony: Insolubility of Quantum Measurement Problem for Unsharp Observ-
ables. Stud. Hist. Philos. Mod. Phys. Vol. 27, 397–404 (1996).
6. Busch, P.: Can ‘Unsharp Objectiﬁcation’ Solve the Quantum Measurement Problem? Int. J.
Theor. Phys. Vol. 37, 241–47 (1998).
2 Reports about these attempts can be found in the literature, e.g. [3], chapter IV and [4], chapters
4 and 5.
3 The non-objectiﬁcation theorems can be found in ref. [4], pp. 82–88.
4 Ref. [6], p. 246.

420
Objective Quantum Probabilities
Secondary Literature
7. Wheeler, J. A., W. H. Zurek (eds.): Quantum Theory and Measurement. Princeton University
Press, Princeton NJ (1983).
8. d’Espagnat, B.: Reality and the Physicist. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, p. 85 (1989).
Objective Quantum Probabilities
Storrs McCall
Objective quantum probabilities represent the polar opposite to the Bayesian ap-
proach to quantum probabilities, which assumes probabilities to be subjective
degrees of belief. In the objective theory, probabilities of quantum events are part
of the physical world, and take their values independently of what human beings
believe. The ﬁrst objective theory was Karl Popper’s propensity theory of prob-
abilities, which identiﬁed propensities as the dispositional properties of particles
to assume certain states under given conditions [1]. The propensity theory placed
Popper squarely on the “particle” side of de Broglie’s and Bohr’s  wave-particle
duality. Propensities, however, suffered from the defect that Popper was unable to
specify where in the physical world the values of his propensities lay. The present
theory deals with this problem in locating precise quantum probability values in
space-time structure.
Imagine that a spin-1/2 particle with direction of  spin at an angle of 60◦to the
vertical is passed through an “HV apparatus”, a vertically-oriented Stern–Gerlach
magnet with two exit channels which separates particles into a “spin-up” stream
(direction of spin v or vertical) and a “spin-down” stream (direction of spin h or hori-
zontal). The spin-60◦particle has a probability of cos2 30◦= 3/4 of emerging in the
spin-up channel. In the objective theory, this value is encoded in space-time structure
in the following way. Imagine that at the time the particle enters the apparatus the
4-dimensional manifold divides into non-mutually-accessible future branches, and
that on 75% of these branches the particle is measured spin-up and that on 25% it is
measured spin-down. Figure 1, part (i), depicts a simple instance of this branching
in space-time.
The future branches represent possible outcomes of the experiment, and the
relative proportionality of sets of branches containing different kinds of outcome
represent the probabilities of each outcome. But when the particle has exited from
the apparatus there is only one actual outcome, and this “passage from potential-
ity to actuality” (Heisenberg [2]) is represented by the progressive vanishing of all
branches but one in space-time structure (Fig. 1 part (ii)). There will, of course,
always be many more branching surfaces and future branches higher up on the se-
lected branch.

