How Social Media, Influencer 
Culture and New Technologies
are Altering Society
 ―
Rhoda Okunev
The Psychology 
of Evolving 
Technology

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF 
EVOLVING TECHNOLOGY
HOW SOCIAL MEDIA, INFLUENCER 
CULTURE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES ARE 
ALTERING SOCIETY
Rhoda Okunev

Rhoda Okunev
Tamarac, FL, USA
The Psychology of Evolving Technology: How Social Media, Influencer 
Culture and New Technologies are Altering Society
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-8685-2	
	
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-8686-9
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9
Copyright © 2023 by Rhoda Okunev
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the 
whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, 
reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other 
physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, 
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter 
developed.
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a 
trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use 
the names, logos, and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark 
owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. 
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, 
even if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to 
whether or not they are subject to proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the 
date of publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any 
legal responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no 
warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
Managing Director, Apress Media LLC: Welmoed Spahr
Acquisitions Editor: Shiva Ramachandran
Development Editor: James Markham
Coordinating Editor: Jessica Vakili
Copy Editor: Kim Wimpsett
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York, 1 
New York Plaza, New York, NY 10004. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505, e-mail 
orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. Apress Media, LLC is a 
California LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance 
Inc (SSBM Finance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation.
For information on translations, please e-mail booktranslations@springernature.com; for 
reprint, paperback, or audio rights, please e-mail bookpermissions@springernature.com.
Apress titles may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional use. eBook 
versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our 
Print and eBook Bulk Sales web page at www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Printed on acid-free paper

About the Author                                                                     v
About the Technical Reviewer                                                      vii
Introduction                                                                            ix
Part I:	
Scientific Advances                                                            1
Chapter 1:	
History of Computing                                                        3
Chapter 2:	
History of the Internet, Search Engines, and More              9
Chapter 3:	
History of Smart Devices, Video Games, and 
Videoconferencing                                                            17
Part II:	
History of Social Media                                            25
Chapter 4:	
Social Media’s Launch                                                       27
Chapter 5:	
Meta, Twitter, Spotify, Instagram, Pinterest, 
Snapchat, and TikTok                                                        29
Part III:	
Synopsis of Psychological Theories                           37
Chapter 6:	
Piaget’s Life and Cognitive Developmental Stages            39
Chapter 7:	
Erikson’s Life and Psychosocial Developmental Stages      49
Chapter 8:	
CDC and Medline Milestones and APA 
Factsheets Guidelines                                                       57
Part IV:	
Developing a Framework for Using 
Technology in Today’s World                                     93
Chapter 9:	
Guidelines for Giving Your Children Technology                95
Chapter 10:	 Common Problems in Today’s Society                             105
Chapter 11:	 Conclusion                                                                      111
Bibliography                                                                                        113
Index                                                                                                   121
Contents

About the Author
Rhoda Okunev has a master’s degree in mathematics from the Courant 
Institute at New York University, a master’s degree in statistics from Columbia 
University, and a master’s degree in psychology with an emphasis in develop­
mental psychology from Yeshiva University. She also has an advanced certifica­
tion in finance from Fordham University. Rhoda has worked in the finance 
world in market risk for more than 10 years as a risk analyst. Rhoda has also 
worked as a researcher at Harvard University, Columbia Presbyterian Hospital, 
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, and Emblem Health (HIP).​
Rhoda Okunev currently is an Associate at the Columbia University’s School 
of Professional Studies in the Applied Analytics Department. She also teaches 
at Nova Southeastern University in the Math Department. Rhoda is an avid 
pickleball player.

About the Technical 
Reviewer
Stephen  Glicksman, PhD, is a licensed developmental psychologist and 
director of clinical innovation at Makor Care and Services Network (formerly 
Women’s League Community Residences), a life-span social services organiza­
tion meeting the needs of children and adults with intellectual and develop­
mental disabilities and their families. He is also an adjunct associate professor 
at Yeshiva College and the Ferkauf Graduate School of Psychology of Yeshiva 
University, as well as the founder and director of the Makor College Experience 
Program, a partnership program of Makor and YU providing the YU Experience 
for individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities on the Wilf 
Campus. In addition to his Makor and YU activities, Dr. Glicksman serves as 
the consultant psychologist for the School for Children with Hidden 
Intelligence (SCHI) in Lakewood, New Jersey, and has a private practice in 
Teaneck, New Jersey. Dr. Glicksman has presented on a variety of develop­
mental topics at numerous professional conferences and parent meetings, and 
his research has been published in both national and international scientific 
journals and periodicals.  

Introduction
Technology is advancing at such an incredible speed that it is hard to keep 
track of all its progress. This book reviews many technological developments 
that are impacting our world as adults and influencing on our children. In 
many respects, the computers, smartphones, and smart devices with texting 
capabilities, social media, and video apps on them have transformed our world 
and made it feel smaller, more controllable, and much easier to manage. In less 
than a few seconds, we can communicate with others down the street or 
across the world. It is brilliant! Or is it? I mean, the consequences of these 
experiences could hurt us mightily. Even as adults we are constantly barraged 
on our phone with robocalls or people trying to scam us for money. Some 
pictures and videos are edited to make us believe events happened that did 
not occur. If we can be mislead as adults, how can we not worry about our 
children? Children especially can be tricked into scams, cyber-bullying, and 
sharing explicit photos or sexting. Not to mention, gadgets can lead to addic­
tion to the smart device, lack of concentration, and obesity. Parents are forced 
to make vital decisions for their children every day about which technology 
devices is age-appropriate and important for our children’s successful growth 
in the areas of motor skills, mental capacity, and social development.
This book is a framework to start a conversation about this imperative and 
fundamental topic; it is by no means a scientific study or definitive explanation 
of how parents, teachers, mentors, or friends should make decisions. Each 
child is unique, and each child has an individual cognitive and social learning 
growth process. Therefore, each child’s life takes a different and amazing jour­
ney of its own.
One thing is for certain: these technological advances are here to stay, and 
they are only going to get more advanced. Our world is dependent and thrives 
on progress. These technological advances rely on and are shaped by artificial 
intelligence. Data science uses machine learning algorithms and transforms 
them into applications for images, videos, and audio content. It can recognize 
faces and decipher writing biases, sentiments, and feelings. These advances are 
propelling our world forward in ways we could not have imagined years ago. 
While it has become much easier to communicate with others around the 
world, it has disrupted a simpler life, when smart devices were not constantly 
at our sides with their its apps and notifications.

x
Colleges and universities have programs to advance these applied analytical 
tools and skills to be useful and usable, and new technological advances are 
happening fast, especially with smart glasses. Now and for the foreseeable 
future it is time to embrace these robotic and machine learning advances and 
discover how they can benefit our lives and how we can learn to control their 
detrimental forces so that our moral character is not weakened or destabi­
lized. In fact, we need to learn how they can strengthen our moral character 
and produce a more livable and peaceful world.
This book will discuss the theories of Jean Piaget’s stages of cognitive develop­
ment and Erik Erikson’s psychosocial development stages, along with the 
rapid advancements of computers, email, texting, video games, social media, 
and smart technologies that now utilize artificial intelligence. We’ll talk about 
how far technology has advanced, yet the maturation process of humans is 
still evolving through the same stages and growth process, for the most part, 
as our ancestors. This will be shown by using the age-appropriate milestones 
criteria of the Center for Disease Control (CDC), MedlinePlus: U.S. National 
Library of Medicine (Medline), and American Psychological Association (APA) 
factsheets.
This Book’s Organization
Let us begin a whirlwind journey through the history of technological changes 
with the intent to show these awe-inspiring innovations that have changed the 
world and also have created many hardships. Some of these advances have 
made life fun such as video games, yet the world is more weary of cybercrime 
activities that seek your private information.
Part I
The first part of this book discusses the scientific advances in the context of 
the history of computers and personal computers, word processors, Wi-Fi, 
email, and texting. It discusses the history of smart devices, video games, and 
videoconferencing.
Specifically, Chapter 1 reviews the history of computers and smart phones, 
including the invention of the iPhone, Samsung’s smart TV and phone, and 
Google’s Android. It also review the history of video games and video com­
munication and conferencing.
Chapter 2 reviews the most popular search engines, such as Google. The 
Internet and search engines have connected the world yet have exposed our 
families and livelihood to blackmail and the Dark Web. We are able to critique 
a restaurant or salon in one click, but if we click the wrong button on our 
computer, we might lose access to our data because someone on the Web 
Introduction

xi
decides to hold it for ransom. When Wi-Fi was developed, it connected the 
world in ways that were unimaginable before. This chapter will explore how 
and why email was invented for the military and academia.
Chapter 3 discusses the Apple, Samsung, and Google smartphones. It also 
goes into the history of video games and how an individual can now play 
games with millions of other people online all over the globe. Chapter 3 also 
talks about the history of video conferencing. In addition, the chapter covers 
how we have the ability to make and edit videos on the fly.
Part II
Part II discusses the history of social media. Each and every person who owns 
a smart device can connect to multiple media apps to relay their thoughts in 
an instant.
Specifically, Chapter 4 reviews the beginning of social media and demonstrates 
its impact. Social media’s appearance opened communication with our neigh­
bors, lost relatives, and friends and strangers from places around the world.
Chapter 5 discusses the advent of social media on smartphones and tablets. 
In fact, social media spread quickly after the creation of the smart device. 
Once social media was put on the smart device, it brought people closer 
together. People with the same views and interests are able to hang out 
together virtually and share videos and other media. This has also created a 
polarizing effect. Cyber-bullying can occur from our peers and strangers who 
do not hold the same views as ours or do not and agree with our online view­
point. Different types of social media will be discussed such as Facebook, 
Twitter, Spotify, Instagram, Pinterest, Snapchat, and TikTok. Chapter 5 also 
discusses influencers.
Part III
This part will cover age-appropriate developmental theories, Medline and 
CDC developmental milestones, and APA factsheets guidelines. It will focus 
on psychologists Jean Piaget and Erik Erickson and show how their develop­
mental theories have more stages than the behaviors described for the CDC, 
Medline, and APA.
Specifically, Chapters 6 and 7 examine Jean Piaget’s and Erik Erikson’s back­
ground and stages of development. Piaget developed four cognitive develop­
mental stages, and Erik Erikson developed eight psychosocial stages of 
development.
In Chapter 8, the book will explore the CDC and Medline milestones and the 
APA factsheets and how they affect development.
Introduction

xii
Part IV
This part of this book will present a framework for using psychological theo­
ries, as well as best practices, to teach children computer and smartphone 
skills, as well as how to use social media wisely.
Specifically, Chapter 9 reviews an article by Tom’s Hardware, American 
Psychiatric Association, American Pediatric Association, Mayo Clinic, and 
Harvard University on how to work with your children to teach them best 
practices for computer learning.
Chapter 10 discusses what behavioral and emotional problems have become 
commonplace today because of technology advances.
Chapter 11 concludes the book with ways you can be inspired by these indus­
trious and awesome innovations yet wary and ready and able to take on the 
dark side of them.
Introduction

P A R T
I
Scientific 
Advances
Part I of this book will cover the history of computers as well as search 
engines, word processors, Wi-Fi, texting, video games, and telecommunica­
tion systems. It will discuss some of the competition between individuals and 
the rivalries between companies such as between IBM (and IBM-compatible 
or clone companies) and Apple with the Macintosh computer. Although many 
people and companies were involved at the beginning of these innovations, 
IBM, Bell Labs, and Apple’s Steve Jobs are the most prominent names remem­
bered. This book is by no means a complete collection of technological his­
tory; there are many other great inventors who contributed to the personal 
computer (PC) and other technologies. We will review many of the main ones.

C H A P T E R 
1
History of 
Computing
The history of the personal computer and other technological advances is by 
no means a straight path or one person’s idea. The current state is a result of 
many advances. At times, an invention was arrived at by chance or by mistake. 
Some inventions were developed for wartime needs. The technological 
advances that affect many parts of our lives today have a story and inventor 
behind them. This chapter will take a look at some of them.
To Begin With…
Ada Byron Lovelace, a mathematician from England and the daughter of poet 
Lord Byron, wrote the first “computer program,” which was a set of 
instructions to solve a complex math problem. When she was a teenager, she 
met the Cambridge mathematician and engineering professor Charles 
Babbage, and they had a long correspondence about mathematics and 
computer topics. In 1848 Babbage designed the first analytical engine, which 
was the first general-purpose computer that would use punch cards. Lovelace 
thought that a table of logarithms could be calculated and the computer could 
be used as a calculating device. Although Babbage designed the machine, 
Lovelace envisioned a machine that could process musical notes, letters, and 
images. She, in effect, imagined the modern-day computer. In Lovelace’s 
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9_1

4
famous notes, she used the design of Babbage’s machine to compute an 
algorithm to calculate the Bernoulli numbers. Her invention is believed to be 
the world’s first computer program. At the time, in part because of lack of 
funding, the Babbage analytical engine did not materialize.
Alan Turing is an esteemed and renowned mathematician who received his 
PhD from Princeton. Turing is mostly known and remembered for many ideas 
in artificial intelligence, cryptology, and computer science. In about 1938, 
Turing broke the Nazi code, called the Enigma code, using cryptology and 
“the Bombe” machine in Britain during World War II. This saved the allies in 
many conflicts, including and importantly the Battle of the Atlantic, which was 
the longest continuous military campaign in World War II. Much of Turing’s 
mathematical work remains secret because of his position in British 
intelligence.
Around 1947, Turing joined Max Newman at the University of Manchester in 
the Mathematics Department where Newman received a grant to build a new 
computing machine called the Mark I. It was the first ENIAC-type electronic 
stored-program computer to be completed. The ENIAC computer has many 
of the properties of the modern-day computer. This was one of the first 
computers with stored programming. After that, Turing was recruited by 
Ferranti Ltd. to develop the Ferranti Mark 1, a machine that Ferranti would 
market commercially. At the same time, Turing continued to work on his 
abstract mathematics ideas and whether computers were intelligent or could 
think, and in 1950 he wrote an article in Mind called “Computing Machinery 
and Intelligence” that introduced the Turing test. The Turing test examines if 
a computer is intelligent or was able to think. The way to determine, according 
to Turing, is if a computer is able to think like a human, then people would not 
be able to differentiate between the computer’s decision and a person’s 
decision.
The modern-day CAPTCHA uses the Turing test. The CAPTCHA acronym 
stands for Completely Automated Public Turing test, and it is used to 
differentiate computers from humans. Today CAPTCHA is used as a type of 
security measure known as the challenge-response authentication process to 
help protect computer users from spam. It analyzes password decryption by 
asking users to complete a task to show that they are not an automaton 
trying to break into a password-protected account.
Turing thought it better to build a program that would simulate the child’s 
mind because it would be a simpler model. So in 1948, Turing, working with 
his former colleague D.G. Champernowne, wrote a computer program for 
chess moves against an opponent. In 1950 the program was completed and 
dubbed the Turochamp. In 1952 it was implemented on a Ferranti Mark 1, but 
the computer lacked suitable power to execute the program. Turing’s program 
did not run because the program needed to flip through the many, many pages 
Chapter 1 | History of Computing

5
of the algorithm to carry out its instructions on a chessboard, and it took 
about half an hour per move. Turing’s computer lost the chess competition, 
but the event was still significant and pushed forward the ideas behind artificial 
intelligence. Similar methods to Turing’s machine learning have been utilized 
and sharpened by Dennis Hassabis to have computers play chess. Hassabis is 
a British neuroscientist, artificial intelligence scientist, and video game designer. 
He was a co-founder of DeepMind, which was bought by Google in 2014, and 
is now vice president of engineering at Google DeepMind.
Turing is also remembered for the award named after him, the Turing Award. 
It is recognized as the highest honor in computer science and is also known 
as the Nobel Prize of Computing. Turing is thought of as the major founder 
and thinker behind many concepts in computer science and data science.
Bell Labs and Unix
Bell Labs, formally known by other names such as Volta Laboratory and Bell 
Laboratories, was started by Alexander Graham Bell from the Volta Prize he 
received in 1880 for his invention of the telephone. In 1876 Alexander Graham 
Bell, Thomas Sanders, and Gardiner Hubbard filed for a patent for the 
telephone, and Bell Labs Company was formed a year later. In 1889 it became 
part of the American Telephone & Telegraph Company known as AT&T. Bell 
has nine Nobel Prizes, the most Nobel Prizes of any company so far. The 
company was sold to Nokia and is now called Nokia Bell Labs.
During the 1960s, Ken Thompson, Dennis Ritchie, and others while working 
at Bell Labs developed the Unix system, a multitasking, multiuser operating 
system for computers. Multitasking means new tasks can be started before old 
ones are finished. Multiuser is where multiple users can have access to the 
computer operating system at the same time. Software resources provide 
common services for computer programs. By the early 1980s, Unix was seen 
as a universal operating system, suitable for computers of all sizes. This was 
essential for the development of the Internet and the reshaping of computing, 
not only for individual computers but for network computing as well.
While working at Bell Labs, in 1972 and 1973, Thompson developed the B 
programming language, which was the precursor to the C programming 
language. Ritchie is known for creating the C language, which is still widely 
used in applications, operating systems, and embedded system developments.
In 2009, Thompson left Bell Labs and co-developed the Go programming 
language at Google with his colleagues, Rob Pike and Robert Griesemer. 
Moreover, in 1983, Thompson and Ritchie received the Turing Award for their 
development of generic operating systems theory and for the implementing 
the UNIX operating system.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

6
The Kenbak-1, designed by John Blankenbaker and released in 1970, is 
considered to be the first personal computer. It had 256 bytes of memory, an 
8-bit word size, and input and output restrictions. The computer did not have 
much power, and therefore, this computer was only good for learning the 
essentials of programming but not at running application programs.
In 1973 the Xerox Alto computer was developed, and the Xerox PARC 
computer followed soon after. The Xerox PARC was a major step in the 
development of personal computers because it had a graphical user interface 
(GUI), a bitmapped high-resolution screen, internal and external storage 
capabilities, a mouse, and some software. This was the first personal computer 
to be recognized as workable because of those listed capabilities.
IBM
International Business Machine (IBM), nicknamed Big Blue, was the first 
multinational and IT consulting corporation, headquartered in Armonk, 
New York. IBM started to work on the first computers in the 1940s that used 
a punch card. During World War II, the punch card was used in Los Alamos 
for the Manhattan Project in developing the first atomic bombs. IBM does not 
deny the allegations that it also corroborated with the Nazis to use the punch 
cards that were developed to tabulate the Census in the United States to help 
run the concentration camps. Also, during the war, the Harvard Mark I for the 
Navy was built by IBM, which was an Automatic Sequence Controlled 
Calculator that could add, subtract, multiply, and divide. At this time this was 
a novel idea. The company offered a range of hardware, software, and custom 
packages for the computer. Starting in 1952, IBM started working with the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory on an air-
defense computer, which did not go too well. Then, in 1958, IBM worked with 
MIT on the massive computing and communication system for the United 
States Air Force on a project called SAGE. It was here that digital data was 
transmitted over the telephone, duplex multiprocessing, and other mechanics 
for this algebraic computer and real-time digital computer. In 1964 IBM had its 
first breakthrough with its System/360 family of mainframe computers because 
they had interchangeable software and peripheral equipment. In 1956, Arthur 
Samuel of IBM’s Poughkeepsie, New York, laboratory used machine learning 
to program the IBM computer to play checkers using techniques in which the 
machine could learn from its own mistakes. IBM was for the most part one of 
the most respected computer companies in the 1970s and 1980s for its 
computers and technological research.
Bill Lowe was known as the Father of the IBM Personal Computer. In 1962 he 
received his physics degree at Layfette College. After that, he joined IBM in 
1975 as a product test engineer. He moved up very quickly at IBM until he 
reached the position of lab director for the site. Lowe encouraged IBM to enter 
the PC business. The IBM Corporate Management Committee gave approval 
Chapter 1 | History of Computing

7
for him to move forward to build an internal personal computer, and in 1980 
Lowe selected a team to develop and launch the new product. To move quickly 
on the project, Lowe designed the computer with standard components and 
outsourced the development of the operating system to Microsoft and the 
processor to Intel. Following Lowe's strategy, the IBM PC was developed in 
one year. It was launched in August 1981 and sold far more units than had been 
projected, thereby legitimizing the personal computer business.
IBM was the giant of the computer industry at that time and was expected to 
beat Apple’s market share. However, because of the shortcuts that IBM took 
to enter the market quickly, the nonproprietary parts of the products it ended 
up releasing were easily copied by other manufacturers. This outsourcing 
maneuver by Lowe opened the doors to the PC clones that imitated the IBM 
PC because it was based on relatively standard integrated circuits, a basic 
card-slot design that was not patented, and hardware that was outsourced to 
Microsoft and Intel.
In other words, IBM’s major contribution in the role of the personal computer 
was the establishment of standards for hardware architecture among 
manufacturers. Because IBM outsourced and took too many shortcuts to cut 
the process time of developing a computer other companies where able to 
copy and perfect the computer to the point where IBM was no longer the 
significant force in its construction. In effect, IBM became only the prototype 
of the PC standard. In the process, Microsoft started to emerge as the 
dominant force because it provided the operating system and utilities for PCs 
whether they were IBM machines or PC clones.
Apple Computer
Now the Apple Inc. name is known worldwide primarily for its iPhones, 
smartwatches, and macOS computers and tablets, but it was founded originally 
as Apple Computer Company in 1976 by Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak, and 
Ronald Wayne to sell the Apple I personal computer that Wozniak developed. 
When the Apple II computer became a bestseller in 1977, Jobs and Wozniak 
incorporated the name of the company as Apple Computer, Inc. The computer 
had color graphics and open architecture. In 1979, Apple released VisiCalc, a 
spreadsheet program that was easy to use as well. Soon after, in 1980, Apple 
went public with its success in selling PCs.
In 1983 the Apple Lisa was created and was the first personal computer with 
a GUI interface. The Lisa computer was named after Steve Jobs’ daughter. 
GUI is a graphics-based operating system interface that uses icons, menus, 
and a mouse to carry out commands, such as opening, deleting, and moving 
files. Although a GUI operating system mainly uses a mouse, keyboard 
shortcuts or the arrow keys can also be used. This graphic-based idea came 
to Steve Jobs when he visited a Xerox Alto demonstration that had a computer 
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

8
with a graphical interface. Even though it was a brilliant suggestion to put in 
the computer, due to infighting and its high price and limited quantity of 
software, Apple took a big financial hit.
Jobs was pushed off the Lisa team and went to the Macintosh division of the 
company. It was there that he introduced a cheaper graphical interface system 
than what was used on the Lisa computer. However, the Macintosh had only 
128 kilobytes of RAM, which limited its speed. This was done to keep the 
price point low. However, once the slow speed of the computer hit the public 
media, the Macintosh sales slipped.
Soon after in 1985 there were more infighting and power struggles in the 
company mainly between Steve Jobs and CEO John Scully, who Steve Jobs had 
hired because the computers were not selling well. Steve Jobs resigned and 
founded NeXT, and Wozniak removed himself amicably from Apple at 
that time.
In 1990 Apple was losing market share to other companies in the personal 
computers arena, while other companies using the Microsoft Windows 
operating system expanded with Intel-powered clone IBMs. Just before Apple 
went bankrupt, the company brought Steve Jobs back to fix its operating 
strategy and restructure the company. In 1997 Apple returned to being a 
profitable company under the leadership of Steve Jobs, and the iMac, iPod, 
iPhone, and iPad were launched to great success. Apple Stores started to 
open, but Steve Jobs’ health declined, and soon after he died of pancreas 
cancer in 2011. Steve Jobs’ leadership brought the Apple Company to fame 
and glory. Tim Cook took the CEOs role after Steve Jobs’ death, and the 
Macintosh and iPhone markets continue to thrive.
Summary
The late 19th century was the start of a revolutionary time for the design of 
the computer, with Ada Lovelace and Professor Babbage first imagining a 
computer that could solve complex math algorithms. The 20th century 
brought Alan Turing who was able to utilize cryptology and the technology of 
a massive machine to save many lives in World War II. Turing also showed that 
computers could have the ability to think and was the impetus for the field of 
artificial intelligence.
After that, Bell Labs, IBM, and Apple were able to put the technology to use 
by having the foresight to put a personal computer in the hands of every 
person. In about a century, the world had changed, but the next chapter will 
review some of the other discoveries that helped the computer to become 
more prominent and powerful and that made it more efficient and 
effective to use.
Chapter 1 | History of Computing

C H A P T E R 
2
History of the 
Internet, Search 
Engines, and 
More
This chapter will review the internet and the WWW, search engines, email, 
word processors, Wi-Fi and texting. After the invent of the computer many 
inventions were developed that made life easier while using them. The internet, 
WWW and Wi-Fi enabled computers to speak to each other and share infor­
mation. Search engines allowed users to see details of facts and figures that 
were on the internet instead of having to search through encyclopedias. The 
word processor made writing, computing and editing simpler to manage than a 
typewriter. Email and texting allowed the user to relay messages without having 
to make a call.
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9_2

10
The Internet and the WWW
In October 1957, when the Soviets launched Sputnik, the first manmade 
satellite, into space, the United States panicked. Americans started to realize 
we needed more science and technology courses and majors at universities. 
The goal of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and 
the Department of Defense’s Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) was 
to develop more space-age technology such as rockets and computers to rival 
the Soviet threat. In the 1960s, during the Cold War, MIT, Rand, and others 
recommended building computers that could speak to each other to enable 
leaders to communicate even if the telephone system was destroyed. In 1968, 
Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPAnet) used a technique 
developed by MIT called packet switching. This technique was the start of 
computers communicating but did not work very well. It did lay the 
groundwork for the Internet, though.
In 1974, Vinton Cerf and Robert Kahn, considered the Fathers of the Internet, 
designed the architecture of the Internet and the Transmission Control 
Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), which allows supercomputers and 
desktop PCs to share information across the Internet. The design allowed 
DARPA’s Packet Radio, Packet Satellite, and ARPANET networks to 
interconnect and interwork. In the 1980s, only researchers and scientists 
used TCP to transport files and data from computer to computer. In 2004, 
Cerf and Khan received the Turing Award for their pioneering work on the 
Internet and its advances.
Then, in 1989, at CERN, a European particle-based psychics lab, Tim Berners-
Lee created the World Wide Web. He developed the idea for the building 
blocks of the Web: the HyperText Markup Language (HTML), Uniform 
Resource Locators (web addresses), and the Hypertext Transfer Protocols 
(HTTP). These tools have made the Internet more usable and accessible and 
are still in use today.
Search Engines
Search engines gained recognition in the 1990s. In 1989, Alan Emtage was a 
systems administrator in the information technology department at McGill 
University in Montreal. His job was to manually go through File Transfer 
Protocol (FTP) servers to scour nameless files to find some that could be 
useful to students and faculty. His Internet connection was slow, and it was a 
tedious process and time-consuming to run the search process. This led to 
Emtage’s invention of the Archie search engine. Archie is named after “archive,” 
without the v.
Chapter 2 | History of the Internet, Search Engines, and More

11
The Archie search engine dialed the computer in the middle of the night when 
no one was using the link. That was the fastest way to get the job done. For 
Archie to search, the exact name of the file had to be typed, so users needed 
to know the exact title of the file they were looking for. Emtage did not patent 
his idea.
Although there were many that came and went, one of the more well-known 
search engines was AltaVista, developed at Digital Equipment Corporation 
(known as Digital); it used a crawler system that sent out “spiders” to record 
websites and build searchable indexes. AltaVista automatically categorizes 
web pages by natural language. The spider determines the language of a web 
page at the time when it spiders.
AltaVista’s name came from the scenic views in Palo Alto, where Digital was 
based. For the most part, Paul Flaherty developed the idea for AltaVista, while 
Louis Monier, a computer scientist at Digital’s Western Research Lab, created 
the web crawler tool named Scooter. In August 1995, Scooter completed its 
first complete web crawl by returning around 10 million pages to the primitive 
AltaVista index, written primarily by Michael Burrows. It was the first search 
engine to allow people to find images, video, and audio alongside text content. 
It was also the first tool that could translate entire websites to another 
language by using the BabelFish translator, which would later be used by Yahoo.
AltaVista was officially launched in 1995 by Digital and later acquired by Yahoo 
in 2003.
In early 1994, Yahoo was started and founded at Stanford University by Jerry 
Yang and David Filo, who were electrical engineering graduate students. The 
name was first “Jerry and David’s Guide to the World Wide Web.” This was 
a directory of other websites, organized in a hierarchy, as opposed to a 
searchable index of pages. In April 1994, the guide was renamed Yahoo. The 
word yahoo is an acronym for Yet Another Hierarchically Organized Oracle or 
Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle. This paved the way for the yahoo.
com domain, which was created in 1995.
Sometimes creations just happen by chance, and the Google story is one of 
these situations. In 1995 at Stanford University Larry Page toured Stanford for 
graduate school, and Sergey Brin, a student there, was assigned to show him 
around. During the tour, they argued; however, later they struck up a 
partnership and built Google in their dorm rooms at Stanford. At first, Page 
and Brin called it Backrub; they later renamed it to Google. The name was 
based on a mathematical expression called googol, which is the number 1 
followed by 100 zeros. Their motto was “to organize the world’s information 
and make it universally accessible and useful.” In 1997, Larry and Seregey 
registered the domain name incorrectly, and instead of writing googol they 
wrote google. By the time they realized what they did, it was too late.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

12
At that time, search engines were based on keywords and would process 
those keywords to unload their information from the WWW to the user. Brin 
and Page’s idea returned lists of websites ranked by how often a search phrase 
appeared on them. They did this by embedding the number of links each web­
site had into the search function crawlers. For instance, a website that had 
thousands of links would logically be more valuable than a website with just a 
few links. A heavily linked site was higher on the list and deemed more valuable 
for possible results. This technique gave the user more valuable information.
In 1998 Brin and Page received financing for Google from Andy Bechtolsheim, 
the president of Cisco Systems. This helped them tremendously, and in 1998 
Google Inc. became a company. Its popularity ballooned very fast, with people 
even using google as verb. Google reorganized itself in August 2015 to become 
a subsidiary of the holding company Alphabet Inc., with Page as CEO of 
Alphabet and Brin as president.
In 2004 Google began offering a free web-based email account. Google 
developed a wide variety of products such as a word processor, spreadsheet, 
instant messaging tools, and more.
Emails
Electronic mail (email) is a method of sending messages between individuals 
electronically. In the early 1960s, email could be sent only if it was on the 
same computer. Not until Ray Tomlinson invented network email in 1971 was 
a system able to send an email to a different host user across the ARPANET 
at the US Defense Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA). He used the 
@ sign to link the user with a destination server, which is still used today. The 
address became username@name-of-computer-destination-server.
Larry Roberts, also at ARPANET, wrote emails in 1972 that were based on 
the store-and-forward model where the server for the email accepts, forwards, 
delivers, and stores messages. This meant the receiver did not need to be 
online to receive the mail. To get the mail, the receiver only needed to log on 
to a mail server or webmail interface.
Eric Schmidt, for his master’s thesis in 1979, wrote Berkley’s Network, which 
was an early intranet service offering serial connections between the campus 
computer center and certain computing departments. Schmidt later went on 
to become the CEO of Google.
The first junk email—named Scientifically Processed Animal Matter (SPAM)—
was sent by a man named Gary Thuerk in May 1978. By 1990, SPAM hit users 
across the Internet with a force that we still feel today.
Chapter 2 | History of the Internet, Search Engines, and More

13
In 1993, AOL developed the first version of Microsoft’s Outlook as part of an 
Exchange Server 5.5. Hotmail was launched in 1996 by Sabeer Bhatia and Jack 
Smith. At that time, it was called HoTMaiL, and it was the first email webmail 
service. Later, it was bought by Microsoft in 1997 and rebranded MSN Hotmail, 
and in 2013 it replaced by Outlook.com. Elwood Edwards' voice helped the 
masses get hooked on checking email with the message “You’ve got mail.”
Even though SPAM was already a problem, it was not until 2002 that the 
Directive on Privacy and Electronic Communication was written in the 
European Union to address this problem. It included a section on SPAM that 
made it illegal to send unsolicited communications for direct marketing 
purposes without prior consent of the recipient. The United States followed 
with a similar law. Neither law has been effectively enforced, and they have 
not reduced the amount of SPAM in mailboxes.
In 2004 Gmail launched as an internal mail for Google employees through an 
invite-only system, and a few years later it was released to the public. Its lead 
creator was Paul Buchheit. One of the main benefits of Gmail was that it gave 
users an email address that was independent of any particular Internet service 
provider (ISP). This made it easier for the user to maintain a permanent address. 
In addition, the service gave free email storage space for users to store files.
Apple around this time introduced email to the iPhone user. This iPhone 
technology started email use for the consumer masses. iPhones, which will be 
discussed soon, use a user interface built around a multitouch screen. The 
phone is connected to the Wi-Fi, and it can make calls, browse the Web, take 
pictures, play music, and send and receive emails and text messages.
Word Processors
In 1975, Michael Shrayer, a semiretired New  York filmmaker, moved to 
California. He bought an Altair computer and believed that he would be able 
to use the computer instead of a typewriter to write. During this time, he 
developed the first word processor software for Altair and called it Electric 
Pencil in 1976. Altair was one of the first commercial personal computers, 
and it was sold by mail order. The word processor software could word wrap, 
insert, and delete. The company lasted until the 1980s.
Soon after, in 1978, WordStar Processor for the computer was created. 
WordStar was the first commercially successful word processing software 
program produced for personal computer. It became the best-selling software 
program of the early 1980s. Seymour Rubenstein and Rob Barnaby invented 
it. Rubenstein was the director of marketing for IMS Associates, Inc. (IMSAI), 
a California-based computer company. He left that software company in 1978 
to start his own. He convinced Barnaby, the chief programmer for IMSAI, to 
join him and to write the processing program.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

14
In 1979, Alan Ashton and Bruce Bastian created the WordPerfect processing 
software. They developed it for a Data General minicomputer system owned 
by the city of Orem, Utah. Bastian and Ashton retained ownership of the 
software and founded Satellite Software International Inc. so that they could 
sell WordPerfect to other Data General users. The first version was on an 
IBM PC released in 1982.
Microsoft: Word and Excel
In 1975 when most people used typewriters, childhood friends Bill Gates and 
Paul Allen founded Microsoft. It was originally called Micro-Soft, for 
microprocessors and software.
In 1978, Microsoft’s sales topped more than $1 million, and in 1979 the 
business moved its headquarters to near Seattle, Washington, where Gates 
and Allen grew up. Microsoft licensed the MS-DOS operating system to IBM 
for its first personal computer, which came out in 1981. In 1983, Allen 
departed Microsoft after being diagnosed with Hodgkin’s lymphoma. He was 
successfully treated for the disease and then went on to create and work at 
other companies.
In 1981, Microsoft Word, the word processor software, was developed by 
Richard Brodie and Charles Simonyi who joined the Microsoft team. In 1983 
Multi-Tool Word for computers was released, and it was in competition with 
WordStar and WordPerfect; both of those programs were released around a 
year earlier.
Similar to WordStar and WordPerfect, Word was WYSIWYG, which means 
“what you see is what you get.” In other words, whatever a document looked 
like to a user on their computer screen was how it would look when printed.
Excel was developed by Doug Klunder who became an attorney and privacy 
activist for the American Civil Liberties Union in Washington. In 1985, the 
first version of Excel was released for Apple Inc.’s Macintosh computer. It had 
graphics and fast processing features, which made it very popular. In 1987 the 
next version of Excel was for Microsoft’s Windows operating system. 
Microsoft has upgraded and improved this software every couple of years, and 
it is still quite popular.
Apple: Pages and Numbers
Apple in the early 21st century introduced the iWorks suite for the Mac 
computer, and it has pages for word processing, numbers for spreadsheets, 
and keynotes for presentations. This suite is in competition with the Microsoft 
suite of Word, Excel, and PowerPoint.
Chapter 2 | History of the Internet, Search Engines, and More

15
Google: Docs and Sheets
Google bought Writely, a web-based text editing platform, in 2006 and made 
it the foundation of Google Docs. Writely was originally created in 1998 by 
Sam Schillace.
Gmail was about a year or so old at the time and could barely support the 
code for Google Docs, which was not stable. The developers made a deliberate 
decision that users would want speed, convenience, and collaborative features 
more than richer functionality like rich formatting, margins, and pagination, 
which proved successful.
Google Sheets was founded by Jonathan Rochelle and Farzad “Fuzzy” 
Khosrowshahi and originated from 2Web Technologies’ XL2Web, which was 
acquired by Google in 2006.
Google Sheets was built as a cloud-based alternative to compete with 
Microsoft Excel. Google Sheets is accessible from your Gmail account, where 
all your files are accessible to the Google Drive.
Wi-Fi and Its Importance
Wi-Fi stands for “wireless fidelity,” and it was invented by mistake, as some of 
the most awesome discoveries are. Australian John O’Sullivan, a fan of Stephen 
Hawking’s theory of evaporating black holes and their subsequent radio waves, 
set out to prove the theory correct, but never did. Instead, while he was 
working on the problem, he realized that signals travel vast distances and 
could be very small and distorted by the gas and dust of space they passed 
through. In other words, their waveform altered from a sharp identifiable 
spike to a flattened curve. O’Sullivan created a tool that could identify and 
filter specific radio waves. In 1992, a team at the Commonwealth Scientific 
and Industrial Research Organization of Australian (CSIRO) with O’Sullivan 
worked on the technique for reducing multipath interference of radio signals 
transmitted for the use of computer networking, and it was patented in 1996.
Vic Hayes has been called the “Father of Wi-Fi” in 1997 because he chaired 
the IEEE committee that created the 802.11 standards. These standards are 
the specifications for wireless local area networks (WLANS). Hayes created 
the standards and improvement to the bandwidth that were added to 802.11.
Texting
Friedhelm Hillebrand, a German engineer, and Bernard Ghillebaert, a French 
telecommunications engineer, businessman, and former chief executive of 
Orange UK, are the inventors of SMS. SMS means Short Message Service, or 
texting. In 1985, Hillebrand became chairman of the nonvoice services 
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

16
committee of the Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) stan­
dard. He conducted experiments on random sentences on his teletypewriter 
where he found that most messages people sent were about 160 characters. 
This is how he determined that 160 characters were enough for a text mes­
sage. The GSM group continued to work on this technology but it was not 
believed this technology would be popular when you could make a telephone 
call and not much was done to promote the software.
On December 3, 1992, Neil Papworth, at 22 years old, was a test engineer 
and developer. He worked with a team to develop an SMS message at Sema 
Group Telecoms for its customers at Vodafone UK in Newbury, Berkshire. 
Neil sent the world’s first text message from a computer, which said “Merry 
Christmas” to Richard Jarvis, the director at Vodafone, who was enjoying his 
office Christmas party. Jarvis received the message on a big bulky handset 
used at that time.
In 1993 Nokia, a Finnish company, was the first handset manufacturer that 
supported users sending SMS text messages with a full keyboard, which used 
the Global System for Mobile Communications network. In 1997, it became 
the first manufacturer to produce a mobile phone that could text. However, 
Apple took the lead with the iPhone soon after, and Nokia never caught up. 
In 2014, Nokia’s mobile phone business was sold to Microsoft. Now, texting 
is a popular technology we cannot imagine being without.
Summary
Some of the important uses of how computers and phones are used and 
enjoyed today include email, texting, and the word processor. Wi-Fi has 
allowed us to use our phones and computers in many places and in many 
ways. For the most part, we take these devices for granted because they are 
so ubiquitous, but each piece of technology was developed individually from 
brilliant and creative teams working together to enhance the technology and, 
at times, compete with another team of scientists. Ultimately, these 
technologies led to smart technology, a field that is growing in many ways 
today and will be discussed in the next chapter.
Chapter 2 | History of the Internet, Search Engines, and More

C H A P T E R 
3
History of Smart 
Devices, Video 
Games, and 
Videoconferencing
This chapter reviews the different types of smart devices and reviews context 
awareness, autonomous computing, and connectivity. It discusses the invention 
of the smartphone and how it ultimately changed our world. It has allowed us 
to email, text, and word process all from our phones or other smart devices. 
We are even able to play video games and communicate with videoconferencing 
using our handheld devices. We no longer have to wait until we are home to 
get our next message; it is all in the palm of our hands and easy to access.
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9_3

18
Smart Devices
SMART stands for “self-monitoring analysis and reporting technology,” and 
smart technology uses advanced technologies like the Internet of Things 
(IoT), artificial intelligence, big data, and machine learning. Smart devices have 
three main features: context awareness, autonomous computing, and 
connectivity. Context awareness is a computing style that has user-specific data 
or location-based technology and sensors. Autonomous computing is a 
computer’s ability to manage itself automatically so that it cuts down on the 
time required by professionals to maintain software updates and resolve 
system difficulties. Connectivity describes communication between hardware 
or software devices and other devices. Some examples of objects that have 
connectivity are personal computers, servers, mobile telephones, and video 
game consoles. Other devices like cars and appliances can also be connected 
to the Internet. These devices are connected to the Internet through network 
links. Different modes of connections are dial-up, ISDN, DSL, cable TV 
Internet connections, satellite Internet connections, and wireless Internet 
connections.
Smart devices are “things” that are connected to other “things” through the 
Internet. Together, they make up the Internet of Things (IoT). Smart devices 
share and store information or data using the cloud. The IoT describes the 
network of physical objects that connect and exchange data with other 
devices or systems over the Internet with the software and sensors.
Some IoT devices include wireless sensors, software, and computer devices. 
In other words, they are objects that are attached to operate through the 
Internet, enabling the transfer of data among objects or people automatically 
without human intervention.
Types of smart devices are smartphones, smart cars, smart doorbells, smart 
locks, smart beds, smart refrigerators, tablets, televisions, smart home devices, 
and smartwatches. Also, Amazon’s Echo, Amazon’s Alexa, Apple’s Siri, Microsoft’s 
Cortana, and Google Assistant are IoT devices powered by an Internet-connected 
voice assistant. Many of us are now dependent on these voice assistants. Although 
they are powerful tools, they will not be discussed in this book.
In the 1960s, E. A. Johnson is known for inventing the first finger capacitive 
touchscreen. George Samuel Hurst, who attended Berea College and the 
University of Kentucky and graduated with a PhD in physics in 1959, invented 
the resistive touchscreen screen. In 1977, the companies Both these tech­
nologies are widely used today. The capacitive is mainly used on more expen­
sive tablets and smartphones and they are more sensitive to slight touches. 
The resistive touchscreen is cheaper and usually requires more pressure from 
the hand to work.
Once the technologies for a handheld device were there, companies were 
ready to put all these capabilities together.
Chapter 3 | History of Smart Devices, Video Games, and Videoconferencing

19
The first smartphone-like device was conceived in the early 1990s by IBM 
engineer Frank Canova who realized that a chip and the wireless technology 
was small enough for a phone, so he is referred to as the inventor of the 
smartphone. While the first smartphones were bulky and long, they still 
featured several elements that have become staples to every phone today. 
They were equipped with standard-input screen keyboards, touchscreens 
with the capabilities to send and receive both emails and faxes, and a calendar, 
address book, and appointment scheduler. These phones did not take off 
because they were expensive and the battery died very fast.
iPhone by Apple Inc.
Apple’s Steve Jobs had a vision, and in 2007, the iPhone was released first with 
4 GB and then with 8 GB. At this time, it was able to connect with the 
Internet but not with a network connection. In 2008, a few iPhones were 
developed and released with 16 GB and more advanced versions of the OS 
system, as well as the App Store, which supported third-party applications. 
Siri was released initially as an app for iOS in 2010, and a few months later 
Apple Inc. acquired it and integrated it into the iPhone with the voice of Susan 
Bennett. At this time, technologies and the motivation to input these 
technologies into phones were pushing the demand through the roof for the 
next and newest device out there.
Samsung Smart TV and Phone
Samsung is now the largest South Korean company, and its primary production 
lines are in electronics, defense, and construction. Other areas are insurance 
and media and entertainment. Samsung did not start out that way; in 1938 
Lee Byung-chul started a grocery store selling fish, noodles, and vegetables 
and sold goods from around the city. When the Korean War (1950–1953) 
broke out, he expanded by buying other companies and then after the war 
added textiles and insurance. In the 1960s, Samsung, now a family-based 
business, expanded even more, buying even more companies and putting into 
production TVs, microwaves, and other consumer products through the 
electronic and semiconductor and telecommunications divisions. In 1987, 
Byung-chul died, and his son, Lee Kun-hee, became the head of Samsung 
Enterprise. Under his direction, the semiconductor and telecommunication 
division merged with chip productions to form Samsung Motors. First, 
Samsung came out with a digital TV. By 2011, after acquiring more and more 
companies, Samsung developed the Galaxy phone, which is one of the world’s 
most popular smartphones. Samsung has more patents approved in the United 
States than any other company so far.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

20
Android Smartphone
In 2003, Android Inc. was founded by Andy Rubin, Nick Sears, Rich Miner, and 
Chris White. In 2005, Google acquired it. The Google smartphone was 
released in 2007, and the HTC Dream was launched in 2008 with many 
updates, all named after desserts. The Android uses a version of the Linux 
kernel and open-source software used mainly for touch-screen technologies 
like the touch-screen mobile devices. The Open Handset Alliance, a group of 
developers, was sponsored by Google to create free software. Google 
smartphones have this software as well as other proprietary software such as 
Google Chrome, Google Play (which is the official store for Android apps, 
games, music, movies, and e-books), and Google Play services. The owner of 
the phone is restricted to the Amazon Appstore. There are many series of 
the Android out, and it remains today one of the most popular smartphones.
Video Games
Humans love to play games. In ancient Mesopotamia, the Royal Game of Ur 
was played. The game rules of this game were simple and written on a 
cuneiform tablet by a Babylonian astronomer in 177 BC. Irving Finkel was able 
to decipher the rules from this cuneiform tablet: two players compete to race 
for a piece from one end of the board to the other.
Today the most played games are video games. While video games are fun to 
play, they can also lead to an addiction as well as isolation when playing the game 
solo. Other concerns are overeating while solitary and aggressive behavior due 
to many of the games’ themes of violence and guns. The growth and enthusiasm 
in games will never cease, though. Gaming is and will always be a part of our 
world and played by millions. There are many games out there, and they are 
constantly being created, but only a few will be reviewed in this book.
In the 1950, Josef Kates created Bertie the Brain, the first video game that 
played Tic-Tac-Toe against artificial intelligence. It used a huge computer to 
play. In 1958, Tennis for Two was invented by William Higinbotham. This is a 
more interactive electronic game that uses a graphical display. Higinbotham 
was a physicist at Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island in New York 
and is mostly known for his work on the nuclear bomb.
Later in the 1980s and early 1990s, driven by improvements, standardization, 
and accessibility to the personal computer, Nintendo and Sega were developed 
and competed for market share. Nintendo develops, produces, and markets 
software and hardware for TV-linked and mobile console games. The first 
handheld consoles in the 1990s mostly held Nintendo’s Game Boy platform. 
Sega is a Japanese video game company that became very popular in the 
1990s. But in 1993 it lost much of its market share, but today it still makes 
games for all the popular consoles.
Chapter 3 | History of Smart Devices, Video Games, and Videoconferencing

21
With further technological advancement in the personal computer’s optical 
media, with CD-ROMs, graphic cards, and computer microchips, which made 
possible real-time polygonal 3D graphics, gaming continued to grow and 
started to be incorporated into the personal computer. Nintendo, at this 
time, partnered with Sony to develop a new CD-ROM console and attachment 
for the Super Nintendo system. However, Sony’s deal with Nintendo fell 
through, ultimately leading to making Sony’s PlayStation even more popular. 
PlayStation has been a Japanese company since 1994, and it is recognized as a 
global leader in the interactive and digital gaming and entertainment business.
Nintendo dominated the market with its handheld games during the late 
1990s and early 2000s with the release in 2001 of the Game Boy Advance, 
which had high resolution, a full-color LCD screen, and a 32-bit processor. In 
2004, the Nintendo DS and Sony’s PlayStation Portable (PSP) came out.
In the early 2000s, Xbox, a video gaming brand created and owned by 
Microsoft, entered the market. Some of the consoles include Xbox, Xbox 
360, and Xbox One. The game console connects to a television or other 
display media and provides realistic graphics. The Xbox online gaming service 
gave Microsoft early popularity in the online gaming market and made it a 
strong competitor.
Another huge shift occurred when the smartphone and mobile tablet were 
developed in the early 2000s. With the start of the app stores that had many 
different games, a smartphone and smart device owner could download and 
buy subscriptions of games to play with others. Angry Birds and Bejeweled 
took the lead and became wildly popular. Angry Birds was created by Rovio 
Entertainment and is a Finnish action-based media franchise. The game series 
focuses on a flock of birds that try to save their eggs from green-colored pigs. 
In 2001, PopCap Games published Bejeweled, and it became one of the most 
iconic mobile games in history. Bejeweled challenges players to swap colorful 
jewels to form vertical or horizontal line chains of three or more gems with 
the same color.
Then in 2012 Candy Crush Saga and Puzzle & Dragons took off.
Games in the cloud became more popular around 2010 with increased 
bandwidth made available to consumers. Sony started to buy smaller popular 
games, OnLive and Gaikai, and used them in PlayStation Now cloud games. 
Other popular cloud games were xCloud by Microsoft, Stadia by Google, and 
Luna by Amazon.
In 2013, Facebook purchased Oculus, which was developed by Palmer Luckey 
in 2010. Oculus was a virtual reality (VR) system for video games. PlayStation 
VR by Sony was released in 2016. Augmented reality (AR) games are when 
the game produces a real-time video game image with additional graphics. 
Pokémon Go, an AR game, was popular in 2016.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

22
Video Communication and Conferencing
Video-teleconferencing, video-telephony, and videoconferencing allow people 
to meet each other face to face and hear each other at the same time in 
different locations. They can work together via audio, video, and text to give 
presentations in real time through the Internet.
The first video conference technology in the 1870s used audio wires, and in 
1927 Bell Labs invented the video phone, patenting the word video, which is 
the prototype of the modern-day video phone. On the first call, Bell Labs 
officials in Washington, DC, connected with the president of AT&T in 
New York City. They were connected via two-way audio and a one-way video.
Before 1935, video conferencing was referred to as visual radio and sight-sounds 
television systems, and in the 1950s it was termed the video phone. In 1956, 
AT&T created the first Picture-Phone prototype and made the first-ever video 
calls using still images transmitted every two seconds over regular analog 
public switched telephone network (PSTN) telephone lines.
In 1964, at the World’s Fair in New York, the Mod 1 (Model 1) was first 
introduced by AT&T, and it was called the Picturephone. People were able to 
communicate transcontinentally and see each other through video for 10 
minutes at a time in from New York to California. For this black and white 
process to work, images were sent at 30 frames per second, and the 
participants at the receiving end could not move. This was the first video 
telephone device designed for the masses, but it was expensive, clunky, and 
hard to set up. In 1970, AT&T introduced the Picturephone Mod II for the 
home and office. It was expensive for a 30-minute call; it cost $160/month 
plus $.25 for each additional minute.
In 2003, Skype was released by Skype Technologies. Skype was founded by 
Niklas Zennstrom and Janus Friis and created by developers Ahti Heinla, Pritit 
Kasealu, Jaan Tallinn, and Toivo Annus. Skype has VoIP-based video-
teleconferencing, voice calls, instant messaging, and file transfers and is able to 
work on landlines and mobile devices. It had a hybrid peer-to-peer and client-
based system. Peer-to-peer allows each computer to act as a server for the 
others in the network so that the computers can share files and peripherals 
without a central server. A client-server system is where many personal 
computers can communicate with shared servers on a local area network.
In 2011, Sykpe was bought and became operated by Microsoft super nodes, 
and in 2017 it became a centralized Azure-based system and was not peer-to-
peer any longer.
In 2004, WhatsApp was founded by Brian Acton and Jan Koum who had 
worked at Yahoo. They named the app to sound like “What’s up?” Korum told 
Acton he wanted to build an app that showed the status of each user. They 
found the developer Igor Solomennikov on the site RentACoder.com. 
WhatsApp had many technical issues, and the system kept crashing in the 
Chapter 3 | History of Smart Devices, Video Games, and Videoconferencing

23
beginning, but then they had a release by Apple with a push notifications 
add-on in 2009. This notification reminded the user when they were not using 
the application. WhatsApp was acquired by Facebook in 2014.
FaceTime is a video calling feature that was designed, developed, and 
distributed by Apple for iOS, iPadOS, and macOS. In 2010, FaceTime was 
initially made available on the iPhone 4 and the 4th-generation iPod touch.
Zoom Video Communication was founded and developed by Eric Yuan. Yuan 
was born and raised in Tai’an Shandong Province, China. This software was built 
on romance. In 1987, Yuan was at the Shandong University of Science and 
Technology, and he would travel ten hours to visit his girlfriend (now wife). At 
times, he was not able to see her, so he invented a way to see her without 
traveling. In 1997, he moved to California and worked for Webex as one of the 
first 20 hires where he successfully implemented an online meeting platform.
In 2007, Webex was acquired by Cisco, and Yuan worked as a VP in the 
engineering department. Yuan reportedly pitched to Cisco the idea of a 
mobile video system but was turned down by Cisco; that pitch is now Zoom. 
Yuan left Cisco and started Zoom, which he originally called Saabee, Inc. 
Zoom was influenced by a children’s book called Zoom City by Thacher Hurd. 
Zoom is an online video telephony service through the cloud and started out 
able to host only 15 people. It uses peer-to-peer software for video, chat, and 
phone, as well as conferences and events. In 2017, Zoom was a unicorn 
company, meaning a private company with a net worth more than $1 billion 
dollars; it became profitable in 2019 when it went public. Although Zoom was 
a leader in web conferencing, it was not until the coronavirus pandemic that 
Zoom rocked the teleconferencing space with the boom in online school 
learning and remote working environments.
Zoom is an American company based in California, but many of its developers 
are from China. Zoom has been criticized for security lapses, and in 2020 
Latitia James, New York Attorney General, launched an investigation into the 
security and privacy concerns of Zoom. Although Zoom did not admit to 
doing anything wrong, it did agree to focus on the security concerns. There 
have been other lawsuits about security issues that have been settled with 
other companies, but Zoom remains a powerhouse.
Summary
The technologies discussed in this chapter have transformed our lives and the 
world! No longer do we have to wait for messages from a landline when we can 
use our smart devices held in our pockets and purses. When we are bored, we 
just pull out our smart device and surf the Web or video chat with friends. We 
may even decide to play a video game on the smart device. In Chapter 4, you 
will see further how we have become dependent on our smartphones to 
connect us with our family, friends, and, yes, even strangers on the Internet.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

P A R T
II
History of Social 
Media
Social media is a relatively new phenomenon in the history of computing. 
Social media facilitates creating, sharing, and exchanging messages, pictures, 
videos, questionnaires, and other content to build communities and raise 
funds for charities via the online processes of networks using electronic 
devices. In essence, it utilizes all the technology discussed so far such as 
computers and smartphones, including TV with Wi-Fi, texting, email, search 
engines, video gaming, and teleconferencing. It has changed the way we 
interact with each other, and each social media website and app has its own 
unique draw. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, Snapchat, and TikTok 
have allowed individuals in real time to connect with others next door and 
from around the world to share conversations, pictures, videos, ideas, news, 
and an endless amount of information. Social media has become a driving 
force in connecting and organizing communities from small groups to large 
companies. Families, friends, nonprofit organizations, charities, advocacy 
groups, entrepreneurs, businesses, governments, and political parties all use 
social media to share and display their beliefs, ideas, and other content both 
in public and in private.

C H A P T E R 
4
Social Media’s 
Launch
In 1996, Andrew Weinreich founded Six Degrees, and in May 1997 it launched. 
It is the initial prototype of a social media platform. This site allowed users to 
upload a profile and interact with other users, such as friend lists and school 
affiliations. But it was short lived, and the world was not ready for it at this 
time because of a lack of people who had access to the Internet. This short 
chapter takes a brief look at the early stages of the social media phenomenon 
and how the smartphone changed the course of social media with the use of 
apps. In particular, Meta’s (Facebook) inception which will be discussed in the 
next chapter.
We Have Lift Off
When Steve Jobs started Apple in 2007 and released the iPhone, the 
smartphone with apps, it propelled social media into a new space by shifting 
the focus from computers to smartphones and devices. With just a downloaded 
app from your smartphone, you could hear the voice of your friends and 
strangers, read what their thoughts and ideas were, and see pictures and 
videos of them. Everyone could post about their favorite things and places 
they visited in the past and in real time.
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9_4

28
Pushing Movements
Through social media, people and organizations have the ability to influence 
others to join a group, promote a campaign, or fight for a cause. Some groups 
are based on hobbies such as a running club or a book club. Some campaigns 
are launches for products. Some causes are helpful like exposing a crime or 
asking to help charities and sharing community activities. However, some 
social media messages are malevolent and spread malicious lies to harm others 
or exploit and sexually traffic the innocent.
The latter is of concern and should be on the minds of everyone. Many if not 
most of the individual and collective memories messages promoted on social 
media cannot be deleted. In many instances, old posts remind individuals of 
past experiences and achievements; however, there is a dark side, because we 
may not be able to delete some posts we may later regret.
Influencers
Social media is inextricably tied to the modern-day influencer, and no story 
about social media would be complete without discussing how influencers 
affect us. An influencer is a person who has the ability to influence potential 
buyers of products or services by promoting or recommending these items 
on social media. Their role has become important in social media and to our 
society as a whole to push ideas and engage the public to purchase products. 
An influencer can be a famous actor or athlete showing off a product or a 
rising star that may come from nowhere who knows how to display products 
in a meaningful way to the public. A video or post “goes viral” when many 
viewers of that platform, sometimes millions, click the link to view it.
Summary
Social media has transformed our world in ways that were unthinkable when 
the computer was created. It was only after smart devices were conceived 
that the popularity of social media exploded. It has allowed us in real time to 
see what our friends are doing and to see the latest trends, not only from 
famous people but from influencers who are able to use their personality to 
promote sell products and speak their minds. In the next chapter, we’ll review 
some of the most widely used and largest social media companies worldwide.
Chapter 4 | Social Media’s Launch

C H A P T E R 
5
Meta, Twitter, 
Spotify, 
Instagram, 
Pinterest, 
Snapchat, 
and TikTok
A comprehensive review of all social media sites is far too long, so this chapter 
will look at some of the most popular ones: Meta, Twitter, Instagram, 
Pinterest, Snapchat, and TikTok.
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9_5

30
Meta Platform, Inc. (Meta)
Facebook is now known as Meta Platform Inc. (or Meta); it was founded in 
2004 by Mark Zuckerberg, a sophomore at Harvard, along with Eduardo 
Saverin, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes. At that time they called the 
platform TheFacebook. It was originally for Harvard students to post their 
photographs, as well as to share details about themselves and information 
about their class schedules and clubs in which they participated. The idea was 
to force users to be transparent and to make it difficult to create false 
identities on the site. Soon after that, other prestigious schools were allowed 
to join; then MasterCard started to pay to advertise on the site. The founders 
allowed the advertising in order to build new, functional, and powerful 
customer relationships.
The site included a wall that allowed users to write tidbits on their profile 
page. In 2005, the name of the site was changed to Facebook. It introduced 
tagging, where users can identify themselves and others in a photo that is 
posted. Facebook allowed users to upload an unlimited number of photos. 
High school students at this time were allowed to join as well as international 
students. In 2006, Facebook opened its usership to anyone older than 13.
Creating an account is free on Facebook, and most of the money earned by 
Facebook is through advertisements. Users are able to create profiles, upload 
photos, join groups, and create groups. The Facebook features are timelines, 
statuses, and news feeds. The timeline is where users can post their content 
to friends, and their friends can respond with messages on the user’s profile 
page of their entire life, not just of recent posts. The status feature is an alert 
system for the users’ friends to be notified about the location and situation of 
each other. The news feed shows changes to the profile and status of their 
friends, and it collects a wall of user friends in one place.
On Facebook members can chat and send each other messages privately and 
publicly. The controversial Like button, which allows other users to endorse 
posts, started on Facebook around 2009. It appears that even Zuckerberg 
paused before permitting the Like button to be introduced. At first he called 
it the Awesome button. It was developed in 2007, but he waited a couple of 
years before introducing it to the public. Now you see some form of the Like 
button all over the Internet.
Facebook went public in 2012 and started allowing marketing companies to 
mix their ads in with the status feature updates and photos of users. Later 
that year Facebook bought Instagram, which will be discussed later in this 
chapter.
Chapter 5 | Meta, Twitter, Spotify, Instagram, Pinterest, Snapchat,  
and TikTok

31
There was a lot of controversy in the beginning stages of this site and a lawsuit 
evolved out of it that was settled out of court. The claim was that Zuckerberg 
had stolen the idea of the site from Tyler and Cameron Winklevoss, two 
Olympic rowers, and their colleague, Divya Narendra. In 2008 there was a 
settlement among the parties purported to be for $65 million.
In 2021, Facebook rebranded its name to Meta. These problems were discussed 
by the whistleblower, Frances Haugen, in a testimony on Facebook, the reasons 
may be because Facebook is challenged by privacy and safety allegations 
and that it could be more transparent about its business relationships. The 
value of the stock has also declined. The name Meta is from science fiction 
and may indicate Facebook’s attempt to universalize the way it communicates, 
particularly in the Metaverse, and this may help it reach other users to exceed 
its revenue and expectations and environment.
At Meta, the metaverse is a type of virtual environment where the user is able 
to virtually meet, work, and play using virtual reality (VR) headsets and glasses 
on their devices. It is a real-life video game.
Twitter
Twitter, initially called Twttr, was developed and launched in 2006 by Jack 
Dorsey, Evan Williams, Biz Stone, and Noah Glass and was sold to Elon Musk 
in 2022. Dorsey created the first Twitter account and profile and sent out the 
first tweet. It is a social and networking site on which users post with messages 
called tweets. A retweet is a tweet that can be forwarded by other users to 
their own feed. A quote tweet is a retweet with a comment added to a tweet. 
Registered users can post, like, and retweet, while users who are not registered 
can only read publicly available tweets. By default, tweets are publicly available, 
but the sender can restrict the message to only their followers. Users are 
allowed to mute, block, and remove users that they do not want to interact 
with. Users can post to topics or use hashtags to promote their tweets. In 
2007, Chris Messina debuted the hashtag, which is one of the most recognizable 
features of Twitter. In 2008, Evan Williams became CEO, and Jack Dorsey 
became chairman of the board.
Twitter grew quickly to become one of the most popular websites, and it 
allowed more advertising in the form of tweets to promote products. In 2013 
Twitter launched a video-sharing app called the Vine, which had been founded 
by Dom Hofmann, Rus Yusupov, and Colin Kroll. It was a social media platform 
that allowed users to upload and watch six-second videos. It was similar to 
Instagram’s app in functionality and interface to share images, but its purpose 
on Twitter was only to share videos. In 2016, Vine closed due to competition, 
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

32
lack of profit, personnel turnover, and internal issues at Twitter. Twitter later 
regretted shutting Vine down, and, in its stead, TikTok was born in 2016 and 
will be discussed soon.
In 2013 a new update timeline feature was introduced that allowed Twitter 
users to link up conversations in chronological order. A year later Twitter 
promoted a service that allowed videos straight from the Twitter feed. In 
2015 Google and Twitter joined together to ensure that relevant Twitter 
posts, images, and videos appear in search engine results.
In 2015 Twitter introduced the Curator, which enables publishers to create 
complex keyword and hashtag queries to uncover streams of high-quality 
tweets. These queries can be refined by follower counts, location, and 
languages to uncover the most relevant tweets to that topic.
Moments in Twitter was a tool that allows you to create slideshows using 
tweets from different users. Moments were used for telling stories, sharing 
news, or creating collections of favorite tweets. “While you were away” is a 
service that shows what Twitter thinks are the best tweets users may have 
missed since their last logon. Twitter’s features give users a global reach to 
communicate their ideas. As a result, Twitter is appealing not only to individuals 
but to many businesses and organizations.
Spotify
Spotify was founded in 2006 by Daniel Ek and Martin Lorentzon to deal with 
music piracy and went live in 2008; its headquarters is in Stockholm, Sweden. 
Its parent name is Spotify Technology S.A. The name Spotify comes from two 
words: spot and identify. Spotify at first was limited to Scandinavia, the United 
Kingdom, Spain, and France, and now it is in more than 180 countries. It is an 
online and offline audio streaming and music streaming service provider that 
provides a platform to store a large number of different types of songs on 
devices. For the online version, a premium membership is needed. It has 
podcasts, videos, and music. Spotify brings affordable music to listeners and 
copyright-protected podcasts and music to its users. Spotify has a good search 
engine that allows users to type a song, artist, genre, or album to find songs.
Spotify was seen for some as an unwanted middleman. That is when Spotify 
launched Spotify for Artists, which is a feature that provides a platform to 
manage artists’ profiles, accumulate audience statistics, and promote their 
music with merchandise. It is an attempt to help artists create fans and earn 
revenue from their music.
Spotify’s tagline is “Music for Everyone,” and its mission is to “unlock the 
potential of human creativity.”
Chapter 5 | Meta, Twitter, Spotify, Instagram, Pinterest, Snapchat,  
and TikTok

33
Instagram
Instagram was launched in 2010 by Stanford’s Kevin Systrom as a photo- and 
video-sharing social media site. Instagram is a combination of instant camera 
and telegram. Instagram was originally called Burbn because Systrom was a fan 
of the liquor. In the beginning, the application was too complicated, but then 
he looked at the data to see what the customers were interested in and 
converted the app to a photo- and video-sharing site.
Right before its initial public offering (IPO) in 2012, Facebook acquired 
Instagram. The provision with the sale was that Instagram remain independently 
managed. Instagram was a profitable investment for Facebook.
Instagram’s main feature is photo and video sharing. Users can create a free 
account and upload, edit, and organize media with hashtags and geographical 
tagging and locations. These hashtags and location finders allow users to 
search for other users. Users are allowed to make their media sharing public 
for all on Instagram to see or private for only their friends. Users can like and 
follow other users, and users can hide the likes as well. Another feature is the 
explore feature, where Instagram selects content for its users and each user 
sees different content based on the posts they like and who the user follows. 
In other words, it is a collection of posts that Instagram thinks the user would 
enjoy. Another feature is Instagram Stories, which allows users to post photos 
or videos that automatically disappear within 24 hours.
Pinterest
Pinterest Inc. was founded in 2009 and launched in 2010 by Ben Silbermann, 
Evan Sharp, and Paul Sciarra; it is based in San Francisco. Pinterest social 
media focuses on image sharing that is not real time, and it requires registration. 
Pinterest comes from the words pin and interest, and it is like a corkboard that 
uses push pins to display images or documents. The Pinterest boards are a 
collection of pins within a theme or multiple themes. Silbermann wanted to 
create a community that would grow organically. He did this by setting up a 
campaign called “Pin It Forward.” For this campaign, users would create a 
visual pinboard and invite friends to also create their own pinboards. In 2012 
users did not need to be invited to join the site any longer. Business accounts 
were created as well. Posted content on Pinterest can be shown to other 
users who can save it or repin it. Buyable pins are advertisements based on 
users’ interest or results from visiting a site that the user can buy from 
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

34
Pinterest. Users can follow or unfollow other users and boards. Pinterest can 
search with images, not only words. The pins, repins, pinners, and repinners 
who have the most clicks are considered popular and usually feature the 
products that will sell the most.
In 2017, Pinterest removed the Like button and instead enumerated that the 
pin board was a collection of posts. In 2019 Pinterest became a public company 
and is still similar to what it was before it went public.
Snapchat
Snapchat, Inc. was developed by Snap, Inc. The company was founded in 2011 
by three Stanford students: Evan Spiegel, Reggie Brown, and Bobby Murphy. It 
is a social media video sharing service that uses short videos or stories with 
disappearing content after a single viewing by the receiver. Snapchat’s mission 
is not to just include a traditional point in time but to capture a moment in 
time full of a range of human emotions. A snap is a photo or short video that 
can be edited and that includes filters with effects, captions, and drawings. In 
2013, Snapchat added the features Story, which is private to friends-only 
viewers, and Our Story (now Live Stories) for the public through video chat. 
For the story, the users publish a photo or video where it lives for 24 hours. 
The feature Discover allows brands to show short advertisements. Another 
feature called In My Eyes Only allows the user to keep their pictures private, 
and it has a personal identification number (PIN). Users’ friends can watch the 
story, and the user can see who viewed the story. There are geographical 
stories and stories that surround events, sports events, festivals, holidays, and 
cultural themes. Snapchat rebranded in 2016 to Snapchat Inc. because they 
introduced Spectacles, which are smart glasses with built-in cameras that can 
record videos. At this time, Snapchat developed the feature Memories where 
the user could privately save snaps and stories. In 2017, Snapchat rebranded 
to Snap.com and also this year allowed the user to play with emojis and 
stickers and fill in backgrounds.
TikTok
In 2017, TikTok was developed by the Chinese tech company ByteDance as a 
social media networking application. TikTok features short 15-second to 
3-minute videos of dance, comedy, education, and much more. TikTok users 
can create videos using a music genre and then speed up, slow down, and edit 
their music videos with filters. Users can lip- sync to popular songs as well. 
TikTok has a For You page where they recommend to users, using an artificial 
intelligence algorithm, based on what they listen to; these pages aid influencers. 
Influencers, the most popular users, are known as meme machines, and 
popular influencers on this site can earn money through likes and comments. 
Chapter 5 | Meta, Twitter, Spotify, Instagram, Pinterest, Snapchat,  
and TikTok

35
Users can accept the recommended music or not. Users can also react, 
another feature, to the music they hear.
TikTok is initially on public mode, but it can be changed to private mode to 
be viewed only by friends. In 2018, TikTok merged with Musical.ly to develop 
a larger user base. It is very popular with teens and young adults. In fact, it has 
turned ordinary teens to singing stars. Many famous celebrities and sports 
teams also use TikTok. Sony Music and Warner Brothers have signed leases 
with TikTok.
Summary
Social media allows people to broadcast their thoughts and ideas at a moment’s 
notice, and it can influence a viewer’s opinions and provoke them to buy 
certain products. It is quite an influential tool. Social media is also constantly 
changing. There are positive aspects to it like enhanced sociability and 
entertainment opportunities; at the same time, it can spew hate and mistruths 
that are harmful. It is a new-world voice that transcends traditional TV ads 
and posters and billboards. Although our governments may try to control 
social media, each one of us has the ability to instill in our families and friends 
and even strangers a sense of responsibility to use it for moral and virtuous 
acts of kindness toward others.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

P A R T
III
Synopsis of 
Psychological 
Theories
Is it possible to put all of the technological advances you’ve learned about into 
a framework so that humanity’s adaptation and growth can be better 
understood? Can we as a society use the technological benefits to thrive? This 
part of the book will describe two psychological theorists, Jean Piaget and 
Erik Erikson, and their stages of development. Their theories are from the 
mid-twentieth century and complex, but this book will attempt to explain the 
ideas behind each theory in plain language.
Developmental psychology is the study that attempts to explain why humans 
change in their life cycles and how these changes make a difference. Piaget’s 
theory examines cognitive development, and Erik Erikson’s studies examine 
psychosocial development. These two theories go hand in hand to explain 
much of human behavior at various times. The physiological aspects are not 
covered by these theorists and will not be covered in this book. No theory 
can explain all human interaction and reactions, but together these two 
theories provide context on how humans are changing and growing at different 
ages. They give insight into the strengths and challenges humans have at each 
stage. In effect, this part gives a framework for the outcome of successes and 
challenges that can occur at each stage of development.

Part III | Synopsis of Psychological Theories
38
Artificial intelligence scientists are actively seeking to understand ways humans 
think so that they can have machines or computers do tasks that only humans 
are capable of solving right now and, as stated earlier, it was Turing’s idea to 
simulate the child’s mind. There are holes and gaps in the way we understand 
how humans think and grow, but that is to be expected, and no theory will 
completely solve all problems. This is true of any problem. If we knew every 
reason why humans acted and reacted in the way they do, it would be easy to 
program a computer to do the work instead. Humans are complicated and 
complex, and therefore it follows that theories that try to imitate them will 
be as well.

C H A P T E R 
6
Piaget’s Life 
and Cognitive 
Developmental 
Stages
Jean Piaget was a Swiss developmental psychologist who lived from 1896 to 
1980. In this chapter, we will first take a quick look at his life and at his work 
and then turn our attention to his four main developmental stages: senso­
rimotor, preoperational, concrete operational, and formal operational. The 
substages of Piaget development theory will not be reviewed in this book. 
Piaget cognitive theory is important even today because it helps us under­
stand that even with all these technological changes, individual’s thinking has 
not changed but evolved with time. More importantly, individuals are only 
capable to comprehend their age-appropriate level of cognition.
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9_6

40
Piaget and His Work
Piaget received a PhD in Zoology. He also studied psychoanalysis with Carl 
Jung and Paul Bleuer at the University of Züricha. In the 1920s Piaget worked 
and collaborated with Alfred Binet and Theodore Simon on human intelligence. 
The Binet Intelligence test was a way of measuring intelligence at different 
ages. Binet was asked to test French children when they entered school, and 
Piaget was asked to administer some intelligence tests. It was at this time that 
Piaget thought this method to test human intelligence was too restrictive and 
did not take into account that children did not have full life experiences at this 
point; he thought they had a limited comprehension due to their maturation 
and experiences at this age to answer the questions.
Piaget considered himself a genetic epistemologist who believed that while 
genetic factors play a role in the development of the health and disease of 
individuals, there were still environmental factors involved. A genetic 
epistemologist’s role is to search for the factors of cognition and how they are 
acquired. What are the various types of developmental knowledge as human 
go through at different stages of development, and what are their limitations?
Piaget was also a constructivist and not a Watson behaviorist like most 
psychologists at the time. Behaviorists emphasize the outward behavioral 
aspects of thought and for the most part disregard the inner experiences. A 
constructivist believes that individuals construct their knowledge rather than 
passively take in all the knowledge. In other words, as individuals grow and 
experience the world they live in, they build those representations and 
incorporate their own knowledge with their preexisting knowledge. Piaget 
believed that humans develop knowledge through their interactions with 
others and their own reflections of their pre-existing knowledge.
Piaget married Valentine Châtenay, and they had three children. Piaget 
observed his three children as they grew up and as they passed through 
disparate stages of cognitive development. More importantly, he conducted 
scientific research on groups of children and their different actions at different 
stages of development. He wrote many articles and books in the 20th century 
on the stages of development. His theories characterize language, memory, 
reasoning, and morals for each age-specific thought and behavior. Piaget did 
not believe that the mind was a blank slate. He thought that children’s play 
and their interaction with the world played an imperative role in the growth 
of cognition. This means that children learn through the action of doing 
activities that are different at each stage of development. He believed that 
learning occurs by observing and imitating and interpreting situations. Piaget 
described the ability of humans to cope with a changing world through 
continuously organizing and reorganizing experiences and that reasoning or 
abstract thinking was the highest point of cognition. Piaget thought that the 
child was like a philosopher who perceives the world as he experiences it. At 
birth and early in life, the baby’s universe revolves around its needs and 
Chapter 6 | Piaget’s Life and Cognitive Developmental Stages 

41
pleasures. Later in life and gradually the child will learn how to play and interact 
with others. Piaget perceived that babies are born with genetic determinations 
in their nervous system and sensory motor organs. At each stage of 
development, the child will have limits, and as they develop, their ability and 
structure of interaction become more flexible, effective, and efficient with the 
environment. All these interactions with the environment are cumulative, and 
therefore each experience will lead to adjusting and readjusting for the next 
experience, which comprises their learning and knowledge base. The 
adaptation or adjustment to new environments has dual processes, which he 
believed were the principles of human functioning called assimilation and 
accommodation. Assimilation is the process of taking in new information and 
integrating it into preconceived notions about objects or the world around 
us. Accommodation is the way to adjust to new experiences or objects by 
revising how old experiences were dealt in the past to fit in with the new 
information. How this works is that at first the child will attempt to understand 
new experiences by applying old solutions (assimilation), and when they are 
unable to do that, because they never saw that situation before, the child will 
be forced to change their conception of the world to interpret the situation 
(accommodation). This dual process of assimilation-accommodation will lead 
the child to develop and form schemas.
This schema is the way humans organize information so they can use it to 
interpret the objects and situations that can be heard, seen, smelled, and 
touched. At first, a baby or young child that is starting to have experiences in 
the real world has an overwhelming curiosity and will distort information to 
fit their schema and not try to adjust their schema. As the child is introduced 
to more experiences and objects, the child will accommodate the new 
information to adapt to these situations. This adaptation is the equilibrium 
between the self and the environment. An equilibrium occurs when there is a 
balance between the process of assimilation and accommodation.
Piaget referred to four components that guided development, which are 
emotion, maturation, experience, and social interaction. All these components 
work in tandem to guide development and work in disequilibrium to create 
learning. The way to create motivation and excitement in learning is through 
the feeling of emotions. Through this process of differentiation of their 
nervous system’s mental structures and as children grows physically, they 
become capable of greater understanding. This maturation produces the 
physical feeling that excites and motivates an infant or child to learn. Experience 
is key and is the catalyst in which discoveries occur. It is through exposure to 
different scenarios and a variety of experiences that the child discovers and 
learns. There are limitations; for example, a parent can show a 2-year-old how 
to calculate an algebra problem, but they will still not have the capacity to do 
so. Therefore, each stage of development matters. The child socially interacts 
with their parents, teachers, and other children, and as the child receives 
feedback, this will motivate and excite learning organically. Play is essential for 
the development of cognition in children.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

42
Piaget’s theory proposes that as children mature, their environment and play 
encourage cognitive and language development. This is the way by which 
children develop and refine concepts before they have the ability to think in 
the abstract. Two of the most important developments that are produced 
from play are interest and motivation. Play is healthy and essential for children 
to reach important social, emotional, and cognitive developmental stages. 
There are different types of playing for children such as unstructured free play, 
compensatory play, and parallel play.
The later stages of cognition build and evolve from the earlier experiences. 
For a baby, the cognition is exploring their environment in the form of tasting, 
pushing, and pulling objects. Later, as the child matures, the child will begin to 
think by classifying, sorting, integrating, and matching information. Cognition 
occurs when there is an equilibrium between assimilation and accommodation, 
and intelligent thought occurs when assimilation outweighs accommodation. 
For a baby, thought is at the sensorimotor stage as they explore their 
environment through pushing, pulling, and tasting. As the child matures, the 
child's movements will be more egotistical because they have more flexible 
movements. Some sequences of behaviors that are both internal and external 
for each human will occur at different times. In other words, some children 
will grow cognitively faster than others. However, all children go through the 
same stages to develop behavior, and the sequence of stages is fixed and 
unchangeable. However, the process that children go through in the different 
stages is disparate, and the timing varies. Again, it should be stressed that all 
children go through the same stages. The way that a child will interact with 
the world and move from one stage of development to the next stage will be 
different. And, at each stage of development, the child will develop more 
complex and flexible motor skills and cognitive abilities. This means that as 
the child transitions from one stage to the next, different behaviors are 
associated with them, and the transition will be gradual. Experience and 
culture affects when a child will reach a stage and also when the child is 
physically and psychologically ready to learn. Each child will act differently at 
different stages of development. No disadvantage or advantage is viewed for 
any child at any stage of development; however, at each stage there will be an 
average characteristic, which can vary.
Piaget’s Main Developmental Stages
The stages featured in the following sections will focus on the objective, the 
characteristics, the cognition needed, and the language level developed. Note 
that each stage should occur in consecutive order, but the time it takes each 
child to go through those stages will vary.
6-1
Chapter 6 | Piaget’s Life and Cognitive Developmental Stages 

43
Table 6-1.  Piaget Stages of Cognitive Development
Age
Stage
Objective
Characteristic
Cognition
Language
Birth–
24 
months
Sensorimotor
Object 
permanence
Sensory 
curiosity about 
the world.
Imitation; uses 
pushing, pulling, 
sucking, and 
pushing, along 
with tasting, 
smelling, and 
listening.
None; progresses 
to 
representational 
and symbolic 
thought.
2–7 
years
Preoperational Symbolic 
thought
Language, 
memory, and 
imagination are 
egocentric and 
unsocialized.
Egocentric. 
unsocialized and 
intuitive 
behaviors. 
Pretend play.
Language and 
grammar used in 
expression, and 
imagination and 
intuition used.
7–11 
years
Concrete 
operational
Operational 
thought
Logical 
operations in 
applying 
reasoning. Logic 
is concrete and 
tangible 
material.
Playing games. 
Time, space, and 
quantity are 
understood. Less 
egocentric. Math 
transformation.
Less focused on 
themselves, more 
socialized, 
vocabulary 
grows.
11 and 
up 
years
Formal 
operational
Abstract 
thought
Able to use 
symbols for 
abstract 
thought.
Abstract and 
logical reasoning. 
Able to 
formulate 
hypotheses. 
Strategy planning 
and moral 
thinking. 
Deductive 
reasoning 
emerges.
Collaborate with 
each other in a 
meaningful 
manner. Have 
conversations 
about topics.
Stage 1: Sensorimotor Developmental
The sensorimotor developmental stage is from birth to 24 months old.
The objective of the first stage is objective permanence. At first a baby does 
not realize that objects exist when they are not around them; it’s an “out of 
sight, out of mind” experience. The baby starts to see near the end of the 
stage that even though there is a hidden object that it still exists. The child 
will also start to know that even when the parent leaves the room, they will 
come back.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

44
The characteristic of the baby’s experience is by means of motor activity of 
pushing, pulling, and sucking without using symbols, and for the baby all its 
experiences are learned through trial and error.
Cognition happens through imitation by way of trial and error, and the motor 
skills of the baby’s activities gradually become more flexible. This means that the 
baby copies or imitates what the adult movements are and the child practices. 
Examples are when the baby pushes, sucks, and pulls; when the child starts to 
stand and walk; and when using their motor schemas of grasping and releasing 
their hand. When they start to move further, they will develop the mental 
schemas of “near” and “far.” The baby is able to understand the world by way 
of tasting, smelling, and listening techniques. Sounds like crying and whining 
show the amount of pleasure or unpleasant feelings the child is experiencing. 
Around the first year of life the infant begins to play and learns through imitation.
From birth to 24 months the child has essentially no language skills. Around 
the first year children do start speaking their first words but the understand­
ing of words as symbols cannot develop until object permanence develops.
Stage 2: Preoperational
The Preoperational stage is from the age 2 to 7 years old.
The objective at this stage is symbolic thought. In the beginning of this stage, 
children are more flexible in their movements but are not able to think 
logically. By the end of this stage, children have acquired considerable language 
skills, and children’s worlds are represented in symbols. At this stage, children 
are completely egocentric and see the world around them from an egocentric 
perspective. Children at this stage (preschoolers) use symbols to represent 
their mental images. These symbols depend on children’s own perception and 
intuition. Children are very curious about what is going on around them and 
exploring. They are always asking why something is happening. Because these 
children have egotistical and limited abilities to explain their thought processes, 
which are not as advanced as adults, they may make up situations at this stage.
The characteristic at this preoperational stage is the development of some 
language, memory, and imagination capacities.
The children’s cognition at this stage is egocentric and intuitive. Children start 
out having a bit more advanced and flexible symbolic imitation than in the 
sensorimotor stage. Here is where they use things other than the original 
objects, actions, or ideas to symbolize those things. Symbolic play begins 
around the second year to around 5 years old. At this time, children start 
doing things for a reason.
Children will start to play make-believe and pretend, and children will also 
distort reality to give it meaning. Children may use play and use make-believe 
to correct and alter reality, and they will do actions through make-believe that 
Chapter 6 | Piaget’s Life and Cognitive Developmental Stages 

45
cannot be done in reality. In other words, they may act out in a situation that 
is fearful in reality to them. Another example may be if children are hit by 
their parents, they may in turn hit objects like dolls. This is where children 
reenact their experiences but modify original outcomes. Parallel play is when 
two or more children play near one another but do not interact directly with 
each other. Children may observe each other’s actions while they play with 
themselves and have entire monologues by themselves with their toys or 
dolls, and they may also even mimic the children’s play next to them.
At the ages of 4 to 7 years old, children start to learn games that have rules. 
Games with rules can become more involved and run into the next stage, the 
concrete stage. Play helps children learn more about the world and probably 
has a lot to do with the development of children’s personalities and developing 
morality.
Language begins around the age of 2 to 4 years old. Language evolves and 
becomes more flexible as children have developed object permanence from 
the sensorimotor stage and know that things and objects exist to the 
preoperational stage. Even if they cannot reach for the object, they start using 
words to refer to them, and they know they exist even when they are in a 
different room. Once object permanence is complete, there are words that 
refer to objects and things. At this time, children language begins to grow 
rapidly but their language is egocentric. With this activity, children do not care 
who is listening and will talk to themselves without regard to who is in the 
room. Children’s speech may not make sense, and it may be hard to decipher 
what children are saying at this point. It is common for children to have 
soliloquies or entire conversations with themselves.
There are different types of speech at this age. Echolalia is repetition in speech 
and where children are so absorbed in their play that they are not aware of 
what they are even saying. Delayed echolalia is where children may repeat 
what they hear from perhaps a conversation between their parents. Collective 
monologue is the most socialized form of speech at this stage. This is a form 
of egocentric, unsocialized speech in which children talk among themselves in 
group settings but do not meaningfully communicate with each other. The 
words of one child are unrelated to the words of another.
Stage 3: Concrete Operational
The concrete operational stage is from 7 to 11 years old.
At this stage the objective is operational thought. Children are less egocentric, 
and they are more aware of what is going on around them. Here children are 
able to perform mental thought. And by the end of this stage, children are 
able to perform simple math operations.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

46
This stage is characterized by logical operations of applying logical reasoning. 
These processes are conservation, reversibility, seriation, and classification. 
These mental acts are not at this time applied in hypothetical situations but 
are still concrete in nature. Conservation is when children are able to conserve 
or know that a quantity remains the same even though the physical appearance 
may change or the object may be stretched, cut, elongated, or spread out. 
Preoperational children believe there is a different quantity if a container is 
changed but has the same amount of water, while children in the concrete 
stage will be able to know that it is the same amount of water that was 
transferred from one container to another.
Reversibility is a mental operation that reverses a sequence of events from 
the original condition. Math and logical operations are examples of reversibility. 
If the child has ten items and takes away three items, then there are seven 
items remaining. And, if the child adds three items back, the remaining items 
will be the original ten items.
Seriation is the process of arranging a collection of items in a specific order 
on the basis of a particular dimension and uses the concepts of numbers, 
time, and measurement. A simple exercise would be children putting toys in 
order from small to medium to large.
Classification is the ability to identify properties of categories, to compare 
from one category to another category, and to use categories to solve 
problems. Here children know that regardless of whether the cat is a Siamese 
cat or a Persian cat that they are both cats.
The cognition at this stage is that children play games, their vocabulary grows, 
their awareness is acute, and their concentration is heightened. Children learn 
better how to interact and be in harmony with each other through game 
playing. Their thought process tends to be even more flexible, and they learn 
delayed gratification. At this stage, empathy and imagination can develop 
through children dressing up like others and pretending to be another person. 
By the end of this stage, children can add, subtract, multiply, and divide.
Language evolves around the age of 5 or 6 years old, and by 7 or 8 years old 
children’s speech, although still focused on themselves, starts to expand to 
what other children are trying to say. Children start using language for social 
interaction and communication instead of egocentrically at this time. When in 
the past the world revolves around them, they gradually become more 
socialized as they enter school. Children’s language pattern at this time is a 
transition from immature and illogical to mature and logical thinking. In school 
children start socializing by interacting and talking to each other, and they 
start sharing toys and food. It is at this point that children start to ask 
questions, give answers, order commands, and criticize others.
Chapter 6 | Piaget’s Life and Cognitive Developmental Stages 

47
Stage 4: Formal Operational
The formal operational stage is from ages 11 and up. The objective at this 
stage is abstract thought. While concrete thinking refers to what is happening 
now, formal operations can deal with thinking about what will happen in 
the future.
At this stage, teenagers, young adults, and adults can use symbols to refer to 
abstract concepts, and they are able to hypothesize, understand theoretical 
concepts, and have meaningful relationships and conversations. Their thought 
is more rational, systematic, and flexible.
Their language ability is that they are able to formulate hypotheses, have a 
conversation about topics, see more solutions to a problem, and systematically 
test their ideas to answer problems.
Cognition is shown when they are able to collaborate with each other in a 
discussion on a meaningful topic, not just an action, and there is a purpose in 
mind. Arguments at this time can occur, but they not only relay opposition 
but factual reasons and explanations with proof of why they disagree with the 
view stated. This is a time when young adults and adults forgo egocentric 
monologues for socialized interactive speech.
Piaget’s theory of development proposes that cognition changes as children 
gradually grow. Children develop constructs of mental models of the world 
and acquire knowledge with the ability to work with others in meaningful 
relationships using abstract thought.
Summary
Piaget is indeed a pioneer in the field of developmental theory, and his theories 
have withstood time and the evolution of societal growth. This will be further 
discussed in Part III of this book with milestones and factsheets from respected 
institutions. Through research at different stages of development, he saw and 
demonstrated behaviors by clarifying different characteristics in disparate 
stages of cognitive development. His insights are invaluable even today for 
studying healthy and normal growth behaviors. Each child will have their own 
growth cycle with different behaviors, but the core cognitive outline of the 
types of objectives, characteristics, and language growth will be the same for 
how they pass from one stage to the next.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

C H A P T E R 
7
Erikson’s 
Life and 
Psychosocial 
Developmental 
Stages
Piaget’s theories surmise how the evolution of motor and mental schemas help 
in the development of cognitive abilities of children. Erik Erikson, who devel­
oped a true lifespan model, describes the individualized social development of 
each individual while elaborating on the developmental stages that all humans 
encounter. He lived from 1902 to 1994. Today much of the psychosocial devel­
opment for infants and children and, particularly, for tweens, teen and adults 
seem to be overlooked. The same virtues and developments are true now as 
during the time of Erikson. Therefore, a review of Erik Erikson’s work is in order.
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9_7

50
As with Piaget in the previous chapter, we’ll first take a quick look at Erikson’s 
life and work and then turn our attention to his eight psychosocial 
developmental stages: trust versus mistrust, autonomy versus shame, initiative 
versus guilt, industry versus inferiority, identity versus role confusion, intimacy 
versus stagnation, and ego integrity versus despair.
Erikson and His Work
Erik’s mother, Karla Abrahasen, was Jewish, and it is believed that she was 
separated from her husband, Vlademar Isidor Salomonsen, when she found 
out she was pregnant with Erik. Since she came from a prominent Jewish 
family in Copenhagen, Denmark, and Erik’s father was not Jewish, Karla fled 
to Frankfort, Germany. It was there that Karla trained to be a nurse, and in 
1902 Erik Salomonsen was born. The two moved to Karlsruhe, Germany, and 
in 1905 Erik’s mother married Theodor Homburger, Erik’s pediatrician. Erik’s 
name was changed to Erik Homburger, and a few years later he was officially 
adopted by Theodor. As a child, Erik was told that Theodor was his real 
father, and later in life when he found out that his real father was not Theodor, 
he felt deceived. Erik had blond hair and blue eyes and seemed to have trouble 
adjusting to his community and surroundings.
Around 1927, Erik, who was an excellent art teacher, was hired by many 
affluent families in Germany to teach their children. Some of these families 
were close to Anna and Sigmund Freud. It was Anna Freud who, when she saw 
Erikson’s skill working with children, encouraged him to study psychoanalysis 
at Vienna’s Psychiatric Institute. At this time, Erik also studied the Montessori 
method with its focus on development.
In 1930 Erik married Joan Mowat Serson, a Canadian dancer and artist, and 
eventually converted to Christianity. In 1933, Erik moved with his wife and 
two children to the United States; he worked at the Massachusetts General 
Hospital and held a position at Harvard Medical School where he met 
psychologist Kurt Lewin and anthropologists Margaret Mead and Gregory 
Bateson, who influenced his life and theories. In 1936, Erik left Harvard and 
joined Yale University to work at the Institute of Social Relations and teach at 
the medical school. At Yale he studied for a year Sioux children at a South 
Dakota Indian reservation. This shows how rounded and culturally diverse 
Erickson’s background was.
Erik moved to California in 1939 and changed his name at this time to Erikson. 
He taught at the University of California, Berkeley and San Francisco, and he 
worked with the Institute of Child Welfare. He continued his studies of Native 
American children as he worked with the Yurok tribe in California. In 1950, 
while at the University of California, Erickson wrote the book Childhood and 
Society. Later, in 1968, Erikson wrote the book Identity Youth and Crisis and 
explained the “identity crisis” in adolescents. He believed this stage was a 
crucial turning point in life, because an identity was formed at this stage. 
Chapter 7 | Erikson’s Life and Psychosocial Developmental Stages    

51
Erikson returned to Boston, and he worked at Austen Riggs Center where his 
focus of attention was on emotionally challenged youth. This adolescence 
stage was also a powerful time in Erikson’s life. Erikson’s theories were 
motivated by his studies of anthropology and psychology, as well as his 
knowledge and understanding from working with children and their families in 
clinical, research, and natural settings.
Erikson’s Psychosocial Development Stages
7-1
Table 7-1.  Erickson’s Stages of Psychosocial Development
Stages 
and Ages
Psychosocial 
Conflict
Focus
Virtue
Success
Failure
Stage 1
0–18 
months 
old
Trust versus 
mistrust
Feeding and 
movement 
skills
Hope
Success leads to 
trust of the 
caregiver and an 
emotional 
foundation.
Failure leads to 
mistrust of the 
caregiver and 
could lead to poor 
emotional stability.
Stage 2
18 
months–3 
years old
Autonomy 
versus shame
Toilet 
training and 
play
Will
Success leads to a 
sense of personal 
control over 
physical skills and 
independence, 
which lead to 
feelings of 
autonomy.
Failure leads to 
feelings of 
shame, 
insecurity, and 
doubt.
Stage 3
3–5 years 
old
Initiative 
versus guilt
Exploration 
and control
Purpose
Success leads to 
children asserting 
control and 
initiative over the 
environment, and 
they may need a 
balance of initiative 
and guilt to develop 
a conscience.
Failure leads 
children who try 
to exert too 
much initiative 
to experience 
disapproval, 
resulting in a 
sense of guilt for 
natural curiosity.
(continued)
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

52
Table 7-1.  (continued)
Stages 
and Ages
Psychosocial 
Conflict
Focus
Virtue
Success
Failure
Stage 4
6–12 
years old
Industry 
versus 
inferiority
School and 
friends
Competence Success leads to a 
feeling of social 
and academic 
competence. 
Some failure is 
necessary for 
modesty.
When children 
fail and do not 
get 
encouragement 
from their role 
model, it results 
in feelings of 
inferiority or low 
self-esteem.
Stage 5
12–18 
years old
Identity 
versus role 
confusion
Personal 
social 
relationships
Fidelity
Success leads to 
the ability of 
teens to develop 
a sense of self and 
personal identity.
Failure leads to 
role confusion 
and a weak 
sense of self.
Stage 6
18–40 
years old
Intimacy 
versus 
isolation
Relationships Love
Success leads 
young adults to 
build strong 
relationships and 
to form intimate, 
loving relationships 
with other people.
Failure results in 
loneliness and 
isolation.
Stage 7
40–65 
years old
Generativity 
versus 
stagnation
Work and 
parenthood
Care
Success leads 
adults to feel 
useful and 
accomplishment 
and to create or 
nurture children 
or create a 
positive change 
situation that 
benefits other 
people.
Failure results in 
shallow 
involvement in 
the world.
Stage 8
65–death
Ego integrity 
versus despair
Reflection 
on life
Wisdom
Success at this 
stage for seniors 
is the need to 
look back on life 
and feel a sense 
of fulfillment.
Failure results in 
regret, 
bitterness, and 
despair.
Chapter 7 | Erikson’s Life and Psychosocial Developmental Stages    

53
Stage 1: Trust vs. Mistrust
Trust versus mistrust covers birth to 18 months. The focus of this stage is 
that infants are totally dependent on the caregiver and look to their caregivers 
for stability and consistency of care as the infants are uncertain about the 
world around them. Infants cannot use words at this stage and show their 
feelings through crying, cooing, and body language. The outcome of success 
at this stage is that when the parents are consistent and reliable, the children 
develop a trust, and they will be able to feel secure in other relationships even 
in threatening situations. The virtue is hope. In other words, infants develop 
a sense of trust, and this will carry them later in life to believe that others will 
be there for them as a source of support. Failure at this stage causes infants 
to mistrust. They will be suspicious and anxious, and infants will not have 
confidence in the world around them, and they will not have trust to influence 
events around them. In turn, infants will have fear and mistrust in their 
relationships, and they will feel anxious and insecure about the world 
around them.
Stage 2: Autonomy vs. Shame and Doubt
Autonomy versus shame and doubt covers the ages 18 months to three years. 
The focus of this stage is that as children develop physically and become more 
mobile, they develop a sense of control over their physical skills and a sense 
of independence that they have many skills and abilities. The parents’ role is 
delicate at this stage because they need to encourage children to become 
more independent, and at the same time they have to be careful in their 
criticism when children have an accident or fail at an activity. It is important 
to allow children to explore their abilities in a supportive environment.
Children at this stage will be putting on their clothes and shoes and playing 
with toys. The child will learn how to walk away from his parents, and the 
child will decide which toys to play with as well as what food to eat and what 
clothes to wear. This allows a child to feel a sense of independence and 
autonomy. The outcome of success is when children are encouraged and 
supported, they will feel more confident and secure in their own abilities. The 
virtue is will, and it is the will to explore and assert themselves. Failure for 
children, at this point, is when children are criticized and controlled when 
they try to assert themselves. Children will feel inadequate, and children may 
develop lack of self-esteem and dependency, in other words, a sense of shame 
and doubt in themselves.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

54
Stage 3: Initiative vs. Guilt
Initiative versus guilt covers the ages from 3 to 5 years. The focus of this stage 
is that children start to play games with other children as they start to attend 
school. This active interaction with other children is a period of rapid 
development, and children by way of interacting with other children explore 
ways to act and respond to other children. Children will do this by playing 
games, initiating activities, or planning activities. Children will ask many 
questions at this stage, and parents need to respond in a way so that children 
do not feel it is a nuisance, trivial, or embarrassing. The success at this stage 
is that children will have a balance between initiative and guilt. Children need 
to believe that they can directly respond in play and social interactions by 
themselves, but they must also develop a conscience and know how to 
exercise control. The virtue at this stage is purpose. Children will develop 
empathy, humor, and resilience at this stage. Failure at this stage is when 
children feel too much guilt when acting with others, which will inhibit their 
creativity.
Stage 4: Industry vs. Inferiority
Industry versus Inferiority covers the ages of 6 to 12. The focus of this stage 
is that school has a greater importance in children’s lives, and teachers start 
to take an important role in children’s life as they teach them skills. Children 
start to learn how to read and write and calculate arithmetic problems. 
Children start to do more on their own at this stage. At this stage children 
develop peer groups that will be a major source of children’s self-esteem and 
will gain more importance and significance in their lives.
Success at this stage is that as children succeed in their studies and are 
encouraged, they will feel competent, industrious, and confident in their 
abilities to achieve their goals. To endure modesty, some failure is necessary 
to balance it all out. The virtue is competence. Children will have humility and 
the ability to accept the course of his own initiative. Failure is when children 
do not receive the support from their parents and teachers or role models; 
they will start to feel doubt and inferiority in their abilities, and this could 
stunt them in their potential to achieve their goals.
Stage 5: Identity vs. Role Confusion
Identity versus role confusion covers the ages of 12 to 18. The focus of this 
stage is on an adolescent’s search for their personal identity and who they are 
and where they stand among others by vocalizing and displaying their personal 
values, beliefs, and goals. The adolescent, which is between childhood and 
adulthood, will examine and re-examine their independence of who they are 
Chapter 7 | Erikson’s Life and Psychosocial Developmental Stages    

55
sexually and occupationally, and they will start to learn where they identify in 
the society around them. They start to search for the roles they will play in 
society and what their psychosocial world of family, friends, and other 
relationships will be like when they are adults. It is very important to note 
that the body has major biological and chemical changes at this time that 
affect the body and the body image of the adolescent. The adolescent at this 
stage may feel uncomfortable with their body image until they grow into it. 
This is a sensitive stage according to Erikson because it also affects the 
morality children feel and the ethics they will develop in adulthood.
The success during this stage is that the adolescent will explore other points 
of view and then determine where they feel comfortable within society. The 
virtue is fidelity or where they feel mastery, homage, and allegiance. The 
failure at this stage may be role confusion, which is the adolescent may be 
confused about how they fit in society, and they experience an identity crisis. 
This role confusion is where they may experiment with negative work, politics, 
and educational activities when they are unhappy, which creates a negative 
identity.
Stage 6: Intimacy vs. Isolation
Intimacy versus isolation covers the ages 18 to 40. The focus of this stage is 
for the young adult to experience harmony and conflicts in establishing 
intimacy with loving partners and other people in general. Long-term 
relationships continue to be established and re-established at this time where 
the young adult starts to become more intimate with others.
The success at this stage is a happy and committed relationship with a feeling 
of safety and care. The virtue at this stage is love, including being able to show 
love and tenderness freely. The failure is when a young adult avoids intimacy 
and has a fear of commitments. This may cause the young adult to experience 
isolation, which may lead to depression.
Stage 7: Generativity vs. Stagnation
The seventh stage’s psychosocial conflict is generativity versus stagnation and 
includes ages from 40 to 65. The focus of this stage is that adults have the 
ability to care for and to be concerned about others. Adults will be raising 
their children, engaging in community activities and organizations, and working 
in rewarding and productive occupations. The adult will see the bigger picture 
in life and what life has to offer.
The success at this stage is when the adult is successfully able to give back, 
and the adult will feel useful, needed, and accomplished. The virtue at this 
stage is care, and the adult will be able to care for others and sympathize and 
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

56
empathize with their other concerns. The failure is that when adults do not 
feel they are productive or accomplished, they may be stagnant and have a 
shallow sense of the world.
Stage 8: Ego Integrity vs. Despair
Ego Integrity versus despair covers the age 65 to death. The focus of this 
stage for senior citizens or just older adults is slowing down and pondering 
their accomplishments and failures. There is a complexity between the sense 
of integrity and the disintegration of the body.
The outcome of success will be integrity if the adult has achieved their goals 
in life. The wise senior citizen will feel a balance between integrity and despair. 
They will be able to look back at their lives with a wholeness and with a sense 
that they achieved meaningful accomplishments. The virtue at this stage is 
wisdom, being able to, with sensitivity and insight, see and understand the 
paths of others. The failure is that a senior citizen may look back on their lives 
and regret not working harder to achieve their goals. They may experience 
bitterness and hopelessness to the point of feeling depressed.
In essence, unlike Piaget’s theory, Erikson’s theory is a true lifespan approach. 
Together they encompass cognitive and psychosocial development from 
infancy to adulthood.
Summary
Like Piaget, Erikson is a pioneer in the field of developmental theory, and his 
theories have withstood time and the evolution of societal growth, which will 
discussed in Part III of this book. Psychosocial development of conflict, focus, 
success, and failure at each stage is pertinent and can add clarity to 
understanding how a person throughout their life will deal with the virtues at 
each stage. Like Piaget’s cognitive development, Erikson’s insights are invaluable 
even today to show how healthy and normal psychosocial development can 
help a person develop solid core virtues. Again, like Piaget, Erikson realized 
that each child will have their own growth cycle with different virtues, but the 
core psychosocial outline will be the same for how they pass from one stage 
to the next.
Chapter 7 | Erikson’s Life and Psychosocial Developmental Stages    

C H A P T E R 
8
CDC and 
Medline 
Milestones and 
APA Factsheets 
Guidelines
This chapter will start by reviewing the U.S. National Library of Medicine 
(Medline) and the Center for Disease Control (CDC) developmental 
milestones, as well as the American Psychological Association (APA) 
developmental factsheets. The tables display the milestones of how babies 
and children learn to play, speak, act, and move.
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9_8

58
We will then show how these charts support Piaget’s cognitive developmental 
stages and Erickson’s psychosocial developmental stages. The Medline and 
CDC milestones and APA factsheets will be reviewed, and the stages of 
development of Piaget and Erikson will be restated in order for you to make 
comparisons.
Some of the tables also talk about how to think of games your children would 
like to play and how to share and enjoy time with your children by doing some 
activities together. What are the activities your children like to do? Be 
conscious and alert if your child is doing something that concerns you at each 
stage and their growth pattern does not look right or if they are gaining skills 
at a faster or slower pace than expected. And always be cognizant if your 
children have other medical or behavioral needs. The APA details development 
factsheets of mental and social development up to the age of 10, as well as tips 
for handling difficult situations that may happen.
We start with the behavioral charts of Medline that show what infants, chil­
dren, and adolescents should be learning at each milestone; after the tables, 
there will be a discussion on Piaget’s and Erikson’s theories. As intimated in 
the previous chapters, Piaget and Erikson went further in their theories of 
cognitive and psychosocial development than many of these milestone and 
factsheets.
Medline Age-Appropriate 
Developmental Milestones
Table 8-1 lists how these milestones evolve from infancy to adolescent.
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

59
Table 8-1.  Medline Age-Appropriate Developmental Milestones
Age
Developmental Milestones
Infancy: Ages birth to 1 year • Able to drink from a cup
• Able to sit alone, without support
• Babbles
• Displays social smile
• Gets first tooth
• Plays peek-a-boo
• Pulls self to standing position
• Rolls over
• Says “mama” and “dada,” using terms appropriately
• Understands “no” and will stop activity in response
• Walks while holding on to furniture or other support
Toddler: Ages 1 to 3 years
• Able to feed self neatly, with minimal spilling
• Able to draw a line (when shown one)
• Able to run, pivot, and walk backwards
• Able to say first and last names
• Able to walk up and down stairs
• Begins pedaling tricycle
• Can name pictures of common objects and point to body 
parts
• Dresses self with only a little bit of help
• Imitates speech of others, “echoes” word back
• Learns to share toys (without adult direction)
• Learns to take turns (if directed) while playing with other 
children
• Masters walking
• Recognizes and labels colors appropriately
• Recognizes differences between males and females
• Uses more words and understands simple commands
• Uses spoon to feed self
(continued)
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

60
Table 8-1.  (continued)
Age
Developmental Milestones
Preschool: Ages 3 to 6 
years
• Able to draw a circle and square
• Able to draw stick figures with two to three features for 
people
• Able to skip
• Balances better; may begin to ride a bicycle
• Begins to recognize written words; reading skills start
• Catches a bounced ball
• Enjoys doing most things independently, without help
• Enjoys rhymes and word play
• Hops on one foot
• Rides tricycle well
• Starts school
• Understands size concepts
• Understands time concepts
School-Age Child: Ages 6 
to 12 years
• Begins gaining skills for team sports such as soccer, T-ball, or 
other team sports
• Begins to lose “baby” teeth and get permanent teeth
• Girls begin to show growth of armpit and pubic hair, breast 
development
• Menarche (first menstrual period) may occur in girls
• Peer recognition begins to become important
• Reading skills develop further
• Routines important for daytime activities
• Understands and is able to follow several directions in a row
Adolescent: Ages 12 to 18 
years
• Adult height, weight, sexual maturity
• Boys show growth of armpit, chest, and pubic hair; voice 
changes; testicles/penis enlarge
• Girls show growth of armpit and pubic hair; breasts develop; 
menstrual periods start
• Peer acceptance and recognition is of vital importance
• Understands abstract concepts
CDC Age-Appropriate 
Developmental Milestones
Table 8-2 lists how the CDC development evolves from infancy to 5 years.
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

61
Table 8-2.  CDC Age-Appropriate Developmental Milestones
Milestones at 2 months
What do most babies do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Calms down when soothed or picked up
• Looks at your face
• Seems happy to see you
• Smiles when you talk to or smile at baby
Language/communication
• Makes sounds other than crying
• Reacts to loud noises
Cognitive (learning, thinking, problem-solving)
• Watches you as you move
• Looks at the toy for several seconds
Movement/physical development
• Holds head up when on tummy
• Moves both arms and legs
Milestones at 4 months
What do most babies do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Smiles to get your attention
• Chuckles (not yet a full laugh) when you do something funny
• Looks at you, moves, or makes sounds to get or keep your 
attention.
Language/communication
• Makes sounds like “oooo” and “aahh” (cooing)
• Makes sounds back when you talk
• Turns head toward the sound of your voice
Cognitive (learning, 
thinking, problem-solving)
• If hungry, opens mouth when sees breast or bottle
• Looks at hands with interest
Movement/physical 
development
• Holds head steady without support when being held
• Holds a toy when you put it in their hand
• Uses arm to swing at toys
• Brings hand to mouth
• Pushes up onto elbows/ forearms when on tummy
(continued)
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

62
Table 8-2.  (continued)
Milestones at 6 months
What do most babies do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Knows familiar people
• Likes to look in the mirror
• Laughs
Language/communication
• Takes turns making sounds with you
• Blows “raspberries” (sticks tongue out and 
blows)
• Makes squealing noises
Cognitive (learning, thinking, 
problem-solving)
• Puts things in mouth to explore them
• Reaches to grab a toy
• Closes lips to show doesn’t want more food
Movement/physical development
• Rolls from tummy to back
• Pushes up straight arms when on tummy
• Leans on hands for support while sitting
Milestones at 9 months
What do most babies do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Is shy, clingy, or fearful around strangers
• Shows several facial expressions, like happy, sad, 
angry, and surprised
• Looks when you call name
• Reacts when you leave (looks, reaches for you, and 
cries)
• Smiles or laughs when you play peek-a boo
Language/communication
• Makes different sounds like “mamamama” and 
“babababa”
• Lifts arms up to be picked up
Cognitive (learning, thinking, 
problem-solving)
• Looks for object when dropped out of sight
• Bangs two things together
Movement/physical development
• Gets to a sitting position on own
• Moves things from one hand to other hand
• Uses fingers to “rake” food
• Sits without support
(continued)
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

63
Table 8-2.  (continued)
Milestones at 12 months
What do most babies do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Plays games with you, like pat-a-cake
Language/communication
• Waves “bye-bye”
• Calls a parent “mama” or “dada” or another special 
name
• Understands “no” (pauses briefly or stops when you 
say it)
Cognitive (learning, thinking, 
problem-solving)
• Puts something in a container, like a block in a cup
• Looks for things that you hide, like a toy under a 
blanket
Movement/physical development
• Pulls up to stand
• Walks, holding on to furniture
• Drinks from a cup without a lid, as you hold it
• Picks things up between thumb and pointer finger, 
like small bits of food
Milestones at 15 months
What do most babies do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Copies other children while playing, like taking toys out 
of a container when another child does
• Shows you an object they like
• Claps when excited
• Hugs stuffed doll or other toy
• Shows you affection (hugs, cuddles, or kisses you)
Language/communication
• Tries to say one or two words besides “mama” or “dada” 
like “ba” for ball or “da” for dog
Cognitive (learning, thinking, 
problem-solving)
• Tries to use things the right way, like a phone, cup, or 
book
• Stacks at least two small objects, like blocks
Movement/physical development • Takes a few steps
• Uses fingers to feed self some food
(continued)
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

64
Table 8-2.  (continued)
Milestones at 18 months
What do most babies do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Moves away from you, but looks to make sure you are 
close by
• Points to show you something interesting
• Puts hands out for you to wash them
• Looks at a few pages in a book with you
• Helps you by pushing arm through sleeve or lifting up foot 
when getting dressed
Language/communication
• Tries to say three or more words besides “mama” or 
“dada”
• Follows one-step directions without gestures, like giving 
you the toy when you say, “Give it to me”
Cognitive (learning, thinking, 
problem-solving)
• Copies you doing chores, like sweeping with a broom
• Plays with toys in a simple way, like pushing a toy car
Movement/physical 
development
• Walks without holding on to anyone or anything
• Scribbles
• Drinks from a cup but may spill sometimes
• Feeds herself with her fingers
• Tries to use a spoon
• Climbs on and off a couch or chair without help
Milestones at 2 years
What do most babies do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Notices when others are hurt or upset, like pausing or 
looking sad when someone is crying
• Looks at your face to see how to react in a new situation
Language/communication
• Points to things in a book when you ask, like “Where is the 
bear?”
• Says at least two words together, like “More milk”
• Points to at least two body parts you ask to show you
• Uses more gestures than just waving and pointing, like 
blowing a kiss and nodding yes
Cognitive (learning, thinking, 
problem-solving)
• Holds something in one hand while using the other hand; 
for example, holding a container and taking the lid off
• Tries to use switches, knobs, or buttons on a toy
• Plays with more than one toy at the same time, like putting 
toy food on a toy plate
(continued)
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

65
Table 8-2.  (continued)
Milestones at 2 years
What do most babies do at this age?
Movement/physical 
development
• Kicks a ball
• Runs
• Walks (not climbs) up a few stairs with or without help
• Eats with a spoon
Milestones at 30 months
What do most babies do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Plays next to other children and sometimes plays with 
them
• Shows you something by saying “Look at me!”
• Follows simple routines when told, like helping to pick up 
toys when you say, “It’s cleanup time”
Language/communication
• Says about 50 words
• Says two or more words, with one action word, like 
“Doggie run”
• Names things in a book when you point and ask, “What is 
this?”
• Says words like “I,” “me,” or “we”
Cognitive (learning, thinking, 
problem-solving)
• Uses things to pretend, like feeding a block to a doll as if it 
were food
• Shows simple problem-solving skills, like standing on a 
small stool to reach something
• Follows two-step instructions like “Put the toy down and 
close the door”
• Show he knows at least one color, like pointing to a red 
crayon when you ask, “Which one is red?”
Movement/physical 
development
• Uses hands to twist things, like turning doorknobs or 
unscrewing lids
(continued)
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

66
Table 8-2.  (continued)
Milestones at 3 years
What most children do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Calms down within 10 minutes after you leave her, like at 
a childcare drop-off
• Notices other children and joins them to play
Language/communication
• Talks with you in conversation using at least two back-and-
forth exchanges
• Asks “who,” “what,” “where,” or “why” questions, like 
“Where is mommy/daddy?”
• Says what action is happening in a picture or book when 
asked, like “running,” “eating,” or “playing”
• Says first name, when asked
• Talks well enough for others to understand, most of the 
time
Cognitive (learning, thinking, 
problem-solving)
• Draws a circle, when you show him how
• Avoids touching hot objects, like a stove, when you warn her
Movement/physical 
pevelopment
• Strings items together, like large beads or macaroni
• Puts on some clothes, like loose pants or a jacket
• Uses a fork
Milestones at 4 years
What most children do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Pretends to be something else during play (teacher, 
superhero, dog)
• Asks to go play with children if none are around, like 
“Can I play with Alex?”
• Comforts others who are hurt or sad, like hugging a 
crying friend
• Avoids danger, like not jumping from tall heights at the 
playground
• Likes to be a “helper”
• Changes behavior based on location (places of worship, 
library, playground)
Language/communication
• Says sentences with four or more words
• Says some words from a song, story, or nursery rhyme
• Talks about at least one thing that happened during his 
day, like “I played soccer”
• Answers simple questions like “What is a coat for?” or 
“What is a crayon for?”
(continued)
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

67
Table 8-2.  (continued)
Milestones at 4 years
What most children do at this age?
Cognitive (learning, thinking, 
problem-solving)
• Names a few colors of items
• Tells what comes next in a well-known story
• Draws a person with three or more body parts
Movement/physical development
• Catches a large ball most of the time
• Serves himself food or pours water, with adult 
supervision
• Unbuttons some buttons
• Holds crayons or pencil between fingers and thumb 
(not a fish)
Milestones at 5 years
What most children do at this age?
Social/emotional
• Follows rules or talks turns when playing games with 
other children
• Sings, dances, or acts for you
• Does simple chores at home, like matching socks or 
clearing the table after eating
Language/communication
• Tells a story she heard made up with at least two 
events
• Answers simple questions about a book or story 
after you read or tell it
• Keeps a conversation going with more than three 
back-and-forth exchanges
• Uses or recognizes simple rhymes (bat-cat, ball-tall)
Cognitive (learning, thinking, 
problem-solving)
• Counts to 10
• Names some numbers between 1 and 5 when you 
point to them
• Uses words about time, like “yesterday,” “tomorrow,” 
“morning,” or “night”
• Pays attention for 5 to 10 minutes during activities, 
for example, during story time or making arts and 
crafts (screen time does not count)
• Write some letters in name
• Names some letters when you point to them
Movement/physical development
• Buttons some buttons
• Hops on one foot
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

68
American Psychology Association 
Developmental Factsheets
Tables 8-3 through 8-6 highlight the cognitive and social skills to expect from 
birth to 10 years old.
Table 8-3.  Cognitive and Social Skills to Expect at 0 - 18 Months
Mental Skills
    • Remember people and objects that are not present.
    • Imitate other people’s facial expressions, sounds, and actions.
    • Imitate what they see on TV, even if they don’t understand what they are doing.
    • Understand what they hear before they can speak.
    • Make noises to communicate with others and to show satisfaction or displeasure.
    • Recognize their own name.
    • Begin to explore the environment; touch and manipulate objects.
    • Learn by imitating and observing other people.
    • Show understanding of words for highly familiar objects.
    • Understand about a dozen common phrases.
    • Begin to use “me,” “I,” and “you.”
    • Understand and can follow very simple instructions.
    • Have very short attention spans.
Social Skills
    • Cry and flail arms and legs when in pain, tired, hungry, cold, thirsty, wet, lonely, or in a 
new situation and/or with new people.
    • Smile, babble, and coo to show pleasure, joy, and excitement.
    • Recognize the difference between familiar people and strangers.
    • Develop strong bonds with people regularly caring for them, such as a parent or other 
adult, and show anxiety when separated.
    • Are friendly to familiar people and afraid of strangers.
    • Recognize distress of others by showing distress and crying.
    • Enjoy audiences and applause.
    • Can play alone for brief periods of time.
    • Become angry when frustrated.
    • Are afraid of strangers and are wary of unexpected situations.
(continued)
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

69
Table 8-3.  (continued)
Tips for Parents
    • If your baby is distressed and cries, comfort them. This will not spoil your child. When 
babies cry, they need warm and gentle responses to feel secure and safe. This trust 
forms the foundation for your future relationship with your child.
    • Don’t punish a crying baby. Be patient; your baby is just trying to tell you that 
something is wrong. Harsh responses will frighten a baby and make things worse.
    • Play with your child every day. Make fun playtime part of your time together.
    • Provide toys that are designed for your child’s age and are safe.
    • Talk frequently to your child; use simple direct words and give positive instructions. (Say 
“Let’s play with the rattle” instead of “Don’t play with the fork!”)
    • Read simple books to your child every day, including those with familiar objects to 
stimulate language and communication.
    • If possible, reduce separations, or always have a familiar person caring for your child.
    • Create and maintain daily routines to help your baby feel secure and build trust.
Table 8-4.  Cognitive and Social Skills to Expect 18 to 36 Months
Mental Skills
    • Have mental images of people and objects that are not present.
    • Can use imagination and begin to play pretend games.
    • Use an object to represent a person, like a doll to represent a mother or a child.
    • Recount events of the day and imitate actions and events that occurred in the past.
    • Has a vocabulary of several hundred words; can use two- to three-word sentences; 
repeat words.
    • Listen to stories for a short period of time.
    • Understand that images and pictures represent real objects and people.
    • Have a vague notion of time; still confuse the meanings of today, tomorrow, and 
yesterday.
    • Generally have short attention spans and can be easily distracted.
    • Are just beginning to remember rules and don’t really understand right from wrong.
(continued)
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

70
Table 8-4.  (continued)
Social Skills
    • Are developing a strong sense of themselves as separate individuals.
    • Think they are the center of the world.
    • Beginning to show signs of independence; can be stubborn and contrary and say “no” to 
adults.
    • Are possessive, with strong notions of territory: “This is mine!” Have difficulty sharing.
    • May be having trouble waiting and want things right now.
    • Have trouble expressing emotions with words; when frustrated or angry can have 
tantrums or hit and kick to get what they want.
    • Play side by side with others more than cooperatively with them.
    • Begin to understand that other people have expectations of them.
    • Are more aware of feelings of others; enjoy adult attention.
    • Express their feelings through pretend play/make-believe play.
Tips for Parents
    • It is hard for children of this age to share things and take turns.
    • The best way to deal with disputes over toys is to have more than one toy for them.
    • Children of this age are always busy and often cannot do the same thing for long 
periods of time. Do not expect them to be happy in a place (church, grocery store) or 
situation (family dinners) or playing with the same toy or the same children for more 
than a half-hour or so without your support and attention.
    • When children fight over the same toy, teach positive and nonviolent solutions: (1) 
provide another toy or remove the toy; (2) if that doesn’t work, redirect children’s 
attention to something else or take them to another place. Always make it clear that 
hurting another child is not acceptable.
    • Always help your child resolve conflicts by using words to express what is happening 
(“You want to play with the car and Joanna is playing with the car? Tell her, ‘I want the 
car’”).
    • Tantrums are typical of this age, but when they happen:
(a) Remain calm; use a few gentle words to calm or distract your child.(b) Don’t yell or 
hit your child.(c) Don’t try to talk or teach in the middle of a tantrum.(d) Give little 
attention or ignore.(e) Shift your child’s attention to something else.(f) Stand firm; don’t 
give in to tantrums; try never to reward a tantrum.(g) Try to understand the causes.
    • Adults should try to save saying “no” for situations involving safety and emotional 
well-being. In other situations, give choices.
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

71
Table 8-5.  Cognitive and Social Skills to Expect from 3 to 5 Years
Mental Skills
    • Can think about objects, people, and events without seeing them.
    • Although less than before, still think they are the center of the world and have trouble 
seeing things from someone else’s perspective.
    • More able to use words to express thoughts and feelings and to share experiences.
    • Talk to themselves out loud as a way to control their behaviors.
    • Can think of events in the past or those yet to happen.
    • Begin to think ahead and plan their actions; often can anticipate physical consequences 
of actions that are not too complicated.
    • Starting to see the difference between things they see and what they really are (a stuffed 
dog is not a dog).
    • Starting to see the relationship of cause and effect (“If I do this, then that will happen”).
    • Ask a lot of why, how, when questions.
    • Learn by imitation, observation, and exploring, creating, and doing things.
    • Understand that breakfast is before lunch, lunch is before dinner, etc.
    • Begin to understand before/after, up/down, over/under, today/yesterday/tomorrow.
    • Can’t play or do something for too long or become bored and tired unless there is adult 
guidance.
(continued)
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

72
Table 8-5.  (continued)
Social Skills
    • Can read and interpret emotions of others; can tell when someone is angry or upset.
    • Can’t understand abstract emotions like pity, greed, gratitude.
    • Use different ways to control their own emotions: close their eyes and ears; remove 
themselves from the situation; sometimes can resist temptation to respond to whatever 
is disturbing them.
    • May develop first true relationship because friends become very important.
    • How they play: At age 3, they typically play near a friend and find it difficult to take turns 
and to share things; at age 4, they may begin cooperative play, still difficult to share but 
begin to understand turn-taking, begin to offer things to others; at age 5, enjoy playing 
with other children, often cooperate well, have special friends.
    • Use less physical aggression than when younger.
    • Use more frequent verbal aggression like insults, threats, or teasing to hurt other 
children; bullying appears; they understand the power of rejection.
    • Understand social rules and can act in accordance to them.
    • Are eager to carry out some responsibilities; offer to help.
    • Understand that praise or blame happens because of what they do.
    • Begin to understand the difference of doing things “on purpose” and “by accident”; focus 
more on the damage than on the intentions of the perpetrator.
    • By age 4, begin to have a sense of their ethnic identity and of the ways their social group 
is perceived in the society.
    • Increased capacity to use imagination; can imagine terrible things can happen to them, 
which can lead to fear; nightmares can happen.
Tips for Parents
    • Teach your children to use words when they are angry or sad. (“You are sad because 
Grandpa is gone.”)
    • Ask your children to show angry, mad, sad, happy, and surprised feelings using their 
faces and tell you what makes people feel that way.
    • Ask your children to draw a picture of their mad feelings and talk about them.
    • Give your children opportunities to accomplish something like organizing toys and 
books, helping with making up the grocery list, delivering short messages to others, 
giving their own ending to a story in a book.
    • Help your children cope with fantasy fear by pointing out the difference between reality 
and fantasy.
    • Keep your children away from situations that create real fear such as seeing violence in 
the home or neighborhood, watching violence on TV, and receiving physical 
punishment.
    • When there is a fight, (a) stop the fighting; go first to the child that is injured to calm 
them. (b) Use time outs to calm down the child who is the aggressor (no more than 
one minute for each year of the child’s age). (c) When both children are calm, talk to 
them and ask: What happened? What is each one feeling? Ask them to think of a 
solution; tell that it’s OK to be angry or mad but not to hurt. (d) Praise both children 
for thinking of a solution. Remember to show your love and care even though you 
disapprove of their behavior.
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

73
Table 8-6.  Cognitive and Social Skills to Expect from 6 to 10 Years
Mental Skills
    • Become able to understand the viewpoint of others; are aware that others can have 
different thoughts.
    • Can focus on several aspects of a problem at a time.
    • Can concentrate on what they are doing for longer periods of time.
    • Increased problem-solving ability, but not yet like an adult.
    • Can think of simple plans before acting. For example, when inviting friends over to play, 
children can plan in advance what games they will play.
    • Can begin to understand time and the days of the week; by age 10, children can place 
events in time sequence.
    • Improved short- and long-term memory.
    • Can speak and also write; by age 10, children have a vocabulary of 20,000 words and 
learn an average of 20 new words a day; can also understand that a word may have 
different meanings.
    • Can communicate better and longer with others, express themselves, and understand 
things.
    • Can better understand and internalize moral rules of behavior (right/wrong; good/bad; 
wonderful/terrible).
    • Begin to understand that what is fair is related to merit: who works harder deserves 
special treat.
    • Are better able to empathize with other people and accept the idea of giving special 
consideration to those in greater need.
Social Skills
    • Are able to view themselves based on how they perform in school; capacity to make 
friends; and their physical appearance.
    • Understand they can feel two emotions at the same time (I like Jenny, but I hate how 
she talks to me).
    • Are intensely interested in peers; prefer same-sex friends; develop friendships marked by 
give and take, mutual trust, and shared experiences.
    • Feel that belonging and acceptance by peers is very important. (Children may look more 
for peers than to adults for gratification.)
    • Play is no longer just fantasy play where imagination is the key element; more often 
children choose rules-based games where the rules are the key element and winning the 
game is more frequently the objective.
    • Have great concern with justice and fairness; what is fair or equal is important, and 
some children may try to get even and become verbally or physically aggressive.
    • Continue to develop social skills like empathy and compassion.
    • Become more able to do things by themselves, and as a result, their relationship with 
parents changes.
(continued)
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

74
Tips for Parents
    • Help your children to develop a sense of competence: give them opportunities to 
master some skills like cooking, building models, making crafts, playing an instrument.
    • Learn to gradually share the control of your child’s life with them.
    • Reinforce the understanding of right and wrong and consequences.
    • Teach problem solving to your child. Use the IDEAL model to:
      • Identify the problem and the feelings involved (your child is being bullied and is afraid 
of going to school).
      • Determine with the child possible solutions without use of violence.
      • Evaluate with the child the merits of each possible solution.
      • Act, choosing the best solution.
      • Learn from what you and your child did to solve the problem.
    • Use real-life situations (in your family or make up a situation), and when you are on the 
bus, in the car, or in the kitchen, play the IDEAL game with your child. A mock 
scenario could be: A child can’t watch TV because they haven’t done their homework 
and is mad and breaks the remote control.
    • Reinforce prosocial skills such as sharing, empathy, and cooperation by asking a child to 
do things like help care for a baby or collect food for a shelter.
    • Provide opportunities for your child to develop an understanding of rules by playing 
simple table games that rely on chance rather than on skills such as cards, dominoes, 
tic-tac-toe.
    • Teach by speaking out loud to yourself (so your child will hear) about a problem and 
how to resolve it. An example: We are out of milk, bread, and fruit. I’m not feeling well. 
I will call Daddy and ask him to stop by the grocery store on his way home to get them.
    • Demonstrate that behaviors and actions have consequences for everybody involved in a 
situation: if you do that, this will happen, or when you do this, then you will get this.
Table 8-6.  (continued)
Milestones, Factsheets, and 
Developmental Theory Comparisons
As you will see in this section, there do not appear to be any discrepancies 
between the milestones of the Medline and CDC, APA Developmental 
Factsheets, and the theories and research of Piaget and Erikson. Examples will 
be shown at each stage. The detailed movements, language, cognition, 
movements, and social and emotional skills of the milestones and factsheets 
support the theories. The drawback is that the milestones and factsheets do 
not cover all the stages of development.
We will review the Medline and CDC milestones and APA Developmental 
Factsheets and then discuss Piaget’s and Erikson’s stages.
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

75
Piaget’s Stages of Cognitive Development
Medline Sensorimotor Stage (Birth to 24 Months)
Medline states this milestone of infancy is between the ages of birth to 1 year. 
For the infancy stage, some of the milestones are that the infant babbles, 
walks while holding on to furniture or another support, is able to drink from 
a cup, and is able to sit alone, without support.
CDC Sensorimotor Stage (Birth to 24 Months)
Here are the CDC milestones at 2 months:
Language/communication: The baby makes sounds 
other than crying; reacts to loud noises.
Cognitive: Watches you as you move; looks at the toy 
for several seconds.
Movement/physical development: Holds head up 
when on tummy; moves both arms and legs.
Here are the CDC milestones at 4 months:
Language/communication: Makes sounds like “oooo” 
and “aahh” in cooing; makes sounds in response to 
voices; turns head toward the sound of your voice.
Cognitive: If hungry, opens mouth when sees breast 
or bottle; looks at hands with interest.
Movement/physical development: Holds head steadily 
without support when being held; holds a toy when 
you put it in infant’s hand; uses arms to swing at toys; 
brings hands to mouth; pushes up onto elbows/
forearms when on tummy.
Here are the CDC milestones at 6 months:
Language/communication: Takes turns making sounds 
with you; blows “raspberries” (sticks tongue out and 
blows); makes squealing noises.
Cognitive: Puts things in mouth to explore them; 
reaches to grab a toy; closes lips to show doesn’t want 
more food.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

76
Movement/physical development: Rolls from tummy 
to back; pushes up straight arms when on tummy; 
leans on hands for support while sitting.
Here are the CDC milestones at 9 months:
Language/communication: Makes different sounds like 
“mamamama” and “babababa”; lifts arms up to be 
picked up.
Cognitive: Looks for objects when dropped out 
of sight.
Movement/physical development: Gets to a sitting 
position on own; moves things from one hand to her 
other hand; uses fingers to “rake” food; sits without 
support.
Here are the CDC milestones at 12 months:
Language/communication: Waves “bye-bye”; calls a parent 
“mama” or “dada” or another special name; understands 
“no” (pauses briefly or stops when you say it).
Cognitive: Puts something in a container like a block 
in a cup; looks for things you hide like a toy under a 
blanket.
Movement/physical development: Pulls up to stand; 
walks holding on to furniture; drinks from a cup 
without a lid as you hold it; picks things up between 
thumb and pointer finger like small bits of food.
Here are the CDC milestones at 15 months:
Language/communication: Tries to say one or two 
words besides “mama” or “dada” like “ba” for ball or 
“da” for dog.
Cognitive: Tries to use things the right way, like a 
phone, cup, or book; stacks at least two small objects, 
like blocks.
Movement/physical development: Takes a few steps 
on own; uses finger to feed self some food.
Here are the CDC milestones at 18 months:
Language/communication: Tries to say three or more 
words besides “mama” or “dada”; follows one-step 
directions without gestures, like when you say, “Give 
it to me.”
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

77
Cognitive: Copies you doing chores, like sweeping 
with a broom; plays with toys in a simple way like 
pushing a toy car.
Movement/physical development: Walks without 
holding on to anyone or anything; scribbles.
APA Sensorimotor Stage (Birth to 24 Months)
Here are the APA Developmental Factsheets cognitive (mental) skills from 0 
to 18 months:
Child can remember people and objects who are not 
present; imitate other people’s facial expressions, 
sounds, and actions; imitate what they see on TV, 
even if they don’t understand what they are doing; 
understand what they hear before they can speak; 
make noises to communicate with others and to show 
satisfaction or displeasure; recognize their own name; 
begin to explore the environment; touch and 
manipulate objects; learn by imitating and observing 
other people; show understanding of words for highly 
familiar phrases; begin to use “me,” “I,” and “you”; 
understand and can follow very simple instructions; 
have very short attention spans.
According to Piaget, all these activities would fall in the sensorimotor stage 
because they show imitation activities and the infants learn and show pleasure 
and dislike by way of pushing, sucking and pulling, and using the movements of 
tasting, smelling, and listening to sounds. The infant experiences by using 
motor activity without using symbols. These experiences are learned through 
trial and error. As the infant gets older, the movements become more flexible.
Medline Preoperational Stage (2–7 Years)
Medline states toddlers are between 1 and 3 years old, and preschoolers are 
between the ages of 3 to 6 years. The toddler is able to feed themselves 
neatly, with minimal spilling; able to run, pivot, and walk backwards; able to say 
first and last name; and uses more words and understands simple commands.
The preschooler is able to draw a circle and a square, skip, begin to recognize 
written words, hop on one foot and understand size and time concepts.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

78
CDC Preoperational Stage (2–7 Years)
Here are the CDC milestones at 2 years:
Language/communication: Points to things in a book 
when asked, like “Where is the bear?”; says at least 
two words together like “More milk”; points to at 
least two body parts you ask; uses more gestures than 
just waving and pointing, like blowing a kiss and 
nodding yes.
Cognitive: Holds something in one hand while using 
the other hand, for example, holding a container and 
taking the lid off; tries switches, knobs, or buttons on 
a toy; plays with more than one toy at the same time. 
Likes putting toy food on a toy plate.
Movement/physical development: Kicks a ball; runs.
Here are the CDC milestones at 30 months:
Language/communication: Says about 50 words; says 
two or more words together, with one action word, 
like “Doggie run”; names things in a book when you 
point and ask, “What is this?”; says words like “I,” 
“me,” or “we.”
Cognitive: Uses things to pretend, like feeding a block 
to a doll as if it were food; shows simple problems-
solving skills, like standing on a small stool to reach 
something; follows two-step instructions like “Put the 
toy down and close the door”; knows at least one 
color, like pointing to a red crayon when you ask, 
“Which one is red?”
Movement/physical development: Uses hands to twist 
things, like turning doorknobs or unscrewing lids.
Here are the CDC milestones at 3 years:
Language/communication: 
Talks 
with 
you 
in 
conversation using at least two back-and-forth 
exchanges; asks “who,” “what,” “where,” or “why” 
questions, like “Where is mommy/daddy?”; says what 
action is happening in a picture or book when asked, 
like “running,” “eating,” or “playing.”
Cognitive: Can draw a circle; avoids touching hot 
objects, like a stove, after a warning.
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

79
Movement/physical 
development: 
Strings 
item 
together, like large beads or macaroni; puts on some 
clothes by himself, loose pants or a jacket; uses a fork.
Here are the CDC milestones at 4 years:
Language/communication: Says sentences with four or 
more words; says some words from a song, story, or 
nursery rhyme; talks about at least one thing that 
happened during his day like “I played soccer”; answers 
simple questions like “What is a coat for?” or “What 
is a crayon for?”
Cognitive: Names a few colors of items; tells what 
comes next in a well-known story; draws a person 
with three or more body parts.
Movement/physical development: Catches a large ball 
most of the time; serves self food or pours water, 
with adult supervision; unbuttons some buttons; 
holds crayons or pencils between fingers and thumb.
Here are the CDC milestones at 5 years:
Language/communication: Tells a story heard or made 
up with other children; answers questions about a book 
or story after you read or tell it to him; keeps a 
conversation going with three back-and-forth exchanges; 
uses or recognizes simple rhymes (bat-cat, ball-tall).
Cognitive: Counts to 10; names some numbers 
between 1 and 5 when you point to them; uses words 
about time, like “yesterday,” “tomorrow,” “morning,” 
or “night”; names some letters when you point 
to them.
Movement/physical development: Buttons some 
buttons; hops on one foot.
APA Preoperational Stage (2–7 Years)
Here are the APA Developmental Factsheets cognitive (mental) skills for 18 
to 36 months:
Children have mental images of people and objects 
that are not present; use an object to represent a 
person, like a doll to represent a mother or a child; 
recount events of the day and imitate actions and 
events that occurred in the past; has a vocabulary of 
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

80
several hundred words; can use two- to three- word 
sentences; repeat words; listen to stories for a short 
period of time; understand that images and pictures 
represent real objects and people; have a vague notion 
of time; still confuse the meanings of “today,” 
“tomorrow,” and “yesterday”; generally have short 
attention spans and can be easily distracted; are just 
beginning to remember rules and don’t really 
understand right from wrong.
Here are the APA Developmental Factsheets cognitive (mental) skills from 3 
to 5 years:
Can think about objects, people, and events without 
seeing them; although less than before, still think they 
are the center of the world and have trouble seeing 
things from someone else’s perspective; more able to 
use words to express thoughts and feelings and to 
share experiences; talk to themselves out loud as a 
way to control their behaviors; can think of events in 
the past or those yet to happen; begin to think ahead 
and plan their actions; often can anticipate physical 
consequences of actions that are not too complicated; 
starting to see the difference between things they see 
and what they really are (stuffed dog in not a dog); 
starting to see the relationship of cause and effect (“If 
I do this, then that will happen”); ask a lot of why, 
how, when questions; learn by imitation, observation, 
and exploring, creating, and doing things; understand 
that breakfast is before lunch, lunch is before dinner, 
etc.; beginning to understand before/after, up/down, 
over/under; can’t play or do something for too long or 
become bored and tired unless there is adult guidance.
According to Piaget, all these skills and activities would fall in the preoperational 
stage because they involve pretend play, unsocialized play, and egocentric 
language where they talk to themselves even in groups. The children start to 
develop memory and imagination during this stage.
Medline Concrete Operational Stage (7–11 Years)
Medline states that school age is between the ages of 6 to 10 years and is 
when children begin gaining skills for team sports such as soccer, T-ball, or 
other team sports. Reading skills develop further, and the child is able to 
understand and follow several directions in a row.
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

81
CDC Concrete Operational Stage (7–11 Years)
N/A CDC
APA Concrete Operational Stage (7–11 Years)
Here are the APA Developmental Factsheet’s cognitive (mental) skills at 6 to 
12 years:
Children become able to understand the viewpoint of 
others; are aware that others can have different 
thoughts; can focus on several aspects of a problem at 
a time; can concentrate on what they do for longer 
periods of time; increased problem-solving ability, but 
not yet like an adult; can think of simple plans before 
acting. For example, when inviting friends over to play, 
children can plan in advance what games they will play; 
can begin to understand time and the days of the 
week; by age 10, children can place events in time 
sequence; improved short- and long-term memory; 
can speak and also write; by age 10, children have a 
vocabulary of 20,000 words and learn an average of 20 
new words a day; can also understand that a word 
may have different meanings; can communicate better 
and longer with others, express themselves, and 
understand things; can better understand and 
internalize moral rules of behavior (right/wrong; good/
bad; wonderful/terrible); begin to understand that 
what is fair is related to merit: who works harder 
deserves special treat; are better able to emphasize 
with other people and accept the idea of giving special 
consideration to those in greater need.
According to Piaget, all these skills and activities would fall in the concrete 
operational stage because school-age children are able to perform mental 
thought in their minds and by the end of this stage are able to do math 
problems. There is a spurt in vocabulary growth at this time as well. They also 
apply less focus on themselves and are more socialized and play games with 
their peers. Also, there is a sense of time, space, and quantity. Conservation, 
reversibility, seriation, and classification appear at this stage but are concrete 
in nature, as described in the characteristic section of Piaget’s research. As 
children play games and go to school, their vocabulary increases, they are 
more aware of their surroundings, and their concentration is better. Their 
thought process tends to be more flexible, and by then they can add, subtract, 
multiple and divide.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

82
Medline Formal Operational Stage (11 and Up)
Medline states adolescence is between the ages of 12 and 18, and they are 
able to understand abstract thinking. Peer acceptance/recognition is of vital 
importance.
CDC Formal Operational Stage (11 and Up)
N/A CDC
APA Formal Operational Stage (11 and Up)
N/A APA
According to Piaget, at this stage all these skills and activities fall under the 
formal operational stage because there is abstract and logical reasoning, 
strategy planning, and moral thinking. The individuals collaborate with each 
other in a meaningful manner and have conversations about topics. At this 
stage, during arguments, they respond to opposition and factual reason and 
provide explanations with proof of why they disagree in the way they do.
Erikson’s Stages Psychosocial of Development
Medline Stage 1: Trust vs. Mistrust (Birth 
to 18 Months)
Medline states this milestone of infancy as between birth and 1 year. Displays 
social smile; understands “no” and will stop activity in response.
CDC Stage 1: Trust vs. Mistrust (Birth 
to 18 months)
Here are the CDC milestones at 2 months:
Social/emotional: Calms does when soothed or picked 
up; looks at your face; seems happy to see you; smiles 
when you talk or smile.
Here are the CDC milestones at 4 months:
Social/emotional: Smiles on own to get your attention; 
chuckles (not yet when you try to make her laugh; 
looks at you, moves, or makes sounds to get or keep 
your attention.
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

83
Here are the CDC milestones at 6 months:
Social/emotional: Knows familiar people; likes to look 
in the mirror; laughs.
Here are the CDC milestones at 9 months:
Social/emotional: Is shy, clingy, or fearful around 
strangers; shows several facial expressions, like happy, 
sad, angry, and surprised; looks when you call name; 
reacts when you leave (looks, reaches for you, and 
cries); smiles or laughs when you play peek-a-boo.
Here are the CDC milestones at 12 months:
Social/emotional: Plays games with you, like pat-a-cake.
Here are the CDC milestones at 15 months:
Social/emotional: Copies other children while playing 
like taking toys out of a container when another child 
does; shows you an object she likes, claps when 
excited; hugs stuffed doll or other toy; shows you 
affection (hugs, cuddles, or kisses you).
APA Stage 1: Trust vs. Mistrust (Birth 
to 18 months)
Here are the APA Developmental Factsheet for social skills from 0 to 
18 months:
Cry and flail arms and legs when in pain, tired, hungry, 
cold, thirsty, wet, lonely or in a new situation and/or 
with new people; smile, babble, and coo to show 
pleasure, joy, and excitement; recognize the difference 
between familiar people and strangers; develop strong 
bonds with people regularly caring for them such as a 
parent or other adult and show anxiety when 
separated; are friendly to familiar people and afraid of 
strangers; recognize distress of others by showing 
distress and crying; enjoy audience and applause; can 
play alone for brief periods of time; become angry 
when frustrated; are afraid of strangers and are wary 
of unexpected situations.
According to Erikson, at this stage infants are totally dependent on the 
caregiver, and how the caregiver, usually the parent, interacts with the baby is 
of most importance for their social and emotional health. Since infants cannot 
use words to show how they feel, they do show the caretaker how they feel 
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

84
through crying, cooing, and body movements. Erikson thought that if an infant 
shows it feels safe and secure in this world, then they will successfully develop 
a sense of trust. It is important for the caretaker to show consistency. It is 
important for the caretaker to show affection when the baby cries, and it is 
important for the caregiver to try to determine which needs of the infant 
need to be met. When the parent holds the baby closely during feeding, 
bathing, and comforting, then babies will feel secure, and this helps the infant 
develop the virtue of hope. Also, when children are fully fed and feel nourished, 
they may begin to develop trust. When the child is not dealt with in a 
consistent, secure manner, they may develop insecurity and distrust of the 
world around them.
Medline Stage 2: Autonomy vs. Shame (18 Months 
to 3 Years)
Medline states this milestone of infancy as between the ages of 1 and 3 years. 
The child learns to share toys (without adult direction) and learns to take 
turns (if directed) while playing with other children.
CDC Stage 2: Autonomy vs. Shame (18 Months 
to 3 Years)
Here are the CDC milestones at 18 months:
Social/emotional: Moves away from you, but looks to 
make sure you are close by; points to show you 
something interesting; puts hands out for you to wash 
them; looks at a few pages in a book with your; helps 
you dress them by pushing arm through sleeve or 
lifting up foot.
Here are the CDC milestones at 2 years:
Social/emotional: Notices when others are hurt or 
upset, like pausing or looking sad when someone is 
crying; looks at your face to see how to react in a new 
situation.
Here are the CDC milestones at 30 months:
Social/emotional: Plays next to other children and 
sometimes plays with them; shows you what they can 
do by saying “Look at me!”; follows simple routines 
when told like helping to pick up toys when you say, 
“It’s cleanup time.”
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

85
Here are the CDC milestones at 3 years:
Social/emotional: Calms down within 10 minutes after 
you leave her, like at a childcare drop-off; notices 
other children and joins them to play.
APA Stage 2: Autonomy vs. Shame (18 Months 
to 3 Years)
Here are the APA Developmental Factsheet’s social skills from 18 to 
36 months:
Children are developing a strong sense of themselves 
as separate individuals; think they are the center of 
the world; beginning to show signs of independence; 
can be stubborn and contrary and say “no” to adults; 
are possessive, with strong notions of territory: “This 
is mine!” Have difficulty sharing; may be having trouble 
waiting and want things right now; have trouble 
expressing emotions with words; when frustrated or 
angry can have tantrums or hit and kick to get what 
they want; play side by side with others more than 
cooperatively with them; begin to understand that 
other people have expectations of them; are more 
aware of feeling of others; enjoy adult attention; 
express their feelings through pretend play/make-
believe play.
According to Erikson, at this stage toddlers become more mobile and begin 
to assert their independence. At this time, the toddler has a need to show 
more control and independence over themselves as they explore their 
caretaker and the world around them. There are some tasks that are important 
during this stage that will help the toddler. Toilet training is of utmost 
importance because the toddler learns how to control their body functions 
and will develop the virtue of will. Toddlers like to pick out the clothes they 
wear at this stage and want more control over what they eat and what toys 
they play with. When the child develops successfully socially and emotionally, 
they feel more confident and secure in their abilities of self-control; if they fail, 
they develop self-doubt and possible inadequacy, are overdependent, will feel 
shame, and have a lack of self-esteem.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

86
Medline Stage 3: Initiative vs. Guilt 
(4 to 5 Years)
Medline states this milestone is between 3 to 6 years old. The child starts 
school, rides a tricycle well, and enjoys doing most things independently, 
without help.
CDC Stage 3: Initiative vs. Guilt 
(4 to 5 Years)
Here are the CDC milestones at 4 years:
Social/emotional: Pretends to be something else 
during play (teacher, superhero, dog); asks to go play 
with children if none are around, like “can I play with 
Alex?”; comforts others who are hurt or sad, like 
hugging a crying friend; avoids danger, like not jumping 
from tall heights at the playground; likes to be a 
“helper”; changes behavior based on location (places 
of worship, library, playground).
Here are the CDC milestones at 5 years:
Social/emotional: Follows rules or takes turns when 
playing games with other children; does simple chores 
at home, like matching socks or clearing the table 
after eating.
APA Stage 3: Initiative vs. Guilt (4 to 5 Years)
Here are the APA Developmental Factsheet’s social skills from 3 to 5 years old:
Can read and interpret emotions of others; can tell 
when someone is angry or upset; can’t understand 
abstract emotions like pity, greed, gratitude; uses 
different ways to control their own emotions such as 
closes their eyes and ears or removes themselves 
from the situation; sometimes can resist temptation 
to respond to whatever is disturbing them; may 
develop first relationship because friends become 
very important. At age 3, they typically play near a 
friend, but find it difficult to take turns and to share 
things. At age 4, they may begin cooperating play; it is 
still difficult to share but they begin to understand 
turn-taking and begin to offer things to others. At age 
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

87
5, they enjoy playing with other children, often 
cooperate well, and have special friends; use less 
physical aggression than when younger; use more 
frequent verbal aggression like insults, threats, teasing 
to hurt other children; bullying appears; they 
understand the power of rejection; understand social 
rules and can act in accordance to them; are eager to 
carry out some responsibilities; offer to help; 
understand that praise or blame happens because of 
what they do; begin to understand the difference of 
doing things “on purpose” and “by accident”; focus 
more on the damage than on the intentions of the 
perpetrator. By age 4, they begin to have a sense of 
their ethnic identity and of the ways their social group 
is perceived in the society. Also, there is an increased 
capacity to use imagination; can imagine terrible things 
can happen to them and can lead to fear; nightmares 
can happen.
According to Erikson, at this stage, preschoolers begin to assert themselves 
more and are more active mostly by playing and interacting with others. At 
this time, the child begins to interact more with other children, and their 
playtime will give children the time to explore their social skills. The caregivers 
should encourage initiative by allowing the child to explore their world by 
undertaking and finishing tasks, facing challenging scenarios, and planning their 
own activities. These activities allow the preschooler to start to develop the 
virtue of purpose. The preschooler should be taught persistence and initiative 
during this time in order to have success. Encourage children to make safe 
choices within a secure and safe boundary, and they will develop a sense of 
purpose in this world.
It is imperative that the guardian is not too restrictive and demanding with 
criticisms and ridicule during this time or else the preschooler may develop guilt.
Medline Stage 4: Industry vs. Inferiority 
(6 to 12 Years)
Medline states this milestone of infancy is between the ages of 6 and 12 years. 
Children begin gaining skills for team sports such as soccer, T-ball, or others.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

88
CDC Stage 4: Industry vs. Inferiority 
(6 to 12 Years)
CDC N/A
APA Stage 4: Industry vs. Inferiority 
(6 to 12 Years)
Here are the APA Developmental factsheet social skills from 6 to 10 years old:
Children are able to view themselves based on how 
they perform in school, capacity to make friends, and 
their physical appearance; understand they can feel 
two emotions at the same time (“I like Jenny, but I 
hate how she talks to me”); are intensely interested in 
peers, prefer same-sex friends; develop friendships 
marked by give and take, mutual trust, and shared 
experiences; feel that belonging and acceptance by 
peers is very important (children may look more for 
peers than to adults for gratification); play is no longer 
just fantasy play where imagination is the key element; 
more often children choose rules-based games where 
the rules are the key element and winning the game is 
more frequently the objective; have great concern 
with justice and fairness; what is fair or equal is 
important, and some children may try to get even and 
become verbally or physical aggressive; continue to 
develop social skills like empathy and compassion; 
become more able to do things by themselves, and as 
a result, their relationship with parents changes.
According to Erikson, at this stage children are more affected by their peers 
at school and during social activities. During this time, children receive tasks, 
such as reading, writing, arithmetic, and problem solving. The virtue of 
confidence develops at this stage. Success occurs when they have a sense of 
confidence in what they accomplish and feel competent in what they value 
when they are given praise for what they are doing. Failure occurs when the 
parent over-praises their children and children learn unrealistic abilities. The 
parents should encourage children in areas where they may excel so that they 
feel confident in their abilities.
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

89
Medline Stage 5: Identity vs. Role Confusion (12 
to 18 Years)
Medline states this milestone of infancy is between the ages of 12 to 18. Peer 
acceptance/recognition is of vital importance.
CDC Stage 5: Identity vs. Role Confusion (12 
to 18 Years)
CDC N/A
APA Stage 5: Identity vs. Role Confusion (12 
to 18 Years)
APA N/A
According to Erikson, at this stage, adolescents develop a sense of self by 
exploring their independence. Adolescents interact with friends, family, social 
groups, and societal trends, and they develop relationships that will characterize 
their growth. They will experiment with a variety of roles and behaviors and 
play in different activities. The adolescent will develop a sense of uniqueness, 
and this is how they can be differentiated from others. They have a sense of 
sameness about how they fit in the community with themselves and in 
interactions with others. They need mental and physical health as well. Success 
is that they develop a sense of fidelity with the ability to relate to others in 
making genuine relationships. The adolescent needs to feel independent by 
being encouraged to explore and then will feel more in control. Otherwise, 
they will fail and may become insecure and confused of their roles in the 
world. They need to feel more self-confident and have a sense of trust in their 
abilities, judgments, and thoughts. At this time, they will develop committed 
relationships, and they will explore career paths, social groups, and personal 
style. With failure the adolescent will have difficulty with commitment, 
develop a weak sense of self, and be emotionally and psychologically frail. 
With success, adolescence will develop a solid commitment, develop a strong 
sense of self, and be emotionally and psychologically fit. With success, the 
virtue of fidelity develops. Here, children accept and commit to others with 
similar and different ideologies. Otherwise, they could become rebellious and 
have difficulty with where they fit in society.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

90
Medline Stage 6: Intimacy vs. Isolation (18 Years 
to 40 Years)
Medline N/A
CDC Stage 6: Intimacy vs. Isolation (18 Years 
to 40 Years)
CDC N/A
APA Stage 6: Intimacy vs. Isolation (18 Years 
to 40 Years)
APA N/A
According to Erikson, at this stage adults explore long-term relationships 
with others outside the family and form intimate relationships, in particular 
romantic and friendship relationships. These relationships with others are 
described as close, loving, and honest. Success at this stage leads to strong, 
fulfilling, deep, and meaningful relationships that are enduring. Supportive 
networks that are emotionally and mentally strong with a virtue of love are 
the key. Otherwise, failure at this stage, which is when there may be disruption 
in relationships, may lead to adults feeling isolated, depressed, and alone.
Medline Stage 7: Generativity vs. Stagnation 
(40–65 Years)
Medline N/A
CDC Stage 7: Generativity vs. Stagnation 
(40–65 Years)
CDC N/A
APA Stage 7: Generativity vs. Stagnation 
(40–65 Years)
APA N/A
According to Erikson, at this stage, adults during this time are getting married, 
raising families and parenting, working on their career path, and developing 
communities. The adult is part of a community. The events are less specific at 
Chapter 8 | CDC and Medline Milestones and APA Factsheets Guidelines 

91
this time. The way to enhance generativity is through commitments with 
others, developing relationships with family and friends, mentoring, and giving 
to the next generation. Success is when you are able to give to others and the 
world, and failure is when you feel disconnected and not involved with your 
community and unproductive with no sense of how to give back to society.
Medline Stage 8: Ego Integrity vs. Despair 
(65–Death)
Medline N/A
CDC Stage 8: Ego Integrity vs. Despair 
(65–Death)
CDC N/A
APA Stage 8: Ego Integrity vs. Despair (65–Death)
APA N/A
According to Erikson, at this stage older adults become less active and 
productive in society, and they will look back at their lives and assess if it was 
meaningful. The senior adults will feel successful if they have succeeded by 
way of feeling accomplished and fulfilled. Success will be if they have less lack 
of regret and more feelings of peace and a sense of wholeness and worthiness. 
They will have a virtue of wisdom. Otherwise, they will be disappointed or 
have regret and shame of being unproductive during their life. Disruption 
during this stage of death of loved ones, retirement, and terminal illnesses 
may happen.
Summary
This chapter reviewed the behaviors that are associated with normal 
development at each stage outlined by the CDC, Medline, and APA. These 
organizations give details on cognitive, social, behavioral, and biological 
growth, while Piaget’s and Erickson’s research provides the theories on why 
these stages happen with details. The APA adds tips to help the parent get 
through difficult situations that children may encounter in their development.
It is now time to continue on the journey to understand how the stages are 
relevant and how children interact with modern-day smart and advanced 
technologies, which will be introduced in Part IV.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

P A R T
IV
Developing a 
Framework for 
Using 
Technology in 
Today’s World
Part IV reviews how to understand your family values and talk to children 
about them so that they know them and share in their making. The Harvard 
School of Education states that when young children start using smart devices, 
it is imperative to keep the conversation going so that children can compre­
hend the significance and drawbacks of these technologies. Using what we 
now know from the developmental psychologists covered earlier, this part 
will use Tom’s Hardware’s advice on age-specific technologies for children, 
along with Piaget’s and Erikson’s developmental stage criteria. Chapter 10 will 
cover symptoms that are prevalent in our society now, some of which are 

Part IV | Developing a Framework for Using Technology in Today’s World
94
thought to be related to screen time, according to the Mayo Clinic. However, 
there is no way to stop these artificial intelligence disruptions. In fact, more 
advanced technologies are being created every day that are even more disrup­
tive. This book is a framework for how families, friends, teachers, and men­
tors can take some initiative to ready their children for the future in a 
nurturing, able, and competent manner. They need to keep in mind virtues 
and understand the values of technology while keeping a constructive ongoing 
conversation about it.

C H A P T E R 
9
Guidelines 
for Giving Your 
Children 
Technology
Thus far, this book has reviewed the history of technological advances, given 
a synopsis of Piaget’s and Erickson’s developmental theories, and presented 
the Medline, CDC, and APA cognitive and social milestones and factsheets 
highlighting the most common movements children acquire at different stages. 
Now, it is now time to assess, in a general way, how and when to introduce 
infants, children, adolescents, and adults to texting, streaming, social media, 
and videos, in an age-appropriate manner, on computers and smart devices.
An article by the Harvard Graduate School of Education titled “When to Give 
Your Child a Smartphone” states, “Deciding when to get your child a 
smartphone has less to do with age and more to do with action on both the 
parent and child’s part, according to experts.”
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9_9

96
The article continues saying, “Psychologist Catherine Steiner-Adair, author of 
The Big Disconnect, says the real question is not about the ‘right’ age or about 
the phone itself but about whether your child is developmentally ready to 
have ‘full access to the adult world’ and whether you’ve laid the groundwork 
to prepare them for healthy and responsible device use.”
The article continues: “You know your child is ready for a device when you’ve 
talked about responsible use and modeled the behavior on your own device,” 
says Kerry Gallagher, a digital learning specialist at St. John’s Prep in Danvers, 
Massachusetts, and director of K-12 education at ConnectSafely.org. “If you 
haven’t done any of this work, then it might make sense to wait another year.” 
These are important statements that should be addressed.
This chapter will cover what age-appropriate time is ideal to introduce your 
children to technology. For the most part, we will give an overview of the 
situation. Children need to be ready to use the devices you give them. This 
book does not cover each technology individually or when to give children 
each gadget or media because for the most part it is thought that this is up to 
the parent, the child or the young adult, and the family unit to decide. Also, 
all technologies are constantly changing, and new inventions are coming onto 
the market every day. The parent or guardian should work with their children 
and young adults to develop age-appropriate moral guidelines and virtues that 
are understandable and within reasonable limits. As Kerry Gallagher states, 
the foundation needs to be established before introducing the technology.
Recognize and Identify Your 
Circle of Unity Values
Understand what your family values are and keep talking to your children 
about those values and virtues. Erik Erickson gives essential virtues that can 
be addressed at every stage of development.
First, it is essential to understand, talk about, and embrace your family values. 
Set aside some time to think about them by yourself and with your family so 
that the entire family can more or less define what they are and be active 
participants in creating them. Of course, as time goes by, values change, and 
people get older, so they should be assessed every now and again and adapted 
to age-appropriate ones. Erikson gives a good starting point for how to review 
these virtues at each stage. It is important to allot time and energy to 
understand what your families goals are and how they will add value to 
advance, at each stage of your children’s development, their cognition and 
psychosocial development. Do not worry if there are differences in your 
family goals and opinions. Use this time as an exercise to understand what 
others are thinking and feeling and why they are thinking and feeling a certain 
way. This is one aspect of what Piaget called abstract thinking. At young ages, 
Chapter 9 | Guidelines for Giving Your Children Technology

97
it may be even more important to help your children to learn how to 
communicate using different modes so that they can express their feelings and 
competences at various stages as they develop.
Here are some ways to start thinking about your values help children to 
understand those values:
• 
Think of important values and virtues to you and 
your family.
• 
Think about advancing creativity in the family.
• 
Think about encouraging and showing sympathy, kindness, 
empathy, and responsibility in your household.
• 
Think about creating innovative ideas together and 
encouraging your children to develop ideas independently.
• 
Think about activities the family can do together and play 
together.
• 
Think about the quality of the media children are exposed 
to and the time spent on these technologies.
Decide which technologies will advance goals you have and how and why 
these technologies may do that.
Introducing smart device practices is the parents’ and guardians’ responsibility 
at first and can be treated as an opportunity to educate children’s moral 
development. As the American Psychological Association (APA) says, children 
do not grow in a one-size-fits-all approach. Every family is unique and needs 
to allow themselves space and time to decide which technology to let their 
children use, and when to use and how often the device should be used in an 
appropriate and high-quality manner.
There is no magical age when children are suddenly able to watch streaming 
videos, talk with their friends on Zoom, or use a computer; this will be 
dictated by their parents, teachers, and friends. Setting up the values at each 
stage will be a continuous activity the whole family can participate in. There 
may be struggles with family members along the way, but that is a learning 
experience as well and can be handled with care, consistency and empathy. 
Parents can learn from the children what the new technologies are and what 
they do and how the children’s friends use them. Then, if possible, they should 
check them out for their children. Give the children freedom to talk about 
what is going on in their world, and, in response, the children may freely talk 
about their technology activities. Always be mindful that your children need 
to keep up with learning such as reading, writing, and arithmetic and not just 
playing games on the computer. In other words, their cognition and real-life 
play need time to develop for healthy growth, as discussed by Piaget. The 
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

98
cognitive and psychosocial skills of children can be fostered by age-specific 
technologies by the parents and later in life by the children’s friends and 
teachers who may have input to introduce certain age-specific technologies.
Children can use a computer at a young age because it may give them time to 
learn and grow with the technology and ask questions with their parents by 
their side who can encourage them to think positively and with confidence. 
This includes letting your infants or children who are young learn through 
pushing and pulling, sucking, trial and error, or egocentric behaviors to play 
with your phones. Keep your smartphones clean because children do put 
them in their mouths. As these actions are happening, it is an ideal time to 
talk with your children about the phone and its uses as they play with it. As 
children grow up, it is important to answer questions in a positive, honest, 
and clear manner. They will want to know what is this thing, why is it important, 
and how is it used.
Keep the Conversation Going 
with Your Children
Tom’s Hardware was founded in 1996 by Tomas Pabst and is now owned by 
Future Plc. Future is listed on the London Stock Exchange and was founded in 
1985 as a British media company. Tom’s Hardware is an online high-technology 
and computer hardware publication. The website has reviews, news, and 
videos. Discussed here are its breakdown of age groups and relevant 
technological skills children can acquire at the various stages. We go into 
when and how to introduce the computer and other technological advances 
and review at each stage how to add new technologies relevant to your 
children. The following sections will review Tom’s Hardware’s stages for 
introducing children to technologies along with Piaget’s cognitive stages and 
Erikson’s psychosocial stage and the virtues associated with each stage.
Infants: Ages 0–2
At this stage infants do not have the physical or cognitive ability to understand 
computers. Infants do seem to look at videos of familiar faces chatting. As 
infants get a bit older, they may also start to press keys and mimic what they 
see parents and siblings doing.
The Mayo Clinic encourages during this time unstructured playtime instead of 
electronic media, which they believe is valuable for young children’s developing 
brains. This is because children aged 2 and younger are learning when they 
interact and play with parents, siblings, and other children and adults.
Chapter 9 | Guidelines for Giving Your Children Technology

99
The APA reiterates the American Academy of Pediatrics’ digital guidelines for 
promoting technology use for children. These are some of their suggestions:
• 
For children under 18 months, avoid screen-based media 
except video chatting.
• 
For children 18 months to 24 months, parents should 
choose high-quality programming and watch with their 
children.
Perhaps this is because with video chatting children can see and learn from 
the responses of the person they are talking to. Shows that are programmed 
do not display responses or interact with the child, and this could lead to a 
distorted understanding of situations. According to Piaget, at the sensorimotor 
developmental stage, infants are figuring out object permanence and who is 
who depending on where they are located. It is important to work with the 
infant to let them know who is in the video and when they see the person in 
real life to know that it is the same person. The infant at this time is curious 
about the world and uses their motor skills of pushing and pulling and puts 
objects in their mouth to learn. At this stage, children imitate what parents 
are doing and learn this way as well.
In addition, in line with Erickson’s developmental theory, infants need to 
understand that what they are touching is fine and that they should not be 
afraid of that hardware. The virtue that should be remembered is how to give 
hope to the infant so that it will lead children to have trust in themselves and 
their parents.
Toddlers: Ages 2–3
At this stage toddlers begin to show curiosity. The toddler will start “button 
pushing” on the computer and smartphone they move into this stage.
Tom’s Hardware suggests at this age toddlers should co-use technology with 
adults. This means that adults need to help and guide the toddlers by navigating 
their hands to the right places on the keyboard and/or mouse.
Toddlers should be given minimal computer time, and this time should be 
limited to minutes each day. Toddlers at this age may be able to start 
recognizing letters and numbers on a keyboard, and each letter and number 
should be pointed out to toddlers as they look at the keyboard. As the toddler 
moves from preschool to elementary, they can start to use the mouse; it is 
important to use imitation so that the toddler learns the proper way to use it.
Tom’s Hardware suggests that games for toddlers can be simple and cause-
and-effect games like pressing a button, which causes another event to occur. 
The parent needs to show the toddler how to be gentle so that they do not 
bang, hit, drop, or throw the keyboard, mouse, or monitor around or at 
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

100
anyone. The toddler at this age does not necessarily need their own computer. 
Show the child how to share on your PC.
Even the Mayo Clinic encourages by age 2 that children may benefit from 
some types of screen time, such as programming with music, movement, and 
stories. By the toddler watching the media with you, you have an opportunity 
to explain and talk with children so that they see quality screen time and how 
to use these skills they learn in real-life experiences. Passive screen time 
where the parent leaves children to watch the video should be replaced with 
letting children have downtime and allowing them to read a book, play with 
friends or by themselves, or problem-solve with toys.
The APA reiterates the American Academy of Pediatrics’ digital guidelines 
technology use for children 2 to 5: limit their screen time to 1 hour per day 
with high-quality programming.
Erikson stated that the virtue at this stage is will, and allowing it to develop in 
toddlers will give them a sense of control—control over touching and 
physically controlling these devices and their environment—that will be a 
success for these children.
Preschool: Ages 3–4
At this time, according to Tom’s Hardware, preschoolers start to play with 
software and often show a willingness to play games and other creative and 
more complex activities such as puzzles, drawing, and matching.
The preschoolers may still co-use the computer, mouse, and keyboard with 
an adult and even take control of these devices. Preschool children need time 
to play a few games or activities a day. At this age children may look for 
certain keys and are capable of moving a basic mouse. During this age children 
can use a word processor for learning letters and spelling names, and they 
may use computers even in school for a few tasks. Continue to reinforce that 
children use clean hands and gently push on buttons.
Good hygiene needs to be taught to children as well. Teach them not to eat 
by the computer and to wash their hands before they use it.
Erikson used the virtue of purpose during this time because the preschooler 
is exploring and trying to control the environment. At this stage, the parent 
needs to balance when and how the preschooler touches the devices. The 
parent needs to let children know through firm and gentle physical movements 
when the device is to be used or not to be used. Try to be as consistent with 
your instruction as much as possible.
Chapter 9 | Guidelines for Giving Your Children Technology

101
Elementary: Ages 5–7
At this stage, elementary children can use computers independently and can 
play even more complex and time-based games and activities independently 
and with friends. Elementary children are even able to start coding with 
simple tools. Parents or teachers should be present, and they need to retain 
control of the mouse and keyboard. Children at this age can be by the 
computer for longer in order to work on their schoolwork and age-appropriate 
activities. Children at this age learn how to use a mouse with basic comfort 
and are likely to be using a computer regularly in school as part of their 
learning process. Encourage children to learn how to type. Start to talk with 
your children about Internet safety and family technology rules. Help your 
child build confidence. Help children to find games and activities that they find 
fun and that are developmentally appropriate for them for their own skill 
level. Otherwise, it may become frustrating for children. The APA reiterates 
the American Academy of Pediatrics’ digital guidelines for promoting 
technology use for children 6 and up, which is to establish consistent limits on 
the time spent using media and the types of media.
The virtue that Erikson’s theory talked about for elementary and tweens is 
competence. This is when the children interact more with school and friends. 
Be cognizant about this and encourage this behavior. Give your children time 
to interact with their peers and possibly play with the technology with them 
and explain to them what it is used for and how it should be used both with 
and without their friends around. Do this so that you get a feeling for what 
the community around you feels about the devices and how your child feels 
about the devices.
Tweens: Ages 8–12
Tweens at this age start to want more independence and privacy and may be 
rebellious, but they need guidance to help them understand what is the best 
course of action, particularly with online activity and social interactions. As 
parents start to buy their children personal devices, it is even more important 
to encourage clear and understandable rules and expectations of why those 
rules are needed. The parent should be able to open communication with the 
tween about family Internet safety expectations. The parent can filter or use 
some Internet management software as children start to explore the Internet.
At this point, tweens can work independently, but an adult should not be far 
away so that when children have a question, they can ask. If your children did 
not learn how to type at school, teach them to type properly. Also show them 
how to open, save, and print files. By this age children will use the computer 
in many different ways, including for standardized testing and everyday school 
activities. They may play games on the computer that involve skill.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

102
When buying a computer, make sure it is durable, that children are able to 
travel with it, that the computer can handle their daily needs, and that children 
can play games and edit videos for their enjoyment.
Piaget’s developmental theory of concrete operational thoughts, which is 
between the ages of 7 to 11, describes when a tween starts to think concretely 
or they start to use logical operations in their reasoning. It is a prime time to 
discuss with your child what is proper behavior as they start to work 
independently. Be patient and consistent when creating and establishing the 
rules. You could establish the rules with and without them at this point, but 
it is good to include them in the conversation so that they understand what 
and why you are establishing those rules.
Teens: Ages 13–18
At this stage, teens are able at this age to create artwork or use the computer 
to do assignments. Parental support can help encourage teens to be competent 
in these areas. Parents still need to make sure teens do not run into risky 
situations on the Internet.
Teach children to use the computer for high-quality searches, communication, 
and use. Continue to communicate with your children about their activities, 
and make sure that their computer can do the type of work and challenges 
that the teen has an interest in doing and includes the essentials they need to 
use at school.
At this developmental age, according to Piaget, teens and older individuals are 
developing abstract thinking. They are developing a moral compass and a 
strategy to deal with life. Encourage and talk with your children to learn in a 
meaningful way with others in their age group and older.
Erikson’s developmental stage virtue for the ages 12 to 18 is fidelity. It is an 
important time for your children to realize that personal relationships matter 
and that they may talk with others in a meaningful and impactful way. Spend 
the time and effort to discuss with your children what they think they want 
to do in life and what they enjoy doing while encouraging them the importance 
of having friends and friendship values in which they could grow into.
Although age-appropriate expected skills go up to age 18 for some of the 
milestone’s developmental stages, adults, the role models, also need some 
guidance. The APA gives guidance for how adults should deal with some 
potentially stressful situations with children.
This section talked about what values and virtues parents and caregivers can 
instill in their children to use technology in a useful, productive, and positive 
manner and at what ages different virtues and ethics should be discussed, 
from infant to young adult, so that they can understand them at the 
appropriate age.
Chapter 9 | Guidelines for Giving Your Children Technology

103
Summary
Even for the very young who cannot even hold on a conversation it is 
important to explain in simple movements and words the various technologies. 
Use age-appropriate terms and basic concepts about the computer and 
devices as they develop. Begin an ongoing conversation about how teachers 
use technology, how friends use it at school, and even how you use it. Ask 
questions about what your child enjoys about technology. If there is a game 
or video that your children like, ask them to explain why they like it. In some 
cases, it might be a signal that your child is interested in actually doing a similar 
activity or even something more creative. Also think and talk with your 
children about the effects technology has on us. All this will not only help you 
understand what your children like to do but also make you more aware of 
the benefits and risks of the media children are using.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

C H A P T E R 
10
Common 
Problems 
in Today’s 
Society
Too much screen time and regular exposure to poor-quality programming 
may be linked to biological problems, physical difficulties, and behavior issues, 
according to the Mayo Clinic. These issues may also result from too much 
texting and social media use. Some types of challenges are obesity, depression, 
violence, anxiety disorder, attention problems, and less time learning. If you 
see your children with any of these problems, you may want to consult a 
specialist, such as a family practitioner, psychiatrist, psychologist, or nutritionist. 
This chapter will review these issues.
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9_10

106
Obesity
Obesity is a disorder that involves having excessive body fat, which may 
increase the risk of developing other health problems. Obesity often results 
from taking in more calories than are burned by exercise and normal daily 
activities. The treatment for obesity is usually exercise and eating the right 
foods in moderation. Dr. Thomas Robinson of Stanford University states that 
“Obesity is one of the most obvious adverse conditions of screen time.” 
When children are in front of a screen, they often reach for high-caloric, low-
nutrient food, and artificial beverages. Some ads influence children’s and 
adolescent’s preferences, purchase requests, consumption habits, and sleep 
duration.
Inadequate sleep schedules and insufficient sleep deprivation can cause 
“changes in the appetite-regulating hormones ghrelin and leptin to increase 
hunger and decrease satiety,” according to Thomas Robinson, a pediatrics 
physician. “Short sleep duration can affect children’s choices to consume 
more calories and fewer nutritionally-dense foods, and shorter sleep duration 
may lead to increased snacking and eating outside of normal mealtimes, 
including during the night.”
Depression
Depression, according to the American Psychiatry Association (APA), is a 
common mental disorder and can affect anyone. Those with depression may 
experience some of these symptoms: lack of interest or pleasure in daily 
activities, lack of energy, inability to concentrate, significant weight gain or 
loss, and excessive sleeping or insomnia. Those with clinical depression may 
even feel suicidal.
The APA states that clinical depression is different from periods of sadness or 
bereavement. Clinical depression may be caused by various situations such as 
a death of a loved one, loss of a job, or the ending of a relationship (although 
in these situations it is normal to feel some sort of sadness or grief). Both 
grief and depression may involve sadness and withdrawal from typical activities.
In grief, painful feelings are often interspersed with positive memories of the 
deceased. In clinical depression, mood and loss of interest occur for at least 
two weeks. While experiencing depression, feelings of worthlessness are 
common, and these feelings are not apparent in grieving situations.
The ability to differentiate between grief and depression is imperative because 
it can help individuals get the right help and support and the proper treatment.
Depression can be manifested biologically, genetically, and environmentally. 
The biochemistry component is that certain biochemicals in the brain may 
provide symptoms of depression. The genetic component of depression may 
Chapter 10 | Common Problems in Today’s Society

107
occur in familial genes. The personality component is that those who have 
low self-esteem or are easily overwhelmed by stress may be more likely to 
experience depression. There are also environmental factors that contribute 
to depression, and those components may be continuous exposure to 
violence, neglect, abuse, or poverty. Fortunately, depression is for the most 
part treatable. A combination of therapy and antidepressant medication can 
help, for the most part, to ensure recovery.
Violence
The American Academy of Children and Adolescent Psychiatry states that 
watching and listening to too much violence may lead individuals to imitate 
that behavior in their own lives. Even toddlers and children who imitate 
behaviors around them can see as commonplace the violence on TV, movies, 
videos, and music and may imitate those violent movements of fighting, 
victimization, and bullying if they become desensitized by the violence.
Anxiety Disorder
Anxiety is described by feelings of tension, worried thoughts, and physiological 
changes such as a racing heartbeat and sweating. Anxiety disorders symptoms 
are recurring and intrusive thoughts.
Anxiety in normal situations is a reaction to stress and danger and can be 
beneficial in helping to prepare for an unwelcome or uncomfortable situation.
Anxiety disorder differs in that it involves excessive fear or anxiety to certain 
scenarios. Anxiety disorder is for the most part treatable, and treatment 
helps many continue with normal lives.
Attention Problems
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common 
mental disorders affecting children. ADHD is a behavioral syndrome that is 
characterized by the persistent symptoms involving inattention and 
hyperactivity. Those with this disorder may have difficulty in completing tasks 
or paying attention, lack of concentration, and distractibility. Children may be 
impatient, restless, and have trouble organizing work or taking turns. In 
addition, they may need to talk excessively, run around, and fidget. These 
symptoms could occur before the age of 7 in different situations and impair 
social, academic, or occupational functioning.
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

108
Less Time Learning
With all these gadgets, the smartphone and computer games, kids are 
preoccupied and are spending less time learning. Even in the classroom and 
during playtime with their peers kids are turning to their devices. Encourage 
unstructured playtime with no devices and discourage use of extra technology 
during homework. Encourage real-life friendships. Some kids may find 
connecting with peers difficult and may spend more time online than playing 
with real-life friends. Digital friendships are not a substitute or replacement 
for real-life interactions. Talk and enable good communication with children 
so that they develop strong social skills so that they feel confident to have 
real-life relationships.
You may want or need to set daily or weekly screen time limits on devices. 
When you allow your children to watch smart TV or any of their smart 
electronic applications, the quality of the screen time matters. Preview 
programs, games, and apps before allowing children to view or play with them. 
Seek out interactive and educational games and apps that engage your child, 
rather than just require the child to push and swipe. It is helpful if parents or 
guardians are close by during screen time so that they can supervise their 
activities. Ask and talk with your child on a regular basis about the programs, 
games, and apps they use. Encourage frequent breaks to stretch, get physical 
activity, and avoid eyestrain. Do not bang on, drop, hit the computer, keyboard, 
or monitor. Show kids proper etiquette to use and keep the hardware clean.
Set up computers in a way that is ergonomically friendly for the age/size of 
your kids. They may need a booster seat to use a mouse, monitor, etc., at 
appropriate angles. Enable Internet filters that allow you to block/manage 
your kids’ access to online content. Young kids may only need access to a few 
games and favorite websites, while older kids may need broader access for 
school projects and creative activities.
Use the time when watching programming with your child to discuss what 
you are watching and to educate your children about what they are seeing. 
Encourage digital literacy. When children are exposed to “bad” content on 
devices without Internet filters, talk to your child about the situations and 
how you expect them to behave.
When children are young, try to avoid fast-paced programming so that 
children can understand what they are watching. Also, try to avoid violent 
content and apps with a lot of distracting content. Teach your children what 
is factual content and what is not. Establish clear values and virtues to explain 
rules and set reasonable limits for your child’s use of digital media.
Encourage your child to think critically about what they see on their screens 
and teach appropriate and ethical behaviors. Enable children to understand 
that all media consist of points of view. Explain that many types of technology 
Chapter 10 | Common Problems in Today’s Society

109
collect data to send users ads or to make money and how and why to avoid 
and ignore them.
Online relationships and social media have become a major part of adolescent 
and adult life in general. Explain when needed what sexting, cyberbullying, and 
sharing personal information online is, explain that they are not acceptable 
behavior, and explain how they should be avoided and not tolerated. Let your 
children know that they can talk to you about situations that make them feel 
uncomfortable. Let children know not to send or share anything online that 
they would not want the entire world to see and remember forever. That 
includes personal information such as name, address, and other identifying 
information.
Important Tips and Suggestions
No matter what age your kids are, you need to keep your circle of unity safe 
and sound. The following are suggestions to keep in mind. Some of these are 
tips from Tom Harding as described in the previous chapter that are elabo­
rated upon.
Don’t overreact if you see your child playing around with technology. It is an 
important part of our modern world. It will not help your child to grow and 
develop securely if you set overly restrictive limits or send the message that 
technology is something to fear even if you, as an adult, do not understand the 
technology. If you do not understand the technology, focus on teaching healthy 
habits that will stay with your child for a lifetime.
Consider the context when establishing your family’s rules for technology use 
and know why you are setting these rules up. For instance, using Zoom or 
FaceTime to talk with grandparents is different from playing a video game, 
especially a violent video game. Children should respect the former and 
understand the warning and consequences of the latter. If needed at times, 
allow your child to be entertained with a little extra screen time that day, but 
just do this once in a while.
At bedtime it may be necessary to restrict digital use because it may interfere 
with your children’s quality of sleep.
Look and quietly observe what children are doing online and make sure it is 
honest and in good practice. When they are young adults, it is not easy 
knowing what they are doing. At that point it is important to have open and 
honest discussions about what sites and types of content are off-limits. Before 
you talk with them, do some research to understand the social media and 
technology your children know. If it is possible, look at their history browser.
Teach good online behavior and talk with children about respect and courtesy 
online and during in-person interactions. It is more commonplace these days 
The Psychology of Evolving Technology

110
to say things online that never would be said if the person was in front of you. 
Encourage children to go to the parent or caretaker if they witness 
cyberbullying or troubling online activity. Talk to your children about what is 
bothering them.
Discuss decision-making and talk with children about how to evaluate digital 
authenticity and accuracy online. Explain to them not to download unfamiliar 
programs, click suspicious links, or share personal information on unknown 
apps or websites because it may be hazardous to them and the family at large. 
Also teach children not to respond to unsolicited messages from strangers 
online or in real life.
Summary
Encourage real-life friendships, social activities, and game playing. It is not easy 
to connect with peers in person as some children are spending more time 
online in a virtual reality world. Children learn appropriate behaviors through 
trial and error in real-life situations. The goal is to help children build awareness 
and learn, ultimately, to regulate their relationship with devices.
In sum, talk to children and teach them about technology and its uses from a 
young age. These conversations should be ongoing and should become more 
detailed as your children develop and are able to connect with technology and 
with others. Use your judgment and state your values at each stage of 
development. Do not assume technology use is inherently harmful, and 
encourage conversations about the uses and practices of technology.
Chapter 10 | Common Problems in Today’s Society

C H A P T E R 
11
Conclusion
Living on this earth these days is busy, entertaining, and interesting, and it is 
easier now to see and experience people and places even if you are not 
physically at or with them. With technology, we are able to see, hear, and 
almost touch others through social media, texting, and videos.
This will become even more advanced as machine learning capabilities improve. 
New and interesting places in the world can be observed and almost touched 
virtually with special glasses, gloves, and gadgets. Imagine the places you could 
go and the people you could meet. This is really incredible and remarkable!
Yet, there are consequences that are real and that need to be addressed. 
Parents, teachers, mentors, and caretakers need to consider how to address 
the virtues that their family would like to live by. This involves critical thinking 
that is constantly evolving to figure out how to present the real world to your 
children and how to show empathy to everyone you encounter, one person 
at a time. It takes time and consideration to understand and empathize with 
what others are saying.
The big picture is that without our real-life circle of parents, family, teachers, 
mentors, and friends—our circle of unity—we are alone. We can wear smart 
glasses all day and talk endlessly to strangers, but when you take them off, you 
are alone. This book is a framework to start a conversation in families about 
how to approach these new advances in technology. We should never lose 
sight that our parents, families, teachers, mentors, and friends are our people, 
and we can physically see, hear, and touch them. Piaget and Erikson both 
intimate that we learn about the world and ourselves by interacting with 
parents, teachers, and friends whether it is by playing games or in other ways. 
They are our core, our circle of unity, of what our world should be about.
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9_11

Bibliography
Part I: Scientific Advances
Chapter 1: History of Computing
	1.	 Charles Petzold, The Annotated Turing: A Guide Tour through 
Alan Turing’s Historic Paper on Computability and the Turing 
Machine, Wiley Publishing Inc., 2008.
	2.	 Paul E.  Ceruzzi, Computing: A Concise History, MIT 
Press, 2012.
	3.	 James W. Cortada, IBM: the rise and fall and reinvention of 
a global icon, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2019.
	4.	 Edwin Black, IBM and the Holocaust: The Strategic Alliance 
Between Nazi Germany and the America’s Most Powerful 
Corporation, Three Rivers Press, 2001.
	5.	 Walter Isaacson, The Innovators: How a Group of Hackers, 
Geniuses, and Geeks Created the Digital Revolution, Simon & 
Schuster, 2014.
	6.	 Bob Goldsborough, “William C.  Lowe, helped launch 
IBM’s first personal computer, 1941–2013,” Chicago 
Tribune, 2013.
B
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9

114
Chapter 2: History of the Internet, Search Engines, and More
	7.	 Spicer, D., “Raymond Tomlinson: Email Pioneer, Part 2” in 
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing, vol. 38, no. 3, 
pp. 78-83, doi: 10.1109/MAHC.2016.41, July–Sept 2016.
	8.	 Spink; Minsoo Park; B.J. Jansen; J. Pedersen, “Multitasking 
Web search on Alta Vista,” International Conference on 
Information Technology: Coding and Computing,” ITCC, 2004.
	9.	 Ian H. Witten, et al., “Web Dragons: Inside the Myths of 
Search 
Engine 
Technology,” 
Elsevier 
Science 
& 
TechnologyProQuest 
Ebook 
Central, 
https://ebook
central.proquest.com/lib/novasoutheastern/
detail.action?docID=285784, 2006.
	10.	 Brian McCullough, How the Internet Happened: From 
Netscape to the iPhone, LiveRight Publishing Corp, 2018.
	11.	 Anna Crowley Redding, Google It: A History of Google, 
Feiwel and Friends, 2018.
	12.	 The Famous People, “Eric Schmidt Biography,” https://
www.thefamouspeople.com/profiles/eric-
schmidt-6451.php.
	13.	 Gina Smith, “Unsung innovators: Gary Thuerk, the father 
of spam,” Computerworld, Dec. 2007.
	14.	 Federal Trade Commission, “Federal, State, and Local 
Law Enforcers Tackle Deceptive Spam and Internet 
Scams,” November 2002.
	15.	 European Commission Information Society and Media, 
“Protecting privacy and fighting spam,” https://
ec.europa.eu/information_society/doc/
factsheets/024-privacy-and-spam-en.pdf, 2006.
	16.	 Federal Trade Commission, “Federal, State, and Local 
Law Enforcers Tackle Deceptive Spam and Internet 
Scams,” 
https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/
press-releases/2002/11/federal-state-local-
law-enforcers-tackle-deceptive-spam-internet-
scams, 2002.
	17.	 “Google Docs began as a hacked together experiment, 
says creator, Ellis Hamburger,” https://www.theverge.
com/2013/7/3/4484000/sam-schillace-interview-
google-docs-creator-box, 2013.
Bibliography

115
	18.	 Alexandra Samuel, Meet Alan Emtage, the Black 
Technologist Who Invented ARCHIE, the First Internet 
Search 
Engine, 
https://daily.jstor.org/alan-
emtage-first-internet-search-engine/, 2017.
	19.	 Seymour Rubenstein & Rob Barnaby, Inventors of the 
Modern Computer WordStar, http://www.landley.
net/history/mirror/timelines/inventors/html/
aa030199.htm
	20.	 Computer History Tracing the History of the 
Computer  - WordPerfect Word Processor, http://
www.computernostalgia.net/articles/word
Perfect.htm
	21.	 Wikipedia, Paul Allen, https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Paul_Allen#:~:text=Paul%20Gardner%20
Allen%20(January%2021,of%20the%201970s%20
and%201980s, 2022.
	22.	 Britannica, The Editors of Encyclopedia. “Microsoft 
Word”. Encyclopedia Britannica, 2 Dec. 2022, https://
www.britannica.com/technology/Microsoft-Word. 
Accessed 18 December 2022.
	23.	 Julie Fox, Here’s Why the Creator of Microsoft Excel 
Left a Software Career to Work in Civil Liberties, 
https://alum.mit.edu/slice/heres-why-creator-
microsoft-excel-left-software-career-work-
civil-liberties, 2016.
	24.	 Wikipedia, Google Sheets, https://www.wikiwand.
com/en/Google_Sheets
	25.	 Dr John O’Sullivan  – The inventor of modern WiFi, 
https://www.pauseawards.com/dr-john-osullivan-
the-inventor-of-modern-wifi/, 2022.
	26.	 IEEE Computer Society, Victor Hayes, https://www.
computer.org/profiles/victor-hayes, 2001.
	27.	 Investor’s Business Daily, PATRICK SEITZ, LEADERS 
& SUCCESS: Hillebrand Made Mobile Text Messaging 
A 
Reality, 
https://www.investors.com/news/
management/leaders-and-success/friedhelm-
hillebrand-oversaw-the-development-of-short-
message-service/, 2012.
	28.	 #technicianjourney, Neil Papworth, https://technician
journey.com/2019/08/29/neil-papworth/, 2019.
Bibliography

116
Chapter 3: History of Smart Devices, Video Games, and 
Videoconferencing
	29.	 Mary Bellis, “The Inventor of Touch Screen Technology,” 
https://www.thoughtco.com/who-invented-touch-
screen-technology-1992535, 2018.
	30.	 Wikipedia, 
iPhone 
(1st 
generation), 
https://
e n . w i k i p e d i a . o r g / w i k i / I P h o n e _ ( 1 s t _
generation)#:~:text=After%20years%20of%20
rumors%20and,Apple%20Inc, 2022.
	31.	 Matthew Burris, LIFEWIRE’S EDITORIAL GUIDELINES, 
The History of Samsung (1938-Present), https://www.
lifewire.com/history-of-samsung-818809, 2020.
	32.	 The history of Android: The evolution of the biggest 
mobile OS in the world, John Callaham, https://
www.androidauthority.com/history-android-os-
name-789433/, 2022.
	33.	 Wikipedia, Bertie the Brain, https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Bertie_the_Brain, 2021.
	34.	 Wikipedia, Tennis for Two, https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Tennis_for_Two, 2022.
	35.	 Wikipedia, Game Boy, https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Game_Boy#:~:text=The%20Game%20Boy%20
is%20an,in%20Europe%20in%20late%201990, 2022.
	36.	 Britannica, The Editors of Encyclopaedia. “PlayStation”. 
Encyclopedia Britannica, 2 Sep. 2022, https://www.
britannica.com/topic/PlayStation. Accessed 18 
December 2022.
	37.	 Andy Patrizio, The history and evolution of video 
conferencing, https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/
feature/The-history-and-evolution-of-video-
conferencing, 2021.
	38.	 Peter High, Zoom CEO’s Promise To His Wife Helped 
Inspire A $1B Company, https://www.forbes.com/
sites/peterhigh/2017/03/06/zoom-ceos-promise-
to-his-wife-helped-inspire-a-1-billion-
valued-company/?sh=1334c85848a7, 2017.
Bibliography

117
Part II: History of Social Media
Chapter 4: Social Media’s Launch
Chapter 5: Meta, Twitter, Spotify, Instagram, Pinterest, Snapchat, 
and TikTok
	39.	 Veikko Eranti and Markku Lonkila, “The social 
significance of the Facebook Like button,” https://
firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/
view/5505/4581, 2015.
	40.	 BILLY PERRIGO, Inside Frances Haugen’s Decision 
to Take on Facebook, https://time.com/6121931/
frances-haugen-facebook-whistleblower-
profile/, 2021
	41.	 Wikipedia, History of Facebook, https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/History_of_Facebook, 2022.
	42.	 Wikipedia, Jack Dorsey, https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Jack_Dorsey, 2022
	43.	 Viktor Hendelmann, What Happened To Vine? Why The 
Once-Popular App Shut Down, https://productmint.
com/what-happened-to-vine/
	44.	 https://blog.twitter.com/en_us/a/2015/introducing-
curator-a-new-way-to-find-and-display-great-
twitter-content
	45.	 Jana Messerschmidt, Introducing Curator, a new way 
to find and display great Twitter content, https://
blog.twitter.com/en_us/a/2015/a-new-way-to-
discover-tweets, 2015.
	46.	 Paul Rosania, While you were away..., https://blog.
twitter.com/en_us/a/2015/while-you-were-
away-0, 2015.
	47.	 Igor Bonifacic, Most Twitter users can no longer create 
new “Moments”, https://www.engadget.com/twitter-
s u n s e t s - m o m e n t s - f e a t u r e - 2 3 2 0 3 8 0 7 1 .
html?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6
Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig
=AQAAAELEUbdbikVAeLLMW7GT4anM_p6FZiRaPQJ-
LiNLxiEkogbXsDWDkaZvbhABCcQ06IV_NEYf_lhL
9 X k f m C I j H B W C 8 y W A 2 b i w F g E f v p j a n n c -
aCfZzOKw4Yw5uo7gTuJ56wEEnJ61MU-UdzlluAFnh3sq
kbCVrC3MUkjTHtCHYBBf, 2022.
Bibliography

118
	48.	 Anik Banerjee, Spotify Success Story: How it Brings Music 
for Everyone?, https://startuptalky.com/spotify_
success_story/, 2022.
	49.	 Wikipedia, Instagram, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Instagram, 2022.
	50.	 https://www.vox.com/2017/4/21/15383980/pinterest-
like-button-removed-facebook-instagram
	51.	 Kurt Wagner, Pinterest is killing off its ‘Like’ button 
and wants you to know it’s different from Facebook 
and Instagram, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Pinterest, 2017.
	52.	 Wikipedia, Snapchat, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Snapchat#:~:text=is%20their%20birthday.-,
Stories%20and%20Discover,to%20all%20of%20
their%20friends, 2022.
	53.	 Wikipedia, TikTok, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
TikTok#:~:text=TikTok%20is%20an%20international
%20version,ly%2C%20on%202%20August%202018, 2022.
Part III: Synopsis of Psychological Theories
Chapter 6: Piaget’s Life and Cognitive Developmental Stages
54.	 Biography.com Editors, “Jean Piaget Biography,” A&E 
Television Networks, https://www.biography.com/
scientist/jean-piaget#:~:text=Sorbonne%20
i n % 2 0 P a r i s . - , G r o u n d b r e a k i n g % 2 0
Developmental%20Work,tests%20that%20Simon%20
had%20designed, 2014.
55.	 Singer and Revenson, A Piaget Primer: How a Child Thinks, 
International Universities Press, Inc., 1997.
56.	 Ashley 
Marcin, 
“What 
Are 
Piaget’s 
Stages 
of 
Development and How Are They Used?,” https://
www.healthline.com/health/piaget-stages-of-
development#stages, March 29, 2018.
57.	 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean_Piaget
Chapter 7: Erikson’s Life and Psychosocial Developmental Stages
58.	 Play and Playground Encyclopedia, “Erik Erikson,” Picture 
Perfect Playgrounds, Inc., https://www.pgpedia.com/
e/erik-erikson, 2022.
Bibliography

119
59.	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erik_Erikson
60.	https://www.verywellmind.com/psychosocial-
psychology-4157178
Chapter 8: Medline, CDC, and APA Milestones for Infants to 
Adolescents
61.	 Neil K. Kaneshiro, “Developmental Milestones Record,” 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/002002.
htm, 2021.
62.	 Paul H. Lipkin, et al., “CDC’s Developmental Milestones,” 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/actearly/
milestones/index.html, 2022.
63.	 American Psychological Association, “Factsheets and 
Handouts,” 
https://www.apa.org/act/resources/
fact-sheets, 2022.
Part IV: Developing a Framework for Using Technology in Today’s World
Chapter 9: Guidelines for Giving Your Children Technology
64.	 Jill Anderson, “When to Give Your Child a Smartphone,” 
https://www.gse.harvard.edu/news/uk/18/02/
when-give-your-child-smartphone.
65.	 Christy Matte, “What’s the Right Age to Introduce Your 
Kid to Computers?,” https://www.tomshardware.com/
reviews/right-age-for-first-computer,5633.
html, 2018.
66.	 https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/childdevelopment/
early-brain-development.html#:~:text=
Parents%20and%20other%20caregivers%20can%20
support%20healthy%20brain,and%20build%20on%20
their%20child%E2%80%99s%20skills%20and%20
interests
67.	 https://www.aacap.org/AACAP/Families_and_Youth/
Facts_for_Families/FFF-Guide/Children-
And-Watching-TV-054
68.	 https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/
childrens-health/in-depth/screen-time/art-
20047952
69.	 https://www.apa.org/topics/social-media-
internet/technology-use-children
Bibliography

120
Chapter 10: Common Problems in Today’s Society
70.	 Jill Christensen, “Children and screen time: How 
much is too much?,” May 28, 2021, https://www.
mayoclinichealthsystem.org/hometown-health/
speaking-of-health/children-and-screen-
time, 2018.
71.	 Thomas 
N. 
Robinson, 
et 
al., 
“Screen 
Media 
Exposure and Obesity in Children and Adolescents,” 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5769928/, 2018.
72.	 Meeyoung Cha, et  al., “Social Networking Sites, 
Depression, and Anxiety: A Systematic Review,” 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5143470/, 2016.
73.	 Mayo Clinic Staff, “Tween and teen health: Teens and 
social media use: What’s the impact?,” https://www.
mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/tween-and-
teen-health/in-depth/teens-and-social-media-
use/art-20474437, 2022.
74.	 Adapted from the Encyclopedia of Psychology, “Depression,” 
https://www.apa.org/topics/depression, 
August 2022.
75.	 American Psychiatric Association, “What Is Depression?,” 
https://www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/
depression/what-is-depression, 2022.
76.	 Mojtaba Keikha, et  al., “Screen Time Activities and 
Aggressive Behaviors Among Children and Adolescents: 
A Systematic Review,” https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC7297421/, 2020.
77.	 Donald Black, “Anxiety disorder,” APA, https://www.
psychiatry.org/patients-families/anxiety-
disorders, 2020.
78.	 Scott Benson, “Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 
(ADHD),” 
APA, 
https://www.psychiatry.org/
patients-families/adhd, 2021.
Bibliography

I
Index
A
Abstract thinking, 40, 82, 96, 102
Accommodation, 41, 42
Advanced Research Project Agency 
(ARPA), 10
Advanced Research Projects Agency 
Network (ARPAnet), 10, 12
Age-appropriate moral 
guidelines, 96
American Psychiatry Association (APA), 106
American Psychological Association (APA), 
57–91, 97
Android Inc., 20
Anxiety, 68, 83, 105, 107
Assimilation, 41, 42
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD), 107
Augmented reality (AR), 21
Autonomous computing, 17, 18
Autonomy vs. shame, 84–85
Autonomy vs. shame vs. doubt, 53
B
BabelFish translator, 11
Bell Laboratories, 5
Bell Labs, 1, 5–6, 22
C
Card-slot design, 7
CDC Age-Appropriate Developmental 
Milestones, 60–67
Center for Disease Control (CDC), 57–91
Challenge-response authentication process, 4
Client-server system, 22
Cognition, 10, 39–44, 47, 74, 96, 97
Cognitive development, 42
APA concrete operational stage, 81
APA formal operational stage, 82
APA preoperational stage, 79
APA sensorimotor stage, 77
CDC concrete operational stages, 
78, 79, 81
CDC preoperational stage, 78
CDC sensorimotor stages, 75, 76
Medline concrete operational stage, 80
Medline formal operational stage, 82
Medline preoperational stage, 77
Medline sensorimotor stage, 75
Collective monologue, 45
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organization of 
Australian (CSIRO), 15
Completely Automated Public Turing test, 4
Concrete operational stage, 45, 81
Concrete stage, 45, 46
© Rhoda Okunev 2023
R. Okunev, The Psychology of Evolving Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8686-9

122
Connectivity, 17, 18
Context awareness, 17, 18
D
Decision-making, 110
Defense Advanced Research Project Agency 
(DARPA), 10, 12
Delayed echolalia, 45
Delayed gratification, 46
Depression, 55, 105–107
Digital Equipment Corporation, 11
Digital friendships, 108
E
Echolalia, 45
Ego Integrity vs. despair, 56, 91
Electronic mail (email), 9, 12–13, 17, 19, 25
Elementary children, 101
Emotion, 34, 41, 70, 72, 73, 85, 86, 88
ENIAC computer, 4
Equilibrium, 41, 42
Experience, 40–45, 55, 56, 73, 97, 106, 
107, 111
F
Facebook, 21, 23, 25, 27, 30, 31, 33, 34
FaceTime, 23, 109
File Transfer Protocol (FTP), 10
Formal operational stage, 47, 82
G
Gaming, 20, 21, 25
Generativity vs. stagnation, 
55–56, 90–91
Genetic determinations, 41
Global System for Mobile Communications 
(GSM), 16
Googol, 11
Graphical user interface (GUI), 6, 7
Graphics-based operating system, 7
H
HoTMaiL, 13
Human intelligence, 40
HyperText Markup Language 
(HTML), 10
Hypertext Transfer Protocols 
(HTTP), 10
I, J, K
Identity crisis, 50, 55
Identity vs. role confusion, 54–55, 89
IMS Associates, Inc. (IMSAI), 13
Industry vs. Inferiority, 54, 87, 88
Infants, 49, 53, 58, 77, 83, 95, 98–99
Influencer, 28, 35
Initial public offering (IPO), 33
Initiative vs. guilt, 54, 86–87
Instagram, 25, 29–35
International Business Machine 
(IBM), 1, 6–8, 14, 19
Internet filters, 108
Internet of Things (IoT), 18
Internet service provider (ISP), 13
Intimacy vs. isolation, 55, 90
iPhone, 7, 8, 13, 16, 19, 23, 27
L
Logical reasoning, 43, 46, 82
M
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT), 6, 10
Maturation, 40, 41
Medline Age-Appropriate Developmental 
Milestones, 58–60
Meta Platform Inc. (Meta), 29–35
Modern-day computer, 3, 4
Montessori method, 50
Multitasking, 5
Multiuser, 5
Index

123
N
National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA), 10
O
Obesity, 105, 106
Online high-technology, 98
P, Q
Packet switching, 10
Parallel play, 42, 45
Personal identification number 
(PIN), 34
Personal information, 109, 110
Piaget development theory, 39
Picturephone, 22
Pinterest Inc., 33, 34
Playing games, 43, 54, 67, 86, 97, 111
PlayStation, 21
PlayStation Portable (PSP), 21
Preexisting knowledge, 40
Preoperational stage, 44, 45, 78, 79
Preschoolers, 44, 77, 87, 100
Psychosocial developmental stages, 
49–56, 58
Psychosocial of development, 37, 49, 51–53, 
56, 58, 96
APA stages, 83, 85–89
CDC stages, 82–86
Medline stages, 82, 84, 86, 87, 89
Psychosocial skills, 98
Public switched telephone network 
(PSTN), 22
R
Real-life friendships, 108, 110
Reversibility, 46, 81
S
SAGE, 6
Samsung Enterprise, 19
Scientifically Processed Animal Matter 
(SPAM), 12, 13
Self-monitoring analysis and reporting 
technology (SMART), 18
Sensorimotor developmental stage, 
43, 44, 99
Seriation, 46, 81
Sight-sounds television systems, 22
Smart devices, 17–19, 93, 95
Smartphone-like device, 19
Snapchat, 25, 34
Social interaction, 41, 46, 54, 101
Social media platform, 27, 31
Spotify, 32
Stages of development, 40, 42, 51, 58, 74
Store-and-forward model, 12
Super Nintendo system, 21
Symbolic play, 44
T
Technological skills, 98
Teens, 35, 52, 102
Texting, 1, 9, 15, 16, 25, 95, 105, 111
TikTok, 25, 29, 32, 34–35
Toddlers, 77, 85, 99–100, 107
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet 
Protocol (TCP/IP), 10
Trust vs. mistrust, 53, 82–84
Turing’s machine learning, 5
Tweens, 49, 101–102
Twitter, 25, 29, 31–32, 34
U
UNIX operating system, 5–6
Unsocialized speech, 45
V
Video conference technology, 22
Video games, 1, 17, 20–21
Video phone, 22
Index

124
Violence, 20, 72, 74, 105, 107
Virtual reality (VR), 21, 31, 110
Visual radio, 22
Volta Laboratory, 5
W
Wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi), 1, 9, 13, 15, 16, 25
Wireless local area networks (WLANS), 15
Word processor
Apple, 14
Google, 15
Microsoft, 14
X, Y
Xbox online gaming, 21
Xerox Alto demonstration, 7
Z
Zoom, 23, 97, 109
Index

