C
Cajetan, Thomas of Vio
▶Thomas of Vio (Cajetan)
Calvin, John, Political Thought
▶John Calvin, Political Thought
Campanus of Novara
▶Adelard of Bath
▶Mathematics and Philosophy in the Arab World
Canon Law
JAMES A. BRUNDAGE
Department of History
University of Kansas
Lawrence, KS
USA
Abstract
The history of canon law, the western church’s legal sys-
tem, reaches back almost to the origins of Christianity
itself. Despite the aversion of Jesus and his earliest fol-
lowers to legalism, their successors quickly discovered that
good will and brotherly love were not by themselves suf-
ﬁcient to form a viable community. Rules concerning
worship, property, and relationships within the commu-
nity started to appear around CE 100 and multiplied
rapidly thereafter. Canonical rules varied considerably
from one region to another; however, until around 1140,
when Gratian’s Decretum ﬁnally provided a body of texts
that all could accept as binding. Popes and councils during
the following centuries promulgated a substantial volume
of new canon law and by 1250, the church had a working
system of courts, complete with professional canon law-
yers. These courts and lawyers sought with mixed success
to regulate the personal lives and religious practices of
medieval Christians in great detail. While the sixteenth-
century Reformation rejected much (but not all) of medi-
eval canon law, the Catholic Counter-Reformation sought
to reshape the medieval law and to centralize authority
ﬁrmly in the papacy, through the Roman Congregations
that the Council of Trent established. In 1917, the Catholic
church again reorganized its legal system, which had
grown unwieldy over the centuries, in the form of
a Code, which was further revised in 1983, which remains
in force among Roman Catholics.
The earliest surviving set of canons (so called from the
Greek kanon, meaning ‘‘a rule’’) is a brief collection known
as the Didache, or Doctrine of the Twelve Apostles, written
around CE 100. Further collections – the Pastor of
Hermas, the Traditio apostolica of Hippolytus, and the
Didascalia apostolorum – followed during the second and
third centuries. These early collections, produced while
Christians were a persecuted minority within the Roman
Empire, dealt almost exclusively with internal concerns of
the community of believers, such as the conduct of wor-
ship, fasting and penance, the authority and duties of
bishops, priests, and deacons, and the conduct of Chris-
tians toward one another.
A revolution in Roman religious policy occurred when
the emperor Constantine I proclaimed toleration for
Christianity in 313 and then proceeded to embrace the
religion himself. Imperial patronage made Christianity the
most favored religion in the Roman world and under
Constantine’s successors, it was established by the end of
the fourth century as the Empire’s ofﬁcial religion. Canon
law quickly expanded in scope and force. Imperial author-
ities enforced decisions by popes, bishops, and church
councils. Pronouncements by church fathers, such as
Saints Jerome, Ambrose, and Augustine, were accorded
the force of legal enactments. Church property and reve-
nues became the subject of a complex body of law. The
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

imperial government adopted many of the church’s rules
regulating marriage and family life. Bishops’ courts
enforced canonical rules about sexual morality, public
entertainments, commercial and ﬁnancial transactions,
and even contract law.
As Roman government gradually faded away in the
western part of the Empire following the barbarian inva-
sions during the ﬁfth and sixth centuries, bishops stepped
in to ﬁll much of the resulting power vacuum. They took
over a host of functions previously performed by civil
servants. We ﬁnd them proving wills and supervising the
administration of decedents’ estates, provisioning garri-
sons, maintaining roads, bridges and aqueducts, operating
schools, and overseeing tax collection. Church authorities,
in brief, took over much of the day-to-day machinery of
local government, in addition to their religious duties.
Canon law burgeoned during the early Middle Ages.
New and increasingly voluminous collections of canons
appeared in great numbers, as church law grew ever more
complex. At the same time, however, the rulers of the new
kingdoms that sprang up in western Europe began to
appropriate church property and revenues. They likewise
commenced to appoint bishops, abbots of monasteries,
and the rectors of parishes, in contravention of canon law.
As a reaction against these developments, a church reform
movement materialized during the second half of the
eleventh century. Its leaders saw canon law as one of the
principal tools that they could use to reverse these devel-
opments. Once church reformers captured control of the
papacy in the years following 1050, leading churchmen
openly challenged the authority of kings, noblemen, and
knights to control church property and institutions.
The confrontation between Pope Gregory VII and the
German Emperor Henry IV was only the most dramatic
episode in a struggle that continued into the middle of the
thirteenth century and ended in at least partial victory for
the papacy.
The reinvigoration of canon law that was a central goal
of the church reform party led to what has been called
a ‘‘papal revolution in law.’’ Central to that revolution was
the appearance around 1140 of the Decretum of Gratian.
Gratian’s book, which quickly became the basic textbook
in the schools of canon law, attempted for the ﬁrst time to
rationalize canon law by applying dialectical analysis to
resolve differences between conﬂicting canons.
The making of canon law intensiﬁed during the two
centuries that followed Gratian’s work, as teachers and
students who studied his book became keenly aware of
deﬁciencies in the earlier canon law. Popes and councils
attempted to repair those deﬁciencies by creating new
laws, which they codiﬁed in new collections that
supplemented Gratian’s text. In 1234, the pope promul-
gated a collection of new law in ﬁve books, the Decretals of
Gregory IX. Pope Boniface VIII in 1298 published a further
supplement, called sixth book (Liber Sextus), and this was
followed in the fourteenth century by two more ofﬁcial
collections.
Meanwhile, the volume of litigation in church courts
grew dramatically. Lawyers trained in canon law fashioned
a new and increasingly sophisticated procedural system
that many secular courts adopted as well. By the end of the
twelfth century, trained canon lawyers were beginning to
dominate the College of Cardinals, and from the thir-
teenth century onward, the popes they elected were, not
surprisingly, apt to be canon lawyers as well.
Church authorities increasingly undertook to super-
vise the public and private lives of the faithful, clerics and
laymen alike, to assure that they conformed to the church’s
teachings. They monitored the lives of the clergy to force
them to dismiss their wives and refrain from sexual activ-
ity. They permitted sexual relations among the laity only
between men and women married to one another
according to canonical rules. Popes and bishops issued
regulations governing such things as commercial and
ﬁnancial transactions, the times and conditions of labor,
the prices of commodities, the administration of poor
relief, and they attempted (with mixed success) to enforce
them. Canonical courts punished adulterers, ruled on the
legitimacy of marriages and the children they produced.
They imposed penalties on usurers and on peasants who
worked on Sundays and holidays. The church levied
a variety of taxes from the faithful, which made it as
a whole enormously wealthy, although that wealth was
distributed very unevenly among different parts of the
institution. Church authorities likewise attempted, with
uneven success, to supervise peoples’ religious beliefs and
to penalize those who deviated publicly from the orthodox
positions deﬁned by popes, bishops, and councils. During
the early Middle Ages, enforcement of theological unifor-
mity lay primarily in the hands of local bishops and
synods. From the latter part of the twelfth century onward,
however, the papacy became increasingly involved in these
matters and sought to centralize both the procedures for
this purpose and their implementation through the newly
created papal Inquisition. In short, canon law sought to
regulate almost every aspect of the life of the population,
although its success in doing so (like its wealth) varied
from one region to another.
Although the leaders of the Protestant Reformation
in the sixteenth century in principle rejected the canon
law of the medieval church, in practice they retained
many of its features. Stunned and shocked by the
190 C
Canon Law

Reformation’s
success,
Catholic
leaders
instituted
a sweeping Counterreformation of their own at the Coun-
cil of Trent (1545–1563), which radically transformed
many features of the medieval canon law. Trent sought
to centralize power within the church. It established spe-
cialized ofﬁces within the Roman curia, the so-called
Roman
Congregations,
to
supervise
developments
throughout the church in order to repress deviations
from canonical norms swiftly, before they could lead to
further departures from Catholicism. At the beginning of
the twentieth century, Pope Pius X determined to reduce
canon law, which had grown increasingly unwieldy over
the centuries, to a codiﬁed form and in 1917 his successor,
Pope Benedict XV, promulgated the Codex iuris canonici,
which sought to reduce nearly 2,000 years of canon law to
a single modest-sized volume that every parish priest
could keep at hand. Following the Second Vatican Coun-
cil, Pope John Paul II revised that code in order to incor-
porate the council’s decisions into canon law. He
promulgated the new Codex iuris canonici in 1983 and it
remains the ofﬁcial restatement of the law to this day.
See also: ▶Heresy ▶Inquisition
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1979) Corpus iuris canonici, ed. Friedberg E. 2 vols. Tauchnitz, Leipzig.
(Repr. Graz: Akademische Druck- u. Verlagsanstalt 1959)
(1918) Codex iuris canonici Pii X pontiﬁcis maximi iussu digestus,
Benedicti papae XV auctoritate promulgatus. Typis Polyglottis
Vaticanis, Rome
(1983) Codex iuris canonici auctoritate Ioannis Pauli PP. II promulgatus.
Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis, Vatican City
Secondary Sources
Bellomo M (1995) The common legal past of Europe, 1000–1800, trans.
Cochrane LG. Studies in medieval and early modern canon law, vol 4.
Catholic University of America Press, Washington, DC
Berman HJ (1983) Law and revolution: the formation of the western legal
tradition. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Brundage JA (1995) Medieval canon law. Longman, London
Cortese E (1995) Il diritto nella storia medievale, 2 vols. Il Cigno Galileo
Galilei. (Repr. 1999, Rome)
Helmholz RH (1996) The spirit of classical canon law. University of
Georgia Press, Athens
Ke´ry L (1999) Canonical collections of the early middle ages (ca.
400–1140): a bibliographical guide to the manuscripts and literature.
History of medieval canon law, vol 1. Catholic University of America
Press, Washington, DC
Le Bras G, Lefebvre C, Rambaud J (1965) L’aˆge classique, 1140–1378:
sources et the´orie du droit. Histoire du droit et des institutions de
l’e´glise en Occident, vol 7. Sirey, Paris
Robinson OF, Fergus TD, Gordon, WM (1994) European legal history:
sources and institutions, 2nd edn. Butterworths, London
Stickler
AM
(1950)
Historia
iuris
canonici
Latini:
Institutiones
academicae. Pontiﬁcium Athenaeum Salesianum, Turin
Winroth A (2000) The making of Gratian’s Decretum. Cambridge studies
in medieval life and thought, 4th ser., vol 49. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Capreolus, John
▶John Capreolus
Carolingian Renaissance
JOHN MARENBON
Trinity College
University of Cambridge
Cambridge
UK
Abstract
The Carolingian Renaissance was a cultural revival
inspired by Charlemagne, who during his long reign
(768–814), extended the Frankish kingdom to include
most of present-day France and Germany as well as parts
of Spain and Italy. In this entry, it is taken to cover
philosophy of the period c. 780–c. 900, except for the
work of the best known philosopher of the time, John
Scottus Eriugena, who is treated in separately. After
a section discussing the cultural background (see ‘‘The
Carolingian Renaissance and Carolingian Philosophy’’),
the two philosophers at Charlemagne’s court, Alcuin and
Theodulf of Orleans, are considered (see ‘‘The Founders:
Theodulf of Orleans and Alcuin’’), and then Alcuin’s circle
of pupils is examined (see ‘‘The Circle of Alcuin’’). The
next two sections look at two of the disputes (on predes-
tination (see ‘‘Gottschalk and the Debate on Predestina-
tion’’), and on the world-soul (see ‘‘Ratramnus of Corbie,
the Soul, and Universals’’) – but really on universals),
which encouraged some of the liveliest ninth-century phi-
losophizing. Central to philosophy in the early Middle
Ages were the gloss traditions on important school texts:
these are examined in ‘‘Ninth-Century Glosses to School
Texts.’’ The ‘‘Concluding Remarks’’ emphasize that this
whole area is in need of more research and that
a synthesis such as that offered here is premature.
Carolingian Renaissance C
191
C

The Carolingian Renaissance and Carolingian
Philosophy
In its broadest meaning, ‘‘Carolingian Renaissance’’ refers
to the centrally inspired cultured revival that accompanied
Charlemagne’s achievement at the end of the eighth cen-
tury in making himself ruler of a large empire, and took up
the theme, which, in his politics, reached its apotheosis in
his
imperial
coronation at
Rome
in
800. It was
a movement, primarily, to reform the Church: clerical
corruption was tackled, new standards of Latinity were
imposed, and the text of the Bible and the Liturgy stan-
dardized. Among a small elite, there was a cultural and
intellectual renaissance, also encouraged by Charlemagne.
Intellectuals from Lombardy and Spain such as Paul the
Deacon, Peter of Pisa, and Theodulf of Orleans were
invited to the court, where they not only engaged in
theological controversy but also wrote classicizing Latin
verse. Later, the Anglo-Saxon from York, Alcuin, became
the most inﬂuential of these ﬁgures. A library was built up
at court which contained the texts of Latin authors such as
Lucan, Terence, Horace, Juvenal, Martial, and Cicero, as
well as Calcidius’ translation of Plato’s Timaeus; and after
Charlemagne’s death, his biography was written by
Einhard, in a form imitated from Suetonius. The intellec-
tual renaissance survived the gradual disintegration of
the Empire during the reign of his son, Louis the Pious
(814–40) and his grandson Charles the Bald (d. 877).
Indeed, Charles the Bald seems to have been enthusiasti-
cally interested in poetry, theology, and philosophy,
protecting the greatest thinker of the whole period, John
Scottus Eriugena. Encouraged, perhaps, by the way in
which his court looked to Byzantium as a model, this
period was a time in which knowledge of Greek, rare in
the Middle Ages, was cultivated, not just by Eriugena but
also by his fellow Irishmen Sedulius Scottus and Martin of
Laon (see in general the essays in McKitterick 1994).
The Carolingian Renaissance is clearly important,
then, in the story of the transmission of classical civiliza-
tion and for intellectual history. But what relevance does
this period have to the history of philosophy? To gather
from the bulk of older and recent discussions, it is
Eriugena, and Eriugena alone, who deserves to be consid-
ered as a philosopher. Moreover, Eriugena is usually con-
sidered to have cut himself off from his own background
and century through his reading of Greek Neoplatonic
Christian authors, and so to have been a virtual inhabitant
of Constantinople rather than Laon or Soissons in the
North of France. Other Carolingian scholars seem just to
have been preservers and compilers: avatars of their
epoch’s renaissance perhaps, but hardly thinkers in their
own right. This impression, however, is far from wholly
accurate. The characteristic methods of Carolingian
thinking – excerption, paraphrase, compilation, and
glossing – give the misleading impression of servility.
But, often, the thinkers are exercising a careful choice,
and even by the way they selected and interwove others’
material, they are indicating a clear set of their own ideas.
And, arguably, these ideas and the more general approach
and caste of mind from which they emerged cast medieval
Latin philosophy in the mould which, from then on, it
would continue to exhibit. I shall return to this point at the
end of my discussion. The three areas in which Carolin-
gian philosophy ﬂourished were in logic, in the confron-
tation, as Christians, with pagan philosophical ideas, and
in controversies over Christian doctrine. I have presented
it under these headings elsewhere and tried to give an
impression of the nature of philosophical thinking at the
time through examples (Marenbon 1994, 1998; see also,
for a logically-oriented view Marenbon 2008). Here,
rather, I shall try to set out the different phases of philos-
ophy in period from c. 780–c. 900, with bibliography to
help any new explorers of this neglected area – but perhaps
they should read the two caveats in my conclusion before
they read any further.
The Founders: Theodulf of Orleans and
Alcuin
The two men who revived philosophy for the ﬁrst time in
the medieval Latin West, at the court of Charlemagne,
were Theodulf (d. 821), a Visigoth from Spain and the
Anglo-Saxon Alcuin (d. 804) from York (see Bullough
2004). Both were accomplished poets in the classical
style, theologians, and among Charlemagne’s most trusted
administrators; Theodulf was rewarded with the bishopric
of Orleans (798) and the abbacy of Fleury; Alcuin was
made abbot of Tours (796). Their principal contribution
was, in each case, in reviving logic and using it for theo-
logical purposes. Theodulf’s most important theological
work is the Opus Caroli regis contra Synodum or (as it is
more commonly known) the Libri carolini, the response
written in 792–793 in Charlemagne’s name to the Greek
position on image worship taken at the Council of Nicaea
in 787 (Theodulf of Orleans 1998; cf. Freeman 2003).
Despite the work’s achievement in proposing a moderate
attitude to the use of images, it was never actually issued,
probably because the Papacy accepted the Greek view. The
most remarkable section for historians of logic is IV, 23. In
order to show that ‘‘to kiss’’ and ‘‘to adore’’ do not mean
the same thing, Theodulf indulges in a display of his
knowledge of logic – far beyond anything required for
his point – borrowing from Boethius’ ﬁrst commentary
on On Interpretation and from Apuleius’ Peri Hermeneias.
192 C
Carolingian Renaissance

Although the fate of the Opus Caroli means that this
logical passage cannot have had any direct inﬂuence, it is
perhaps no accident that Fleury became one of the out-
standing centers for logic in the early Middle Ages.
According to the new datings proposed by Donald
Bullough (1991:37; 1997:581–582), Alcuin’s De dialectica,
the ﬁrst logical textbook of the Middle Ages, was not
written until after the Opus Caroli. But if – as seems
probable (cf. Bohn 2004) – the traditional dating of
786–790 is correct, then Alcuin retains the credit for
reintroducing the study of logic into medieval Northern
Europe. The De dialectica (Alcuin 1851:951–976) is, with
one exception, almost entirely derived from the accounts
in Isidore’s Etymologiae and Cassiodore’s Institutiones
(itself based on Isidore). But it seems to have been Alcuin’s
own choice to have shifted the attention away from how
logic is presented in these sources, as a tool for composing
arguments, especially syllogistic ones, to the ten catego-
ries. The one textbook he draws from, extensively and
verbatim, is a paraphrase of Aristotle’s Categories from
the circle of Themistius (fourth century) which he
believed was the work of Augustine. This attribution
points to the special theological purpose he saw in the
categories: without them, the ‘‘profound questions’’ about
the Holy Trinity cannot be explained, he says (see Leh-
mann 1917; Marenbon 1997a).
Some of Alcuin’s ideas outside logic are also philo-
sophically interesting. For example, in his treatise De
rhetorica et de virtutibus (Halm 1863:523–550) he goes
beyond his main source, Cicero, to discuss how philoso-
phers can be said to be virtuous, and although he uses
Augustine, he comes to a different view, much less hostile
to pagan thinkers. Alcuin also wrote a short treatise De
vera philosophia, as an introduction to his text books
on the Arts (Alcuin 1851:849–854; cf. Marenbon 1994:
172–173), in which he melds the biblical idea of wisdom
with the philosophical wisdom to be attained through
studying the seven liberal arts.
The Circle of Alcuin
Two of Alcuin’s pupils are known for their philosophical
interests. The more celebrated of them, Fredegisus, wrote
in 800 or later a letter De substantia nihili et tenebrarum
(On the Substance of Nothing and of Darkness) (Fredegisus
of Tours 1895). Fredegisus believes that God created
names as well as the things named, and that he did not
institute any names which lacked an object. He therefore
believes that there must be some thing which corresponds
to the names ‘‘nothing’’ and ‘‘darkness.’’ A controversy
from later – the only record of it is a letter of Agobard
of Lyons from about 830 – suggests that Fredegisus
speculated
about
the
origin
of
human
souls
and
believed that they preexisted the body (cf. Marenbon
1981:64–66).
Alcuin’s other philosophical pupil was Candidus, who
was also very probably the companion of Theodulf of
Orleans when he went to Rome in 800–801 (Freeman
and Meyvaert 2001:126). Candidus was probably the
compiler of a set of philosophical passages (some original
compositions, some extracts from ancient or patristic
texts), that have been labeled the ‘‘Munich Passages,’’ and
he probably wrote one of them, labeled as ‘‘Dicta Candidi’’
(ed. and discussion in Marenbon 1981, to be corrected by
Bullough 1991:178–181 and Dolbeau 1997:162–165; an
excellent study of the composition, contents, and inﬂu-
ence of this material has been made in Lebech and McEvoy
2009). Among the passages are some which show an inter-
est, like Alcuin’s, in the ten categories, and others which
show a fascination for techniques of logical argument
reminiscent
of
Theodulf.
One
passage
consists
of
a dialogue-form argument for the existence of God,
based on Augustine’s De libero arbitrio but with some of
its own, often simplistic argumentative moves. There is
also an extract from Calcidius’ Commentary to the
Timaeus.
Gottschalk and the Debate on Predestination
Gottschalk was a child oblate and unwilling monk, ﬁrst of
Fulda, then Reichenau, then Orbais and then – as
a prisoner – at Hautvilliers. The reason for his imprison-
ment was the condemnation, at the Council of Quierzy in
849 for teaching the doctrine of double predestination:
that the good are predestined to eternal bliss and the
wicked to eternal damnation (edition – Gottschalk of
Orbais 1945; cf. Jolivet 1958). Gottschalk claimed, with
a great deal of justice, that this was Augustine’s position.
His
opponents,
who
included
his
former
teacher
Hrabanus Maurus, Archbishop of Mainz, and Hincmar,
Archbishop of Rheims, accepted as orthodox the doctrine
that God predestines the good to salvation, but rejected
the idea of predestination to damnation. In their view, it
made God responsible for the evils performed by the
wicked and so an unjust judge in punishing them; more-
over, they regarded the teaching as socially destructive,
since it removed the incentive for Christians to behave
well. Although the subject matter of this dispute was, then,
strictly theological, and much energy on both sides was
spent in ﬁnding patristic texts that supported one or the
other view, it was also the occasion for medieval authors to
begin to tackle the complex of philosophical problems
surrounding the idea of free will (cf. Schrimpf 1980;
Marenbon 1990).
Carolingian Renaissance C
193
C

The outstanding philosophical contribution to the
controversy
was
John
Scottus
Eriugena’s
De
praedestinatione, written in the early 850s at Hincmar’s
request and discussed in the entry on Eriugena. But
Hincmar’s own Ad reclusos et semplices (Gundlach 1889)
and Hrabanus Maurus’ letter to Noting (Patrologia Latina
112, 1530–53) setting out his position both show their
authors struggling with some central ideas. Their difﬁculty
results from the fact that, like Gottschalk, they accept that
humans cannot act well without God’s grace and that only
some are predetermined to receive this grace. But then if
God omits to give a certain person grace, and so that
person cannot but be damned, is this not exactly the
same as double predestination? Hrabanus and Hincmar
are at least aware of this problem. Hrabanus tries to tackle
it by suggesting that it may be the individual person
who chooses to desert God, while Hincmar puts forward
the suggestion (along lines which would be elaborated
into a theory of Middle Knowledge by Molina in the
sixteenth century) that God withholds grace from those
who he has foreseen would misuse it if they received it.
Further interesting contributions to the debate were
made in the 850’s in opposition to John Scottus’ con-
tribution by Florus of Lyons (Patrologia Latina 119,
101–250) and Prudentius of Troyes (Patrologia Latina
115, 1009–1366).
Ratramnus of Corbie, the Soul, and
Universals
A much less public dispute, but of great philosophical
interest, took place in the early 860s, between Ratramnus,
a monk of Corbie (d. c. 868) and an anonymous monk of
Sainte-Germer de Fly, who seems to have been presenting
the doctrines of his (otherwise unknown) Irish master,
Macarius. The only record of the controversy is in the
Liber de anima that Ratramnus wrote for his former
abbot, Odo, who had become Bishop of Beauvais –
a work which itself survives only in a seventeenth-century
copy (Ratramnus of Corbie 1952; cf. Delhaye 1950;
Marenbon 1981:67–70). The discussion arises from
a passage in Augustine’s De quantitate animae, at the
back of which stand the Neoplatonic doctrines of Soul as
an hypostasis – the lowest level of reality – and of the
World Soul. Augustine asks whether all souls are one, or
are individuals’ souls entirely separate, or are they both
one and many. Macarius apparently took this third answer
as Augustine’s own view, but, at least as presented by
Ratramnus, the issues discussed are not to do with the
soul as such, but rather with the status of universals.
Ratramnus believes (almost certainly wrongly, but he
would not have known the Neoplatonic background)
that, when Augustine talks of a single soul, he is merely
referring to soul as a species. Basing himself on passages in
Boethius that go against a realist view of universals,
Ratramnus argues that species do not have any subsis-
tence, but exist merely in the mind. Indeed, he insists
(1952, 29:9–23, cited by Erismann 2010) that properly
speaking the only things that are substances are those we
can see and can point to with our ﬁnger. Macarius’
position is, by contrast, a type of realism – and it has
recently been very convincingly seen as an inchoate ver-
sion of a view that is found in his fellow Irishman Eriugena
and remains important, perhaps central, to thinking about
universals until the time of William of Champeaux: imma-
nent realism (Erismann 2010:334–343). Immanent realists
hold that the same universal substance is present in each
member of a species, and that the individual members are
differentiated from one another only by accidents: in
substance, therefore – just as Macarius seems to have
claimed – all souls are one soul.
Ninth-Century Glosses to School Texts
Outside the work of Eriugena, the most important philo-
sophical work of the later ninth century is found in what
may seem to contemporary historians a strange place – the
glosses written in the margins of manuscripts. These are
not, in the case of some of the main school texts, simply
readers’ notes. Although the glosses in one manuscript are
rarely exactly the same as those in another, there are strong
family resemblances, and one can speak of a ‘‘standard set
of glosses’’ (or in some cases a variety of sets of standard
glosses) which a considerable number of manuscripts
share more or less, often adding some nonstandard mate-
rial. Of central importance for early medieval philosophy
are the glosses found in manuscripts of Martianus
Capella’s De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii, the pseudo-
Augustinian Categoriae Decem, Porphyry’s Isagoge, Boe-
thius’ Opuscula sacra, and the gloss and commentary
tradition on Boethius’ De consolatione philosophiae.
(Another important school-text was the commentary by
Macrobius on Cicero’s Somnium Scipionis, but little is
known as yet about the extent of glossing and commentary
as early as the Carolingian period.) An important ﬁgure in
connection with these gloss traditions is Remigius of
Auxerre (cf. Jeudy 1991). Remigius was born in c. 840,
became a monk of Auxerre and, in 893, took charge of the
cathedral school at Rheims. He wrote commentaries on
a wide variety of works – classical grammarians and poets
and, of the works listed above, the De nuptiis and De
consolatione (and perhaps also Boethius’ Opuscula sacra).
But Remigius did not strive to be original, and his com-
mentaries seem – especially from the evidence of the one
194 C
Carolingian Renaissance

on De nuptiis – to be compiled by merging together
material from various gloss traditions.
Martianus Capella’s De nuptiis is a ﬁfth-century ency-
clopedia in prose with verse interludes, of the seven liberal
arts (grammar, logic, rhetoric, arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, and music) preceded by two books in which
the allegorical marriage between Mercury (divine reason)
and Philology (the human soul). Despite (or because of?)
its rebarbative style of Latin, De nuptiis became a very
popular textbook in the ninth century. Philosophically,
the most interesting gloss material is that attached to
Book IV and some of that to Books I and II. The relations
between the different traditions of glosses have yet to be
properly established. Eriugena is known to have taught De
nuptiis at Charles the Bald’s palace school, and editions of
two different versions of his commentary have been
published (John Scottus Eriugena 1939; Jeauneau 1978;
the glosses to Book IV are better edited in Von Perger
2005). It is not certain that all this material is his (the
basis for identifying the work as John’s are some com-
ments in Remigius’ commentary, which attribute certain
ideas to him), but most of it probably goes back to him,
and his comments on logic show that – in what is very
probably work from his earlier years – he is beginning to
think along some of the lines which will be developed in
his Periphyseon (cf. Von Perger 2005:264–301; Marenbon
2008:26–27). There are also glossed manuscripts that
belong to an earlier tradition (Teeuwen 2008), and
another tradition, which has been associated with
a writer called Dunchad, Martin of Laon, or Heiric of
Auxerre (Pseudo-Dunchad 1944).
The Categoriae Decem, already Alcuin’s favorite, seems
to have been the most intensely studied logical text in the
ninth century. Of the two manuscripts which date from
the last decades of this century, one (Milan Ambrosiana
B 71 sup.) is not very fully annotated, but the glosses it
contains are in many cases obviously linked to the teach-
ing of Eriugena and have little to do with the logical
content of the text. The other set of glosses in Sankt Gallen
274 is much fuller. It contains more material which would
be standard in tenth and eleventh-century glossed manu-
scripts. Unlike all the other glossators of the Categoriae
Decem, however, the Sankt Gallen glossator knows Boe-
thius’ commentary on Aristotle’s Categories and uses it to
help him gloss the pseudo-Augustinian text (Marenbon
1981:116–138).
It also seems that the tradition of glosses to Boethius’
Opuscula sacra was begun in the ninth century. There have
been attempts to link the glosses to a speciﬁc individual –
Eriugena himself or, more recently, Remigius of Auxerre
(Cappuyns 1931), but such attributions are unreliable and
the complexities of this gloss-tradition have yet to be
unraveled. Boethius’ discussions in these little treatises
provided early medieval authors with a chance to think
about some basic metaphysical issues, such as individua-
tion, and how they related to doctrinal problems.
The glosses to Boethius’ De consolatione Philosophiae
have perhaps the richest tradition of all. Pierre Courcelle
(1967) distinguished two strands of a commentary tradi-
tion, one linked to Sankt Gallen and one from Remigius of
Auxerre (extracts, but he acknowledged that some manu-
scripts contained glosses that belonged to neither tradi-
tion.) The most recent research (Godden 2003; Jayatilaka
2006) suggests that the position is as complicated for this
work as for the other textbooks. Each manuscript contains
a different assortment of glosses, and the main groupings
have not yet been properly established. Boethius’ De
consolatione faced the early medieval authors with a special
challenge. Although Boethius was a Christian, he wrote De
consolatione without including any explicit references to
Christianity, and in some passages – most obviously Book
III, metrum 9, an epitome of Plato’s Timaeus – he
proposes, through the mouthpiece of the personiﬁcation
Philosophia, ideas which seem to be at odds with Chris-
tian doctrine. Different Carolingian exegetes had different
approaches to resolving the tension. The late ninth-
century glosses to Book III, metrum 9 in one manuscript
(Vatican lat 3663; edited in Troncarelli 1981) – which
seem to be distinct from the Remigius or the Sankt
Gallen set – give the impression, at ﬁrst, of accepting
without demur the pagan nature of the material, since
they consider the stars and their properties and do not
avoid astrology. But what may seem like a daringly pagan
moment – the equation of the World Soul with the
sun – turns out to be a quotation from the very soberly
orthodox Bede. Both the Sankt Gallen commentator’s
and Remigius’ attitude ﬁt with a line of interpretation
found in Alcuin and, it has been argued (Troncarelli
1981) in the way the De consolatione was presented even
shortly after Boethius’ death: the work is interpreted in an
explicitly Christian way, with the ﬁgure of Philosophia
transformed into the Biblical Sapientia, and any passages
which, taken literally, seem to go against Christian doc-
trine, read allegorically with a Christian meaning. There is,
however, one short, continuous commentary, just of Book
III, metrum 9, which takes a very different approach
(edited in Huygens 1954). It was written by Bovo,
a monk of Corvey. Bovo died in 916, and so this piece of
writing comes from the closing years of what can be
considered the Carolingian period, if not later. Bovo rec-
ognized both that Boethius was a Christian author but
that, in this metrum especially, he said much that was
Carolingian Renaissance C
195
C

‘‘contrary to the Catholic Faith.’’ Using Macrobius’ com-
mentary on the Somnium Scipionis, he gives a remarkably
penetrating interpretation of the Neoplatonic allusions in
this poem, although he does so only – at least ostensibly –
in order to condemn these pagan doctrines.
Concluding Remarks
A survey, like this one, of Carolingian philosophy without
Eriugena is very much a case of Hamlet without the Prince.
But history follows different rules from ﬁction. The real
story of Hamlet is just the story that Shakespeare told, in
which, because he so designed it, Hamlet plays a role so
central that none of the other elements in the play would
make sense without his presence. Although, from the
standard Histories of philosophy, it would seem as if Car-
olingian philosophy without Eriugena is not so much
lacking in sense as absent altogether, what the paragraphs
above suggest is a very different conclusion. Although
Eriugena had a very deﬁnite inﬂuence on a circle of fol-
lowers (Marenbon 1981:88–115), the greatest achieve-
ment of ninth-century philosophers may have been that,
in general, they did not follow him. His bold theology and
imaginative but sometimes less than fully worked-out
Neoplatonic metaphysics were largely ignored, and
instead, scholars worked carefully over the ancient text-
books, absorbing the rudiments of the Aristotelian tradi-
tion of logic. In doing so, they set the mould for eleventh
and twelfth-century philosophizing and that, in its turn,
for how philosophy developed even after the assimilation
of the whole Aristotelian corpus in the thirteenth century.
This judgment, however, must, like any judgment about
philosophy in this period, be qualiﬁed by two notes of
caution, which are, in fact, the most important points that
are made in this article. First, there is no good reason to
choose Carolingian philosophy or philosophy of the Caro-
lingian Renaissance as constituting a distinct period in the
history of philosophy. The gloss traditions, which are central
to the story of early medieval philosophy, run on into the
tenth and eleventh centuries. Second, outside the writings of
Eriugena, philosophy in the late eighth and ninth centuries
(and indeed in the tenth) remains a mostly unstudied ﬁeld
(cf. Marenbon 2009). Scholars are only now beginning to
understand the complexity of the major gloss traditions,
and they are still a long way from being in a position to
start to assess the philosophical achievements of these
years. An encyclopedic synthesis, such as this one, is there-
fore premature: there is nothing in the above paragraphs
which more thorough study may well not show to be
inaccurate, wide of the mark, or plain false.
See also: ▶John Scottus Eriugena
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Alcuin (1851) Opera, Patrologia Latina 101. Migne, Paris
Eriugena John Scottus (1939) Annotationes in Marcianum, ed. Lutz CE.
The Mediaeval Academy of America, Publication 34. The Mediaeval
Academy of America, Cambridge
Fredegisus of Tours (1895) De substantia nihili et tenebrarum.
Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Epistolae IV, Epistolae Karolini
Aevi II, ed. Du¨mmler E. Weidmann, Berlin, pp 552–555
Gottschalk of Orbais (1945) Oeuvres the´ologiques et grammaticales de
Godescalc d’Orbais, ed. Lambot C. Spicilegium Sacrum Lovaniense,
Louvain
Gundlach W (1889) Zwei Schriften des Erzbischofs Hinkmar von Reims –
2. Zeitschrift fu¨r Kirchengeschichte 10:258–309
Halm K (ed) (1863) Rhetores latini minores. Teubner, Leipzig
Huygens
RBC
(1954)
Mittelalterliche
Kommentare
zum
O
qui
perpetua. . . Sacris Erudiri 6:373–427
Pseudo-Dunchad (1944) Glossae in Martianum, ed. Lutz CE. Lancaster
Press, Lancaster, PA (Philological monographs pub. by the American
Philological Association 12)
Ratramnus of Corbie (1952) Liber de anima, ed. Lambot DC. Godenne/
Giard, Namur/Lille
Silk ET (ed) (1935) Saeculi noni auctoris in Boetii consolationem
Philosophiae commentarius. American Academy in Rome, Rome
Stewart HF (1916) A commentary by Remigius Autissiodorensis on the
De consolatione Philosophiae of Boethius. J Theol Stud 17:22–42
Teeuwen M et al (2008) Carolingian scholarship and Martianus Capella:
the oldest commentary tradition. Digital edition, 1st edn. November
2008, online at http://martianus.huygens.knaw.nl
Theodulf of Orleans (1998) Opus Caroli Regis contra Synodum (Libri
Carolini), ed. Freeman A. Hahnsche Buchhandlung, Hannover
Secondary Sources
Bullough DA (1991) Carolingian renewal: sources and heritage. Manches-
ter University Press, Manchester/New York
Bullough DA (1997) Alcuin before Frankfort. Das Frankfurter Konzil von
794 im Spannungsfeld von Kirche, Politik und Theologie, ed.
Berndt
R.
Quellen
und
Abhandlungen
zur
mittelrheinische
Kirchengeschichte
80.
Gesellschaft
fu¨r
mittelrheinische
Kirchengeschichte, Mainz, pp 571–585
Bullough DA (2004) Alcuin: achievement and reputation, being
part of the Ford lectures delivered in Oxford in Hilary Term 1980.
Education and society in the Middle Ages and Renaissance 16. Brill,
Leiden
Cappuyns M (1931) Le plus ancien commentaire des ‘‘Opuscula sacra’’ et
son origine. Recherches de the´ologie ancienne et me´die´vale 1:98–107
Courcelle P (1967) La Consolation de Philosophie dans la tradition
litte´raire. e´tudes augustiniennes, Paris
Delhaye P (1950) Une controverse sur l’aˆme universelle au IXe sie`cle.
Analecta mediaevalia namurcensia 1. Centre d’e´tudes me´die´vales,
Lille
Dolbeau F (1997) Le Liber XIX Sententiarum. Recherches augustiniennes
30:113–165
Erismann C (2010) L’Homme commun. La gene`se du re´alisme
ontologique durant le haut Moyen Aˆ ge. Vrin, Paris
Freeman A (2003) Theodulf of Orleans: Charlemagne’s spokesman
against the second Council of Nicaea. Ashgate, Aldershot/Burlington
Freeman A, Meyvaert P (2001) The meaning of Theodulf’s Apse Mosaic at
Germigny-des-Pre´s. Gesta 40:125–139
196 C
Carolingian Renaissance

Godden M (2003) The Latin commentary tradition and the old English
Boethius: the present state of the Question. http://www.english.ox.ac.
uk/boethius/LatinCommTraditionOEBoeth.pdf
Jayatilaka R (2006) Work on the Latin Commentaries. Reported at the
fourth annual symposium of The Alfredian Boethius Project,
University of Oxford. Retrieved from http://www.english.ox.ac.uk/
boethius/Symposium2006.html
Jeauneau
E
(1978)
Quatres
the`mes
e´rige´niens.
Institut
d’e´tudes
me´die´vales Albert-le-Grand/Vrin, Montreal/Paris
Jeudy C (1991) L’Oeuvre de Re´mi d’Auxerre: e´tat de la question’ and
’Remigii autissiodorensis opera (Clavis)’. L’E´cole carolingienne
d’Auxerre: de Murethach a` Re´mi, 830–908, ed. Iogna-Prat D, Jeudy
C, Lobrichon G. Beauchesne, Paris, pp 373–397, 457–500
Jolivet J (1958) Godescalc d’Orbais et la Trinite´: La me´thode de la
the´ologie a l’e´poque carolingienne. Vrin, Paris
Lebeche M, McEvoy J (with J. Flood) (2009) De dignitate conditionis
humanae: translation, commentary, and reception history of the
Dicta Albini and the Dicta Candidi. Viator 40:1–34
Lehmann P (1917) Cassiodorstudien. VIII. Cassiodor-Isidor-Beda-
Alchvine. Philologus 74:357–383
Marenbon J (1981) From the circle of Alcuin to the school of Auxerre.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Marenbon J (1990) John Scottus and Carolingian theology: from the de
praedestinatione, its background and its critics, to the Periphyseon.
Charles the Blad; court and kingdom, 2nd edn, ed. Gibson M,
Nelson J. Ashgate, Alderhsot, pp 303–325 (repr. Marenbon, 2000)
Marenbon J (1994) Carolingian thought. Carolingian culture: emulation
and innovation, ed. McKitterick R. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 171–192 (repr. Marenbon, 2000)
Marenbon J (1997a) Alcuin, the council of Frankfurt and the beginnings
of medieval philosophy. In: Das Frankfurter Konzil, pp 603–615
(repr. Marenbon, 2000)
Marenbon J (1997b) Glosses and commentaries on the categories and de
interpretatione before Abelard. Dialektik und Rhetorik im fru¨heren
und hohen Mittelalter, ed. Fried J. Schriften des historischen Kollegs,
Kolloquien 27. Historisches Kolleg, Munich pp 21–49 (repr.
Marenbon, 2000)
Marenbon J (1998) Carolingian Renaissance. Routledge encyclopedia
of philosophy, ed. Craig E. Routledge, London. http://www.rep.
routledge.com/article/B02
Marenbon J (2000) Aristotelian logic, platonism, and the context of early
medieval philosophy in the West. Variorum Collected Studies series
696. Ashgate, Aldershot/Burlington/Vermont
Marenbon J (2008) ‘The Latin tradition of logic to 1100’ in a handbook of
the history of logic, 2 medieval and renaissance logic, ed. Gabbay D,
Woods J. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 1–63
Marenbon J (2009) Philosophy in the early Latin Middle Ages (c. 700 –
c. 1100): a survey of recent work. Rech The´ol Philos Me´die´v 76:1–29
McKitterick R (ed) (1994) Carolingian culture: emulation and innova-
tion. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Schrimpf G (1980) Die ethische Implikationen des Auseinander-
versetzung zwischen Hraban und Gottschalk um die Pra¨destina-
tionslehre. Hrabanus Maurus und seine Schule, ed. Bo¨hne W. Die
Schule, Fulda, pp 164–174
Troncarelli F (1981) Tradizioni perdute. La ‘Consolazione Philosophiae’
nell’alto medioevo. Medioevo e umanesimo 42. Antenor, Padua
Von
Perger
M
(2005)
Eriugenas
adaptation
der
Aristotelischen
Kategorienlehre. Logik und Theologie. Das Organon in arabischen
und lateinischen Mittelalter, ed. Perler D, Rudolph U. Studien und
Texte zur Geistesgeschichte ders Mittelalters 84. Brill, Leiden,
pp 239–303
Categories
PAUL THOM
Department of Philosophy
School of Philosophical and Historical Inquiry
University of Sydney
Sydney, NSW
Australia
Abstract
The body of thought contained in Aristotle’s Categories
posed a host of questions for its medieval interpreters.
This article considers medieval approaches to ﬁve such
questions:
1. What is the subject matter of the Categories, words or
things?
2. Is Aristotle’s list of ten categories complete and irre-
ducible, and can its completeness be demonstrated?
3. What is the nature of the accidents in the last six
categories (which are not covered extensively in the
Categories)?
4. Are individual accidents individuated by the sub-
stances in which they inhere, can they be transferred
from one substance to another, and what are the
implications
for
the
Christian
doctrine
of
the
Eucharist?
5. What is the ontological nature of relations and rela-
tives, and what are the implications for the Christian
doctrine of the Holy Trinity?
Aristotle’s Categories
Aristotle’s Categories (1b25) states that incomplex expres-
sions signify either Substance (e.g., Man) or Quantity
(e.g.,
Two
cubits
long)
or
Quality
(e.g.,
White)
or Relation (e.g., Double) or Where (e.g., In the market
place) or When (e.g., Yesterday) or Position (e.g., Lying)
or State (e.g., Shod) or Action (e.g., To cut) or Affec-
tion (e.g., To be cut). These are the ten Aristotelian
categories. The non-Substance categories are known as
Accidents.
Among substances, Aristotle distinguishes primary
substances (e.g., the individual man) as being neither
said of a subject nor present in a subject (2b11). Two
types of predication are thus distinguished (2a19). What
is ‘‘said of’’ a subject (as Animal is said of Man) is pred-
icated, both in name and deﬁnition, of the subject. What is
‘‘present in’’ a subject (as Grammatical knowledge is pre-
sent in Man) may be predicated in name, but not in
Categories C
197
C

deﬁnition, of the subject; it is not part of the subject and
cannot exist apart from it (1a20).
According to the Categories, there are individual acci-
dents as well as individual substances. Everything other
than primary substance is either said of or present in
a primary substance. Thus, it is sensible individuals, such
as this man or this horse, which are substance in the truest
and primary and most deﬁnite sense of the word – a claim
that is diametrically opposed to Plato’s Theory of Forms,
which states that intelligible Forms that are most truly
substances.
The Categories mentions features peculiar to some of
the categories, whereby they can be distinguished from
other categories. It is common to all substances, and also
to the differentiae whereby one species is distinguished
from another, that they are not present in any subject
(3a7). It is common to all substances and also peculiar to
them that, while remaining numerically identical, they can
receive contrary qualities through a process of change
(4a10).
What is distinctive of quantity is that subjects can be
equal or unequal to one another in respect of quantity
(6a26). (But equality and inequality themselves are rela-
tives.) What is distinctive of quality is that subjects can be
similar or dissimilar to one another in respect of quality
(11a15). (But similarity and dissimilarity themselves are
relatives.)
Items in the category of relation are not relations in the
modern sense, that is, many-place properties. A relation,
like mastery, inheres in a single subject (a master), which
stands toward an object (a slave). Every relative has
a correlative, as Slave is correlative with Master. It seems
to be a peculiarity of relatives that correlatives are simul-
taneous by nature: when one man becomes a master,
another becomes a slave and when one becomes a slave,
another becomes a master (7b15). (Aristotle discusses
knowledge and the knowable as a possible counterexample
to this claim.)
The Subject Matter of the Categories
The Neoplatonist Plotinus (d. 270) raised a number of
detailed difﬁculties with Aristotle’s account. The big prob-
lem, for him, was that if Aristotle’s scheme of categories is
supposed to be a classiﬁcation of all beings, it seems
unable to accommodate those intelligible entities that are
the primary beings from which all others emanate.
Plotinus’ disciple Porphyry (d. 305) wrote two commen-
taries on the Categories, only one of which survives. He
proposed an ingenious solution to Plotinus’ interpretive
problem. The Categories should not be read as a pretended
classiﬁcation of all beings but as a classiﬁcation of the
species and genera of sensible beings. By this means,
Aristotle’s book could be assimilated into Neoplatonic
doctrine. Porphyry’s most famous work is the Eisagoˆgeˆ –
an introduction to the Categories – which contains the
structure later known as Porphyry’s Tree, a detailed
account of the way in which the category of substances
branches out into its genera and species.
The Categories talks sometimes about ‘‘things that are
said’’ (1a16) and sometimes about ‘‘things that are’’
(1a20). Thus, there arose the interpretive question of
whether the work is about words or things. Porphyry
proposed that the book is about words insofar as they
are used to signify things. This compromise solution was
to become inﬂuential in the Middle Ages.
The commentary on the Categories by Boethius
(d. 524/525) takes over much of Porphyry’s thinking. For
example, he says that the substances of which the Catego-
ries speaks are compounds of matter and form, and not
such things as God or the soul.
In the eleventh century, some interpreters rejected
Porphyry’s compromise concerning the subject matter
of the Categories; they insisted either on reading the
work as being about things [in re] or being about words
[in voce].
The Sufficiency of the Categories
Since the time of Simplicius in the sixth century, com-
mentators have tried to prove that Aristotle was right in
naming just ten categories, and just the ten, which he did
name. They used a variety of principles to divide all beings
into Aristotle’s ten categories.
In the Arabic-speaking world, Avicenna (d. 1037) pro-
posed a division of beings into Substance, Quantity, and
Quality (which can be conceived without regard to any-
thing other than their substance), and the remaining seven
categories (whose conception requires reference to some-
thing other than their substance). This two-plus-seven
division of accidents was taken up in the West by Albert
the Great (d. 1280).
Robert Kilwardby (d. 1279) proposed a three-plus-
three-plus-three division, based on a distinction between
what attached to a substance intrinsically or extrinsically
or in a mixed mode, and between what concerned the
subject’s matter or form or the composite of matter and
form. Kilwardby’s division was later reproduced by Walter
Burley (d. 1344).
In 1266, William of Moerbeke translated Simplicius’
Categories commentary into Latin. Thomas Aquinas,
whose derivation of the ten categories was based on the
198 C
Categories

different modes of predication, consulted this translation:
a predicate either indicates what its subject is substantially,
or else it is in the subject, or else it is outside the subject.
A predicate that is in the subject is so either absolutely
(following either from the subject’s matter or from its
form) or it is in the subject relatively. A predicate that is
outside its subject is either wholly outside the subject
(either not as a measure of the subject or as a measure –
and then either as a measure of time, or of place in relation
to the subject’s parts, or of the whole subject), or outside of
it in the way that Action and Affection are outside their
subject.
John Duns Scotus thought the method of division
could never demonstrate the sufﬁciency of the ten catego-
ries, though he believed they were only ten.
Like Scotus, William Ockham (d. 1347) rejected the
opinion of those who sought to construct a deduction
of the ten categories from ﬁrst principles. He believed
it was necessary only to have categories of Substance
and Quality, the remaining categories being reducible
to these. John Buridan (d. c. 1361) thought all the
categories were reducible to Substance, Quantity, and
Quality.
Problems About Accidents
Aristotle does not deal with the non-substance categories
in any detail. The Categories ends with some loosely
related chapters on contrariety and other types of oppo-
sition, on priority and simultaneity, on motion and on
having. In the Latin world, the Book of the Six Principles,
formerly attributed to Gilbert of Poitiers (d. 1154),
attempts to ﬁll the gap left by Aristotle’s failure to give
a detailed discussion of the six categories coming after
Quality.
In the Arabic world, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ ﬁlled this gap by ana-
lyzing the remaining six categories in detail.
Regarding the individuation of accidents, Porphyry
suggested that an individual accident such the fragrance
of an apple can be separated from its subject, and thus can
exist separately from what it was in, but only if it gets
transferred to another subject. Porphyry’s view of individ-
ual accidents as dependent on individual substance, albeit
in a transferable way, was taken up and transmitted to the
Latin Middle Ages by Boethius.
Peter Abelard took a different view of individual acci-
dents. He understood Aristotle to say that what is in
a subject cannot subsequently exist separated from that
subject. He held that individual accidents are not trans-
ferable between subjects, but at the same time, he held that
they do not attach with necessity to their actual subjects:
an individual accident inhering in a given subject might
have inhered in a different subject.
The question whether individual accidents are indi-
viduated by the substances in which they inhere takes on
an added signiﬁcance when considered in relation to the
Christian doctrine of the Eucharist. The Church’s teaching
is that in the Eucharist the bread and wine become the
body and blood of Christ. Berengar of Tours (d. 1088)
argued that this doctrine entailed that if the bread changes
substantially into the body of Christ while preserving the
accidental features it had when it was bread (rather than
merely preserving the appearance of those accidental fea-
tures), then the same individual accidents must inhere
ﬁrst in one substance and then in another. Thus, it seems
that the Church’s doctrine, when transposed into the
language of the Categories, is not consistent with the
theory that individual accidents are individuated by their
substantial subjects and are not transferable from one
substance to another.
Problems About Relations
Aristotle had raised, but not solved, a question about
whether all correlatives are really simultaneous in nature:
knowledge and the knowable appear to be correlatives, but
the knowable exists prior to becoming known. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
following Porphyry, gives a solution, namely that potential
knowledge is simultaneous with the potentially knowable,
and actual knowledge with the actually known.
In the Christian world, the notions of substance and
relation were used by Saint Augustine to cast philosophical
light on the doctrine of three Persons in one God. Augus-
tine pointed out that when a relation inheres in a subject,
the subject is something substantially besides being subject
to the relation: the slave is substantially a man. What the
subject is substantially came later to be called the relation’s
ground [fundamentum]. Augustine held that God is
a substance (not in the sense that God can receive contrary
qualities through change, but in the sense that God is an
essence not present in anything as a subject). The Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit are said with reference to one
another, in just the way that correlatives are; at the same
time, each of them is substantially God. Augustine’s elab-
oration of the doctrine of the Trinity became the source of
a long tradition of theological thought.
Given that a relation inheres in its subject but stands
toward its object, the question arises whether these two
aspects are independent of each other, and if they are
mutually independent whether one or both are essential
to relations. Robert Kilwardby (d. 1279) took these two
aspects to be mutually independent and took the second
Categories C
199
C

aspect (standing toward an object) to be the essential one.
Given the independence of a relation’s two aspects and
given that its ‘‘towardness’’ is what is essential to it, there
can be no contradiction in supposing a relation to stand
toward an object while not inhering in any subject. If,
then, the mark of a substance is taken to be not inhering
in any subject, it follows that there is no contradiction in
supposing a relation to be a substance.
This argument is rich in theological potential, because
in Augustine’s treatment of the Trinity the three divine
Persons are supposed to be both constituted by their
relations and substantially identical with the Divine
Essence. Clearly, if the Divine Essence is a substance, and
if it is not to be contradictory for the Father to be identical
both with Paternity and with the Divine Essence, then it
should not be contradictory for a relation to be
a substance.
Aristotle had pointed out that a relation of similarity
can come to characterize a subject without any change
occurring in the subject (e.g., because there is a change
in the relation’s object). Some medieval thinkers con-
cluded from this example that no relation has any onto-
logical content: A relation adds nothing to its subject
beyond what is already contained in the relation’s
ground. Among the proponents of this view were
Henry of Ghent (d. 1293) and Richard of Middleton
(d. 1300).
Among the opponents of the view was Walter Burley,
who posited ﬁve elements in a relational situation: the
relation itself, its subject, its ground, its terminus a quo
and its terminus ad quem. Thus, he clearly distinguishes
the ground of a relation from its subject and from its
terminus a quo. For example, the relation of mastery is
grounded in a power to coerce. Both the relation and its
ground are distinguished from the man who happens to be
a master (the subject) and from that master considered
purely as a master (the terminus a quo). Mastery is
a relation, the man is a substance, and the master is an
aggregate of a substance and a relation. Both mastery and
the man are per se beings, but the master as such is a per
accidens being. Thus, what is a per se being (the man) is
a relative only per accidens, whereas what is a per se relative
(the master) is merely a per accidens being.
Robert Alyngton (d. 1398) follows Burley on many
points, but posits four instead of ﬁve elements in
a relational situation. These, it turns out, are the four
per se beings that enter into any real relation: the relation
itself, the subject (the man who happens to be master), the
ground (the power to coerce), and the per se being that
happens to be the terminus ad quem (the man who hap-
pens to be slave).
Alyngton’s analysis, though original, does not depart
from the standard medieval view of relations as inhering in
a single subject (i.e., in modern language as monadic
properties). A relation does require, besides its ground,
two per se extremes. But it inheres in only one of these,
namely its subject. The relation does not inhere in its
object; rather, the relation’s correlative (e.g., servitude)
inheres in the object.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Augustine ▶Boethius
▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Gilbert of Poitiers ▶Henry of
Ghent ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John Buridan
▶John Duns Scotus ▶Peter Abelard ▶Richard of
Middleton
▶Robert
Kilwardby
▶Thomas
Aquinas
▶Trinitarian Logic ▶Trinity ▶Walter Burley ▶William
of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1961) Commentary on the Metaphysics of Aristotle,
trans. Rowan JP, 2 vol. Henry Regnery, Chicago
Aristotle (1963) Aristotle’s Categories and De interpretatione, trans.
Ackrill JL. Clarendon, Oxford
Augustine (1991) The trinity (De trinitate), trans. Hill E. New City, Hyde
Park
Boethius Anicius Manlius Severinus (1891) Categorias Aristotelis
Commentaria, ed. Migne JP. (Patrologia Latina vol 64)
Burley Walter (1497) Super Artem Veterem, Venice, (Repr. Minerva,
Frankfurt 1967)
Kilwardby Robert (1986) Quaestiones in Librum Primum Sententiarum,
ed.
Schneider
J.
Verlag
der
Bayerischen
Akademie
der
Wissenschaften, Munich
Plotinus (1988) Ennead VI.1–5, trans. Armstrong AH. Harvard Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge
Porphyry (1975) Isagoge, trans. Warren EW. The Pontiﬁcal Institute of
Medieval Studies, Toronto
Porphyry (1992) On Aristotle’s categories, trans. Strange S. Cornell Uni-
versity Press, Ithaca
Simplicius (2003) On Aristotle’s categories 1–4, trans. Chase M. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca
Secondary Sources
Conti A (2007a) Robert Alyngton. In: Zalta EN (ed) The Stanford
encyclopedia
of
philosophy,
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
alyngton/
Conti A (2007b) Walter Burley. In: Zalta EN (ed) The Stanford encyclo-
pedia of philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/burley/
Dunlop DM (1957–1959) Al Farabi’s paraphrase of the categories. Islamic
Q 5:168–197; 7:21–54
Henninger M (1989) Relations: medieval theories 1250–1325. Clarendon,
Oxford
Klima G (2008) John Buridan. Oxford University Press, New York
Marenbon J (2007) Medieval philosophy: an historical and philosophical
introduction. Routledge, London
Morewedge P (1973) The metaphysics of Avicenna (Ibn Sı¯na¯). A critical
translation-commentary and analysis of the fundamental arguments
200 C
Categories

in Avicenna’s Metaphysica in the Da¯nish Na¯ma-i‘ala¯’ı¯ (The book of
scientiﬁc knowledge). Routledge/Kegan Paul, London
Sorabji R (2005) The philosophy of the commentators 200–600 AD:
a sourcebook, vol 3: logic and metaphysics. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca
Categories, Commentaries on
Aristotle’s
▶Albert the Great
▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and
Hebrew Traditions
▶Aristotle, Arabic
▶Boethius
▶Categories
▶Garlandus the Computist
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
▶John Scottus Eriugena
▶Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle Ages
▶Logic, Byzantine
▶Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World
▶Logic, Jewish
▶Michael Psellos
▶Peter Abelard
▶William of Ockham
Causality
ANDRE´ GODDU
Department of Physics
Stonehill College
Easton, MA
USA
Abstract
Modern philosophical accounts of causality deviate dra-
matically from medieval accounts, yet many of the views
held in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries represent
the end of an evolutionary process that began in the
thirteenth century with the reintroduction of Aristotelian
natural philosophy to medieval authors. The entry traces
the
evolution
from
premodern
to
modern
views,
explaining the transition that occurred from early medie-
val authors through late medieval scholastics. The crucial
turning point is the tendency to distinguish explanatory
principles from causes properly conceived. That tendency
in turn corresponds to a critique of ﬁnal causes in nature.
The crucial change that occurred in the seventeenth cen-
tury, however, was due less to a change in causal concep-
tions and more to implications of mechanical philosophy
for commonsense inferences about nature and causal
relations.
The history of western accounts of causality can be
divided
into
two
long
periods:
premodern
and
modern. Premodern philosophers generally adopted
a commonsense perspective that corresponds to ordinary
experience. They concluded from observed regularities
that some events are the causes of events that follow
from them. In some of these cases they further concluded
that the regularity proceeded from intrinsic characteristics
of things that, unless hindered, produce or generate always
or for the most part the same effects. Premodern accounts
of causality in human events (history, law, and ethics)
depend on the purpose of the account. Accordingly, they
may be very speciﬁc if the aim is to assign praise or blame,
or very general if the end is to understand human nature
or the signiﬁcance of a major event. In ‘‘sacred’’ histories,
authors interpreted secular events as either divine actions
or dependent somehow on divine intervention. Ancient
Greek historians interpreted the causes of major events as
general characteristics of a culture inferred from details
about customs. This sort of view is sometimes portrayed
as cyclical in the sense that humans in given cultures tend
to behave in similar and predictable ways. Christian
authors,
following
the
lead
of
Sacred
Scripture,
superimposed directionality on history, a view that also
depended on their belief in a providential order. This
linear conception later contributes to modern ideas of
progress (Funkenstein 1965).
In medieval European philosophy, we may also distin-
guish a major division between accounts prior to the
thirteenth century and those after about 1250. The divi-
sion arises from the introduction of Aristotle’s treatises on
nature in western Europe around the middle of the thir-
teenth century.
Among Arabic philosophers there is also a division
that appears in the ninth to tenth centuries between theo-
logical accounts that attribute everything and all events to
a single cause (the Ashʿarite doctrine sometimes referred
to as ‘‘occasionalism’’) as opposed to those accounts that
argued for the integrity and legitimacy of secondary
causes. In Greek and Latin European thought of the early
Middle Ages, there is also a major theological focus very
much inﬂuenced by Neoplatonism, but unlike extreme
Ashʿarite
thought
it
preserves
secondary
causation
Causality C
201
C

(Fakhry 1958; Marmura 1965). The following focuses ﬁrst
on accounts of causality in the period prior to 1250, and
then turns to developments after 1250 that advance
a relatively more secular approach, leading, in the later
Middle Ages, to critiques that inﬂuenced some early mod-
ern developments.
Late antique and early medieval Christian authors
maintained that no new substance or change can be pro-
duced out of nothing. They believed that God created the
world out of nothing, but Christian authors following the
declarations of the early Fathers of the Church and of
Neoplatonic philosophers conceived of divine creation in
terms of overﬂowing of the divine essence or of emanation
while maintaining a distinction between God and creation.
Neoplatonic authors maintained that causes and effects
resemble each other, and that an effect has a preexistence
in a sense in the cause, and something of the cause con-
tinues to exist in a way in its effect (Bos and Meijer 1992).
Augustine of Hippo also believed that every effect
must have a cause, and adapted the Neoplatonic concep-
tion by positing the preexistence of created things as
exemplars in the mind of God. Writing in polemical con-
texts, Augustine fashioned compromises inﬂuential on
later Christian authors. How can one reconcile belief in
an omnipotent and omniscient God with afﬁrmation of
free will and the contingency of natural and human
events?
The
doctrine
of
original
sin
allowed
for
a distinction between prelapsarian and postlapsarian nat-
ural law, the latter justifying compromises in a world
where nature and the human relationship with nature
are corrupted by rebellion and sin. Thus is human history
depicted as a great drama subsumed by an eschatology in
which the life of Christ acts as a pattern or model for the
Christian life (Markus 1972; Matthews 1999). This is
a comprehensive view of history and causation that we
encounter in later authors such as Dante and Milton, and
in secular forms in Hegel, Marx, and Tolstoy.
What stands out among Christian adaptations of Neo-
platonic ideas is the subordination of logical issues to
ontology. Many of the major theses about causality held
by medieval authors can be found in Proclus and the Liber
de causis. All existing things are in each according to its
proper nature, that is to say, being is adapted to the level of
the recipient. Every effect remains in its cause, proceeds
from it, and returns to it. Representative authors maintain
the dependence of lower creatures on the higher, adopting
different views about the direct and immediate depen-
dence of all things on God (Bos and Meijer 1992).
Perhaps the ﬁrst western medieval author to provide
a systematic account is John Scottus Eriugena. In his
Periphyseon, we ﬁnd a kind of Neoplatonic summa written
remarkably by an author with no direct knowledge of
Plotinus, Porphyry, or Proclus. His study of nature elabo-
rates the dialectical relation between creator and created.
He describes four divisions of nature, and works out the
process of divine self-articulation and self-manifestation,
creation as relating like to like with cause and effect
expressed as mutually dependent relative terms. Eriugena
exercised enormous inﬂuence on authors up to the thir-
teenth century when some of his formulations were
condemned as giving occasion to misunderstanding and
confusion. He nonetheless continued to inﬂuence the
more Neoplatonic Aristotelians and the mystical thinkers
of the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries (Eriugena 1987;
Moran 1989).
The medieval proofs for the existence of God are
variations on causal proofs or on the dependence of beings
for their existence and well-being on a being that is totally
self-sufﬁcient. Saint Anselm’s ‘‘faith seeking understand-
ing’’ represents an effort to articulate the extent of God’s
self-sufﬁciency and the relation of the divine attributes to
that than which no greater can be thought (McDowell and
Williams 2003).
With Saint Bonaventure appears a representative Fran-
ciscan author of the Neoplatonic tradition who employed
Aristotelian causal categories to ﬂesh out the relations
(vestiges and images) that lead us back to the original
exemplar (Noone 1999).
The inﬂuence of Aristotelian physics and account of
scientiﬁc demonstration transformed discussions about
causality, leading to more analytical treatment of the prin-
ciple of causality and the achievability of scientiﬁc knowl-
edge. The transformation also reﬂects the relatively more
depersonalized and relatively more secular accounts of
nature and causal processes. Aristotle sought explanation
of nature and change in causal principles. All things tend
to intrinsically determined goals. Every change requires
a cause, and nothing can change by itself. These assump-
tions adopted from his predecessors and taken as self-
evident led Aristotle to propose material, formal, ﬁnal,
and efﬁcient causes (not necessarily all four) to account
for change (Aristotle 1941b, 1968–1970; Falcon 2005). The
basic principles that inﬂuenced his medieval commenta-
tors attest to their acceptance generally of commonsense
notions and of the principle of the uniformity of nature.
Things acting always or for the most part in regular and
predictable ways cannot, they thought, be due to chance.
They contrasted natural motions with forced motions,
and attempted to account for forced motions in terms of
natural motions. Accordingly, they rejected the possibility
that regularly observed events could be the result exclu-
sively of external forces acting on a body. Even authors like
202 C
Causality

William of Ockham who was skeptical about strict dem-
onstration of causal connections, nonetheless, afﬁrmed
the certainty of causal relations and even the knowability
a priori of some causal relations (Adams 1987).
Critics tried to reﬁne notions and settle disputes about
details. Most adopted Aristotle’s formal and ﬁnal causes,
the material subject of change that is receptive of form and
capable of being formed, and the efﬁcient or producing
causes of change and motion. In some cases, entities
transmit the form they possess to the entity that they
produce or in which they produce a change. Among
motions, locomotion has a privileged status. Because all
change is dependent on contact or proximity, every
change depends on locomotion. In Aristotle’s cosmologi-
cal vision, lower motions depend on higher motions. In
a chain of efﬁcient causes, the ﬁrst is the moving cause,
leading Aristotle to propose the unmoved mover as the
ultimate and ﬁrst source of all change in the universe. By
his account no change is neutral; all change is either
according to nature or contrary to nature. In Aristotle’s
account of natural elemental motions, their natures
account for tendencies and directionality, but their mov-
ing or efﬁcient causes are the entity that generated the
elemental nature in the ﬁrst place and the agents that
remove obstacles. The distinctions among the elements
are rooted in qualitative contraries in the case of the
contrary motions of sublunar elements, and in the eternal
circular motion of the celestial element, according to
the Prime Mover’s emulation of the unmoved mover
(Aristotle 1939; Bodna´r 1997).
After 1250, Latin philosophers applied this general
picture to their understanding of theological doctrine,
and modiﬁed it by their efforts to reconcile it with the
views of their Neoplatonic predecessors. A general over-
view cannot do justice to the details, distinctions, and
differences among them. Issues that they discussed and
reﬁned included numerous questions. Can a cause have
a plurality of effects? Can a cause have speciﬁcally or
numerically different effects? Can the same or a similar
effect be produced by two speciﬁcally different causes? Are
causes prior to their effects, simultaneous with their
effects, or, in some cases, later than their effects? What
are necessary and/or sufﬁcient conditions? What is the
difference between an efﬁcient cause and a sine qua non
condition? Finally, Aristotle’s conception of strict scien-
tiﬁc demonstration imposed a challenge to produce dem-
onstrations from cause to effect, and to justify our
knowledge of causes (Aristotle 1941a). By the end of the
fourteenth century, philosophers held to a variety of opin-
ions on the demonstrability, certainty, and knowability
of causes. In general, some authors afﬁrmed all three
(with
signiﬁcant
variations
by
Robert
Grosseteste,
Bonaventure, Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas, Giles of
Rome, Duns Scotus, and their followers). Some rejected
demonstrability while afﬁrming certainty and knowability
(e.g., Ockham and other like nominalist and somewhat
more empiricist Aristotelians). Nicholas of Autrecourt
rejected the principle of causality while accepting some
causal inferences in a very restricted sense (Thijssen 1987).
Among speciﬁc examples, explanations of elemental
motion and accounts of the highest form of demonstra-
tion serve to illustrate the above general comments.
What causes heavy bodies to always move downward
toward the center of the Earth? In Physics VIII, 4, Aristotle
argued that heavy bodies fall because of an intrinsic prin-
ciple of motion, but he characterized the principle as
passive, a capacity for being moved, not for moving itself.
A heavy body is capable of a natural motion if acted upon,
so the weight or the matter of the body is not its mover,
and no heavy body stops its motion. Heaviness is nothing
more than a downward tendency. The heavy body is
moved, then, directly by the agent that generated it and
made it heavy and, incidentally, by the agent that removes
any obstacle to its motion. The argument constitutes
a step in Aristotle’s proof of the unmoved mover (Bodna´r
1997). In De caelo III, 2, he turned speciﬁcally to
a discussion of elemental motions. The natural motion
of each body is simple. Heavy bodies rest naturally at the
center of Earth, and so their natural motion is toward their
place of rest. In this account Aristotle characterizes nature
as a cause of movement in the thing itself. Here he suggests
that sublunar bodies owe their impulse or tendency to
weight or lightness. He explains the acceleration of falling
bodies by means of the instrumentality of air. He suggests
that the weight acting as an original force transmits the
force by impressing its motion onto air, which having an
intermediate tendency upward or downward, causes the
body to accelerate as it falls. Aristotle’s account here can be
reconciled with the version from Physics if we keep in
mind Aristotle’s principles about the direct cause as the
ﬁrst cause, and the nature of the element as the tendency
placed in it by its generator. The remainder of De caelo III
and IV is an extensive discussion of the generation of
the elements and the nature of weight and lightness,
conﬁrming its consistency with the account given in
Physics. In De caelo IV, 3–6, Aristotle repeats the assertion
that the essential cause of natural downward motion
is the agent that ﬁrst made the body heavy and, inciden-
tally, the remover of obstacles to motion, adding that
acceleration is also a function of the shape of bodies in
relation to the divisibility of the medium through which
they move.
Causality C
203
C

The account in De caelo III, 2 is nonetheless suscep-
tible to a more mechanical interpretation. When Aris-
totle refers to nature as a cause, he suggests that weight
acts as a force transmitting an impulse or motion to air
that in turn functions as an instrumental cause of faster
motion. Such texts occasionally stimulated medieval
commentators, dependent on Latin translations and
commentaries to treat the motions of elemental bodies
in a more mechanical way (Aristotle 1957–1990; Goddu
1981, 1999).
Albert the Great came to grips with an apparent prob-
lem in Aristotle’s account and Averroes’ interpretation.
Heavy bodies move naturally downward because their
tendency downward is in them, yet the direct essential
cause of that tendency is the agent that generated them,
and the incidental cause is the agent that removes the
obstacle to motion. Therefore, the cause of downward
motion is both natural and extrinsic. With respect to
acceleration, force or impetus assists a natural motion.
As he considered the instrumentality of air, Albert con-
cluded that natural motions are partly violent, and pro-
jectile motions are partly natural (Albert the Great 1890,
1971; Goddu 1981; Weisheipl 1980, 1985).
The theory of impetus implied that the motor of
a projectile would be intrinsic to the body. Thomas
Aquinas rejected the theory of impetus in part because
a violent motion would then have an intrinsic principle of
motion, a conclusion that is contrary to the very notion of
a violent motion – it must have its force or mover extrinsic
to it. Likewise, Thomas recognized that the principle of
elemental motion must also be natural and intrinsic, albeit
passive and not active (Aquinas 1963a, b; Goddu 1981,
1984).
William of Ockham gave two not entirely compatible
accounts. In one, he regarded weight as the efﬁcient cause
of a motion downward. Elsewhere he also adopted the
instrumentality of air in the account of both elemental
and projectile motions (William of Ockham 1985; Adams
1987; Goddu 1984, 1999). The point in referring to all of
these discussions, however, is to emphasize the extent to
which some medieval commentators (e.g., Albert the
Great, Duns Scotus, and Ockham) interpreted intrinsic
and extrinsic principles as movers, motors, forces, in
short, as efﬁcient causes.
With respect to the highest form of demonstration,
these authors’ views are also instructive. Aristotle aimed at
scientiﬁc understanding of known facts, why facts are so,
what causes explain them (Aristotle 1941a). With a great
deal of experience, we can, Aristotle believed, discover the
ﬁrst principles that explain why subjects have the
attributes that we know them to have. The form of argu-
ment that Aristotle made preeminent is the syllogism.
Typically, a syllogism consists of two premises and
a conclusion, linking the subject of the major premise to
the predicate of the conclusion by means of a middle term.
In the highest form of demonstration, the middle term of
a syllogism expresses the cause why the predicate of the
conclusion belongs to its subject. The cause is distinguish-
able from the essence, yet follows from it. Medieval
authors agreed that the middle term is a real deﬁnition,
although they differed about whether it is a real deﬁnition
of the subject or of the attribute (Longeway 2007; see also
the entry on Posterior Analytics, Commentaries on
Aristotle’s by Longeway in this volume).
Robert Grosseteste established a pattern for under-
standing Aristotle’s doctrine while attempting to reconcile
it with Augustine’s Neoplatonic account of knowledge.
Knowledge of a real deﬁnition of a substance does not
provide knowledge of its causal powers, according to
Grosseteste. Only experience (usually oft-repeated experi-
ence) can provide knowledge of causal powers, a view that
inﬂuenced Ockham. Grosseteste linked his account, how-
ever, to an emanationist metaphysics that subsequent
authors rejected. Albert the Great adopted the Aristotelian
view that each subject has its own principles, and he also
argued that the highest form of demonstration has
a deﬁnition of the attribute as the middle term, a causal
deﬁnition of an attribute whose existence depends on
other things, demonstrating that the attribute actually
belongs to the subject (Longeway 2007).
Thomas Aquinas maintained that a thing’s nature is
necessarily an efﬁcient cause of its primary attributes,
capacities that depend on the right conditions for their
actualization. Therefore, Thomas argued for the deﬁnition
of the subject term as the middle term; the minor premise
being true because of the efﬁcient causal connection
between the essence of the subject (the real deﬁnition)
and its attributes (Longeway 2007).
William of Ockham agreed with Thomas that the
middle term is the deﬁnition of the subject, but only in
mathematics does a demonstration show that an attribute
actually belongs to the subject (Albert’s criterion). Ock-
ham held that causal connections can be known with
certainty, a few relating to human voluntary operations
even a priori, but they cannot be demonstrated. Talk about
capacities is oblique talk using modal terms about actual
events. Every conclusion that relies on natural efﬁcient
causes is hypothetical, not categorical. Ockham rejected
ﬁnal causes as exercising any real productive power, so that
identiﬁcation of an efﬁcient cause implies the material
204 C
Causality

conditions on which the operation of the efﬁcient cause
depends, and entails a ﬁnal cause only when the efﬁcient
cause is a conscious agent with a purpose. Both Duns
Scotus and Ockham retained Grosseteste’s empiricist
bent. Ockham thought that in some cases the causal
power of a natural kind can be known from a single
instance, conﬁrming the extent to which he accepted
the principle of the uniformity of nature. Our knowl-
edge of the effects, however, is entirely dependent
on experience or the observation of at least one
instance and, in most cases, repeated experience criti-
cally evaluated (Longeway 2007; Adams 1987; Goddu
1984, 1999).
The upshot of such discussions can be formulated as
a list of tendencies. The notion of ‘‘cause’’ was distin-
guished from explanatory principles, and accordingly
restricted more and more to efﬁcient or producing
cause. This restriction did not entail the rejection of mate-
rial and formal causes, although it did tend to entail the
rejection of ﬁnal causes in nature. Scholastic philosophers,
for the most part, continued to ﬁnd matter and form,
whether as principles or as existing constituents of things,
useful in the explanation of substances and their attri-
butes, essential and accidental (Goddu 1999). Even in
the seventeenth century, there was less a denial of the
four causes than a decision to focus on efﬁcient causes as
the proper aim of practical investigations of nature.
Paralleling this trend (restriction to efﬁcient causality)
was a process of secularization, by means of which per-
sonal and teleological conceptions of causality give way to
more reductive and empiricist views, or, in cases where the
linear conception of history was ‘‘secularized,’’ history was
seen as having an inner logic.
Finally,
however
much
seventeenth-century
mechanical philosophy reduced efﬁcient causality in
nature to contact-action, the belief in invisible parti-
cles and forces as causes of motion, behavior, and
secondary qualities of bodies in nature undermined
the foundation in ordinary experience for observing
causal connections. Because the supposed fundamental
causes are invisible, some even occult, ordinary expe-
rience could no longer serve as a reliable guide to our
understanding of nature or for our inferences about
causal relations. This evolutionary process began with
the re-introduction of Aristotelian natural philosophy
in the thirteenth century, leading to the critique of
natural ﬁnal causality in the fourteenth, inﬂuencing
the practical reduction to efﬁcient causality in the
seventeenth, culminating in Hume’s empiricist reduc-
tionism
to
invariable
sequence
and
habit
in
the
eighteenth, and collapsing into the modern notion of
concomitant variation. The adequacy of early modern
views may be questioned by considering the regular
sequence between day and night—regular, sequential,
and plainly noncausal (Taylor 1963). Contemporary
philosophers have reintroduced notions of agency, capac-
ity, power, tendency, disposition, impediment, and the like
into their discussions, perhaps in part as the result of
renewed interest in ancient and medieval accounts.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Albertism ▶Anselm of
Canterbury ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Augustine ▶Bonaven-
ture ▶De caelo, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Episte-
mology ▶Form and Matter ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad ▶Giles of Rome ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad
ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Impetus ▶John Duns
Scotus ▶John Scottus Eriugena ▶Metaphysics ▶Natural
Philosophy ▶Nicholas of Autrecourt ▶Philosophical
Theology, Byzantine ▶Philosophical Theology, Jewish
▶Posterior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Pro-
clus, Arabic ▶Proofs of the Existence of God ▶Realism
▶Robert Grosseteste ▶Skepticism ▶Substance, Accident
and Modes ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Thomism ▶Will
▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert the Great (1890) Physicorum libri. In: Opera omnia, vol 3,
ed. Borgnet A. Ludovicus Vive`s, Paris
Albert the Great (1971) De caelo et mundo. In: Opera omnia, vol 5,
ed. Geyer B. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Albert the Great (1987–1993) Physica. Pars I. Libri 1–4, Pars II. Libri 5–8,
ed. Hossfeld P. Aschendorf, Mu¨nster
Anselm of Canterbury (1998) The major works. ed. and trans. Davies B,
Evans GR. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Aquinas Thomas (1963a) Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics, trans.
Blackwell R et al. Yale University Press, New Haven
Aquinas Thomas (1963b) Exposition of Aristotle’s treatise On the
Heavens, Books I–III, 2 vols, trans. Larcher R, Conway P. College of
St. Mary of the Springs, Columbus
Aristotle (1939) On the heavens, trans. Guthrie WKC. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
Aristotle (1941a) Analytica posteriora, trans. Mure GRG. In: The basic
works of Aristotle, ed. McKeon R. Random House, New York
Aristotle (1941b) Metaphysica, trans. Ross WD. In: The basic works of
Aristotle, ed. McKeon R Random House, New York
Aristotle (1957–1990) Physica. In: Aristoteles Latinus, vol 7. Translatio
Vetus, ed. Bossier F, Brams J; Translatio Vaticana, ed. Mansion A.
Brill, Leiden
Aristotle (1968–1970) Physics, 2 vols, trans. Wickstead PH, Cornford FM.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Eriugena John Scottus (1987) Periphyseon, trans. Williams IS, O’Meara J.
Bellarmin, Montreal
Causality C
205
C

William of Ockham (1985) Expositio in octo libros Physicorum. Opera
philosophica, vol 4, ed. Richter V, Leibold G; Vol 5, ed. Wood R et al.
The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
William of Ockham (2007) Demonstration and scientiﬁc knowledge,
trans. Longeway J. University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame
Secondary Sources
Adams M (1987) William Ockham, 2 vols. University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame
Bodna´r I (1997) Movers and elemental motions in Aristotle. Oxford Stud
Anc Philos 15:81–117
Bos EP, Meijer PA (eds) (1992) On Proclus and his inﬂuence in medieval
philosophy. Brill, Leiden
Fakhry M (1958) Islamic occasionalism and its critique by Averroes and
Aquinas. Unwin and Unwin, London
Falcon A (2005) Aristotle and the uniformity of nature: unity without
uniformity. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Funkenstein
A
(1965)
Heilsplan
und
natu¨rliche
Entwicklung.
Nymphenburger Verlagshandlung, Munich
Goddu A (1981) The contribution of Albertus Magnus to discussions of
natural and violent motions. In: Albert der Grosse, Seine Zeit, Sein
Werk, Seine Wirkung. Miscellanea Mediaev, vol 14, pp 116–125
Goddu A (1984) The physics of William of Ockham. Brill, Leiden
Goddu A (1999) Ockham’s philosophy of nature. In: Spade P (ed) The
Cambridge companion to Ockham. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 143–167
Longeway J (2007) Introduction. In: William of Ockham (ed) Demon-
stration and scientiﬁc knowledge in William of Ockham. University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, pp 1–140
Markus RA (ed) (1972) Augustine: a collection of critical essays. Anchor
Books, Garden City
Marmura M (1965) Ghazali and demonstrative science. J Hist Philos 3:
183–204
Matthews G (ed) (1999) The Augustinian tradition. University of Cali-
fornia Press, Berkeley
McDowell J, Williams T (2003) In search of certainty. Tyndale House,
Wheaton
Moran D (1989) The philosophy of John Scottus Eriugena, A study of
idealism in the Middle Ages. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Noone T (1999) The Franciscans and epistemology: reﬂections on the
roles of Bonaventure and Scotus. In: Houser R (ed) Medieval mas-
ters, essays in honor of Msgr. E. A. Synan. University of St. Thomas,
Houston, pp 63–90
Taylor R (1963) Causation. Monist 47:287–313
Thijssen JMMH (1987) John Buridan and Nicholas of Autrecourt on
causality and induction. Traditio 43:237–255
Weisheipl J (ed) (1980) Albertus Magnus and the sciences: commemora-
tive essays 1980. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies, Toronto
Weisheipl J (1985) In: Carroll W (ed) Nature and motion in the middle
ages. Catholic University of America, Washington, DC
Censorship and Academic
Freedom
▶Parisian Condemnation of 1277
▶Universities and Philosophy
Certainty
CHRISTOPHE GRELLARD
Philosophy
University of Paris 1 Panthe´on-Sorbonne
Paris
France
Abstract
The medieval reﬂections on certainty (certitudo) under-
stood as an epistemic and psychological property of beliefs
and of the subject that possesses them are presented
mainly in two ﬁelds, on one hand the examination of the
status of knowledge facing skeptical criticism, and on the
other hand, the demarcation of the role of faith in relation
to knowledge and opinion. In general, we assume in the
Middle Ages, that science is about truth, and science as
a psychological state (act or habit) must be accompanied
by guarantees that what is known, cannot be wrong.
Knowledge must be certain in the sense that its truth
must be unambiguous (excluding any possibility of
doubt). To the extent that such immunity may be both
objective and subjective, there are three types of certainty:
ﬁrst objective certainty, which rejoins the concept of
evidentness (evidentia) and is linked to the idea of infalli-
bility; second, a subjective certainty, as we do not hesitate
to give our consent (the medieval philosophers use of the
expression sine formidine de opposito, without fear that the
opposite of what we assume is true); and ﬁnally a moral
certainty, which refers to the reﬂection on the contingent
action and designates enough certainty to an act. This
latter kind of certainty comes closer to a form of probabi-
lism. The main debate among philosophers and medieval
theologians focuses on conditions of certainty and the
objects of a certain judgment. In other words, one must
determine what makes a proposition certain.
Thomas Aquinas exempliﬁes the primary position in the
thirteenth century. The three forms of certainty distin-
guished
above
(epistemological,
psychological,
and
moral) are clearly presented by him (In Sent. L. III, d.
23, q. 2, a. 1, q. 3, a. 1; ST I II, 14, 6, 112, 5, II-II, 4, 8). We
must distinguish the certainty that refers to the strength of
the adhesion (ﬁrmitas adhaesionis) from certainty assim-
ilated from evidentness. This distinction in fact refers to
a difference in the cause. Its object causes the evidentness
whereas the ﬁrmness increases the disposition of the sub-
ject. Thus, the ﬁrmness will be considered as a state proper
to every intellect, and will be only a relative judgment on
206 C
Censorship and Academic Freedom

the collection of beliefs and knowledge of the intellect.
A form of reﬂexivity, which is an additional guarantee,
manifests this type of certainty that when I know by faith
or science, I know that I know. However, the objective
certitude called evidence is a certainty caused not by the
dispositions of the subject but directly by the object. Thus,
there is such a certainty when we judge from the principles
of the object. To assess the certainty of assent, we must
then identify its cause, but we must also determine how
the mind apprehends the cause. In fact, in many ways (if
not
more)
than
the
understanding
of
principles
(intellectus) and science, faith should be entitled to this
evidentness since its objects are immutable and eternal
realities, the ﬁrst infallible truth, simple and unchanging.
But these objects are not fully apprehended by the intel-
lect, since the will just supplements the work of the intel-
lect as a cause of certainty. De iure, therefore, the highest
certainty is one whereby the cause is the highest, that is to
say wisdom as the science of divine things. Nevertheless,
science, which is at the same time evident with regard to its
object and ﬁrm, because of the mode of apprehension of
the object by the subject, is more certain to us than faith.
Thomas can then resume the hierarchy established by
Hugh of St. Victor that places faith below science in
terms of evidentness, but above opinion because of the
strength that accompanies it. Thus, the perfection of
a science is heightened by the more or less larger
evidentness that accompanies it while that of faith will be
in force (vehementia) of the adhesion. Besides this dual
characterization of certainty in evidence and ﬁrmness, we
must still distinguish absolute certainty, which covers
objects immutable, from the certainty of the contingent
which is related to a state of affairs, for example, the
current status of the world when we make judgments.
Therefore, Thomas concluded that one should not seek
certainty in the same way as one would in all things. In
human affairs, in particular, it is virtually impossible to
achieve absolute certainty. One must therefore be content
with a probable certainty (II-II, 70, 2). This certainty is
one relating to objects that are true in most cases (ut in
pluribus, I-II, 96, 1).
If we can say that, in general, the Thomistic distinc-
tions are widely used throughout the Middle Ages, an
important milestone is found in Duns Scotus’ reﬂections
on certainty, in his refutation of Henry of Ghent’s ‘‘skep-
ticism’’ (Ord. I, d. 3, }} 224ss). Duns Scotus proposes
a kind of architecture of reasoning whereby absolute
certainty is a guarantee for all inferior forms of certainty
speciﬁc to contingent knowledge. But alongside absolute
certainty of the principles which warrant both experience
(induction) and of sensation, Scotus adds absolute
certainty of reﬂexive acts, following Augustine, in that
we are certain about our own actions. Knowledge of self
is an absolute knowledge in the same way as the princi-
ples. There is thus a dual foundation of certain knowl-
edge, both necessary and contingent, so that self-
knowledge, even if it is known in a secondary way, is
a condition of experience and science. This epistemic
revaluation of contingency is coupled with a reversal of
Aristotelian epistemology, which is obviously dependent
on the nature of the known object. Henceforth, the foun-
dation of certainty is moved toward the subject of knowl-
edge.
The
introduction
of the
infallible
form
of
contingency cuts both ways in the medieval debates. On
one hand, it highlights more clearly the fragility of our
grasp of the contingent. This fragility will be highlighted
in post-Scotus theology through the reﬂections on the
intuition of a nonexistent object and divine deception.
On the other hand, it provides the ultimate stopping point
for skeptical doubt and a point of departure for
a reconstruction of knowledge from the certainty of self,
since we are dealing with a proposal absolutely indubitable
and infallible, which brings subjective certainty on par with
objective certainty or evidentness. This approach is gener-
ally taken in the treatment of divine deception. The inclu-
sion of the ego cogito in the foundation of all certainty
opposing divine deception appears explicitly for example
in William Crathorn (In I Sent, q. 1, ccl. 14). This founda-
tion is however strengthened by the argument that God
cannot deceive, and it is the conjunction of these two
theses that can save beliefs.
An alternative position, which allows support of con-
tingency, without giving a special role to contingent
knowledge like the cogito, appears in Buridan. This posi-
tion, which can be described as reliabilism, will have some
success in the epistemology of the late Middle Ages up
until the circle of John Mair in the sixteenth century. In
many ways, this is a restatement of the Thomistic position
in a new context. In a sense, Buridan again clearly sepa-
rates certainty and evidentness. Certainty refers to the
ﬁrmness of the assent to truth, while evidentness indicates
a causal relationship between an object and my mind
(Summulae, tract. 8, from Demonstrationibus, In Met II,
Q. 1). Thus, evidence implies certainty, but not vice versa
as shown in the case of faith (in which the content may be
obscure). From this starting point, Buridan distinguishes
absolute evidentness, unfalsiﬁable by any power whatso-
ever (i.e., the evidentness of analytical principles), and
relative evidentness (ex suppositione) that refers to any
proposition always true under the laws of nature, but
which can be falsiﬁed in supernatural circumstances.
This
natural
evidentness
ensures
the
certainty
of
Certainty C
207
C

experimental science and our sensations. In fact, the basis
of this evidentness is the natural inclination of the human
mind to truth. The inclination of the intellect to the truth
is nothing other than the afﬁrmation that there is no
reason to think that an event that has always occurred,
an observation that has always been conﬁrmed, will be
invalidated at once. When certain precautions are taken
(repeated observations in different circumstances, the
absence of counterexamples, similarities between cases),
it is neither reasonable nor scientiﬁcally fruitful to doubt
our cognitive processes. Indeed, the Picard Master argues
that our inclination to truth is comparable to the inclina-
tion of wheat growing. Indeed, wheat cannot grow in
exceptional climatic conditions, but it will under normal
conditions. We must therefore understand that there is,
similarly, in us humans a biological structure that enables
us to sufﬁciently make a reliable capture of the outside
world, under normal functioning of our cognition. Natu-
ral evidentness excludes error (the opposite cannot occur)
in normal operating conditions. That is to say, assuming
that God does not intervene. Buridan requires only that
such divine intervention does not need to be taken into
account in practice in a theory of knowledge. The relative
evidentness makes clear on the impossibility in some cases
to control all parameters of knowledge. The inclination of
the intellect to realize the truth reﬂects this general reli-
ability. Justifying our knowledge is neither to exclude any
objections that are logically possible, nor to reject a priori
all sources of error, but only to exclude some relevant
alternatives in a particular context. Thus, the error, exem-
pliﬁed by divine intervention, is a theoretical possibility,
which reﬂects the ignorance of some possible parameters
of knowledge in a given context, but does not call into
question the criteria of the infallibility of truth and knowl-
edge of the contingent.
See also: ▶Divine Power ▶Epistemology ▶Henry of
Ghent ▶Intuitive and Abstractive Cognition ▶John
Buridan ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Knowledge ▶Skepticism
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Truth, Theories of ▶William
Crathorn
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1929–1947) Scriptum super libros Sententiarum, ed.
Mandonnet and Moos. Lethielleux, Paris
Augustine of Hippone. Contra Academicos. Brepols, Turnhout CCSL 23
Augustine of Hippone. De Trinitate. Brepols, Turnhout, CCSL 50
Buridan
John
(1518)
In
Metaphysicen
Aristotelis
Questiones
argutissimae. Paris (repr. (1964) Kommentar zur Aristotelischen
Metaphysik, Minerva, Frankfurt a. M)
Buridan John (2001) In: De Rijk LM (ed) Johannes Buridanus, Summulae:
De
Demonstrationibus,
Artistarium
10-8.
Ingenium,
Haren,
Groningen
Crathorn William (1988) Quaestiones super librum sententiarum, ed.
Hoffmann F. Questionen Zum ersten Sentenzenbuch. Beitra¨ge zur
Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des Mittelalters, Band 29.
Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Duns Scotus John (1954) Ordinatio, Opera Omnia, vol 3. Typis
Polyglottis Vaticanis, Civitas Vaticana, pp 123–172, L. I, d. 3, q. 4:
Utrum aliqua veritas certa et sincera possit naturaliter cognosci ab
intellectu viatoris absque lucis increati speciali illustratione
Nicholas of Autrecourt (1994) In: De Rijk LM. Nicholas of Autrecourt.
His correspondence with Master Giles and Bernard d’Arezzo. Brill,
Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Wodeham
Adam
(1990)
Lectura
secunda
in
Librum
primum
Sententiarum, 3 vols, ed. Wood R, Gal G. St Bonaventure University,
New York
Secondary Sources
Boulnois O (2007) Ego ou Cogito? Doute, tromperie et de certitude de soi
du xiv au xvi sie`cle. In: Boulnois (ed) Ge´ne´alogies du sujet de Saint
Anselme a` Malebranche. Vrin, Paris, pp 171–214
Broadie A (1989) Notion and object. Aspects of late medieval epistemol-
ogy. Clarendon Press, Oxford
De Rijk LM (1994) On man capability of grasping the truth. In: Craemer-
Ruegenberg I, Speer A (e´ds) Scientia und ars im Hoch- und
Spa¨tmittelalter. Miscellanea Mediaevalia, 22/1. De Gruyter, Berlin/
New York, pp 281–303
Fitzgerald (2003) The medieval roots of reliabilist epistemology: Albert of
Saxony’s view of immediate apprehension. Synthese 136(3):409–434
Grellard C (2005) Croire et savoir. Les principes de la connaissance selon
Nicolas d’Autre´court. Vrin, Paris
Oberman H (1967) The harvest of medieval theology. Gabriel Biel and late
medieval nominalism. W. Eerdmans, Grands Rapides
Perini-Santos E (2006) La the´orie ockhamienne de la connaissance
e´vidente. Vrin, Paris
Perler D (2006) Zweifel und Gewissheit. Skeptische Debatten im
Mittelalter. Klosterman, Frankfurt-am-Main
Schmutz J (2007) L’existence de l’ego comme premier principe
me´taphysique avant Descartes. In: Boulnois O (ed) Ge´ne´alogies du
sujet de Saint Anselme a` Malebranche. Vrin, Paris, pp 215–268.
Speer A (1993) The certainty and the scope of knowledge: Bonaventure’s
disputed questions on the knowledge of Christ. Mediev Philos Theol
3:35–51
Tachau K (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham. Optics,
epistemology and the foundations of semantics. Brill, Leiden/
New York/Kobenhavn, pp 1250–1345
Zupko J (2001) On certitude. In: Thijssen H, Zupko J (eds) The meta-
physics and natural philosophy of John Buridan. Brill, Leiden/
Boston/Ko¨ln, pp 165–182
Change and Motion
▶Natural Philosophy
208 C
Change and Motion

Chatton, Walter
▶Walter Chatton
Choumnos, Nikephoros
▶Nikephoros Choumnos
Chrysoloras, Manuel
▶Manuel Chrysoloras
Church Fathers
STEPHEN F. BROWN
Institute of Medieval Philosophy and Theology
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
The Church Fathers are the early Christian authors who
were considered the authentic witnesses of Christian life
and belief. The ﬁrst of these writers were the Apostolic
Fathers, those closest to the time of the Apostles, and thus
the earliest noncanonical witnesses to the Church’s under-
standing of the Christian Scriptures. As the Church grew
in numbers and became more noticed, it also became the
target of criticism and needed to be defended against
charges that were opposed to it. This work was done by
the next generation of Church Fathers, the Christian Apol-
ogists. When the Church grew and spread even more, it
gathered into its ﬂock people of different cultural levels.
This demanded that the Church develop schools and also
sound teachers. These teachers, both in the East and the
West, manifested the strength of Christian truth and the
power of Christian life in their writings that marked this
period as the Golden Age of the Fathers. The end of the
Patristic era is generally marked in the West with the death
of St. Isidore of Seville (d. c. 636) and in the East with the
death of St. John of Damascus (d. c. 750). The writings of
the Fathers have been given great respect both in their role
of establishing the Christian tradition of beliefs and pat-
terns of living and also as works that provide a deeper
grasp of the meaning of Christian truths or provoke ques-
tions that lead Christians to a deeper understanding of
their beliefs.
The Church Fathers, whose lives and writings were exem-
plary in building Christian community life and decisive in
matters of doctrine, were the early Christian writers who
were considered by the Church to be models of Christian
living and authentic witnesses of the Christian faith. Their
sermons, letters, and treatises fostered understanding of
Christian truths, fought against detractors and heretics,
and encouraged strong moral habits and trust in God’s
grace and providential guidance.
Meaning of the Expression ‘‘Church Father’’
St. Clement of Alexandria (d. c. 213), in the opening
chapter of his Stromata (Tapestry or Miscellanies) (PG 8,
687–690), explains the meaning of the expression by
acknowledging the importance of spiritual fathers: ‘‘It is
a good thing, I reckon, to leave to posterity good children.
This is the case with children of our bodies. But words are
the progeny of the soul. Whence we call those who have
instructed us, fathers.’’ According to Clement, the Fathers
of the Church replaced the fathers of the pagan world,
Homer, and the other ‘‘theologians of vice’’ (Logos
protreptikos (Exhortation to the Heathen), 4; PG 8,
133–164). St. Basil (d. 379), speaking for those attending
the Council of Nicea (325), wrote: ‘‘What we teach is not
the result of our personal reﬂections, but that which we
learned from the holy Fathers’’ (Ep. 140, 2; PG 32, 588).
These early Christian Greek writers sensed themselves as
simply following the advice given in the Book of Deuter-
onomy (32, 7) that admonished the covenant people to
‘‘ask your fathers, and they will inform you; your elders,
and they will tell you.’’ Yet, even more, they viewed the
Church Fathers as imitating the example of Saint Paul,
who in his First Letter to the Corinthians (4, 14–15) said: ‘‘I
am not writing this to make you ashamed, but to admon-
ish you as my beloved children. For though you might
have ten thousand guardians in Christ, you do not have
many fathers. Indeed, in Christ Jesus I became your father
through the gospel.’’ In the West, St. Augustine (d. 430), in
his late battle with the Pelagian, Julian of Eclanum, refuted
the latter’s charge that he was an innovator in his teaching
about marriage by appealing to Sts. Irenaeus (d. c. 202),
Cyprian (d. 368), Hilary (d. 397), Ambrose (d. 397), John
Chrysostom (d. 407), and Jerome (d. 420) (Contra
Julianum Pelegianum 1, 7, 30–34: PL) as those supporting
Church Fathers C
209
C

his position. While not employing the word ‘‘Fathers,’’
Augustine was invoking as his justiﬁcation a tradition
followed earlier in the East by Sts. Clement of Alexandria
and Basil.
The Community of the Fathers
Many writers in the later Christian tradition might speak
broadly of their spiritual fathers, namely, their more
immediate teachers. St. Bonaventure (d. 1274), for exam-
ple, refers to Alexander of Hales (d. 1245), his teacher at
the University of Paris, as his spiritual father. Dominicans
and Franciscans invoked the founders of their religious
communities,
Sts. Dominic (d. 1121) and Francis
(d. 1226), as their guiding fathers in imitating and
preaching Christ. The traditional Fathers of the Church,
however, had a longer and wider claim to respect. In the
view of some scholars, they extended from the time of the
Apostolic Fathers, like St. Clement of Rome (d. c. 100), to
the last of the Western Fathers, St. Isidore of Seville
(d. c. 636), and the last of the Eastern Fathers, St. John
of Damascus (d. c. 750). Other modern scholars cut the
era off with St. Gregory the Great (d. 604), while still
others extend it to 850.
This community of respected Church writers also
contained a special group of more renowned authors, the
Doctors of the Church. At ﬁrst, there were equally four
doctors from the East (Sts. John Chrysostom, Basil the
Great, Athanasius (d. 374), and Gregory of Nazianzus
(d. 390)) and four from the West (Sts. Ambrose, Augus-
tine, Jerome, and Gregory the Great). In modern times,
a number of other traditional Fathers have been added to
the list of Doctors: Sts. Cyril of Jerusalem (d. c. 386), Cyril
of Alexandria (d. c. 444), Hilary of Poitiers, and John of
Damascus. The criteria of qualiﬁcations for doctors
include renowned sanctity as well as faithful learning. An
outstanding learned man who had great inﬂuence in
developing the understanding of Christian beliefs, such
as Origen, is excluded from the list of Doctors of the
Church because he is not ofﬁcially canonized and held
some faulty doctrinal positions. Some, nonetheless, still
consider him a Church Father, since he made strong
contributions to the orthodox teachings of the Church
both by opposing errors and by bringing greater under-
standing to the faith.
Those enshrined in the ranks of the Fathers form
a much larger group than the Doctors of the Church.
The general criteria for their admission to this community
are antiquity, orthodoxy, moral goodness, and church
approval. Disagreements over meeting these criteria are
frequent. Antiquity is measured somewhat ambiguously
by the undeﬁned border between Antiquity and the
Middle Ages. While full orthodoxy is desired, often, as in
the cases of Tertullian and Origen, brilliance and vigor in
presenting and defending the faith overshadow for many
the errors or inexactness that are attached to some of their
dubious teachings. Moral goodness is not the same as
canonized sanctity, so this criterion in the eyes of some
demands that the way of life of a Father of the Church only
be such that it does not interfere with a ﬁrm grasp of
divine revelation. Approbation certainly, at times, is
a formal declaration of a pope or church leader or council,
but it may also be attained in a virtual way through
a general Christian consensus.
While these criteria for the most part function within
a confessional context, often the study of the Church
Fathers, called Patristic studies, extends to authors who
are not considered Church Fathers, such as pagan authors
like Celsus, Porphyry, and Julian the Apostate, who pro-
vide the context for apologetic works by Christians
attempting to refute their attacks on Christian life and
belief. Even of more importance for understanding many
of the works of the Fathers are philosophers, like Plato,
Proclus, Plotinus, Seneca, and Cicero, as well as Jewish
authors, like Philo Judaeus, who inﬂuenced early Chris-
tian writers. Since a major role of the Church Fathers was
to defend the Christian faith, it also is necessary to know
its enemies and its heretical interpreters, such as Simon
Magus, Arius, Nestorius, and Pelagius, who provide the
context for many Patristic writings.
The Apostolic Fathers
The ﬁrst of the authors considered to be Church Fathers
are called the Apostolic Fathers. While also dealing with
doctrinal issues, these authors are more generally seen as
guiding the way of life of those who walk in the footsteps
of Christ and his apostles. Clement of Rome, whose Letter
to the Corinthians was written c. 96, was a successor to the
apostle Peter as the bishop of Rome. His strong appeal to
the Church at Corinth to cease its conﬂicts and disagree-
ments is made with a sense of authority and duty. This
letter was well received and respected, reestablished unity
within the Church of Corinth, and has been judged by
some as conﬁrming the primacy of the bishop of Rome.
Ignatius of Antioch, who suffered martyrdom under the
emperor Trajan around 110, is renowned for seven letters
he wrote to different Christian communities. He bears
witness to a hierarchical structure of bishops, priests,
and deacons in the early church. His strongest attacks
against heresy were aimed at the Docetists, as he afﬁrms
the divinity and true humanity of Christ. The Didache,
perhaps written in the 80s and 90s, may be the earliest
Patristic document. It sets out in clear terms the difference
210 C
Church Fathers

between the demands of a Christian life and the evils of
paganism. It is also considered the ﬁrst code of canon law
directing the lives of those in primitive Christian commu-
nities. Polycarp, the author of a Letter to the Philippians
and a bishop of Smyrna, was a disciple of John the Evan-
gelist. He also wrote a strong recommendation for the
letters of Clement, many of which do not survive, and
taught St. Irenaeus before suffering martyrdom c. 155 CE.
In his surviving letter, written to the Philippians, he
fought against the errors of Docetism and the demands
of the Judaizers, who required converts to become Jews in
order to become Christians. He urged a way of life that
stressed charity, almsgiving, and prayer, including prayer
for civil authorities. Another disciple of John and a friend
of Polycarp was Papias. Only fragments of his work exist,
but the surviving material is important, since it is the
earliest witness to the authorship of the Gospels. Another
work that is generally listed among the writings belonging
to the era of those who may have had contact with the
Apostles is The Shepherd of Hermas. This treatise was
respected for its many moral exhortations and was even
considered canonical by some in the early Christian era. Its
theme of the two cities is noted as a possible source for
St. Augustine’s portrait of the two cities in The City of God.
The Apologists
In the next era, as the Church grew, Christians became
more noticed and their teachings and way of life criticized.
The main pagan view of religion was connected with the
gods of the city and with the emperors or rulers who were
given divine honors. Refusal by Christians to consider the
rulers divine marked them as atheists. Also, because their
lasting city was the heavenly Jerusalem, Christians were
considered to be disloyal to earthly kingdoms and unwill-
ing to participate in political affairs or the defense of their
homeland. Their love for one another and the closeness of
their communities led to accusations that they shared their
wives. Athenagoras (d. c. 190) addressed his Apology for
the Christians to the emperor Marcus Aurelius and refuted
philosophically the charges of atheism and appealed for
a just dealing with Christians. The unknown Christian
author of The Letter to Diognetus likewise attempted to
defend Christians against the same charges. He therefore
portrayed the followers of Christ in these words: ‘‘They
play their full role as citizens but labor under all the
disabilities of aliens. . . . They share their meals, but not
their wives.’’ Justin (d. c. 165) is the greatest of the Greek
Apologists. In his search for truth, he studied all the
current philosophies before arriving at the true philoso-
phy of the Gospel. His Apologies aimed at a Greek philo-
sophical audience and argued that their philosophies
needed revelation. Christianity did not need to become
Greek, he contended; rather Greek philosophy, in order to
become fully true, needed to be absorbed and transformed
by Christianity. His Dialogue with Trypho is directed to
Jews, showing the positive Christian view of the Old Tes-
tament, that worship of Christ is not opposed to mono-
theism and that the Church is the New Israel. He
attempted to show how the Jews and the Greeks each
possessed some germ of the Logos (logoi spermatikoi), but
that only Christians, joined to the divine Logos (or Word)
which is found in Christ in its fullness, have the total and
unadulterated truth. Not only did the Apologists attempt
to answer the charges against Christianity mentioned
above, they also tried to meet the challenge coming from
those who twisted the Gospel teachings with their heretical
interpretations. St. Irenaeus of Lyon (d. c. 202) left two
large works: his Adversus haereses (Against Heresies or The
Overthrow of the Pretended but False Gnosis) and his
Epideixis (Demonstration of the Apostolic Teaching). Both
works were written in Greek by the well-travelled Irenaeus,
but Adversus haereses survives only in its Latin translation.
In his effort to refute Gnosticism as a secularized imitation
of Christianity, which reduced faith to a form of human
wisdom, Irenaeus presented the varying teachings of dif-
ferent Gnostic teachers. He followed this catalogue with
a contrast between the various forms of Gnosticism and
true Christian teaching, using reason, tradition, and the
teachings of Christ, the Prophets and the Apostles.
Irenaeus’ Epideixis is a much simpler work that presents
the essential truths of Christian faith: the triune God,
Creation, the Fall, the Incarnation and Redemption. He
follows this exposition with a defense of Christian truth
and completes the work with an effective appeal to Chris-
tian living. Adversus haereses strongly appeals to tradition
in contrast to claims on the part of certain Gnostics to
new supplemental revelations. Irenaeus searches for
a tradition that goes back to the Apostles whom Christ
instructed.
Apostolic
tradition
under
his
inﬂuence
becomes established as one of the main criteria for deter-
mining true Christian teaching and for judging the reli-
ability of the teachings of the Church Fathers in their
various works.
The Birth of Christian Schools
As those joining the Church gradually came from all levels
of society, including lawyers, rhetoricians, and philoso-
phers, a need for more sophisticated presentations of
Christian belief and life became necessary. This led to the
development of Christian schools. At ﬁrst, they were
developed on already prepared locations. Alexandria for
a long time had pagan and Jewish schools. Philo was
Church Fathers C
211
C

representative of the Jewish tradition there and attempted
to make the Old Testament meaningful for Alexandrian
Jews, promoting allegorical interpretations of Biblical
stories. Abraham, for him, was not just the literal
Abraham from Ur in Chaldea who was told by God to
search for the land of promise; he was every Jewish
searcher for covenant fulﬁllment. Origen (d. 253) learned
his allegorical principles from Philo and developed in the
same local a Christian allegorical reading of the Old and
New Testaments. The chief members of this school were
Ammonius, Athanasius, and Clement of Alexandria. In
232, Origen was forced to move his school to Caesarea,
a community that later counted among its members the
Cappadocians: Basil the Great, Gregory of Nazianzus, and
Gregory of Nyssa. In reaction to Origen’s allegorical
method, a Christian school was begun at Antioch by
Lucian of Samosota at the end of the third century. It
concentrated on grammatical exposition and the literal
and historical interpretation of the Scriptures. It counted
among its alumni John Chrysostom and Theodore of
Mopsuestia. Antioch also established another school, in
Edessa, that ﬂourished under Ephraem the Syrian
(d. c. 370) and Nemesius of Emesa (ﬂ. 350–400). Although
many controversies arose in these schools, it was also in
them that the formulation of many Christological truths
was established.
The First Latin Fathers
The Latin language with its concrete practical character
was, unlike Greek, incapable of expressing philosophical
truths in early Christian times. Neither did it have the
capacity to present Christian truths with precision. This
ability had to be developed, and it was gradually formed in
the third century by Tertullian (d. c. 220), Cyprian (d.
258), Arnobius (d. c. 317) and Lactantius (d. 317). One of
Tertullian’s chief doctrinal works was On the Prescription
against Heretics, with its famous caution against the dan-
gers of philosophy as the source of heresies. Asking ‘‘What
has Athens to do with Jerusalem?’’ he pointed out how
Christians have often been led astray in their beliefs by the
teachings of various philosophers. Tertullian’s Against
Marcion defends the compatibility of the Old and New
Testaments and challenges Marcion’s rejection of the Gos-
pels of Matthew, Luke, and John. His Against the
Valentinians and On the Flesh of Christ both show his
own philosophical acumen, however, as he ﬁghts against
the different Gnostic positions. His Against Praxeas is one
of the best expositions on the Trinity before the Council of
Nicea. However, he speaks especially of how the divine
plurality was manifested in creation and redemption and
seems to contend that the Father became the Father only
after the generation of the Word as the model of creation.
He presents no awareness of an eternal generation. Many
of his later works also were disrespected, since they were
produced after he became a Montanist and embraced its
rigorism. Cyprian, another Latin writer, is most praised
for his treatise On the Unity of the Church, a twofold attack
on the Roman schism of Novatian and the African schism
of Felicissimus. Arnobius and his student Lactantius are
known as competent rhetoricians, and certainly the latter
is considered a master of Latin expression. However, nei-
ther is highly respected for theological originality in their
works.
Clement of Alexandria and Origen
The outstanding third century Greek writers were Clem-
ent of Alexandria and Origen. The former was a convert
who became president of the School of Alexandria around
200 and dedicated his life to writing and teaching, the ﬁrst
Christian to attempt a synthesis of pagan learning and
Christian revelation. Clement’s three main works that
survive are the Protrepticus (Exhortation to the Greeks),
the Pedagogue, and the Stromata (Tapestry or Miscella-
nies). Clement makes a strong case against the Gnostic
contention that faith and reason are irreconcilable. He
does not claim that reason establishes faith, but rather
argues that reason brings understanding to the truths of
the faith. This, for him, is the true Christian gnosis. When
Clement had to ﬂee the School of Alexandria due to the
persecution of Septimus Severus, he was succeeded as
president by Origen. Origen is the greatest scholar of
ancient Christian times. Some of his teachings, or the
misinterpretations of his teachings by his followers, were
condemned at the Second Council of Constantinople in
553. They were related to the divine processions, angels,
the soul and the last things. In regard to the divine pro-
cessions Origen described the Father as ‘‘self-existent
God’’ (autotheos) and the Son as a secondary deity, distinct
from the Father by an essential inferiority. He is consid-
ered the source of the heretical teachings that were initi-
ated by the heretic Arius. Origen’s much admired
exegetical work, the Hexapla, presented various forms of
the Old Testament in six columns with cross references so
that a reader could compare the different versions with the
original. He also left scholia or explanations of difﬁcult
passages, as well as commentaries and homilies On Mat-
thew, On the Gospel of John, On the Epistle to the Romans,
and On the Canticle of Canticles. His main dogmatic work
is his Peri archon or De principiis (On First Principles). It is
a treatise on the Trinity: the creation and fall of angels; the
creation, fall, and redemption of man; and the basic prin-
ciples of the moral life and the sources of revelation. His
212 C
Church Fathers

Contra Celsum (Against Celsus) refutes Celsus’ portrait of
Christ as a deceiver and contests his attempt to provide
a naturalistic account of the extraordinary spread of
Christianity. His On Prayer is an introduction to prayer
in general, followed by an explanation of the Lord’s Prayer.
The Golden Age of the Fathers
In 313, the Edict of Toleration ushered in a new era for
Christians. Apologetical writings were less necessary.
Writers could aim their works at the Christianization of
the world and the presentation and explanation of the
Church’s teachings. The Greek world of the East had
talented Christians who were well-tutored in Greek cul-
ture; the Latin authors of the West were nourished on
many of the same sources of Greek learning in transla-
tion. The works of both the Greek and Latin Christian
writers took on diverse forms: exegetical, doctrinal,
polemical, moral, and ascetical. Many of the doctrinal
and polemical works were attempts to bring understand-
ing to the basic truths of the Christian faith. Others were
to correct heretical presentations of Christian truths or to
clarify distorted representations of Christian life and
beliefs.
The ﬁrst ecumenical or general Council of the Church
was held at Nicea in 325. One of its charges was to present
the teaching of the Church in regard to the triune charac-
ter of the one God. In a sense, the council was asked to
rescue Christians from the ambiguity bequeathed by Ori-
gen. Origen had, in effect, used the correct Greek term
homoousios (of the same substance) to indicate that the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit were of the same substance.
Still, as mentioned above, he portrayed the Father as self-
existent and the Son as in some way subordinate. The
Word and the Spirit, for Origen and many of his followers,
are in some way distinct from the Father by an essential
inferiority. The Council of Nicea had to confront this
puzzling Origenist portrait of the Trinity that had festered
for more than a century and that was most forcefully
represented just prior to Nicea by the subordinationist
theology of Arius. The Council of Nicea understood
homoousios (of the same substance) to mean that the Son
possessed the entire Godhead or divine essence as the
Father. Still, the declaration of the council did not settle
matters for everyone: some of the strongest opponents of
the Arians opposed the non-Biblical term homoousios,
despite its use to defend an undeniable Biblical truth.
Athanasius came to the council’s defense in his well-
known three Orationes contra Arianos (Against the Arians),
written between 335 and 356. He defended Nicea’s teach-
ing on the unity of substance of the Son with the Father
and his eternal generation. His Epistola de decretis
Nicaenae synodis (Letter on the Decrees of the Council of
Nicea), written in 351, explains and defends more broadly
the Trinitarian terminology of Nicea. Though his doc-
trinal contributions are his most notable, Athanasius sup-
plied spiritual riches of another sort with his Life of
Anthony, translated into Latin by Evagrius of Antioch
(d. c. 392). It is considered one of the most able ascetical
treatises of the Patristic era.
Athanasius was one of the principal writers preparing
the way for the First Council of Constantinople (381),
which extended the homoousios doctrine of Nicea to the
Holy Spirit. This second ecumenical council established
what would stand thereafter as the Trinitarian dogma: the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are consubstantial, sharing
one substance, but in three hypostases or persons. That
this is the case was established by the two councils (Nicea
and Constantinople). Three of the great Greek Church
Fathers, Sts. Basil, his brother, Gregory of Nyssa, and
their friend Gregory of Nazianzus, jointly called the
Cappadocians, in many of their writings tried to go
beyond the declarations of these truths and attempted to
bring further understanding of them by attempting to
explain how the three persons, who shared a common
nature, were distinct. Basil, in his Contra Eunomium
(Against Eunomius), taught that the distinctive element
connected with each person was not that which made him
to be God, but rather was the property that made the
Father to be the Father and the Son to be the Son and
the Holy Spirit to be the Holy Spirit. These properties,
according to Gregory of Nyssa, were matters of generation
or procession. In his four treatises on the Trinity, Ad
Eustathium de Trinitate (To Eustathius Concerning the
Trinity), Ad Abladium (To Abladius), Ad Simplicianum
(To Simplicianus), and his Adversus paganos (Against the
Pagans), Gregory explains that what made the Father to be
the Father was his ungenerated character (not, however, in
the sense of Origen’s ‘‘self-existence’’), and what made the
Son to be the Son was his generated character. The latter
property explained
the unique
way
in which
the
undiminished or unsubordinated divine substance was
communicated from the Father to the Son. Gregory went
on to explain that the Holy Spirit likewise proceeded from
the Father through the Son, and this particular explana-
tion stayed with the Eastern Church. (In the West, the
procession of the Holy Spirit was rather portrayed with the
Holy Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son. This
varying explanation formed what is called the Filioque
debate.) Although less interested in dogmatic matters,
Gregory of Nazianzus, has left a solid defense of the
Nicea-Constantinople teachings on the Trinity, especially
in his Orations (#27–31). His De vita sua (On His Life),
Church Fathers C
213
C

a long poem, is heralded as a worthy competitor to
Augustine’s Confessions. Among the many other Greek
Fathers of this period, certainly the most noteworthy is
John Chrysostom, the ‘‘golden-mouthed’’ orator. His
strong efforts in Constantinople to correct clerical abuses,
reform monastic life, and uproot the vices of the rich met
strong resistance and banishment, though the emperor,
Theodosius II, later asked publicly for God’s forgiveness
for the ill-treatment suffered by Chrysostom. John Chry-
sostom, however, is best known for his literary output. He
was a superb exegete, well-trained in the Antiochian
method of clear exposition and practical application. He
has left homilies on Genesis, the Psalms, and Isaiah, but his
best work was saved for the exegesis of the New Testament,
especially the Epistles of St. Paul. His most popular trea-
tises are his De sacerdotio (On the Priesthood) and his
defenses of the monastic life, which are found in three
works: On the Enemies of Monasticism, On Compunction,
and Exhortation to the Fallen Theodore (which inspired
Theodore of Mopsuestia to re-embrace monastic life).
Among the many Latin writers of the West, in the
Golden Age of the Fathers, the ones who stand out most
prominently are Sts. Hilary of Poitiers, Ambrose, Jerome,
and Augustine. Hilary of Poitiers must be ranked with
Athanasius as one of the great defenders of the Nicean
teaching on the Trinity. He opposed Arianism and effec-
tively silenced it in the West. In fact, his De Trinitate (On
the Trinity) was originally called De ﬁde contra Arianos (On
the Faith against the Arians). Ambrose of Milan is most
noteworthy as the bishop who converted Augustine. He
was well-trained in the works of the Greek Fathers. Like
Hilary, he also opposed Arianism, which had a ﬁrm sup-
porter in Empress Justina. His writings against them
included his De ﬁde ad Gratianum (On the Faith to
<Emperor> Gratian) and his De Spiritu Sancto (On the
Holy Spirit). He wrote a number of treatises on the sacra-
ments and also three guidebooks for catechumens. In his
exegetical writings he followed the Alexandrian exegetes,
Philo and Origen, with some help from St. Basil, especially
on his exegesis of the Hexaemeron. His moral treatises
show the inﬂuence of Cicero, especially in his De ofﬁciis
(On Duties), which takes its title from Cicero’s work of the
same name. Ambrose is also known as ‘‘the Father of
Ecclesiastical Chant.’’ Jerome mastered both Greek and
Hebrew and was commissioned by Pope Damasus to
rework the Latin Bible; the result was the Vulgate. He
was without doubt the greatest Scripture scholar of his
era, vastly improving on the Vetus Latina (Old Latin) text.
He revised the Psalter on the basis of the Septuagint text
and then reworked the whole Old Testament in view of the
Septuagint of Origen’s Hexapla and the original Hebrew
text. His exegesis of so many Scriptural works, found in his
‘‘Prefaces’’ and homilies on various books of the Bible,
demonstrates his concern with both the literal and alle-
gorical understandings of the Biblical texts.
Augustine of Hippo is the most talented and respected
Western Father of the Church. His Confessions treats many
events of his life but places them in a larger Christian
context that makes this work more an odyssey of a soul
searching for God and meaning within a divine frame-
work than the biography of an individual’s self-reﬂective
experiences. He shows true gratitude to Cicero for his
Hortensius and its invitation to search for truth and praises
the Platonists for their high spirituality. Still, in many of
his works, especially The City of God, he criticizes the
philosophers and shows their tendencies to place them-
selves at the top of the hierarchy of reality. Peace, man’s
goal in life is the tranquility of the soul that the Stoics
sought, but it is a tranquility brought about by the pursuit
of the right order of things, with God at the top. Augustine
fought powerfully and untiringly against the Pelagians and
Manicheans. Many of his doctrinal treatises, both philo-
sophical and theological, are considered classics and his De
Trinitate (On the Trinity) is not only his greatest dogmatic
work, but at least for the Latins the most important
treatise on the Trinity written in the Patristic era. His
Retractationes (Re-Treatments) provides an impressive
picture of his later reﬂections on the aims and main
ideas of the 93 works he had previously written. His De
doctrina Christiana (On Christian Teaching) provides the
model followed by later Christian writers for theological
education. His sermons and letters are often simple in
style, exemplifying the truth of his perception, that it is
not necessary to use a gold key to open doors that can
more readily be opened by a wooden key (De doctrina
Christiana IV, 9, 11: PL 34, 100). His philosophical insights
and theological vision markedly set the framework of
Christian understanding in the Middle Ages, and even in
the modern world.
The Last of the Fathers
Among the last of the Western Church Fathers, the most
important were Boethius (d. 524), Gregory the Great
(d. 604), and Isidore of Seville (d. 636). Boethius set for
himself the task of translating the great philosophers Aris-
totle and Plato. He translated most of the logical works
that make up Aristotle’s Organon, though not all of these
translations survived. He wrote commentaries on some of
them:
one
on
the
Categories
and
two
on
the
Perihermeneias. One of the Perihermeneias commentaries
also provides much information about all the ancient
Greek commentaries on that work. While a careful scholar,
214 C
Church Fathers

Boethius was also a deep, talented, creative artist and
theologian.
His
Consolation
of
Philosophy
is
a masterpiece of philosophy and poetry, and his ﬁve theo-
logical tractates are dense works of technical linguistic
precision aimed at those alone who could wrestle with
the complications involved in attempting to attain some
understanding of the mysteries of the Trinity and the
Incarnation. Gregory the Great was a major force in
reestablishing Rome and the Church after the barbarian
invasions. His writings were extensive and inﬂuential. His
Moralia on Job explained that text according to the numer-
ous models of exegesis that descended from the schools of
Alexandria and Antioch: providing literal, allegorical, ana-
gogical, and tropological interpretations that became uni-
versal patterns for reading all the works of Scripture. The
tropological or moral interpretation of the Biblical texts
revealed their rich teachings concerning the way Chris-
tians should live in the present life. His Moralia thus
became for centuries a guidebook for Christian moral
and ascetical practices. His Liber regulae pastoralis (Book
of Pastoral Care), written when he became pope, provided
speciﬁc directions for the spiritual life of pastors and
prudent advice for developing the faith and moral char-
acter of their ﬂocks. He also played a major role in revising
the celebration of the liturgies and bringing reform to
Church music. Isidore of Seville is considered by many
to be ‘‘the last of the Fathers of the West.’’ He is recognized
mainly as a compiler, but a compiler who preserves many
of the riches of the Fathers and famous pagan authors. His
most often cited work is his Etymologies, which, like many
of his other treatises, provides interesting, but at times
uncritical derivations and information. His books on
grammar, rhetoric, dialectic, and the four mathematical
sciences show his support for the educational basics of the
seven liberal arts that many Church Fathers viewed as
important for the development of Christian learning.
Before turning to John of Damascus, generally consid-
ered the last of the Eastern Fathers, special mention has to
be made of Dionysius the Areopagite. This author was at
ﬁrst judged to be the ﬁrst-century Dionysius converted by
the preaching of St. Paul (Acts 17, 34). His chief works
were: De divinis nominibus (On the Divine Names), De
mystica theologia (On Mystical Theology), De caelesti
hierarchia (On the Celestial Hierarchy), and De ecclesiastica
hierarchia (On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy). In the
thirteenth century students of his works found that they
showed signs of strong inﬂuence from the neo-Platonic
philosopher Proclus, and thus had to be produced toward
the end of the ﬁfth century. In earlier times, some pas-
sages in his works were challenged, but when Maximus
the Confessor (d. 662), aided by the sixth-century
commentaries of John of Scythopolis, defended his ortho-
doxy in a work called the Ambigua (On Ambiguous Points),
Dionysius’ reputation was restored. The intellectual
power of his books was so strong that they were recognized
in the Latin West as worthy of translation. Hilduin, the
abbot of St-Denis, ﬁrst translated them in 827, but it was
the translations of John Scotus Eriugena, about twenty-
ﬁve years later, that were employed by mystical and theo-
logical writers throughout the Middle Ages. John of
Damascus or John Damascene (d. 749), the last of the
Eastern Fathers, is most respected for his Fountain of
Wisdom. This three-part work begins with a treatise that
serves as an introduction to the study of theology, the
Dialectica (On Dialectic). The second part provides
a history of heresies. The most famous section of the
work was the third part, De ﬁde orthodoxa (On Orthodox
Faith), a compendium of the Christian doctrines of God,
creation, providence, Christology, the sacraments (Bap-
tism and Eucharist), veneration of the saints and their
images, the books of Scripture, evil, and the last things.
He also wrote many treatises on Christian morality and
asceticism, exegetical works on Paul’s epistles, and pro-
duced a small collection of sermons and liturgical hymns.
All of his works show a strong familiarity with the councils
and the Patristic writings of the East. He underscored the
strong respect for tradition that is exempliﬁed by the
Church Fathers and carried by their writings.
Influence of the Church Fathers
The later Church Fathers vouch for the moral, ascetical,
doctrinal, and liturgical contributions of their spiritual
fathers in the faith. John of Damascus, the last of the
Eastern Fathers, shows his dependence on Dionysius the
Areopagite, Gregory of Nazianzus, Maximus the Confes-
sor, and Nemesius of Emesa in his De ﬁde orthodoxa.
His commentaries on the Epistles of St. Paul borrow fre-
quently from John Chrysostom and Cyril of Alexandria.
The Second Council of Constantinople (553) in its acts
states:
"
We further declare that we hold fast to the decrees of the
four Councils, and in every way follow the holy Fathers,
Athanasius, Hilary, Basil, Gregory the Theologian, Gregory
of Nyssa, Ambrose, Theophilus, John Chrysostom, Cyril,
Augustine, Proclus, Leo and their writings on the true
faith (Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers: 14, 303).
St. Augustine, as already mentioned, not only cited Sts.
Irenaeus, Cyprian, Hilary, Ambrose, John Chrysostom,
and Jerome as he battled with the Pelagian Julian of
Eclanum; he cited them authoritatively as proof that his
own teaching was in accord with the traditions of the
Church Fathers C
215
C

Church. Still, this respect for Patristic authorities was not
routine or slavish. Augustine, at the beginning of Epistle 82
(PL 33, 277), says:
"
Only those books of Scripture which are called canonical
have I learned to hold in such honor as to believe their
authors have not erred in any way in writing them. But
other authors I so read as not to deem anything in their
works to be true, merely because of their having so
thought and written, whatever may have been their holi-
ness and learning.
Perhaps even more forcefully, in his Letter to Fortunatianus
(Epistle 148; PL 33, 628–629) he argued: ‘‘Still, we are not
obliged to regard the arguments of any writers, however
Catholic and estimable they may be, as we do the canon-
ical Scriptures, so that we may – with all due respect to the
deference owed them as men – refute or reject anything we
happen to ﬁnd in their writings wherein their opinions
differ from the established truth, or from what has been
thought out by others or by us, with divine help. I wish
other thinkers to hold the same attitude toward my writ-
ings as I hold toward theirs.’’ Vincent of Lerins, in his
Commonitorium (A Commonitory or Letter of Instruc-
tions), I, 2, 6 (Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers: 11, 132),
written 3 years after the Council of Ephesus (431), indi-
cates that both the Scriptures and the Church Fathers can
be manipulated by heretics. He instructs his audience to be
careful about the misuse of Scripture and the writings of
the Fathers and he sets up a demanding standard before
accepting any teaching found in Scripture or the works of
the Fathers as a declaration of Christian faith: ‘‘Moreover,
in the Catholic Church itself, all possible care must be
taken, that we hold that faith which has been believed
everywhere, always, by all.’’ Despite
these
cautions
regarding the writings of the Fathers, whether due to
the Fathers’ fault or misinterpretations of their state-
ments, they still commanded great respect as authors
who were searching for a more profound penetration of
Scriptural revelation. In the medieval period, theologians
frequently went to their texts, even conﬂicting texts, to
force themselves to pursue a deeper understanding of the
faith or a richer appreciation of their examples of Chris-
tian moral, ascetical, or liturgical practices. Later, those
who found the teachings of medieval theologians
dissatisfying returned to the Church Fathers as more
dependable guides of Christian faith and life.
See also: ▶Alexander of Hales ▶Aristotelianism in the
Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions
▶Augustine ▶Boethius ▶Bonaventure ▶Cicero in
Political Philosophy ▶Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Bibliography
Primary Sources
A select library of Nicene and post-Nicene fathers of the Christian church
(1886–1900) 2 series, 28 vols, Buffalo. (Repr. Grant Rapids, Michi-
gan, 1952–1956)
Migne Jacques-Paul (1844–1866) Patrologiae cursus completus (PG =
Patrologia Graeca; PL = Patrologia Latina), 382 vols, Paris
The Ante-Nicene Fathers (1884–1887) 10 vols. American reprint of Edin-
burgh ed., Buffalo
Secondary Sources
Brown SF (2003) The patristic background. In: Gracia JE, Noone TB (eds)
A companion to philosophy in the Middle Ages, Blackwell, Oxford,
pp 23–34
Di Berardino A, Studer B (eds) (1997) History of theology I: the patristic
period. Liturgical Press, Collegeville
Kelly JND (1960) Early Christian doctrine, 2nd edn. Harper, New York
Wace H, Piercy WC (1994) A dictionary of Christian biography.
Hendrickson Publishing, Peabody
Wolfson HA (1967) The philosophy of the Church fathers, 2nd edn.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Cicero in Political Philosophy
CARY J. NEDERMAN
Department of Political Science
Texas A & M University
College Station, TX
USA
Abstract
The Roman philosopher and statesman Cicero was the
most eminent pagan whose work on political ideas was
available and known to the Latin Middle Ages. His ideas
about the natural foundations of society and politics,
natural law, and the best regime were widely debated and
interpreted. Among the authors who read and interpreted
his thought were John of Salisbury, Brunetto Latini,
Thomas Aquinas, John of Paris, Ptolemy of Lucca, and
Marsilius of Padua. Even after the reception of Aristotle’s
political philosophy in the middle of the thirteenth cen-
tury, Cicero continued to be an inﬂuential ﬁgure.
Marcus Tullius Cicero (106–43 BCE) was the only impor-
tant political thinker of pagan antiquity whose ideas con-
tinued to be widely accessible without a break to the
Christian West following the collapse of the Roman
Empire. Cicero’s two major political treatises, De re publica
and De legibus, were not directly circulated during the
Middle Ages. But the doctrines contained in these works
216 C
Cicero in Political Philosophy

were familiar through intermediary patristic sources such
as St. Augustine and Lactantius. Moreover, Ciceronian
tracts on moral matters (De ofﬁciis) and rhetorical tech-
nique (De inventione) contained many passages that were
extremely germane to political speculation. Cicero’s ideas
on the subjects of politics and society were broadly dis-
seminated because De ofﬁciis and De inventione were
among the most widely read and revered texts in the
medieval West. Signiﬁcantly, both De ofﬁciis and De
inventione present accounts of society and government
derived from the modiﬁed Stoic ideas expressed in De re
publica and other of Cicero’s political works. Thus, by way
of a variety of sources, Cicero’s political philosophy stood
out as a separate and coherent theory to its medieval
inheritors.
Central to the Ciceronian conception of human soci-
ety is the claim that men join together because of their
natural powers of reason and speech. Reason induces in
human beings the desire to live in civil unity, while speech
offers the method by which association may be achieved
and maintained. Thus, for Cicero, social, political, and
legal order was based on laws of nature that were knowable
by and applicable to all human beings equally and without
differentiation, on which grounds he has properly been
credited with introducing a larger measure of universalism
and egalitarianism into political philosophy than had been
present among his Greek predecessors. On the other hand,
Cicero recognized that some people enjoyed superior abil-
ities to exercise their rational and linguistic faculties – and
thus a better claim on leadership roles as statesmen and
legislators. Indeed, he suggests that human societies could
not have formed in the ﬁrst place without the guidance of
wise and eloquent men who awoke in scattered individuals
the reason and speech latent in them. Magistrates and
orators in mature political communities recapitulate the
same function, appealing through persuasion to the ratio-
nal powers and basic moral sense of citizens in achieving
public decisions. These basic principles are retained
throughout Cicero’s corpus, whether in his rhetorical or
his philosophical texts.
In turn, one ﬁnds these quintessential Ciceronian doc-
trines upheld throughout the Middle Ages. Beginning
already in the eleventh century, glosses on De inventione
underscored the idea that human association has its basis
in the natural faculties of speech and reason. Likewise,
medieval moralists were demonstrably imbued with the
naturalistic description of social organization contained in
De ofﬁciis. Perhaps the earliest medieval thinker to
embrace a self-consciously Ciceronian perspective on
political matters was John of Salisbury (1115/1120–
1180), a highly educated churchman. As a leading
exponent of twelfth-century Latin humanism, John was
intimately familiar with the extant portions of the Cicero-
nian corpus and expressly identiﬁed himself as a devotee
of Cicero. There is some evidence that John’s famed
organic metaphor for the commonwealth, sketched in
his major work of political and moral thought, the
Policraticus, was partially rooted in Cicero’s ideas. Like
Cicero, John holds that art imitates nature and hence
that the precepts of justice could be discovered through
reason and realized in political and legal institutions. His
deﬁnition of justice itself, as a twofold duty to refrain from
committing evil acts and to aid those who are threatened
with injury, is derived directly from De ofﬁciis. John clearly
upheld conclusions about one’s responsibility to sacriﬁce
for the good of the community that resonate with Cicero,
not least his agreement with his Roman predecessor that
violent action against an incorrigible tyrant is sometimes
justiﬁed and necessary. Furthermore, in his treatise on
speculative philosophy and education, the Metalogicon,
John adopted an essentially Ciceronian approach to the
natural origins of society. In that work, he regards the
foundations of civil and social life to result from the
human capacities of reason and language, so that political
institutions and relations must rest on a proper theory of
education.
John of Salisbury wrote prior to the reception into
Europe of Aristotle’s major writings on moral and political
philosophy, the Nicomachean Ethics and Politics, which
were not translated into Latin until the mid-thirteenth
century.
Although
some
scholars
have
attributed
a fundamental change in medieval political thought to
the appearance of these Aristotelian texts, Cicero’s doc-
trines continued to be cited and utilized alongside, and
sometimes in preference to, Aristotle’s teachings. An early
illustration of the continuation of Ciceronian thought is
afforded by Brunetto Latini’s Li livres dou tresor,
a philosophical encyclopedia compiled between 1260 and
1266.
Latini,
a
Florentine
who
was
trained
as
a professional rhetorician, was not a scholastic in
a narrow sense, but his education and career afforded
him knowledge of the current Aristotelian learning. Li
livres dou tresor relies heavily, for instance, upon Robert
Grosseteste’s recently completed Latin version of the
Nicomachean Ethics, although it shows no direct awareness
of Aristotle’s Politics. The work is divided into three sec-
tions, the last of which surveys both rhetoric and politics.
Latini’s rationale for associating rhetoric and politics in
this fashion is expressly Ciceronian. With De inventione
apparently in mind, he follows Tully in upholding the
precept that the greatest skill a governor can possess is
rhetoric, since without eloquent expression neither cities
Cicero in Political Philosophy C
217
C

nor justice nor bare social bounds would have come into
existence and been sustained. Among the primary require-
ments elucidated by Latini for appointment to public
ofﬁce is that he must speak well, as concerning matters
of truth. These attributes indicate that a necessary precon-
dition for competence as a governor is attainment of
qualiﬁcations as a rhetor.
In order to bolster this position, Latini adopts the
Ciceronian view that society itself would be impossible
in the absence of an orator. He cites and embellishes the
doctrine of De inventione that human beings joined
together in communal life only as the result of the stimu-
lus provided by a wise and eloquent person who counseled
his fellows to associate under the terms of justice. Latini
indeed likens the contribution of the primitive orator to
the creative power of God. Wise speech is placed by Li
livres dou tresor at the center of the communal affairs of the
city: public words are the fount of civic life. Moreover,
Latini
maintained
that
this
oratorical
role
forms
a continuing feature of the community, imbedded in the
idea of ‘‘counsel’’ that runs throughout the third part of Li
livres dou tresor. ‘‘Counsel’’ seems to connote wise speech
for the purpose of achieving public welfare or rectitude.
This impression is reinforced by Latini when he turns
directly to the governance of the city: one of the primary
duties of rulers is to assemble the chief and wise men of the
city in order to request and consider their ‘‘counsel’’
regarding important matters, such as the conduct of dip-
lomatic affairs. The magistrate, in turn, may be taken
to speak on behalf of the interests of the community
because his eloquence is coupled with the wisdom to
recognize the public good.
The retention of Ciceronian doctrines after the full
recovery of Aristotelian writings permeated more tradi-
tional scholasticism as well, even among authors who are
normally counted as devoted students of Aristotle, such as
St. Thomas Aquinas (c. 1225–1274). In developing his
conception of the common good, especially as articulated
in the Summa theologiae, Aquinas appropriates some
crucial features of Aristotle (especially his conception of
the political nature of human beings), but weds them to
a doctrine of natural law that owes much to Cicero’s
thought (Keys 2006). Aquinas, unlike Aristotle, sought to
determine a set of principles applicable across all regimes
and at all times, which led him to natural law as a more
acceptable foundation for a universal theory of justice and
a benchmark for the evaluation of political institutions.
Thus, the Ciceronian approach to political philosophy
(brought into line with Christian theology) in some ways
takes precedence over Aristotelianism in the main writings
of Aquinas.
One of Aquinas’ students, John of Paris (c. 1240–1306),
also adopted a Ciceronian stance in expressing his views
about human nature and politics in his De potestate
regia et papali. Although John cites Aristotle concerning
the natural suitability of mankind for political life, he
almost
immediately
supplements
this
source
with
a recapitulation of Cicero’s views. Why does he bother
making reference to Cicero? The answer to this question
turns on John’s deep-seated conviction that there exists an
unbridgeable chasm between individual advantage and
common welfare. Men who are oriented toward their
own advantage cannot at the same time rule themselves
and others according to a principle of public beneﬁt. For
this reason, it is necessary to distinguish sharply between
that person whose duty it is to supervise the common
utility and the great mass of individuals for whom self-
regard constitutes the primary goal. Hence, human beings
would not seem to be ‘‘political’’ in the sense Aristotle
envisioned. Rather, John appeals to the Ciceronian posi-
tion that however much men are naturally suited by phys-
ical need, linguistic facility, and gregarious instinct for
communal life, their actual assembly is not a foregone
conclusion. John postulates that primordial men live sol-
itary lives, saved only from assimilation to the lesser ani-
mals by the fact that they are able to employ reason instead
of relying merely on ‘‘natural instinct.’’ Human beings
require active prompting in order to be transformed
according to the associative inclinations endemic to their
nature. Thus, in John’s view, nature does not impart its
own inherent principle of motion. Rather, men only enter
into communities when a wise man persuades them on
rational grounds to do so, a claim for which Cicero is
expressly cited as the authority. The activation of this
capacity to accept communal order, law, and rulership
depends upon the cogent presentation of the rationale
for and beneﬁts of allegiance to the principle of public
utility. In no way, then, may the institution of government
be regarded as the imposition of coercion over an unwill-
ing populace. Rule is only legitimate (namely, in accor-
dance with nature) when established by a consensual
process in which men agree on the basis of rational per-
suasion to be governed within the conﬁnes of the precept
of the common good.
Ptolemy of Lucca (c. 1226–1327), another associate of
Aquinas, also found himself attracted to Cicero’s concep-
tion of the foundations of human community. In De
regimine principum, which was a continuation of the
tract De regno that is usually ascribed to Aquinas, Ptolemy
sets out to defend the proposition that the republican
system of rule, and especially the Roman Republic, formed
the best or ideal form of government. In part, he defends
218 C
Cicero in Political Philosophy

the view that God speciﬁcally ordained the Roman
Republic as the vehicle for His lordship. But he supple-
ments this claim with reference to a form of social and
political naturalism indebted to Cicero. The Roman
Republic was for him distinctively suited to redressing
the failings of the human condition in its natural state,
namely, that human beings are a frail and always endan-
gered race, lacking the natural resources to survive enjoyed
by other creatures, so that they must struggle to gain and
retain earthly security and welfare. Ptolemy articulates the
foundation of all systems of government to be the discov-
ery of natural laws that preserve human society and direct
men to the common good of all. This is a Ciceronian
doctrine (perhaps most famously stated in De ofﬁciis,
which Ptolemy knew); indeed, in the following paragraph,
Cicero is cited directly in connection with the ‘‘art’’ of
politics necessary to provide for human necessity. The
primary ‘‘natural’’ duty of government is to assure that
those whose preservation is threatened are served and
hence that the bonds of human society are maintained
and strengthened.
How does Ptolemy’s characterization of the natural-
ness of human community relate to his defense of the
special divine ‘‘calling’’ of the Roman Republic? In his
view, the virtues embraced by the Republic naturally and
in the absence of Revelation were identical to the end for
which ‘‘the rule of Christ’’ was initiated: to promote sac-
riﬁce for the good of all and love of one’s fellows rather
than personal self-gloriﬁcation or pursuit of private
advantage. The virtues of patriotism, civil benevolence,
and justice, while preﬁguring the rule of Christ, were
important precisely because humanity’s natural circum-
stances are so precarious and difﬁcult. Although he cites
the Aristotelian contention that human beings are natu-
rally social and political animals, Ptolemy understands
‘‘nature’’ in a decidedly unAristotelian fashion. Cicero’s
deﬁnition of the republic as a common social bond woven
from agreement about matters of right or justice, derived
from his De re publica as reported by St. Augustine, is
invoked and endorsed in support of Ptolemy’s teaching.
People join together in community – and political com-
munity more speciﬁcally – in order to protect and
improve their physical as well as their moral well-being.
The political virtue of governors is thus understood by
him as comprising the qualities conducive to the defense
of the bonds of nature, understood in terms of the provi-
sion to the community of the activities requisite for sur-
vival and peace.
A further scholastic ﬁgure who proves to have a strong
afﬁnity for Ciceronian political theory is Marsilius of
Padua
(1275/1280–1342/1343),
whose
treatise,
the
Defensor pacis, is among the best-known (if somewhat
infamous) political writings of the fourteenth century.
The Defensor is widely acclaimed for its emphatic insis-
tence that only those rulers who govern strictly in accor-
dance with the consent of their citizen-subjects are
legitimate and deserving of obedience. It is precisely in
order to bolster this position that the Defensor invokes the
Ciceronian version of the generation of the human com-
munity. According to Marsilius, men joined together not
because they were coerced to do so, but because they
responded to the exhortation of prudent men who were
specially endowed by nature with extraordinary reason
and eloquence. Human beings may be inclined to associate
in communities and to submit to law and government, but
they cannot be compelled to do so. The provenance of this
doctrine is obviously Ciceronian. Thus, Marsilius realizes
that the inclination to associate differs from the Aristote-
lian notion of internally regulated motion toward an end,
for which reason, perhaps, he, in contrast to John of Paris
and other scholastic theorists, declines to state in the
Defensor that man is a political animal. The natural incli-
nation to enter into community is instead constituted as
an implicit feature of human nature, requiring reasoned
persuasion in order to stimulate and direct it toward
realization.
The Ciceronian aspect of Marsilius’ argument conse-
quently precludes submission to any application of power,
which has not acquired the prior approval of the citizen
body over which it is wielded. It is in these terms that we
may best understand the Defensor’s unwavering commit-
ment to the consent of the populace as the prerequisite for
duly constituted rulers, laws, and all other manner of
government activity. Marsilius’ consent theory is complex,
but its philosophical substance is rooted ﬁrmly in Cicero’s
idea of man’s transformation into a civilized creature.
Marsilius recognizes that human beings often ﬁnd difﬁcult
to live peacefully with their fellows, yet earthly happiness
and comfort make it imperative that people enter into
a civil community. Therefore, political authority needs to
be adequate to coerce those citizens who are incapable of
controlling their temptation to behave iniquitously; yet
government must still not interfere with the free choice to
associate (in accordance with natural inclination), which
forms the basis of all communal institutions, by enforcing
obedience unilaterally. Marsilius presumes, along Cicero-
nian lines, that the inclinations, which nature imparts to
man are only the beginning of social and political develop-
ment. For Marsilius, as for Cicero, the only valid path to
a properly fashioned community is man’s collaboration
with nature in the fulﬁllment of those gregarious propen-
sities inherent within him.
Cicero in Political Philosophy C
219
C

At the close of the Middle Ages, Cicero’s standing
among the so-called Renaissance civic humanists solid-
iﬁed his standing as a preeminent ﬁgure in political
philosophy, suggesting more continuity between medi-
eval and early modern approaches than is sometimes
admitted. Scholasticism, which is often denigrated as
the implacable enemy of humanism, grasped and
employed
many
key
features
of
Cicero’s
thought.
Thus, too ﬁrm a distinction between the Middle Ages
and the Renaissance, or between the scholastic and
humanist outlooks, may become an obstacle to the
appreciation of intellectual traditions that defy narrow
classiﬁcation. Cicero’s political ideas were just as much
admired by medieval thinkers, and regarded by them to
be crucial to conceptualizing the orderly conduct of
public affairs, as by their humanist successors in the
quattrocento.
See also: ▶John of Paris ▶John of Salisbury ▶Marsilius
of Padua ▶Ptolemy of Lucca ▶Thomas Aquinas, Political
Thought
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Cicero (1913) De ofﬁciis, trans. Miller W. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge
Cicero (1928) De re publica and De legibus, trans. Keyes CW. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge
Cicero (1949) De inventione, trans. Hubbell HM. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
John of Paris (1974) On royal and papal power, trans. Monahan A.
Columbia University Press, New York
John of Salisbury (1957) Metalogicon, trans. McGarry DD. University of
California Press, Berkeley
John of Salisbury (1992) Policraticus, trans. Nederman CJ. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Latini Brunetto (1993) The book of the treasure, trans. Barrette P,
Baldwin S. Garland, New York
Marsilius of Padua (2000) The defender of peace, trans. Gewirth A.
Columbia University Press, New York
Ptolemy of Lucca (1997) On the rule of princes, trans. Blythe J. University
of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia
Secondary Sources
Black A (1992) Political thought in Europe, 1250–1450. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge
Colish M (1990) The Stoic tradition from antiquity to the early middle
ages, 2 vols, 2nd edn. Brill, Leiden
Keys M (2006) Aquinas, Aristotle and the pursuit of the common good.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Nederman CJ (1988) Nature, sin and the origins of society: the Ciceronian
tradition in medieval political thought. J Hist Ideas 49:3–26
Nederman CJ (1990) Nature, justice and duty in the Defensor
Pacis: Marsiglio of Padua’s Ciceronian impulse. Polit Theory
18:615–637
Nederman CJ (1992) The union of wisdom and eloquence before the
renaissance: the Ciceronian orator in medieval thought. J Medieval
Hist 18:75–95
Civil (Roman) Law
JOSEPH CANNING
Girton College
University of Cambridge
Cambridge
UK
Abstract
The Roman law was fundamental to medieval civilization –
it was the greatest legacy of the Roman Empire. It was
known through Justinian’s codiﬁcation, the Corpus iuris
civilis. The systematic study of Roman law began at the
University of Bologna toward the end of the eleventh
century. The ﬁrst school of Roman law jurists was that of
the Glossators, followed by that of the Commentators.
A combined ius commune jurisprudence including both
civil and canon law developed. The Commentators sought
to accommodate Roman law to their own society. Most of
the Corpus iuris was concerned with private law but
medieval jurists made major contributions to the lan-
guage of government and politics. Both monarchical
and republican elements existed in Roman law. The
divine source of the emperor’s power was stressed, as
was also its popular origin. The jurists considered the
problem of how the Roman Republic had been legit-
imately succeeded by the Empire. The notion persisted
that the emperor’s power was limited because it
derived from the law. Custom preserved the notion
of popular consent. Medieval jurists faced the problem
of universal and territorial sovereignty, producing the-
ories of the sovereignty of both kings and city-repub-
lics. Medieval jurists treated natural law and the law of
peoples (ius gentium) as higher norms based on reason.
There was a wide range of treatments of the relationship
between temporal and spiritual power. The medieval
scholastic treatment of Roman law was not supplanted
by the sixteenth-century humanist approach but coexisted
with it. In jurisprudence, as in other areas, scholasticism
and humanism were both characteristic of Renaissance
intellectual life.
220 C
Civil (Roman) Law

Roman law played a fundamental role in medieval civili-
zation. It was the greatest legacy from the ancient Roman
Empire to medieval Europe. In the West, it was known
through Justinian’s codiﬁcation (completed in 534),
known as the Corpus iuris in the Middle Ages and as the
Corpus iuris civilis from the sixteenth century. The Corpus
iuris was divided into four parts: the Institutes, which
consisted of a short introduction to the law; the Digest,
composed of legal opinions of 39 classical jurists from the
second to the fourth centuries; the Codex, comprising laws
of emperors; and the Novels, containing further laws of
Justinian, issued up to his death (565). In the early Middle
Ages in the West, some knowledge of Roman law was
transmitted through the barbarian codes, the Lex Romana
Visigothorum and the Lex Romana Burgundionum, but
a
systematic
study
of
the
Corpus
iuris
was
only
reestablished through the revival of legal studies at the
University of Bologna toward the end of the eleventh
century. Thereafter, Roman law was central to the devel-
opment of jurisprudence, especially in Italy, France, and
the Iberian Peninsula. But most importantly, canon law
and its scholarship grew in tandem with civil, thereby
spreading the inﬂuence of Roman law all over western
Christendom. In the Byzantine Empire, the simpliﬁed
Greek version of the Corpus iuris, issued by Leo VI (886–
912) and known as the Basilica, became normative.
In the West, the scholarship of Roman law began with
the
school
of
the
Glossators.
This culminated
in
Accursius’ Glossa ordinaria on the whole text of the Corpus
iuris (completed in the 1230s). From the late thirteenth
century, the school of the Commentators became domi-
nant. The method of these jurists was scholastic in that
they applied Aristotelian methods of argument to an
authoritative body of knowledge, in their case the Corpus
iuris. The school began in France; the Italian jurist, Cynus
de Pistoia (1270–1336/1337), brought the new approach
to Italy. He taught Bartolus of Sassoferrato (1313/1314–
1357), who in turn taught Baldus de Ubaldis (1327–1400),
the most famous jurist of his day. The study of Roman law
was initially distinct from that of canon, but the two forms
of scholarship increasingly inﬂuenced each other. Indeed
from the mid-thirteenth century onward, some jurists
were awarded a doctorate in both laws (Doctor iuris
utriusque). Modern scholars have tended to see civilians
and canonists as operating within an overall common law
(ius commune). This legal system was seen by its practi-
tioners as a complete worldview. It certainly provided
a universe of discourse in terms of juristic language. Fol-
lowing the words of the famous classical jurist Ulpian (d.
223), the law was seen as ‘‘a true not pretended philoso-
phy,’’ of which jurists were the priests (Digest, 1.1.1,1) – the
law provided an explanation of the world in moral terms
as the ‘‘art of the good and the equitable.’’
The approach of the Commentators was not antiquar-
ian. They sought to accommodate the text of the Roman
law to the realities of their world. They were not concerned
to resurrect the meaning of the law in its original historical
context – nor were they philologically equipped to do so.
For them, Roman law was no relic from antiquity but
a living law, normative and applicable in their own day.
The task of the Glossators had been to establish the mean-
ing of the text as it stood, but with a developing tendency
to apply their ﬁndings to their own society. The method of
the Commentators was in stark contrast to that of the legal
humanists of the sixteenth century who sought to recover
the meaning of the Roman law in its original historical
context. A Commentator, such as Baldus, was well aware
of the historical distance between the fourteenth century
and the ﬁrst century BCE, but drew a different lesson:
that it was more important to apply the law to the here-
and-now – it served no useful purpose to try and resurrect
a time long past.
The Corpus iuris enshrined the distinction between
public and private law with its content being almost
entirely concerned with private law. But the treatments
of public law that it contained had a crucial and determin-
ing inﬂuence on the development of the language of gov-
ernment and politics in the Middle Ages. Modern scholars
have been particularly concerned with this area.
The Corpus iuris was overwhelmingly the emperor’s
law. In his decree of promulgation, Justinian had given all
parts of it equal status as imperial law. But the codiﬁcation
had been made in a hurry and there were contradictions
within it. Not least, there coexisted both monarchical and
republican elements. The history of law under the Roman
Republic was given in outline, and there were other traces
of republican law. This meant that medieval jurists were
able to use the Roman law as a treasure-house of passages
to apply to the wide variety of political institutions they
were confronted with: the Empire, kingdoms, city-states,
and lordships of various kinds.
The divine source of the emperor’s power was stressed
and, indeed, he was described as ‘‘lord of the world’’
(dominus mundi) (Digest, 14.2.9). His laws were sacred
and everlasting: Justinian had decreed that his codiﬁcation
would last ‘‘forever’’ (in omne aevum) (Digest, Constitutio,
‘‘Omnem,’’ 11). The emperor was the ‘‘living law’’ (lex
animata) (Novel, 105,2,4) – an echo of Hellenistic notions
of kingship. There was a clear statement of his sovereign
will: ‘‘what has pleased the emperor has the force of law’’
(quod principi placuit legis habet vigorem) (Digest, 1.4.1).
Indeed, he was described as being ‘‘freed from the laws’’
Civil (Roman) Law C
221
C

(legibus solutus) (Digest, 1.3.31). This formulation was the
distant ancestor of early modern notions of absolute mon-
archy but its meaning was restricted: the emperor was
freed from the observance of the leges, in the sense of
positive law.
But a problem remained. Rome had once been
a republic in which power was ultimately derived from
the people. How had it legally become an empire? How
had a series of emperors been set up with legitimate
authority? The answer given by the Corpus iuris was the
so-called ‘‘royal law’’ (lex regia), whereby the Roman peo-
ple had transferred all its power and authority to the
emperor. The Corpus iuris only referred to this law and
modern scholars have disputed whether it ever actually
existed or whether it was a legal construction to explain
the transition from republic to empire. Some have identi-
ﬁed it with the leges de imperio by which the popular
assembly gave power to an emperor on his accession.
The problem with this interpretation is that only one
such law survives (that concerning Vespasian) and only
in a truncated form not conforming to the description of
the lex regia – it is a grant of speciﬁc powers and exemp-
tions rather than a general transfer of power. Whatever the
truth of the matter, reference to the lex regia kept alive the
idea that the people was the source of the emperor’s
authority. Medieval jurists, in discussing it, broached fun-
damental political issues: was it revocable or irrevocable?
In other words was sovereignty alienable? Furthermore,
the notion of the lex regia was relevant to another issue.
Did the emperor have a completely free hand? If he did,
this would go against the spirit of the Roman law because
the self-image of the governmental and legal system of
Rome was that it was one which exempliﬁed the rule of
law. So, there was a passage that stressed that it was ﬁtting
for the emperor to obey the laws, precisely because his
power was derived from the law (lex Digna vox) (Code,
1.14.4). But of course he could not be compelled to
acquiesce.
The notion of popular consent persisted in another
area within the Corpus iuris, that of custom. The treatment
was sketchy and contradictory. Digest, 1.3.32, ascribed to
the second-century jurist, Julian, stated that the people
could express its will in abrogating a law by its tacit
consent through disuse. This passage came to be used by
late medieval jurists as a building block in developing
ideas of consent. A contradictory constitution of Constan-
tine (Code, 8.52.2) stated that a custom could not abrogate
a lex. This view was determinative in the Corpus iuris and
was reinforced by Justinian’s statement that the emperor,
whose will was the sole source of law, was its only inter-
preter (Code, 1.14.12). Interpretation was, of course,
precisely what the late medieval jurists undertook in
accommodating the Roman law to their contemporary
social and political reality.
One of the most well-known maxims from Roman
law, ‘‘what touches all should be approved by all’’ (quod
omnes tangit ab omnibus comprobetur) (Code, 5.59.5,2),
was used by medieval jurists to justify popular consent in
matters of law and government. But they took it out of
context: in the Corpus iuris, it belonged to private law –
when a ward had more than one guardian, all had to agree
to certain acts involving the interests of all guardians.
The universal nature of imperial authority in the Cor-
pus iuris posed a problem for medieval jurists faced with
kings who did not accept subordination to the emperor
and, in Italy, city-republics which from the twelfth century
increasingly
exerted
their
autonomy.
Code,
1.1.1,
according
to
the
medieval
Vulgate
version (littera
Bononiensis), referred to ‘‘all peoples whom the sovereign
authority of our clemency rules’’ (cunctos populos quos
clementie nostre regit imperium). Did this mean that all
peoples were under the emperor’s rule or was it restricted
only to those that actually obeyed him? A solution was
approached ﬁrst in terms of kingship. Two formulae which
were distinct in origin became combined. The ﬁrst was the
notion that the king in his kingdom was the emperor of his
kingdom (rex in regno suo est imperator regni sui). The
source of this was to be found in canonist writings of the
last decade of the twelfth century and in a quaestio written
by the civilian Azo shortly after 1200. The second was that
of the king who did not recognize a superior (rex qui
superiorem non recognoscit). This was derived from
a passage in Pope Innocent III’s decretal, Per venerabilem
(1202): ‘‘Since the king himself [of the French] does not
recognise a superior in temporal matters’’ (quum rex ipse
[Francorum]
superiorem
in
temporalibus
minime
recognoscat). The application of this thinking to indepen-
dent city-states in Italy came in the fourteenth century
with Bartolus who, basing his argument on the power of
popular consent, produced the concept of the city, which
was its own emperor (civitas sibi princeps) and which did
not recognize a superior. Baldus developed further the
implications of the sovereignty of such republics, giving
particular attention to corporation theory and to citizen-
ship as both a political and a legal concept. When faced
with the apparent contradictions between the universal
claims of the emperor and the territorial sovereignty of
kings and then cities, jurists had from the thirteenth cen-
tury used the de iure-de facto distinction. Canonists
discussed whether the king of France did not recognize
a superior de iure or de facto. In the thirteenth century,
civilians (with the possible exception of Johannes de
222 C
Civil (Roman) Law

Blanosco) accorded de iure sovereignty solely to the
emperor. Bartolus took the step of accepting that cities
through the exercise of de facto power gained fully legiti-
mate sovereignty; Baldus applied the same argument to
kings. This approach meant that the facts of political life
were fully recognized. The magnitude of Bartolus’ and
Baldus’ achievements in justifying the sovereignty of Ital-
ian city-republics is shown if one reﬂects that, in the
Corpus iuris, cities enjoyed the status of mere municipia,
licit corporations subject to imperial conﬁrmation of their
legal rights. The lex regia applied solely to the Roman
people and not to cities in general and was, therefore,
not used by either jurist in their arguments supporting
the sovereignty of city-republics.
The Corpus iuris had given cursory attention to the
jurisprudential concepts of natural law (ius naturale) and
the law of peoples (ius gentium). The treatment of natural
law was contradictory. Ulpian considered it to be that
which human beings shared with animals, whereas the
second-century lawyer, Gaius, connected both laws, con-
sidering the ius gentium to be the product of natural
reason. Gaius’ view predominated amongst Roman
jurists. Given the prominence of the concept of natural
law in scholastic discourse, medieval jurists, both civilians
and canonists, treated natural law and the ius gentium as
higher norms. In contrast there was no suggestion in the
Corpus iuris that a provision of the ius civile, which went
against natural law was in any way invalid. Medieval jurists
treated the ius gentium as a legal expression of human
beings’ natural reason. They found the ius gentium
a particularly useful category for dealing with government
and politics, because in the Corpus iuris it was described as
the source of rulership and property. The Neapolitan
school for instance, in support of the king of Sicily’s claims
to independence from the Roman emperor, denied the
latter’s de iure universal sovereignty, maintaining that
there was a plurality of sovereign monarchs on the basis
of the ius gentium. The inhabitants of the kingdom of
Sicily, like those of Spain, had conquered their territory
by the effusion of their own blood. This argument
bypassed the mainstream de iure-de facto one which only
applied within the context of Roman law and rested on the
premise of the de iure claims of the emperor. For the
Neapolitans, the ius civile of the Romans was only one
amongst many. Within the school of the Commentators,
Baldus held that the ius gentium justiﬁed self-government
by peoples and the election of kings by the inhabitants of
a kingdom.
In the Middle Ages, the relationship between the
church and secular rulers was of central importance and
at times highly contentious. In the Corpus iuris, religion
was considered to be part of public law. A distinction was,
indeed, made between the emperorship (imperium) and
the priesthood (sacerdotium), both of which were under-
stood to derive from God. But the emperor, as God’s
vicegerent on earth, was the head of the church under-
stood as the Christian Roman Empire, and legislated on
ecclesiastical matters. The ﬁrst 13 titles of the Code were
concerned with the clergy and religious questions, as were
many of the Novels. From the time of the papal reform
movement in the later eleventh and early twelfth centuries,
the church’s rejection of this imperial role became insis-
tent. Freedom of the church (libertas ecclesiae) from lay
control became enshrined in the rapidly developing canon
law. Civilian jurists had to consider church matters in the
light of papal claims and the arguments of canonists. As
regards the relationship between secular rulership (reg-
num) and the priesthood, juristic opinion within the ius
commune ranged from a dualist approach, seeing both as
derived directly from God and existing in parallel, to
a hierocratic one, seeing the pope as mediating govern-
mental power from God to the secular ruler. As a sign that
canon law could not be ignored by civilians, the greatest of
the Glossators, Accursius, had to consider the Donation of
Constantine. According to this, the emperor had granted
the imperial authority in the West to Pope Sylvester and
his successors. This purported document was not men-
tioned in the Corpus iuris but a version of the supposed
text was included in canon law, notably Gratian’s
Decretum. The authenticity of this donation (which was
not extant) was attacked by Nicholas of Cusa on grounds
of historical evidence in his Concordantia catholica
(1433) and proved to be inauthentic for philological rea-
sons by Lorenzo Valla in 1440. But such arguments were
not known in Accursius’ day. The issue for him and other
jurists was whether the donation was valid or not. He
proved on Roman law grounds that it could not be relying
above all on the emperor’s duty to conserve the empire by
virtue of his ofﬁce. The Donation served as a title to the
Papal States, but one which medieval popes were careful to
have reconﬁrmed by subsequent emperors; indeed popes
came to insist on such reafﬁrmation before they would
conduct an imperial coronation. The division of Italy into
lands of the empire (terrae imperii) and lands of the
church (terrae ecclesiae) became embedded in juristic dis-
course. The range of opinion over the relationship
between temporal and spiritual powers was wide: pope
and emperor were seen as twin pillars of Christendom but
the extent of their power as regards each other was
disputed.
The scholastic treatment of Roman law outlasted the
Middle Ages. From the early sixteenth century, it was
Civil (Roman) Law C
223
C

indeed challenged by the emergence of humanist jurispru-
dence based on a sophisticated knowledge of Latin philol-
ogy but it was not supplanted. Both methods, known
colloquially as the old style ‘‘Italian manner’’ (mos italicus)
and the new style ‘‘French manner’’ (mos gallicus),
coexisted. Indeed, in those places in Europe where
Roman law was applied, the traditional scholastic
approach still remained dominant in the practice of law-
yers and the law courts. Thus in jurisprudence, as in other
areas, scholasticism and humanism were both character-
istic of Renaissance intellectual life.
See also: ▶Canon Law ▶Feudal Law ▶Natural Law
▶Roman Empire
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1497–1498) Corpus iuris civilis (Vulgate text with Glossa ordinaria of
Accursius). Venice
(1928) Corpus iuris civilis. I. Institutiones, ed. Kruger P; (1928) Digesta,
ed. Mommsen T, Krueger P, 15th edn; (1954) II. Codex, ed. Krueger
P, 11th edn; (1954) III. Novellae, ed. Schoell R, 6th edn, Weidmann,
Berlin
Secondary Sources
Reference Works
Coing H (ed) (1973) Handbuch der Quellen und Literatur der neueren
Europa¨ischen Privatrechtsgeschichte, I: Mittelalter (1100–1500).
Beck, Munich
Lange H (ed) (2007) In: Lange H, Kriechbaum M (eds) Ro¨misches Recht
im Mittelalter, I: Die Glossatoren (1997); II: Kommentatoren Beck,
Munich
Ullmann W (1975) Law and politics in the Middle Ages. An introduction
to the sources of medieval political ideas, the sources of history,
studies in the uses of historical evidence. The Sources of History,
London
Monographs
Bellomo M (1995) The common legal past of Europe, 1100–1800.
Cochrane, studies in medieval and early modern Canon Law, 4,
trans. Lydia G. Catholic University of America Press, Washington
Canning J (1987, Repr. 2003) The political thought of Baldus de Ubaldis,
Cambridge studies in medieval life and thought, 4th series, 6. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Fasolt C (2004) The limits of history. University of Chicago Press, Chi-
cago/London
Pennington K (1993) The prince and the law, 1200–1600. Sovereignty and
rights in the Western legal tradition. University of California Press,
Berkeley/Los Angeles/Oxford
Stein P (1999) Roman law in European history. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Woolf CNS (1913) Bartolus of Sassoferrato. His position in the history of
medieval political thought. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Chapters
Canning J (1988) Law, sovereignty and corporation theory, 1300–1450.
In: Burns JH (ed) The Cambridge history of medieval political
thought, c. 350–c. 1450. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 454–476
Pennington K (1988) Law, legislative authority, and theories of govern-
ment, 1150–1300. In: Burns (ed) Cambridge history, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp 424–453
Stein P (1988) Roman law. In: Burns (ed) Cambridge history, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp 37–47
Journal Article
Ryan M (2000) Bartolus of Sassoferrato and free cities. Trans R Hist Soc,
6th series, 10:65–89
Conciliarism
THOMAS M. IZBICKI
Alexander Library
Rutgers State University of New Jersey
New Brunswick, NJ
USA
Abstract
Conciliarism was rooted in church tradition, which valued
the great councils of Antiquity as defenders of true doc-
trine. It became a movement in reaction to the Great
Western Schism (1378–1417). Theologians like Peter of
Ailly and John Gerson, as well as canonists like Francesco
Zabarella, argued for a general council to resolve the
schism. Eventually, the Council of Constance (1414–
1418) declared a council supreme in reuniting the church,
defending orthodoxy and reforming the ecclesiastical
institution. Some conciliarists argued that the church as
a whole was the ultimate ecclesiastical authority, and that
it was represented by a council. Calling a council, however,
was the prerogative of the papacy. An appeal to equity was
used to circumvent the law. If necessity required a council,
other authorities could gather one. Nicholas of Cusa
argued for a church, which balanced hierarchy with
consent of the church as a whole. The Council of Basel
(1431–1449) tried to impose reform on pope and curia.
This produced a papalist reaction led by Pope Eugenius IV
(1431–1447)
and
the
Dominican
theologian
John
Torquemada.
Although shaped by the Great Western Schism (1378–
1417), which divided the papacy between two and then
three claimants, and the desire for reform of the church,
conciliarism
was
rooted
in
traditional
texts
and
224 C
Conciliarism

documents. The history of the church highlighted the
great church councils of the fourth and ﬁfth centuries,
which had deﬁned key doctrines, and medieval popes
had legislated through general councils and local synods
convoked on their initiative. By the end of the thirteenth
century, canon lawyers had examined the remedies avail-
able if a pope fell into error, some thinking he lost his
ofﬁce upon espousing heresy, while others thought
a church council had to depose the pontiff formally.
Canon law, however, restricted the power of summoning
a general council to the Roman pontiff – preventing
a pope’s enemies from using such an assembly against
him.
Canonists
also
discussed
the
church
as
a corporation, an entity able to defend its own interests.
Canonists and theologians also were aware of Augustine’s
idea that Peter had received the keys as the representative
of the whole church (in ﬁgura ecclesiae), not just in his own
right. Theologians, moreover, discussed the church as the
mystical body of Christ. There was room for arguments
that a council could represent Christ even in the absence of
a legitimate pope.
A general council to decide between the rival popes
was recommended soon after the outbreak of the schism.
Henry of Langenstein, a theologian, and Conrad of
Gelnhausen, a canonist, were among the ﬁrst to propose
this solution, arguing that a general council could assem-
ble in the absence of an undoubted Roman pontiff. Equity
(epieikeia, an Aristotelian concept) permitted the church
to waive the letter of the law under such circumstances.
Other measures were tried without success. These
included a compromise between the claimants, the abdi-
cation of one in the other’s favor, and election of the
surviving claimant when his rival died, but none of these
came to fruition. At last, Benedict XIII (Avignon) and
Gregory XII (Rome) agreed, under pressure, to meet to
ﬁnd a solution to the schism. This failed to happen,
provoking both colleges of cardinals to abandon them
and come together. The cardinals agreed to hold
a council of union in Pisa in 1409.
For this council, theologians, like John Gerson and
Peter of Ailly, and canonists, like Francesco Zabarella,
prepared tracts arguing for the ability of a council to
meet and end the schism. The power of the whole church
over a pope was emphasized. The Pisan synod declared
both popes deposed, electing Alexander V in their place.
Alexander having died soon after his election, Baldassare
Cosa was elected his successor as John XXIII. John proved
unable to unite the church, and so Sigismund of Luxem-
burg, king of the Romans, urged on by Gerson and others,
pressured John to call a council. John, driven from Rome
by the king of Naples, called a council to meet in Con-
stance. If John hoped to be conﬁrmed in ofﬁce, he found
his future in doubt. So he ﬂed, but the Council of Con-
stance, after some hesitation, declared that it met with the
authority of the Holy Spirit and had power from God, as
the representative of Christ and the church, to resolve the
schism. The council also claimed, in the decree Haec
sancta, authority to defend the faith and reform the
church ‘‘in head and members.’’ John XXIII was deposed,
and Gregory XII resigned shortly thereafter. (Some later
papalists claimed his pro forma authorization of the coun-
cil had legitimized it.) Benedict XIII refused to yield, but
most of his followers, even in his native Spain, deserted
him. The Council of Constance, once it had representation
of all the former parties in the schism, was able to elect an
undoubted pope, Martin V, a Roman noble of the
Colonna clan. Constance also enacted the decree Frequens,
which called for a regular succession of councils to regu-
late the conduct of church government, especially that of
the Roman curia. Some reforms also were enacted at
Constance, but the reformers were not satisﬁed. The next
council, assembled at Pavia and then moved to Siena,
failed to enact further reforms.
When the next council assembled in Basel in 1431,
a new pope, Eugenius IV, a nephew of Gregory XII, had
just been elected. He tried to dissolve the council or at
least transfer it to Italy to meet representatives of the
Greek Church in an effort to restore ecclesiastical unity
in the face of the advancing Ottoman Turks. The Basel
fathers, deep in negotiations with the Hussite rebels in
Bohemia for a debate over the issues dividing them
from orthodoxy, refused to adjourn or move. They
threatened the pope with suspension from ofﬁce if he
did not yield.
Treatises favoring councils written at the time included
Nicholas of Cusa’s On Catholic Concord, which argued for
a church governed by councils representing the whole
body, including the pope, that would maintain order and
enact reforms. This system of councils balanced the order
of hierarchy with the need to obtain widespread consent.
Cusanus’ treatise shows the inﬂuence not just of canon
law, but also the theology of Ramon Llull, who thought
that harmony could be brought out of discordant ele-
ments. Nicholas also thought the church would beneﬁt
from reform of the Holy Roman Empire, which would be
a strong element in the defense of Christendom against
internal and external foes. (The failure of Basel to achieve
concord eventually would drive Nicholas to become an
agent of the papacy in defeating the council.) Also among
the subtler thinkers at Basel, Heymeric of Camp,
Conciliarism C
225
C

a professor from Cologne, argued for an idea of the coun-
cil as the agent of the whole, including the pope, more fully
representative of God than was the Roman pontiff on his
own. This he argued from the works of Llull and even from
Latin discussions of the Qurʾa¯n. Some other conciliarists,
however, thought in less subtle terms, arguing that the
council represented the whole in very legalistic ways. The
whole being greater than any part, even the most impor-
tant part, the pope himself, a general council was supreme,
holding plenitude of power. (The canonist Panormitanus
would claim this before an imperial diet in 1442.) Conse-
quently, a council could impose reforms on the curia.
Basel also organized its own curia and assumed the
power to issue indulgences.
Faced with this resistance and routed from Rome by
local foes, Eugenius recognized the council, but he
refused to be bound by its reform decrees. Eugenius
dispatched a committee of presidents to Basel, but
they were faced with an oath of incorporation into the
council intended to make them compliant with the will
of the majority. The Council of Basel began to divide
internally, especially over the site of a council with the
Greeks. By 1437 Eugenius was able to decree transfer of
the assembly to Ferrara. Some of the fathers left – seeing
discord as a sign that the Spirit had departed, but the
remainder resisted. They turned the decree of Con-
stance
on
conciliar
authority,
Haec
sancta,
into
a pronouncement of dogma. Then they deposed Eugenius
IV, electing the semiretired duke of Savoy, Amadeus VIII,
to reign as Pope Felix V.
This election set off a ﬁerce diplomatic struggle,
particularly in the Holy Roman Empire. Basel’s apolo-
gists traveled to imperial diets to proclaim that general
councils represented the church with fullness of eccle-
siastical power. Even a legitimate pope had to obey,
embracing
reforms,
or
face
deposition.
Eugenius’
envoys argued that the pope was supreme, the one
who received the power of jurisdiction from Christ
and distributed it to bishops and priests. This hierar-
chic view was supported with allusions to ideas of
celestial hierarchy, derived from Pseudo-Dionysius the
Areopagite, and an idea of the natural order as monar-
chic. Bees – obeying a king! – and migrating birds
following a leader were invoked, using a text from
canon law, as proof that a plurality of rulers was against
nature.
Eventually Eugenius and his supporters prevailed
through propaganda describing the Basel assembly as
a mob of rebellious subjects and by making concessions
to the princes, especially those in the Germanic lands.
A temporary reunion with the Greeks, decreed at Florence
in 1439, also buoyed the embattled pope. The Basel assem-
bly yielded at last, after Eugenius’ death, and ‘‘elected’’ his
successor, Nicholas V, as pope. Felix V abdicated, retiring
to Savoy.
Conciliar sentiment remained alive, especially in
Paris, well after this defeat, and both rulers and prel-
ates at odds with Rome appealed to a future general
council. Even Pius II’s prohibition of appeals from
pope to council failed to destroy this conciliar tradi-
tion. It remained alive until the French Revolution
destroyed Gallicanism in France. Ultramontane views
of papal supremacy held sway unquestioned for more
than
a
century.
These
dismissed
conciliarism
as
inspired
by
heretical
critics
of
the
papacy.
The
conciliarist example, however, has been invoked since
the Second Vatican Council was announced in 1959.
The possibility that a more consultative order might
prevail in the church was tied to an argument that the
decree Haec sancta of the Council of Constance deﬁned
a dogma that could not be overturned on behalf of pope
and curia.
See also: ▶Canon Law ▶Corporation Theory ▶Jacques
Almain ▶John Gerson ▶John Torquemada ▶Nicholas of
Cusa ▶Peter of Ailly ▶Political Philosophy
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Burns JH, Izbicki TM (ed and trans) (1997) Conciliarism and papalism.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Crowder CMD (ed) (1977) Unity, heresy and reform 1378–1460:
the conciliar response to the Great Schism. Edward Arnold,
London
Nicholas of Cusa (1991) The catholic concordance, trans. Sigmund PE.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Spinka M (ed) (1953) Advocates of reform from Wyclif to Erasmus.
Westminster, Philadelphia
Secondary Sources
Black A (1970) Monarchy and community: political ideas in the later
conciliar controversy 1430–1450. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
McGuire BP (2005) Jean Gerson and the last medieval reformation.
Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park
Morrall JB (1960) Gerson and the Great Schism. Manchester University
Press, Manchester
Oakley F (1964) The political thought of Pierre d’Ailly: the voluntarist
tradition. Yale University Press, New Haven
Oakley F (2003) The conciliarist tradition. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Tierney B (1998) Foundations of the conciliar theory: the contribution of
the medieval canonists from Gratian to the Great Schism. Brill,
Leiden
226 C
Conciliarism

Consciousness
MIKKO YRJO¨ NSUURI
Department of Social Sciences and Philosophy
University of Jyva¨skyla¨
Jyva¨skyla¨
Finland
Abstract
Medieval discussions recognize many of the issues that are
nowadays associated with the philosophical term ‘‘con-
sciousness,’’ but the conceptual schemes used in these
discussions are very different from the modern ones.
Thus, the modern interest in consciousness and self-
consciousness relates to medieval interest in perception,
conceptual representation, attention, and self-knowledge.
The phenomenality of conscious thought was not directly
addressed. The medieval theories of self-cognition distin-
guish between knowledge of the essence of the soul and the
acts of the soul. For the former, opinions varied so that
the Platonic thinkers often afﬁrmed that the essence of the
soul can be directly perceived while the Aristotelians
claimed that such perception is indirect. Knowledge of
the existence of one’s own soul was often given as an
example of a certainty. Medieval authors generally agreed
that acts of one’s own soul can be self-consciously per-
ceived, but opinions differed in respect to how such self-
conscious thought is structured and whether all mental
acts are actually perceived, or whether all thought is self-
conscious.
Conceptual Changes
As a technical philosophical term, ‘‘consciousness’’ and
its cognates in other languages became important only
in modern philosophy. It has been claimed that the
concept was unknown in Ancient Greek philosophy.
For medieval philosophy, such a straightforward claim
would be obviously misleading. The phenomena related
to the concept in modern philosophy were intensively
studied during the Middles Ages, though with some-
what different conceptual schemes. Medieval authors
discussed issues that nowadays are associated to con-
sciousness in distinct contexts and in settings very dif-
ferent from the modern ones.
Contrary to what has sometimes been claimed, the
Latin term conscientia was used in Classical Latin in
a meaning close to modern English ‘‘consciousness.’’
Augustine, for example, claims (De trin. 13.1.3) that he
has most certain knowledge of the faith he has in his heart
through conscientia. Such usage of the word continued to
the Middle Ages, but the word did not gain any central
position in philosophical discussions before the modern
era. More relevant medieval terms include, for example,
cognitio reﬂexiva, notitia sui, cognitio intuitiva, intentio,
and representatio.
Historically, medieval discussions of philosophical
topics related to consciousness can be traced back to the
Neoplatonic–Stoic tradition, to which Aristotelian ele-
ments were incorporated. This tradition was taken over
by Arabic thinkers like Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna) and Ibn Rushd
(Averroes). Both had major inﬂuence on medieval Latin
discussions. Also certain Ancient Roman thinkers like
Augustine were important for the developments among
Latin authors.
Phenomenality and Intentionality
Phenomenality as such, or the qualitative aspect of con-
scious experience, does not seem to play any signiﬁcant
role in medieval discussions of conscious experiences. It
seems that medieval thinkers typically did not think that
there would be any special private dimension in conscious
experience. Rather, their view was that we normally expe-
rience the world as it is, and thus share phenomenally the
same experience when perceiving the same object. Thus, in
perceiving a white object, the species of whiteness informs
the mind of any perceiver in the same qualitative way, and
exact description of how the form informs the mind raised
much interest. The viewpoint was not, however, subjective
in the modern sense, and it did not become a topic of
philosophical dispute whether there is a special ‘‘what is it
like for a person to be perceiving whiteness.’’
There were, however, elaborate discussions concerning
how we experience our mental acts as our own. Do the
phenomenal
characteristics
of
mental
acts
include
experiencing the acts as personally one’s own? Do we
have consciousness of the unity of the mind? Can the so-
called Averroist view that we all share the same intellect be
refuted simply through reference to experiential con-
sciousness? These questions did not receive unanimous
answers. Generally, medieval authors thought that intel-
lectual understanding is experienced as individually one’s
own, although that experience may not reveal an incorpo-
real soul. Also, although most Latin authors thought that
the sensory soul and the intellectual soul are distinct, even
metaphysically distinct, it was mostly thought that the
subject of sensory perception was experienced to be the
same as that of intellectual cognition. The discussion
seems to be connected to Avicenna’s insight that the sub-
ject of visual perception and the subject of the resulting
emotion are experienced to be the same.
Consciousness C
227
C

Consciousness is about some object. Such intention-
ality of consciousness has been one of the main obstacles
in twentieth-century projects of naturalizing conscious-
ness. Medieval discussions recognized the intentionality,
and aimed at explicating what exactly is it that serves as
the object of consciousness, and what the presence of the
object to the mind in consciousness amounts to. Repre-
sentational theories gained little following, while the main
thrust was toward direct realism, where the object of
consciousness is typically an external real thing that some-
how gains presence in thought.
Knowledge of the Essence of the Soul
It was a commonplace in medieval philosophy that no one
can be in doubt about the existence of one’s own soul. For
example, Matthew of Aquasparta refers to Augustine’s The
City of God (XI, 26) as having given the ﬁnal refutation of
the radical skeptical position by pointing out the certain
knowledge of one’s own existence. There was, however,
a widespread opinion about exactly how such self-
knowledge is grounded and what it contains. Can one
have direct self-consciousness in the sense of experiencing
oneself as a mental subject, or is such knowledge mediated
through experiences of mental acts so that the subject of
the acts is not as such a possible object of consciousness? If
the soul itself can be experienced, does this experience
yield knowledge of the incorporeality of the soul or its
separability from the body?
Before Aristotelian thought gained importance in the
thirteenth-century universities, Latin authors followed the
Neoplatonic tradition and afﬁrmed that it is possible to
turn intellectually inward to one’s mental self. According
to an Augustinian argument that was often quoted in the
Latin Middle Ages, the soul’s incorporeality can be directly
grasped in the immediate awareness of oneself that is
unlike any
awareness
of
anything
corporeal. Also,
Avicenna’s ‘‘ﬂoating man’’ thought experiment was well
known among the Latin thinkers. In this thought experi-
ment, one is to imagine oneself as being created as if
ﬂoating in air without any sensory experiences. As Avi-
cenna claims, the thought experiment shows how one can
know one’s own existence without any knowledge of the
body, and that therefore one should conceive of oneself as
an incorporeal soul. Franciscan thinkers developed the
epistemological aspects of this Augustinian–Avicennian
understanding of the structure of self-consciousness.
Aristotelian thinkers like Thomas Aquinas claimed
that the essence of the soul cannot be directly experienced,
and even knowledge of the existence of one’s own soul
comes through experiencing the acts of the soul. Knowl-
edge of the incorporeality of the soul comes through
scientiﬁc study rather than direct experience. Some other
thinkers followed Averroes’ interpretation of the Aristote-
lian position, which implied an even stronger denial of
direct self-consciousness.
Knowledge of the Acts of the Soul
It was generally agreed in the Middle Ages that we perceive
the acts of our own soul. When seeing a stone, say, we
normally perceive the seeing and not only the stone. There
were, however, disagreements concerning how this sec-
ond-order perception ought to be understood and
whether it is separable from the ﬁrst-order seeing. Already
Augustine recognized the implicit inﬁnite regress resulting
from perceiving the act by which one perceives one’s own
perceptual act, and welcomed it as showing even to the
skeptics that we know not just something but an inﬁnity of
things, but the medieval authors did not take the inﬁnite
regress as a refutation of a theory involving second-order
mental acts. William Ockham, for example, remarks that
inﬁnity is beyond human capacities. One perhaps can have
a third-order perception of the perception that one sees,
but further levels of perception may be beyond the reach of
the human mind.
Medieval authors often took up as a separate question
whether habits or dispositions of the soul can be directly
perceived. Normally, the answer is that they are perceived
through acts of the soul.
As a part of his theory of intuitive cognition, John
Duns Scotus took the view that we have indubitable
knowledge of our own mental acts, because we perceive
them directly and immediately. In his own theory, William
Ockham made it clear that we perceive our own mental
acts by second-order acts – that there are no literally
reﬂexive acts which would not be directed at objects.
These second-order acts are reﬂexive in the looser sense
that they have ﬁrst-order acts as their objects, thus yielding
intuitive, certain knowledge of one’s own mental acts.
Walter Chatton criticized Ockham’s theory and
claimed that all perceptual acts are experienced already
through their presence in the soul. No second-order act
would thus be needed for the ﬁrst-order act to be experi-
enced. Ockham, and his disciple Adam Wodeham,
answered by making it clear that nothing can be experi-
enced without a mental act taking it as an object, and
interestingly pointed out that not all mental acts are con-
scious. Thus, if one sees a stone on a narrow path (and
does not stumble on it), one notices and knows that one
sees the stone only if one has a second-order act directed at
the ﬁrst-order perception of the stone. Thus, one must
recognize
the
class
of
mental
acts
that
remain
nonconscious. Wodeham even presents the interesting
228 C
Consciousness

case of a person thinking that he does not think. Other-
wise, the examples found in the discussion are parallel to
examples used in twentieth-century philosophy like stop-
ping at red lights without noticing that one has seen any
trafﬁc lights.
See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶Augustine ▶Ibn Rushd,
Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯,
Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Intentionality ▶John Duns Scotus
▶Matthew of Aquasparta ▶Peter John Olivi ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶Walter Chatton ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Secondary Sources
Black DL (1993) Consciousness and self-knowledge in Aquinas’s critique
of Averroes’s psychology. J Hist Philos 31:349–385
Heina¨maa S et al (ed) (2007) Consciousness: from perception to reﬂec-
tion in the history of philosophy, Studies in the history of philosophy
of mind, 4. Springer, Dordrecht
Lagerlund H (ed) (2007a) Forming the mind. Studies in the history of
philosophy of mind, 5. Springer, Dordrecht
Lagerlund H (ed) (2007b) Representation and objects of thought in
medieval philosophy. Ashgate studies in medieval philosophy.
Ashgate, Aldershot
Yrjo¨nsuuri M (2006) Types of self-awareness in medieval thought.
In: Mind and modality, ed. Hirvonen V et al. Brill, Leiden,
pp 153–170
Consequences, Theory of
TUOMO AHO
Department of Philosophy
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
The theory of consequence is a branch of logic that studies
dependence relations between propositions as a separate
subject. Thus it is, in a way, more general than syllogistics.
It rests on old foundations, but as a distinct ﬁeld it was
born around 1300. Its most creative phase was 1320–1340
(Burley, Ockham, Buridan), but it was elaborated after-
wards, and retained an established place in the logic books.
A ‘‘consequence’’ from antecedent(s) to a consequent is
probably best regarded as a valid inference. According to
its standard deﬁnition, a consequence holds when the
antecedent is incompatible with the opposite of the
consequent. Logicians sought general rules for such
relations. Some rules were ‘‘proof-theoretical,’’ that is,
one
consequence
follows
from
others;
some
rules
concerned the validity of a single inference type. A lot of
theorems of propositional logic were proved in this con-
nection, and modal qualiﬁcations were soon added.
A large part of the discussion was about various distinc-
tions of consequences. They could be ut nunc (under
present conditions), or simply, without temporal qualiﬁ-
cations. Simple consequences were either formal or mate-
rial. Roughly, the earlier writers (Burley, Ockham) declare
that formal consequences are valid because of the mean-
ings of terms, but Buridan deﬁnes formal validity in the
manner of modern logic, as the validity of all instances of
the same logical form. This initiative was criticized, but
ﬁnally many logicians utilized both deﬁnitions, one
amounting to analyticity, the other to logical validity.
History
The theory of consequence (consequentia) was a ﬁeld of
logic investigating how something follows (sequor) from
something. ‘‘Consequence’’ was a wide notion that could
be applied even to mean just term inclusion, but in logical
theory it usually denoted the relation of following between
propositions. This is obviously a crucial issue for logic,
and both the Aristotelian syllogistics and the Stoic prop-
ositional logic provided background for the medieval
development. The Latin term consequentia is from Boe-
thius, who was aware of both of these traditions and
studied propositional inferences among ‘‘hypothetical
syllogisms.’’
A consequence consists of component propositions,
the antecedent and the consequent, and some element
marks them as so conjoined that the latter follows from
the former. A modern reader will immediately ask what
kind of relation is meant with this ‘‘following’’: is the
consequence a conditional sentence, or an entailment, or
an inference? But this question has proved extremely com-
plicated, and perhaps no full answer is available, since the
medieval classiﬁcations were not the same as ours and the
authors differed in their opinions. Scholars have often
emphasized the nature of medieval consequences as con-
ditionals (if p, then q); indeed, this is how medieval logi-
cians often express their consequentiae, and hence they
have been read as complex propositions. More recently
a different interpretation has gained ground: at least in the
best era of consequence theory, consequences seem to
function like inferences (p; thus q). Note, for example,
that an acceptable consequence is usually called, not
true, but ‘‘good’’ (bona), or such a consequence ‘‘holds’’
(tenet, valet). And the study of consequences appears in its
own place
in treatises, separate
from hypothetical
Consequences, Theory of C
229
C

propositions. Its nature was inferential, though even the
close logical connection between conditionals and infer-
ences was well known at least in the fourteenth century.
However, consequential inferences could be expressed as
conditionals if the conditional was to be read as ‘‘metalin-
guistic’’: ‘‘if p is asserted, it is correct to assert q.’’
(Buridan’s preferred view seems to be like this.)
For simplicity, let us ﬁrst give a rough outline of the
external historical development and only then go to sub-
stantial matters.
After Boethius, the word consequentia was frequently
used, though without further theoretical import. In the
earliest era of logical theory, Garlandus Compotista clas-
siﬁed consequences according to the truth-values of their
members; he also stated explicitly the leading principle
that no consequence with a true antecedent and a false
consequent can be true. (He discussed these questions in
the context of hypothetical propositions.) Abelard then
made relations of consequence and inference a central
subject in his Dialectica. There the theory had already
achieved
considerable
philosophical
sophistication.
Abelard’s ﬁndings were radical, since he was clearly
aware of the special logical character of necessary conse-
quence and excluded all relations that were less binding.
Consequences did not ﬁgure as a separate subject in
the foremost textbooks of the thirteenth century, though
they were applied and commented upon in some chapters;
apparently the theme was well-known. The distinct genre
of consequence theory was born after that. Its source is
somewhat puzzling; it has often been assumed that it
originates from topics, but the concrete links to the thir-
teenth-century topical literature remain questionable.
Anyway, the investigation of consequences by themselves
began around 1300, and a few short treatises De
consequentiis from that time have survived. The idea of
the emerging theory was to express some fundamental
features of consequence relations as a distinct subject
and in as general a form as possible. The initiative clearly
gained immediate response, since consequences were soon
an established branch of logical inquiry. Its most creative
period was perhaps 1320–1340, when three leading phi-
losophers wrote, arguably, the most important contri-
butions to it: Walter Burley’s De puritate artis logicae
(two treatises), William Ockham’s Summa logicae, Part
III-3, and John Buridan’s Tractatus de consequentiis.
After the central problems had thus been explicated,
the theory was carried on, both by Englishmen and by
Buridan’s continental followers, and its interpretation also
caused some interesting philosophical debate. The later
fourteenth century achieved remarkable elaboration in the
study of consequences, and the results of this process
found their place in textbooks (e.g., in the inﬂuential
books of Ralph Strode and Paul of Venice). The
commenting and qualifying discussion continued during
the whole ﬁfteenth century, mainly in Italy. The last con-
tributions were after 1500; then the authors were mainly
interested in counterexamples and special cases.
Rules
It is hardly possible to ﬁnd any clear and universal deﬁni-
tion of consequence. In fact, the medieval authors seem to
presuppose the notion of ‘‘following’’ as fundamental, as it
well may be. But all of them seem to assume that there is
some modal element: if the antecedent of a valid conse-
quence is true, the consequent cannot be false. Among
other things, this means that consequence is quite differ-
ent from our material implication. It must not be simply
identiﬁed with the modern strict implication either.
(Notice, moreover, that only correct inferences were usu-
ally called consequences, though it was admitted that the
term could also have a wider sense.)
During the heyday of consequence theory, a special
problem arose concerning the existence of the compo-
nents of a consequence. Since the medieval practice was
to regard propositions as concrete linguistic acts, truth
and falsehood could only belong to actual propositions,
and a consequence could hold only if its two components
were simultaneously present. This trouble was avoided
with a counterfactual assumption: if the two components
were formed simultaneously, then the required relation-
ships would occur. Yet, there are problems: in Buridan’s
example ‘‘No proposition is negative, therefore no ass is
running,’’ the antecedent would obviously be false when
asserted, and the consequence would become correct,
though it is surely incorrect. The strategy recommended
by Buridan is to say that, in a correct consequence, things
cannot be as the antecedent signiﬁes, without being as the
consequent signiﬁes: a semantical interpretation by means
of a step from propositions to states of affairs. But espe-
cially conjoined with self-reference, the condition of the
existence of propositions was a source of numerous
problems.
It is remarkable that consequence theory can consider
relations
between
unanalyzed
propositions,
without
entering the structure of subjects and predicates. In this
respect it resembles propositional logic and is simpler than
the Aristotelian syllogistics. Burley states, indeed, that
propositional consequence rules must be utilized in all
logic, and he places consequence theory before syllogistics,
because syllogisms are just a species of consequences. Most
writers do not say this equally explicitly, even if they often
follow the same order. And even in Burley’s case it would
230 C
Consequences, Theory of

be quite mistaken to claim that he builds predicate logic
upon propositional logic in the modern sense. (Note,
however, that from the case of syllogisms it is easy to see
that the antecedent can include several propositions.)
The theory of consequences aimed at ﬁnding some
universal rules about consequence relations. What were,
then, these laws? Let us designate consequence with !.
Interestingly, a number of rules were about relations
between consequences, about proper steps from one con-
sequence to another. (This is one context where it is best to
regard the consequences as inferences and to think that the
rules are about the universal validity of some inference
forms.) These rules have therefore been occasionally called
‘‘proof-theoretical.’’ In other words, such rules concerned
the conduct of inference. One such universal rule was, if
P ! Q and Q ! R, then P ! R. (This can be generalized
to what is now known as the ‘‘cut rule.’’) Another central
rule was that of contraposition: if P ! Q, then ¬Q ! ¬P.
These two recur constantly in the texts. Burley, Ockham,
and Buridan did not mention the fundamental modus
ponens and modus tollens among consequence rules, but
later for instance Strode began his exposition by stating
these two with perfect elegance.
A different type of rules just declared that a certain
single inference form was universally valid. For instance,
the consequence from ‘‘All S are P’’ to the particular ‘‘Some
S is P’’ was valid, because the universal proposition had
existential import, according to the medieval conception.
Likewise, many consequences were considered valid
because of the connection between ‘‘superior’’ and ‘‘infe-
rior.’’ For example, the consequence from ‘‘Every animal is
running’’ to ‘‘Every man is running’’ is valid, since the
subject term in the antecedent is superior to the subject
term of the consequent. (The study of such relations is
connected to the semantical doctrine of suppositions of
terms.) No authors attempted to list a large array of
present-day propositional tautologies as consequential
rules, but a few basic principles occurred in this function.
Thus, Burley already proved De Morgan’s laws as conse-
quence rules. He presents them as immediate corollaries of
his rule: ‘‘The formal element that is afﬁrmed in one
contradictory must be denied in the other.’’ Therefore, if
¬(P & Q) and P, then ¬Q, that is, if ¬(P & Q) then ¬P ∨
¬Q. Such absolutely elementary tautologies of proposi-
tional logic as P & Q ! P, P ! P ∨Q do not appear
among consequence rules; instead, there are rules about
inference from conjunctive to simple terms and from
simple to disjunctive terms.
Authors who wrote comprehensively about conse-
quences had obviously systematic purposes, which they
expressed by laying down primary rules and then proving
derived rules, which were occasionally even called theo-
rems. The proofs could be long and detailed. However, the
process did not amount to a calculus in any modern sense,
since the principles of derivation were not spelled out
beforehand. They were chosen case by case. Consequence
treatises also listed examples of erroneous consequence
rules: rules that resembled correct rules but produced
fallacies.
During the fourteenth century, consequence theory
was enriched with modal considerations. An increasing
space was given to consequences with necessary or possi-
ble antecedents. To take the most elementary example,
when the antecedent is necessary the consequent is neces-
sary too. At the same time the correct understanding of
modal syllogisms was debated, and modal consequences
reﬂect similar issues. The ﬁnal addition was that of episte-
mic operators. Strode already gave a set of rules for con-
sequences
concerning
knowledge,
doubt,
and
understanding, and ﬁfteenth century authors then added
more attitude operators, like belief. The various modal
qualiﬁcations multiplied the number of given rules.
The ﬁrst theorists said that the consequence holds
because the negation (or ‘‘opposite’’) of the consequent
is repugnant to the antecedent. The ‘‘repugnance’’ was
then explained with a modal condition about the neces-
sary relation. The nature of this necessity disturbed logi-
cians somewhat, and they referred to current modal
theories. After the birth of possible-worlds semantics,
Buridan offered one particularly interesting principle: if
one proposition can have more causes of truth, that is,
verifying states of affairs, than another, but not conversely,
the former follows from the latter.
Philosophical Interpretation
The most interesting part of consequence theory for
present-day readers is perhaps the discussion about vari-
ous kinds of consequence. Logicians always gave much
attention to such distinctions of types. Usually the ﬁrst
distinction is drawn between consequences ut nunc (‘‘as-
of-now’’) and simpliciter. It stems from Boethius, but its
precise meaning caused confusion.
A consequence P ! Q held simply if it was valid always
without temporal qualiﬁcations, and as-of-now if P and
the opposite of Q were incompatible only now, or alter-
natively, for a certain period. The consequence is thus
valid ut nunc if the antecedent cannot now be true without
the consequent, under present conditions. Simple conse-
quences were studied more, and they are more important
than the temporally determined ones, but modern
scholars have shown great interest in consequences ut
Consequences, Theory of C
231
C

nunc. The reason is that, as formulated for instance by
Ockham, it reminds of the modern truth-functional mate-
rial implication. Yet it is probable that even consequence
ut nunc is essentially modal. Mere truth of the consequent
does not make the consequence valid but something more
is required, since some propositions that are now true
could, under present conditions, be false. Examples of
this depend on modal theories, but at least propositions
about future contingents as consequents can lead to such
situations – the temporal import of ‘‘now’’ must be taken
seriously. Keeping strictly to one single moment, the out-
come can amount to material implication. During the
ﬁfteenth century, the role of ut nunc declined.
On the other hand, another issue kept its full impor-
tance, that is, the question about formality and material-
ity. This is founded on the conviction that even valid
consequences can be valid for different reasons, some for
more remarkable reasons than others. Let us consider the
basic deﬁnition that the antecedent and the opposite of the
consequent are repugnant or incompatible. What can be
the explanation of such repugnance? Obviously, it often
results from the contents of the propositions in question:
the natures or essences of the mentioned things are
such that the antecedent and the opposite of the conse-
quent are in conﬂict. This was noted by the thirteenth
century logicians, like Kilwardby, who said that this
consequence was ‘‘natural.’’ But there existed even other
cases where the repugnance was undeniable but had noth-
ing to do with the contents of the propositions, with the
natures of things, and here they spoke about accidental
consequence.
We see the meaning of this distinction when we look at
the doctrine of Burley
that retains basically the same
scheme. For him, a consequence holds naturally when
the antecedent ‘‘includes’’ the consequent, whereas the
consequence ‘‘a man is a donkey, thus you are sitting’’ is
only accidental because it involves no internal connection
between the propositions. Attempting to get further, he
introduced the notions of formal and material conse-
quence, which were to become generally used. According
to him, consequences are formal, when they depend either
on logical theorems or on formal relations of inclusion
between terms; otherwise they are material. This implies
that ‘‘a man is a donkey, thus you are sitting’’ would be
only material, but so would the consequence ‘‘Socrates is
sitting, thus Socrates is not running’’ be as well. The
incompatibility of man and donkey, sitting and running,
are no formal conceptual features. Burley is possibly uti-
lizing the Scotistic doctrine of formalities, but his presen-
tation is rather obscure.
Later, authors followed and explicated the distinc-
tion between formal and material in different ways.
Ockham’s characteristic idea is to claim that conse-
quences are valid because of ‘‘mediums,’’ which are
either ‘‘external’’ general logical rules or some ‘‘intrin-
sic’’ principles that are more like additional premises
and true because of the meanings of the terms in the
propositions. Both cases can produce formal conse-
quences: ‘‘Socrates is sitting, thus Socrates is not run-
ning’’ is formal for him, and so are syllogisms as well.
On the other hand, at least ‘‘a man is a donkey, thus
there is no God’’ is a material consequence. The reason
is that the external rule guaranteeing its validity
becomes applicable only because of the terms ‘‘man’’
and ‘‘donkey.’’ Ockham hints towards the notion of
logical form, but his text is here very brief.
The idea of logical form was fully developed in
Buridan’s
logic.
According
to
him,
the
form
of
a proposition consists of its structure of syncategorematic
elements and the distribution of categorematic elements.
And as he deﬁnes it, ‘‘a consequence is formal if any
proposition with similar form would, when stated, be
valid.’’ This means that formally valid consequences hold
merely because of the logical forms of the propositions
and do not depend on what the categorematic elements
are. A consequence is formally valid if all its substitution
instances are valid. The same deﬁnition is encountered in
modern logic. Formal consequences are sheer instances of
strict logical theorems, whereas material consequences are
valid because they could be completed to formal ones by
adding necessary propositions as supplementary pre-
mises. (Hence, Buridan called them enthymematic, and
his pupils called them imperfect.) ‘‘A man runs, thus an
animal runs’’ is not formal, since the substitution ‘‘A horse
walks, thus a wood walks’’ is not valid, but it is materially
valid since the addition of ‘‘Every man is an animal’’ leads
to a formal consequence.
Buridan’s conception is a remarkable achievement in
the history of formal logic. Some followers embraced it,
such as Pseudo-Scotus in his famous logic commentary,
and Albert of Saxony. But it did not win general accep-
tance; on the contrary, critics argued that it did not catch
the point of logical consequence, which was in conceptual
inclusion. Actually, it became customary to see the for-
mality of consequences as a matter of inclusion relations
(analyticity). It has been argued that such an interpreta-
tion of consequence is psychologistic, but this is not nec-
essary. Apparently the important writers were not mainly
interested in psychology but in the contents of forms; that
is why they called the corresponding consequences formal.
232 C
Consequences, Theory of

Expressly psychologistic positions developed only toward
the end of the ﬁfteenth century.
Gradually, a number of logicians understood that the
two criteria concerned different things, two senses of for-
mality. For example, Paul of Venice explains that
a consequence is formal if the contradictory of the conse-
quent is formally incompatible with the antecedent (but
his account of this formal incompatibility is not quite
clear). On the other hand, a consequence is valid de
forma if every consequence of the same logical form is
valid. This distinction led to somewhat awkward labels like
‘‘formally formal,’’ that is, formal in both senses. The
double characterization was elaborated during the ﬁf-
teenth century by several logicians, such as Paul of Pergula.
One ﬁnal point must be mentioned. The basic deﬁni-
tion of consequence immediately implies that anything
follows from an impossible antecedent (ex impossibili
quodlibet), and equivalently, the necessary follows from
everything. These are the ‘‘paradoxes of implication.’’
Abelard pointed them out and regarded them as so intol-
erable that he rejected the standard deﬁnition of conse-
quence. But in later literature they were normally accepted
and sometimes even deﬁnitely defended. For most
authors, they were fundamental examples of material con-
sequences.
This
conviction
faltered
only
in
the
psychologistic wave near 1500.
See also: ▶Boethius ▶Garlandus the Computist ▶John
Buridan ▶Logic ▶Paul of Venice ▶Peter Abelard
▶Ralph Strode ▶Syncategoremata ▶Walter Burley
▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1970) Dialectica, ed. De Rijk LM. Van Gorcum, Assen
Albert of Saxony (1522) Perutilis logica, Venetiis (Repr. Georg Olms,
Hildesheim, 1970)
Buridan John (1976) Tractatus de consequentiis, Philosophes me´die´vaux,
vol 16, ed. Hubien H. Publications Universitaires, Louvain
Burley Walter (1955) De puritate artis logicae Tractatus longior, with a
revised version of the Tractatus brevior, Text series, vol 9, ed. Boehner
Ph. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Ockham William (1974) Summa logicae. Opera philosophica, vol. I.
Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Paul of Pergula (1961) Logica and Tractatus de sensu composito et diviso,
Text series, vol 13, ed. Brown MA. Franciscan Institute, St.
Bonaventure
Paul of Venice (1472) Logica parva, Venetiis (Repr. Georg Olms,
Hildesheim, 1970)
Pseudo-Ockham (1988) Tractatus minor logicae, ed. Buytaert E. In:
Ockham William, Opera philosophica, vol VII: Opera dubia et
spuria. St. Bouaventure University, St. Bonaventure
Pseudo-Scotus (1639) In librum primum Priorum Analyticorum
Aristotelis quaestiones. In: Duns Scotos John, Opera omnia, vol I.
Lyon (Repr. Georg Olms Verlag, Hildesheim, 1968)
Strode Ralph (1493) Consequentiae. In: Alexandri Sermonete cum dubiis
Pauli
Pergulensis
necnon
Gaetani
de
Thienis
declaratives
commentariolus. Venetiis
von Osma Wilhelm (1991) De consequentiis – U¨ ber die Folgerungen,
hrsg. Schupp F, Felix Meiner, Hamburg
Secondary Sources
Ashworth EJ (1974) Language and logic in the post-medieval period.
D. Reidel, Dordrecht
Boh I (1982) Consequences. In: Kretzmann N et al (eds) The Cambridge
history of later medieval philosophy. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 300–314
Boh I (1993) Epistemic logic in the later Middle Ages. Routledge, London
Boh I (2001) Consequence and rules of consequence in the post-Ockham
period. In: Yrjo¨nsuuri M (ed) Medieval formal logic. Kluwer, Dor-
drecht, pp 147–181
Bos EP (1976) John Buridan and Marsilius of Inghen on consequences. In:
Pinborg J (ed) The logic of John Buridan (Opuscula Graecolatina 9).
Museum Tusculanum, Copenhagen, pp 61–69
Bottin F (1976) Proposizioni condizionali, ‘‘consequentiae’’ e paradossi
dell’implicazione in Paolo Veneto. Medioevo 2:289–330
Dutilh Novaes C (2005) Buridan’s consequentia: consequence and
inference within a token-based semantics. Hist Philos Logic
26:277–299
Dutilh Novaes C (2007) Formalizing medieval logical theories: sup-
positio, consequentiae and obligationes. Springer, Dordrecht
Gonzales A (1958) The theory of assertoric consequences in Albert of
Saxony. Francisc Stud 18:290–354; 19:13–114
Green-Pedersen NJ (1983) Early British treatises on consequences.
In: Lewry PO (ed) The rise of British logic (Papers in Mediaeval
Studies 7). Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto,
pp 285–307
Green-Pedersen NJ (1984) The tradition of topics in the Middle Ages: the
commentaries on Aristotle’s and Boethius’ ‘Topics’. Philosophia,
Mu¨nchen
King P (2001) Consequence as inference: medieval proof theory
1300–1500. In: Yrjo¨nsuuri M (ed) Medieval formal logic. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, pp 117–145
Moody
E
(1953)
Truth
and
consequence
in
medieval
logic.
North-Holland, Amsterdam
Pozzi L (1978) Le Consequentiae nella logica medievale. Liviana Editrice,
Padova
Schupp F (1988) Logical problems of the medieval theory of consequences
(History of Logic 6). Bibliopolis, Napoli
Constantine the African
▶Arabic Texts, Natural Philosophy, Latin Translation of
▶Arabic Texts, Philosophy, Latin Translations of
▶Medicine and Philosophy
▶Medicine in the Arab World
Constantine the African C
233
C

Contemplative Happiness and
Civic Virtue
IACOPO COSTA
Paris
France
Abstract
According to medieval anthropology, man can reach
his perfection through both moral virtue and contem-
plative life. This conception is developed in medieval
commentaries on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, in
theological texts concerning the after-life and the beatiﬁc
vision, and in texts concerning the secular-mendicant
controversy.
Human perfection is a central concept in medieval anthro-
pology. Like any other being, animate or inanimate, man
is what he is thanks to a form. This form expresses the
essence of the human being and realizes its fundamental
characteristics. According to a tradition that goes back to
late Antiquity, man is conceived as a two-sided creature:
he is a creature both material and spiritual, since he is
composed of a body and a soul. As a spiritual creature,
man is the less noble of all spiritual beings, inferior to God
and the angels; as a material creature, man is the noblest of
all material beings, superior to the inanimate things and to
the irrational animals. As a corporeal creature, man has to
dominate the passionate and irrational part of his mind; to
achieve this, he needs to master moral and political vir-
tues. As a spiritual creature, man has to try to improve the
intellectual part of his mind through contemplation and
philosophy.
This
conception
stems
from
elements
borrowed from Plato, Neoplatonism, and Augustine, and
achieves its fullest development in commentaries on
Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics (ﬁrst complete Latin trans-
lation a few years before 1250).
According to Aristotle, one can consider human life
from two points of view. In so far as man is a social animal,
he leads a political or active life, which requires him to
exercise such moral virtues as justice, temperance, cour-
age, liberality, etc. Nevertheless, absolutely speaking, the
noblest activity of man is contemplation, realized through
the use of intellectual virtues: leading the philosophical life
improves the best part of the human being, the intellect,
and brings him the purest and most complete form of
happiness.
In their ethical writings, medieval thinkers examine
the problematical question of the relation between active
life and contemplative life, or in other words between the
moral virtues and philosophical speculation.
The usual position taken on this problem, which
accords with the views of Albert the Great and Thomas
Aquinas, asserts that the active life is inferior to the
contemplative, but that an active life prepares and eases
the way to achieve the contemplative life. This position
is frequently referred to with a saying quoted from
Aristotle, Phys. VII: in quiescendo namque et sedendo
anima sciens ﬁt et prudens. The proper activity of the
rational
part
of
the
soul,
that
is,
contemplation
and philosophy, is difﬁcult if the passions of the irrational
part of the soul (such as anger, desire, etc.) are not
submissive to the rational part, and are not led by
the right rule (orthos logos – recta ratio) of the moral
virtues.
But since the means is always inferior to the end,
a contemplative life is always superior to an active life:
for contemplation is an end that is self-deﬁned.
Such is the view expressed for instance by Albert the
Great (Super Ethica X, lect. 10–19; Ethica X, tract. II) and
by Thomas of Aquinas (Sent. lib. Eth. X, 9–16; Summa
theologiae, IIa IIae, qu. 179–182); it is also defended by the
masters of arts, for instance in the Nicomachen Ethics
commentaries of Giles of Rome (preserved in manuscript
BnF lat. 16089) and Radulphus Brito.
During the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, an
effort was made to assimilate this Aristotelian concep-
tion
to
Christian
morals
and
anthropology.
This
resulted in several problems, which emerged in partic-
ular in the years preceding and following the Parisian
condemnations of 1270 and 1277. Christian doctrine
and anthropology consider that the purpose of our
terrestrial life is merely to lead to the after-life; only
in this after-life can mankind achieve its own perfec-
tion. According to this Christian conception, our life on
earth is an imperfect one, in which the body and sin
hold back the human being from perfection and hap-
piness. In contrast with this conception, the Aristotelian
conception does not postulate that the soul survives the
body and hence does not take into account any form of
after-life: according to this conception, man can attain
perfection only in this life. The condemnation issued in
1277 is in part a reaction against this Aristotelian
conception of human perfection: see especially propo-
sition 157 (Quod homo ordinatus quantum ad intellectum
et affectum, sicut potest sufﬁcienter esse per uirtutes
intellectuales et alias morales de quibus loquitur philosophus
in
ethicis,
est
sufﬁcienter
dispositus
ad
felicitatem
eternam) and 176 (Quod felicitas habetur in ista vita et
non in alia).
234 C
Contemplative Happiness and Civic Virtue

Although this problem is still being discussed, it
can be stated that these propositions, expressed in
such a plain manner, are nowhere to be found in the
texts of the period that are known today. Still, they
may be related to the ideas defended by Boethius of
Dacia in his famous De summo bono (a brief work in
which the author praises the contemplative life and phi-
losophy); they also may have been maintained in one or
several commentaries on the Nicomachean Ethics that have
since been lost. But the only extant commentary on the
Ethics, which could possibly precede the condemnations
(namely the questiones contained in MS Paris BnF
lat. 14689, tentatively attributed to the Parisian master
James of Douai) is far from defending such radical views;
furthermore, the date of this commentary is very
uncertain.
In the theological texts, the contemplative life is held
superior to the active life on the basis of evangelical
authority, Luke, 10, 41–42: Martha Martha sollicita es et
turbaris erga plurima, porro unum est necessarium; Maria
optimam partem elegit quae non auferetur ab ea. The
canonical interpretation of this passage identiﬁes Martha
with the active life, and Mary with the contemplative. The
Glossa ordinaria explains that the ‘‘best part,’’ chosen by
Mary, shall not be taken back from her, since the contem-
plative life starts in this life but proceeds in the after-life;
on the other hand, the active life, represented by Martha,
ends with the death of the body. Mary is therefore praised
by the Lord in so far as she has privileged the contempla-
tive life.
During the second part of the thirteenth century,
the confrontation between the active and contempla-
tive lives became the object of numerous discussions
in
the
context
of
the
dispute
between
seculars
(praelati) and mendicants (religiosi): seculars typically
led an active life, while mendicants typically led a contem-
plative life.
In this debate, Henry of Ghent defended the idea that
contemplation in its perfect state, that is the metaphysical
contemplation of the blessed, is superior to action but that
in this earthly life the good works of an active life are
superior to contemplation (which at this point is neces-
sarily imperfect), since meritorious acts contribute to the
salvation of the soul and, thus, they produce the contem-
plation of the after-life.
Opposing Henry, Godfrey of Fontaines maintained
that the debate over the type of life must be separated
from the dispute between seculars and mendicants:
according to Godfrey, the praelatus must devote himself
to contemplation as much as he can, and devote himself to
the works of the active life only when the community he is
in charge of needs it (Quodl. V, qu. 16; Quodl. XI, qu. 6;
Quodl. XII, qu. 19–20).
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Boethius of Dacia ▶Ethics
▶Giles
of
Rome,
Political
Thought
▶Godfrey
of
Fontaines ▶Henry of Ghent ▶Nicomachean Ethics, Com-
mentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Parisian Condemnation of
1277 ▶Radulphus Brito ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1882) Opera omnia iussu Leonis XIII P. M. edita, ed.
Commissio Leonina, Rome/Paris
Godfrey of Fontaines (1904–1937) Quodlibeta, ed. De Wulf M et al.
Institut Supe´rieur de Philosophie, Leuven
Henry of Ghent (1979) Opera omnia, ed. Macken F et al. Leuven Univer-
sity Press, Leuven
Magnus Albertus (1890–1899) Opera omnia, ed. Borgnet SCA. Vive`s,
Paris
Magnus Albertus (1952) Opera omnia, ed. Institutum Alberti Magni
Coloniense. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster i. W
Secondary Sources
Bejczy I (ed) (2008) Virtue ethics in the middle ages. Brill, Leiden/Boston
Bejczy I, Newhauser RG (eds) (2005) Virtue and ethics in the twelfth
century. Brill, Leiden
Bianchi L (1987) La felicita` intellettuale come professione nella Parigi del
Duecento. Rivista di Filosoﬁa 78:181–199
Bianchi L (1990) Il vescovo e i ﬁlosoﬁ. La condanna del 1277
e l’evoluzione dell’aristotelismo scolastico. Pierluigi Lubrina Editore,
Bergamo
Bianchi L (1999) Censure et liberte´ intellectuelle a` l’Universite´ de Paris
(XIIIe–XIVe sie`cles). Les Belles Lettres, Paris
Bianchi L (2002) Felicita` terrena e beatitudine ultraterrena. Boezio di
Dacia e l’articolo 157 censurato da Tempier. In: Bakker PJJM (ed)
Chemins de la pense´e me´die´vale. E´tudes offertes a` Ze´non Kaluza.
Brepols, Turnhout, pp 193–214
Bianchi L (2006) Boe`ce de Dacie et l’E´thique a` Nicomaque. Documenti
e Studi sulla traduzione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 17:369–387
Congar YM-J (1961) Aspects eccle´siologiques de la querelle entre
mendiants et se´culiers dans la seconde moitie´ du XIIIe sie`cle et le
de´but du XIVe. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du moyen
aˆge 28:35–151
Costa I (2008) Le questiones di Radulfo Brito sull’ ‘Etica Nicomachea’.
Introduzione e testo critico. Brepols, Turnhout
de Libera A (1994) Averroı¨sme e´thique et philosophie mystique. De la
fe´licite´ intellectuelle a` la vie bienheureuse. In: Bianchi L (ed) Filosoﬁa
e teologia nel trecento. Studi in ricordo di Eugenio Randi. Brepols,
Louvain-la-Nueve, pp 33–56
Gauthier R-A (1947–1948) Trois commentaires ‘averroı¨stes’ sur l’E´thique
a` Nicomacque. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du moyen
aˆge 16:187–336
Trottmann C (1995) La Vision Be´atiﬁque. Des disputes scolastiques a` sa
deﬁnition par Benoıˆt XII. E´cole Franc¸aise de Rome, Rome
Zavattero I (2005) La ‘Quaestio de felicitate’ di Giacomo da Pistoia. Un
tentativo di interpretazione alla luce di una edizione critica del testo.
In: Bettetini M, Paparella FD (eds) Le felicita` nel medioevo. Brepols,
Louvain-la-Neuve, pp 355–410
Contemplative Happiness and Civic Virtue C
235
C

Corporation Theory
MAGNUS J. RYAN
Faculty of History
Peterhouse, University of Cambridge
The Old Schools
Cambridge
UK
Abstract
Detailed medieval discussion of corporations began in the
late twelfth century among the glossators of canon and
Roman law. Although the concept of the corporation was
later adopted, modiﬁed, challenged, and developed both by
theologians and specialists in Aristotelian philosophy in the
faculties of arts, it remained quintessentially a legal idea of
fundamental importance in later medieval political debate.
Canonists in particular were confronted by practical difﬁ-
culties arising from collegiate churches. Corporation theory
designed to make sense of such institutions and the law
governing them was then applied by advocates of conciliar
government to the relationship between the pope and the
universal church, and was integral to the juristic analysis of
other communities such as kingdoms and cities.
Roman law provided the technical starting point in the
shape of the universitas, traditionally translated as ‘‘cor-
poration.’’ The classical lawyers’ principal interest had
been the procedural status of collectivities such as munic-
ipalities, particularly how such a collectivity could initiate
or react to a legal challenge. In the course of their discus-
sions, the classical jurists raised or implied a number of
further questions, which would play a vital role in medi-
eval jurisprudence and political theory. Undoubtedly,
their most important legacy was contained under the
rubric of Digest 3.4: (Actions in the Name of Any Corporate
Body, or Quod cuiusque universitatis nomine vel contra eam
agatur, in the Littera Boloniensis or vulgate version of the
Corpus iuris civilis in use at the medieval schools). Corpo-
rations were not willingly recognized by Roman law (D.
3.4.1pr). Tax farmers, exploiters of mines and salt
marshes, providers of public services such as Roman
bakers or Tiber sailors were all organizations that were
‘‘permitted to have a corpus.’’ However, the Digest also
contained passages where things in public ownership
were said to belong to a corporation (D. 1.8.1pr), and
where the corporation was closely associated with the res
publica in the sense of a city or municipality (D. 1.8.6.1;
D. 3.4.1.1; D. 3.4.2). This capacity of the universitas to
express a collectivity of public signiﬁcance was greatly
exploited and extended by medieval jurists in their glosses
and commentaries on Roman law. The most dramatic
example of this was the attribution of corporate powers
to the entire Roman people by Johannes Bassianus, who
taught at Bologna and Mantua in the late twelfth century.
The immediate context was an exegete’s problem: Roman
law seemed to ascribe sole legislative powers to the
emperor (Code, 1.14.12) at the same time as maintaining
that the Senate could also make law (D. 1.3.9). Bassianus’
solution, which became famous thanks to its adoption by
his pupil Azo (d. 1220/1229), was that the emperor was the
only person who could legislate on his own, and was in
that sense superior to his subjects as long as the latter were
understood as discrete individuals (singuli); however,
taken collectively as members of a corporation (universi)
the Romans still had the power to legislate. Since Roman
law
located
the
origins
of
imperial
authority
in
a concession of governmental powers by the Roman peo-
ple known to the compilers of the Corpus iuris as the Lex
regia, then perhaps by corporate action that original act
could also be revoked. The canonist Laurentius Hispanus
(d. 1248) assumed this in pointing out that the emperor
could be deposed because he received his jurisdiction from
the people, whereas the pope could not be deposed by the
college of cardinals because he held his authority by the
word of the Lord. The contrast between the corporate and
the single or private on which Bassianus’ distinction turns
was reﬂected in the way the glossators of the Roman law
handled a closely related question. They argued that the
consent of private individuals could not establish some-
one as a judge; jurisdiction in the sense of forensic author-
ity could only be created by a corporate act of consent
(C. 3.13.3). The ﬁrst statement was derived directly from
the law itself, but the second was purely glossatorial and
testiﬁes to the willingness of the medieval jurists to deploy
corporate notions. Accursius (d. 1263), the author of the
standard gloss to the Roman law, went on to stress that
such a judge received jurisdiction purely through his elec-
tion by the corporation, although it remained true that if
he wished to use that jurisdiction, he would still require
the approval of a superior ofﬁcer. For the jurists who
followed Accursius, especially in the early fourteenth cen-
tury, much would depend on the consequences if approval
by a superior were not forthcoming. The contemporary
political background against which many of these ideas
were ﬁrst ventilated was after all that of northern and
central Italy, where autonomous cities routinely deﬁed,
ignored, or usurped imperial authority both to legislate
on their own and pass coercive judgment over their own
citizens.
236 C
Corporation Theory

In entering his proviso about the actual exercise rather
than the mere possession of jurisdiction mentioned above,
Accursius cited two further passages in Roman law (Novel
15pr and } 1), but it is hard to believe he was not at the
same time thinking of another set of authorities and
problems entirely. For although the technically juristic
vocabulary of corporation theory was ultimately derived
from the Roman law, it was not in fact the glossators of
Roman law who made the most of it, at least in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries, but the canonists. The archetypal
structure within the institutional church was the collegiate
church, which by the later twelfth century was almost
everywhere composed of the bishop and his chapter. In
an earlier tradition, represented in Gratian’s Decretum, the
bishop was not merely the spouse of his church but also its
representative, such that the bishop was said to be in his
church and the church in its bishop (C. 7 q. 1 c. 9). But the
nuances and complexities identiﬁed by Gratian himself,
together with the burgeoning commentary both on this
foundational text as well as subsequent papal letters or
‘‘decretals’’ rendered such a summary wholly inadequate.
As a result of intensive legal scholarship, papal legislation
and yet more legal reﬂection on the new papal law, the
bishop emerged by the early to mid-thirteenth century as
the recipient of a legally articulated and tightly regulated
delegation by his chapter. In his commentary on the
Decretals of Gregory IX, the future Pope Innocent IV
(reg. 1243–1254) argued that rectors chosen by corpora-
tions held jurisdiction, not the corporations themselves.
Innocent’s attribution of jurisdiction to the head rather
than to the members of a corporation was primarily an
intervention in the vexed question of bishop and chapter.
Bishops were supposed to be elected by their chapters, but
they were not supposed to take up the full active gover-
nance of their diocese until conﬁrmation, consecration,
and installation by their ecclesiastical superior, who in
most cases would be a metropolitan or the pope himself.
In the meantime, the chapter disposed of some powers of
governance. Thirteenth-century canonists were compelled
by the exigencies of daily life to resolve the problem of
where different authorities lay in an ecclesiastical corpo-
ration composed of head and members, bishop and chap-
ter. This question arose in its sharpest form during an
episcopal vacancy but had continued relevance in
a variety of other situations besides. Could a bishop bind
his church without obtaining the consent of the canons,
for example, and if so, on what business? Innocent IV’s
answer that the jurisdiction of an ecclesiastical corpora-
tion was concentrated in its head implied extensive powers
for the bishop, but his was only a minority opinion.
Moreover, it did not sit easily with other comments by
the same jurist to the effect that jurisdiction was
transferred to the chapter at the bishop’s death, and
that voluntary alienations of ecclesiastical property
were invalid without the consent of the chapter.
Commentators on Gratian’s Decretum (‘‘decretists’’)
had recognized from the mid-twelfth century that the
goods of a church were not owned by its bishop, but by
the church itself, understood either as the clergy of the
diocese or even the congregation of believers subject to
that church. This basic truth could not be ignored when,
say, alienation of ecclesiastical goods was discussed, and
explains why even Innocent IV was unable to present an
entirely consistent picture of relations between bishop and
chapter.
Innocent’s pupil Henricus de Segusio (d. 1271),
known by his later cardinal’s title as Hostiensis, adopted
a distinction originally put forward by the author of the
standard gloss to the Decretals of Gregory IX, Bernardus
Parmensis
(d.
1266).
Bernardus
had
differentiated
between rights belonging solely to the chapter, those
belonging solely to the bishop, and those held by bishop
and chapter together. The results in Hostiensis’ more
thorough treatment of the problem were complicated by
the different capacities in which a bishop interacted with
his chapter. When the matter at issue concerned only the
rights of the chapter, he voted simply as a canon; when
the business affected everyone, he sat as prelate over the
canons; when it pertained to him alone he not merely sat
as prelate but could even act against the advice and wishes
of the canons. The principle was clearly established that
where the matter touched everyone, the bishop had to
consult his chapter. Hostiensis characterized the role of
the bishop as that of a general proctor (procurator
generalis) of his chapter, able to conduct administrative
and judicial business simply on the strength of the ordi-
nary jurisdiction bestowed on him at election, with no
need for further mandate or commission on a case-by-case
basis. When Hostiensis declared that the corporation
made the ordinary judge (iudex ordinarius) by electing
him, he was not just reﬂecting comparable ideas among
the Roman lawyers, even though election by a corporation
played a prominent role in their analysis of ordinary
jurisdiction.
Rather,
he
conﬁrmed
and
stabilized
a tradition of canonist scholarship, which went back at
least a generation to the works of Tancred (d. 1236) and
Laurentius, both of whom had speciﬁed that a collectivity
conferred ordinary jurisdiction by electing its own lord or
prelate. By combining the various comments of his pre-
decessors into a systematic whole, Hostiensis provided the
ﬁrst fully articulated explanation of the ecclesiastical cor-
poration. From then on, the majority opinion among
Corporation Theory C
237
C

canonists was that a bishop’s jurisdiction came from the
corporation that elected him, not from the subsequent
ceremony in which he was raised to the higher sacramental
rank of bishop. Otto von Gierke’s famous criticism that
canonist corporation theory opened the way to authori-
tarianism failed to take account of this by focusing on the
metaphysical principle of unity of a corporation – never
a canonist interest – rather than the legal source of juris-
diction within a corporation.
The distinction between the powers the prelates
enjoyed by ordination, and the powers conferred on
them by the corporate act of election, familiar to canonists
since the twelfth century, assumed ampliﬁed importance
in the ﬁrst years of the fourteenth century when it was
applied to the pope by the Dominican friar John of Paris
(d. 1306) in his treatise On Royal and Papal Power (De
potestate regali ac papali). This analysis owed most of its
key elements to the canonists’ meditations on the relation-
ship between bishop and chapter and provided the main
outlines of a conciliar theory, over a century before the
Council of Constance met to end the Great Schism. As we
have seen, canonists since the twelfth century had been in
no doubt that prelates were not the owners of the property
of their churches. In conformity with this tradition, John
characterized the prelate as an administrator or steward of
ecclesiastical property; he took the tradition an important
step further by asserting this of the pope, who thus became
the general administrator rather than the owner of the
universal church’s property. Thirteenth-century canonists
had also left important indications and hints about the
relationship between pope and cardinals. Hostiensis had
tried to provide a more structured, synthetic explanation,
according to which the papal plenitude of power devolved
on the cardinals during a papal vacancy. Under normal
circumstances, Hostiensis argued, the cardinals shared in
the pope’s fullness of power as parts of his body; the image
was owed to Roman law, which presented the senators as
parts of the emperor’s body (C. 9.8.5pr), but the substance
of the idea was more an extrapolation from the relation-
ship between bishop and chapter at the diocesan level as
Hostiensis and his canonist predecessors had construed it.
Hostiensis went even further by hypothesizing that,
should the college of cardinals be wiped out during
a papal vacancy, then their authority would devolve to
the Roman clergy and people, who ought then to summon
a general council of the church to elect a new pope. John of
Paris’ precise innovation lay in his claim that the cardinals
held their authority even under normal circumstances as
representatives of the universal church. Christ had cer-
tainly established the ofﬁce of papacy on Peter, alone
among the apostles as whose successors bishops in the
modern church were routinely regarded. But the choice
of incumbent fell, John argued, on the church at large.
Roman lawyers had long argued that the Roman Empire
had been willed by God but actually created by the Roman
people who obliged by means of the Lex regia. Something
similar was now happening to the church under John of
Paris’ merciless combination of canon law with the Aris-
totelian conviction that governmental power – jurisdic-
tion – was a natural quantity inherent in every self-
sufﬁcient perfect community. What was of jurisdiction
was not, he argued in a brilliant passage, beyond the
normal course of human affairs but reached the ruler –
in this case, the pope – in a certain sense naturally. What
was bestowed by human agency could, in John’s view, be
withdrawn by the same means. This was all the more
signiﬁcant in that from their earliest commentaries on
Gratian’s Decretum onward, canonists had upheld the
theoretical possibility that a pope could be judged and if
necessary deposed for heresy, a category of misdemeanor,
which jurisprudence had enlarged to include persistent
scandalous behavior to the obvious detriment of the
church and the faith. John’s solution was not entirely
satisfactory because it is hard to accept the creation of
the papal ofﬁce by Christ in person as just another exam-
ple of nature’s most important process as outlined in
Aristotle’s Politics. But John’s thesis combined most of
the elements which, under pressure of the Great Schism
would issue in the conciliar theory, most of which were, to
repeat, the fruit of canonist scholarship. The new ingredi-
ent was Aristotelian naturalism, allowing John to imply,
in his comment about jurisdiction not being beyond the
normal course of human affairs, what became a common-
place by the mid-fourteenth century and a cliche´ by the
ﬁfteenth: The ‘‘political’’ community was a corporation,
which contained by its very nature jurisdiction within itself;
the universal church was no exception. This contention
rapidly became a load-bearing element in political polemic
beyond the legal discourse, as the works of William of
Ockham, Marsilius of Padua, Nicholas Oresme, and John
Gerson demonstrate. It could be challenged, but not
ignored. But the key argument had only been enhanced,
not inspired, by the Aristotelian corpus. This was the rec-
ognition, given focus in the magisterial systematization of
canonist conciliar doctrine by Franciscus Zabarella (d.
1417), that the jurisdiction, which constituted the pope’s
plenitude of power and hence his preeminence over other
prelates, subsisted in the church as its foundation and was
detained by the pope only in a ministerial capacity. With
that realization, the distinction noted in the early thirteenth
century by Laurentius Hispanus between the emperor and
the pope ceased to apply.
238 C
Corporation Theory

The resolution and legal articulation of the relation-
ship between bishop and chapter was one of the most
urgent and arduous tasks facing canonists from the later
twelfth century onward. For them, the corporate nature of
collegiate foundations was a given, whereas the precise
structure of such corporations and its implications for
the daily governance of the church were unfortunately
anything but. Scholarship and supplementary papal legis-
lation had to ﬁll out the picture. For Romanists, by con-
trast, the universitas and the questions it raised might
more properly be said to have constituted an opportunity.
In a famous gloss to Digest 3.4.7, Accursius had iden-
tiﬁed a corporation with its members (gl. non debetur).
His conclusion was strange because it seemed to under-
mine one of the main purposes of the corporation. From
the way the gloss is structured, moreover, it is not certain
that this was Accursius’ own opinion rather than just an
argument put forward by other people, which he included
for pedagogic reasons. Either way, other glossators
disagreed. Roffredus Beneventanus (d. after 1243) related
how as an advocate in the Tuscan city of Arezzo he had
persuaded the court to put an entire subject town under
ban
and
to
compensate
the
plaintiff
from
that
community’s common property, even though the town
was now divided between factions, the consuls who had
contracted on behalf of the town no longer existed, and the
ofﬁces they had ﬁlled were defunct. Roffredus argued that
the universitas nevertheless remained liable although the
town was functionally no longer a town. The example
shows how robust the universitas could be as a bearer of
legal capacity entirely distinct from that of its members.
About a century later, Bartolus of Sassoferrato (d. 1357)
carefully explained that by ﬁction of law, a universitas
represented a single person distinct from the persons of
its members. Philosophers and canonists denied this, he
continued, and admitted that in a certain sense they were
right: the whole did not differ in reality from its parts.
Innocent IV had indeed described such a person as persona
ﬁcta and consequently denied it any legal capacity not
possessed by its members. Fictiveness was by contrast no
obstacle for Bartolus and the other Romanists, but the
precise advantage of the corporate person. As he went on
to explain, by ﬁction of law the person represented by
a universitas outlived its members. Bartolus referred in
support of his claim to Digest 46.1.22, which only says
that a municipality, a court of decurions, and a societas all
function vice personae or ‘‘in the place of a person.’’ (Cities
are also taken as private persons in Digest 50.16.16 and
46.1.22.) A major advantage of ascribing personality to
a corporation was that it rendered more accessible the type
of solution to otherwise intractable problems that
Roffredus had advocated. It was also capable of some
surprising extensions. Bartolus’ pupil Baldus de Ubaldis
(d. 1400) applied the universitas so conceived to kingdoms:
the res publica of the kingdom was distinct from the people
of the kingdom, and constituted a royal dignity that
resided in the king for as long as he lived. If ‘‘The person
of the king is the organ and instrument of that intellectual
and public person,’’ and if ‘‘that intellectual and public
person is that which is the principal source of action,’’ then
it ought to be possible to ascribe sempiternity to some acts
of the ruler, which lawyers had for years attempted to
uphold against the strong counterargument that no ruler
could be bound by his predecessor. Such acts might
include contracts and enfeoffments, because a case could
now be made for the principle of noncontradiction based
on the identity of the contracting or enfeofﬁng universitas
(dignitas, res publica) despite the change of ruler.
Medieval
corporation
theory
was
adopted
and
exploited wholesale by Calvinist polemicists in the 1570s
and by their counter-reformation opponents. Via such
works as Theodore Beza’s On the Right of Magistrates
(Du droit des magistrats, De iure magistratuum, 1574),
the anonymous Defences Against Tyrants (Vindiciae contra
tyrannos, 1579), Franc¸ois Hotman’s Francogallia (three
versions: 1573, 1576, 1586) and William Barclay’s On the
Kingdom and Royal Power (De regno et regali potestate,
1600) the notion of the corporate people as the source
and residual repository of jurisdiction also survived to
inspire and revolt English and Scottish thinkers of the
seventeenth century.
See
also:
▶Canon
Law
▶Civil
(Roman)
Law
▶Conciliarism ▶John of Paris
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1879) Corpus iuris canonici, ed. Friedberg E, vol I, Decretum Magistri
Gratiani,
vol.
II,
Decretalium
Collectiones.
Leipzig.
(Repr.
Akademische Druck-und Verlagsanstalt, Graz, 1959)
(1963) Corpus iuris civilis, vol I: Institutiones, Digesta, ed. Krueger P,
Mommsen Th; (1967) vol II: Codex, ed. Krueger P; (1963) vol III:
Novellae, ed. Schoell R, Kroll G. (Repr. 17th ed., 14th ed., and 8th ed.
respectively. Weidmann, Berlin)
(1994) Vindiciae contra tyrannos or Concerning the legitimate power of
a prince over the people, and of the people over a prince/Stephanus
Junius Brutus, the Celt, ed. and trans. Garnett G. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge
Accursius (1488a) Accursii glossa in Digestum vetus. Baptista de Tortis,
Venice. (Repr. Corpus Glossatorum Juris Civilis VII,
Bottega
d’Erasmo, Turin, 1969)
Accursius (1488b) Accursii glossa in Codicem. Baptista de Tortis, Venice.
(Repr. Corpus Glossatorum Juris Civilis X, Bottega d’Erasmo, Turin,
1968)
Corporation Theory C
239
C

Azo (1506) Azonis summa super Codicem, Instituta, Extraordinaria.
Bernardinus et Ambrosius de Rovellis, Pavia. (Repr. Corpus
Glossatorum Juris Civilis II, Bottega d’Erasmo, Turin, 1966)
Azo (1577) Azonis lectura super Codicem. Sebastianus Nivellius, Paris.
(Repr. Corpus Glossatorum Juris Civilis III Bottega d’Erasmo, Turin,
1966)
Barclay
William
(1600)
De
regno
et
regali
potestate:
adversus
Buchananum, Brutum, Bucherium et reliquos monarchomachos
libri sex. Guillielmus Chaudiere, Paris
Beza Theodore (1971) Du Droit des Magistrats sur leur Sujets, ed.
Kingdon R. Droz, Geneva
de Sassoferrato Bartolus (1528) Commentaria. Bartolus super prima
infortiati. Baptista de Tortis, Venice. (Repr. Il Cigno Galileo Galilei,
Rome, 1996, vol III)
de Segusio Henricus (1537) Summa aurea. Johannes de Lambray, Lyon.
(Repr. Scientia, Aalen, 1975)
de
Segusio
Henricus
(1581)
Lectura
in
quinque
Gregorii
noni
Decretalium libros. Iuntas, Venice. (Repr. 2 vols Bottega d’Erasmo,
Turin, 1975)
de Ubaldis Baldus (1575/1576) Consilia sive responsa. apud Hieronymum
Polum, Venice. (Repr. Bottega d’Erasmo, Turin, 1971, vol III)
Gratian, see: Corpus iuris canonici
Gregory IX, see: Corpus iuris canonici
Hostiensis, see: Henricus de Segusio
Hotman Franc¸ois (1972) Francogallia, parallel Latin and English text, ed.
and trans. Giesey RE, Salmon JHM. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Innocent IV (1570) Commentaria. Apparatus in V libros decretalium.
Hieronymus Feyerabend, Frankfurt am Main. (Repr. Minerva,
Frankfurt am Main, 1968)
John of Paris (1971) On royal and papal power, trans. Watt JA. Pontiﬁcal
Institute of Medieval Studies, Toronto
Parmensis Bernardus (1528) Glossa ordinaria to Decretals of Gregory IX.
In: Gregorii noni pontiﬁcis maximi decretales epistole. Giunta, Lyon
Roffredus Beneventanus (1500) Quaestiones, in Solemnis atque aureus
tractatus libellorum [. . .] Dominicus Anselmus, Avignon (Repr.
under the new title of Roffredi Beneventani Libelli iuris civilis, Corpus
Glossatorum Juris Civilis VI.1. Bottega d’Erasmo, Turin, 1968)
Roman law, see: Corpus iuris civilis.
Tancred (1842) Ordo iudiciarius. In: Bergmann F (ed) Pillii, Tancredi,
Gratiae libri de iudiciorum ordine. Go¨ttingen. (Repr.
Scientia,
Aalen, 1965, pp 89–314)
Zabarella Franciscus (1566) Tractatus de Schismate. In: Schard S (ed) De
jurisdictione, auctoritate et praeeminentia imperii ac potestate
ecclesiastica. Johannes Oporinus, Basel, pp 688–711
Secondary Sources
Canning J (1980) The corporation in the political thought of the Italian
jurists in the 13th and 14th centuries. Hist Polit Thought 1:9–32
Canning J (1987) The political thought of Baldus de Ubaldis. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Canning J (1988) Law, sovereignty and corporation theory, 1300–1450.
In: Burns JH (ed) Cambridge history of medieval political thought,
c. 350–c. 1450. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 454–476
Gierke O (1868–1913) Das deutsche Genossenschaftsrecht. Weidmann,
Berlin. (Repr. Graz: Akademische Druck-u. Verlagsanstalt, 1954.
Partial translation by Maitland FW (1900) Political theories of the
Middle Age, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge)
Kantorowicz EH (1957) The king’s two bodies: a study in medieval
political theology. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Michaud-Quantin P (1970) Universitas. Expressions du mouvement
communautaire dans le moyen-aˆge Latin. Vrin, Paris
Pennington K (1988) Law, legislative authority and theories of govern-
ment, 1150–1300. In: Burns JH (ed) Cambridge history of medieval
political thought, c. 350–c. 1450, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, pp 424–453
Ryan MJ (2000) Bartolus of Sassoferrato and free cities. Trans R Hist Soc,
sixth series, 10:65–89
Salmon JHM (1982) An alternative theory of popular resistance:
Buchanan, Rossaeus and Locke. In: Diritto e potere nella storia
europea: atti in onore di Bruno Paradisi, vol 2. Olschki, Florence,
pp 823–849. (Repr. in Salmon, Renaissance and Revolt, Cambridge
University Press, New York, 136–154)
Tierney B (1955) Foundations of the conciliar theory. The contribution of
the medieval canonists from Gratian to the Great Schism. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Walther H (1990) Die Gegner Ockhams: Zur Korporationslehre der
mittelalterlichen Legisten. In: Go¨hler G, Lenk K, Mu¨nkler H, Walther
M (eds) Politische Institutionen im gesellschaftlichen Umbruch.
Ideengeschichtliche Beitra¨ge zur Theorie politischer Institutionen.
Westdeutscher, Opladen, pp 113–139
Crathorn, William
▶William Crathorn
Cristoforo Landino
JILL KRAYE
The Warburg Institute
University of London
London
UK
Abstract
Cristoforo Landino (1424–1498) was a leading humanist
in Medici Florence; he was known as an accomplished
Latin poet and an enthusiastic proponent of the Italian
vernacular. He lectured on Latin and Italian literature at
the Florentine Studio from 1458 to 1497, numbering
among his students Marsilio Ficino, the most important
Renaissance translator, commentator, and promoter of
Plato. Though not himself a professional philosopher,
Landino took a keen interest in philosophy, especially –
though not exclusively – Platonism. He produced three
philosophical
dialogues:
De
anima,
Disputationes
Camaldulenses, and De vera nobilitate. Largely derivative,
not only of classical authors but also of medieval and
Renaissance thinkers, these three works, written in elegant
240 C
Crathorn, William

Ciceronian Latin, dealt with philosophical themes such as
the immortality of the soul, the superiority of contempla-
tion to action, the supreme good, and the primacy of
virtue in determining nobility. In addition, he drew on
various Platonic notions, mostly to do with ethics, in his
allegorical interpretation of Virgil’s Aeneid and his com-
mentary on Dante’s Divine Comedy, both of which were
highly inﬂuential; and in this way he contributed to the
Renaissance revival of Platonism.
Cristoforo Landino was born in Florence in 1424; his
family, originally fromPratovecchio in theCasentino, was of
modest means. In his early youth,he pursued legal studies in
Volterra, earning a doctorate at the age of 15; however, he
disliked the law and returned in 1439 to Florence, where he
attended lectures in the studia humanitatis given by Carlo
Marsuppini (1398–1453) and also came under the inﬂu-
ence of other prominent humanists such as Leonardo
Bruni (1369–1444). After Marsuppini’s death, he sought
to take over his chair in the Florentine Studio, but he had
several rivals for the post, each supported by different
factions within the city. In the end, the various disciplines
covered by Marsuppini were divided between three
scholars: the Byzantine John Argyropoulos (c. 1415–
1487)
taught
philosophy;
Francesco
da
Castiglione
(c. 1420–1484) lectured on Greek; and Landino, who was
a specialist neither in philosophy nor in Greek, gained the
chair of rhetoric and poetry in 1458, with the powerful
support of Piero de’ Medici (1416–1469). In his long and
successful career at the Studio, which lasted until 1497, the
year before his death, Landino lectured mainly on the
Roman poets (Virgil, Horace, Juvenal, Persius), and also
on Cicero’s Tusculan Disputations and Familiar Letters,
and on the Divine Comedy of Dante and the Canzoniere
of Petrarch. His lectures formed the basis of the line-by-
line commentaries, which he published in Latin on Horace
(1482) and Virgil (1488), and in Italian on Dante (1481);
all three were frequently reprinted and inﬂuenced the later
critical tradition of these authors. Landino took the view
that the great poets – above all Virgil and Dante, and also
Juvenal – included philosophical truths in their writings;
however, they hid these under the veil of metaphors and
allegories, which he thought was the task of learned com-
mentators like him to uncover. These truths, which were
usually closely connected to Platonism, centered on ethics,
with the poet seen as deploying his art in order to inspire
readers to seek virtue and shun vice.
In his own Latin poetry, he imitated the Roman poets
Catullus, Horace, and Propertius, and also the Italian verse
of Petrarch – Landino’s main major collection was entitled
Xandra, after the woman who played the role of Laura in
his poetry. The ﬁrst book, begun around 1443, was orig-
inally dedicated to the humanist and architect Leon
Battista Alberti (1404–1472), who later became a relative
by marriage when, in 1459, Landino wed Lucrezia di
Alberto di Adovardo Alberti. The ﬁnal version of the
collection, in three books, was rededicated to Piero de’
Medici and completed around 1459 or 1460. Apart from
amatory verses to Xandra, it includes poems in praise of
the Medici and of Landino’s circle of humanist friends:
Carlo Marsuppini, Leonardo Bruni, Poggio Bracciolini
(1380–1459), and Bartolomeo Scala (1430–1497).
Like Alberti, Landino was a champion of the vernacu-
lar. He published two Italian translations from Latin:
Pliny’s Natural History in 1476 and the Sforziad of
Giovanni Simonetta (1420–1490) in 1490. He also com-
posed a Formulario di lettere e di orazioni in volgare, which
was ﬁrst printed in 1485.
Following a well-established tradition among Floren-
tine humanists, Landino attempted, in 1456, to enter the
Chancery, the highest echelon of the Republic’s civil
service. He did not succeed, but in 1467 he attained the
lower post of chancellor of the Parte Guelfa, and in 1483 he
became a secretary to the Signoria, the ruling body of
Florence. Landino’s involvement in civic duties, which he
carried in parallel to his career as a university professor,
conﬁrms his commitment to the view, put forward in his
philosophical works, that the best life combines both
action and contemplation and that humanist intellectuals
had a responsibility to act as advisors to those who
governed.
Among Landino’s students was Marsilio Ficino (1433–
1499), who later became a close friend. In 1456, Ficino
dedicated
his
treatise
Institutiones
ad
Platonicam
disciplinam, now lost, to Landino, who impressed on the
budding Platonist the need to study Greek in order to gain
access to the original sources, thus setting Ficino on the
course that would lead to his publication of the ﬁrst
complete translation of Plato into Latin (1484) and his
emergence as the key ﬁgure in Renaissance Platonism. In
his commentary on the Symposium, completed in 1469
and written in the form of a dialogue, Ficino cast Landino
as one of the interlocutors, given the task of interpreting
the famous speech of Aristophanes.
Landino himself composed three philosophical dia-
logues. The earliest, De anima, written around 1471–
1472, features three interlocutors – himself, Marsuppini
and the mathematician Paolo Toscanelli (1397–1482) –
who discuss a variety of issues concerning the soul over
the three days of Easter. Landino broadly structures the
treatise on Aristotle’s De anima: Book I deals with the
nature of the soul and its origin; Book II with the faculties
Cristoforo Landino C
241
C

of the soul that interact with the body; and Book III with
the mind, the intellectual virtues, and the immortality of
the soul. As one would expect of a humanist, he draws on
a range of classical, Christian, and Renaissance sources;
more surprisingly, he makes extensive use of works by
medieval scholastics, especially the commentary on De
anima by Albert the Great (McNair 1993). Interestingly,
Landino’s account of the Platonic doctrine of the soul
relies more on Macrobius, Albert the Great, and the trea-
tise In calumniatorem Platonis, published a few years ear-
lier in 1469, of Cardinal Bessarion (1403/1408–1472), than
on the translations of Plato by Ficino, which may not yet
have been in circulation (McNair 1992).
By the time Landino wrote his second philosophical
dialogue, Disputationes Camaldulenses, now dated to
around 1474 (Fubini 1996), he had gained access to Ficino’s
translations of Plato and also to his Theologia Platonica,
completed in 1474. The dialogue, which was ﬁrst printed
in 1480, is set in the summer of 1468 at the monastery of
Camaldoli. Landino again includes himself among the
interlocutors, along with Ficino and other Florentine
intellectuals; but the main speakers in the ﬁrst half are
Alberti and Lorenzo de’ Medici (1449–1492), who discuss
the relative merits of action and contemplation, in Book I,
and the ultimate good, in Book II. Although in the debate,
Alberti, the spokesman for contemplation, triumphs over
Lorenzo, the advocate of action, both sides accept that, in
reality, the best life will be a combination of the two, as
represented by the dialogue’s dedicatee, Federico da
Montefeltro (1422–1482), Duke of Urbino, a successful
military
commander,
whose
leisure
moments
were
devoted to study. A discussion of the competing theories
of the ultimate good leads to the conclusion that it lies in
the soul’s cognition of God in the afterlife, a position that
is supported by arguments liberally borrowed from
Book III of Thomas Aquinas’ Summa contra gentiles.
These themes are picked up in the second half of the
dialogue, in which Alberti delivers an extended Neopla-
tonic interpretation of Books I–VI of the Aeneid as an
allegory of the soul’s arduous ascent from pleasure
(Troy), through political activity (Carthage), avoiding
moral hazards such as greed (Harpies) and ambition
(Polyphemus), so that it can reach its ﬁnal destination of
true wisdom (Italy).
The last of Landino’s philosophical dialogues, De vera
nobilitate, is set in 1469 but could not have been written
before 1487, since it refers to Ficino as a canon of the
Florentine cathedral, an ofﬁce he obtained in that year.
Unlike his other two dialogues, the interlocutors are not
friends and associates of Landino, but instead are given
ﬁctional Greek names: Aretophilus (‘‘lover of virtue’’),
who is poor but learned, and his wealthy patron,
Philotimus (‘‘lover of honor’’). In line with earlier human-
ist treatments of true nobility, the argument is overwhelm-
ing weighted in favor of virtue, in particular, the virtues of
the mind and soul.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Aristotelianism in the
Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions
▶Dante Alighieri ▶Petrarch ▶Platonism, Renaissance
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Virtue and Vice
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Landino Cristoforo (1915/1916/1917) De anima, ed. Paoli A, Gentile G.
Annali delle universita` toscane 34:1–50 (1915); 35:1–138 (1916);
36:1–96 (1917)
Landino Cristoforo (1939) Carmina omnia, ed. Perosa A. Olschki,
Florence
Landino Cristoforo (1949) Testi inediti e rari di Cristoforo Landino
e Francesco Filelfo, ed. Garin E. Fussi, Florence
Landino Cristoforo (1952) Disputationes Camaldulenses [Book I with
a facing Italian translation]. Prosatori latini del Quattrocento, ed.
Garin E. Riccardo Ricciardi editore, Milan/Naples, pp 716–791
Landino Cristoforo (1968) Cristoforo Landino’s Allegorization of the
Aeneid: Books III and IV of the Camaldolese Disputations (trans:
Stahel TH). PhD dissertation, Johns Hopkins University
Landino Cristoforo (1970a) De vera nobilitate, ed. Lentzen M. Droz,
Geneva
Landino Cristoforo (1970b) De vera nobilitate, ed. Liaci MT. Olschki,
Florence
Landino Cristoforo (1974a) Reden, ed. Lentzen M. Fink, Munich
Landino Cristoforo (1974b) Scritti critici e teorici, 2 vols, ed. Cardini R.
Bulzoni, Rome
Landino Cristoforo (1980) Disputationes Camaldulenses, ed. Lohe P.
Sansoni, Florence
Landino Cristoforo (1991) On true nobility (English translation of De
vera nobilitate). Knowledge, goodness, and power: the debate over
nobility among Quattrocento Italian Humanists, ed. and trans. Rabil
Jr A. Medieval & Renaissance Texts & Studies, Binghamton, pp
190–260
Landino Cristoforo (2001) Comento sopra la Comedia, 4 vols, ed.
Procaccioli P. Salerno, Rome
Landino Cristoforo (2008) Poems (trans: Chatﬁeld MP). Harvard Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge
Secondary Sources
Field A (1988) ‘The studio controversy, 1455’ and ‘Cristoforo Landino
and Platonic poetry.’ The origins of the Platonic Academy of Flor-
ence. Princeton University Press, Princeton, pp 77–106, 231–268
Foa` S (2004) Landino (Landini), Cristoforo. Dizionario biograﬁco
degli Italiani, 63. Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana, Rome,
pp 428–433
Fubini R (1996) Cristoforo Landino, le ‘‘disputationes camaldulenses’’ e il
volgarizzamento
di
Plinio:
questioni
di
cronologia
e
di
interpretazioni.
Quattrocento
ﬁorentino:
politica,
diplomazia,
cultura. Pacini editore, Pisa, pp 303–332
242 C
Cristoforo Landino

Gilson SA (2003) Plato, the platonici, and Marsilio Ficino in Cristoforo
Landino’s Comento sopra la Comedia. The Italianist 23:7–53
Huss B, Mu¨ller GM (2002) Illud admiror, cur Ficinum silentio
praeterieris: Renaissance platonismus und Dialogform in Cristoforo
Landinos Disputationes Camaldulenses. In: Haempfer KW (ed)
Mo¨glichkeiten
des
Dialogs:
Struktur
und
Funktion
einer
Literarischen Gattung zwischen Mittelalter und Renaissance in
Italien. Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart, pp 225–278
Jorde T (1995) Cristoforo Landinos De vera nobilitate. Ein Beitrag zur
Nobilitas-Debatte im Quattrocento. Teubner, Stuttgart/Leipzig
Kallendorf C (1983) Cristoforo Landino’s Aeneid and the humanist crit-
ical tradition. Renaiss Quart 36:519–546
McNair BG (1992) Cristoforo Landino’s De anima and his Platonic
sources. Renaiss Quart 32:227–245
McNair BG (1993) Cristoforo Landino’s use of Albert on the soul. The
Modern Schoolman 70:115–129
McNair BG (1994) Cristoforo Landino and Coluccio Salutati on the best
life. Renaiss Quart 47:747–767
Rombach H (1991) Vita activa und vita contemplativa bei Cristoforo
Landino. Teubner, Stuttgart
Ru¨sch-Klaas U (1993) Untersuchungen zu Cristoforo Landino, De anima.
Teubner, Stuttgart
Weiss R (1981) Cristoforo Landino: das Metaphorische in den
‘‘Disputationes Camaldulenses.’’ Fink, Munich
WebSite
Ha¨uptli BW Landino, Cristoforo. In: Biographisch-bibliographischen
Kirchenlexikon. http://www.kirchenlexikon.de/l/landino_c.shtml
Cristoforo Landino C
243
C


